A 55-year-old woman presented with severe recurrent headache accompanied by dizziness. The brain CT scan showed multiple low-density cystic
lesions in the suprasellar and left sylvian cisternae with total empty sell syndrome. The communication between the cisternae and the
suprasellar cyst was not verified on the metrizamide CT scan. Treatment with praziquantel resulted in headache inilially and a rise in
specific IgG. Cerebral cysticercosis is caused by infection of the central nervous system by the larvae of the pork tapeworm, Taenia solium.
The parasites can be located in the brain parenchyma, the subarachnoid space and the ventricular system in highly variable combinations. The
frequency of the diagnosis has been increasing, presumably as a result of the widespead availability of computed tomography. Empty-sella
syndrome is the name given by Busch1) to an enlargement of the sella due to bulging of the arachnoid through a defect of the dural
diaphragm. Pressure and pulsation of the cerebrospinal fluid supposedly act on the walls of the sella turcica so as to flatten the pituitary
gland.2) The primary empty sella syndrome has been a subject of much interest and research in recent years on account of its clinical
correlations with headache, visual defect, papilledema and endocrine disorders.3–5) In this paper we report a very rare case of total empty
sella syndrome associated with cerebral cysticercosis. A 55-year-old Korea woman, previously in good health, presented with severe recurrent
headache and dizziness. She had no particular history of preceding head trauma or drug use. She had no previous parasitic infections and had
not ingested any raw or undercooked pork. She had been complaining of intermittent headache and dizziness since her first delivery. The
headache, which was localized on the frontal and the occipital areas, had a throbbing characteristic. It was not associated with any other
specific signs or symptoms and there was also no evidence of migraine. Bean sized skin nodules had once appeared on the trunk and had
disappeared spontaneously. Six moths prior to admission, she had once visited a private clinic because of headache. She refused the
recommended brain CT scan, but took some medicine prescribed by the clinic. She came to Yonsei University Hospital with a worsened headache
and aggravated dizziness. Routine serum tests and blood counts were all in the normal limits. Examination of stool was negative. Examination
of CSF showed an opening pressure of 130mmCSF, 9 leukocytes/mm3, a protein level of 30mg/dl and a glucose level of 49mg/dl. Routine
bacteriologic cultures were all negative. A CT scan showed multiple low-density cystic lesions in the suprasellar and left sylvian cisternae
compatible with empty-sella syndrome (Fig. 1). In order to evaluate the communication between the cisternae and the suprasellar cyst, a
metrizamide CT scan was performed, but it revealed no communication (Fig. 2). Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for anti-cysticerci
IgG in the patient’s CSF and serum gave titers of 1.14 and 0.95, respectively, consistent with active infection (Table 2). There were no
abnormal neurological findings. In the combined pituitary stimulation test, the reserve capacities were all prompt except for the TSH
response which was blunted (Table 1). The basal serum T3 level was 104.75ng/dl. T4 5ug/dl, fT4 0.86ng/ml, estradiol 25 pg/dl and prolactin
4.31ng/ml. After the patient gave an informed consent, praziquantel therapy was started at 50mg/kg body weight/day in three divided doses
for 15 days. On the first day of praziquantel treatment, the patient complained of diffuse headache, and a low-grade fever and signs of mild
meningismus developed. The therapy was continued with dexamethasone added to the original regimen from the second day on. The 15-day course
of praziquantel was completed without further difficulty. The headache and dizziness disapperaed dramatically just after the treatment. She
was discharged on an anticonvulsant medication with a tapering course of steroid. A follow-up CT scan, done one month after praziquantel
therapy, showed a slight reduction in the size of all intracranial cysts (Fig. 3). The term EMPTY SELLA was applied by Busch1) to an autopsy
material in which the diaphragma sella was incomplete regardless of whether there had been prior surgical or radiotherapeutic interventions.
Later, Weiss and Raskind6) emphasized the need to distinguish primary (without any prior surgical or-radiotherapeutic procedures) from
secondary (following such procedures) cases. Because this patient had no past history of operation or radiotherapy, this case would be
classified as primary empty-sella syndrome associated with multilobulated cystic lesions in the suprasellar cistern and the left sylvian
cistern. The total empty sella syndrome associated with CNS cysticercosis has not been reported so far. Headache is by far the most frequent
clinical manifestation of empty-sella syndrome; on review of previous case studies,7) it appears to occur in approximately 80% of cases,
while papilledema, visual defects and endocrine disorders occur in no more than 8%, 16% and 25%, respectively. In the case of
neurocysticercosis, headache together with seizure is one of the most frequently manifested symptoms. In this patient, however, the origin
of the headache might be the combination of the above two conditions, namely the empty sella and the neurocysticercosis, and it was very
difficult to confirm whether the one was mainly caused by the other or the two were just incidentally associated with each other. Several
mechanisms of the pathogenesis of the empty-sella have been postulated: 1) rupture of intrasellar or parasellar cyst1, 4) 2) infarction of
the sellar contents, 3) pituitary hypertrophy and subsequent atrophy, and 4) transmission of cerebrospinal pressure through a congenitally
defective sellar diaphragm of these etiologic hypotheses, the most commonly accepted one might be the transmission of either normal or
elevated cerebrospinal pressure. An incomplete sellar diaphragm is an essential prerequisite to the development of the empty sella according
to this hypothesis although it was not confirmed in this particular patient. Kaufman2) called attention to the documented or suspected
elevation of CSF pressure, but in this patient the elevated CSF pressure was not documented. It is speculated however, that a slightly
longstanding elevation of CSF pressure by the cyst of the pork tapeworm might have resulted in the enlargement and remodeling of the sellar
turcica and in the flattening of the pituitary contents against the floor in the setting of the incomplete sellar diaphragm. We do not
exclude, however, the possibility of a coincidental association of the total empty-sella syndrome with cysticercosis in this particular
case. For the evaluation of pituitary functional reserve, a combined pituitary stimulation test was done. The reserve capacities were all
within normal limits, but TSH response by TRH was blunted. In the empty sella syndrome, abnormalities of pituitary function have been
confined to failure of the growth hormone to increase following insulin induced hypoglycemia, arginine and glucose loads,3) diminished
corticoid response,5) imparied TSH response, hypogonadotropism3,8) and virilization. Incidence figures for all the abnormalities are well
under 25 percent. Definitive treatment for cerebral cysticercosis has not been available. Surgery has been generally disappointing and
largely limited to managing the secondary effect of the infection, and it is not helphul for the most common presentation of the disease,
namely, diffuse parenchymal infection as observed in our patient. The medical treatment of neurocysticercosis is greatly improved by
praziquantel, the first effective drug aganist cysticerocosis. The treatment with praziquantel clearly elicited an immunogenic effect, as
evidenced by the devolpment of the cerebrospinal fluid syndrome accompanied by a significant rise in the levels of specific IgG that
followed treatment. Most authors have stressed the importance of simultaneous use of steroid10) given with parziquantel to prevent the
dampening of the inflammatory reaction that often follows the action of the antiparasitic agent on the larvae. Early in the course of the
praziquantel treatment without dexamethasone, this patient showed symptoms of cerebrospinal reaction syndrome such as headache, meningismus
and fever. In this patient there would be no way of determining, retrospectively, if the cerebrospinal fluid reaction was really diminished
in its intensity by the steroid therapy, but we were able to complete the praziquantel course in this patient without further complication.
In patients with CNS cysticercosis, the pituitary gland should be evaluated with a sella CT scan which can diagnose empty sella syndrome.
Inevitably, the reserve capacity of the pituitary gland should be investigated for the patient with empty sella syndrome. Coronal CT scan of
the sella with IV contrast infusion: multilobulated cystic lesion in the suprasellar cistern and the left sylvian cistern with extension
into the pituitary fossa. A thin rim of the compressed pituitary gland is noted. Coronal CT scan of the sella after intrathecal injection of
metrizamide: contrast filling in the right side of the suprasellar cistern (arrow) and the pituitary fossa is differentiated with cystic
lesions in the left sylvian area, which is revealed in neurocysticercosis. Coronal CT scan of the sella with IV contrast after 1 month from
initial CT scan and praziquantel treatment: partial shrinkage of the cystic lesion is noticed but persistent empty sella is still being
seen. Conbined Pituitary Stimulation Test Anti-Cysticercus IgG in CSF and Serum Positive: >0.81
