A case with some components of Cronkhite-Canada syndrome such as onycholdystrophy, a large amount of diarrhea, hypoproteinemia and
hypoalbuminemia in a 16 year-old man with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome was studied. His family members were conirmed to have Peutz-Jeghers
syndrome by biopsy of polyps in the rectum and duodenum. This is the first case report of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome associated with some
components of Cronkhite-Canada syndrome. Peutz-Jehgers syndrome, a familial disease which appears to be inherited in an autosomal dominant
pattern, is characterized by mucocutaneous pigmentation and gastrointestinal polyposis and was nominated by Bruwer et al in 1954.1) In
Korean literature about 16 cases have been reported, almost all of which describe its complications and malignant changes.2) Generalized
gastrointestinal polyposis associated with hyperpigmentation, hair loss and nail atrophy was first described by Cronkhite and Canada in 1955
and is generally recognized as the Cronkhite-Canada syndrome.3) Approximately 55 cases have been described in world literature,4) but no
cases have been reported in Korea. A rare case of Peutz-Jeghers syndrome associated with some components of Cronkhite-Canada syndrome is
reported with special reference to its correlation between the histologic finding of polyps and clinical manifestations. A 16-year old man
was admitted to the Department of Internal Medicine of Dongsan Medical Center with the chief complaint of hematochezia. He had suffered on
4–5 occassions from hematochezia and dizziness for 5 months. About 1 month prior to admission, he complained of a large amount of diarrhea
(3–4 times a day) and swelling of the face and lower extremities. Eight years previously he underwent an operation for intestinal
intussusception. Family history revealed that his father and younger sister also had pigmentation of the lips and oral mucosa, palms, and
soles at birth (Fig.1). On physical examination, the patient appeared to be chronically ill. His blood pressure was 100/60mmHg, pulse rate
76/minute, respiration rate 20/minute, and temperature 36.9°C. The face was puffy and the conjunctiva was pale. There were multiple, dark
blue colored pigmentations of the lips, buccal mucosa, palms, and soles (Fig.2) and especially onychodystrophy such as a longituidinally
ridged, spoon-like deformity and distortion in all fingernails (Fig.3), and pitting edema of the lower extremities. The other parts were
normal. The laboratory findings on admission were as follows: hemoglobin 5.9g%, hematocrit 19.0%, WBC count 9100/mm3) with 60% neutrophils,
serum iron 6ug/dl, TIBC 174 ug/dl, ferritin Ong/ml, total protein 3.2g%, albumin 1.2g%, calcium 6.4mg%, inorganic phosphorus 5.0g%, sodium
142 m Eq/L, and potassium 3.3m Eq/L. Fecal occult blood test was positive. The x-ray film of the upper GI tract, small intestine series and
barium enema revealed variable sized, scattered, grouped, multiple polyps in the C loop of the duodenum, proximal jejunum, and from the
rectum to the ascending colon (Fig. 4). Endoscopy of the upper GI tract and rectosigmoid showed red colored, variable sized, grouped,
multiple polyps in the first portion of the duodenum to the distal (Fig. 5), and in the rectum at 12cm, 15cm, and 18cm from the anal verge.
The culture and semar of nail scrapings were negative for fungi. The microscopic finding of specimens taken from rectal polyps showed
hamartomatous polyps with cystic dilatation of glands and containing smooth muscle bundle supports, epithelial proliferation and
infiltration of plasma cells, lymphocytes, and neutrophils (Fig. 6). The microscopic finding of specimens taken from duodenal polyps also
showed Peutz-Jehgers polyps with columnar and goblet cells in the superficial portion and some inflammatory cell infiltration. During
admission, the patient was treated with blood transfusion, albumin infusion, and iron tablet medication, thereafter he was discharged with
improvement. At present he is in good general condition with disappearance of the onychodystrophy, edema of face and lower extremities, and
he showed improvement in laboratory tests during the OPD follow up check. His father and sister also revealed similiar findings of the upper
GI tract, small intestine series, barium enema, and endoscopy without hypoproteinemia, hypokalemia, and onychodystrophy. The microscopic
findings of rectal polyps showed hamartomatous polyps having smooth muscle fibers from muscularis mucosa and chronic inflammatory cell
infiltration without cystic dilated glands (Fig. 7). The younger sister developed two segmental intestinal intussusceptions in the proximal
and distal jejunum, one at a time, and underwent an operation recently. The Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is defined as mucocutaneous pigmenation,
gastrointestinal polyposis, and transmission of an autosomal dominant trait.1) On the other hand, the Cronkhite-Canada syndrome is
characterized by the following cardinal features: 1. gastronitestinal harmartomatous polyps of the juvenile (retention) type, 2. ectodermal
changes consisting of alopecia, onychodystrophy, and hyperpigmentation, 3. the absense of a family history of polyposis, and 4. adult
onset.3) In this case, the findings of mucocutaneous pigmentation in the lips, buccal mucosa, palms and soles, intestinal polyposis, and the
proved family history are consistent with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Besides these, some clinical components of Cronkhite-Canada syndrome are
associated as follows: onychodystrophy in all fingernails, edema of face and lower extremities, large amounts of diarrhea, hypoproteinemia,
hypoalbuminemia, and hypokalemia. In patients with Cronkhite-Canada syndrome, hypokalemia below 3.5mEq/L was reported in 48.6%, hypocalcemia
in 92.6% and in 51.9% when corrected for coexisting hypolalbuminemia, hypoproteinemia in 93.8% and hypoalbuminemia in 86.8%. Serum protein
electrophoresis revealed a decrease in the albumin fraction in 50% of patients and elevation of α1, globulin in 59.1%. Excessive enteric
protein loss was documented in 88.9% by one or more of the following means: 51 Cr labeled albumin, 131 I PVP, and 131 I albumin.4) These
studies indicated that hypoproteinemia in these patients is due, at least in part, to a protein losing enteropathy. Although a study of
protein losing enteropathy was not conducted in this case, the microscopic findings of inflammatory change and cystic dilated glands with
mucin pool formation and infiltration of neutrophils were highly suggestive of a protein losing enteropathy. There was no cause of protein
loss other than a clinical gastrointestinal tract problem. The microscopic finding of Cronkhite-Canada syndrome is characterized by
proliferated tortuous glands cystically dilated and filled with proteinaceous fluid or inspissated mucus, abundant stroma with edematous
chronically inflamed lamina propria, and intact surface epithelium.4) The microscopic findings in this case also showed many cystic
dilatations of the glands; the largest one was filled with neutrophils and there was infiltration of plasma cells, lymphocytes, and
neutrophils in the lamina propria. The above finding is analogous to that of Cronkhite-Canada syndrome with the exception of branching
smooth muscle bands. Microscopically, the polyps in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome are clearly distinguishable from those in Cronkhite-Canada
syndrome by the presence of characteristic branching core muscular tissue.5,6) The gastric mucosa of Cronkhite-Canada syndrome is
microscopically similiar to that of Menetrier’s disease,7) which is confined to the stomach and not usually associated with ectodermal
changes. Both are associated with protein losing enteropathy and symptomatic remission. Similiar histopathologic findings were reported by
Kyriakos et al8) in 1978, the first case of enteritis cystica profunda to occur in association with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. It is
characterized microscopically by mucosal glands and mucinous cysts within the bowel wall including penetration through the serosa, and is
occasionally misdiagnosed as mucinous adenocarcinoma. The differentiation of this lesion from adenocarcinoma is of major improtance.
Enteritis cystica profunda does not exhibit atypical or malignant cytologic features at all and the cells have the appearance of normal
mucosal cells. Follow up studies have verified the benign nature of this disease. After reviewing the published articles of carcinoma
arising in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Reid9) and Kyriakos et al8) considered that such misplaced glands are comparable to those in enteritis
cystic profunda. Ectodermal changes in Cronkhite-Canada syndrome have also been seen in cases associated with hypoparathyroidism,
kwashiorkor, and administration of 5-fluorouracil, which may be responsible for the observed ectodermal changes.4) However, neither symptoms
nor signs in this case indicated malnutrition and hypoparathyroidism. The culture and smear of nail scrapings were also negative for fungi.
Onychodystrophy and other symptoms disapperared after blood transfusion, albumin infusion, and iron tablet medication. Therefore we
considered that some components of Cronkhite-Canada syndrome could be seen in a patient with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome who showed such
histopathologic findings as cystic dilated glands and chronically inflammed lamina propria. A summary of this article was presented at the
24th congress of the Korean Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, 1988. Pedigree of case. Dark blue colored pigmentation in the lips,
buccal mucosa, palms, and soles. Onychodystrophy in all fingernails. Small intestine series showing multiple polyps in the C loop of the
duodenum and proximal jejunum. UGI endoscopy showing variable sized, multiple polyps in the first portion of the duodenum. Hamartomatous
polyp showing ramifying central stalk containing muscle bundle supports and epithelial proliferation with many cystic dilated glands, the
largest one in mid-left field is filled with neutrophils. (H&E X40) Microscopic finding showing hamartomatous polyps. (H&E X40)
