A patient with hypersensitivity pneumonitis caused by a contaminated cool-mist vaporizer was evaluated. A detailed microbiologic and
immunologic study was done, and a Pseudomonas species was isolated as the possible causative organism by inhalational provocative and
serologic tests. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP), such as farmer’s lung, pigeon breeders disease and bagassosis, has been generally
associated with inhalation of specific organic dusts. Sensitive individuals intermittently exposed to these materials develop acute symptoms
of fever, malaise, cough, dyspnea and chest tightness within four to eight hours after exposure. The organic dusts are usually contaminated
with thermophilic actinomyces or fungi1,2). A few cases of HP by a cool mist vaporizer (HPCMV) have previously been reported, but they
failed to identify the causative organism3,4). Recently we had an opportunity to evaluate a patient with HPCMV. A detailed immunologic and
bacteriologic study was done to identify the causative agent. A 25-year-old housewife was admitted to Yeungnam University Hospital in
February of 1986 with cough and anterior chest tightness. She was well until ten days prior to admission, when she developed symptoms of
gastroenteritis. She was treated with unknown medicines by a local physician and stayed home. The gastrointestinal symptoms subsided in two
days, but she noticed tightness in her chest, dyspnea, nonproductive cough, fever, chills and headaches. She was treated again for “acute
bronchitis” with different medicines by the same physician. But the symptoms progressed over the next eight days and she was referred for
pulmonary evaluation. She was a garments salesperson, nonsmoker, and had no significant past medical history. Her family history was
unremarkable and she had no known allergies. She denied recent travels, changes of home environment, and exposure to any pets, trees, or
bird extracts. On admission, she was afebrile, and her respiratory rate was 34/min. On auscultation of the chest, there were inspiratory
rales on all lung fields, but no wheezing or friction rub. The peripheral blood hemoglobin was 14.5gm/dl, hematocrit 44, WBC 14,800 (poly
74%, lymphocyte 14%, eosinophil 7%), and ESR was 43mm/hr. The chest x-ray showed bilateral patchy infiltrates (Fig. 1), No organisms were
found on sputum smears and cultures. After treatment with erythromycin, she had a prompt recovery and was discharged. At the time of
discharge, she was in an asymptomatic condition and had normal vital signs. The chest was clear on auscultation. The peripheral leukocyte
count and ESR were normal. Twelve hours after discharge, she was brought back to the emergency room with the same symptoms of severe chest
tightness, cough and dyspnea. She was apprehensive and tachypneic. Body temperature was 39°C, pulse rate 142/min and respiratory rate
36/min. Inspiratory rales were heard on all lung fields again, but no wheezing. The peripheral leukocyte count rose to 31,600 (poly 61%,
band 35, lymph 4%). The arterial blood gases on room air were pH 7.50, PCO2 33.2 mmHg, and PO2 50.0 mmHg. HP or other inhalational diseases
were suspected. On careful interview, it was found that she had used a small cool-mist vaporizer (Fig. 2) every night since she suffered
from the gastroenteritis and had used it again on the night of discharge from hospital. HPCMV was suspected. In the reservoir of the
vaporizer, the water was slightly cloudy and some floating material in the water and sediment on the bottom were seen. She claimed that
“fresh tap water” was used for the vaporizer and it was occasionally rinsed out with tap water, but no further efforts to clean the
container were made. She recovered without any specific therapy. Three days later when she became asymptomatic, spirometry was done and
showed FVC 1.82L (56.2% of predicted), FEV1 1.64L (54.7% of predicted), and FEV1/FVC 90%, consistent with restrictive lung disease. On the
fourth day, an inhalational challenge test was tried by keeping the vaporizer on to confirm the possibility of HPCMV, and nine hours after
the vaporizer was on, she suddenly developed symptoms of HP. Body temperature rose to 39.6°C, pulse rate to 120/min and peak expiratory flow
dropped from 260 to 230 L/min. The diagnosis of HP due to a contaminated cool-mist vaporizer was made. She was discharged from hospital and
remained in a stable condition. A follow-up spirometric study was done three weeks later and showed normal FVC, FEV1 and FEV1/FVC ratio. The
peak flow was 360L/min. The smear of the floating materials and sediment in the reservoir showed molds, yeasts and gram negative bacilli
which were also identified by cultures. Culture specimens were taken 1) from water in the reservoir, 2) from debris on mechanical parts and
the mist-outlet and 3) by direct exposure of media to mist. All specimens were placed in 1) blood agar plate, 2) Sabouraud’s media and 3)
brain heart infusion broth, and were incubated at room temperature, 37°C and 56°C. Seventy ml of blood was obtained on the day of the second
admission and the serum was stored below −70°C. Six harvested organisms were tested serologically with the stored serum by the 1)
hemagglutination test, 2) double immuno-diffusion test and 3) counter immune electrophoresis test. Precipitation studies with additional
antigen were not done because the antigens were not available. Skin tests with the extracts of the individual organisms were done. The
extract was prepared from the cultured fungi and bacteria cultured and diluted on a 1:1000 wt/vol basis in saline. An inhalational challenge
test with the untouched contaminated vaporizer produced all the symptoms and signs of HP as above (Fig. 3). To identify the causative agent,
inhalational challenges were done with 2ml of the following materials: 1) untreated fresh tap water at her house, 2) millipore-filtered
vaporizer water and 3) phenol-killed suspension. Challenges with phenol-killed suspensions of other harvested organisms were planned but the
patient refused. Each test was done on different days after confirmation of stable vital signs and an asymptomatic condition. Inhalation was
done by nebulizer (Inhaleboy made in West Germany). Vital signs and peak flow were measured every 30 minutes up to 10 hours or until she
developed symptoms of HP. On microbiologic studies, the following six organisms were identified: a Pseudomonas species, a Candida sp., a
Foncelea sp., a Fusarium sp., a Rodotorala sp. and an Aureobasidium sp., No thermophilic organisms or amoebas were identified. On serologic
studies, her serum only reacted weakly to the harvested Pseudomonas species by hemagglutination test, but did not react to the other
harvested organisms on all methods. All skin tests were negative. Inhalational challenges with untreated fresh tap water and millipore-
filtered vaporizer water failed to produce any symptoms and signs of HP. On inhalational challenge with a phenol-killed suspension of the
Pseudomonas species, she developed coughing and mild irritation of the throat immediately after inhalation. Peak flow dropped from the
360L/min to 340L/min in 10 minutes and returned to 360L/min over the next 30 minute. Eight hours later, it dropped again to 240L/min (Fig.
3) and she became febrile, developed a cough and complained of chest tightness. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis is a granulomatous lung disease
caused by repeated exposure to various inhaled organic dusts or occupational agents. Numerous conditions causing HP have been reported since
1713 when the first case of HP was reported by Ramazzini, and many causative agents have been identified1,2,3,6). Thermophilic organisms are
the main causative organisms of HP and they grow in warm and humid conditions and reach the human lung by inhalation. Since humidifiers and
air conditioners have been developed and widely used, they have become one of the common causes of HP. In HP caused by humidifiers
(“humidifier fever”), the thermophilic organisms are also the main causative organisms. They grow in warm water and moisture in the filter
or the air passway of the humidifiers, and are distributed by fans2). Different organisms such as amoebas and gram negative bacilli have
been added to the list of the etiologic agents of HP caused by humidifiers as well as other types of HP2,5). In our case, a gram negative
bacilli, Pseudomonas species, was identified as the etiologic agent on the basis of a positive serologic test and inhalational challenge. It
was unfortunate that inhalational challenges with other harvested organisms were refused. Even though it was not done, they are unlikely to
be the cause of her illness because of negative serologic and skin tests. On inhalational challenge with the phenol-killed suspension of the
isolated Pseudomonas species, there was an early drop of peak flow which was not seen on the initial challenge with the untouched vaporizer
(Fig. 3), and it made this positive result uncertain as the definite cause of her HPCMV. The reason for this difference is still unclear,
but might be a nonspecific reaction of bronchial irritation with the strong-smelling phenol added for sterilization. No thermophilic
organisms were isolated. In English literature, only a few cases of HP by cool-mist vaporizer (HPCMV) have been reported3,4,6). They failed
to identify the causative agent and no thermophilic organisms were found. It could be expected because their vaporizer was not a heated
system. Dr. Hodges did a careful study on a patient of HPCMV to identify the causative organism, and Gram-negative bacilli was clearly
eliminated3). Therefore, the identified organism in our case, Pseudomonas species, seems not to be the sole cause of HPCMV. Many different
organisms and materials could be expected to cause HPCMV, as with HP. These small, inexpensive, cool-mist vaporizers have been distributed
widely to many families, offices and even hospital rooms in the last few years. All users should be aware that these can cause HP and should
try to keep them clean. Physicians should give HPCMV a high index of suspicion where these vaporizers are being used and in any patient
presenting with symptoms of HP to ensure early diagnosis and prevent its sequelae. In conclusion, we are presenting the first case of HP in
Korea, and on the basis of the above results, we concluded that the cause of HP in this patient was due to a cool-mist vaporizer and Gram-
negative organisms of Pseudomonas species were the etiologic organism. Chest x-ray on admission: Bilateral patahy infiltrations are seen,
more in Lt upper and Rt lower lung field. The contaminated cool-mist vaporizer. The water in its reservior was slightly cloudy. Colony-like
materials floated in the water and detected on the bottom of the reservoir Change of PEFR and body temperature after inhalation of the
phenol killed suspension of the isolated Pseudomonas species. A dual response is seen.
