We present here two patients that had an aberrant right subclavian artery and an anomalous origin of the right vertebral artery from the
right common carotid artery. We review the previous literature and discuss herein the embryologic mechanism and clinical implications of
this variation. There have been about 20 case reports describing an aberrant right subclavian artery (ARSCA) and an anomalous origin of the
right vertebral artery from the right common carotid artery (right VA-CC) (1-10). We recently experienced two cases of ARSCA with a right
VA-CC, and these were confirmed by the enhanced CT images. In this study, we discuss the embryologic mechanism of this variation. Based on
our cases, we evaluate the incidence of right VA-CC with underlying ARSCA and the clinical implication of this variation, and we especially
focus on the arterial course of the vertebral artery. A 30-year-old male was admitted to our hospital due to a midline anterior neck mass.
On the enhanced CT images, the mass was located at the infrahyoid midline neck and it showed the imaging features of a thyroglossal duct
cyst. The enhanced oblique coronal multiplanar reconstruction CT images revealed a variation of the aortic arch as an aberrant right
subclavian artery that was distal to the left subclavian artery (Fig. 1A). The right vertebral artery had its origin from the right common
carotid artery at the inferior border of the right thyroid gland, and it had an aberrant entrance to the C5 transverse foramen (Fig. 1B).
The prevertebral segment of the right vertebral artery was located in the retro-thyroid area and very close to the thyroid gland (Fig. 1C).
A 67-year-old female was admitted to our hospital for an operation for thyroid cancer. The enhanced CT images revealed an aberrant right
subclavian artery distal to the left subclavian artery (Fig. 2A). In addition, the left vertebral artery originated from the aortic arch
between the left common carotid artery and the left subclavian artery. The right vertebral artery had an origin from the right common
carotid artery and also an aberrant entrance to the C5 transverse foramen (Fig. 2B). The left vertebral artery also had an aberrant entrance
to the C5 transverse foramen. The prevertebral segment of the right vertebral artery was located in the retro-thyroid area and close to the
thyroid gland (Fig. 2C). The embryologic mechanism of ARSCA with a right VA-CC has been explained in the several studies (2, 4, 8). The
normal vertebral artery (VA) builds up due to the process of longitudinal anastomosis and obliteration of the horizontal parts of the
cervical intersegment artery. Normally, the first to the sixth cervical intersegment arteries (CIAs) develop into the VA and the seventh CIA
makes the subclavian artery (SCA). If longitudinal anastomosis of the right CIA stops between the 6th and 7th CIA, and the right side of the
dorsal aorta is obliterated proximal to the 7th CIA, then the right side subclavian artery (SCA) originates from the left side aorta distal
to the left SCA and the right VA originates from the right common carotid artery (Fig. 3). Aberrant right subclavian artery has been
reported with the incidence of less than 1% (8). The known incidence of right VA-CC is about 0.18% (1). A combination of these two
variations is rare, but the true incidence of right VA-CC with underlying ARSCA is not known. Fifteen cases of ARSCA were confirmed by
enhanced CT or CT angiography in our hospital during the recent three years. Among these cases, only the two cases we present herein showed
the right VA-CC variation. Also, only these two cases had an aberrant level of the entrance of the VA into the transverse foramen of the
cervical spine. Based on our results, the right VA-CC variation is not likely to frequently occur with an underlying ARSCA. There have been
many reports about the variation of the ARSCA with a right VA-CC, but only three reports remarked about the aberrant entrance of the VA into
the transverse foramen of the cervical spine (3, 7, 10). The vertebral artery usually enters into the transverse foramen of the 6th cervical
spine (the C6 entrance). Those three reports revealed different entrance levels as C2, C3 and C4. In our two cases, the right VAs had a C5
entrance. There have been no reports describing the anatomical course of this type of VA-CC. In our cases, this VA-CC had a close spatial
relation with the thyroid gland. It was located in the retro-thyroid area and very close to the thyroid gland. During its course up to the
transverse foramen, it traveled above the longus colli muscle. This anatomical characteristic of the VA-CC bears watching during anterior
cervical spine surgery, thyroid surgery or other interventions. If this VA-CC were overlocked, it may be pulled with the longus colli
muscle, or it may become lacerated during the anterior crevical spine surgery. During thyroidectomy, the inferior thyroid artery is usually
ligated. As mentioned by one autopsy result (7), the inferior thyroid artery may be near to the right VA-CC, so meticulous care may be
needed to avoid an inadvertent injury to the VA-CC during thyroidectomy. During thyroid aspiration, the needle occasionally penetrates the
posterior surface of the thyroid gland and it reaches the vertebral body. If the VA-CC is near to the thyroid gland, then there is a
possibility to puncture the VA during thyroid aspiration. Therefore, knowledge of this aberrant course of the VA may be helpful to avoid
injury of the VA when performing these procedures. Aberrant right subclavian artery with right vertebral artery originating from right
common carotid artery. A. Enhanced oblique coronal multiplanar reconstruction CT image shows aberrant right subclavian artery (arrow)
originating from aortic arch distal to left subclavian artery. B. Oblique sagittal maximum intensity projection image shows right vertebral
artery originating from right common carotid artery at inferior border of right thyroid gland, and note aberrant entrance to C5 transverse
foramen. C. Enhanced axial CT image reveal close spatial relation between right vertebral artery originating from right common carotid
artery (arrow) and right thyroid gland. Aberrant right subclavian artery with right vertebral artery originating from right common carotid
artery. A. Enhanced axial CT image at upper thorax level shows retrotracheal aberrant right subclavian artery (arrow) and left vertebral
artery originating from aortic arch between left common carotid artery and left subclavian artery (double arrows). B. Oblique sagittal
maximum intensity projection image shows right vertebral artery originating from right common carotid artery and aberrant entrance to C5
transverse foramen. C. Enhanced axial CT image reveals close spatial relation between right vertebral artery originating from right common
carotid artery (arrow) and right thyroid gland. Schematic diagram of embryologic development of aberrant right subclavian artery and right
CCA-VA variation. Longitudinal anastomosis of right CIA stops between 6th and 7th CIA, and right side dorsal aorta is obliterated proximal
to 7th CIA. Right side SCA originates from left side aorta distal to left SCA, and right VA originates from right common carotid artery.
Dashed lines are obliterated zone during the development of vascular system. CCA = common carotid artery, CIA = cervical intersegment
artery, III = third aortic arch, IV = fourth aortic arch, LCC = left common carotid artery, RCC = right common carotid artery, SCA =
subclavian artery, VA = vertebral artery
