Sirs, Recombinant human erythropoietin was introduced in 1988 for the treatment of anemia in chronic kidney disease (CKD). The development
of antibodies against epoetin was a rare complication during the first decade of its use. However, in 1998 there was a sudden increase in
epoetin-induced antibodies associated with pure red cell aplasia (PRCA) in patients with CKD who had been using Eprex, a subcutaneous
epoetin-alfa product marketed in Europe [1, 2]. Although the recombinant epoetin products differ in glycosylation, the increase in PRCA was
probably caused by a change in the formulation of Eprex in which human serum albumin was replaced by glycine and polysorbate 80 . Switching
patients from subcutaneous to intravenous administration and adding Teflon to the rubber stopper of prefilled Eprex syringes subsequently
eliminated nearly all antibody formation. For epoetin-beta, antibody-associated PRCA is even rarer, as evidence by the very few cases that
have been published. We present here the first report of a child who developed antibody-associated PRCA elicited by the use of epoetin-beta.
The patient was born on the Dutch Antilles. In 2004, at the age of 5 years, he developed renal failure due to persistent obstructive
uropathy. His CKD-related anemia was treated with epoetin-beta subcutaneously from 2004 onwards (2 × 2000 IE/week). After 1.5 year of use,
he developed a progressive transfusion-dependent anemia unresponsive to recombinant epoetin-beta (Neorecormon: maximum 5 × 2000 IE/week) and
presented at our hospital (Fig. 1). An increase in the epoetin-beta dose to 5 × 6000 IE/week had no effect on the reticulocyte count,
demonstrating that the anemia was unresponsive to epoetin-beta. Fig. 1Treatment regimen of progressive transfusion-dependent anemia
unresponsive to recombinant epoetin-beta in our young patient with chronic kidney failure. Hb hemoglobin Treatment regimen of progressive
transfusion-dependent anemia unresponsive to recombinant epoetin-beta in our young patient with chronic kidney failure. Hb hemoglobin
Laboratory testing revealed the following: hemoglobin (Hb), 2.8 mmol/L; reticulocyt count, <0.1%; MCV, 83; white blood cells (WBC),
11.7 × 109/L; platelet count, 228 × 109/L. There were no signs of hemolysis: lactate dehydrogenase, 184 U/L; haptoglobin, 0.99 g/L. The
combination of anemia, low reticulocyte count, and normal leukocyte and trombocyte count with the use of epoetin-beta suggested a diagnosis
of antibody-mediated PRCA. Anti-epoetin immunoglobulin (Ig) G antibodies identified by means of an antigen binding assay, essentially as
described by Aalberse et al. , were indeed elevated. Treatment was initiated with one pulse methylprednisolone (15 mg/kg), followed by
prednisone 1 mg/kg/day, and cyclosporine 4 mg/kg/day (trough levels 50–100 mg/l). Within days of starting this treatment, anti-epoetin-
antibodies levels declined and were undetectable after 2 months of treatment (Fig. 1). The reticulocyte count increased to 2% after
3 months, and from then on Hb remained at acceptable levels between 5 and 7 mmol/L without the need for blood transfusions (Fig. 1). After 3
months, the prednisone dosage was reduced to 7.5 mg (0.3 mg/kg/day) and the cyclosporine dosage to 3 mg/kg/day until transplantation. One
year later a successful family kidney transplantation was performed, and Hb was stable at 6.5 mmol/L 4 months after transplantation
(Fig. 1). This 5-year-old boy developed PRCA caused by anti-epoetin-antibodies following exclusive treatment with epoetin-beta
subcutaneously. The subcutaneous administration of epoetin may have rendered the immune system of this boy more susceptible to antibody
formation. Treatment options for antibody-associated PRCA are invariably based on case reports or case-series. Several immunosuppressive
drugs have been tried: corticosteroids alone, cyclophosphamide, cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil, intravenous immunoglobulin, and anti-
CD20 monoclonal antibodies, with or without corticosteroid treatment. Although the results of different strategies vary, all patients who
had a kidney transplant showed a full recovery of erythropoiesis . Our patient responded well to a pulse of methylprednisolone followed by
prednisone and low-dose cyclosporine. After this treatment the Hb remained stable, indicating the permanent disappearance of antibodies. No
side-effects of our treatment were noted, and a successful renal transplantation was ultimately performed. In conclusion, the combination of
prednisone and cyclosporine in a low dose was successful in the treatment of anti-epoetin-antibody-induced anemia in a child with chronic
renal failure. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which
permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
