To describe magnetic resonance-guided focused ultrasound surgery (FUS) as a treatment for a case of leiomyoma-associated infertility. Case
report from a randomized clinical trial. Academic medical center. A 37-year-old woman with known leiomyomas and a history of 18 months of
home-inseminations from a known donor. Magnetic resonance-guided FUS treatment of uterine fibroids, where the dominant fibroid distorted the
uterine cavity. Pregnancy. A viable intrauterine pregnancy, with a full-term vaginal delivery, was conceived after a single clomiphene
citrate and intrauterine insemination cycle. The role of FUS for enhancement of fertility in women with nonhysteroscopically resectable
uterine fibroids distorting the uterine cavity should be investigated further. Uterine leiomyomas are the most common tumors in women of
reproductive age (1). The incidence of fibroids increases with age, and with the increased success of assisted reproductive technologies,
more women of advanced maternal age are seeking pregnancies. Thus, the number of women seeking pregnancies and having leio-myomas is growing
(2). The relationship between leiomyomas and fertility has been the subject of debate for many years (3, 4). However, there is now general
consensus that the location of the fibroid and its relationship to the uterine cavity are the key factors in whether the fibroid has a
negative influence on fertility (5, 6). Submucosal fibroids are believed to decrease fertility rates the most, followed by intramural
leiomyomas. Subserosal fibroids appear to have little to no effect on a woman's ability to conceive (5, 6). For submucosal fibroids, it is
agreed that myomectomy is beneficial and enhances the rates of fertility and live birth (5). However, for intramural fibroids there is not
enough evidence to draw the same conclusions. It is not clear whether the difference in outcome is related to the biological differences
between intramural and submucosal fibroids or to the fertility impairment from nonhysteroscopic surgeries for fibroids. We report a case
from a randomized clinical trial (NCT00730886, clinicaltrials.gov) evaluating fertility enhancement after magnetic resonance-guided focused
ultrasound (FUS) or myomectomy in women with unexplained infertility, distortion of the uterine cavity, and nonhysteroscopically resectable
uterine fibroids (type II submu-cosal and intramural). Focused ultrasound is a noninvasive therapy for treating uterine leiomyomas, and it
was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2004 for this indication. This technique converges multiple sound waves on a
target site, causing localized coagulative necrosis, while guidance and thermal feedback are provided by magnetic-resonance imaging (MRI).
Before conducting this trial, internal review board approval was obtained. A 37-year-old Asian female in a committed same-sex relationship
presented for an infertility consultation. She had been attempting to conceive witha known sperm donor and had been using home insemination
timed by ovulation predictor kits for 18 months. She had one spontaneous miscarriage at 6 weeks with this approach. Three weeks before her
consultation at our institution, she had been diagnosed with uterine leiomyomas. She also reported leiomyoma symptoms, including heavy,
prolonged menses and intermenstrual spotting. The patient underwent a basic infertility evaluation. An ultrasound examination showed several
uterine fibroids and two hemorrhagic cysts in the right ovary, possibly consistent with endometriosis. A sonohysterography showed multiple
fibroids with distortion of the uterine cavity, and an endometrial polyp was identified. Hysterosalpingogram showed normal opacification of
both fallopian tubes and bilateral peritoneal spillage, and it confirmed the cavitary distortion. The ovaries appeared normal, with an
antral follicle count of 18. Her cycle day-3 level of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) was 2.8 IU/L and of estradiol was 38 pg/mL. Her
known sperm donor was a healthy 44-year-old male; his semen analysis was excellent, with a total motile sperm count of 141.8 million. An MRI
with gadolinium was acquired to further evaluate the fibroids, revealing an enlarged uterus measuring 6.2 × 9.4 × 9.1 cm. Multiple myomas
were identified, with a dominant fibroid measuring 4.8 × 4.4 × 5.1 cm in the inferior right lateral myometrial wall abutting the
endometrium. An intramural fundal fibroid measured 3.5 × 3.2 × 3.0 cm, and three other 1-cm intramural fibroids were identified. Again,
small hemorrhagic ovarian cysts, possibly consistent with endometriosis, were seen. The patient met the enrollment criteria for clinical
trial NCT00730886; after we had obtained her written informed consent, she was randomized to the FUS arm. Treatment took place in two FUS
sessions on two successive days without complications in August 2009. Only the dominant fibroid was treated in the first session, achieving
a nonperfused volume (NPV) of 41%. In the second session, a NPV of 68% was achieved in the dominant fibroid, and four additional fibroids
were ablated with similar results (Fig. 1). During a subsequent visit in October 2009, a repeat sonohysterogram again showed a 7-mm polyp
with no Doppler flow. A hysteroscopic polypectomy was performed, and the pathologic analysis confirmed a benign endometrial polyp. In
November, the patient took 50 mg of clomiphene citrate for 5 days starting from cycle day 3. On cycle day 14, she detected a luteinizing
hormone (LH) surge by use of an ovulation predictor kit. Intrauterine insemination (IUI) was performed the next day with cryopreserved donor
sperm (postwash sperm count of 20.8 million). A home pregnancy test was subsequently positive. The patient was closely observed during her
pregnancy with frequent ultrasounds. The placenta implanted on the anterior wall with no relation to the treatment sites (Fig. 2). Fetal
growth was normal, and the uterine fibroids remained stable in size. At 40 gestational weeks, the patient presented in labor with
spontaneous rupture of membranes 24 hours before presentation. The patient had no fever and refused prophylactic antibiotics as recommended
by her obstetric provider. After an uneventful labor, she gave birth to a 3,450 g girl, Apgar score of 7 and 9. Her postpartum course was
complicated by a maternal temperature of 38.9°C, and she was started on intravenous antibiotics for endomyometritis; she was discharged
afebrile 2 days later. The baby was treated with phototherapy and intravenous immunoglobulin for hyperbilirubinemia due to ABO
incompatibility. Reproductive dysfunction is a rare symptom attributable to leiomyomas (7). Recently, Pritts et al. (5) conducted an updated
sys-tematic review of fibroids and fertility, and concluded that the clinical pregnancy rate of women with any type of fibroid is
statistically significantly lower than in control women (RR 0.85; 95% CI, 0.73–0.98). However, in evaluating the effects on fertility by
fibroid location, only submucosal and intramural fibroids have been found to have a negative influence on fertility. Moreover, for fibroids
other than submucosal ones, surgical removal of the fibroids does not necessarily improve reproductive outcomes. There are two ways of
interpreting this discrepancy. First, the fertility-impairing characteristics of submucosal fibroids may be more profound than those of
intramural fibroids. Karyotypes of fibroids differ by location within the uterus, which suggests that there may be biological differences
(8). An alternative explanation is that morbidity from the myomectomy accounts for the difference. Thus, hysteroscopic myomectomy may
provide a net benefit for fertility while laparoscopic or abdominal myomectomy and their increased risk of bleeding, adhesion formation, and
infection may not (9, 10). A patient with unexplained infertility, endometrial cavity distortion, and a nonhysteroscopically resectable
fibroid is a clinical dilemma. Our trial was designed to address this question by randomizing women with unexplained infertility to
myomectomy or FUS. For patients who wish to conceive, FUS is a promising technique for treating leiomyomas. Since its introduction in 2004,
there have been numerous reports documenting the safety and efficacy of FUS (11–18). Moreover, a recent case series reported on the safety
of pregnancies after FUS (19). Fifty-four pregnancies in 51 women that occurred after FUS treatment were prospectively registered with the
FDA. Live births occurred in 41% of the pregnancies, with an additional 21% ongoing beyond 20 weeks. There was a 64% vaginal delivery rate,
and the mean birth weight was 3.3 kg, with no low birth weight infants. It is interesting that, in over a third of the patients who
conceived after FUS treatment, infertility was a complaint prior to treatment (19). In our patient, the distortion of the uterine cavity was
not the only factor affecting her fertility. The patient also had undergone a hys-teroscopic procedure to remove a benign endometrial polyp.
She elected to proceed with the clomiphene citrate plus intrauterine insemination treatment after that procedure, which most reviews suggest
is an effective protocol for both unexplained and endometriosis-related infertility (20, 21). Unfortunately, it is impossible to tell which
aspect of her treatment contributed to her enhanced fertility. Because of the limited recruitment of participants, this randomized clinical
trial was closed by the sponsor in February 2010. Only one other patient participated in the study, and she was also randomized to FUS.
After her treatment, she underwent two IVF cycles but has yet to conceive. This case report shows that there may be a role for FUS for the
enhancement of fertility in women with nonhysteroscopically re-sectable uterine fibroids and unexplained infertility. However, current
experience is limited, and more systematic research is needed before any recommendations can be made. E.V.A.B. has nothing to disclose.
K.R.G. has nothing to disclose. G.K.H. received salary support through a clinical trial agreement between the Mayo Clinic and InSightec
(Haifa, Israel) for clinical trial NCT00730886. J.R.J. has nothing to disclose. L.G.P. received salary support through a clinical trial
agreement between the Mayo Clinic and InSightec (Haifa, Israel) for clinical trial NCT00730886. E.A.S. received salary support through a
clinical trial agreement between the Mayo Clinic and InSightec (Haifa, Israel) for clinical trial NCT00730886, and also serves as a
consultant to Abbott, Columbia Laboratories, and Gynesonics and serves on the Scientific Advisory Board for the Bayer HealthCare Scientific
Committee. (A–B) Two fibroids (F1 and F2) on sagittal T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) before treatment. F1 is the dominant
intramural fibroid in the right lateral myometrial wall abutting the endometrium. F2 is the smaller fundal fibroid. (C–D) Posttreatment
sagittal T1-weighted images demonstrating a large area of nonenhancement in both fibroids after the administration of gadolinium. The
nonenhanced areas correspond to nonperfused tissues resulting from focused ultrasound surgery (FUS) ablation. These images show the largest
dimensions of the fibroids and do not illustrate the cavitary distortion. Transabdominal ultrasound image at 12 weeks' gestation showing the
implantation of the placenta on the anterior wall. The treated dominant fibroid is located in the lateral myometrial wall and abuts the
endometrial cavity.
