Rheumatoid arthritis is a systemic inflammatory disease characterized by synovitis and the destruction of articular structures in multiple
joints. Methotrexate is recommended as an anchor drug for rheumatoid arthritis treatment to achieve the therapeutic goal of reducing damage
to joints and improving clinical score. However, several studies have shown that methotrexate has been associated with the development of
lymphoproliferative disorders, namely methotrexate-associated lymphoproliferative disorders. On the other hand, primary central nervous
system lymphoma is an aggressive disease with poor prognosis. Both methotrexate-associated lymphoproliferative disorders and primary central
nervous system lymphoma are reported to be associated with Epstein-Barr virus. A Japanese female patient of between 60 and 70 years of age
with rheumatoid arthritis was admitted to our hospital because of sudden convulsion and impaired consciousness. Just before admission, she
was treated with adalimumab and methotrexate. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan showed a densely stained mass with surrounding
edema in both frontal lobes and the left nucleus basalis, and enlarged lymph nodes in the right supraclavicular fossa. We performed a biopsy
of the right cervical lymph node, but could not establish a histopathological diagnosis. In situ hybridization showed the presence of
Epstein Barr virus, therefore we diagnosed this case as methotrexate-associated lymphoproliferative disorders mediated by Epstein Barr virus
after considering the drug history of the patient. After we discontinued methotrexate, patient symptoms gradually improved. The masses at
both frontal lobes and the left nucleus basalis were gradually regressed. Since the frequency of methotrexate use and the maximum dosage has
been increasing, particular attention should be paid to the development of methotrexate-associated lymphoproliferative disorders in
rheumatoid arthritis patients who are treated with methotrexate. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic inflammatory disease that is
characterized by inflammation of the synovial membrane and extensive, progressive destruction of articular structures in multiple joints.
The therapeutic goal of RA is to control such tissue damage and to improve long-term prognosis. Methotrexate (MTX) is the anchor drug for RA
treatment, and is expected to suppress the articular destruction. However, several studies have shown that patients with RA have a high risk
of onset of lymphoproliferative disorders (LPD) , and MTX has been associated with the development of these disorders . In 2008, according
to the World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues, LPD induced in immunodeficient
patients treated with MTX is specifically defined as MTX-associated LPD (MTX-LPD) . Characteristically, MTX-LPD is reported to regress
spontaneously following the withdrawal of MTX . Additionally, an association with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is indicated . However, primary
central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) is aggressive and has a poor prognosis . Several reports have indicated that PCNSL is also related
to EBV infection, and EBV-related PCNSL occurs more frequently in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients and organ transplant
recipients with severely decreased immunocompetence . However, EBV-related PCNSL rarely occurs in patients treated with immunosuppressive
therapy. Herein, we describe a RA patient treated with MTX who developed MTX-associated and EBV-related PCNSL. A Japanese female patient of
between 60 and 70 years of age was admitted to the emergency room in our hospital because of sudden convulsion and impaired consciousness in
September 2012. She had been diagnosed with RA two decades earlier. She began MTX therapy in 2005, and etanercept was added the next year,
but was then changed to adalimumab (ADA) in 2009. Just before admission to our hospital, she was undergoing treatment with ADA
(40 mg/2 weeks), MTX (14 mg/week), and predonisolone (PSL) (2 mg/day). In the emergency room, her level of consciousness was E1V1M1 on the
Glasgow Coma Scale. Additionally, her upper and lower limbs had a convulsive seizure. Although she did not have anisocoria, her eyeballs
were deviated to the left side. After we administered diazepam, her convulsions were improved. However, relapse occurred within a short
duration, and the patient was therefore admitted to the intensive care unit. On admission, hematological and biochemical testing (Table 1)
revealed an elevated white blood cell count to 14730 per microliter (neutrophils, 64.0%; lymphocytes, 24.0%). C-reactive protein and lactate
dehydrogenase were also increased to 0.81 mg/dl (normal range; <0.2 mg/dl) and 306 IU/l (normal range; 110〜220 IU/l), respectively.
Immunological test results were within almost normal ranges, except for rheumatoid factor (RF; 64 IU/ml, normal range; <15 U/ml).
Procalcitonin and beta-D-glucan were negative, and ferritin and soluble interleukin-2 receptor were within normal ranges. EBV antibody
showed a pattern indicative of previous infection (EB-VCA-IgG, 160 titer; EBV-VCA-IgM, negative; anti-EBNA, 80 titer). Cranial computed
tomography (CT) scan showed low density areas in the frontal lobes of both sides and the nucleus basalis of the left side (Figure 1).
Convulsions disappeared following repeated administration of diazepam. However, we performed artificial ventilation because of severe
respiratory depression. Additionally, we discontinued MTX and ADA, and increased PSL dose to 10 mg/day.Table 1 Laboratory data upon hospital
admission CBC Biochemistry Immunology Infection
WBC14730/μlCRP0.81mg/dlIgG1335mg/dlPCT<0.02ng/mlNeu.64%TP7.7g/dlIgA113mg/dlβ-D<5.0pg/mlglucanLym.24%Alb4.4g/dlIgM103mg/dlEBV-
VCA0.15IgGMono.11.5%BUN13mg/dlC3155.9mg/dlEBV-VCAnegativeIgMEos.0.5%Cr0.6mg/dlC427.2mg/dlEBNA0.1Baso.0%eGFR75.99ml/min.CH5063.8U/mlT-SPOT
TbnegativeRBC391x104/μlT-bil0.7mg/dlANA1:40, Ho.Hb12.3g/dlAST25IU/lRF64IU/mlHct36.8%ALT12IU/lMMP-333.2ng/mlABG (O2;
3 L)Plt25.8x104/μlALP246IU/lSS-A Ab10.1U/mlpH7.29γGTP27IU/lSS-B
Ab8.9U/mlpCO249TorrLDH306IU/lMPO-<3.0IU/mlpO274TorrANCANa143mEq/lPR3-<3.5IU/mlHCO324.3mmol/lANCAK4.4mEq/lsIL-2R391U/mlBE−3.4mmol/lCl105mEq/lSpO294.8%Ca9.3mEq/lWhite
blood cell count was elevated, and C-reactive protein and lactate dehydrogenase were increased.Figure 1 Cranial computed tomography scan on
admission. Arrows indicated low density areas at the frontal lobes of both sides and the nucleus basalis of left side. Laboratory data upon
hospital admission White blood cell count was elevated, and C-reactive protein and lactate dehydrogenase were increased. Cranial computed
tomography scan on admission. Arrows indicated low density areas at the frontal lobes of both sides and the nucleus basalis of left side. On
the sixth day after admission, we performed a contrast-enhanced CT scan, which showed a densely stained mass with surrounding edema in the
left frontal lobes and nucleus basalis, and enlarged lymph nodes in the right supraclavicular fossa (Figure 2). Furthermore, the
accumulation in swollen lymph nodes was detected on fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (Figure 3). Therefore, we
performed a biopsy of the right cervical lymph node.Figure 2 Contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan on the sixth day after admission.
(a) Arrow indicated showed densely stained masses with surrounding edema at the left frontal lobe, and (b) circle showed many swollen lymph
nodes in the right supraclavicular fossa.Figure 3 Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography scan. Arrow and circle
indicated the accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose in the swollen lymph nodes of the right supraclavicular fossa. Contrast-enhanced computed
tomography scan on the sixth day after admission. (a) Arrow indicated showed densely stained masses with surrounding edema at the left
frontal lobe, and (b) circle showed many swollen lymph nodes in the right supraclavicular fossa. Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission
tomography/computed tomography scan. Arrow and circle indicated the accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose in the swollen lymph nodes of the
right supraclavicular fossa. Histopathological examination of the right cervical lymph node showed the disappearance of follicle structure
and dispersed Hodgkin-like large cells with small lymphocytes. These large cells were positive for CD30, Bob1 and Oct2, undeterminable for
CD20 and PAX5, and negative for CD15. This finding differed from typical Hodgkin lymphoma, which generally has immunoreactivity for CD30,
CD15, and PAX5 (Figure 4 a–e). Many of the small lymphocytes were CD20-positive cells. However, these were negative for MIB-1, and IgH
reconstitution was not observed by polymerase chain reaction, therefore we could not diagnose this case as B-cell lymphoma. In situ
hybridization showed EBV-encoded ribonucleic acid (EBER) in the nuclei of lymphoma cells (Figure 4f). Consequently, we could not establish a
histopathological diagnosis and therefore diagnosed this case as MTX-associated LPD after considering the drug history of the patient.Figure
4 Biopsy of swollen lymph nodes in the right supraclavicular fossa. Hematoxylin and eosin staining showed (a) the disappearance of follicle
structure, and (b) dispersed Hodgkin-like large cells with small lymphocytes. (c)-(e) Immunostaining for CD30, Bob1 and Oct2 showed positive
large cells. (f) In situ hybridization showed Epstein-Barr virus encoded ribonucleic acid in the nuclei of lymphoma cells. Biopsy of swollen
lymph nodes in the right supraclavicular fossa. Hematoxylin and eosin staining showed (a) the disappearance of follicle structure, and (b)
dispersed Hodgkin-like large cells with small lymphocytes. (c)-(e) Immunostaining for CD30, Bob1 and Oct2 showed positive large cells. (f)
In situ hybridization showed Epstein-Barr virus encoded ribonucleic acid in the nuclei of lymphoma cells. After withdrawal of MTX, patient
symptoms gradually improved. The masses at both frontal lobes and the left nucleus basalis, and the lymphadenopathy in the right
supraclavicular fossa were gradually reduced, as observed by CT scan (Figure 5) and there was no accumulation of FDG after 3 months. The
patient was treated with PSL and salazosulfapyridine (1000 mg/day) for RA, and no recurrence of lymphoma was observed more than one year
after the discontinuation of MTX.Figure 5 Cranial computed tomography scan after the withdrawal of methotrexate. The masses of (A) right
frontal lobe, (B) left frontal lobe, and (C) left nucleus basalis were gradually reduced. Cranial computed tomography scan after the
withdrawal of methotrexate. The masses of (A) right frontal lobe, (B) left frontal lobe, and (C) left nucleus basalis were gradually
reduced. MTX is an important drug used for the treatment of RA. Hence, over time, the frequency of MTX use and the maximum dosage has been
increasing. However, several studies have reported that LPD more readily develops in immunodeficient patients treated with MTX . The
characteristics of MTX-LPD are that 1) lymphoma regresses spontaneously following the withdrawal of MTX treatment , 2) MTX-LPD is associated
with EBV seropositivity , and 3) histological findings show various tissue types including diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, Hodgkin lymphoma,
polymorphic-LPD, and Hodgkin like-lymphoma . EBV is an oncogenic virus associated with several malignant diseases such as Burkitt’s
lymphoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and so on . These malignancies are usually considered to be the result of virus reactivation . EBV was
demonstrated in approximately 40% of MTX-LPD cases, and most of them regress spontaneously . The mechanism of MTX-LPD is that the
immunosuppressive state induced by MTX treatment may allow reactivation of EBV as normal anti-virus surveillance is impaired, and some MTX-
LPDs associated with EBV may regress after MTX withdrawal by the restoration of normal immunity . In our case, a RA patient with a history
of MTX administration had a sudden convulsion, multiple brain tumors, and lymphadenopathy observable by CT scan. We could not make a
definite diagnosis by histological findings of cervical lymph node biopsy, which demonstrated Hodgkin-like large cells and many
CD20-positive lymphocytes. Additionally, EBERs were detected in the nuclei of lymphoma cells. Therefore, we diagnosed MTX-LPD mediated by
EBV. However, we could perform the biopsy not from central nervous system (CNS) lesion but from cervical lymph node. In fact, we could not
judge whether the CNS tumor was MTX-LPD or not. After withdrawal of MTX, symptoms gradually improved, and both the CNS tumors and cervical
lymphadenopathy remarkably decreased, as observed by cranial CT scan. Hence, we could conclude that these tumors are from same origin. In
this case, ADA was also administered but discontinued after onset of convulsions, concomitantly with MTX. However, Ramiro et al. indicated
that patients treated with an anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitor did not have an increased risk of lymphoma . Burmester et al.
showed that the greater rate of lymphoma occurrence observed during ADA trials in patients with RA was within the range that might be
expected in a similar RA population not treated with anti-TNF therapy . Therefore, in the present case study, we considered the lymphoma to
be caused by MTX and not ADA. PCNSL occurs in brain, spinal cord, eyeball, cranial nerve, and meninges without affecting other organs. It is
aggressive, and almost always of B-cell origin . Although PCNSL is a rare lymphoma that accounts for only approximately 3% of all primary
brain tumors, the incidence tends to increase within the last 10 years. High-dose MTX and radiation therapy is recommended as a treatment of
PCNSL . Furthermore, previous reports uphold the relationship between EBV and PCNSL . In general, EBV-related PCNSL has a poor prognosis.
Moreover, it occurs in some AIDS patients, organ transplant recipients and a few immunocompetent individuals . Furthermore, there are a few
reports that PCNSLs occurred in patients treated with immunosuppressive drugs. Kleinschmidt-DeMasters et al. showed four cases of EBV-
related PCNSL occurring in older patients who were treated with immunosuppressive drugs (MTX, mycophenolate mofetil, azathioprine, PSL,
cyclophosphamide, and so on). In one case, in which the patient was treated with MTX, the lymphoma improved following the cessation of MTX
and specific treatment for the toxoplasmosis . Her neurological deficits markedly improved, but she developed renal failure and died on
approximately 3 months later. Migita et al. also reported a patient with RA who developed an EBV-related PCNSL during treatment with MTX.
They underwent surgical resection and MTX withdrawal, resulting in MTX-LPD improvement without any recurrence . In our case, PCNSL markedly
regressed only by the discontinuation of MTX, and there is presently no recurrence. This finding confirms the potentiality of the
spontaneous nature of MTX-LPD regression following cessation of MTX treatment. We have presented a rare case in which a RA patient treated
with MTX developed MTX-associated, EBV-related PCNSL, which regressed markedly upon the withdrawal of MTX. Since current treatment
strategies for RA recommend MTX as a first choice therapy in early stages of disease, the frequency of MTX use and the maximum dosage has
been increasing. Therefore, we need to pay attention to the development of MTX-LPD for RA patients who are treated with MTX. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publications of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of the journal. Rheumatoid arthritis Methotrexate Lymphoproliferative disorder World
Health Organization Methotrexate-related lymphoproliferative disorder Primary central nerve system lymphoma Acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome Epstein-Barr virus Adalimumab Predonisolone Rheumatoid factor Computed tomography Fluorodeoxyglucose Epstein-Barr virus encoded
ribonucleic acid Central nervous system Tumor necrosis factor Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions HS, HD, TK, KS, MI, SN, and YT made substantial contributions to conception and acquisition of data and analysis and
interpretation of data. HM and OI helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors do not
have any acknowledgement to make. None of the authors were recipients of any sources of funding and no funding was received towards the
preparation of the manuscript.
