Double gallbladder is a rare anomaly of the biliary tract. Double gallbladder arising from the left hepatic duct was previously reported
only once in the literature. A case of symptomatic cholelithiasis in a double gallbladder, diagnosed on preoperative ultrasound, computed
tomography (CT) and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatogram (ERCP) is reported. At laparoscopic cholangiography via the accessory
gallbladder no accessory cystic duct was visualized. After conversion to open cholecystectomy, the duplicated gallbladder was found to arise
directly from the left hepatic duct; it was resected and the duct repaired. We emphasize that a careful intraoperative cholangiographic
evaluation of the accessory gallbladder is mandatory in order to prevent inadvertent injury to bile ducts, since a large variety of ductal
abnormality may exist. Double gallbladder is a rare anomaly of the biliary tract, occurring in about 1 per 3800 cases at autopsy.1 Two cases
of double gallbladders managed laparoscopically have been reported previously.2,3 We report herein another patient in whom laparoscopic
cholecystectomy was attempted. The case represents a very rare variety of a double gallbladder, only once previously reported in the
literature.4 It highlights possible anomaly of the accessory biliary system, emphasizing the need for an intraoperative cholangiography in
order to prevent iatrogenic injuries to the bile ducts. A 69-year-old female presented with several months history of right upper abdominal
and epigastric pain. Ultrasonography revealed a gallbladder containing multiple stones and a normal-size common bile duct. In addition, a
cystic structure was noted lateral to the left hepatic duct, raising the possibility of an accessory gallbladder. Computed tomography (CT)
and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatogram (ERCP) confirmed the presence of an accessory, partially intrahepatic gallbladder, which
also contained stones (Figure 1). No ductal stones were visualized, and liver function tests were normal. Since the accessory gallbladder
did not have an identified cystic duct on ERCP, the laparoscopic procedure started with a double cholangiogram through the cystic duct of
the normal gallbladder and the accessory gallbladder ((Figure 2). No accessory cystic duct was, however, visualized, and the laparoscopic
procedure was converted to an open procedure. Cholecystectomy of the primary gallbladder was completed, and a cholecystectomy of the
accessory gallbladder was performed in a retrograde fashion. The accessory gallbladder was found to have no cystic duct and originated
directly from the distal left hepatic duct. It was dissected off the lateral wall of the left hepatic duct, and the resulting 3 mm defect
was closed with 5-0 polydioxanone. Completion cholangiogram revealed several small stones in the distal common bile duct, which was then
explored (Figure 3). Recovery was uneventful, and the T-tube cholangiogram was normal. Pathology report described a 3 Ã— 4 cm accessory
gallbladder containing three stones. Histology revealed chronic cholecystitis with a mild dysplasia of the mucosa. Preoperative ERCP
demonstrating double gallbladder with stones. (See arrows.) Intraoperative cholangiogram performed via the accessory gallbladder. (Upper
arrow shows the left hepatic duct. Lower arrow points at the accessory gallbladder.) Completion T-tube cholangiogram showing continuity of
the biliary tree. (Upper arrow shows the left hepatic duct. Lower arrow points at the pancreatic duct.) Double gallbladder is a biliary
anomaly usually not diagnosed preoperatively. Instead, it often represents an intraoperative surprise2 or is missed during the operation,
only to be diagnosed at postoperative ERCP, performed for persistent biliary symptoms.5,6 In our case, both gallstone-containing
gallbladders were probably symptomatic. The presence of the accessory gallbladder was suggested by the sonogram and confirmed on pre-
operative ERCP and CT scan. The operation was started laparoscopically, but was converted to an open procedure due to the absence of the
accessory cystic duct. This case represents a type VI in the large spectrum of accessory gallbladders as proposed by Mochizuki7 (Table 1),
or type C as proposed by Harlafits et al. (Table 2). This rare variety of the accessory gallbladder has been reported only once.4 Among 207
cases reviewed by Harlafits et al.,4 the majority of the anomalies consisted of duplicated gallbladders sharing the same cystic duct (Type
A), or accessory gallbladders, with two cystic ducts entering common bile duct separately (Type B). The large spectrum of ductal anomalies
associated with a double gallbladder mandates an intra-operative cholangiogram prior to the resection of the accessory gallbladder. Such an
approach would minimize the risks of inadvertent injury to the biliary ductal system. Classification of double gallbladder. Adopted from
Mochizuki S, Makita T7 Classification of double gallbladder. Adopted from Herlaftis N, Gray SW, Skandalakis JE4
