This is a case presentation of an usual nature, a 43-year-old Hispanic female, multigravida presenting with physical findings of massive
ascites. In most instances, the presence of massive ascites is associated with malignancies, tuberculosis or perforated visous. In this
case, the diagnosis of extensive endometriosis with ascites is reported as a very rare complication of the disease. Endometriosis associated
with massive ascites is sufficiently rare with less than 20 cases being reported since 1954.l Most cases of hemorrhagic ascites are found in
patients with underlying malignancies, such as hepatoma or ovarian carcinoma, in tuberculosis, or with a perforated duodenal ulcer.
Endometriosis, however, is an exceptionally rare cause.2 A 43-year-old Hispanic female Gravida 3 Para 3 was transferred from an outlying
hospital with complaints of acute onset abdominal pain located primarily in the right lower quadrant. The patient described the pain as
being sharp in intensity. It was not associated with any physical activity. Bowel movements were normal, and she denied nausea or vomiting.
Her only previous complaint had been generalized abdominal bloating since 1990. She was admitted through the emergency room at the outlying
hospital where she underwent extensive evaluation. Laboratory investigations revealed a normal initial complete blood count (CBC) with an
increase in white blood cell count (WBC) to 15 900 thousand, containing 91% polymorphonuculear neutrophiles, 6% lymphocytes, 2% bands, and
1% monocytes, on hospital day two. The patient was transferred on this date and taken to surgery within two hours of admission. The
preoperative white count was down to 11 800 with a similar differential. Urinalysis with culture and sensitivity was negative for infection.
Chem 7 and liver function tests were normal. BHCG was negative. Chest X-ray revealed right lower lobe subsegmental atelectasis. Abdominal
flat plate revealed nonspecific gas pattern. Pelvic ultrasound demonstrated a complex mass in the cul-de-sac with septations extending into
the right lower quadrant of the abdomen as well as a significant amount of intraperitoneal fluid in the pelvis and upper abdomen. The
patient was hospitalized for two days. Despite Demerol injections every three hours, her pain did not subside. She was placed empirically on
Cefotan 1 gm every 12 hours 24 hours prior to transfer to Woman's Hospital. In general, the patient's clinical picture was worsening with no
evidence of specific etiology for her abdominal pain. Consultations were obtained, and she was transferred to a tertiary care hospital for
further care. Her medical history was significant in that she had been diagnosed with Stage IV endometriosis and extensive pelvic adhesions.
She had undergone a laparoscopic procedure in 1990 for vaporization of endometriosis and a left salpingo-oophorectomy. On her admission to
the hospital, she had a markedly distended, tender abdomen. Bowel sounds were hypoactive. Diffuse rebound tenderness and a fluid wave were
present. She was fairly anxious. Pelvic examination was difficult to access uterus and adnexa secondary to distension. She was transferred
to the operating room within two hours of admission. The working diagnosis at that time was a ruptured endometrioma vs ruptured ovarian
cyst. Open laparoscopy revealed the large amount of brown, greenish fluid in the pelvis and abdomen. An exploratory laparotomy was
performed. Multiple endometrial implants were present throughout the anterior abdominal wall, omentum, small and large bowel, as well as the
pelvic organs. The total ascitic fluid measured approximately 2000 cc. The fluid, although not sent for cell block and cytology, had the
appearance of a transudate rather than exudate. Cultures of the fluid were negative. Once the fluid was aspirated, the pelvis was evaluated
more clearly and a ruptured endometrioma was noted on the right ovary. There was no evidence of bowel perforation. A total abdominal
hysterectomy and right salpingo-oophorectomy were performed. Final pathology revealed proliferative endometrial pattern, myometrium with
indistinct nodular areas of adenomyosis and leiomyoma right ovary, which measured 4×5×7 cm containing a 5 cm ruptured endometrioma without
evidence of an adjacent functional cyst. There were no signs of inflammation in any of the pelvic tissues examined. The simultaneous
occurrence of ascites and endometriosis is rare. The first case was reported in 1954 by Brews.1 The combination of pleural effusions is even
more rare with fewer than ten cases in the world literature.3 The exact cause for ascites associated with endometriosis remains obscure.
Bernstein et al in 1961 proposed a mechanism whereby the rupture of chocolate cysts release blood and endometrial cells into the peritoneal
cavity. The formation of ascites and dense adhesions are the result of irritation on serosal surfaces caused by free blood in the peritoneal
cavity.4 Ascites has also been found in extensive endometriosis without rupture of chocolate cysts. Theoretically, transdiaphragmatic
lymphatics allows spread of ascitic fluid into the pleural cavity, as seen with Meig's syndrome.5 In reviewing cases since 1954, the
patients were generally young with an average age of 27 years (Table 1). The majority of patients were nulliparous. The most common
presentation was increasing abdominal girth, often accompanied by pain and dysmenorrhea. The average amount of ascitic fluid was 3,404 cc
with the fluid varying between 150 to 7500 cc. The fluid was characteristically dark brown or bloody. Cytology was negative for malignancy.
Pleural effusions were present in 33% of the reported cases.1–6 The present case report demonstrated similar findings on presentation to the
hospital. Patient characteristics in cases with endometriosis with ascites. The treatment of choice for a ruptured endometrioma is yet to be
established (Table 2). The most definitive therapy is surgical with hysterectomy and removal of both ovaries. This method, however, seems
too radical for women wishing to preserve their fertility. As a consequence, medical therapy with hormonal management has been attempted.
Hormonal therapy includes progestin, progestin and estrogen, depomedroxyprogesterone acetate, danazol, or GnRH agonists.5 Treatment Options.
The physician must consider endometriosis in the differential diagnosis whenever both ascites and a pelvic mass are found in the same
patient. Pleural effusion may be associated with endometriosis, but this finding is very rare. The definitive therapy appears to be surgical
castration since no recurrence of ascites or progression of endometriosis has been reported in the management.4 However, ascites has been
suppressed with hormonal therapy, and this appears to be promising in the treatment of this complication, especially for women wishing to
retain their fertility.6
