The majority of lymphomas of the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)-type arise in the stomach, but extragastric locations are also
frequently encountered. Due to previous results indicating that somatostatin receptor (SSTR)-expression distinguishes between gastric and
extragastric MALT-type lymphoma, we have initiated a study to evaluate the role of SSTR-scintigraphy for staging and follow-up of patients
with extragastric manifestations of MALT-type lymphoma. A total of 30 consecutive patients, including 24 with primary extragastric MALT-type
lymphoma, 5 patients with dissemination to extragastric sites (including colon, lung, parotid, ocular adnexa and breast) following an
initial gastric MALT-lymphoma and one patient with spread to stomach, lung and lymph nodes following parotid lymphoma were prospectively
studied. All patients had histologically verified MALT-type lymphoma: 2 patients had lymphoma presenting in the lung, 9 in the ocular
adnexa, 7 had lymphomas in the parotid, 2 patients had disease located in the breast, 3 patients had lymph-node relapse following MALT-type
lymphoma of the parotid, the lacrimal gland and the thyroid, and 1 had primary MALT-lymphoma of the liver. All patients underwent SSTR-
scintigraphy using 111In-DTPA-D-Phe1-Octreotide (111In-OCT) before initiation of therapy, while 13 also had a second scan after treatment.
The results of gamma camera imaging were compared to conventional staging. No positive scans could be obtained in patients with
dissemination following gastric lymphoma, while all patients with primary extragastric lymphoma had positive scans at the site of
histologically documented involvement before initiation of therapy. In addition, also the patient with secondary spread to stomach, lung and
lymph nodes was positive in all documented lymphoma sites. In one patient, focal tracer uptake in projection to the maxillary sinus was
documented, which was bioptically verified as inflammation. In the scans performed after therapy, focal tracer accumulation in the left
orbit indicated persistance of disease following irradiation in one patient with otherwise negative work-up, which was verified by MRI and
biopsy 6 months later. In another patient, a positive scan indicated disease relapse in the lacrimal gland 9 months before clinical
verification by means of ultrasound. In one patient, a focus not present in the pretherapeutic scan was found in the ethmoidal sinus,
corresponding to a hyperplastic polyp. Both SST-scan as well as CT indicated disease persistance in one case, while negative scans
corresponding to complete remission as judged by conventional staging were obtained following therapy in the remaining patients, and absence
of relapse has been confirmed for a median follow-up of 2 years. These results indicate that 111In-OCT is an excellent tool for staging and
non-invasive therapy-monitoring in extragastric MALT-type lymphomas. These data further confirm our initial finding that gastric MALT-type
lymphomas do not express relevant amounts of respective SSTR, and that SSTR-scanning is able to distinguish between gastric vs extragastric
origin of MALT-type lymphoma irrespective of the site of presentation.Â© 2001 Cancer Research Campaign http://www.bjcancer.com
