We present a case of medullary sclerosis of the appendicular skeleton in a patient with chronic renal insufficiency for whom MR imaging
findings were characteristic. T1- and T2-weighted MR images showed multiple vertical lines (medullary streaks) of low signal intensity in
the metaphyses and diaphyses of the distal femur and proximal tibia. In renal osteodystrophy, musculoskeletal manifestations associated with
chronic renal insufficiency are common and may be related to the stage of the disease or its treatment. They encompass a range of conditions
which includes secondary hyperparathyroidism, osteosclerosis, osteoporosis, osteomalacia, soft-tissue and vascular calcification, amyloid
deposition, tendon rupture, infection, and avascular necrosis (1, 2). While the various characteristic imaging features seen in chronic
renal insufficiency have been reported, only a few studies (1-3) have described the bone marrow pattern revealed by MR imaging in renal
osteodystrophy. In this report, we describe the radiologic findings, including those of MR imaging, of medullary sclerosis of the
appendicular skeleton in a patient with chronic renal insufficiency after hemodialysis. A 34-year-old man who for nine years had been
undergoing hemodialysis for chronic renal insufficiency, and 20 days earlier had fallen over, visited our hospital complaining of pain in
both knees. Physical examination revealed mild tenderness in the suprapatellar area, the popliteal fossa of the left knee and the
infrapatellar area of the right, and in both knee joints movement was limited. Laboratory data included a serum calcium level of 9.0 (normal
range, 8.2-10.7) mg/dL, phosphorous of 5.8 (normal range, 2.5-4.5) mg/dL, and alkaline phosphatase of 550 (normal range, 30-110 IU/L. Serum
protein was 5.9 (normal range, 6.4-8.5) g/dL, and serum BUN and creatinine were 86 (normal range, 7-20) and 14.2 (normal range, 0.7-1.4)
mg/dL, respectively. Intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) was 1941 (normal range, 10-65) pg/mL, serum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D was 4.1 (normal
range, 20-60 pg/mL, and serum aluminum was 35.8 (normal range, < 60) ug/L. Plain radiographs of both knee joints showed arterial
calcification of pipe-stem appearance in both lower legs, and fine calcifications in the suprapatellar area of the left knee (Fig. 1A) and
the infrapatellar area of the right. The bony density of the distal femur and proximal tibia was slightly increased. US revealed focal
thickening, decreased echogenicity with obliteration of the normal fibrillar pattern, and scattered calcifications with posterior shadowing
at the distal insertion site of the left quadriceps tendon and the proximal insertion site of the right patellar. In the right knee, there
was also complete discontinuity of this tendon (Fig. 1B). Sagittal T1-weighted MR imaging (TR/TE = 600 ms/35 ms) of the left knee
demonstrated obliteration of the normal laminated appearance and focal thickening, with inhomogeneously increased signal intensity from the
insertion site of the quadriceps tendon to the base of the patella (Fig. 1C). Sagittal T2-weighted MR imaging (TR /TE = 2500 ms/80 ms)
revealed slightly increased signal intensity in the thickened area, and T2-weighted MRI also showed an area of abnormal increased signal
intensity within the popliteus muscle of the left knee (Fig. 1D). Sagittal and coronal T1- and T2-weighted MRI also demonstrated multiple
vertical lines (medullary streaks) of low signal intensity in the metaphyses and diaphyses of the distal femur and proximal tibia. The lines
were rough and irregular (Fig. 1E). For further evaluation of the nature or cause of the vertical lines seen on MR images, CT scans of both
femora were obtained. Unenhanced scans showed coarse and thickened trabeculae in the metaphyses of both distal femora, with a moderate
amount of joint effusion in the suprapatellar bursae (Fig. 1F). We believe that the vertical lines of bone marrow of the femur and tibia
revealed by MR imaging were related to the thickened trabeculae seen on CT scans. In patients with chronic renal insufficiency,
abnormalities involving the musculoskeletal system are numerous and frequent (1, 2).Osteosclerosis is a well known feature of renal
osteodystrophy, occurring in 9-34% of patients (1), and although the cause is not clearly understood, PTH has been implicated because of its
stimulation of osteoblastic activity (1). In patients with osteosclerosis, iliac crest biopsy reveals trabecular thickening and significant
fibrosis (4). Osteosclerosis has a strong predilection for the axial skeleton, where cancellous, rather than cortical, bone in predominant.
The areas of the axial skeleton that demonstrate osteosclerosis include the vertebral bodies (rugger jersey spine), pelvis, ribs, and
clavicle, and the appendicular skeleton, particularly the metaphyseal regions of long bones, may also be involved (1, 4). As in our case,
the epiphysis of the distal femur and proximal tibia are usually spared. Calcification can be seen in the ocular tissues, arteries,
subcutaneous and periarticular soft tissues, and viscera. The factors causing soft and vascular calcification include hypercalcemia, local
tissue damage, alkalosis, and increased calcium-phosphorous product in the extracellular fluid. As in our case, arterial calcification
occurs in medium and intimal elastic tissues, giving a pipe-stem appearance without prominent luminal involvement (1). In cases involving
chronic renal insufficiency, spontaneous rupture and avulsion of a tendon can occur. The factors causing tears in a tendon are PTH excess,
tendon calcification, and chronic acidosis with connective elastosis. These changes result in diminished tendon tensile strength and
accelerated degeneration (1). In our case, the rupture of the popliteus tendon might have been caused by recent trauma rather than chronic
renal insufficiency. In patients with chronic renal insufficiency including osteosclerosis, brown tumors, skeletal deformity, fatty marrow
inversion, osteonecrosis, transient bone marrow edema and occult stress fracture, MRI is helpful in the evaluation of bone marrow
abnormalities (2, 3). Ito et al. (5) reported that in chronic renal failure, T1 relaxation time was related to the cellular histologic
findings of the vertebrae. The prolonged T1 relaxation time of the vertebrae observed in cases involving osteosclerosis was due to
hypercellularity, the presence of thickened or many small irregular trabeculae, or peritrabecular fibrosis. Olmastroni et al. (3) reported
that the thickened irregular trabeculae in the proximal femoral metaphyses were observed in three of 14 patients with renal osteodystrophy
who underwent MR. Trabecular bone thickening was clearly demonstrated by MR as very low signal intensity cortical sleeves or medullary
streaks. In summary, the vertical lines of low signal intensity revealed by MRI in the metaphyses and diaphyses of the proximal tibia and
distal femur appeared to correspond to the trabecular thickening that may be caused mainly by secondary hyperparathyroidism. We have
described the MR imaging findings of medullary osteosclerosis of the long bone as medullary streaks, and in renal osteodystrophy, other
radiologic findings include spontaneous tendon rupture. A 34-year-old man with chronic renal insufficiency and pain in both knees. A.
Lateral radiograph of the left knee shows fine calcific opacities (open arrows) at the superior aspect of the patella. B. Longitudinal US of
the right knee reveals discontinuity of the normal fibrillar patterns (arrows) and arc-like calcifications (open arrows), with posterior
shadowing at the proximal insertion site of the patellar tendon. P= patella. C. T1-weighted sagittal MR image of the left knee shows focal
thickening with inhomogeneous increased signal intensity (arrows) at the insertion site of the quadriceps tendon. D. T2-weighted sagittal MR
image of the left knee shows a slight increase in signal intensity at the insertion site of the quadriceps tendon (arrows) and abnormal
increased signal intensity within the popliteus muscle (open arrow). E. T1-weighted coronal MR image shows medullary streaks of low signal
in the metaphyses and diaphyses of the distal femur and proximal tibia. The epiphysis of the femur and tibia were relatively spared. F.
Unenhanced CT scan shows irregularly thickened trabeculae (arrows) in the bone marrow of the distal femora. Also note the presence of joint
effusion (open arrows) in the suprapatellar bursae of both knees.
