Primary antiphopholipid syndrome (APS) is a disease producing vascular thrombus with antiphospholipid antibody without association with
autoimmune diseases as systemic lupus erythematosus. Retinal vein occlusion is a rare vascular manifestation in primary APS. We describe 2
cases of primary APS presenting with developing blurred vision. Each had central retinal vein occlusion and high titer of IgG
anticardiolipin antibody. Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is a disorder of recurrent arterial or venous thrombosis, pregnancy losses and/or
thrombocytopenia associated with persistently positive results of anticardiolipin (aCL) antibody or lupus anticoagulant tests1). This
disorder may occur in association with systemic lupus erythematosus or other autoimmune diseases, or it may occur alone (Primary APS). The
deep and superficial veins of the lower extremity are the most common sites of the venous thrombosis2). But central retinal vein occlusion
is rare in primary APS. The highest level of IgG aCL antibody is more often associated with retinal vein occlusion3). We want to report two
cases of retinal vein occlusion with IgG aCL antibody as the first manifestation of the primary APS in two male patients. A 21-year-old male
patient was referred for evaluation of thrombocytopenia and blurred vision in his left eye for one month. He did not have any ocular or
systemic diseases before. He was neither a smoker nor an alcoholic, nor did he have a history of drug abuse. Family history was also
unremarkable. His height was 175 centimeters and his body weight was 68 kilograms. His blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg. The corrected visual
acuity on his first visit was 20/20 in his right eye and 20/20 in his left eye. On ophthalmic examination, the left eye disclosed branch
retinal vein occlusion and superficial flame-shaped retinal hemorrhages on superotemporal arcade (Figure 1). The right eye showed normal
sizes of the retinal vessels and retina. On laboratory studies, platelets were 37,700/mm3, 7,520/mm3 leukocytes (67% neutrophils, 21.6%
lymphocytes), 15.6 g/dL hemoglobulin. Erythrocyte sedimenstration rate (ESR) was 2 mm/hr, 0.2 mg/dL CRP. Prothrombin (PT) and partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT) were in normal range. Serum creatinine, aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotrasferase, alkaline phosphatase
and urine analysis were all normal range. An immunologic study revealed high titer (>120 U/mL) IgG aCL antibody (normal, <10 U/mL) but the
antinuclear antibody, anti-dsDNA antibody, lupus anticoagulant, IgM antiphospholipid antibody and antiplatelet antibody were negative. The
serologic test for syphilis was negative; protein C and S antigen were also normal range. He was started on warfarin to maintain an
international normalization unit (INR) of 2.0 to 3.0 and high dose prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) for a month at first. One month later, the
patient’s visual acuity deteriorated to 20/400 in his left eye during anticoagulant therapy. Warfarin was switched to a low dose of aspirn
(100 mg/day) after developing viterus hemorrhage. On the second month, prednisolone was tapered to 10 mg daily because platelet kept above
50,000/mm3. His visual acuity did not change during follow-up a year’s. A 60-year-old male patient presented with blurred vision in his
right eye. There was no history of diabetes mellitus or hypertension. He also did not have any ocular or systemic diseases before. He is
neither a smoker nor did he have a history of drug abuse. Family history was also unremarkable. His height was 173 centimeters and his body
weight was 73 kilograms. His blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg. The uncorrected visual acuity on his first visit was 18/20 in his right eye and
18/20 in his left eye. On ophthalmic examination, the right eye disclosed mild to moderate tortuous and dilated branch retinal vein and
superficial flame-shaped retinal hemorrhages on superior and inferomedial arcade. The left eye showed normal sizes of the retinal vessels
and retina. On laboratory studies, platelets were 154,000/mm3, 4,500/mm3 leukocytes (63.6% neutrophils, 30.0% lymphocytes), 12.8 g/dL
hemoglobulin. ESR was 7 mm/hr, 0.4 mg/dL CRP. PT and aPTT were in normal range. An immunologic study revealed 80 U/mL IgG aCL antibody
(normal <10 U/mL), 5.1 PL IgM antiphospholipid antibody (normal <5.0 PL) and positive lupus anticoagulant antibody. But the antinuclear
antibody, anti-dsDNA antibody and antiplatelet antibody were negative. The serologic test for syphilis was negative and protein C and S
antigen were also normal range. He has been maintained with low dose of aspirn (100 mg) daily. His visual acuity kept well during
antiplatelet therapy but the blurred vision persisted. Proposed diagnostic criteria for primary APS was a positive test of aCL antibody or
lupus anticoagulant (LA) antibody, measured twice with a minimum interval of three months and one major clinical manifestation of APS, such
as venous thrombosis, arterial thrombosis or thrombocytopenia in an individual without any underlying predisposing disorder3).
Anticardiolipne antibodies, isotype IgG and Ig M were measured by means of an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay and the results were
classified as negative (0 to 5 U/mL), low positive (5 to 15 U/mL), moderately positive (15 to 60 U/mL) or high positive (greater than 60
U/mL)4). The two cases were compatible with primary APS as they had retinal vein thrombosis with high titer of IgG aCL antibody without
association to other immunologic diseases. According to Asherson et al.5) the prevalence of ocular vaso-occlusive disease patients with
lupus without antiphospholipid antibodies was less than 2%. When these antibodies were present, its prevalence increased fourfold. The
recurrence of cerebral vascular thrombosis in APS was also more frequent in patients with high titers (over 100 U/mL) of aCL6). IgG isotype
was significantly more frequent than IgM isotype and seemed to correlate best with clinical disease7). A previous study showed that all
ocular vaso-occlusive patients with primary APS had high titer IgG aCL antibody, but the prevalence of lupus anticoagulant was as low as 29
percent3). In our 2 cases, IgG aCL antibodies were high titer (over 80 U/mL) and persisted for more than 4 months but IgM antiphopholipid
antibody was normal or low positive. Ocular symptoms associated with primary APS were transient blurring of vision, decreased vision,
transient diplopia and transient field loss associated with headache and photophobia. Fundoscopic abnormalities were vein tortuosity,
swelling optic disc, vitreous and preretinal hemorrhage, microaneurysms8). The two patients initially complained of blurred vision without
decreased visual acuity, but the vision of one patient rapidly deteriorated because of vitreous hemorrhage during anticoagulant therapy.
Coexistent thrombosis and thrombocytopenia presented a major therapeutic dilemma in the anticoagulated patient. Lower levels of
anticoagulation have been utilized (INR 2.0–3.0) for platelet count of 50,000–100,0009). In case 1, who had retinal vein thrombosis and
thrombocytopenia, viterus hemorrhage occurred during anticoagulation therapy with warfarin. In conclusion, it is necessary to evaluate the
APS in patients with retinal vein thrombosis without considerable causes, as well as to further study whatever APS is related with retinal
vein thrombosis. Fundus photograph of the left eye with branch retinal vein occlusion with hemorrhages (Case 1).
