5-fluorouracil pharmacokinetics, dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase-activity and DNA sequence analysis were compared between a patient with
extreme 5-fluorouracil induced toxicity and six control patients with normal 5-fluorouracil related symptoms. Patients were treated for
colorectal cancer and received chemotherapy consisting of leucovorin 20 mg m−2 plus 5-fluorouracil 425 mg m−2. Blood sampling was carried
out on day 1 of the first cycle. The 5-fluorouracil area under the curve0→3h in the index patient was 24.1 mg h l−1 compared to 9.8±3.6
(range 5.4–15.3) mg h l−1 in control patients. The 5-fluorouracil clearance was 520 ml min−1 vs 1293±302 (range 980–1780) ml min−1 in
controls. The activity of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase in mononuclear cells was lower in the index patient (5.5 nmol mg h−1) compared to
the six controls (10.3±1.6, range 8.0–11.7 nmol mg h−1). Sequence analysis of the dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase gene revealed that the
index patient was heterozygous for a IVS14+1G>A point mutation. Our results indicate that the inactivation of one dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase allele can result in a strong reduction in 5-fluorouracil clearance, causing severe 5-fluorouracil induced toxicity. British
Journal of Cancer (2002) 86, 1028–1033. DOI: 10.1038/sj/bjc/6600199 www.bjcancer.com © 2002 Cancer Research UK Fluorouracil (5-FU) is widely
used in chemotherapeutic regimens for the treatment of breast-, colorectal- and head- and neck cancer. The cytotoxic mechanism of 5-FU is
complex, requiring intracellular bioconversion of 5-FU into cytotoxic nucleotides (see Figure 1Figure 1Metabolism of 5-FU.
5-Fluoro-2′-deoxyuridine-5′-monophosphate (FdUMP) is the cytotoxic product resulting from a multi-step 5-FU activation route. FdUMP inhibits
the enzyme thymidylate synthase (TS), which leads to intracellular accumulation of deoxy-uridine-monophospate (dUMP) and depletion of deoxy-
thymidine-monophosphate (dTMP). This causes arrest of DNA synthesis. The initial and rate-limiting enzyme in the catabolism of 5-FU is
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD), catalysing the reduction of 5-FU into 5,6-dihydrofluorouracil (DHFU). Subsequently, DHFU is degraded
into fluoro-β-ureidopropionic acid (FUPA) and fluoro-β-alanine (FBAL).). Inhibition of thymidylate synthase by the metabolite
5-fluoro-2′-deoxyuridine-5′-monophosphate is thought to be the main mechanism of cytotoxicity (Pinedo and Peters, 1988) . The cytotoxicity
is caused by only a small part of the administered 5-FU dose, as the majority of 5-FU is rapidly metabolised into inactive metabolites. The
initial and rate-limiting enzyme in the catabolism of 5-FU is dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD), catalysing the reduction of 5-FU into
5,6-dihydrofluorouracil (DHFU). Several groups have suggested a major role of DPD in the regulation of 5-FU metabolism and thus in the
amount of 5-FU available for cytotoxicity (Harris et al, 1990; Fleming et al, 1992a; Lu et al, 1993; Etienne et al, 1994). Indeed, in
patients with DPD enzyme deficiency, 5-FU chemotherapy is associated with severe, life-threatening toxicity (Van Kuilenburg et al, 2000a).
Moreover, a markedly prolonged elimination half-life of 5-FU has been observed in a patient with complete deficiency of DPD enzyme activity
(Diasio et al, 1988). Several mutations in the dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase gene (DPYD), which encodes for the DPD enzyme have recently
been identified (Van Kuilenburg et al, 2000a; Collie-Duguid et al, 2000). Furthermore, the frequency of DPD deficiency has been estimated to
be as high as 2–3% (Etienne et al, 1994; Lu et al, 1995; Chazal et al, 1996). To date, a direct correlation between DPYD gene mutation and
decreased 5-FU clearance has only been suggested but never been proven. In this study, we provide the first detailed analysis of 5-FU
pharmacokinetics in a patient with low DPD-activity due to heterozygosity for a mutant allele of the gene encoding DPD. Metabolism of 5-FU.
5-Fluoro-2′-deoxyuridine-5′-monophosphate (FdUMP) is the cytotoxic product resulting from a multi-step 5-FU activation route. FdUMP inhibits
the enzyme thymidylate synthase (TS), which leads to intracellular accumulation of deoxy-uridine-monophospate (dUMP) and depletion of deoxy-
thymidine-monophosphate (dTMP). This causes arrest of DNA synthesis. The initial and rate-limiting enzyme in the catabolism of 5-FU is
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD), catalysing the reduction of 5-FU into 5,6-dihydrofluorouracil (DHFU). Subsequently, DHFU is degraded
into fluoro-β-ureidopropionic acid (FUPA) and fluoro-β-alanine (FBAL). 5-Fluorouracil was obtained from Sigma Chemical Co. (Zwijndrecht, The
Netherlands). 5,6-Dihydro-5-fluorouracil was kindly provided by Roche Laboratories (Basel, Switzerland). AmpliTaq Taq polymerase and BigDye-
Terminator-Cycle-Sequencing-Ready-Reaction kit were supplied by Perkin Elmer (San Jose, CA, USA). A Quaquik Gel Extraction kit was obtained
from Qiagen (Hilden, Germany). Human heparinised plasma was obtained from the Red Cross Blood Bank (Groningen, The Netherlands). Thymine
(1.85–2.22 GBq mmol−1) was obtained from Moravek Biochemicals (CA, USA) and Lymphoprep (spec.gravity 1.077 g ml−1, 280 mOsm) was from
Nycomed Pharma AS (Oslo, Norway). Leucosep tubes were supplied by Greiner (Frickenhausen, Germany). All other chemicals were of analytical
grade. All patients were treated for Dukes C colorectal cancer and participated in a protocol that had been designed to study 5-FU and DHFU
pharmacokinetics. The protocol was approved by the Medical Ethics Review Committee of the Martini Hospital Groningen and written informed
consent was obtained from all patients. All patients who entered this protocol were chemotherapy naive. Chemotherapy consisted of leucovorin
20 mg m−2 combined with 5-FU 425 mg m−2, both on 5 successive days, in a 28-day cycle. Blood sampling was carried out on the first day of
the first chemotherapy cycle immediately following the 5-FU dose, administered as bolus intravenous injection over 2 min. Leucovorin was
infused after the end of blood sampling. On the following 4 days, the same 5-FU dose was administered as short time infusion, after
leucovorin administration. One patient experienced severe toxicity during the first chemotherapy cycle and, therefore, a screening on DPD
deficiency was initiated. Data from six patients who participated in the same study protocol and who showed no signs of severe toxicity were
randomly selected for reference pharmacokinetics, DPYD genotyping and DPD enzyme activity. These patients served as controls. For
pharmacokinetic sampling, a canule was placed in the arm of the patient contralateral from drug administration. Blood samples (5 ml) were
collected in heparinised tubes just before, and 2, 5, 10, 20, 30, 45, 60, 80, 100, 120, 150 and 180 min postinjection. Collected samples
were immediately placed on ice and subsequently centrifuged at 2500 g for 10 min. The plasma samples were analysed for 5-FU and DHFU
concentrations by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) on the day of collection. Blood samples for DPD analysis were collected 5 to
23 months after blood sampling for 5-FU pharmacokinetics, which corresponds to intervals ranging from 2 to 17 months after the last 5-FU
dose. None of the patients received chemotherapy at that moment. 5-Fluorouracil and DHFU concentrations were measured by HPLC analysis using
a modification of the method described by Ackland et al (1997). Briefly, 100 μl chlorouracil internal standard solution (80 mg l−1 in water)
was added to 1 ml plasma sample, and this mixture was vortexed and subsequently deproteinated with 50 μl of a 50% (w v−1) trichloracetic
acid solution. After centrifugation at 8000 g for 2 min the supernatant was transferred into a 20 ml centrifuge tube and neutralised with
1 ml 1 M sodium acetate solution. Then 5 ml ethylacetate was added and the mixture was vortexed during 10 min. After separation of the
organic and aqueous layers by centrifugation at 5000 g for 5 min, the ethylacetate layer was transferred into a 10 ml tube and evaporated
under a stream of nitrogen at 25°C. The residue was dissolved in 100 μl ultrapure water and 20 μl was injected. 5-Fluorouracil and DHFU
standards ranging from 0.5 to 20 mg l−1 were prepared in human plasma. The chromatographic system consisted of a Waters 616 pump equipped
with a Waters 717+ autosampler. The separation of 5-FU and DHFU was accomplished by gradient elution at ambient temperature on a Phenomenex
Prodigy ODS 3 column (I.D. 250×4.6 mm, 5 μm) equipped with a guard column (30×4.6 mm) of the same material. Mobile phase A consisted of
1.5 mM K3PO4 and 1% (v v−1) methanol (pH=6.0) and mobile phase B of 1.5 mM K3PO4 and 5% (v v−1) methanol (pH=6.0). The gradient was
programmed as follows: 100% A during 2 min; 100% A→100% B in 0.5 min; 100% B during 7 min; 100% B→100% A in 0.5 min; 100% A during 10 min.
Detection was performed using a Waters 996 Photo Diode Array UV detector interfaced with a Millenium 2010 Chromatography Manager
Workstation. Spectra were acquired in the 201–300 nm range. 5-FU was monitored at 266 nm and DHFU at 205 nm. The internal standard
chlorouracil was monitored at both wavelengths. The pharmacokinetic analyses were performed in the ADAPT II computer program (version 4.0;
USC Los Angeles). The pharmacokinetic data of both the index patient and the six control patients were tested in eight different models. In
each model the patient's data were fitted individually and for each data set the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) was calculated. The
model with the lowest summarised AIC value was selected as the better one (data not shown). The model used for calculating 5-Fluorouracil
pharmacokinetics is a two-compartment model with Michaelis–Menten elimination from the first compartment and is described by two
differential equations: X1 and X2 indicate the amount of drug in each compartment, respectively. The k-values represent linear distribution-
and elimination rate constants, and the Vmax and Km values represent Michaelis–Menten constants for non-linear elimination from the first
compartment. Rinf represents the infusion rate of 5-FU. The area under the curve of 5-FU and DHFU was calculated using the trapezoid rule.
The average systemic clearance of 5-FU was calculated by dividing the administered dose by the area under the curve (AUC0→3h). To
investigate whether the 5-FU toxicity might have been caused by a partial deficiency of DPD, we determined the activity of DPD in peripheral
blood mononuclear (PBM) cells. Therefore PBM cells were isolated from 15 ml EDTA anticoagulated blood and the activity of DPD was determined
according previously described methods (Van Kuilenburg et al, 2000b). In brief, the sample was incubated in a reaction mixture containing
35 mM potassium phosphate pH 7.4, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 2.5 mM magnesium chloride, 250 μM NADPH and 25 μM thymine. After an appropriate
incubation time, the reaction catalysed by DPD was terminated by adding 10% (v v−1) perchloric acid. The reaction mixture was centrifuged at
11 000 g for 5 min to remove protein. The separation of radiolabelled thymine and the reaction products was performed by reversed phase
HPLC. Protein concentrations were determined with a copper-reduction method using bicinchoninic acid, as described by Smith et al (1985).
The DNA from the index and control patients was isolated from PBM cells as previously described (Van Kuilenburg et al, 1997). PCR
amplification of exon 14 and flanking intronic regions was carried out according to Van Kuilenburg et al (2000a). PCR products were
separated on 1% agarose gels, visualised with ethidium bromide and purified using a Qiaquick Gel Extraction kit and used for direct
sequencing. Sequence analysis of the genomic fragment was carried out on an Applied Biosystems model 377 automated DNA sequencer using the
Dye-Terminator method. Each value, measured in the index patient, was compared to the mean±2 s.d. range of the corresponding parameter in
the control group. Values outside this range were considered abnormal (P<0.05). We did not match our control patients for age and gender.
Patient characteristics from the index and control patients, as measured before 5-FU administration on the first day of the first
chemotherapy cycle, are listed in Table 1Table 1Patient characteristics. The index patient is a 60-year-old white female who received
adjuvant chemotherapy for Dukes C colon carcinoma. She was known with a chronic moderate renal function impairment as a result of a double-
sided nephrolithotomy at age 40. The first two injections with a total dose of 800 mg 5-FU day−1 were tolerated well by the patient without
complications. On the third day of chemotherapy she experienced nausea and cold shivers. The nausea was successfully treated with
metoclopramide. The cold shivers remained on days 4 and 5. Twelve days after administration of the first 5-fluouracil injection, leukopenia
(1.5×109 leukocytes l−1) and thrombocytopenia (26×109 platelets l−1) developed along with nausea, diarrhoea, stomatitis, fever and hair
loss. The next day leukocytes and platelets decreased to 0.5×109 l−1 and 12×109 l−1 (both nadir values respectively). During this period the
patient developed leukopenic fever (40°C) for which antibiotics were administered. Until day 20 the leucocytes and platelets remained low
(1×109 l−1 and 13×109 l−1 respectively). During the subsequent week the clinical picture and hematological parameters gradually improved and
normalised. On day 34 the patient was discharged from the hospital. The toxicity observed in the six control patients was limited to mild
nausea (n=4), vomiting (n=2) and CTC grade 1 stomatitis (n=1). The clearance of 5-FU was considerable slower in the index patient than in
the six control patients. In all control patients the plasma level at t=90 min was below 0.1 mg l−1, whereas in the index patient the plasma
level was still 3.8 mg l−1 at this time point (see Figure 2Figure 2Pharmacokinetics of 5-FU. Shown are 5-FU plasma levels observed in a
patient with a IVS14+1G>A mutation in the DPYD gene (solid diamond) and the 5-FU plasma levels resulting from simulation of a normal renal
function in the same patient. 5-FU plasma levels from control patients are depicted as mean±s.d. (solid triangle; n=6).). The AUC0→3h in the
patient suffering from toxicity was 24.1 mg h l−1 compared to 15.3 mg h l−1 as highest AUC0→3h value in control patients. We calculated an
average systemic clearance of only 520 ml min−1 vs 980–1780 ml min−1 in controls. The Vmax value, calculated by pharmacokinetic modelling
was 548 mg h−1, while the Vmax values of control patients ranged from 984 to 1772 mg h−1 (see Table 2Table 2Overview of pharmacokinetic
parameters. Data are presented as single observation or as mean±2 s.d.). The pharmacokinetic data of the six control patients were
comparable to data from literature (Port et al, 1991; Terret et al, 2000) Pharmacokinetics of 5-FU. Shown are 5-FU plasma levels observed in
a patient with a IVS14+1G>A mutation in the DPYD gene (solid diamond) and the 5-FU plasma levels resulting from simulation of a normal renal
function in the same patient. 5-FU plasma levels from control patients are depicted as mean±s.d. (solid triangle; n=6). The effect of the
impaired renal function of the index patient on 5-FU clearance was studied by pharmacokinetic modelling. The excretion of 5-FU in urine was
measured in five patients and kurine was estimated 0.5±0.08 h−1. This kurine value, individually normalised on calculated GFR, was used
during subsequent modelling of other patient data. A normal renal function was simulated in the index patient by replacing the GFR related
kurine by kurine=0.6. Renal function impairment appeared to have only a slight effect on 5-FU clearance. In the index patient, we estimated
an additional 18% increase of the AUC due to the renal insufficiency upon a 108% higher AUC due to partial DPD deficiency. Simulation of
anuria in the control group (Kurine=0), revealed a 16±4% increase of the 5-FU AUC. The activity of DPD in peripheral blood mononuclear (PBM)
cells was lower in the patient experiencing severe toxicity (5.5 nmol mg−1 h−1) compared to the six control patients
(8.0–11.7 nmol mg−1 h−1; mean 9.6) and comparable to obligate heterozygotes (Van Kuilenburg et al, 2000a) Sequence analysis of the DPYD gene
showed that the patient was heterozygous for a G→A point mutation in the invariant GT splice donor site (IVS14+1G>A), leading to the
skipping of exon 14 directly upstream of the mutated splice donor site during DPD pre-mRNA splicing. Sequence analysis of exon 14 of DPYD of
the six control patients revealed no mutations. 5-Fluorouracil remains the major drug in the treatment of advanced colorectal cancer.
Dihydropyrimide dehydrogenase is the key metabolic enzyme in 5-FU degradation and since more than 80% of the dose is metabolised by this
enzyme, DPD activity is one of the main factors determining drug exposure (Harris et al, 1990; Fleming et al, 1992a; Lu et al, 1993; Etienne
et al, 1994). It is generally accepted that DPD activity in the liver is responsible for the majority of 5-FU catabolism (Ho et al, 1986;
Fleming et al, 1992b), but PBM cells are often used as a surrogate for liver DPD activity, since these cells are better accessible (Harris
et al, 1990; Fleming et al, 1992a; Lu et al, 1993; Etienne et al, 1994). Several groups have suggested that markedly diminished DPD activity
in PBM cells is strongly related to the risk of developing severe 5-FU toxicity due to reduced 5-FU clearance (Lu et al, 1993; Etienne et
al, 1994; Van Kuilenburg et al, 2000a). Although total DPD deficiency is rare in adults, about 2–3% of the population has a low PBM–DPD
enzyme level and, thus, is at risk to develop severe toxicity when treated with 5-FU (Etienne et al, 1994; Lu et al, 1995; Chazal et al,
1996). In only few reports however, the effect of DPD-deficiency on 5-FU clearance has been objectively quantified. Diasio et al (1988)
administered a test dose of 25 mg m−2 5-FU to a patient with non-detectable DPD-activity in PBM cells and found a very low 5-FU clearance
rate. This patient was probably homozygous for a mutant DPD allele, although the genetic cause was never elucidated. Stephan et al (1995)
reported severe toxicity in a female patient after treatment comprising Leuvorin 500 mg m−2 as 2 h intravenous infusion plus 125 mg orally,
followed by 5-FU 2 g m−2 as a 24 h continuous infusion. They found a 5-FU plasma level of 0.3 mg l−1 on day 15 after administration, which
implies a dramatic overexposure to 5-FU. This patient could not have been homozygous deficient because the DPD activity in lymphocytes was
within the normal range. The role of PBM–DPD activity as an indicator for 5-FU clearance is, however, questionable. Lu et al (1993) found a
correlation between PBM–DPD activity and DPD activity measured in the liver, but others reported a weak, non-significant relationship
(Chazal et al, 1996). Both Harris et al (1990) and Fleming et al (1992a) initially reported a correlation between PBM–DPD activity and 5-FU
clearance but re-examination of this relationship in a larger set of patients revealed a markedly weakened correlation (Etienne et al,
1994). These data indicate that PBM-DPD activity is not a strong and reliable indicator of 5-FU clearance. To some extent, the variability
in DPD activity might have been caused by the composition of the isolated PBM cells (Van Kuilenburg et al, 2000b). Another important factor
is the timing of cell sampling in relation to 5-FU administration, since McLeod et al (1998) showed that 5-FU is able to inhibit DPD-
activity. In this paper, we report a combined pharmacokinetic and genetic analysis of the DPYD gene and demonstrate that a single G→A point
mutation in the invariant splice donor site IVS14+1 of the DPYD gene has profound impact on the clearance of 5-FU. We also found a lower
PBM–DPD activity in the index patient compared to six controls. The DPD activity was comparable to the activity observed in obligate
heterozygotes (5.5±2.1 nmol mg−1 h−1, n=8) in previous work (Van Kuilenburg et al, 2000a), but the measured value also fits within the range
for normal controls (10.0±3.4 nmol mg−1 h−1, range 3.4–18 nmol mg−1 h−1, n=22). This might indicate that not only obligate heterozygotes,
but also low normal homozygotes are at risk for developing severe toxicity when treated with 5-FU. It is however as yet unclear whether the
pharmacokinetic profile of 5-FU is identical in both groups. We did not measure DPD activity and 5-FU pharmacokinetics on the same day. DPD
activity was measured at least 2 months after completing chemotherapy and therefore might have been changed since the first chemotherapy
cycle as a result of chemotherapy itself or disease state. Although 5-FU has a direct inhibitory effect on DPD activity, as was shown by
McLeod et al (1998), we believe that it is not likely that this effect will continue until 2 months after the last dose. Furthermore, it has
been shown that DPD activity is lower in breast-cancer patients compared to healthy persons (Lu et al, 1998), suggesting an effect of
disease state on DPD activity. All our patients had Dukes C carcinoma and showed no signs of disease progression at the time of blood
sampling for DPD. Therefore we considered the index patient and controls comparable regarding their disease state. Thus, despite delayed DPD
sample collection, we believe our results to be representative for DPD activity during pharmacokinetic sampling. The structural organization
of the DPYD gene has recently been described. It is 150 kb in length and consists of 23 exons ranging in size from 69 to 1404 bp (Johnson et
al, 1997). The G→A mutation changes an invariant GT splice donor site into AT which leads to skipping of a 165 bp exon immediately upstream
of the mutated spice donor site during the splicing of DPD pre-mRNA. As a consequence, a 165 bp fragment encoding the amino acid residues
581–635 of the primary sequence of the DPD protein is lacking in the mature DPD mRNA, which results in an enzyme without catalytic activity
(Wei et al, 1996; Van Kuilenburg et al, 1997). Analysis of the prevalence of the various mutations among cancer patients with partial DPD
deficiency showed that the G→A mutation in the invariant splice donor site is the most common one (43%) (Van Kuilenburg et al, 2000a). The
prevalence of this mutation in the normal Dutch population is 1.8% (Van Kuilenburg et al, 2001). We believe that in our patient the
IVS14+1G>A mutation explains the dramatic reduction in 5-FU clearance compared to controls. This is in line with the observation that at
least 80% of the 5-FU dose is catabolised by DPD. Although our patient had a moderately impaired renal function, we analysed that the effect
of renal function on 5-FU clearance is only limited. This was to be expected, as only about 10% of the 5-FU dose is normally excreted in
urine (Heggie et al, 1987). It is important, however, to realise that in patients with reduced DPD capacity, the contribution of renal
excretion to total clearance is relatively increased. As a consequence, the impact of renal insufficiency on the AUC is larger in DPD
deficient than in normal patients. Thus, in the index patient, the impaired renal function might have contributed to development of more
severe toxicity, additionally to that caused by DPD deficiency. Development of rapid assays to detect mutations in the DPYD gene makes it
possible to carry out a genetic screening prior to the start of chemotherapy containing 5-FU. However, it is important to identify those
mutations that result in a defect DPD protein. So far, 19 molecular defects in the DPYD gene such as point mutations and deletions due to
exon skipping have been reported, but not all mutations result in a DPD enzyme deficiency (Van Kuilenburg et al, 2000a). Incomplete
correlation between DPD phenotype and genotype is clinically important and suggests that DPD polymorphisms are likely to be complex (Collie-
Duguid et al, 2000). Our results indicate that low DPD activity, due to the inactivation of one DPYD allele results in a strong reduction in
5-FU clearance, measured on the first chemotherapy day. Inhibition of the yet reduced DPD activity by 5-FU itself during subsequent days may
lead to further reduction of 5-FU clearance and this may further add to the development of severe toxicity. In order to identify those
mutations that result in reduced 5-FU clearance, monitoring of 5-FU plasma levels using a limited sampling strategy can be helpful in
patient selection. This requires, however, rapid plasma level analysis, because results from the first 5-FU infusion must be available
before the second dose is administered. Unfortunately, no rapid 5-FU (immuno-)assay is available yet, and therefore in most hospitals
therapeutic drug monitoring of 5-FU is not yet feasible. We thank Dr JH Proost (Department of Pharmacokinetics and Drug Delivery, State
University Groningen) for advice on pharmacokinetic modelling. We thank Roche Basel for providing dihydrofluorouracil chemical standard.
