NK/T-cell lymphoma, which often shows an angiocentric growth pattern, is a distinct clinicopathologic entity highly associated with Epstein-
Barr virus. The disease is characterized by a destruction of the upper respiratory tract, particularly the nasal cavity, palate and
paranasal sinuses. Interestingly, NK/T-cell lymphoma is closely linked to a variety of complications, such as hemophagocytic syndrome,
second primary cancer, sepsis and bleeding. Here we report a case of a 50-year-old man diagnosed initially as NK/T-cell lymphoma of the
oropharynx and who developed a second primary carcinoma of the hard palate during combination chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Natural
Killer (NK)/T-cell lymphoma is a distinct clinicopathologic entity highly associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)1). The disease has
protean clinical features characterized by a destruction of the upper respiratory tract, particularly the nasal cavity, palate and paranasal
sinuses3). Pathologically, angiocentric and angiodestructive patterns, marked necrosis and infiltration of atypical lymphoid cells are found
in most of the lesions. NK/T-cell lymphoma also has a characteristic immunophenotype: CD2-positive, CD56-positive, but usually surface
CD3-negative1). NK/T-cell lymphoma is closely linked to a variety of medical complications, such as hemophagocytic syndrome, sepsis and
bleeding. Rarely, patients can develop a second primary cancer during the follow-up period and this can be a cause of death3). We
experienced a case of NK/T-cell lymphoma complicated by a squamous cell carcinoma of the hard palate during combination chemotherapy and
radiation therapy and report the case with a review of the literature. A 50-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital with
complaints of sore throat, fever and bloody sputum for three months. The patient had been suffering from a recurrent sore throat for one
year without seeking medical attention. On admission, he had a fever up to 39Â°C mainly at night, but he denied weight loss or night
sweating. Physical examination showed multiple lymphadenopathy, including bilateral cervical area along the jugular chain. There was no
splenomegaly or hepatomegaly. Diffuse erythematous lesions and wall thickness in the oropharyngeal area were seen on otolaryngeal
examination. Laboratory findings were as follows: WBC 7,500/mm3, Hb 12.5 g/dL, Hct 37%, platelet 250,000/mm3, normal urine analysis, ALT/AST
25/40 U/L, serum alkaline phosphatase 95 IU/L and LDH 288 U/L. Chest X-ray finding was normal. A computed tomographic (CT) scan of the neck
showed a soft tissue mass in both oropharynx, soft palate and posterior laryngeal wall, and multiple lymph node enlargements of both
cervical areas (Figure 1). For a pathologic confirmation, multiple biopsies were performed on the oropharyneal mass and other surrounding
areas. Microscopic examination showed an infiltration of atypical small irregularly shaped lymphoid cells admixed with plasma cells,
neutrophils and eosinophils. On immunophenotyping study, CD56 and cytoplasmic CD3 were positive and CD20 was negative (Figure 2). According
to the microscopic examination and immunophenotype, a diagnosis of NK/T-cell lymphoma was made. For a staging work-up, bilateral bone marrow
aspiration and biopsy, gastroscopic examination, bone scan and abdomino-pelvic CT were performed. All of these studies revealed negative
findings. The final diagnosis was NK/T-cell lymphoma with stage IIB. The patient was treated initially with combination chemotherapy with
COPBLAM-V (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, adriamycin, bleomycin, prednisolone and procarbazine). After 2 cycles of chemotherapy, a follow-up
CT scan showed a partial improvement of the mass lesions in the oropharynx. However, after further two cycles of chemotherapy, he developed
high fever, severe sore throat and neutropenia. Since an aggravation of the mass lesion was noted on a follow-up CT scan, salvage radiation
therapy was given to the patient. Unfortunately, the radiation therapy discontinued due to a sustained neutropenia during the treatment
period. The patient was referred to the Hanyang University KURI hospital for further evaluation and treatment. On admission, the patient
looked pale and sick. Physical examination revealed a newly-developed large ulcerative lesion on the hard palate. It seemed that the lesion
was developed from the previous radiation therapy. The ulcerative lesion did not heal and rather, increased in size during the hospital
stay. Since the new lesion was separated from the initial lymphoma site, we performed a biopsy on the ulcerating lesion of the hard palate.
Unexpectedly, the biopsy revealed a moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with a p53 immunoreactivity (Figure 3). The ulcerated
lesion was directly connected to the nasal floor. We decided to treat the patient with radiation therapy for the hard palate carcinoma.
However, the patient could not tolerate the radiation therapy due to a poor general condition. Although a salvage combination chemotherapy
was administered to the patient, a severe hepatic dysfunction and sustained pancytopenia developed without an improvement of the lymphoma or
carcinoma lesion and he eventually died of sepsis. The nasal lymphoma expressing a T- or NK-cell phenotype is a disorder with protean
clinical features characterized by a destruction of the upper respiratory tract, particularly the nasal cavity, palate and paranasal
sinuses3). Pathologically, most of the lesions show angiocentric and angiodestructive patterns, marked necrosis and infiltration of atypical
lymphoid cells and are highly associated with EBV. The nasal NK/T-cell lymphoma has a characteristic immunophenotype: CD2-positive,
CD56-positive, but usually surface CD3-negative. Cytoplasmic CD3 reactivity can be detected in paraffin sections1,4). Epidemiologically,
NK/T-cell lymphoma is rare in the United States and Europe, but relatively common in Asia1,2). The most important aspect of the nasal NK/T
cell lymphoma, as in our case, is that the disease is frequently associated with a variety of medical complications or immunologic
disorders3). It has been suggested that the angiocentric lymphomas occasionally retain an immunologic dysfunction, which may be reflected in
some clinical manifestations observed in patients with T-lymphocyte malignancies. Ishii et al5) and Sordillo et al6) found a profound
immunologic deficit in a few patients with angiocentric lymphomas, probably resulting from the impairment of the T-lymphocyte function. Kim
et al3) and Ng et al7) reported that a hemophagocytic syndrome can occur at any time during the clinical course of the disease and is
usually rapidly fatal over several weeks. Also, there is a tendency toward an extranodal involvement of sites such as lungs, liver or
gastrointestinal tract. More widespread involvement of unusual sites, such as testes or skin, has been occasionally observed. Some patients
develop second primary cancers during the follow-up period. The most striking clinical outcome in such patients is a rapid progression of
the second primary cancer after diagnosis3). Despite an aggressive treatment for the second primary cancer, most of the patients die from a
rapid deterioration of the cancer within 1 year, which was the case in our patient. Interestingly, our patient developed a squamous cell
carcinoma of the hard palate during combination chemotherapy for the NK/T cell lymphoma, with a very short latent period of the development
of the second primary cancer. Although it is plausible that the squamous cell carcinoma of the hard palate coexisted initially with the NK/T
cell lymphoma, the fact that multiple blind biopsies were performed on the oral cavity, including soft palate, hard palate, oropharynx and
pharyngeal wall, at the initial diagnosis argues against this possibility. Furthermore, the hard palate was initially shown to be normal on
physical examination, pathological examination, and CT scan. Only limited information is now available regarding the relationship between
angiocentric lymphoma and the development of second primary cancers. In an earlier study of 10 patients with midline lethal granuloma by
Fauci et al.8) three patients developed second primary cancers and the authors speculated such patients with aberrant immunologic reactions
would have an increased propensity for the development of new cancers. Until recently, there has been no clear consensus on the optimal
management for the NK/T cell lymphoma, probably because of the rarity of the tumor and little understanding of its natural history. Despite
the inconsistent responses elicited, radiation treatment is still accepted as the treatment of choice for the localized form of angiocentric
lymphoma, and achievement of a complete response after radiation treatment is still the most important determinant of favorable
survival9,10). There are several important aspects in our case. Firstly, the patient initially showed multiple systemic failures, which can
often be observed in NK/T-cell lymphoma. Although we did not perform a liver biopsy in this patient, unexplained severe hepatic dysfunction
with hyperbilirubinemia and prolonged pancytopenia, even after the withdrawal of chemotherapy, suggested that the patient would have a
hemophagocytic syndrome and liver involvement by the lymphoma. Secondly, the patient developed a second primary cancer during the
combination chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Since the full dose of chemotherapy or radiation therapy was not administered to the patient
and the latent period of the development of the second primary malignancy was very short, the exact mechanism should be elucidated. Finally,
although radiation therapy is regarded as the standard treatment for the patients with NK/T cell lymphoma, a large proportion of these
patients are frequently associated with a systemic involvement by lymphoma and, therefore, need a multimodality treatment, including more
effective chemotherapeutic agents. Also, the development of new drugs specifically targeted against the NK/T lymphoma cells is needed. In
summary, we experienced a case of NK/T-cell lymphoma complicated by a squamous cell carcinoma of the hard palate during combination
chemotherapy and radiation therapy. A computed tomographic scan of the neck shows a soft tissue mass in oropharynx. Light microscopic
examination shows an atypical small irregular shaped lymphoid cell infiltration admixed with plasma cells, neutrophils and eosinophils (H &
E, Ã100). Immunohistochemical staining shows a positivity for CD56 and typical angiocentricity (inlet, Ã100). Light microscopic findings of
the hard palate mass show moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (H & E, Ã100) and p53 immunoreactivity (inlet, Ã100).
