Occult gastrointestinal bleeding can originate from the foregut, midgut, or hindgut. The evaluation of the foregut and hindgut are well
established. Cases that involve bleeding from the midgut present a much more significant challenge in terms of detection and treatment.
Methods of evaluation include small bowel endoscopy, arteriography, and gastrointestinal contrast studies. The differential diagnosis
includes arteriovenous malformations, angiodysplasia, ulcers, and small bowel tumors. We will demonstrate that both the evaluation and
treatment of these lesions may be accomplished using minimally invasive techniques. A case of occult gastrointestinal bleeding from a
polypoid hemangioma located in the distal jejunum is presented. Diagnosis and treatment was accomplished using angiographic localization
with laparoscopic resection. Laparoscopic small bowel resection after angiographic localization was successful in removing the jejunal
polypoid hemangioma. The patient experienced no further gastrointestinal bleeding. We will discuss the technique of localization and
treatment used in this unusual case. A laparoscopic approach is an appropriate and beneficial treatment modality in a bleeding midgut lesion
provided the lesion can be localized preoperatively and an oncologic resection is maintained. Gastrointestinal bleeding that originates in
the small intestine is often difficult to diagnose and treat. Fortunately, it is also uncommon. Angiography is frequently used to identify
the source of bleeding and may also be used to locate the source of bleeding by injecting the surrounding tissue with methylene blue. When
successful, this should allow a laparoscopic approach to small bowel resection and eliminate the need to manipulate the entire length of the
small intestine in hopes of palpating the lesion. A 62-year-old female was found to have anemia during a routine screening exam by her
primary care physician. Her hemoglobin was 8g/dL and hematocrit 25%. She had vague complaints of fatigue with mild exertion at that time.
Her past medical history is significant for severe valvular heart disease secondary to rheumatic fever. She has prosthetic mitral and aortic
valves, a history of a tricuspid annuloplasty, and takes coumadin. She denied vomiting, melena, and bright red blood per rectum. However,
she was found to have heme-positive stools. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed only mild gastritis that did not account for her degree
of blood loss. Colonoscopic findings were unremarkable. A UGI/SBFT demonstrated poor gastric motility but otherwise no abnormalities. Over
the 6-week course of her evaluation, she received a total of 10 units of packed red blood cells. Angiographic evaluation of the superior
mesenteric artery demonstrated a lesion with rapid venous filling in the distal jejunum (Figure 1). The differential diagnosis included
angiodysplasia, arteriovenous malformation, and vascularized tumor. SMA angiogram with focal area of rapid venous filling in distal jejunum.
Interventional radiology localized the lesion with methylene blue in the immediate preoperative period. Laparoscopy was successful in
identifying the location of the dye, and a mass was appreciated within the lumen of the small bowel. The segment of bowel was exteriorized
and resected using GIA and TA staplers. A 7-mm polypoid hemangioma was identified in the pathologic specimen. The patient experienced no
further gastrointestinal bleeding. Primary neoplasms of the small bowel are uncommon. These neoplasms may represent either a benign or
malignant process with a wide range of symptoms that are often nonspecific.1, 2 Surgical series report an equal frequency of benign and
malignant tumors, whereas autopsy series heavily favor benign tumors as the most common. This indicates that malignant tumors are far more
likely to produce symptoms.3 Bleeding is one of the symptoms associated with small bowel neoplasms. This is usually occult and generally
requires an extensive gastrointestinal evaluation before a diagnosis is obtained. Modalities used include plain films, UGI/SBFT,
enteroclysis, computed tomography, routine and extended upper endoscopy, tagged RBC scanning, and angiography.4, 5 Angiography may also
offer the ability to localize the lesion for resection. This requires the lesion to be easily identified and amenable to passage of an
intravascular catheter to within close proximity. Methylene blue must then be injected into the surrounding tissue allowing the location of
the lesion to be identified from an extramural vantage point. Minimally invasive surgery using laparoscopy may then be offered to the
patient if the above criteria are met. This avoids the guesswork in transillumination and palpation for localizing the tumor. Laparoscopic
small bowel resection is an established technique and is performed by exteriorization of the diseased segment of bowel. Traditional
resection and anastamotic techniques are then used to remove the lesion. This provides a resection identical to historical control while
decreasing the invasive nature of the procedure. Compromise of the surgeon's ability to perform an adequate oncologic resection, however,
mandates conversion to an open procedure. The incidence of malignancy is too high in this group of tumors to allow complacency. Midgut
sources of bleeding represent a challenge in diagnosis, localization, and treatment. Laparoscopy in conjunction with angiographic
localization is a viable means to approach this problem. This offers a minimally invasive treatment with established techniques that is well
tolerated by the patient and reduces recovery time. Conservatism, however, necessitates the surgeon to consider that up to 50% of bleeding
lesions of the small bowel may represent a malignant process, and an adequate oncologic technique should be preserved.
