To the Editor: On October 21, 2000, a previously healthy 25-year-old male farmer was admitted to a mission hospital in western Kenya with an
acute hemorrhagic illness. Four days before admission, the patient had rapid onset of fever, headache, nausea, vomiting, severe muscle
pains, and diarrhea, which became bloody. On admission his temperature was 36.4°C, pulse was 60/minute, respiratory rate was 20/minute, and
blood pressure was 90/40 mm Hg. In addition to the signs and symptoms listed above, the only other abnormal finding on admission was neck
stiffness. The differential diagnoses included bacterial dysentery and meningitis. Results of a blood smear for malaria parasites and Widal
test for typhoid were negative, and cerebrospinal fluid and urine examinations were normal. The patient was treated with doxycycline,
cotrimoxazole, metronidazole, and intravenous fluids. On the day after admission, the patient’s vomitus became blood stained and blood was
passed rectally. The patient was isolated and strict barrier nursing implemented on the suspicion of viral hemorrhagic fever (VHF).
Progressive hypotension developed, resistant to resuscitation efforts with intravenous fluids and corticosteroids, and later massive
bleeding from the nose, mouth, and upper and lower gastrointestinal tract occurred. The patient died on the second day of admission, 6 days
after onset of illness. A serum sample was sent to the Arbovirus and Viral Hemorrhagic Fever Reference Laboratory in Nairobi for diagnostic
screening. Serologic tests in Nairobi were negative for yellow fever, dengue, West Nile, Chikungunya, and Rift Valley fever (immunoglobulin
M–capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) tests for flaviviruses,
alphaviruses, and Bunyamwera serogroup bunyaviruses were also negative. RT-PCR for Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (C-CHFV) was
positive. Tests for anti-C-CHFV–specific IgM antibody by indirect immunofluorescence were negative. Virus isolation attempts were then
terminated because the cultivation of C-CHFV (the presumptive cause) requires biosafety level 4 facilities. The specimen was submitted to
the Special Pathogens Unit in Johannesburg for confirmation of the result. The sample was positive by RT-PCR for C-CHFV and was IgM and IgG
antibody negative. No isolation of the virus could be made from the serum sample, possibly because it was received by the Johannesburg
laboratory 8 days after initial collection and following freeze-thaw conditions. The specimen was was insufficient to attempt C-CHVF antigen
detection assays. Sequencing of the RT-PCR amplicon confirmed C-CHFV. C-CHFV is a tick-borne virus of the genus Nairovirus, family
Bunyaviridae, and is widely distributed throughout eastern Europe and the Crimea, to the Middle East and western China, Pakistan, and
Africa. Natural hosts for this virus are varied (including wild and domestic animals and birds) and may reflect the feeding preferences of
the host tick (1). While C-CHFV infections are rare in humans, the virus is notorious for nosocomial outbreaks of VHF, typically following
admission of an index case to a health-care facility where VHF was not suspected, with mortality rates up to 40%. Previous evidence for
C-CHFV in Kenya is limited and based on serology (human and bovine) and two isolations of C-CHFV from non-human sources (1,2). This report
represents the first documented case of acute human C-CHFV infection in Kenya. The hospital concerned belongs to a VHF surveillance network
serving to increase awareness and preparedness within Kenyan health-care facilities. In this case suspicion of VHF was raised, and the
patient was immediately isolated, noninvasive procedures were instigated, and barrier nursing was implemented to prevent nosocomial
transmission. No family or hospital staff member who had close contact with the patient became ill. Although VHFs are rare, this report
stresses the need for health facilities in Kenya and East/Central Africa to include VHFs in their differential diagnosis of unexplained
fever with hemorrhagic tendencies, as well as the utility of the surveillance network. The causative agents of Ebola hemorrhagic fever,
Marburg hemorrhagic fever, C-CHFV, Rift Valley fever, and yellow fever are all endemic in East and Central Africa, and sporadic cases, as
well as outbreaks, are likely to continue to occur in this region (3–5). Suggested citation for this article: Dunster L, Dunster M, Ofula V,
Beti D, Kazooba-Voskamp F, Burt F, et al. First documentation of human Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, Kenya . Emerg Infect Dis [serial
online] 2002 Sep [date cited]. Available from http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol8no9/01-0510.htm 1 Dr. Kazooba-Voskamp, the attending
physician in this case, has requested that the hospital’s identity remain anonymous.
