Strychnine poisoning is uncommon, and in most severe cases, the patient dies before reaching hospital. The management of strychnine
poisoning is well documented, although there are few data on the kinetics of elimination of strychnine after overdose. A 42-year-old man
presented shortly after ingestion of an unknown quantity of strychnine powder. After a respiratory arrest, with intensive supportive
management requiring admission to an intensive care unit, he survived. Eight serum samples were taken over the first 5 days and analysed
subsequently for strychnine concentrations. The initial concentration at 1.5 hours after ingestion was 4.73 mg/l, falling to 0.38 mg/l at 74
hours postingestion. Serum concentrations followed a monoexponential elimination curve with a calculated elimination half-life of 12 hours.
Strychnine poisoning presents with classical features, and with early diagnosis and supportive management, the patient can survive. The
initial serum concentration of 4.73 mg/l is the highest reported concentration in a patient who has survived. Previous reports of the
elimination half-life have suggested it is between 10 and 16 hours, which conforms to the elimination data in our case. Strychnine is a
bitter, white, powder alkaloid derived from the seeds of the tree Strychnos nux-vomica. It has had an interesting past, initially having
been introduced in the 16th century as a rodenticide, and until recently it was used as a respiratory, circulatory and digestive stimulant .
It is no longer used in any pharmaceutical products, but is still used as a rodenticide. Strychnine is also found as an adulterant in street
drugs such as amphetamines, heroin and cocaine . Strychnine poisoning is uncommon, and in most severe cases, the patient dies before
reaching hospital . The management of strychnine poisoning is well documented, but there is less information available about the elimination
kinetics of strychnine. We report the toxicokinetics of strychnine in a patient who survived a deliberate strychnine ingestion. A 42-year-
old man with no significant past medical history presented approximately 1 hour after ingestion of a bottle of wine together with some
"white powder" from his garden shed (this was later confirmed to be strychnine). He was able to walk in to the Emergency Department, but he
was agitated and ataxic, in keeping with his ethanol intake. Within a few minutes of his arrival, his condition rapidly deteriorated and he
developed a marked tremor and muscular spasms and shortly after this had a respiratory and secondary cardiac arrest. At this stage he was
intubated and ventilated, and cardiac output returned after 5 minutes. He was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and the National
Poisons Information Service (London) was contacted for further advice on management. He continued to have marked muscle spasms and so was
paralysed with 0.1 mg/kg pancuronium given intravenously. He was given 50 g activated charcoal via a nasogastric tube. Postarrest, his blood
pressure was 85/40 mmHg, heart rate 96 beats/min and temperature 38.2°C. Arterial blood gases showed a severe metabolic acidosis (pH6.51,
PaO2 9.5 kPa, PaCO2 2.6 kPa, HCO3 3.7 mmol/l, base excess -18) and he was given 3 mmol/kg 8.4% sodium bicarbonate; his metabolic acidosis
improved over the next 8 hours (pH7.26, PaCO2 5.35 kPa, PaO2 13.4 kPa, HCO3 18 mmol/l, BE -9). He remained hypotensive despite fluid
resuscitation and over the first 24 hours he required norepinephrine to maintain his blood pressure (maximum dose 900 g/h). His temperature
rose to 39.9°C on day2 but settled after simple cooling measures and rehydration. His creatinine kinase peaked at 8218 IU/l, (although there
was no evidence of myoglobinuria) and his creatinine peaked at 194 mol/l on day 2. He was extubated on day3, initially with some persisting
twitching and muscular spasms, requiring boluses of midazolam and diazepam and an alfentanil infusion for analgesia. By day5 he was
asymptomatic and his renal function had returned to normal. He was discharged from hospital on day10 after psychiatric assessment. Eight
serum samples were obtained over the first 5 days and subsequently analysed on a Hewlett-Packard 6890 gas chromatograph (Stockport,
Cheshire, UK) equipped with a nitrogen phosphorous detector for strychnine concentrations. A Restex RTX 1 column was used with an isothermal
oven temperature of 270°C. The injector and detector temperatures were set at 250°C and 300°C, respectively. The strychnine concentrations
are shown in Fig. 1; the patient's initial concentration at 1.5 hours after ingestion was 4.73 mg/l, falling to 0.38 mg/l and to 0 at 74
hours and 100 hours postingestion, respectively. The data conformed to a monoexponential elimination curve and the calculated elimination
half-life was 12 hours. Strychnine poisoning is an uncommon but potentially fatal poisoning and most patients die before reaching hospital.
In the case presented here, the patient presented early after ingestion. He was initially asymptomatic but rapidly developed severe muscle
spasms leading to respiratory arrest. With meticulous supportive care in the ICU he made a complete recovery. The mechanism of action
causing strychnine toxicity is well understood. This poison is a competitive antagonist of the inhibitory neurotransmitter glycine at
receptors in the spinal cord, brain stem and higher centres . It results in increased neuronal activity and excitability, leading to
increased muscular activity. The classical features of strychnine poisoning occur from 15 to 30 minutes after ingestion and include
heightened awareness, muscular spasms and twitches and hypersensitivity to stimuli. In large ingestions, these can progress to painful
generalised convulsions, during and after which the patient retains consciousness. The cause of death is usually respiratory arrest
secondary to respiratory muscle spasms , although prolonged muscular spasm can lead to hyperthermia, rhabdomyolysis and associated renal
failure due to myoglobinuria . Severe metabolic acidosis can occur due to increased lactate levels following repeated muscular activity,
although the lactate is rapidly removed once the muscular spasms have been controlled . Prompt recognition of poisoning and initiation of
treatment are required to prevent deterioration and death. Control of convulsions and muscular spasms requires either high doses of
benzodiazepines, such as 1 mg/kg diazepam , or, in resistant cases, paralysis with neuromuscular blockers such as pancuronium . In addition,
meticulous supportive care is required, and careful monitoring and observation for complications such as acute renal failure. Clinical
effects of strychnine ingestion have been seen at doses as small as 2 mg in a child and 20 mg in an adult . Survival after ingestion of
large amounts has been reported: 480 mg (24 mg/kg) in a child and 3750 mg in an adult . Death from strychnine ingestion has been reported in
adults after doses as low as 5 to 10 mg . Since severe, life-threatening features have been reported after the ingestion of small amounts
and patients can deteriorate rapidly, strychnine ingestion should be regarded as potentially fatal and the patient should be admitted to an
ICU for close observation and appropriate treatment. In this case, as with many other reported cases, both the concentration of strychnine
in the preparation ingested and the amount taken were unknown. The serum strychnine concentration of 4.73 mg/l at 1.5 hours postingestion is
the highest reported concentration that a patient has survived. In previous reports, concentrations of 2.1 mg/l at 3 hours and 3.8 mg/l at
0.5 hours caused death. The potential fatal serum concentration of strychnine is not known and clinical features rather than the serum
concentration should guide management. At a postmortem, less than 4 hours after an intentional ingestion of strychnine, a serum
concentration of just 0.33 mg/l was found . A postmortem study showed that a strychnine concentration of 3.32 mg/l in the blood of the
inferior vena cava was associated with concentrations of 11.4 mg/l, 2.42 mg/kg, 2.32 mg/kg and 98.6 mg/kg in bile, brain, skeletal muscle
and liver, respectively . Of the 50 reported cases of strychnine poisoning in the past 36 years, only two nonfatal cases have included data
on serum strychnine concentrations . Both of these patients had much lower concentrations (1.6 mg/l at 4 hours after ingestion and 2.17 mg/l
at 6 hours after ingestion, respectively) than that found in our patient. The elimination and metabolism of strychnine are poorly
understood. Strychnine is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, with symptoms occurring within 10 to 20 minutes of ingestion .
It is also absorbed through other mucous membranes, as in poisonings when strychnine has been mistaken for cocaine . Strychnine has been
shown in animal studies to be metabolised in the liver by cytochrome P-450 microsomal enzymes , but 1–30% is excreted unchanged in the urine
. The proportion of strychnine excreted unchanged appears to be smaller when larger amounts are ingested . In our patient, elimination of
strychnine obeyed first-order kinetics with a half-life of 12 hours. Only three other papers have reported on the elimination kinetics of
strychnine, and these provide conflicting views of its toxicokinetics. Edmunds and colleagues were the first authors to describe the
elimination of strychnine and theirs is the only other report on the kinetics of strychnine in a patient who survived . They reported a
42-year-old man who ingested an unknown quantity of strychnine and developed severe muscle cramps and convulsions and had a respiratory
arrest 35 minutes after ingestion. In that case, the elimination of strychnine obeyed first-order kinetics with a half-life of 10 hours,
based on 19 blood samples collected over a 53-hour period, the first of which was taken at 4 hours after ingestion. Palatnick et al. also
reported first-order kinetics with a half-life of 16 hours, based on 18 serum concentrations over a 51-hour period in a 34-year-old man
after ingestion of 125 ml of a 2% strychnine solution . Heiser et al. reported zero-order kinetics in a fatal case in a 51-year-old man who
presented after ingesting 4.8 g of strychnine . His serum concentrations were measured in only five samples, ranging from 3.5 mg/l at 0.5
hours after ingestion to <0.1 mg/l at 43 hours after ingestion. The differences in the kinetics of strychnine found in our patient from the
kinetics in the above three cases almost certainly reflect the influence of clinical parameters such as different periods of hypotension,
metabolic acidosis and renal impairment, all of which would influence hepatic metabolism and renal elimination of strychnine. However, the
calculated half-life of 12 hours in our patient is comparable to the half-lives previously reported (10 hours and 16 hours), suggesting that
the true elimination half-life of strychnine lies between 10 and 16 hours. We describe a case of severe strychnine poisoning with a
favourable outcome in which the strychnine half-life was 12 hours. The patient presented early, his symptoms were recognised and meticulous
supportive care was instituted without delay. All of these factors were probably important in preventing what would otherwise have been a
fatal ingestion of strychnine. Strychnine overdose is rare but potentially fatal With prompt recognition of the characteristic features and
rapid supportive care, survival is possible Ingestion of small amounts and/or low plasma strychnine concentrations are associated with
fatality Strychnine has a toxicokinetic half-life in overdose of 12 hours Elimination of strychnine in our patient obeyed firstorder
kinetics, as has previously been reported None declared. BE = base excess; ICU = intensive care unit. Serum strychnine concentrations in a
patient with severe strychnine poisoning.
