The protein kinase inhibitor imatinib has been approved as an efficient anticancer drug with common but mild cutaneous toxicities. We here
report on two out of four melanoma patients treated with high-dose imatinib presenting with severe and strongly dose-dependent skin
eruptions, suggesting a cutaneous reactivity pattern different from allergic hypersensitivity. Imatinib mesylate (Gleevec, formerly STI571,
Novartis, Basel, Switzerland) is a selective inhibitor of the tyrosine kinase family including the oncogenes Abl and Kit as well as the
platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGF-R). Owing to its mechanisms of action, imatinib has been used successfully in chronic
myelogenous leukaemia (CML) and in gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GIST). Dose-escalation studies proved imatinib as a well-tolerated oral
drug with rare dose-limiting toxicities (Druker et al, 2001). Nevertheless, severe cutaneous side effects have been reported, leading to a
cessation of imatinib treatment in single cases (Brouard and Saurat, 2001). We here report on the first four patients being enrolled into a
clinical phase II study investigating imatinib as a second-line therapy in advanced melanoma. The study's rationale was based on the well-
known expression of c-kit as well as PDGF-R in melanoma cell lines and tissues (Ohashi et al, 1996). Albeit the patients' clinical outcome
still has to be awaited, we hereby provide a first report of the noticeable strong and frequent cutaneous adverse events. All four patients
received imatinib 400 mg b.i.d. (800 mg day−1) after progression of melanoma disease under a first-line cytostatic regimen was ascertained.
Patients' clinical data are summarized in Table 1(A) Table 1Skin reactions to imatinib(A)Age (years)/genderLocalization of metastasesSkin
reactionCTC gradingOnset of reaction (days after first application of imatinib)Dose adjustmentPatient 171/mLiver, spleen,
subcutaneousNone0NoneNonePatient 251/fLung, subcutaneousGeneralised macular and urticarial eruption31050% reductionPatient 341/fLymph nodes,
subcutaneousGeneralized macular and urticarial eruption3550% reduction, corticosteroidsPatient 469/fSkinMacular rash of the
face27None(B)Author, year of publicationImatinib dose (mg day−1)Number of patients treated Mild or moderate cutaneous reactions (CTC grade
1–2)Severe cutaneous reactions (CTC grade 3–4)CMLKantarjian et al (2002)400532 155 (29.1%)16 (3.0%)CMLTalpaz et al (2002)400–600235 49
(20.8%)3 (1.3%)CMLSawyers et al (2002)400–600260 48 (18.5%)11 (4.2%)GISTvan Oosterom et al (2001)400–100040 17 (42.5%)5 (12.5%)GISTDemetri
et al (2002)400–600147 41 (27.9%)4 (2.7%)(A) Melanoma patients treated with imatinib 800 mg day−1. (B) CML and GIST patients treated with
different doses of imatinib. CTC=common toxicity criteria of the National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health; CML=chronic
myelogenous leukaemia; GIST=gastrointestinal stromal tumour.. Three of four patients showed moderate to strong cutaneous reactions with a
macular and/or urticarial pattern within the first two weeks of therapy (Figure 1A, BFigure 1Photographs and photomicrographs of patient 3
at day 10 after the onset of treatment with imatinib 800 mg day−1. (A, B) Face and trunk of the patient showing generalised macular and
urticarial cutaneous eruptions. (C) Haematoxylin–eosin staining of lesional skin revealing a mononuclear infiltrate and marked oedema of the
upper dermis; magnification 1 : 200. (D, E) Immunohistochemical staining of lesional skin showing strong expression of c-kit (CD117) in
discrete mononuclear cells (arrows) of the upper dermis; magnification 1 : 100 (D) and 1 : 400 (E). (F) Giemsa staining revealing an
increased number of mast cells (arrows) in the upper dermis of lesional skin; magnification 1 : 400.). The exanthema emanated from the face
and trunk, and subsequently afflicted the extremities. Other side effects were of mild to moderate intensity including fluid retention,
nausea, vomiting and fatigue. As a result of the severity of skin reactions, 50% dose adjustments became necessary in two of three patients.
Additionally, corticosteroids (methylprednisolon 60 mg day−1 p.o.) were given in one patient. The cutaneous eruptions regressed in all three
patients within 2–3 weeks. Thereafter, imatinib was again escalated to 75% of the initial dose (600 mg day−1) in patients 2 and 3, leading
to a strong relapse of skin eruptions in both cases. During the further course of treatment, imatinib was left at 50% reduction
(400 mg day−1) in these two patients, resulting in no further skin reactions. Skin reactions to imatinib (A) Melanoma patients treated with
imatinib 800 mg day−1. (B) CML and GIST patients treated with different doses of imatinib. CTC=common toxicity criteria of the National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health; CML=chronic myelogenous leukaemia; GIST=gastrointestinal stromal tumour. Photographs and
photomicrographs of patient 3 at day 10 after the onset of treatment with imatinib 800 mg day−1. (A, B) Face and trunk of the patient
showing generalised macular and urticarial cutaneous eruptions. (C) Haematoxylin–eosin staining of lesional skin revealing a mononuclear
infiltrate and marked oedema of the upper dermis; magnification 1 : 200. (D, E) Immunohistochemical staining of lesional skin showing strong
expression of c-kit (CD117) in discrete mononuclear cells (arrows) of the upper dermis; magnification 1 : 100 (D) and 1 : 400 (E). (F)
Giemsa staining revealing an increased number of mast cells (arrows) in the upper dermis of lesional skin; magnification 1 : 400. A review
of the literature revealed mild to moderate cutaneous reactions as a common side effect to imatinib (Table 1(B)). In contrast, severe skin
reactions are rarely reported but, however, occurred following high treatment doses of 600–1000 mg day−1 as used in a phase I trial in GIST
(van Oosterom et al, 2001) as well as in our ongoing study. Histological analyses of biopsy specimens of lesional skin from patients 2 and 3
revealed loose mononuclear cells infiltrating the dermis with a perivascular pattern (Figure 1C). The upper dermis showed marked oedema and,
remarkably, an increased number of mast cells. Immunohistochemical analyses using polyclonal goat-anti-human antibodies A4502 (DAKO,
Hamburg, Germany) recognising the c-kit gene product CD117 revealed a strong staining of mononuclear cells of the dermis morphologically
corresponding to mast cells (Figure 1D, E), as additionally confirmed by Giemsa staining (Figure 1F). Human mast cells, which express a
functional c-kit receptor, are known to be susceptible to tyrosine kinase inhibition by imatinib leading to impaired proliferation as well
as induction of apoptosis (Ma et al, 2002). Therefore, an enhanced proliferation of mast cells as observed in our patients seems to be
unlikely mediated via c-kit inhibition on the mast cells themselves. We therefore suggest imatinib to act as a dose-dependent inducer of
chemoattractant substances like, for example, cytokines and growth factors leading to dermal mast cell accumulation. Nevertheless, the
precise mechanism of action needs to be further elucidated. We conclude that imatinib acts as a dose-dependent inducer of cutaneous adverse
reactions with mainly mild reactivity to low or intermediate doses (200–600 mg day−1) but severe eruptions to high doses (600–1000 mg day−1)
of the drug. Our findings should stimulate further investigation of the cutaneous reaction profile to imatinib. To avoid strong cutaneous
adverse reactions, however, treatment with low or intermediate doses of imatinib should be preferred in comparison with high doses of this
drug whenever feasible.
