We report two cases of paratracheal air cyst discovered incidentally at neck ultrasonography and confirmed at CT. The cysts were located at
the inferoposterior aspect of the right lobe of the thyroid. Ultrasonography revealed an ill-defined hypoechoic mass containing hyperechoic
foci which mimicked calcifications. Neck CT confirmed the presence of an ill-defined air pocket which communicated with the trachea through
a slit. Paratracheal air cyst is a rarely described lesion, and its pathologic nature is not clearly proven (1-4). Previous reports state
that the cyst was identified at routine chest radiography or chest CT (1, 2); the sonographic findings have not, however, been described. In
this report, we present two cases of paratracheal air cyst with peculiar sonographic findings. A 43-year-old woman underwent neck sonography
as part of a routine medical checkup. Six years earlier she had received a renal transplant, and the kidney involved had been functioning
well up to the time of the checkup. Neck ultrasonography revealed a 2.9×1.4-cm hypoechoic mass at the inferoposterior aspect of the right
lobe of the thyroid (Figs. 1A, B). The lesion, located outside the thyroid capsule, had an ill-demarcated margin and contained multiple
hyperechoic foci which appeared to be small calcifications. The thyroid gland was normal in echogenicity and size, and no focal lesion was
observed. Cervical lymphadenopathy was absent. Subsequently, on the basis of the sonographic findings, a tumor of the right parathyroid
gland was suspected, and needle aspiration biopsy (NAB) was planned. Further sonography suggested that the hyperechogenic foci were mobile.
To rule out Zenker's diverticulum, esophagography was also performed, and the findings were negative. For further evaluation, neck CT scans
were obtained, and an unusual air pocket was found on the right side of the trachea. It had an irregular wall (Fig. 1C), and multiplanar
reformatted imaging showed that a slit-like structure linked it with the trachea (Fig. 1D). The findings of chest radiography were normal,
however. After reviewing all the above findings, a paratracheal air cyst was diagnosed. A 65-year-old man presented with anterior neck pain.
Sonography indicated that the thyroid gland was normal, but at the inferoposterior aspect of its right lobe, an ill-defined hypoechoic mass
was discovered (Figs. 2A, B). The lesion contained multiple echogenic foci which appeared to be mobile. Esophagography revealed no evidence
of esophageal diverticulum, but neck CT demonstrated an ill-defined air pocket, which communicated with the trachea (Figs. 2C, D). Chest
radiographs revealed mild emphysematous change but did not depict the air pocket in the right lower neck region. A paratracheal air cyst is
histopathologically diverse. In surgically confirmed cases, pathologic diagnoses of these cysts vary (tracheal diverticulum, or
lymphoepithelial or bronchogenic cyst), but all are lined by ciliated columnar epithelium and communicate with the trachea (1-4). The
differential diagnosis of a paratracheal air collection includes pharyngocele, esophageal diverticulum, laryngocele, apical hernia of the
lung, and apical paraseptal blebs or bullae (1, 2). Because of the reverberation artifact at ultrasonography, Zenker's diverticulum may be
seen as a mass with hyperechoic foci, mimicking a thyroid nodule, but the shape of the mass changes as the patient swallows, and the
hyperechoic foci are mobile (5, 6). A barium swallow study is used to confirm Zenker's diverticulum and pharyngocele. Laryngocele can be
identified at CT as abnormal dilatation of the saccule of the laryngeal ventricle (7), and CT also shows that apical hernia of the lung is
contiguous with the remainder of the lung. At chest radiography, the hernia tends to enlarge on forced expiration and shrink on inspiration
(8). Apical paraseptal blebs or bullae, which are air cysts within the lung, can be recognized on CT scans. In most previously reported
cases, paratracheal air cysts were identified at routine chest radiography and CT, and were located at the right posterolateral aspect of
the trachea at the level of the T1-T2 vertebral body (1-4). Goo et al. (4) reported that if a right paratracheal air cyst was observed at
CT, this could be a sign of obstructive lung disease, clinically, and of the presence of emphysema, radiologically. At initial
ultrasonography, we misdiagnosed the paratracheal air cyst as a calcified parathyroid mass. Surprisingly, the cyst appeared as a hypoechoic
mass-like lesion at ultrasonography, though CT revealed no fluid density within it. We constructed a paratracheal air cyst model by trapping
a balloon between slices of pork (Figs. 3A, B), and ultrasonography of the model demonstrated a hypoechoic mass with multiple echogenic foci
(Fig. 3C). This outcome was probably due to the strong reflection of the ultrasound beam from the anterior wall of the balloon, and the
multiple echogenic foci detected within the mass may be due to reverberation artifact. This phantom model explains why the paratracheal air
cyst was seen as a hypoechoic mass containing hyperechoic foci. Moreover, compression by the sonographic transducer distorts the wall,
making it more irregular, and this invokes artifacts from many different directions. As a result, the shape of the hyperechoic foci is more
irregular. In conclusion, when sonography depicts a mass-like lesion containing hyperechoic foci at the right inferoposterior aspect of the
thyroid gland and to the right of the trachea, the possibility of a paratracheal air cyst should be considered. CT may help disclose the
nature of the lesion before performing an invasive procedure such as NAB. A 43-year-old woman who underwent a routine medical checkup. A, B.
Transverse (A) and longitudinal (B) sonograms of the neck depict a 2.9 × 1.4 - cm hypoechoic mass (thick arrows) with multiple hyperechoic
foci (thin arrow) at the inferoposterior aspect of the right lobe of the thyroid gland. C. Neck CT shows an air-filled cyst (arrow) with an
irregular wall to the right of the trachea. D. Reformatted coronal CT image depicts slit-like communication (arrowhead) between the trachea
and the air cyst. (A=right common carotid artery, C=paratracheal air cyst, E=esophagus, T=trachea) A 65-year-old man who presented with
anterior neck pain. A, B. Transverse (A) and longitudinal (B) sonograms of the neck reveal a 2.5×1.1-cm hypoechoic mass (thick arrows) with
multiple hyperechoic foci (thin arrows) at the inferoposterior aspect of the right lobe of the thyroid gland. C. Neck CT shows an air cyst
(arrow) to the right of the trachea, with slit-like communication between it and the trachea. D. Reformatted coronal CT image reveals the
presence of an air pocket to the right of the trachea. (C=paratracheal air cyst, E=esophagus, T=trachea, Th=right lobe of the thyroid gland)
A phantom model made with pork and a balloon. A, B. A small balloon connected to a syringe was placed between two slices of pork, and
ultrasonography was performed. C. The balloon is depicted as a hypoechoic mass (arrows) with an echogenic wall. Within it, muliple
hyperechoic foci are observed.
