ZD 1839 (gefitinib, Iressa; AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Wilmington, DE, USA) is an orally active, selective epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) tyrosine-kinase inhibitor (TKI), which demonstrated antitumour activity in vitro and in vivo (Ciardiello et al, 2000). In
pretreated non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, phase I and II studies demonstrated that ZD 1839 is active and well tolerated, with
a response rate of about 10–15% (Kris et al, 2000,2002; Fukuoka et al, 2002). The presence of brain metastases (BM) has been considered as
an exclusion criterion in all trials conducted so far (Kris et al, 2000,2002; Fukuoka et al, 2002; Giaccone et al, 2002; Johnson et al,
2002). Therefore, the activity of ZD 1839 on BM is unknown. Since January 2001, we participated in the ZD 1839 compassionate use programme,
in which pretreated fit NSCLC patients were candidates to receive ZD 1839 at 250 mg daily dose. Compassionate use programme criteria do not
exclude patients with BM. Here, we report four cases of BM from NSCLC patients responding to ZD 1839 therapy. Patients were 53, 54, 55, and
65 years old, two male and two female patients. Histology was adenocarcinoma (two cases), squamous cell carcinoma (one case) and bronchiolo-
alveolar carcinoma (one case). All patients developed BM in the presence of extracranial disease. All patients had received a first-line
platinum-based chemotherapy, and two patients were treated with whole-brain radiotherapy (WBRT) for BM terminated at least 3 months before
starting ZD 1839, with evidence of brain disease progression when therapy with ZD 1839 was started. In the other two patients, ZD 1839 was
begun for appearance of asymptomatic BM and progressive disease on the extracranial sites. After 3 months of ZD 1839 therapy, all the
patients had a partial response both in the brain and in the extracranial sites (Figure 1Figure 1Case 4: Brain CT-scan at baseline (A) and
after 3 months of ZD1839 therapy (B). Brain metastasis from NSCLC responding to ZD 1839 therapy. This patient has been pretreated with three
lines of chemotherapy including platinum and taxanes, and received ZD 1839 after whole-brain radiotherapy failure.). At the time of this
analysis, two patients discontinued the treatment after 8 and 15 months for disease progression, while two patients are still on treatment
with no evidence of treatment failure after 6+ and 11+ months. ZD 1839 therapy was generally well tolerated, with skin toxicity recorded in
three patients (two patients grade 1 and one patient grade 2). All four patients experienced symptomatic improvement while on treatment.
Case 4: Brain CT-scan at baseline (A) and after 3 months of ZD1839 therapy (B). Brain metastasis from NSCLC responding to ZD 1839 therapy.
This patient has been pretreated with three lines of chemotherapy including platinum and taxanes, and received ZD 1839 after whole-brain
radiotherapy failure. This report suggests that ZD 1839 is effective in NSCLC patients with pretreated BM, but further trials are needed to
better evaluate the role of this compound in these patients. Based on our results, the presence of BM should not be considered an exclusion
criterion in future TKI studies.
