Techniques for mobilizing the greater curve of the stomach during laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication (LNF) include division of the short
gastric vessels (SGV). The splenic artery and vein lie directly posterior to the proper plane of dissection. Uncontrolled bleeding during
SGV division places the splenic vessels at risk for inadvertent injury or ligation. We report herein on 2 patients referred to our
institution who had left upper quadrant pain and radiographic evidence of segmental splenic infarction (SI) that resulted from a peripheral
splenic artery branch injury during LNF. Management strategies included a trial of conservative management and splenectomy for persistent
symptoms or complications resulting from SI. Intense inflammation and adhesion formation making laparoscopic splenectomy difficult should be
anticipated when operating on the infarcted spleen. The laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication (LNF) procedure has revolutionized the surgical
management of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). Numerous surgical series have demonstrated good symptom relief and minimal operative
morbidity. The necessity for mobilizing the greater curve of the stomach via division of the short gastric vessels (SGV) has been
debated.1,2,3 At present, division of the SGV is commonly performed.4,5 If uncontrolled bleeding occurs during SGV mobilization, the splenic
vessels are at risk of inadvertent injury or ligation. When bleeding results, these injuries are most often recognized and managed at the
time of surgery. Unfortunately, when splenic infarction (SI) results from vessel ligation, the injury to the spleen may go unrecognized. We
report on 2 patients referred to our institution with left upper quadrant pain and radiographic evidence of splenic infarction that resulted
from a peripheral splenic artery branch injury during LNF. We have outlined a diagnostic algorithm and management strategy for this
complication (Figure 1). Management strategy following laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication. A 45-year-old female presented with classic
symptoms of GERD, which were not fully controlled with medical management. She underwent standard preoperative testing including an
esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) with a biopsy, upper gastrointestinal examination (UGI), and esophageal manometry. She underwent a standard
LNF with division of the SGV performed using the Harmonic scalpel. During the SGV division, 1 superior vessel near the splenic hilum
retracted and continued to bleed. Directed application of the Harmonic scalpel controlled the bleeding with only minor blood loss of
approximately 50 cc. The case was completed without further incident. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 3, one day later than
planned because of somewhat more pain than usual though she remained afebrile and was tolerating a diet well. On follow-up visits, she
reported good reflux control but persistent, severe left low back and flank pain. A computed tomography (CT) scan obtained 19 days
postoperatively to investigate these complaints showed a segmental infarction of the upper pole of her spleen (Figure 2A). The patient was
managed conservatively with pain medication, and her symptoms largely subsided over the next month. A follow-up CT scan 1 month later showed
a much smaller area of infarct (Figure 2B), and a 3-month scan showed complete resolution (Figure 2C). The patient subsequently underwent a
laparoscopic cholecystectomy 1 year later. Laparoscopic examination of the spleen demonstrated a single adhesion over a normal capsule. CT
scan demonstrating a small area of intracapsular infarction with minimal inflammation (A). Repeat CT scan at 6 weeks (B) and 3 months (C)
demonstrating complete resolution. This case was successfully managed conservatively. A 33-year-old male suffered from worsening GERD
symptoms that were only controlled with escalating doses of proton pump inhibitors. He opted for elective surgical correction over chronic
medication dependence. Preoperative evaluation included EGD with a biopsy and manometry. The patient underwent a standard LNF with division
of the SGV performed using the Harmonic scalpel. Bleeding from one SGV was controlled with the application of multiple surgical clips. The
patient made a rapid postoperative recovery and was discharged on postoperative day 2. The patient reported persistent fevers and left upper
quadrant pain and was readmitted 1 week following surgery. A directed search for esophageal injury was performed to include a swallow study
and a CT scan. The CT scan demonstrated a large segmental infarction (Figure 3). The patient was initially managed conservatively, but his
pain and fevers worsened. A CT scan obtained 6 weeks after surgery demonstrated a persistent area of infarction and new pleural effusions.
The pleural effusions were aspirated and cultured. Three sets of blood cultures and the pleural fluid cultures were negative. Two months
following surgery, he was transferred to our institution. On the first hospital day, he had a temperature to 101.4Â°F, an elevation in his
white blood cell count (WBC) to 17.4, and an increase in his granulocytes to 82%. A repeat CT scan showed persistent superior pole
infarction with intense surrounding inflammation. An arteriogram was performed that confirmed our clinical suspicion of SI resulting from a
peripheral splenic artery branch ligation (Figure 4). CT scan demonstrating an infarction involving the superior pole of the spleen with
intense inflammation surrounding the capsule. The indication for splenectomy was persistent pain and fevers. Arteriogram demonstrating the
occluded peripheral splenic arterial branch and several clips. Note the absence of vascular contrast to the superior pole of the spleen.
Splenic infarction occurs with peripheral branch occlusion due to limited collateral circulation. The patient underwent preoperative
immunization and bowel preparation. He was scheduled for a laparoscopic splenectomy with clear counseling about the high conversion rate.
Surgically, the abdomen was adhesion free and initial splenic mobilization went uneventfully. As the superior pole of the spleen was
approached, intense fibrous, inflammatory adhesions involving the diaphragm, stomach, and left lobe of the liver were encountered (Figure
5). After converting to an open procedure, the spleen was removed. Pathologic examination showed focal necrosis with surrounding fibrosis.
Gram-positive organisms were seen in the specimen and cultures grew both streptococcus intermedius and coagulase negative staphylococcus.
The patient did well following surgery and was discharged on postoperative day 7. Laparoscopic splenectomy was attempted, but intense
inflammation involving the diaphragm, liver, and colon required converting to an open procedure. The spleen is an organ with good proximal
collateral circulation via the gastric, omental, and pancreatic vessels. Occlusion of the main splenic artery seldom produces splenic
infarction. On the other hand, peripheral splenic arterial branches have very little collateral circulation. When these vessels are occluded
or injured, an area of infarction will occur immediately distal to the involved branch or branches.6 Most spontaneous cases of SI are caused
by hematologic or thromboembolic events. Three recent reviews describe the clinical presentation and management of this form of SI.7,8,9 A
growing body of literature discusses therapeutic partial splenic embolization (PSE). PSE produces SI to treat various diseases including
hematologic splenic disorders, splenic trauma, and portal hypertension. The experience gained from PSE can be applied to iatrogenic SI.
Splenic injuries have been reported in the laparoscopic literature. Most of these injuries involve parenchymal tears or vascular injuries
that are recognized and managed intraoperatively. Management tenets involve standard surgical teachings: obtain hemostasis by primary
repair, direct pressure, or splenorrhaphy/splenectomy as indicated. Splenic bleeding presents as an acute surgical event; by comparison,
infarction is silent and may go unrecognized at the time of surgery. Working at the splenic hilum provides limited exposure because fluid
and blood can obscure the surgical field. Mobilizing the stomach away from the spleen helps visualize the SGV for safe division. If bleeding
occurs near the hilar area, blind clip application or the use of the Harmonic scalpel places the splenic vessels in danger because the SGV
arise from the splenic artery. Occlusion of a peripheral splenic artery will produce an infarct due to the limited collateral circulation in
this area. Small areas of ischemia, infarction, or both, may go unrecognized in the operating room. In the postoperative setting, either
splenic ischemia, infarction, or both of these, will produce unexpected symptoms as described below. How often and whether these subjective
complaints are evaluated for SI or simply managed with pain control is unknown. Very little has been reported about SI as a complication of
surgery. A single case of partial SI was reported in a series of 169 laparoscopic adrenalectomies.10 This case was managed successfully with
observation alone. The incidence of SI as a complication of LNF is unknown. Because the military medical system is defined by region and
each region has a designated tertiary referral center, we can estimate the incidence of this entity. Within the southeastern region,
complications are referred to only 1 tertiary military hospital. This hospital, Eisenhower Army Medical Center, received only 2 cases of SI
following LNF during the past 3 years, 1998 to 2002, out of a total of 231 LNF completed within the region. Note that this does not include
procedures that were converted to open Nissen fundoplication or those initiated using an open technique. We calculate the minimum incidence
to be 2/231 or <1.0%. In actuality, the incidence is probably much higher because many cases of SI may have gone undiagnosed. Little
information exists about the diagnosis and treatment of iatrogenic SI in the surgical literature. The best information available comes from
experience with spontaneous (hematologic or thromboembolic) events and therapeutic (PSE) SI. Nonspecific complaints are present in the
majority of cases of hematologic and thromboembolic SI. Left upper quadrant pain (67%), fever-chills (70%) and nausea-vomiting are common
symptoms. But abdominal symptoms may be absent in 33% of embolic cases.9 In autopsy series of SI, 10% to 50% of patients had no clinical
symptoms that could be attributed to SI.7,8 An unrecognized infarction that results following a laparoscopic procedure may be difficult to
diagnose based on clinical presentation alone. Left upper quadrant abdominal pain, subjective changes in appetite and early satiety are
common after LNF. Fever and an elevated WBC developing after esophageal mobilization would raise suspicion of an esophageal injury. Unless
SI is suspected and properly investigated, the diagnosis would be easy to overlook. The diagnosis of SI can be confirmed with an intravenous
(IV) contrast CT scan, liver-spleen scan, ultrasound, or angiography. The classic pattern on CT scan demonstrates a low attenuation wedge of
tissue surrounded by normal-appearing contrast enhanced splenic parenchyma. A word of caution, when the entire spleen is involved, the CT
scan may fail to demonstrate this classic pattern. Other CT scan findings include cysts, abscesses, and gas formation within the splenic
parenchyma.6 In 1 series, the false-negative rate of CT scans was 25%.7 Clinical judgment and use of alternate radiographic modalities may
be necessary. Diagnosing SI is important because patients deserve to know why they are having persistent symptoms, and complications that
arise from SI should be recognized, anticipated, and treated. The natural history of SI can be extrapolated from the experience gained from
cases of therapeutic PSE. In the 1980s, elective PSE was performed as an adjunct to renal transplantation, benign splenic pathology, and
portal hypertension. Mozes et al11 reported the results of elective PSE in a series of over 100 patients. They reported severe abdominal
pain lasting between 2 to 5 days requiring epidural anesthesia to manage. Fevers (>100Â°F) and elevated white blood counts occurred following
the procedure and lasted between 2 and 4 days. In their experience, PSE in excess of 60% to 70% of the spleen volume resulted in a higher
complication rate. Overall, they reported a 17% (17/101) complication rate to include splenic cysts (n=2), splenic abscesses (n=2),
pancreatitis (n=3), and pleural effusions (n=10). Splenic cysts were associated with delayed mortality in 2 cases. They concluded that
therapeutic PSE had a low complication rate (17%) but that when complications did develope prompt treatment with splenectomy was
indicated.11,12 PSE is presently used to treat hypersplenism in patients suffering from cirrhosis and portal hypertension. In 1 series of 17
patients, abdominal pain lasting 1 to 2 weeks and fever lasting up to 15 days was reported. Two severe complications (12%) were reported to
include liver failure and splenic abscess.13 In the trauma literature, PSE is used to manage blunt splenic injuries. Therapeutic
embolization has been shown to improve nonoperative splenic salvage rates for patients suffering high-grade injuries.14 Following PSE,
suspicious radiographic findings are seen in 9% of cases (7/80) and include subcapsular fluid collections, cysts, abscesses, and
intraparenchymal gas. Interestingly, these radiographic findings have been documented to occur up to 10 weeks after embolization.6 Splenic
artery embolization is also used as an adjunct to elective laparoscopic splenectomy. In these cases, the spleen is removed surgically after
infarction and provides little useful clinical information about the management of chronic SI. From the PSE experience, we know that the
initial procedure can be done safely, and the expected signs and symptoms can be managed. Unfortunately, an unpredictable delayed
complication rate exists that may result in significant morbidity and even mortality. After diagnosing postoperative SI, a trial of
conservative management is recommended. Duration of symptoms is reported to be 2 days to 2 weeks in some historical series. In the series by
Mozes et al,11 involving over 100 patients, splenectomy was never required for pain control. In the series by Nores et al,9 34% of SI cases
required splenectomy for persistent pain. These represent 2 different populations, the former being therapeutic PSE and the latter
spontaneous SI. When to apply a surgical approach in cases of iatrogenic SI has yet to be clearly outlined. For severe and persistent pain
lasting several weeks, a more aggressive surgical approach is warranted. These patients may benefit from early splenectomy. Complications
arising from SI occur in 17% to 20% of cases, and patients with large infarction volume (excess of 60% to 70%) have a higher complication
rate.7,9,11 The management of a recognized SI complication remains controversial. Splenic cysts and abscesses are the most commonly reported
complications. Unfortunately, it is difficult to differentiate between these 2 conditions radiographically, and the natural history of these
conditions may be unpredictable. Limited series report that percutaneous drainage can differentiate and treat these SI-related
complications.6,14 Splenic rupture, hemorrhage, and death are the most feared events arising from an SI-related complication. The incidence
of these dramatic events ranges from 17% (2/12)9 to 47% (14/30)7 in retrospective series. The conservative approach is to perform
splenectomy for any SI-related complication to include cyst or abscess formation, rupture, or hemorrhage. Others have questioned the need
for splenectomy for asymptotic splenic cysts resulting from SI, stating that these lesions can be safely observed.12 If an SI-related
complication is to be managed conservatively, the patient and surgeon should be educated as to the risks of observation. When surgery is
indicated, semi-elective splenectomy with preoperative immunization and full bowel preparation can be performed in the majority of cases. In
the cases presented here, SI caused symptoms that were severe enough to merit further investigation. Because symptoms had been present for
over 6 weeks, these patients had already been observed and failed a trial of observation for âunrecognizedâ SI. One patient had persistent
symptoms that were mild. This patient was managed conservatively and followed clinically without sequela. No SI-related complications have
been identified to date. The second case presented with persistent symptoms and multiple admissions for pain and fever. CT scan and
arteriography confirmed the diagnosis of SI. No radiographic evidence existed of cyst or abscess formation, and the clinical presentations
(pain and fever) were nonspecific findings commonly associated with uncomplicated SI. The indication for surgery was persistent pain. The
spleen was approached laparoscopically, but efforts to mobilize the spleen from the adjacent diaphragm and colon were unsuccessful. Early
conversion to a midline laparotomy facilitated the procedure. On final pathological review, a splenic abscess was present. Katkhouda et al15
reported successfully removing an infarcted spleen with abscess formation by using laparoscopic techniques. The intense adhesion formation
and inflammatory process may be variable, and the location of the infarction-abscess with respect to the adjoining structures must be taken
into account. At the present time, we recommend that the laparoscopic approach be used cautiously when performing elective splenectomy for
iatrogenic SI.
