Clinical characteristics and complications of Duchenne muscular dystrophy caused by skeletal and cardiac muscle degeneration are well known.
Gastro-intestinal involvement has also been recognised in these patients. However an acute perforated gastro-duodenal peptic ulcer has not
been documented up to now. A 26-year-old male with Duchenne muscular dystrophy with a clinical and radiographic diagnosis of acute
perforated gastro-duodenal peptic ulcer is treated non-operatively with naso-gastric suction and intravenous medication. Gastrointestinal
involvement in Duchenne muscular dystrophy and therapeutic considerations in a high risk patient are discussed. Non-surgical treatment for
perforated gastro-duodenal peptic ulcer should be considered in high risk patients, as is the case in patients with Duchenne muscular
dystrophy. Patients must be carefully observed and operated on if non-operative treatment is unsuccessful. Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD)
is a fatal X-linked recessive disease. It is the most common congenital neuromuscular disorder of childhood . It's clinical course and
characteristics caused by skeletal and cardiac muscle degeneration are well known and documented . Progressive muscle weakness inevitably
results in the complete inability to walk around the age of 11 . By the age of 18 patients are predisposed to serious pulmonary infections .
It leads to death before the age of 30. Gastro-intestinal involvement is less well known. Dystrophic changes in smooth muscle of the gastro-
intestinal tract have been implicated in causing gastro-intestinal dysfunction . We want to present and discuss a patient with Duchenne
muscular dystrophy with a clinical and radiographic diagnosis of acute perforated peptic ulcer. Treatment options for an acute perforated
peptic ulcer should be well considered in a patient at pulmonary and cardiac risk caused by DMD. A 26-year-old male has DMD and is non-
ambulatory. He was presented on our emergency department because of severe sudden onset abdominal pain. Upon presentation there was sharp
constant pain located in the epigastrium, with nausea and vomiting. Complaints had been present for several hours. There were no signs and
symptoms of gastrointestinal bleeding. On physical examination there was direct tenderness in his abdomen with rebound tenderness and
guarding. Bowel sounds were absent. His body temperature was 38, 3Â°C, there was a tachycardia at a rate of 150/min and blood pressure was
115/60 mmHg. A sitting chest radiograph showed free air in the peritoneum (figure 1). Sitting chest radiograph showing free air in the right
subphrenium Previous medical history was without respiratory aid and no signs of nightly hypoxia, but with recurring episodes of pneumonia.
His functional vital capacity was 30% of the predicted value. Two years ago he had two episodes of acute gastric bleeding from peptic ulcer
vessels; both diagnosed endoscopicaly and subsequently treated with endoscopic epinephrine injections with bipolar coaptation. Thereafter
Helicobacter Pylori (HP) eradication therapy (omeprazole, metronidazole and clarithromycin for 7 days) was given, followed by a continuous
use of omeprazol and sucralfate. Furthermore he was known to have a chronically dilated stomach, with recurring episodes of poor gastric
passage and vomiting. Based on his previous medical history and signs and symptoms on current presentation a clinical diagnosis of
perforated peptic ulcer was established. The associated perioperative risks of pulmonary dysfunction and cardiac failure in this patient
were high. Therefore non-operative treatment for perforated peptic ulcer was started. The patient was treated with continuous naso-gastric
suction (20 cm H2O) and intravenous omeprazol continuously and regular doses of intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics aimed at gram
positive, gram negative and anaerobic-bacteria (Cefuroxim and Metronidazole) were administered. The patient's symptoms rapidly improved
thereafter. After a five-day period the naso-gastric suction tube was removed. The pain and nausea had subsided; there was less direct
tenderness in the abdomen and no rebound tenderness or guarding. Bowel sounds were present. Body temperature was normal. Oral intake of
fluids and solids was started. Twelve days after admission the patient was dismissed from hospital in good clinical condition. DMD is caused
by a deletion in the dystrophin gene located on the short arm of the X-chromosome . The resulting lack of dystrophin causes degeneration of
striated muscle . Respiratory dysfunction caused by dystrophic changes in respiratory muscle causing pulmonary infection is the most common
complication in DMD . Dystrophin is also present in smooth muscle. The involvement of smooth muscle in addition to the progressive
dystrophic changes in striated muscle may cause clinical dysfunction of the gastro-intestinal tract . Both gastric dilatation and intestinal
pseudo-obstruction have been described as gastro-intestinal complications in DMD . To provide evidence that smooth muscle is functionally
impaired in patients with DMD, Barohn et al. compared gastric-emptying time between DMD patients and healthy control subjects. They showed a
significant difference in gastric emptying time in patients with DMD. Furthermore, on examination at autopsy degeneration and loss of smooth
gastro-intestinal muscle similar to changes in skeletal and cardiac muscle were found in DMD patients . To our knowledge however there are
no reports on gastro-duodenal (perforated) peptic ulcer as a complication in DMD. The common treatment for patients with perforated peptic
ulcer is surgical repair . In most cases an omental patch repair is performed, followed by treatment with H2 receptor antagonists and if
indicated HP eradication therapy . Non-operative treatment for perforated peptic ulcer can be successful, as first reported by Taylor in
1957. He compared operative and non-operative treatment for perforated peptic ulcer and reported similar mortality rates in both groups (5%)
. Crofts et al. compared the outcome of non-operative treatment with that of emergency surgery in a randomised trial and reported an overall
mortality rate of 5% in each group and no significant difference in morbidity . Crofts et al. conclude that an initial period of non-
operative treatment is safely allowed except in patients over 70 years old . Kaene et al. reported favourable survival rates (2.4%
mortality) in a series of 42 patients treated non-operatively compared with reported surgical mortality . The importance of careful clinical
observation by an experienced surgeon is emphasised in reported literature, because non-operative treatment should be promptly abandoned if
unsuccessful . In spite of those reports non-operative treatment has never really been accepted as standard treatment . However in selected
cases non-operative treatment for perforated peptic ulcer may be considered. Boey et al. identified major medical illness, preoperative
shock and longstanding perforation, as perioperative risk factors . Based on these risk factors they correctly predicted the outcome in
93.8% of patients in a series of 259 patients treated operatively for perforated peptic ulcer. Mortality rate increased with the presence of
one, two or all three risk factors. Boey et al. conclude that non-operative treatment should be re-evaluated for patients with all three
risk factors because of their uniformly dismal outcome after surgery . Patients with DMD are at high risk for perioperative respiratory
dysfunction or heart failure . Therefore in this case a non-operative approach was well considered and proved to be successful. This case
demonstrates a gastro-duodenal peptic ulcer as a possible complication in DMD. Furthermore it illustrates that in pulmonary and cardiac high
risk patients non-operative treatment for perforated peptic ulcer can be successful. If treated non-operatively patients should be carefully
observed and operated on if non-operative treatment is unsuccessful. None declared. DMD: Duchenne muscular dystrophy HP: Helicobacter Pylori
Brinkman J-M: rewrote the manuscript in 2003. Van Royen BJ: helped rewriting the manuscript in 2003. Brinkman J-M and Oddens J: drafted the
manuscript in 2001. Wever J and Olsman JG: read and approved the manuscript in 2001 and 2003. The pre-publication history for this paper can
be accessed here: The authors received written consent from the patient's family. No financial support was received.
