Perforation of the bowel during placement of a biliary stent is a known complication of this procedure. We report the endoluminal loss of a
biliary stent during routine stent extraction that ultimately led to a chronic colovaginal fistula. This case emphasizes the need for
evaluation of fecal passage of stents in patients with a known dislodged prosthesis. A 65-year-old white female underwent biliary stent
placement for an episode of choledocholithiasis. The stent was lost in the duodenum during routine extraction. The patient was managed
expectantly. She denied ever passing this stent via the rectum and began to develop symptoms of colovaginal fistula. Evaluation found a
retained biliary stent in the sigmoid colon and a fistula into the vagina. The patient underwent elective low anterior resection and
colovaginal fistula repair. Reports exist of migration of stents that lead to acute colonic perforation and the need for emergent surgery.
For this reason, it has been suggested that dropped or migrated stents be purposefully retrieved. However, if the option of expectant
observation is used, it is important to clearly document the fecal passage of these stents and be prepared to retrieve these objects if they
have a prolonged bowel transit time. Endoscopic placement of biliary stents has become a mainstay of treatment for both benign and malignant
biliary disease. Perforation of the duodenum during placement of a biliary stent is a known complication of this procedure.1 A less
frequently reported complication is the perforation of the small bowel or colon as a result of migration of a stent.1â€“5 To date, reports
describing this situation involve free perforation of a viscus, with or without abscess formation, and the need for emergent operation. We
report the endoluminal loss of a biliary stent during routine stent extraction that ultimately led to a chronic colovaginal fistula. This
diagnosis was confirmed with both endoscopic and pelvic examinations and was repaired with a standard, low anterior resection of the sigmoid
colon and rectum with repair of the vaginal fistula. This case emphasizes the need for evaluation of fecal passage of stents in patients
with a known dislodged prosthesis. A 65-year-old white female presented to her primary care physician with complaints of passing air and
stool per vagina. She had a significant past surgical history of cholecystectomy and postoperative endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) with biliary stent placement. At the time of reevaluation of the biliary stent, the endoscopist reportedly
had difficulty removing the stent and dropped it in the duodenum. The patient was managed expectantly. Several months after this procedure,
she began to notice the passage of air via the vagina, which had recently progressed to fecal drainage. A plain film of the abdomen revealed
a retained biliary stent in the pelvis (Figure 1). On vaginal examination, the patient was found to have a colovaginal fistula at the
fornix. Colonoscopy showed extensive diverticular disease as well as a biliary stent in the sigmoid colon leading into a fistula tract
(Figure 2). The location of this fistula in relationship to the rectum is further demonstrated with a barium enema examination (Figure 3).
The patient underwent preoperative bowel preparation and elective, low anterior resection. The colovaginal fistula was repaired at that
time. Intraoperative findings included the presence of a biliary stent lodged in the sigmoid colon directly leading into a colovaginal
fistula. Postoperatively, the patient has done well with no evidence of recurrence of the fistula. Plain KUB film revealing biliary stent
prosthesis lodged in the pelvis. Colonoscopic view of sigmoid colon with diverticuli (D) and a stent (S) perforating a diverticulum leading
to a fistula tract (F). Barium enema demonstrating a low sigmoid colovaginal fistula (F) with the presence of a biliary stent (B).
Endoscopic placement of biliary stents is an integral part of the treatment for biliary tract disease. The complication rate for biliary
stents has been reported to range from 8% to 10%. The most common complications are clogging of the stent and cholangitis.2,3 Other serious
complications, such as bowel perforations, particularly duodenal perforations, are known to occur.1 These perforations usually happen either
at the time of placement or extraction of the stent. Migration of biliary stents occurs in up to 6% of patients.2,4 These patients are often
managed conservatively with expectant passage of the stent in the stool.4 Serial x-ray examinations can be done to confirm the catheter
passage or identify its location within the gastrointestinal tract.4 However, the treatment of a dislodged biliary stent is not well
defined.4 Reports exist of migration of stents that lead to acute colonic perforation and need for emergent surgery.2,4,5 Unlike experiences
discussed in these reports, the dislodged stent in our patient eroded through her colon to produce a chronic colovaginal fistula. It has
been suggested in prior publications2,4 that dropped or migrated stents be purposefully retrieved, especially in patients with known
intraluminal intestinal pathology such as strictures or diverticula. However, if the option of expectant observation is used, it is
important to clearly document the fecal passage of these stents and be prepared to retrieve these objects electively if they have a
prolonged bowel transit time. Surgeons should have a high index of suspicion for stent-related complications in these patients if they
develop peritonitis or a fistula. Special thanks to Mrs. Berta Turner for her help and support.
