We report the first laboratory-confirmed case of Rickettsia mongolotimonae infection in Africa. The patient sought treatment for an eschar
on his toe; lymphangitis, severe headaches, and fever subsequently developed. After a regimen of doxycycline, symptoms rapidly resolved. R.
mongolotimonae infection was diagnosed retrospectively by serologic tests and molecular-based detection of the organism in biopsy specimens
of eschar material. Rickettsioses are infections of emerging medical importance, particularly in southern Africa, where an increasing number
of cases are being encountered among both residents and tourists (1). Three Rickettsia species have been associated with human disease in
South Africa to date. Rickettsia conorii has long been recognized as the agent of Mediterranean spotted fever, and more recently, a newly
recognized species, R. africae, has been identified as the agent of African tick-bite fever. In 2002, the first case report of a patient
infected with R. aeschlimannii was published (2). In addition to these recognized pathogens, Rickettsia species, including R.
mongolotimonae, have been detected in human-biting arthropods in Africa. This species (3) was first encountered in Hyalomma asiaticum ticks
in Inner Mongolia in 1991 (4) but has subsequently been associated with human infections in southern France (5) and, perhaps of most
relevance to this report, has been detected in H. truncatum ticks collected from cattle in Niger (6). This species of tick, which at least
during its immature life stages parasitizes migratory birds, is widely distributed in many African countries, including South Africa (7). In
September 2002, a 34-year-old (HIV-seronegative) construction worker, working near Ellisras in South Africa’s Northern Province, discovered
a lesion on the inside of the second toe on his right foot (Figure); subsequently, severe headaches and high fever developed. He was
examined at a local hospital and found to have lymphangitis extending pretibially from the lesion; as a result of his other symptoms, he was
treated for blood poisoning with ceftriaxone sodium, 1,000 mg once daily. During the next 3 days, the lesion at the bite site (noted by the
examining physician) remained very sore, and the patient’s right inguinal lymph node became enlarged and very painful. The patient then
decided to return to his hometown and sought treatment from his general practitioner (on day 5 after discovery of the lesion). On
examination, the lesion and lymphangitis were clearly visible on the patient’s toe, although cellulitis and edema were not observed. His
inguinal lymph node had swollen to 3 cm in diameter, and he was still febrile (38.5°C). Blood samples were then obtained as well as a biopsy
specimen from the lesion. A regimen of doxycycline, 100 mg per day orally, for 5 days was prescribed and 1 day’s dosage was administered.
The next day, the patient was afebrile, and the lymphangitis had completely resolved. Eschar with lymphangitis. In the laboratory, a Giemsa
stain of a smear prepared from the patient’s blood showed activated lymphocytes. A complete blood count showed thrombocytosis (632 x
103/μL), but all other hematologic parameters were within the normal range. Biochemical findings showed elevated levels of alanine
transaminase (66 IU/L), blood urea nitrogen (7.2 g/L), and triglycerides (2.2 mmol/L); and decreased levels of chloride (96.3 mmol/L) and
albumin (38g/L); all other tests yielded results within the normal range. Testing of the patient’s serum with the Weil-Felix test
demonstrated an antibody titer (80) only against the OX2 Proteus antigen, giving presumptive evidence of a rickettsial infection. As a
result, antirickettsial microimmunofluorescence testing was performed (8). The serum did not yield significant immunoglobulin (Ig) M titers
against R. conorii or R. africae antigens, but IgG titers of 64 were found by using both antigens. DNA was extracted from the eschar biopsy
specimen by using the QIAamp Tissue kit (QIAGEN GmbH, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions. This DNA extract was
used as template in a previously described polymerase chain reaction assay targeting a Rickettsia spp. rOmpA fragment (9). An amplification
product was obtained from this extract but not from any concurrently processed control materials. The amplification product was purified;
the nucleic acid sequences of both strands were then determined. The sequence obtained from these efforts was found to share >99% similarity
with the corresponding rOmpA fragment of R. mongolotimonae. The combination of clinical and laboratory data yielded strong evidence that the
case described here was an infection of R. mongolotimonae, the first reported in southern Africa. A single eschar is also typical of R.
conorii infections, but these are characterized by rash (Mediterranean spotted fever), which the current patient did not have. Although R.
africae infections manifest only rarely as a rash, they are typified by multiple eschars (10). This case description is also very similar to
that relating to a French patient infected with R. mongolotimonae, who had lymphangitis and inguinal lymphadenopathy. The serologic findings
indicate exposure to a spotted fever group rickettsia rather than to a specific species within this group, but the near identity of the
rOmpA sequence obtained from the patient’s eschar to that of R. mongolotimonae provides a clear indication that this species, rather than
other spotted fever group rickettsiae, was present at the site of the tick bite. Although no tick was found in association with the
patient’s eschar, his infection may have been acquired from a H. truncatum, as this species is abundant in the region of the bushveld where
the patient had been working and is known to feed on humans (11). Suggested citation for this article: Pretorius A-M, Birtles RJ. Rickettsia
mongolotimonae infection in South Africa. Emerg Infect Dis [serial online] 2004 Jan [date cited]. Available from: URL:
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol10no1/02-0662.htm Dr. Pretorius is a medical scientist and lecturer. at the National Health Laboratory
Services, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa. Her research interests include the clinical
and epidemiologic features of vector-borne diseases, especially rickettsiae, ehrlichiae, and bartonellae. Dr. Birtles is a senior lecturer
at the Centre for Comparative Infectious Diseases, Department of Veterinary Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool, UK. His research interests are epidemiology, ecology and pathogenicity of bartonellae and other arthropod-borne
bacteria, particularly in natural reservoir–vector systems.
