Small bowel ischemia following laparoscopy was described recently as a rare fatal complication of the CO2 pneumoperitoneum. Of the 8 cases
reported in the surgical literature, 7 were fatal, 1 was not. In this report, we describe the first gynecological case. A 34-year-old woman
who underwent laparoscopy with extensive adhesiolysis and myolysis was re-admitted with an acute abdomen on postoperative day 4. Immediate
laparotomy revealed acute peritonitis, extensive adhesions, and a 3-cm defect in the small bowel. Tissue examination showed ischemic
necrosis of edematous, but essentially normal, bowel mucosa. The postoperative course was extremely complicated. She was discharged after a
2-month hospital stay in the intensive care unit for rehabilitation. Data are available on 7 patients (including ours). All procedures were
described as uneventful. The intraabdominal pressure was set at 15 mm Hg when specified. Some abdominal pain occurred in all, nausea and
vomiting in 4, diarrhea in 2, abdominal distention in 1, fever in none. Quick reintervention laparotomy was performed in 2 and delayed in 5
(up to 4 days). The CO2 pneumoperitoneum is a predisposing factor for intestinal ischemia as it reduces cardiac output and splanchnic blood
flow. However, critical ischemia relies on underlying vasculopathy or an inciting event. Patient selection, maintaining intraabdominal
pressure at 15 mm Hg or less, and intermittent decompression of the gas represent the best options for preventing this complication.
Laparoscopic surgery has become the standard of care for many gynecologic conditions, and the laparoscopic technique is recognized as being
safe and effective. However, recent case reports in the surgical literature describe small bowel ischemia as a rare fatal complication of
the CO2 pneumoperitoneum.1–7 Andrei et al7 reviewed the literature on small bowel ischemia in 1999 and added 1 case that occurred following
laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Their review yielded 5 cases following laparoscopic cholecystectomy1–3,5,6 and 1 after laparoscopic Nissen
fundoplication.4 These authors also reported a personal communication of another case following laparoscopic cholecystectomy.4 Of the 8
cases in the literature, 7 were fatal, 1 was not. The CO2 pneumoperitoneum appears to be a predisposing factor in the development of
intestinal ischemia because it compromises the mesenteric circulation through decreased cardiac output and mechanical reduction of the blood
flow due to increased intraabdominal pressure, and humoral vasoconstriction.6–10 However, as we will describe, progression to critical
ischemia seems to rely on underlying vasculopathy or an inciting event. In this report, we describe the first case in gynecology of small
bowel ischemic necrosis following laparoscopic surgery. Our intention is to increase awareness about this catastrophic complication and to
examine the literature for possible causes and preventive measures. A 34-year-old African-American woman, gravida 3, para 1, presented to
the first author with a newly developed 4- to 5-cm left uterine mass associated with menorrhagia and pelvic pain of several months duration.
The mass was thought to be a myoma. Ultrasound showed multiple small myomas. A diagnostic laparoscopy with possible myomectomy was planned
pending a second opinion consult and medical clearance. Past surgical history included laparotomy with left oophorectomy for ovarian cysts
and 2 elective terminations of pregnancy, the last of which may have been associated with an inflammatory process that contributed to
development of the pelvic mass not appreciated during previous pelvic examinations. Past medical history included asthma and use of
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for pain. Physical examination revealed bradycardia and a small thyroid nodule. A laboratory workup
showed mild iron deficiency anemia (hemoglobin 11.6 g/dL; hematocrit 35.3%) and inconclusive thyroid studies with the patient being
clinically euthyroid. At laparoscopy, the open entry method was used. Adherent small bowel loops were noted at the entry site requiring
careful dissection. With the establishment of an adequate pneumoperitoneum at a pressure of 15 mm Hg, exploration of the abdomen revealed
extensive adhesions. Careful port placement and adhesiolysis using disposable scissors were performed to expose the pelvic organs. The
uterus was intimately adherent to the sigmoid colon. Two uterine bulges consistent with myoma or adenomyoma were exposed and palpated.
Because of safety considerations, myolysis was selected as the procedure of choice with serial bipolar needle punctures placed into the
perceived junction between each lesion and uterus as well as in its dome. The abdomen was lavaged with copious amounts of saline, leaving
behind a generous amount to minimize adhesion reformation. The operative time was 75 minutes, the anesthetic inhalation agents used were
sevoflurane and nitrous oxide, and the estimated blood loss was <30 mL. The patient was discharged on the same day of surgery. The first
author kept in contact with the patient on a daily basis because of the extensive dissection. Her postoperative recovery appeared to be
uneventful for the first 3 days. She was afebrile throughout, voiding well, and tolerating oral intake on the first postoperative day. She
passed flatus on the second day and had a small bowel movement on the third day. She had a bloody drainage from the incision attributed to
hydroflation on day 1 and a black and blue mark around the umbilicus on day 2, probably representing a bruise from surgical dissection. She
also reported some abdominal pain and distention mostly during the first 2 days. However, on the morning of the fourth postoperative day,
the patient reported that she had vomited and was told to go to the emergency room immediately. The patient presented to the emergency room
several hours later and was met by the first author as she was being admitted. An acute abdomen was diagnosed, and the surgical team
mobilized for an immediate laparotomy. Shortly thereafter, the patient experienced a sudden onset of atrial fibrillation and hypotension. A
triple lumen catheter was placed, and the patient was taken to the operating room for exploratory laparotomy. The second author performed
surgery. Enteric fluid was noted to exit from the umbilical port site while the patient was being prepped and draped. A midline laparotomy
was performed. Gross spillage of enteric fluid was noted as well as extremely dense adhesions between the bowel and anterior abdominal wall
mostly in the midline. Extensive mobilization of the small bowel was carried out. An area of perforated bowel seeping fluid was noted along
the midline. An incidental enterotomy occurred during the adhesiolysis. The affected bowel was resected and a Prasad double barrel ileostomy
was done. Mobilization of the bowel was difficult and required repeated releasing incisions due to foreshortening of the mesentery. The
pathology report showed a 3-cm defect in the center of the resected bowel associated with changes consistent with ischemic necrosis. The
bowel mucosa was slightly edematous but otherwise grossly normal. For instance, no coagulation necrosis, inflammatory reaction, or
granulation tissue was present. Following surgery, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and treated with broad-
spectrum antibiotics and activated protein C (Xigris). Her 2-month ICU course was extremely difficult. It was complicated by candidemia,
unsuccessful extubation trials, profound multiple neuropathy, nosocomial pneumonia, pressure ulcer, drug-induced thrombocytopenia, and
gastrointestinal bleeding, precipitating shock and 2 cardiopulmonary arrests. Gastrostomy and tracheostomy tubes were placed, as well as an
inferior vena cava filter when she developed a deep-vein thrombosis. She is currently in rehabilitation. This case represents a rare
catastrophic complication that is not attributable to operative laparoscopic manipulations. As with all previously reported 6 cases for whom
detailed information was available,1,2,4,5–7 a seemingly successful operative outcome was interrupted by a devastating complication. None of
the procedures lasted longer than 85 minutes; 4 took less than 1 hour to complete. The procedures were variably described as elective,
routine, uneventful, or without apparent complications. Extensive lysis of adhesions was carried out in our case; multiple adhesions were
also noted in another report.1 Different anesthetic agents were utilized, sevoflurane in our case, isoflurane,2,7 deslfurane,6 and
halothane1 in others. The intraabdominal pressure was set at 15 mm Hg in our case as well as in all communications specifying this
parameter.1, 5, 7 The case reports are from different countries: 3 (including ours) from the USA,6,7 2 from Germany,1,3 2 from the UK,2,5 1
from Australia,4 and 1 personal communication from an unspecified source.4 In the USA, the length of stay following the laparoscopic
procedure was consistent with an outpatient approach as opposed to in-patient hospitalization considered standard elsewhere. Our 34-year-old
patient was discharged the same day of surgery and returned to the hospital on day 4 after having vomited and reporting a few other
symptoms. She was reoperated upon for an acute abdomen almost immediately thereafter. The 72-year-old reported by Andrei et al7 was
discharged on day 1 and returned to the hospital on day 8. Her symptoms consisted of diffuse abdominal pain associated with nausea,
vomiting, and bloody diarrhea that started 1 or 2 days after the operation. She was reoperated upon on day 9, following marked deterioration
in her general condition. The entire small bowel was found gangrenous; she expired 48 hours later. Schorr's 62-year-old patient6 was ready
for discharge on day 1, but could not be because of family matters. While awaiting her family on day 2, she developed severe abdominal pain
and tachycardia and was kept in the hospital. She suffered an unresponsive cardiac arrest while being investigated on day 3. Autopsy
revealed infarction of the small bowel and colon to the hepatic flexure due to superior mesenteric artery thrombosis. The artery was not
constricted by plaque, and no evidence was present of an embolic phenomenon anywhere. The first case in the literature was reported by Paul
et al1 in Germany. Their 68-year-old patient, who was kept in the hospital, developed uncharacteristic abdominal pain and intermittent
diarrhea. He was reoperated on on day 4 following increasing abdominal pain and general deterioration including renal failure. Gangrene of
the ileum and right colon was managed with resection and primary anastomosis. Intraabdominal sepsis secondary to anastomotic breakdown led
to several further reoperations. The patient died on day 45 from a septic complication. The 76-year-old patient reported by Jaffe and
Russell2 from the UK was discharged on day 2 and readmitted on day 3 complaining of vague periumbilical discomfort. She was observed and
investigated for 4 days and reoperated on on day 7 following rapid hemodynamic deterioration. The bowel was gangrenous from the
duodenojejunal junction to the hepatic flexure. A diagnosis of superior mesenteric artery thrombosis was made, intestinal resection was not
done, and the patient died 12 hours later. The 55-year-old patient from Australia reported by Mitchell and Jamieson4 developed on day 1 deep
epigastric pain with nausea, retching, and itching. On day 2, she had fever and tachycardia with worsening pain and rash. She improved on
day 3 but suffered sudden left subcostal pain at midnight and was operated on on day 4 following increasing abdominal pain and rigidity. The
proximal stomach and esophagus were infarcted with full thickness necrosis of the esophagus. Resection and esophagogastric anastomosis was
done. Subsequently, the patient underwent 7 reoperations, resecting ischemic tissue and ultimately died from overwhelming sepsis and hepatic
infarction. Postmortem examination revealed congenital narrowing of the celiac artery, which contained an organized thrombosis. Other major
vessels were normal without significant atheromatous disease. The 36-year-old English patient reported by Dwerry-house et al5 was discharged
on day 1. He returned to the hospital on day 2 complaining of colicky pain, abdominal distention, and vomiting. Ultrasound showed dilated
fluid-filled loops of small bowel. Laparoscopy revealed dilated small bowel and a small amount of turbid peritoneal fluid. Laparotomy was
performed. The terminal ileum was stenosed and thickened with associated fat wrapping suggestive of Crohn's disease. An ileocecal resection
was performed, and the patient made an uneventful recovery. Histologic examination of the resected ileum showed features of a venous
infarction with patchy mucosal necrosis. The clinical presentations were similar in several aspects. Some abdominal pain was experienced by
all patients, including ours, but was considered severe in only 2.4,6 Nausea and vomiting occurred in 4 of the 7 patients, including
ours,4,5,7 diarrhea in 2,1,7 and abdominal distention in 1 patient.5 A febrile reaction was not present in any patient. Reintervention
laparotomy was carried out in our patient as soon as she was admitted and on the same day of readmission in Dwerryhouse et al's patient.5 It
was delayed in the other cases from 1 day7 to 4 days1, 2 because of vague presentations and inconclusive investigations. It is generally
agreed that the CO2 pneumoperitoneum is a predisposing factor for the development of intestinal ischemia because it causes the following
physiologic alterations: a) decreased cardiac output due to increased systemic vascular resistance, decreased venous return, and elevated
intrathoracic pressure,8,9,11 b) significant reduction in the splanchnic blood flow, resulting from mechanical compression of the mesenteric
veins, humoral vasoconstriction of the mesenteric bed and increased portal venous pressure caused by hypercapnia, local absorption of the
CO2, and increased release of vasopressin.6–10 However, reduction in cardiac output and mesenteric blood flow associated with the CO2
pneumoperitoneum should be insufficient to cause significant intestinal ischemia in healthy patients. Critical intestinal ischemia following
CO2 pneumoperitoneum may be triggered by thrombosis of an arterial trunk,1,2,4,6 acute compromise of the mesenteric circulation of
undetermined nature,7 or a focal lesion caused by a local insult5 (present report). Arterial thrombosis or acute insufficiency causes
gangrene or infarction, with or without full thickness necrosis, of the gastrointestinal segment supplied by the compromised arterial trunk.
Superior mesenteric artery thrombosis was diagnosed clinically in 2 instances1, 2 and acute insufficiency in one.7 These were attributed to
atherosclerosis on the basis of age and history of cardiovascular disease. Arterial thrombosis noted at autopsy was deemed to be due to
unknown causes in 1 patient,6 and to congenital stenosis of the artery in another.4 In our case and that of Dwerryhouse et al,5 the
triggering mechanism appears to have been related to a local insult: dense adhesions pulling against a foreshortened mesentery in our case
and abnormal ileum suggestive of Crohn's disease in theirs. The severity of insult in our case caused transmural necrosis, consistent with
the description of severe focal segmental ischemia provided by Greenwald et al.12 The gravity of the clinical situation resulting from a
3-cm open defect in the small bowel may be compared to that associated with a grossly ruptured appendix. Free flow of intestinal contents
into the peritoneal cavity would soon lead to generalized peritonitis and major third space losses into the peritoneum promptly resulting in
dehydration, hemodynamic instability, and toxic shock. The profound multiple neuropathy noticed in our patient represents a peculiar
phenomenon that has been linked to bowel ischemia. Woodward et al13 recently described a previously fit 23-year-old man who presented with a
sudden onset of profound autonomic neuropathy of unknown origin and subsequently developed ischemic enterocolitis requiring colectomy and
subtotal enterectomy. The approach to this rare catastrophic complication should be directed to prevention rather than treatment. Analysis
of the reported cases indicate that signs and symptoms existing prior to rapid patient deterioration were generally insufficient to warrant
intervention by the reporting teams, and surgical management after the fact was frequently futile. However, a high index of suspicion and
early evaluation by ultrasound followed by laparotomy may be helpful in improving survival rates. It is generally agreed that periodic
decompression of the pneumoperitoneum gas while maintaining the intraabdominal pressure at 15 mm Hg or less represents the best available
option for preventing this complication.1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9 Patients in whom the splanchnic circulation is suspected of being impaired, based
on preexisting atherosclerosis or other risk factors, should be handled with great care or offered an open laparotomy rather than the
laparoscopy approach.
