This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Adenoid cystic carcinoma is a rare malignant
parotid tumor. Metastasis can occur even a decade or more after initial treatment of the primary. We report a 60 year old female patient who
presented with adenoid cystic carcinoma of the parotid gland. She underwent a total conservative parotidectomy followed by adjuvant
radiotherapy. While on follow up, patient developed multiple liver metastases which manifested three years later. Patient lived for another
two years before she died of her disease. Although distant metastases of adenoid cystic carcinoma develop frequently, isolated metastasis to
liver is unusual. Even after manifestation of distant metastasis, patients can be expected to live for a number of years. Palliative
chemotherapy can be considered in symptomatic cases while the usefulness of metastatectomy is controversial. Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC)
is a rare malignant neoplasm of the salivary gland. Salivary gland neoplasms constitute 3% of cancers of all sites, of which, 10–15% are
malignant . Though ACC is the most common malignant tumor of the submandibular, sublingual and minor salivary glands, it accounts for only
15% of parotid cancers . They are generally slow growing and spread relentlessly to adjacent structures. Hematogenous spread is more common
than lymphatic spread, the common sites of metastasis being the lung, bone and viscera . We present a case of multiple liver metastases
occurring 3 years after surgery for ACC of the parotid gland. The primary therapy, metastasis and outcome of ACC are discussed. A 60 year
old woman presented with a small swelling beneath the right ear lobe of 4 months duration. The swelling measured 2 × 1 cm placed in the
superficial part of the parotid and was not fixed. There was no facial nerve palsy or palpable cervical nodes. A fine needle aspiration
cytology (FNAC) was carried out which showed the lesion to be ACC . The clinical staging was T1, N0, M0. The patient underwent a total
conservative parotidectomy after metastatic work up. Histopathology revealed ACC with cribriform pattern and perineural invasion (Figure 1).
60 Gy adjuvant external beam radiotherapy was administered post-operatively to the parotid area and the neck. Patient was placed on regular
follow-up. Three years after primary surgery, patient presented with heaviness and pain in the right hypochondrium of 15 days duration.
Patient was anicteric and abdominal examination revealed firm nodular and non tender enlargement of the liver. There was no ascites.
Surgical site and neck were clinically normal. Chest roentgenogram was normal. Ultrasonography (US) of the abdomen revealed multiple
metastatic lesions scattered in both lobes (Figure 2). Liver function tests were normal and an US guided FNAC revealed metastatic ACC
(Figure 3). Since the lesions were multiple and scattered over both lobes of liver, surgical option was not considered and the patient was
offered palliative chemotherapy which she declined. She developed pedal edema and abdominal distention 20 months after detection of liver
metastasis. On clinical examination, patient was anicteric but liver had increased in size and abdomen showed evidence of a little free
fluid. Chest CT scan was normal. Bone scan did not suggest any metastatic focus. Patient died a month later still without evidence of local
recurrence or pulmonary metastasis. Although ACC is the second most common malignant salivary gland neoplasm and constitutes approximately
one third of all salivary gland malignancies it constitutes only 2% of parotid neoplasms . As ACC is neurotropic, frozen section analysis of
nerve margins is suggested specially when nerve is grossly involved by the tumor . A total conservative or a radical parotidectomy is
advocated for ACC though the main intent is to obtain a tumor free area of at least 1 cm . ACC, with its often unusually slow biologic
growth, tends to have a protracted course and ultimately a poor outcome, with a 10-year survival reported to be less than 50% for all grades
. These carcinomas typically show frequent recurrences and late distant metastases . In a retrospective review of 92 cases, a tumor size
greater than 4 cm was associated with an unfavorable clinical course . Cribriform and solid patterns seen histologically were thought to
predict more biological aggressiveness while tubular pattern represented more differentiated pattern of ACC. Over long periods of patient
follow-up such grade based prognostication is less valid. Currently, stage and tumor location are the only factors considered prognostically
significant . Radiotherapy has been used as a primary modality for patients with surgical contraindications and in those with unresectable
neoplasms. Though no improvement in survival is reported, the use of adjuvant radiation improves locoregional control and disease free
survival. This patient received adjuvant radiation and did not have any locoregional recurrence. Regional metastasis is less common
occurring in about 17% while systemic failure occurs in 33 to 50% of the patients . Though involvement with distant metastases are
unpredictable, organs involved in the order of decreasing frequency are lung, bone, brain and the liver . Other rare metastatic sites of
parotid and non parotid ACC include stomach, toe, choroids, brain and skin . The initial site of metastasis is usually the organ containing
the first capillary bed (first filter) and hence lungs would be the common site of metastasis . Clinical observations from various
malignancies have indicated that metastasis from certain types of tumor tend to occur in specific target organs leading to the famous 'soil
and seed' hypothesis where metastatic cells 'home' to the organ . Though liver metastasis has been reported, most of the liver metastases
reported are of non parotid ACC . The occurrence is usually metachronous or synchronous with metastasis to other organs like the lung as it
is the first filter. In the series of Spiro, of the 74 patients developing metastasis from salivary gland ACC, 23 did so without loco-
regional recurrence while 5 had isolated bone metastasis . Sung and colleagues found metastases in 46 out of 94 head and neck ACC . In that
study, only one patient developed liver metastasis and that patient had metastasis to both lung and bone. In this case, the patient
manifested with multiple metastatic foci in the liver as the first and only metastatic organ which is very unusual. Surgical options of
metastatectomy were not explored as patient had multiple metastases involving both lobes of liver. Although the patient lived with disease
for a further two years, she did not show any evidence of lung metastasis or loco-regional recurrence. In this patient, the liver metastasis
could have occurred prior to treatment as an organ of preference; evidenced by the fact that there were no other organs showing metastasis
nor was there a loco-regional recurrence later. Studies in ACC have shown long tumor doubling times of pulmonary metastasis and late
recurrences up to 10 years after primary treatment . The estimated doubling time of lung metastasis in ACC ranges from 200 to 600 days .
There is even a suggestion that metastasis at the cellular level could occur many years prior to clinical presentation of primary tumor.
FNAC was done to prove the metastatic foci in this patient and can be a useful tool for diagnosis . Although this patient declined
chemotherapy, chemotherapeutic responses have been reported in ACC . ACC carries a mortality of 75–80% over a 30 year period and most
patients who die of their disease do so between 5 and 10 years after initial treatment . Our patient died 5 years from diagnosis with
metastatic disease that developed 3 years after initial treatment. ACC is a rare malignant tumor of parotid gland. Metastasis can manifest
very late and hence a long term follow-up and a high index of suspicion is necessary to diagnose them early. An annual ultrasound study of
abdomen would be desirable on follow-up. Unlike metastasis from other malignancies, these grow indolently and long term survival can be
expected even with multiple metastases as also evidenced in the present case. Chemotherapy could be considered in selected patients as a
therapeutic option in metastatic disease. ACC: Adenoid cystic carcinoma FNAC: Fine needle aspiration cytology Gy: Gray None declared KH was
the principal clinician who planned the evaluation and procedure, in addition to conceptualizing and drafting the article. SRMG was the
pathologist. Both the authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: Since
the patient has expired, the legal heir was informed that the case would be published and his consent was obtained. Photomicrograph showing
small darkly stained cells with scanty cytoplasm arranged in nests fenestrated by round or oval spaces – cribriform pattern, H & E (× 100)
Abdominal ultrasound showing multiple hypoechoiec (short arrow) and hyperechoeic lesions (long arrow) in the liver FNAC liver showing
metastatic ACC, H & E (× 400)
