This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Chronic meningitis is defined as symptoms and
signs of meningeal inflammation and persisting cerebrospinal fluid abnormalities such as elevated protein level and pleocytosis for at least
one month. A 62-year-old woman, of unremarkable past medical history, was admitted to hospital for investigation of a four-week history of
vomiting, malaise an associated hyponatraemia. She had a low-grade pyrexia with normal inflammatory markers. A CT brain was unremarkable and
a contrast MRI brain revealed sub-acute infarction of the right frontal cortex but with no evidence of meningeal enhancement. Due to
increasing confusion and patient clinical deterioration a lumbar puncture was performed at 17 days post admission. This revealed gram-
negative coccobacilli in the CSF, which was identified as Neisseria meningitidis group B. The patient made a dramatic recovery with high-
dose intravenous ceftriaxone antibiotic therapy for meningococcal meningitis. 1) Chronic bacterial meningitis may present highly atypically,
particularly in the older adult. 2) There may be an absent or reduced febrile response, without a rise in inflammatory markers, despite a
very unwell patient. 3) Early lumbar puncture is to be encouraged as it is essential to confirm the diagnosis.4) Despite a delayed diagnosis
appropriate antibiotic therapy can still lead to a good outcome. Bacterial Meningitis usually presents as an acute illness, predominantly
affecting children and young adults. It typically presents with the classical clinical triad of fever, neck stiffness and an altered mental
state. However, it may rarely present as a chronic illness, without the classic clinical features noted in acute meningitis. A 62-year-old
retired woman was admitted to hospital via her GP for investigation of a four-week history of vomiting and malaise associated with
hyponatraemia. She was initially diagnosed as suffering from viral gastroenteritis. However, the vomiting had persisted and had become
associated with a mild frontal headache. She had an unremarkable past medical history and was not taking any regular medication. She had
never smoked and there was no recent antecedent foreign travel. On examination she appeared clinically dehydrated but otherwise looked well,
and was alert and orientated. She was apyrexial and had no rash, photophobia, neck stiffness or stigmata of endocarditis. She had a sinus
tachycardia of 104/minute, with normal heart sounds, and a blood pressure of 130/76 mmHg. Chest, abdominal and neurological examinations
were unremarkable. She had a plasma sodium of 127 mmol/L (135–145 mmol/L), potassium of 3.4 mmol/L (3.5–5.0 mmol/l), urea 4.8 mmol/L
(3.0–6.5 mmol/L) and creatinine of 68 mmol/L (60–125 mmol/L). There was no biochemical evidence of the syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) production (serum osmolality 261 mmols/kg; urine osmolality 71 mmols/Kg; urine sodium < 10 mmol/L). Serum
complement and plasma immunoglobulin levels were unremarkable with no evidence of immunosuppression. In addition, she had a normal full
autoimmune profile and thyroid function. Random cortisol level was mildly elevated at 799 nmol/L (normal 140 – 700 nmol/L) consistent with a
stress response. Her initial white cell count (WCC) was mildly elevated at 13.0 × 109/L (normal 4–11 × 109/L) with a neutrophilia of 10 ×
109/L (normal 2–7.5 × 109/L). Her ECG and chest X-ray were normal. Her C-reactive protein (CRP) was slightly elevated at 10 mg/L (normal <5
mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was normal at 5 mm/hour. Her Chest X-ray and electrocardiogram were normal. Initial
microbiological investigations (blood cultures, urine microscopy and culture) were normal. Initial management consisted of slow intravenous
rehydration with normal saline and antiemetic therapy, which led to a mild symptomatic improvement. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
revealed mild oesophagitis. During the ensuing two weeks her laboratory investigations remained stable (CRP normal; ESR normal; sodium
127–131 mmol/L; WCC 11–13 × 109/L). However, on day 4 of admission she developed a low-grade pyrexia of 37.5°C, which persisted (<38°C). A
CT scan of the head revealed periventricular patchy white matter changes but no features of raised intracranial pressure or space occupying
lesion. Unfortunately the patient had become slowly more lethargic, withdrawn, and depressed. By day 17 of admission, although alert, she
was uncooperative with intermittent confusion. Her symptoms of intermittent nausea and vomiting with occasional frontal headache continued.
On day 18 she underwent a lumbar puncture (LP) as she still had a low-grade pyrexia (temperature 37.5°C) and neutrophilia of 9.3 × 109/L).
In addition, her nausea and vomiting had failed to fully settle with supportive treatment. The LP results were as follows: cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) appearance was pale yellow and clear; protein = 5.69 g/L (0.15–0.4 g/L); CSF glucose 1.7 mmol/L versus plasma glucose 5.7 mmol/L
(ratio = 30%, normal > 50%); CSF WCC = 106/mL (normal <5 WCC/mL) – 99% lymphocytes. Gram's stain revealed gram-negative coccobacilli; acid-
fast bacilli were not seen. She was commenced on intravenous ceftriaxone. Contrast MRI brain revealed sub-acute infarction of the right
frontal cortex but with no evidence of meningeal enhancement. EEG demonstrated slow wave activity, which was consistent with a meningo-
encephalitis. Within 48 hours of intravenous antibiotics she was more alert, orientated, and sitting out of bed. CSF culture grew gram-
negative cocci, which was identified as Neisseria meningitidis group B, type NT, subtype NT P1.16/nt. She underwent contact tracing and
completed a 10-day course of intravenous ceftriaxone. She continued to make a slow but progressive recovery. After a period of
rehabilitation and intense physiotherapy she was discharged home 40 days after admission, with mild residual gait ataxia. This case report
presents two important clinical concepts: firstly, the presentation of chronic meningitis and secondly, the clinical presentation of
bacterial meningitis in the older adult (defined as > 60 years old). The diagnosis was delayed due to the highly atypical clinical
presentation . Chronic meningitis is defined as symptoms and signs of meningeal inflammation and persisting cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
abnormalities such as elevated protein level and pleocytosis for at least one month . It affects less than 10% of meningitis sufferers and
is linked to a large variety of both infective and non-infective causes . However, whilst there are numerous published individual case
reports on chronic meningitis, there is a definite paucity of large case series in the literature. The most common cause of chronic
meningitis is Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which accounts for 40–60% of cases . Other relatively frequent causes include malignancy (8–13%)
and crytococcal infection 7–11%) . In up to 33% of cases no underlying cause is identified . Chronic meningococcal meningitis is rare and is
limited to a few isolated case reports in the literature . There are several distinguishing features that may help to differentiate chronic
meningitis from adult acute bacterial meningitis (table 1). The classic triad of clinical features of meningitis (fever, neck stiffness,
altered mental state), whilst seen in up to 85% of patients presenting with acute bacterial meningitis is far less commonly seen in chronic
meningitis . Focal neurological signs with cranial nerve palsies and abnormal CT brain findings are also far more commonly seen in chronic
meningitis . Features distinguishing chronic meningitis (bacterial and non bacterial) compared with acute bacterial meningitis WCC, white
cell count; CRP, C-reactive protein; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Hyponatraemia (as in our patient), whilst very uncommon in acute
bacterial meningitis, is seen in the vast majority of cases of chronic meningitis . Although there was a persistent mild neutrophilia, both
the CRP and ESR were normal throughout the course of the disease, which, whilst being highly unusual for acute meningitis, has been
reported, in chronic meningitis . Acute bacterial meningitis is usually a rapidly progressive and highly lethal disease in older adults .
Rapid diagnosis is vital as the prognosis worsens with treatment delay leading to a high rate of sustained neurological deficit in this age
group . Despite the widespread use of antibiotics the overall case mortality rate remains unchanged and is far higher (37–44%) in the older
adult compared with that seen in younger adults (10–25%) with significant long-term morbidity (up to 70% of infected patients) in survivors
. Given the success of childhood immunization, and an increasingly aging population, the proportion of older adults presenting with
bacterial meningitis is increasing . There are several additional factors, which make the older adult more prone to bacterial meningitis.
Older adults often have underlying acute and chronic diseases (e.g. diabetes, renal or hepatic failure) with immunosenescence (age related
decline in immune function) . This can lead to symptoms, which can be confused with those of meningitis and at the same time increase the
propensity to infection . The role of immunosenescence in predisposing patients to bacterial meningitis is not clearly defined, but appears
to relate to defects in innate, specific cellular and humoral immunity leading to an attenuated immune response . Persons who lack or are
deficient of antibody-dependent, complement-mediated lysis (bacteriocidal activity) are most susceptible to meningococcal disease . Our
patient had an unremarkable past medical history with normal complement and immunoglobulin levels with no evidence of immunosuppresion . The
clinical presentation of bacterial meningitis is more variable in the older as compared with the younger adult, with fewer patients
manifesting with the classic symptoms of fever, neck stiffness and altered mental state than among younger adults . It has been suggested
that 1 of 3 findings (fever, neck stiffness, altered mental state) is present in virtually all patients with meningitis and that the absence
of these features virtually excludes meningitis with a high negative predictive value (table 1) . Our patient had none of these features on
presentation and had been unwell for four weeks prior to presentation, but did develop a mild fever (<38°C) and cognitive dysfunction during
her inpatient stay. The blunted febrile response is well recognised in older adults in general . Our patient's CSF showed a lymphocytosis,
raised protein, and low glucose ratio, which are seen in only 10% of bacterial meningitis cases. This CSF profile would normally suggest
infection with Listeria monocytogenes meningitis or alternative causes such as tuberculous and fungal infection . Neisseria (N) meningitidis
is a leading cause of bacterial meningitis in the Western World and tends to predominate in young adults . N. meningitidis is a gram-
negative, aerobic diplococcus. It is classified into serogroups (e.g. A,B,C etc) according to the immunological reactivity of their
polysaccharides . The most prevalent serogroups implicated in clinical meningococcal meningitis are serogroup B (62%, as in our patient) and
the more virulent serogroup C (22%) . The relatively reduced virulence of serogroup B may partly explain the chronicity of presentation and
reduced inflammatory response seen in our patient. Serogroups B and C have a seasonal variation occurring more commonly in the first quarter
of the year (our patient presented in February) . Meningococcal meningitis is also more common among the following groups: persons of black
race; lower socioeconomic classes; those exposed actively or passively to tobacco smoke; persons exposed to overcrowding and amongst binge
drinkers . This case highlights the diagnostic challenge associated with bacterial meningitis presenting in an older patient. The
presentation was made even more difficult owing to the blunted febrile response, the lack of inflammatory response observed in laboratory
tests and the chronicity of the patient's symptoms. The diagnosis required thorough investigation during the inpatient stay. Early lumbar
puncture is to be encouraged as it is essential to confirm the diagnosis. Despite a delayed diagnosis appropriate antibiotic therapy can
still lead to a good outcome. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. MD generated the idea of writing the case report
and was the consultant in charge of the patient. CD reviewed the case notes of the patient and wrote the original draft of the case
presentation. CB significantly revised the original draft and added the conclusions, references and figures. AH offered considerable help
with the manuscript revisions. All authors contributed to the final version of the manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper
can be accessed here: We would like to thank Dr Chester Choi for his considerable help in peer reviewing and offering constructive help with
each draft of this manuscript.
