This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) is a useful
tool for guiding transseptal puncture during electrophysiological mapping and ablation procedures. Left-sided accessory pathways (LSAP) can
be ablated by using two different modalities: retrograde approach through the aortic valve and transseptal approach with puncture of the
fossa ovalis. We shall report two cases of LSAP where transcatheter radiofrequency ablation (TCRFA) was firstly attempted via transaortic
approach with ineffective results. Subsequently, a transseptal approach under ICE guidance has been performed. During atrial septal puncture
ICE was able to locate the needle tip position precisely and provided a clear visualization of the "tenting effect" on the fossa ovalis. ICE
allowed a better mapping of the mitral ring and a more effective catheter ablation manipulation and tip contact which resulted in a
persistent and complete ablation of the accessory pathway with a shorter time of fluoroscopic exposure. ICE-guided transseptal approach
might be a promising modality for TCRFA of LSAP. Trans-catheter radiofrequency ablation (TCRFA) has become the treatment of choice for
patients suffering from refractory to medical treatment supraventricular tachycardias . During percutaneous ablation procedures, catheter
location is usually monitored by using fluoroscopy together with the analysis of intracardiac electrograms in order to clarify the
mechanisms underlining the arrhythmia and to both locate its origin and record its circuit. This technique may be adequate for several
standard ablative procedures, but it has still some limitations concerning the treatment of more complex tachycardia forms. Left-sided
accessory pathway (LSAP) may be ablated using two different modalities: conventional approach through the aortic valve, or transseptal
puncture of the fossa ovalis. By using the traditional approach, the left atrium is reached by a retrograde way through the left ventricle
and crossing the mitral valve whereas, with the transseptal puncture, the mitral ring is reached by an anterograde approach. For this
reason, this approach has been considered an alternative and complementary technique for the transvenous introduction of catheters into the
left cavities of the heart . However, transseptal puncture under fluoroscopic guidance alone, might be hampered by some acute and
potentially lethal complications that may be challenging even for expert electrophysiologists . With the technological and miniaturization
advances of low frequency transducers capable of enhanced tissue penetration, intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) has become feasible and
potentially useful for guiding transseptal puncture and ablation procedures, especially when location of specific anatomic landmarks appears
to be more crucial . In this manuscript, two cases of ICE-guided catheter ablation of LSAP via transseptal approach have been described. A
24 year-old woman with Wolf-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome and recurrent episodes of sustained supraventricular tachycardia, refractory to
medical therapy, was referred to our Department in order to attempt TCRFA procedure. The electrophysiological study was performed off
therapy using three diagnostic catheters (one decapolar and two quadripolars) which have been positioned in the coronary sinus (CS1 → CS5 =
distal → proximal coronary sinus), His bundle region, and high right atrium/right ventricular apex. The clinical arrhythmia was diagnosed as
an orthodromic atrio-ventricular re-entrant tachycardia (AVRT) due to a LSAP that was repetitively induced by both right atrial and
ventricular programmed electrical stimulation. The length of the tachycardia cycle ranged from 310 to 300 msec. A well-localized accessory
pathway insertion was detected in the lateral left free wall with atrial-ventricular (AV) and ventricular-atrial (VA) intervals of fusion
noticeable only in CS2 (Fig 1). During programmed atrial stimulation and AVRT, the transaortic approach was initially attempted by using a
7F-4 mm bidirectional ablation catheter (Blazer HTD, Boston Scientific). Although very short VA and AV intervals (<50 msec without
isoelectric line between the two potentials) and satisfactory mean temperature (54–56 C° for 20–30 sec with less than 30 Watts for each
radiofrequency application) were obtained, repeated radiofrequency erogations resulted in a transient interruption of the anomalous
connection, with recurrence of retrograde conduction along the accessory pathway and atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia inducibility
after a period of 20–30 min. Therefore, by using a mechanical single element ultrasound 9F-9 MHz catheter, an ICE-guided transseptal
approach was attempted in order to cranially map the mitral ring (Ultra ICE Boston Scientific/CVIS San José, CA USA). This approach has
provided a 360° two-dimensional imaging on a transverse plane perpendicular to the transducer with a radial field of view of approximately 5
cm in depth. ICE catheter was introduced via femoral vein through a 10F long sheath and advanced into the high right atrium. Careful
handling of the catheter, along the interatrial septum, provided optimal view of the fossa ovalis that could be easily recognized as a thin
area compared to the surrounding atrial structures. The standard approach to transseptal catheterization using a long sheath and dilator
over a Brockenbrough needle, was used . The tip of the needle-dilator-sheath apparatus was positioned facing the middle portion of the fossa
ovalis. Careful up and down movements of ICE catheter allowed a clear visualization of the needle as well as its contact with the septal
wall causing the typical "tenting" effect (Fig 2), which allowed precise location of the puncture of the needle. Orthodromic AV re-entrant
tachycardia. Orthodromic AV re-entrant tachycardia induction with programmed atrial stimulation. Notice VA fusion on CS2 (lateral portion of
the mitral ring; see arrow). Brockenbrough needle and the fossa ovalis. Brockenbrough needle in right atrium approaching the fossa ovalis
(right panel); typical "tenting" of the fossa (see arrow) just before septal puncture (left panel). Note the left atrial free wall close to
the interatrial septum. (FO = fossa ovalis; LA = left atrium; RA = right atrium). Accessory pathway was completely and definitively ablated
with this approach after two erogations lasting each 40 sec. Although the AV and VA intervals that had been selected to deliver
radiofrequency energy were similar to those previously recorded, the only difference was a better AV ratio (Fig 3). Such findings might be
related to the cranial approach of the atrioventricular ring which has allowed a more stable catheter position on endocardium surface and a
lack of lateral sliding, resulting in a higher mean temperature (60° ± 3° vs 54° ± 2°). Radiation exposure was shorter with the transseptal
approach (11 vs 19 min) when compared to the retrograde approach. Ablation of the accessory pathway. Radiofrequency erogation during atrial
pacing with maximal pre-excitation. Notice AV fusion (major arrow) followed by AV split (two minor arrows) on the ABLd recording,
corresponding to lateral mitral annulus. A 61 year-old man was referred to our Department for a TCRFA procedure due to a recurrent sustained
supraventricular tachycardia refractory to antiarrhytmic drugs. The electrophysiological study has been performed by using the previously
described protocol. An atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia, due to an overt LSAP, was repetitively induced by atrial and ventricular
programmed electrical stimulation. The length of the tachycardia cycle ranged from 340 to 320 msec. The accessory pathway insertion resulted
well-localized in the left lateral mitral ring during AVRT and atrial pacing with maximal pre-excitation (Fig 4A,4B). The trans-aortic
approach was firstly attempted by using a 7F- 4 mm bidirectional ablation catheter (Blazer HTD, Boston Scientific). Despite an optimal
catheter tip temperature for a reasonable period of time (five erogations reaching a mean temperature of 55° lasting 30–40 sec), only a
temporary interruption of the anomalous pathway conduction was obtained. Therefore, ICE-guided transseptal approach was performed as
previously described (see additional file: Movie 1 transseptal puncture.avi). The approach resulted in a persistent and complete ablation of
the accessory pathway after two successful radiofrequency erogations which have been delivered when the VA interval resulted fused and its
ratio was 1,5:1. In this case, ICE allowed a more complete mapping of the mitral ring and a confirmation of effective catheter ablation tip
contact. As in the previously described case, the superior approach to the left AV ring resulted in a better manipulation of the ablation
catheter in addition to a reduction in fluoroscopic time (10 vs 21 min). Left sided accessory pathway. The shortest AV and VA are recorded
in CS2 (see arrows) during programmed atrial stimulation (A) and atrio-ventricular orthodromic re-entrant tachycardia (B) respectively
suggesting a left sided posterolateral accessory AV connection. During a standard ICE examination, sequential pull-back of the probe from
the superior vena cava through the right atrium to the inferior vena cava allows a detailed identification of important structures such as:
the crista terminalis; the right atrial appendage; the caval and the coronary sinus orifices; the fossa ovalis; the ascending aorta and its
root; the pulmonary artery; the right ventricle and all of the cardiac valves . Thus, this technique has the potential to provide a direct
visualization of the endocardium and to precisely locate the ablation catheter which can be identified by the highly specific fan-shaped
echocardiographic artefact of the large tip of the ablation electrode . ICE is a well-recognized tool to guide ablation procedures. Compared
to fluoroscopy, which does not provide definition of endocardial structures, ICE gives a highly accurate evaluation of firm and stable
tissue contact. This results in a reduced radiofrequency power output. In addition, it is possible to visualize the lesion site and
formation, such as swelling and crater formation. Moreover, possible complications such as occurrence of microbubbles, clot formation and
pericardial effusion may be promptly detected through this ultrasound technique . A recently developed phased-array intracardiac
echocardiography device provides two-dimensional and Doppler images of the heart . Recently, new strategies for ablation of atrial
fibrillation (linear atrial ablation and focal ablation of triggers) have been proposed. Phased-Array intracardiac echocardiography enables
a direct visualization of the pulmonary veins and allows the assessment of the Doppler flow velocity for all of the pulmonary veins . This
technique has been proved to be helpful in monitoring pulmonary vein isolation in patients with atrial fibrillation by improving the outcome
and decreasing the incidence of complications such as pulmonary vein stenosis . Transseptal catheterization is usually performed under
fluoroscopic guidance . However, safe transseptal puncture requires detailed visualization of the fossa ovalis that cannot be obtained
through fluoroscopy. Thus, it remains a difficult procedure especially for patients which present anatomic abnormalities such as atrial and
aortic root dilatation, musculoskeletal disorders and lipomatous hypertrophy of the atrial septum . Furthermore, some complications of the
transseptal catheterization due to accidental puncture of adjacent structures , such as atrial or aortic perforations, and pericardial
tamponade, although rare, can be severe and life threatening. Moreover, in hypovolemic states, the left atrial free wall may be closed to
the atrial septum. This potentially dangerous condition can be promptly recognized through the ICE technique, suggesting fluid
administration in order to restore an adequate blood volume and to prevent left atrial free wall puncture . The ability to visualize the
anatomy of atrial septum and the localization of the fossa ovalis, may greatly enhance both the safety and the efficacy of the transseptal
catheterization without any additional morbidity to the procedure . As in the above-described cases, ICE allows a continuous monitoring of
this procedure showing the tip of the sheath and Brockenbrough needle placed against the middle of the fossa ovalis immediately prior to the
puncture . Previous reports suggested the use of both transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography, but these techniques present some
limitations . The former fails to display, in detail the fossa ovalis, the latter requires sedation which limits communication with the
patient during the procedure and increases the risk of hypoventilation. LSAP represent the majority (59%) of all accessory pathway locations
. They can be ablated via transaortic approach. However, severe complications have been reported, including aortic dissection, lesion of the
aortic valve, late endocarditis, peripheral and cerebral thromboembolic events . Some authors, using the transseptal approach, have reported
both a decreased procedural duration and radiation exposure, with higher success rate compared to the transaortic technique . Two factors
have been taken into account: 1) several left accessory pathways exhibit a broad or oblique insertion on the AV ring, so that they require a
multisite radiofrequency energy delivery on both the atrial and ventricular sides in order to be ablated; 2) with the transaortic approach
left atrio-ventricular ring mapping becomes a cumbersome procedure due to the retrograde crossing of the ablation catheter through the
aortic and the mitral valves. In such a situation, the ablation catheter should be carefully manipulated in order to avoid entrapment into
the mitral valve apparatus . The use of ICE during ablation procedures in order to treat LSAP has been previously reported . The
observations pointed out by our case report have shown that ICE provides a precise localization of the needle tip position, a clear
visualization of the fossa ovalis, a more complete mapping of the mitral ring and a more effective catheter ablation manipulation as well as
tip contact. All of these advantages resulted in a persistent and complete ablation of the LSAP with a shorter time in fluoroscopic exposure
in opposition to the transaortic approach. It has also been taken into account that a standard TCRFA procedure involves a radiation burden
of about 17–25 mSv which appears to be equivalent to what is usually absorbed from natural radiation exposure in during a time period of 10
years and to about 1000 chest X-ray . The combined use of ICE allows to reduce to a half the time of fluoroscopic exposure that induces a
significant reduction in radiation load and consequent long term oncogenic risk both for patients and physicians . In conclusion, ICE-guided
transseptal approach might be a promising modality for TCRFA of LSAP. However, this report needs to be confirmed by further studies. AV=
atrial-ventricular; AVRNT= atrio-ventricular re-entrant tachycardia; CS= coronary sinus; ICE = intracardiac echocardiography; LSAP= left
sided accessory pathway; TCRFA= transcatheter radiofrequency ablation; VA= ventricular-atrial; WPW= Wolf-Parkinson-White. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. RC carried out intracardiac echocardiography and drafted the manuscript, VD carried out
electrophysiological study, AS drafted the manuscript, MS carried out electrophysiological study, MS drafted the revision of the manuscript,
GG drafted the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. Brockenbrough needle immediately after the puncture of
the fossa ovalis can be clearly visualized. Click here for file We are indebted to Antonio Isabella, Antonio Elia, Antonietta Sacco and
Alessandro Laurito for their technical assistance. The study publication was partially funded by an unrestricted educational grant of Boston
Scientific.
