Aorto-atrial fistulas (AAF) are rare but important pathophysiologic conditions of the aorta and have varied presentations such as acute
pulmonary edema, chronic heart failure and incidental detection of the fistula. A variety of mechanisms such as aortic dissection,
endocarditis with pseudoaneurysm formation, post surgical scenarios or trauma may precipitate the fistula formation. With increasing
survival of patients, particularly following complex aortic reconstructive surgeries and redo valve surgeries, recognition of this
complication, its clinical features and echocardiographic diagnosis is important. Since physical exam in this condition may be misleading,
echocardiography serves as the cornerstone for diagnosis. The case below illustrates aorto-left atrial fistula formation following redo
aortic valve surgery with slowly progressive symptoms of heart failure. A brief review of the existing literature of this entity is
presented including emphasis on echocardiographic diagnosis and treatment. A 66 year old male with history of rheumatic heart disease and
aortic valve replacement (AVR) (twice for severe native and subsequent prosthetic valve regurgitation) presented with progressive worsening
fatigue, exertional dyspnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. His other medical problems included poorly controlled hypertension and
hyperlipidemia. Following his second AVR 4 years prior to this presentation, a routine follow-up 2-dimensional echocardiogram (TTE) had
shown preserved left ventricular and prosthetic valve function and a aorto-atrial fistula with color flow between the aorta-and the left
atrium. Notably, only a soft and short ejection murmur across the mechanical prosthesis was appreciated and no continuous murmurs were
heard. This was felt to be a possible postoperative complication currently not of clinical significance given his asymptomatic status and he
was treated medically and did well for the last 3â€“4 years. Physical examination during this visit revealed an afebrile patient with a blood
pressure of 138/84 mm Hg, regular pulse of 84/minute. An ejection systolic murmur (2/6 in intensity) was heard all over the precordium
likely from the flow across his prosthesis. No continuous murmurs were heard. No evidence for clinical heart failure, anemia, jaundice or
infection was noted. Laboratory tests revealed no leukocytosis and blood cultures were negative. Given prior echo documentation of fistula
and new symptomatology suggestive of heart failure, a transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was requested for more detailed assessment of
prosthesis and AAF. TEE revealed normal left ventricular function, normal aortic prosthesis function with trivial aortic regurgitation. An
echolucent area above the mechanical prosthesis, close to the left atrium near the orifice of the left coronary artery was noted. There
appeared to be expansion of a portion of this lucency into the left atrium during systole suggesting communication with the aorta (Fig 1)
with turbulent color flow from the aorta into the left atrium (suggestive of AAF) throughout the cardiac cycle but mainly in systole as
shown by color and continuous wave doppler (Figs 2 and 3). Compared to the prior 2-D echo there appeared to be mild left atrial dilation,
mild left ventricular hypertrophy and significantly more prominent fistula flow suggesting either progressive shunting and enlargement of
the fistula over time or underestimation by the prior 2-D echo. Although the echocardiographic findings mimicked changes which could also be
related to endocarditis (abscess around prosthesis with pseudoaneurysm formation), the absence of any obvious vegetations or prosthetic
malfunction combined with lack of clinical and laboratory evidence of endocarditis favoured a more slowly progressive postoperative
complication rather than an infectious process. Based on his heart failure symptoms and progressive increase in AAF size and flow, surgical
correction was recommended. He underwent uncomplicated surgical repair of the AAF which was found during surgery to be inferior to the left
coronary ostium. No evidence of abscess or infection was found and the prosthesis appeared intact and healthy. The echo lucent area
represented a postoperative weakening of the aortic wall adjacent to the left atrium, predisposing to the fistula formation and was also
repaired. Intra-operative TEE showed no residual fistula by color flow at the site of repair. Off axis 2-D short axis TEE view demonstrates
the left atrium (LA) the prosthetic aortic valve (AV). An echolucent area (EL) around the aortic valve protruding into LA is seen with focal
outpouching into the LA. This represents weakening of the wall of the aorta near the posterior aspect of the LA Off axis 2-D short axis TEE
view with the probe advanced further into mid-esophagus: demonstrates turbulent color flow entering the LA from the EL region of the aortic
valve illustrated in Fig 1 Continuous wave Doppler signal across turbulent jet showing high velocity throughout cardiac cycle but
predominantly in systole consistent with aorto-left atrial fistula In a large collection of about 4000 cases of thoracic aortic aneurysms,
Boyd first reported AAF as an incidental finding on autopsy back in 1924 . Most of common etiologies of AAF are related to its occurrence as
a result of bacterial endocarditis, paravalvular abscess, ruptured sinus of Valsalva, aortic dissection and possibly of congenital etiology
. Clinical presentation of AAF could vary from an acute presentation with acute chest pain syndrome due to rupture in the setting of
dissection or a refractory heart failure picture in the setting of endocarditis and aortic dissection . In a previous report we have
highlighted the fulminant course of prosthetic valve endocarditis due to Proteus mirabilis leading to aorto-right atrial fistula from
rupture of a pseudoaneurysm secondary to prosthetic valve endocarditis . Isolated case reports of AAF as an immediate postoperative
complication has also been reported . TTE and TEE form an integral part of assessment of patients presenting with chest pain and heart
failure symptoms particularly if audible murmurs or valvular pathologies are suspected. TTE is the intial test of choice in routine
prosthetic aortic valve assessment and gradients estimation. Nevertheless TEE is superior to TTE in real time assessment of prosthetic valve
function and morphology and for better delineation of intracardiac pathology such as complications of endocarditis namely root abscess and
fistulas . TEE has better signal to noise ratio and proximity of transducer to the heart leading to higher quality images with lesser
attenuation. Furthermore since aorto-left atrial fistulas usually occur from the posterior aspect of the aorta, this area is better
delineated with TEE than TTE. Turbulent flow of AAF can be mistaken on TTE particularly if near the prosthetic valve for prosthetic
malfunction in the setting of endocarditis or heart failure. Inter-chamber communications and the fistulous tracts that are particularly
small are best tracked by multiplane TEE. The exact origin, chamber communications and even the size of the fistulous opening can be well
assessed by TEE. Furthermore, coexistent complications with AAF in the setting of aortic endocarditis such as presence of annular abscess,
extension to the upper interventricular septum or the subaortic area and pseudoaneurysm formation are best seen by TEE. Nevertheless cases
of underestimation of cardiac involvement also been reported with TEE . This reveals the limitations of viewing a three dimensional
structure such as the heart in a two dimensional fashion, a void which may be filled by 3-dimensional (3-D) echocardiography. This case
highlights the importance of intraoperative TEE in guiding valvular surgery identifying potential intraoperative cardiac complications,
which can be corrected in the same setting. Since repeat sternotomy and cardiac surgery by itself carries a higher risk of perioperative
complications, intraoperative pre and post pump TEE play an integral role in guiding the surgeons as to any new complications which may have
risen during surgery. This is more so in valve surgeries or aortic reconstruction surgery where a real time 2-D TEE with color assessment
pre and post pump provides important information regarding success of surgical intervention and new complications. Since clinical diagnosis
of AAF is difficult, definitive diagnosis is by a thorough echocardiographic evaluation (TTE and TEE). Apart from antibiotic treatment for
endocarditis, definitive treatment revolves around surgical correction. Since many of these patients may have had some form of surgical
intervention in the past , reoperation is challenging. Mortality is high in patients who are continued on medical therapy particularly in
the setting of aortic dissection . Surgical intervention consists of repairing the affected aortic segment, replacing prosthesis if the
valve is destroyed, annular debridement in the setting of abscess and suture of the fistula. Aorto atrial fistulas are rare but important
complications of many disease processes of the aorta and aortic valve. Classical clinical signs of continuous murmurs may not be present and
echocardiography forms the cornerstone of diagnosis. AAF should be suspected in patients with poorly controlled heart failure and prior
aortic surgery. Prompt surgical repair is usually helpful in relieving symptoms and decreasing mortality. The author declares that he has no
competing interests in preparation of this mansucript and has fully contributed to preparation of this manuscript.
