Here, a case of a patient with incidental finding of a carcinoid tumor of the ampulla of Vater, who was treated with endoscopic snare
papillectomy, is reported. A 62-year-old male was admitted to our hospital due to a carcinoid tumor of the ampulla of Vater, which was found
during follow-up endoscopy after an endoscopic mucosal resection of early gastric cancer. No lymphadenopathy or visceral metastasis was
found on an abdominal CT scan, In-111 octerotide scan and EUS. The ampulla was then en bloc removed by endoscopic snare papillectomy. The
resected specimen revealed a 0.7×0.5×0.1 cm sized carcinoid tumor. All margins of resection were negative for tumor. After six months of
follow-up, there was no evidence of recurrence and metastasis, either endoscopically or radiologically. To our knowledge, this case is the
first report of an ampullary carcinoid tumor treated by endoscopic snare papillectomy in Korea. Carcinoid tumors of the ampulla of Vater are
extremely rare1). The natural history of this disease entity has not been well established, but it has been postulated that the prognosis is
generally good1, 2). In contrast to carcinoid tumors arising in the jejunum and ileum, the clinical and laboratory findings of carcinoid
syndrome are absent in patients with a carcinoid tumor of the ampulla of Vater, such as duodenal carcinoid tumors3, 4). However, in small
numbers of carcinoid tumors of the ampulla of Vater can show more aggressive behaviors, such as distant metastasis. Therefore, the standard
treatment for this entity has been complete surgical removal5). There have been several reports of endoscopic treatment of small carcinoid
tumors arising from the duodenum6, 7), but there has been no report of pretreatment diagnosis and intentional endoscopic treatment of
carcinoid tumors of the ampulla of Vater in Korea. The ampulla of Vater is a complex structure, and is the confluent portion of common bile
duct, pancreatic duct and contains the sphincter of Oddi. This may explain the reason why an ampullary carcinoid often clinically manifests
as obstructive jaundice or acute pancreatitis, and an attempt to remove the tumor may result in more frequent procedure-related
complications. Here, a case of a carcinoid tumor of the ampulla of Vater, diagnosed before treatment and intentionally treated by endoscopic
snare papillectomy, is reported. A 62-year-old male was admitted with an incidental finding of a carcinoid tumor of the ampulla of Vater.
The patient had undergone an endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) of early gastric cancer 1 year earlier. Every 3 month following the EMR, he
has undergone surveillance gastroscopic examination with forward-viewing endoscopy. During the latest endoscopic examination, subtle
abnormalities were noted on the covering mucosa of the ampulla of Vater. Biopsies were taken from the lesion, which was histologically
confirmed as a carcinoid tumor. He denied weight loss, diarrhea, flushing, or any respiratory difficulties or obstructive biliary symptoms.
He underwent ERCP for a more detailed evaluation of the ampulla of Vater. An examination with a side-viewing duodenoscope showed prominent,
but a preserved configuration of the ampulla, but depressed erosion with hyperemia on the covering mucosa (Figure 1). There was no definite
ulcer or mass. Contrast agent was injected into common bile and pancreatic ducts, but no abnormality within the lumen of either the bile or
pancreatic ducts were seen. Following the ERCP, EUS was performed to determine the depth of invasion and regional lymph node status. This
revealed a hypoechoic, ovoid shaped lesion less than 1 cm in diameter arising from the mucosal layer (Figure 2). There was no evidence of
proper muscle layer invasion and regional lymphadenopathy. An abdominal CT scan was negative for lymphadenopathy or visceral metastasis. An
In-111 octreotide scan revealed no definitive metastatic lesion. A chest X-ray was also negative. The patient then underwent endoscopic
snare papillectomy for the removal of the carcinoid tumor of the ampulla of Vater (Figure 3). After elevation of the tumor by submucosal
injection of saline solution, the ampulla was grasped by snare and a papillectomy performed using blended electrosurgical current (cut to
coagulation ratio 4:1) at a setting of 50 watts employing a electrosurgical unit (UES-20, Olympus Optical Co., Tokyo, Japan). The tumor was
resected en bloc. Then, plastic biliary (7 Fr, 3 cm) and pancreatic (5 Fr, 3 cm) stents were inserted to prevent possible cholangitis and
pancreatitis. There was no complication after endoscopic snare papillectomy, i.e., cholangitis, pancreatitis, bleeding or perforation.
Pathologic analysis of the resected specimen revealed a 0.7×0.5×0.1 cm sized carcinoid tumor of the ampulla of Vater within the mucosal
layer (Figure 4). All margins of resection were negative for tumor. Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor was strongly positive for
synaptophysin and chromogranin. The patient had an uneventful hospital course and was discharged on the 5th post-papillectomy day following
the removal of the biliary and pancreatic stents. Two months after the endoscopic snare papillectomy, a follow-up duodenoscopic examination
was performed, which revealed no evidence of tumor recurrence, either macroscopically or microscopically. Six months after the endoscopic
snare papillectomy, there was no evidence of local recurrence and metastasis of the tumor, either endoscopically or radiologically.
Carcinoid tumors of the ampulla of Vater are very rare1). According to a review of 90 reported ampullary carcinoid cases, the mean patient
age was 52 years8), and affected patients were more often male8). Jaundice was the most common presenting symptom of a carcinoid tumor of
the ampulla of Vater and was present in 59% of patients8). It is often apparent at an early stage because of the location; obstructive
symptoms may arise early when the tumor is relatively small3). Despite frequent regional lymph node metastasis, the prognosis of carcinoid
tumors of the ampulla of Vater has generally been considered good. In one study, the 5 year survival was 90%, with only 4 (6%) patients
dying of a metastatic disease or progressive tumor1, 2). Even though there are reports on the benign nature of this tumor, they have
malignant potential4). Unlike carcinoid tumors of the duodenum, the size of the tumor seems to have no prognostic implications for carcinoid
tumor of the ampulla of Vater8). In one review of 73 cases of carcinoid tumors of the ampulla of Vater, thirty one were larger than 2 cm in
diameter and 48% (15/31) of these had metastasized. Interestingly, 40% (17/42) of patients with tumors less than 2 cm also had a metastatic
disease9). Hence, the tumor size was not a reliable predictor of aggressiveness; therefore, complete resection of the tumor is mandatory
regardless of the size. In our case, careful examinations, including EUS and abdominal CT scan, were performed before determining the
therapeutic options. The size of the tumor was small (less than 1 cm) and there was no evidence of muscularis propria invasion and regional
lymph node metastasis on EUS. An In-111 octreotide scan performed to evaluate occult metastases showed negative findings. Since the majority
of carcinoid tumors express receptors for somatostatin, the detection rate using an In-111 octreotide scan ranges from 80 to 90%, and most
investigators agree that this radionuclide scan and conventional imaging, such as CT, are complementary9, 10). The treatment of choice for
carcinoid tumors of the ampulla of Vater is complete resection, and the standard treatment modality for the tumor has been surgery, such as
pancreaticoduodenectomy or local excision of the tumor. In one review of 90 patients with an ampullary carcinoid, 52 were treated with a
pancreaticoduodenectomy and 22 with local excision of the tumor8). Local excision was generally performed in patients with tumors less than
2 cm in diameter, while a pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed in patients with tumor larger than 2 cm. Three of 52 patients who underwent
a pancreaticoduodenectomy died of postoperative complications. On the other hand, 21 of the 22 patients who underwent local excision are
alive, with no evidence of recurrence after long-term follow-up, and only one patient died of local recurrence 20 months following the local
excision. Either a pancreaticoduodenectomy or local excision, via a duodenotomy, may be selected depending on the size of the tumor1, 11,
12). Although a pancreaticoduodenectomy enables complete resection of the tumor, this procedure has the disadvantage of relatively higher
morbidity1). Local excision showed satisfactory results in tumors less than 2 cm1). As a result, local excision may be an option for the
treatment of a carcinoid tumor of the ampulla of Vater if the size of the tumor is small and there is no evidence of regional lymph node or
distant metastasis. Compared to local surgical excision, endoscopic snare papillectomy may be much less harmful to the patient, since it
does not require a laparotomy and duodenotomy. In the management of an ampullary adenoma, endoscopic therapy seems to be successful and may
be a reasonable alternative to surgical resection14). A carcinoid tumor of the ampulla of Vater originates from the deep mucosa7). Most
reports describe it as a round or oval mass, with intact overlying duodenal mucosa, with negative biopsies1). Only a few reports present it
as a prominent papilla, with a shallow ulcer on the surface3, 13). However, a carcinoid tumor of the ampulla of Vater can show mucosal
change, theoretically because it originated from the deep mucosa, not the submucosa. In our case, depressed erosion, which may be
misinterpreted as papillitis, was found. Without a biopsy, this subtle mucosal change may be misdiagnosed as papillitis. Thorough
examination, including the ampulla, is essential in all patients undergoing esophagogastroduodenoscopy, and biopsy of suspicious mucosal
changes should always be carried out to diagnose the tumor in early stage. In conclusion, endoscopic snare papillectomy may be one
therapeutic option in the management of carcinoid tumors of the ampulla of Vater in selected patients, such as those with a small sized and
localized in the mucosa or submucosal layer, without regionally or distant metastasis. Further experience with more cases will be needed to
establish the exact indication for endoscopic snare papillectomy. Endoscopic view of carcinoid tumor of the ampulla of Vater. Side-viewing
duodenoscope showed a rather prominent, but preserved configuration of the ampulla, and depressed erosion (arrow) with hyperemia on the
covering mucosa. EUS showed a 0.7×0.3 cm sized, hypoechoic lesion (arrows) confined to the mucosal layer. The proper muscle layer was
intact. Endoscopic snare papillectomy of a carcinoid tumor of the ampulla of Vater. (A) Endoscopic view showing snaring of the carcinoid
tumor of the ampulla of Vater after a submucosal injection of saline solution. (B) Endoscopic view immediately after papillectomy using
blended electrosurgical current (C) Biliary (7 Fr, 3 cm) and pancreatic (5 Fr, 3 cm) stents were inserted to prevent possible cholangitis
and pancreatitis. (D) Gross finding of the resected specimen. Pathological findings of a carcinoid tumor of the ampulla of Vater. (A) Under
low power magnification, the typical histological appearance of an intramucosal tumor is seen. The tumor is a discrete, though not
encapsulated, mass of multiple nests of small cells in the deep mucosa (hematoxylin and eosin, ×10). (B) The nests of a carcinoid tumor have
a typical endocrine appearance, with small round cells having small round nuclei and pink to pale blue cytoplasm (hematoxylin and eosin,
×40).
