After the spontaneous relief of initial symptoms by traumatic carotid-cavernous fistula (CCF), paradoxical worsening of patient's condition
can be followed. We present a case of a 60-yr-old man whose audible bruit from a traumatic CCF had completely disappeared. A few days later,
however, the patient had spontaneous intracerebral hematoma with cortical venous drainage. Complete obliteration of the fistula was achieved
after embolization. When initial audible bruit in traumatic CCF disappears suddenly, cerebral angiography should be performed to
differentiate venous hypertension by the hemodynamic changes of the cavernous sinus channels from spontaneous resolution of CCF. Spontaneous
closure of traumatic carotid-cavernous fistulas (CCFs) by thrombosis of the cavernous sinus is quite rare since these are high-flow
fistulas. We recently observed a traumatic CCF that had rapid improvement of symptoms after the event, but it recurred shortly after the
resolution of symptoms. The mechanism for paradoxical worsening of the patient's condition is discussed by reviewing literature. A 60-yr-old
man fell down from a ladder on 11 August 2002, suffering mental deterioration to a Glasgow Coma Scale of 10 and mild left hemiparesis. Brain
computed tomography (CT) scan showed a massive right epidural hematoma. The hematoma was evacuated with right fronto-temporoparietal
craniotomy. On August 17, he was improved to the extent that he complained a headache. Proptosis and conjunctival chemosis of left eye was
observed with edema of the eyelid. A bruit was heard over the left orbital and periorbital regions. The left eye was fixed with a sluggish
light reflex. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed dilated superior ophthalmic vein in the left orbit (Fig. 1), suggesting a
traumatic CCF. While in the hospital waiting for a cerebral angiography, the bruit disappeared with improvement of other ocular signs. We
thought the spontaneous resolution of traumatic CCF had occured with thrombus formation of cavernous sinus. Four days later, however, the
patient suddenly became semicomatose with a palsy of the left third cranial nerve and an audible bruit of left eye. A brain CT scan revealed
a large amount of hematoma in left frontal base (Fig. 2). A left carotid angiogram demonstrated direct CCF with drainage into sigmoid sinus
via inferior petrosal sinus, superior ophthalmic vein and inferior ophthalmic vein, and showed dilated subfrontal pial veins (Fig. 3).
During the operation to evacuate the spontaneous intracerebral hematoma (ICH), bleeding appeared to be originated from ruptured subfrontal
pial veins. The left CCF was occluded by the transarterial embolization with platinum coil. On September 29, ocular signs and bruit were no
longer present. A follow-up left carotid angiogram showed a complete occlusion of fistula (Fig. 4). CCFs typically produce symptoms in two
ways: cerebral arterial steal and venous hypertension. The back-flow with venous hypertension resulting from the CCFs is much more
threatening. Multiple routes of drainage from the cavernous sinus provide the basis for the varied modes of presentation of CCFs. If the
venous drainage is via sphenoparietal sinus, cortical venous hypertension may result, placing the patient at risk for ICH (1-3), which is
extremely uncommon in traumatic CCF. The spontaneous occlusion of a CCF has been reported to occur in about 10% of all reported cases (4-6),
but the spontaneous resolution of symptomatic traumatic CCF is quite rare. As a mechanism of spontaneous occlusion of traumatic CCFs,
carotid angiography played an important role in most reported cases. It is thought that formation of a thrombus is induced due to vascular
contraction caused by the contrast medium, or due to the decrease in blood flow passing through the fistula (7, 8). The possibility that a
dissecting aneurysm (7) or false aneurysm (9) formed in the cavernous internal carotid artery was obliterated has also been suggested. Lin
et al. (10) presented a case of traumatic CCF that had completely resolved after the initial event, but recurred 4 yr later, causing ICH
during pregnancy and puerperium. They suggested that the hemodynamic change and the hormonal effects due to the patient's subsequent
pregnancy further aggravated the venous engorgement and finally caused rupture. Muraine et al. (11) also reported that a case of spontaneous
thrombosis of CCF was preceded by paradoxical worsening of initial ocular symptoms. We speculated that spontaneous closure occurred probably
from thrombotic occlusion of most of the cavernous sinus channels. Partial thrombosis of the cavernous sinus, especially the superior
ophthalmic vein, gave rise to the resolution of the patient's eye signs and the bruit. Nevertheless, this also rendered the subfrontal
cortical vessels, which were the preserved drainage routes of the occult CCF, more dilated and engorged. This process was followed by
paradoxical worsening of the patient's condition. In conclusion, even if initial audible bruit abruptly disappears or eye signs improve in
direct CCF, cerebral angiography should be performed to confirm the true closure of CCF, in consideration of the fact that not only
spontaneous resolution of CCF but also diversion of drainage channels may result in symptom improvement. This paper was supported by
Wonkwang University in 2004. T2-weighted axial and sagittal magnetic resonance images show a dilated superior ophthalmic vein (arrows). Non
contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan shows a large amount of hematoma in the left frontal base. Left internal carotid artery angiogram
in lateral projection, showing direct CCF with drainage into sigmoid sinus (short arrow), superior ophthalmic vein (long arrow) and inferior
ophthalmic vein (arrowhead), and dilated subfrontal pial veins (open arrow). Follow-up angiogram after the transarterial embolization shows
a complete occlusion of CCF.
