Widespread use of antimicrobial drugs in the management of otitis media has significantly reduced the incidence of labyrinthitis nowadays.
Cases of tympanogenic labyrinthitis following acute otitis media have rarely been reported in recent literature on otolaryngology. We report
an unusual case of tympanogenic labyrinthitis that presented with sudden sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) following acute otitis media in
an adult who had no previous otological complaints. An audiogram revealed SNHL with pure tone threshold of 43.7 dB in the left ear. MRI was
helpful to identify the inflammatory change of the membranous labyrinth. The patient's hearing returned to normal after treatment. The
definite diagnosis of serous labyrinthitis was established retrospectively. Complications of otitis media may occur when the natural
defensive barriers of the middle ear are penetrated, permitting infection to spread into adjacent structures. Tympanogenic labyrinthitis is
secondary to middle ear disease so it is typically unilateral. Aggressive middle ear infections may result in propagation of infection to
involve round window or oval window. Nowdays, widespread use of antimicrobial agents in the management of otitis media has significantly
reduced the incidence of labyrinthitis.1,2 Cases of tympanogenic labyrinthitis following acute otitis media have rarely been reported in
recent literature on otolaryngology. We report an unusual case of tympanogenic labyrinthitis in an otherwise healthy adult that presented
with sudden sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) following an episode of acute otitis media. A healthy 29-year-old woman was admitted to our
hospital in July 2002 with chief complaints of unilateral sudden hearing loss, tinnitus and dizziness. Two weeks earlier, she had developed
otalgia, middle ear fullness and fever over 2 days and had been treated with antibiotics for 2 weeks under the impression of acute otitis
media at a local clinic. She was referred to our deparment because of unimproved hearing loss and dizziness in the left ear, along with
headache, and tinnitus, despite rigorous antibiotic treatment. She had no past history of any ear disease. Physical examination was
unremarkable. She had no nystagmus, signs of meningeal irritation or neurological deficits. Otoendoscopic examination revealed a still
hyperemic, tympanic membrane with purulent middle ear effusion. An audiogram revealed SNHL with pure tone threshold of 43.7 dB in the left
ear (Fig. 1). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. Contrast-enhanced, axial-T1 weighted, MRI images demonstrated minor
enhancement of basal turn of cochlea, vestibule, semicircular canals and intense enhancement of mastoid in the left side (Fig. 2). These MRI
findings were suggestive of otitis media with mastoiditis and membranous labyrinthitis. The patient underwent myringotomy and insertion of
ventilation tube. The purulent secretion drained from the middle ear was sent for culture. Although the culture demonstrated no growth of
microorganisms, she was initially treated with intratympanic instillation of ciprofloxacin drops and put on intravenous cephalosporin
(MeicelinÂ®) injection for one week. The ECG, chest radiograph and laboratory studies were unremarkable. However, the symptoms of tinnitus
and hearing loss were not resolved despite the parenteral antibiotic treatment. Under the impression of possible labyrinthitis, 5-day oral
steroid treatment with prednisone (69 mg/d) was started on the 8th day after admission and was tapered off between days 10 and 12. Six days
after the commencement of steroid treatment, objective improvement in hearing was first noted, and the patient was discharged. At first
outpatient check-up 9 days after the commencement of steroid treatment, dramatic improvement was detected with pure tone threshold returning
to 25 dB (Fig. 3). Her hearing had returned to normal at all frequencies except 8 kHz. Tinnitus continued to subside over the subsequent 1
month of outpatient follow-up (Fig. 4). Post-treatment MRI was not obtained owing to the patient's refusal off follow-up examination. We
report a case of a young woman who presented with acute suppurative otitis media and tympanogenic labyrinthitis. Nowadays, tympanogenic
labyrinthitis is a rare intratemporal complication of otitis media. The decline in its incidence is partly due to earlier diagnosis,
development of better antibiotics and greater awareness by medical personnel of the complications of otitis media. Acute serous
labyrinthitis is a result of irritation to the labyrinth caused by otitis or meningitic infection without real bacterial invasion of the
inner ear. Labyrinth irritation is induced by bacterial toxins or other mediators of inflammation.3 SNHL may fluctuate and is less severe
than that often seen in suppurative labyrinthitis. Suppurative labyrinthitis caused by direct bacterial invasion into the inner ear may lead
to severe, irreversible hearing loss and vertigo. In the acute phase, serous labyrinthitis may not be easily distinguishable from
suppurative labyrinthitis. However, patients with serous labyrinthitis often can retain some audiovestibular function. The signs and
symptoms are less dramatic than those of purulent labyrinthitis, and the pathologic consequences in the inner ear are less destructive.
Every patient with serous labyrinthitis should be observed closely for development of suppurative labyrinthitis, which presents as abrupt
worsening of the vestibular symptoms and sudden loss of all hearing.4 Ludman has observed that the distinction between serous and
suppurative labyrinthitis is one made in retrospect after cochlear and vestibular function has returned.5 In the present case, the diagnosis
of serous labyrinthitis was established retrospectively. Until recently, the diagnosis of tympanogenic labyrinthitis was made on clinical
grounds. The presence of labyrinthitis can be speculated only if bone conduction loss co-exists with otitis media. In this case, the toxins
were assumed to have penetrated the round window to affect the basal turn of the cochlea; hence the resulting hearing loss was localized at
the high frequencies. MRI proves to be beneficial to confirm the presence of labyrinthine inflammation by showing enhancement of the
membranous labyrinth as seen on gadolinium-contrasted, T1-weighted sequences. This enhancement is typically faint and is clearly different
from the intense and localized contrast enhancement that occurs in individuals with intra-labyrinthine Schwannoma.6 The enhancing labyrinth
occurs most commonly in the subacute stage. The enhancement is believed to occur due to accumulation of gadolinium within inflamed
labyrinthine membranes resulting from breakdown of labyrinthine vasculature.7 Aside from the characteristic, faint, diffuse nature of the
contrast enhancement, segmental involvement of the labyrinth is not uncommon. Hearing loss is also a sign a cochlear involvement, and high
frequency loss is closely associated with the disease extent to the basal turn of cochlea. Treatment for labyrinthitis caused by otitis
media usually starts with establishing a drainage route and obtaining a purulence culture; appropriate antibiotic therapy is then
administered subsequently. Myringotomy and ventilation tube insertion should be reserved for patients with clear evidence of serous
labyrinthitis associated with otitis media. If there is persistent SNHL despite adequate antibiotic treatment, steroids should be considered
as adjunctive therapy for otitis media associated with labyrinthitis. Treatment with steroid has been reported to yield a statistically
significant reduction in subsequent hearing loss.8 Untreated serous labyrinthitis can ultimately lead to suppurative labyrinthitis and
consequently meningitis. In conclusion, we have described a rare case of tympanogenic labyrinthitis complicated by acute otitis media. MRI
is mandatory diagnostic tool for the investigation of suspected cases. This study was supported by Regional Research Center of Korea Science
and Engineering Foundation (R122001048010060) and Ministry of Science and Technology. Pure tone audiogram revealed a sensorineural hearing
loss with pure tone threshold of 43.7 dB in the left ear on admission day. Contrast-enhanced axial-T1 weighted images of MRI demonstrated
that faint enhancement of basal turn of cochlea, vestibule, semicircular canals and intense enhancement of mastoid in the left side. These
MRI findings are suggestive of otitis media with mastoiditis and tympanogenic labyrinthitis. Pure tone audiogram revealed an improvement
with pure tone threshold 25 dB in the left ear at 9th day following steroid treatment. Hearing returned to normal at all frequencies except
for 8 kHz, 1 month after initial steroid treatment.
