A preliminary report of this work was presented at the 36th Annual Meeting of the Korean Association of Internal Medicine, Seoul, Korea,
October 1984. This work was supported in part by clinical research grants from Seoul National University Hospital. Antibodies against
thyroxine (T4) were detected in a patient of systemic lupus erythematosus associated with chronic thyroiditis and a patient with primary
myxedema. Both patients were clincally hypothyroid with elevated serum TSH. Serum T4 values measured with solid phase radioimmunoassay were
very high (over 25ug/dl), but were undetected with polyethylene glycol separation method. On the extraction of the sera with ethanol, the
concordant low values of T4 were obtained with both radioimmunoassay methods and these values were compatible with clinical findings and
serum TSH levels. Major portion of 125I-T4 binding of sera was found in 7S fraction on Sephadex G-200 column chromatography and T4-binding
protein migrated to the gamma-globulin region on cellulose acetate electrophoresis. The 125I-T4 binding of IgGs were competitively inhibited
by the addition of unlabelled T4 in both patients. In Case 1, the association constant (Ka) for binding to T4 was 6.1 ×108 l/mol and the
binding capacity was 4.8ng T4/mg IgG. The anti-T4 antibody of Case 1 cross reacted with T3 and resulted in falsely high or low T3 values
with radioimmunoassay. Ka and the binding capacity of case 2 were 9.2×109 l/mol and 0.11ng T4/mg IgG respectively. The clinical significance
of these antibodies was discussed. The presence of gamma-globulins capable of binding to thyroid hormones was suggested first by Robbins et
al.1) and Premachandra et al2) in certain cases of thyroid carcinoma and Hashimoto’s disease, and later confirmed by Staeheli et al.3) who
also suggested their influences on thyroxine (T4) or triiodothyronine (T3) radioimmunoassay. Most of the antibodies were IgG and specific to
T3 or T4 but cross-reactivity with thyroglobulin was also demonstrated in certain cases.12) Radioimmunoassays give spuriously high or low T3
and T4 values in the presence of anti-T3 or T4 antibody according to the separation method and quantity of antibody. The pathophysiologic
and clinical significancy of thyroid hormone autoantibodies are still unknown, however recently, Karlsson et al.7) reported cases of
hypothyroidism occassioned by such antibodies to expedite studies on their clinical significance. To our knowledge, there was no report of
such antibodies to thyroid hormone in Korea, and moreover, this is the first report to demonstrate anti-T4 antibody in the case of systemic
lupus erythematosus. We attested the presence of anti-T4 antibodies in SLE patients with autoimmune thyroiditis, and primary myxedema
patients, and also investigated their influence on radioimmunoassays, binding characteristics with T4 and their cross-reactivity with T3. A
27-year-old woman visited the outpatient clinic of Seoul National University Hospital because of goiter and hypothyroid symptoms of mild
degree in Nov. ‘82. 100ug of Synthroid was administered under the impression of chronic thyroiditis. Serum T3 was 476 ng/dl, T4, over 25
ug/dl and TSH was 68.5ull/ml at the time of first visit. Titers of antimicrosomal and antithyroglobulin antibodies were 1:3202 and 1:640,2
respectively. She has been hospitalized because of superimposed symptoms, (e.g., fever, chest pain, edema and dyspnea on Mar. ‘83.) Physical
and radiological examination disclosed cardiomegaly, pleural effusion, hepatomegaly and goiter (50gm). A diagnosis of SLE was made with the
labolatory findings such as hypoproteinemia, proteinuria, pancytopenia, positive LE cell and elevated serum anti-DNA antibody (2944 uLI/ml).
T3 resin uptake was 20%, T3, over 600 ng/dl, T4, over 25 ug/dl and TSH level was over 155 uU/ml at the time of admission. Prednisolone and
Cytoxan were administered with clinical improvement including diminished goiter size and decrement of T3, T4, TSH levels (Table 1). A
35-year-old woman visited the outpatient clinic because of weight gain of 5Kg over 6 months, edema, slurred speech, hoarseness and
menorrhagia. Physical examination disclosed typical findings of hypothyroidism including cold, coarse skin and hungup reflex etc., and
goiter was absent. T3 resin uptake was 21.7% T3, 63 ng/dl, T4, over 25 ug/dl and TSH was over 160 uU/ml. Titers of antimicrosomal and
antithyroglobulin antibodies were both 1:1280.2 Solid phase method: Bound and free forms of T3 and T4 were separated with antibody-coated
bead using T3 RIA BEAD, TETRABEAD-1 25 kits (Abbott). Polyethylene glycol (PEG) method: 200 ul of antibody was added to the admixture of 100
ul of patient’ sera or T3, T4 stardards and 200 ul of 125I-T3, 125I-T4. The tubes were incubated for 90 minutes at room temperature, and
centrifuged subsequently for 15 minutes at 1500g after addition of 1 ml PEG. Supernatant fluid was decanted and pellet was counted with
gamma-counter. One ml of 99.5% ethanol was added to 500 ul of patients’ sera and after 5 minutes of shaking, tubes were centrifuged for 5
minutes at 2000g. 900 ul of supernatant was evaporated under nitrogen to dryness, and the remainder was reconstituted with 300 ul of
reference serum (supplied in the kit) that contained no iodothyronine and served as zero standard. Three hundreds ul of serum samples and
control sera containing trace amount of 125I-T4, 125I-T3 were applied on a Sephadex G-200 column (1.5 × 90cm), equilibrated with 0.02 M PBS
buffer (pH 7.6). 3ml of elutes were collected and opical density at 280 nm and radioactivity of each tube were checked with
spectrophotometer and gamma-counter, respectively. Cellulose acetate electrophoresis (barbital buffer, pH 8.6) was carried out in 50 ul of
patient’s sera and control sera containing trace amount of 125I-T4, 125I-T3. Lanes were cut into 5 sections containing each band was counted
with gamma-counter, subsequently. IgG was purified with DEAE Sephadex A-50 batch method using modified Baumstask method.19) After dialysis
against 10 mM Tris-50 mM NaCl-0.1 % BSA buffer, and concentration with Amicon ultrafiltration chamber, protein concentration was measured of
the Lowry method.20) Fifty ul of 125I-T4 and 100 ul of 3% BSA-0.3% thimerosal were added to 50 ul of patients’ IgG (1 mg/0.1 ml), and the
admixtures were incubated for 20 hours at 4°C with 50 ul of serially diluted cold T4 and T3. 300 ul of 30% PEG was used to precipitate bound
forms and gamma-counting was done after centrifugation for 20 minutes at 2000 g, 4°C. Serum T4 values were over 25 ul/dl in both cases with
solid phase method using anti-T4 antibody coated bead, whereas, unmeasurably low in both cases with PEG method for separation of bound and
free forms. Nonspecific binding was over 80% with PEG precipitation method, suggesting the presence of abnormal T4-binder besides TBG (Table
2). Serum T3 values were over 600 ng/dl with solid phase method but unmeasurably low with PEG method in Case 1, while, 65 ng/dl with solid
phase method and 37 ng/dl with PEG method in Case 2. Serum T4 values measured after alcohol extraction were 6.5 and 3.2 ul/dl (Case 1 and 2)
with solid phase method, and 5.8 and 2.4 ug/dl with PEG method showing significant discrepancies with the values measured without
extraction. These values were regarded as “true” T4 levels considering patients’ clinical status and TSH levels. Serum T3 values were 38
ng/dl with solid phase method and 32 ng/dl with PEG method in Case 1 (Table 2). Recovery of T3 and T4 with alcohol extraction was 86%. Major
portion of 125I-T4 appeared to be bound to immunoglobulin G in both cases whilst, almost all of 125I-T4 was restricted to those fractions
containing TBG in normal control sera (Fig. 1). In contiadistinction to 125I-T4, 125I-T3 appeared in the TBG regions, in both patients’ and
control sera, suggesting the absence of anti-T3 antibody in patients’ sera. With control sera, 78.3%, 19.9% and only 0.17% of 125I-T4 were
found to be present in the inter alpha-globulin, albumin and gamma-globulin regions, respectively, whereas, 88% (Case 1) and 60.3% (Case 2)
were present in gamma-globulin domain with patients’ sera (Table 3). 62% and 31.5% of 125I-T3 were in the gamma-globulin and inter alpha-
globulin domain, respectively, in Case 1, but case 2 showed similar distribution pattern of 125I-T3 to normal control sera (Table 3, Fig.
2). Adding cold T4 inhibited binding of patients’ IgG with 125I-T4 in both cases (Fig. 3). Binding was also inhibited by high concentration
of T3 in Case 1 suggesting cross-reactivity of anti-T4 antibody with T3. As shown in Fig. 4, Schatchard analysis gave an association
constant of 6.1 × 108 l/mol and a binding capacity of 4.8 ng T4/mg IgG in Case 1. In Case 2, the association constant was 9.2×109 l/mol to
be higher than in Case 1, and the binding capacity was 0.11 ng T4/mg IgG to be smaller. Most of anti-T3 or T4 antibodies reported so far are
found in autoimmune thyroid diseases (e.g., Graves’ disease or Hashimoto’s disease, but also found rarely in thyroid carcinoma,1) normal
subject7) and Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia15) etc). These antibodies interfere radioimmunoassay of thyroid hormones to give falsely high
or low values according to separation method. That is to say, in case of double antibody method or solid phase method, radioiodinated
hormone binds by and large to patient’s own antibody instead of test antibody to lower apparent B/F ratio to bring about a spuriously high
result. To the contrary, in case of precipitation method using ammonium sulfate or PEG, radioiodinated hormone bound to patient’s own
antibody co-precipitate to heighten apparent B/F ratio to give spuriously low value. Our 2 cases were clinically hypothyroid with elevated
serum TSH levels, but had elevated T4 levels with solid phase radioimmunoassay, while, they had unmeasurably low values with PEG method.
Moreover, nonspecific binding of over 80% with PEG precipitation suggested abnormal T4-binding protein besides TBG, albumin and prealbumin,
and it is further substantiated by the findings that T4 levels measured after ethanol extraction showed similar results with both separation
methods and matched well with clinical findings and serum TSH levels. These abnormal T4-binding proteins seem to be antibodies to T4
considering 88% (Case 1) and 60.3% (Case 2) of 123I-T4 migrated to gamma-globulin region on electrophoresis and peaks of 123I-T4 coincided
with gamma-globulin domain on Sephadex G-200 column chromatography. Moreover, binding of 123I-T4 and these antibodies were specifically
inhibited by adding cold T4 to corroborate the nature of these antibodies. In Case 1, the association constant was 6.1 × 108 l/mol and the
binding capacity was 4.8 ng T4/mg IgG, being substantially larger than that of TBG on Schatchard analysis. Binding of IgG with 125I-T4 was
inhibited by T3 in case 1 to some degree, suggesting cross-reactivity of anti-T4 antibody with T3, and to our knowledge, there has been no
report of such cross-reactivity. The findings that the T3 level was high with the solid phase method but unmeasurably low with the PEG
method and T3 measured after ethanol extraction matched well with clinical status may suggest the existence of anti-T3 antibody. But there
was no evidence of binding of 125I-T3 with IgG on chromatographic findings. Migration of 34.8% and 30.4% of 125I-T3 to gamma-globulin region
on electrophoresis might to interpreted in either way, and it is not certain whether it means mere cross-reactivity or presence of another
anti-T3 antibody. The mechanism of genesis of anti-T4 or T3 antibodies is far from clear, although they are nearly confined to autoimmune
thyroid diseases,3,8,11–14,18) and regarded as a kind of autoantibodies. Most of these antibodies are reported to cross-react with
thyroglobulin,4,10,18) and it is also reported experimental animals can produce anti-thyroid hormone antibodies when immunized with
thyroglobulin under appropriate condition, suggesting that immunogen of antithyroid hormone antibody would be thyroglobulin and this
antibody to thyroglobulin would cross-react with thyroid hormones.18) This assumption is consistent with the findings that most of the
patients with these antibodies have high titer of antithyroglobulin antibody as 1:6402 and 1 ;12802 in our cases. Clinical significance of
these anti-thyroid hormone antibodies seems mainly to consist in disturbance of radioimmunoassay for thyroid hormones, but Karlsson et al.7)
reported a case of hypothyroidism due to anti-T3 antibody. In our first case, the administration of prednisolone and Cytoxan brought about
diminution of goiter size and decrease in TSH levels with improvement of lupus symptoms. This suggests the possibility that the anti-T4
antibody having cross-reactivity with T3 would have induced hypothyroidism in our first case. But we could not exclude the possibility that
the decrease in TSH might be due to the improvement of autoimmune thyroiditis because the patient had high titer of antimicrosomal antibody
besides antithyroglobulin antibody, and we did not prove that histology of her thyroid was normal with biopsy. We wish to thank Mr. Jae Min
Chung and II Taek Suh for excellent technical assistance and Ms. Eun Ja Kwak for preparation of the manuscript. Sephadex G-200 column
chromatography of the control and patient’s sera incubated with 125I-T4 and 125I-T3. Abscissa is fraction number. Distribution of 125I-T4
among proteins in control and patients’ sera after electrophoresis on cellulose acetate. Inhibition of 125I-J4 binding to patient’s IgGs by
cold T3 and T4. Scatchard plots of T4 binding to patient’s IgGs. Laboratory data of case 1 Measured by solid phase (bead) radioimmunoassay
MCHA: antimicrosomal antibody TGHA: antithyroglobulin antibody T4 and T3 values in the whole sera and the ethanol extract of the sera
obtained by solid phase and PEG separation methods of radioimmunoassay Binding percent of 123I-T4 and 125I-T3 to each fraction of serum
protein in cellulose acetate electrophoresis NC = Normal Control
