Massimo Pietropaolo is at the Division of Immunogenetics, Diabetes Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Rangos Research Center, Children's
Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, and at the Center for Diabetes and Endocrinology, Department of
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America. E-mail: pietroma+@pitt.edu
Competing Interests: The author declares that he has no competing interests. A young patient with type 1 diabetes needs an elective
operation under general anesthesia. How will you manage his diabetes before, during, and after the surgery? An 18-year-old Caucasian male
with type 1 diabetes presented to the emergency department complaining of severe left knee pain and swelling after sustaining a knee injury
that occurred during a high school football match. Joint effusions were visible and palpable above the left knee, and there was significant
loss of smooth motion of the knee, passively performed. Plain X rays showed no signs of fractures. The patient had had type 1 diabetes for
six years, and his insulin regimen consisted of insulin glargine, 35 units at 8:00 p.m., and insulin lispro, 23 units at 8:00 a.m. and 16
units at 8:00 p.m. The patient had no apparent complications related to type 1 diabetes. On examination he was alert, his pulse was 76 bpm
regular, and his blood pressure was 118/66 mm Hg. Recently, the patient had had frequent episodes of both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia.
However, he had never developed diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). His recent HbA1c was 9.5%, demonstrating inadequate glycemic control. The
patient was referred to an orthopedic surgeon, and arthroscopy was scheduled a few days later. A complex tear of the medial meniscus
extending to the articular surfaces was diagnosed. Partial meniscectomy was recommended. (This procedure usually takes about one
hour—nonetheless, the preoperative preparation for general anesthesia and the postoperative recovery may add several hours to this time.)
This patient should be hospitalized no later than the evening before surgery, given his history of frequent episodes of hypo- and
hyperglycemia and his poor glycemic control. This should allow for final optimization of glucose control before surgery. Ideally, frequent
contact with the patient and adjustment of the insulin regimen prior to surgery should lead to an excellent glycemic control. This 18-year-
old patient on glargine might benefit from additional doses of lispro given before lunch and dinner (rather than at 8 p.m., unless this is
before dinner). A patient with poorly controlled diabetes should not undergo elective surgery until glycemic levels are reasonably
controlled. For example, bringing the patient into the hospital with blood glucose levels of 450 mg/dl will likely result in a canceled
surgery. If a patient is scheduled for day of admission surgery, one way to avoid having to send the patient out without being able to do
the procedure is to perform a finger stick blood sugar on arrival so one can cancel before admission. Patients undergoing minor surgical
procedures (e.g., arthroscopy) may be brought to the hospital on the morning of surgery. As the patient is usually NPO (i.e., has been given
orders to fast before the surgery), a lower dose of the intermediate- or long-acting insulin is administered, and the regular insulin is
withheld (Box 1). Insulin therapy should never be withheld in a patient with type 1 diabetes as this can result in DKA. Day of procedure if
the patient is NPO: Withhold morning dose of insulin.Measure capillary glucose levels prior to procedure every 2–4 hours.Administer short-
acting or fasting insulin subcutaneously every 2–4 hours as indicated in Table 1.Administer the usual afternoon dose of insulin. Withhold
morning dose of insulin. Measure capillary glucose levels prior to procedure every 2–4 hours. Administer short-acting or fasting insulin
subcutaneously every 2–4 hours as indicated in Table 1. Administer the usual afternoon dose of insulin. Day of procedure if breakfast is
allowed: Administer morning dose of insulin.Measure glycemia before and after procedure.Give supplemental four units of short- or fast-
acting insulin subcutaneously if glycemic levels are >250 mg/dl.Give usual afternoon insulin dose.Modified from . Administer morning dose of
insulin. Measure glycemia before and after procedure. Give supplemental four units of short- or fast-acting insulin subcutaneously if
glycemic levels are >250 mg/dl. Give usual afternoon insulin dose. The degree of metabolic control should be carefully evaluated before
surgery; the goal is to improve the patient's blood glucose readings on an outpatient basis before undergoing surgery. If hyperglycemia has
been present for a prolonged period of time before surgery, this could result in dehydration, which is commonly associated with electrolytic
abnormalities such as sodium and potassium loss and possibly intravascular volume depletion. Prolonged hyperglycemia will delay healing and
increase the risk of ischemia. A number of observations have indicated that hyperglycemia impairs collagen formation and causes a decrease
in the tensile strength of surgical wounds . Simply avoiding hyperglycemia can prevent these consequences. The reduction of glucose levels
to below 200 mg/dl has been shown to improve granulocyte adherence and granulocytosis, both key components of the innate immunity and the
defense against bacterial infections. Studies in both humans and animals suggest that high glucose levels might exacerbate ischemic brain
damage . Admission to the hospital is recommended for all patients with type 1 diabetes, and a stabilization period of 12–16 hours is also
recommended for urgent procedures if severe hyperglycemia is present . However, the widespread use of home blood glucose monitoring makes
the improvement of glycemic control possible prior to admission. Traditionally, long-acting (e.g. ultralente) insulin is discontinued 2–3
days before surgery, and the patient is stabilized on a regimen of intermediate-acting (neutral protamine hagedorn or lente) and short-
acting (regular or humalog) insulin twice a day, or regular insulin before meals and intermediate-acting insulin at bedtime. However, if the
glycemic control is good and the patient is being treated with glargine, it is acceptable to continue the regimen until the day of surgery .
Alternatively, 1/2–2/3 of the usual insulin regimen is given on the day of the procedure . On the morning of surgery patients with type 1
diabetes should receive the insulin regimen that is used intraoperatively (Box 2) . Preoperative Days Attempt to obtain reasonable glycemic
control. The goal is to achieve preprandial glycemic levels between 70 and 150 mg/dl (3.9–8.3 mmol/l). Attempt to obtain reasonable glycemic
control. The goal is to achieve preprandial glycemic levels between 70 and 150 mg/dl (3.9–8.3 mmol/l). Operative Day Four to eight hours
before surgery, keep patient NPO, discontinue SC insulin, and insert IV infusion line.Measure capillary glucose levels at one-hour
intervals.Infuse D5W intravenously via an IV regulator pump.If renal function and serum potassium concentration are normal, add 20 mEq
KCl/l.Based on hourly blood glucose determination, adjust each infusion as indicated in Table 2. Four to eight hours before surgery, keep
patient NPO, discontinue SC insulin, and insert IV infusion line. Measure capillary glucose levels at one-hour intervals. Infuse D5W
intravenously via an IV regulator pump. If renal function and serum potassium concentration are normal, add 20 mEq KCl/l. Based on hourly
blood glucose determination, adjust each infusion as indicated in Table 2. Modified from . Evaluation of metabolic homeostasis, lipid
profile, and kidney and myocardial function must be completed before surgery. The presence of diabetic autonomic neuropathy should also be
assessed prior to surgery because this condition predisposes to perioperative hypotension. In such patients meticulous monitoring of blood
pressure and volume status is essential during the perioperative period . The common agreement is that 4–8 hours before surgery, the patient
should be kept NPO, subcutaneous (SC) insulin should be discontinued, and an intravenous (IV) infusion line should be inserted. It should be
emphasized that if the elective surgical procedure can be scheduled for early morning hours and the procedure lasts at least four hours,
this limits the NPO to about 4–6 hours and allows administration of usual or 1/2–2/3 usual insulin and use of a glucose infusion to replace
breakfast and supplemental insulin either subcutaneously or intravenously. If both glucose and insulin are infused, it should be pointed out
that these must be two separately controlled infusions, so glucose and insulin infusion can be varied independently. Major surgery and
general anesthesia can cause severe metabolic abnormalities in patients with type 1 diabetes. Given the limitations of SC insulin therapy,
such as unpredictable absorption and variable plasma insulin levels, constant infusion of insulin is recommended . Anesthesia induces
complex neuroendocrine stress responses and activates the sympathetic nervous system. The abnormal release of growth hormone, cortisol, and
epinephrine leads to impaired insulin secretion, and causes insulin resistance and hyperglycemia due to increased glycogenolysis,
gluconeogenesis, and decreased glucose disposal. Many other conditions may cause severe insulin resistance in a patient with diabetes (Box
3). Recent DKAPoor glycemic controlSepsisSteroid therapyLiver diseaseObesity Recent DKA Poor glycemic control Sepsis Steroid therapy Liver
disease Obesity For patients scheduled for elective surgery, IV insulin and glucose infusion are usually started several hours
preoperatively, and glucose levels should be maintained between 100 and 125 mg/dl. Slightly higher targets (100–150 mg/dl) have been
recommended by some diabetologists to minimize the risk of hypoglycemia. The maintenance of glucose levels below 200 mg/dl has been shown to
prevent bacterial infections and ischemic brain damage . Suggested guidelines for management of patients with type 1 diabetes by use of
insulin are outlined in Box 2. Since IV regular insulin has a short half-life (ten minutes), hypoglycemia is of little concern, as the
infusion can be decreased and the IV glucose rate increased. The infusion rate can be adjusted by a floor nurse before surgery and by the
anesthesiologist intraoperatively. An insulin infusion algorithm is constructed to allow easy titration of the insulin dose, and IV glucose
must also be infused to obtain glucose levels within target (Box 2). This type of algorithm is effective in the majority of patients;
however, it is based on the “average” patient and might require individualization. If the patient has a coexisting condition associated with
increased insulin requirement, IV insulin doses need to be increased. Glycemic levels must be monitored at hourly intervals to keep glucose
levels between 100 and 125 mg/dl. Patients with type 1 diabetes who are treated with continuous SC insulin infusion by an insulin pump
should be easily converted to IV regular insulin infusion just before surgery. Continuous SC insulin infusion is an acceptable regimen for
surgical procedures requiring local anesthesia. An adult without diabetes requires a minimum of 100 to 125 grams (400 to 500 calories) of
glucose per day to prevent protein catabolism and the development of ketosis. Hence, this patient with types 1 diabetes should be treated
with 5–10 grams of glucose per hour (1.2 to 2.4 mg/kg/min in a 70-kilogram subject) to provide sufficient basal energy requirement and
prevent hypoglycemia during surgery. The dextrose concentration of the IV solution (Box 2) is adjusted based on the expected length of
surgery. Thus, in this case 5% of dextrose in water (D5W) can be administered intravenously via infusion pump. For longer surgical
procedures (intraabdominal or intrathoracic surgery), 10% of dextrose should be used to avoid excessive fluid administration. A 20% or 50%
dextrose solution can be infused through a central venous catheter if fluid restriction is critical. If additional fluids are required, for
instance, to replace unexpected intraoperative blood losses, non-glucose-containing solutions should be administered. As a general rule,
normal serum potassium levels do not necessarily imply that the total body potassium content is normal, as only 2% of total body potassium
stores are extracellular . In patients with diabetes, the metabolic homeostasis can rapidly be altered and many factors may influence serum
potassium levels and total body potassium stores. These factors are (a) insulin, which increases potassium uptake by cells; (b) acidemia,
which causes hyperkalemia as a result of the exchange of intracellular potassium for hydrogen ions; and (c) hyperosmolarity, which causes a
rearrangement of potassium and fluid from intracellular to extracellular compartments. In patients with diabetes who have normal renal
function and normal serum potassium concentration, 10 to 20 mEq of potassium should be added to each liter of dextrose-containing fluid. A
higher dose is required in patients with hypokalemia. If serum potassium levels are greater than 5.5 mEq/l, potassium therapy should be
withheld from the IV fluids and potassium serum levels should be monitored closely. It has been estimated that as many as 5% of all patients
with diabetes require surgery at some point during their lives . Many of these patients undergo emergency surgery as a result of lower
extremity infections requiring incision and drainage or even lower limb amputations. More than 50% of lower limb amputations in the United
States occur among people with diabetes. The majority of patients with diabetes admitted for emergency procedures have a poor glyco-
metabolic control and some of them may have coexisting DKA. The first step in management is to assess glycemic, electrolyte, acid-base, and
volume status. An IV saline infusion should be started while waiting for laboratory tests to correct possible volume loss. Insulin infusion
should be started at an appropriate rate (Box 2), and frequently insulin requirement might increase during emergency surgery. It is crucial
that volume losses and electrolyte abnormalities are corrected prior to surgery. If DKA is diagnosed, immediate treatment is indicated, and,
if possible, surgery should be delayed until the glyco-metabolic control is corrected and stabilized. If emergency surgery procedures cannot
be delayed, DKA can be treated concurrently with surgery. Both IV insulin and glucose (D5W, 0.45% normal saline) infusion should be
continued until the glycol-metabolic control is stable and until 1–2 hours after the patient is able to resume oral feeding without
difficulty. If postoperative nausea and vomiting are present, IV insulin and glucose infusion should not be discontinued. Furthermore, in
patients with type 1 diabetes ketonuria could be an early sign of impending DKA, which could be triggered by starvation. Capillary glucose
should be monitored every 1–2 hours at the bedside, and the variable insulin and glucose infusion should be adjusted to maintain blood
glucose levels between 100 and 150 mg/dl (Box 4). Serum electrolytes should be measured immediately after surgery. Hypo- and hyperkalemia
are fairly common in the postoperative period and should be corrected without delay. The presence of a widened anion gap suggests the
possibility of DKA or lactic acidosis that might be caused by systemic infections or hypoperfusion. Continue IV insulin and glucose (D5W)
infusion until two hours after oral feeding is resumed.Measure capillary blood glucose before meals, at 10:00 p.m., and at 3:00
a.m.aMaintain blood glucose levels between 100 and 150 mg/dl (5.5–8.3 mmol/l).Provide three meals and three snacks (20–30
kcal/kg/day).Administer preprandial short- or fast-acting insulin subcutaneously according to the schedule in Table 3.For patients treated
with continuous SC insulin infusion, resume basal rate and give bolus doses according to the carbohydrate counts. Continue IV insulin and
glucose (D5W) infusion until two hours after oral feeding is resumed. Measure capillary blood glucose before meals, at 10:00 p.m., and at
3:00 a.m.a Maintain blood glucose levels between 100 and 150 mg/dl (5.5–8.3 mmol/l). Provide three meals and three snacks (20–30
kcal/kg/day). Administer preprandial short- or fast-acting insulin subcutaneously according to the schedule in Table 3. For patients treated
with continuous SC insulin infusion, resume basal rate and give bolus doses according to the carbohydrate counts. aIf hypoglycemia is
present at 3:00 a.m., reduce the 10:00 p.m. insulin dose. Modified from . If the patient is stable and can tolerate oral feeding, the
regular home dose of insulin may be administered 20–30 minutes before the meal and the insulin infusion stopped 15–20 minutes after the
meal. Of note, insulin infusion should be discontinued only after the SC insulin regimen is started to avoid any gaps in plasma insulin
levels that may lead to a loss of metabolic control. Resuming a sliding scale SC insulin treatment postoperatively has been advocated to
improve metabolic control in patients with type 1 diabetes. However, there are several drawbacks with this approach. First of all, this
approach is based on a retrospective treatment for hyperglycemia, which reflects the degree of insulin sensitivity and glucose disposal rate
in the preoperative period. The use of a SC insulin treatment postoperatively tends to create fluctuations in blood glucose levels that
could be difficult to control. Moreover, there is a risk of exposing the patient to the risk of hypoglycemia if excessive doses of insulin
are administered. More importantly, the use of a sliding scale treatment might predispose to DKA in insulin-deficient patients before the
development of hyperglycemic levels. Patients with type 2 diabetes require good blood glucose control prior to undergoing surgery. Although
these patients seldom develop DKA, the same adverse effects of poor glycemic control may develop. For procedures that require general
anesthesia, specific treatment, other than hourly glycemic monitoring, is not required for patients with type 2 diabetes whose diabetes is
well controlled with diet (i.e., fasting blood glucose less than 125 mg/dl). However, insulin should still be administered as described in
Box 2, as hyperglycemic responses may still occur intraoperatively in these patients. Targeted glycemic levels are identical to those for
patients with type 1 diabetes. For elective procedures requiring general anesthesia, insulin infusion is usually required to control
hyperglycemic levels that occur during surgery. Frequent intraoperative glucose monitoring is imperative in this setting to avoid
complications resulting from a poor glycemic control. Patients with type 2 diabetes who require insulin and who are scheduled for surgery
should be managed similarly to patients with type 1 diabetes. As a general rule, SC insulin should not be used in patients with type 2
diabetes requiring surgery and general anesthesia, since insulin absorption from the SC tissue could be quite variable, particularly in
obese individuals. With regard to patients with type 2 diabetes who require general anesthesia and whose diabetes is well controlled with
sulfonylureas, there is some degree of disagreement. Many diabetologists recommend withholding the sulfonylurea the morning of surgery for
procedures requiring general or local anesthesia and using continuous insulin infusion. Any patient treated with metformin should
discontinue this medication at least 48 hours before surgery. The drug should be completely cleared after discontinuing metformin 48 hours
preceding surgery. This is a prophylactic measure in an effort to lower the risk of lactic acidosis that could be secondary to complications
of surgical procedures such as hypotension, myocardial infarction, or septic shock. Treatment decisions for patients with type 2 diabetes
receiving local anesthesia and undergoing minor surgical procedures are similar to those described above for patients with type 1 diabetes.
Patients with type 1 diabetes undergoing elective or emergency surgical procedures have a higher degree of morbidity and mortality than
those without diabetes, as a result of impaired glyco-metabolic homeostasis and electrolyte balance. The magnitude of the catabolic
responses is not only related to the severity of surgical and postsurgical complications but also to the effects of inadequate perioperative
management on metabolic control. Health-care providers should be very familiar with the perioperative management of type 1 diabetes; with
individualized insulin and glucose variable infusions, young patients affected by type 1 diabetes can undergo surgery with a minimal risk.
The goal of glycemic management in these situations is to maintain normal glucose homeostasis and normal metabolism. As insulin resistance
and gluconeogenesis increase during surgery-related stress and anesthesia, additional insulin will be needed to prevent excessive hepatic
glucose release. An important issue is maintaining a physiological fluid and electrolyte balance. Patients with type 1 diabetes undergoing
elective or emergency surgical procedures have a higher degree of morbidity and mortality than those without diabetes.Perioperative
hyperglycemia is associated with an increased risk of infections, delayed wound healing, and an increased risk of ischemia.A patient with
poorly controlled diabetes should not undergo elective surgery until glycemic levels are reasonably controlled.Patients undergoing minor
surgical procedures, such as arthroscopy, may be brought to the hospital on the morning of surgery.Given the limitations of subcutaneous
insulin therapy, such as unpredictable absorption and variable plasma insulin levels, constant infusion of insulin is recommended during
surgery. Patients with type 1 diabetes undergoing elective or emergency surgical procedures have a higher degree of morbidity and mortality
than those without diabetes. Perioperative hyperglycemia is associated with an increased risk of infections, delayed wound healing, and an
increased risk of ischemia. A patient with poorly controlled diabetes should not undergo elective surgery until glycemic levels are
reasonably controlled. Patients undergoing minor surgical procedures, such as arthroscopy, may be brought to the hospital on the morning of
surgery. Given the limitations of subcutaneous insulin therapy, such as unpredictable absorption and variable plasma insulin levels,
constant infusion of insulin is recommended during surgery. Perioperative hyperglycemia increases the risk of infections, delayed wound
healing, and ischemia. Achieving preprandial glycemic levels between 70 and 150 mg/dl before surgery in the preoperative period and
maintaining plasma glucose levels between 100 and 125 mg/dl during surgery and between 100 and 150 mg/dl after surgery using simple and safe
algorithms (Boxes 1, 2, and 4) can significantly decrease the risk of these complications. 5% percent of dextrose in water diabetic
ketoacidosis intravenous subcutaneous a Administer 10 ml D5W intravenously and repeat glycemic levels 15 minutes later. Citation:
Pietropaolo M (2005) An 18-year-old patient with type 1 diabetes undergoing surgery. PLoS Med 2(5): e140.
