Eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorders are an emerging disease entity characterized by eosinophilic infiltration of the intestinal wall.
Oral steroids can be still considered as first line treatment. Unfortunately relapses are quite common. Usually long term low-dose
prednisone or immunosuppressive therapy is required, which is especially problematic in young patients. Thus a reliable steroid sparing
agent with low side effects suitable for long term use is needed. There are strong hints to a similar pathophysiology of eosinophilic
gastrointestinal disorders to that of asthma. Indeed leukotriene D4 plays an important role in the recruitment of eosinophils into the
intestinal tissue causing damage. This patho-mechanism provides the rationale for the treatment with a leukotriene D4 receptor antagonist.
Recently there have been first reports about successful short term use of Montelukast in eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorders. We report
the case of a 17 year old girl with a long history of severe abdominal complaints leading to several hospitalizations in the past. Mimicking
the picture of an intestinal tuberculosis she received an anti mycobacterial treatment without any success. Marked eosinophilia in blood,
ascites and tissue samples of the intestinal tract finally lead to the diagnosis eosinophilic gastroenteritis. Tapering off prednisone
caused another severe episode of abdominal pain. At that point leukotriene antagonist Montelukast was started at a dose of 10 mg once daily.
Steroids could be tapered off completely within six weeks. The patient has been free of symptoms for over two years by now. Routine
examinations, blood tests and endoscopy have rendered regular results. So far no side effects were noted. Here report about successful long
term remission of eosinophilic gastroenteritis under Montelukast. Further randomized control trials are required to asses the full benefits
of Montelukast therapy in the whole spectrum of eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorders. Eosinophilic gastroenteritis is a rare disease
characterized by eosinophilic infiltration of the intestinal wall. It may mimic peptic ulcer, intestinal obstruction, gastroenteritis,
irritable bowel syndrome, and inflammatory bowel disease. Long-term personal history of digestive symptoms and the course of the disease
with relapses and remissions is the key for the disease to be suspected. Endoscopy, CT scan and sonographic studies may provide important
indirect signs of the disease. But only in combination with histological examination the diagnosis can be achieved. Primary eosinophilic
gastrointestinal disorders (EGID) selectively affect the gastrointestinal tract with eosinophil rich inflammation in the absence of known
causes for eosinophilia. The natural history of EGIDs has not been well documented, however these diseases are often chronic waxing and
waning disorders. The clinical presentation depends on the gastrointestinal division affected and the wall layers infiltrated. EGIDs are
primarily polygenic allergic disorders involving mechanisms that fall between IgE-mediated food allergy and cellular-mediated
hypersensitivity disorders. Steroids are still the main therapy for cases in which diet restriction is not feasible or has failed. The
recent research suggests a similar pathophysiology to asthma. Cysteinyl leukotrienes have potent chemo attractant properties for
eosinophils. Together with interleukin 3 and 5 they play a major role in the recruitment of eosinophils into the tissue causing damage.
Disrupting this vicious circle may provide the rationale for treating patients with eosinophilic gastroenteritis with leukotriene receptor
antagonists (LTRA). Here we report a case of young women with a long history of eosinophilic gastroenteritis. Under therapy with the LTRA
Montelukast she has been completely free of symptoms for over two years by now. Routine physical examinations and blood tests have rendered
regular results. A 17-year-old girl was admitted to the local gynaecology unit with recurrent abdominal cramps, nausea and vomiting. She had
a history of repeated episodes of abdominal pain in the past. The symptoms had begun some years earlier, causing several hospitalizations
and two laparoscopic interventions. Medical history revealed allergic coryza and neurodermatitis, but no food allergy. No other diseases
were reported. Laboratory rendered a high white blood cell count (WBC) 13.300 × 109/liter with an eosinophil count of 58% and CRP 5.2 mg/l.
Laparoscopy showed a large amount of ascites and swollen intraabdominal lymph nodes. Thus, screening for tuberculosis was initiated. A chest
x-ray showed no signs of pulmonary disease, Mantoux test and all cultures remained negative. However, one pcr from ascites was positive and
the diagnosis of intestinal tuberculosis was established. The patient was started on rifampicin, isoniazid, ethambutol and pyrazinamide.
Despite treatment symptoms persisted for the following six month. On admission the patient was still under therapy with rifampicin and
isoniazid. Physical examination demonstrated diffuse abdominal tenderness without peritoneal signs. The WBC was 13100 × 109/liter with an
eosinophilic count of 53 %, total IgE 1870 kU/l and CRP 32 mg/l. Clinical and laboratory indices for autoimmune disease were absent.
Abdominal ultrasound and computed tomography showed ubiquitous ascites and thickening of the wall of the lower oesophagus, stomach and bowel
(Fig. 1). The patient developed severe abdominal pain, only controlled by opoid analgesia. An iliac crest biopsy showed an eosinophilic
count over 40 percent but no signs of leukaemia. Again the ascitic fluid rendered a high eosinophilic count. Blood tests as well as stool
cultures and microscopy for ova and parasites were negative. Endoscopy of the upper intestinum and the colon showed no abnormalities of the
intestinal mucosa. Remarkably biopsies from oesophagus, stomach, ileum and colon yielded distinct eosinophilic infiltrations reaching the
lamina propria which finally lead to the diagnosis of a primary eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorder (Fig. 2). Thus, this patient
fulfilled all diagnostic criteria for eosinophilic gastroenteritis. Since active tuberculosis was ruled out we stopped anti-mycobacterial
treatment. The patient was switched to 40 mg prednisone per day. Symptoms were alleviated quickly in the beginning. The patient was set on a
taper. Reaching a dose of 10 mg a day symptoms started again. Therefore the dose was doubled and Montelukast 10 mg/d was started. The
symptoms resolved within days and the prednisone could be tapered within six weeks. Currently, the patient remains completely off steroids.
She has been symptom free for the last 24 months under Montelukast. Regular physical examinations and blood tests have shown normal results.
EGIDs are primarily polygenic allergic disorders involving mechanisms that fall between IgE-mediated food allergy and cellular-mediated
hypersensitivity disorders. They selectively affect the gastrointestinal tract with eosinophil rich inflammation in the absence of known
causes for eosinophilia. The clinical presentation depends on the gastrointestinal division affected and the wall layers infiltrated.
Eosinophils have been shown to be integral members of the gastrointestinal mucosal immune system, but their presence in deeper layers is
almost always pathologic. One of their principal functions is to defend against multicellular helminthic parasites. Many of the secreted
proteins are potent helminthotoxins. Other products affect smooth muscle contraction, vascular permeability and the release of other
mediators from mast cells and basophiles. Eosinophilic gastroenteritis is still a quite rare disease, but EGIDs are currently being
recognized more frequently. Patients with EGIDs present with a variety of clinical problems, most commonly failure to thrive, abdominal
pain, irritability, gastric dysmotility, vomiting, diarrhoea and dysphagia. Thus the variety of non-specific common gastrointestinal
symptoms und laboratory findings explains why the correct diagnosis is completely dependent on the microscopic examination of the biopsy
samples. The clinical presentation depends on the division affected and the wall layers infiltrated. Patients with primarily mucosal disease
tend to present with non-specific gastrointestinal symptoms while those with serosal disease can present with severe abdominal pain and
ascites. Our patient suffered from recurring severe non-specific abdominal pains for about five years, causing several hospital stays and
two laparoscopic interventions. Approximately one year before admission to our hospital the patient developed ascites. Eosinophilic ascites
is only observed in 10 % of cases. It indicates the involvement of the tunica serosa and is typical in women of childbearing age.
Laparoscopy showed a swollen intestinal tract and lymph nodes resembling the aspect of intestinal tuberculosis. Thus ascites was screened
for mycobacteria. One pcr screening turned out positive. Microscopy and repeated cultures from ascites, sputum and biopsy of intestinal
lymph nodes remained negative for mycobacteria at all times. Lacking another coherent differential diagnosis anti mycobacterial treatment
was started. Despite therapy for six month ascites and abdominal complaints remained nearly unchanged. On admission no signs of active
tuberculosis were found. Skin test, chest x-ray, double pcr screening as well as cultures from sputum and ascites were negative. These
findings raise the question if the tuberculosis has been treated successfully or the first pcr result has been false positive. Regarding the
persisting symptoms the latter seems more probable. Furthermore international guidelines do not accept the single use of nucleic acid
amplification technique to establish the diagnosis tuberculosis. The patient now presented again with same complaints which strongly
suggested an eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorder. Retrospectively eosinophilia was present already at the last hospital stay which argues
for EG then. Exclusion of other causes of eosinophilia, summarized in Klein's criteria and histopathological confirmation of eosinophilic
infiltration of the GI tract supported our initial diagnosis. The diagnosis hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) should always be considered in
patients with EGIDs. But here was no evidence of extraintestinal organ manifestation (e.g. cardiorespiratory system or skin) in our patient.
Bone marrow analysis showed no signs of myodysplasia. Markers like vitamin B 12 and serum mast cell tryptase were normal. The FIP1L1-PDGFRA
fusion event, which is found in about half of the HES patients, was not present. It is generated by a chromosomal deletion and indicates
that these cases are hematopoetic malignancies. Taken together HES seemed to be very unlikely. EG is an uncommon disease and, as such, no
prospective treatment studies are available. In literature, case reports and small case series have reported positive impact from a variety
of agents. Besides corticosteroids, mast cell stabilizers, antihistamins, leukotriene antagonists, octreotide as well as restriction diets
and resection of stenosed intestinal segments (reviewed in ). Based on this data, systemic steroids still can be considered first choice
therapy in non obstructive disease. Unfortunately relapses are common. These patients require long term low-dose prednisone or
immunosuppressive therapy, which is problematic especially in young patients. Cysteinyl leukotrienes, along with cytokines interleukin 3 and
5 and granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor seem to play a crucial role in the recruitment of eosinophils into the tissue causing
damage. The leukotriene antagonist (LTRA) Montelukast blocking the leukotriene receptor Cys-LT1 could be the rationale to treat EG with this
drug. Anti-leukotriene drugs are considered generally safe and effective in most patients. However there have been reports about the
association between LTRA and the development of Churg-Strauss-Syndrome (CSS). So clinicians need to vigilant of any development of CSS in
any patient receiving these agents. Up to now no side effects were noted in our patient. There has been one study with promising short term
results in children treated with Montelukast. But only two cases reporting successful control of symptoms in eosinophilic gastroenteritis in
adults. Schwartz and co-workers were first to report control of symptoms over twenty months. One more recent study found improvement in
peripheral blood but not in tissue eosinophilia or symptoms in a severe, long-standing disease. The presented case now shows successful long
term treatment with Montelukast over a period of two years. Eosinophilic gastroenteritis is a rare disease, but should be considered as
differential diagnosis in cases of recurrent abdominal pain. Failure to diagnose this disorder often relates to reluctance to biopsy an
apparently normal intestinum. Montelukast therapy seems promising to be an effective long term treatment in these patients, particularly
when they are steroid dependent. So far no side effects were noted in our patient. Further randomized trials are required to asses the full
benefits of Montelukast therapy in eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorders. CSS, Churg-Strauss-syndrome; EG, eosinophilic gastroenteritis;
EGID, eosinophilic gastrointestinal disorder; HES, hypereosinophilic syndrome; LTRA, leukotriene receptor antagonist; FIP1L1-PDGFRA,
FIP1-like-1-platelet-derived-groth-factor-receptor-alpha fusion kinase The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. IQ
patient's management; design and manuscript draft LS patient's management; help with manuscript draft and figures NB endoscopy, reviewed
history and acquired follow up data of patient DT analysed tissue samples and provided figures LR reviewed manuscript and literature BH
design, coordination and supervision of patient's management All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history
for this paper can be accessed here: Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of personal details. Contrast-enhanced
spiral CT revealing ascites and concentric thickening of colon and ileum. Endoscopic biopsy of ileum showing distinct eosinophilic
infiltration (haematoxylin and eosin ×100).
