An investigation of malaria in a US patient without recent travel established Plasmodium falciparum molecular genotype identity in 2
patients who shared a hospital room. P. falciparum can be transmitted in a hospital environment from patient to patient by blood inoculum if
standard precautions are breached. Almost all of the 1,400 cases of malaria reported each year in the United States are acquired by mosquito
bite during travel in malaria-endemic areas (1). However, mosquito transmission in the United States accounts for a few cases each year (2).
Nosocomial malaria represents person-to-person transmission of parasite-infected erythrocytes through blood transfusion, needlestick injury,
improper use of blood glucometers, multidose heparin vials, organ transplantation, contaminated catheters that deliver contrast medium, or
rarely, open wounds (3–6). Nosocomial transmission of malaria secondary to inpatient nursing practices has never been reported in the United
States. We report nosocomial transmission of Plasmodium falciparum, confirmed by molecular genotyping, by improper use of saline flush
syringes in a tertiary care hospital in the United States. Abdominal pain, emesis, and a high fever developed in patient 1, a 9-year-old
Gambian boy with sickle cell disease residing in the United States, during the flight home after a month in the Gambia; he had taken no
malaria prophylaxis drugs. After diagnosis of P. falciparum malaria with 4% parasitemia and transfer to unit A of a tertiary care hospital,
he responded well to antimalarial therapy and was discharged 2 days later. Seven days before patient 1's admission, patient 2, a 14-year-old
girl, with severe developmental delay, was admitted to unit A for placement of a surgical feeding tube. Patients 1 and 2 shared a unit A
semiprivate room for ≈24 hours. Patient 1 received a continuous quinidine gluconate infusion through a peripheral intravenous line. Chart
review and interviews indicated that neither patient had glucose monitoring by glucometer, blood transfusions, common infusions such as
contrast material, or a needlestick injury report, all events that have been previously implicated in nosocomial malaria. Medicine doses
given and blood samples drawn were documented with a separation time >50 minutes. A week after discharge and 17 days after sharing the
semiprivate room, patient 2 was admitted to another hospital (3-day stay), and a viral illness was diagnosed after all cultures were
negative for pathogens. Persistent fever and pancytopenia developed and resulted in her readmission to unit A of the tertitary care
hospital, now 23 days after sharing the room with patient 1. Patient 2 was febrile and pale, with no notable change in her baseline
neurologic state. The leukocyte count was 1,890 cells/mm3, hematocrit was 35.2%, platelets were 47,000/mm3, and total bilirubin was 1.5
mg/dL. Despite administration of antimicrobial drugs for presumed microbial sepsis, the following conditions developed over the next 72
hours: persistent spiking fevers; loose, nonbloody stools; splenomegaly; abdominal distension; and bilateral lower extremity edema. Formal
review of her peripheral blood smear by the hematology consultation service showed intraerythrocytic ring forms indicative of P. falciparum
malaria, with 12% parasitemia and ≈200 gametocytes/mm3. After 3 blood transfusions and quinidine gluconate and doxycycline therapy, the
patient was discharged on hospital day 14, with a stable hematocrit, persistent gametocytemia, and splenomegaly. Initial and follow up tests
on patient 2 were negative for viral bloodborne pathogens. The patient lives with her parents in the Baltimore-Washington area ≈12 miles
from the nearest international airport. She had no history of recent travel to any areas that are endemic for malaria. No locally acquired
cases of malaria had been reported in the regional area. This prompted an investigation to look for a nosocomial route of transmission.
Approval for the study was obtained from Johns Hopkins University Two potential sources of nosocomial transmission in unit A were
identified: 1) heparin syringes, which were filled from multidose vials, and 2) factory preloaded 10-mL saline flushes, of which up to 3 mL
was used per flush for intravenous lines not in use. Hospital policy had strict guidelines for using multidose devices and did not allow
reusing single use devices. However, interviews of 7 nurses, including those who cared for the 2 patients, showed that 2 nurses admitted
reusing saline flushes on the same patient, and 4 nurses had observed saline flushes being reused in unit A. Reusing multidose heparin vials
was not documented. To determine whether used saline flush syringes that were visibly clear contained blood, we tested saline from 8 used
syringes and 2 unused controls. The contents of only 1 used saline flush syringe visibly contained blood. After the contents were
centrifuged to concentrate erythrocytes, blood was found in 4 of 8 of the used syringes (Figure 1) by using matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization/time-of-flight mass spectrometry (7). No blood was found in the unused syringes. Mass spectroscopic analysis of sterile saline
flush syringes after routine use. The contents of the used syringes were concentrated by centrifugation. Matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization detected the α and β chains of hemoglobin as the ions at mass/charge (m/z) 15,126 and 15,867, respectively, in samples A (red), B
(green), C (blue), and J (aqua) that were absent in the matrix alone (black). The lower limit of sensitivity with matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization is ≈0.5 erythrocytes per mL. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of P. falciparum genomic DNA, isolated with
DNAzol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), was successful from the archived Giemsa blood films from both patients and 2 other patients (not
related in time or travel history) infected with P. falciparum malaria seen at our institution in the past year. Figure 2 shows that the PCR
product restriction digests for the polymorphic P. falciparum merozoite protein 2 (Pfmsp2) (8) and the P. falciparum chloroquine resistance
transporter (Pfcrt) (9) gene fragments were identical for patients 1 and 2. This identity was also confirmed by sequence analysis. Genotype
analysis of patient blood films. Restriction fragment length polymorphism are shown for Pfmsp2 and Pfcrt. Patient 1 and 2 are identical at
the polymorphic Pfmsp2 (lanes 1 and 2), while unrelated patient controls (lanes 3 and 4) are different. One of the 2 negative controls is
shown (lane 5). Genomic DNA from clone HB3 (lane 6) and isolate NF54 (lane 7) are also included as additional positive controls. All recent
patient samples have the Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine-resistant genotype. We also examined 4 P. falciparum microsatellite alleles
(TA81, PFPK, C13M30, C4M8) at independent chromosomal loci by a fluorescent-tagged heminested PCR amplification (10). Patients 1 and 2 had
identical Plasmodium microsatellite lengths at all 4 loci; each of the positive controls was different as shown in Figure 2, the Figure A1,
and the Table. With the simplistic assumption of ≥10 alleles at each microsatellite loci and Pfmsp2, the chance occurrence of identity is
<1:100,000. By using the AmpFLSTR Profiler kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), subsequent forensic analysis of the human genomic
DNA from leukocytes in the same isolated P. falciparum DNA samples from the blood films demonstrated the sex difference between patients 1
and 2. The analysis also demonstrated the differences at 9 human microsatellite loci, which indicated that cross-contamination during
processing was not a likely source for the similarities detected. Natural transmission of malaria between patients 1 and 2 by a mosquito is
not possible within 24 hours; the maturation cycle from ingestion of viable gametocytes in a blood meal to infective sporozoite stage in the
mosquito salivary glands is 8–35 days (11). Direct mechanical transmission of parasitized blood by an arthropod vector is a theoretical
possibility, but no such transmission has ever been reported, and the female Anopheles mosquito does not regurgitate blood upon refeeding.
Another remote possibility, luggage malaria, is the introduction of an already infectious mosquito from the Gambia brought into unit A
through patient 1's luggage (12). If this were the case, a different parasitic genotype would be expected in patients 1 and 2 because the
wild mosquito that infected patient 1, from 1 to 2 weeks before onset of symptoms, would have died 2–6 days after delivering the infective
bite. Likewise, an asymptomatic traveling companion of patient 1 would have a distinct parasite genotype. In this report, epidemiologic
investigation excluded many nosocomial routes of transmission. Potential sources not excluded were multidose heparin vials and saline flush
syringes. However, identifying reuse of saline flush syringes in the unit and detecting blood in clear, used saline flush syringes suggested
that this was the most likely source. Finally, molecular identity of P. falciparum isolated from patients 1 and 2, as assessed by
restriction fragment length polymorphism of Pfmsp2, and forensic microsatellite analysis of P. falciparum genotypes confirmed that
contaminated fluid from patient 1 was the source of the infection in patient 2. Together, these data strongly suggest that apparently clear
solution in a used saline flush syringe containing infected P. falciparum erythrocytes, was reused on a neighboring patient, leading to
nosocomial transmission of malaria. Saline flush vials and bags have been implicated in nosocomial transmission of hepatitis B and microbes,
respectively (13,14). Theoretically, a single infected erythrocyte is able to transmit malaria by inoculation. Patient 1 had almost 200
million infected erythrocytes per milliliter of blood based on parasitemia level. Based on our data, apparently clear saline can contain ≈1
million erythrocytes per milliliter. Therefore a single microliter of patient 1's blood diluted into 5 mL of saline would be almost 40,000
infected erythrocytes per milliliter of an apparently clear solution. Our report illustrates that nosocomial transmission can occur in a
tertiary care setting in the United States, despite healthcare workers' access to gloves, disposable needles, intravenous devices, and
flushes. The common perception that flushing practices are not associated with the aspiration of minute amounts of blood contributed to this
occurrence of nosocomial malaria. Our institution, like many others, has used such episodes to facilitate change and refocus on patient
safety. The interventions initiated specifically included retraining of pediatric staff about 1) no reuse of single use saline flushes, 2)
transmission of bloodborne pathogens with an emphasis on nonviral pathogens, and 3) removal of multidose vials, including those with
heparin, from pediatric units. Warnings about the potential risks of reusing saline flush syringes have been incorporated into institution-
wide safety training. Ongoing rigorous review of healthcare practices and strict adherence to body and fluid precautions are essential for
minimizing patient exposure to highly infectious pathogens, even in resource-rich settings. Suggested citation for this article: Jain SK,
Persaud D, Perl TM, Pass MA, Murphy KM, Pisciotta JM, et al. Nosocomial malaria and saline flush. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet].
2005 Jul [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1107.050092 We thank Lirong Shi, Karen Mackie, and the pediatric intensive care unit and
hospital epidemiology and infection control staff who assisted in this investigation. We also thank Stephen Dumler for his continued
encouragement and support. The AB-Mass Spectrometry Facility at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine is funded by National Center for
Research Resources Shared-Instrument Grant 1S10-RR14702. NCCR grant GPDGCRC RR0052 supported the culture of P. falciparum for control DNA.
Capillary electropherograms of Plasmodium microsatellite analysis. The x axis represents fragment size in bases and the y axis represents
fluorescence intensity. The P. falciparum microsatellites products C13M30 and PFPK (black peaks) and TA81 and C4M8 (blue peaks) from
amplification genomic DNA from patients 1, 2, one of the unrelated patient controls, and control P. falciparum clone HB3. Each
microsatellite has ≥10 alleles. Patients 1 and 2 have identical microsatellites at all 4 loci (Table). Dr. Jain is a senior clinical and
research fellow in pediatric infectious diseases at Johns Hopkins University. His research interests include tropical diseases and central
nervous system tuberculosis.
