Macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) is a rare and potentially fatal complication of rheumatic disorders in children. We describe a
13-month-old boy in whom MAS developed as a complication of systemic juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (S-JRA). He suffered from fever and
generalized rash followed by multiple joints swelling for four months before admission. Physical examination revealed cervical
lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly. Laboratory findings were: abnormal liver enzymes, increased triglyceride and ferritin levels,
coagulopathies resembling disseminated intravascular coagulation, anemia and thrombocytopenia. Hyperplasia of hemophagocytic macrophages was
remarkable in his bone marrow. Methylprednisolone and cyclosporin therapy resulted in clinical and laboratory improvements. This is the
third case of MAS associated with S-JRA in Koreans, and the first one, in which hemophagocytic macrophages were proven in bone marrow.
Macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) is a clinical entity characterized by serious liver diseases, hematologic abnormalities, coagulopathy
resembling disseminated intravascular coagulation, and neurologic involvement. MAS is known to be a severe and potentially life-threatening
complication of rheumatic disorder, especially systemic juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (S-JRA) (1). MAS is a rarely-occurring disorder, and
only sporadic case reports or several studies with relatively small number of patients are available in the literature (2-4). In Korea, only
two cases of MAS associated with S-JRA have been reported (5, 6). Here we describe a 13-month-old boy, in whom MAS developed as a
complication of S-JRA. This is the third case of MAS in Koreans, and the first one, in which hemophagocytic macrophages were proven in bone
marrow (BM). A 13-month-old boy, who had suffered from fever, generalized rash, and multiple joints swelling for four months, visited
pediatric rheumatology clinic. At admission, fever, which had shown an intermittent high pattern, nearly subsided, but salmon pink-colored
rheumatoid rash was diffusely present on his abdomen. His hands, lower legs and feet were bilaterally swelled with the involvement of
metacarpal and proximal interphalangeal joints of second fingers, knee joints, and fifth toes (Fig. 1). Physical examination revealed
cervical lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly. Under the diagnosis of S-JRA, he had been treated with aspirin (100 mg/kg for nine days)
and ibuprofen at local hospital until one week before admission. Laboratory results of rheumatoid factor, anti-streptolysin O, lupus
anticoagulant, and antinuclear antibody were all negative. Complement and immunoglobulin data were: C3, 199 mg/dL; C4, 33.5 mg/dL; IgG, 766
mg/dL; IgA, 112 mg/dL; and IgM, 81.5 mg/dL. There was no evidence of viral infection or hepatitis. Other laboratory findings at admission
are presented in Table 1. Bone marrow (BM) examination, which was performed as a further work-up of hematologic abnormalities showed
normocellular marrow with a cellularity of 90%. Granulocytic and megakaryocytic lineages were normal in maturation, but erythroid lineage
was hypoplastic. Benign-looking macrophages were remarkably increased, and some of them showed hemophagocytic features. Their presence was
confirmed with CD68 immunostain (Fig. 2). He was diagnosed as having MAS. Immunosuppressive therapy with methylprednisolone (2 mg/kg/day for
three days, and switched to oral prednisolone) and cyclosporin (2.5 mg/kg/day, under continuous medication) was started from the third and
the ninth hospital days, respectively. Clinical and laboratory findings improved with decreased hepatomegaly and joints swelling at the time
of discharge (Fig. 3-5). He has remained stable without relapse of MAS during the follow-up period of six months. In 1985, Hadchouel et al.
described seven patients who showed unique clinical features with hematologic, neurologic, and hepatic abnormalities in association with
S-JRA (7, 8). Since they suggested the term MAS in 1993, MAS has been commonly used to identify the hemophagocytic syndrome that may develop
in children with chronic rheumatic diseases, particularly S-JRA (9). MAS is a potentially fulminant disorder, and occurs during the clinical
course of underlying S-JRA characterized by repetitive disease flares. It is thus very important to differentiate the onset of MAS from a
flare of the disease, as they have different treatments and prognoses. Clinically, the patterns of fever and skin rash are somewhat
different, although both of the diseases share lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly (1). From the aspect of laboratory findings, decreases
of blood cells, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and fibrinogen present striking contrasts to S-JRA. Hypertriglyceridemia, elevated liver
enzymes, and abnormal coagulation profile are consistently found. Hyperferritinemia greater than 10,000 ng/mL is known to be also remarkable
heralding MAS development, thus making early and aggressive immunosuppression possible (4, 10, 11). The patient described here showed
typical clinical and laboratory features of MAS, which changed dramatically after the initiation of immunosuppressive treatment (Fig. 3-5).
To our knowledge, two cases of MAS were previously reported in Koreans (5, 6). Three cases including our case are summarized in Table 1.
Although they were all pediatric patients suffering from S-JRA, MAS can also develop in other rheumatic disorders as well as in adults (2,
4). The pathognomonic feature of MAS is numerous well differentiated macrophages actively phagocytosing hematopoietic elements in BM.
Hemophagocytic macrophages can also be found in spleen or lymph nodes. BM examination, however, may reveal false negative result related to
a sampling error or the timing of aspiration during disease course (1, 2, 4). Accordingly, morphologic confirmation is not a prerequisite
for the diagnosis of MAS. BM study was not performed in both of the previous Korean cases. However, coagulopathies resembling disseminated
intravascular coagulation as well as other laboratory or clinical findings support their diagnoses of MAS. Although the mechanism of MAS is
still poorly understood, it is known that cytokine storm plays a major role. T cell or natural killer cell dysfunction may lead to
uncontrolled macrophage activation, and increased levels of many cytokines, representatively tumor necrosis factor-alpha or interferon-
gamma, released by macrophages or T cells initiate systemic hemophagocytosis (9, 11-13). At molecular level, dysfunctional perforin was
recently suggested as a possible cause of this condition (11, 14). Triggering episodes like infections or medications may precede the onset
of MAS, and they have been reported in at least 58% to 88.9% of patients (1, 2). The possibility of triggers also existed in all of the
three Korean cases (Table 1). In the patient by Kim et al., there was a history of infection and salicylates medication four to six weeks
prior to the onset of coagulopathy (5). The other two patients by Park et al. and by us recently received anti-inflammatory drugs (6). With
regard to nomenclature, the term reactive hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis is interchangeably used with MAS (1, 15). Although MAS is
widely used in the field of rheumatology, this is relatively unfamiliar to specialists in other fields such as infectious disease or
hematology. MAS is even not included in the recently proposed classification of histiocytic disorders (16, 17). Some researchers insisted
that MAS should belong to the category of secondary hemophagocytic syndrome likewise infection or malignancy-associated ones, and the term
rheumatic disease-associated hemophagocytic syndrome is preferable to MAS (18-20). We agree with their opinion in that such unifying
criteria would be beneficial for investigating etiologic relationships or developing treatment strategies among the related disorders. In
summary, we report a case of MAS in a 13-month-old boy suffering from S-JRA. His clinical and laboratory features were typical of MAS, and
his clinical course improved after immunosuppressive therapy with methylprednisolone and cyclosporin. This is the third case of MAS in
Koreans, and the first one, in which hemophagocytic macrophages were proven in BM. Swelling of both lower legs and feet. Bone marrow biopsy
section shows increased numbers of diffusely distributed and minimally clustered macrophages (CD68 immunostain, Ã—200). Laboratory findings
of liver enzymes during hospital days. AST, aspartate aminotransferase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; GGT, gamma
glutamyl transferase; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; HD, hospital day. Laboratory findings of PT, aPTT, and fibrinogen during hospital days.
PT, prothrombin time; aPTT, activted partial thromboplastin time; HD, hospital day. Laboratory findings of complete blood cell counts during
hospital days. At the third hospital day, red blood cell was transfused. Hb, hemoglobin; WBC, white blood cell; PLT, platelet; HD, hospital
day. Cases of macrophage activation syndrome in Koreans *In this case, detailed laboratory data on liver function and complete blood cell
count except platelet count was unavailable at the onset of coagulopathy. ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; aPTT, activated partial
thromboplastin time; FDP, fibrin degradation product; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; LDH, lactate
dehydrogenase; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; GGT, gamma glutamyl transferase; S-JRA, systemic juvenile rheumatoid arthritis; NA, not available;
FFP, fresh frozen plasma; IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulin.
