Eosinophilic fasciitis (EF) is scleroderma-like disease without Raynaud's phenomenon or visceral involvement. It is characterized by painful
swelling of the extremities, accompanied by rapid weight gain, fever and myalgia. The acute state of disease is associated with significant
peripheral blood eosinophilia, an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and hypergammaglobulinemia. EF is also frequently associated with
hematological abnormalities, including malignant lymphoproliferative diseases, but rarely associated with autoimmune thyroiditis. In the
present study we report a case of eosinophilic fasciitis associated with autoimmune thyroiditis. Eosinophilic fasciitis (EF) was first
recognized by Shulman as scleroderma-like disease without Raynaud's phenomenon or visceral involvement1). It is characterized by painful and
erythematous swelling of the extremities, accompanied by rapid weight gain, fever and myalgia. During acute period of the disease, most of
the patients suffer from significant eosinophilia in peripheral blood, but is less commonly associated in affected tissues2). It has been
reported that EF is usually related with various hematologic abnormalities, such as myelodysplastic syndrome and malignant
lymphoproliferative disease3). The etiology of EF is still unclear, and its association with autoimmune disease has rarely been reported. In
the present study, we report a case of eosinophilic fasciitis associated with autoimmune thyroiditis, with a review on the past literature.
A 45-year-old woman was referred to our hospital to evaluate the swelling on both the forearms lasting from past 3 months. She had
intermittent cramp-like pain on both the forearms, which got aggravated by movement. The patient was placed on non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs intermittently. Raynaud's phenomenon was absent on past history. Upon physical examination, both the upper extremities
showed marked swelling without pitting or erythematous change, and there was no swelling in the hands. However, physician was able to pinch
her skin on both the forearms. Laboratory findings revealed the white cell count of 7,200/mm3 with 13.8% of eosinophils (absolute counts
993/mm3), hemoglobin of 10.8 g/dl and platelet count of 319×103/mm3. Stool examination for the presence of parasites was negative.
Peripheral blood smear showed normocytic and normochromic red blood cells and no atypical leukocytes were seen except for an increased level
of eosinophils. Liver function test, renal function test, and levels of CRP, glucose, creatinine kinase, calcium, and phosphate were normal.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, colonoscopy, ultrasonography, and chest radiography revealed no abnormal findings. The titer level of anti-
nuclear antibody in IT-1 cell was 1:40 with speckled pattern, but rheumatoid factor and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody wrere negative.
Based on thyroid function test, the levels of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and free thyroid hormone-4 (FT4), were 4.86 uIU/mL (normal
0.27~4.2 uIU/mL) and 0.85 ng/dL (normal 0.93-1.7 ng/dL), respectively. The titre values of antithyroglbulin antibodies and antimicrosomal
antibodies were 1:1600 and 1:1600, respectively. No nodule was detected during ultrasonography of thyroid and there was no hot uptake by
thyroid scan. MRI demonstrated swelling and increased signal of muscles like extensor carpi ulnaris, extensor digitorum longus, and extensor
carpi radialis, and there was thickening and edematous change of fascia around the muscles (Figure 1). Full-thickness wedge biopsy on
extensor carpi radialis revealed the presence of thickened fibrous fascia with perivascular infiltration of lymphocytes, plasma cells and
few eosinophils, and these findings were compatible with eosinophilic fasciitis (Figure 2). To the patient, we initially prescribed
prednisone 30 mg/day, cetirizine 10 mg/day and levothyroxine sodium 0.1 mg/day. Hypereosinophilia disappeared immediately after treatment
with prednisone and induration on both the forearms also improved gradually. Unlike scleroderma, the onset of EF is typically abrupt and in
many cases occurs after excessive or unusual physical activity2). Induration is developed by progressive thickening of the skin and is
common in the upper extremities with a symmetrical distribution4). Also, in contrast to scleroderma, the fingers, toes and the face are
always the most affected padt. Laboratory investigations revealed significant peripheral blood eosinophilia in more than 60% of the
patients5), an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and hypergammaglobulinemia, whereas levels of muscle enzymes were normal6). It has
been reported that EF is usually related with various hematologic abnormalities, including myelodysplastic diseases and malignant
lymphoproliferative disease3). It was demonstrated that the overall frequency of hematological disorders in EF was close to 10%4).
Hematological diseases, such as thrombocytopenia and hemolytic anemia can be combined, and amongst them, aplastic anemia is the most
commonly seen form2). Therefore, it is suggested that bone marrow aspirate may be essential if hematological diseases are suspected from
laboratory findings. Murata et al.7) observed the presence of peripheral eosinophilia in 21% of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma, 11.1% of
T-cell lymphoma and 10.5% of B-cell lymphoma. Rarely, peripheral neuropathy, carpal tunnel syndrome, and lymphadenopathy have been reported
in association with EF3,8). Autoimmune thyroiditis was reported in only 6 of the cases in English literatures. To date, 4 cases of EF were
reported in Korea. One of them was associated with hematological disorder, but none of them were associated with autoimmune thyroid
disorder9-12). In our case, the patient had no abnormal physical findings even in thyroid gland, except for abnormal thyroid hormone level.
We could not find any other abnormal findings, although the patient was evaluated for hematologic malignancies. If on evaluation, the
hematologic abnormalities are not accompanied with EF, it becomes still unclear whether bone marrow biopsy should be performed in all the EF
patients. In those cases, we need to look for the appearance of hematologic malignancy. Eventually, contracture could occur in 76% of the
untreated patients with EF, and rarely there was any recovery2). Prednisolone at a daily dose of 1 mg/kg effectively improves edema and
induration. Antihistamines, particularly cimetidine and cetirizine, have been anecdotally reported to be beneficial13). Treatment with other
drugs such as penicillamine, methotrexate and psoralen-UVA have been reported to be beneficial14). In the present study we report the case
of an EF patient associated with autoimmune thyroiditis. From the present study we contemplate that, when the diagnosis of EF is suspected,
a careful investigation of the patient including thyroid function test is required. MR of left forearm showing increased signal of extensor
carpi ulnaris, extensor digitorum longus, and extensor carpi radialis muscles. There is thickening and edematous changes in fascia around
these muscles. Muscle biopsy showing thickened fibrous fascia with perivascular infiltration of lymphocytes, plasma cells and few
eosinophils (H&E, ×400).
