Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is a rare disease usually occurring in young women of child-bearing age. It is characterized by a distinctive
proliferation of lymphatic smooth muscle cells, especially occurring in the pulmonary parenchyme. The majority of primary LAM occurs in the
lung, but there are a few reports of extrapulmonary cases. We report a case of a 21-yr-old female who first complained of low abdominal pain
and was referred from a local clinic with the impression of an ovarian cyst. Gynecologic ultrasonography revealed a large posterior pelvic
mass with an irregular echogenicity measuring 9.7×4.2 cm in size. Pelviscopy showed a large, thin walled, partly cystic, pelvic mass. The
mass was partly removed. Microscopically, the mass was characterized by a haphazard proliferation of smooth muscle cells arranged in
fascicular, trabecular, and papillary patterns around a ramifying network of endothelium-lined spaces. The cells were plump or epithelioid
with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and showed a positive reaction for both alpha-smooth muscle actin and HMB-45 antigen. Surgical and
pathological findings were consistent with pelvic retroperitoneal LAM. Despite the numerous treatment attempts, the patient suffered from
intractable chylous ascites and developed pulmonary LAM and died due to severe respiratory distress. Lymphangiomyomatosis (LAM) is a rare
disease of a hamartomatous nature characterized by proliferation of abnormal lymphatic smooth muscle cells. Smooth muscle cells are often
classified in the family of perivascular epithelioid cells (PEC). Some of these cells include renal angiomyolipoma, sugar tumor of the lung
and pancreas, and clear-cell myomelanocytic tumor of the falciform ligament. These so-called "PECom" all express HMB-45 (1). The primary
site of origin is the lung and occurrence is usually associated with decreased pulmonary function and chylous effusions (2). The outcome of
this disease can be devastating but the underlying etiology and effective treatments are unknown. Extrapulmonary LAM is quite rare and
mainly located in the pelvis and retroperitoneum, along the lymphatic channels. The clinical features are the presence of chylous ascites, a
palpable abdominal mass, and abdominal pain (3). We report a case of a young female who was initially diagnosed with retroperitoneal LAM
that eventually led to pulmonary involvement with decreased lung function. A 21-yr-old female patient presented with a sudden onset of low
abdominal pain. With the clinical impression of an ovarian cyst, she was transferred from a local GYN clinic to our hospital. Gynecologic
ultrasonography revealed a large posterior pelvic mass with an irregular echogenicity measuring 9.7×4.2 cm in size (Fig. 1). The patient had
no specific past medical history with a parity of 0-0-0-0. A considerable amount of fluid was present in the cul de sac. The uterus and both
adnexae were unremarkable. There was no ultrasonographic evidence of lymphadenopathy. Pelviscopy showed a large, thin walled, partly cystic,
pelvic mass measuring approximately 10 cm in diameter. The mass was adherent to the internal and external iliac vessels and the right pelvic
wall. It was not possible to remove the tumor completely. The retroperitoneal mass was partly removed by pelviscopy and samples were
submitted for frozen section analysis. The submitted specimen for frozen section analysis consisted of multiple irregular fragments of soft
tissue weighing approximately 30 g. The tumor was soft and grayish-tan with focal areas of hemorrhage (Fig. 2). On frozen section, the
possibility of epithelioid smooth muscle tumor or paraganglioma was suspected. Microscopically, the masses were characterized by a haphazard
proliferation of smooth muscle cells (LAM cells) arranged in fascicular, trabecular, and papillary patterns around a ramifying network of
endothelium-lined spaces. The cells were plump or epithelioid with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and bland nuclei with no mitotic
activity. These cells invaded into fat tissue surrounding the lesion. The vascular spaces were empty or sometimes filled with eosinophilic
material (Fig. 3). Aggregations of lymphocytes were between the LAM cells, representing vestiges of preexisting lymph nodes (Fig. 4).
Occasional foci of hemorrhage and necrosis were present. Most of the LAM cells showed a positive reaction for alphasmooth muscle actin (Dako
Co., Carpinteria, CA, U.S.A.), vimentin (Zymed, San Francisco, CA, U.S.A.), desmin (Bio-Genex, San Ramon, CA, U.S.A.), and HMB-45 (Dako)
(Fig. 5). S-100 protein (DiNonA Inc. Seoul, Korea), cytokeratin (Dako), chromogranin (Zymed), and CD 34 (Immunotec, Marseille, Cedex,
France) were negative. Estrogen (Immunotec) and progesterone (Novocastra Lab. Ltd. Newcastle, U.K.) receptors were observed in only 10% of
the LAM cells. Ki-67 (Zymed) was positive in less than 5% of the tumor cells. Clinical evidence of tuberous sclerosis was not present.
Evaluation for the TSC gene was not performed. After operation, the patient had continuous oozing of chylous ascitic fluid of approximately
1,500 to 2,000 mL per day. There was no clinical or radiological evidence of pulmonary involvement at the time of the initial diagnosis.
Chylous pleural effusion was also identified two months after the operation. Chest CT scans showed diffuse, small, thin walled cystic
lesions in both lung parenchymas with pleural effusion (Fig. 6). The patient was treated with tamoxifen and medroxyprogesterone, but the
response was limited. Even after chest tube insertion and pleurodesis, she continued to drain approximately 800 to 2,300 mL of chylous fluid
per day. In the terminal stages of the disease, the patient suffered severe respiratory distress and died six months after initial
operation. Zamboni et al. (1) described a group comprising sugar tumor, angiomyolipoma, and lymphangiomyoma as a special family of tumors.
The nature of perivascular proliferation of abnormal smooth muscle cells and common antigenic expression of HMB-45, a melanosomal antigen,
leads to the concept of so-called perivascular epitheloid cells-PEComa. HMB-45 positive cells are found in both LAM and angiomyolipoma;
however, angiomyolipomas are characterized by the presence of abundant adipose tissue and by disorganized components of blood vessels (4).
The incidence of angiomyolipomas in patients with LAM has been reported to be as high as 60% (2). Matsui et al. (3) regarded angiomyolipomas
as an unusual but distinct expression of the proliferative capacity of LAM cells. Most of the tumor cells in this case showed a positive
reaction for HMB-45. Accumulation of fat tissue within the lesion was not prominent in this case. LAM is a tumor of the lymphatic channels
and lymph nodes clinically manifested by recurrent chylous pleural effusions and ascites. The disease is usually progressive and
unresponsive to surgery, chemotherapy, or irradiation. LAM of the lungs is characterized microscopically by abnormal smooth muscle
proliferation causing gradual obstruction of small airways, lymphatics, and vasculature (5). The typical presenting symptoms include dyspnea
(83%) and pneumothorax (69%) (2). Extrapulmonary LAM is rare. Recently, Jaiswal et al. (6) reviewed 32 extrapulmonary LAM cases, including
22 cases of extrapulmonary LAM reported by Matsui et al. (3). Among the reported cases of clinically significant extrapulmonary LAM, 14
cases occurred in the lower retroperitoneum or pelvic cavity (3, 4, 6). Most extrapulmonary LAM lesions occurred in lymph nodes along the
lymphatic vessels of the posterior mediastinum, retroperitoneum, and the pelvic cavity. The diagnosis of extrapulmonary LAM preceded that of
pulmonary LAM in 13 of 17 patients for whom follow-up data were available (3). In this case, extrapulmonary manifestations preceded chylous
pleural effusion. Our patient presented with a sudden onset of low abdominal pain. In Korea, approximately 24 cases of LAM have been
reported in the current literature, all with a primary site in the lungs (7-9). This case is, to our knowledge, the first extrapulmonary LAM
reported in Korea. The origin and cause of this disease are yet to be undetermined however there are some common peculiar aspects. LAM can
be divided into a sporadic form, as in this case, or a tuberous sclerosis-associated form (10-12). There have been many studies regarding
the genetic predisposition of LAM, especially associated with the mutation of tuberous sclerosis genes (TSC1 and TSC2) (12, 13). This
condition is usually defined as tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC). TSC is an autosomal dominant disorder and is manifested as seizures,
mental retardation, autism, and hamartomatous tumors of the brain, heart, kidney, lung, and skin. These tumors include cerebral cortical
tumors, subependymal giant cell astrocytomas, retinal hamartomas, cardiac rhabdomyomas, renal angiomyolipomas, and facial angiofibromas
(13). Four of the 32 extrapulmonary LAM cases were associated with tuberous sclerosis (6). There was no clinical evidence of TSC in this
case. The speculation that LAM is a female sex hormone dependent tumor is supported by the high prevalence rate in women of reproductive age
and exacerbation of the disease by pregnancy or by administration of estrogen. Numerous studies and case reports regarding clinical trials
of hormonal therapy had been reported (14, 15). However, the role of estrogen and progesterone receptors in proliferation of smooth muscle
and the therapeutic efficacy of hormone therapy are not well established. Our patient was treated with tamoxifen and medroxyprogesterone,
but her response was limited. Despite a variety of treatment regimens developed since the first description of LAM, patient survival has not
improved appreciably. LAM progresses slowly and most patients die within 10 yr of diagnosis (16). Despite the slow progression rate of other
LAM cases, our patient died of the disease six months after operation. The reason for her rapid progression is not clear. Prolonged chylous
peritoneal and pleural effusions, aggressive deterioration of pulmonary function, and her lack of response to various treatment modalities
were major contributing factor. Pelvic ultrasonogram shows a large posterior pelvic mass with an irregular echogenicity (arrow) measuring
9.7×4.2 cm. The submitted specimen consists of multiple irregular fragments of soft tissue. The tumor cells proliferate in papillary
patterns, with lymphoid aggregates and some cystic spaces filled with eosinophilic material (arrow) (H&E, ×100). The epithelioid
lymphangioleiomyomatous cells proliferate haphazardly around slit-like vascular channels, with aggregation of lymphoid cells (arrow) (H&E,
×400). The perivascular epithelioid cells express strong cytoplasmic positivity for HMB-45 (×200). A chest CT scan shows diffuse small thin
walled cystic lesions in both lung parenchymas with pleural effusion (arrow).
