This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Refractory status epilepticus (RSE) secondary to
traumatic brain injury (TBI) may be under-recognized and is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. This case report describes
a 20 year old previously healthy woman who suffered a severe TBI as a result of a motor vehicle collision and subsequently developed RSE.
Pharmacological coma, physiological support and continuous electroencephalography (cEEG) were undertaken. Following 25 days of
pharmacological coma, electrographic and clinical seizures subsided and the patient has made an excellent cognitive recovery. With early
identification, aggressive physiological support, appropriate monitoring, including cEEG, and an adequate length of treatment, young trauma
patients with no previous seizure history and limited structural damage to the brain can have excellent neurological recovery from prolonged
RSE. We describe a case of refractory status epilepticus (RSE) secondary to traumatic brain injury (TBI) requiring 25 days of
pharmacological coma with subsequent excellent neurological recovery. A review of the relevant literature on RSE, including diagnostic and
treatment issues as well as the difficult ethical questions surrounding appropriate length of treatment in this condition, is undertaken. A
previously healthy right-handed 20 year old woman sustained multiple injuries following a rollover motor vehicle collision. Her initial
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 6, but deteriorated to 3 on scene. Her vehicle was found overturned. She was belted into the driver's seat with
the shoulder belt compressing her neck. Her face was cyanotic. She was intubated on scene and transferred to hospital. In the emergency
department, her temperature was 35.7°C, blood pressure 112/66, heart rate 108 and oxygen saturation on 50% FiO2 was 98%. Pupils were 3 mm
equal and reactive. Minimal withdrawal to pain in the lower extremities was noted. Reflexes were 1+ and symmetric with equivocal plantar
responses. Initial laboratory investigations were normal. Injuries identified included a burst fracture of the 6th and 7th cervical
vertebral bodies with canal narrowing of 50%, subluxation of the right 3rd cervical facet joint, and a right occipital condyle fracture. A
computed tomography (CT) scan of the head demonstrated a hypodensity in the left cerebellum. CT angiography revealed a dissection at C3 and
complete occlusion at C7 of the right vertebral artery. Six hours after admission, the patient had a witnessed generalized tonic-clonic
seizure that responded to 2 mg of IV lorazepam. A 20 mg/kg IV loading dose of phenytoin was then given followed by a maintenance dose of 100
mg IV q8h. Two hours later, she was taken for decompression and fixation of C6 to T1. Twelve hours post-operatively, generalized tonic-
clonic seizure activity was again noted, but resolved after 6 mg of IV lorazepam. One hour later, further generalized seizure activity did
not respond to 8 mg of IV lorazepam, so three 100 mg boluses of intravenous propofol followed by an infusion at 50 μg/kg/minute was
undertaken with clinical resolution of the seizures. A repeat CT head confirmed an evolving left cerebellar infarct, but was otherwise
unchanged. Continuous electroencephalography (cEEG) was initiated, which demonstrated ongoing and repeated right frontal electrographic
seizures with secondary generalization. These were transiently suppressed with further bolus doses of 100 mg of propofol, but would recur
despite increasing the infusion of propofol to 80 μg/kg/minute. Therefore, a loading dose of 700 mg of pentobarbital was given followed by
an infusion at 1 to 5 mg/kg/hour to achieve burst suppression on cEEG with an interburst interval of 10 to 15 seconds. Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) confirmed the CT findings and also demonstrated a small area of contusion subcortically in the right frontal lobe. Further
history obtained from family and friends revealed no personal or family history of seizures, strokes or hypercoaguable states, no recent
illness, no medications and no illicit drug use. Every two to three days, the pentobarbital infusion was weaned, but as the patient emerged
from burst suppression, electrographic seizures would recur on cEEG. In stepwise fashion, valproic acid, oral phenobarbital and
levetiracetam were added, with doses reaching 500 mg tid, 90 mg tid and 2,000 mg bid, respectively, by the tenth day of her admission
(Figure 1). All anticonvulsants were maintained at therapeutic serum levels. The patient experienced multiple complications felt in part to
be related to the barbiturate coma, including ventilator-associated pneumonia, deep vein thrombosis and ileus with microperforation and
pelvic abscess formation requiring laparotomy. Therefore, after 13 days of ongoing RSE, the pentobarbital was changed to propofol 80
μg/kg/minute and midazolam 15 mg/hour continuous infusions. The infusion rates were titrated to achieve burst suppression on cEEG and were
interrupted every two days to assess for ongoing seizures. Trials of a continuous ketamine infusion up to 5 mg/kg/hour and inhalational
isoflurane with a minimum alveolar concentration of 1.0% did not result in ameliorating the RSE when burst suppression was interrupted. On
day 25 of her admission, while on propofol, midazolam, phenytoin, valproic acid, and levetiracetam, the interruption in the burst
suppression showed no ongoing electrographic seizures. Over the next three days, the midazolam and propofol were discontinued while
maintaining cEEG to ensure no seizure recurrence. On day 33 phenobarbital and valproic acid were discontinued, leaving only phenytoin 300 mg
bid and levetiracetam 1,000 mg bid. She was discharged from the intensive care unit on day 50. The patient has had one seizure since then,
which was associated with a sub-therapeutic phenytoin level. Neuropsychological testing three months after the initial accident demonstrated
mild difficulty with short-term memory, but was otherwise normal. She continues to undergo rehabilitation for her spinal cord injury and
cerebellar stroke. While excellent neurological recovery has been described for prolonged RSE , to our knowledge this is the first reported
case describing such an outcome in a patient after nearly four weeks of seizure activity with severe TBI as the acute precipitant. Status
epilepticus (SE) has been variably defined as a continuous, generalized seizure lasting greater than 5 or 30 minutes, or two or more
seizures during which the patient does not return to baseline level of consciousness, again within 5 or 30 minutes . When SE does not
respond to two first-line agents or to a first and second line agent it is termed RSE . The estimated age-adjusted incidence of SE in Europe
and the USA is approximately 20/100,000 per year, with a higher incidence in the elderly and early childhood . Depending on the underlying
etiology, RSE develops in 9% to 40% of patients with SE . Following severe TBI, the incidence of seizures has been estimated to be 10% ,
with 1.9% to 8% of these patients developing SE . The true incidence of seizures may be closer to 20%, however, as studies using cEEG have
demonstrated that more than 50% of seizures in this population go undetected due to a lack of witnessed motor activity . No studies have
reported the incidence of RSE in patients with acute TBI. SE and RSE are medical emergencies. Mortality rates range from 2% to 100% , with
factors such as older age of the patient, acute etiology for the seizure and duration of seizure associated with increased mortality . In
the setting of acute TBI, SE portends a particularly poor prognosis, with at least one report of a mortality rate of 100% . Both SE and RSE
are associated with significant morbidity as evidenced by increased hospital stays and increased likelihood of developing symptomatic
epilepsy . As seizure duration is one of the only potentially modifiable factors for improving patient outcome, rapid identification and
treatment is crucial. The Veterans Affairs cooperative trial and the San Francisco Emergency Medical Services study both found IV lorazepam
provided the best termination rates for SE. Phenytoin remains the second-line agent of choice, especially if given early ; however, there is
limited evidence to guide the systematic addition of anticonvulsants in RSE. Claassen et al. performed a systematic review of 28 studies
involving 193 patients with RSE treated with continuous infusions of midazolam, propofol or pentobarbital. While they determined
pentobarbital resulted in fewer breakthrough seizures and treatment failures than the other two agents, the authors also state that due to
significant limitations with the original data, their results were not intended to provide firm treatment recommendations, but to guide
planning a prospective trial. Until this prospective randomized trial is undertaken, expert opinion and case series suggest that continuous
infusions of intravenous propofol or midazolam can also be considered as agents of choice in RSE because of better side effect profiles and
easier titration . For cases of prolonged RSE that are refractory to propofol, midazolam and/or pentobarbital, inhalational anesthetics,
intravenous ketamine and newer anticonvulsant agents including topiramate may be considered . In cases where a localized area is causing the
seizure, surgery has been used as a last resort . As already described, over 50% of seizures in patients with TBI may go unrecognized
without cEEG monitoring . Even after convulsive SE was felt to have resolved following appropriate medical therapy, DeLorenzo et al.
demonstrated that 14% of patients continued to have nonconvulsive status epilepticus detectable only by cEEG. Given the increased morbidity
and mortality associated with prolonged seizure activity, the difficulty diagnosing nonconvulsive status epilepticus clinically and the
frequency with which these occult seizures have been found to occur, cEEG monitoring in patients with severe TBI and persistent or
unexplained coma should be considered a standard of care . With the current technology in multidisciplinary intensive care units, the
ability to support patients for indefinite periods of time exists. This then raises the ethical issue of defining the duration of therapy
beyond which the treatment of RSE is considered futile. Bramstedt and colleagues have recently recommended that in the absence of an Advance
Directive/Living Will, if pharmacological coma is only sustaining life and not reversing the clinical course of RSE, it is most appropriate
to provide comfort measures only. In our patient, there were several factors that predicted a very poor outcome: acute TBI, no previous
history of seizures, coexistent stroke , potential hypoxic brain injury, low initial GCS and the significant duration of the RSE. Given her
young age and the relatively normal cranial MRI, however, an aggressive treatment strategy with pharmacological coma was undertaken.
Determining when supportive care becomes futile is extraordinarily difficult. Despite advances in technology, providing an accurate
assessment of long-term outcome at the time of a severe TBI remains problematic. Several features, including lower initial GCS, older
patient age, bilaterally absent pupillary light reflex, hypotension and certain findings on CT scan, have been shown to predict poor outcome
. As was demonstrated in our case, however, given the vast number of variables that play a role in determining the final outcome from TBI,
except in the most obvious of cases, young patients need and deserve a significant period of time in order to demonstrate their potential
for recovery. Our case demonstrates that with early identification, aggressive physiological support, appropriate monitoring, including
cEEG, and an adequate length of treatment, young trauma patients with no previous seizure history and limited structural damage to the brain
can have excellent neurological recovery from prolonged RSE. • SE should be considered as a possible diagnosis in patients with TBI and an
unexplained decreased level of consciousness. • Given the imprecision of early prognostication in TBI, young patients with limited
structural damage to the brain need and deserve a significant period of time in order to demonstrate their potential for recovery. •
Excellent neurological recovery from prolonged RSE is possible in this patient population. cEEG = continuous electroencephalography; CT =
computed tomography; GCS = Glasgow Coma Scale; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; RSE = refractory status epilepticus; SE = status
epilepticus; TBI = traumatic brain injury. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All authors made significant
contributions to the concept, writing and revisions of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this study. Anticonvulsant therapy timeline.
