We report on the case of a 15-year-old adolescent who presented with a transient paraplegia and hyposensibility of the upper extremities
after sustaining a minor hyperflexion trauma to the cervical spine. Neuroimaging studies revealed atlantoaxial dislocation and ventral
compression of the rostral spinal cord with increased cord signal at C1/C2 levels caused by an os odontoideum, as well as anterior and
posterior arch defects of the atlas. The patient underwent closed reduction and posterior atlantoaxial fusion. We describe the association
of an acquired instability secondary to an os odontoideum with an anteroposterior spondyloschisis of the atlas and its functional result
after 12 months. The rare coincidence of both lesions indicates a multiple malformation of the upper cervical spine and supports the theory
of an embryologic genesis of os odontoideum. The craniovertebral junction is a common site for malformations . Clefts of the anterior and
posterior arch of the atlas are rare, but well-documented congenital anomalies [1, 2]. Several reports attributed the aetiology of os
odontoideum to an either embryologic, traumatic or vascular basis [3–5, 8]. We describe the unusual case of a combined midline cleft of the
anterior and posterior arch of the atlas associated with os odontoideum leading to atlantoaxial instability with acute myelopathia after a
minor trauma. We presume an embryologic genesis of our findings. A 15-year-old male patient injured his cervical spine in a hyperflexion
trauma when performing a somersault on a trampoline. He presented with transient numbness and weakness of both arms. Initial X-rays and
computed tomography demonstrated a displaced os odontoideum which reduced on extension and a rostral compression of the cervical spinal cord
due to a subluxation of C1 over C2 with narrowing of the spinal canal to 50%. Additionally midline clefts of the anterior and posterior arch
of the atlas became evident (Figs. 1, 2). MRI scans revealed increased cord signals at C1/C2 levels on T2-weighted images and a persistent
subdental synchondrosis was visualized on T2-weighted turbo spin echo sequences (Fig. 3). The patient underwent closed reduction and
posterior atlantoaxial fusion by sublaminar tension band wiring with autologous bone grafting and transarticular lag screw fixation.
Postoperatively all symptoms improved significantly. Radiographs taken 1 year after the trauma showed a stable fusion of C1/C2 (Fig. 4). The
patient presented with a range of motion at 30° of extension, 40° of flexion and 50–0–40° of rotation. He was free of symptoms and had
returned to his pre-injury status regarding work and leisure activities. Fig. 1X-rays of the cervical spine in neutral position (a), flexion
(b) and extension (c). Ventral subluxation of C1 over C2 in flexion (b), which reduces on extension (c)Fig. 2CT scans reveal midline clefts
of the anterior and posterior arch of the atlas (a). Displaced os odontoideum and subluxation of C1 over C2 with narrowing of the spinal
canal (b)Fig. 3T2-weighted MRI images with increased cord signals at C1/C2 levels and a persistent subdental synchondrosisFig. 4Follow-up
X-rays 12 months after trauma. Stable atlantoaxial fusion after sublaminar wiring and transarticular screw fixation in ap (a) and lateral
(b) view X-rays of the cervical spine in neutral position (a), flexion (b) and extension (c). Ventral subluxation of C1 over C2 in flexion
(b), which reduces on extension (c) CT scans reveal midline clefts of the anterior and posterior arch of the atlas (a). Displaced os
odontoideum and subluxation of C1 over C2 with narrowing of the spinal canal (b) T2-weighted MRI images with increased cord signals at C1/C2
levels and a persistent subdental synchondrosis Follow-up X-rays 12 months after trauma. Stable atlantoaxial fusion after sublaminar wiring
and transarticular screw fixation in ap (a) and lateral (b) view The odontoid process and the atlas originate from the first cervical
sclerotome. Body of the axis, lateral masses and posterior arch arise entirely from the second cervical sclerotome. The atlas is formed from
three primary ossification centres, which develop during the seventh week of gestation. Two centres at the lateral masses extend
posteromedially to form the posterior arch usually in the fourth year. Ossification of the anterior arch involves one or two ossification
centres, which extend posterolaterally to fuse with lateral masses around the seventh year. The odontoid process separates from the atlas
between the sixth and seventh week of intrauterine life and moves caudally to join the body of the axis (Fig. 5). Fig. 5Scheme of the
embryologic development of atlas and axis Scheme of the embryologic development of atlas and axis Os odontoideum is an oval or round shaped
ossicle of variable size with a smooth cortical border. Several reports attributed its aetiology to either an embryological, traumatic or
vascular basis. Failure of fusion of ossification centres in the odontoid process has been considered to be the main aetiology .
Considerable evidence on cases of acquired os odontoideum indicates, that occult fractures with subsequent avascular necrosis might result
in similar pathology . O’Rahilly et al. studied the cervical spine of 8-weeks-old human embryos and observed that axis consists
morphologically of three parts. Two rostral parts form the odontoid process and a caudal part gives rise to the axis body, separated from
the middle part by subdental synchondrosis. A segmentation anomaly of the two rostral parts, which never occurred in normal individuals, may
result in bipartite dens . Currarino reported 11 cases with complete or partial segmentation defect in mid odontoid, suggesting an
embryological anomaly characterized by a complete segmentation of two rostral parts of axis which may explain the congenital os odontoideum.
Malformations of the atlas are very rare and include both clefts and aplasias [1, 2]. Galindo and Francis reported the incidence of
anteroposterior spondyloschisis of the atlas in normal individuals as 0.3%. Atasoy et al. reported the first case of bipartite atlas with os
odontoideum causing spinal stenosis. Garg et al. presented a report of bipartite atlas with anterior arch aplasia associated to an os
odontoideum. They found a small projection on the anterior surface of the dens and concluded that the ossification centre of anterior arch
of atlas may fail to separate from future dens resulting in anterior arch aplasia with a small tubercle attached to the anterior surface of
the dens. To our knowledge no other case of bipartite atlas with os odontoideum had been reported previously in the English literature. In
our case, there was a malformation of the anterior and posterior arch of the atlas and a persistent subdental synchondrosis, both likely to
be a result of a congenital failure of fusion of ossification centres. The associated os odontoideum was clinically silent until a traumatic
instability occurred which resulted in acute myelopathy. Our findings support the theory of a congenital aetiology of os odontoideum. Both
the combined anterior and posterior clefts of atlas and os odontoideum are either asymptomatic or, if cervical instability arises, may
develop neurological symptoms. We described a rare association of an anterior and posterior midline cleft of the atlas with an os
odontoideum in an adolescent. An embryologic genesis is likely. Minor trauma is commonly the cause for the onset of symptoms, which may
occur immediately after the injury, be transitory and experienced repeatedly or have a delayed progressive course. If the lesion is
reducible, atlantoaxial fusion is recommended.
