Introduction: Spontaneous spinal epidural haematoma (SSEH) is widely recognised throughout the literature as a cause of myelopathy,
radicular compression being very rarely reported. Surgical management is almost always recommended, especially in the cases of spinal cord
compression. Conservative treatment is reported as a curiosity and only in the case of spontaneous improvement. This report presents the
particular case of a 64-year-old patient undergoing anticoagulant therapy that had a cervical radiculopathy due to a SSEH confirmed by MRI.
The patient improved spontaneously and symptoms were solved with unconventional conservative treatment and without stopping the
anticoagulant therapy. Conclusions: Spontaneous epidural haematoma must be kept in mind when patients undergoing anticoagulant therapy have
a sudden onset of cervicobrachialgia. Even though most spinal surgeons advocate surgical treatment, a conservative approach may lead to a
complete recovery and may be considered as a good option in the case of radicular involvement. Discontinuation of the anticoagulant therapy
may not always be needed, especially when the clinical syndrome improves spontaneously. Although spontaneous spinal epidural haematoma
(SSEH) is a low incidence condition, it is widely recognised throughout the literature as a cause of myelopathy [5, 15]. The relationship
between SSEH and anticoagulant therapy is well known and the probable cause of bleeding is thought to be the rupture of the venous epidural
plexus during a sudden elevation of thoracic or abdominal pressure [4, 6, 8, 10, 11, 13, 15]. The most common symptoms are cervical or
thoracic pain followed by cord compression signs. Radicular involvement is very rare and, when it appears, it mostly affects the lumbar
spine, producing ciatalgia [1, 3, 11]. Although the currently suggested approach is an urgent surgical decompression [9, 10], conservative
treatment is recommended when there is an objective improvement of the neurological status [2, 11, 12]. In general, anticoagulation
treatment must be suspended or adjusted before surgery. The originality of this report arises in three points:The case involved the cervical
spine producing simple radiculopathy.It was solved spontaneously.Anticoagulation therapy was not discontinued. The case involved the
cervical spine producing simple radiculopathy. It was solved spontaneously. Anticoagulation therapy was not discontinued. A 64-year-old
white man undergoing anticoagulant therapy because of cardiac valve prosthesis arrived at the emergency room of our Hospital suffering from
a sudden onset of cervical pain and a left C5 brachial pain and weakness. The physical exam revealed a 4/5 deltoid weakness and abolition of
the bicipital reflex. The patient showed no signs or symptoms of cord compression. Standard radiographs of the cervical spine were normal.
Based on the suspicion that it was a case of disc herniation with left C5 root involvement, symptomatic treatment by means of non-steroid
anti-inflammatory drugs and painkillers was indicated. A cervical MRI was scheduled and the patient was invited to undergo further
examination at the Spinal Surgery Unit. Owing to the fact that the first physician was not a spinal surgeon and therefore not aware of the
relationship between anticoagulation and SSEH, discontinuation of anticoagulant therapy was not indicated. Two days later, when the patient
was examined by the Spinal Surgery Unit, the pain had been completely relieved and the weakness had also decreased. The MRI revealed a left
posterolateral ovoid mass compatible with a haematoma extending from C4 to C5 (Fig. 1). Symptomatic medical treatment was interrupted. Once
the specialist knew the real cause of the radicular syndrome, the haematologist was consulted and they preferred not to suspend the
anticoagulant therapy (despite an adequate level of anticoagulation, INR 2,7) in order to prevent thromboembolism. Fig. 1MRI 2 days after
the onset of symptoms. Posterolateral placement of the haematoma at C4–C5 level. a, c Isointense appearance of the haematoma on the MRI
T1-weighted sagittal and axial images. b, d Hyperintense appearance of the haematoma on the MRI T2-weighted sagittal and axial images MRI
2 days after the onset of symptoms. Posterolateral placement of the haematoma at C4–C5 level. a, c Isointense appearance of the haematoma on
the MRI T1-weighted sagittal and axial images. b, d Hyperintense appearance of the haematoma on the MRI T2-weighted sagittal and axial
images Seven days later, the patient was free of weakness and the MRI showed a decrease in the haematoma size (Fig. 2). Successive MRI
results were obtained 1 month (Fig. 3) and 1 year later on (Fig. 4) to document the resolution of the haematoma. One year on, the patient
remains asymptomatic.Fig. 2MRI performed 7 days later. The haematoma is smaller nevertheless it is located at the same C4–C5 levelFig. 3MRI
1 month later: disappearance of the haematomaFig. 4MRI 1 year later: normal MRI MRI performed 7 days later. The haematoma is smaller
nevertheless it is located at the same C4–C5 level MRI 1 month later: disappearance of the haematoma MRI 1 year later: normal MRI Radicular
compression due to SSEH is far less frequent than myelopathy. Groen and Van Alphen reported that 4.5% of a series of 320 SSEH cases treated
surgically presented radiculopathy; all cases affecting the lumbar spine. Recently, Groen reported that 9% of a series of 64 SSEH cases
treated conservatively presented an isolated radicular compromise; only one of his cases was located on the cervico–thoracic spine. Our case
adds little in terms of number but the fact that it may be the only report of its kind on purely cervical radiculopathy due to SSEH, which
may be considered anecdotic, as well as interesting. Although the spreading of the haematoma throughout the epidural space is the most
likely hypothesis proposed for spontaneous recovery in case of neurological impairment [7, 14], our case does not support that theory
because the haematoma did not spread throughout the epidural space. (Figs. 1, 2) Conservative management is currently indicated in uncommon
situations or when neurological symptoms improve before medical evaluation. Geographic isolation, initial inaccurate diagnosis, neurological
improvement pending an adequate coagulation level prior to surgery, high surgical risks and several other reasons had been referred to as
the likely causes that led to the opportunity for spontaneous recovery [4, 7, 9, 11, 16]. Our case can be categorised as wrong diagnosis
initially, but we have to admit that the first non-specialised consultation spared our patient from the operation. If the patient had first
consulted a more skilled specialist, following the state of the art, he would have probably been operated on, thus obtaining a good result
and a proud surgeon. Finally, the main interest of our case would be focused on the controlled maintenance of the anticoagulant therapy in
patients with mild neurological compromise such as radiculopathy due to SSEH in order to avoid thromboembolic risk.
