The necessity for general anesthesia represents an impediment to using a laparoscopic approach for some procedures that are otherwise
performed with the patient under local anesthesia using a conventional open technique. Heating and humidifying the insufflation gas
reportedly reduces perioperative pain associated with a CO2 pneumoperitoneum, thus enabling awake laparoscopy. Two cases are reported herein
of laparoscopy performed with the patient under local anesthesia using heated, humidified CO2 gas for the pneumoperitoneum. Both patients
experienced pain with insufflation of heated, humidified CO2 gas of sufficient magnitude that the procedure could not be performed. The CO2
gas was washed out and replaced with helium gas insufflation with complete resolution of pain. The laparoscopic procedures were accomplished
without further discomfort with local anesthesia and using a helium gas pneumoperitoneum. Heated, humidified CO2 gas insufflation does not
reduce pain sufficiently to permit satisfactory performance of laparoscopy with local anesthesia, especially when full volume insufflation
is required. Cold, dry helium gas produces no pain. The theory that cold, dry insufflation gas is a source of peritoneal pain during
laparoscopy needs to be reassessed. Ordinarily, CO2 gas cannot be used during laparoscopy with local anesthesia to create the
pneumoperitoneum because it produces immediate pain upon insufflation. The CO2 becomes carbonic acid at the level of the peritoneal membrane
and produces noxious stimulation.1 Alternative insufflation gases like nitrous oxide and helium have been used with success to perform
laparoscopy with local and regional anesthesia for peritoneal dialysis access surgery, appendectomy, and cholecystectomy.2,3 Neither of
these gases produces pain during insufflation. Nitrous oxide has an acceptable solubility; however, although not flammable, it does not
suppress combustion in the event that a hole is present in the bowel with leakage of methane or hydrogen gas. However, previous fears about
the use of nitrous oxide generated by 2 odd reports4 subsequently have been shown to be unjustified. Helium is neither flammable nor
supports combustion; however, the low solubility is of theoretical concern should accidental gas embolism occur. Both gases are
metabolically inert, which is an advantage in high-risk patients with problems eliminating CO2, poor tolerance for metabolic acidosis, or
cardiac arrhythmias. Configuring the gas tank and laparoscopic insufflator for nitrous oxide and helium can be inconvenient in that both
require gas-specific plumbing connections. For practical purposes, this requires dedication of a laparoscopic equipment tower specifically
for the alternative gas. Some newer insufflation devices on the market have CO2 sensors that prevent the use of alternative gases. For this
reason, a method of conditioning CO2 gas that enables the performance of laparoscopy with local anesthesia is of great interest.5,6 In part,
pain from CO2 insufflation was ascribed to the cold, dry properties of the gas as it leaves the tank. Heating and humidifying the CO2
reportedly diminishes the noxious stimulation produced by a cold, dry gas and permits laparoscopy with local anesthesia with good patient
tolerance.5,6 Source gases provided to laparoscopic insufflators are near 0% relative humidity (RH) and presumed to be at ambient operating
room temperature (21°C to 22°C). In the present report, insufflated CO2 gas was heated (35°C) and humidified (95% RH) by using an Insuflow
device (Lexion Medical, St. Paul, MN). A 67-year-old female with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) was admitted to the outpatient surgery
department for laparoscopic implantation of a peritoneal dialysis catheter. The procedure was performed with the patient under local
infiltration anesthesia with lidocaine-HCl 1% and bupivacaine-HCl 0.5% mixed in equal volumes with intravenous sedation consisting of
midazolam-HCl 1 mg, fentanyl citrate 50 μg, and propofol 20 mg. The patient was completely awake and coherent during the entire procedure.
After placement of the Veress needle, heated, humidified CO2 gas was insufflated at a rate of up to 2.2 liters/minute with the Insuflow
device. Insufflator pressure limit was set at 10 mm Hg. Immediately, the patient began to complain of diffuse abdominal pain. The pain
increased in magnitude as insufflation proceeded. With 1.3 liters of gas insufflated, the Veress needle was replaced with a 5-mm port.
Because of the continuing complaints of pain, the CO2 was allowed to escape through the port stopcock. The pain quickly resolved. After the
product representative assisted in assuring that the Insuflow device was functioning properly, an attempt was made to reinsufflate the
patient. Again, the patient immediately experienced diffuse abdominal pain. Insufflation was stopped, and the pneumoperitoneum was released
with resolution of pain over several minutes. The laparoscopic tower equipped with a helium insufflation system was brought into the
operating room. A standard gas hose was used to connect the helium-configured insufflator to the laparoscopic port. The patient denied any
complaints of pain with insufflation of 4 liters of helium. The insufflator pressure limit was 10 mm Hg. The surgical procedure was
completed laparoscopically using a helium pneumoperitoneum without further complaints of discomfort. A 39-year-old male with ESRD was
admitted through the outpatient department for laparoscopic placement of a peritoneal dialysis catheter and repair of an umbilical hernia.
The patient received intravenous sedation with midazolam-HCl 2 mg and fentanyl citrate 100 μg during local anesthetic infiltration of
lidocaine-HCl 1% and bupivacaine-HCl 0.5% mixed in equal volumes. Peritoneal access was initially obtained by entering the hernia sac
through an infraumbilical incision. A 5-mm port device was secured in the hernia defect with a purse-string suture. Heated, humidified CO2
gas was insufflated through the port at a rate of up to 1 liter/minute. The insufflator pressure limit was set at 4 mm Hg. The patient
immediately complained of burning pain that involved the entire abdomen after insufflation of only 200 mL. Insufflation was stopped, and the
gas was allowed to escape from the port with resolution of the pain over several minutes. After the product representative confirmed proper
function of the Insuflow device, an attempt to reinsufflate the patient with heated, humidified CO2 was accompanied by the same painful
response. The helium gas insufflator was connected, and a pneumoperitoneum of 2.7 liters was rapidly created without pain. Pressure limit
for helium insufflation was set at 10 mm Hg. The laparoscopic procedure was completed without further complaints of pain. Controversy exists
regarding the benefits of heated, humidified CO2 gas insufflation in patients undergoing laparoscopic procedures under general anesthesia.
Previous studies relied upon outcome measures that included after-the-event use of visual analog pain scales,7–13 analgesic consumption
amounts,7–10,13 time until subjective perception of return to well being,10,12 or time it took to return to work.10,12 It is very difficult
to control the myriad of confounding variables that potentially taint these measured outcomes. As a result, some studies have shown that
heated CO2 gas reduced postoperative pain compared with cold, dry gas,7 while others have found either no difference in pain8 or the pain
was actually made worse by gas heating.9,10 Equally conflicting reports exist regarding postoperative pain reduction11,12 or lack thereof13
when the insufflated CO2 gas was both heated and humidified. The 2 cases in the present report offered a unique opportunity to evaluate the
effects of heated, humidified CO2 gas insufflation on awake patients through real time verbal feedback and to immediately compare the
results to an alternative insufflation gas. Previous reports about awake laparoscopy with heated, humidified CO2 gas insufflation are
difficult to assess. Demco5 used limited insufflation volumes (700 mL) to conduct gynecological procedures and did not describe his
preoperative analgesic use. He acknowledged that heating and humidifying CO2 did not completely eliminate pain and suggested lower gas flow
rates and humidification with fluids other than water to improve pain tolerance. Almeida6 did not report sufficient data to permit analysis;
however, heated and humidified CO2 did not completely eliminate pain in his series of patients undergoing laparoscopic gynecological
procedures. Although both studies showed improved pain tolerance with local anesthesia with heated, humidified CO2 compared with cold, dry
CO2, no statistically significant difference was found between groups. Heated, humidified CO2 gas appears unsatisfactory for awake
laparoscopy, especially when full volume insufflation is required. Outside of a limited number of gynecological procedures, few laparoscopic
procedures can be adequately accomplished with a 700 mL pneumoperitoneum. In addition, aggressive sedation to control insufflation pain
potentially turns the procedure into “open-air” general anesthesia and generates concerns for patient safety. Furthermore, excessive
sedation produces an abdominal respiratory pattern that impedes the performance of the procedure. The theoretical significance of cold, dry
insufflation gas as a source of peritoneal pain during laparoscopy needs to be reassessed. The 2 cases in the present report and the
author's previous experience with the use of cold, dry nitrous oxide and helium gas during laparoscopy with local and regional anesthesia
without complaints of insufflation pain would seem to refute this theory.2,3,14 Although the observations about 2 cases using heated,
humidified CO2 cannot be considered conclusive, they emphasize the importance of further investigation into the cause of CO2 gas-induced
pain.
