Mycoplasma hominis is a commensal of the genitourinary tract. It mostly causes infections to associated structures of this system; however,
occasionally it is a pathogen in nongenitourinary tract infections. Since, M. hominis strains require special growth conditions and cannot
be Gram stained, they may be missed or delay diagnosis. This report describes a deep wound infection caused by M. hominis after
neuromuscular scoliosis surgery; M. hominis was recovered by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). An awareness of the role of M.
hominis as an extragenital pathogen in musculoskeletal infections, especially in neuromuscular scoliosis, being a high-risk group for
postoperative wound infection, it is necessary to identify this pathogen. Real-time PCR for postoperative deep wound infection, in patients
with a history of genitourinary infections, decreases the delay in diagnosis and treatment. In these cases rapid real-time PCR on deep
cultures should be considered. Deep wound infections complicating spinal surgery are sources of major morbidity in neuromuscular scoliotic
patients. Enterobacter, Enterococcus, Escherichia coli, Proteus and Staphylococci account for the majority of postoperative spinal wound
infections in these patients . Increasingly, previously uncommon pathogens are being identified in surgical infections. These organisms may
be difficult to identify and/or resistant to most of the broad-spectrum antibiotics used for preoperative prophylaxis and for the treatment
of postoperative wound infections. Among these pathogens, Mycoplasma hominis has been recognized as a cause of postoperative wound
infections [25, 27, 31]. M. hominis is a commensal bacterium in humans and is distinguished phenotypically from other bacteria by the minute
size and lack of a cell wall. As a result, M. hominis cannot be Gram stained and is resistant to penicillin and other antibiotics that
interfere with the cell wall metabolism. In addition, it is a fastidious slow-growing organism, which may not be readily identified by using
routine culture protocols. Early diagnosis, however, is of utmost importance for adequate institution of appropriate antimicrobial therapy.
To our knowledge, only two cases of postoperative spinal wound infections due to M. hominis have previously been reported . We describe a
case report of a M. hominis postoperative deep wound infection in a patient with a progressive myelomeningocele scoliosis who underwent
posterior scoliosis surgery with bone allograft. Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) provided a fast and secure diagnosis, which
prevented further complications. An 11-year-old girl with a complete paraplegia at level L2–L3 caused by a myelomeningocele was admitted to
our hospital for surgical correction of a progressive right convex scoliosis. Preoperative physical examination revealed a flexible right
convex thoracic scoliosis with a left convex thoracolumbar curve. The unsupported sitting anteroposterior radiograph showed a right convex
thoracic scoliosis of 55°and a left convex thoracolumbar curve of 42°with no pelvic obliquity. Her medical history revealed a shunted
hydrocephalus with an Arnold Chiari type II malformation, chronic urinary tract infections, and an auto-augmentation of the bladder. The
patient was treated with single stage scoliosis correction involving posterior instrumentation (Xia™ spinal system, Stryker Spine, Cestas,
France) from T3 to L5. The spondylodesis was completed by applying allograft bone chips (Netherlands Bone Bank Foundation, Leiden, The
Netherlands) over the laminae in the thoracolumbar region. In addition, Collagraft® (Neucoll, Campbell, CA, USA), a synthetic bone graft
substitute composed of collagen and a composite mineral (hydroxyapatite and tricalcium phosphate), was applied posterolateral in the
lumbosacral region. Prophylactic antibiotics, cefazolin (cefalosporin, Kefzol®) 1,000 mg IV, were administered at the induction of
anaesthesia, and as a second and third dose 8 and 16 h postoperatively, respectively . Because of a chronic urinary tract infection
including a positive culture with E. coli, cefradin (cefalosporin, Velosef®) 500 mg orally was continued for 9 days at 8-h intervals. The
postoperative course was uneventful. At day 8 the patient was discharged. At discharge the wound produced negligible clear fluid at the
distal end without any signs of infection. However, at day 18 postoperatively, the patient developed fever (39°C) and was readmitted to our
centre. On physical examination, an enlarged distal wound dehiscence was seen with increased fluid production. Infection parameters showed
an increased C-reactive protein (CRP) (120 mg/l; normal <10 mg/l) and white blood cell (WBC) count (10.9 cells×109/l; normal
4–10 cells×109/l). A surgical intervention was performed including a thorough debridement of necrotic tissue and removal of the bone grafts.
The instrumentation was left in place. According to the established guidelines, cultures were taken of various deep areas by fluid
aspiration and from the applied bone graft [15, 28, 32]. After extensively irrigating with pulsatile lavage, the wound was closed leaving
gentamicin collagen fleeces (Septocoll®, Biomed, Darmstadt, Germany) over the instrumentation. Adjuvant therapy with gentamicin
(aminoglycoside, Garamycinl®) 210 mg IV and flucloxacillin (isoxazolylpenicillin, Floxapen®) 2,000 mg IV were initiated immediately after
obtaining appropriate intraoperative cultures, and was continued postoperatively at 6-h intervals. Intraoperative cultures from both the
fluid aspiration and the bone graft yielded Mycoplasma after 4 days incubation. Real-time PCR on the peri-operative biopsy material was only
positive for Mycoplasma and the species was identified by 16S DNA amplification as M. hominis (Fig. 1). Separately a Collagraft® sample of
the same batch was tested for Mycoplasma, however, the culture as well as real-time PCR remained negative. Gentamicin and flucloxacillin
were stopped, and doxycycline (tetracycline, Vibra-S®) 100 mg was administered orally at 12-h intervals and continued for 3 weeks. The
patient was discharged 5 days after surgery. Fig. 1Agarose gel analysis of duplo PCR amplification of Mycoplasma DNA. M Molecular weight
marker, Lanes 1 and 2 positive PCR amplification of clinical sample, lane 3 negative control, lane 4 positive control. Subsequent sequencing
results revealed M. hominis Agarose gel analysis of duplo PCR amplification of Mycoplasma DNA. M Molecular weight marker, Lanes 1 and 2
positive PCR amplification of clinical sample, lane 3 negative control, lane 4 positive control. Subsequent sequencing results revealed M.
hominis Wound healing and temperature were monitored at regular intervals at the outpatient clinic. After 3 months, the infection parameters
were normalized and the wound was healed (Fig. 2). Four years after surgery there were no signs of infection. Radiographs at final follow-up
demonstrated no instrumentation failure and no loss of correction of the scoliotic deformity (Fig. 3).Fig. 2Clinical appearance 3 months
after surgical intervention for deep wound infection, located at the distal end of the woundFig. 3AP radiographs of the lumbar spine at the
site of the deep wound infection immediately after surgical intervention and debridement of necrotic tissue including removal of the bone
grafts (a) and at 4 years of follow-up (b) Clinical appearance 3 months after surgical intervention for deep wound infection, located at the
distal end of the wound AP radiographs of the lumbar spine at the site of the deep wound infection immediately after surgical intervention
and debridement of necrotic tissue including removal of the bone grafts (a) and at 4 years of follow-up (b) Mycoplasma hominis is a
commensal bacterium in humans. The organism is commonly associated with infections of the genitourinary tract, particularly in females.
Rates of colonization in the urogenital tract range from 21 to 54% among women and from 4 to 13% among men . Reports on M. hominis
infections outside the genitourinary tract are scarce. Most of them are case reports describing extragenital infections, such as septic
arthritis [17, 21], septicemia [11, 12], prosthetic valve endocarditis [3, 10], postoperative wound infections [25, 31], peritonitis ,
neonatal encephalitis , meningitis [7, 9], brain abscess , thrombophlebitis , and mediastinitis . Extragenital infections are mainly related
to patients with immunosuppression [3, 7, 9, 17, 19, 21, 25, 27, 30, 33]. Osteomyelitis caused by M. hominis is predominantly reported in
combination with hypogammaglobulinemia [5, 14, 16, 24]. In an extensive overview of nongenitourinary M. hominis infections, Madoff and
Hooper described only two cases of postoperative deep wound infections caused by M. hominis after orthopedic surgery. Both cases concerned
with deep wound infections after scoliosis surgery, one of them with a history of pyelonefritis. Postoperative deep wound infections after
scoliosis surgery are more common in neuromuscular patients than in patients with idiopathic scoliosis . Risk factors associated with
increased postoperative wound infection rates include a generalized decline in the immune status of neuromuscular patients, poor personal
hygiene, and soiling of the wound. Sponseller et al. reported 25 patients (12%) with a deep wound infection out of a series of 210
surgically treated patients with neuromuscular scoliosis in a 10-year retrospective study. From these 25 patients, 16 had a scoliosis
related to myelomeningocele. Two risk factors were found to be significant: the degree of cognitive impairment and use of bone allograft.
Furthermore, 52% of the infections were polymicrobial, which could point to contamination during or after surgery. However, the authors did
not report any case of M. hominis wound infections in their series. Antibiotics are used routinely to prevent postoperative wound infection
in patients undergoing spinal implant procedures. Currently, first or second-generation cephalosporin (e.g. cefazolin) are recommended as
prophylaxis . Prophylactic cefazolin was also routinely given in our case. Since, cephalosporins act on the cell wall of organisms in a
manner similar to the penicillins, postoperative wound infection by M. hominis was not prevented. Antimicrobial treatment for M. hominis
include protein-synthesis inhibitors such as tetracycline (e.g. doxycycline) and doxycycline was administered accordingly. The postoperative
deep wound infection resolved favorably after surgical debridement and appropriate antimicrobial treatment with doxycycline. The source of
M. hominis deep wound infection in our case is unclear. M. hominis is commonly associated with infections of the genitourinary tract and
patients with meningomyelocele are known to have a high incidence of urinary tract infections . In addition, it has been shown that children
with myelomeningocele have a high incidence of urological complications after surgical treatment of scoliosis . Possibly, in our case the M.
hominis could have been present in the urinary tract infection and spread hematogenous or by contamination, either at the time of surgery or
secondarily through the wound. Other possible sources are the materials that were used during surgery. Obviously, the instrumentation and
the applied Collagraft®, were sterilized. In addition, cultures and PCR on the same batch of the Collagraft® were negative. Bone allograft,
used to induce and facilitate spinal fusion, could also have been the source of the infection. The fact that the bone allograft was positive
for M. hominis, proved that it was infected before retrieval, however, not that it was the source of the infection itself. Bone allograft
has not been reported as a carrier of M. hominis in the literature, however, it must be noted that the standard screening at the Netherlands
Bone Bank Foundation does not include screening on M. hominis. Unfortunately, no other specimen of the donor could be retrieved for testing.
As a result, haematogenous spread or contamination from a colonized urogenital tract or contamination by the bone allograft as source of the
infection could not be excluded. In the presented case, cultures taken during the reintervention proved to be positive for Mycoplasma.
However, the diagnosis of a Mycoplasma infection was delayed due to the fastidious nature of mycoplasmas. To identify the Mycoplasma
species, which in our case was cultured, 16S DNA amplification was used. Because isolation of M. hominis is difficult, time consuming, and
not routinely done, a rapid specimen processing is required. Real-time PCR on deep cultures could provide a rapid alternative with a higher
sensitivity and specificity than culture for the detection of M. hominis [1, 2]. In conclusion, M. hominis infections should be considered
in postoperative deep wound infection after neuromuscular spinal surgery, especially in patients with genitourinary tract comorbidity.
Since, M. hominis is not covered by routine prophylactic and therapeutic antibiotics, rapid real-time PCR is advised in these patients to
initiate appropriate antibiotic treatment.
