Neurofibromatosis type 1 disease is characterized by pigmented cutaneous lesions and generalized tumors of a neural crest origin and it may
affect all the systems of the human body. Sphenoid dysplasia is one of the characteristics of this syndrome and it occurs in 5-10% of the
cases; further, abnormalities of the sphenoid wings are often considered pathognomonic. However, complete agenesis of a sphenoid wing is
very rare. We report here on an unusual case of neurofibromatosis type 1 disease with the associated absence of a sphenoid wing that was
diagnosed by using multidetector computed tomography. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF-1) is a relatively common autosomal dominant disorder
that occurs in one in 3,000 live births. It is a hamartomatous disorder that originates in the neural crest and is characterized by neural
tumors, cafe-au-lait spots, and Lisch nodules. Skeletal signs include scoliosis, sphenoid wing dysplasia, bony distortion and local cystic
and erosive change. Although sphenoid wing dysplasia has been observed in between seven to 12.8 percent of patients with neurofibromatosis,
the absence of a sphenoid wing is very rare (1-3). We report here an unusual case of NF-1 with an associated absence of a sphenoid wing by
using multidetector computed tomography (MDCT). A 31-year-old white man was admitted to our hospital with complaints of severe head pain and
cross-eyed right globe. Physical examination revealed a normotensive man with cafe-au-lait spots on his chest and abdomen (Fig. 1). An
ophthalmic examination revealed that his vision was normal except his right cross-eyed towards out paralysis and enophthalmos. Another
notable finding was the discovery of a family history of neurofibromatosis. The patient was accepted for radiological evaluation in our
clinic. MDCT was performed using an Aquilion scanner (Toshiba Medical Systems, Tokyo, Japan) with 16 high-resolution detectors. The images
were obtained to define the caudocranial extent of the neck to the head region, by using a collimation of 1 mm√ó16 rows, with a helical pitch
of 3, a gantry rotation speed of 0.75 sec per round, voltage of 120 kV and current of 300 mA. Three-dimensional images were reconstructed
using maximum intensity projection (MIP) and 3D rendering algorithms on a Vitrea 2 (Vital Image Inc) workstation. The anterior volume
rendered 3D CT image showed details of a bony defect in the right orbital region (Fig. 2A). Thick multiplanar axial reconstructions (MPR)
revealed the absence of the right sphenoid wing, and the intracranial and orbital contents were separated only by dura mater (Fig. 2B). In
addition, the transverse bone window MDCT scan, performed at the level of the orbit, revealed the absence of the right sphenoid wing, right
eye microphthalmos, increased fat tissue in the retrobulbar space and an enlarged middle cranial fossa. Furthermore, the left globe was
larger than the right (Fig. 2C). Neurofibromatosis type 1 may affect all systems of the human body. It is a hamartomatous disorder that
originates in the neural crest and secondarily affects the supporting mesenchyme. The disorder, which is characterized by pigmented
cutaneous lesions and generalized tumors that originate in the neural crest (taking the form of a discrete fibroma nodule or a plexiform
neurofibroma), manifests itself in various ways. Central nervous system indicators consist of an increased incidence of astrocytomas,
meningiomas, schwannomas, and ependymomas. Other features of the disease include bony dysplasias, kyphoscoliosis, sphenoid wing hypoplasia
and vascular dysplasia. Sphenoid dysplasia is one of the characteristics of NF-1, occurring in 5-10% of cases. Furthermore, abnormalities of
the sphenoid wings are often considered pathognomonic. However, complete dysgenesis of the sphenoid wing is very rare (1-4). Its
radiological characteristics describe the area of defect in the greater sphenoid wing and enlargement of the middle cranial fossa. Many
ophthalmic manifestations may occur in NF-1 patients. Lisch nodules are virtually all pathognomonic, and Huson et al. (5) found these iris
hamartomas to be present in all of his NF-1 patients over the 16 years of age. Other ophthalmic findings include choroidal hamartomas,
plexiform neurofibromas, retinal phakomos and optic nerve gliomas. Exophthalmos and enophthalmos, potential sequelae, are associated with
orbital tumors and/or sphenoid wing dysplasia (1, 6). Unilateral enophthalmos, primarily viewed as a complication of an orbital fracture,
may result from other causes such as microphthalmos, orbital fibrosis, and sclerosing orbital tumors (1, 3). Congenital microphthalmia
occasionaly accompanies sphenoid dysplasia or similar sphenoidal abnormalities. The neuro-ophtalmological findings of NF-1 are variable,
pulsating exophthalmos is a common one. However, in a few cases in which NF-1 patients have sphenoid dysplasia, enophthalmos was also seen
as a result of microphthalmia or because the lateral wall of the orbit was deficient and allowed decompression of the neurofibromatous
tissue or retrobulbar fat into the temporal fossa (7). The present case had NF-1 with sphenoid wing dysgenesis leading to enophthalmos, but
neurofibroma was not observed. The recent development of MDCT, which can quickly scan a large longitudinal area and enable us to obtain
thinner section collimation within a short period of time, allowed us to obtain isotropic volume data for 3D imaging. The volume data
obtains serviceable 3D images by using various reconstruction methods such as high-quality MPR, MIP algorithm, surface rendering and volume
rendering. Sixteen-slice scanners can shorten the duration of scanning as well. By using thick MPR techniques, image quality can be improved
while keeping patient dose low. Reconstructing overlapping thin-section data provides the basis for image reconstruction in any desired
plane. Proper reconstructions, 3D images and postprocessing allow better visualization of structures and their normal and abnormal
morphologic features (8). In conclusion, sphenoid dysplasia is one of the features of NF-1, but the absence of a sphenoid wing is very rare.
By using MDCT, we were able produce good axial and 3D images of the sphenoid bone and the surrounding area. Physical examination revealed a
normotensive man with cafe-au-lait spots on his chest and abdomen. A. Anterior volume rendered 3D CT image illustrates details of the bony
defect in the right orbital region. B. Thick multiplanar axial reconstructions illustrates the absence of the right sphenoid wing and the
intracranial and orbital contents separated only by dura mater. C. Transverse bone window multidetertor CT scan, performed at the level of
the orbit, illustrates the absence of the right sphenoid wing, right eye microphthalmos, increased fat tissue in the retrobulbar space and
enlarged middle cranial fossa. The left globe is larger than the right.
