A 4-year-old female Barbary sheep (Ammotragus lervia) was found dead in the Gwangju Uchi Park Zoo. The animal had previously exhibited
weakness and lethargy, but no signs of diarrhea. The carcass was emaciated upon presentation. The main gross lesion was characterized by
severe serous atrophy of the fat tissues of the coronary and left ventricular grooves, resulting in the transformation of the fat to a
gelatinous material. The rumen was fully distended with food, while the abomasum evidenced mucosal corrugation with slight congestion.
Microscopic examination revealed the presence of Balantidium coli trophozoites within the lymphatic ducts of the gastric lymph node and the
abdominal submucosa. On rare occasions, these organisms may invade extra-intestinal organs, in this case the gastric lymph nodes and
abomasum. Balantidiasis is an infectious disease which occurs worldwide, and is caused by the protozoan, Balantidium coli. This single-
celled organism is characterized primarily by its large size, which ranges from 50 µm to over 500 µm, including the cilia on its cell
surface . This parasite has been detected in the lumen of the cecum and the colon of swine, humans, and nonhuman primates as a commensal
organism, but can become a pathogenic opportunist via the invasion of tissues that have been previously damaged by other diseases . The
clinical diagnosis of this disease has proven somewhat difficult, as it is asymptomatic and can be complicated by other diseases or
parasites . Here, we report the incidental detection of Balantidiasis within the gastric lymph ducts of a Barbary sheep (Ammotragus lervia).
The subject of this case was a member of a herd resident in the Gwangju Uchi Park Zoo in Gwangju City, Korea. The affected herd contained a
total of 10 animals, 5 of which had suffered from arthritis and lameness. Two of the affected animals died, and the case specifically
described in this study was one of these 2 animals. The initial examination of the animal revealed that the aforementioned lameness and
arthritis was the result of foot rot induced by Fusobacterium necrophorum, which was isolated from the lesion site. As the result of this
weakness, the animal grew increasingly lethargic, and finally succumbed and perished. The results of the external examination of the carcass
clearly indicated emaciation and dehydration. The necropsy examination also revealed a serous atrophy of subcutaneous fat and fat deposits
along the coronary and left ventricular grooves of the heart (Fig. 1). Fecal samples were collected from the ileum and colon for parasite
examination. The mucosa of the abomasum was moderately congested and partially corrugated, whereas the gastric lymph nodes were mildly
enlarged. The tissues were fixed in 10% buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. The paraffin-embedded sections of the lymph nodes were
cut at 4 µm, and were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. The histopathological examination of the gastric lymph nodes and the abomasum
revealed the presence of a few Balantidium coli trophozoites within the ducts and submucosa (Fig. 2). A few distorted anucleated
trophozoites were also detected (Fig. 3). B. coli was characterized by its spherical shape (40-60 µm) with a hyaline wall and large
macronucleus, which could be seen within. The characteristic two nuclei of the protozoan parasite were clearly visible. The macronucleus was
long and kidney-shaped, and the spherical micronucleus was nestled adjacent to it. No B. coli trophozoites or cysts were detected in the
feces, but we did note a heavy infestation of Eimeria spp. oocysts, Trichuris sp. and Strongyloides sp.. Oocysts normally break out of the
epithelial lining of the intestine, and are then passed via the feces of the infected animal. Each stage coccidial development within the
animal inflicts physical damage. As opportunist organisms, Balantidium coli trophozoites tend to become invasive, and penetrate the mucosal
lining of the damaged intestine, from which they travel throughout the rest of the body. In this case, the absence of Balantidium cysts can
probably be attributed to an incomplete encystations cycle. The diagnosis, in this case, was predicated on the detection of trophozoites or
cysts in the feces, and also in the tissues. Balantidium can be recognized in tissues primarily by its large size, ovoid shape, the presence
of a dense curved or kidney-shaped macronucleus, and the presence of cilia arranged in rows on the surface . Under favorable conditions,
Balantidium invades and penetrates the compromised mucosal lining prior to localizing within certain lymphoid tissues . The penetration of
the mucosal lining results in varying degrees of acute inflammation within the general vicinity of the penetration site, and may culminate
in some manifestations of enteric disease. Little data is currently available regarding Ammotragus lervia parasitism in animals in
captivity. B. coli has been detected in 7.7% of fresh fecal sample collected from wild De Brazza's monkeys (Cercopithecus neglectus) in
Kenya , and 19.3% of fecal sample collected from local cross-bred pigs in the upper East Region of Ghana . The prevalence of B. coli in wild
boars in Western Iran was approximately 25%, but other amoebic cysts can complicate these findings . In this case, no trophozoites were
detected in the feces, although this is not an uncommon finding. The trophozoites travel down to the large intestine, in which they normally
reproduce via binary fission within the lumen. The presence of coccidian oocysts made it possible for them to invade the damaged tissue, and
to localize within the ducts of the gastric lymph nodes. A secondary invader, Balantidium travels throughout the body via several specific
routes. It is possible for this organism to perforate the large intestine prior to migration into the small intestine , appendix , vagina,
uterus, and bladder and, rarely, into the liver and lungs . Balantidium is also known to generate hyaluronidase, which allows them to effect
an enlargement of the lesions by attacking the ground substance between the cells. It is fairly common to detect organisms which nest within
the tissues, or even in the capillaries, lymph ducts, and neighboring lymph nodes or tissue . The presence of heavy infestations of
endoparasites in these animals indicated that they were under stressed conditions, which ultimately culminated in lymphocytic dysfunction.
Balantidium infection rates are also likely to be fairly high in pigs, in which immunodeficiency can result in the exacerbation of the
disease . The immunocompromise of animals as the result of the stress inherent to heavy endoparasitic infestation might explain why
Balantidium could be detected in the gastric lymph ducts and mucosa of the abomasum in the absence of eosinophils or other inflammatory
cells within the adjacent tissues. We suggest that the trophozoites traveled to the abomasum and invaded the submucosa, until they had
reached the gastric lymph ducts. This, however, is currently only a hypothesis, and remains to be proven, due to the fact that this report
chronicles an incidental finding, and the first reported case of Balantidiasis in the Barbary sheep (Ammotragus lervia). Serous atrophy of
the heart of the Barbary sheep. A trophozoite (arrow) of Balantidium coli was identified in the submucosa of the abomasum. H&E stain; bar =
200 µm. Intact or distorted anucleated trophozoites were identified in the duct of gastric lymph node. H&E stain; bar = 50 µm.
