To the Editor: Norovirus (NoV), the distinct genus within the family Caliciviridae, is a major cause of sporadic cases and outbreaks of
acute gastroenteritis in humans (1). NoV possesses a positive-sense, single-stranded RNA genome surrounded by an icosahedral capsid. The NoV
genome contains 3 open reading frames (ORFs). ORF1 encodes nonstructural proteins, ORF 2 encodes capsid protein (VP1), and ORF3 encodes a
small capsid protein (VP2). NoV is still uncultivable by standard culture with different cell lines. However, expression of either VP1 or
both VP1 and VP2 with recombinant baculoviruses formed viruslike particles that are morphologically and antigenically similar to the native
virion (2). A fecal specimen was collected from an infant hospitalized with acute gastroenteritis in Kunming, China, in November 2004 and
was tested for diarrheal viruses in a cooperative laboratory in Japan. The viral genome was extracted by using a Qiagen kit (Qiagen, Hilden,
Germany). Polymerase chain reaction with specific primers resulted in the identification of astrovirus, rotavirus, sapovirus, adenovirus,
and NoV genogroup I (GI) and GII (3). NoV polymerase was also amplified to identify recombinant NoV with primers Yuri22F and Yuri22R (4).
Products were sequenced directly, and sequence analysis was performed by using ClustalX and SimPlot. The fecal specimen was positive for NoV
GII. The Figure shows that the 146/Kunming/04/China sequence clustered into the distinct GII genotype 7 (Leeds/90/UK cluster).
146/Kunming/04/China was classified into the Saitama U4 cluster (GI/6) when polymerase-based grouping was performed. Altogether,
146/Kunming/04/China was expected to be the recombinant NoV with GII/7 capsid and GII/6 polymerase. Changes in norovirus (NoV) genotypes on
the basis of phylogentic trees of nucleotide sequences of 146/Kunming/04/China. Trees were constructed from partial nucleotide sequences of
capsid and polymerase regions of 146/Kunming/04/China. 146/Kunming/04/China is boldface. Dashed boxes indicate the maintenance of genotypes
of reference NoV strains, and solid boxes indicate the involvement of NoV genotypes with recombinant NoV 146/Kunming/04/China. A
phylogenetic tree with 100 bootstrap resamples of the nucleotide alignment datasets was generated by using the neighbor-joining method with
ClustalX. The genetic distance was calculated by using the Kimura 2-parameter method (PHYLIP). The scale indicates nucleotide substitutions
per position. The numbers in the branches indicate the bootstrap values. Manchester strain was used as an outgroup strain for phylogenetic
analysis. The nucleotide sequence of NoV strain 146/Kunming/04/China had been submitted to GenBank and has been assigned accession no.
DQ304651. Reference NoV strains and accession nos. used in this study are as follows: Manchester (X86560), Toronto (U02030), Melksham
(X81879), Camberwell (AF145896), Leeds/90/UK (AJ277608), Lordsdale (X86557), Hawaii (U07611), Saitama U3 (AB039776), Saitama U4 (AB039777),
and Miami/94/US (AF414410). To eliminate the possibility of co-infection with 2 different NoV genotypes, to localize the potential
recombination site, and to clarify a possible recombination mechanism, the ORF1/ORF2 overlap and flanking polymerase and capsid regions of
146/Kunming/04/China was amplified with primers Yuri22F and GIISKR to produce a 1,158-bp amplicon (3,4). When the sequence of
146/Kunming/04/China was compared with that of Saitama U4 by using SimPlot, a recombination site was found at the ORF1/ORF2 overlap. Before
this junction, 146/Kunming/04/China and Saitama U4 were homologous. After the ORF1/ORF2 overlap, however, the homology was notably
different. SimPlot showed a sudden drop in the nucleotide identity for 146/Kunming/04/China. ClustalX showed that 146/Kunming/04/China
shared a high identity (93%) in the polymerase region and a low identity (78%) in the capsid region with Saitama U4. In contrast, high
identity (95%) in the capsid region was found between 146/Kunming/04/China and Leeds/90/UK. Since Leeds/90/UK polymerase was not available
in GenBank, the polymerase homology between 146/Kunming/04/China and Leeds/90/UK was unknown. Polymerase of 146/Kunming/04/China was almost
identical with that of Saitama U4, but the capsids of 146/Kunming/04/China and Leeds/90/UK were distinctly different from that of Saitama
U4. This genetic pattern of 146/Kunming/04/China implied a novel, naturally occurring recombinant NoV with GII/7 capsid and GII/6
polymerase. RNA recombination is a mechanism for virus evolution (5). Literature documenting recombination in NoV is fairly rich, but none
is from China (6). Therefore, 146/Kunming/04/China was not only the first but also the first recombinant NoV from China. This isolate shared
the closest sequences of polymerase and capsid with Saitama U4 and Leeds/90/UK, respectively. Strain Saitama U4 was detected in 1997 in
Japan (7), whereas strain Leeds/90/UK was detected in 1990 in the United Kingdom (8). Quite possibly, Saitama U4 and Leeds/90/UK were
parental strains of 146/Kunming/04/China. However, the distant geographic relationship of these strains obscured evidence of where and when
the recombination event occurred. This phenomenon also suggested that these parent strains or this progeny strain might be more prevalent
than is often assumed. Recombination depends on various immunologic and intracellular constraints. Recombinant viruses are all alike in that
they successfully pass through 5 stages: 1) successful co-infection of a single host, 2) successful co-infection of a single cell, 3)
efficient replication of both parental strains, 4) template switching, and 5) purifying selection (9). In this study, 146/Kunming/04/China
was recovered from a patient with diarrhea, fever, and vomiting. This observation indicated that this strain theoretically fulfilled all
prerequisites for recombination. The NoV capsid is predicted to be well suited for genotype classification (10). In this study,
146/Kunming/04/China belonged to 2 distinct genotypes, 7 and 6, by capsid- and polymerase-based groupings, respectively. Moreover, the
recent demonstration of recombination in an increasing number of NoVs suggests that it is a more widespread event than was previously
realized. Consequently, the phylogenetic classification of NoV on the basis of on capsid sequence is questionable. We suggest that
classification of NoV strains should rely on not only capsid sequence but also polymerase sequence. In conclusion, our results described the
genetic characterization of novel, naturally occurring recombinant NoV and increased evidence for the worldwide distribution of recombinant
NoV. This report is the first to describe acute gastroenteritis caused by recombinant NoV in China and warns of the threat it poses.
Suggested citation for this article: Phan TG, Yan H, Li Y, Okitsu S, MÃ¼ller WEG, Ushijima H. Novel recombinant norovirus in China . Emerg
Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2006 May [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1205.051566 This study was supported by grants-in-
aid from the Ministry of Education and Sciences and the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, Japan. This study was also supported by the
Heiwa Nakajima Foundation, the Mishima-Kaiun Foundation, and the Sumitomo Foundation, Japan.
