Bucillamine is a disease modifying anti-rheumatic drug, structurally similar to D-penicillamine. Although D-penicillamine-induced pemphigus
has been not infrequently demonstrated, pemphigus associated with bucillamine was rarely reported. We describe a patient complicating
pemphigus vulgaris after bucillamine treatment in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and polymyositis (PM) overlap syndrome. PM and RA overlap
syndrome was diagnosed three years ago and bucillamine was administrated for 20 months. Skin lesions including erythematous flaccid blisters
on her chest, axillae, and back were occurred and were compatible with pemphigus vulgaris by typical pathology. Withdrawal from bucillamine
and prednisolone treatment made rapid improvement of pemphigus lesions. D-penicillamine has been known as one of the agents that are able to
induce pemphigus (1,2). Bucillamine is a thiol compound contained two free sulfhydryl groups, whereas D-penicillamine has only one
sulfhydryl radical (3). While drug-induced pemphigus was not infrequently demonstrated in association with d-penicillamine, it has rarely
been reported with bucillamine and has never been reported in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and polymyositis (PM) overlap syndrome. Hereby, we
report a case of bucillamine-induced pemphigus vulgaris in a patient with RA and PM overlap syndrome. A 46-yr-old woman was referred to our
rheumatology department due to polyarthralgia, and myalgia in May 2001. Soft tissue swelling and tenderness were bilaterally noted at the
proximal interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joints with morning stiffness lasting at least 1 hr. Proximal motor weakness on upper arms
and legs has insidiously developed over three months and findings of magnetic resonance image on both thighs were compatible with myositis.
In addition, elevated level of muscle enzymes including creatine kinase (CK), aldolase, alanine aminotransferase (AST and ALT), and lactate
dehydrogenase was shown. Antinuclear antibody was positive at 1:80 of speckled pattern, and 1:2,560 of cytoplasmic pattern. Auto-antibodies
including anti-Jo-1, anti-RNP, anti-double stranded DNA, anti-Sm, and anti-SS-A/SS-B were absent. Level of rheumatoid factor was 3,420
IU/mL, but level of C3 and C4 was 97.9 mg/dL (normal range 79-152 mg/dL) and 30.8 mg/dL (normal range 16-38 mg/dL) respectively. Chest
radiograph showed pattern of interstitial lung disease and pulmonary function test revealed significantly decreased DLCO. She was diagnosed
as RA and PM overlap, and had been treated with prednisolone, azathioprine and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug since May 2001. Myositis
became silent over time with above regimen, however she had continuous synovitis and joint pain on right knee and small joints on both
hands. Her regimen was changed to cyclosporine and bucillamine. Twenty months later, the skin lesions occurred. She exhibited erythematous
flaccid blisters on her chest, axillae, and back. Blisters consisted of erythematous patches and superficial erosions with turbid bullae
suggesting pemphigus vulgaris (Fig. 1). Nikolsky's sign was positive. Laboratory tests showed C-reactive protein 0.831 mg/dL (normal range
<0.8 mg/dL), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 66 mm/hr. Liver function, renal function, CK, and electrolytes were normal. A skin biopsy
revealed intraepidermal vesicle formation with acantholysis and the vesicle formation is suprabasal (Fig. 2). Indirect immunofluorescence,
performed by using serial dilutions of the patient's serum, demonstrated no IgG, IgA and C3 staining along epidermis and papillary dermis.
Bucillamine was discontin-ued and the patient was placed on oral prednisolone 20 mg daily. The skin lesions rapidly improved, and
disappeared within 2 months. D-penicillamine and bucillamine have been used for patients with rheumatoid arthritis as a disease modifying
anti-rheumatic drug. D-penicillamine can cause various autoimmune diseases including pemphigus, PM, and myasthenia gravis (4-6). Although
bucillamine has a chemical structure similar to D-penicillamine, autoimmune diseases are rarely associated with bucillamine. Some cases of
bucillamine-induced interstitial lung disease, nephropathy, and myasthenia gravis were described (7-9). It was reported that the incidence
of D-penicillamine-induced pemphigus was about 7% (5,10) and mean duration until the onset of pemphigus was 11 to 13 months (11,12). It
frequently presents as an urticarial, annular, or moniliform erythematous prodrome. Scaly crusted patches, vesicles, and bullae are
developed subsequently (5). The mechanism of thiol drugs-induced pemphigus is still obscure. It has been suggested that the epidermal cell
surface proteins play a role as an antigen to the host through a sulfhydryl radical and other unknown factors (1). In D-penicillamine-
induced pemphigus, the prevalence of IgG and IgA antibodies directed against the intercellular region is lower than that in spontaneously
occurring pemphigus (13). It has been shown that these antibodies might not be detected in some cases of drug-induced pemphigus like our
case (13,14). To date, only 2 cases of bucillamine-induced pemphigus were reported in English literature. One was drug-induced pemphigus
foliaceus with features of pemphigus vulgaris and the other was subcorneal pustular dermatosis-type IgA pemphigus induced by thiol drugs
(12,14). The discontinuation of D-penicillamine may be inadequate in treatment because it frequently fails to stop disease
progression.Initial dose of corticosteroid is typically about 0.75-1 mg/kg/day. It has been suggested that high-dose or pulse therapy with
steroids usually clears blisters promptly. Prednisolone at a lower dose of 20-30 mg/day can maintain these patients without blistering but
other adjuvant immunosuppressive drugs is need to achieve steroid-sparing effect or prevention of relapse (15,16). Blisters of our patient
disappeared rapidly with corticosteroid treatment and discontinuation of bucillamine. Relapse was not found during the subsequent 6 months.
In conclusion, bucillamine may cause pemphigus even at a low rate therefore we have to keep in mind that skin lesions with blisters should
be carefully investigated in patients with bucillamine treatment. Erythematous patches and superficial erosions with pustular bullae on
axillae and back of the patient. Skin biopsy shows acantholysis at the suprabasal layer, as well as at the upper layers of epidermis (H&E,
Ã—400).
