In this case, a successful mitral valve repair was confirmed by transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) at the end of a cardiopulmonary
bypass. The left ventricular vent was placed through the mitral valve to remove the air after the TEE examination, and on its way out, the
left ventricular vent damaged the anterior mitral leaflet (AML). Re-examination of the valve with TEE detected the new mitral valve
insufficiency. The CPB was reinstituted, and tearing of the lateral third part of the anterior mitral leaflet was found. This case
emphasizes the importance of TEE in the operating room as a continuous monitor, not only to evaluate the result of the cardiac surgery, but
also to detect any unpredictable events during the surgery. Intraoperative decisions are often based on the interpretation of results from
intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE). Residual mitral valve insufficiency at the completion of a valve repair is a well-
known risk factor for late reoperation, and the use of TEE has decreased the incidence of immediate repair failure.1,2 However, the
development of a new mitral valve insufficiency after the removal of the left ventricular vent is rare. This case emphasizes the importance
of TEE as a continuous monitor during cardiac surgery. Usually, TEE is used to assess the valve function at the end of the surgery in the
operating room, but an unexpected event can occur at any time after the inspection, as in this case, in which the mitral valve was damaged
during the left ventricular vent removal. A 53-year-old female patient with mitral valve insufficiency underwent surgery for mitral valve
repair. She had no history of medical illness until the day she was diagnosed with mitral valve insufficiency after an incidence of the
syncope seven months previously. The dyspnea upon exertion grew worse, and by the time of the operation her symptoms of congestive heart
failure were classified as New York Heart Association functional class III. Her transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a flail
posterior mitral leaflet (PML) with an eccentric mitral valve insufficiency of grade IV/IV. The left ventricular ejection fraction was 89%.
A preoperative TEE demonstrated the prolapse of the medial scallop (P3) of the PML with grade IV mitral valve insufficiency. In the
operating field, a rupture of the posterior chordae was seen, and it was repaired with a prolene suture. The mitral valve annulus was
repaired with a Duran ring 610R (#29 mm Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA). Following the release of the aortic cross clamp, pump flow was
reduced uneventfully to about 500 ml min-1, and hemodynamics were virtually unchanged due to adjustments of arterial pressure and
intravascular volume. A TEE examination was performed to evaluate the result of the surgery. No residual mitral valve insufficiency was
found, and the vent in the left atrium was advanced into the left ventricle to remove the air. After removal of the air, the left
ventricular vent was removed, and a new mitral valve insufficiency was seen on the TEE (Fig. 1). The cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was
reinstituted, and the surgeon found tearing of the lateral third part of the anterior mitral leaflet (A1 scallop), which had been normal
during the first mitral valve repair. At the end of the second CPB, no residual mitral valve insufficiency was evident (Fig. 2). The patient
was discharged without any further events. This case is interesting because the development of a new mitral valve insufficiency after
removal of the left ventricular vent is rare. An early reoperation was prevented with the use of TEE, which detected an unpredictable
surgical complication. Usually, immediate failure of mitral valve repair is due to residual prolapse, residual annular dilatation, or suture
dehiscence, which are procedure-related.1,3 TEE is a mainstay of cardiothoracic anesthesia for the surgical correction of cardiac valve
defects.4,5 TEE allows identification of the different mitral valve segments and the precise localization of pathology, and helps to
diagnose the mechanism of the mitral valve insufficiency. 6,7 The functional anatomy of the mitral valve insufficiency defined by TEE is
strongly and independently predictive of valve reparability and postoperative outcome.8 In this case, the valve function was evaluated
before CPB termination and the repair was successful, with no residual mitral valve insufficiency. Since the new mitral valve insufficiency
developed after the removal of the left ventricular vent through the mitral valve, it was considered that the left ventricular vent had
injured a part of the mitral valve during its removal. During the second CPB, a tearing of A1 was found and repaired with a prolene suture.
There was no residual mitral valve insufficiency at the end of the second CPB. The patient was weaned and separated from the second CPB
without difficulty. Any procedure related to cardiac manipulation needs TEE as an intraoperative monitor of cardiac function, which must be
continued until the end of the surgery.9 This case emphasizes the importance of TEE in the operating room, not only to evaluate the result
of the cardiac surgery, but also to detect any unpredictable events during the surgery. Transesophageal echocardiography shows evidence of
mitral valve insufficiency after the removal of the left ventricular vent. Transesophageal echocardiography, after the repair of the
anterior mitral leaflet ruptured by the removal of the left ventricular vent, shows no residual mitral valve insufficiency.
