We report here on the multiple genital tract neoplasms in a 41-yr-old Korean woman with Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome (PJS). The patient presented
with lower abdominal pain. Her previous medical history was PJS and breast cancer. Pelvic ultrasound showed a multilocular cyst at the right
adnexal region, diagnosed as bilateral ovarian mucinous borderline tumors. An ovarian sex cord tumor with annular tubules was incidentally
diagnosed together with a minimal deviation adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix and mucinous metaplasia of both the Fallopian tubal mucosa
and the endometrium. Although the cases of multiple genital tract tumors with PJS has rarely been reported, the present case appears to be
the first in Korea in which the PJS syndrome was complicated by multiple genital tract tumors and infiltrating carcinoma of the breast. The
clinical significance of the multiple genital tract tumors and breast cancer associated with PJS is reviewed. Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS)
is an autosomal dominantinherited disorder that is characterized by hamartomatous polyps of the gastrointestinal tract, mucocutaneous
melanin pigmentation and various neoplasms. Previous studies have reported that PJS is often accompanied with a higher incidence of other
malignancies, such as breast cancer, adenoma malignum of the uterine cervix and ovarian tumors, and the incidence of cancer among the
patients suffering with PJS has been estimated to be 15-fold higher than the incidence of cancer in the general population (1-8). Genital
tract neoplasms in the female patients with PJS include ovarian neoplasms from the epithelium and stromal cells, adenoma malignum of the
cervix and adenocarcinoma of the endometrium (1). The most common ovarian neoplasm found in patients with PJS is the sex cord tumor with
annular tubules (SCTAT), and this is followed by Sertoli cell tumor of the ovary, mucinous epithelial ovarian tumor, serous tumor and
ovarian mature teratoma. Each of the genital tract neoplasms in female patients rarely occur in this syndrome, whereas cases with multiple
tumors at different sites are very rare indeed. We report here on a 41-yr-old woman with PJS who had a sex cord tumor with annular tubules,
ovarian mucinous borderline tumor, adenoma malignum of the cervix, mucinous metaplasia of both the Fallopian tubal mucosa and the
endometrium, and infiltrating carcinoma of the breast. In 1999, a 41-yr-old, G2P1, Korean woman was referred to our institution because of a
right adnexal palpable mass that was associated with lower abdominal pain. In 1989, the patient was diagnosed as having PJS because of the
multiple hamartomatous polyps found in the small bowel and the melanin pigmentation around lips. In 1990, a small bowel resection was
performed for intussusception. After 1990, findings on endoscopic examinations had been negative up to death. In 1997, the left modified
radical mastectomy and left axillary lymph nodes dissection were performed for breast cancer. The tumor pathological stage was pT2, N1, M0.
Postoperatively, the patient had two courses of combination chemotherapy that consisted of 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide.
During chemotherapy, the patient was not able to tolerate the toxicity of chemotherapy and so it was stopped. There was no family history of
the PJS. Physical examination revealed freckling around the lips. Pelvic examination revealed an anteverted, slightly enlarged uterus and a
right adnexal mass 12 cm in diameter. The Pap smear contained several atypical metaplastic cells. Cervical biopsy was performed and the
histological diagnosis revealed adenoma malignum. Pelvic ultrasound showed multiple myomas in the uterus and a multilocular cyst at the
right adnexal region that was 15.1×13.8×12.6 cm in size. At the laparotomy, the right and left adnexal cyst appeared to be 20 cm and 8 cm at
the maximal diameter, respectively. A subsequent bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed and the intra-operative frozen sections were
found to contain mucinous tumors from the both ovaries. Consequently, the patient underwent radical hysterectomy and biopsy of the whitish
tissue of the previous colectomy site that was 1 cm in diameter. Postoperatively, the patient had one course of combination chemotherapy
that consisted of cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil. The patient was not able to tolerate the toxicity of chemotherapy and so we stopped it. In
2001, the patient presented with dyspnea. Chest CT scan revealed pleural effusion, extensive consolidations and small metastatic lung
nodules in both lungs. Treatment with combination chemotherapy that consisted of of taxol and epirubicin was unsuccessful, and patient
expired approximately 4 yr after the radical hysterectomy. Gastrointestinal tract (1988 to 1990): 21 polyps were biopsied and removed by
polypectomy from the colon and stomach once in 1988, three times in 1989 and once in 1990. In 1990, the segmental resection of the
strangulated small intestine was done. There were three polyps with the largest one measuring 5.6×3.3×3.0 cm and they showed hemorrhagic
infarct (Fig. 1). On the histologic examination, the polyps were hamartomatous polyps. Breast (1997): The left breast and the axillary fat
pad were removed by a modified radical mastectomy after excisional biopsy for frozen sectioning. The breast measured 20.0×12.5×1.5 cm. The
nipple was hemorrhagic and eroded. The ill defined, grayish and gritty mass measuring 3.2×2.0×1.0 cm was found on the lower outer quadrant.
Histologically, the infiltrating ductal carcinoma was Broom and Richardson grade II, and it involved the nipple and one of 21 regional lymph
nodes (Fig. 2). Female genital tract (1999): Radical hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy were performed. The uterus measured
12.0×6.0×4.0 cm and it weighed 220 g. The uterine endocervix showed a mucinous solid mass that measured 4.5×2.0 cm (Fig. 3A). Both the
ovaries were cystic. The right ovary measured 19.0×13.0×7.0 cm and it weighed 800 g, and the left ovary measured 9.0×6.0×5.0 cm and it
weighed 180 g (Fig. 3B). The cut surface showed multilocular cysts containing mucus. Both oviducts were unremarkable on gross examination.
The peritoneum, including the hamartomatous polyps around the anastomosis site for the previous segmental resection of small intestine, was
removed. Histologically, the uterine cervix showed a deeply infiltrative, but well differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma (adenoma malignum)
(Fig. 4). Frequent sites of vascular invasion were found. The pelvic lymph nodes on both sides showed metastasis. The peritoneum around the
anastomosis site showed a pseudomyxoma peritonei. Both the ovaries showed mucinous tumor that had borderline malignancy (Fig. 5A).
Additionally, there were scattered small nests of sex cord tumors with annular tubules in the cortex and septa of the multilocular cysts
(Fig. 5B). Both the tubal mucosa and endometrium showed mucinous metaplasia (Fig. 6). There was a metastatic adenocarcinoma from the uterine
cervix in the pelvic lymph nodes. The most common ovarian neoplasm found in the patients with PJS is the SCTAT (1). Among the patients
diagnosed with SCTAT, 36% of them are affected by PJS (2). The SCTAT is a distinctive ovarian neoplasm, and the predominant component of
this tumor has morphologic features that are intermediate between those features of the granulose cell tumor and those features of the
Sertoli cell tumor; focal differentiation into either granulose cell or Sertoli cell tumor may occur. SCTAT is capable of producing both
estrogen and progesterone (2,3). Symptoms of hyperestrogenism, including irregular menstrual bleeding, postmenopausal bleeding and isosexual
precocity, have been described (3). When this condition occurs in association with PJS, the ovarian SCTATs are almost always benign and they
are typically multifocal, calcified, bilateral, very small or even microscopical in size (2). Microscopically, ovarian SCTATs with PJS are
mainly characterized by sharply circumscribed rounded epithelial nests composed of ring-shaped tubules encircling the hyalinized basement
membrane-like material. The nests have two basic patterns: the simple pattern is that of a single tubule encircling a central rounded
hyaline mass, and the complex pattern is characterized by communicating tubules encircling multiple hyaline masses. In contrast, those
SCTATs unassociated with PJS are unilateral and large, and they sometimes have malignant behavior. Microscopically, the predominant
appearance of the tumor is similar to that encountered in patients with the PJS, but variations from the characteristic pattern are seen in
minor portions of the tumor. Another frequent ovarian neoplasm associated with PJS is the Sertoli cell tumor of the ovary that causes
precocious puberty (1). Mucinous epithelial ovarian tumors are also seen with increased frequency in patients with PJS. Although the
frequency of mucinous ovarian tumors in PJS patients may be close to that seen in the general population, it appears that the ratio of
mucinous to serous tumors is higher in PJS patients than the ratio of mucinous to serous tumors in the general population (8:1-1:3,
respectively). Two cases of serous tumor of the ovary associated with PJS have been published (3,4). In general, the patients with PJS who
have even simple ovarian cysts should undergo frequent follow-up and, at least, annual sonographic surveillance. Minimal deviation
adenocarcinoma (adenoma malignum) of the uterine cervix is a well-differentiated variant of adenocarcinoma in which the branching glandular
pattern strongly mimics that of the normal endocervical glands. Adenoma malignum is strongly associated with PJS (1,3,5,6). A serine
threonine kinase gene, STK11, has been identified as the tumor suppressor gene responsible for the PJS (9). Kuragaki et al. (9) have
reported that somatic mutations of the STK 11 gene were confirmed in 6 (55%) of the 11 mucinous adenoma malignums and in 1 (5%) of the 19
mucinous adenocarcinomas, but not in 5 nonmucinous adenocarcinomas, 15 squamous cell carcinomas, nor in 5 endocervical glands with gastric
metaplasia. Adenoma malignums with the STK 11 mutation has a significantly poorer prognosis than adenoma malignums without the STK 11
mutation. Mutations in the STK 11 gene may play an important role in the etiology of adenoma malignum of the uterine cervix, and this gene
mutation may distinguish this rare tumor from the other more common types of adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix. The prognosis of patients
with cervical adenoma malignum associated with PJS is generally poor (3,10). Srivastsa et al. (3) reviewed the outcome of the 10 reported
cases of cervical adenoma malignum associated with PJS that had adequate follow-up. Eight of these 10 patients died of their disease, and
only one patient survived for more than 5 yr. Of the 26 cases reported by Gilks et al. (10), 13 of the 22 patients (59%) died of their
disease and four additional patients were alive with recurrent tumor. They also reviewed a total of 57 cases that had been reported since
1963 and that had at least 2 yr of follow-up. Only 16 patients were alive without recurrent disease; 33 patients died of their disease.
Mucinous metaplasia and primary mucinous neoplasia of the Fallopian tube are extremely rare. Mucinous metaplasia of the Fallopian tube has
been associated with PJS (5,11). Seidman (11) in 1994 reported on seven women with mucinous lesions of the Fallopian tube, and two of the
patients had PJS. The mucinous lesions of the Fallopian tube were associated with multiple independent mucinous neoplasms and with PJS.
Furthermore, they suggested the possibility that mucinous metaplasia of the Fallopian tube was due to the direct extension from a adenoma
malignum of the endocervix. Breast cancer that is usually ductal, but occasionally it is lobular carcinoma, seems to be found in patients
with PJS with an increased frequency (4,7). This syndrome is caused by truncating germline mutations in the LKB1 gene (also called STK11
gene) (7). Low LKB1 protein expression in breast cancer correlates with a higher histological grade, a larger tumor size, a progesterone
receptor status and the presence of lymph node metastasis (12). Furthermore, low LKB1 expression has been associated with a higher relapse
rate and a worse prognosis. LKB1 expression may be a useful prognostic marker for human breast cancer. The case of PJS with multiple genital
tract tumors at different sites was first reported in 1986, and 3 cases of multiple genital tract tumors with PJS have been reported to date
(5,6,13). Chen (5) in 1986 reported the first case with multiple genital tract tumors including bilateral ovarian SCTAT, adenoma malignum of
the cervix and bilateral ovarian mucinous tumors in a 33-yr-old woman with PJS. Podezaski et al. (6) in 1991 reported a case of SCTAT of the
right ovary, mucinous cystadnoma of the left ovary and recurrent adnoma malignum of the cervix in a woman with PJS. Mangili et al. (13) in
2004 reported a case of ovarian mixed serous and mucinous borderline tumor, ovarian microscopic SCTAT, adenoma malignum of the cervix and
areas of mucinous metaplasia of the tubal mucosa in a 41-yr-old woman with PJS. The case with the multiple genital tract tumors and
infiltrating breast cancer has not been reported to date. Our patient was the first case in which the PJS syndrome was complicated by
ovarian mucinous borderline tumor, ovarian SCTAT, adenoma malignum of the cervix, the mucinous metaplasia of both the Fallopian tubal mucosa
and the endometrium, and infiltrating ductal carcinoma of the breast. The cancer risk for those patients affected with PJS is known to be
higher than the cancer risk of the general population. The prognosis for the patient with genital tract tumors associated with PJS is poor
and so early detection and regular surveillance of the high-risk patients with PJS is crucial. The Peutz-Jegher polyp composed of
hyperplastic, dilated mucous glands and central radiating smooth muscle bundles. Surface epithelium undergoes hemorrhagic necrosis due to
intussception (H-E, ×40). The invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast (H-E, ×100). (A) The uterine endocervix shows a nodular pale pink
tumor, infiltrating into deep cervical wall. (B) Bilateral ovarian multilocular cysts contain mucus. The endocervical adenocarcinoma
composed of well-differentiated, infiltrative glands (H-E, ×100). (A) Mucinous tumor of the ovary shows papillary growth and nuclear
stratification (H-E, ×200). (B) The sex cord element composed of multiple hyaline materials surrounded by clear cells (H-E, ×200). (A) The
salpingeal mucosa shows mucinous metaplasia (H-E, ×100). (B) Mucinous metaplasia of endometrial glands (H-E, ×100).
