Drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) syndrome associated with anticonvulsant drugs is a rare but potentially life-
threatening disease that occurs in response to arene oxide producing anticonvulsant such as phenytoin and carbamazepine. There have been
many reports of cross reactivity among the anticonvulsants upon first exposure to the offending drugs. However, there has been few data
describing the development of DRESS syndrome after switching medication from previously well-tolerated phenytoin to carbamazepine, and the
induction of hypersensitivity to phenytoin by DRESS to carbamazepine. We experienced a case of a 40-yr-old man who had uncontrolled seizure
that led to the change of medication from the long-term used phenytoin to carbamazepine. He developed DRESS syndrome after changing the
drugs. We stopped carbamazepine and restored phenytoin for seizure control, but his clinical manifestations progressively worsened and he
recovered only when both drugs were discontinued. Patch tests with several anticonvulsants showed positive reactions to both carbamazepine
and phenytoin. Our case suggests that hypersensitivity to a previously tolerated anticonvulsant can be induced by DRESS to another
anticonvulsant, and that the patch test may be a useful method for detecting cross-reactive drugs in anticonvulsant-associated DRESS
syndrome. Hypersensitivity syndrome is an idiosyncratic, serious drug reaction that consists of a rash, fever, involvement of multiple
visceral organs, and hematological abnormalities such as eosinophilia. To better individualize drug hypersensitivity reaction and to
distinguish the hypersensitivity reaction from drug-induced pseudolymphoma, Bocquet et al. have recently introduced the term drug rash with
eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) syndrome (1). Anticonvulsants are the principal drugs responsible for this malady. Among them,
arene oxide producing aromatic anticonvulsants such as phenytoin and carbamazepine are the particular drugs most frequently implicated for
DRESS syndrome or the anticonvulsant hypersensitivity syndrome (AHS) (2-10). Cross-reactivity among the aromatic anticonvulsants frequently
occurs when a previous history of DRESS syndrome exists (10-12). Many studies have described cross sensitivity as a worsening of the initial
features of DRESS syndrome when switching from a sensitive anticonvulsant to a cross-reactive anticonvulsant (8,13-15). However limited data
have described the development of DRESS syndrome after switching medication from a previously well-tolerated anticonvulsant to another
(5-7). We present here a case of DRESS syndrome in which hypersensitivity reaction to a previously well-tolerated phenytoin was induced by
hypersensitivity to carbamazepine, and we show that the patch test may be a useful method for detecting possible cross-reactive drugs in
such situations. A 40-yr-old man suffering from epilepsia presented with a generalized skin rash, facial edema, sore throat and high-grade
fever of 3-day duration. He had been taken phenytoin and sodium valproate for 4 yr without having any adverse reaction. Because of several
attacks of seizure while taking these anticonvulsants, the medications were switched to carbamazepine and sodium valproate 16 weeks before
the onset of skin rash and fever. At admission his temperature was 38.9℃, blood pressure 90/50 mmHg, pulse 140 beats/min, and respiratory
rate 17 breaths/min. On physical examination, generalized, diffuse, maculopapular, erythematous, pruritic rash was noted over the face,
trunk and extremities with marked facial edema (Fig. 1). He had moderately enlarged tonsils, injected oropharynx, and bilateral cervical
lymphadenopathy. His neurological examination and the remainder of the physical examination were unremarkable. The laboratory studies showed
a leukocytosis of 16.1×109/L with an eosinophilia of 2.7×109/L (Table 1). The platelet count and coagulation profile were normal. The
creactive protein was high at 11.3 mg/dL (normal <0.3 mg/dL), and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 2 mm in the first hour. Liver
function tests revealed aspartate aminotransferase 68 IU/L (normal 10-59 IU/L), alanine aminotransferase 122 IU/L (normal 10-72 IU/L),
alkaline phosphatase 232 IU/L (normal 30-140 IU/L), and serum bilirubin 0.4 mg/dL. Serology for antinuclear factor, RA factor, HBS Ag, anti-
HIV antibodies, anti-Mycoplasma antibodies, IgM anti-EB virus antibodies, anti-Hantan virus antibodies, anti-leptospiral antibodies, anti-
rickettsial antibodies, p-ANCA and c-ANCA antibodies was all negative. The other laboratory tests were all negative. Skin biopsy showed
moderate perivascular and interstitial infiltration of lymphocytes, eosinophils with exocytosis, basal cell vacuolization and marked upper
dermal edema. The diagnosis of DRESS syndrome due to carbamazepine was proposed on the basis of his clinical and biological findings.
Carbamazepine was discontinued, phenytoin was restarted at the dose of 300 mg/day, and he was also treated with prednisolone (40 mg/day).
However, during the next 7 days his skin rashes and facial edema progressively worsened, and mucosal lesions developed with the persistence
of fever (Fig. 2). Rapid progression of the leukocytosis with an eosinophilia was also noted (Table 1). On the seventh day of
hospitalization, phenytoin was stopped while continuing prednisolone based on a presumed diagnosis of hypersensitivity reaction to
phenytoin. Topiramate (100 mg/day) was then added for seizure control. There was marked improvement in his general condition over the next
several days with subsidence of the fever. Following the resolution of his skin eruption and laboratory abnormalities, the prednisolone was
tapered over the next 3 weeks. After obtaining informed consent, patch test was performed 3 months after the total resolution of his
illness. Several anticonvulsants including carbamazepine and phenytoin were tested at concentrations of 1% and 10% in petrolatum
with/without 1% and 10% in water. Using Finn Chambers on Scanopor tape, 2-day closed patch testing was performed on the backs of the
patient. The reactions were scored at 30 min after removal and 4 days after application, according to the International Contact Dermatitis
Research group recommendations (16,17). Carbamazepine and phenytoin patch tests were positive at day 2 and day 4, however, phenobarbital,
sodium valproate, topiramate, gabapentin, and vigabatrin showed no significant response on the patch tests (Fig. 3, Table 2). At a follow-up
examination after 12 months, he was completely asymptomatic and was tolerating sodium valproate (1,200 mg/day) and topiramate (250 mg/day).
DRESS syndrome can manifest 1-8 weeks after starting the anticonvulsant therapy with a mean of 3 weeks (11-13,18). In previously sensitized
individuals, DRESS may occur within 1 day upon rechallenge. In our case, DRESS syndrome developed 16 weeks after the introduction of
carbamazepine. The patient had no known exposure to other medications that have been implicated in development of the DRESS syndrome.
Various factors may have contributed to this long induction period; interindividual variations, individual susceptibility, and induction of
the carbamazepine metabolism via the hepatic cytochrome P-450 system by the previously administered phenytoin, which might have reduced the
tendency to develop DRESS syndrome. Cross sensitivity among the aromatic anticonvulsants occurs at a rate as high as 80% (11,12). However,
development of DRESS syndrome to one anticonvulsant after switching medication, and the subsequent development of hypersensitivity to a
previously well-tolerated anticonvulsant upon second exposure rarely occurs (5-7). For most of these cases, there was no objective evidence
about secondary induction of hypersensitivity to a previously tolerated drug, and only a presumptive diagnosis was made based on the
clinical manifestations (5,7). Some patients with DRESS syndrome may have flare-up of symptoms 3 to 4 weeks after the initiation of the
reaction despite the discontinuation of the offending drug. In addition, once the offending drug is discontinued, those organs initially
involved may show progressive changes or organs that were previously uninvolved may manifest involvement (11). Therefore, we cannot exclude
the possibility that the worsening of the clinical features was not due to cross-reactivity but due to the natural course of the DRESS
syndrome in some reports (5,7). Klassen and Sadler (6) only showed induction of hypersensitivity to the previously tolerated phenytoin by
carbamazepine with the reintroduction of phenytoin to the patient. The initial lack of adverse reaction to phenytoin, followed by immediate
adverse response on later rechallenge several months after development of hypersensitivity to carbamazepine indirectly suggest induction of
hypersensitivity to phenytoin in that report. Besides the clinical features, we showed induction of hypersensitivity to phenytoin with the
results of the patch tests. The diagnosis of DRESS syndrome is made based on the history of drug exposure and clinical examination. The
differential diagnosis includes other cutaneous drug reactions, acute infections, neoplastic, and other immunologic disorders. Withdrawal of
the suspicious drug and subsequent improvement of clinical manifestations makes the diagnosis more reliable. When anticonvulsant therapy is
invaluable, however, additional diagnostic methods can be sought to select safe drugs for seizure control. Although no gold standard exists,
in vitro lymphocyte toxicity assay or lymphocyte transformation tests (LTT), and in vivo patch tests may be helpful in such situations. Many
studies have showed the usefulness of LTT and patch testing for the diagnosis of hypersensitivity to anticonvulsants (11,12,17-23). LTT
shows similar results with patch test. But false negative reaction of LTT was also noted in patients with simultaneous positive patch test
(20). As patch testing is less cumbersome and seems more reliable, it is more frequently used in the case of diagnostic uncertainty
(17,19-24). Positive rate of patch tests to carbamazepine were relatively high from 70% to 100% (20-24). However, positive patch test
results in phenytoin-induced AHS were much lower (30-60%) than in carbamazepine-induced AHS (25,26). Moreover, it is not yet known
accurately how many patients who are on anticonvulsants have a positive patch test. Thus the diagnostic accuracy of patch test in DRESS
syndrome is currently unknown. In general, positive predictive value of patch test is relatively good, but negative results of patch test
cannot exclude the possibility of hypersensitivity. If patch testing is to be performed, 1% and 10% carbamazepine or phenytoin in
petrolatum, in water or in alcohol is recommended (11,19). It is also recommended that at least 2 months should elapse from the time of the
skin eruption to the testing date since either false positive reactions due to increased reactivity or false negative reactions due to a
refractory state may exist. We performed patch tests 3 months after the total resolution of symptoms with several anticonvulsants at 1% and
10% concentrations, and both carbamazepine and phenytoin showed positive results. Although we did not perform an oral rechallenge testing
with phenytoin, the imputability of these two drugs was possible because of the clinical features and the in vivo patch test results.
Aromatic anticonvulsants are metabolized by the cytochrome P-450 enzyme to a common arene oxide metabolite that is normally detoxified by
enzyme systems such as epoxide hydrolase. Genetically determined abnormalities in enzyme systems leading to inability to detoxify toxic
metabolites may be involved in the pathogenesis of AHS (11,12,25). Reactive toxic metabolites irreversibly modify cellular proteins, and
then initiate or serve as targets for an immune attack on modified proteins in target organs (27,28). Thus both pharmacogenetic and
immunologic mechanism may play an important role in anticonvulsant-induced DRESS syndrome, and this immune response can explain the late
induction of hypersensitivity to the previously tolerated phenytoin after sensitization to carbamazepine. Recent studies have strongly
suggested that viral infections, especially reac-tivation of human herpesvirus 6, contribute to the pathogen-esis of drug hypersensitivity
to anticonvulsants (4,9,10). However further study will be required to establish the relationship between human herpesvirus 6 infection and
drug hypersensitivity. In conclusion, we present a case of carbamazepine-induced DRESS syndrome that also showed induction of
hypersensitivity to the previously well-tolerated phenytoin. Our case suggests that physician should be aware that hypersensitivity to
previously tolerated anticonvulsants can be induced by hypersensitivity to another anticonvulsant, and patch test may be a worthwhile method
for detecting other possible cross-reactive drugs in such situations. This study was supported by Inha University Research Grant 2005.
Generalized diffuse maculopapular rashes over the face and trunk with facial edema on the day of admission. Desquamative facial rash and
edema (A), and vesiculation on upper arms (B). Photographs taken at seventh admission day with prednisolone (40 mg/day) treatment. Results
of drug patch testing at day 2. 1, petrolatum; 2, phenytoin 10% aq; 3, phenytoin 1% aq; 4, phenobarbital 10% pet; 5, phenobarbital 1% pet;
6, phenytoin 10% pet; 7, phenytoin 1% pet; 8, carbamazepine 10% aq; 9, carbamazepine 1% aq; 10, carbamazepine 10% pet; 11, carbamazepine 1%
pet; 12, carbamazepine 0.5% pet; 13, carbamazepine 0.1% pet; 14, sodium valproate 10% pet; 15, sodium valproate 1% pet; 16, topiramate 10%
pet; 17, topiramate 1% pet; 18, gabapentin 10% pet; 19, gabapentin 1% pet; 20, vigabatrin 10% pet. aq, in water; pet, in petrolatum.
Laboratory values and clinical characteristics Summary of patch test results with several anticonvulsants aq., water; pet., petrolatum.
