Left ventricular diastolic dysfunction, with secondary atrial pressure elevation, is a well-known concept. On the contrary, effect of left
atrial compliance on pulmonary pressure is rarely considered. We report the echocardiographic case of a 9-year-old child who presented
severe rheumatic mitral valve regurgitation with a giant left atrium, in contrast to a normal artery pulmonary pressure, testifying of the
high left atrial compliance. Left atrial compliance is an important determinant of symptoms and pulmonary artery pressure in mitral valve
disease. Diastolic heart failure, with marked increase in filling pressures secondary to less compliant ventricles is now well evaluated by
new echocardiographic modalities. On the other hand, the effect that the left atrial compliance may have on pulmonary artery pressure is not
considered in the daily practice. This concept has been studied especially in mitral stenosis, with a wide range of left atrial pressures
despite similar mitral valve areas . We report the case of a 9-year-old asymptomatic girl who presented a 3 on 6 holosystolic murmur,
discovered during a cross sectional survey estimating rheumatic heart disease prevalence in schoolchildren of Maputo in Mozambique. The
apical impulse was displaced to the left, and a third heart sound and a short diastolic rumble reflect the rapid and voluminous left
ventricular filling. No hepatomegaly or other right ventricular failure was found. According to the physical examination, the severe mitral
regurgitation was estimated on the trans-thoracic echocardiography, using the PISA method (effective regurgitant orifice of 26 mm2, body
mass index of 0.80 m2). Though unfortunately frequent in sub-Saharan Africa, this case draws a particular attention. As seen on the figure,
the giant left atrium (73 cm2, 2-D four cavities apical view) contrasted with a normal pulmonary artery pressure estimated on Doppler
analysis of the minimal tricuspid regurgitation (Doppler velocity 2.45 m/s, giving a systolic pulmonary artery pressure about 29 mmHg), well
correlated with normal convexity of the interventricular septum and low speed of the pulmonary diastolic flow. This profile illustrated the
important role that left atrial compliance may have on pulmonary artery pressure. Pressure decay across the mitral valve depends on mitral
valve area, trans-mitral gradient, and atrio-ventricular compliance . Atrio-ventricular compliance can be estimated by Doppler
echocardiography from the ratio of mitral valve effective orifice area (calculated by the continuity equation, cm2) and E-wave downslope
(cm/s2); according of Flachskampf et al. the net auriculo-ventricular compliance (Cn) can be calculated as follows: Cn = 1270 Ã— (MVA/E
dv/dt) (ml/mmHg) [MVA: mitral valve area in cm2. E dv/dt: E wave downslope of the mitral Doppler signal in cm/sec2]. Atrio-ventricular
compliance implies compliance characteristics of the both chambers, atrium and ventricle, as a single unit. When the compliance of either of
these chambers is normal, any abnormality of atrio-ventricular compliance reflects abnormal compliance of the other. In case of pure mitral
stenosis in young people without additional cardiac pathology, the left ventricle compliance is expected to be normal, and atrio-ventricular
compliance is also equivalent to the left atrial compliance, and is a major independent determinant of pulmonary artery pressure measured by
catheterization . This low atrial compliance may explain the overestimation of mitral valve area by pressure half-time, in comparison with
continuity equation method or planimetry. Moreover, this limitation of the pressure half-time method is well recognized in the setting of
percutaneous mitral valvotomy, which induces substantial changes in chamber compliance within a short period of time. On the opposite, in
case of mitral regurgitation, very few data are reported. Echocardiographic atrio-ventricular compliance evaluation may remain difficult
because of difficulties to assess to the mitral valve area. In addition, on the contrary of mitral stenosis, in which auriculo-ventricular
is essentially dictated by atrial compliance, auriculo-ventricular compliance in mitral regurgitation is more difficult to evaluate. However
in mitral regurgitation, atrial size is known to be proportional to its compliance , and may explain a normal pulmonary artery pressure in
spite of a chronic severe mitral regurgitation. In case of severe mitral regurgitation, left atrial size may be a strong predictor of atrial
compliance, which is an important determinant of symptoms and pulmonary artery pressure. The author(s) declare that they have no competing
interests. EM, DJ carried out the schoolchildren survey to assess to the prevalence of rheumatic heart disease. EM, DJ did the
echocardiography of this case, analyzed the literature, and wrote the paper. SV, PO have been involved in the final approval of the version
to be published, after analyze of the literature. Trans-thoracic echocardiography (2-D apical, four cavities view) showing a giant left
atrium (73 cm2). Note the marked deviation of the atrial septum (white arrow). LA: left atrium, LV: left ventricle.
