The schwannomas are benign tumors originating from Schwann cells which constitute the nerve sheath. The dorsal pigmented type of schwannomas
is relatively rare (Goldstein in Am J Med Genet 86:62–65, 2004; Kurtkaya-Yapicier in Histol Histopathol 18(3):925–934, 2003). There are two
distinct types of melanotic schwannoma: the sporadic melanotic schwannomas and the psammomatous melanotic schwannomas of Carney complex. We
report a case of a patient harboring a right dorsal dumb-bell melanotic schwannoma and left adrenal mass. The patient underwent a surgical
procedure for en bloc total removal of the mass by a posterior and anterior approach. Histopathological examination revealed the diagnosis
of melanotic schwannoma. At present, we have no reliable marker of histopathological malignancy of melanotic schwannoma so the follow-up
period ought to continue for a period of more than 5 years. As the total removal of the melanotic neurinomas is mandatory to prevent
possible malignant transformation of the tumor recurrence or regrowth, we believe that the posterior and trans-thoracic approach are the
most suitable one for the dorsal dumb-bell schwannoma. Dorsal dumb-bell melanotic schwannomas are very rare . They are rather frequently
associated to Carney’s complex . They present problems on different aspects, such as pre-operative diagnosis, surgical approach and post-
operative course. We describe the case of a 53-year-old man who presented with left adrenal hyperplasia and right paravertebral mass
suggesting a dumb-bell schwannoma. In January 2003, a 53-year-old salesman, heavy smoker with an elevate level of arterial hypertension,
began to complain about pain in his right chest and upper limb. Chest X-ray and thoracic CT scan in the following February revealed a D9–D10
dumb-bell mass extending into the intrathoracic right space for about 2.5 cm. The patient was admitted to our clinic. A spinal dorsal MRI
confirmed the presence of the voluminous D9–D10 right paravertebral mass (Figs. 1, 2). Abdomen MRI showed an almost 4 cm swelling of the
left suprarenal gland, suggesting a pheochromocytoma (Fig. 3). The neurologic examination and brain MRI were normal. The renal arterial
echodoppler, the dosing of vanilmandelic acid, alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, urinary catecholamine and cortisol were normal.
The renin activity and the plasmatic level of aldosteron resulted normal in orthostasis and increased in recumbency. The medullar adrenal
gland scintigrams (123 IIs MIBG-148 MBqs e.v.) resulted negative for pheochromocytoma. Therefore, we excluded a pheochromocytoma and the
patient underwent a surgical procedure for total removal of the dorsal mass by posterior and anterior approach in collaboration with the
thoracic surgeons. Fig. 1MR images demonstrating a right dumb-bell intra-extradural mass at T9–T10 level extending into the intrathoracic
right space for about 2.5 cm. Coronal and axial T1-weighted images with Gd-DTPA enhancementFig. 2Sagittal T2-weighted MRI showing T9–T10
right intervertebral foramen occupied by the tumorFig. 3Coronal abdominal spectral fat saturation inversion recovery (SPIR) MR images
showing left suprarenal swelling MR images demonstrating a right dumb-bell intra-extradural mass at T9–T10 level extending into the
intrathoracic right space for about 2.5 cm. Coronal and axial T1-weighted images with Gd-DTPA enhancement Sagittal T2-weighted MRI showing
T9–T10 right intervertebral foramen occupied by the tumor Coronal abdominal spectral fat saturation inversion recovery (SPIR) MR images
showing left suprarenal swelling A D9–D10 laminectomy after radioscopic control was performed. A right dumb-bell intra-extradural mass of
blackish aspect was seen. En bloc total removal of a markedly melanotic intradural lesion was achieved using operating microscope. Then the
patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus and by trans-thoracic approach the paravertebral mass was radically removed en bloc, also
freeing the right D9–D10 intervertebral foramen from the black and well-encapsulated neoformation. Accurate plastic of the paravertebral
pleural wall was obtained. Histological examination revealed melanotic schwannoma with mitotic index not superior to one for ten fields on
high magnification indicating low risk for malignancy. Post-operative course was uneventful, with marked improvement of the painful
symptomatology and good healing of the surgical wounds. The patient was discharged from our ward after 10 days, with a recommendation for
ichnographic controls of the left adrenal gland hyperplasia. During a 2-year follow-up period, no recurrence was evident on surveillance
MRI. The schwannomas are benign tumors originating from Schwann cells which constitute the nerve sheath. The first case was described by
Bjornboe [13, 15] in 1934 in a patient with neurofibromatosis type I. There are two distinct types of melanotic schwannoma: the sporadic and
the psammomatous melanotic schwannomas of Carney complex [8, 14, 24, 27, 29, 36]. In 1985, Carney described a syndrome characterized by
mixomas (heart, skin and breast), mucus-cutaneous spotty pigmentations and endocrine overactivity (due to thyroid dysfunction or hypophysial
adenoma or Cushing syndrome secondary to adrenocortical pigmented primary nodular hyperplasia) [8, 9]. A year later, a Mendelian dominant
heredity was defined responsible for the symptomatologic complex . About 50% of patients with melanotic psammomatous schwannomas are
affected by the syndrome of Carney and one-fifth of them are carriers of multiple lesions [21, 42]. Generally, melanotic schwannoma affects
the spinal nerves, the central nervous system and the autonomous nerve system, but extra-nervous locations can also exist. The dorsal
location represents 30.5% of the spinal melanotic schwannoma . Until today we were able to find 47 spinal cases of extramedullary melanotic
neurinoma in literature (Table 1) [1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 16, 18, 20, 21, 26, 28, 30, 31, 33, 34, 35, 38, 39, 44, 45]. The clinical
presentation is not specific but similar to that of other extramedullary spinal tumors (radicular pain, dysesthesias, progressive sensorial-
motor deficits). Preoperative diagnosis is based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): melanotic schwannomas appear hyperintense on
T1-weighted sequences and hypointense on T2-weighted sequences compared to the nonmelanotic type of schwannomas that are hypo-isointense on
T1 and hyperintense on T2 [1, 13, 17, 25, 37]. Table 1Review of 47 cases of spinal extramedullary melanotic schwannoma reported in
literatureReferencesAgeGenderLevelAprile et al. 70FL3Bagchi et al. 40MT6–T7Belak et al. 44–DorsalBosman et al. 43ML4–L5Bouziani et al.
46MLumbarBuhl et al. 28ML5–S1Bunc et al. ––T12–L2Cornejo et al. 36ML3–L4Di Gregorio et al. ––SacralErlandson et al. 36ML5–S1Goasguen et al.
66FC2–C3Graziani et al. 40FT3Gregorios et al. 45FT2Iizuka et al. 58FT10Killeen et al. 26FS1Krichen et al. 27MC6–C7Kuchelmeister et al.
53FC5–C6Le Cam et al. 35FL4Leger et al. 36MC4Lowman et al. 17FT12–L1Lowman et al. 26FC6Ludvikova et al. 56FSpineLudvikova et al.
58MSpineMandybur et al. 59MT7Martin-Reay et al. 32MSacrumMcGavran et al. 12FT2McGavran et al. 49FC8Mennemeyer et al. 23FL1Mennemeyer et al.
25MT7Mennemeyer et al. 36MS1Parent et al. 63FS1Paris et al. 49FC8Parker et al. 18FDorsalPrieto-Rodriguez et al. 38MT5Schmitz et al.
42FCervicalTawk et al. 61MT7Vallat-Decouvelaere et al. 5 casesF and MC–T–L–SZhang et al. 5 casesF and MSpinal nerve rootZonenshayn et al.
27FL2 and L4–L5 Review of 47 cases of spinal extramedullary melanotic schwannoma reported in literature The histological differential
diagnosis with the other spinal pigmented tumors is with the meningeal melanocitoma, the pigmented neurofibroma, the paraganglioma, the
ganglioneuroma, the fibrous form of meningioma and above all with the primitive melanoma or relative metastasis [13, 15]. Even if the
association of the left adrenal swelling and arterial hypertension with the dumb-bell thoracic melanotic schwannoma can be correlated to the
Carney complex, in our opinion our patient did not harbor such a syndrome. In fact only the adrenocortical pigmented primary nodular
hyperplasia is a characteristic stigmata of Carney complex. Moreover, our patient did not show cutaneous signs of neurofibromatosis and his
family history was negative for Carney complex stigmata. The total body CT scan showed the left adrenal mass and excluded any other typical
lesion of the syndrome. The increased plasmatic level of renin and aldosteron in recumbency in our patient, that was on heavy medical
therapy for high level of arterial blood pressure, may be correlated to left adrenal hyperplasia or solitary adrenal adenoma and not to
adrenocortical pigmented nodular hyperplasia, which is the cause of ACTH-independent adrenal Cushing’s syndrome and normally do not trigger
elevation of plasmatic aldosteron. Moreover, in our case the histological examination of the neurinoma did not show the most common,
psammomatous aspect of Carney complex [8, 13]. In summary, we did not perform a left adrenal biopsy as we ruled out the Carney syndrome and
malignancy of the adrenal mass by clinic and radiological investigations. Hypertension, adrenal mass and dumb-bell melanotic schwannoma do
not imply Carney complex. In our patient the hypertension was not correlated to the Carney complex, but to the hyperaldosteronism caused by
left adrenal hyperplasia or solitary adrenal adenoma. Nevertheless, neurosurgeons ought to keep in mind the connection between the melanotic
schwannoma and the Carney complex, since more than 50% of the cases described in literature have been related to such syndrome. A complete
endocrinological evaluation and a total body CT should always be performed together with a genetic study in the suspicion of Carney complex.
The risk of possible malignant transformation of the neurinoma should also be taken into consideration as cases of recurrences or metastases
have been described even 13 years after surgery [4, 6, 19, 21, 23, 32, 41]. It is not possible to have any reliable histopathological
indication of possible malignant transformation after the first surgical operation . The follow-up ought to continue for a period of more
than 5 years. We have both to check the primitive tumor regrowth or recurrence and the possible remote locations, particularly in the lungs.
From the surgical point of view the total removal of the melanotic neurinomas is mandatory to prevent possible malignant transformation of
the tumor remnants. The therapeutic potential of radiotherapy is not proven . The prognosis depends, therefore, almost entirely on the
extent of surgical removal of the tumor [3, 44]. So we believe that the posterior and anterior approach is the most suitable one to remove
the dorsal dumb-bell schwannoma completely, both in the thoracic cavity and in the intervertebral foramen, and to avoid possible liquoral
leakage.
