Atypical Mycobacteria (ATB) are a miscellaneous collection of Mycobacteriaceae which also includes M. tuberculosis, M. bovis and M. leprae.
In the paediatric population, ATB infections present with non-tender unilateral lymphadenopathy in a systemically well child. Initially the
disease may be mistaken for a staphylococcal or streptococcal abscess. Inappropriate surgical incision and drainage is often performed and
specimens may be sent for routine histopathology and bacteriology analysis only without considering Mycobacterial infection. The simple
incision and drainage procedures can complicate the management and may result in a poor cosmetic outcome. ATB can go undiagnosed until the
initial medical management has failed, these surgical interventions performed and the child remains symptomatic. We wish to highlight the
importance of considering ATB infection in the differential diagnosis of a child with painless lymphadenitis. An illustrative case report is
described. A review of the paediatric data from the Mycobacterial laboratories in Northern Ireland over the last 14 years was performed to
ascertain disease trends and prevalence of species. Overall an upward trend in the number of cases of cervical lymphadenitis caused by ATB
infections in children was demonstrated. Organisms isolated in our population were M avium intracellulare, M malmoense and M interjectum. We
would like to present this data and a literature review, illustrated by case report, on the optimal management of these infections. We
suggest that early definitive surgery is the management of choice, performed ideally by a surgeon with experience of this condition. A
heightened awareness of these infections is essential to ensure appropriate early management. Atypical Mycobacteria (ATB) are a
miscellaneous collection of Mycobacterial species which also includes M. tuberculosis, M. bovis and M. leprae. Thirteen Atypical species are
associated with human infection. These organisms are ubiquitous in the environment, existing in soil and water, as pathogens in birds or
cattle and as pharyngeal flora in clinically well humans. Infected children are usually healthy with no immunological impairment and once
appropriately treated there is full recovery. Immunocompromised individuals, such as HIV positive and immunodeficient patients, are
susceptible to disseminated ATB infections. ATB infections present with non-tender unilateral lymphadenopathy in a systemically well child.
Initially the disease may be mistaken for a Staphylococcal or Streptococcal infection leading to inappropriate incision and drainage which
can cause cosmetic complications. Consideration of an ATB diagnosis may not be given until medical or surgical therapy has failed. We wish
to highlight the importance of considering ATB infection in the differential diagnosis of a child with painless lymphadenitis. Over the past
14 years in Northern Ireland, we have observed an upward trend in the number of cases of cervical lymphadenitis caused by Atypical
Mycobacteria in children. Our 3-year old patient presented with a firm inflamed swelling in the right submandibular area. Initial medical
management with intravenous antibiotics was ineffective. Fine needle aspiration of the lesion revealed acid-fast bacilli on Ziehl-Nielsen
staining. Subsequent biopsy demonstrated a granulomatous reaction in keeping with a Mycobacterial infection. Specific questioning revealed
no family history of tuberculosis, abscesses or infections; there were no family pets, no exposure to birds and no unpasteurised milk
consumption. An initial chest x-ray was normal and Mantoux testing was negative. Conventional anti-tuberculous therapy (Isoniazid,
Rifampicin, and Pyrazinamide) was commenced. Definitive Culture at 6 weeks isolated Mycobacterium avium intracellulare. The prescription was
altered to include Clarithromycin. This boy remained on antimicrobial therapy for 9 months. When the therapy was discontinued the lesion
appeared to be quiescent. However, following a minor episode of local trauma 6 months later, the lesion became swollen, inflamed and started
to discharge. The original antibiotic therapy regimen was restarted. Subsequent referral was made to a supra-regional Paediatric Infectious
Diseases unit because of failed medical management. Full surgical excision by a paediatric plastic surgeon was recommended as offering the
best chance of complete recovery. At operation an inflammatory mass of submandibular nodes and a large jugulodigastric node were resected. A
minor branch of the facial nerve, which had become attenuated to the nodes, was excised and repaired under magnification. There was minimal
cosmetic upset and only transient facial nerve weakness. Acid-fast bacilli were seen on initial pus analysis. Histology of the nodes
confirmed granulomata & caseating necrosis in keeping with chronic Mycobacterial infection. Excision was curative as two years later, our
patient remains in good health and disease-free. Data on children with ATB-positive culture samples was collected from the only two
Mycobacterial laboratories in Northern Ireland, based in Belfast City Hospital and Antrim Area Hospital. The records dated back to October
1990. Data was collected until October 2004. A total of 40 children aged 1 to 11 years (average age 3.6 years) were included in this study.
All children presented with a unilateral neck swelling. Organisms isolated in this population were M. avium intracellulare (n=27), M.
malmoense (n=12) and M. interjectum (n=1). Twenty eight out of the 40 children (70%) were female (fig 1). None of the patients suffered
recurrence. Overall an upward trend in the annual figures for ATB infections was demonstrated. The annual incidence over 14 years varied
from 0 to 7 patients per year. Atypical Mycobacterial infections in children are most frequently located in superior anterior cervical or in
submandibular nodes (91%).1,2 The pre-auricular, post cervical, axillary and inguinal lymph nodes can also be involved. The children usually
lack constitutional symptoms and present in 95% of cases with unilateral, subacute, progressive lymphadenopathy. The swelling is painless,
firm and not erythematous. ATB infections have a winter and spring predominance and higher incidence in females.1 Person to person spread
does not occur. Mycobacterial lymphadenitis affects children aged 1-12 years. However, the majority of cases are reported in 1-5 year olds
presumably because there is increased tendency of these children to put objects contaminated by soil or stagnant water into their mouths. It
may also be due to the relative poor immunity to Mycobacteria found in this age group.3 Most of the affected children are healthy and are
not immunocompromised. Markers of infection (WCC/CRP) and chest x-rays are normal. Mantoux testing may be positive or negative. Definitive
diagnosis is confirmed by surgical excision of the node and recovery of the pathogen by culture. Exact species identification can take up to
8 weeks. Differential diagnoses include tuberculosis, cat-scratch disease, infectious mononucleosis, toxoplasmosis, brucellosis and
malignancy (lymphoma). The natural evolution of the cervical lymphadenitis varies; either the lymph nodes remain indurated for many months,
or the disease progression results in softening, eruption, sinus formation and prolonged discharge. Other complications include reactivation
after prolonged quiescence and damage to peripheral branch of facial nerve. The latter complication is because the preauricular nodes are
often located within the parotid gland necessitating a limited parotidectomy with risk to the facial nerve. Four large retrospective studies
have demonstrated that surgical excision of infected nodes has a cure rate between 81% and 92%, rising to 95% if there is early surgical
intervention.4â€“7 The evidence for anti-mycobacterial chemotherapy being effective in this infection is limited.5 Indeed it is accepted that
in-vitro sensitivity testing may not reflect clinical response8 and it is our experience that many children respond inconsistently to these
antibiotics. Our case typifies the difficulty in managing this infection with antimicrobial therapy only. Surgical excision where possible
in the hands of an experienced operator is the management of choice. However, surgical excision may be technically difficult because of
adjacent and surrounding inflammation. Surgical excision of infected pre-auricular glands may result in a poor cosmetic outcome. In these
situations a trial of antibiotics may be warranted. Anti-microbial chemotherapy directed at ATB can include aminoglycosides, macrolides and
quinolones.3,5 We suggest that, where ATB infection is suspected, early referral to Paediatric Infectious Diseases or to a surgeon with
experience in this area is indicated. In conclusion, Atypical Mycobacterial infection presents as local cervical lymphadenitis in
immunocompetent children. In our opinion we suggest that early definitive surgery by an experienced operator is the management of choice.
Specimens should be sent for histopathology, bacteriology and Mycobacterial culture. A heightened awareness of these infections is essential
to ensure appropriate early management. The authors have no conflict of interest.
