Langerhans cell histiocytosis affects mainly young children and features an accumulation of CD1a+ dendritic Langerhans cells in the bone,
skin, and other organs. A few cases of Langerhans cell histiocytosis on the penis have been reported in the literature. We present a case of
Langerhans cell histiocytosis on the penis and review the similar cases in the literature. The patient was a 13-year-old boy who had a
history of lymph node, femur bone, and pituitary-thalmic axis lesions from Langerhans cell histiocytosis who noticed a painful nodule on the
prepuce of his penis. The histological and immunohistochemical examination fulfilled the criteria of Langerhans cell histiocytosis. We
herein describe the case reported of Langerhans cell histiocytosis on the penis. Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is characterized by an
organ-specific infiltration of cells with many morphological features and immunohistochemical markers of Langerhans cells. Clinically, LCH
ranges from self-healing lesions to a multi-system involvement with organ dysfunction resistant to current therapies. The lesions appear in
multiple organs, for example in the bones, skin, and lungs, but a lesion localized on the penis is uncommon. We herein report a case of LCH
on the penis. A 13-year-old boy presented with a nodular lesion on the prepuce of his penis. A diagnosis of LCH had been made at the age of
3 years. The first lesion was on a cervical lymph node. After the administration of chemotherapy with vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and
predonisone, the lesion resolved. When the patient was 11 years old, he restarted chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide and 6-mercaptopurine)
because of a recurrent lesion in the femur bone and along the pituitary-thalmic axis. At this time, he noticed a painful nodule, 5 mm in
diameter, which was elastic, hard, and reddish, with a smooth surface (Fig. 1). Surgical resection of the nodule in the foreskin, without
amputation or circumcision, was performed. Histologically, the lesions consisted of diffuse infiltrates of Langerhans cells with indented or
grooved nuclei and eosinophilic or pale cytoplasm. Also present were various numbers of eosinophils, lymphocytes, and neutrophils. The
lesions represented stromal edema and mild fibrosis. Their surface was focally eroded. Scattered vascular proliferation was present (Fig.
2). Both S-100 protein and CD1a were immunoreactive in the majority of these Langerhans cells (Fig. 3, 4). These findings led to a diagnosis
of LCH of the penis. An additional treatment with oral and ointment steroid was given, and the patient was well throughout a 4-month follow-
up, showing no signs of other lesions. Histiocytosis X, which included Letterer-Siwe's disease, Hand-Shuller-Christian's disease, and
eosinophilic granuloma, was renamed Langerhans cell histiocytosis in 1985 by the Histiocytic Society . The diagnosis of LCH has been based
on a histopathological pattern in biopsy specimens showing mono- or multinucleated Langerhans cells, histiocytes, and eosinophils. The
presence of Birbeck granules on electron microscopic examination or of antigenic markers that react with CD1a glycoprotein and the
cytoplasmic protein S100 detected by immunostain is considered diagnostic, as shown in the present case. LCH lesions are common in the bone,
lung, skin, liver, spleen, and lymph nodes. In 30.6% of patients, LCH involved more than one body system. Twenty-five percent of patients
had skin and/or mucous membrane LCH. The most common mucous membranes involved are the genitalia and oral mucous . In the current
literature, we found only 6 cases of a penile lesion, reported by Myers et al. , Caputo et al. , Yokota et al. , Meehan et al. , Seseke F et
al. , and Maekawa et al., respectively. Each case was treated by surgical excision, chemotherapy, or steroid ointment, and there are no
reports in the literature of recurrence on the penis. Although treatment of vulvar lesions with radiation and surgical excision did not
prevent recurrence , penile lesions appear to be too sensitive for this type of treatment. In a prior report, distinct Langerhans cell
preponderance is shown in the transformation zone of the cervix and the vulva. Langerhans cells are modulated actively in response to
certain chemical stimuli, human papillomavirus infection, and cervical intraepithelial neoplasia . It is not proven that the distribution of
Langerhans cells or various stimuli to the penis may be related to the rare nature of penile lesions or the good response to the treatment.
In the adult cases, there are sole cutaneous involvements of the penis. These cutaneous lesions in adult life may simply represent a limited
form of LCH with an excellent prognosis. It is also possible that such lesions are the initial presentation of one of the multi-system
instances of LCH . Patients with localized LCH may have a good chance of spontaneous remission and a favorable outcome over a period of
months to years . The important factors for predicting recurrent disease and poor prognosis include LCH involving both bone and
mucocutaneous tissue, LCH involving both osseous and extraosseous tissues, relapse after treatment of patients with osseous LCH and multi-
systemic LCH, >3 bones involvement, the presence of mucous membrane LCH, the presence of hepatosplenomegaly in patients <3 years of age at
presentation, pituitary-thalamic axis LCH in the presence of multi-systemic LCH, young age (<5 years) at presentation, and LCH involving 3
or more body systems . This patient had presented LCH at 3 years old and had already relapsed after the treatment for 3 lesions when the
penile lesion appeared. Because this may indicate poor prognosis, we will continue to follow the patient closely, to watch for the
development of any additional lesions. The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. The pre-publication history for this
paper can be accessed here: We thank the patient for giving consent for publication of this case report. JH designed this case report and
drafted the manuscript. SA and IK carried out the operation of this patient and helped to draft the manuscript. MU and ND participated in
the design of the study and helped to draft the manuscript. KI carried out the pathological examination. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. Painful nodule on the prepuce of the penis. High-power view showing mononuclear Langerhans cells. The irregular nuclei
have prominent grooves and folds. Numerous eosinophils can also be seen. Hematoxylin and eosin staining ×400. Note membranous
immunoreactivity of S-100 protein and CD1a in the majority of the Langerhans cells. ×400. Note membranous immunoreactivity of S-100 protein
and CD1a in the majority of the Langerhans cells. ×400
