A 54-year-old Korean male with scleroderma-like manifestation of primary systemic amyloidosis presented with firm cutaneous induration of
face and distal extremities, subcutaneous induration of the trunk and proximal extremities, limited range of motion in all joints,
hoarseness, and dysphagia. Monthly high-dose intravenous immunoglobulin (hdIVIg) was given (three treatments, each time administering 0.4
g/kg per day for five days), and both signs and symptoms began to improve. However, the quantitative analyses of serum protein did not
improve. Therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) was performed monthly to clear the elevated serum immunoglobulin, and after several treatments,
their levels normalized and symptoms were maintained in the improved state for more than two years. To summarize, hdIVIg and TPE combination
therapy may be used as a safe first-line treatment for patients with primary systemic amyloidosis presenting with symptomatic monoclonal
gammopathy. Amyloidosis refers to a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by extracellular deposition of proteinaceous fibrillar
materials (termed amyloid) in various tissues and organs.1 It can be divided into two major forms: amyloid light chain (AL) amyloidosis and
amyloid A amyloidosis.2 Clinical skin involvement occurs in approximately 25% of patients with AL amyloidosis,3 and common manifestations
include petechiae, purpura, ecchymoses, papules, nodules, plaques, and tumefactive lesions; a scleroderma-like manifestation is rarely
seen.4,5 Therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) has been proven to be an effective treatment in patients showing monoclonal gammopathy.6 We
applied TPE to treat an AL amyloidosis patient with scleroderma-like manifestations because the amyloids in AL amyloidosis are derived from
the monoclonal immunoglobulin light chains produced by plasma cells. A 54-year-old Korean male was first referred to our department on
October 4, 2001, with a history of hoarseness, difficulty in swallowing, and progressive generalized hardening of the body that had
progressed over the past two years. The skin on his face and distal extremities was indurated, and several brownish and shiny papules were
noted on the forehead and perioral area. On the trunk and proximal extremities, the skin was normal in elasticity, but the underlying
muscles were indurated, and almost all of the joints were restricted in motion (Fig. 1A, Table 1). Quantitative analyses of serum protein
revealed concentrations of immunoglobulin G (IgG) of 1,780 mg/dl and kappa (κ) light chain of 532 mg/dl (the normal ranges are 700-1,600
mg/dl and 170-370 mg/dl, respectively). Serum immunofixation showed a characteristic pattern of monoclonal IgG gammopathy, particularly of κ
paraprotein. Laryngoscopic examinations revealed granulomatous materials deposited in the vocal cords, and nerve conduction studies showed
polyneuropathy of the sensory nerves. Impaired left ventricular systolic function and thickening of the left ventricular walls with
restrictive filling were noted upon echocardiography. There were no remarkable findings in various studies, including a bone marrow
aspiration study, abdominal ultrasonography, and esophagography. The skin biopsy specimens showed a deposition of amyloid materials in the
dermis, subcutaneous tissues, and in the connective tissue septae of the skeletal muscle by Congo-red stain (Fig. 1C), and it produced a
characteristic apple-green birefringence when viewed under a polarized light source (Fig. 1D). After failure to control the symptoms with
systemic steroids, colchicine, or cyclophosphamide, monthly high-dose intravenous immunoglobulin (hdIVIg) was infused for three courses of
treatment (each time giving 0.4 g/kg/day for five days); the patient noted improvement in subjective symptoms such as tightness of legs and
dysphagia, and the range of motion of his joints began to improve as early as three weeks after the first treatment (Fig. 1B, Table 1).
However, the elevated IgG and κ light chain levels did not decrease, despite the symptomatic changes, and the symptoms progressed with the
discontinuation of hdIVIg therapy. Although the patient had no apparent renal dysfunction, the concern of potential renal involvement in
systemic amyloidosis and the possibility that hdIVIg would enhance that risk made us decide to discontinue further hdIVIg therapy. To clear
the excess serum immunoglobulin, which was constantly elevated despite the hdIVIg therapy, monthly TPE was performed, and the normalized
serum immunoglobulin levels and the symptoms and signs, including dysphagia, tightness of legs, induration of skin, and the limited range of
motion, were maintained in an improved state for more than two years. Most reports on the treatment of primary and myeloma-associated
systemic amyloidosis have been anecdotal, and responses to treatment are difficult to assess because of the poor correlation between amyloid
load and organ dysfunction.7 Cytotoxic chemotherapy is the mainstay of treatment, and melphalan, prednisone, colchicine, penicillamine,
azathioprine, vincristine, and cyclophosphamide have been used in the treatment of systemic amyloidosis. Cohen et al.8 reported that
colchicine was found to improve life expectancy in 53 patients with AL amyloidosis. Erikkson et al.9 proposed the therapeutic implications
of α1-antitrypsin. More aggressive chemotherapy, myeloablation, and autologous bone marrow transplantation have been proposed as novel
therapeutic approaches.10,11 Immunotoxins directed against the precursors of the amyloidogenic plasma cells are under investigation.9
Conflicting evidence exists concerning vitamin C and vitamin E.7 Merlini et al.10 showed that doxorubicin derivatives play a role in
enhancing the resorption of AL amyloid in vitro and in murine models. HdIVIg has increasingly been used for the treatment of certain
dermatoses, such as bullous autoimmune diseases and erythema multiforme.12 Lister et al.13 reported two patients with scleromyxedema who
showed a dramatic response to treatment with hdIVIg. Krastev et al.14 reported a case of gastrointestinal amyloidosis showing clinical
improvement with hdIVIg treatment, as in our case. Although the majority of cases reported to date show an absence of or only slight adverse
side-effects with hdIVIg, it is suggested that hdIVIg therapy may enhance the risk of adverse side-effects, and should be carefully
considered in patients with pre-existent diseases such as congestive heart failure, immobilization, or renal insufficiency.15 In addition,
dysproteinemia due to hdIVIg therapy itself may result in cast nephropathy and renal failure. Although the patient had no apparent renal
dysfunction, to avoid potential renal involvement in systemic amyloidosis and other possible risks of hdIVIg, we decided against further
hdIVIg therapy. Also, considering that hdIVIg could not effectively reduce the level of serum paraprotein, TPE seemed to be an effective and
safe alternative for removing the paraproteins, which is ultimately necessary to prevent disease progression. TPE is regarded as being less
effective than hdIVIg therapy for the treatment of amyloidosis. However, it is effective in patients with symptomatic monoclonal gammopathy
because it removes the paraproteins very efficiently, particularly in patients who do not respond to drug therapy.4 In conclusion, hdIVIg
and TPE combination therapy may be used as a safe first-line treatment for patients with primary systemic amyloidosis presenting symptomatic
monoclonal gammopathy. However, long term follow-up is needed to fully elucidate the effects of combination therapy, and the application of
these treatments in a larger group of patients is necessary. (A) Joints are severely restricted in motion when fingers are fully extended.
(B) Marked improvement in the range of motion three weeks after the 3rd hdIVIg therapy. (C) Biopsy from the lip shows pinkish amorphous
homogeneous masses of amyloid in dermis, subcutaneous tissue, and muscle (Congo red stain; original magnification × 40). (D) Congo red stain
produces apple-green birefringence under a polarized light microscope (original magnification × 40). Estimated Range of Motion of the Joints
under Passive Movement Data are given in degrees unless otherwise indicated. MPJ, Metacarpophalangeal joint; PIP, Proximal interphalangeal
joint; IP, Interphalangeal joint.
