We identified a novel human parechovirus (HPeV) type (K251176-02) from a neonate with fever. Analysis of the complete genome showed
K251176-02 to be a new HPeV genotype. Since K251176-02 could not be neutralized with antibodies against known HPeV serotypes 1–3, it should
be classified as a fourth HPeV serotype. Infections with human parechoviruses (HPeVs) are commonly associated with mild gastrointestinal and
respiratory symptoms in young children (1–3), but more severe conditions, such as flaccid paralysis (4) and encephalitis (5), have also been
described. Recently, a new serotype (HPeV3) has been isolated, which has been associated with transient paralysis (6) and neonatal sepsis
(7). HPeV1 and HPeV2 were previously known as the enteroviruses echovirus 22 and 23 but were reclassified into a new genus within the family
Picornaviridae after phylogenetic analysis showed that parechoviruses were distinct from other picornaviruses (1–3,8–11). HPeVs have
predominantly been isolated from young children, and increasing evidence shows that HPeV can cause serious illness in these patients. We
recently showed that infection with HPeV3 is associated with younger age and more severe disease than is infection with HPeV1 (12). During
the screening of patient samples, we identified 1 aberrant HPeV type. Phylogenetic analysis of the full-length sequence and viral
neutralization assays showed that the isolate designated K251176-02 is a new HPeV genotype and serotype. Viral culture of the stool of a
6-day-old patient with a 2-day history of high fever and poor feeding and no history of gastrointestinal or respiratory symptoms showed
enterovirus cytopathic effects. However, PCR targeted at the 5´ untranslated region (UTR) of enterovirus (13) was negative, whereas a 5´ UTR
PCR specific for HPeV (12) was positive. Results of sequencing the VP1 region (12) suggested that K251176-02 was a novel HPeV genotype.
Therefore, the full-length sequence was determined. Combinations of consensus primers were used to generate partially overlapping amplicons
that covered the complete genome. Amplicons were sequenced according to a primer walking strategy. The 5´ UTR was amplified by using the 5´
RACE System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Because a primer composed of the first 22 nucleotides (nt) of published consensus parechovirus
sequences was used to amplify the 5´ UTR proximal end, these 22 nt could not be determined with absolute certainty (8). The 3´ UTR end was
amplified with a tagged oligo-dT primer. The complete genome of K251176-02 was 7,348 nt long, containing a 5´ UTR of 708 nt, a large single
open reading frame (ORF) of 6,549 nt, and a 3´ UTR of 91 nt followed by a poly(A) tract. The full-length sequence of K251176-02 has been
deposited in GenBank under accession no. DQ315670. We found a best-match nucleotide identity (14) of 72.2% in the VP1 gene with HPeV2
CT86-6760, which suggests that K251176-02 is most closely related to HPeV2 CT86-6760. Indeed, phylogenetic analysis of the capsid nucleotide
sequence based on Jukes and Cantor distances showed K251176-02 to cluster with HPeV2 CT86-6760 (Figure 1A). However, the genetic distance
was considerable (0.327) and comparable to the genetic distance between HPeV1 Harris and HPeV2 Williamson (0.332). Phylogenetic analysis of
the nonstructural region showed that K251176-02 clustered with the HPeV3 prototypes A308-99 and Can82853-01 (Figure 1B). Unrooted
phylogenetic trees showing the relationship between K251176-02 (DQ315670) and the prototype strains human parechovirus serotype 1 (HPeV1)
Harris (S45208), HPeV2 Williamson (AJ005695), HPeV2 CT86-6760 (AF055846), HPeV3 A308-99 (AB084913), and Can82853-01 (AJ889918) based on
nucleotide Jukes and Cantor substitution model for the capsid region (A) and the nonstructural region (B). The tree was constructed by the
neighbor-joining method as implemented in MEGA version 3.1. Gaps introduced for optimal alignment were not considered informative and were
excluded from the analyses by complete deletion. Numbers represent the frequency of occurrence of nodes in 1,000 bootstrap replicas. The use
of other evolution models did not influence the tree topology. To identify recombination events between the different HPeV prototypes, a
SimPlot analysis was performed on the known full-length nucleotide HPeV genomes against K251176-02. The SimPlot analysis (Figure 2) showed
the differential similarity of K251176-02 with HPeV2 CT86-6760 in the highly variable P1 region and with HPeV3 in the more conserved P2–P3
region. This finding may be the result of a recombination event. Similarity plot of human parechovirus serotype 1 (HPeV1) Harris (S45208),
HPeV2 Williamson (AJ005695), HPeV2 CT86-6760 (AF055846), HPeV3 A308-99 (AB084913), and Can82853-01 (AJ889918) against K251176-02. Each curve
is a comparison between the K251176-02 genome and an HPeV prototype. Each point represents the percentage identity within a sliding window
600 bp wide, centered on the position plotted, with a step size of 20 bp. Positions containing gaps were excluded from the comparison by gap
stripping, and Jukes and Cantor correction was applied. Similarity plots of the full-length sequences of the HPeV prototypes were generated
by using SimPlot version 2.5. The secondary structure of the 5´ UTR of K251176-02, determined by the Mfold program of Zuker and Turner
(http://mfold2.wustl.edu), was predicted to be highly structured and was characterized by a stable hairpin at the proximal end that was also
found in known HPeV prototypes (8, 11, data not shown). The predicted secondary structure of the 3´ UTR of K251176-02 contained the same
1-stem loop organization as the HPeV prototypes and was similar to the secondary structure of HPeV1 Harris and HPeV2 Williamson and
CT86-6760 (15). A comparison of the complete ORF of K251176-02 with the HPeV prototypes showed an amino acid identity of 86.9% to 90.1%
(Table 1). This amount is in the same range of amino acid identity as observed between known HPeV protoypes. For the VP1 gene, the greatest
amino acid identity was observed with HPeV2 CT86-6760 (80.4%). In the nonstructural region, identity was greater to HPeV3, with 98.1%
identity in the polymerase gene (3Dpol). *Amino acid identities for the open reading frame (ORF), capsid region (P1), and nonstructural
region (P2-P3) are based on p-distance models between K251176-02 (DQ315670) and the HPeV prototypes, HPeV1 (H) (Harris, S45208), HPeV2 (W)
(Williamson, AJ005695), HPeV2 (CT) (CT86-6760, AF055846), HPeV3 (A308) (A308-99, AB084913), and HPeV3 (Can) (Can82853-01, AJ889918). The
full-length sequence of K251176-02 was aligned with the HPeV prototypes by using ClustalW, included in the Vector NTI Advance 10 software
package (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Alignment was edited by using GeneDoc software (version 2.6.02). The matrix was constructed by
using MEGA version 3.1. The 5´ untranslated region (UTR) and 3´ UTR are excluded from the analysis because the regions are noncoding.
Comparison of the deduced amino acid sequence in the capsid region of K251176-02 with the HPeV prototypes showed that the sequences that are
predicted to be part of the β-barrel structure (6,10,11) are well conserved in K251176-02. Like HPeV1 and HPeV2, K251176-02 also contained
an RGD motif at the C-terminal end of the VP1 gene, which was absent in HPeV3 (6,7,15). K251176-02 also contained the common motifs
X2GXGK(S/T) and DDLXQ (2C gene), which are predicted to have a helicase function. The active-site cysteine of the protease 3C is in the
context of GXCG, and the active site of polymerase 3Dpol contains the conserved sequence YGDD. The well-conserved motifs within the 3Dpol
gene (KDELR, PSG, and FLKR) were also found in K251176-02 (6,9,11). In summary, K251176-02 represents a new genotype in the genus
Parechovirus. To confirm that K251176-02 is also a new serotype, a neutralization assay was performed. Table 2 shows that K251176-02 could
not be neutralized by antisera directed against HPeV1 Harris, HPeV2 Williamson, and HPeV3 A308-99, which confirms that K251176-02 is a new
genotype that can be classified as a fourth HPeV serotype. *Culture isolates of K251176-02, human parechovirus 1 (HPeV1, echovirus 22) and
HPeV2 (echovirus 23) from a reference panel (National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, the Netherlands) and
K251181-02 that was previously genotyped as HPeV3 (12) were incubated with antisera (20 U/mL in Eagle minimal essential medium) directed
against HPeV1 Harris, HPeV2 Williamson, and HPeV3 A308-99. The antisera to HPeV1 and HPeV2 were raised in horses. The antiserum to HPeV3 was
raised in guinea pigs. Neutralization is done on a 96-microtiter plate containing a monolayer of LLcMk2 cells that have been incubated for 3
days. The assay was determined after viral controls (no antisera used) of the 4 culture isolates showed cytopathic effects >50% (++++).
HPeVs are classified in the genus Parechovirus in the family Picornaviridae. The recently identified HPeV3 has been associated with severe
illness in young children in several studies (6,7,12). This association has increased the awareness of HPeVs as relevant pathogens in young
children. We identified a new HPeV genotype in a stool specimen from a neonate with high fever. Since classification criteria based on
genotyping have not been defined for HPeVs, we used the criteria proposed by Oberste et al. (14) for the classification of new enteroviral
genotypes. According to these criteria, a new genotype is defined when a best-match nucleotide identity of <70% is found in the VP1 gene. A
70%–75% best-match nucleotide identity indicates further characterization is needed. Therefore, neutralization assays were conducted; these
assays showed that K251176-02 did not neutralize with antisera directed against the 3 known HPeV serotypes. This finding indicates that
K251176-02 is a new genotype that can be classified as a fourth HPeV serotype. The patient from whom K251176-02 was isolated had high fever
but no signs of neonatal sepsis, as has been found in infections with HPeV3 (6,7,12). Previous data suggest differences in severity of
disease between the different HPeV serotypes (12); however, more data are needed to elucidate epidemiologic and pathogenic features of the
different HPeV serotypes, including K251176-02. HPeV2 CT86–6760 was genotypically as distinct from HPeV2 Williamson as from other HPeV types
(Table 1). The existence of 2 genotypically divergent HPeV serotypes 2 is surprising and needs to be elucidated further. This finding,
however, argues in favor of a universal typing method that is based on molecular characteristics (genotyping) instead of serotyping,
provided classification criteria are well defined. Suggested citation for this article: Benschop KSM, Schinkel J, Luken ME, van den Broek
PJM, Beersma MFC, Menelik N, et al. Fourth human parechovirus serotype. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2006 Oct [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1210.051647 We thank Georgios Pollakis for his assistance in the phylogenetic analysis and for technical
support in sequencing the full-length genome, Rene Minnaar for further technical support, and Hiroyuki Shimizu for antisera used in the
neutralization assay. This study was supported by the Department of Medical Microbiology at the Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam. Ms
Benschop is a PhD candidate who works at the Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam. Her primary research interests are the clinical and
molecular epidemiology and pathogenesis of enteroviruses and human parechoviruses.
