Metastatic calcification, a known complication of prolonged end-stage renal disease, is herein described for the first time in a 10-month-
old boy with acute renal failure, manifesting as a painful and swollen arm. Imaging revealed diffuse calcification and technetium-99
methylene diphosphonate (99Tc-MDP) uptake around the humerus and axilla. Calcium and vitamin D restriction, followed by intravenous
administration of sodium thiosulfate caused a full symptomatic, radio- and scintigraphic improvement. Vascular (“metastatic”) calcification
(MC) (or calcific uremic arteriolopathy) is the most common type of extra-osseous calcification in end stage renal disease, manifesting as
both medial and intimal calcification of large arteries . It usually results from a deposition of calcified products in otherwise normal
tissues as a result of hyperphosphatemia with or without hypercalcemia. It may affect the visceral organs, such as kidneys, lungs, and
gastric mucosa, as well as joints, eyes, and skin . The predisposing conditions of hyperphosphatemia and high (calcium×phosphorus)
concentration products need to be persistent over weeks and months, since MC has been not been described in the setup of acute renal failure
(even though a similar biochemical profile is seen there too). We describe a case of MC in a 10-month-old child presenting with hemolytic
uremic syndrome (HUS) and acute renal failure (ARF). A 10-month-old male infant was recovering from his first episode of atypical HUS. He
belonged to a Bedouin tribe previously diagnosed by us with recessive factor H deficiency. His clinical course was remarkable for
microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, oliguric renal failure and hypertension with a depressed myocardial function, associated with resistant
hypocalcemia (total calcium as low as 5.4 mg/dl) and hyperphosphatemia (as high as 13 mg/dl). The latter was eventually controlled with
phosphor binders (aluminum hydroxide at first for several days and, later, calcium gluconate), intravenous administration of calcium (mainly
due to an episode of cardiac arrest without hyperkalemia, as previously described for HUS ), low phosphorus diet and alphacalcidol, 0.25 μg
q.d. (the latter only after serum phosphorus had been normalized). Medications were given through a right femoral vein catheter and
peripheral veins in the right arm. Peritoneal dialysis was started, using regular calcium (3.5 meq/l) dialysate. Fresh frozen plasma
(20 ml/kg) was given daily until there was evidence of HUS remission, and was then switched to 20 ml/kg twice a week, as previously done in
homozygous factor H-deficient children . Ten days after hospitalization, he was found to have a painful and mildly swollen left arm, mainly
in the elbow area, with flexion limitation. There was no intravenous device in this arm. There were no high fever, local redness or swollen
joints. The plain X-ray did not reveal any lesions or fractures. A week later the left shoulder and humeral area were more swollen and
tender, with no specific nodule or bone deformity. On physical examination, the swelling was deeper than the dermis (mainly in the humeral
area) and painful. The superficial skin did not show signs of ischemia, necrosis, ulceration or livedo reticularis. This time the plain X
ray revealed diffuse calcification, involving mostly the arm muscles and the axilla (Fig. 1a). Calcium and phosphorus levels were 9.9 mg/dl
and 6.6 mg/dl, respectively. Renal function remained stable but impaired (serum creatinine and urea concentrations were as low as 1.05 mg/dl
and 90 mg/dl, respectively). Parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels were normal (25.7 pg/ml). Renal sonogram showed no evidence of
nephrocalcinosis. A bone scan revealed significant technetium-99 methylene diphosphonate (99Tc-MDP) uptake along the areas that had seemed
to be affected on the X-rays and physical examination (Fig. 1b). Treatment with peritoneal dialysis, alphacalcidol and calcium salts was
stopped. Ketoconazole 1 mg/kg per day was given for 3 days, in addition to prednisolone 2 mg/kg per day for a week. Renal function improved,
but the (Pi×Ca) products remained above 60 mg2/dl2. No improvement in the arm lesion was seen. On day 25 of hospitalization, intravenously
administered sodium thiosulfate, 100 mg/kg q.d., was started for 12 days. A gradual symptomatic improvement in arm range of movement and
resolution of local pain was seen. At follow-up 8 weeks afterwards, X- ray and bone scan revealed significant resolution of MC (Fig. 2). At
long-term (>12 months) follow-up, no recurrence of MC was seen, in spite of recurrent events of HUS, eventually needing periods of
peritoneal and hemodialysis. Fig. 1Chest X-ray on day 18 (a) black arrow calcification on the axilla, arrowheads calcification lines along
the humerus. Tc-99m MDP scintigraphy (b) shows increased abnormal uptake in the soft tissue of the left shoulder, humerus and left scapula.
Kidneys are enlarged, with increased diffuse abnormal radiotracer activityFig. 2Repeated X-ray (a) and bone scan (b) after 1 month show no
abnormal findings Chest X-ray on day 18 (a) black arrow calcification on the axilla, arrowheads calcification lines along the humerus.
Tc-99m MDP scintigraphy (b) shows increased abnormal uptake in the soft tissue of the left shoulder, humerus and left scapula. Kidneys are
enlarged, with increased diffuse abnormal radiotracer activity Repeated X-ray (a) and bone scan (b) after 1 month show no abnormal findings
The unique MC features in our patient were its appearance early after the diagnosis of renal failure and its transient nature. Evidence for
such early appearance of this complication comes only from an animal model of ARF (adenine-induced renal failure in rats), where microscopic
metastatic calcification in aorta, coronary artery and other soft tissues were found after 4 weeks of uremia . This was associated with
hyperparathyroidism, hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. In addition, a high index of suspicion may detect the MC early in the renal failure
course, before it becomes ulcerated . Current sophisticated imaging techniques suggest an incidence of subclinical or asymptomatic MC in
20–100% of patient with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) . MC with soft tissue involvement in acute renal failure, to the best of our
knowledge, has not been reported in children: using the PubMed and MESH search systems, and the terms “calcinosis” and “kidney failure,
acute” (the term “calciphylaxis” is not an official indexing term), we found only three case reports of adults with such combination. There
was a combination of risk factors for MC in our patient, including high dose parenteral calcium administration via both intravenous and
peritoneal dialysis; high serum phosphorus levels due to renal failure and the hemolytic state; and the use of alphacalcidol . These may
have led to MC so early in the course of his disease. The possible correlation between renal failure due to HUS, a state where the basic
damage is to the endothelium in small vessels, and MC is not supported by the literature search. Uremic calcification was thought to be a
largely physico-chemical process facilitated by elevated Ca×P (i.e., “metastatic” calcification). Evidence now shows that vascular smooth
muscle cells actively take up phosphate to form bio-apatite. This process is associated with a phenotypic transformation of vascular smooth
muscle cells during which they express osteoblast markers . Soft tissue accumulation of Tc99m MDP may be due to passive localization of
tracer in slow fluid spaces (ascites, pleural effusion) when the blood concentration of tracer is high and these spaces do not clear as
rapidly as the blood pool. Tracer may also bind in necrotic tissues (myositis, myonecrosis). Other causes of metastatic calcification
include hypercalcemia from widespread destruction of bone (from metastatic cancer), parathyroid neoplasm and hypervitaminosis D. When the
solubility product of calcium and phosphate is exceeded, there is precipitation of calcium in the extracellular space. Soft tissue
calcification is, thus, another cause of soft tissue uptake of Tc99m MDP . Reported therapeutic strategies for treating and preventing MC
include: increasing dialysis dose, lowering serum calcium phosphorous and Ca×P solubility products, and avoiding calcium-based Pi binders
and vitamin D analogs. Unfortunately, these methods have been ineffective in some patients with MC. Intravenously administered sodium
thiosulfate (ST) increases the solubility of calcium deposits . ST was shown to be successful in the treatment of both nephrolithiasis and
tumoral calcinosis. ST has antioxidant effects on endothelial cells, but its exact mechanism of effect is unclear. It undergoes mainly renal
clearance. Its half-life is increased from 15 min in the normal glomerular filtration rate (GFR) to 478 min in dialysis-dependent patients.
The recommended adult dose is 12.5–25 g at the end of dialysis. The duration of this treatment is unclear. In our patient, a short ST course
plus the withdrawal of enteral calcium and vitamin D were sufficient to resolve MC, which did not recur in the following events of HUS.
acute renal failure hemolytic uremic syndrome metastatic calcifications sodium thiosulfate
