Clear cell basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is a variant of BCC with a characteristic clear cell component that may occupy all or part of the
tumor islands. Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining for glycogen is variably positive, and mild deposition of sulfated mucin has been noted.
However, to our knowledge, clear cell BCC with sialomucin deposition has not been reported. Here we report a case of clear cell BCC showing
sialomucin deposition. The clear tumor cells stained with PAS and showed incomplete diastase-resistance. In addition, mucin staining with
alcian blue was positive at pH 2.5 but not at pH 0.5. Basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) have several histological variants which may be due, in
part, to the pluripotential capacity of the primary epithelial germ to differentiate in different directions, and to the different responses
of the stroma to these tumors.1 Clear cell BCC is a variant of BCC with a characteristic clear cell component that may occupy all or part of
the tumor islands; however, the basis for this unusual histological variant has not been elucidated.2 The affected cells are round to
polyhedral in shape, with pale, eosinophilic, vacuolated, or finely granular cytoplasm.3 Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining for glycogen is
variably positive, and mild deposition of sulfated mucin has been noted.2,3 However, to our knowledge, clear cell BCC with sialomucin
deposition has not been reported. Here, we report a case of clear cell BCC showing sialomucin deposition. An 83-year-old Korean woman
presented to our clinic with a slowly enlarging cutaneous lesion in the right infraorbital area that was first noticed three years earlier.
The lesion was depressed with crusts and marginal infiltration and was about 2.0 cm in diameter (Fig. 1). A punch biopsy of the tumor was
performed, and the pathologic examination showed that the tumor lobules were composed of irregularly arranged, atypical-appearing basaloid
cells with portions of peripheral palisading. Vacuolated cells were distributed across a fairly large area within the lobules (Fig. 2A). The
vacuoles varied in size and number, and often occupied the entire cytoplasm (Fig. 2B). The nuclei of the vacuolated cells were deformed and
displaced to one side of the cells. Neither mitotic activity nor necrosis was observed. The clear tumor cells were stained with PAS, and
showed incomplete diastase-resistance (Fig. 2C). Mucin staining with alcian blue of the tumor cells was positive at pH 2.5 but not at pH 0.5
(Fig. 2D). The stroma surrounding the tumor lobules stained with alcian blue at pH 0.5 and it stained more deeply than the tumor cells at pH
2.5. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were negative for both epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA). A
pathologic diagnosis of clear cell BCC with sialomucin deposition was established, and the tumor was removed by Mohs micrographic surgery.
BCC is the most common type of skin cancer, and it is now widely accepted that BCC occurring later in life arises from pluripotential cells
that form continuously during life. Like embryonic primary epithelial germ cells, pluripotential cells have the potential to form hair,
sebaceous glands, and apocrine glands.4 This is why BCC shows a variety of histological variants and its microscopic diagnosis is not always
obvious. In 1984, Barr and Williamson reported an unusual variant of BCC, which they named clear cell BCC.2 Because some clear cells
contained glycogen, they suggested that the pathogenesis of clear cell BCC is mainly due to trichilemmal differentiation of the BCC.
However, many investigators considered the large membrane-bound vacuoles, which occupied the cytoplasm on electron microscopy, as
phagolysomes or end stage products of intracellular organelles. Clear cells are now generally thought to be the result of degeneration, and
likely involve lysosomes or the mitochondria.3,5-7 Clear cell BCCs have shown variability in conventional histochemical findings. Most of
the cases have shown deposition of glycogen, which was positive for PAS with a diastase-labile nature, and a few cases have also
demonstrated the concomitant deposition of sulfated mucopolysaccharide.5-8 However, to our knowledge, sialomucin deposition in clear cell
BCC has not yet been reported. According to histochemical findings, we considered our case as an unusual histological variant showing
sialomucin deposition. Sialomucin contains nonsulfated acid mucopolysaccharides as well as PAS-positive neutral polysaccharides. Whereas
nonsulfated acid mucopolysaccharides stain with alcian blue at pH 2.5 but not at pH 0.5, sulfated-acid mucopolysaccharides stain with alcian
blue both at pH 2.5 and 0.5. Sialomucin has been observed in the dark cells in the eccrine glands, secretory cells of the apocrine glands,
oral mucosal cyst and its lining cells, metastatic carcinoma of gastrointestinal cancer, some cases of Paget's disease, and almost all cases
of extramammary Paget's disease (EMPD). Generally, EMPD is currently considered to arise as an intraepithelial neoplasm, and the origin of
the Paget cell is thought to be from either intraepidermal cells of the apocrine gland ducts or from pluripotent keratinocyte stem cells.9
Based on the presence of sialomucin in sweat glands and the similar pathogenetic features of EMPD and the clear cell BCC in our case, we
hypothesize that the sialomucin in clear cell BCC might be obtained as one of the products of tumor glandular differentiation, rather than
from degenerated components of tumor cells. However, negative results with EMA and CEA immmunostaining in our case do not support glandular
differentiation. Thus, further studies that include electron microscopy and involve a larger number of cases should be conducted to confirm
our hypothesis. Because the tumor cells of BCCs can differentiate toward the components of sweat gland structures, and EMPD originates from
sweat gland structures in the epidermis, it was necessary to differentiate our case from BCC with sweat gland differentiation. BCC with
sweat gland differentiation is usually classified as adenoid-type BCC. Adenoid-type BCC shows formations suggesting tubular or gland-like
structures and cells are arranged in intertwining strands with a lace-like pattern.1 Immunohistochemical stainings for apocrine or eccrine
differentiation are mostly negative in adenoid-type BCC, because it shows only low degree of differentiation.10 In addition, adenoid-type
BCC generally produces sulfated mucopolysaccharide, but not sialomucin, from the tumor cells showing tubular or glandular structure. In our
case, clear cell BCC did not show distinct histological findings suggestive of sweat gland differentiation and the tumor cells contained
sialomucin, not sulfated mucopolysaccharide. Therefore, no pathogenetic similarities between our case and adenoid-type BCC were found. BCC
with sebaceous differentiation shows interspersed aggregates of sebaceous cells as well as basaloma cells. The sebaceous cells appeared to
be similar to the clear cells in our case, but this entity could be excluded by the sialomucin deposition and negative staining of clear
cells with EMA.11 In conclusion, we report a case of an unusual histological variant of clear cell BCC showing sialomucin deposition.
However, the pathogenesis of the sialomucin deposition has not yet been elucidated. A solitary coin sized, irregularly pigmented, and
depressed erosion with marginal elevation in the right infraorbital area. Irregularly arranged basaloid cells and clear vacuolated cells
with peripheral palisading of basaloid cells within infiltrating tumor lobules (hematoxylin and eosin, A, × 40; B, × 400). C. Tumor cells
sparsely stained with PAS, and incomplete diastase-resistance (d-PAS, × 200). D. Tumor cells were stained with alcian blue at pH 2.5 (Alcian
blue, × 200).
