Early colorectal cancer (ECC) is defined as invasive tumor limited to the colonic and rectal mucosa or submucosa, regardless of the presence
or absence of lymph node metastasis. The incidence of lymph node metastasis in ECC ranges from 0 to 15.4%, and risk factors include depth of
submucosal invasion, growth patterns (polypoid or non-polypoid), histologic subclassification, and lymphatic invasion. Of non-polypoid
growth patterns, the depressed types of colorectal cancer have higher malignant potential than polypoid types, even for small sizes.
Unfortunately, this type is also difficult to detect on colonoscopic examination. In this report, we describe a case of depressed type ECC
with extensive lymph node metastasis without regional lymph node involvement. Most ECCs are polypoid type, which undergo the adenoma to
carcinoma sequence. However, it must be emphasized that non-polypoid lesions also occur.1 These are classified as protruded, slightly
elevated (small flat adenoma), lateral spreading tumor (LST), and depressed type.2 The existence of flat or depressed type ECC has been
reported in Japan, and may have higher malignant potential than polypoid type ECC.3 In this report, we present the case of a 65-year-old
female diagnosed with a small sized and histologically well-differentiated lesion of depressed type ECC, however, with extensive lymph node
metastasis and no regional lymph node involvement. A 65-year-old female with a significant medical history for hypertension and diabetes
mellitus type II, presented with a 2-month history of low abdominal discomfort, bowel habit changes, and weight loss. Physical examination
revealed no abnormal findings, except for slight lower abdominal tenderness. Abnormal laboratory studies included an elevated serum CEA
level of 7.65ng/ml, but CA19-9, CA125 was within normal range. Evaluation included colonoscopy, which disclosed a 1.0cm sized depressed
mucosal lesion with marginal elevation on the proximal transverse colon (Fig. 1). Absence of air deformation was present, signifying a more
invasive cancer. Histologic evaluation of biopsied tissue showed adenocarcinoma. Because depressed type ECC has a high incidence of deep
submucosal invasion, we recommended surgical removal of this tumor. Staging workup included abdominal CT (computed tomography) scan (Fig.
2), which illustrated questionable wall thickening in the proximal transverse colon and multiple lymph node enlargements along the root
mesentery, aortocaval, left paraaortic, and left common iliac lymph node axis. This suggested extensive lymph node metastasis; however,
there was no regional lymph node enlargement in the transverse colon paracolic area. EGD (esophagogastroduodenoscopy) to rule out other
origin of the tumor revealed no abnormal findings. PET (positron emission tomography) scan (Fig. 3) demonstrated multiple lymph node
metastases to the left supraclavicular fossa as well as left paraaortic and aortocaval lymph node enlargement. We performed a right
hemicolectomy for the purpose of accurate diagnosis and treatment by resection of primary colon mass and metastasized lymph nodes, if
possible. Findings included a 1 × 1cm sized mass on the proximal transverse colon with grossly enlarged paraaortic, middle colic, ileocolic
lymph nodes without regional lymph node enlargement and ascites (Fig. 4). Histologic evaluation showed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma
extending to the deep submucosa with frequent lymphovascular permeation and no regional lymph node involvement of 21 resected lymph nodes
(Fig. 5). The patient was treated with several chemotherapeutic regimens; however, the disease progressed to carcinomatosis, and she decided
to continue with supportive care only without further chemotherapy. Early colorectal carcinoma is defined as "invasive carcinoma that has
not spread in the direction continuity beyond the submucosal layer, regardless of the presence of blood-borne or lymphatic metastasis for
the TNM classification, these lesions are T1NxMx".4 A classification for T1 lesions has been developed in Japan,5,6 this classification is
essentially for a sessile lesion in which the submucosal invasion is divided into sm1 (invasion in upper one-third), sm2 (invasion in the
middle one-third), and sm3 (invasion in the lower one-third).2 ECC seems to have two patterns of progression. The first is a relatively slow
development of cancer in an adenoma; this is demonstrated by a polypoid growth eventually becoming cancerous. The second is a more
controversial rapid and deep cancerous invasion; this is demonstrated by non-polypoid growth arising de novo and not found to be associated
with adenoma.7 These non-polypoid colorectal neoplasm are grossly classified into three groups: slightly elevated (small flat adenoma),
laterally spreading (LST), and depressed.2 Kariya et al. first described depressed type ECC in 1977.8 These tend to be invasive even when
small sized,9 and are more malignant than flat adenomas. The incidence of submucosal cancer is higher in ECC with depression (IIc, IIc+IIa,
and IIa+IIc) than without depression or in the elevated type (Ip, Isp, and Is).10 In one study, rate of submucosal invasion was 2.1%, 0.05%,
8.2%, and 29.5% for polypoid, small flat adenoma, LST, and depressed lesions, respectively.2 Therefore, depressed lesions should always be
treated. Endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) technique can be used to remove lesions confined to the mucosa or that only slightly invade the
submucosa. Additional surgical resection would be required for resected specimens demonstrating massive submucosal invasion or vessel
permeation on histologic analysis; otherwise, risk of recurrence or metastasis would be high.2 The incidence of lymph node metastasis in
submucosal invasive cancers has been reported to be less than 15%, with only 0 to 3.2% of cases having carcinomas with shallow invasion of
the submucosa (sm1 carcinomas).7,11 Many investigators have demonstrated that lymph node metastasis is closely associated with depth of
submucosal invasion, growth patterns (polypoid or non-polypoid), lymphovascular invasion, and histologic subclassification at the deepest
invasive portion.7,11-13 Generally, poorly differentiated carcinomas have a high risk of lymph node as well as distant metastasis.14 Distant
metastasis to the liver and lung had been reported in early invasive colorectal cancer, but all had been associated with primary tumor in
the rectum, a sessile type configuration, sm3 level of invasion, and positive lymphatic invasion.7 In the case presented, the lesion was an
ECC of small and depressed type, for which detection is difficult and incidence of submucosal invasion is high. The risk factors for
metastasis included depressed type, submucosal invasion (sm3, submucosal invasion in the lower one-third), and lymphovascular permeation.
The surprising fact in this case was that metastasis was very extensive compared to T staging, including a high level of lymph node
involvement such as the aortocaval and paraaortic nodes without regional lymph node involvement, and that it presented well-differentiated
histology. In conclusion, we recommend careful colonoscopic examination to detect small and flat depressed lesions, and even if the lesion
is small or flat, the possibility of distant metastasis should be considered. Colonoscopic findings; indigo carmine contrast spray
demonstrates a 1.0cm sized, flat, depressed lesion with distinct margins and marginal elevation. Abdominal CT (computed tomography) shows
questionable wall thickening in proximal T-colon without gross mesocolic extension but with left paraaortic lymph node enlargement. PET
(Positron emission tomography) scan shows multiple lymph node metastases along the left paraaortic, aortocaval, and supraclavicular fossa.
Gross finding; 1.0 × 1.0cm sized, depressed mucosal lesion with marginal elevation (type IIa+IIc) seen on proximal transverse colon.
Histologic examination shows an infiltrative well-differentiated adenocarcinoma is seen at low power magnification, which extends to the
lower third of the submucosa A (H&E stain, ×10). Lymphovascular permeation is seen in the peritumoral submucosal lymphatics at high power
magnification B (H&E stain, ×200).
