Subaortic and midventricular hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in a patient with extreme segmental hypertrophy exceeding the usual maximum wall
thickness reported in the literature is a rare phenomenon. A 19-year-old man with recently diagnosed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) was
referred for sudden death risk assessment. The patient had mild exertional dyspnea (New York Heart Association functional class II), but
without syncope or chest pain. There was no family history of HCM or sudden death. A two dimensional echocardiogram revealed an asymmetric
type of LV hypertrophy; anterior ventricular septum = 49 mm; posterior ventricular septum = 20 mm; anterolateral free wall = 12 mm; and
posterior free wall = 6 mm. The patient had 2 types of obstruction; a LV outflow obstruction due to systolic anterior motion of both mitral
leaflets (Doppler-estimated 38 mm Hg gradient at rest); and a midventricular obstruction (Doppler-estimated 43 mm Hg gradient), but without
apical aneurysm or dyskinesia. The patient had a normal blood pressure response on exercise test and no episodes of non-sustained
ventricular tachycardia in 24-h ECG recording. Cardiac MRI showed a gross late enhancement at the hypertrophied septum. Based on the extreme
degree of LV hypertrophy and the myocardial hyperenhancement, an implantation of a cardioverter-defibrillator was recommended
prophylactically for primary prevention of sudden death. Midventricular HCM is an infrequent phenotype, but may be associated with an apical
aneurysm and progression to systolic dysfunction (end-stage HCM). Midventricular hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an infrequent
phenotype, but may be associated with an apical aneurysm and progression to systolic dysfunction (end-stage HCM) . A 19-year-old man with
recently diagnosed HCM was referred for sudden death risk assessment. The patient had mild exertional dyspnea (New York Heart Association
functional class II), but without syncope or chest pain. There was no family history of HCM or sudden death. The patient's blood pressure
was 130/70 mmHg and a grade 3â€“4/6 systolic ejection murmur was present at the apex. ECG showed a left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy with
strain pattern. A two dimensional echocardiogram revealed an asymmetric type of LV hypertrophy; anterior ventricular septum = 49 mm;
posterior ventricular septum = 20 mm; anterolateral free wall = 12 mm; and posterior free wall = 6 mm (Figure 1). The patient had 2 types of
obstruction; a LV outflow obstruction due to systolic anterior motion of both mitral leaflets (Doppler-estimated 38 mm Hg gradient at rest);
and a midventricular obstruction (Doppler-estimated 43 mm Hg gradient), but without apical aneurysm or dyskinesia (Figure 2) [see Additional
file 1]. The LV end diastolic diameter was 45 mm and the left atrium was 45 mm. The patient had a normal blood pressure response on exercise
test and no episodes of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia in 24-h ECG recording. Cardiac MRI showed a gross late enhancement at the
hypertrophied septum. Based on the extreme degree of LV hypertrophy and the myocardial hyperenhancement, an implantation of a cardioverter-
defibrillator was recommended prophylactically for primary prevention of sudden death. Written consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of study. Short-axis view at end diastole showing an asymmetric type hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with extreme hypertrophy of the
anterior septum. A three-chamber view showing a combination of 2 different flow jets, one in the mid of left ventricle and the other in the
outflow tract. This case is a rare example of a patient with subaortic and midventricular hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with extreme segmental
hypertrophy exceeding the usual maximum wall thickness reported in the literature, although Maron et al have published a case of a patient
with an even greater hypertrophy (60 mm) . Movie representing 2 types of obstruction. This movie shows a three-chamber view with a
combination of 2 different flow jets, one in the mid of left ventricle and the other in the outflow tract. Click here for file
