To the Editor: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is an established nosocomial pathogen worldwide but more recently has
emerged as a highly virulent organism in the community, particularly in the United States (1–3). In Latin America, community-associated MRSA
(CA-MRSA) has only been described in the southern area of the continent (Uruguay and Brazil) (4,5). No reports from the Andean region are
available. We describe 2 cases of CA-MRSA causing soft-tissue infections (1 severe) in Colombia. The first case was in a 19-year-old man
with a history of trauma to the left side of his body 1 week before admission after a fall. On admission, he complained of 2 days of fever,
malaise, erythema and induration in the left hemithorax extending to the left thigh, and purulent secretion from an excoriation on the
anterior aspect of the left thigh. He had no previous medical history. No previous hospitalizations or antimicrobial drug prescriptions were
documented, nor did he report relatives with history of recent hospitalizations. Vital signs at admission were normal except for fever
(39°C), and physical examination showed induration and erythema in the region of left hemithorax extending to the thigh, with an area of
excoriation in the same thigh with purulent discharge. Laboratory evaluation showed a leukocyte count of 23.1×109/L (86% neutrophils with 2%
band forms) and elevated C-reactive protein levels. The patient was hospitalized. Because necrotizing fascitis was suspected, intravenous
ampicillin-sulbactam (12 g per day) was started, and surgical evaluation was requested. The patient underwent surgical debridement of the
left thigh, left hemiabdomen, and hemithorax, which confirmed the diagnosis of necrotizing fascitis. Intravenous vancomycin (1 g every 12 h)
was added to the regimen, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. After several surgical debridements, the patient
underwent placement of cutaneous-muscle grafts. He was discharged from the hospital without complications after completing 14 days of
antimicrobial agents. The second case involved a 53-year-old man with no history of previous hospitalizations who reported to the emergency
department with a 3-day history of fever, pain, swelling, and warm sensation on the posterior aspect of the left thigh. A diagnosis of
cellulitis was made, and cephalexin (500 mg every 6 h) and gentamicin (160 mg intramuscularly every 24 h) were administered for 7 days
without improvement. He returned to the hospital with worsening symptoms, an area of induration of 4×4 cm in the thigh, and purulent
discharge. Drainage of the lesion was performed, and oral trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole (160 and 800 mg, respectively, every 12 h) was
started. His clinical signs and symptoms completely resolved after 7 days of therapy. Tissue culture from secretions from both patients
showed gram-positive cocci in clusters on the Gram stain, and subsequent cultures yielded MRSA. Species identification and presence of the
mecA gene were confirmed by PCR, as described previously (6). MICs were determined by using the agar diffusion test, according to Clinical
and Laboratory Standards Institute recommendations (7). Both organisms were susceptible to vancomycin, teicoplanin, chloramphenicol,
linezolid, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, and rifampin. The isolate from the second patient was resistant to erythromycin and susceptible to
clindamycin, exhibited the M phenotype on the double-disk diffusion assay (D test), and harbored the msrA gene, encoding an efflux pump (8).
In contrast, the first isolate was susceptible to both erythromycin and clindamycin and resistant to tetracycline (MIC >64 μg/mL). Because
infections caused by CA-MRSA isolated elsewhere are associated with the presence of the lukF gene encoding the Panton-Valentine leukocidin
toxin and the staphylococcal chromosome cassette mec (SCCmec) type IV, the presence of both was evaluated by PCR, as described previously
(9). Both isolates were positive for lukF and harbored the SCCmec type IV. The molecular epidemiology of healthcare-related MRSA in Colombia
has changed during the past 3 years (10), but no reports of CA-MRSA had emerged. We believe these to be the first reports of CA-MRSA in
Colombia with similar characteristics to those reported elsewhere. No risk factors associated with healthcare-associated MRSA were found in
either of these patients, and the patients were not epidemiologically related. The first case involved a severe soft-tissue infection
associated with CA-MRSA. Clinicians should be aware of the circulation of CA-MRSA in Colombia. Suggested citation for this article: Alvarez
CA, Barrientes OJ, Leal AL, Contreras GA, Barrero L, Rincón S, et al. Community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus,
Colombia . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. December 2006 [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1212.060814
