We describe a 59-year-old patient who developed acute renal failure because of rhabdomyolysis after extensive red fire ant bites. This case
illustrates a serious systemic reaction that may occur from fire ant bites. Consistent with the clinical presentation in rhabdomyolysis
associated with non-traumatic causes, hyperkalemia, hypophosphatemia, hypocalcemia, and high anion gap acidosis were not observed in this
patient. While local allergic reactions to fire ant bites are described in the literature, serious systemic complications with
rhabdomyolysis and renal failure have not been previously reported. It is our effort to alert the medical community of the possibility of
such a complication that can occur in the victims of fire ant bites. Rhabdomyolysis occurs after crush injury because of trauma, excessive
muscle activity, hereditary muscle disorders, drugs, toxins, metabolic and endocrine disorders, infections, and hyperthermia.1,2 Rare cases
of rhabdomyolysis have been described after insect stings (e.g., wasps, bees) and snake bites.3–5 While local allergic responses to fire
ants are well-known, systemic reactions such as anaphylaxis, with life threatening laryngeal edema, bronchospasm, and hypotension, are less
common.5–11 Seizures, serum sickness, and nephritic syndrome have also been reported with fire ant bites 6,11,12. Herein, we report an
unusual case of acute renal failure because of rhabdomyolysis after red fire ant bites to alert the medical community of this rare
complication that may occur in the victims with multiple fire ant bites. A 59-year-old African-American male with a past medical history of
hypertension, hepatitis C, and a right nephrectomy for a benign renal cyst, presented to the emergency department in an unresponsive state.
The patient was last seen and noted to be well 11 hours before presentation. On the day of admission, he was found unresponsive lying supine
on the floor of his bedroom with multiple red fire ants crawling on his face, torso, and upper extremities. He was a known alcohol abuser
and had a 30-pack-year smoking history. His medications included hydrochlorothiazide, amlodipine, and clonidine. Physical examination
revealed a pulse rate of 84 beats/minute, blood pressure of 155/84 mmHg, temperature of 98.4°F, and respiration of 18 breaths/minute. He was
initially on a non-rebreather mask (FiO2 of 100%) with 100% oxygen saturation and was switched to 2 L/minute oxygen by nasal cannula
maintaining oxygen saturation above 90%. Pertinent positive findings included periorbital edema, numerous erythematous maculopapular and
vesicular lesions on the eyelids, forehead, both upper extremities, and over the chest and upper abdomen (Fig. 1a), diffuse wheezing
throughout lung fields and hypoactive bowel sounds. Lips were swollen significantly, but there was no evidence of tongue bite or
incontinence of bowel or bladder or trauma to the head or extremities. Neurological examination was remarkable for the patient being
stuporous, responsive only to painful stimuli, without focal neurological deficit. Pupils were normal. Reflexes were hypoactive and
Babinski’s sign was absent. There was no swelling or tenderness noted in the lower extremities. Other systems were normal. Fig. 1a
Erythematous maculopapular and vesicular lesions following multiple fire ant bites on the patient’s upper extremity is shown. b Hematoxylin
and Eosin staining of the skin biopsy showing epidermal necrosis with subepidermal blister (*), underlying dermal necrosis and patchy acute
inflammatory cell infiltration (arrows). Magnification bar = 100 microns. a Erythematous maculopapular and vesicular lesions following
multiple fire ant bites on the patient’s upper extremity is shown. b Hematoxylin and Eosin staining of the skin biopsy showing epidermal
necrosis with subepidermal blister (*), underlying dermal necrosis and patchy acute inflammatory cell infiltration (arrows). Magnification
bar = 100 microns. Laboratory data on admission included serum sodium, 147 mEq/L; potassium, 3.3 mEq/L; chloride, 112 mEq/L; bicarbonate,
28 mEq/L; urea nitrogen, 19 mg/dL; creatinine, 2.8 mg/dL; calcium, 8.5 mg/dL; magnesium, 1.5 mg/dL; phosphorus, 4.1 mg/dL; total protein,
7.3 gm/dL; albumin, 3.9 gm/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 317 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 167 U/L; and alkaline phosphatase, 80 U/L.
Complete blood count (CBC) was normal. Urinalysis revealed reddish brown urine with 3+ protein, positive for blood, 0–2 red blood cells, and
2–5 white blood cells/high-power field. Urine drug screen was positive for amphetamines and cannabinoids but was negative for cocaine. Blood
alcohol level was undetectable. Renal ultrasound was normal except for surgical absence of right kidney. Creatine kinase (CK) on admission
was 6,284 U/L, with CK-MB of 8.4 μg/L and troponin of 0.06 μg/L. Arterial blood gases revealed pH of 7.34, pCO2 of 47 mmHg, pO2 of 290 mmHg,
and bicarbonate of 25 mEq/L (FiO2 100%). Cerebrospinal fluid analysis was normal and cultures for acid-fast bacilli, fungi, and West Nile
virus were negative. Computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head were normal. Electroencephalogram (EEG)
revealed diffuse encephalopathy without any epileptiform foci or triphasic waves. During the hospital course, the patient’s renal function
deteriorated, and the CK level increased to 158,610 U/L on day 2 after admission (Fig. 2). A diagnosis of acute renal failure secondary to
rhabdomyolysis was made, and the patient was treated with intravenous fluids, alkalinization and potassium supplementation. He continued to
be stuporous, and a neurologist was consulted who considered metabolic or hypoxic encephalopathy as the cause for the patient’s neurological
status. The patient remained non-oliguric, and because of deteriorating renal function and encephalopathy, hemodialysis was initiated.
Nutrition was maintained during the hospital course initially with parenteral nutrition, followed by tube feeds, and subsequently, an oral
renal diet. Fig. 2Renal function measured by serial serum creatinine and creatine kinase (CK) during the initial 2 weeks of hospitalization.
Renal function measured by serial serum creatinine and creatine kinase (CK) during the initial 2 weeks of hospitalization. Treatment for a
possible anaphylactic reaction was also initiated with epinephrine, steroids, albuterol and atrovent inhalation. Local calamine lotion was
applied to the skin lesions. The skin lesions demonstrated central clearing and peripheral erythema. Most of the lesions on the face,
including the upper chest, were vesicular with a milky appearance. Some of the lesions appeared crusted and weeping. No new lesions were
noted from the day of presentation. A punch biopsy of the skin lesion revealed localized area of epidermal necrosis with subepidermal
blister, underlying dermal necrosis, and patchy acute inflammatory changes consistent with arthropod bites (Fig. 1b). After 6 hemodialysis
treatments that were given every other day, his mental status improved to a point where he became alert, responsive, and communicative. His
CK levels returned to normal (Fig. 2), and he was discharged 14 days after admission. He required intermittent outpatient hemodialysis for
4 months thereafter until his serum creatinine returned near his admission value of 3.0 mg/dL, and dialysis was discontinued. About a year
later, he was seen in the emergency department for uncontrolled hypertension at which time his creatinine was 3.5 mg/dL. Two common groups
of ants seen in the US are fire ants (Solenopsis species) and harvester ants (Pogonomyrmex species).13 Historically, the red fire ant
(Solenopsis invicta or Solenopsis wagneri) was imported from South America into Mobile, Alabama from soil of potted plants that were shipped
in the 1930s and into Texas in the 1950s.8,14 Imported fire ants infest more than 310 million acres in the US and Puerto Rico.15 As fire
ants do not survive winters, their incidence in the northern US is significantly less. The composition of venom from fire ants is complex.
Formic acid, an important constituent of fire ant venom, is produced in ants mainly for hunting and protection of their brood. The presence
of formic acid is responsible for the local pain at the sting bite and is also the reason for the use of the term “formicidae” for the fire
ant superfamily.7,9,14 In small doses, formic acid is an antibiotic, but in larger doses, it acts as an inhibitor of the mitochondrial
cytochrome oxidase complex, causing tissue suffocation, and consequently cell death; the latter is most likely the underlying mechanism for
rhabdomyolysis from fire ant venom. The venom is also composed of a water-insoluble, nonproteinaceous alkaloid which results in local
swelling and can induce hemolysis.9 In addition, several proteins that are capable of inducing allergic responses are found in ant venom.9
Rhabdomyolysis can manifest as a spectrum ranging from asymptomatic increases in CK to a medical emergency with complicated acute renal
failure.1,2 In non-traumatic rhabdomyolysis, the usual features of hyperkalemia, hypophosphatemia, hypocalcemia, and high anion gap acidosis
are not commonly seen, as was also not observed in this patient.1 The pathogenesis of acute renal failure in rhabdomyolysis is secondary to
renal vasoconstriction, intraluminal cast formation, and direct tubular toxicity by heme proteins (e.g., myoglobin).1,16 While it is not
possible to directly implicate the fire ant bites in the causation of rhabdomyolysis and acute renal failure, the clinical presentation and
the skin histology being suggestive of multiple arthropod bites raises the possibility of fire ant bites as a cause of rhabdomyolysis in
this patient. Several other factors may have also contributed to the development of rhabdomyolysis and acute renal failure in this patient,
including the possibility of seizures, amphetamine use, and immobilization, the latter known to be a risk factor for fire ant attacks.15
However, absence of clinical features suggestive of tongue bite or incontinence and the absence of circumstantial evidence of seizure
surrounding the patient at the time of presentation rules out seizures as a cause of rhabdomyolysis. The absence of tachycardia, significant
hypertension, hyperthermia, tremors, and pupillary dilatation on admission makes amphetamine-induced toxicity less likely. The patient was
immobilized for a relatively short duration of time (11 hours) and did not have any features suggestive of a compartment syndrome or crush
injury, eliminating prolonged immobilization as a cause of rhabdomyolysis in this patient. The presence of a single kidney and underlying
chronic kidney disease may have further predisposed this patient to increased susceptibility and delayed recovery from acute renal injury.
Although the above individual factors were considered less likely as a cause of rhabdomyolysis in this patient for the reasons described,
the possibility still exists that multiple factors including amphetamines, immobilization, and the solitary kidney may have all together
predisposed this patient to increased susceptibility to renal failure from fire ant bites and contributed to this clinical presentation. In
conclusion, an unusual case of rhabdomyolysis and acute renal failure after multiple fire ant bites is presented. This case illustrates a
serious systemic reaction to multiple fire ant bites and highlights the need for awareness of this complication in patients who are attacked
by fire ants. Potential Financial Conflicts of Interests None disclosed.
