A 41-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to our hospital with epigastric pain. Computed tomography detected a heterogeneous enhancement
tumor fed by the left gastroepiploic artery in the left lower quadrant and cholelithiasis. Excision of the tumor in the greater omentum and
cholecystectomy were performed laparoscopically. Histological findings confirmed a diagnosis of hemangiopericytoma with low-grade
malignancy. To our knowledge, hemangiopericytoma of the greater omentum is very rare, and only 12 cases were reported in English literature.
We report a case of hemangiopericytoma arising in the greater omentum and review the literature. Hemangiopericytoma is a rare tumor of the
Zimmermann’s pericyte, which was first described by Murray and Stout1 in 1942. Pericytes are rudimentary cells that have contractile
properties and regulate the blood flow through capillaries. Although hemangiopericytoma may arise anywhere, the musculature of the lower
extremities, the pelvic fossa, and the retroperitoneum are the predominant sites of origin2. The development of hemangiopericytoma in the
greater omentum is rare; to our knowledge, only 12 cases were reported in the English literature until the end of 20033–11. We report a
patient with hemangiopericytoma originating in the greater omentum. A 41-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to our hospital with epigastric
pain of 6-months in duration. On physical examination, the abdomen was flat and no tumor was palpable. Enhanced computed tomography detected
a well-defined tumor with heterogeneous contrast enhancement and no calcifications in the left lower quadrant whose arterial blood supply
came from the left gastroepiploic artery (Fig. 1). Cholecystolithiasis was an incidental finding. With a preoperative diagnosis of abdominal
stromal tumor of the greater omentum, laparoscopic surgery was performed; a solitary tumor arose with a vascular pedicle originating from
the greater omentum, which was free from adjacent organs and structures (Fig. 2). There was no evidence of peritoneal or liver metastases.
The tumor was excised with 10 cm of the vascular pedicle to secure sufficient surgical margin, and cholecystectomy was also performed. The
resected tumor was a solid tumor with the largest diameter of 55 mm, measured 55 × 45 × 40 mm, weighed 68.5 g, and was encapsulated without
central necrosis or hemorrhage (Fig. 3). On histological examination, hematoxylin–eosin staining demonstrated that spindle cells grew around
the vascular endothelial cells, and no mitoses were found in high power fields. Immunohistochemical examination exhibited that the tumor was
positive for CD34, factor-XIIIa, and HLA-DR. These findings confirmed a diagnosis of hemangiopericytoma with low-grade malignancy, and the
resection margin was clear. The resected gallbladder demonstrated chronic cholecystitis with gallstones. The patient made a satisfactory
recovery and was discharged on the fifth postoperative day. Histological findings and absence of mitoses suggests hemangiopericytoma with
low-grade malignancy. Therefore, adjuvant chemotherapy was not given. She remains well with no evidence of tumor recurrence 6 months after
resection. Figure 1Enhanced computed tomography exhibited a well-defined heterogeneous tumor with contrast enhancement in the left lower
quadrant of the abdomen, and demonstrated that the left gastroepiploic artery (arrow) was feeding the tumor.Figure 2A solitary tumor arose
in the greater omentum and was connected with the greater omentum by a vascular pedicle.Figure 3The resected tumor measured 55 × 45 × 40 mm,
weighed 68.5 g, and was solid and encapsulated without central necrosis or hemorrhage. Enhanced computed tomography exhibited a well-defined
heterogeneous tumor with contrast enhancement in the left lower quadrant of the abdomen, and demonstrated that the left gastroepiploic
artery (arrow) was feeding the tumor. A solitary tumor arose in the greater omentum and was connected with the greater omentum by a vascular
pedicle. The resected tumor measured 55 × 45 × 40 mm, weighed 68.5 g, and was solid and encapsulated without central necrosis or hemorrhage.
Hemangiopericytoma arising in the greater omentum is extremely rare and only 12 cases were reported in the English literature3–11. A review
of the reported cases revealed that three patients died of recurrence. Therefore, evaluation of the malignant potential seems important.
Recent reports proposed that malignant hemangiopericytoma is suspected for tumor size of more than 5 cm, a high mitotic index with more than
four mitoses per ten high power fields, and necrosis and hemorrhage within the tumor12. According to the 13 reported cases3–11, tumor size
and mitotic index related to tumor recurrence after resection. Because most recurrences developed at distant sites, i.e., the liver, lung,
and peritoneum, systemic chemotherapy may be an additional treatment for hemangiopericytoma with high malignant potential after resection
and for recurrence. However, effective chemotherapeutic regimens and molecular targeting therapy have not been established to date. Because
three of the four patients who underwent omentectomy in the literature had peritoneal recurrences, the significance of omentectomy is
questionable, especially for these with low-grade malignancy like in our patient. Therefore, surgical resection provides the only
opportunity of cure for patients with hemangiopericytoma arising in the greater omentum. For pedunculated tumors like in our patient,
laparoscopic excision is feasible.
