We report a surgical case of primary polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma (PLGA) of the minor salivary gland-type of the lung. A PLGA
originating from the right upper lobar bronchial inlet was successfully treated by sleeve right upper lobectomy. PLGAs are thought to be
indolent tumors that are preferentially localized to the palate, and they affect the minor salivary glands almost exclusively. Until now,
two cases of distant metastases to the lung have been reported in the English literature. To the best of our knowledge, only one case of
PLGA of minor salivary gland-type of the lung without evidence of a previous oropharyngeal primary tumor has been reported in the English
literature. But the case was not a single lesion; it was bilateral tumors accompanied by tumors of the cervical lymph nodes. We report here
the first case of a single primary PLGA of the minor salivary gland-type of the lung, which was successfully treated by sleeve bronchial
resection of right upper lobe. Polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma (PLGA) is a low-grade malignant infiltrative tumor of the minor
salivary gland. The term polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma of the minor salivary glands was coined in 1984 by Evans and Batsakis (1), to
reflect this tumor's morphologic appearance and clinical behavior. PLGAs are thought to be indolent tumors that are localized preferentially
to the palate and almost exclusively affect the minor salivary glands. The local recurrence rates range from 10% to 20%, and metastases to
locoregional lymph nodes occur in only 6-10% of the cases (2, 3). Metastasis of this tumor to the lung occurs very rarely, and there have
been only two reported cases, which were both microscopically confirmed (4, 5). Lee and his associates (6) reported the first clinical case
of primary lung tumor of this type in 2004. But the patient presented with bilateral lung tumors and low cervical and supraclavicular lymph
node involvement, and the possibility of metastases from an unknown primary tumor was not completely ruled out. A 66-yr-old woman was
admitted to the department of pulmonology due to her chronic and recently aggravated dyspnea. She had been treated for three years at
another hospital under the diagnosis of asthma. The patient was referred to the department of pulmonology at our hospital. The finding of
collapse and consolidation of the anterior segment of the right upper lobe was noted on her chest radiography (Fig. 1A). The bronchoscopic
examination revealed a cystic fungating mass that nearly obstructing the inlet of the right main bronchus (Fig. 1B). A portion of the mass
was hyperemic, and the biopsy from the periphery of the mass revealed a few atypical spindle cell proliferations in the stroma. The
tentative diagnosis did not exclude the possibility of a spindle cell neoplasm. The patient was referred to the department of thoracic and
cardiovascular surgery for surgical intervention. Preoperative chest CT scanning revealed about a 1.8-cm sized slightly lobulated and mildly
heterogeneously enhancing endobronchial mass at the right main bronchus and the upper lobar bronchus with resultant postobstructive
pneumonia in the right upper lobe and right middle lobe. The tracheobronchial lymph nodes and the subcarinal nodes were also noted to be
enlarged. The patient was in the high risk group for pneumonectomy and the parameters of the lung function test were as followings; forced
vital capacity (FVC) of 1.04 L and 47% of the predicted value, forced expired volume in 1 second (FEV1) of 0.76 L and 48% of the predicted
value, residual volume (RV) of 2.49 L and 177% of predicted value, and diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) of 7.1 mL/mmHg/min and
51% of the predicted value. The operation of sleeve right upper lobectomy and mediastinal lymph node dissection was performed. The mass was
found to have originated from the right upper lobar bronchial inlet, and it was about 1.0Ã—0.7 cm in size upon fixation with formalin. The
mass was lobulated, and the cut surface of the tumor was soft and tan-yellow. The microscopic findings revealed a low grade, infiltrating
tumor with a mixed growth pattern: there were ductal, tubular, cystic and trabecular patterns. No definite cartilagenous differentiation was
observed. Most of the tumor cells had bland-appearing nuclei and finely speckled chromatin; the cytoplasm was relatively scanty (Fig. 2, 3).
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen (Fig. 4), S-100 protein and smooth muscle
actin; they were negative for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), alpha-1-antitrysin and lysozyme. The bronchial cut margin was free from tumor
infiltration, and there was no evidence of invasion to the visceral pleura, the lymphovascular structures and the perineural structures. The
dissected lymph nodes were 13 in number and they were as follows; tracheobronchial nodes, hilar nodes, subcarinal nodes and interlobar
nodes. The dissected lymph nodes were all negative for tumor invasion. Her postoperative clinical course was uneventful, and she was
discharged on her 9th postoperative day (Fig. 1C, D). Her head and neck examination was performed after we obtained the pathologic report.
The study included a clinical examination of the oropharynx and laryngoscopy, and computer-assisted tomography (CAT) scans of the head and
neck were done. She underwent the whole-body positron emission tomography (PET) scan 2 months after the operation. All the above
examinations did not reveal any primary lesion outside the chest. She is still stable without any respiratory symptoms at the time of this
report and the parameters of her lung function test, performed 2 months after the operation, were as followings; FVC of 2.37 L and 106% of
the predicted value, FEV1 of 1.69 L and 107% of the predicted value, RV of 1.11 L and 78% of predicted value, and DLCO of 13.4 mL/mmHg/min
and 88% of the predicted value. Although not commonly, it is well recognized that salivary gland-type tumors can also occur in the lung.
These are thought to arise from the mucous glands that line the bronchial tree. The most common salivary gland-type tumors that arise in the
lung are adenoid cystic carcinoma and mucoepidermoid carcinoma. Polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma (PLGA) is a low-grade malignant
infiltrative tumor of the minor salivary gland that displays bland-looking tumor cells and a diverse range of architectural patterns; this
tumor was first described by Evans and Batsakis in 1984 (1). Since its original description and acceptance as a separate entity, more than
200 cases of this tumor have been reported. PLGA comprises 7.4% of the minor salivary gland tumors and 19.6% of those that are malignant
(7). Despite its bland morphologic appearance, there are also a few reported cases where the tumor has undergone differentiation to a high-
grade carcinoma, and often after a considerable period of years since the diagnosis (8). A large study of 164 cases (9) has shown that 97.6%
of all patients were alive or they had died of unrelated disease after a mean follow-up period of 115.4 months after the treatment with
surgical excision only. Complete surgical excision is the treatment of choice. The macroscopic examination usually displays a circumscribed
but nonencapsulated, often lighttan to gray mass. Microscopically, as the name suggests, the tumor has a diverse range of growth patterns
that may include tubules, trabeculae, single-cell files, solid nests, and fascicles, or cribriform, papillary or cystic structures. Unifying
all these different patterns is the cytologic uniformity of the tumor cells, and these cells exhibit a bland or low-grade cytologic
appearance. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells show diffuse moderate to strong staining for epithelial markers, epithelial membrane
antigen (EMA), S-100 and vimetin. Staining for smooth muscle actin is usually negative or weakly positive and focal. The tumor is generally
negative for glial fibrillary acidic protein and monoclonal CEA. Knowledge concerning the tumor site is rather important. A tumor arising in
a central bronchial site would raise the possibility of a primary salivary gland tumor, as opposed to a conventional adenocarcinoma that is
usually peripherally located. The markers CEA and TTF-1 could also be useful targets for antibody testing, as they are quite specific to
lung adenocarcinoma. It is also important to distinguish this tumor from other types of salivary gland tumors, especially pleomorphic
adenoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC), and mucoepidermoid carcinoma. The first tumor is benign, whereas the latter two malignant tumors
have a more aggressive behavior compared to PLGA. Unlike PLGA, pleomorphic adenoma is a noninfiltrative, well-circumscribed tumor that
consists of a biphasic population of epithelial and myoepithelial cells within a chondromyxoid stroma. Pleomorphic adenoma does not
demonstrate perineural or stromal invasion. Adenoid cystic carcinoma shows a greater number of angular, pleomorphic nuclei and increased
mitotic activity, as compared with the nuclei seen in PLGA, which are slightly larger, rounder and more uniform. The cytoplasm of the tumor
cells is usually more eosinophillic in PLGA, whereas it is clearer in ACC. ACC shows EMA staining that is confined to the glandular lumina,
and there is weak and patchy S-100 protein staining. In contrast, PLGA shows more diffuse EMA staining and more intense staining for S-100
protein. Mucoepidermoid carcinomas usually show definite squamoid or intermediate cells. Although there are few reports on primary PLGAs of
the lung, given the presence of minor salivary glands in the bronchial glands, this tumorous malady is theoretically possible (6). Primary
PLGA of the minor-salivary gland-type of the lung had not been reported until 2004, when Lee and associates (6) reported a patient who had
presented with bilateral lung tumors and low cervical and supraclavicular lymph nodes involvement without a known history of any previous or
concurrent tumor or any oral surgery. The patient was managed by bilateral wedge resection of the lung. The patient underwent postoperative
clinical examination including the laryngoscopy, CAT scans of the head, neck, chest and abdomen, and a whole-body PET scan, which did not
reveal any primary lesion. However, the authors discussed a possitility that those lung tumors might have represented metastasis of unknown
origin rather than primary lung tumors. In our case, the pathological features were typical of PLGA, where the tumor cells displayed a
variety of growth patterns and they had a bland cytologic appearance, which was similar to its counterpart in the minor salivary gland. The
diagnosis of PLGA was based on both the typical morphologic appearance and the immunohistochemical findings. There was no evidence of
primary tumor outside the chest on the detailed head and neck examination including the laryngoscopy, chest CT scanning, and whole body PET-
scanning. The specific operative technique of bronchial sleeve resection was first performed by Price Thomas (10). It avoids the need for
pneumonectomy and it spares the healthy lung tissue distal to the pathologic lesion. Benign or malignant tumors confined to the large
bronchus can be successfully managed by sleeve lobectomy. Because the surgical risk is not higher than that for pneumonectomy, and a
significantly better postoperative quality of life and physical activity is ensured by the preservation of the functioning and intact lung
tissue, we regard this type of tumor with its low-grade malignant potential as being well suited for sleeve bronchial resection. In
conclusion, PLGA is a rare minor salivary gland-type tumor that has been thought to occur almost exclusively in the minor salivary glands in
the oral cavity and the neck. However, PLGA should be considered in the differential diagnosis of patients presenting with low-grade gland-
forming tumors of the lung. When this tumor originates from the large bronchus, it can be safely resected by the technique of bronchial
sleeve resection. (A) Preoperative chest roentgenogram. (B) Preoperative bronchoscopic finding of the lobulated intraluminal mass in the
right main bronchus. (C) Bronchoscopic finding on the 5th postoperative day. (D) Postoperative chest roentgenogram on the postoperative 9th
day. The low-power view shows the various architectural patterns (arrow) including ductal, cystic and trabecular growth (H&E stain, Ã—40).
Higher magnification shows the strands of cells with duct-like structures.; the cytoplasm is scanty (H&E stain, Ã—200). Most of the tumor
cells show diffuse strong staining for epithelial membrane antigen (H&E stain, Ã—200).
