Ronald Ma and colleagues discuss the differential diagnosis and management of a patient who presented with recurrent episodes of chest
discomfort, palpitations, and labile blood pressure. A 53-year-old man was admitted to hospital in September 2005 with chest pain. He had a
history of nasopharyngeal carcinoma in 1986, for which he was treated with fractionated radiotherapy (62.5 Gy total). His blood pressure
(BP) was 100/70 mmHg at the time of diagnosis. He was in remission following radical radiotherapy, but had partial hypopituitarism for which
he required thyroxine replacement. Six months prior to admission, he complained of chest discomfort, was noted to be hypertensive in clinic
with BP 156/93 mmHg and pulse rate of 107 bpm, and was started on atenolol. Renal function tests, electrolytes, fasting lipids, thyroid-
stimulating hormone, and free T4 (thyroxine) were normal. Baseline electrocardiogram (ECG) was unremarkable. An exercise tolerance test was
negative. On the day of admission, the patient described retrosternal chest tightness lasting 10 minutes. This was associated with
palpitations and nausea. His medications were felodipine, propranolol, alprazolam, and thyroxine. On admission, he was markedly hypertensive
(BP 182/123 mmHg). On examination, the patient was afebrile. His BP was persistently elevated. His pulse rate was 80 bpm. Cardiovascular
examination was otherwise unremarkable. He had no audible carotid or abdominal bruits. Neurological examination was unremarkable. Fundoscopy
was normal. Bedside urine analysis was normal. Plasma electrolytes, renal function, liver function, and amylase were all normal. Fasting
glucose was 6.3 mmol/l. Heart size was normal on chest X-ray. ECG showed sinus rhythm (90 bpm) and incomplete right bundle branch block. The
patient was initially treated for suspected acute coronary syndrome and was started on an intravenous nitrate infusion. Shortly afterwards,
his BP abruptly dropped to 97/62 mmHg and the nitrate infusion was discontinued. Repeat ECG with right-sided chest leads did not show any
evidence of right ventricular infarct. Serial troponin T tests were negative. On further questioning, he described a 6-month history of
episodic chest discomfort, palpitations, and sweating. He also described marked fluctuation in blood pressure with home readings around
80/40 mmHg and markedly elevated readings in clinic. During admission, frequent fluctuation in BP with a systolic BP (SBP) between 106–226
mmHg and a diastolic BP (DBP) between 62–114 mmHg was noted. This was accompanied by a resting tachycardia with frequent fluctuation of
heart rate. Phaeochromocytoma was suspected on the basis of the patient's presenting symptoms and labile blood pressure, but repeated
collections for urinary catecholamines were normal during admission despite documented paroxysms during the collections. The patient denied
use of any recreational drugs. Psychiatric assessment did not support a diagnosis of anxiety disorder or panic attacks. Twenty-four hour
ambulatory BP monitoring revealed a mean asleep BP of 107/69 mmHg with mean heart rate 85 bpm but frequent surges of BP during waking daily
activities, with mean daytime BP 139/94 mmHg and average awake heart rate of 95 bpm (Figure 1). In view of the widely fluctuant blood
pressure and resting tachycardia, autonomic failure was also considered. The patient had absent heart rate response to standing, with
reduced heart rate response to the Valsalva manoeuvre (RR ratio 1.07, age-matched lower limit of normal: 1.24), consistent with
parasympathetic failure. There was no postural hypotension, and mental arithmetic with the serial-7 test caused a significant rise in BP,
suggesting there was no sympathetic failure. A bolus intravenous injection of 50 μg nitroprusside induced a significant drop in blood
pressure, but did not cause any heart rate changes. Likewise, a rise in blood pressure induced with a bolus injection of 50 μg phenylephrine
was not accompanied by a change in heart rate, supporting a diagnosis of baroreflex failure. Review of his medical history confirmed
extensive irradiation to both sides of the neck during treatment of his nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and this was considered the likely cause
of his baroreflex failure. In support of this theory, a carotid duplex ultrasound showed diffuse thickening of the intimal wall with focal
plaques affecting the bulb regions of both carotid arteries (Figure 2). Clonidine was prescribed to the patient, which led to improvement in
his symptoms as well as his BP. A repeat 24-hour ambulatory BP monitor 4 weeks later showed a mean BP of 126/83 mmHg with only one surge of
BP to 175/100 mmHg and only 30% of SBP readings and 33% of DBP >140/90 mmHg. The patient remained well in July 2006 on clonidine 0.1 mg TDS.
The presence of paroxysmal hypertension should always alert health-care providers to the possibility of a catecholamine-secreting
phaeochromocytoma. The diagnosis is supported by the demonstration of elevated plasma or urine catecholamines or metanephrines . However, if
this diagnosis is not confirmed, an alternative explanation needs to be sought. Other causes of paroxysmal hypertension include labile
hypertension, hyperthyroidism, renovascular hypertension, seizure disorder, migraine, alcohol withdrawal, drugs such as cocaine,
amphetamines, or clozapine , carcinoid syndrome, panic disorder, and baroreflex failure . In some cases of paroxysmal hypertension, no
obvious cause could be identified, though it has been suggested that careful psychosocial interviewing may uncover repressed emotional
distress that patients may not be aware of . Arterial baroreceptors provide a tonic inhibitory influence on sympathetic tone (Figure 3),
failure of which can result in excessive fluctuation in blood pressure. Baroreflex failure can result from abnormalities in vascular
baroreceptors, the glossopharyngeal or vagal nerves, or the brainstem. This results in interrupted afferent baroreflex input from carotid
sinus to nucleus tractus solitarii with accompanied interrupted efferent parasympathetic output to the heart and vessels (Figure 4).
Affected patients may exhibit marked and acute variations in blood pressure . Causes include carotid surgery, brainstem stroke, afferent
sensory neuropathy, or neck trauma . It is also a recognized late complication of neck irradiation , which may accelerate the development of
carotid arteriosclerosis, causing splinting of the carotid mechanoreceptors in rigidified arterial walls and thereby disrupting baroreflex
regulation of cardiovagal and sympathetic outflow . A diagnosis of baroreflex failure should be suspected in patients with excessive
excursion of heart rate during normal daily activities, often with marked fluctuation in blood pressure. The diagnosis is supported by the
finding of absent bradycardia in response to a pressor such as phenylephrine or absent tachycardia in response to a depressor such as
nitroprusside. Baroreflex failure can often be distinguished from pure autonomic failure. The presentation of autonomic failure is typically
dominated by orthostatic hypotension, and often associated with supine hypertension and postprandial hypotension. Labile hypertension and
episodic tachycardia are not usually observed. The presentation of baroreflex failure, on the other hand, often resembles that of
phaeochromocytoma, with labile hypertension and episodic tachycardia, whilst orthostatic hypotension is rarely seen . Subjects with
baroreflex failure often have a low blood pressure at rest. In rare cases where there is selective baroreflex failure with interrupted
afferent baroreflex input from the carotid sinus to the nucleus tractus solitarii with intact efferent sympathetic and parasympathetic
output to the heart and great vessels, the condition can also lead to malignant vagotonia . Treatment is aimed at reducing the frequency and
magnitude of the life-threatening surges in blood pressure. In addition, a secondary goal of therapy is to attenuate symptomatic hypotensive
episodes. Behavioural therapy with relaxation training can help by reducing sympathetic surges. Clonidine, a centrally and peripherally
acting α-adrenoceptor agonist, can dampen sympathetic activation to limit the extent of pressor surges. Treatment with clonidine reduces the
frequency of attacks and attenuates the blood pressure and heart rate changes during an attack . In patients whose condition has been well
controlled for prolonged periods, clonidine may be tapered off and replaced by high doses of benzodiazepines. In rare cases with predominant
hypotension, low doses of fludrocortisone may be required . (37 KB DOC) Click here for additional data file. (77 KB PPT) Click here for
additional data file. Presence of paroxysmal hypertension may indicate an underlying condition causing secondary hypertension. Labile
hypertension may be due to hyperthyroidism, renovascular hypertension, seizure disorder, migraine, alcohol withdrawal, carcinoid syndrome,
panic disorder, baroreflex failure, or drugs such as cocaine, amphetamines, or clozapine. Baroreflex failure should be considered in the
differential diagnosis of labile hypertension, especially in subjects with a history of neck injury or neck irradiation. Treatment of
baroreflex failure is aimed at reducing blood pressure surges and avoiding hypotensive episodes. The authors would like to thank the nursing
staff of the coronary care unit at Prince of Wales Hospital. blood pressure beats per minute diastolic blood pressure electrocardiogram gray
systolic blood pressure 24-hour ambulatory BP and pulse showing marked variability in BP, with frequent surges of BP during daytime
activities and lack of heart rate correlation. The image shows diffuse thickening of the intimal wall (intimal medial thickness of 0.15 cm
at right bulb, 0.16 cm at left bulb) with focal plaques present at bilateral distal common carotid arteries at bulb regions. With normal
baroreflex function, there is appropriate balance of sympathetic and parasympathetic tone to maintain BP and heart rate, under both normal
resting conditions (A), and during arousal, when there is increased cortical input (B). BP, blood pressure; HR, heart rate; PNS,
parasympathetic nervous system; SNS, sympathetic nervous system. In baroreflex failure, there is interrupted afferent baroreflex input, as
well as efferent parasympathetic output. This results in decreased BP with no change in heart rate in the resting state, when there is
reduced cortical input (A). However, increased sympathetic activity and lack of efferent parasympathetic activity during arousal will lead
to marked elevation of BP and HR (B). BP, blood pressure; HR, heart rate; PNS, parasympathetic nervous system; SNS, sympathetic nervous
system. Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Funding: The authors received no specific funding
for this article. Author contributions. All authors were involved with the management of the patient. RCWM and CCC enrolled the patient.
RCWM, KHY, EHCW, KHL, and JYSC collected and analyzed the data. KHY and EHCW conducted and interpreted the autonomic function test. KHL
performed ultrasound examinations on the patient. RCWM and CSC were both involved directly in the patient's management and the decision to
write up the case.
