Photodynamic therapy (PDT) involves the induction of endothelial cell death or occlusion of blood vessels. On the basis of this mechanism of
action, PDT is used in the treatment of predominant classic choroidal neovascularization (CNV), if the classic component is over 50%, and in
myopic CNV. This study describes 2 cases of distinctive, abnormal, large, subretinal new vessels that are thought to have originated from
the choroids. Diminishment of the new vessels was observed following treatment with PDT. Photodynamic therapy (PDT) has proven to be
effective in the treatment of predominant classic choroidal neovascularization (CNV) of age-related macular degeneration and myopic CNV and
is now used in the treatment of a wide range of retinochoroidal disorders. PDT was also shown to be effective in the obliteration of
polypoid vascular lesions of polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV)1 and in a case of subretinal neovascularization associated with
radiation retinopathy.2 We report 2 cases of an unusual pattern of subretinal, new vessel growth with excellent outcomes after PDT with
verteporfin. A 55-year-old male presented to our clinic complaining of decreased visual acuity in his left eye. The visual acuity in the
left eye at presentation was 0.2. The anterior segments of both eyes were unremarkable. Fundus examination revealed submacular hemorrhage of
about 4 disc areas in diameter in the left eye. No abnormal findings were observed in the right eye other than tiny pigment epithelial
atrophy in the macula. Intravitreal injection of 25 Âµg of tPA and 0.3cc of SF6 was performed to remove the subretinal hemorrhage. The
hemorrhage was significantly absorbed 4 days after the injection and fluorescein angiography (FAG) and indocyanine green angiography (ICGA)
were performed. FAG & ICG showed that an aberrant new subretinal vessel with large vessel diameter traversed the macula in a triangular
shape. Superior to the macula, an abnormal vessel with terminal polypoid dilation that is considered to be of choroidal origin was observed
above the retinal vessel. Multiple hyperfluorescent bleb-like lesions were observed inferior to the fovea and showed leakage during the late
phase (Fig. 1A). Optical coherence tomography (OCT) confirmed that the hyper-reflective lesion is located above retinal pigment epithelium
(RPE). The patient received PDT with verteporfin. The polypoid lesions and aberrant subretinal new vessels observed on FAG and ICGA
disappeared following PDT (Fig. 1B). The visual acuity had improved to 0.8 five months after PDT and the patient is currently being followed
up. A 50-year-old female presented at our department with decreased visual acuity in her left eye. Visual acuity was 0.2 at the time of
initial visit. The findings of the anterior segment of both eyes were not remarkable. Fundus examination revealed no significant findings in
the right eye and a grayish lesion with serous elevation in the macula of the left eye. FAG revealed atypical vascular branches with a
distinct margin. Leakage from these lesions was observed in the late phase. ICGA also showed new vessels in the subretina (Fig. 2A). A
hyper-reflective lesion from the subretinal vascular complex was also confirmed on OCT (Fig. 2C). The patient was treated with PDT with
verteporfin and the visual acuity had improved to 0.4 three months after PDT. Fundus examination showed fibrotic changes to the subretinal
neovascularization with shallow serous elevation. Three months after PDT, FAG showed the disappearance of abnormal vascular branches and no
leakage from the previously observed lesions. On ICGA, abnormal vascular branches were not seen in the early phase, and mild hyper-
fluorescent lesions typical of stained fibrotic tissue were observed (Fig. 2B). On OCT, the previous hyper-reflective lesion disappeared and
newly developed hyper-reflective lesions due to fibrosis were observed (Fig. 2D). The patient has been followed up for 9 months with no
further change. Subretinal new vessels may evolve from angiomatous proliferation within the retina or from choroidal neovasclarization
penetrating the retinal pigment epithelium. The subretinal location of the new vessels observed in our cases was confirmed by OCT and these
vessels are believed to originate from the choroids. In Case 1, the presence of leaking dilated lesions superior and nasal to the thick
subretinal vessel may be interpreted as another form of polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy. However, there is no evidence from FAG and ICGA
to prove that the polypoid lesions are terminal dilations of the branching vessels. Furthermore, the fact that the polypoid lesion is
located above the retinal vessel and atypical vessels are located at the subretinal level, distinguishes this case from normal PCV. In case
2, new vessels originating from choroids run at the subretinal level as confirmed by the observation of hyper-reflective lesions in OCT. A
possible explanation for the good outcome in these cases is that the effect of PDT was maximized in the treatment of immature subretinal new
vessels and new vessels close to the retinal pigment epithelium. Classic CNV responds to PDT more favorably than occult CNV and the fact
that polypoidal lesions in PCV were obliterated readily with PDT supports the excellent outcomes from the above cases. It should be noted
that although PDT resulted in excellent outcomes in the current two cases, PDT may not be effective in all cases of retinal new vessels. As
reported previously, PDT was not effective in chorioretinal anastomosis and may cause photochemical damage due to intraretinal leakage of
the photosensitizing dye. This initial encouraging outcome should be confirmed through a series of studies with longer follow-up periods.
Case 1. (A) Indocyanine green angiogram (ICGA) reveals distinct atypical subretinal new vessel (large asterisk) and polypoid retinal hyper-
fluorescent lesions (small asterisk) before photodynamic therapy (PDT). (B) ICGA taken 3 months after PDT shows no evidence of subretinal
vessel and hyperfluorescent lesions. Case 2. (A) Indocyanine green angiogram (ICGA) reveals tadpole-shaped subretinal new vessels (asterisk)
before photodynamic therapy (PDT). (B) ICGA after PDT show mild staining, indicating the obliteration of new vessels and replacement with
fibrotic component. (C) Optical coherence tomography (OCT) before PDT shows hyper-reflectivity in the subretina from subretinal vascular
complex. (D) OCT after PDT reveals localized hyper-reflective lesion due to healed fibrotic tissue.
