Potentially life threatening diseases can mimic a groin hernia. We present an unusual case of diverticulitis with perforation and a
resulting abscess presenting as a strangulated inguinal hernia. The features demonstrated were not due to strangulation of the contents of
the hernia but rather pus tracking into the hernia sac from the peritoneal cavity. The patient underwent sigmoid resection and drainage of
retroperitoneal and pericolonic abscesses. Radiological and laboratory studies augment in reaching a diagnosis. The differential diagnosis
of inguinal swellings is discussed. The association of complicated inguinal hernia and diverticulitis is rare1. Diverticulitis can present
as left iliac fossa pain, rectal bleeding, fistulas, perforation, bowel obstruction and abscesses. Our patient presented with a diverticular
perforation resulting in an abscess tracking into the inguinal canal and clinically masquerading as a strangulated inguinal hernia. The
management warranted an exploratory laparotomy and drainage of pus. An 86 year old woman presented to the emergency department with a long
standing history of reducible left groin swelling which had become irreducible, painful and erythematous. She noted nausea, anorexia and
increasing abdominal pain. She had no previous history of any surgery or trauma and was on warfarin for atrial fibrillation. On admission,
she had a tachycardia (pulse 102 beats/min) and a temperature of 37.5Â°C. Blood pressure was 130/69 mmHg. On examination the abdomen was soft
with a swelling in the left groin that was nonfluctuant, erythematous, indurated and tender (Fig 1). There was no peritonitis. Digital
rectal examination revealed tenderness anteriorly. Blood laboratory values were unremarkable with the exception of a raised CRP of 137 mg/l
(normal <10 mg/l)and leukocytosis (13,000/mm3). No intra-abdominal free air was identified on an erect chest X-ray. CT scan (Fig 2) of the
abdomen showed bilateral inguinal herniae, with marked inflammatory changes with stranding of the subcutaneous fat on the left side. The
differential diagnosis included an irreducible small bowel hernia without obstruction and herniation of the sigmoid colon with associated
diverticular abscess. Erythematous and indurated left groin area. CT scan showing inflammatory changes with stranding of the subcutaneous
fat in the left groin and a large bowel diverticulum A lower midline laparotomy was performed. Findings showed sigmoid diverticulitis
complicated by perforation and a paracolonic abscess. The abscess tracked along the round ligament through the inguinal canal and into the
subcutaneous space of the left lower quadrant, and was associated with a plug of indurated inflamed omentum into the inguinal canal. The pus
was drained and after a wash out, a standard Hartmann's procedure was performed. The inguinal hernia was not repaired at this stage. The
patient continued on IV antibiotics (cefuroxime and metronidazole). Pus cultures were positive for K. pneumonia and B. fragilis. The post-
operative course was complicated with respiratory tract infection and a confusional state. Pathology showed a perforation in a sigmoid
diverticulum with histological examination confirming diverticular disease with diverticulitis and peridiverticular abscess formation and a
perforation. The patient responded to antibiotic treatment along with other standard chest management and had a slow recovery. A wide
variety of pathological processes and diseases present as atypical inguinal hernia. We present this unusual case of diverticulitis with
perforation. The abscess formed tracked along the round ligament through the inguinal canal and presented clinically as a strangulated
inguinal hernia. Appendicular abscesses2 and appendicitis3 have been reported on the right side in the hernial sac. The presence of an
appendix within an inguinal hernia is not uncommon and is labelled an Amyand hernia4. Enlarged lymph nodes, lipomas or abscess of the psoas
muscle5 can present as an inguinal swelling. Patients with no evidence of bowel obstruction clinically and radiologically, presenting with a
painful inguinal swelling have a risk of significant extra-abdominal and intra-abdominal disease processes. An infected hip prostheses
abscess6, a subcutaneous fungal abscess7, pancreatic pseudocyst8, leaking abdominal aortic aneurysm9, and peritonitis10 can present as an
atypical inguinal hernia. In females leiomyoma of the round ligament11, endometrial carcinoma12, ovarian cysts13 and Bartholins cysts14 are
reported. In males, torsion of an undescended testis15, hydrocele and sarcoma of the spermatic cord16,17 can present as an inguinal
swelling. Sarcoma18, lymphoma19, and metastatic carcinoma from ovary, gastrointestinal tract, prostate and mesothelium20 have been confused
with the presentation of inguinal hernia. We could not find any reports of complicated diverticulitis to present as a strangulated hernia in
patients with pre-existing inguinal hernia. We report a case of perforated sigmoid diverticular abscess, on physical examination and
radiographic evidence thought to be a strangulated inguinal hernia. Careful history taking, physical examination and a CT scan of the
abdomen and pelvis should help reach a diagnosis, as it is important in planning the management especially in elderly patients with co-
morbidities. Thus radiological evidence of incarceration, signs of bowel obstruction and local signs of inflammation should help direct the
differential diagnosis. The proposed treatment remains surgery and drainage of pus and resection of the diseased bowel. The main conclusion
is that an appearance of a tender red irreducible hernia may not always be due to strangulation of the contents but also due to inflammation
of the hernia secondary to intra-abdominal pathology such as generalised peritonitis or abscess formation. The authors have no conflict of
interest.
