In the summer of 2006, a previously healthy 16 year old individual presented to the local Accident and Emergency Department, of a Northern
Ireland hospital, with a 1.5cm diameter abscess over the left great toe, surrounded by cellulitis. The lesion had failed to respond to oral
flucloxacillin prescribed by the family doctor. Apart from trauma to the toe three weeks previously, the patient had no significant past
medical history and no risk factors for the acquisition of meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). The lesion required incision
and drainage on two occasions. Culture of pus revealed MRSA and treatment was changed to oral doxycyline. Phenotypically, the organism
behaved unusually, in that it was sensitive to ciprofloxacin, unlike the majority of other MRSA isolates seen. Detailed molecular work-up of
the isolate demonstrated that it carried the Panton Valentine Leukocidin (PVL) gene locus and belonged to subclass IV of the Staphylococcal
Chromosomal Cassette (SCCmec), a typical microbiological characteristic of community-associated MRSA (CA-MRSA). To date, there has been an
extensive awareness of MRSA within healthcare facilities, particularly hospitals. More recently, there has been increased reporting of MRSA
occurring in the community amongst healthy individuals who have no hospital association.1 Most recently, the first nosocomial outbreak of
community-associated MRSA, has been described in the West Midlands.2 Eight cases of Panton-Valentine Leukocidin (PVL) positive community-
associated MRSA (CA-MRSA) were identified among individuals in a hospital and their close household contacts, of whom four individuals
developed an infection, which was fatal in two cases. Transmission of the CA-MRSA strain appeared to have occurred on two separate wards and
went undetected until a fatal case was examined in detail. These organisms are termed CA-MRSA (community-associated MRSA) and differ
significantly from healthcare-associated MRSA (HA-MRSA). Although all are Staphylococcus aureus, they have distinct epidemiological and
microbiological characteristics which are summarised in Tables I and II. Notably CA-MRSA are more likely to produce PVL, a cytotoxin that
causes leucocyte destruction and tissue necrosis, than HA-MRSA. Comparison of clinical, epidemiological and microbiological characteristics
of community-associated MRSA Person-to-person spread Healthcare staff (e.g., nurses, doctors, surgeons, physiotherapists), visitors,
patients. Environment-to-patient spread e.g., hospital equipment Animal-to-patient spread Relative antibiotic sensitivity of community-
associated MRSA (CA-MRSA) (right plate) and resistance of healthcare-associated MRSA (HA-MRSA) (left plate) to ciprofloxacin, erythromycin
and clindamycin by standard disk diffusion assay (Photo: Courtesy of Mr. Lester Crothers and Mr. Mark McCalmont, Northern Ireland Public
Health Laboratory, Department of Bacteriology, Belfast City Hospital) Key points associated with community-associated MRSA (CA-MRSA).
(Adopted from Elston1) Community-associated MRSA has recently emerged in the US as a clinically significant and virulent pathogen. It is
associated with serious skin and soft tissue infections, particularly in young healthy individuals in the community and those who have no
risk factors for acquisition of HA-MRSA.1 Several reports have described this organism in individuals in prisons, military personnel,
athletes (especially those involved in combat and ball sports, including rugby, American football, wrestling, fencing), male homosexuals and
ethnic populations (native American Indians, Hawaiian islanders, Alaskan native people). Risk factors for its acquisition include close
physical contact, abrasion injuries and activities associated with poor communal hygiene (e.g. sharing towels). This organism is now
emerging in several European countries, including the UK. While HA-MRSA cause heterogeneous invasive infections, CA-MRSA is usually limited
to skin and soft tissue infections, particularly folliculitis, pustular lesions and abscesses. Less commonly, CA-MRSA can cause severe and
rapidly fatal infections such as necrotizing pneumonia and necrotizing fasciitis. Therapy for CA-MRSA infections presents a challenge for
the clinician. They are resistant to the agents most likely to be prescribed for S. aureus infections in the community i.e. Î²-lactams. Small
abscesses may respond to incision and drainage alone but antibiotic treatment is indicated if the patient does not respond rapidly. Current
UK guidance suggests consideration of doxycycline and rifampicin for such infections. Patients should also be screened for CA-MRSA carriage
and a decolonization schedule, as employed for HA-MRSA used where carriage is demonstrated. For severe and overwhelming infections caused by
these organisms, antimicrobial agents may be ineffective because the patient receives the treatment too late. Such patients require full
intensive care support. Optimal antimicrobial agent therapy is unknown but combination therapy may be helpful. Agents which have been used
in this setting include vancomycin, rifampicin, cotrimoxazole, linezolid and clindamycin. The latter two agents have the advantage of
suppression of bacterial toxin production. Finally, the addition of intravenous immune globulin (which contains anti PVL antibodies) should
be considered in fulminant cases. Microbiologically, CA-MRSA are difficult to differentiate from HA-MRSA and at present, there is no
phenotypic testing method available in most primary diagnostic clinical microbiology laboratories in the UK, that can reliably distinguish
between these two organisms, for definitive identification purposes. In a recent study adopting molecular (PCR) techniques to aid in their
differentiation, our group have identified 4/224 (1.8%) consecutive MRSA isolates, as CA-MRSA, which had been classified generically as
MRSA.3 Therefore, given the important clinical and epidemiological differences between these types of MRSA, it is important that local
physicians have a comprehension of CA-MRSA and that any presumptive CA-MRSA isolates that begin to emerge in Northern Ireland are confirmed
and further characterized, so that we can quickly gain an understanding of the diversity/relatedness of such isolates to help guide local
guidelines/practice and interventions to minimize its occurrence. In conclusion, this initial report of CA-MRSA in Northern Ireland, from a
16 year old patient, is typical of CA-MRSA presentation. Firstly, it occurred in a young otherwise healthy individual, with a history of
recent trauma. Secondly, the signs and symptoms, namely cellulitis with a large abscess, requiring drainage, was consistent with CA-MRSA
skin/soft tissue infection. Thirdly, the resulting cultured MRSA was unusual, in that it was sensitive to ciprofloxacin on in vitro
antibiotic susceptibility testing, suggesting the presence of a CA-MRSA organism. Thus, GPs, dermatologists and A&E physicians should beware
of the emergence of CA-MRSA locally and should consider and manage such an organism in patients presenting with such symptoms.
