Editor, We report a rare cause of pyrexia of unknown origin. An 81-year old woman presented to hospital with left hip pain following a fall.
On admission, there was reduced range of movement of the left hip but no other abnormal findings. Initial investigations were normal and she
was managed with analgesia and low dose enoxaparin. She was a retired missionary nurse who had worked in Africa for most of her life. Her
past medical history included episodes of malaria and schistosomiasis. Five days after admission she developed a temperature of 38Â°C.
Clinical examination was normal except for bruising over her left hip. Haemoglobin fell from 12g/dl on admission to 7g/dl, although there
was no overt blood loss and she remained haemodynamically stable. It was suspected that she had bled at the site of injury, however an
isotope bone scan excluded a hip fracture. Her C-reactive protein (CRP) was elevated at 320 mg/l (normal <10 mg/l) and, as dipstick
urinalysis showed blood and protein, she was treated for a possible urinary tract infection. Over the ensuing weeks unremitting low-grade
pyrexia continued. Other than lethargy and anorexia there were no specific symptoms. Repeated physical examinations were normal. There was
no growth on repeated blood and urine cultures. A search for acid-fast bacilli was negative. Serological tests for atypical bacteria,
viruses and autoimmune causes of her pyrexia were negative. Multiple blood films for malarial parasites were negative. Chest radiographs, an
abdominal ultrasound scan and an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan were unremarkable. No vegetations were identified on a
transthoracic echocardiogram. A transoesophageal echocardiogram was not performed at this stage as it was thought unlikely that the patient
would tolerate the procedure due to agitation. An empirical course of intravenous antibiotics followed by a trial of anti-tuberculosis
therapy were administered without a significant response. After 40 days of pyrexia we remained concerned that infective endocarditis had not
definitively been excluded. A transoesophageal echocardiogram was performed. This demonstrated a previously unsuspected thoracic aortic
dissection that was delineated further on a CT scan of chest (Figure). It arose at the level of an aberrant right subclavian artery and
terminated at the level of the coeliac axis. It was not suitable for surgical intervention and the patient was managed with careful blood
pressure control (systolic blood pressure <120 mmHg). She spontaneously defervesced after 52 days of pyrexia. Her CRP normalised and
following a period of rehabilitation she returned home. Aortic dissection usually presents as an emergency, most often associated with
tearing chest pain1. However approximately 15% can remain almost clinically silent2. Although one third of patients with aortic dissection
may experience a transient increase in temperature1, prolonged pyrexia as the dominant presenting clinical sign is extremely rare3. The
pyrexia is thought to result from tissue destruction in the aortic wall and the release of endogenous pyrogens in the aortic haematoma4. The
febrile episode may last anywhere between five and eleven weeks and is often accompanied with a rise in inflammatory markers and a
normochromic, normocytic anaemia5. Computerised tomography of chest demonstrating thoracic aortic aneurysm (T= true lumen, F=false lumen) In
this case the unusual presentation of the dissection along with the confounding factor of previous residence in Africa delayed the
diagnosis. This reminds physicians investigating PUO to remain open-minded as not all conditions present themselves as classically as the
textbooks would have us believe. The authors have no conflict of interest.
