This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. We report a case of Eikenella corrodens causing vulvar abscess in
a diabetic patient. Eikenella corrodens is a slow growing, nonmotile, facultative anaerobic, Gram-negative bacillus which is commensal of
the oral cavity, intestinal and genital tracts. The most common clinical sources of this organism are human bite wounds, head and neck
infections and respiratory tract infections. In our knowledge, the presented case is the first report of Eikenella corrodens causing vulvar
abscess in a diabetic patient. Eikenella corrodens is a slow growing, nonmotile, facultative anaerobic, Gram-negative bacillus which is
commensal of the oral cavity, intestinal and genital tracts . The most common clinical sources of this organism are human bite wounds, head
and neck infections and respiratory tract infections [1, 2, 4]. Eikenella species have also been shown to cause endocarditis, intraabdominal
infection, pancreatic abscess, arthritis, vertebral osteomyelitis, discitis, orbital cellulites, thyroid abscess, brain abscess, liver
abscess and genitourinary infections [1–3, 5–8]. According to our research, this is the first report of Eikenella corrodens causing vulvar
abscess in a diabetic patient in English literature. A diabetic 55 year old woman was admitted to Zonguldak Karaelmas University emergency
clinic with a complain of an insidious onset of swelling in the left part of vulva, a pain radiating to the left inguinal region, chills and
high fever over a week. She has had hypertension and type II diabetes mellitus and has used oral anti-diabetic and anti-hypertension drugs
for 8 years. She had no history of previous trauma, operation, underlying skin lesion, use of foreign body or human bite on her vulvar
region. Two days after onset, her left part of the vulva became swelling and the lesions color turned to red. Even though she had used
amoxicilline-clavulanic acid and ornidasole for three days, the lesion on the vulva and pain worsened. In clinical examination her fever
38°C, pulse 96/dk, blood pressure 160/80 mmHg, in the left part of the vulva there was an erode lesion in the certain part of the
inflammatory halo. The lesion was 5 × 4 cm in size, red, hot, swollen, and painful and fluctuant. Local tenderness and edema were also
marked (Figure 1). The borders of the lesion was not elevated and sharply demarcated. Laboratory values were as follows: WBC count, 18200/
mm3 (82% neutrophils, 8% lymphocyte, 8% monocytes) ; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 122 mm/hour [0–20 mm/hour]; C-reactive protein,
(++++); and blood glucose, 235 mg/dL [70–110 mg/dL]. Vulvar abscess was diagnosed and it was drained. In Gram stain of the pus, granulocytes
(80% neutrophil), Gram-negative rods and Gram-positive cocci were detected. Ampicilline-sulbactam 4 × 1 gr IV/day, ciprofloxacin 2 × 400 mg
IV/day and local care with 2% eau borique fluid were started empirically. Her oral anti-diabetic drugs stopped and IV insulin treatment
started. The blood glucose was in regular limits after IV insulin treatment began. Following drainage, her fever, leucocyt count became
normal and, edema, pain and erythema of the lesion subsided. Eikenella corrodens and metisilline sensitive Staphylococcus epidermidis (MSSE)
were isolated from culture of the pus. After 3 days of the treatment her fever, white blood cell count was normal, ESR was 100 mm/hour. The
patient completed 14 days of treatment with resolution of signs and symptoms. The ESR was 72 mm/hour in the first week of the treatment, 30
mm/hour at the end of the treatment. An informed consent was obtained from the patient to use of her photographs. Eikenella corrodens is
commonly found in oral, gastrointestinal, and genitourinary flora. A break in barriers, such as mucous membranes or the skin, can lead to
hematogenous spread and serious Eikenella infections . It is described that previous or concomitant illness had a greater association with
Eikenella infections than did a previously healthy status . Diabetes mellitus is one of these underlying conditions; our case is also type
II diabetic patient. Eikenella is typically susceptible to many antibiotics, including penicillin G, ceftriaxone, amoxicillin-clavulonic
acid, and fluoroquinolones . Some of the β-laktamases produced by Eikenella are inhibited by clavulonate and sulbactam, however β-laktamase
production is uncommon at present . Surgical drainage may be more important than antibiotics alone in the management of Eikenella infections
. Our patient was started on amoxicillin-clavulonate and ornidasole before admitting to our hospital and not responded well until drainage
of the abscess. Depending on the location of infection, treatment choice is a combination of surgical management and antibiotics. Our
patient has been successfully treated with ampicilline-sulbactam and ciprofloxacin for 14 days. There are a few literatures reporting that
ESR is a valuable test in genital abscess [9, 10]. However, we could not find any study showing correlation between ESR level and vulvar
abscess. On the other hand, in a study reported by Paul and Patel including 54 children and adolescents with E. corrodens infections
elevated ESR was detected for most of the patients and the authors considered that ESR was a better indicator than WBC count for E.
corrodens infections . In this case, ESR was 122 mm/hour at the onset of the illness and ESR level reduced to 30 mm/hour at the end of the
treatment. E. corrodens causes various clinical manifestations especially in diabetic patients and ESR may be a good indicator of Eikenella
corrodens infections. Vulvar abscess (The lesion is 5 × 4 cm in size, red, and swollen).
