This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Mycetoma a worldwide disease frequently occurs in the tropics with
the highest prevalence being in Africa. Madurella mycetomatis is the main causative organism of human eumycetoma in Sudan. The legs and feet
were commonly the sites of the infection. A 22-year-old lady was presented with painful abdominal swelling around a previous caesarian
section scar. A provisional diagnosis of obstructed incisional hernia was put. Histopathological examination revealed macroscopically four
masses of soft tissue. Microscopic sections showed grains of Madurella mycetomatis. Mycetoma is a worldwide disease that frequently occurs
in the tropics with the highest prevalence being in Africa . Madurella mycetomatis is the main causative organism of human eumycetoma in
Sudan . The site of involvement varies with the casual agent and the geographical distribution . The disease is characterized by extensive
subcutaneous masses, usually with sinuses draining pus and fungal grains. The characteristic triad, of a subcutaneous mass, sinus, and the
presence of discharge containing grains are pathognomonic of mycetoma. It usually involves the subcutaneous tissue after a traumatic
inoculation of the causative organism. Feet and legs were usually the sites of the infections, but rare sites were reported too. Hereby, we
presented abdominal wall mycetoma presented as obstructed incisional hernia of cesarean section in eastern Sudan. A 22-year-old lady was
presented with an abdominal swelling—around a previous caesarian section scar—gradually increasing in size for one year. In the last 2 days,
it became tense, increased in size, and very painful. There was no vomiting or abdominal distention and she had normal bowl habits. She had
mild fever but no otherwise significant symptoms. There was no past history of trauma or thorn prick injury to the site of the swelling and
no other body swellings. She was not known diabetic or having any other chronic illness. On examination, she looked ill but not pale nor
emaciated. Her pulse rate was 100 per minute, her temperature was 38°C. Her abdomen was not distended; there was a subumblical midline scar.
There was a swelling involving the umbilical region and encroaching the hypogastrium about 5 × 8 cm, the swelling was tense, and did not
increase in size with coughing, skin over it was normal. It was tense, tender, hot, firm in consistency, and nonreducible. There was no
organomegaly and bowl sounds were heard normal. A provisional diagnosis of obstructed incisional hernia containing an omentocele was put and
the patient was prepared for surgery. Her hemoglobin was 10.5 g/dl, her urine was clear, and her renal and liver function tests were within
normal range. There was no peritoneal sac identified intraoperatively; instead a nodulated mass which involved the anterior and posterior
walls of the rectus sheath together with the rectus abdominis muscle. The peritoneum was intact. On dissecting the mass, pus was found
trickling from cavities containing black grains. The mass was excised with a margin of safety, the field was soaked with iodine tincture 2%,
and the rent was closed. The patient was put on ketoconazole tablets 400 mg/d for 6 months to be followed in the referred clinic.
Histopathological examination revealed macroscopically 4 masses of soft tissue measuring 1, 2, 4.5, and 4 cm. Microscopic sections showed
grains of Madurella mycetomatis, surrounded by heavy neutrophilic inflammatory cells (type 1 reaction). Mycetoma has been a disease of major
concern during the last few decades, in areas where it is endemic. Its importance came from being a significant cause of morbidity and
mortality. The disease is supposed to originate from traumatic inoculation of plant material or soil contaminated by these fungi . It has a
male predominance, commonly affecting adults between 20–40 years of age and these are the earning members of the society especially in
developing countries. The commonest site for mycetoma is the foot, the hand is the second commonest site . However, rare sites such as the
chest, abdominal walls, fascial bones, mandible, paranasal sinuses, eyelid, vulva, orbit, scrotum, and surgical incisions may be affected
[5, 6]. Primary actinomycosis of the anterior abdominal wall is rare . In this case, the course of transmission of the organism is
questionable and difficult to predict. It could be an iatrogenic cause resulting from peroperative introduction of the organism into the
tissues. As it could be the result of pre- or postoperative inoculation although the patient has no history of any trauma to the region of
the swelling. Yet, it remains to be elucidated in view with other cases reported in likewise parts of the body.
