Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs) are uncommon primary mesenchymal tumours of the gastrointestinal tract mostly observed in the
adults. Duodenal GISTs are relatively rare in adults and it should be regarded as exceptional in childhood. In young patients duodenal GISTs
may be a source of potentially lethal haemorrhage and this adds diagnostic and therapeutic dilemmas to the concern about the long-term
outcome. A 14-year-old boy was referred to our hospital with severe anaemia due to recurrent episodes of upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage.
Endoscopy, small bowel series, scintigraphy and video capsule endoscopy previously done elsewhere were negative. Shortly after the
admission, the patient underwent emergency surgery for severe recurrence of the bleeding. At surgery, a 4 cm solid mass arising from the
wall of the fourth portion of the duodenum was identified. The invasion and the erosion of the duodenal mucosa was confirmed by intra-
operative pushed duodenoscopy. The mass was resected by a full-thickness duodenal wall excision with adequate grossly free margins.
Immunohistochemical analysis of the specimen revealed to be positive for CD117 (c-KIT protein) consistent with a diagnosis of GIST. The
number of mitoses was < 5/50 HPF. Mutational analysis for c-KIT/PDGFRA tyrosine kinase receptor genes resulted in a wildtype pattern. The
patient had an uneventful course and he has remained disease-free during two years of follow-up. Duodenal GISTs in children are very rare
and may present with massive bleeding. Cure can be achieved by complete surgical resection, but even in the low-aggressive tumours the long-
term outcome may be unpredictable. Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs) are uncommon mesenchymal tumours of the gastro-intestinal tract
(GI) believed to originate from the interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC) . Likewise ICC, the GIST cells carry the receptor tyrosine kinase
(KIT). Immunohistochemically the specific marker for KIT (CD117) is used to distinguish GIST from others spindle-cell tumours of the GI.
Although a GIST may arise anywhere in the GI, stomach and small bowel are the most elective sites . It can be estimated that the frequency
location of GISTs in the duodenum account approximately to 5% . GISTs are far more common in adults, and over the age of 40. A report
focused on the epidemiology of GISTs and including 1,458 cases found no patient below the age of 20 . Others large sample size retrospective
studies confirm that GISTs are mostly observed in adults and are rare in children. Only 2.7% of GISTs of the stomach and 0.6% of GISTs of
the small-bowel occur before the age of 21 years and the mean age of patients presenting with duodenal GISTs is over 50 . Duodenal GISTs in
children are extremely rare. We report a new clinical observation to enforce knowledge about GISTs of the duodenum in young patients. A 14
year-old boy was referred to the emergency department for severe episodes of upper gastrointestinal bleeding, the first of whom dated back
to one year. A few days before, the patient had been admitted elsewhere for melena, tachycardia, mild hypo-tension and severe anaemia (Hb7.5
g/dl). At that time, after blood volume replacement, the patient underwent upper and lower endoscopy studies, abdominal ultrasound (US)
scan, pertecnate 99 m (Tc99m) scintigraphy and video-capsule enteroscopy, all of which resulted negative. The patient re-bled severely
shortly after his arrival at the emergency department and surgery was warranted. At laparotomy there was fresh blood into the jejunum and
ileum but not into the stomach. Exposure of the duodenum by extended Kocher's manoeuvre and Treitz's ligament take-down, allowed the
detection of a roundish solid mass, 4 cm. in diameter, arising from the pancreatic border of the fourth portion of the duodenum. The mass,
mostly esophytic, did not invade the pancreatic body (Figure 1). Intra-operative pushed upper endoscopy was performed. At endoscopy, the
tumour protruded into the lumen and centrally ulcerated the mucosa. (Figure 2) A mild ongoing haemorrhage from the erosion was seen. The
duodenal wall was carefully dissected free from the lower pancreatic border and from the superior mesenteric artery. Removal of the mass was
then accomplished by a full-thickness excision of the anterior duodenal wall with adequate grossly free margins. The duodenal defect was
over-sewn and covered by an omental patch. Histopathologic report revealed the tumour was composed by epithelioid and spindle cells (Figure
3), with a mitotic activity < 5 per 50 high power field (HPF). The tumour stained positive for CD117 (Figure 4), CD34 and smooth muscle
actine and negative for S100 protein, CK-pan, CD45-LCA, and melanosome, consistent with the diagnosis of GIST. Genomic DNA was isolated from
paraffin-embedded tumor tissue. Molecular work-up based on polymerase chain amplification followed by direct sequence analysis of selected
coding sequences of KIT (exons 9,11, and 13) and platelet-derived growth factor receptor α (PDGFRα; exons 12,14, and 18) yielded no evidence
of mutation. As diagnosis of GIST was made, the patient was investigated to detect clinical features of type 1 neurofibromatosis and of
Carney's triad (GIST associated with paraganglioma and pulmonary chondroma). Both syndromes were excluded. In addition, no other family
members resulted affected by GIST. The course was uneventful and the patient has remained asymptomatic with no local or distant recurrence
at the two years follow-up. No program of imatinib mesylate chemotherapy was undertaken. Most GISTs arise in adults over 40 years of age .
In the pediatric age group, GISTs occur in the sporadic form and in some cases are associated with Carney's triad or type 1
neurofibromatosis. Rare cases of familial GISts which carry a KIT or PDGFRa germline mutation have been also described . The duodenal
localization of a GIST in children is however exceptional. Cypriano and Coll. reported in 2004 a series of 7 pediatric patients affected by
GIST: none of them originated from the duodenum. More recently, from a review of the English-language biomedical literature, Hayashi & Coll.
found 25 children affected by GIST, none of them with a duodenal localization. Two further series of pediatric GISTs, each collecting five
cases, failed to identify a duodenal localization . So far, the only previously described pediatric patient with a duodenal GIST is by Towu
and Coll. that reported in two papers the case of a 7-year-old boy: bleeding was the clinical presentation and the tumour was successfully
resected . Likewise in adults, duodenal GISTs in children may have an acute clinical onset, with bleeding as one of the most common
complication. Endo-luminal bleeding is the expression of local invasion and erosion of the GI mucosa. For GISTs of the foregut, the
identification of the source of bleeding may be easily performed by upper endoscopy whenever the tumor is located in the stomach or in the
upper duodenum. On the other hand GISTs of the distal duodenum may remain undetected at endoscopy. Alternative diagnostic means for occult
upper GI bleeding include duodenum series, US and computed tomography, video-capsule endoscopy, Tc99m scintigraphy and angiography. In the
presented cases most of them resulted un-effective in making the diagnosis that was cleared only at surgery. Surgical removal of a duodenal
GIST may be accomplished by several options, ranging from the minimal to outmost demolitive procedures. Local tumour excision , segmental
duodenal resection and pancreatoduodenectomy have all been advocated, depending on the site and the size of the tumour and on the
surrounding organs invasion. Total tumour resection is the standard of cure for GISTs. Nodes dissection is not recommended, because GISTs
rarely metastasize to lymph nodes . In eligible patients, total resection of a duodenal GIST can be achieved by a simple excision procedure,
that is effective in controlling the bleeding and in achieving cure. Children may benefit of advantages from lesser demolitive duodenal
surgery. Treatment with imatinib, an inhibitor of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), may be offered to pediatric patients with advanced GIST
disease, not radically amenable by surgery. Several papers have reported a correlation between the nature of molecular alterations of KIT
and PDGFRα and response to imatinib treatment . In adults most GISTs are caused by mutations in the KIT or PDGFRα receptor tyrosine kinase
genes and this make them amenable to therapy with imatinib. Thus, adult patients with unresectable or recurrent GIST have a better prognosis
because the disease usually responds to therapy. In children genes mutations have been described in the rare cases of familial GISTs, but
they do occur very rarely in sporadic GISTs . Because most pediatric GISTs have KIT/PDGFRα wildtype patterns, these patients are expected to
respond to imatinib treatment less well than adults do. Complete surgical resection of GISTs seems however more likely in pediatric rather
than in adult patients. In a paper presenting a series of pediatric patients with GIST and collecting data from literature, the rate of
complete surgical resection was 80% (18 out 23 patients) and more than 90% of these patients survived with no evidence of recurrence . In
adults, complete surgical resection of GISTs has been reported in 40% of cases . Moreover the recurrence of GISTs in adults ranges from 40
to 80% despite complete surgical resection of the primary tumor . These data suggest a more benign course for pediatric GISTs respect to
adult cases. According to the risk assessment criteria , the GIST of the presented case fell in to the low-risk of aggressive behaviour
category (tumour size < 5 cm and mitotic counts < 5 mitotic figures per 50 HPF) and no chemotherapy after surgery was offered. Miettinen &
Coll. in a review of 156 duodenal GIST including adult and pediatric patients, found that 86% of those with a tumour > 5 cm with > 5 mitoses
per 50 HPF died of disease, whereas no recurrence or metastases were seen in patients with tumour < 2 cm with < 5 mitoses/50 HPF. However,
they occasionally observed the development of metastases even if the mitotic activity was < 5/50 HPF and the tumour size was < 5 cm. Thus,
in young patients, even for the low-aggressive category of totally resected duodenal GISTs, the long-term outcome remains unpredictable. A
long-term follow-up study is strongly advisable. The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. MC conceived of the study and
participated in its design and coordination CG conceived of the study and participated in its design PL participated in the design of the
study and drafted the manuscript GZ participated in the design of the study and helped in drafting the manuscript MS conceived of the study
and participated in its coordination. All the Authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can
be accessed here: Written consent was obtained from the parents of the patient for publication of the patient's details. Operative view:
esophytic GIST of the fourth duodenal portion. Intra-operative push-endoscopy: GIST protusion into the duodenal lumen with mucosa ulcerated.
Microscopic appearance of the duodenal GIST demonstrating epithelioid and spindle cells (H&E; magnification, ×10). GIST cells stained
positive for CD117(c-KIT) (magnification, × 20).
