Proteus syndrome was originally described by Cohen and Hayden in 1979. The disorder was named Proteus syndrome by Wiedmann and colleagues in
1983 after Proteus, the giant Greek god of the sea. Proteus syndrome is a rare, sporadic, congenital polymorphic condition. Approximately
200 cases have been reported in the literature, but none has been associated with anal bleeding from hemorrhoids. We describe the case of a
21-year-old man with Proteus syndrome with severe anal bleeding. A hemorrhoidectomy was assumed to be too risky because of the massive
venous abnormalities seen on CT. The patient was successfully treated by Doppler-guided haemorrhoidal artery ligation (DG-HAL). Six months
after surgery, the patient has had no further episodes of anal bleeding. Proteus syndrome was originally described by Cohen and Hayden in
1979. The disorder was named “Proteus syndrome” by Wiedmann and colleagues in 1983 after Proteus, the giant Greek god of the sea. Proteus
could predict the future but did not always want to reveal information. Luckily he was able to change the shape of his body to avoid
capture. The name Proteus therefore refers to polymorphism. Proteus syndrome is a rare congenital condition . Somatic mosaicism, lethal in
the nonmosaic state, is the best working hypothesis. Although Proteus syndrome data are consistent with this hypothesis, it has not been
proven. Its etiology is unknown to date . The clinical manifestations include partial gigantism of the hands or feet, hemihypertrophy,
macrodactyly, plantar or palmar hyperplasia, hemangioma, lipoma, lymphangioma, varicosity, epidermal and connective tissue nevi, cranial
exostosis, macrocephaly and skeletal anomalies [5, 6]. It is now thought that the “Elephant Man” suffered from Proteus syndrome instead of
neurofibromatosis type 1 . Although approximately 200 cases of Proteus syndrome have been reported in the literature, none has been
associated with severe anal bleeding from hemorrhoids. We report such a case in a 21-year-old man. A 21-year-old man with Proteus syndrome
complained of severe anal bleeding after defecation. The patient had been admitted several times for anemia due to anal bleeding, for which
blood transfusion was necessary. Proctoscopy showed stage 3 hemorrhoids but no active bleeding. He was treated several times with Barron
ligation, but this had only temporarily effects. Further symptoms of Proteus syndrome included: partial gigantism of the hands and feet,
hemihypertrophy (Fig. 1), macrodactyly, hemangioma, lipomas, varicosis, epidermal and connective tissue nevi, and scoliosis. Fig. 1A21-year-
old man with Proteus syndrome. Shown are a large portwine stain on the left leg and right-sided hemihypertroph A21-year-old man with Proteus
syndrome. Shown are a large portwine stain on the left leg and right-sided hemihypertroph Because of the repeated bleeding, computed
tomography (CT) of the lower abdomen was performed, and showed massive venous anomalies around the rectum (Fig. 2). Because of the massive
venous abnormalities, resection was considered to be a major risk. We assumed that the bleeding was from hemorrhoids and not from the major
veins around the rectum, but that a connection between the hemorrhoids and the veins was likely. Fig. 2CT image of the pelvis in a patient
with Proteus syndrome. The dots mark the venous anomalies (dilatated veins) around the ano-rectum CT image of the pelvis in a patient with
Proteus syndrome. The dots mark the venous anomalies (dilatated veins) around the ano-rectum We performed Doppler-guided hemorrhoidal artery
ligation (DG-HAL), a procedure first described by Morinaga et al. in 1995. With this treatment, the intraluminal arteries located 2 cm
proximal to the dentate line are ligated with a special proctoscope, which contains an integrated Doppler transducer and a lateral ligation
window. The internal pressure of the plexus hemorrhoidalis is decreased, because the arteries responsible for the blood inflow are ligated,
and the typical symptoms of hemorrhoids disappear. At a recent follow-up, 6 months after surgery, the anal bleeding had completely resolved.
Vascular abnormalities as part of the Proteus syndrome have been described several times in the literature. Hoeger et al. presented data on
22 patients with vascular abnormalities diagnosed on clinical grounds and supported by imaging studies or histology. Thirty-five vascular
anomalies were identified in 22 patients, and more than one type of vascular anomaly was present in 10 patients. Other studies revealed
vascular anomalies in 70% of the patients with Proteus syndrome. The percentage of 70% is probably higher due to under-reporting. They also
reported that varicosities and prominent veins were the most common findings. Nguyen et al. studied 24 patients in a prospective cohort
study. Vascular anomalies were identified in 20 patients (83%). The vascular anomalies were mostly located in the trunk and legs. In
contrast to our patient, none of the reviewed cases had anal bleeding. Our patient had severe anal bleeding from hemorrhoids, probably
associated with vascular abnormalities of Proteus syndrome. He was successfully treated with Doppler-guided hemorrhoid artery ligation (DG-
HAL), because a conventional hemorrhoidectomy was considered to be too risky. In conclusion, proteus syndrome can be recognized by its
specific characteristics. Severe anal bleeding in these patients can be associated with massive venous abnormalities. CT may help identify
these patients. Surgical hemorrhoidectomy can be risky and should be avoided. DG-HAL can be a good alternative and is a safe and effective
method to treat hemorrhoids.
