Mirizzi syndrome is a rare complication of prolonged cholelithiasis with presence of large, impacted gallstone into the Hartman's pouch,
causing chronic extrinsic compression of common bile duct (CBD). Fistula formation between the CBD and the gallbladder may represent an
outcome of that condition. According to Mirizzi's classification and Csendes's subclassification, Mirizzi syndrome type IV represents the
most uncommon type (4%). Spontaneous biliary-enteric fistulas have also been rarely reported (1.2–5%) in a large series of
cholecystectomies. Cholecystocolic fistula is the most infrequent biliary enteric fistula, causing significant morbidity and representing a
diagnostic challenge. We describe a very rare, to our knowledge, combination of Mirizzi syndrome type IV and cholecystocolic fistula. A 52
year old male, presented to our clinic complaining of episodic diarrhea (monthly episodes lasting 16 days), high temperature (38°C–39°C),
right upper quadrant pain without jaundice. The definitive diagnosis was made intraoperatively. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and
Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) demonstrated the presence of Mirizzi syndrome with cholecystocolic fistula formation.
The patient was operated upon, and cholecystectomy, cholecystocolic fistula excision and Roux-en-Y biliary-enteric anastomosis were
undertaken with excellent post-operative course. Appropriate biliary tree imaging with ERCP and MRI/MRCP is essential for the diagnosis of
Mirizzi syndrome and its complications. Cholecystectomy, fistula excision and biliary-enteric anastomosis with Roux-en-Y loop appears to be
the most appropriate surgical intervention in order to avoid damage to Calot's triangle anatomic elements. Particularly in our case, ERCP
was a valuable diagnostic tool that Mirizzi syndrome type IV and cholecystocolic fistula. Mirizzi syndrome (MS) in association with biliary-
enteric fistula is an extremely rare combination. To our knowledge there is only one report that refers to the rare coexistence of Mirizzi
syndrome Type II with a parapapillary choledochoduodenal fistula . The definitive diagnosis for these two rare internal fistulas was reached
preoperatively, by ERCP. It is important to identify Mirizzi syndrome and fistula formation because of the serious morbidity and mortality
related to the condition . Treatment choice is equally important as the chronic biliary tree inflammation and subsequent bile ducts anatomic
alterations necessitate a meticulous surgical approach. We present here a very rare combination of Mirizzi syndrome type IV and
cholecystocolic fistulas, diagnostic approach and surgical therapy. A 52 years old Caucasian male, presented himself to our clinic
complaining of episodic diarrhea, fatigue, intermittent high fever and right upper quadrant pain. Nevertheless he was anicteric. Blood tests
showed SGOT 89 U/L (normal 5–40 U/L), SGPT 115 U/L(normal 5–40 U/L), Alkaline Phosphatase 153 U/L(normal < 106 U/L), γGT 107 U/L(normal < 50
U/L) with normal bilirubin levels 0.5 mg/dl (normal values for total bilirubin 0,2-1 mg/dl). Afterwards U/S examination revealed pneumobilia
and large gallstone impacted in a shrunk gallbladder and a narrow, ill-defined common bile duct. Subsequently, CT scan revealed the large
gallstone and pneumobilia (Fig. 1). Finally, MRI and MRCP indicated the presence of a sinus tract between the gallbladder fossa and the
hepatic flexure, and a possible cholecystobiliary fistula (Fig. 2). The patient underwent colonoscopy in order to investigate the
possibility of inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn's disease) being the underlying condition. The endoscopy revealed a small area in the
hepatic flexure with mucosal inflammation but no fistulous tract opening. Consecutively, ERCP undertaken, showed Mirizzi syndrome type IV,
fistulous tract formation, a large impacted gallstone and severe stricture of the common bile duct, with a simultaneous revealing of the
cholecystocolic fistula delineating the colonic haustration (Fig.3). Spiral CT with evidence of pneumobilia and suspicion of cholecystocolic
fistula. MRI:T1 and T2 weighed images with iv contrast Gadolinium- Bopta, revealing fistulous tract between the right colonic flexure and
gallbladder (cholecystocolic fistula) and a large gallstone (2 cm). Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. Severe common bile duct
stenosis, with wide cholecystocholedochal communication. A shrunk gallbladder with a large gallstone and a secondary formation of a
fistoulous tract, the right hepatic flexure with the contrasted colonic haustration are the highlights of this image modality. The
definitive diagnosis of these two internal fistulas was reached intraoperatively. Right subcostal incision with left and midline extension
was performed and two severe anatomic alterations were observed. The first was the cholecystocolic communication with the right hepatic
flexure and the second was the shrunken gallbladder with the associated presence of a wide communication (about 3 cm), between the
gallbladder and common bile duct. After excision of the cholecystocolic tract and suturing in two layers of the colonic wall, the extraction
of a large stone (3 cm in diameter) through an incision of the gallbladder fundum and after two consecutive intraoperative cholangiograms
the definition of Mirizzi syndrome type IV was more than obvious. The final therapy was partial cholecystectomy and side- to- side
choledochojejunostomy Roux en Y. No malignancy was observed in any section of the cholecystectomy specimen . The postoperative course was
uneventful. The patient was discharged a week after the operation. Mirizzi syndrome is a rare complication (frequency about 1%) of chronic
cholecystitis and prolonged cholelithiasis, which consists of inflammatory process of gallbladder wall and direct compression (Mirizzi
syndrome type I) or erosion (Mirizzi syndrome type II, III, IV) of the common bile duct and subsequent fistulous formation . After Mirizzi
and Mc Sherry classification, the most recent and predominant classification was made by Csendes et al . According to it, Mirizzi syndrome
is divided in four types depending on the size of the destruction of the common bile duct (Fig. 4). A wide communication that included the
entire circumference of the CBD (Over 66% of the common bile duct diameter) classifies this case as Mirizzi syndrome type IV . Schematic
representation of Csendes classification for Mirizzi syndrome . In a large study (219 patients), Csendes et al , reported that 11% of their
patients with Mirizzi syndrome had type I lesions, 41% had type II lesions, 44% had type III lesions, and 4% had type IV lesions. Clinical
manifestation of this syndrome includes recurrent cholangitis, jaundice, right upper quadrant pain, and abnormal liver biochemistry . It is
remarkable that this patient was anicteric. The gold standard in diagnosis of Mirizzi syndrome is ERCP . In this case ERCP was a valuable
diagnostic tool that revealed the bile duct stenosis, the impacted gallstone, the wide cholecystocholedochal fistula, and the colonic
haustration of the cholecystocolic fistula. Another helpful diagnostic method in this case was Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography
(MRCP). In this case MRCP demonstrated neither the fistulas nor the choledochal stenosis, but it raised a suspicion of an abnormal
communication between the gallbladder and the common bile duct. According to the literature, MRCP usually is a sensitive diagnostic tool for
the detection of fistulas . Mirizzi syndrome is a rare complication of cholelithiasis that represents a dangerous alteration of the anatomy
and bears the potential to lead to significant morbidity and biliary injury, particularly in the laparoscopic era. In this condition the
cystic duct usually runs parallel to the CBD (10% of cholangiograms) . Preoperative recognition of this variation is important to avoid
inadvertent ligation or severance of the bile duct. An attempt to expose Calot's triangle may lead to severe bile duct injury such as: i)
iatrogenic communication between the gallbladder and CBD , ii) complete transection of CBD after dissection of the gallbladder neck , iii)
tear of CBD . Additionally, a high coincidence of Mirizzi syndrome and gallbladder cancer has been reported in several studies. The
intraoperative confirmation of Mirizzi syndrome was made after the extraction of the large gallstone. The contracted gallbladder, the
inflammatory wall and the subsequent adherence with the common bile duct (CBD) resulted to the wide communication (fistulas diameter: = 3.5
cm) . After temporary stenting of the CBD through the fistula opening we classified the condition as Mirizzi syndrome type IV which
represents the most uncommon type . The cholecystoenteric fistula usually develops insidiously, and an association with gallstones is always
present. Cholecystoenteric fistula appears in 1.2 to 5% of patients with acute and chronic cholecystitis in a large series of
cholecystectomies . About 50% of diagnosis for biliary-enteric fistulas is preoperative. ERCP is the most important diagnostic tool in order
to identify the presence of biliary-intestinal fistula. Two other significant diagnostic methods MRI and MRCP set up a high index of
suspicion revealing the fistulous tract . Subsequently ERCP was almost pathognomic as it demonstrated the colonic haustration. ERCP, barium
enema, colonoscopy with contrast fistulography, technetium 99 m scintiscan, and morphine augmented hepatobiliary cholescintigraphy have been
proved to be efficacious in the detection of the cholecystocolic fistula . In this case, colonoscopy was unable to detect the fistulous
tract, but the notification of the inflammatory area of the hepatic flexure was very helpful in the overall diagnosis. A causative
correlation between Crohn's disease and cholecystocolic fistula formation was also precluded in this case, by colonoscopy . The most common
type of biliary-enteric fistula is cholecystoduodenal (75%); cholecystocolic is next common (10–20%), with a variety of other types being
less frequent (15%) . Pneumobilia, atrophic gallbladder with inflamed wall and impacted gallstone as U/S and CT findings, malabsortion with
monthly diarrhea as the only clinical manifestation, were the main initial characteristics of this patient . The potential causative agent
of this fistula was mechanical erosion by the gallstone between the gallbladder infundibulum and the adjacent colon . Chronic diarrhea,
massive lower gastrointestinal hemorrhage, and gallstone ileus are the main severe complications of a cholecystocolic fistula . The
fistula's excision and repair of the hepatic flexure with primary closure was finally performed without any further postoperative
complications. The relatively high rate of inadvertent bile duct injury, as previously mentioned, reiterates the danger of Mirizzi syndrome.
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy in MS type IV is hazardous and maintains a high threshold to open surgery. ERCP and intraoperative
cholangiograms are significant diagnostic tools for MS. The proper surgical treatment of this fistula is partial cholecystectomy and side to
side Roux-en-Y choledochojejunostomy. The inflammation and the high risk of fibrosis and stenosis make the primary repair of the fistula
hazardous with increased morbidity and mortality rates, indicating Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy the treatment of choice in Type IV Mirizzi
syndrome . On the other hand cholecystocolic fistula can be diagnosed and even treated by ERCP, and other methods as previously mentioned.
Early operation with excision of the fistula and primary closure of the large bowel's defect is the treatment of choice. Successful
laparoscopic repair of isolated cholecystocolic fistulas has also been reported . The rarity of this combination and the precocious
recognition remains a challenge for the surgeon. ERCP remains the most powerful diagnostic tool and particularly in this case report
approached with high accuracy the correct diagnosis. Primary repair of cholecystocolic fistula and minimal surgical maneuvers of Calot's
triangle at the time of the operation for Mirizzi syndrome type IV in order to avoid bile duct injury are two important key points for
successful treatment, of these clinical entities. The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. All the authors have been
involved in literature search, writing and final reviewing of this manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed
here: We report here that written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report.
