Identification of HPeV-6 will advance HPeV diagnosis and epidemiology. Using Vero cells, we isolated a virus (NII561-2000) from a
cerebrospinal fluid specimen of a 1-year-old girl with Reye syndrome. The determined amino acid sequence of the virus indicated that the
isolate was a human parechovirus (HPeV), a member of Picornaviridae. Neutralization test showed that the NII561-2000 virus had distinct
antigenicity to HPeV-1, HPeV-2, and HPeV-3, and that the sequence was distinct from these types as well as from HPeV-4 and HPeV-5. Thus, we
propose the virus (NII561-2000) as the prototype of HPeV-6. We isolated 10 NII561-2000–related viruses, 14 HPeV-1, 16 HPeV-3, and 1 HPeV-4
of 41 HPeVs from various clinical samples collected in Niigata, Japan. Clinical symptoms of the persons infected with the
NII561-2000–related viruses were infectious gastroenteritis, rash, upper respiratory tract infection, and paralysis, in addition to Reye
syndrome in the 1-year-old girl. Human parechovirus (HPeV) is a small, nonenveloped RNA virus with a single-stranded genome of positive
polarity, ≈7.3 kb in length; it is a member of the Picornaviridae family (1–3). On the basis of serologic and genetic studies, HPeV has been
found to have 5 types, HPeV-1, HPeV-2, HPeV-3, HPeV-4, and HPeV-5, with 76.0%–80.9% similarity at the nucleotide level and 84.7%–90.0%
similarity at the amino acid level (1,4–7). HPeV infections are commonly observed in general populations. For example, ≈20% of healthy
children in Finland have antibodies against HPeV-1, and the percentage is as high as 97% in adults (8). In addition, these viruses are
frequently isolated from patients with various human diseases, such as gastroenteritis, encephalitis, flaccid paralysis, and respiratory
infections, and they are thought to be associated with these diseases (2,3,5,8,9). We report a 1-year-old girl who died with Reye syndrome,
which is characterized as an acute, noninflammatory encephalopathy with hepatic dysfunction and fatty infiltration of the viscera; the
syndrome is frequently associated with an antecedent viral infection, such as influenza or varicella (10–12). Inoculation of a cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) specimen from the patient into Vero cells identified a virus (NII561-2000) with similar properties to HPeVs. The nucleotide
sequence of this virus showed it was closely related to HPeVs, especially HPeV-1, with 79.5% nucleotide and 90.7% amino acid (aa)
similarities. Moreover, mutual neutralization assay showed that NII561-2000 has distinct antigenicity to HPeV-1, HPeV-2, and HPeV-3. In
addition, the NII561-2000 virus was genetically distinct from HPeV-4 and HPeV-5. Thus, we propose that NII561-2000 is the prototype of
HPeV-6. Eight adherent cell lines, MDCK, Caco-2, RD-18S, Vero, HeLa, HEp-2, LLC-MK2, and BSC-1, were used in our study. In brief, MDCK
originated from a kidney of a normal adult cocker spaniel, Caco-2 was from a primary colorectal adenocarcinoma, RD-18S was from a
rhabdomyosarcoma, Vero was from the kidney of a normal adult African green monkey, HeLa was from a cervical adenocarcinoma, HEp-2 was from
an epidermoid carcinoma of the larynx, LLC-MK2 was from a kidney of a normal adult rhesus monkey, and BSC-1 was from a kidney of a normal
adult African green monkey. These cell lines were cultured in Eagle minimum essential medium with 6 mmol/L L-glutamine, 1.1 g/L sodium
bicarbonate, antimicrobial agents (0.2 g/L gentamicin, 0.25 g/L amphotericin B), and 8% fetal bovine serum at 37°C under 5% carbon dioxide.
MDCK, Caco-2, RD-18S, Vero, HeLa, HEp-2, LLC-MK2, and BSC-1 cells were cultured on 24-well plates for 3 days. Then, these cells were
inoculated with a CSF specimen (100 µL per well) from a patient with a diagnosis of Reye syndrome and cultured at 33°C for 2 weeks. To check
for cytopathic effect (CPE), we examined the cells under a light microscope. To purify the virus particles, we mixed 900 mL culture fluid of
Vero cells inoculated with the NII561-2000 virus with 20 g NaCl and 76 g polyethylene glycol #6,000 at 4°C overnight. Next, the sample was
centrifuged at 5,000 rpm for 30 min, and the pellets were suspended in 4.5 mL of phosphate buffer (pH 7.2). After treatment with 4.5 mL of
chloroform at 4°C for 5 min, the sample was centrifuged at 2,500 rpm for 20 min. The supernatant was centrifuged at 120,000 × g for 24 h in
cesium chloride (CsCl) solution at an initial density of 1.34 g/mL, and the virion-containing fraction was collected and used for viral RNA
isolation. Double-stranded cDNA was synthesized from 5 µg of the viral RNA from the viruses purified by the CsCl density gradient
ultracentrifugation method described above. The nucleotide sequences of the cDNAs from randomly picked-up bacterial colonies transfected
with the cDNA-containing plasmids were determined by using the Big Dye sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Two cDNAs
isolated contained part of the NII561-2000 gene. To isolate the 3′ cDNA fragment of the isolated NII561-2000 cDNAs, the 3′ rapid
amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) was performed by using the RNA PCR Kit (AMV) according to the instructions provided by the supplier
(TaKaRa, Kyoto, Japan). The primers used for 3′ RACE were 35F-out (forward primer for the first PCR; 5′-GAT GCG GAA AAC TGC TGG ACA C-3′),
35F-in (forward primer for the second PCR; 5′-TGC CAA ATT TTT CTG CCC TAC TG-3′), and M13M4 (reverse primer for the first and second PCR;
5′-GTT TTC CCA GTC ACG AC-3′). Herculase Hotstart DNA Polymerase (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA) was used. To isolate the 5′ cDNA fragment
of the isolated NII561-2000, the cDNA fragment containing part of the 5′ untranslated region (UTR) and capsid precursor protein VP0 was
amplified by PCR from the cDNA prepared from the NII561-2000 virus with degenerate primers corresponding to this region. The degenerate
primers used were E23P1 (forward primer; 5′-CCG YAG GTA ACA AGW GAC AT-3′) (5) and 35R (reverse primer; 5′-TCT CAG CAC TAA TGA CCC TC-3′).
To further extend the sequence information of 5′ UTR of the NII561-2000 virus, the 5′ RACE was performed with 5′ RACE System for Rapid
Amplification of cDNA Ends (Version 2.0), by using the instructions provided by the supplier (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA, USA). The primers
used for 5′ RACE were AAP (forward primer for the first PCR; 5′-GGC CAC GCG TCG ACT AGT ACG GGI IGG GII GGG IIG-3′), HPeV-GSP2 (reverse
primer for the first PCR; 5′-AGA TGC ATC ATC TGC GAC TC-3′), UAP (forward primer for the second PCR; 5′-CUA CUA CUA CUA GGC CAC GCG TCG ACT
AGT AC-3′), and HPeV-GSP (reverse primer for the second PCR; 5′GCC ATG TCT GCA ATG CTC TT-3′). Taq polymerase (Biotech International,
Bentley, Western Australia, Australia) was used as a polymerase. Because 5′ RACE did not reach to the 5′ end of the NII561-2000 virus cDNA,
the 5′ end cDNA fragment of the NII561-2000 virus was amplified from the NII561-2000 viral RNA by reverse transcription–PCR (RT-PCR). The
primers used for RT-PCR were HPeV-head (forward primer; 5′-TTT GAA AGG GGT CTC CT-3′) and HPeV-mid (reverse primer; 5′-CAT AAG TTC CAC AAG
CGT GG-3′ HPeV-head primer was designed as a conserved 5′ end sequence of the HPeVs 5′ UTR. Twenty-five microliters (100 median tissue
culture doses; 50% tissue infective dose ) of the indicated viruses and 25 µL of the serially diluted antisera (an initial 10-fold dilution
and then 2-fold serial dilutions) were mixed in a 96-well plate and incubated at 37°C for 2 h. Then suspended Vero cells (100 µL/well) were
added into these wells. Three to 10 days later the CPE of Vero cells was checked by light microscopy. To prepare the antiserum against the
NII561-2000 virus, the virus particles grown in Vero cells were purified by CsCl centrifugation as described above. By using this purified
virus, we prepared antiserum by Nippon Biotest Laboratory (Tokyo, Japan). In brief, the purified viruses were subcutaneously injected into
rabbits 3× every 2 weeks. After we checked the antiviral titer by the Ouchterlony method, blood was collected from the vaccinated rabbits.
To determine the VP0 amino acid sequences of viruses isolated from clinical samples with cultured cell lines, we extracted the viral RNA
from culture supernatant of cells injected with the clinical samples by using the High Pure Viral RNA Kit (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). cDNA
was synthesized from 8 µL of the viral RNA by using 1 U Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) and 20 U of
recombinant RNAs in ribonuclease inhibitor (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The 810-bp fragment containing part of 5′ UTR and VP0 was amplified
by PCR, using 5 µL of cDNA in a 50-µL reaction mixture containing 50 mmol/L KCl, 10 mmol/L Tris/HCl (pH 8.5), 2.5 mmol/L MgCl2, 0.2 mmol/L
of each deoxynucleoside triphosphates, 50 pmol of each primer, and 1 U of Taq polymerase (Biotech International). The amplification reaction
consisted of 30 cycles at 95°C for 30 s, at 59°C for 30 s, and at 72°C for 1 min. The primer set used was E23P1 as a forward primer and
HPV-N1 (5′-TAG GGG ATA CAT ARG TCR GCY T-3′ as a reverse primer (5). The bootstrap values were calculated from P1 amino acid sequences of
parechoviruses with the CLUSTAL X software program (13), and the phylogenetic tree of these P1 amino acid sequences was constructed by using
the neighbor-joining method. The nucleotide sequences of the following parechoviruses were obtained from GenBank: and their accession
numbers were L02971 for HPeV-1 (Harris strain), AJ005695 for HPeV-2 (Williamson strain), AB084913 for HPeV-3(A308/99), AJ889918 for HPeV-3
(Can82853-01), DQ315670 for HPeV-4 (K251176-02), AM235750 for HPeV-4 (T75-4077), AF055846 for HPeV-5 (CT86-6760), AM235749 for HPeV-5
(T92-15), and AF327920 for Ljungan virus (LV). The GenBank/EMBL/DDBJ accession numbers of NII428-2000, NII2392-2001, NII2667-2001,
NII2694-2001, NII2729-2001, and NII561-2000 are AB252577–AB252582. In January 2000, a 1-year-old girl with croup and high fever (39.6°C) was
hospitalized in a regional general hospital in Niigata Prefecture, Japan. The infant died, and her condition was diagnosed as Reye syndrome
after postmortem pathologic examination. To identify the pathogenic agent, we added a CSF specimen collected before death to 8 cell lines:
MDCK, Caco-2, RD-18S, Vero, HeLa, HEp-2, LLC-MK2, and BSC-1 cells. Only Vero cells inoculated with the specimen exhibited a CPE. The CPE
titer of the culture fluid was 105–106 TCID50 per 25 µL against Vero cells. Electron microscopic examination detected typical
enteroviruslike virions in the culture fluid of the specimen (round, no envelop, ≈30 nm in diameter). Taken together, these results
suggested that the CSF from the patient contained a virus, which we refer to here as NII561-2000. Neutralization tests were performed to
examine whether the NII561-2000 agent is related to known viruses. The NII561-2000 virus infection of Vero cells was not neutralized by a
pool of enterovirus typing antisera or 3 HPeV typing antisera [(HPeV-1, HPeV-2, and HPeV-3) (A308/99)] (Table 1). Conversely, the rabbit
antiserum to the NII561-2000 virus did not neutralize the infection of prototype strains of echovirus (serotypes 1–6, 9, 11–15, 17–21,
24–27, 29, 30, and 33), enteroviruses (serotypes 68 and 69), and 3 HPeVs, while it efficiently inhibited the infection of the NII561-2000
virus. These results suggest that the NII561-2000 agent is distinct from the examined known enteroviruses and HPeVs. *HPeV, human
parechovirus. †The HPeV strains used were Harris strain for HPeV-1, Williamson strain for HPeV-2, and A308/99 for HPeV-3. We next examined
the sensitivity of the virus to 5-iodo-2′-deoxyuridine (IUDR) (14). The NII561-2000 virus, treated with 10–4.5 µmol/L IUDR, was injected
into Vero cells. The IUDR treatment did not affect the CPE in Vero cells, indicating that the virus has the RNA genome (data not shown). We
next examined the acid-stability and thermostability of the NII561-2000 virus. The virus was treated at pH 3.0 for 3 h at room temperature,
but the infectivity of the treated virus to Vero cells was little affected. Incubation of the virus at 50°C for 30 min reduced the
infectivity, while incubation at 50°C for 1 h in the presence of 1 mol/L MgCl2 did not reduce the infectivity. These results indicate that
the NII561-2000 virus has similar properties to human enteroviruses and HPeVs. To determine the nucleotide sequence of the NII561-2000
virus, the viral RNA was extracted from the purified virus. The partial nucleotide sequences of cDNA clones derived from this viral RNA were
determined. BLAST (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast) search identified that the nucleotide sequences of 2 isolated cDNAs showed high similarity
with that of HPeV-2. By using these cDNAs as a starting material, the cDNAs containing the 5′ portion and 3′ portion of the NII561-2000 gene
were isolated by RT-PCR with degenerated primers, 5′ RACE and 3′ RACE. The determined nucleotide sequence of NII561-2000 was 7,347 nt in
length, excluding a poly (A) tract. Following a 709-nt 5′ UTR, a long open reading frame encoded a putative polyprotein precursor of 2,182
aa, which was followed by an 89-nt 3′ UTR. To verify the nucleotide sequence of the determined NII561-2000 genome, RT-PCR with a set of
primers and RNA sample extracted from the virus-infected Vero cells was carried out. The nucleotide sequences of the NII561-2000 genome
obtained by using this RT-PCR method were perfectly matched with those of the originally determined sequences (data not shown). Phylogenetic
tree analysis with complete P1 (VP0, VP3, and VP1) amino acid sequences showed that the NII561-2000 virus was most similar to HPeV-1/HPeV-2
(Figure, panel A). The nucleotide sequence and amino acid similarities of NII561-2000 virus to HPeV-1 were 79.5% and 90.7%, those with
HPeV-2 were 77.1% and 87.3%, those with HPeV-3 (A308/99) were 76.7% and 85.9%, those with HPeV-4 were 77.1% and 88.2%, and those with HPeV-5
(CT86-6760) were 77.0% and 86.9%, respectively (Table 2). Thus, the NII561-2000 virus is the most similar to HPeV-1 at the amino acid level.
The VP1 capsid gene of NII561-2000 was the most divergent (33.8% at nucleotide level) from that of HPeV-5 (CT86-6760). Phylogenetic tree
analysis of the NII561-2000 virus and the NII561-2000–related viruses. A) The phylogenetic tree of P1 amino acid sequences was constructed
as described in Materials and Methods. Bar shows a genetic distance of 0.05. The following amino acid sequences were obtained from GenBank:
L02971 for HPeV-1 (Harris strain), AJ005695 for HPeV-2 (Williamson strain), AB084913 for HPeV-3 (A308/99), AJ889918 for HPeV-3
(Can82853-01), DQ315670 for HPeV-4 (K251176-02), AM235750 for HPeV-4 (T75-4077), AF055846 for HPeV-5 (CT86-6760), AM235749 for HPeV-5
(T92-15), and AF020541 for Ljungan virus (LV). B) Phylogenetic relationships among the NII561-2000 virus, the NII561-2000–related viruses,
and other prototype HPeVs based on comparisons of amino acid similarities of capsid protein (the first 200 aa of VP0 sequences). The tree
was constructed by the neighbor-joining method, using ClustalX. Bootstrap values are expressed in percentages after sampling 1,000×. Bar
shows a genetic distance of 0.05. *HPeV, human parechovirus; UTR, untranslated region; ORF, open reading frame. †The HPeV strains used were
Harris strain for HPeV-1, Williamson strain for HPeV-2, A308/99 for HPeV-3, K2511876–02 for HPeV-4, and CT86–6760 for HPeV-5. HPeVs have 9
polyprotein cleavage sites: VP0/VP3, VP3/VP1, VP1/2A, 2A/2B, 2B/2C, 2C/3A, 3A/3B, 3B/3C, and 3C/3D (Table 3). Comparison of these
polyprotein cleavage sites among 6 HPeVs showed that those in VP3/VP1, 2A/2B, 2B/2C, 2C/3A, 3A/3B, 3B/3C, and 3C/3D were conserved among all
6 HPeVs. The cleavage site in VP1/2A was identical among HPeV-1, HPeV-2, HPeV-4, HPeV-5, and NII561-2000 but not HPeV-3. The cleavage site
in VP0/VP3 of NII561-2000 was identical to that of HPeV-3 but not to those of others. *The human parechovirus (HPeV) strains used were
Harris strain for HPeV-1, Williamson strain for HPeV-2, A308/99 for HPeV-3, K2511876–02 for HPeV-4, and CT86–6760 for HPeV-5. The
NII561-2000 virus, HPeV-1, HPeV-2, HPeV-4, and HPeV-5, but not HPeV-3, had an RGD (arginine-glycine-aspartic acid) motif at the C terminus
of VP1 (15). The RGD motif may be used for an entry receptor of these HPeVs to attach, penetrate, or both, into host cells. Mutant HPeV-1
viruses with 2 aa deletions in the RGD motif showed little infectivity, while an RGD-to-RGE (arginine-glycine-glutamic acid) change showed
reduced infectivity, and the resultant viruses possessed a rescued RGD. In addition, mutations at the +1 and +2 positions downstream from
the RGD motif produced small virus–inducing plaques, and an M-to-P change at +1 position was lethal (15). The amino acids (+1 and +2
positions) downstream from the RGD motif of NII561-2000 were identical to those of HPeV-1. The N terminal ends of VP4 of many picornaviruses
are myristoylated, and they have a consensus myristoylation motif (16). HPeVs, including NII561-2000, lacked a myristoylation motif in the
corresponding VP0 sequence. Myristoylation of capsid proteins is suggested to play a role in virion assembly. Thus, the virion assembly
mechanism of HPeVs, including NII561-2000, might be distinct from other picornaviruses, including poliovirus. By using cultured cells
(Caco-2, RD-18S, Vero, HeLa, HEp-2, LLC-MK2, and BSC-1), we have isolated 8,195 CPE-inducing agents from 13,656 clinical samples (stool,
throat swab, and CSF) collected between 1991 and 2005, at Niigata, Japan (Table 4, Table 5). The CPE morphologic features and CPE-inducing
cell types suggested that 1,521 isolates are likely to be enteroviruses, HPeVs, rhinoviruses, or other viruses, and the others are likely to
be influenza viruses or adenoviruses. Neutralization tests that used antisera against enteroviruses and HPeV-1 showed that 1,365 were
enteroviruses and 12 were HPeV-1, and the remaining 144 viruses were not neutralized by these agents. RT-PCR that used degenerate primers
against HPeVs, enteroviruses, and rhinoviruses identified 29 HPeVs, 72 enteroviruses, and 26 rhinoviruses, respectively. The remaining 17
viruses were not identified by these methods. Thus, a total of 41 HPeVs were isolated from the samples collected in Niigata. *HPeV, human
parechovirus. *HPeV, human parechovirus; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid. Phylogenetic tree analysis showed 14 HPeV-1, 16 HPeV-3, and 1 HPeV-4, but
no HPeV-2 and HPeV-5 among the examined 41 HPeVs. In addition, 10 viruses, including NII561-2000, formed a distinctive tree from those of
the other HPeVs (Figure, panel B). Of note, in our search from 1991 through 2005, the NII561-2000–related viruses were isolated only in 2000
(3 cases) and 2001 (7 cases); HPeV-1 were isolated in 1991, 1998, 2001, 2004, and 2005; HPeV-3 were isolated in 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001,
2004, and 2005; and HPeV-4 was isolated only in 1993 (Table 4). The clinical symptoms of the patients infected with NII561-2000–related
viruses were gastroenteritis, respiratory symptoms, rash, and flaccid paralysis in addition to Reye syndrome (Table 5), and these disease
categories were similar to those of other HPeVs (2,3). In this study, we isolated a novel HPeV (NII561-2000) from a 1-year-old girl with
Reye syndrome and determined the nucleotide sequence. Nucleotide sequence analysis and mutual neutralization test indicated that the
NII561-2000 virus was distinct from 5 known HPeVs (Figure, panel A) (17). Thus, we propose that the NII561-2000 virus is the prototype of
HPeV-6. The NII561-2000 virus was originally isolated from a patient with Reye syndrome, an acute noninflammatory encephalopathy
characterized by an antecedent viral infection, such as influenza or varicella (10–12). The significance of the NII561-2000 virus in this
syndrome is not clear, because our samples did not include any other samples from this patient. We also isolated 9 NII561-2000–related
viruses from clinical samples collected from other patients. The clinical symptoms of the persons infected with NII561-2000–related viruses
were gastroenteritis, upper respiratory tract infection, rash, and flaccid paralysis. These disease categories of the NII561-2000–related
virus are similar to those of other HPeVs, but the pathologic roles of the NII561-2000 viruses in these diseases, including Reye syndrome,
need further etiologic and biologic studies. In our search at Niigata from 1991 through 2005, the NII561-2000 and related viruses were
isolated only in 2 consecutive years (2000 and 2001), HPeV-1 were isolated in 5 years, and HPeV-3 were isolated in 6 years. The genetic
variations of these NII561-2000–related viruses were small (Figure, panel B). These results suggest that a 2-year outbreak of
NII561-2000–related virus may have occurred in Niigata, Japan. Thirteen of 16 HPeV-3 isolated in Niigata were from the patients <3 years of
age, consistent with the previous report (18). Sepsislike illness and central nervous system involvement were more frequently reported in
children infected with HPeV-3 than HPeV-1 (18). Consistent with those findings, the HPeV-3 infections in Niigata included 2 aseptic
meningitis patients, whereas no such illness was associated with HPeV-1. HPeV-4 was isolated from a 5-year-old patient with lymphadenitis in
Niigata (Table 5). Thus, this virus is prevalent and is likely to be pathogenic in at least 3 countries. The diseases associated with HPeV-4
in the Netherlands and the United States were fever and TORCH (toxoplasmosis; other infections; namely, hepatitis B, syphilis, herpes
zoster, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex virus infections) (6,19). Further analysis is required to establish an association of
HPeV-4 with these diseases. The degenerate primer set we used here was originally developed by Ito et al. (5) to amplify 3 known HPeV cDNAs.
Here, we successfully amplified the NII561-2000 viral cDNA and HPeV-4 from culture supernatants of the infected cells, indicating that this
primer set can amplify the cDNA fragments of at least 5 HPeVs from culture supernatants of infected cells. Thus, this primer set is a useful
tool to determine the subtypes of HPeVs. Suggested citation for this article: Watanabe K, Oie M, Higuchi M, Nishikawa M, Fujii M. Isolation
and characterization of novel human parechovirus from clinical samples. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2007 Jun [date cited].
Available from http://www.cdc.gov/eid/content/13/6/889.htm We thank Dr. Hiromu Yoshida for providing HPeV-1, HPeV-2, and monkey antisera
against HPeV-1 and HPeV-2 and Dr. Miyabi Ito for providing HPeV-3 and guinea pig antiserum against HPeV-3. Mrs Watanabe is a graduate
student at the Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences. Her research interests include molecular biology and
molecular epidemiology of enterovirus infection.
