Percutaneous approaches to upper tract urothelial cancers have been performed in patients unsuitable for radical nephroureterectomy. We
present the case of an 82-year-old man with significant comorbidities including dependency on a cardiac pacemaker. Without deactivating the
pacemaker, we used bipolar cautery to percutaneously resect a large upper tract urothelial tumor in the renal pelvis. Bipolar cautery is a
suitable method of percutaneous or transurethral resection in patients who are pacemaker dependent. It is well established that the presence
of neoplasms in the upper tract urothelium necessitates the en bloc removal of the ipsilateral kidney, ureter, and bladder cuff as the
standard of care based on the premise that urothelial cancers are caused by a field change or defect. However, due to the morbidity
associated with open nephroureterectomies, conservative management may be appropriate for poor surgical candidates.1 Percutaneous and
ureteroscopic techniques have been utilized in the management of urothelial tumors with percutaneous access required to treat larger of
upper tract urothelial cancers being used in suitable candidates.1,2Various techniques for this approach have been reported including
monopolar electrocautery, laser, rollerball, and electrovaporization. The reported recurrence rates have been low, and disease-free survival
is comparable to that in patients treated with nephroureterectomy.1 The use of monopolar electrosurgery however can interfere with cardiac
pacemakers resulting in potentially fatal dysrhythmias. We report the case of an upper tract urothelial carcinoma in the renal pelvis
resected with bipolar cautery through percutaneous access without deactivation of the cardiac pacemaker. To our knowledge, the use of
bipolar cautery has not been described in this setting. An 82-year-old man who was a lifelong nonsmoker presented with a history of
intermittent gross hematuria. His medical comorbidities included non-insulin-dependent diabetes, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia,
hypothyroidism, chronic renal insufficiency (creatinine 2.4 mg/ dL), multiple transient ischemic attacks, stroke, sleep apnea, peripheral
vascular disease resulting in a below-knee amputation, colon resection for diverticulitis, and a VDD pacemaker (Model # 640, Vitatron,
Minneapolis, MN) for bradycardia. His medications included aspirin, ramipril, hydrochlorothiazide, L-thyroxine and rosuvastatin. His
preoperative cardiac risk was Goldman Class II-III, and he was at high risk of developing a deep venous thrombosis. Postoperative
respiratory depression was a concern due to his sleep apnea. Initial cystoscopic examination revealed no bladder tumors. The retrograde
pyelogram on the right side was normal, but the left retrograde pyelogram demonstrated moderate hydronephrosis in a bifid collecting system
and a 2-cm filling defect in the renal pelvis with renal malrotation (Figure 1). Urine cytology was positive for urothelial carcinoma. A CT
scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a tumor limited to the left renal collecting system with no evidence of metastases. Further, a
metastatic workup was negative. Retrograde pyelogram displaying a renal filling defect in a bifid renal collecting system with a malrotated
kidney. Based on a background of renal insufficiency, the options were discussed with the patient and a tumor ablation with the Holmium:YAG
laser and flexible ureteroscopy was carried out. The ureteroscopic procedure was ineffective in completely ablating the tumor at its stalk
because the ureteroscope could not fully access the tumor due to the capacious renal pelvis and renal malrotation. This patient was
dependent on his VDD pacemaker, thus making monopolar cautery potentially hazardous. Therefore, a percutaneous resection using a bipolar
resectoscope was planned under a second general anesthetic without deactivating the pacemaker. With the patient under general anesthesia,
percutaneous access to the kidney was obtained, the tract was dilated to 30 F, and an Amplatz sheath was inserted. A resectoscope using
bipolar cautery (VISTA, ACMI Corporation, South-borough, MA) was used to resect the tumor (settings: cut, 6; coagulation, 6) through the
Amplatz sheath. The operation lasted 30 minutes without any evidence of dysrhythmias or interference with the pacemaker. A 22 F nephrostomy
tube was left indwelling until postoperative day 1 when it was removed, and the patient was discharged home without any complications. The
patient used a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine postoperatively that helped prevent any postoperative respiratory
complications. There were no cardiac or thromboembolic complications. The patient was seen in follow-up at 3 months with an intravenous
pyelogram (IVP) that was free of any filling defects and negative cytology. Serum creatinine increased only slightly from 2.4 mg/dL
(preoperatively) to 2.6 mg/dL, postoperatively. At 8 months, a retrograde pyelogram revealed a recurrence of his upper tract tumor that was
too large for ureteroscopic management, and percutaneous bipolar resection was once again undertaken. The patient declined upper tract
bacille Calmette-Guérin therapy and laparoscopic nephroureterectomy due to his declining health including a recent cerebral vascular
accident. At 6 months, the patient remains free of recurrent or metastatic disease with stable renal function (2.5 mg/dL). Bipolar
electrocautery was introduced over 20 years ago as an energy source for endourologic procedures.3 The potential benefits of bipolar energy
include the use of isotonic normal saline irrigation and improved hemostasis.3 Importantly, it can also be used on patients with permanent
cardiac pacemakers and has been described in a case involving transurethral resection of a bladder tumor in a similar pacemaker-dependent
patient.4 Electrocautery-induced cardiac pacemaker failure or malfunction has been well described.5,6Since the invention of cardiac
pacemakers nearly 50 years ago, electromagnetic interference has been a concern for patients who wear them. Over the years, despite improved
technology, permanent cardiac pacemakers remain susceptible to this electromagnetic interference, including electrocautery, during surgical
procedures.5 Traditionally, the use of monopolar electrosurgery is avoided in patients with cardiac pacemakers because the monopolar current
passes from the instrument tip through the patient's body towards the ground plate and may adversely affect the pacemaker, resulting in
potentially fatal dysrhythmias. Bipolar electro-surgery can reduce the level of interference between electrocautery units and pacemaker
electrodes.5 Bipolar electrosurgery has also been shown to reduce the depth of thermal damage at the site of surgery. In an ex vivo porcine
kidney model, Wendt-Nordahl et al7 compared the effects of the Vista bipolar system to monopolar cautery. The depth of thermal damage was
significantly deeper at 300 µm measured with the monopolar resectoscope but only reached 160 µm with the bipolar device even at the highest
output level (level 8). The lower tissue temperature may be beneficial during resection of upper tract renal tumors. Excessive heat may
cause problems with the urothelium of the renal collecting system or penetrate deeply into parenchyma resulting in arteriovenous fistulae.
Radical nephroureterectomy is the gold standard in the treatment of upper tract urothelial malignancies. However, in patients with
significant medical comorbidities who are not candidates for radical surgery, bipolar resection through a percutaneous access is an
alternative. Given the patient's cardiac status, a bipolar resectoscope was used not only to perform tumor resection but also to minimize
the risk of electrical interference with the pacemaker. Both ureteroscopy and percutaneous laser ablation would have been tedious due to
tumor size and location. Disease recurrence occurred due to multifocality and not due to failure of the initial bipolar procedure. It can be
argued that the patient underwent 2 endoscopic procedures while under general anesthesia, whereas a laparoscopic nephroureterectomy would
have offered treatment in a single procedure; however, the single procedure would have required more surgical time in one sitting and is
much more invasive than 2 short endoscopic procedures. The mortality and morbidity risk would be higher with a nephroureterectomy than 2
shorter endoscopic procedures. While the use of the bipolar electrocautery may be advantageous in the percutaneous resection of upper tract
urothelial tumors, potential drawbacks of this technique include limited utility depending on tumor location and access, and dessication of
the tissue creating more artifacts for pathological examination. It is advisable to perform a cold biopsy of the tumor for both pathology
and margin status before using the bipolar electrocautery. More importantly, this approach is not a replacement for nephroureterectomy but
may be an option for nonsurgical candidates or patients who may benefit from nephron-sparing procedures. It may be a palliative procedure in
some cases and potentially therapeutic in others. As illustrated in this case, the use of bipolar electrocautery circumvents the potential
risks of using electrocautery in patients with cardiac pacemakers. Bipolar electrocautery is a safe and feasible resection modality in
percutaneously approached upper tract urothelial neoplasms in patients with cardiac pacemakers.
