Mc Indoe vaginoplasty is one of the mostly performed surgical interventions in Mullerian agenesis. We present our experience on the use of a
new designed vaginal stent that was coated with silicone in two mullerian agenesis cases who had Mc Indoe vaginoplasty. Both full thickness
and splitt thickness skin graft were used with the stent. No graft loss or hyperthrophic scarring which may be seen at the apex of neovagina
after Mc Indoe vaginoplasty was observed during the follow-up period and adequate neovaginal depth were obtained in both of the patients. We
think that the incorporation of silicone to a vaginal stent for postoperative wound care improves skin graft take and decreases a possible
constriction band formation in neovagina. The correction of vaginal agenesis requires the creation of a neovaginal cavity that is dissected
between the bladder and the rectum . The technique needs to use the split-thickness skin graft or full-thickness skin graft. The procedure
is not entirely satisfactory in cases of reconstructed vaginal stenosis, inadequate vaginal length. In order to prevent a possible
contraction of the reconstructed vagina, a long-term vaginal stent use is required to maintain vaginal width and depth. The vacuum assisted
closure-system (VAC) has recently been introduced to improve the take of skin graft in vaginal reconstruction and it has been reported to
exclude the need for vaginal stent . Although new techniques which does not necessitate a prolonged dilatation is developed, McIndoe's
method is still one of the very popular methods of vaginoplasty and it has been shown to be effective in creation of a neovagina for
patients with mullerian agenesis . Several vaginal stents have been described for postoperative maintanence after Mc Indoe vaginoplasty . We
present our experience with a new silicone coated acrylic stent in 2 vaginoplasty patients. Silicone is the most widely used biomaterial in
plastic surgery field for different purposes due to its high biocompatibilty. We incorporated silicone to a new designed vaginal stent. The
idea has been originated from the fact that using silicone gel sheeting is an effective method for skin graft stabilization . The stent is 3
cm in diameter and 11–12 cm in lenght. It's inner body is composed of rigid acrylic mold and the outer surface is coated with solid
silicone. One hole at the distal end of the stent for drainage at the early postoperative period and four holes at the proximal plastic
plate for securing the stent to body are designed (figure 1). The silicone-coated vaginal stent is seen. The stent has three components
which are formed by inner acrylic (akrileks, Turkey), outer silicone (monopren liquid siliconei silimed, Germany) and a perpendicularlary
attached plastic with holes for fixation. The main body is consisted of acrylic solid material which is 12,5 cm long. Its diameter is 3 cm
and clyndric construction resembles a 20 cc syrnge. The plastic plate that was attached to the main body was consisted of a material which
is used for dental mold applications (meraport, germany). These three components are prepared sparately and then they are combined to form
an compact unit under 80–90°C for 5 minutes. The stent is sterilized under etilen oxide for surgical usage. The holes of plastic component
is designed for fixation of the stent to the body. The liquid silicone is applicated to the outer surface of acrylic stent just before the
heating process which converts it to a solid silicone The vaginal agenesia is opened through an I incision and then two sides of the central
fibrotic band are dissected. After having hemostasis and pouches at 8 cm long bilaterally, the central band is excised. The newly created
vaginal pouche is rechecked for hemostasis and then the stent is inserted to the pouche for checking of stent compliance with the neovagina.
At this time, the harvested skin graft (full-thickness or splitt-thickness) is wrapped around the silicone coated stent with an antibiotic
oinment (furaderm, toprak ilaç, turkey). The edges of skin graft is sutured to each other with a resorbable suture material. The application
of the skin graft to the wound necessiates a great care. During the graft insertion, an or two assistants make a wide exposure to vaginal
pouche with ecartors and the stent with the skin graft is settled gently. From this time of operation every movement must be done carefully
avoiding graft distorsion or tear. The distal edges of skin graft can be sutured to the edges of openning incision at this time. The stent
is fixated to a belt around the body with inserting sterile serum set through the holes. The most important point in the stent fixation is
to hold a parellel fixation to normal vagen axis, otherwise meatal or urethral necrosis may occur due to undue pressure resulted from
improper stent fixation. This paralel fixation prevents the stent from prolapsing at the early postoperative period. The incorporation of
silicone has the advantage of a superior skin graft take with relieving a possible pressure necrosis around the stent. 21 years old female
was referred as complete vaginal agenesis. She was examined and Rokitansky Kustner was diagnosed. She was operated under general anesthesia
in october 2004. Full-thickness skin graft taken from inguinal region was used. The prosthesis was secured in place for 5 days after the
operation and then it was gently removed for first look to the grafts. For the first postoperative three weeks, wound care was done with
serum physiologic, furacine (nitrofurantione) cream and rifocine (rifampisine). Then the prosthesis kept in place for 7 months with
cleansing it for one time in every week. The only problem encountered during postoperative course, a granulation tissue formation along with
the graft suture lines and electrocautery was applicated for 2 times. Additionaly aloe-vera cream was used for wound care during the period
of 2nd–7th postoperative months in which a complete epithelization was achieved. She has been sexually active without any problem (Figure 2
and 3). Hair growth problem in the newly created vaginal space was solved with an epilatory cream application. The stent is seen after
securing to body with intravenous infusion set tubes which tied to belt in the patient. 1 year later the view of neovagina of the case 1. 30
year-old female was also referred for amenore. Gynecologic examination showed that vaginal agenesis was present and a rudimentary uterus was
palpated with rectal examination. Ovaries were seen normal dimentions by ultrasounographic evaluation. A further Caryotype analysis showed
46XX and Mayer-Rokitansy-Küster-Hauser syndrome (mullerian agenesis) was diagnosed for the patient. She was operated at january of 2006 with
the same technique. A split-thickness skin graft was used and a monoblock skin-graft was wrapped around the prosthesis and placed into the
pouche which was dissected according to Mc Indoe thechnique. 4/0 chrome catgut (Dogsan, Turkey)was used for suturing the edges of grafts.
The same wound care protocol was applied to the patient and no skin graft loss was seen. She was followed up for 5 months no complication
was seen except a minimal granulation tissue formation. This was also managed with electrocautery. An vaginal depth of 11 × 3 cm was
obtained and maintained in the patient. The patient is still under follow-up at early postoperative period and an ideal wound healing course
was also noted (Figure 4). 3 months after Mc Indoe vaginoplasty, the neovagina in the case 2 is seen. We executed two vaginoplasty using the
stent. Both full thickness skin graft and splitt thickness skin graft were used with the stent without any complication. Securing the skin
grafts to the stent is easy for surgeon as skin grafts easily adopted to the stent. No graft loss was seen in our experience. One patient
was followed up for more than one year and the other was for 7 months. No vaginal constriction band was observed in these patients and a
neovaginal depth of 3 × 9 cm were obtained and maintained in the cases. We think that the use of a silicone incorporated stent with Mc
Indoee vaginoplasty has double advantages. The first is that it has a superior skin graft intake and the second advantage of it's use in Mc
indoe vaginoplasty is that it prevents a possible hypertophic scar formation after epitheliazation completed. The creation of vagina that
has a satisfactory appearance function and feeling as the aim of vaginoplasty should always be considered . In a retrospective study 75% of
Mc indoe vaginoplasty patients stated that the procedure improved their quality of life . If surgery is required for creating a functionally
useful vagina the primary operation should be definite and performed by well-trained experts . Some wound contraction may occur at apex of
neovaginoplasty after skin graft vaginoplasty techniques . The patient wears the stent day and night for 3–4 months and the use a silicone
coated stent during remodeling phase of a grafted vaginoplasty case may help to reduce such a wound contraction in neovagina. So the stent
is not only used at peroperative period after sterilization, but also used for postoperative period for stenting. We recommend to use this
kind of silicone coated vaginal stent in the postoperative management of Mc Indoe vaginoplasty patients. The author(s) declare that they
have no competing interests. All the authors have been involved in literature search, writing and final reviewing of this manuscript. The
pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: We would like to thank Mr. Ali Ecevit, who is a dental technician, for
manufacturing the stent according to our drawings. Written consents were obtained from the patients.
