Rituximab is a chimeric human-mouse anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody, which is used in the treatment of both B-cell lymphomas and rheumatic
diseases. We describe a case of a previously healthy 57-year-old man developing arthritis while being treated with rituximab-CHOP
chemotherapy (R-CHOP) for a non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The remittant arthritis developed at successively shorter time-intervals after R-CHOP
administration and only improved after rituximab was removed from the chemotherapy schedule, suggesting a rituximab-related phenomenon, as
extensive diagnostic testing ruled out any other diagnosis. Rituximab is increasingly used in the treatment of both B-cell lymphomas as well
as rheumatic diseases. Several side-effects of rituximab are known, but until now only two reports described the development of arthritis
after rituximab therapy [1, 2]. Here we describe yet another case. A 57-year-old man was referred to the out-patient clinic of rheumatology
because of arthritis of the right knee and left wrist. The patient had been in perfect health until he noticed a swelling of 2.5 cm under
his right jaw. He was referred to a specialized oncology center where he was diagnosed with an aggressive follicular B-cell non-Hodgkin
lymphoma (NHL) stage IVA with involvement of submandibular and mesenteric lymph nodes and bone marrow. Treatment was instituted with R-CHOP
chemotherapy, which consists of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone, and rituximab, given at a 3-week interval. During
this treatment, granisetron (Kytril®) was given and occasionally magnesiumoxide and paracetamol. Because this patient suffered from a low
tumor burden, no tumor lysis profylaxis, i.e., allopurinol was prescribed. Two and a half weeks after the first course of R-CHOP, the
patient developed arthritis of his right knee and left wrist without morning stiffness or involvement of the small hand joints. He had no
history of arthralgia, joint swelling, preceding trauma, fever, or infection nor did he have a history of inflammation of the eyes, Raynaud
phenomenon, photosensitivity, sicca-syndrome, or inflammatory back pain. The further medical history disclosed several tick bites the year
before, with a skin reaction. He rarely used alcohol (maximum of two glasses a day). Family history revealed no rheumatic diseases. Physical
examination showed a profusely swollen and painful right knee and left wrist. The other joints were not afflicted. Laboratory testing before
the start of chemotherapy showed no abnormalities besides a erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 21 mm/h. At the time of presentation
with arthritis, there was ESR of 41 mm/h, C-reactive protein 256 mg/l, leucocytes 11.1 × 109/l, a normal liver and kidney function, and an
IgM-rheumatoid factor (RF) 7 IE/ml, anti-cyclic citrulline peptide (a-CCP) <1 AU/ml, anti-nuclear factor (ANF) negative, and urate of
0.25 mmol/l. A diagnostic puncture of synovial fluid from the right knee was performed, which revealed an inflammatory arthropathy (cell
count 5,300/mm3, 14% lymphocytes, 8% mononuclear cells, and 78% granulocytes) with no signs of malignant cells or crystals. Microbiological
testing (Gram-stain, Ziehl–Neelsen, and culture) of the synovial fluid showed no microorganisms. X-rays of both knee and wrist did not show
bone involvement or chondrocalcinosis. The patient was treated with naproxen (500 mg, twice daily), with which both pain and swelling of the
joints were reduced but not completely resolved. Four days after the second course of R-CHOP, the pain and swelling returned in all its
severity and spontaneously regressed after 1 week. Shortly after the third course of R-CHOP, the patient experienced the same painful joint
swellings, now also involving the left knee. This was in spite of intra-articular kenacort injections and prednisone maintenance therapy
(10 mg daily), which was started between the courses of chemotherapy. Repeated pathological and microbiological testing of synovial fluid
showed no new results. After these three courses of R-CHOP, the effect on the NHL was evaluated and disclosed that the intra-abdominal NHL-
mass was somewhat reduced, and the remnant of the submandibular lymph node had disappeared. Since the causal relationship between the
(activity of) arthritis and the courses of R-CHOP and rituximab being the only component of R-CHOP of which the development of arthritis is
described after the administration of this drug [1, 2], the decision was made to give the fourth and fifth course of chemotherapy without
rituximab. This time there was no increase in pain or swelling of the joints. Well over a year after the first R-CHOP chemotherapy, the
patient is fully recovered. Evaluation of his NHL shows a near complete remission, and no further treatment was indicated. The arthritis has
fully resolved. Arthritis developing during the course of R-CHOP chemotherapy is very unusual. The arthritis developed after successively
shorter time-intervals after the R-CHOP administration while no arthritis occurred when CHOP was given without rituximab. This suggests a
probably rituximab related, immune-mediated phenomenon. We were not able to detect antibodies against rituximab or immune complexes that
might strengthen this diagnosis. However, we did have strong arguments against the other differential diagnoses. The pattern of arthritis in
this patient is unusual for a rheumatoid arthritis; moreover, both IgM-RF and a-CCP were negative, while X-rays made of the afflicted joints
disclosed no erosions. Spondylarthropathy very rarely develops after the age of 45 years. Moreover, inflammatory back pain was absent, and
positive arguments for an infection causing reactive arthritis were lacking. Other autoimmune diseases like systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) or Sjögren’s syndrome were also very unlikely looking at the clinical presentation, the absence of characteristic signs and symptoms,
and the absence of the specific autoantibodies. A crystalarthropathy is a more likely candidate, as treatment of NHL can cause tumor lysis
syndrome, which can give rise to gout. However, serum values of urine acid were repeatedly very low, and there where no other signs of tumor
lysis syndrome. Moreover, repeated samples of synovial fluid failed to show any crystals, kidney function was normal; the patient barely
used alcohol and did not use diuretics. The X-rays of both the right knee and left wrist did not show signs of chondrocalcinosis. Latent
infections provoked by the administration of R-CHOP were considered. However, repeated cultures, Gram-stain, and Ziehl–Neelsen of synovial
fluid did not disclose any bacteria or yeasts. Serologic testing for Borrelia Burgdorferi, Lues, Chlamydia trachomatis, Parvovirus B19 and
PCR on Mycobacteria tuberculosis and Chlamydia trachomatis (both performed in the synovial fluid) proved to be negative. A wide spectrum of
autoimmune manifestations, among others arthritis, is described in NHL . However, arthritis is unlikely in this patient as autoimmune
manifestation, as it developed during R-CHOP and the NHL responded well to this chemotherapy. Furthermore intra-articular localization of
NHL was considered. However, both primary and secondary intra-articular localization of NHL is very rare , and the fact that more than one
joint is afflicted in this patient makes it even more unlikely. Moreover, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of both knees did not show tumor
mass, and repeated punctures of synovial fluid of both knees did not show any malignant cells. On top of this, a computed tomography (CT)
scan of the abdomen revealed regression of the mesenteric NHL-tumor mass after chemotherapy, which means that in the case of any presumed
intra-articular localization of NHL, one would expect relapse of joint involvement in the course of chemotherapy instead of progression. An
arthroscopy was considered but not performed because of the risks of infection in this immunocompromised patient, and the low expectancy of
achieving the diagnosis by performing the arthroscopy as the presence of NHL intra-articular was considered to be very unlikely. Because our
patient received high dosages of prednisone, the diagnosis of avascular bone necrosis was considered but ruled out by a MRI of both knees.
None of the other medications our patient used are known to give arthritis. Ruling out the above-mentioned diagnoses and taking into account
the relationship in time between the development of arthritis and the gifts of R-CHOP, one or more of the components of R-CHOP seem to be
the most likely cause of the arthritis in our patient. Of all of the components of R-CHOP, only rituximab is known to be able to give
arthritis [1, 2]. Pijpe et al. described the development of arthritis in three patients who received rituximab for primary Sjögren’s
syndrome. All of these patients had developed human antichimeric antibodies (HACAs), which suggests an immune-mediated mechanism. Only one
other patient tested positive for HACAs but was asymptomatic. The significance of HACAs being present is actually not quite sure as other
studies show HACAs being present without specific clinical manifestations [5, 6] or show HACAs being present but later becoming undetectable
. Repeated blood tests of our patient did not show any HACAs. The precise mechanism of action in the development of arthritis in our patient
is still unknown. In conclusion, we describe a patient developing severe oligo-arthritis at successively shorter time-intervals after
receiving CHOP-rituximab for a NHL. The arthritis is probably caused by an immune-mediated reaction to rituximab. As it is to be expected
that rituximab will be used more frequently in future to treat both NHL as rheumatological diseases, we think it is important for physicians
to be aware that rituximab may cause severe (oligo-)arthritis as a side effect.
