Two patients with incomplete pentalogy of Cantrell are described. The first was a girl with a large omphalocele with evisceration of the
heart, liver and intestines with an intact sternum. Echocardiography showed profound intracardiac defects. The girl died 33 h after birth.
The second patient was a female fetus with ectopia cordis (EC) without intracardiac anomalies; a large omphalocele with evisceration of the
heart, stomach, spleen and liver; a hypoplastic sternum and rib cage; and a scoliosis. The pregnancy was terminated. A review of patients
described in the literature is presented with the intention of finding prognostic factors for an optimal approach to patients with the
pentalogy of Cantrell. In conclusion the prognosis seems to be poorer in patients with the complete form of pentalogy of Cantrell, EC, and
patients with associated anomalies. Intracardial defects do not seem to be a prognostic factor. The pentalogy of Cantrell was first
described in 1958 . The hallmark of this syndrome is an omphalocele associated with ectopia cordis (EC). The full spectrum consists of five
anomalies: a deficiency of the anterior diaphragm, a midline supraumbilical abdominal wall defect, a defect in the diaphragmatic
pericardium, various congenital intracardiac abnormalities, and a defect of the lower sternum. Only a few patients with the full spectrum of
the pentalogy have been described. We present two patients with incomplete pentalogy of Cantrell. We reviewed the literature to find
prognostic factors that may help to assess the best multidisciplinary approach in prenatal counselling and in postnatal therapy in patients
with the pentalogy of Cantrell. A prenatal ultrasound in a 26-year-old G1P0 showed a fetus with bilateral hydrothorax, EC with a ventricular
septal defect (VSD), and a large omphalocele with evisceration of the heart and the liver. The diagnosis of pentalogy of Cantrell and the
prognosis were discussed with the parents. The prenatal medical team together with the parents decided to continue the pregnancy. At
39 weeks and 1 day of gestational age, a girl was delivered by primary cesarean section with Apgar scores of 6 and 8 at 5 and 10 min,
respectively. Birth weight was 2,310 g (<p 2,3). There was a large omphalocele with evisceration of the heart, liver and intestines
(Fig. 1); on palpation the sternum was intact. Echocardiography showed tetralogy of Fallot with a VSD, pulmonary valve stenosis and an
aberrant aortic valve, a large atrial septal defect (ASD), and signs of pulmonary hypertension. The girl was intubated 30 min after birth.
Due to progressive respiratory distress, conventional mechanical ventilation was switched to high-frequency oscillation. Endotracheal
instillation of surfactant and evacuation of 45 ml pleural fluid were performed without any clinical improvement. Treatment with inhaled
nitric oxide, inotropic support of the heart and systemic blood pressure, and prostaglandin E1 (Prostin VR Paediatric) to preserve the
ductus-dependent circulation were started. Despite this treatment, the child remained hypotensive with oxygen saturation levels between
50 and 60%. The girl died 33 h after birth. The parents refused autopsy. Fig. 1Patient 1 with a large omphalocele with evisceration of the
heart (arrow), liver and intestines Patient 1 with a large omphalocele with evisceration of the heart (arrow), liver and intestines A
prenatal ultrasound in a 19-year-old G1P0 showed a fetus with EC with a VSD; a large omphalocele with evisceration of the heart, stomach,
spleen, and liver; and a scoliosis. After discussing the diagnosis of pentalogy of Cantrell and related prognosis with the parents, the
pregnancy was terminated at 23 weeks and 4 days of gestational age. Post-mortem examination showed a female fetus presented with a large
omphalocele with evisceration of the liver, spleen, and a major part of the gastro-intestinal tract (Fig. 2). The heart was situated
directly under the skin, not protected by the ribs or the hypoplastic sternum. The anterior diaphragm was absent and a peritoneal-
pericardial connection was found. Furthermore the fetus was characterized by a low implant of the left ear, a severe scoliosis, and a
hypoplastic right ribcage with both lungs positioned in the left ribcage. Because of its small size, the heart was examined under the
dissecting microscope, but a VSD or another intracardial defect could not be found. Fig. 2Post-mortem examination of patient 2 showed a
large omphalocele with evisceration of the liver, spleen and a major part of the gastro-intestinal tract. The arrow indicates the heart
covered with skin Post-mortem examination of patient 2 showed a large omphalocele with evisceration of the liver, spleen and a major part of
the gastro-intestinal tract. The arrow indicates the heart covered with skin Histopathological examination showed dysmaturity of the lungs
due to the intrathoracal malpositioning. The other organs showed no major abnormalities on microscopy. The pentalogy of Cantrell is a rare
syndrome with an estimated incidence of 5.5 per 1 million live births . It is described as a deficiency of the anterior diaphragm, a midline
supraumbilical abdominal wall defect, a defect in the diaphragmatic pericardium, various congenital intracardiac abnormalities, and a defect
of the lower sternum. The pathogenesis of pentalogy of Cantrell has not been fully elucidated. Cantrell et al. suggested an embryologic
developmental failure of a segment of the lateral mesoderm around gestational age 14–18 days. Consequently, the transverse septum of the
diaphragm does not develop, and the paired mesodermal folds of the upper abdomen do not migrate ventromedially. Organs may eviscerate
through the resulting sternal and abdominal wall defects. EC itself is characterized by complete or partial displacement of the heart
outside the body. Cervical, cervicothoracic, thoracic, and thoracoabdominal types of EC have been described . Intracardiac anomalies are
described in the pentalogy of Cantrell including VSD (100%), ASD (53%), tetralogy of Fallot (20%), and ventricular diverticulum (20%) .
Various other associated anomalies have been reported and include craniofacial and central nervous system anomalies such as cleft lip and/or
palate, encephalocele, hydrocephalus, and craniorachischisis [14, 29, 34]; limb defects such as clubfoot, absence of tibia or radius, and
hypodactyly [33, 41]; and abdominal organ defects such as galbladder agenesis and polysplenia . Often the spectrum of the original pentalogy
of Cantrell is not complete. Toyama suggested the following classification of the pentalogy of Cantrell: class 1, definite diagnosis, with
all five defects present; class 2, probable diagnosis, with four defects present, including intracardiac and ventral wall abnormalities; and
class 3, incomplete expression, with various combinations of defects present, including a sternal abnormality. In our first patient, the
sternum was intact, and in addition to the large omphalocele, there were diaphragmatic and intracardiac defects. The second patient had a
sternal defect with associated anomalies such as a low implant of the left ear, a hypoplastic right rib cage and a scoliosis. There were no
intracardiac anomalies. We considered both patients to be incomplete forms of the pentalogy of Cantrell. With prenatal ultrasonography, the
pentalogy of Cantrell usually can be diagnosed in the first trimester of pregnancy . In a fetus with omphalocele, pentalogy of Cantrell
should be ruled out. If pericardial effusion can be seen, associated anterior diaphragmatic hernia and diaphragmatic pericardial defects may
be suspected, and specific and detailed search for the features of the pentalogy of Cantrell, as described above, should be done . Use of
prenatal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may enhance the visualization of the fetal anomalies . After birth, echocardiography is essential
for diagnosis of associated cardiac anomalies. Other features of the pentalogy of Cantrell and known associated anomalies can be diagnosed
by conventional radiography or sonography. Nevertheless, small defects of the diaphragm and pericardium can be extremely difficult to
diagnose accurately. In these patients and in cases of possible surgical intervention, MRI might be useful [31, 37]. The treatment of the
pentalogy of Cantrell consists of corrective or palliative cardiovascular surgery, correction of ventral hernia and diaphragmatic defects
and correction of associated anomalies. The best treatment strategy depends on the size of the abdominal wall defect, the associated heart
anomalies, and the type of EC. To find prognostic factors that might help to determine the best strategy in patients with the pentalogy of
Cantrell we performed a literature search of patients with pentalogy of Cantrell described in the English literature over the last 20 years.
The results are shown in Table 1. An overview of patients described earlier was made by Toyama et al. in 1972 . Our search on Pubmed using
the search terms “pentalogy of Cantrell” and “Cantrell’s syndrome” yielded 58 patients with pentalogy of Cantrell between 1987 and April
2007. Thirty-three patients were described as complete and 23 patients as incomplete. Two patients were not clearly defined as complete or
incomplete. Fourteen patients had EC without intracardiac anomalies, 16 patients had intracardiac defects without EC, and 23 patients had
both. Other associated anomalies were described in 29 patients. Thirty-seven of 58 patients, including patients in whom pregnancy was
terminated, died within days after birth. This mortality from the reported literature may be higher because successful treatment of these
patients is considered rare, and therefore these patients will be reported relatively more often. In this selected group, the mortality was
higher in the patients with associated anomalies and if the complete form was present. The surviving patients with EC were those with
associated intracardiac anomalies. This suggests that intracardiac defects may favor the prognosis. However, a selection bias was present
due to the small number of patients. Table 1Review of patients with pentalogy of Cantrell (complete and incomplete form) with cardial
defects, associated anomalies, and outcomeReferenceFormCardial defectAssociated anomaliesSurvivalBaker et al. 1984 CFECCloacal extrophy,
genitourinary and spine anomaliesNoSoper et al. 1986 CFEC, VSDOccipital encephalocele 47,XX +18NoBick et al. 1988 CFECOccipital
encephalocele 47,XX +18, abnormally lobated small lungs, horseshoe kidneyNoFox et al. 1988 CFEC, single ventricle and atrium, bicuspid
ventricular outflow valve, malpositioned right aortic archBilateral clubfeet, spina bifida, hydrocephalus, abnormal ears, horseshoe kidneys:
trisomy 18NoCarmi and Boughman 1992 CFEC, VSD, D-transposition of great vessels, pulmonary atresia, hepatic venous connection, common
pulmonary veinLarge left cleft lip and palateNoCFEC, diverticulae of right and left ventricleNoneYesCFEC, TOFBilateral cleft lip and palate,
single-lobed left lung, intralobar pulmonary sequestrationNoCFTOF, ASDNoneNoCFTOF, pulmonary atresiaRight cleft lip, small ears, dysplastic
toe nailsNoMartin et al. 1992 CFEC, hypoplastic left ventricle and atrium, dilated right ventricle, pulmonary valve and arteryNoneNoCFASD,
VSDNoneNoEgan et al. 1993 IFEC, hypoplastic left ventricle, single pulmonary veinSirenomeliaNoAbdallah et al. 1993 CF (?)EC,
TOFNoneYesBogers et al. 1993 CFEC, VSD, left and right ventricular diverticulumNoneYesDenath et al. 1994 IFECExencephaly, pulmonary
hypoplasiaNoSiles et al. 1996 IFNoneYesIFNoneYesIFVSD, double outlet right ventricle, bilateral superior venae cavae, pulmonary
stenosisNoneYesChen et al. 1996 CF (?)NoneYesHornberger et al. 1996 ?NoneNo?NoneNoLiang et al. 1997 IFECNoneNoVazquez-Jimenez et al. 1998
IFASD, VSD, LVD, left superior vena cava without connection to the right systemShort, flat noseYesHsieh et al. 1998 CFECCystic
hygromaNoCFECCystic hygromaNoLaloyaux et al. 1998 CFVSD, ASD, tricuspid atresia, pulmonary stenosisNoneYesSong et al. 2000 IFEC, single
ventricle with double outlet, pulmonary atresia, tricuspid atresiaNoneNoMorales et al. 2000 IFEC, VSD, LVD, dextrocardia, double outlet
right ventricle, right ventricle outflow tract obstruction, dextrocardia, VSD, double outlet right ventricle, pulmonary stenosisCleft
palate, large encephalocele, hydrocephalusYesIFTOFNoneYesIFNoneYesAlayunt et al. 2001 CF (?)VSD, LVD, ASD, TOFNoneYesSpencer et al. 2002 CF
(conjoined twin)EC, single anomalous multiventricular heart with ventricular septal defects, single common atria with three atrioventricular
openings, anomalous systemic and pulmonary venous drainage; one twin: severe pulmonary stenosis; other twin: absent ductus ateriosus; common
atria bilateral superior venae cavae; tricuspid, mitral and pulmonary valve aplasia; malrotation of the great vessels; aorticopulmonary
communicationThoracopagus twinsNoCF (conjoined twin)ASDOmphalopagus twinsNoHalbertsma et al. 2002 IFLVD, ASD, VSD, anomalous venous
pulmonary returnNoneYesNanda et al. 2003 CFEC, VSDKyphoscoliosis, club footNoCFEC, VSDNoneNoOnderoglu et al. 2003 CFECTrisomy 21, pulmonary
and extremity anomaliesNoOka et al. 2003 CFEC, PDA, LVD, tricuspid atresia, pulmonary stenosis, hypoplastic pulmonary
arteriesNoneYesBittmann et al. 2004 CFSmall right ventricle, VSD, ASDGallbladder agenesis, polysplenia, segmentation defect of the
lungsNoUygur et al. 2004 IFECLeft clubfoot, hypodactyly right hand, absent third finger of the right hand, absent left tibia and right
radiusNoPatent foramen ovalePDAAslan et al. 2004 IFECBilateral undescended testes, scoliosis, adherence between left upper limb and trunk,
adrenohepatic fusion, anterior thoracic myeloschisis, multiple accessory spleens, renal agenesisNoIFECNoCorrea-Rivas et al. 2004 CFEC, ASD,
PDABilateral cleft lip and palate, bilateral pulmonary hypoplasiaNoPolat et al. 2005 CFECCraniorachischisis, bilateral
clubfootNoCFECCraniorachischisis, bilateral clubfoot and clubhandNoCFECNoneNoMarijon et al. 2006 IFLVD, VSDNoneYesBhat et al. 2006
IFDextrocardia, ASDNoneYesAraujo Junior et al. 2006 CFEC, VSDNoneNoKnirsch et al. 2006 IFMesocardia, VSD, ASD, LVDNoneYesChen et al. 2006
CFEC, VSDScoliosis, hypoplasia of the right upper limb, ectrodactyly of the right hand and footNoRashid et al. 2007 CFECEncephalocele, club
footNoDesselle et al. 2007 CFEC, TOFNon-rotation of the midgut, accessory spleenYesGrethel et al. 2007 IFVentricular aneurysmMorgagni
herniaYesMcMahon et al. 2007 IFEC, TOF, VSD, hypoplastic pulmonary valveNone?IFEC, VSDNone?Our patientsIFEC, TOF, ASD aberrant aortic
valveNoneNoIFECLow implant of left ear, hypoplastic right rib cage,scoliosisNoCF Complete form, IF incomplete form, EC ectopia cordis, VSD
ventricular septal defect, ASD atrial septal defect, TOF tetralogy of Fallot, LVD left ventricular diverticulum, PDA patent ductus
arteriosus Review of patients with pentalogy of Cantrell (complete and incomplete form) with cardial defects, associated anomalies, and
outcome CF Complete form, IF incomplete form, EC ectopia cordis, VSD ventricular septal defect, ASD atrial septal defect, TOF tetralogy of
Fallot, LVD left ventricular diverticulum, PDA patent ductus arteriosus In conclusion, the prognosis seems to be poorer in patients with the
complete form of pentalogy of Cantrell, EC, and patients with associated anomalies. Intracardial defects do not seem to be a prognostic
factor. When the diagnosis pentalogy of Cantrell is suspected, a multidisciplinary approach is essential. A prenatal medical team consisting
of a gynecologist, a neonatologist, a pediatric cardiologist, a geneticist, and a pediatric surgeon should use their expertise in choosing
the best approach to this severe disorder. atrial septal defect ectopia cordis magnetic resonance imaging ventricular septal defect
Statement of financial support: no financial assistance was received.
