Primary retroperitoneal cystadenomas are extremely rare. This is the first report in literature to describe a primary retroperitoneal
cystadenoma with a sarcoma-like mural nodule. A 45-year-old woman complained of a left-sided abdominal mass. A computed tomography scan
revealed a cystic mass with a mural nodule, which seemed to originate from the tail of the pancreas. At laparotomy the cyst was not adhered
to the pancreas but localized retroperitoneally. Histologic examination showed a mucinous cystadenoma with only foci of borderline
malignancy with a mural “sarcoma-like” nodule. In view of the surgical and histopathological findings, the mucinous cystadenoma was regarded
as primary retroperitoneal. This case demonstrates that in the era of radiological preoperative refinement, pathological diagnosis remains
of utmost importance, especially for rare cases. Mucinous cystadenomas of the ovary are clinically and histopathologically well-established
and common tumors. Primary retroperitoneal mucinous cystadenomas are extremely rare. Such tumors are histologically similar to ovarian
mucinous cystadenomas. Their histogenesis is still unclear. We report a case of primary retroperitoneal mucinous cystadenoma with foci of
borderline malignancy containing a mural “sarcoma-like” nodule. A 45-year-old, para 2, woman presented at the emergency room with a 3-week
history of left-sided abdominal pain. She had felt a mass in the left lower quadrant 2 days before. Her clinical history included
endometriosis and a car accident. The mass was progressive but not painful. Apart from the palpable mass of 15 cm in the left lower abdomen,
physical examination was unremarkable. Ultrasonography demonstrated a 15-cm cystic mass with a 3.8-cm nodule in its wall. The uterus was
normal in size, and internal ultrasonography showed small ovaries. Carcinoembryonic antigen, cancer antigen (CA) 125, and CA 19-9 levels
were within normal limits. The next day, a contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan of the abdomen revealed a 15-cm left-sided cystic
mass, which seemed to originate from the tail of the pancreas (Fig. 1a). The cystic mass showed a 4-cm nodule in its wall (Fig. 1b) and was
suspected for a cystic papillary adenocarcinoma. At laparotomy, the cyst was not adhered to the pancreas and could be easily separated from
its location near the tail without opening the pancreatic capsule. Vascularization appeared to arise from the mesentery of the left colon.
It was localized in the retroperitoneal space extending caudally from the spleen to the lower abdomen with medial displacement of the left
colon. Total resection of the cyst was performed, and the specimen was sent for histopathological examination. Further inspection showed two
normal ovaries. Her postoperative recovery was uneventful. One year after surgery, the patient was without signs of recurrence or
metastasis. Fig. 1Contrast enhanced CT scan shows images of a pancreatic cyst (arrowheads) originating from the tail of the pancreas (a) and
a mural nodule within the wall of the cystic mass (b) Contrast enhanced CT scan shows images of a pancreatic cyst (arrowheads) originating
from the tail of the pancreas (a) and a mural nodule within the wall of the cystic mass (b) The specimen was fixed in 4% buffered formalin.
Representative samples were routinely processed and embedded in paraffin blocks. Four-micrometer-thick sections were stained with
hematoxylin and eosin and with parallel routine immunohistochemical procedures. The antigens tested by immunohistochemistry were: pan-
keratin, keratin Cam 5.2, cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 10, cytokeratin 18, cytokeratin 20, epithelial membrane antigen, vimentin, desmin,
actin, myosin, CD34, CD68, CD99, CD117, S-100 protein, and bcl-2. The specimen consisted of a unilocular cyst measuring 20 × 11 cm with a
smooth surface. The content was a watery mucinous material. The wall was thin with a smooth gray-white inner surface and contained a
circumscribed bean-shaped solid mural nodule of 3.5 × 3.5 × 2.5 cm, which showed a brown-yellow and focally hemorrhagic cut surface.
Microscopically, most of the cyst was lined by single-layered tall columnar cells, abundant clear cytoplasm, and small basally located
nuclei (Fig. 2a). Fig. 2Cyst wall with typical tall columnar mucous-secreting epithelium and fibrous wall (a). Low cellular proliferation
with some stratification of the cells and slight nuclear atypia (b). Heterogenous proliferation of pleomorphic cells, spindle cells,
osteoclast-like giant cells, and some mononuclear cells with some pigment (c). Detail of sarcoma-like nodule (d) Cyst wall with typical tall
columnar mucous-secreting epithelium and fibrous wall (a). Low cellular proliferation with some stratification of the cells and slight
nuclear atypia (b). Heterogenous proliferation of pleomorphic cells, spindle cells, osteoclast-like giant cells, and some mononuclear cells
with some pigment (c). Detail of sarcoma-like nodule (d) Occasionally (over less than 1% of the surface), the epithelium showed slightly
atypical proliferation with glandular budding, tufting of the epithelium, decreased cytoplasmic mucin, some stratification of slightly
irregular nuclei, and an occasional mitoses (Fig. 2b). There was no infiltrative growth but foci of borderline malignancy. The nodule was
well circumscribed without vascular invasion and consisted of a heterogenous population of spindle-shaped cells, pleomorphic cells with
bizarre nuclei, mixed mononuclear inflammatory cells, benign osteoclast-like giant cells, and foci of hemorrhage. There were mitotic
figures, including some atypical forms (Fig. 2c and d). The sarcoma-like cells proved to be keratin negative (Table 1).
Table 1Immunohistochemical results of the sarcoma-like cellsAntigenResultPan-keratin−Keratin Cam 5.2−Cytokeratin 7−Cytokeratin
10−Cytokeratin 18−Cytokeratin 20−Epithelial membrane antigen−Vimentin+Desmin−Actin+/− (some)Myosin−CD34−CD68+CD99−CD117−S-100
protein−bcl-2+/− (some) Immunohistochemical results of the sarcoma-like cells Mucinous cystadenomas can be located in the ovaries, pancreas,
and in the retroperitoneum. The mucinous cystadenoma presented was localized retroperitoneally near the pancreas but was clearly not adhered
to it. Because normal-appearing ovaries were found, the cystadenoma was thought to be primary retroperitoneal. According to the literature,
symptoms are nonspecific, and most patients complained of an abdominal distension or mass with or without pain . Mucinous cystadenomas were
relatively large, varying from 10 to greater than 20 cm in diameter, which is large enough to cause symptoms like abdominal fullness .
Preoperative diagnosis is very difficult, not because the tumors are often overlooked in the differential diagnosis but also because no
sensitive methods or reliable markers are available . As retroperitoneal mucinous cystadenomas are histologically similar to mucinous
cystadenomas of the ovary, the ultrasonographic image pattern is in general of no help in distinguishing between ovarian and retroperitoneal
origin. In our case, the diagnosis of the retroperitoneal mucinous cystadenoma could not be established preoperatively by ultrasonography or
computed tomography. Although ultrasonography, computed tomography, or magnetic resonance imaging can detect retroperitoneal cysts, the
diagnosis of mucinous cystadenoma is seldomly made preoperatively. The usual preoperative differential diagnosis consists of ovarian cyst,
cystic mesothelioma, cystic lymphangioma, nonpancreatic pseudocyst, and renal cyst [4, 9, 18]. Although aspiration is a good method for
delineating the nature of the cyst, cytologic analysis of the aspirated fluid frequently fails to reveal the type of epithelial cells lining
the cyst. Therefore, exploratory laparotomy with complete excision of the cyst is usually indicated both for diagnosis and treatment .
Retroperitoneal mucinous cystadenomas are histologically similar to mucinous cystadenomas of the ovary. The histogenesis of these tumors is
still unclear. Four main hypotheses have been proposed [2, 14]. According to the first three hypotheses, the tumor arises either from
ectopic ovarian tissue, although ovarian tissue was only rarely found , from a teratoma in which the mucinous epithelium has overgrown all
other components or from urogenital remnants. The most widely accepted theory suggests coelomic metaplasia as the causal agent, whereby
tumors arise from invagination of the peritoneal mesothelial layer that undergoes mucinous metaplasia with cyst formation [3, 9]. Such
origin rather than from ectopic ovarian tissue is supported by the occurrence of such a tumor in a male patients [5, 8, 10, 17]. Primary
mucinous tumors of the retroperitoneum are very uncommon. These tumors can be classified into three clinicopathologic types: mucinous
cystadenoma, mucinous cystic tumor of borderline malignancy, and mucinous cystadenocarcinoma. Our case was diagnosed as a primary
retroperitoneal mucinous cystadenoma with only foci of borderline malignancy and a mural “sarcoma-like” nodule. Mural nodules have been
described in ovarian and pancreatic mucinous cystic tumors [7, 16]. Mural nodules may be malignant representing anaplastic carcinoma,
containing a predominant population of cytokeratin-positive cells with high-grade malignant nuclei, or a genuine soft tissue-type sarcoma
[7, 15, 16]. Benign pseudosarcomatous mural nodules are composed of a heterogeneous cell population of epulis-type giant cells, atypical
spindle cells with bizarre nuclei and mitotic figures, mixed inflammatory cells, and signs of hemorrhage and necrosis. In these cases,
immunohistochemical staining shows a weakly or focally cytokeratin positivity in the pseudosarcomatous cells. We performed a literature
review using Embase and Medline starting in 1966 and identified approximately 45 cases of retroperitoneal mucinous cystadenoma and 25 cases
of mucinous cystadenocarcinoma. Only eight cases of mucinous cystadenoma with borderline malignancy have been reported (Table 2). Thus, our
case is the ninth case of a retroperitoneal mucinous cystadenoma of borderline malignancy. By our knowledge, however, combination with a
mural “sarcoma-like” nodule has not been described earlier in the literature. The patient should be followed. However, in this case, long-
term follow-up seems not warranted regarding the only focal aspect (<1% of the surface) of borderline malignancy of the cyst and the benign
reactive nature of the mural nodule. Table 2Cases of primary retroperitoneal mucinous cystadenomas of borderline malignancyStudy (year)Age
(years)SexSymptomSize, imageTumor markerPreoperative diagnosisHistoryPathologyExtracystic extensionTherapyOutcomeNagata et al.
(1987)41FAbdominal swelling, pain12 × 10 × 9 cmUDUDUDMCAborNoTRUDBanerjee and Gough (1988)47FAbdominal mass10 cm (US) next to spl.NDLt
adrenal tumorApp HystMCAborNoTR, resection spl. + lt adrenalNEDMotoyama et al. (1994)63MAbdominal pain6 cm (US), under rt kidneyHigh CEA in
cystic fluidRt renal cystNRMCAborNoNDNEDPearl et al. (1996)33FAbdominal swelling, painLarge, unilocular lt (CT)NDNDNRMCAborNoLRNED, 10
monthsPapadogiannakis et al. (1997)33FAbdominal mass13 × 9 cm (US + CT)NDMesenteric cystNRMCAborNoTRNED, 12 monthsChen et al.
(1998)48FAbdominal fullness15 × 13 × 9 cm (CT)NDMesenteric cystNRMCAborNoLRNED,8 monthsGutsu et al. (2003)41FFlank pain, abdominal
distension21 × 16 cm rt (CT)NDRetroperitoneal cystNRMCAborNoTRNED, 18 monthsMatsubara et al. (2005)36FAbdominal distension12 × 8 cm rt
(CT)CA 125:51 CA 19-9: 55Ovarian cystNRMCAborNoTR, App, MyoNED, 6 monthsPresent case (2007)45FAbdominal pain15 cm (US + CT)CEA, CA125,
CA19-9: normalCystic papillary adenocarcinoma or mucinous cystic neoplasmEndomMCAborNoTRNED, 12 monthsF Female; M male, UD unknown data, NR
not remarkable, MCAbor mucinous cystadenoma borderline malignancy, TR tumor resection, LR laparoscopic resection, NED no evidence of
disease, US ultrasonography, spl. spleen, App appendectomy, Hyst hysterectomy, Myo myomectomy, Endom endometriosis, rt right, lt left Cases
of primary retroperitoneal mucinous cystadenomas of borderline malignancy F Female; M male, UD unknown data, NR not remarkable, MCAbor
mucinous cystadenoma borderline malignancy, TR tumor resection, LR laparoscopic resection, NED no evidence of disease, US ultrasonography,
spl. spleen, App appendectomy, Hyst hysterectomy, Myo myomectomy, Endom endometriosis, rt right, lt left A 45-year-old woman complained of a
left-sided abdominal mass, which turned out to be a primary retroperitoneal cystadenoma with mural nodule.
