Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma (ACC) is a rare tumor entity and comprises about 1% of all malignant tumor of the oral and maxillofacial region. It
is slow growing but a highly invasive cancer with a high recurrence rate. Intracranial ACC is even more infrequent and could be primary or
secondary occurring either by direct invasion, hematogenous spread, or perineural spread. We report the first case of the 5th and 6th nerve
palsy due to cavernous sinus invasion by adenoid cystic carcinoma. A 49-year-old African American female presented to the emergency room
complaining of severe right-sided headache, photophobia, dizziness and nausea, with diplopia. The patient had a 14 year history migraine
headaches, hypertension, and mild intermittent asthma. Physical examination revealed right lateral rectus muscle palsy with esotropia. There
was numbness in all three divisions of the right trigeminal nerve. Motor and sensory examination of extremities was normal. An MRI of the
brain/brain stem was obtained which showed a large mass in the clivus extending to involve the nasopharynx, pterygoid plate, sphenoid and
right cavernous sinuses. Biopsy showed an ACC tumor with a cribriform pattern of the minor salivary glands. The patient underwent total
gross surgical resection and radiation therapy. This is a case of ACC of the minor salivary glands with intracranial invasion. The patient
had long history of headaches which changed in character during the past year, and symptoms of acute 5th and 6th cranial nerve involvement.
Our unique case demonstrates direct invasion of cavernous sinus and could explain the 5th and 6th cranial nerve involvement as
histopathology revealed no perineural invasion. Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma (ACC) is a rare tumor entity and comprises about 1% of all
malignant tumor of the oral and maxillofacial region . It is a slowly growing but highly invasive cancer with high recurrence rate.
Lymphatic spread to local lymph nodes is rare. Hematogenous spread, however, occurs often in the course of the disease . Intracranial ACC
even is more rare and has been reported as 4 – 22% of ACC . It could be primary or secondary which could occur either by direct invasion
like in our case, hematogenous spread, or perineural spread . Perineural spread of ACC has long been recognized. The literature revealed
that the region of Gasserian ganglion to be the most common site of involvement (35.8%) , while cavernous sinus was involved in 15.1% .
Presenting signs and symptoms are related to the anatomical site of the lesion. Facial pain, parasthesia in trigeminal distribution is
commonly reported reflecting the frequency of involvement of gasserian ganglia, and possibility of perineural spread along the trigeminal
nerve. Involvement of cavernous sinus could be asymptomatic or could present with involvement of either 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th and internal
carotid artery . Literature is consistent that the time between onset of neurological signs and symptoms, and the time of diagnosis range
between few months to 3 years . However, one study suggests that the duration could be several years . A 49-year-old African American female
with a past medical history of hypertension, migraine headaches and mild intermittent asthma presented to emergency room with a severe
right-sided headache for the last 3 days. The patient gave a 14-year history of migraine headaches described as a slow onset unilateral
throbbing headaches without aura accompanied by nausea and lasting 2–3 days. The patient stated that her migraine attacks were decreasing in
frequency and severity for the past 2–3 years until the past year when she started experiencing different kind of headache. At the time of
examination, she described the headache as sharp, intermittent, non-radiating pain with sudden onset behind her right eye lasting 1–2 days.
During the last 3 days the pain became more intense, reported as 10/10 on the pain scale 1 to 10, with associated photophobia, dizziness and
nausea, with diplopia that was worsened with gaze to the right lateral field. Her past medical history was significant for hypertension and
asthma which were stable. Her past surgical history is significant for adenoidectomy at age of 12. Her family history is significant for a
sister with breast cancer, and a father who died of renal cancer. A complete review of systems was otherwise negative. On physical
examination the patient displayed right lateral rectus muscle palsy (6th cranial nerve palsy) with inward deviation of her right eye. There
was numbness in all three divisions of the right trigeminal nerve, suggesting involvement of the fifth cranial nerve. There was no evidence
of right 3rd, 4th, 7th or 8th nerve involvement. Motor and sensory examination of her extremities was normal. The rest of the examination
was negative. The patient was admitted to the inpatient service. Her pain was controlled with medications. All laboratory studies, including
complete blood count, biochemical studies and syphilis screening were negative. A Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the brain and brain
stem revealed a large mass in the clivus extending anteriorly, involving the nasopharynx and sphenoid sinus, and posteriorly destroying the
clivus laying anterior to the pons. There was destruction of the pterygoid plate and right cavernous sinus (Figure 1). Neurology consult
recommended starting the patient on phenytoin and dexamethasone for seizure prophylaxis. A pituitary profile was ordered which revealed a
slight elevation of prolactin level 39.1 ng/ml (normal 20 ng/ml). On day number 2 of admission, neurosurgery and otolaryngology were
consulted and the patient underwent sinus endoscopy with biopsy of the right sphenoid sinus. From days 3 to 6, the patient was stable, and
pain was controlled. On day 6th pathology revealed a tumor with a cribriform pattern. The neoplastic cells were monotonous and intraluminal
basophilic material was noted. No perineural invasion was identified. The neoplastic cells were strongly positive for cytokertain AE1/AE3
and positive for S-100 and CD117. This histology indicated ACC of the minor salivary glands. Oncology consultant recommended resection
followed by radiation. Additional work up included a thin cut computerized tomography (CT), which revealed bone invasion. Chest, abdomen and
pelvis CT scans were negative for metastatic disease. The patient underwent total gross surgical resection. A postoperative CT scan showed
partial resection of the tumor and the patient was scheduled for a second surgery followed by postoperative radiation. Magnetic Resonance
Imaging of the Brain: a large mass in the clivus extending anteriorly to involve the nasopharynx and sphenoid sinus and posteriorly to
destroy the clivus and lie anterior to the pons. Our patient's course prior to diagnosis is unusual. The patient had a history of 14-year
headaches which changed in character for the past year, and symptoms of acute 6th and 5th cranial nerve involvement. It is difficult to
determine whether the 14-year history of headache was due to slowly growing ACC with gradual invasion of clivus, nasopharnx sphenoid, and
cavernous sinus. It is possible that when the patient started experiencing "different" kind of headache was a warning sign of intracranial
invasion of vital structures. This is likely due to the fact that ACC is a very slowly growing tumor , and the size of the patient's tumor
was 3.8 × 3 × 2 cm. when discovered. In our case, direct invasion of cavernous sinus could explain 6th and 5th cranial involvement, as
histopathology revealed no perineural invasion. Based on the literature review, there are only two other cases of intracranial ACC with 6th
nerve involvement. One case was reported 6th nerve involvement due to perineural spread and second case was duo to invasion of the cavernous
sinus . The prognostic factors of ACC depend on tumor site, tumor stage, the presence of perineural invasion, and tumor grade. Tubular and
cribriform subtypes have better prognosis than solid subtypes . Many authors describe worse prognosis for tumor of the minor salivary
glands, due to early local infiltration and invasion of surrounding tissue and bone as in our reported case. The treatment of choice
consists of total tumor resection . However, there is still controversy regarding the adjuvant treatment of this tumor. Several authors
recommend postoperative radiation since radiation often produces tumor regression and relieve symptoms . Prokopakis and Kokemueller, on the
other hand, doubt that postoperative radiation may influence the course of the disease . On the other hand, chemotherapy use for ACC is
controversial. Some authors report it being ineffective while others had some positive response and recommend chemotherapy as palliative
treatment in advance cases of ACC . We report a case of ACC arising from the minor salivary glands and invading the clivus nasopharynx,
sphenoid, and cavernous sinuses. Controversy exists regarding the most effective treatment of ACC and there is lack of reliable information
about the clinical behavior of ACC in response to treatment. Further clinical trials needed to evaluate the effectiveness of treatment on
improving quality of life and survival rates. This case is a reminder that careful monitoring of headache symptoms in patients is essential
and a change in characteristics should prompt further investigations. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All
authors, AA, PM, and TM have contributed significantly in the literature review, drafting the manuscript and revising it critically, and
have given final approval for publication. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: Patients' consent was obtained
for publication of this case report.
