A 45-year-old man presented with post-traumatic aniridia. We describe the combined surgery done to treat both aniridia and epiretinal
membrane simultaneously. A combined aniridia intraocular lens and vitreoretinal surgery was done. The case report highlights the advantage
of combined surgery in terms of cost factor and surgical time. An intact iris diaphragm is essential for accurate and satisfactory visual
function because it decreases the spherical and chromatic aberrations arising from the crystalline lens and increases depth of focus.
Partial or complete aniridia may occur developmentally or after severe trauma. We report a case of traumatic aniridia with retinal
detachment, vitreous hemorrhage and intraocular lens (IOL) haptic extrusion, in whom the aniridic IOL was combined with a vitreoretinal
surgery with good anatomical and functional outcome. A 46-year-old gentleman presented with sudden onset of loss of vision following blunt
trauma to the right eye. The patient had sustained the injury when he was assaulted with a stone. He had undergone cataract surgery with
posterior chamber (PC) IOL in the right eye three months ago elsewhere. On examination his visual acuity was perception of light, accurate
projection of rays in the right eye and 20/30, N6 in the left eye. Anterior segment evaluation revealed IOL haptic ("J" type) extrusion
through the scleral tunnel with hyphema, aniridia and posterior capsular remnant in the right eye [Figs 1,2]. The left eye was within normal
limits. His intraocular pressure (lOP) was undetectably low in the right eye and 16mmHg in the left eye. There was vitreous hemorrhage in
the right eye, with no retinal details seen. Ultrasonography revealed total retinal detachment (RD) with vitreous hemorrhage. He was
diagnosed to have traumatic RD with vitreous hemorrhage with IOL extrusion with total aniridia. He was advised IOL haptic explantation,
vitreoretinal surgery with encircling band and silicone oil. Intraoperatively, after clearing the vitreous hemorrhage, the total RD was
evident, with two peripheral retinal tears. There was no evidence of proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR). The breaks were well supported
after the application of silicon encircling band (Mira - 240 with a width of 2.5 mm). Hence C 3 F 8 (perfluoropropane) gas was used as a
tamponade. A single-piece IOL was explanted. The inferior and nasal 180˚ posterior capsule was intact and was left behind for a secondary
implant later. At six weeks follow-up his best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/120 +1, NI0 with aphakic correction. Anterior segment
evaluation showed aphakia with aniridia and posterior capsular remnant in the right eye [Fig. 3]. His IOP was 14.0mmHg. Indirect
ophthalmoscopy showed attached retina with epiretinal membrane (ERM) and mild macular pucker in the right eye [Fig. 4]. At three months
follow-up BCVA was 20/80 (hazy), N8 in the right eye with correction. Fundus examination showed attached retina with ERM and internal
limiting membrane striae in the right eye. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed ERM and cystoid macular edema (CME). He underwent
secondary aniridic PCIOL (IO care Baroda; optic 10 mm, central 2.25 mm opaque with surrounding 5.5 mm clear, A constant 118.2) with ERM
removal in the right eye under local anesthesia. The ERM was removed after staining with trypan blue. Although a scleral fixated IOL was
planned, the IOL when placed on the inferior capsular rim was found to be stable. The posterior capsule had fibrosed since the injury and
hence provided adequate support without the need for scleral fixation. Moreover, since the IOL was rigid and measured 12.75 mm in length, it
was found to be stable in the scleral sulcus. The incision had to be widened to 10 mm to accommodate the IOL. At six weeks follow-up his
BCVA was 20/30 and N6, with -2.00 diopter cylinder X 170° and lOP was 15 mmHg. The cornea was clear, with aniridic IOL in place [Fig. 5].
Indirect ophthalmoscopy revealed normal disc, macula and attached retina with good buckle effect [Fig. 6]. Optical coherence tomography
revealed resolution of CME. At six months follow-up the above findings were maintained. An abnormal iris can be acquired or congenital.
Abnormal pupils affect patients in several ways, including photophobia and glare. These patients often describe discomfort or difficulty in
brightly lit areas, such as on sunny days. Concern over the cosmetic appearance of the eye is also a factor. Traumatic aniridia is often
associated with injury to other structures of the eye. A history of blunt trauma besides damage to the iris; tends to be associated with
trauma to the angle or zonules. The most common of these are traumatic cataract, retinal detachment and vitreous hemorrhage. Both
penetrating and blunt injuries can cause traumatic total iridectomy.1 In our case there was significant damage to the iris with a crescent
of posterior capsule intact. Iridoplasty, colored contact lenses and corneal tattooing have been developed to overcome the visual function
impairments that arise from damage to the iris.2,3 However, when significant amounts of iris tissue are damaged or missing, iris repair may
be impossible. In these eyes, artificial iris implants can augment the iris diaphragm, thereby reducing photophobia and glare. Several
ophthalmologists have used this artificial iris implants called aniridic IOL in patients with traumatic and congenital aniridia.4 Additional
procedures along with IOL implantation may be required, including cataract surgery, transscleral IOL fixation, keratoplasty and
vitreoretinal procedures. A combined aniridic IOL implantation and vitreoretinal procedure is possible without significant intraoperative
complications.5 A black diaphragm IOL design allows simultaneous treatment of aniridia and aphakia6 as was the situation in our case wherein
the previously implanted IOL had extruded through the scleral tunnel and was removed in the first sitting along with retinal detachment
surgery. At the second sitting the aniridic IOL was implanted with an ERM removal. The patient did not suffer from any of the complications
associated with such similar procedures such as, persistent intraocular inflammation, glaucoma, endophthalmitis and residual photophobia.
The patient had good visual recovery, with his vision being 20/30 on his last follow-up six months after the surgery. We present a rare case
of traumatic aniridia with vitreous hemorrhage and retinal detachment, in which a good visual outcome was achieved after a combined surgery.
After a detailed Medline search, there were less than five such cases reported in the literature. No such case has been reported from the
Indian subcontinent. Both the cost factor and surgical time could be reduced with a combined approach giving an excellent cosmetic, visual
and surgical outcome. Extruded intraocular lens haptic (arrow) Aniridia, remnant of posterior capsule and vitreous hemorrhage The anterior
segment picture after the first surgery showing aniridia with posterior capsule crescent Fundus photograph showing the epiretinal membrane
seen after the first surgery The aniridic intraocular lens in place after the second surgery The fundus picture after the epiretinal
membrane removal
