We identified three eyes that had undergone enucleation after transscleral resection of uveal melanoma. Two enucleated eyes with
microscopically positive margins of resection exhibited no evidence of residual melanoma and these patients were alive without metastasis
with at least four yearsâ€² follow-up. One eye with a transected melanoma contained residual melanoma and that patient died with metastatic
melanoma to the liver three years after enucleation. There appear to be at least two general types of positive surgical margins of resection
of uveal melanoma: microscopically positive margins and macroscopically positive (transected) margins of resection. Currently, there is no
evidence that indicates the superiority of any single treatment modality with regard to survival of the patient with uveal melanoma.1 Local
resection may be appropriate for certain ciliary body melanomas or ciliochoroidal melanomas.2 Local resection of uveal melanoma is a
technically demanding procedure with a high incidence of positive or questionable surgical margins of resection.3,4,5,6,7 The purpose of
this study was to understand the implications of positive surgical margins of resection. A 79-year-old man who had a history of age-related
macular degeneration was found on routine ophthalmic examination to have a minimally pigmented tumor in the ciliary body and choroid of his
right eye. The patient underwent a lensectomy, cyclectomy and eye wall resection for the tumor. The resected specimen showed a 10 mm
diameter X 8 mm thickness minimally pigmented ciliary body/choroidal tumor [Fig. 1]. Microscopic examination showed a mixed cell type
melanoma that extended to the lateral margins of resection, although the tumor was not transected [Fig. 2]. The patient developed
proliferative vitreoretinopathy, a tractional retinal detachment, fibrovascular ingrowth and a blind, painful right eye. He underwent
enucleation nine months after local resection. The enucleated eye showed no residual melanoma [Fig. 3]. There was redundant, gliotic retina
and proliferated ciliary body epithelium posterior to the resected ciliary body [Fig. 4]. There was no residual melanoma. The patient had no
evidence of metastatic melanoma four years after enucleation. A 45-year-old man with a two-week history of cloudy vision was found to have a
moderately pigmented tumor of the ciliary body and peripheral iris in his right eye. The patient underwent an iridocyclectomy and partial
eye wall resection. The resected specimen showed a moderately pigmented 9 mm diameter X 4 mm thickness tumor. Microscopic examination showed
an epithelioid cell type melanoma that extended to the posterior and lateral margins of resection, although the tumor was not transected.
The patient developed a vitreous hemorrhage and due to microscopic extension of the melanoma, the eye was enucleated two weeks later.
Examination of the enucleated specimen showed the site of iridocyclectomy temporally and no evidence of residual melanoma. The patient had
no evidence of metastasis five years after enucleation. A 56-year-old man was found to have a moderately pigmented ciliary body/choroidal
tumor in his right eye during a routine ophthalmic examination. A lamellar sclerouveactomy was performed. The resection specimen showed a 12
mm diameter X 5 mm thickness multilobed tumor [Fig. 5]. Microscopic examination showed a mixed cell type melanoma with the posterior margin
of the tumor transected [Fig. 6]. Due to transection of the melanoma, the eye was enucleated two weeks later. The enucleation specimen
showed the site of previous sclerouveactomy temporally with a 3X3mm nodule of residual melanoma [Fig. 7]. Microscopic examination confirmed
the residual melanoma [Fig. 8]. An abdominal CT three years after enucleation showed multiple liver nodules, consistent with metastatic
melanoma. The patient died three years after enucleation. In a matched, case-control study comparing transscleral resection and I 125
brachytherapy for uveal melanoma, patients who underwent transcleral resection were found to have a significantly smaller risk of developing
cataract, vitreous hemorrhage and maculopathy compared to those treated with brachytherapy.8 Additionally, rubeosis, glaucoma and optic
neuropathy were found only in the brachytherapy group.8 Melanoma-specific survival after I 125 and local resection were comparable. There
was greater local tumor control in the I 125 treated group compared with the locally resected group.8 Local resection of uveal melanoma is
technically demanding with numerous associated risks including vitreous hemorrhage, retinal/subretinal hemorrhage, ptosis, cataract, retinal
detachment, proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR), choroidal detachment and persistent corneal edema.9 Two series have reported positive or
questionably positive margins of excision in 68 of 138 patients (49.3%)4 and 174 of 286 (60.8%)5 patients. However, recurrent melanoma was
found in only 13 of 138 patients (9.4%)4 and 57 of 286 patients (19.9%)5 in those series. Other studies have reported similar incidences of
recurrence after local resection ranging from 3 to 18%.3,6,7 Our laboratory has evaluated 5/12 (41%) resected melanomas with positive
surgical margins of resection and 1/12 (8%) that recurred, similar to the published series.3,4,5,6,7 Although recurrences were probably
prevented by additional treatment with brachytherapy in some of those cases, it is clear that positive surgical margins of resection without
additional treatment did not lead to persistent (recurrent) tumor in many cases.3,4,5,6,7 None of the patients in this report had additional
treatment for their uveal melanoma. The relatively high rates of positive surgical margins after local resection of uveal melanoma may be
explained by the fact that the uveal tract is a continuous tissue without anatomic barriers that prevent lateral spread of melanoma.
Noncontiguous tumor recurrence of uveal melanoma after local resection has been reported.8,10 Evaluation of the surgical margins of
resection is, at best, a percentage of the margin of the entire specimen. An inadequately sampled margin, multifocal tumor or a separate
primary melanoma may account for tumor persistence (recurrence) after reportedly negative margins. However, melanoma recurs in only
approximately 20 to 33% of eyes after local resection with positive surgical margins.4,5 This may be due to secondary treatment (i.e.
brachytherapy), spontaneous regression of residual melanoma or melanoma extending to but not beyond the surgical margin. Our cases provide
examples of two general types of positive surgical margin of excision of uveal melanoma. The first type is the microscopically positive
margin, as seen in Cases 1 and 2. The second type of positive margin occurs when the tumor is transected. Case 1. The resected melanoma
straddles the ora serrata (Ora). The vitreous base (V) is present. There is hemorrhage at the posterior aspect of the tumor Case 1. A. The
lobular tumor is not transected. There is microscopic extension of the resected tumor to its lateral margins. B. Tumor cells and
erythrocytes are present at the lateral margin (inset) (H/E, A. 10x, B. 100x) Case 1. The enucleated, aphakic eye contains proliferative
vitreoretinopathy (PVR) and detached, gliotic retina (R). There is no grossly apparent residual melanoma Case 1. The choroid terminates
(arrow) in the area of the resected tumor. Detached, gliotic retina (R) is present in this area (H/E, 25x) Case 3. The resected melanoma is
multilobed. The posterior aspect of the melanoma is transected (arrow) Case 3. A. The resected melanoma is lobular. B. (inset) The area of
posteriorly transected tumor (between arrows) is visible on low magnification (H/E, A. 5x, B. 25x) Case 3. A nodule of recurrent (residual)
melanoma (arrow) is present in the enucleated eye Case 3. The transected portion of recurrent (residual) melanoma is hemorrhagic (between
arrows) (H/E, 25x)
