Posterior polymorphous dystrophy is a rare corneal dystrophy, usually detected by chance. This case series describes the morphologic
features in the three different types of posterior polymorphous dystrophy using confocal microscopy. Posterior polymorphous dystrophy is a
rare, often innocuous, autosomal dominant and usually asymptomatic corneal dystrophy which may frequently be diagnosed by chance in later
life.1 It is asymmetrical and consists of three types: vesicular, band-like and geographic (placoid) patterns. The principle of confocal
microscopy allows us to study the morphology of the cornea in vivo . This series describes the morphologic features in different types of
posterior polymorphous dystrophy using confocal microscopy using the Rostock corneal module of the Heidelberg retinal tomograph II
(Heidelberg Engineering, Germany). A Tomey pachymeter (Tomey Corporation, Japan) was used to obtain the central corneal thickness. A
28-year-old asymptomatic male was diagnosed on routine examination to have a vesicular type of posterior polymorphous dystrophy in both eyes
by slit-lamp examination. The best-corrected visual acuity was 6/6 (Snellens) in both eyes. White flecks with guttae were seen involving the
Descemet′s membrane and endothelium [Fig. 1A]. Central corneal thickness measurements were 570 μm and 566 μm in the right and left eyes
respectively. Confocal microscopy findings included vesicular abnormalities ranging from 10 to 160 μm. Endothelial cells were visible within
some vesicular lesions [Fig. 1B]. Patchy hyperreflective lesions were noted at the level of the Descemet′s membrane and around the vesicular
lesions [Fig. 1C]. The endothelial densities were 1757 ± 40 cells/mm2 and 1497 ± 51 cells/mm2 (normal: 2218 to 4434 cells/mm2)1 in the right
and left eyes respectively. A 72-year-old asymptomatic male was diagnosed to have a band type of posterior polymorphous dystrophy in the
left eye on slit-lamp examination [Fig. 2A]. The best-corrected visual acuity was 6/9 (Snellens) in both eyes. Clinically, his right eye
appeared normal. Central corneal thickness measurements were 526 mm and 611 mm in the right and left eyes respectively. Confocal microscopy
findings in both eyes showed endothelial polymorphism and polymegathism with folding and scalloping of the endothelial cell borders [Fig.
2B]. Occasionally, bright endothelial nuclei were noted. The endothelial densities were 2056 ± 66 cells/mm 3 and 1609 ± 40 cells/mm 3
(normal: 1250 to 2010 cells/mm 2 )1 in the right and left eyes respectively. A 64-year-old symptomatic woman with decrease in vision was
diagnosed to have a geographic pattern of posterior polymorphous dystrophy in the right eye on slit-lamp examination [Fig. 3A]. Her best-
corrected visual acuity was counting fingers three meters and 6/18 (Snellens) in the right and left eyes respectively. Clinically, her left
eye was normal. Central corneal thickness measurements were 668 mm and 559 mm in the right and left eyes respectively. Confocal microscopy
findings in the right eye showed needle-shaped lesions suggestive of scarring in the stroma [Fig. 3B]. Large vesicles were noted in the
endothelium. The borders of the endothelial cells appeared indistinct [Fig. 3C]. The left eye showed plenty of hyperreflective dot-like
lesions in the endothelium and polymegathism [Fig. 3D]. The endothelial cells could not be counted in the right eye due to indistinct cell
margins while the endothelial cell density in the left eye was 1541 ± 45 cells/mm 3 (normal: 1250 to 2010 cells/mm 2 ).1 In vivo confocal
microscopy allows observations of the living human eye at a cellular level. It is based on the principle that the illumination (condenser)
and observation (objective) systems are focused on a single point (have common focal points).2 This eliminates out of focus information and
brings a lateral resolution of 1-2 μm and an axial resolution of 5-10 μm increasing the magnification up to 600 times. Findings such as
cracks, vesicles, craters have been described in general in posterior polymorphous dystrophy.3,4 This case series delineates the
morphological features seen on confocal microscopy in each type of posterior polymorphous dystrophy. In case 1, both eyes showed similar
findings on slit-lamp and confocal microscopy examinations. The presence of vesicles and patchy hyperreflective lesions at the level of the
Descemet′s membrane and around the vesicles corresponded to the guttae and white flecks seen clinically. In case 2, although band-shaped
areas were seen clinically only in the left eye, the right eye also showed similar changes on confocal microscopy. The confocal microscopy
findings of the folding and scalloping of the endothelial cell borders represent edges of individual vesicles that might have fused to give
the above appearance.5 In case 3, clinically evident geographic pattern was noted in the right eye. The confocal microscopy findings of
needle-shaped lesions in the stroma with large vesicles in the endothelium and indistinct cellular margins indicate the corneal edema with
scarring seen in these eyes. However, certain changes like dot-like hyperreflective lesions were also seen in the left eye indicating
abnormal changes in the endothelium. Confocal microscopy thus enhances the clinicopathological diagnosis and aids in the follow-up of
corneal dystrophies with subtle clinical presentations. A: Slit-lamp photograph showing vesicular type of posterior polymorphous dystrophy
Confocal microscopy showing vesicles with abnormal endothelial cells within them Confocal microscopy showing hyperrefl ective lesions around
the vesicles A: Slit-lamp photograph showing band type of posterior polymorphous dystrophy B: Confocal microscopy showing endothelial
polymorphism. Occasional bright endothelial nuclei also seen A: Slit-lamp photograph showing geographic pattern of posterior polymorphous
dystrophy B: Confocal microscopy showing needle like lesions in the stroma with few keratocytes suggestive of scarring C: Confocal
microscopy showing large lacunae with surrounding indistinct endothelial cell borders D: Confocal microscopy showing dot-like
hyperreflective lesions in the endothelium involving the other eye
