We present herein the case of a patient with solitary metachronous contralateral adrenal metastasis from renal cell cancer. The patient had
undergone left radical nephrectomy and adrenalectomy for localized renal cancer 7 years previously. Laparoscopic transperitoneal right
adrenalectomy was performed. The postoperative period was uneventful. Histology showed right adrenal metastasis from renal cancer. At
6-month follow-up, there was no evidence of recurrence. Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common malignancy involving the kidney.1
Nearly 20% to 30% of patients with renal cell carcinoma have distant metastasis at presentation.2 Although RCC can metastasize to almost
every organ, the most common metastatic sites are the lung parenchyma (50% to 60%),3 bone (30% to 40%),4 the liver (30% to 40%), and the
brain (5%).5 Other rare sites of metastasis include the pancreas6,7 and parotid gland.8 Whereas metastasis of RCC to different sites is not
uncommon, contralateral adrenal metastasis is very rare. The average patient survival of metastatic RCC is about 4 months, and only 10% of
these patients survive for 1 year. There is a small subset of patients where solitary metastasis is present either at the time of
presentation or develops during follow-up after nephrectomy; these patients have a better survival. Although adrenal metastases from RCC are
rarely diagnosed in patients, these are not uncommonly found at autopsy.9,10 These are rare lesions that are diagnosed synchro-nously with
the renal tumor. Most of the cases are in patients with multiple metastases. Only a few are detected metachronously. Surgical removal of
metastatic lesions is the only known effective treatment in patients with solitary metastasis, with 14% to 38% surviving 5 years or
more.11–13 Several investigators have re-ported better survival for metastatic RCC in patients who have a solitary metastasis that appears
more than 18 months after nephrectomy.11,12,14 We present herein a case of large, metachronous, contralateral adrenal metastasis from
primary left renal cell adenocarcinoma that was removed completely by the laparoscopic approach. The patient had left nephrectomy and left
adrenalectomy 7 years earlier. A 44-year-old Caucasian man underwent left radical nephrectomy, including ipsilateral adrenalectomy in 1999,
for a left renal mass and did not receive adjuvant chemo-therapy. The histology report showed adenocarcinoma. The patient did well until 7
years later, when an annual follow-up abdominal computerized tomography (CT) scan revealed a 9×8-cm hypervascular mass in the right adrenal
(Figure 1). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed a malignant-appearing mass measuring 9×8cm arising from the right adrenal. After
intravenous injection of gadolinium, the mass showed a hypervascular mass (Figure 2). No evidence was found of calcification or invasion of
adjacent tissues or organs. No other abdominal abnormalities were noted. Abdominal computed tomographic scan suggested possible metastatic
tumor to the right adrenal gland. Abdominal magnetic resonance image showing the right adrenal mass. The patient was in good health and
asymptomatic. Blood pressure was within the normal range. At physical examination, no abnormalities were found. Radiography of the thorax
and an electrocardiogram were normal. Routine blood and urine tests as well as tumor markers showed no abnormality. On metabolic evaluation,
24-hour urine collection for 17-ketosteroids, 17-hydroxycorticoids, metanephrines, cortisol, and vanillylmandelic acid were within normal
limits. The laparoscopic approach was chosen. We prefer a transperitoneal lateral decubitus approach as the best for maximal exposure of the
gland and major vessels. Using the Hasson technique, a 12-mm trocar, one 10-mm trocar, one 12-mm, and one 5-mm trocar were inserted below
the costal margin. Laparoscopic exploration of the abdominal cavity revealed no abnormalities, and the tumor was easily identified. The
right triangular ligament and the retroperitoneal liver attachments were cauterized and divided to allow liver retraction. After dividing
the retroperitoneum, the inferior vena cava (IVC) was identified. The inferior periadrenal fat was carefully dissected from the upper pole
of the right kidney and the renal vein identified. The right adrenal vein was subsequently identified, dissected, double-clipped, and
divided. The inferior and superior adrenal vessels were cauterized with ultrasonic scissors following division of the right adrenal vein.
The entire specimen was placed intact into a laparoscopy entrapment sack and extracted through an extension of the incision done for the
Hasson technique. The pneumoperitoneum was aspirated through ports before specimen extraction. The port-site wounds were irrigated with a
solution of povidone iodine 10% followed by normal saline. The fascia of the 3 trocar sites was closed with a 1-0 Prolene stitch. The
procedure lasted 3 hours, the estimated intraoperative blood loss was 600 mL, and the patient was not transfused. The surgical specimen
measured 9×8 cm and weighed 330 g. The patient was started on immediate steroid replacement, with the hydrocortisone dosage tapered to 20mg
3 times daily, in addition to 0.1 mg fludrocortisone daily. The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the
second postoperative day with bowel function returned to normal and the patient able to return to normal physical activity. Histology
confirmed a metastatic tumor from renal aden-ocarcinoma. Six months after the procedure, there was no evidence of recurrence on abdominal CT
scan, and the cosmetic result was satisfactory. RCC metastasis may be found synchronously with the primary tumor or in various organs many
years after the primary lesion has been treated. Metastasis of RCC to the contralateral adrenal gland is very rare. In reviews of the
literature, the majority of the cases described involved synchronous metastasis.15–17 Most metachronous metastases are identified in the
first or second year after nephrectomy, and 25% of patients develop metastatic disease within 5 years of nephrectomy.18 Metastasis has been
diagnosed as late as 23 years after nephrectomy.19,20 Adrenal metastasis is rarely diagnosed during life. In fact, clinical signs and
symptoms are rare in these patients. However, recently improvements in noninvasive radiological techniques, such as computerized tomography
(CT), selective arteriography, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), have improved the clinical detection of metastatic lesions. CT-guided
needle biopsy is currently available in some centers, including ours. Biopsy of adrenal masses may be helpful in doubtful cases, although in
general the diagnosis has been problematic. However, several concerns have been raised, among which are that the capsule of an adrenal tumor
is thin and the lesion tends to be brittle. As a result, an intrinsic risk exists of hemorrhage.21,22 In some cases, failure to use routine
imaging studies might explain the delayed detection. However, a more possible explanation for the delayed diagnosis of metastasis is that
some metastases can be very slow growing.21 RCC is known for its varied presentation and its propensity to metastasize by way of both venous
and lymphatic routes. Conversely, it is believed that hematogenous metastasis to the adrenal gland is more common than lymphogenous
extension due to the rich blood supply of the adrenal gland and its high blood volume-to-unit weight ratio.23 The prognosis for patients
with untreated widely metastatic renal cell carcinoma is dismal. Nevertheless, in patients with solitary or limited metastases, removal of
the RCC metastasis is associated with prolonged survival. Studies have shown significant differences in survival between synchronous and
metachronous solitary metastases, the synchronous group being the worst.12,14,24 Many studies have reported that patients with adrenal
metastasis occurring a long time after nephrectomy had a better prognosis than those with a short interval to diagnosis. Several
investigators have noted better survival for metastatic RCC in patients who have a solitary metastasis that appears more than 18 months
after nephrectomy.11,12,14,25,26 In other studies, a better prognosis has been reported in patients with a disease-free interval of more
than 12 months.27 Furthermore for some investigators, the disease-free interval required for better survival is only 6 months. The
observation of poorer survival most likely is an indicator of tumor biology. After metastasectomy, overall median survival ranges from 26
months to 45 months. The 3-year survival rate ranges from 35% to 60% and 5-year survival ranges from 14% to 38%.11,16,17 A broad range of
treatments, including chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, and radiotherapy, have failed to markedly improve survival. Moreover, despite the
early promising results with immunotherapy, a complete response occurs in less than 15%. Therefore, aggressive treatment of such lesions is
indicated. Complete extirpation of all tumor clearly is important.17,19 Laparoscopic adrenalectomy has been performed successfully
transperitoneally and retroperitoneally to treat a variety of benign adrenal pathological conditions. Laparoscopic procedures are associated
with less postoperative discomfort, decreased hospital stay, less postoperative disability, and a lower rate of complications. Few absolute
contraindications exist for laparoscopic adrenalectomy, and most of them are not specific to adrenal surgery. Large but well-encapsulated
adrenal masses without evidence of local invasion can be removed laparoscopically.28 The lateral transabdominal approach offers the best
visualization of major vessels adjacent to the adrenals.29 The role of laparoscopic surgery for malignant adrenal tumors is controversial,
because few data exist in the literature for this rare disease. Concerns have focused on the possibility of tumor rupture due to
manipulation with laparoscopic instruments with the attendant fear of disseminating malignant cells inside the peritoneal cavity. Three
cases of diffuse peritoneal dissemination and death of patients who underwent laparoscopic adrenalectomy for adrenal cancer have been
reported.30 Moreover in a larger study, 13 patients, 6 with adrenal cortical carcinoma and 7 with metastasis, were reported. The mean size
of the malignant lesions was 5.9cm. The mean follow-up was 30 months, during which 3 patients died, 1 from endoperitoneal and trocar port-
site seeding.31 In another study, 31 patients underwent 33 laparoscopic adrenalectomies. In 26 cases, metastatic cancer and primary adrenal
malignancy were present in 7. Follow-up was 26 months, during which 15 patients died. Local recurrence was noted in 7 patients. However, no
port-site metastases occurred. The 5-year survival reached 40%.32 On the contrary, Heniford and colleagues in a review of 10 patients with
metastatic adrenal tumors and 1 patient with adrenocortical carcinoma reported no local or port-site recurrence at a mean follow-up of 8.3
months.33 Furthermore, there is another study of 8 patients with malignancies, 4 with cortical carcinomas and 4 with metastases (from renal
carcinoma, breast carcinoma, leiomyosarcoma and rhabdoid sarcoma). Mean follow-up was 40.5 months. During follow-up, 3 patients with
cortical carcinomas were disease-free and 1 died of a stroke, 2 had metastases (1 leiomyosarcoma and 1 breast carcinoma) 1 died of disease,
and 2 were disease free. No port-site metastases occurred.34 In the largest series reported in the literature,35 21 patients who underwent
laparoscopic adrenalectomy for malignant tumors were reviewed. Three locoregional recurrences occurred 1 to 2.5 years after resection (2
local and 1 lymph node metastasis) in the 6 patients with primary adrenal cancer. There were no local recurrences in the 13 patients with
metastatic adrenal tumors. A study has focused on solitary adrenal gland metastasis in patients operated on for nonsmall cell lung cancer.
Eleven patients had solitary adrenal metastases. All of them underwent laparoscopic adrenalectomy. Three were still alive and well at 37
months to 80 months after the lung resection. One patient (who underwent bilateral adrenal-ectomy) was still alive at 44 months with local
relapse. Two patients died 5 and 6 months after the adrenalectomy of other causes; 1 died at 14 months for local and systemic relapse, and
the remaining 3 patients died at 12 to 38 months for systemic relapse.36 We report a case of metachronous, contralateral metastasis from
left renal adenocarcinoma, occurring 7 years after curative radical nephrectomy, including left adrenalectomy. Despite the large size of the
tumor, laparoscopic adrenalectomy was successfully performed. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy resulted in a short hospital stay, minimal blood
loss, and minimal postoperative analgesic requirement. There was no other evidence of metastatic disease at adrenalectomy, or at 6-month
follow-up. Patients having metachronous, contralateral adrenal metastasis from renal cell carcinoma benefit from the surgical resection of
the lesion. Patients with a disease-free interval of more than 1 year before development of solitary metastasis appear to have better
survival. The laparoscopic approach, having more advantages versus open surgery, is feasible but necessitates experience in advanced
laparoscopic surgery. The benefits to the patient of earlier ambulation, decreased pain, better cosmetic results, and lower percentage of
incisional hernia must be weighed against the as yet unknown long-term results. Extensive experience in advanced laparoscopic techniques and
open adrenal surgery are mandatory to manipulate and excise laparoscopically malignant tumors.
