Deliberate termination of life of newborns (involuntary euthanasia) with meningomyelocele (MMC) is practiced openly only in the Netherlands.
‘Unbearable and hopeless suffering’ is the single most cited criterion for this termination, together with the notion that ‘there are no
other proper medical means to alleviate this suffering’. In this paper, both (and other) statements are questioned, also by putting them in
a broader perspective. First, a historical overview of the treatment of newborns with MMC is presented, concentrating on the question of
selection for treatment. Second, a thorough analysis is made of the criteria used for life termination. Third, a case of a newborn with a
very severe MMC is presented as a ‘reference case’. ‘Unbearable and hopeless suffering’ cannot be applied to newborns with MMC. They are not
‘terminally ill’ and do have ‘prospects of a future’. In these end-of-life decisions, ‘quality of life judgments’ should not be applied.
When such a newborn is not treated, modern palliative care always will suffice in eliminating possible discomfort. There is no reason
whatsoever for active life-termination of these newborns. “An infant with spina bifida cannot ‘suffer unbearably’. Infants might be able to
experience unbearable pain, but spina bifida does not cause it.” (Chervenak 2006) “An infant with spina bifida cannot ‘suffer unbearably’.
Infants might be able to experience unbearable pain, but spina bifida does not cause it.” (Chervenak 2006) Before the 1960s, most newborns
with meningomyelocele (MMC) were not treated given the consideration that it was in the best interests of the child and family, in most
cases resulting in the death of the child. They died from sepsis, meningitis, hydrocephalus, or renal failure. Contraindications to
operation included “hydrocephalus, irreparable deformities, paralysis of the sphincters, complete paraplegia or any ulcerative process in
the region of the spina bifida” . The influence of the surgical approaches since the 1960s allowed gradually effective early treatment of
the complicating hydrocephalus, resulting in many patients surviving into childhood. Early treatment of the spinal lesion and hydrocephalus
resulted in decreased mortality and morbidity . ‘Wait and see’ changed into active treatment. Lorber (1971) published the first large series
of patients treated between 1959 and 1969 . He found that only 7% of the survivors had less than “crippling disability”, “most had a quality
of life inconsistent with self-respect, learning capacity, happiness, and even marriage”. To “spare children and families prolonged
suffering” he proposed the well-known ‘Lorber selection criteria’. These four major adverse criteria are: severe paraplegia, gross
enlargement of the head, severe kyphosis or scoliosis and associated gross congenital anomalies (such as heart disease) or major birth
injuries. No active treatment was advised for children who had one or any combination of these criteria. The result of this proposed
selection was to treat only those with lesions on lumbar and sacral level without any other major complication. Others would, according to
Lorber, “die quickly”. Since the Lorber era there have been tremendous successes in the treatment of patients with MMC [48, 50]. Over the
last 30 years, continual progress has not only been made in the neurosurgical (closure of the back defect, shunting, or endoscopic
techniques for the complicating hydrocephalus, treatment of tethered spinal cord and Chiari II malformation), orthopedic (treatment of
scoliosis, correction of club feet), urological (preserving normal renal function, securing social continence), and psychosocial treatment
of patients with MMC, but also in support for independence by modern rehabilitation programs. Nevertheless, early decision making (for
restriction) and selective treatment of newborns with MMC is still propagated [27, 69], resulting in approvals but also in critiques [7, 23,
41, 42, 49, 79]. What is considered ethical at one time, or in one country, can be considered unethical or unacceptable at/in another. The
ethical debate on treating children with MMC is unique in the sense that these children will/can have a life of substantial and sometimes
severe physical disability but often with normal mentation, this in contrast to severely psycho-motor handicapped children. Children and
adults with MMC can be aware of their deficits. Lorber (1971) stated that untreated children will die quickly . However, he delivered the
children anticonvulsants to prevent seizures, opioids and chloral hydrate to prevent pain . One pediatrician has said that these untreated
children received the same care and attention as others, being fed and loved, but they also received 60 mg/kg body weight of chloral
hydrate, four times a day. This was being administered for pain, but the children who were operated on did not receive this regimen. Another
physician just said: we don’t feed them . Consequently, the duration of life seems to depend on the attitude of the responsible doctor. In
the United States, untreated children were not given morphine or anticonvulsant drugs and were fed every 4 h, resulting in many ‘survivors’
with severe handicaps. On the contrary, in the United Kingdom the children died quickly. However, the question remains if these children
were really in pain or suffered from seizures; perhaps not. Not all physicians did follow the ‘Lorber criteria’, but treated all children
unselectively, regardless of the level of the lesion. This approach resulted in multidisciplinary MMC clinics and MMC teams. The
nonselective treatment of newborns with MMC started in the early 1970s and gives us a picture of long-term outcome of newborns with MMC [4,
9, 32, 48, 52] and also of the quality of life and health status of adults with spina bifida [58, 63]. Some physicians became bitter after
treating children with MMC for years . In the early 1980s, the ‘Baby Jane Doe (‘Stony Brook baby’) case resulted in the United States in an
ethical debate on the prospect physicians make about the future life of handicapped children born with MMC. This girl was born with MMC,
complicated with hydrocephalus (although diagnosed by the attending physician as microcephalic). The team of physicians told the parents
that the child would spend her life “lying in bed, bottle fed....She would experience no joy, sadness or any such emotion except response to
pain and would develop no cognitive skills. She might survive for 20 years” . Based on the given information, the parents agreed not to
treat their child. However, the physicians turned out to be wrong. Although the child developed meningitis, sepsis, and hydrocephalus (which
were only treated to some extent), she survived all these complications, was taken home, became ambulating and communicating on an
acceptable level of intelligence, all this despite the partial treatment [24, 25]. After the introduction of alpha feto-protein (AFP)
screening in the late 1980s (followed by amniocentesis) and ultrasound diagnosis, many fetus with MMC can now be detected early in
pregnancy. Nowadays, after being counseled, most pregnant couples decide to abort a fetus with MMC (in many Western countries resulting in
an abortion rate of 95%, resulting in fewer children with MMC born [13, 14, 53]), seen by many as ‘prevention’ of MMC. But what advice
should neonatologists, neurologists, or neurosurgeons give the parents when a full-term child with MMC is born? Is the advice not to treat,
or to terminate the life of the newborn deliberately (involuntary euthanasia) an ethically defendable one? Deliberate and active termination
of life in newborns with MMC is only discussed and practiced in an open way in the Netherlands [35, 38_40, 71_76, 78]. The judgment
“unbearable and hopeless suffering” of the newborn and “the prospect of unbearable and hopeless suffering” in the future, together with the
notion that there is “no other proper medical means to alleviate the unbearable suffering” form the basis for this decision . Because these
judgments are questioned, and to quantify the level of discomfort in these neonates, the “Rotterdam Prospective Study on Discomfort in
Newborns with Spina Bifida” was started in 2005 in the Erasmus Medical Center (EMC)–Sophia Children’s Hospital (Rotterdam, the Netherlands).
Although in due time the results of this study will be published, some important aspects will already be addressed in this paper by
elaborating on the case of a newborn with a very severe form of MMC and hydrocephalus. The Dutch neurosurgeon De Lange analyzed the
selection criteria for treatment of newborns with MMC in the Netherlands already in the 1970s [41, 42]. It became clear from an enquiry
among Dutch neurosurgeons that a number of them advised against treatment on the basis of physical handicaps alone. Others regarded the
expected mental abilities as an overruling factor. When basic communication skills could be expected, most children were treated. At the
time, deliberate termination of life was never practiced. De Lange (1970) also concluded “If we were to decide that in our opinion patients
with spina bifida who are below a certain level of physical or mental ability should not be kept alive, it should be illogical not to apply
the same rules to other categories of handicap.” In the 1980s, the Dutch ethicist Hertogh (1988) published his paper “Ethical considerations
on the dilemmas caused by the selective treatment of newborns with MMC” in the leading Dutch medical Journal . He elaborated on the
philosophical and ethical aspects of the Lorber selection criteria: “The objective medical fact of a physical shortcoming is something
completely different than the subjective reality of ‘being-handicapped’ itself. Studies have shown that living as ‘being-handicapped’ does
not correlate directly to the severity of physical shortcomings. The question as to what can be considered as an acceptable handicap
transgresses, in other words, the scope of what can be ascertained in a medical-scientific way and this, therefore, refers inevitably to the
subjective experience. It has to be questioned whether the quantification of qualitative aspects of medical treatment perhaps offers nothing
more than pretence-rationality, caused by the used decisive terminology. In conclusion: up to date the criterion ‘quality of life’ appears
to be more deceptive than clarifying in the medical decision about the possible continued existence of a newborn with spina bifida.” He also
referred to the ethics of the philosopher Levinas: “Ethos cannot be founded in scientific facts; it is founded in the human relationship
itself. Mutual dependency, which is characteristic for ‘human being’, makes us responsible just by itself and therefore defines ‘the
disposition of ethos’ as a rational fact. This relationship always precedes facts themselves.” In other words: human beings, just because of
the fact that they are human beings, have an intrinsic and mutual responsibility for the well-being of others, this responsibility itself
preceding physical qualities. This thoughtful paper, however, was not given much attention in the Dutch medical press. In 1993, baby Rianne
was born in a small town in the Netherlands with a MMC at level of the first and second lumbar vertebrae complicated by hydrocephalus. The
lower limbs were deformed and paralyzed. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the head confirmed the diagnosis of severe hydrocephalus. On the
first day of her life, the decision was made by the pediatrician and the gynecologist in consultation with a neurologist, neurosurgeon, and
pastor not to operate the back lesion and the hydrocephalus. On the fourth day of her life, at the request of the parents, the gynecologist
Prins terminated the life of the baby by a lethal injection. In an interview, Prins stated : “Closing the defect and fighting infections
with maximal treatment could enable the child to survive for years. No one knows how long”. On the question of what an operation could have
accomplished, Prins answered: “The defect would have been closed. The possibility of secondary infection, which was an immediate threat to
her life, would have been diminished. Her brain pressure would rise, however, and it would have been necessary to implant a shunt”. On the
question of how he would calculate the benefit of treatment, he answered: “It (the operation) would have prolonged her life without treating
the symptoms and consequences of the defect because the operation would not have alleviated them. The operation would only have minimized
the possibility of infection, but it would have created the necessity for repeated operations involving the shunt and the urological system
because there were obstructions in the passage between the kidney and the bladder. Her brain damage was so extensive and the possibility of
movement so limited. She would never have been able to walk or sit unsupported; she would have been incontinent in her bladder and bowel.
There was sensory damage as well; she could not feel sensation in her lower body. She would have started life with repeated operations, need
for persistent medical attention, no possibility for self-support, and very low communicative ability” . As a definition of a severe
handicap he stated: “This can relate to the estimated possibility of becoming happy” , and he further referred to the Dutch Association of
Paediatrics who developed criteria, including the lack of capacity to communicate, lack of capacity for self-maintenance, persistent need
for medical assistance, and the existence of pain. All these criteria grouped together gave a picture of the baby’s quality of life. Because
most of the criteria were satisfied, the baby was considered to be severely handicapped, resulting in a very poor expected quality of life;
the child was not operated on because of the severity of the expected handicaps. On the necessity of life-termination, Prins (1997)
explained: “The baby was in a great deal of pain and the normal analgesics did not work well. So it would have been necessary to use
narcotic analgesics—morphine-like drugs. And that would have caused depression of consciousness. It is clear to me that the use of such
drugs would have depressed normal functioning—behavior, expressions, and sensibility. Using morphine-like drugs would have caused a
situation of floating between heaven and earth. It would have been dishonest and should be considered as unethical and unjust. There is no
moral difference between killing and withholding useless medical treatment. There is an emotional difference. And there should not be a
legal difference” . Although elements of the offense of murder were proven, the physician was acquitted based on the unavoidable conflict of
duties between his duty to prolong life and his duty to alleviate unbearable suffering . In 1996, three Dutch child neurologists and one
neurosurgeon questioned in the leading Dutch medical journal the active termination of life of newborns with MMC . They defended the opinion
that (severe) handicapped life could also be meaningful. Deliberate termination of life was not considered appropriate; sedation and the
delivery of opioids were mandatory in the case of suffering. Not treating a child with MMC should not result in a more severe handicapped
life; the decision to withhold treatment was only made in the case of severe pulmonary or cardiac complications with the prospect of early
death. The possible suffering of the parents should not be an indication for deliberate termination of the life of a newborn with MMC. They
referred to the study of Steinbok et al. (1992) for their argument that the life of children and adults with (severe) MMC can be meaningful
. In 2003, the Dutch physician/medical ethicist Van de Vathorst stated that whenever it is decided not to treat a defective newborn,
deliberate termination of the life of this newborn should be regarded as a moral demand, based on the principle of ‘mercy’ . She illustrated
her arguments with a case of a newborn with a thoracic MMC. Interestingly enough, the life of this child was not terminated. It died by
itself, a few days old, because of pulmonary insufficiency. Although she received a national award for this paper, it resulted in several
disapproving letters to the editor. In January 2005, two pediatricians, one physician, and one pediatric neurologist reported on the
deliberate termination of life of 22 newborns in the Netherlands between 1997 and 2004 . Explaining the fact that all 22 cases were newborns
with MMC and hydrocephalus, Verhagen et.al. referred to the ‘baby Rianne case’, stating that “her life was dominated by unbearable
suffering” and “since this case it is established that newborns with a severe form of spina bifida do suffer severely” . According to the
authors, the deliberate termination of life was necessary because of the presence of “unbearable and hopeless suffering, acutely and long-
term, with no other proper medical means of alleviating the suffering” . All parents consented to the proposal of termination of life; in
four cases, they explicitly requested for it. For the public prosecutor, the termination of life was acceptable if four requirements were
properly fulfilled: (1) the presence of hopeless and unbearable suffering, (2) consent of the parents to termination of life, (3)
consultation of another physician or of a multidisciplinary MMC team, and (4) a proper and careful execution of the termination. These four
criteria eventually became the cornerstone of the so-called ‘Groningen Protocol’, a protocol meant to insure that the decision for life
termination, the executing itself, together with reporting to the legal authorities, are all conducted in a proper way. This protocol was
approved and adopted by the Dutch Association of Paediatrics in 2005. The motivation for the judgement of ‘unbearable and hopeless
suffering’ in the 22 cases of spina bifida was : ‘suffering’ (acute and chronic pain, physical pain) (100% of the 22 cases);the ‘lack on
ability to live or do things independently’ as the result of ‘severely disturbed sensomotoric development’ (100% of the 22 cases);the ‘lack
of possibility to verbal and non-verbal communication’ (82% of the 22 cases);‘the prospect to dependency to the medical circuit as the
result of frequent hospital admissions and operations’ (77% of the 22 cases)the ‘life expectation’ (‘the burden of severe suffering
increases by a longer life span’) (in 59% of the 22 cases). ‘suffering’ (acute and chronic pain, physical pain) (100% of the 22 cases); the
‘lack on ability to live or do things independently’ as the result of ‘severely disturbed sensomotoric development’ (100% of the 22 cases);
the ‘lack of possibility to verbal and non-verbal communication’ (82% of the 22 cases); ‘the prospect to dependency to the medical circuit
as the result of frequent hospital admissions and operations’ (77% of the 22 cases) the ‘life expectation’ (‘the burden of severe suffering
increases by a longer life span’) (in 59% of the 22 cases). None of the cases led to prosecution; all cases were found to be in accordance
with good medical practice. This article of Verhagen et al. (2005a) gave rise to only a few reactions in the Netherlands. Kompanje et al.
(2005) questioned the validity of ‘unbearable suffering’ as a useful criterion. They also stated that with the use of modern palliative
care, ‘suffering’ always can be dealt with in an adequate way, as did Laane (2005) [39, 40]. De Jong (2006) made a plea for ‘letting them
die’ instead of ‘making them die’ in the case of an untreated newborn with MMC. On request of the editor of the New England Journal of
Medicine, Verhagen and Sauer (2005) published another article concerning the Groningen protocol and the 22 cases and a similar article
appeared in Pediatrics . The reactions in the international medical press were mostly negative. In his article “Control of suffering on the
slippery slope of care” in the Lancet, Feudtner (2005) also addressed the poor quality and the insufficiency of the offered palliative care
and questioned whether legalization of active termination of life might not lead to the abuse of it . Saugstad (2005) stated in the Acta
Paediatrica: “Neonatologists must be extremely careful not to start on the slippery slope ending in the Dutch practice of euthanasia of
newborns. I would strongly warn against this attitude, which I find non-compatible with Western humanistic traditions” . Jotkowitz and Glick
(2006), in the Journal of Medical Ethics, were worried: “We feel an important line has been crossed if the international medical community
consents to the active euthanasia of severely ill infants and are concerned about the extension of the policy to other at risk groups” .
Bondi et. al. (2006), in Pediatrics, made a plea for an open discussion: “Rather than performing an in-depth examination of the
philosophical, ethical, and moral implications of this protocol, the authors focus on its technical details and acceptability within the
European medical community. The Groningen Protocol centers not on patient self-determination, but instead on the perception of the patient’s
current and future suffering. Although the authors note that an open discussion of these issues is ‘extremely important,” they fail to
initiate it. We hope that thoughtful ethicists and legislators will initiate the open discussion that the authors advocate” . In their
article ‘Why the Groningen Protocol should be rejected’, Chervenak et al. (2006) concluded that: “The justification they offer is woefully
inadequate. It relies on appeals to the concepts of “hopeless and unbearable suffering,” the “best interests of the patient,” and “medical-
ethical values,” but it never explains these concepts, and it gives no ethical argument for their clinical application. In fact, not only is
no argument for the Protocol given, none can hope to succeed. The Groningen Protocol should therefore be rejected as the basis for obstetric
and neonatal practice in The Netherlands and throughout the world.” (11) Manninen (2006a), finally, made an important contribution with her
article “A case for justified non-voluntary active euthanasia: exploring the ethics of the Groningen Protocol” in the Journal of Medical
Ethics . She made a thoughtful plea for the ethics of the Groningen Protocol: “What the Groningen Protocol proposes to do is both ethical
and also the most human alternative for these suffering and dying infants.” Newborns eligible for this protocol “do face no future at
all—that is, the infants must be terminally ill”, “will die soon no matter what actions doctors undertake, modern medicine can do nothing to
save them”, “have no prospects, have crossed the threshold into a comparatively valueless state of existence”, “will spend the remainder of
their lives in a chronic state of nothing but pain and suffering” . Interestingly enough, on November 23 an additional letter of herself,
“Regarding the Groningen Protocol” , was published in the same journal. Some key passages of this letter: “It has recently been brought to
my attention that the physicians of the Groningen Hospital who originally proposed the Groningen Protocol have proposed to violate the first
two conditions of the original Groningen Protocol: (1) The suffering must be so severe that the infant has no prospects for a future; (2)
There is no possibility that the infant can be cured or alleviated of her affliction with medication or surgery. For example, Dr. Verhagen
has maintained that the Protocol could apply to infants that are not necessarily terminally ill, but nevertheless may face a compromising
future. In essence, the Groningen Protocol has begun to make quality of life judgments. If the Groningen physicians have commenced making
quality of life judgments, they have strayed away from the original purpose of the Protocol, and this, I believe, may have concerning
ethical implications. As I write in my paper: “...the Groningen Protocol does not make quality of life judgments, and it is because of this
very important requirement that the Protocol strikes me as humane and morally permissible, for it seems utterly vicious to extend the life
of a suffering infant with no prospects for a future. If the infant did have a possible future ahead of her, I would be more hesitant to
condone a legal practice that begins to make quality of life judgments, for such judgments can be, and have been, subject to error.” In her
opinion, in these end-of-life decisions ‘quality of life judgments’ should not be made and, in a way, with this letter she also highlights
the inconsistencies in the reports by Verhagen et al. Being of crucial importance, the subject of ‘quality of life judgments’ will be
discussed more extensively in paragraphs 4 and 5. Finally, in 2006, in The Netherlands a national multidisciplinary expert review committee
has been appointed. In the case of active termination of the life of a newborn, the responsible physician is supposed to inform this
committee, which then has to determine whether the criteria for life termination have been met. Subsequently this committee has to advise
the Public Persecutor’s Office (OM) whether the physician should be prosecuted or not. Although such a committee seems to guarantee more
certainty, it can be doubted, however, if this ‘checking on afterhand’ is of much value for the newborn in question. It seems to be more
sensible to change this procedure to a ‘checking on beforehand’. Legally, this might perhaps be difficult to establish, but it seems not
justifiable that legal procedures themselves do dominate the question of appropriateness of life termination; errors in judgment being
unacceptable (cf. the level of certainty required for a death penalty in crime in, e.g., the USA). The actual presence of acute unbearable
and hopeless suffering of the newborn and the prospect of future/chronic unbearable and hopeless suffering as the result of handicaps, pain,
and discomfort is the most given argument for deliberate termination of life in neonates with MMC. In the recent Dutch series, this
suffering was stated to be present in 100% of the 22 cases [73, 75, 76]. Acute pain Not any convincing evidence can be found in the
literature that newborns with MMC actually do suffer from untreatable pain in the days after birth caused by their back lesion or by other
complications. A pediatric surgeon who devoted much of his professional life of more than 30 years to the treatment of those who have been
born with spina bifida stated: “I personally have seen little evidence that the babies have pain in the newborn period, nor have I found
them unable to sleep.” Delight and Goodall (1988; 1990) [17, 18] studied the experiences of parents of 44 children born with MMC, all
managed without any surgery. All 44 children died before their first birthday. Only a quarter of them did require some medication such as
analgesics and anticonvulsants; half of them were given drugs in the dying period. Analgesics were given in a low dose simply to enhance
their quality of life [17, 18]. Chronic pain The literature on chronic pain in MMC is scarce. The first systematic examinations of the
nature and prevalence of pain in children with MMC was published in 2005 . Headache is not uncommon in adults with MMC and is associated
with hydrocephalus. In this series, 56% of 68 patients reported experiencing pain once a week or more frequent. Of the shunted children, 88%
reported headaches compared to 79% of the children without a shunt . Children in this study reported frequent and sometimes intense pain at
multiple locations associated with the physiological sequelae, equipment usage, and medical management of the disability. The authors
concluded that children with spina bifida frequently report clinically significant, under-recognized and untreated pain, and they propagated
proper care and adequate medical management of these children. In another series, 55% of 42 patients underwent investigations for one or
more episodes of chronic headache due to shunt malfunction, ventriculostomy failure, or symptomatic Arnold–Chiari malformation . Although
all these problems sometimes can be fairly serious, the notion of ‘unbearable and hopeless suffering’ is never mentioned. The second
argument for unbearable and hopeless suffering is the prospect of lack of ability to live or do things independently as the result of
severely disturbed senso-motoric development experienced by the patient in childhood, puberty, and adult life . McLone reported in 1982 the
results of the unselective treatment of 100 consecutive newborns with MMC . After a follow-up period of 3.5 to 7 years there were 86
survivors. He concluded that the total percentage of children who could be independent and competitive is approaching 70–80%. Hunt and
Oakeshott (2003) and Oakeshott and Hunt (2003) studied the outcome in 117 unselected and actively treated patients with MMC at age 35. The
patients were treated between 1963 and 1971 without any attempt at selection. Forty-two patients had a severe lesion at a sensory level
above Th11, 30 of whom died, most before their first birthday. They died mostly of cardio-respiratory or renal failure, hydrocephalus, or
CNS infection. Two of the 12 survivors live independently, drive cars, and have an open employment; six have an IQ >80. In another study ,
29% out of 60 adolescents with spina bifida had the lesion at a high lumbar or thoracic level. The authors studied the quality of life in
these patients. They concluded that there were no significant relationships between the level of the lesion or spina bifida severity and the
overall quality of life, which appeared to be 70 to 80 on a 100-point scale; both patients and their parents view the overall quality of
life positively . Besides these results, criteria such as ‘living independently’ or ‘doing things independently’ can be confusing when
deciding about the future life of vital newborns. Most people who do live a meaningful life are dependent on others or interdependent on
each other. In fact, interdependency and especially the willingness to care for other (perhaps dependent) people can be considered as a
criterion of a truly civilized society, certainly so when this means to offer ‘something for nothing’ (this being real mercy). In 18 of the
22 studied Dutch cases, it was predicted “(future) communication of and with the child would not be possible, neither verbally nor
nonverbally” . In other words, these babies were predicted to be or to become in a state of deep coma or in a persistent vegetative state.
Neither of these states of very severe disturbed consciousness, however, is applicable to a newborn with MMC and hydrocephalus. Furthermore,
several publications concerning the level of mental functioning of adults with MMC have been published [3, 4, 9, 32, 33, 47, 67, 68, 70].
Intellectual development varies between normal IQ (this being the case in 60% [9, 68] to 70% of the studied population) and severe mental
disability, but the predicted complete absence of the possibility to communicate is never mentioned. On the contrary: “Virtually all infants
with spina bifida are capable of meaningful human relationships, independent of the level of the lesion. Indeed, most are of normal
intelligence” . Aside from this incorrect medical description there are some other important aspects that need to be highlighted. When all
communication is claimed to be impossible, one wonders by what methods at all (the amount of) suffering can be established. Furthermore,
when a person is in such a state of deep coma or in a persistent vegetative state, there simply is no cognitive experience whatsoever, also
not of (unbearable) suffering. This was confirmed in a recent conviction of the Dutch Medical Disciplinary Committee against a general
practitioner who euthanized a comatose patient; the ground of the verdict being “because of the comatose state there was no longer any
question of unbearable suffering nor any question of euthanasia” . It seems hardly possible to quantify this criterion in such a way that it
can be used to justify life termination of vital newborns. When compared to persons with other congenital malformations or congenital
diseases or some acquired diseases, patients with MMC do not appear to need substantially more medical care than, e.g., patients with
intracranial tumors or with chronic diseases such as severe pulmonary, cardiac, or neurological disorders. Furthermore, the claim of
Verhagen (2004) that “this child would have to undergo at least 60 operations in the course of a year to temporarily alleviate its problems”
again cannot be substantiated: a retrospective survey of treated newborns with MMC over 2 years in the Sophia Children Hospital showed that
three to four operations were needed in their first year of life. It is clear that the longer a patient lives, the more medical care will be
needed in a quantitative way. Whether this means that this will affect the experienced quality of life in a negative way remains totally
unclear and cannot be predicted. Furthermore, patients with MMC do require relatively much of their medical care in their first two decades,
this steadily decreasing when they grow older and when disabilities and coping with these disabilities are gradually stabilized. Suffering,
especially the ‘unbearable and hopeless’ aspects of it, is a complex psychosocial phenomenon and by definition strictly individualized: only
the individual itself can experience the existence, the intensity, and hopelessness of it. Others (parents, physicians, nurses) can only to
some degree make an estimation of it. It is therefore tentative whether ‘suffering’ can be applied to newborns at all. What is possible,
however, is to establish quite precisely the level of ‘(dis)comfort’ of a newborn by making use of standardized score charts such as the
Comfort score and the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) (see below). The Dutch physician Beijk(1998) stated it as follows: “suffering will be
interpreted by every patient, by every doctor, and by every other involved person in a different way and therefore can lead to completely
different conclusions. The bearableness is especially dependent on personal and environmental factors; it is all about the subjective
experience of the individual itself who is suffering, about the durableness of the suffering, and about the wish to die” . In 2005, in his
Ph.D. thesis, also Hamburg (physician and jurist) concluded “for the criterion ‘suffering’ there are no objective or scientifically
validated criteria available, with the consequence of decisions of life-termination being dependent of the subjective judgment of the
doctor, leading to inconsistent decisions” . Therefore, according to Hamburg, “in a time of evidence-based medicine ‘suffering’ is not
acceptable anymore” , as also was suggested by Kompanje et al. (2005) . Although Beijk and Hamburg are referring to the practice of
euthanasia (which in the Netherlands is strictly referring to competent patients wishing to die), their statements are the more applicable
to newborns, as in these cases predictions are being made about future suffering of others. According to Chervenak et al. (2006): “An infant
with spina bifida cannot have and therefore cannot have lost the ability to realize intentions, desires, and hopes for the future; it can
feel pain but cannot ‘suffer’ as a psychosocial phenomenon” . Laane (2005a) came to the same conclusion: “having no biographical
consciousness, ‘suffering’ cannot be applied to newborns . To date, it is unclear why this improper use of ‘suffering’ still continues in
this debate. In a time in which most fetuses with MMC will be detected by AFP and amniocentesis or by ultrasound diagnosis (in most cases
being followed by iatrogenic abortion), the birth of a newborn with MMC is increasingly becoming a rare phenomenon . The decision to
terminate a pregnancy in the case of a fetus with MMC is usually made shortly after the diagnosis. It can be questioned whether there is
enough time for proper counseling about the prospect of living with spina bifida, as a patient and also as parents. Freeman (1998) stated:
“Decisions are made by the parents without knowledge of the child’s future; without knowing whether the child will have minimal deficit and
walk with only short leg braces or walk with no braces at all, and without awareness of whether this child will have a thoracic lesion with
high paraplegia and spend his or her life in a wheelchair. Few parents at that stage in the pregnancy know much about spina bifida or about
what life will be like for that child and for that family. In other words, these rarely are informed decisions” . He points in the same
direction concerning physician experience: “Today, few younger physicians have experience with the decision-making process for spina bifida
either before or after birth. Thus, physician advisors will lack experience with the joys of caring for a child, even a handicapped child,
as well as experience with the pains and problems. They will have little experience with the feelings of the handicapped children
themselves. With the lack of experience, how should the physician counsel? On what basis can the inexperienced physician advise uninformed
parents? What decision should the parents make?” In their article “Tell the truth about spina bifida,” Bruner and Tulipan(2004) also showed
their worries about the quality of counseling: “Unfortunately, many healthcare professionals are equally ignorant of the current prognosis
of children with spina bifida who have ready access to comprehensive care in a modern multidisciplinary clinic. As a result, much of the
information initially provided to couples with a newly diagnosed fetus is biased and misleading. As medical ethicists Bliton and Zaner at
Vanderbilt University Medical Center observed, “To date we have met and held intense conversations with more than 150 pregnant women and
their partners. Many times, couples admitted, the initial counseling they received from their obstetrician was slanted—both against
disability and toward termination of pregnancy. What they remembered was how the initial obstetric consultation portrayed as grim a picture
as possible about their future child’s prognosis.” The statements of Verhagen et al. (2005) mentioned earlier, together with other incorrect
predictions (“these newborns have no prospect of a future and no chance to survive at all; are barely able to breathe”, “these children face
a life of agonizing pain that cannot be alleviated by any proper medical means”, “the child would suffer such unbearable pain that it has to
be constantly anaesthetized” , that “they all have spina bifida of the most severe form at level of the neck and all have non-functioning
kidneys” ), unfortunately seem to confirm these worries, also in counseling the parents of a newborn with MMC. To date, it is not clear why
such incorrect information is presented to parents, colleagues, and society as a whole. When parents are told that communication with and of
their child never will be possible, that their child will face a life of agonizing pain and will suffer unbearably, that this suffering
cannot be alleviated by any means, that annually at least 60 operations will be needed to offer some (but only temporary) relief, then these
parents are left without any hope and their consent/decision to non-treatment, or to active termination of life, almost can be predicted.
However, in such situations the fundamental concept of ‘informed decisions’ is obviously violated. Does the level of the lesion determine
the amount and severity of disturbances? In general, the higher up the spine the lesion is, the more likely are severe neurological
disabilities to be found. Cervical lesions often do not contain neural tissue and are simple meningoceles. At lower levels (thoracic and
especially lumbar), the converse is true: the infant nearly always being (partially) paralyzed below the level of the lesion, the cord
showing the classical features of dysplasia . However, the extent of handicaps that a person with MMC experiences is determined not by the
site of the lesion, but almost entirely by the neurological deficit. Verhoef (2005) concluded that young adults with a mild form of spina
bifida (and subsequently with few disabilities), did experience their disabilities more often as problematic than contemporaries with a
serious form of spina bifida . Likewise, in the study of Seller (1990) , eight patients ended up with minimal handicaps, having bony lesions
in the thoracic (one patient), lumbar (two patients), and lumbosacral (five patients) spine. Three others with lumbosacral bony lesions were
among the most gravely handicapped . According to Hetherington (2005), low lesions do not necessarily indicate a mild course; physical well-
being was not related to the level of the spinal lesion . Although persons with sacral lesions showed less impairment compared to persons
with higher spinal lesions, Padua et al. (2002) did not find a correlation between quality of life (both physical and mental) and the site
of the lesion . According to Pit-ten Cate et al. (2002), lesion level, type of spina bifida, and gender were not significantly related to
the quality of life in children with spina bifida . This is in agreement with the results of the study of Sawin et al. (2002) : no
significant relationship with lesion level, spina bifida severity or shunt status and quality of life was found in 60 adolescents.
Schoenmakers (2003) concluded that being independent in mobility contributes more to quality of life than other functional abilities such as
whether or not being wheelchair-dependent. And, although children with the most severe forms of MMC have significantly more and severe
disabilities than children with milder forms of MMC, scores about self-esteem did not differ significantly between the two groups . In
conclusion, the level of the lesion does not correlate with the actual experience of the handicaps themselves. There is little doubt that
surgical procedures are unjustified in hydrocephalic newborns with little or no potential for independent survival, the decision as to what
constitutes as irreversible and severe brain damage may however be difficult to make. Ventricular size alone cannot be used as a conclusive
predictive criterion. It has been repeatedly demonstrated that there is no consistent correlation between the thickness of the cortex and
the eventual psychomotor development. Barf et. al. (2003) concluded that cognitive status was especially negatively influenced by multiple
shunt revisions and by other pathologies associated with hydrocephalus. Amacher and Wellington (1984) treated 170 children with
hydrocephalus in 636 operative procedures and concluded that “there is no difference in results based upon measurement of the initial
thickness of the cerebral mantle.” They found normal intelligence in 63% of the 5-year survivors. In a recent study also, Beeker et al.
(2006) described the difficulty in making a reliable prognosis of the intellectual development based on ventricular size . It seems
impossible to predict with certainty the future quality of life of newborns with MMC. One also has to be aware of the fact that the self-
reported quality of life of children with handicaps does not differ from that of children without disabilities, and health care
professionals are known to underestimate disabled persons’ quality of life as compared to self-reports . Generally speaking, prognostic
judgments about quality of life are conceptually plausible; their failing is simply that, given the available evidence, they do not appear
to be reliable . Finally, and perhaps the most important, quality of life judgements are considered as being ethically unacceptable in end-
of-life decisions [45, 46]. In his Ph.D. thesis, Dorscheidt (2006) raises the issue as to whether the deliberate termination of the life of
disabled newborns is compatible with the ‘non-discrimination principle’, in particular the legal prohibition of discrimination on the ground
of disability . Deliberate termination of the life of newborns with spina bifida is always preceded by a non-treatment decision (as in the
baby Doe case and the baby Rianne case) and according to Dorscheidt, the decision of non-treatment should be questioned with regard to the
non-discrimination principle as well. He elaborates on two fundamental rights of the child, being the child’s right to life and its right to
health(care), mentioned in international human rights instruments such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), The United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, and the European Convention of Human Rights, and on the authoritative views of international
human rights bodies such as the United Nations Children’s Rights Committee (UNCRC) and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
(CESCR). Some examples: Article 25, UDHR: “Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself,
including medical care and the right to security in the event of disability. All children shall enjoy the same social protection”. CESCR,
par. 26: According to standard Rules: ”States should ensure that persons with disabilities, particularly infants and children, are provided
with the same level of medical care within the same system as other members of society.” UNCRC: “In its examination of States parties
reports, the Committee should commit itself to highlighting the situation of disabled children and the need for concrete measures to ensure
recognition of their rights, in particular the right to live, survival and development”. UN, General Counsel: “We will take all measures to
ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including equal access to health, education and
recreational services, by children with disabilities and children with special needs, to ensure the recognition of their dignity, to promote
their self-reliance and to facilitate their active participation in the community”. Proposal text of the American delegacy for the UN
Convention to Promote and Protect the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities: ”States Parties reaffirm the inherent right to life
of all persons with disabilities, shall take all necessary measures to ensure its effective enjoyment by them, and shall ensure that
disability, or perceived quality of life, shall not serve as a basis for infringement of the right to life.” These international political
statements and agreements are also reflected in the resolution of the International Federation for Spina Bifida and Hydrocephalus (IF) as
formulated at the 12th International Conference (“The Right to be Different”) for Hydrocephalus and Spina Bifida in Toulouse : People with
spina bifida and hydrocephalus can live a full life with equal value to that of any other citizen and they should not be seen as a medical
condition. Their views should be sought and heard by governments and health professionals, who should acknowledge the right of people with
spina bifida and hydrocephalus to speak for themselves.People with disabilities have the right to aim for lives as rewarding as those of
their peers who have what is regarded as a normal life. Supportive systems must be in place when they are needed.Experience over the past
30 years has improved considerably the medical outcome and the quality of life of people with spina bifida and hydrocephalus.Most adults
with spina bifida underline that their quality of life is not automatically—and should not be given as—a reason for abortion . People with
spina bifida and hydrocephalus can live a full life with equal value to that of any other citizen and they should not be seen as a medical
condition. Their views should be sought and heard by governments and health professionals, who should acknowledge the right of people with
spina bifida and hydrocephalus to speak for themselves. People with disabilities have the right to aim for lives as rewarding as those of
their peers who have what is regarded as a normal life. Supportive systems must be in place when they are needed. Experience over the past
30 years has improved considerably the medical outcome and the quality of life of people with spina bifida and hydrocephalus. Most adults
with spina bifida underline that their quality of life is not automatically—and should not be given as—a reason for abortion . As a
recognition of the importance of non-discrimination on the basis of disability (that is to say, present as well as expected disability) or
(expected) quality of life in deciding whether or not a newborn child with, e.g., spina bifida should be treated or whether or not it is
justified to deliberately terminate such a child’s life, Dorscheidt (2006) recommends to involve the legal concept of ‘objective
justification’ in the medical-decision making process. By using a particular questionnaire, the physician in charge may take advantage of
this concept when considering (and deliberating on) how to act properly and professionally. Through this, the physician can ensure the
disabled newborn child’s rightful claim to equal protection of its right to life and its right to health(care). Doing so would offer
possibilities to replace the usual doctor-centered approach of decision making by a more patient-centered approach as well. To summarize
from another perspective: “Prominent theories of justice emphasize equality of opportunity for human experience and development; if society
has an obligation to provide citizens this very broad equality of opportunity, then it has an obligation to shoulder the burden of care
associated with citizens who have spina bifida” . When a newborn with spina bifida is not treated, discomfort can be expected in the nearby
future caused by the lesion itself (e.g., by becoming infected), by a subsequent meningitis/ventriculitis, or by raised intracranial
pressure caused by an untreated hydrocephalus. Therefore, the decision not to treat should always be accompanied by offering proper
palliative care. It is becoming increasingly evident that, taken modern palliative techniques in newborns seriously, pain and discomfort can
always be dealt with in an adequate way [43, 57]. In their article “Strong opioids in pediatric palliative medicine” Hain et al. (2005) also
stated that “clinical evidence is accumulating that strong opioids can be used safely and effectively; they should be used as part of a
rational approach to the management of pain” . This use of strong pain killers is also highlighted in the recent Oxford Textbook of
Palliative Care for Children . In the highly unlikely event of insufficient effect of modern pain medication, terminal palliative sedation
should be the next step in the palliative approach . With palliative sedation, the possible experience itself of discomfort can always be
dealt with adequately. In the “Consensus guidelines on sedation and analgesia in critically ill children” by Playfor et al. (2006) in
Intensive Care Medicine, some 20 guidelines are mentioned by which pain and discomfort in critically ill children can be treated in an
efficient way; life termination not being mentioned at all . When it is decided that surgical treatment is not a feasible option in a
newborn with spina bifida, it is regarded by some to be an act of ‘mercy’ to terminate the life of the newborn . This notion, however, is a
misconception: they are not terminally ill because of the MMC and/or hydrocephalus per se; they are ‘terminally ill’ because of the decision
not to treat their congenital malformations. The needs of these untreated newborns, however, are still the same as the needs of all
newborns: proper care, feeding, comfort, respect and love; till death (and apparently not death itself). The ‘need’ for life termination in
these patients can only be regarded as an indication of insufficient palliative care. Life termination as an act of mercy can only be
applied to hopeless situations that can occur, e.g., on battlegrounds or in mountaineering, when there are no proper means indeed to
alleviate real unbearable suffering. This is obviously not the case in a modern equipped hospital (at least, it should not be) with
experience in palliative care and pain management. This is all confirmed in the paper of Sauer in 2001, “Ethical dilemmas in neonatology:
recommendations of the Ethics Working Group of the CESP (Confederation of European Specialists in Pediatrics)” in the European Journal of
Pediatrics . In this paper, some ethical principles, applicable to every newborn, are being formulated, like: “decisions to withhold or
withdraw treatment should always be accompanied by optimal palliative therapy and dignified and comforting care” and “every form of
intentional killing should be rejected in paediatrics” . This is followed by: “However, giving medication to relieve suffering in hopeless
situations which may, as a side effect, accelerate death, can be justified”. To date, it is not clear why these recommendations should not
hold for cases of untreated spina bifida and hydrocephalus in the Netherlands and why the Dutch Association of Paediatrics does not adopt
these recommendations. After an uneventful pregnancy, a full-term female child was delivered spontaneously, Apgar scores being 4 and 5.
Physical examination revealed a huge MMC at high thoracic level (Fig. 1), a very large head with a large but soft fontanel, a marked
deformation of the thorax with scoliosis, and clubfeet. After counseling the parents, they persisted in their wish to treat the child, if
this probably could save her life. The MMC team decided to respect the parents will and on day 3 the back lesion was closed by the
neurosurgeon in collaboration with the plastic surgeon, making use of extensive rotational flaps together with free skin grafting (Fig. 2).
Shunt placement could be postponed till day 9; a medium pressure valve being used. Because postoperatively the fontanel did not soften
adequately, 2 weeks later the medium pressure valve was changed in a low-pressure valve, now with satisfying clinical results.
Fig. 1Photograph of the newborn, showing the extensive MMC, extending from +/− the 4th thoracic vertebra till the midlumbar
regionFig. 2Photograph at the end of the surgical procedure. The MMC was closed by making use of extensive rotational flaps together with
free skin grafting Photograph of the newborn, showing the extensive MMC, extending from +/− the 4th thoracic vertebra till the midlumbar
region Photograph at the end of the surgical procedure. The MMC was closed by making use of extensive rotational flaps together with free
skin grafting All period long, from birth till 1 week after the shunt revision, the well-being of the baby was estimated by making use of
the Comfort score and the VAS and also medication used for treatment of pain or discomfort (paracetamol and morphine) was recorded
(Fig. 3a,b). Fig. 3a Comfort scores during the first month of life (min = 5: no discomfort; max = 35: extreme discomfort). Green bars: only
paracetamol (intermittently) being used. Green/black bars: low-dose morphine together with paracetamol being used. b The same as a, but now
with the VAS (min = 0: no pain; max = 10: most severe pain) Note: The combination of a Comfort score of at least 17 and a VAS of at least 4
indicates that the well-being of the newborn is in jeopardy. In such a situation, the attending nurse is expected to determine the cause of
the discomfort and to take adequate measures (changing a full nappy, feeding a hungry child, emptying a full bladder, giving adequate
painkillers if appropriate, etc.) to secure the child’s well-being a Comfort scores during the first month of life (min = 5: no discomfort;
max = 35: extreme discomfort). Green bars: only paracetamol (intermittently) being used. Green/black bars: low-dose morphine together with
paracetamol being used. b The same as a, but now with the VAS (min = 0: no pain; max = 10: most severe pain) Note: The combination of a
Comfort score of at least 17 and a VAS of at least 4 indicates that the well-being of the newborn is in jeopardy. In such a situation, the
attending nurse is expected to determine the cause of the discomfort and to take adequate measures (changing a full nappy, feeding a hungry
child, emptying a full bladder, giving adequate painkillers if appropriate, etc.) to secure the child’s well-being Studying these data and
particularly the amount of medication needed, several conclusions can be made: When untreated (the first 3 days), the child was not
discomfortable.Closing of the back lesion, in this case certainly a major procedure, did not contribute significantly (and only temporarily)
to more discomfort. In other words, closing of the open spine can be qualified as a proportional treatment modality.The same holds true for
placing a ventricular shunt.Treating an active hydrocephalus adequately contributes to the well-being of the patient.In 1 month’s time, this
active treatment resulted in a stable situation of overall well-being in this patient.Only paracetamol and low-dose morphine were necessary
in the treatment of actual discomfort. When untreated (the first 3 days), the child was not discomfortable. Closing of the back lesion, in
this case certainly a major procedure, did not contribute significantly (and only temporarily) to more discomfort. In other words, closing
of the open spine can be qualified as a proportional treatment modality. The same holds true for placing a ventricular shunt. Treating an
active hydrocephalus adequately contributes to the well-being of the patient. In 1 month’s time, this active treatment resulted in a stable
situation of overall well-being in this patient. Only paracetamol and low-dose morphine were necessary in the treatment of actual
discomfort. In summary, this case not only demonstrates that there is no such thing as ‘suffering’ in these newborns, but also the
incorrectness of the statement of Verhagen et al. (2005a) that “the suffering of these newborns cannot be alleviated by any means in a
proper medical way” (Fig. 4). The overall impression of this case is in accordance with the preliminary results of the Rotterdam Prospective
Study on Discomfort in Newborns with MMC: there is no “acutely unbearable suffering” in these newborns (Figs. 5a,b) Fig. 4The same child at
7 months old; fixating and following with the eyes, vocalizing, normal movements of the arms, moving both legs vigorously (perhaps
nonvoluntary), still being partially fed by a nasogastric tubeFig. 5a and b Preliminary results of the Rotterdam Prospective Study on
Discomfort in Newborns with MMC (n = 13) The same child at 7 months old; fixating and following with the eyes, vocalizing, normal movements
of the arms, moving both legs vigorously (perhaps nonvoluntary), still being partially fed by a nasogastric tube a and b Preliminary results
of the Rotterdam Prospective Study on Discomfort in Newborns with MMC (n = 13) Although in an interview Verhagen himself reported that “all
22 cases had a lesion of the most severe form, at level of the neck” , in their published articles Verhagen et al. do not quantify the level
of the lesion. However, it seems very unlikely that his statement is correct or that the levels of lesion in these 22 cases are of the same
level and/or magnitude as in the case described. There is no evidence that newborns with MMC and hydrocephalus do either ‘suffer’ unbearably
or hopelessly and certainly not without the prospect to relieve this suffering by standard care. ‘Suffering’ itself is a nonconclusive, and
in newborns, inapplicable denominator that should not be used anymore in this debate. Although they will in their future life be confronted
with handicaps, sometimes very severe, their future prospects and their actual experienced quality of life cannot be predicted with such
certainty at birth that their lives can be regarded as hopeless or meaningless (‘quality of life judgments’ as such being unacceptable in
this decision making). Possible discomfort in these newborns can easily be treated in a straightforward way by active treatment (closure of
the defect and shunting the hydrocephalus) and, when necessary, by the use of a professional pain/symptom protocol. The decision not to
treat such a newborn, when based on expected handicaps, possibly violates the ‘non-discrimination’ principle (Dorscheidt, 2006). When not
being treated, they are not terminally ill because of the MMC and/or hydrocephalus per se; they are ‘terminally ill’ because of this
nontreatment decision. Not being terminally ill, it is not ‘humane’ or ‘merciful’ to terminate their life, this also being not in accordance
with international legislation and international medical recommendations. When untreated and when it is the intention to alleviate actual
discomfort (this question of intent being crucial to a moral and legal analysis of end-of-life decisions including active termination of
life), this can always be achieved in an effective way by using one of the widely accepted palliative protocols. Such a child can and should
be cared for in a respectful and dignified way, providing all its actual needs (which apparently is not death itself). This being the case,
there is no indication whatsoever for the deliberate termination of the life of children born with MMC. While Verhagen et al. (2005, 2006)
must be credited for bringing the discussion about deliberate termination of newborns in the open, to date, there does not seem to be much
in their qualifications that can be quantified properly, especially not in cases of MMC, which is prone to quality of life judgments (and
thereby neglecting the needs and rights of the newborn). To date, the Groningen protocol, therefore, cannot be regarded as very useful.
Being a tool, it seems to have been changed in a means in itself. To gain more usefulness, at least it has to be extended in a way as
proposed by Dorscheidt (2006), by adding charts such as the Comfort Score and the VAS and by adding palliative medication charts. Thus, it
should be changed from a doctor-centered protocol to a patient-centered protocol. To throw more light on these end-of-life decisions,
Verhagen et al. should consider to extend their retrospective study, focusing on the medical aspects of the 22 cases. Thus, it must be
possible to get a basic understanding of the extent of the malformations themselves, of possible co-morbidities, whether or not quality of
life judgments were made, how ‘unbearable suffering’ was ascertained, how palliative care was offered, and why this failed. Such a study
would contribute significantly to the open discussion they propagate. Verhagen is undoubtedly correct indeed in his appeal: “It’s time to be
honest about the unbearable suffering endured by newborns with no hope of a future”. Finally, to date it remains unclear on what grounds the
Dutch Association of Paediatrics has adopted the Groningen protocol and why international legislation, international human rights
instruments, and international medical recommendations appear not to hold for the Netherlands, especially not in newborns with MMC. The
author is much indebted to E.J.O. Kompanje, clinical ethicist, for his generous and stimulating help in preparing this article. Commentaries
on this paper are available at doi:10.1007/s00381-007-0479-2,, doi:10.1007/s00381-007-0480-9, doi:10.1007/s00381-007-0481-8,
doi:10.1007/s00381-007-0482-7, doi:10.1007/s00381-007-0483-6, doi:10.1007/s00381-007-0484-5, doi:10.1007/s00381-007-0485-4,
doi:10.1007/s00381-007-0486-3, doi:10.1007/s00381-007-0487-2, doi:10.1007/s00381-007-0488-1, doi:10.1007/s00381-007-0489-0, and
doi:10.1007/s00381-007-0490-7.
