Collision tumors of the colon are rare. We report the first case, to our knowledge in the English literature, of a collision tumor composed
of a colonic adenocarcinoma arising in a sigmoid diverticulum coexisting with a recurrent ovarian granulosa cell tumor. A 64-year old woman
presented with small bowel obstruction and a large, heterogenous, solid/cystic serosal based pelvic mass consistent with a gastrointestinal
stromal tumor on imaging. Her significant past history 16-years ago included a bilateral salpingo-oophrectomy with hysterectomy. Surgical
removal of the mass and pathological examination revealed the presence of a colonic adenocarcinoma arising in a large sigmoid diverticulum
coexistent with a second neoplastic tumor phenotype; confirmed to be a delayed recurrent ovarian granulosa cell tumor. Though coexistent,
the two tumor phenotypes respected their boundaries with no diffuse intermingling or transition between them. She developed lung metastases
from the recurrent ovarian tumor within 6 months and died within a year of follow-up. Collision tumors of the colon are rare. This is the
first case reported of a collision tumor composed of adenocarcinoma colon and recurrent granulosa cell tumor representing an example of two
independent tumors in a unique one-on-another collision. Clinical awareness and recognition of such tumors are important as they will
dictate appropriate treatment strategies dependent on the individual biological aggressiveness of each of the tumor components. Our report
highlights the need for histopathologists, surgeons, and oncologists to be aware of the rare possibility of collisions tumors. As seen in
our case, the delayed recurrence of granulosa cell tumor of the ovary sixteen years after the initial presentation was the key determining
factor in tumor recurrence, tumor progression, and tumor metastasis within three months, which ultimately lead to accelerated death within a
year of clinical presentation. Thus accurate identification and recognition of the second neoplasm is important as prognosis and survival
may be determined by this component as seen in our index case. A composite tumor is described as a lesion that has different components of a
tumor intermingling in a way wherein the two components are difficult to distinguish from each other in many areas . A true "collision"
tumor on the other hand represents a coexistence of two adjacent but histologically different malignant neoplasm's occurring in the same
organ without histological admixture or an intermediate cell population zone . Such tumors consist of components with different histogenesis
and different tumorigenetic pathways representing a mosaic of two concurrent but independent tumors that have "collided" with each other.
Thus, "collision" tumors are synchronous morphologically different neighboring neoplasm's that have expanded into each others territory and
are occurring side by side in the same organ. Without special or unique clinical features, such tumors are difficult to diagnose
preoperatively and pathological identification of the dual components is often the only way to make a correct diagnosis. The occurrence of
collision tumors in the human body is rare and even rarer in the colon. Reported cases include adenoma of the colon and carcinoid ,
adenocarcinoma of the colon and carcinoid , adenocarcinoma of the colon and transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder , Non-Hodgkin
lymphoma and adenocarcinoma of the colon , and adenocarcinoma of the colon and peritoneal metastasis of a hepatoid variant of yolk sac tumor
. Our case represents an example of a true collision tumor composed of two independent tumors occurring in a unique one-on-another pattern:
i) sixteen year delayed recurrence of a granulosa cell tumor of the ovary coexisting with ii) a primary colonic adenocarcinoma. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first reported case in the English literature. A 64 year old woman presented with small bowel obstruction and
a pelvic mass. Her significant past history included a bilateral salpingo-oophrectomy with hysterectomy sixteen years ago which on
retrospective investigation and tracking of medical records was attributed as surgery for an ovarian granulosa cell tumor. Imaging studies
with an abdominal ultrasound showed the presence of a mass which was followed by a CT scan which showed the presence of a large,
heterogenous, solid/cystic serosal based pelvic mass that was felt to be an extracolonic gastrointestinal stromal tumor (Figure 1). Positron
emission tomography or colonoscopy was not undertaken. Recurrent ovarian carcinoma or a complicated pelvic abscess was also offered as a
radiological differential diagnosis. She underwent an explorative laparotomy with en-bloc removal of the pelvic mass. CT scan showing the
presence of a large, heterogenous, solid/cystic serosal based pelvic mass (arrows). On gross examination, the segment of the colon with
overlying fatty tissue and attached firm mass weighed 467 g. The colonic segment measured 25 cm in length and contained a neoplastic lesion
measuring 12.0 × 12.0 × 12.0 cm in maximum dimensions. The bowel mucosa was tan colored, unremarkable and showed normal folding pattern
overlying the predominantly serosal based neoplastic mass being pale tan in color to red-brown in color with several necrotic areas. Two
components of tumor were not identified on gross though there were some streaks of 'orange' colored tissue in one adjacent region of the
specimen (Figure 2). Gross photograph of the specimen composed of colonic segment containing a predominantly serosal based neoplastic lesion
measuring 12.0 × 12.0 × 12.0 cm in maximum dimensions (asterisks). Microscopically, the granulosa cell tumor was composed of fairly large
monotonous cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and nuclei being predominantly oval. Many architectural patterns including diffuse, micro-
follicular and cords of neoplastic cells (Figure 3A, B, and 3C) were seen. The recurrence was predominantly seen along the peritoneal
surface of the bowel and along the lateral pelvic wall. Isolated adenocarcinoma glandular cells were also identified fortuitously in some
regions. Further sections showed the focus of the predominant growth of the typical dirty necrosis with glandular formation of a colonic
adenocarcinoma to originate from a diverticular out pouching present within the serosal fat. Detailed sectioning confirmed the connection to
the overlying colonic mucosa thus establishing the diverticular status of the bowel. The free "isolated" cells supported the view that the
adenocarcinoma had perforated through the diverticulum and was present on the peritoneal surface. These "free tumor cells" though admixed
with the granulosa cell tumor cells still respected their individual boundaries. Extensive co-existing diverticular disease of the sigmoid
was also present. The adenocarcinoma component was moderately well-differentiated with the mucinous component representing less than 50% of
the tumor and there was no evidence of a pre-existing polyp at the site of the carcinoma. The free serosal surface was involved by the
ovarian granulosa cell tumor. Sampling of the subserosal fat showed evidence of irregular nodules keeping with venous invasion of an
extramural variety along with perineural invasion both from the granulosa cell component. A small focus of giant cell granulomatous response
was also observed in the serosal fat. The proximal and surgical margins of the lesion were free of tumor and no separate polyps were
identified in the remainder of the bowel sampled. Twenty-one lymph nodes had been harvested from the specimen, of which, one was positive
for the presence of metastatic colonic adenocarcinoma. A, B, C – Colonic adenocarcinoma colliding with granulosa cell tumor (3A) showing
many architectural patterns including diffuse (3A) (asterisk), microfollicular (3B) and cords of cells (3C). Immunohistochemical studies
clearly delineated the two components of the collision tumor even in the closely admixed zones on the serosal surface of the lesion. The
adenocarcinoma cells were strongly positive to low molecular weight keratin, and CK20 (Figure 4A), while CK7, vimentin, and S100 were
negative. This immunohistochemical profile of CK20 being positive and CK7 being negative in the adenocarcinomatous component confirmed the
histomorphological diagnosis of colonic adenocarcinoma. P53 antibodies were markedly over expressed in the majority of the adenocarcinoma
cells. CA125 remained negative in these cells. Meanwhile, the granulosa cell tumor recurrence regions showed complete negativity to keratin
antibodies (low molecular weight keratin, CK 7, CK 20), P53, and CA125. However, these cells were strongly positive to vimentin and inhibin
(Figure 4B) with focal positivity with S100 antibodies. This immunohistochemical profile of CK7-, CK20-, inhibin+, vimentin+ confirmed the
histomorphological diagnosis of granulosa cell tumor of the ovary. Table 1 summarizes the dilution, clone and the type of the antibodies
used in this case. A, B – Collision tumor with the two neoplastic components seen with their individual staining pattern with cytokeratin 20
antibodies strongly positive in the adenocarcinomatous component (asterisk) in A and negative in the granulosa cell component (pound). While
the vimentin antibodies are strongly positive in the granulosa cell component (asterisk) and negative in the adenocarcinomatous component
(asterisk) in B. Inhibin staining pattern was identical to that seen with vimentin antibodies. Summarizes the different immunohistochemical
antibodies used to confirm the two histological components of the collision tumor of the colon. Ck-7, Inhibin, S100, CA125,
p53-DakoCytomation; Mississauga, ON Vimentin, Low Molecular Weight Keratin-Intermedico; Markham, ON Ck-20-Novacastra; Norwell, MA Thus, the
final completed pathological analysis of the specimen revealed a primary colonic adenocarcinoma arising in a large sigmoid diverticulum
coexisting with another tumor phenotype. The histomorphology and the results of immunohistochemistry, together with the retrieval of the
sixteen year old records, confirmed the second neoplasm to be a recurrent ovarian granulosa cell tumor comprising 60% of the specimen.
Though coexistent with the primary adenocarcinoma cells, the two tumor phenotypes respected each others boundaries with no diffuse
intermingling or transition between the two. At three month postoperative follow-up she developed local recurrence of the granulosa cell
tumor in the pelvis and lung metastases within six months confirmed pathologically by image guided fine needle aspiration biopsy. She
declined adjuvant chemotherapy and died within a year's follow-up. Colonic adenocarcinoma is the most common malignant neoplasm occurring in
the colon. Collision tumors of the colon on the other hand are extremely rare neoplasms. The admixtures of such two independent tumor
phenotypes include the presence of adenocarcinomas with carcinoid , transitional cell carcinoma , and lymphomas . The occurrence of both
colonic adenocarcinoma and granulosa cell tumor is uncommon, and to the best of our knowledge has never been reported in the English
literature. Although there is no satisfactory explanation for the occurrence of such collision tumors, theories relating to the occurrence
of such collision tumors include: 1) Simultaneous proliferation of two different cell lines. 2) Common origin from pluripotent precursor
stem cell that differentiates into two components. 3) Chance apposition of two unrelated tumors. Questions that are not easy to answer and
which require further exploration include a) Are these tumors simple incidental associations? b) Are these lesions connected by a causal
relationship? c) Does a single carcinogenic agent interact with two neighboring tissues inducing development of tumors of different
histological types in the same organ? Furthermore, in the diagnosis of collision tumors it is important to exclude rare tumors resulting
from one cancer metastasizing to one another. In our case, it is hypothesized that some central carcinogenic stimulus induced the
development of the primary adenocarcinoma of the colon – a change in the immunological surveillance status – which "awakened" the sleeping
dormant granulosa tumor cells resulting in a sixteen year delayed recurrence. Granulosa cell tumors are rarely aggressive, with a five year
survival reported to be as high as 86% . The stage of the disease is critical for prognosis, as stages 3 and 4 have a five year survival of
only 33.3% . Delayed recurrences of granulosa cell tumors a well known, though uncommon, has a median relapse time of 4–6 years with the
longest reported delayed recurrence being 37 years after the initial diagnosis . Further, though colonic adenocarcinoma is a common
neoplasm, its origin within a sigmoid diverticulum is uncommon and rare adding further complexity to this case in its overall clinical
presentation and evolution. Due to the infrequency of such lesions the biological behavior of colliding tumors is difficult to ascertain in
the context of which component will determine the final outcome in terms of disease free survival times. It is debatable whether such
outcomes are dependent on either the most predominant component of the collision and/or the more histologically aggressive component of the
collision tumor. Molecular genetic analysis may be of special importance for the diagnosis of collision tumors consisting of poorly
differentiated neoplasm's such as T cell lymphomas and anaplastic carcinoma when immunohistochemistry remains inconclusive. It is likely
such collision tumors are under diagnosed in the routine laboratory. Clinical awareness and recognition of such tumors are important as they
will dictate appropriate treatment strategies dependent on the individual biological aggressiveness of each of the tumor components. Our
report highlights the need for histopathologists, surgeons, and oncologists to be aware of the existence of such rare collisions tumors. As
seen in our case, the delayed recurrence of granulosa cell tumor of the ovary sixteen years after the initial presentation was the key
determining factor in tumor recurrence, tumor progression, and tumor metastasis within three months, which ultimately lead to accelerated
death within a year of clinical presentation. In conclusion, accurate identification and recognition of both components of the collision
neoplasm is important in guiding decisions regarding overall prognosis, adjuvant therapeutic options, and survival which may be dependent on
either of the components. The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. SK contributed the surgical aspects of the case, RK
contributed the pathological/immunohistochemical portions of the case and conceived of the study, MB conceived of the study, and
participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report.
