Mid-ventricular obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (MVOHCM) is a rare type of cardiomyopathy, associated with apical aneurysm formation
in some cases. We report a patient presenting with ventricular fibrillation, an ECG with an above normal ST segment, and elevated levels of
cardiac enzymes but normal coronary arteries. Left ventriculography revealed a left ventricular obstruction without apical aneurysm. There
was a significant pressure gradient between the apical and basal sites of the left ventricle. Cine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
performed on the 10th hospital day, showed asymmetric septal hypertrophy, mid-ventricular obstruction, and an apical aneurysm with a
thrombus. The first evaluation by contrast-enhanced imaging showed a subendocardial perfusion defect and delayed enhancement. It was
speculated that the intraventricular pressure gradient, due to mid-ventricular obstruction, triggered myocardial infarction, which
subsequently resulted in apical aneurysm formation. Mid-ventricular obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (MVOHCM) is a rare form of
cardiomyopathy, characterized by the presence of a pressure gradient between the left ventricular basal and apical chambers, as well as by
asymmetric left ventricular hypertrophy. MVOHCM is frequently associated with an apical aneurysm,1-7 but the mechanism of aneurysm formation
remains unknown. We describe a patient with MVOHCM in whom the apical aneurysm developed rapidly after an episode of acute myocardial
ischemia. A 58-year-old man presented with ventricular fibrillation. There was no family history of cardiomyopathy or sudden death. After
successful defibrillation, his blood pressure was 106/60mmHg, and his pulse rate was 80beats/min. A 12-lead ECG showed ST-segment elevations
in leads V3-V6 but no Q waves. Chest X-ray showed no cardiomegaly or pulmonary congestion. Laboratory examination revealed a mild increase
in creatine kinase-MB (38mIU/mL) and troponin T (0.3ng/mL) levels. With provisional diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction, coronary
angiography and left ventriculography were performed. Coronary angiography yielded normal results (Fig. 1A), but the left ventriculogram
showed severe left ventricular obstruction during systole with no aneurysmal bulging in the apical segment (Fig. 1B). There was a
significant pressure gradient (45mmHg) between the basal and apical sites of the left ventricle at rest (Fig. 2). Using continuous wave
Doppler echocardiography, the pressure gradient was measured as 60mmHg. The patient had been diagnosed as having MVOHCM, and medical
treatment with a beta blocker and amiodarone was started. ECG-gated, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed on the 10th hospital
day, using an Intera Achieva (1.5 T, Philips Medical Systems, Best, Netherlands). Cine MRI showed mid-ventricular obstruction and an apical
aneurysm with a large thrombus on long-axis (Fig. 3A) and 4-chamber (Fig. 3B) images. Initial gadolinium-diethylenetriomine pentaacetic
acid-enhanced imaging showed reduced subendomyocardial perfusion in the mid-ventricular portion of the left ventricle (Fig. 3C). Fifteen
minutes later, delayed enhancement of the subendomyocardium was noted (Fig. 3D). Because medical treatment with a beta blocker (carvedilol)
did not reduce the intraventricular pressure gradient determined by continuous wave Doppler echocardiography, the patient underwent surgery
in which left ventricular aneurysmectomy and removal of the thrombus were performed. The patient received a beta-blocker postoperatively,
and the 8-week follow-up period was uneventful. MVOHCM is a rare form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, characterized by the presence of a
pressure gradient between the apical and basal chambers of the left ventricle. It is frequently associated with an apical aneurysm without
significant atherosclerotic coronary artery disease.1-7 The mechanisms responsible for apical aneurysm formation are not well understood.
Major causes of aneurysm formation that have been proposed are increased afterload and high apical pressure, resulting from mid-ventricular
obstruction, which lead to compression of the intramyocardial coronary arteries and/or greater oxygen demand due to increased myocardial
thickness and decreased oxygen supply due to the decreased capillary network.7 In addition, the apex is subject to greater and sustained
systolic stress due to the high pressure gradient. In two cases, Maron et al. discovered extremely high pressure in the apex (260mmHg and
225mmHg)8. However, in the present case, the peak systolic pressure in the apex was 135mmHg, which might not be sufficient to cause
aneurysmal bulging. Furthermore, apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may show a myocardial perfusion defect in the apex on stress images even
in the absence of epicardial coronary artery obstruction, suggesting decreased coronary flow reserve in the hypertrophic apical segment.9
One limitation of our report is that we do not have evidence of apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in our patient prior to the acute
ischemic event. The process of aneurysm formation has been believed to occur over a long period of time due to predisposing ischemic
episodes resulting from a chronic increase of systolic wall stress.7,10,11 However, the present case involved rapid aneurysm development
within 10 days after the acute ischemic episode. A left ventriculogram showed no aneurysm, and the increase in cardiac enzyme levels was
mild in the acute phase, whereas MRI performed after 10 days revealed extensive myocardial necrosis at the site of the apical aneurysm.
Thus, it was hypothesized that the initially small infarction arose in the apex as a result of compression of intramyocardial coronary
arteries and/or oxygen supply-demand imbalance and expanded rapidly because of the further increase in systolic wall stress due to the
sustained pressure gradient. Management of MVOHCM is obscure because it may result in life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias4 and sudden
death.5 Generally, beta blockers are the first choice of treatment for patients with subaortic obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,12
but the optimal treatment for MVOHCM has not yet been established. Dual-chamber pacing13,14 and percutaneous myocardial ablation6,15 have
been proposed as non-surgical treatments, but their long-term prognosis and procedural safety await further observation with a large patient
population. In conclusion, our case demonstrated that apical aneurysm may develop rapidly after an episode of acute myocardial ischemia in
patients with MVOHCM. Acute increase in the intraventricular pressure gradient was thought to be the major cause of apical aneurysm
formation. (A) Coronary aniogram showing normal left (left panel) and right (right panel) coronary arteries. (B) Left ventriculogram in the
30Â° right anterior oblique projection, showing a small left ventricular cavity during diastole (left panel) and complete obstruction of the
apical site during systole (right panel). Left ventricular pressure in the apex (upper panel) and in the base (lower panel), showing a
pressure gradient of 45mmHg ECG-gated, cine magnetic resonance imaging of the long axis (A) and 4-chamber view (B), showing mid-ventricular
obstruction during systole (large arrows) (lower panels), an apical aneurysm (small arrows), and a thrombus (Th, upper panels) during
diastole. Contrast-enhanced first-pass myocardial perfusion (C) and delayed enhancement (D) images, showing a subendomyocardial perfusion
defect (arrows) and delayed enhancement (arrows), respectively.
