Early gastric cancers with duodenal invasion are rare, and no previous case of multiple early gastric cancer, one invading the duodenal
bulb, has been reported. A 79-year-old woman was investigated for upper abdominal discomfort. Endoscopic examination revealed an irregular
nodulated lesion in the antrum area, and a reddish aggregated-type semi-circumferential nodulated lesion extending from the prepyloric area
to the duodenal bulb through the normal mucosa with the antrum lesion. Biopsy revealed a tubular adenoma for the antrum lesion and a well-
differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma for the prepyloric lesion. Distal gastrectomy with sufficient duodenal resection was performed.
Microscopically, the antrum lesion appeared as a papillary adenocarcinoma, and the prepyloric lesion as a mainly papillary adenocarcinoma
which partially invaded the submucosa without any sequential elongation for endoscopic findings. The lesion extended into the duodenal bulb,
and was 12 mm in length from the oral end of Brunner's gland's area and limited within the duodenal mucosa. Here, we present an unusual case
of multiple early gastric cancer, one of which invaded the duodenum with relative wide mucosal spreading. This case illustrates that even
early stage cancers located in the gastric antrum, particularly in the prepyloric area can invade the duodenum directly. Advanced gastric
cancer of the antrum occasionally invades the duodenum beyond the pyloric ring. These cases are reported to have a poor prognosis . However,
early gastric cancers with duodenal invasion are rare, with an incidence ranging from 0.5% to 1.8% of all gastric cancer cases . In this
report, we describe a patient with two early gastric cancers, one of which invaded the duodenal bulb, and discuss the clinicopathological
features of early gastric cancer cases with duodenal invasion. A 79-year-old Japanese woman complained of upper abdominal discomfort during
postoperative follow-up for breast cancer in March 2005. She had no remarkable past history other than breast cancer and her relatives have
not been suffered no malignant diseases. On physical findings, her temperature was 36.6°C, and there was no palpable abdominal mass. No sign
of lymphadenopathy was found. Initial laboratory testing revealed no abnormalities other than a high serum concentration of CA19-9 (42.4
U/ml; normal, <37 U/ml) (Table 1). Endoscopic examination revealed an irregular nodulated lesion in the antrum area (Figure 1a), and a
reddish aggregated-type semi-circumferential nodulated lesion extending from the prepyloric area to the duodenal bulb through the normal
mucosa with the antrum lesion (Figure 1b). The biopsy specimens revealed a tubular adenoma from the antrum lesion and a well-differentiated
tubular adenocarcinoma from the prepyloric lesion. A double-contrast picture showed an irregular nodulated lesion extending from the
prepyloric area to the duodenal bulb; however, no hardening of the gastric wall was detected on barium study (Figure 2). Metastatic workup
was negative. Distal gastrectomy with sufficient distal surgical margin, 30 mm from pyloric ring, and lymph node dissection (D2) was
performed in April 2005. We adopted Roux-en Y reconstruction which is capable of cancer free anastomosis even if duodenal resection reached
broad. The intraoperative distal surgical margin was negative. Macroscopically, the resected specimen showed two independent polypoid
lesions, an oral-side lesion of 70 × 40 mm located in the antrum area extending superficially and an anal-side semi-circumferential lesion
of 70 × 25 mm located mainly in the prepyloric area and duodenal bulb beyond the pyloric ring. The intervening mucosa between the two
lesions was normal (Figure 3ab). a, b. Endoscopic examination showed an irregular nodulated lesion in the antrum area (a) and a reddish
aggregated-type semi-circumferential nodulated lesion extending from the prepyloric area to duodenal bulb through the normal mucosa with the
former lesion (arrowheads show the p-ring) (b). The double-contrast picture showed an irregular nodulated lesion from the prepyloric area to
the duodenal bulb (arrowheads show extension to the duodenal bulb. arrows show the p-ring) a, b. Microscopically, the resected specimen
showed two independent irregular nodulated lesions. The oral-side lesion extending superficially, is located in the antrum area and is 70 ×
40 mm (a). The anal-side semi-circumferential lesion is 70 × 25 mm and located mainly in the prepyloric area and duodenal bulb beyond the
pyloric ring (b). Laboratory data on admission The resected specimen was examined histologically to determine the depth and mode of
invasion, metastasis to lymph nodes, histologic type, and invasion to the duodenum according to the general rules established by the
Japanese Gastric Cancer Association . Microscopically, the antrum lesion showed a papillary adenocarcinoma with high-grade atypia limited
within the gastric mucosa without vessel invasion (Figure 4a). The prepyloric lesion showed a mainly papillary adenocarcinoma mixed with
tubular and villous formations which partially invaded the submucosa without vessel invasion (Figure 4b). The cancerous lesion extended into
the duodenal bulb, and was 12 mm in length from the oral end of Brunner's gland's area, and limited within the duodenal mucosa. This lesion
showed an identical histology to the prepyloric part (Figure 4c). The two lesions were classified as intestinal type and separated by at
least 20 mm of intervening normal mucosa. The back ground mucosa of these lesions was mild atrophic gastritis and intestinal metaplasia.
Helicobacter pylori infection was detected by histological findings. The distal margin of the surgical specimen, 4 mm in length, was
negative. A schematic representation of the resected specimen is shown in Figure 5. No dissected lymph nodes showed metastasis. We finally
diagnosed the lesions as two early gastric cancers, as follows. Antrum lesion: L, pap, type 0 I, pT1(M), ly0, v0, pPM(-), pDM(-), pN0, sH0,
sP0, sM0, CY0; and prepyloric lesion: LD, pap, type 0 I, pT1(SM), ly0, v0, pPM(-), pDM(-), pN0, sH0, sP0, sM0, CY0, stage IA. The
postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged 38 days after admission. No recurrence or metastasis has been detected
during three years of follow-up after the operation. a-c. Microscopically, the antrum lesion showed a well-differentiated papillary
adenocarcinoma limited within the gastric mucosa (HE stain. × 10) (a). The prepyloric lesion showed a mainly well-differentiated papillary
adenocarcinoma partially invading the submucosa (HE stain. × 20) (b). The lesion extending into the duodenal bulb was limited within the
duodenal mucosa and showed an identical histology to the prepyloric part (HE stain. × 10). The arrow shows the beginning of Brunner's glands
(c). Schematic representation of the resected specimen. Horizontal lines show adenoma components of each tumor. Vertical lines show
submucosal invasion of the prepyloric lesion, while dotted lines show the pyloric ring. Here, we present an unusual case of multiple early
gastric cancer, one of which invaded the duodenum with relative wide mucosal spreading. Although advanced gastric cancer with duodenal
invasion is widely reported, cases of early gastric cancer with duodenal invasion are rare, with an incidence ranging from 0.5% to 1.8% of
all gastric cancer cases . 34 cases of early gastric cancer with duodenal invasion have been reported previously, to our knowledge, no case
of multiple early gastric cancer has been reported (Table 2). Multiple gastric cancer is defined generally by Moertel's criteria . Moertel
reported the incidence of multiple gastric cancer is 2.1%. Recently, the incidence is increasing up to 6% approximately with an improvement
of diagnostic technique . Reported cases early gastric cancer with duodenal invasion Clinically, definition of the border between the
stomach and the duodenum is contentious. Although the pyloric ring is composed of gastric tissue macroscopically, Brunner's glands are
present beginning in the mucosa over the pyloric ring. Clinicopathological studies of duodenal invasion suggest the duodenum starts at the
point where Brunner's glands first occur . The pyloric ring is the contact point between two different types of mucosa; hence, Brunner's
glands seem to act as a protective barrier against cancer invasion . Another report showed that the presence of extremely dense connective
fibers in the subepithelial proper mucosal layer can prevent the direct extension of mucosal carcinoma into the duodenum . These theories
are thought to explain the rarity of early gastric cancer with duodenal invasion, at least in part . However, the increasing number of such
cases attests to the ability of it gastric cancer cells can to directly invade the duodenum in the mucosal layer . Our case also showed
direct mucosal invasion into the duodenum. Preoperative diagnosis of early gastric cancer with duodenal invasion is difficult. Nakayama et
al. reviewed 24 cases in Japan and found that duodenal invasion was preoperatively detectable in only four, all of which were well-
differentiated and of the elevated type. The microscopic extension of cancer cells in poorly-differentiated cases is often infiltrative and
broader than the macroscopic extension, hampering the detection of duodenal invasion of poorly differentiated early gastric cancer,
particularly for small lesions. Regarding the length of duodenal invasion, most early gastric cancer cases reported to date have shown
invasion of less than 10 mm . This is another reason for the difficulty of detecting duodenal invasion preoperatively. In our case, however,
invasion extended 12 mm into the duodenum from the beginning point of Brunner's glands. Uchida et al. reported that papillary-type gastric
cancer cells have a high affinity for the duodenal mucosa and that papillary-type gastric adenocarcinoma occasionally shows transient
formation in the duodenal mucosa. These findings may help explain the broad duodenal invasion of over 10 mm in our case. Besides, most cases
of early gastric cancer with duodenal invasion is limited to the mucosal layer of the duodenum, only 2 cases with submucosal invasion into
the duodenum have been reported previously (Table 2). The cases of submucosal invasion into the duodenum do not always show the longer
invasion into duodenum compared with mucosal invasion cases. This finding indicates that, as in the reported advanced cases with duodenal
invasion, the depth of duodenal invasion does not independently affect the length of duodenal invasion . Therefore, these imply us that, it
is difficult to anticipate the extent of duodenal invasion, pre and intra operative close observation for duodenal invasion is indispensable
to keep the distal surgical margin negative with sufficient duodenal resection. Koufuji et al. reported four cases of early gastric cancer
with duodenal invasion which showed lymph node metastasis. All the four cases showed just one regional lymph node metastasis. Three of four
cases metastasize to No. 6 and one case to No. 12 lymph node. Nevertheless, the small number of reported cases has prevented any clear
understanding of whether early gastric cancer with duodenal invasion has a higher incidence of lymph node metastasis than that without
duodenal invasion. Although the reported incidence of lymph node metastasis from early gastric cancer with submucosal invasion is
approximately 20%, our present case showed no metastasis . A greater number of cases should help clarify the clinicopathological findings of
early gastric cancer with duodenal invasion. The present case emphasizes that even early stage cancers located in the gastric antrum,
particularly in the prepyloric area can invade the duodenum directly. The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. AM, YS,
TO, JS and MF carried out the surgical procedures. SK and TT revised and finally approved the manuscript for been published. All authors
read approved the final version of the manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of the case
report.
