Laryngoplasty is well-known technique for unilateral vocal fold paralysis (UVFP). However, operation result are sometimes not as good as
expected before surgery. Three-dimensional Computed tomography (3DCT) is useful for visualizing complicated intralaryngeal structures.
Moreover, 3DCT is suited for analyzing the movement of the vocal fold and arytenoid cartilage because the technique is based on actual data
from live patients. We have been used 3DCT of the Larynx for evaluation of UVFP before and after treatment. We uncovered some new findings
about UVFP and reasons of unsatisfactory outcomes after operation. Technique and clinical applications of 3DCT for UVFP are outlined in this
paper. The movement of the arytenoid cartilage is complicated [1, 2]. Three-dimensional computed tomography (3DCT) is useful for visualizing
the location of the arytenoid cartilage. However, complete understanding of the laryngeal anatomy is necessarily to reconstruct the
cartilages in three dimensions. In our institution, an otolaryngologist who specializes in the larynx utilizes 3DCT reconstruction. The use
of Windows® XP-compatible image-processing software enables various analyses in unilateral vocal fold paralysis. This study reports the
clinical application of 3DCT in the laryngeal region using the image-processing software Mimics (Materialise, Yokohama, Japan). Computed
tomography was performed in the horizontal plane using a CT scanner (Sensation Cardiac 64; Siemens, Munich, Germany) with a 1 mm slice
width, a helical pitch of 1, and an image production interval of 0.5 mm. Several other studies have used slice widths of around 1 mm . Scans
were made when the glottis was closed (with phonation) and open. Each patient was scanned for about 2 s. The speed of the scan enables
scanning of patients with unilateral vocal fold paralysis during a brief phonation and minimizes motion artifact. Before scanning, doctors
(the authors) were consulting the patient about the timing between phonation and the scan. The data were transferred using the Dicom system.
Mimics ver. 9.01 (Materialise) was used to create 3DCT images through its surface-rendering protocols. Using Windows® XP (Microsoft®,
Redmond, WA, USA), 3DCT images can be shown in axial, coronal, sagittal, and 3D display windows (Fig. 1). Fig. 1Actual view seen with the
Mimics image-processing software. Using Windows® XP (Microsoft®), 3DCT images can be created with axial, coronal, sagittal, and 3D display
windows. The use of Windows XP-compatible image-processing software enables various analyses in unilateral vocal fold paralysis Actual view
seen with the Mimics image-processing software. Using Windows® XP (Microsoft®), 3DCT images can be created with axial, coronal, sagittal,
and 3D display windows. The use of Windows XP-compatible image-processing software enables various analyses in unilateral vocal fold
paralysis The threshold was set from 69 to 85 HU for the thyroid and cricoid cartilages and 52 to 69 HU for the arytenoid cartilage.
Visualization of the vocal process is usually limited to its base because of its elastic cartilage. In addition, the laryngeal lumen was
visualized. The threshold was set between −600 and −100 HU . First, we present a case of severe unilateral vocal fold paralysis with a mean
flow rate (MFR) of 1,200 ml/s (Fig. 2). The patient was an 80-year-old man suffering from paralysis following aortic aneurysm surgery.
Fig. 2The locations of the arytenoids in severe unilateral vocal fold paralysis. During inspiration, the healthy side (yellow) was located
in the lateral part of the cricoarytenoid joint, while the paralyzed side (red) was located in the dorsocranial part of the cricoarytenoid
joint. During phonation, the healthy side rocked and moved to the ventromediocaudal part of the cricoarytenoid joint, while the paralyzed
side glided dorsocranially. This movement is a passive movement The locations of the arytenoids in severe unilateral vocal fold paralysis.
During inspiration, the healthy side (yellow) was located in the lateral part of the cricoarytenoid joint, while the paralyzed side (red)
was located in the dorsocranial part of the cricoarytenoid joint. During phonation, the healthy side rocked and moved to the
ventromediocaudal part of the cricoarytenoid joint, while the paralyzed side glided dorsocranially. This movement is a passive movement
During inspiration, the arytenoid cartilage on the healthy side was located in the lateral part of the cricoarytenoid joint. Simultaneously,
the vocal process was located outside and above the joint. In comparison, the arytenoid cartilage on the paralyzed side was located in the
dorsocranial part of the cricoarytenoid joint, while the paralyzed vocal process was located inferiorly and the arytenoid cartilage dropped
forward. This position on the paralyzed side was the result of posterior cricoarytenoid muscle paralysis. During phonation, the healthy side
rocked and moved to the ventromediocaudal part of the cricoarytenoid joint to adduct the vocal cord, and the vocal process moved inward and
downward. Conversely, the paralyzed side glided dorsocranially in comparison with its position during inspiration. Therefore, the arytenoid
cartilage showed a rocking movement on the healthy side, and a gliding movement on the paralyzed side. This gliding movement on the
paralyzed side was a passive movement. the paralyzed arytenoid underwent passive movement caused by contact with the mobile side during
phonation. The vocal fold blown up may affect this passive movement. We call such arytenoids “flaccid arytenoids.” The position of the
paralyzed arytenoid depends on the severity of paralysis. This section describes type I thyroplasty. It is important to determine the level
of the vocal folds in this procedure. Note that the arytenoid cartilage on the paralyzed side glides dorsocranially, as mentioned above. The
paralyzed vocal fold becomes higher than the vocal fold on the healthy side during phonation. The type I thyroplasty window should be based
on the vocal cord level on the healthy side during phonation. Therefore, the vocal fold level of the healthy side must be projected onto the
thyroid cartilage of the paralyzed side. Figure 3 compares the upper surface of the vocal fold between our 3DCT simulation and the original
type I procedure reported by Isshiki et al. . The figure shows that the upper surface level of the vocal fold in the original procedure is
consistent with the vocal fold level on the paralyzed side detected by 3DCT. This might have arisen because the upper surface level of the
vocal cord in the original procedure was based on cadaveric studies of the larynx. However, the vocal process on the healthy side during
phonation is lower than that on the paralyzed side. Therefore, the design should be made consistent with the healthy side. Individualized
simulation for each case is needed because of the shape difference between left and right laminas of the thyroid cartilage (especially the
laryngeal deviation) [9, 10]. The program Mimics allows distances to be measured on a personal computer; for example, the distances from the
inferior notch or inferior nodule to the surface of the vocal fold may be measured. The 3DCT could contribute to a better oriented and
designed thyroplasty window. Fig. 3A comparison of the upper surface of the vocal fold between the 3DCT simulation (red dotted line) and the
original type I procedure reported by Isshiki (black dotted line). The figure shows a 3D image processed to make the thyroid cartilage more
radiolucent, allowing the healthy vocal fold to be visualized. The upper surface level of the vocal fold with the original procedure is
consistent with the vocal fold level of the paralyzed side detected by 3DCT. However, the vocal process of the healthy side during phonation
is located below than that of the paralyzed side A comparison of the upper surface of the vocal fold between the 3DCT simulation (red dotted
line) and the original type I procedure reported by Isshiki (black dotted line). The figure shows a 3D image processed to make the thyroid
cartilage more radiolucent, allowing the healthy vocal fold to be visualized. The upper surface level of the vocal fold with the original
procedure is consistent with the vocal fold level of the paralyzed side detected by 3DCT. However, the vocal process of the healthy side
during phonation is located below than that of the paralyzed side A 69-year-old woman underwent arytenoid adduction for right recurrent
nerve paralysis after thyroid carcinoma surgery. According to the postoperative 3DCT images (Fig. 4), the vocal process adducted to the
appropriate position. However, a large glottal chink was observed during phonation. In this case, the cricothyroid joint was released, and a
thread placed on the muscular process was fixed to the anterior part of the thyroid cartilage. Since the cricothyroid joint was released,
the cricoid cartilage (arytenoid cartilage) and thyroid cartilage were close together, which shortened the anteroposterior diameter of the
vocal fold. The vocal fold relaxed and lost its tension. Fig. 4Case 1: A 69-year-old woman underwent arytenoid adduction for right recurrent
nerve paralysis after thyroid carcinoma surgery. a In the postoperative 3DCT images, the vocal process appears to adduct to the appropriate
position. b A large glottal chink is observed during phonation. c Since the cricothyroid joint is released, the cricoid (arytenoid
cartilage) and thyroid cartilages are close together. d The anteroposterior diameter of the vocal fold (double-headed arrow) is shortened.
The vocal fold relaxes and loses its tension Case 1: A 69-year-old woman underwent arytenoid adduction for right recurrent nerve paralysis
after thyroid carcinoma surgery. a In the postoperative 3DCT images, the vocal process appears to adduct to the appropriate position. b A
large glottal chink is observed during phonation. c Since the cricothyroid joint is released, the cricoid (arytenoid cartilage) and thyroid
cartilages are close together. d The anteroposterior diameter of the vocal fold (double-headed arrow) is shortened. The vocal fold relaxes
and loses its tension A 64-year-old man underwent type I thyroplasty for left recurrent nerve paralysis after esophageal cancer surgery
(Fig. 5). This patient had relatively severe paralysis, but still underwent a type I thyroplasty only. The postoperative 3DCT image shows
that the Gore-Tex® is inserted at the proper level of the vocal fold. However, the posterior parts of the vocal fold were at different
levels because the flaccid paralyzed arytenoid cartilage was blown toward the dorsocranial part of the cricoarytenoid joint, as mentioned
above. The MFR was improved from 770 ml/s preoperatively to 290 ml/s postoperatively. If the posterior support of the vocal fold had been
fixed, the vocal fold would have developed tension against the flow of expired air during phonation, further improving the voice. Fig. 5Case
2: A 64-year-old man underwent type I thyroplasty for left recurrent nerve paralysis after esophageal cancer surgery. a The postoperative
3DCT image shows that the Gore-Tex® was inserted at the proper level of the vocal fold. b A level difference is seen in the posterior part
of the vocal fold because the flaccid paralyzed arytenoid cartilage was blown toward the dorsocranial part of the cricoarytenoid joint
during phonation Case 2: A 64-year-old man underwent type I thyroplasty for left recurrent nerve paralysis after esophageal cancer surgery.
a The postoperative 3DCT image shows that the Gore-Tex® was inserted at the proper level of the vocal fold. b A level difference is seen in
the posterior part of the vocal fold because the flaccid paralyzed arytenoid cartilage was blown toward the dorsocranial part of the
cricoarytenoid joint during phonation A 70-year-old man was given a silicon injection 20 years earlier to treat left recurrent nerve
paralysis after thoracic aortic aneurysm surgery (Fig. 6). The MFR was 650 ml/s, which improved insufficiently. The 3DCT showed that the
silicon was injected widely from the anterior to posterior parts of the vocal fold. Silicon is also injected near the arytenoid cartilage.
It was thought that the original surgeon had intended to adduct the arytenoid cartilage. However, the arytenoid cartilage glides
dorsocranially, increasing the vertical difference in the level of the posterior part of the vocal fold. The vocal process was not adducted
and the upper part of the arytenoid cartilage moved medially in an unnatural manner. As described earlier, during phonation, the arytenoid
cartilage on the healthy side moves by rocking to the ventromediocaudal part of the cricoarytenoid joint, and the vocal process is moved
inward. Arytenoid adduction [10, 11] is a procedure that resolves the level difference between the two vocal fold by reproducing the rocking
motion of the paralyzed arytenoid cartilage. In contrast, injection and type I surgery are techniques to medialize the vocal fold by
increasing its volume. An injection near the arytenoid cartilage moves the arytenoids to a dorsocranial position, and they never adduct
naturally. If arytenoid adduction is scheduled after these techniques, the injected materials could interfere with the second procedure. The
effect of the injection on posterior vocal fold closure arises mainly from the increased volume in the posterior part of the vocal fold.
Fig. 6Case 3: A 70-year-old man underwent a silicon injection 20 years earlier to treat left recurrent nerve paralysis after thoracic aortic
aneurysm surgery. a The 3DCT shows that the silicon is injected widely from the anterior to posterior parts of the vocal fold. b Silicon is
also injected near the arytenoid cartilage. The arytenoid cartilage glides dorsocranially; the vocal process is not adducted and the upper
part of the arytenoid cartilage is unnaturally shifted medially. The vertical difference in the level of the posterior part of the vocal
fold increased. c The effect of the injection on posterior vocal fold closure is thought to be due mainly to the volume increase in the
posterior part of the vocal fold Case 3: A 70-year-old man underwent a silicon injection 20 years earlier to treat left recurrent nerve
paralysis after thoracic aortic aneurysm surgery. a The 3DCT shows that the silicon is injected widely from the anterior to posterior parts
of the vocal fold. b Silicon is also injected near the arytenoid cartilage. The arytenoid cartilage glides dorsocranially; the vocal process
is not adducted and the upper part of the arytenoid cartilage is unnaturally shifted medially. The vertical difference in the level of the
posterior part of the vocal fold increased. c The effect of the injection on posterior vocal fold closure is thought to be due mainly to the
volume increase in the posterior part of the vocal fold A 77-year-old man received a fat injection for left recurrent nerve paralysis after
esophageal cancer surgery. Three years after the fat injection, the maximum phonation time improved from 3 s before the injection to 7 s
after the injection. The 3DCT image indicates that the vocal cord closure was sufficient (Fig. 7a). In the lateral view, remaining fat is
seen 3 years after the injection and it appears to be pushing the entire vocal fold (Fig. 7b). However, the coronal section CT image
revealed that the level difference of the two vocal folds had not improved. The vocal folds overlapped so that the incomplete closure was
resolved (Fig. 7c). Fat, unlike silicon, may not interfere with the vocal fold vibration of the healthy side, even if the vocal cords
overlap, because fat is soft. Fig. 7Case 4: A 77-year-old man underwent fat injection for left recurrent nerve paralysis after esophageal
cancer surgery. a The 3DCT (CT endoscopic image) suggests that the vocal cord closure is sufficient. b The lateral view shows fat remaining
3 years after the injection, which seems to be pushing the entire vocal fold. c The coronal view revealed that the difference in the levels
of the vocal fold had not improved Case 4: A 77-year-old man underwent fat injection for left recurrent nerve paralysis after esophageal
cancer surgery. a The 3DCT (CT endoscopic image) suggests that the vocal cord closure is sufficient. b The lateral view shows fat remaining
3 years after the injection, which seems to be pushing the entire vocal fold. c The coronal view revealed that the difference in the levels
of the vocal fold had not improved Laryngeal 3DCT is useful for determining the stereoscopic configuration of the arytenoid cartilage. In
addition, 3DCT enables observation of the laryngeal framework from every angle, and is also useful for surgical simulation and feedback
after surgery.
