Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) has been shown to be caused by germline mutations in the gene CDH1 located at 16q22.1, which
encodes the cell–cell adhesion molecule, E-cadherin. Not only does loss of expression of E-cadherin account for the morphologic differences
between intestinal and diffuse gastric cancer (DGC) variants, but it also appears to lead to distinct cellular features which appear to be
common amongst related cancers that have been seen in the syndrome. As in most hereditary cancer syndromes, multiple organ sites may be
commonly affected by cancer, in HDGC, lobular carcinoma of the breast (LBC) and possibly other organ sites have been shown to be associated
with the familial cancer syndrome. Given the complexity of HDGC, not only with regard to the management of the DGC risk, but also with
regard to the risk for other related cancers, such as LBC, a multi-disciplinary approach is needed for the management of individuals with
known CDH1 mutations. Despite an overall decrease in the global incidence of gastric cancer (GC) , the incidence of the subtype, diffuse
gastric cancer (DGC) has remained stable and may even be increasing . Within the past ten years, germline mutations in CDH1, which encodes
E-cadherin, have been found in over 50% of hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) families with at least two cases of GC, with one
diagnosed as DGC before the age of 50 years . Within these HDGC families, we and others have noted an overrepresentation of lobular breast
cancer (LBC) . This observation has led to efforts to determine whether or not CDH1 is a breast cancer susceptibility gene, distinct from
its gastric cancer risk. Recently our group has reported a novel germline CDH1 truncating mutation (517insA) in an LBC family with no known
history of GC . Within this review we report a germline CDH1 mutation in a second family in which breast cancer is the predominant cancer
diagnosis. The management of HDGC in all patients with a particular focus on the management of the breast cancer risk associated with
germline CDH1 mutations will be discussed. The described family was referred to the ongoing HDGC study at the British Columbia Cancer Agency
from a cancer genetics clinic in Seattle, WA, USA. Informed consent was obtained from the proband by the referring genetic counselor
following ascertainment of a detailed cancer family history and appropriate genetic counseling prior to germline mutation testing. Our
laboratory carried out the molecular genetic testing for the CDH1 mutation on a research basis. Approval for the HDGC study is by the
clinical research ethics board of the University of British Columbia. The proband (IV-4) was diagnosed with widely metastatic lobular breast
cancer at age 53 years (Fig. 1a). Her family, of European ancestry, had a history of breast cancer diagnoses occurring in an autosomal
dominant fashion on the maternal side of the family where her mother, aunt, and first cousin developed breast cancer in their 50’s. Due to
her high-risk pedigree BRCA1, BRCA2, and PTEN genetic testing was undertaken and all were negative. CDH1 testing was also pursued. Fig. 1(a)
Pedigree of family reported showing a predominance of breast cancer. (b) Sequence from family carrying 1565 + 1G→A mutation (a) Pedigree of
family reported showing a predominance of breast cancer. (b) Sequence from family carrying 1565 + 1G→A mutation All 16 exons were amplified
for DHPLC analysis . For exon 10 of CDH1, the initial amplicon failed and was therefore analyzed by direct sequencing and thus revealed a
donor splice site mutation, 1565 + 1G > A (Fig. 1b). Due to its position at a donor splice site, this mutation is regarded as pathogenic .
The proband’s sisters (IV-2 and IV-6) participated in all aspects of the proband’s genetic consultation. They were appropriately concerned
about their risk of breast cancer, but had not thought much about the possibility of getting gastric cancer until the CDH1 mutation was
found. IV-2 and IV-6 had predictive genetic testing for the CDH1 mutation testing and both were found to be negative. Other family members
are being informed about the availability of predictive genetic testing. CDH1 (OMIM *192090), located on chromosome 16q22.1 encodes,
E-cadherin, an epithelial transmembrane cell–cell adhesion molecule and member of the cadherin superfamily of glycoproteins. In a zipper-
like fashion, its extracellular domain forms calcium-dependent homodimers between the E-cadherin molecules of adjacent epithelial cells, to
act as the primary mediator of epithelial cell adhesion at the adherens junction complex . Through interactions of its cytoplasmic tail with
multiple signalling and structural molecules, such as the catenins, E-cadherin, maintains cellular adhesion and epithelial architecture with
this link to the cytoskeleton. The cytoplasmic tail of E-cadherin directly associates with β-catenin and γ-catenin which in turn binds to
the f-actin microfilaments of the cytoskeleton, directly or through α-catenin . p120-catenin also associates with E-cadherin’s cytoplasmic
tail at a different site, the juxtamembrane domain, and acts to both strengthen the adhesion between cells and regulate cadherin membrane
trafficking and degradation [13, 14]. E-cadherin is considered to have an invasion suppressor role, where decreased expression permits cells
to dissociate from each other in order to migrate and invade . In cancers, this manifests as increased infiltrative and metastatic potential
. E-cadherin is also thought to act as a tumour suppressor, potentially through its interaction with the multipurpose β -catenin molecule
which is an effector of the WNT signalling pathway . Loss of E-cadherin can result in β-catenin release from the membrane and translocation
to the nucleus where it complexes with Tcf/Lef-1 transcription factors to initiate transcription of WNT responsive genes . Activation of
these genes have been implicated in tumourigenesis through the WNT signalling pathway as seen in adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) . In
support of the role of E-cadherin as a tumour suppressor is the observation of abnormal or absent E-cadherin expression in precursor lesions
of DGC and LBC, where the phenomenon is seen in in situ signet ring cell carcinomas found in prophylactic gastrectomy specimens from
germline CDH1 mutation carriers and the lobular carcinoma in situ lesions seen adjacent to invasive lobular breast cancers . These examples
suggest that loss of E-cadherin is an early or even tumour-initiating event, however the actual molecular basis of such a potential role of
E-cadherin in such cases is unknown. Inactivating CDH1 mutations are found in 50% of sporadic DGCs [22, 23] and cluster between exons seven
and nine , in contrast with the low percentage of mutations seen in sporadic intestinal type GCs . Decreased expression of E-cadherin in
DGCs may account for morphologic differences between intestinal and DGC variants . Unlike somatic CDH1 mutations, germline mutations
associated with DGC are distributed throughout the gene (Fig. 2). In the cancers from individuals with CDH1 mutations, CDH1 acts as a
classic tumour suppressor gene with loss of expression of the wildtype allele [25, 26]. In a single study of 6 hereditary DGC cancers,
inactivation of the wild-type allele could be attributed to promoter hypermethylation in 5 (83%) of cases . This finding warrants
verification in a larger cohort as abnormal promoter methylation in early cancers could potentially form the basis of a screening test.
Fig. 2DGC and LBC associated CDH1 germline mutations. Mutations shown above CDH1 gene schematic occur in families with DGC history and those
below CDH1 occur in families with an additional or exclusive LBC history. In addition to the known CDH1 germline mutations compiled by
Kaurah et al. , the recent mutation in an LBC family and novel mutation from this paper are shown and identified below the symbol denoting
mutation type. * Denotes the halfway point of the CDH1 coding sequence (1324 or the start of exon 10) DGC and LBC associated CDH1 germline
mutations. Mutations shown above CDH1 gene schematic occur in families with DGC history and those below CDH1 occur in families with an
additional or exclusive LBC history. In addition to the known CDH1 germline mutations compiled by Kaurah et al. , the recent mutation in an
LBC family and novel mutation from this paper are shown and identified below the symbol denoting mutation type. * Denotes the halfway point
of the CDH1 coding sequence (1324 or the start of exon 10) Currently germline mutations in single genes account for approximately 5–10% of
breast cancer . High penetrance genes such as BRCA1 and 2 account for 3–8%, and TP53 and PTEN as seen in Li-Fraumeni and Cowden syndrome
together only account for <0.1% of breast cancer diagnoses . Other medium and low penetrance genes such as CHK2, BRIP1, PALB2 and ATM have
been identified, however, there still remains a proportion of hereditary breast cancer not yet determined. LBC accounts for approximately
10% of all breast cancers compared to the other major histologic subtype, invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) . Several factors suggest that LBC
has a stronger hereditary basis relative to IDC, such as the higher frequency of bilateral disease , and also where excess familiality of
LBC has been observed in population studies . LBCs compose only 3% and 9% of the breast cancer tumour types seen in germline BRCA 1 and 2
mutation carriers, respectively , illustrating that the genetic risk factors for the majority of cases are unaccounted for by these genes.
The histology of LBC is characterized by infiltrative cancer cells which are isolated, highly dispersive and demonstrate a growth pattern
with scattered and single files of tumor cells dispersed in stromal tissue . This pathologic appearance is remarkably similar to DGCs and
both LBC and DGC demonstrate characteristic mucinous, signet ring cells. This is not unexpected as E-cadherin staining is absent in 85% of
sporadic invasive LBC and somatic CDH1 mutations have been identified in 56% of sporadic LBCs . Furthermore, in IDC, somatic CDH1 mutations
are not found and complete loss of E-cadherin expression is an uncommon feature. As loss of E-cadherin expression is a distinctive trait of
both LBCs and DGCs, it likely contributes to the unique histopathologic features shared by the two cancers. There are some differences with
regard to the nature of the mutations seen in LBC and DGC. Generally mutations associated with sporadic LBC have been found to be nonsense
or frameshift mutations which encode truncated, non-functional proteins, whereas in sporadic DGC, mutations have generally been found to be
splice site and in-frame mutations . In sporadic LBC, mutations in CDH1 are spread throughout the gene compared with the mutations seen in
sporadic DGC which tend to cluster. Germline CDH1 mutations associated with DGC and/or LBC occur throughout the gene (Fig. 2). However, when
the DGC and LBC associated CDH1 mutations are tabulated and compared based on their 3′ or 5′ positions relative to the halfway point of the
CDH1 coding sequence (1324 or the start of exon 10), LBC associated mutations show a statistically significant trend towards clustering at
the 3′ end (Fisher’s exact test, two-tailed P-value equals 0.0467) (Fig. 2). As this association is of weak statistical significance, it is
unlikely to impact clinical testing strategies. Future analyses of novel germline LBC-associated CDH1 mutations should help to confirm this
observation. Another difference between the molecular genetics of the two types of cancers, is that in sporadic LBC, silencing of E-cadherin
expression is generally accomplished by a mutation in one allele in combination with loss of heterozygosity (LOH) or promoter
hypermethylation in the remaining allele . This is in contrast to sporadic DGC, where biallellic inactivation is achieved by mutations in
one allele in concert with promoter hypermethylation in the other . We have recently identified a truncating germline CDH1 mutation in an
LBC family where analysis of the tumour was suggestive of partial LOH in the WT allele . Our current case demonstrates a germline CDH1
mutation (1565 + 1G > A) in a predominantly breast cancer family, which is predicted to disrupt splicing. The mutation is in the same
conserved position as a previously reported mutation (1565 + 1G > T) which was found in an Arabian HDGC family with no recorded history of
breast cancer . Moreover, a previous study reported a germline missense mutation in a proband with LBC but did not detail family history, or
functionally characterize the missense mutation . These examples demonstrate the need for further studies of germline mutations in LBC
families in order to determine the mutation frequency and potential genotype-phenotype correlations. Breast cancer has been observed in HDGC
kindreds to the extent where clustering of LBCs within HDGC families has led to the misclassification of families as breast cancer kindreds
who test negative for BRCA1/2 mutations . In 1998, Keller described the first case of histologically defined LBC in association with HDGC .
Since then, several more HDGC families with associated breast cancer were reported where it was observed, that these cases were LBCs when
pathology was available [4, 6–8]. Prior to establishment of the association between HDGC and LBC, several efforts to determine whether CDH1
was a breast cancer susceptibility gene were attempted in view of the well-recognised phenotype of loss of E-cadherin expression displayed
by the breast cancer subtype. For various reasons these studies failed to demonstrate the link. Rahman et al. examined 65 cases of lobular
carcinoma in situ, however did not pre-screen the cases based on family history and included a wide age range, from 26 to 71 years, not
necessarily in keeping with the usual age of onset seen in hereditary cancer syndromes . Salashor examined 19 breast cancer tumours
exhibiting LOH at the CDH1 locus, however of those, only 3 were confirmed to be pure LBC or mixed LBC/IDC pathology . Lei examined 13
familial LBC cases and found no mutations, however did not define the extent of the family history . Penetrance data based on 11 HDGC
families, estimated the cumulative risk for LBC for female mutation carriers to be 39% (95% CI, 12–84%) by 80 years of age . More recently
we have published an estimated cumulative risk for breast cancer for females by the age of 75 years as being 52% (95% CI, 29–94%) from
analysis of 4 predominantly gastric cancer pedigrees from Newfoundland with the 2398delC CDH1 founder mutation . This is with the caveat
that LBC risk for CDH1 mutation carriers has been assessed within high risk HDGC families, leading to a potential ascertainment bias and
underestimation of the role of CDH1 mutations in LBC development. To accommodate for this we have begun analysis of CDH1 mutations within
familial lobular breast cancer families or those families ascertained through a relatively young index case with confirmed LBC and have
found germline CDH1 mutations in these kindreds . At this time, it seems reasonable to conclude that at least four groups of women are at
increased risk for LBC: women with LBC and a family history of breast cancer, women with a known CDH1 mutation, women from families with
diffuse gastric cancer in whom no CDH1 mutation has yet been identified; and women with a germline BRCA2 mutation. Since there has not yet
been a large population based study of the prevalence of CDH1 mutations among women with lobular breast cancer, it is premature to recommend
genetic evaluation to women with a family history of breast cancer unless, at the very least, one of the breast cancers can be shown to have
been lobular. Additional research can be expected to provide better guidance for these families. Although there are not yet definitive data
available on surveillance or risk reduction programs for women with known CDH1 mutations or untested women from CDH1-positive families, the
high lifetime risk of LBC (39–52%) [4, 47] that these women face mandates their careful management. We suggest that they follow the
recommendations for other high-risk women with hereditary breast cancer predisposition. This subgroup should be advised to practice breast
self-examination; and to have annual mammograms, and semiannual clinical breast examination, beginning at least by age 30. There is
certainly interest in regular bilateral breast MRI, as lobular breast cancer are known to frequently elude mammographic detection because
they do not form masses or develop calcifications. These women can also be counseled to consider hormonal chemoprevention, since most LBCs
are estrogen receptor positive , and both tamoxifen and raloxifene reduce the risk of estrogen receptor positive [48, 49] breast cancers in
randomized trials. In addition, the risk reduction was greatest with both agents in women with lobular carcinoma in situ . Prophylactic
mastectomy may also be considered an option by some CDH1-positive women, particularly those who have been previously diagnosed with breast
cancer in one breast or those who have had to undergo multiple biopsies for abnormal clinical findings. Several studies have reported a 90%
reduction in breast cancer incidence with prophylactic mastectomy among women with a strong family history or with a germline BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutation [51, 52]. The published series include some lobular breast cancers, but not at numbers sufficient to permit meaningful subset
analysis at this time. Penetrance studies examining data from HDGC families, have estimated the lifetime risk of developing gastric cancer
by age 75 and 80 respectively, to be from 40–67% in men, to 63–83% in women [4, 47]. Although identification of germline CDH1 mutations has
enabled a significant proportion of HDGC families to utilise predictive testing to determine their individual risks of GC within CDH1
mutation positive pedigrees, unfortunately screening for DGC is ineffective and the current recommendation is for consideration of
prophylactic gastrectomy in mutation positive individuals. Positron emission tomography and chromoendoscopic-directed biopsies have been
proposed over basic endoscopy as more sensitive means of screening carriers, however screening methods have been consistently undermined by
the recurrent discovery of multifocal DGC lesions underlying normal mucosa in prophylactic gastrectomy specimens of individuals with recent
negative screening [4, 55, 56]. Regardless of the current limitations of screening, it is currently recommended that consideration for
genetic testing and screening begin in at risk individuals in the late teens or early twenties and that prophylactic total gastrectomy be
considered in the early twenties for mutation carriers. Female mutation carriers will need specialized counseling to the potential
nutritional effects on pregnancy following gastrectomy . Further studies are currently underway to examine the quality of life impact of
prophylactic gastrectomies. In the case report herein, although there was a GC in the maternal grandfather, the family history was more
striking for the large number of breast cancer cases. This highlights the particular challenges we currently face with regard to counseling
these families which appear to be mainly breast cancer, as it is unknown if the penetrance of DGC in this family is as high as it is in
other HDGC pedigrees. HDGC is one of a number of hereditary cancer syndromes that feature both an increased breast and gastric cancer risk
(Table 1). In general, a lack of shared genetic risks for most breast and GI cancers was suggested through a recent study of 13,023 genes in
11 breast and 11 colon cancer cell lines in which the only commonly mutated gene between these two cancer types is p53 . This likely
reflects underlying differences in the biology of these diseases, however also highlights the unique nature of germline mutations in the
CDH1 gene which are strongly associated with specific histologically defined subtypes of breast and GI cancer, namely LBC and DGC which are
both part of the HDGC syndrome. Table 1Other syndromes with familial susceptibility to breast and gastric cancersSyndromeMode of
inheritanceAssociated gene(s)Sites of primary cancer(s)Evidence for association with the syndrome BRCA2 Hereditary Breast/Ovarian
CancerADBRCA2BreastOvaryLarynxProstateBC is considered an integral tumor of the syndrome with an average cumulative risk in carriers by age
70 years of 45% (95% confidence interval (CI) 31–56%) Familial aggregations of both BC and GC have been reported In a study of 173 families,
relative risk for GC was 2.6 Among Ashkenazi Jewish GC patients, the frequency of 617delT mutation is five times that of the general
Ashkenazi Jewish population frequency Among other cancers, GC occurred in first degree relatives when mutations were located in the ovarian
cancer cluster region of exon 11 of BRCA2 BRCA1 Hereditary Breast/Ovarian CancerADBRCA1BreastOvary ProstateBC is considered an integral
tumor of the syndrome with an average cumulative risk in carriers by age 70 years of 72.8% (95% confidence interval = 67.9% to 77.7%) There
is a 4 times increased risk for GC Peutz-Jeghers SyndromeADSTK 11Gastrointestinal (GI) tractGC is considered an integral tumor of the
syndrome with a relative risk of 213 (95% confidence interval 96–368) BC is considered an integral tumor of the syndrome with a relative
risk of 15.2 (95% CI 7.6–27) Cowden SyndromeADPTENBreastThyroidEndometriumBC is considered an integral tumor of the syndrome with an
incidence of 22–50% [66, 67]GC in situ has been reported in a patient with Cowden Syndrome Li-Fraumeni SyndromeADTP53CHK2BreastAdrenal
cortexConnective tissueKidneyNervous systemPancreas White blood cellsBC is frequently found in families with this cancer susceptibility
syndrome Chompret expanded the spectrum of cancers to include GC Germline TP53 mutations have been found in GC families without CDH1
mutations The 1100delC CHK2 allele confers a 2.2 fold risk of BC to carriers , however germline mutations in GC kindreds have not been
identified Familial Adenomatous PolyposisADAPCColon and rectumDuodenumThyroidPancreasLiterature review by Shimoyama et al. totalled 30
reported cases of GC and FAP 47% to 49% of primary BCs had promoter hypermethylation at the APC locus [77, 78]23% of LBCs have been shown to
have LOH of APC Lynch Syndrome (Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colon Cancer (HNPCC))ADhMSH2hMLH1hMSH6hPMS1hPMS2Colon and rectumEndometriumStomach
Small intestineUrotheliumKidneyOvarySkinPancreasBrainWhite blood cells Biliary tractGastric cancer accounted for 5% of cancers in families
harboring MLH1 or MSH2 mutations hMLH1 mutations in large kindred segregated with BCs exhibiting microsatellite instability (MSI) A slight
increased incidence of BC was seen in hMLH1 mutation carriers Germline hMSH2 mutation carrier with BC exhibited LOH for hMSH2 in tumors
analyzed Analysis of primary invasive BCs demonstrated that 25% of tumours were immunonegative for MSH2 staining Ataxia-telangiectasia
(AT)ARATMWhite blood cellsMutations causing AT in homozygotes, confer susceptibility to BC in heterozygotes, where women with ATM mutations
have a ∼2-fold risk of BC and ∼15% of these women will develop the disease GC has been reported in association with the syndrome There is
evidence of excess risks of GC in heterozygotes (RR = 3.39, 95% CI = 0.86 to 13.4) Xeroderma pigmentosumARXPAERCC3
(XPB)XPCERCC2(XPD)DDB2(XPE)ERCC4(XPF)ERCC5(XPG)POLH(XP-V)SkinEyesBC and GC have both independently been reported with the syndrome Werner
SyndromeARWRNConnective tissue SkinThyroidGC has been reported in association with the syndrome There are no reports of BC in association
with Werner syndrome. Although, there is evidence supporting WRN as a low-penetrance familial BC susceptibility gene, where patients
harboring both WRN Cys1367Arg or TP53 MspI variants had an increased BC risk (OR = 3.39, 95% CI 1.19–9.71) AD = autosomal dominant,
AR = autosomal recessive Other syndromes with familial susceptibility to breast and gastric cancers AD = autosomal dominant, AR = autosomal
recessive With the recent demonstration of a CDH1 mutation in a family ascertained through an index case of LBC and in view of the
additional new mutation in a predominantly breast cancer family that we have described here, the evidence for establishing LBC as part of
the HDGC syndrome is strong. There now is a need for establishing the prevalence of CDH1 mutations in LBC families to avoid the
ascertainment bias generated from only looking at cases from families identified because of their family history of GC. It is not currently
known what the risk of GC is in these families which present predominantly as having a susceptibility to breast cancer and therefore
identification of CDH1 as a true susceptibility gene for LBC could result in CDH1 screening and effective risk reduction strategies for
selected breast cancer families and further studies examining their risk for gastric and other cancers. Most hereditary cancer syndromes are
associated with cancer risk involving multiple organs. Here we have discussed germline CDH1 mutations and the risks with regard to DGC and
LBC, however as the recognised spectrum of related cancers broadens, more affected families will be identified and successfully managed with
regard to avoidance of specific cancer risks. Longer life expectancy in individuals with penetrant mutations could potentially lead to the
development of different, later onset disease as yet to be identified in these kindreds. This represents a particular challenge in
hereditary cancer practice as the clinical community tends to be segregated into organ specific specialties where as the cancer risks and
the risk reduction strategies for germline mutation carriers require a variety of expertise. The medical needs of the HDGC families are
therefore best served through an engaged multidisciplinary team. This work was supported in part by the National Cancer Institute of Canada
(NCIC) and the British Columbia/Yukon Territory chapter of the Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation. DGH is a Michael Smith Foundation for
Health Research Senior Scholar. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial
License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are
credited. diffuse gastric cancer gastric cancer hereditary diffuse gastric cancer lobular breast cancer
