Pelvic masses, especially hydatid disease, rarely present with sciatica (1, 2). We present the computed tomography (CT) and the magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) findings of a 49-year-old female patient with presacral hydatid disease, who was evaluated for her sciatica. We also
want to emphasize the importance of assessing the pelvis of patients with symptoms and clinical findings that are inconsistent and that
cannot be satisfactorily explained by the spinal imaging findings. Disc herniation in the lumbar spine is a well-known etiology of back
pains and sciatica, but whenever disc herniation of the lumbar spine is excluded by the employed imaging modalities, then the pelvis should
be examined for other possible etiologies of nerve compression. We describe here a patient, who was complaining of sciatica, with no
abnormal findings in her lumbar spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The cause of her sciatica was found to be associated with a pelvic
hydatid cyst compressing the lumbosacral nerve plexus. A 49-year-old female patient presented with a 2-year history of progressive right
lumbar pain radiating to her right lower extremity. The pain, which originated in the right buttock, extended down the posterior aspect of
the right thigh and the calf to the ankle. She was operated on for the right ovarian hydatid cyst 16 years before. There was no history of
prior trauma. On admission, the neurological examination revealed hypoesthesia, a slight weakness and atrophy of the abductor and extensor
of the hip and the flexor muscles of the knee, and areflexia and radicular pain of the right leg. Treatment that included anti-inflammatory
drugs and exercise did not alleviate the pain. Therefore, a possibility of lower lumbar disc herniation was considered. An MRI examination
that was intended to detect lumbar disc herniation was performed. The MRI of the lumbar spine showed no nerve-root compromise, but on the
very right parasagittal images, a globular, septated cystic lesion in the right side of the pelvis was noticed (Fig. 1). A review of the
axial computed tomographic (CT) scan of the pelvis showed a multiloculated cystic mass located in the right presacral area (Fig. 2).
According to the pelvic MRI, the multiloculated cystic lesion was located anterior to the right sacral foraminae. The lesion had low T1 and
high T2 signal intensities, without contrast enhancement. Besides this right-sided cyst, there was another lesion with the same imaging
characteristics in the posterior left side of the rectum (Fig. 3A). The right-sided lesion was in close proximity to the sacral nerve
fibers. On the oblique coronal views, the displacement and compression of the lumbosacral nerve trunk could be well seen (Figs. 3B, C).
There was no expansion or destruction in the bony structure of the foraminae. Because of the previous history of the right-sided
oophorectomy due to hydatid disease, the patient was operated on with the presumptive diagnosis of hydatid disease. The diagnosis of a
hydatid cyst was confirmed histologically after surgical removal of the lesion. At the time of the operation, the sacral nerve trunk was
found to be displaced and compressed by the right-sided presacral cyst. Mebendazole (100 mg twice daily for 4 months) was prescribed.
Hydatid disease (echinococcosis), is a parasitic infection that's caused by a cestode Echinococcus, mostly the form of E. granulosus (1).
Hydatid cysts are noted throughout the world, but they are widespread in endemic regions. Echinococcal eggs of the adult worm are present in
the small intestine of canine animals, and they are excreted with the feces. When ingested by intermediate hosts like sheep, cattle or
humans, these eggs hatch in the intestine of these intermediate hosts. Then the eggs, in the form of oncospheres, penetrate through the
mucosa of the intestine and diffuse into the blood and lymphatic circulation. They are transported by the circulation to the organs, mostly
to the liver and lungs, where they grow and produce cysts. Hydatid cysts are seldom primary in other organs, and they are often part of
generalized disease. Involvement of the pelvis in hydatid disease is reported to be â‰¤2% (2-5). In female, genital organs are reported to be
the most affected areas in pelvis which can be attributed to their relatively ample bloodstream and true invasions from connective tissue of
peritoneum of Douglas and suspensory ligaments (2, 6) Pelvic hydatid disease can be presented with vague abdominal pains due to irritation,
swelling, menstrual irregularities, infertility and pressure symptoms involving the adjacent organs (bladder, ureters, rectum and vascular
structures) (2, 4, 7-9). Symptoms indicative of compression of the lumbosacral plexus, as in our case, are really quite infrequent, and on
very few occasions they have been reported (4-6). In the case of Martin-Serradilla et al. (4), a pelvic hydatid cyst compressing the
lumbosacral nerve plexus and the gluteal veins was shown by CT. Hassan et al. (5) documented a pelvic hydatid cyst causing erosion in the
roof of the sacral foramina, extending down to the coccygeal spine and causing swelling in the gluteal region, by CT. The pelvic hydatid
cyst in the case of Gupta et al. (6) was located in the right pelvis, and it extended through the greater sciatic notch into the gluteal
region. The recurrence incidence of hydatid disease after surgery is said to be 8-22% with recurrences most often noted within 2 years after
the operation (2). Our patient was operated on 16 years ago. This shows that the hydatid cyst may recur many years after the operation. It
is not infrequent to confront with sciatica in daily practice of outcome patients in related departments. Lumbar disc herniation affecting
the lower lumbar root nerves is usually the reason of sciatica (5). Adnexial masses like endometrioma, acetabular labral cysts, iliopsoas
bursal cysts and pelvic hydatid cysts, as in our case, are other rare pathologies that may compress the lumbosacral plexus and cause
sciatica (10-12). In this patient, the hydatid cyst operation history was the main clue that helped make the correct diagnosis in a short
time. Nevertheless, cyst formation may primarily take place in the pelvis, may be discovered incidentally, or cause irritation and
compression symptoms and may cause diagnostic dilemma (2). This case demonstrates two important points. First, pelvic masses that include
hydatid cysts may cause sciatica; second, radiologist should be familiar with hydatid cyst imaging features and direct the surgeon, so that
careful attempts be made during operation in order to prevent recurrences and choose the appropriate treatment options. This parasite should
be kept in mind and considered when making the differential diagnosis of pelvic cystic masses, in particularly if the patient is from an
endemic area. Along with their diverse symptomatology, pelvic hydatid cysts may also cause sciatica. In conclusion, if no pathology is
evident for the lumbar discal structures, in connection with the cause of sciatica and lumbar back pains, then the pelvis should also be
examined for the possible etiologies of compression of the lumbosacral nerve plexus. Whenever a multiseptated cyst is come across in a
patient of an endemic origin with a positive history for hydatid disease like surgery, indicating recurrence, hydatid cyst is the most
likely diagnosis. T2 weighted, right parasagittal MRI of the lumbar spine reveals a multiloculated cystic mass in the presacral area
(arrowheads). A contrast enhanced CT scan of the pelvis in the axial plane showing the right-sided multiloculated cystic mass (arrowheads)
in the presacral area in the close vicinity of the sacral foramen. A. An axial T1 weighted MRI of the pelvis showing the right-sided cyst
(C) in the close vicinity of the sacral nerve fibers (arrowhead). Note the other cyst posterior to the rectum (arrow). B. In the oblique
coronal T1 weighted image, the displacement and the compression of the lumbosacral nerve trunk (arrowhead) by the cyst (C) can be seen. C.
The nerve plexus (arrowhead) compressed by the cyst (C) can be seen in the oblique coronal T2 weighted image.
