The long-term follow-up of intra-articular calcaneal fractures is often accompanied by complications. Frequently occurring are arthrosis,
arthrofibrosis of the subtalar joint, and malunion. Uncommon is the calcaneal nonunion. A total of three cases is presented in this report,
including a review of the literature. The occurrence of a nonunion appears to be more common after conservative treatment, but the
pathophysiology remains unclear, however smoking may play a role. During long-term follow-up after intra-articular calcaneal fractures
complications frequently occur. In clinical practice, arthrosis and arthrofibrosis of the subtalar joint, malunion and nonunion are
encountered [8, 12]. Nonunion is only rarely found, and studies concerning complications after intra-articular calcaneal fractures do not
describe this complication [5, 7]. In only five studies, including nine patients, reports on nonunion are made [3, 6, 10, 11, 13]. Three
patients with a pseudarthrosis after an intra-articular fracture of the calcaneus are presented in the current study. A male adult (age 49)
fell from a height of 2 m fracturing his left calcaneus. According to the Essex–Lopresti classification he sustained a joint-depression
type, and a type IIA fracture according to the Sanders classification. There was no injury to the soft tissues. After 6 days the fracture
was operated on, using percutaneous reduction and fixation according to the technique of Forgon and Zadravecz . Post-operative treatment
consisted of active range of motion exercises and 3 months non-weight bearing. Initial recovery was uncomplicated. Two years after the
trauma, the patient however returned to our outpatient department with complaints of painful walking, and unable to work. A computed
tomography (CT) scan showed a pseudarthrosis of the calcaneus and talocalcaneal joint surface incongruence (Fig. 1). An injection of 10 cc
lidocain in the subtalar joint temporarily reduced pain. A subtalar joint arthrodesis was performed, fusing the talus and calcaneus with the
use of bone graft gained from the iliac crest. After 1 year the arthrodesis has fully consolidated, the patient is pain free, but has
currently not yet returned to work. Fig. 1a Case 1: Axial CT-scan image 22 months after percutaneous reduction and fixation showing
nonunion; b Sagittal view a Case 1: Axial CT-scan image 22 months after percutaneous reduction and fixation showing nonunion; b Sagittal
view A female patient, aged 53, sustained a fracture of the right calcaneus after a fall from the stairs (Essex–Lopresti joint depression
type, Sanders type IIB). As patient was seen three weeks after the trauma, the initial treatment was conservatively, consisting of 1 week of
plaster-of-Paris and 3 months non-weight bearing with active range of motion exercises. Two months later the patient was unable to bear
weight at the fractured side due to pain. A CT showed a delayed union of the calcaneus (Fig. 2). Peroperatively, 6 months after trauma,
there was a nonunion of the fracture, without apparent signs of arthrosis of the talocalcaneal joint surface. Because of the smoking habits
and diabetes in this patient, as independent causes of high wound complication rates, an early subtalar arthrodesis with bone graft
harvested from the tibial tuberosity was performed instead of a correcting osteotomy. Three months after the salvage operation the
arthrodesis had consolidated, the patient is walking pain free. Fig. 2a Case 2: Semi-coronal CT-scan image 5 months after conservative
treatment showing delayed union; b Sagittal view a Case 2: Semi-coronal CT-scan image 5 months after conservative treatment showing delayed
union; b Sagittal view A male adult, of 39-years-old, sustained a bilateral calcaneal fracture after jumping of a first storey balcony. The
radiographs showed a comminuted intra-articular calcaneal fracture according to the Essex–Lopresti classification at both sides and Sanders
type IIC and IIIAC fractures on the left and right foot, respectively. Initial treatment was conservative, consisting of 1 week of plaster-
of-Paris and 3 months non-weight bearing with active range of motion exercises. Thirteen months later the patient returned to the outpatient
department with complaints of pain at the left heel. Additional radiographs and CT showed a nonunion of the fracture of the left calcaneus
(Fig. 3). A subtalar arthrodesis was performed, with bone graft from the tibial tuberosity. Two cannulated screws were inserted from the
tuberosity of the calcaneus, bridging the primary fracture line. The after treatment was complicated with a superficial infection, which
could be treated adequately with intravenous antibiotics. Six months after the secondary fusion the patient was able to walk pain free.
Fig. 3a Case 3: Semi-coronal CT-scan image 13 months after conservative treatment showing nonunion; b Sagittal view a Case 3: Semi-coronal
CT-scan image 13 months after conservative treatment showing nonunion; b Sagittal view Improper healing after an intra-articular calcaneal
fracture carries a high morbidity. Three groups: A, malunion; B, nonunion; and C, osteonecrosis, were suggested by Zwipp . These groups are
further divided according to the presence of joint incongruence, varus/valgus, loss of height, translation of bones and luxation. Treatment
of these complications after intra-articular calcaneal fractures depends upon the presence of these conditions . The first written report on
calcaneal fracture nonunion was by Thomas (1993). He presented a 36-year-old female patient, treated non-operatively, who developed a
calcaneal nonunion after 6 months . A correction of the displaced fragment was performed and stabilized using plate osteosynthesis and bone
graft. The patient was able to fully bear weight 12 weeks after this procedure. Gehr described a 38-year-old male patient with an intra-
articular, comminuted fracture of the calcaneus . This fracture was treated with open reduction and internal plate osteosynthesis. After
removal of the plate at 18 months the patient returned to the clinic with local swelling and pain during walking. A nonunion was seen and a
correction osteotomy was performed with bone graft and screw fixation. The fracture showed healing at 8 weeks. Karakurt et al. presented one
42-year-old male patient with a nonunion of the calcaneus after conservative treatment. The patient sustained a comminuted, open calcaneal
fracture which was treated in plastercast for 6 months. Eight months after trauma the patient was unable to walk without crutches because of
severe pain of the heel. After removing fibrotic tissue the calcaneus was filled with bone graft. Eight months after the operation patient
was able to walk and work without pain. Zwipp and Rammelt reported two patients with a nonunion of the calcaneus. A 61-year-old female
patient, with a Sanders IIC fracture with a luxation of the tuberosity fragment, was treated conservatively. An arthrodesis of the subtalar
and calcaneocuboid joint was performed 6 months after trauma. Postoperatively the American Orthopaedic foot and Ankle Society hindfoot score
improved significantly, compared with pre-operative values. The second patient was a 45-year-old female polytrauma patient. After
percutaneous reduction and fixation she was diagnosed with a nonunion 1 year after the trauma, for which a subtalar joint arthrodesis was
performed. No data on outcome was provided in this case. From cases described in literature and in the current report no similarities that
could indicate a risk factor of nonunion could be found. There are no apparent similarities besides the nonunion (Table 1). There might be a
trend of nonunion occurring after conservative treatment, suggesting that less rigid or no fixation may play a role in causing fracture
nonunion in the calcaneus. However Howard et al. saw no cases of nonunion in a group of 164 intra-articular calcaneal fractures treated
nonoperative. Patient age varied between 36 and 61, both sexes were affected equally often and initial treatment differed between patients.
Karakurt et al. suggested that smoking could be the cause of the nonunion. All patients in this report were smokers. For tibial fractures
strong evidence exists for delayed fracture healing in smokers . And a significant lower union-rate was seen after subtalar arthrodesis in
smokers versus non-smokers . Assous et al. however saw no difference in fracture healing between smokers and non-smokers in a small series
of intra-articular calcaneal fractures treated operatively. Table 1Summary of patients presented in the literature after a calcaneal
nonunionStudyGenderAgeInitial treatmentSalvage procedureFollow-up*(months)Thomas and Wilson Female36ConservativeOsteotomy, plate, bone
graft3Thermann et al. –––Subtalar arthrodesis62Gehr et al. Male38ORIFOsteotomy, screws, bone graft2Karakurt et al. Male42ConservativeBone
graft8Zwipp and Rammelt Female61ConservativeSubtalar arthrodesis, calcaneocuboid joint fusion–Female45PercutaneousSubtalar
arthrodesis–Current studyMale49PercutaneousSubtalar arthrodesis14Female53ConservativeSubtalar arthrodesis3Male39ConservativeSubtalar
arthrodesis6* The follow-up period after the salvage procedure is given Summary of patients presented in the literature after a calcaneal
nonunion * The follow-up period after the salvage procedure is given In contrast to the infrequent occurrence of the calcaneal nonunion,
stated in the case reports above, Thermann et al. describe an in incidence of 10% nonunion (n = 4/40) in a group of patients receiving a
subtalar arthrodesis for persisting invalidating pain after an intra-articular calcaneal fracture. In these four patients the nonunion
coincided with painful subtalar posttraumatic arthrosis, delineating the indication for a subtalar arthrodesis, instead of a correction
osteotomy with internal fixation. Calcaneal nonunion has been reported on infrequently in the literature, but the number of patients seen by
Thermann, and our own series, suggests that the incidence might be higher than expected. This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
