Dengue is known to affect the posterior segment of the eye, with a range of hemorrhagic and inflammatory sequelae. A 28-year-old lady
convalescing from dengue fever complained of unilateral blurring of inferior visual field. She was evaluated clinically and with fluorescein
angiography. Her best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 bilaterally. Fundus examination revealed a branch retinal artery occlusion in the
right eye. Fluorescein angiogram confirmed the clinical diagnosis; and also revealed a late staining and leakage from the affected arterial
segment. The patient maintained status quo over a follow-up of six months. We report a major vascular occlusion complicating classic dengue
fever even in the absence of severe systemic manifestations. Dengue, the commonest cause of arboviral disease, is more prevalent now than
ever before and its prevalence is expected to increase globally.1 The ophthalmic manifestations include vitritis, retinopathy (hemorrhages,
edema, cotton-wool spots, serous detachments), vasculitis and retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) disturbances.2,3 We report a case of branch
retinal arterial occlusion secondary to dengue fever. A 28-year-old woman was hospitalized for acute-onset high fever, myalgia, arthralgia
and ocular pain. Detailed history- taking, hematological and serological investigations established the diagnosis of classic dengue fever (a
positive IgM antibody titer); and ruled out mimicking infections like leptospirosis, typhoid, malaria, syphilis, as well as collagen
vascular diseases. Seven days later, during the convalescent phase, the patient noticed blurring of the inferior visual field in the right
eye. She presented to us two weeks after the ocular symptoms had started. Best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 bilaterally. On slit-lamp
examination, anterior segment was unremarkable in both eyes; no anterior vitreous cells or flare was observed. Fundus examination of the
right eye showed a patchy area of partially faded retinal whitening in the superotemporal quadrant of the macula, just encroaching into the
fovea, with attenuation and sclerosis of the macular division of the superotemporal branch retinal artery [Fig. 1]. The left fundus revealed
a single cotton-wool spot towards the edge of the inferotemporal arcade. Midphase fluorescein angiogram of the right eye showed narrowing of
the affected arterial segment, blocked background fluorescence in the area of whitening and delayed arteriovenous transit in the affected
vessels. Staining and leakage of the occluded artery was observed in the late phase [Fig. 2]. Kinetic central field charting with Bjerrumâ€²s
screen showed an inferonasal field defect corresponding to the area of arterial occlusion. The patient was referred for a detailed cardiac
and carotid evaluation - including carotid doppler study and echocardiography - which was unremarkable. She was followed up for three
months. Her visual acuity remained 20/20 in both eyes, but the inferior field defect persisted in the right eye. Ophthalmic manifestations
of dengue fever are rare but diverse, involving ocular structures from vitreous to uvea.2,3 Both viral and host immune factors are probably
involved in the pathogenesis. Different clinico-pathologic manifestations may be caused by different pathogenetic mechanisms: such as
hepatic injury may relate more to viral factors; whereas vascular hyperpermeability (contributing to most ocular manifestations) may be
mediated predominantly by the immune response.4 Ocular involvement in the convalescent phase of the systemic disease also implicates host
immune response rather than direct virus infection.3 The late staining and leakage of the occluded artery in our patient points towards the
inflammatory nature of occlusion: circulating immune complexes probably got deposited at the right-angled branch of the artery - narrowed by
preexisting vasculitis - precipitating the occlusion. Though retinal capillary non-perfusion secondary to dengue fever has been reported to
occur in macula as well as midperiphery,2 we are unaware of any previous report of retinal large-vessel occlusion attributed to systemic
dengue. There remains a possibility of a coincident arterial occlusion independent of the sequelae of dengue fever; though the angiographic
evidence of vascular inflammation points to the contrary. This complication, which potentially entails significant and permanent visual
impairment, occurred in spite of a minimal vasculitis (evident only angiographically) and in the absence of severe systemic disease. The
ophthalmologists should therefore be aware that major ocular complications may occasionally follow relatively moderate systemic involvement
with dengue fever. Fundus view of right eye showing supeficial retinal whitening with narrowing of the occluded artery in the superotemporal
quadrant of the macula Late-phase fluorescein angiogram of the right eye shows staining and leakage of the occluded segment of the branch
retinal artery
