Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia is an uncommon low-grade B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder in which monoclonal immunoglobulin M is
produced. Neurological symptoms due to hyperviscosity are frequent manifestations of Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia. However, central
nervous system infiltration by plasmacytoid lymphocytes (Bing-Neel syndrome) has only rarely been reported. We report a case of a 51-yr-old
woman suffering from Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia who complained of persistant headache. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed an
extra-axial soft tissue mass along the left cavernous sinus, left tentorium, right tentorium, and falx cerebri. A stereotactic biopsy of
dural tissue from the falx was performed and showed plasmacytoid lymphocyte infiltration. The patient became symptom- free with irradiation
of the whole brain followed by chemotherapy with fludarabine. Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia (WM) is the result of a clonal proliferation
of lymphocytes that produce monoclonal immunoglobulin M (IgM). This disease was originally described in 1944 by Jan Waldenstrom. It is now
considered to correspond to lymphoplasmacytoid lymphoma as defined by the World Health Organization classification system (1, 2). Its
clinical features include hyperviscosity, cytopenia, bleeding, lymphadenopathy, and/or splenomegaly. Many central nervous system (CNS)
complications have been described in WM patients; the majority have been associated with blood hyperviscosity caused by IgM. The
hyperviscosity syndrome is characterized by headache, tinnitus, vertigo, blurred vision, and chronic bleeding from the nose and gums (3).
However, CNS infiltration by plasmacytoid lymphocytes (Bing-Neel syndrome) has only rarely been reported (4). A 51-yr-old woman was
diagnosed with WM three years prior to this presentation. She received six courses of chlorambucil (0.3 mg/kg per day on day one to four
orally) and prednisone (45 mg/m2 per day on day one to four). However, the disease progressed. Next, she received fludarabine chemotherapy
(25 mg/m2 per day on day one to five intravenously) with a limited response. High-dose cyclophosphamide and granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor were administered to induce peripheral blood progenitor cell (PBPCs) mobilization for autologous stem-cell transplantation; however,
the number of PBPCs collected was not sufficient. We then decided on a conservative treatment approach, because the patient did not have
specific symptoms and the serum IgM level was stable (3,000-3,500 mg/dL). She was admitted to the hospital because of persistent headache
and increased IgM levels. Physical examination was unremarkable. The laboratory values on admission were as follows: white cell count
8,050/µL with normal differential counts, hemoglobin 9.6 g/dL, platelets 296,000/µL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 144 mm/hr, total protein
9.44 g/dL, albumin 2.85 g/dL, IgG 3144.4 mg/dL, IgA 25.4 mg/dL, IgM 4904.6 mg/dL, and serum β2-microglobulin 3.81 mg/L. A brain computed
tomography scan revealed multifocal extra-axial tumorous lesions along the dura matter. A brain magetic resonance imaging showed an extra-
axial soft tissue tumor along the left cavernous sinus and tentorium, right frontal convexity and tentorium and falx; the brain parenchyma
appeared to be unremarkable (Fig. 1A). Cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed the following: white cell count 43/µL with neutrophils 1%,
lymphocytes 52% and monocytes 47%, total protein 1.81 g/dL, glucose 104 mg/dL, IgM 64.5 mg/dL and a few plasmacytoid lymphocytes on
cytology. Stereotactic biopsy of dural tissue at the falx showed a diffuse infiltration with atypical cells, which were identified
immunophenotypically as plasmacytoid lymphocyte with expression of LCA (+), CD3 (-), CD20 (+), and VS38a (+) (Fig. 2). The patient was
confirmed to have CNS infiltration by atypical plasmacytoid lymphocyte infiltration (Bing-Neel syndrome). The paitent received a total dose
of 1,980 cGy with irradiation therapy of the whole brain that was administered in 11 fractions, and then her headache subsided, but the IgM
level was elevated persistently to 3,379.8 mg/dL. Following radiation therapy, fludarabine chemotherapy was performed (25 mg/m2 per day on 1
to 5 intravenously, two courses). Further treatment was not possible because of persistant bone marrow suppression. A follow-up brain MRI
after six months revealed a marked decrease in the size of the mass in the tentorium and falx (Fig. 1B). The patient had no evidence of CNS
recurrence during the follow-up period of one year. However, the IgM level has been increasing slowly, so further chemotherapy, including
rituximab may be considered. In 1936 Bing and Neel reported the association of hyperglobulinemia, CNS symptoms (paresthesias, headache, and
paralysis), and brain infiltration composed of plasma cells and lymphocytes in two patients (5). In 1944, Waldenstrom described the syndrome
that bears their name (Bing-Neel syndrome) (6). The Bing-Neel syndrome, originally placed in a "toxic-infectious" category, appears to be
the result of involvement of the CNS by diffuse neoplasm infiltration. Neurological complications occur in about 25% of patients with WM.
Although they are most often peripheral, they can involve the CNS. In WM, the CNS may be involved by a variety of mechanisms, including
hyperviscosity and direct infiltration by neoplastic cells (7, 8). Patients with Bing-Neel syndrome have sometimes presented with a mass
containing neoplastic cells, but the masses have been intraparenchymal rather than meningeal (8, 9). This syndrome can be subdivided into
diffuse and tumoral forms. In the diffuse infiltrative form such as this case, malignant cells are localized mainly in leptomeningeal
spaces, periventricular white-matter, pons, and medulla (7, 10-12). Radiological findings in this syndrome have been reported, but a typical
pattern has not emerged (13-15). An imaging technique would be the preferable diagnostic test, although histological confirmation is
necessary to establish the definitive diagnosis. Intraventricular chemotherapy for Bing-Neel syndrome was reported to be effective in 1984
(15). However, a review of the literature reveals that the outcome for most patients who underwent chemotherapy was poor, and the patients
died within several months (10, 13, 14). Therefore, patients with Bing-Neel syndrome may benefit from cranial radiation therapy prior to
chemotherapy (9, 12, 16). Recently, a great deal of interest has been noted by treatments with purine nucleoside analogs (fludarabine,
cladribine, and pentostatin) because of their remarkable activity in lymphoproliferative disorders. It has been reported that a patient with
Bing-Neel syndrome (in its diffuse form) was successfully treated with cladribine administration (17), or radiation therapy and combination
of cladribine, cyclophosphamide, and prednisone (18). In the present case, headache subsided after radiation therapy, but the IgM level
increased persistently. Therefore, following radiation therapy we used fludarabine for two courses. Further treatment was not possible
because of persistant bone marrow suppression. A follow-up brain MRI after six months revealed a marked decrease in the size of the mass in
the tentorium and falx; the patient had no evidence of CNS recurrence during the follow-up period of one year, but the IgM level has been
increasing slowly. We think that the major effect of deceased mass size was due to the radiation therapy in the present case. Several
retrospective and prospective studies have indicated that rituximab may induce an objective response in approximately 30-40% of previous
treated patients with WM (19). However, the effect of rituximab treatment on the cerebrospinal fluid B-cell compartment is limited in
comparison with the effect on the B cells in the periphery (20), and it has not been tried in Bing-Neel syndrome as yet. Therefore, the
effect of rituximab on CNS involovement of WM need to be validated by of future studies. (A) Contrast enhanced axial and coronal T1-weighted
images show a well-enhanced mass along the left tentorium and cavernous sinus (arrows). This mass also extends into the contralateral
tentorium and falx (arrowheads). (B) Marked decrease in the size of the mass in the tentorium and falx after radiation therapy and
fludarabine treatment. Stereostactic brain biopsy showing diffuse infiltration of atypical plasmacytoid lymphocytes into the dural fibrous
tissue (A) Hematoxylin & eosin (original magnification ×200); (B) Positive immunohistochemical staining for CD20 (original magnification
×40).
