Infliximab is a monoclonal antibody directed against TNF-α. It has been approved for use in rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis,
inflammatory bowel disease, psoriatic arthritis and plaque-type psoriasis. In case reports, positive effects on pustular variants of
psoriasis have also been reported. However, paradoxically, manifestation of pustular psoriasis and plaque-type psoriasis has been reported
in patients treated with TNF antagonists including infliximab for other indications. Here, we report on 5 patients with chronic plaque-type
psoriasis who developed palmoplantar pustulosis during or after discontinuation of infliximab therapy. In two of the five cases,
manifestation of palmoplantar pustulosis was not accompanied by worsening of plaque-type psoriasis. Possibly, site-specific factors or a
differential contribution of immunological processes modulated by TNF inhibitors to palmoplantar pustulosis and plaque-type psoriasis may
have played a role. Increased expression of TNF-α has been identified as an important pathophysiological mechanism in different types of
chronic inflammation including psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis. The knowledge about the central role of TNF-α in certain diseases has
successfully been converted to the therapeutic level; over the last years TNF antagonizing agents such as the anti-TNF directed antibodies
infliximab and adalimumab and the fusion protein etanercept have substantially improved the treatment of some of the most common chronic
inflammatory conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA). With 80% of the patients reaching at least a 75% reduction of their baseline skin
symptoms after 10 weeks of therapy , infliximab is regarded as one of the most potent agents available at present for the treatment of
psoriasis vulgaris. Other variants of psoriasis, such as pustular psoriasis have not been formally tested in larger clinical trials.
However, in individual reports, positive effects of infliximab on generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP) with dramatic improvements in some
cases have been reported [3, 13, 15]. Because this type of pustular psoriasis is believed to correspond to an extreme activation of
psoriatic disease mechanisms, the high bioavailability of infliximab and its rapid onset of action following intravenous infusion have been
used to explain the surprisingly fast decrease of pustule formation in patients treated with the agent. Paradoxically, on the other hand,
manifestation of pustular psoriasis has been reported in patients treated with TNF antagonists including infliximab for other indications.
Palmoplantar pustulosis (PPP) has long been regarded as a localized variant of pustular psoriasis, although more recent epidemiological and
genetic findings argue against this concept [2, 12]. Here, we report on five patients with chronic plaque-type psoriasis who developed PPP
during or after discontinuation of infliximab therapy. Relevant aspects of the five patients with chronic plaque-type psoriasis who
developed PPP during or after discontinuation of infliximab therapy are presented in the Table 1 and Fig. 1. Table 1Description of
casesCase12345SexMaleMaleFemaleFemaleMaleAge3742673041Disease duration (years)17 2830Unknown15Psoriasis
typePlaquePlaquePlaquePlaquePlaquePrior pustular psoriasisNoNoNoNoNoPsoriatic arthritisYesNoNoNoYesFamiliy history of
psoriasisNegativePositiveNegativeUnknownNegativePrior UV-therapyYesYesYesYesYesPrior systemic
therapiesMethotrexateLeflunomideEtanerceptPrednisoloneFumaric acid estersCyclosporineFumaric acid estersFumaric acid
estersCyclosporineRetinoidsMethotrexateFumaric acid estersCyclosporineMethotrexateInitial response to infliximabExcellentcPASI 75fPASI
75PASI 75PASI 75Time of manifestation of PPPWeek 38d8 weeks after end of infliximab treatmentWeek 3dWeek 22dWeek 40dConcomitant worsening of
plaque psoriasisaYesYesNoNoYesDevelopment of GPP in addition to PPPYesNoNoNoNoPotential trigger factors of PPP Infection prior to
PPPYesNoYesNoNo Present smokingNoNoYes (36 packyears)UnknownUnknownDiscontinuation of infliximabYesYesYesNoYesSystemic therapy with
sufficient control of PV and PPPbAdalimumab 40 mg e.o.wEtanercept 25 mg BIW plus methotrexate 7.5 mg/week orallyPUVA-therapy of palms and
soles(Additional topical therapy)Etanercept 50 mg BIWSystemic therapy that failed to control PV or PPPEtanercept 50 mg BIWe plus
methotrexate 15 mg/week orallyEtanercept 25 mg BIWPPP Pustulosis palmoplantaris, GPP Generalized pustular psoriasis, PV Psoriasis vulgaris,
e.o.w Every other weeka Loss of >50% of maximum PASI response or increase of physician’s global assessment (PGA) by ≥ 2b All patients
received additional topical therapy with glucocorticosteroids and Vitamin D analoguesc Improvement rated by PGA with “almost clear”
(PGA = 1)d Week of infliximab treatmente BIW = twice weeklyf PASI 75 = Reduction in the psoriasis area and severity index (PASI) by
≥75%Fig. 1Clinical picture of pustulosis palmoplantaris in patient 3 with pustules in different stages of evolution on a sharply delineated
erythematous lesion on the left sole (a) and yellowish pustules on the left palm (b). Histological examination showing intraepidermal
vesiculopustular dermatitis (c, H.E. stain of a biopsy from the left plantar arch) with intraepidermal accumulation of neutrophils and
subcorneal pustule formation (d) Description of cases PPP Pustulosis palmoplantaris, GPP Generalized pustular psoriasis, PV Psoriasis
vulgaris, e.o.w Every other week a Loss of >50% of maximum PASI response or increase of physician’s global assessment (PGA) by ≥ 2 b All
patients received additional topical therapy with glucocorticosteroids and Vitamin D analogues c Improvement rated by PGA with “almost
clear” (PGA = 1) d Week of infliximab treatment e BIW = twice weekly f PASI 75 = Reduction in the psoriasis area and severity index (PASI)
by ≥75% Clinical picture of pustulosis palmoplantaris in patient 3 with pustules in different stages of evolution on a sharply delineated
erythematous lesion on the left sole (a) and yellowish pustules on the left palm (b). Histological examination showing intraepidermal
vesiculopustular dermatitis (c, H.E. stain of a biopsy from the left plantar arch) with intraepidermal accumulation of neutrophils and
subcorneal pustule formation (d) To the best of our knowledge, the development of PPP during the treatment of plaque-type psoriasis with
infliximab has not yet been reported. The occurrence of pustular skin lesions usually resembling GPP or palmoplantar pustular psoriasis has
occasionally been observed in patients treated with infliximab for other indications [1, 6, 11, 16–19]. Induction of pustular skin lesions
seems not to be limited to infliximab therapy, but has also been described in association with the use of the TNF-antagonists etanercept and
adalimumab, including the use in one patient with plaque-psoriasis treated with etanercept [4, 8–10, 16]. One patient with seropositive RA
developed GPP as well as PPP during treatment with infliximab . This patient later experienced a relapse of PPP when treatment with
etanercept was initiated, which also suggests that a class effect of TNF-antagonists may play a role. In two of the three cases in whom an
exacerbation of plaque-psoriasis occurred parallel to the manifestation of PPP, typical trigger factors for active psoriasis could be
identified such as an infection (case 3) and the abrupt termination of anti-psoriatic treatment (case 2). These two cases are compatible
with the existence of common trigger factors for plaque psoriasis and PPP. What are other factors that might contribute to the development
of PPP during treatment of psoriasis vulgaris? While the exact etiology of PPP remains to be established, a history of smoking is the most
important known risk factor for PPP. However, only one out of the three patients in whom a smoking history had been obtained was a smoker at
the time of onset of pustular psoriasis (case 3). Streptococcal infection, a known risk factor for psoriasis vulgaris, has not been
established as a risk factor for PPP and probably plays a minor role there. However, in the cases presented here, one patient (case 3)
suffered an upper respiratory tract infection a few days before manifestation of PPP, while another patient (case 1) had suffered from a
persistent cold 6 weeks before manifestation of pustules. In the former patient, the close temporal relationship between infectious symptoms
and manifestation of PPP may point to a possible contribution of the infection to triggering PPP, and a modulation of the immune response to
infliximab appears possible. It is likely that beyond the contribution of known risk factors, other, immunological mechanisms may be
involved in the manifestation of PPP under infliximab therapy. Interferon (IFN)-α has been suggested as a cytokine mediating the
manifestation of psoriasiform lesions in patients treated with TNF-inhibitors as a consequence of crosstalk of TNF-α and IFN-α: TNF-α is
known to suppress the generation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells that are very potent producers of IFN-α. Appearance of plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (and IFN-α) in ths skin is considered to be an early and crucial step in the pathogenesis of psoriasis (reviewed in ). Thus,
in patients treated with TNF-antagonists, the inhibition of TNF-α might induce an increase of IFN-α in the skin favoring the manifestation
of psoriasiform dermatitis. In fact, an increase of IFN-α signaling has been shown in biopsy specimens from psoriatic plaques induced by
TNF-inhibitors compared with traditional psoriatic plaques . The relevance of IFN-α for PPP and TNF-inhibitor induced PPP, however, still
needs to be determined. The observation of an improvement of pre-existing psoriasis plaques parallel to the first manifestation of PPP in
two of the cases described here supports the concept that immunological mechanisms and/or local factors are not identical in the
pathogenesis of plaque-type psoriasis and PPP. Differences in pathogenesis between plaque psoriasis and PPP are also supported by their
different genetic background, with plaque psoriasis, but not PPP being linked to PSORS1, the major susceptibility locus for plaque-type
psoriasis located on 6p21 . The localized nature of the pustules on palms and soles occurring in association with infliximab therapy in some
patients suggests a contribution of site-specific factors. Possibly, eccrine sweat glands that are numerous in the palmoplantar location are
involved in these processes. Changes secondary to binding of infliximab to TNF-α, that has been shown to be expressed in eccrine sweat
glands, have been suggested as a possible mechanism . Withdrawal or dose reduction of systemic cyclosporine and systemic or topical
glucocorticosteroids given for treatment of psoriasis vulgaris have been associated with manifestation of GPP, but not with PPP. To the best
of our knowledge, no reports on manifestation of GPP or PPP associated with treatment with methotrexate, another drug frequently used in the
therapy of psoriasis, exist. However, in the clinical trials with the CD11a-antagonist efalizumab in the indication plaque psoriasis,
development of PPP has also been observed in 0.2% of 1,620 patients during the first 12 weeks of treatment with efalizumab, compared to none
of the 715 patients in the placebo groups . Whether therapy with TNF-antagonists may induce a more severe form of plaque psoriasis or
psoriatic arthritis in some patients treated for these indications is difficult to determine, as the natural course of both plaque psoriasis
and psoriatic arthritis is variable and a loss of effect is not easily differentiated from an induction of a more severe form of the
respective disease. However, as a manifestation of plaque psoriasis has been noted in a number of patients treated with TNF-antagonists for
other indications without a personal or family history of psoriasis [6, 16], it is likely that TNF-antagonists may in some individuals and
probably in conjunction with environmental factors favor manifestation or worsening of psoriatic skin and/or bone disease. The treatment of
patients with plaque-psoriasis developing PPP should be decided on an individual basis. In case plaque-psoriasis remains controlled under
infliximab therapy, addition of topical therapy may be sufficient for treatment of PPP in some instances (case 4). However, in some cases,
additional topical therapy may not be sufficient and UV-therapy or another systemic therapy may be necessary in addition to or as
replacement of infliximab therapy (case 3). When manifestation of PPP is accompanied by worsening of plaque-psoriasis, discontinuation of
infliximab therapy is advisable and initiation of other systemic antipsoriatic agents, such as cyclosporine or a different TNF-antagonist,
may be necessary (cases 1 and 5). In summary, pustular psoriasis may show a good response to treatment with TNF-antagonists such as
infliximab. However, pustular psoriasis may also manifest during treatment of rheumatological diseases, and, as described here, also in
patients with plaque-type psoriasis under treatment with infliximab. Manifestation of PPP under infliximab is not necessarily accompanied by
worsening of pre-existing plaque psoriasis. Management of the pustular skin lesions has to be decided on an individual basis. In a subgroup
of patients, therapy with the TNF-antagonist has to be discontinued and another systemic therapy (including a different TNF-antagonist) will
probably be necessary to sufficiently control plaque-psoriasis and PPP. R. M. has received travel grants from Abbot, Essex and Wyeth. K. R.
has served as a consultant and paid speaker for Abbot, Biogen Idec, Centocor, Essex, Schering-Plough, Serono, and Wyeth. He has also
received grant funding from Biogen Idec. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and
source are credited.
