Laparoscopic renal surgery has become a widely applied technique in recent years. The development of postoperative rhabdomyolysis is a known
but rare complication of laparoscopic renal surgery. Herein, 4 cases of rhabdomyolysis and a review of the literature are presented with
respect to pathogenesis, treatment, and prevention of this dire complication. A retrospective review of over 600 laparoscopic renal
operations over the past 8 years was performed. All cases of postoperative rhabdomyolysis were identified. A Medline search was performed to
find articles related to the development of postoperative rhabdomyolysis. Cases of rhabdomyolysis developing after laparoscopic renal
surgery and common risk factors between cases were identified. The incidence of postoperative rhabdomyolysis in our series is 0.67%. It is
similar to the rate reported in other series. Male sex, high body mass index, prolonged operative times, and the lateral decubitus position
are all risk factors in its development. The prevention and optimal management of postoperative rhabdomyolysis following laparoscopic renal
surgery has yet to be defined. The risk factors we identified should be carefully addressed and minimized. A better understanding of the
pathogenesis of rhabdomyolysis will also be a key component in its prevention. Since the first laparoscopic nephrectomy was performed in
1991,1 laparoscopic renal surgery has rapidly grown in scope and application. Today, this approach is being utilized for a variety of
procedures from oncologic renal extirpation to renal reconstruction and donor nephrectomy. Herein, we report 4 cases of rhabdomyolysis
following laparoscopic nephrectomy performed with the patient in a 45-degree lateral decubitus position. Rhabdomyolysis following
nephrectomy appears to be a rare but potentially severe and debilitating complication. We reviewed the literature to determine the expected
frequency of this complication and to produce a better understanding of its origins, treatments, and expected outcomes. A 36-year-old 163 kg
male (body mass index = 38.6) underwent a laparoscopic hand-assisted left donor nephrectomy while in a 45-degree right flank position with
the kidney bar raised. Operative time was 6 hours. In the postanesthesia care unit, the patient complained of right lower back and buttock
pain similar in nature to his previously experienced chronic lower back pain. Postoperative creatinine was 1.6 mg/dL, increased from his
baseline of 1.0 mg/dL. This severe pain continued on postoperative day one, at which time the patient was also noted to have weakness in his
right lower extremity, and a neurology consult was obtained. The patient's creatinine rose to 1.9 mg/dL. Additionally, the patient's urine
was noted to be brown in color. Creatinine kinase levels were obtained and found to be markedly elevated at 126,539 IU/L, and a urine
myoglobin test confirmed the presence of myoglobin in the urine. A diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis was made. Over the next 24 hours, the
patient's urine output, which had been 1.3 L on both postoperative days 0 and 1, diminished to 325 mL, and his creatinine increased to 4.9
mg/dL. A diagnosis of oliguric acute renal failure was made, and a renal consult was obtained. Alkalinization of the urine with intravenous
bicarbonate, hydration, and pharmacological diuresis (mannitol and furosemide) were ineffective in reversing the oliguric renal failure, and
the patient would eventually require 4 weeks of dialysis. His lower extremity weakness improved; however, he required long-term physical
therapy. A 33-year-old, healthy, 81.7 kg male (BMI = 28.3), underwent a laparoscopic hand-assisted left donor nephrectomy while in a
45-degree right flank position with the kidney bar raised. Operative time was 6.4 hours. The immediate postoperative course was significant
for complaints of right lower back pain in the postanesthesia care unit. Urine myoglobin test on postoperative urine was positive, and
creatinine kinase and creatinine levels obtained in the recovery room were found to be 2239 IU/L and 1.3 mg/dL, respectively. The patient's
preoperative creatinine was 0.9 mg/dL. A diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis was made, and immediate intravenous hydration with bicarbonate-
containing solution was begun. A nephrology consultation was obtained. Over the first 24 hours, the patient maintained adequate urine output
(1.8 L). However, during the ensuing 24 hours, the urine output dropped to 687 mL followed by a further decline to 440 mL the next day. The
patient's creatinine kinase level peaked at 50,973 IU/L. Additionally, over that time period, the patient developed increasing difficulty
maintaining oxygenation due to volume overload. Continuous infusion of furosemide was unsuccessful in preventing renal failure in this
patient, despite maintenance of reasonable urinary output. The patient's creatinine continued to rise to 11.7 mg/dL, at which point
hemodialysis was initiated. He subsequently received 3 dialysis treatments, after which no further dialysis was required. Additionally, the
patient continued to experience significant right lower back and buttock pain. The patient's pain resolved by postoperative week 6, and he
returned to work without restrictions 8 weeks after surgery. A 60-year-old, 131 kg male (BMI = 45.3), with a history of asthma, bronchitis,
hypertension, and chronic back pain who was found to have a left-upper pole renal mass was taken to the operating room for planned
laparoscopic left partial nephrectomy. The patient's preoperative creatinine was 1.1. The patient was placed on the table in a 45-degree
lateral decubitus position with the table flexed and the kidney bar raised. After exposure of the renal hilum, dissection was begun to
expose the left upper pole mass. Dissection was somewhat difficult around the mass secondary to its close approximation to the adrenal
gland. Nevertheless, over a short period of time during dissection of the tumor, the patient became increasingly difficult to ventilate.
Specifically, the patient required increasingly elevated ventilatory pressures and demonstrated rising end-tidal CO2 levels. The anesthesia
team alerted the surgical team of this problem, and the abdominal insufflation and the operation were temporarily suspended while the
ventilatory issues were corrected. After correction, an attempt was made to once again continue with the operation. However, shortly after
reinstituting abdominal insufflation, the patient again exhibited respiratory changes. Because it was thought that the patient could not
tolerate continued insufflation for a prolonged period of time, the decision was made to perform a hand-assisted nephrectomy. Hand-port
access was obtained, and nephrectomy was accomplished shortly thereafter. In the recovery room, the patient complained of significant right
lower back and leg pain; his postoperative creatinine was 2.0 mg/dL. When this continued for several hours, a serum creatinine kinase level
was obtained and found to be elevated to 33,140 IU/L. Urine myoglobin was positive. The patient's urinary output rapidly declined from 700
mL during the first 6 hours to 230 mL for the next 24 hours. Diuresis with furosemide and hydration with alkaline solution were instituted,
but the patient progressed to acute oliguric renal failure. The patient required 5 dialysis treatments but subsequently recovered adequate
renal function. The patient suffered prolonged right back and lower extremity pain, with marked weakness in his right upper leg. A 52-year-
old, 145 kg male (BMI = 53), with a history of asthma, hypertension, and glaucoma with an incidentally detected 5.3-cm left renal mass
underwent a laparoscopic left radical nephrectomy while in a rotated supine position. His preoperative creatinine was 1.1. Though dissection
was difficult secondary to body habitus, laparoscopic nephrectomy was achieved in 3.5 hours, and the patient was returned to a supine
position. Specimen extraction and wound closure were complete an hour later. The patient remained intubated until postoperative day #1 due
to concerns over his asthma history and obesity. After extubation, the patient complained of right hip and right leg weakness.
Rhabdomyolysis was suspected and confirmed by laboratory evaluation. Creatinine kinase level peaked on postoperative day #3 at 111,470 IU/L,
and the patient progressed from oliguric renal failure to anuric renal failure, despite aggressive hydration, induced diuresis, and
alkalinization of the urine. Serum creatinine peaked at 6.4 mg/dL before institution of dialysis. The patient required long-term dialysis
and remained with severe lower extremity weakness at the time of the most recent follow-up (6 weeks). Rhabdomyolysis and subsequent renal
failure are well-known complications of trauma, particularly in the setting of a crush injury.2 Additionally, it has been reported to occur
in the postoperative setting as a complication of general surgical, orthopedic, and urologic procedures performed with the patient in the
lithotomy position.2–4 At our institution, we have performed 600 laparoscopic nephrectomies over the past 8 years. We report 4 cases of
rhabdomyolysis following laparoscopic nephrectomy over this time period. The incidence of rhabdomyolysis in our series is 0.67%. Three of
these nephrectomies were performed with the patient in a 45-degree flank position with the table in the flexed position and the kidney bar
raised; the last case was performed with the patient in a rotated supine position. Our patients exhibited many of the risk factors that have
been often proposed to contribute to the development of rhabdomyolysis: male sex, elevated BMI, prolonged OR time, and procedure performed
with the patient in the lateral decubitus or 45-degree lateral decubitus position.3,5,6 In reviewing the literature, we noted that all but 2
of the patients who developed rhabdomyolysis were male. Additional risk factors that have been suggested include preexisting renal disease,
extracellular volume depletion, and renal hypoperfusion.5 The earliest association of rhabdomyolysis and renal failure was described in
1941.7 Since that time, a better understanding of the risk factors and pathogenesis of this condition have been achieved. In relating it to
surgical positioning, it should be considered as representing part of the spectrum of local changes that can occur to skin and underlying
soft tissues due to prolonged fixed pressure on these areas. As a disease process, rhabdomyolysis presents 2 separate problems, namely the
local effects of tissue injury and the systemic consequences that result from that injury.2 In rhabdomyolysis occurring in the surgical
setting, the predominant initial contributing factor is thought to be the ischemia or partial ischemia that results from direct, prolonged
pressure on the soft tissues and overlying skin. Experiments by Whitesides8 have suggested that tissue ischemia may begin to occur when
tissue pressures approach to within 10 mm Hg to 30 mm Hg of the diastolic pressure. Studies9 have shown that skeletal muscle tolerates this
ischemia for as long as 2 hours, after which time ultrastructural ischemic changes begin to occur. As ischemia persists, these changes
become more severe and are noted to be irreversible after about 7 hours. As the problems of pressure and time relate to laparoscopic renal
surgery, it is clear why obesity, patient positioning, and operative time could play a role in the development of postsurgical
rhabdomyolysis. In reviewing our reported cases and the literature, we would also question whether the additional insult of intraabdominal
insufflation (generally 12 mm Hg to 15 mm Hg) might narrow what is already a small perfusion pressure window in our obese patients. When
surgical procedures are terminated and the direct pressure on the soft tissue beds is relieved, a secondary pathogenic process occurs in
rhabdomyolysis. Ischemiareperfusion injury in association with resulting localized tissue edema can result in a continued low perfusion
state in the local tissue bed in addition to producing a systemic hypovolemia as intravascular fluids are lost through local capillary
beds.2 Further systemic effects are known to occur as myocyte damage leads to liberation of myoglobin into circulation with the potential
development of myoglobinuria and subsequent acute renal failure.2 These systemic effects can be particularly devastating in the setting of
renal extirpative surgery where the relative renal hypoperfusion and large myoglobin load must be handled by a solitary renal unit. Table 1
lists, in addition to our present cases, all the cases of rhabdomyolysis that developed following laparoscopic renal surgery described in
the literature.5,10–20 All published patient characteristics are included. The rarity of this complication is underscored by review of
several large series of laparoscopic nephrectomy for which no cases of rhabdomyolysis were described.21–25 For the cases described here, the
incidence ranged from 0.4% to 4.9%.10,13,14 The incidence in our series is 0.67%. The data from our series confirm previously stated risk
factors: male sex, long operative time, and high body-mass index. The average length of surgery for all reported cases of rhabdomyolysis
that we identified in the literature is 368.7 minutes. Note should also be made of the fact that 9/28 (32%) of the cases of postlaparoscopic
renal surgery rhabdomyolysis occurred following laparoscopic donor nephrectomy. It may be that this population is particularly susceptible
to this complication, as the operative times may be longer and the patients may tend to be younger and with increased muscle mass compared
with these things in renal cancer patients. Higher perfusion pressures or permissive hypertension may have provided improved perfusion to
the dependent soft-tissue beds and may have helped to prevent the development of rhabdomyolysis. Patient Data From Known Cases of
Rhabdomyolysis Following Laparoscopic Renal Surgery Mean based on 6 patients. †NA = not available; LD = lateral decubitus; MLD = 45° lateral
decubitus flexed w/kidney bar; LOS = length of surgery; CK = creatinine kinase; A = alkalinization; H = hydration; D = diuretic; HD =
hemodialysis. Another consideration in reviewing these data is table positioning and use of the kidney rest. Various positions have been
demonstrated to put surgical patients at particular risk for rhabdomyolysis, including the lithotomy position and the lateral decubitus
position.2–4,6,13,26–28 Three of the 4 patients in our series were placed in a 45-degree lateral decubitus position with a soft roll to
support the upside hip and shoulder. Additionally, we previously put the table in a slightly flexed position with the kidney bar raised.
This modification likely produces more focused areas of pressure. After reviewing these cases, we changed our laparoscopic nephrectomy
positioning. Currently, we have been utilizing a rotated supine position in which the patient is placed supine on the table with a sandbag
placed under the shoulder and back ipsilateral to the side of the planned nephrectomy. The patient is then secured to the table, and the
entire table is rotated to achieve dependency of the abdominal contents to facilitate dissection. The one patient who developed
rhabdomyolysis while in this position had the highest BMI53 and the shortest total operative time (3.5 hours), indicating that morbid
obesity, even in the absence of an exaggerated position or prolonged operative time, may be the most significant risk factor for this
devastating complication. The average BMI combining our series with others in the literature for patients who develop rhabdomyolysis is
33.2. Other authors11 have suggested that early lowering of the kidney rest may help prevent this complication. Whether other devices such
as vacuum “bean bags,” gel cushioning pads, or intraoperative pressure monitoring devices would be helpful in reducing pressure-related
muscle ischemia remains to be seen. All of our patients also exhibited induration and erythema of the skin overlying the dependent muscle
bed. These findings in concert with lower back or lower extremity pain should suggest the possibility of impending rhabdomyolysis.
Investigation with serum creatinine kinase levels, urinalysis, microscopic evaluation, and urine myoglobin should confirm the diagnosis.
Brown or reddish discoloration of the urine, while common in this setting, would not seem to be a reliable predictor of rhabdomyolysis or
impending renal failure, as 3/20 (15%) of the patients did not exhibit this finding even though one of these 3 patients went on to develop
renal failure. There was a tendency for the eventual development of acute renal failure in patients as peak creatinine kinase increased
(average peak CK for renal failure group, 46 780±7200 vs 25 650±15 100 for those who did not develop acute renal failure). Presence of
detectable levels of myoglobin in the urine as a predictor for renal failure could not be determined from these data. Treatment
recommendations for the prevention of renal complications from rhabdomyolysis generally include ample intravenous hydration to overcome
hypovolemia and renal hypoperfusion; bicarbonate infusion to alkalinize the urine and improve myoglobin solubility; and induced diuresis to
assist in flushing the myoglobin out of the renal tubules. Diuresis is generally induced with either mannitol or furosemide, which has the
potential disadvantage of causing acidification of the urine. Despite the use of hydration, alkalinization and diuresis, all of our patients
required temporary dialysis. More specific guidelines as rhabdomyolysis relates to patients with a solitary kidney might be helpful in
determining the optimum methods for preventing renal failure. With regards to limiting neuromuscular impairments that result from
rhabdomyolysis, unfortunately, no good therapies are available. The role of fasciotomy in this circumstance is unclear.2,3 Many of these
patients will need prolonged physical therapy and pain management to achieve a good functional outcome. Rhabdomyolysis is a serious
potential complication of laparoscopic renal surgery. The incidence ranges from 0% to 4.9%. Particular care to prevent this complication
should be taken in patients with increased BMI and in those patients for whom a protracted operating room time is expected. Whether
laparoscopic donor nephrectomy patients are at particular risk for this procedure remains to be seen, but ensuring ample padding and
minimizing positioning time are presumptively the best ways to prevent this complication. Other considerations for preventing this
complication include foregoing attempted laparoscopy in susceptible patients or early conversion to open nephrectomy in cases where progress
is impeded. Furthermore, decreasing the time during which the table is flexed and the kidney bar raised may further diminish the chances of
a patient developing rhabdomyolysis. Routine measurement of creatinine kinase and urine myoglobin levels in the recovery room for patients
at high-risk of rhabdomyolysis may allow for the earlier detection of rhabdomyolysis, and, potentially a better outcome. Nevertheless,
prevention of this complication should remain the primary goal. The next step would be to more thoroughly evaluate the precipitating events
and primary risk factors for the development of rhabdomyolysis postoperatively. To that end, we are initiating a study at our institution to
evaluate several intraoperative parameters that have been thought to play a role in the development of rhabdomyolysis. We hope that this
will add to our understanding of the pathogenesis of this complication and ultimately its prevention.
