To the Editor: More than 2 decades ago, when HIV was first detected, many investigators predicted the rise of leprosy secondary to
opportunistic infection (1). Recently, the phenomenon of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS), or leprosy reversal response,
has received attention. IRIS often occurs secondary to initiating highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). The first indications of an
interaction between HIV and Mycobacterium leprae occurred only recently, with the identification of IRIS after initiation of HAART in
patients with HIV and previously undetected leprosy. A review by Pustianowski et al. discusses the paradox of HIV and leprosy with IRIS (2).
In addition, Lawn et al. described the first case of IRIS after the onset of HAART in a patient who had tuberculoid leprosy that was never
confirmed by molecular analysis (3). Multiple reports (4–7) unmasked subclinical Hansen disease (M. leprae infection) occurring with HAART
or spontaneously (8). In case reports by Lu et al. (6) and Sharma et al. (7), leprosy was associated with erythema nodosum leprosum. Pereira
et al. discovered that patients known to have HIV and leprosy, when treated with HAART manifested a type 1 reversal reaction, acute leprosy
inflammatory episode (4), or IRIS. We describe the first, to our knowledge, 2 cases in the United States of HIV and leprosy infections in
which IRIS has occurred after HAART initiation and which has been confirmed by molecular analysis. Three skin-biopsy samples, 2 from patient
1 and 1 from patient 2, were analyzed to confirm the presence of M. leprae. Patient 1 met the diagnostic criteria for leprosy according to
biopsy result; patient 2’s case was compatible with such criteria. Each patient was treated for leprosy, and each responded favorably. The
purpose of our case study was to confirm M. leprae DNA in skin samples. The skin specimens were paraffin-embedded slides. DNA was extracted
by standard molecular biologic methods that used xylene. PCR amplified the M. leprae heat shock protein 65 gene (hsp65). After
amplification, restriction fragment-length polymorphism (RFLP)–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) was performed with HaeIII (6).
Patient 1 was a 60-year-old Hispanic man who was first evaluated in Los Angeles, California, with skin lesions covering >50% of his body. He
reported having erythematous scaly plaques that had been waxing and waning for several months. Several skin biopsy samples were taken, and
an HIV test was conducted; results showed that he had lepromatous leprosy and was HIV positive. Biopsy specimens were both Fite stain
positive for numerous acid-fast bacilli. Three months after HAART was initiated, repeat skin biopsy samples were taken from nodules that had
recently developed on his right arm and torso. Histologic assessment showed Fite stain–positive granulomatous dermatitis with many foamy
cells. He was treated for leprosy and is continuing HAART. Patient 2 was a 37-year-old West African black man from Burkina Faso who was
evaluated in New York for gram-negative bacteremia. He was admitted and treated for disseminated salmonellosis and was found to be HIV
positive. His T-lymphocyte count was 7/μL. He was promptly prescribed HAART and responded well to treatment: his T-cell count rose to 112/μL
during 5 months and is currently >700/μL. Within 2 years of HAART initiation, multiple anesthetic, hypopigmented skin macules that failed to
resolve over 6 months developed. These macules developed further into nodules. Punch biopsy results were consistent with granulomatous
dermatitis. Fite stain was negative for acid-fast bacilli, but leprosy was diagnosed on the basis of anesthesia localized to his skin
lesions. When the biopsy samples were taken, the patient was receiving dapsone in addition to HAART. Rifampin treatment was started
subsequent to biopsies. PCR amplification for M. leprae hsp65 was positive for all 3 samples. Thus, mycobacterial DNA was present in both
patients. The RFLP analysis results are shown in the Figure. The hsp65 RFLP pattern for patient 1 was identical to those described by
Martiniuk et al. (9) and for the wild-type pattern for patient 2, as shown by Lu et al. (6), thus demonstrating the presence of M. leprae
DNA in these samples. Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis–restriction fragment length polymorphism of PCR amplicons digested with HaeIII with
standards. STDs, sexually transmitted diseases; Pat., patient; WT, wild type. Previous studies have highlighted the low rate of HIV and
leprosy co-infection. For example in Ethiopia, Frommel et al. noted that, before HAART was available in resource-poor settings, increased
HIV seropositivity did not alter the natural course of leprosy nor increase the number of patients with M. leprae (10). Nevertheless,
positive reports of IRIS and leprosy after initiation of HAART have been reported from other nations (3–5). If this syndrome can be detected
even in the mildly leprosy–endemic United States (8), an increase in similar cases in areas where HIV and leprosy occur in higher frequency
can be anticipated. Suggested citation for this article: Martiniuk F, Rao SD, Rea TH, Glickman MS, Giovinazzo J, Rom WN, et al. Leprosy as
immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome in HIV-positive persons . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2007 Sep [date cited].
Available from http://www.cdc.gov/eid/content/13/9/1438.htm This work is supported in part by the National Institutes of Health (GCRC grant
MO1RR00096).
