Dear Editor, Multiple myeloma, a B-cell malignancy characterized by clonal proliferation of plasma cells in the bone marrow, has been
associated with unique clinicopathologic features, genetic abnormalities, and response to therapy . Immunoglobulin D (IgD) myeloma is a rare
disease, accounting for about 2% of all myelomas. Pleural effusions occur in 6% of myeloma patients. The etiology is multifactorial and
effusions due to pleural myelomatous involvement are rare, occurring in <1% of the cases . We experienced a patient with IgD λ multiple
myeloma, which was first indicated by plasma cells in the peripheral blood. Furthermore, cytogenetic study of the pleural effusion revealed
several abnormalities. We reviewed the clinical and cytogenetic features of this case and report the findings in detail. An 82-year-old man
was admitted to our hospital in February 2002 with the chief complaint of dyspnea on effort and arrhythmia. His medical history included
myocardial infarction in 1991. Chest X-ray results showed cardiomegaly and bilateral pleural effusion. He was diagnosed with acute heart
failure as a result of previous myocardial infarction. The administration of diuretics and an antiarrhythmic resulted in a rapid
improvement. However, the recovery did not last; the pleural effusion slowly increased and diuretics were ineffective. Moderate anemia
worsened and transfusion was necessary. Hematological examination revealed plasma cells in the peripheral blood and a hematologist was
consulted. On physical examination, there was anemia in the connective pulp, and heart sounds showed a systolic murmur. There was a decrease
in breath sounds at the base of both lungs. Bilateral presidia-pitting edema was evident. Hematological examination revealed anemia
(hemoglobin 7.7 g/dl) with plasma cells in the peripheral blood (18%). Total serum protein was 6.0 g/dl with 64.9% albumin and 14.5%
γ-globulin. Creatinine 1.35 mg/dl, blood urea nitrogen 27 mg/dl, uric acid 13.3 mg/dl, and lactate dehydrogenase 679 IU/L (reference range
230–460). Immunoelectrophoresis showed monoclonal IgD (λ) in the serum and Bence Jones protein (λ) in the urine. Quantitative immunoglobulin
determination showed a marked increase in IgD, 934 mg/dl, while IgG, IgA and IgM levels were decreased (Table 1). Bone marrow aspiration
resulted in dry tap and biopsy results showed multiple myeloma. Chest X-ray results showed bilateral pleural effusion, whereas X-ray
examination of the rest of the body was normal. Echocardiography results did not indicate amyloid deposition in the myocardium, but the
ejection fraction was decreased because of a previous myocardial infarction. Table 1Laboratory findingsBlood pictureBlood
chemistry ImmunoglobulinCoagulation workPleural fluidRBC224 × 104 per microliterCRP0.2 μg/dlBUN27.0 mg/dlIgG373 mg/dlPT13.3 sSurface
markerHb7.7 g/dlNa143 mMCr1.35 mg/dlIgA33 mg/dlAPTT35.4 s CD190.7%Hct23.4%Cl11 mMUA13.3 mg/dlIgM10 mg/dlFbg375 mg/dl CD200.6%MCV105.0 μm3K4.2 mMGOT32 IU/lIgD934 mg/dlFDP2.0 μg/dl CD273.0%MCH34.5 pgCa9.1 mg/dlGPT29 IU/l
CD8399.4%MCHC33.0%P4.7 mg/dlγ-GTP62 IU/l CD13891.5%PLT5.7 × 104 per microliterTP6.0 g/dlChE217 IU/l Chromosome analysisWBC4,000 per
microliterAlb64.90%LDH679 IU/l 47,XY,del(1)del(1)(p11p13)ins(1;?)(q21:?),add(3)(p13)(,−8,+9), Eos5.0%α 1-gl3.70%ALP241 IU/l
t(11;14)(q13;q32),add(12)(p11),−15add(17)(p11),−22,+mar (ten cells) Seg28.0α2-g l9.10% 47,idem,add(3)(p11) (nine cells) Lym39.0β-g l7.80%
46,idem,−9,−13,−21,−22,+3mar (one cell) Aty. Lym17.0γ-g l14.50% IL-63,970 pg/ml Mono10.0 Laboratory findings The patient also underwent
thoracentesis. Cytological examination of the pleural effusion showed numerous plasma cells. There were two sizes of atypical plasma cells:
small, round-shaped, mature plasma cells, and large, round-shaped, immature plasma cells. Clusters of differentiation 38 (CD38) and CD138
surface markers were investigated in the pleural effusion and found to be positive in 99.4% and 91.5% of the cells, respectively. Metaphase
cytogenetic study on the pleural effusion revealed abnormal karyotypes by G-banding. In the abnormalities, 11q13, 14q32 was evident and +9,
−13, −22 were also detected. After the first cycle of combination chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, vincristine, melphalan, predonisone
(VCMP)–vincristine, saimerine, Adriamycin, predonisone (MCNU-VMP; Table 1), the plasma cells in the peripheral blood disappeared; chest
radiograph showed a reduction of pleural effusion and the anemia improved. IgD levels decreased rapidly to 44.7 mg/dl after completion of
four cycles of chemotherapy. The patient was discharged from our hospital in early June. In outpatient clinic, the patient was treated two
more times with the same chemotherapy, but high fever persisted and bilateral pleural effusions increased. He was readmitted in late August
and treated with antibiotics and an antifungal agent, but the clinical course was aggressive, and he died of septic complications and
progression of the disease. IgD myeloma was first reported in 1965 by Row and Fahey , and the pathological and clinical features were
described by Jancelewicz et al. and Hobbs and Corbett . IgD myeloma is characterized by a small monoclonal IgD peak, occurrence in younger
subjects, primarily in men, a high incidence of both Bence Jones proteinuria and renal insufficiency, an exceptionally high prevalence of λ
light chains over κ light chains, and frequent occurrence of extraosseous spread. The difficulty in the diagnosis of IgD myeloma is based on
the lack of an M component. IgD exhibits a very short biological half-life in peripheral blood. The rate of catabolism of IgD is 26% per
day, compared with 3~6% per day for IgG, and 10~15% per day for IgA. Myelomatous pleural effusion has been considered as a late
manifestation in the natural history of multiple myeloma or as an expression of the aggressive behavior of the disease. Pleural effusions
occur in approximately 6% of patients with myeloma. The etiology is multifactorial, and effusions due to pleural myelomatous involvement are
rare, occurring in <1% of the cases . In previous reports of myelomatous pleural effusions, 80% were due to IgA, whereas the others were
mostly due to IgG. Pleural effusions in myeloma may be due to nephrotic syndrome, pulmonary embolism, congestive heart failure secondary to
amyloidosis, secondary neoplasms and infiltration of myeloma cells from adjacent skeletal or parenchymal locations, direct implantation of
plasma cells on the pleura, and mediastinal lymph node infiltration with lymphatic obstruction . Extramedullary plasmacytoma is a rare type
of tumor, comprising approximately 4% to 6% of the plasma cell malignancies [8, 11]. In our case, a variety of chromosomal abnormalities
were detected from the pleural effusion. Translocations involving the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) region at chromosome region 14q32 are
regularly involved in human B-cell malignancies and may upregulate existing oncogenes or create new hybrid genes with transforming
properties. For example, Burkitt lymphoma shows a specific t(8;14)(q24;q32). This case demonstrated t(11;14)(q13;q32), which commonly
results in the fusion of the BCL-1 locus, although the break points in myeloma may be different from those observed in mantle cell lymphoma.
The protooncogene c-myc is translocated to the IgH locus at 14q32, resulting in increased expression of the oncogene because of strong
immunoglobulin enhancers . 14q32 has been detected in 74% of patients with multiple myeloma, by fluorescence in situ hybridization, and in
85% of plasma cell leukemia cases . 14q32 is one of the factors related to a poor prognosis. These translocations are found in the earliest
stage of the disease, suggesting that such translocations are an early and possibly initiating event in the disease development . The
detection of genetic changes is important, not only because of their association with clinical prognosis, but also because they can be used
as measurable targets for response to treatment. Malignant effusions can occur in the terminal stage of the disease and are difficult to
treat. This particular case of multiple myeloma had a poor prognosis and required appropriate therapy. In general, with the appearance of
malignant effusions, systemic chemotherapy and drainage are necessary. In IgD myeloma, most patients tend to be younger than other myeloma
patients, and there are likely a large number of eligible cases. As a therapeutic approach for IgD myeloma, especially the λ type, we
consider that peripheral blood stem cell transplantation will result in a good prognosis after conventional chemotherapy. Open Access This
article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
