This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial No Derivatives License, which
permits for noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any digital medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not
altered in any way. A 54-year-old woman was admitted for cough, sputum, and an abnormal chest X-ray shadow. Bronchoscopy showed mucoid
impaction of the bronchi (MIB). Histopathologic evidence of mucous plugs was consistent with one component of allergic bronchopulmonary
mycosis. Schizophyllum commune (S. commune) was identified. Two attempts at removal of the mucous plugs were unsuccessful. Itraconazole was
then administered, and the mucous plugs disappeared. There are few reports of MIB due to S. commune; we herein report a case of MIB due to
S. commune infection. Mucoid impaction of the bronchi (MIB) is an uncommon condition indicating segmental and subsegmental bronchi
characterized by the dilatation and filling of bronchi with characteristic thick mucoid material. MIB is believed to occur most commonly as
a manifestation of a hypersensitivity state in bronchial asthma or in association with allergic bronchopulmonary mycosis (ABPM). In this
report, we describe a patient in whom Schizophyllum commune (S. commune) caused MIB, which improved with itraconazole (ITCZ) administration.
S. commune is a basidiomycetes fungus found throughout Japan, commonly in dry logs, dead wood, and fallen trees. S. commune is considered
edible in Peru or Thailand; however, in Japan, it recently has been identified as a causative agent of MIB and ABPM. There are limited
reports of pulmonary involvement due to S. commune, and we believe the case is worth reporting. A 54-year-old woman was referred to Saitama
Cardiovascular and Respiratory Center in August 2000 for investigation of a cough, sputum, and an abnormal chest X-ray shadow. The cough and
sputum had developed in December 1999 and had not improved. The patient had no relevant personal or family history. Physical examination did
not reveal any abnormalities, including wheezes. Chest X-ray showed bilateral, hilar band-like shadows (Figure 1a). Computed tomography (CT)
of the chest showed mucous plugs in both B3 bronchi and consolidation (indicating atelectasis) in the peripheral part of the mucous plugs
(Figure 1b,c). Pulmonary function tests did not indicate bronchial asthma. Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 3,400/mm3,
with 9.5 percent eosinophils (323/µl). Radioimmunosorbent test showed the IgE concentration to be within normal limits, and results of
radioallergosorbent test for specific IgE antibodies against Aspergillus, Cladosporium, Candida, and Cryptococcus were all negative. No
inflammatory reactions, assessed by the C-reactive protein level and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, were observed. Bronchoscopy disclosed
thick white mucous plugs in both B3 bronchi (Figure 2a,b) that could not be removed by forceps and suctioning. Removal was attempted again
on another day but failed. Higher magnification of the mucous plug sample showed numerous eosinophils (Figure 3a). Grocott staining of the
mucous plug sample showed mold with a fragmented appearance (Figure 3b). Transbronchial lung biopsy specimens showed infiltration of
eosinophils in the wall of the right upper lobe bronchus. From the third to tenth day after cultivation, cultures of the mucous plugs,
bronchial aspirates, and sputum samples yielded the same mycelial colonies, which were white and had a felt-like, fluffy appearance on
Sabouraud dextrose agar plates (Figure 4a); however, no other pathogenic microorganisms were isolated. A methane-like odor was observed.
With regard to form, there were narrow and thin walls approximately 1.5 mm in width, as well as wide and thick walls approximately 2.5 mm in
width, with separate hyphae but no clamp connection. Considering the feature of colonies, form, odor, and the two types of hyphae in the
colony, we hypothesized that it was a monokaryotic strain of S. commune. We consulted the Chiba University Research Center for Pathogenic
Fungi and Microbial Toxicoses for identification of the fungus. Mating tests were performed . The clinical isolate was inoculated onto
plates opposite each tester monokaryotic strain of S. commune, wherein it was dikaryotized and a fruit body was formed at the point of
contact (Figure 4b). When co-cultured with a dikaryotic strain, it was dikaryotized and produced basidiocarps. From the foregoing, this
fungus was identified as a monokaryotic mycelium of S. commune. At a later time, the presence of S. commune in the patient's garden was
confirmed (Figure 6). ABPM, as well as ABPA (allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis), usually is diagnosed on the basis of Rosenberg’s
seven primary criteria : (1) episodic bronchial obstruction (asthma); (2) peripheral blood eosinophilia; (3) immediate scratch test
reactivity to Aspergillus antigen; (4) precipitating antibodies to Aspergillus antigen; (5) elevated serum IgE concentrations; (6) history
of pulmonary infiltrates (transient or fixed); and (7) central bronchiectasis. The diagnosis of ABPM is considered likely if the first six
criteria were present, and the presence of all seven made the diagnosis certain. The present case satisfied only two (the second and the
sixth criteria) of seven criteria (neither the third nor the fourth criteria were investigated because of methodological limitation), and
diagnosis of ABPM cannot be established. We diagnosed the patient as MIB due to S. commune infection. Complete removal of the mucous plugs
by bronchoscopy was attempted twice unsuccessfully, and the patient was treated with ITCZ for three months, beginning in September 2000. The
cough improved and sputum diminished, and in December 2000, bronchoscopy disclosed that the mucous plugs had disappeared. Bronchoscopy was
repeated in July 2001, January 2002, and 2003, and there has been no recurrence of the mucous plugs (Figure 5) or symptoms. The patient has
been followed up on an outpatient basis for seven years and has shown no signs of recurrence. We encountered a case of MIB due to S. commune
infection. ITCZ was administered, and the mucous plugs disappeared. MIB occurs commonly in association with ABPM, and it is known that there
is clinical overlap between MIB and ABPM . ABPM/MIB is considered to be the result of an immunologic inflammatory reaction in the bronchi
and the surrounding parenchyma in response to antigens (fungi) growing in mucous plugs in the airways. The major causative agents of
ABPM/MIB are Aspergillus fumigatus and other Aspergillus spp (Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis; ABPA); reports of ABPM/MIB due to S.
commune are limited. The reasons we speculate are as follows: (1) its pathogenic significance is not well understood; and (2) isolation and
identification of S. commune is difficult . It is not easy to identify this fungus only by using pathological samples or smears. This fungus
appears in a clavate form in smears, and it is difficult to discriminate morphologically from filamentous fungi such as Aspergillus spp.
Indeed, in some previous cases, S. commune was morphologically misidentified as Aspergillus . Kamei and colleagues reported that 12 percent
of undetermined pathologic fungi obtained in clinical specimens were S. commune and urged consideration of its pathogenic significance .
Therefore, it is possible that the frequency of ABPM/MIB due to S. commune has been underestimated. The presence of S. commune infection
should be investigated in case of ABPM/MIB in which the antibody against Aspergillus fumigatus is negative or Aspergillus fumigatus is not
detected in the sputum or in specimens obtained in the airway. The present case was diagnosed clinically as MIB, not ABPM. Katzenstein noted
pathologically that MIB or bronchocentric granulomatosis with eosinophil infiltration into the tissue strongly suggests ABPM or ABPA, and
the diagnosis is established when fungal hyphae are recognized in the mucous plug . The present case was histologically characterized by
numerous eosinophils, Charcot's-Leiden crystals, hyphae in the mucous plugs, and infiltration of eosinophils in the wall of the right upper
lobe bronchus; thus, the present case can be diagnosed as ABPM histologically. However, in most cases, the diagnosis of ABPM not due to
Aspergillus was clinically based on Rosenberg's criteria as well as ABPA. In the present case, although peripheral blood eosinophilia was
found, allergic component including elevated serum IgE concentration and bronchial asthma was not found. In addition, there were some
criteria that could not be investigated because of methodological limitation. In such cases, Rosenberg's criteria should not be applied.
There are other diagnostic criteria for ABPA used in the United Kingdom , including asthma, pulmonary eosinophilia (fleeting shadow on the
chest radiograph in association with a peripheral blood or airway eosinophilia), and a positive immediate skin prick test to A. fumigatus;
however, the criteria also were not satisfied (the third criterion could not investigated), so this case clinically cannot be diagnosed as
ABPM. Reports of pulmonary involvement due to S. commune are limited. To our knowledge, 13 cases (including the present case) have been
reported (Table 1). Among the 13 were seven cases of ABPM, one of a fungus ball, one of a lung abscess, and four of mucoid impaction
(including the present case). Patients were predominantly female (female:male, 12:1), and 11 of 13 patients were over 40 years of age. The
reason for the predominance of middle-aged female patients remains unknown. In addition, seven of the patients had bronchial asthma (53.8
percent). Kamei and colleagues reported eight cases of ABPM due to S. commune, only 30 percent of which were accompanied by bronchial
asthma, and they suggested that the frequency of bronchial asthma may be lower in ABPM due to S. commune than in ABPA . A greater number of
reported cases is necessary to clarify this matter. Kamei and colleagues postulated that underlying diseases of the lower respiratory tract
such as old tuberculosis, bronchial asthma, and malignancy often exist in the patients with ABPM due to S. commune, but noted there are
patients without any underlying disorder . Therefore, S. commune infection can develop in any patient, with or without underlying diseases.
In the present case, the patient had no underlying disease. There are no reports that S. commune infection develops more frequently in
individuals in any specific environment or job such as mushroom culture, in which causative fungi are easily inhaled. In the present case,
however, S. commune was growing in the garden at the patient's house. MIB has been treated effectively by repeated bronchoscopic drainage ,
washing with Amphotericin B, and bronchoscopic suctioning . In this case, however, two attempts to remove the mucous plug were unsuccessful.
Subsequent administration of ITCZ 200 mg daily resulted in symptomatic relief and disappearance of the mucous plugs. ABPM/MIB is a state
formed when pathogens and biological immune responses become entangled in a complex way. The allergic aspect of ABPM/MIB has been stressed,
and steroid therapy generally is used for allergic aspect of ABPM/MIB ; however, an infectious aspect has recently been recognized on the
basis of the effectiveness of antifungal therapy for ABPA and histopathologic findings . The present case improved with ITCZ administration
without steroid therapy, which may indicate that the infectious aspect was more likely than the allergic aspect in this case. However, the
histological findings of the mucous plugs characterized by numerous eosinophils, Charcot's-Leiden crystals, and infiltration of eosinophils
in the wall of the right upper lobe bronchus strongly suggested allergic background. It is possible ITCZ reduced S. commune, an allergic
antigen, which resulted in attenuated allergic reaction; therefore, an allergic aspect should have co-existed. It is therefore difficult to
differentiate clearly infection from allergic reaction. Kamei reported a recurrence after a period of improvement with itraconazole 50-100
mg daily ; thus, long-term follow-up is necessary. In summary, we report a case of MIB due to S. commune infection. The most frequent
causative fungus of ABPM is known to be Aspergillus fumigatus; however, S. commune should be added to the differential diagnosis in case of
MIB, especially if mold is found in the specimen with no evidence of Aspergillus fumigatus. An antifungal agent may be useful in the
treatment of MIB due to S. commune. We thank Kazuko Nishimura at Chiba University Research Center for Pathogenic Fungi and Microbial
Toxicoses in Chiba, Japan for the identification of S. commune and for valuable advice. mucoid impaction of the bronchi allergic
bronchopulmonary mycosis itraconazole allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis ABPM: Allergic bronchopulmonary mycosis; ITCZ: Itraconazole;
AMPH: amphotericin B; FLCZ: fluconazole; MIB: mucoid impaction of the bronchi. a. Chest X-ray film obtained upon admission showing patchy
opacification in both right upper lung fields. b,c. Computed tomography scan of the chest showing bronchiectasis and mucoid impaction in the
right B3 (b) and left B3 (c) bronchi. Bronchoscopy showed mucoid impaction in the right B3 (a) and in left B3 bronchi (b). Photomicrograph
(a) of the mucous plug drained bronchoscopically shows numerous eosinophils and Charcot’s-Leiden crystals (arrow) (a. hematoxylin and eosin
stain). Fragment like fungal hyphae (arrow) were detected in the mucous plug sample (b. Grocott stain). x400 Cultures of mucous plug
samples, bronchial aspirates, and sputum samples obtained by bronchoscopy yielded the same mycelial colonies, which were white and had a
felt-like, fluffy appearance on Sabouraud dextrose agar plates (a). White-yellow, fan-shaped basidiocarps of S. commune grew on a plate of
Sabouraud dextrose agar (b) as a result of the mating test. They appeared 36 days after mating. Bronchoscopy showed a patent bronchial lumen
after administration of itraconazole 200 mg daily. A photomicrograph shows that Schizophyllum commune was found on a tree in the patient’s
garden.
