Dermis-fat graft (DFG) is often the only promising option in cases of severely contracted sockets. However, there is an increased risk of
graft failure in irradiated sockets with decreased vascularity. In such difficult cases, repeat DFG implantation also has higher risks of
graft failure. We describe an ingenious method of successful management of an irradiated anophthalmic socket following DFG infection and
necrosis, with acceptable cosmetic results. At surgery, an orbital impression was taken with ophthalmic grade alginate. Based on this
measurement, a custom-made stem pressure socket-expander made up of high density polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) was fitted, a week post
surgery and kept in situ for six weeks. On review, the fornices had considerably deepened. The expander device was removed and the patient
was now fitted with a custom-made thicker prosthesis made up of high-density PMMA. The patient has followed up for a year subsequently and
the prosthesis has remained stable. Dermis-fat graft (DFG) is often the most promising option in maintaining orbital volume, preserving the
fornices and conserving the conjunctiva in cases of complicated orbits and contracted sockets. Although significant atrophy of primary
grafts does not occur very frequently,1 irradiated sockets may have decreased vascularity and increased risks of graft infection and
failure. In such difficult cases, repeat DFG orbital implantation may also suffer a slightly increased frequency and amount of graft
absorption.2,3 We describe a method of successful management of an irradiated anophthalmic socket following DFG infection, with acceptable
cosmetic results. We performed a Medline search with the key words ″anophthalmic socket″, ″contracted socket″ ″socket expansion″ ″dermis-fat
graft failure″ and various combinations thereof. All cross-references in citing literature were included in our search and referenced. To
the best of our knowledge, a similar technique has not been reported previously on irradiated socket. A three-year-old boy presented to us
with a contracted right socket and history of prosthesis instability, since one year. He had been enucleated elsewhere for retinoblastoma of
the right eye, one year prior to presentation, without orbital implant. Subsequently, the right socket had received irradiation, details of
which were unavailable. The fitted prosthesis was extremely unstable with repeated extrusion. On examination, the left eye was unremarkable.
The right socket was quiet, healthy with evidence of severe surface and volume contracture. The patient underwent DFG implantation, under
general anesthesia. A conformer for socket maintenance was inserted, on table, post surgery. The patient was started on topical
betamethasone eye drops and oral antibiotics (an Ampicillin-Cloxacillin combination was used), post surgery. On review, a week later, the
graft was taking up satisfactorily. The oral antibiotics were stopped, the topical steroids were tapered off and the patient was asked to
review with us six weeks later. However, the patient presented to us three weeks later with a painful inflamed socket. On examination, the
socket was severely infected with copious discharge. The DFG had sloughed off completely [Fig. 1A]. The socket inflammation was treated with
topical antibiotics, anti-inflammatory and systemic antibiotic medication. The patient was reviewed at one week and at three weeks. At three
weeks, the orbital inflammation had subsided completely. The fornices were seen to be severely shallow (Grade IV contracture)1 and there was
severe volume contracture (Grade IV),1 as before. At this stage, the options of a second DFG or a larger prosthesis, to compensate for the
volume loss, were considered. However, it was impossible for the patient to retain a conformer or any prosthesis at this stage, due to the
extreme surface as well as volume contracture. Considering the possible high risk of DFG failure, the patient′s parents were not in favor of
another surgical procedure. It was under these circumstances that a new technique was attempted, with informed consent. An orbital
impression was taken with ophthalmic grade alginate [Fig. 1B]. Based on this measurement, a custom-made stem pressure socket-expander was
made from high-density polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) and fitted a week later [Fig. 1C]. This conformer was kept in situ for six weeks, with
pressure exerted by a tight sticking tape on the stem of the conformer [Fig. 1D]. Instructions to change this tape every six-hourly, to
ensure adequate sticking and sufficient pressure to the socket expander, were given to the patient. On review, six weeks later, the expander
device was removed and the socket examined. The socket surface had completely lined with the conjunctiva and the fornices had deepened
sufficiently to accommodate a conformer. We documented the expansion of the socket objectively with our ingeniously devised slit-lamp
measurement device.4 The patient was now fitted with a custom-made thicker prosthesis made up of high-density PMMA [Fig. 2A]. Cosmesis was
satisfactory [Figs. 2B and C]. The patient has been followed up for a year and the prosthesis has remained stable. In a case of failed DFG
in an irradiated socket; expansile expanders can be used. Other useful described techniques include prefabricated temporalis muscle and/or
fascia pedicled flap along with fornix formation sutures, which are to be retained for a minimum of three weeks. We treated a patient with
DFG necrosis and a severely contracted anophthalmic socket with a custom-made stem pressure socket expander device. This device helped
deepen the fornices, with stable prosthesis placement subsequently. The prosthesis was thicker to ensure adequate volume replacement and was
made up of high-grade PMMA to ensure lesser weight. This prosthesis also had a superior shelf extending backwards into the socket, to
provide additional stability. This provided acceptable cosmesis, under the circumstances. We documented the expansion of the socket
objectively with the slit-lamp measurement device. Though it might be difficult to envisage socket expansion solely due to the mechanical
pressure exerted by a tape running from the forehead to the cheek, the expansion was possibly due to a combination of the shape of the
socket expander, its reach deep into the socket and the mechanical force applied by the sticking tape, changed repeatedly, to ensure proper
sticking. The use of a pressure conformer has been previously described in the literature,5 but to the best of our knowledge, the entire
procedure of fitting a special prosthesis post socket expansion, in these patients with severely contracted sockets, has not yet been
described in the literature. However, it is worthwhile to remember that this case of single-time placement of a non-expansile custom-made
stem pressure socket expander in an avascular irradiated socket needs to be conducted on a larger sample size with a longer duration of
follow-up, to judge the true efficacy of this procedure. (A) Custom-molded socket expander device: external photograph of patient presenting
with a painful inflamed right socket (B) Custom-molded socket expander device: photograph of orbital impression taken with ophthalmic grade
alginate (C) Custom-molded socket expander device: external photograph of patient fitted with custom-made stem pressure socket-expander (D)
Custom-molded socket expander device: external photograph of patient fitted with custom-made stem pressure socket-expander, with tape (A)
Custom-molded socket expander device: photograph of thicker prosthesis made up of high-density PMMA (B)Custom-molded socket-expander device:
external photograph of patient fitted with custom prosthesis (C)Custom-molded socket-expander device: external photograph of patient fitted
with custom prosthesis
