Carotid artery stenting is widely performed for extracranial carotid artery stenosis. In-stent thrombosis is a rare but potentially
devastating complication. We present a case of acute in-stent thrombosis immediately following stent insertion and post-balloon dilatation
in a 64-year-old male. Thrombosis was successfully treated by intravenous tirofiban, a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitor. Carotid
artery stenting is increasingly performed for moderate to severe extracranial carotid stenosis and is reported to have similar stroke
prevention and risk compared to endarterectomy.1,2 Carotid stent thrombosis is rare compared to coronary artery stent thrombosis,3,4 however
it can still result in devastating complications.5 Although glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitors (GPI) have been effectively used in
percutaneous coronary intervention, with and without intracoronary stenting, adjunctive GPI use in carotid stenting is unusual. There are
several case reports on abciximab, but none on tribofiban.6-8 We present a case of acute in-stent thrombosis successfully treated by
intravenous tirofiban. A 63-year-old male was admitted for management of known carotid artery stenosis. Medical history was significant for
nasopharyngeal lymphoma status post chemo and radiation therapy 14 years ago, and two episodes of left middle cerebral artery territory
infarction, one and seven years ago. Since the last event, he has been on antiplatelet agents (aspirin 100 mg/d). Left common carotid artery
stenosis was diagnosed by MR angiography two years ago. Other medications include an oral hypoglycemic and anti-hypertensive agent for
diabetes mellitus and hypertension. Neurologic examination showed no deficits. Aspirin (100 mg/d) and clopidogrel (75 mg/d) were
administered for two weeks prior to the procedure as usual preventive medication. A digital subtraction angiography showed severe (85%) long
segmental stenosis of the left common carotid and mild stenosis of the right vertebral artery orifice (Fig. 1A). A 4,000 unit heparin bolus
was given pre-dilatation and 5000 units mixed to 1000 mL of normal saline was used for intra-procedure continuous infusion. After Savvy
balloon (4 × 40mm, Cordis, Roden, Netherlands) pre-dilatation of the stenotic left common carotid, a SMART self-expandable carotid stent (7
× 80mm, Cordis, Miami, USA) was deployed. Due to residual stenosis, Savvy balloon (5 × 40mm, Cordis, Roden, Netherlands) post-dilatation was
performed for approximately 20 seconds. Immediately post-dilatation, a small filling defect at the distal stent aspect was noted (Fig. 1B).
As the defect acutely developed, we suspected acute platelet rich thrombus. Parenteral antiplatelet agent, tirofiban, was infused
intravenously with 0.4 µg/kg/min loading dose for 30 minutes, followed by 0.1 µg/kg/min continuous infusion. In-stent thrombus was
completely dissolved after 30 minutes of infusion (Fig. 1C). There was no occlusion of the distal intracranial vessels. He received
continuous infusion for the next 26 hours. Brain MRI after tirofiban showed small asymptomatic acute infarction on the right occipital lobe
in diffusion-weighted images (Fig. 2). There were no hemorrhagic complications. He was discharged without complication on the fourth post-
procedure day. Thrombosis can cause serious post-procedural complications of stent occlusion or distal embolization, resulting in acute
cerebral infarction. Acute stent thrombosis rate is reported to be approximately 0.5%.3,9 In the CAVATAS (Carotid and Vertebral Artery
Transluminal Angioplasty Study) trial, stroke occurred in 5% of patients immediately or soon after balloon dilatation and stenting. Although
the incidence of stroke attributable to acute stent thrombosis is unclear, a substantial proportion is assumed to be a direct result of
stent thrombosis or an indirect result by distal embolization.2 Several factors, including mechanical plaque disruption, intimal injury, and
stent thrombogenicity predispose the patient to thromboembolic events.10,11 Platelet adhesion, activation, and aggregation play main roles
in mural thrombus formation. Considering the mechanism of acute thrombosis, antiplatelet agents may be the best candidates for rescue
treatment. GPIs prevent thrombus formation and subsequent distal embolization by inhibiting the final common pathway of platelet
aggregation. GPIs have the advantage of parenteral use, and rapid and strong action compared to oral antiplatelet agents. There are three
GPIs (abciximab, tirofiban, eptifibatide) available for clinical use; significant differences exist in biological and plasma half-life
between abciximab and the small molecule agents (tirofiban and eptifibatide). Various trials of GPIs in percutaneous coronary intervention
showed favorable results. However, several trials evaluating routine adjuvant GPI use in carotid artery stent have demonstrated conflicting
results. Kapadia et al. showed decreasing procedural complications while other studies showed increased hemorrhagic complications.10-13 Most
clinical studies used abciximab, and little data exists on tirofiban; abciximab was used alone or combined with thrombolytics or mechanical
thrombectomy in acute stent thrombosis.6-8 Two cases used doses (0.25 mg/kg intravenous bolus and 0.125 µg/kg/min for 12 hours intravenous
infusion) typically administered in coronary artery disease and one case used a half dose (0.125 mg/kg) intra-arterially followed by a full
dose 12 hour infusion. All cases reported patent ICA after treatment. Tirofiban is a non-peptide tyrosin derivative that mimics the RGD
integrin recognition sequence; it has a very short platelet-bound half-life and relatively long plasma half-life. Therefore, it has an
advantage when rapid antiplatelet action reversal is required, such as patients with a high risk of hemorrhage or in combined use with
thrombolytics. When considering thrombolytics or emergency surgical treatment in cases of GPI failure, tirofiban may be more suitable than
abciximab. Furthermore, tirofiban is reported to produce a dose-dependent dethrombotic effect on stent thrombosis and inhibit acute de novo
thrombosis under high-shear flow conditions.14 Surgical management is another possible option for acute stent thrombosis. However, as acute
thrombosis is rare, it is difficult to accumulate evidence for a preferred treatment strategy. Setacci et al. reported positive results of
embolectomy, with or without stent removal, in cases of acute stent thrombosis following stenting while surgical treatment was commonly used
in cases of thrombosis after endarterctomy.9,15,16 We chose medical management rather than surgery, because the event occurred in the
angiography suite allowing immediate drug infusion. In this case, surgical intervention would have resulted in substantial delay and
increased time for ischemia. Furthermore, we had the experience of GPI success in acute thrombosis.17 This case demonstrates that
intravenous tirofiban can successfully resolve acute in-stent thrombosis during carotid stent insertion. Until the benefit of routine GPI
adjuvant use is proven by a large randomized clinical trial, GPIs should not be recommended for routine use. However, for intra-procedure
thrombus, it can be an effective rescue treatment.6,17 Digital subtraction cerebral angiography shows left common carotid artery stenosis
(A). Immediately after stent insertion and balloon dilatation in-stent thrombus (arrow) is seen (B). Thrombus disappears after intravenous
tirofiban infusion (C). Brain diffusion-weighted MRI shows small high signal lesions (arrow) in right occipital lobe.
