A 27-yr-old postgraduate student was found lying at the floor of an unsealed underground dry area, where a valve-opened empty cylinder of
liquid nitrogen (150 L) was connected to a cap-removed empty Dewar-flask (10 L) via a copper infusion tube. No injury was found externally
or internally. There were petechiae in the bilateral conjunctivae and periorbital skin. The dry area, measuring 300×130×260 cm, had a
communication to the basement of the research building by a window measuring 90×60 cm in size at 130 cm above the floor. The scene
reconstruction and atmosphere gas analysis revealed that the O2 concentration at 60 cm above the base dropped to 12.0% in 3 min and 10 sec,
10.0% in 8 min and 53 sec, 6.0% in 18 min and 40 sec, and 4.2% in 20 min and 28 sec. The primary cause of death was asphyxia by evaporated
liquid nitrogen. Nitrogen gas (N2), as a major inert gas of the atmosphere, is liquefied to liquid nitrogen (LN2) on cooling to -196℃ and
easily vaporizes at room temperature. Known to be harmless with the exception of potential frostbite injury, LN2 is widely used in
laboratories and in industry for freezing, filling, or cleaning purposes (1, 2). The few reported cases of accidental harm from LN2 (3-5)
were caused by careless management, which may have involved sudden LN2 evaporation leading to oxygen depletion in limited spaces. However,
those reports (3-5) did not reveal indisputable evidence of the cause of asphyxia even though they included complete autopsies,
toxicological analysis, and blood gas analysis. In this case report, a postgraduate student was found dead in an underground dry area where
a cylinder of LN2 had been disposed. By a complete autopsy, we analyzed the atmosphere gas of the dry area through a reconstruction of the
accidental scene in order to help define the cause of death. A 27-yr-old postgraduate student was found lying in a right lateral decubitis
position on the latticed plastic pallets paving the floor of an underground dry area adjacent to a research building, approximately 12:00
p.m. on a day in June (temperature, 21.9-27.2℃; mean wind velocity, 2.4 m/sec; and mean humidity, 75.5%). Beside him was a cap-removed,
empty Dewar-flask (10 L), connected to a valve-opened, empty cylinder of LN2 (150 L) via a copper infusion tube (Fig. 1). There was no leak
defect in the cylinder, the infusion tube, or the Dewar-flask. The dry area, measuring 300×130×260 cm in dimensions, had a communication to
the basement of the research building by a window measuring 90×60 cm in size at 130 cm above the base, as well as a drain hole located on
the floor (Fig. 2). His last videogram was taken within his laboratory room at 07:17 a.m., when he was just going outside with the empty
Dewar-flask in order to fill it with LN2. A college officer mentioned that the LN2 cylinder was fully filled on the day before the accident.
The autopsy was carried out 2 days later. No injury was found externally or internally. There were petechiae in the bilateral conjunctivae
and periorbital skin (Fig. 3). Dark red livor mortis was seen in the dependent areas of the cadaver, and the heart was filled with dark red
liquid blood. White froth was revealed in the lumens of the trachea and both bronchi. Neck dissection did not show any hemorrhage. Hyoid
bone and thyroid cartilage were also intact. A few lymph nodes in the mesentery of the small intestine were slightly enlarged, determined to
be reactive hyperplasia by histological examination. Congestion and edema were also noted in his organs without other pathomorphological
alteration. Scene reconstruction and atmosphere gas analysis (XP-302 II E, New Cosmos Electric Co., Osaka, Japan) were performed
approximately 10:00 a.m., on a sunny day in September (temperature, 22.6-28.7℃; mean wind velocity, 3.5 m/sec; and mean humidity, 70.9%),
approximately 2 months after the accident (Fig. 4). In order to reproduce the circumstances of the accident as closely as possible,
concentrations of O2, CO, and H2S were measured at a level of 2 m below the ground and 60 cm above the base, while opening the valve of the
cylinder filled with LN2, which was linked to an opened Dewar-flask. The O2 concentration dropped to 12.0% in 3 min and 10 sec, 10.0% in 8
min and 53 sec, 6.0% in 18 min and 40 sec, and 4.2% in 20 min and 28 sec (Fig. 5). LN2 is used widely because it is cheap and innoxious.
However, it is known that a small amount of LN2 can vaporize rapidly to large volumes of N2 (a liter of LN2 will produce 0.7 m3 of N2), and
sudden evaporation of LN2 to N2 in a limited space can lead to O2 depletion in the air (2). If the O2 concentration of atmosphere drops
below 10%, a human becomes unconscious immediately and unable rescue oneself from asphyxia (6). The dry area of this accident had been used
to dispose the LN2 for 2 yr without the awareness of such danger, due to the misconceptions of both N2 being an innoxious gas and the dry
area being an open space outside of the building. Therefore, it is a very important principle that LN2 must be disposed and used in an open
and well-ventilated place (1, 2), and guidelines are needed to minimize the likelihood of injury and illness occurring from the use and
storage of LN2. Within the categories of asphyxia, this case can be treated as an environmental suffocation with no specific autopsy
findings (7). However, external findings did include petechiae in the conjunctiva and periorbital skin, and internal findings included dark
red liquid blood in the heart and congestion of visceral organs. Petechiae in the conjunctiva and periorbital skin of the decedent were
unusual in that such petechiae in an asphyxiated cadaver generally suggests a sudden and strong break of venous return, as is commonly seen
as a result of mechanical compression of the neck. However, the decedent did not show signs of any mechanical strain. This raises doubt as
to whether petechiae are truly absent in cases of environmental suffocation (8). Frostbite was not present, owing to the plastic pallets at
the base that left a gap between his body and the floor while LN2 was overflowing and evaporating. Enlargement of a few visceral lymph nodes
might be reactive and self-limited. Scene reconstruction was performed on a day in September, approximately 2 months later, with weather
conditions similar to the day of the accident. In conclusion, this is a noteworthy case highlighting the risk of environmental suffocation
due to sudden evaporation of LN2 even in an open space, and the circumstances of death were eventually reproduced in scene reconstruction
and confirmed by atmosphere gas analysis. The accident site in the underground dry area showed a LN2 cylinder and a Dewar-flask that were
linked to a copper tube in front of two O2 tanks in a corner. The scheme of the accident site displayed general dimensions of the dry area,
the sites of cylinder and Dewar-flask, and a window communicated of the basement of the building, and indicated the level we measured
atmosphere gas proportion on scene reconstruction. Petechiae (arrowheads) were revealed in periorbital areas of the decedent. On scene
reconstruction, (A) a safe guard officer measured atmosphere gas proportion with XP- 302 II E (New Cosmos Electric Co., Osaka, Japan). (B)
The dry areas are filled with a lot of N2 fume evaporated from LN2. The graph showed rapid decreasing O2 concentration according to time
course in the dry area on scene reconstruction. Temporary increase of O2 concentration (arrow) after 06:25 should attribute to the change of
wind direction and velocity.
