Sympathetic ophthalmia following parsplana vitrectomy is a known complication. We describe here a case of recurrent disc neovascularization
in a patient of sympathetic ophthalmia. It promptly responded to steroids initially but later recurred with inflammation. Sympathetic
ophthalmia (SO) is a well-known cause of chronic granulomatous uveitis. Neovascularization of the disc (NVD) may occur in such chronic
uveitis, however, it has not been reported in SO to the best of our knowledge. Neovascularization of the disc in this case was also of a
recurrent nature. A 25-year-old female patient presented with 2 months history of gradual painless progressive diminution of vision
accompanied by floaters in the left eye. She had been treated with systemic and topical steroids with a presumptive diagnosis of pan uveitis
with disc edema at a primary health care center and was referred. Her history revealed that 8 months earlier she had undergone right eye
parsplana lensectomy and vitrectomy (PPL + PPV) with intravitreal antibiotics at a different center, for suspected metastatic
endophthalmitis secondary to post partum abscess. Culture reports were, however, not available. There was no visual improvement following
surgery and she had developed phthisical changes. On examination best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was no light perception in right eye
while left eye had counting fingers (CF) close to face with accurate light projection. In the left eye apart from fine keratic precipitates,
a 3+ cellular reaction was noted in both the anterior chamber (AC) and vitreous. Lens and intraocular pressure were normal. Fundus
examination showed the presence of hyperemic disc with blurred disc margins and tortuous dilated vessels [Fig. 1A]. It was associated with
serous retinal detachment with shifting fluid. Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) showed multiple tiny pinhead-sized hyperfluorescent
spots in the superior half of the retina [Fig. 1C and D] with an inferior serous retinal detachment. Late phase showed disc
hyperfluorescence with blurring of margins [Fig. 1B]. Systemic examination was normal which included hearing tests and dermatological
examination. A clinical diagnosis of SO was made and intravenous pulse steroids (Dexamethasone 100 mg in 150 ml of 5% dextrose) for three
days along with topical steroids and cycloplegics were started. Visual acuity improved to 13/200 on day four. Patient was continued on once
daily oral steroids at 1 mg/kg body weight. However, 2 weeks after therapy patient started to develop side-effects to steroids and hence
methotrexate 15 mg/week and folic acid 5 mg were added while steroid dose was reduced gradually by 10 mg/week. Six weeks after starting
methotrexate, cellular reaction reduced to 1+ in vitreous and no cells in AC with complete resolution of retinal detachment and the BCVA was
20/60. Patient was continued on these medications and was put on a monthly follow-up with close monitoring of the blood counts and liver
function. After 14 weeks of starting methotrexate, patient was noted to have developed abnormal fine branching vessels on the disc
suggestive of neovascularization and this was confirmed on the FFA [Fig. 2A and B]. Vitreous examination revealed 1+ cell, however, there
was no activity in the AC. Patient was treated with pan retinal photocoagulation (PRP) and a posterior subtenon (PST) injection 0.5 ml of 40
mg/ml triamcinalone acetonide while methotrexate was continued. Three months after the PRP, the vessels appeared to have regressed
clinically as well as on FFA compared to the initial presentation [Fig. 2C and D]. Two months later the patient presented with diminution of
vision. On examination her BCVA was 10/200, which rapidly deteriorated to CF close to face in two days. There was no activity in the
anterior segment while there were 2+ cells in the vitreous. Fundus examination revealed recurrence of NVD and multifocal serous detachments
involving the macula, however, there was no peripheral serous detachment [Fig. 3A and B]. The patient was given a repeat PST injection of
triamcinalone acetonide and the oral steroid was restarted at 1 mg/kg while continuing with methotrexate. Ten days after starting the
steroids serous detachments resolved and the vision improved to 20/200. Six weeks later the vision recovered to 20/60. The steroid dose was
gradually tapered over a period of 12 weeks and maintained at 20 mg/ day with methotrexate reduced to 7.5 mg/week. Sympathetic ophthalmia is
a rare sight-threatening bilateral panuveitis with an incidence of 0.03/100000.1 In our case, SO occurred after parsplana vitrectomy which
is a rare occurrence. The reported incidence of SO following vitreoretinal surgeries is 1 in 80011 and has shown an increasing trend,
especially with repeated surgeries. A corresponding risk following external retinal detachment repair is 1 in 1357.1 Kilmartin et al,1 in
their study have noted that the current SO risk following vitrectomy is more than twice that previously reported by Gass (0.06%). Based on
their study1 the same authors in a commentary on SO2 have suggested that it would be appropriate to counsel patients regarding the risk of
SO before the vitrectomy procedure. Pollack et al.3 in the largest case series of SO following vitrectomy without a previous trauma have
noted that SO following such surgical procedure may have diverse presentations and any atypical or persistent uveitis following vitreous
surgery should alert the treating surgeon of possible SO. Another important manifestation in this case was NVD. Although occurrence of NVD
is known in Behcetâ€²s disease, chronic uveitis4 and Vogt Koyanagi Harada disease,5 it has not been reported in SO to the best of our
knowledge. NVD was of recurrent nature with the recurrence of inflammation. In our patient the clinical setting of previous ocular surgery
and findings in the left eye were consistent with a diagnosis of SO. Early and prompt use of immunosuppressive therapy with systemic
steroids and steroid-sparing agents such as cyclosporin A,6 azathioprine,6 chlorambucil have improved the prognosis in patients with SO. In
our case we were able to use methotrexate to successfully control the inflammation after initial treatment with a combination of
intravenous, oral and topical steroids. After the initial control of inflammation the patient developed NVD after 14 weeks of
immunosuppressive treatment. Considering that this was the only seeing eye of the patient and also the lack of a well-defined protocol for
treating such NVD in chronic uveitis, we decided to treat the patient with PST injection of triamcinalone acetonide. A PRP was also done
considering the one-eyed status although there was no ischemia on FFA. The combined therapeutic approach was initially effective and
resulted in regression of the NVD after 12 weeks. However, the NVD recurred within 8 weeks and was associated with multifocal serous
detachments and inflammation in the vitreous cavity. On restarting steroids with another PST injection of triamcinalone acetonide the serous
detachments resolved within four days. Although the initial occurrence of NVD was not associated with increased activity in vitreous its
prompt response to steroids (systemic + PST) and its later recurrence with inflammation is suggestive of an inflammatory pathomechanism. The
role of PRP in this case is unclear, however, the recurrence of NVD with flare-up of inflammation suggests that PRP may not be useful in
this setting. We suggest that systemic immunosuppression along with repeated PST injection of triamcinalone acetonide may be useful in
treating such NVD in chronic uveitis. (A) Fundus at presentation showing hyperemic disc with blurred disc margins and tortuous dilated
vessels (B) Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) showing disc hyper uorescence with blurring of margins in late phase (C) FFA showing
multiple areas (encircled) of pinhead-sized leaks (arrow) (D) FFA showing multiple areas (encircled) of pinhead-sized leaks (arrow) (A)
Change after 14 weeks of methotrexate, abnormal fine branching vessels seen on the disc (B) Neovascularization of disc (NVD) was confi rmed
on the fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) (C) Three months after the pan retinal photocoagulation, the vessels appeared to have regressed
clinically (D) Reduced leakage on FFA compared to initial presentation (A) Recurrence of NVD with reactivation of inflammation (B) Fundus
fluorescein angiography showing increased leakage from NVD with diffuse leak in the macular area
