Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome (BHDS) is an autosomal dominant genodermatosis characterized by cutaneous hair follicle tumors (fibrofolliculoma or
trichodiscoma), pulmonary cysts, and increased risk of renal neoplasia. The genetic alteration for BHDS has been mapped to chromosome
17p12q11, and the gene in this region has been cloned and believed to be responsible for the BHDS. Mutations in the BHD gene (also known as
FLCN) have been described in the patients with BHDS. We present a case of a 30-yr-old Korean woman with multiple mildly pruritic papules on
her face and neck area. The patient had several firm, flesh-colored, dome-shaped, papular lesions measuring between 2 to 5 mm. Except for a
history of pneumothorax her medical records were not remarkable. Mutation analysis of the BHD gene was performed, and a novel deletion
mutation (p.F519LfsX17 ) causing truncation of the gene product, folliculin, was found in the exon 14. The actual incidence of BHDS is
unknown, but it is most likely underdiagnosed. So it is imperative that doctors recognize the skin lesions of BHDS and institute proper
screening to detect other manifestations of the disease. Here, we report a case of BHDS with a novel mutation, which is the first report in
Korea. Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome (BHDS) is an inherited autosominal dominant genodermatosis that predisposes individuals to the development of
fibrofolliculomas (FF), trichodiscomas (TD), and acrochordons of the face, neck, and upper trunk (1). There is also an increased risk for
lung cysts, spontaneous pneumothorax, and renal carcinomas in affected people, and some patients may also develop colorectal polyps and
cancers (2-4). The disease is caused by germline mutations in the BHD (also known as FLCN) gene located in 17p11.2 encoding folliculin, a
new protein with unknown function (5). We report a patient with BHDS in which mutation analysis subsequently revealed a novel mutation. A
31-yr-old woman visited the Department of Dermatology for evaluation of long-standing mildly pruritic facial papules that she had had for 10
yr (Fig. 1). Previously she had been treated with CO2 laser and Aldara ointment with the impression of verruca or syringoma but with little
effect. Physical examination revealed several firm, flesh-colored, dome-shaped, papular lesions ranging from 2 to 5 mm in diameter,
distributed on the face and neck area. The patient had a history of pneumothorax; otherwise, her medical history was not notable. Skin
biopsies of the facial papules were performed. One sample showed concentric layers of cellular fibrous tissue around hair follicles with an
aritifactual cleft separating the fibroma from adjacent connective tissue (Fig. 2A). Also in another sample, a raised papule composed of
connective tissue surrounded by a lateral collarette was seen (Fig. 2B). Staining with alcian blue and elastin stain revealed an
unencapsulated loosely woven admixture of collagen and thin elastic fibers with mucin. Periodic acid-schiff (PAS) staining showed multiple
thin and thick walled blood vessels with PAS-positive basement membrane within the substane of the tumor. The biopsy findings were
consistent with perifollicular fibroma and trichodiscoma, respectively. Computed tomographic scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed
multiple cysts on both lower lung zone, with sizes ranging from 1.4-2.4 cm and a small amount of pneumothorax noted on the left anterior
basal hemithorax. The scan did not show any abnormalities in the kidney or colon. There was no family history of renal tumors, colon
carcinoma, or other benign or malignant neoplasm. However, the patient reported that her two aunts died of 'lung disease' (diagnosis
unknown) and one of her older sisters was remembered to have had multiple tumorous lesions. Both of her older sisters passed away at an
early age but she did not know the cause of death. Molecular analysis of the BHD gene was performed after informed consent from the patient.
Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes, and subjected to mutation analysis. All the coding regions of the BHD gene
(exons 4-14) were amplified using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with oligonucleotide primers we designed (Table 1). The amplified PCR
products were sequenced using the ABI 3100 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems/Hitachi, Foster City, CA, U.S.A.). Sequencing analysis
revealed a novel deletion mutation (p.F519LfsX17 ) in the BHD gene exon 14 of the patient (Fig. 3). This mutation results in producing the
truncated protein folliculin, which is caused by frameshift of amino acid sequence in the BHD gene product. Also, this deletion mutation has
not yet been found in the normal populations, indicating that this mutation is the real cause of the syndrome in this case. BHDS was
recently found to be caused by heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in the BHD tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 17p11.2, which encodes
the novel protein folliculin. Mutations are predicted to result in truncation of folliculin. Fluorescent in situ hybridization has shown the
expression of BHD mRNA in many normal tissues including the skin and its appendages, the distal nephron of the kidney, stromal cells, and
type 1 pneumocytes of the lung (6). The function of the BHD gene in tumorigenesis, however, has not yet been elucidated. The defective
protein in patients with BHDS may affect the cell's cytoskeleton, disrupting the extracellular matrix and affecting the regulation of
cellular proliferation (7). Because patients with BHDS have inactivating mutations in the BHD gene, and many BHDS tumors exhibit loss of
heterozygosity, the BHD gene is considered to be a tumor suppressor gene (7). Fluorescent in situ hybridization showed that BHD mRNA was
strongly expressed in the proliferating epithelial strands of FFs but not expressed in the renal tumors of patients with BHDS. This further
supports a tumor suppressor role for BHD in renal cancer (8). Genotype-phenotype correlation remains to be evaluated for BHDS, but it was
recently suggested that significantly fewer renal tumors were observed in patients with the C-deletion than those with the C-insertion
mutation in the exon 11 hotspot (9). To date, several different BHD germline mutations have been identified with mutations affecting all
translated exons (4-11) with the exception of exons 8 and 10. Our patient showed novel mutation in the exon 14 (Fig. 4). Clinical diagnosis
of BHDS requires a minimum of 10 skin lesions clinically compatible with FFs and at least one histologically proven FF (5, 9). FF and TD
present as asymptomatic single or multiple dome-shaped papules commonly located on the head, neck, back, and arms. Biopsy from our patient
showed features of perifollicular fibroma and trichodiscoma. However, many researchers now consider perifollicular fibroma in patients with
BHDS to actually represent FF (10). Thus, based on clinical and histological findings, our patient could be diagnosed as BHDS. Since its
description in 1977, BHDS has been linked to tumors of nearly every organ system. BHDS patients are 9.3 times more likely to develop a renal
tumor than unaffected persons, and are 32.3 times more likely to develop a spontaneous pneumothorax (12). Older age and male gender increase
the risk for renal tumors, whereas the risk of spontaneous pneumothorax is inversely associated with age (12). Between 15% and 30% of BHDS-
affected patients develop renal cancers (13). Because of the inherited predisposition, patients develop renal tumors much earlier than
unaffected persons, typically developing tumors in their 20s or 30s instead of in their 70s and often presenting with multiple, bilateral
renal cancers. In the absence of strictly defined guidelines, it is recommended that patients with clinical manifestations of BHDS undergo
abdominal computed tomography and/or renal ultrasound at the time of diagnosis. Interval screening may be performed every 3 to 5 yr.
Siblings should have a complete physical examination with biopsy of lesions suspicious for FF/TDs beginning in their 20s. Routine screening
for renal pathology may begin if they have FF or at age 40 yr. Tumors less than 3 cm are observed, whereas tumors larger than 3 cm are
treated with nephron-sparing procedures including partial nephrectomy (14). Spontaneous pneumothorax was more likely to occur in younger
patients with BHDS (12). Pneumothorax typically presents with dyspnea and chest pain. Clinical findings include tachypnea, diminished or
absent breath sounds, and hyperresonace. Radiographic examination confirms the diagnosis. Patients with BHDS should be informed of the
increased risk and educated on the signs and symptoms of pneumothorax. Our patient was diagnosed with pneumothorax in her 20s but other
concominant abnormalities were not found. However, as the risk of renal tumors increases with age we advised the patient to have regular
screening. The risk for colon polyps and colon cancer was not increased in BHDS (12), so screening for colon pathology may not be warranted.
However, routine screening by colonoscopy is included in the currently recommended guideline for all patients aged >50 yr. The decision to
undergo examination at an earlier age should be discussed with the patient. The actual incidence of BHDS is unknown, and the disease is most
likely underdiagnosed. It is imperative that physicians recognize the skin lesions of BHDS and institute proper screening to detect other
manifestations of the disease, such as renal tumors and lung cysts. Patients with numerous facial and truncal papules resembling FFs are
candidates for biopsy. In summary, we report a case of BHDS with a novel mutation, which is the first report in Korea. Multiple small dome-
shaped, flesh-colored papules on the face and neck. (A) Concentric layers of cellular fibrous tissue around hair follicles representing
perifollicular fibroma (hematoxylin-eosin stain; original magnification ×40, inset ×200). (B) Raised papule composed of connective tissue
surrounded by a lateral collarette representing trichodiscoma (hematoxylin-eosin stain; original magnification ×40, inset ×200). Sequence
analysis of the Birt-Hogg-Dubé gene, showing deletion of a thymidine in the exon 14 (c.2012delT). Distribution of mutations reported in
Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome. The primer sequences used in the amplification of the BHD gene
