Naturally Acquired Human Plasmodium knowlesi Infection, Singapore We report a case of naturally acquired Plasmodium knowlesi in Singapore, a
malaria-free country. Diagnosis was confirmed by PCR with validated species-specific primers. In industrialized countries, free-ranging
primates are a potential source of P. knowlesi human infection. P. knowlesi infection is a differential diagnosis of febrile illness
acquired in Singapore. Plasmodium knowlesi is one of the simian malarias that causes human infection (1,2). All 6 published reports of
naturally acquired P. knowlesi infection were in rural settings with the largest case series being reported from East Malaysia (3–8). P.
knowlesi is commonly misidentified as P. malariae since the blood stages are morphologically similar on microscopy, and molecular methods of
detection are necessary for accurate diagnosis (5,8). Singapore is an urban city-state, which was declared free of human malaria by the
World Health Organization in 1982 (9). However, we report a case of locally acquired P. knowlesi malaria, which indicates that this emerging
zoonotic parasite should be considered as an etiologic agent of acute febrile illness acquired in Singapore, the southern-most locale
reported thus far. A previously healthy 20-year-old soldier in the Singapore Army sought treatment on April 28, 2007. He had had a fever for
4 days, along with myalgia, anorexia, nausea, and occasional vomiting. For a year leading up to his illness, he had trained in a forested
area inhabited by the long-tailed macaque (Macaca fascicularis) in Lim Chu Kang, northwestern Singapore. His only travel out of Singapore
was a 3-week training visit to a non–malaria-endemic foreign country in September 2006 and another visit to Bukit Batok Nature Reserve in
western Singapore, an area with monkeys (M. fascicularis) 1 month before onset of symptoms. On initial examination, his temperature was
39.5°C with a pulse rate of 106 beats/min. He was lethargic with tender hepatomegaly. Laboratory investigations showed thrombocytopenia
(platelet count 66 × 109/L), hyperbilirubinemia (bilirubin 33 mmol/L [reference level 7–31 mmol/L]), and mild transaminitis (alanine
transaminase 64 U/L [reference level 17–63 mmol/L] and aspartate transaminase 67 U/L [reference level 15–41 mmol/L]). Initial diagnosis was
dengue fever, which is endemic in Singapore. The patient experienced daily fever spikes from 39.5°C to 40.4°C (Figure 1). When fever
persisted (40.4°C on day 6 of his illness, hospital day 3), the clinical picture was atypical for dengue fever. Blood films for malaria
parasites were ordered, because introduced cases of malaria have been reported in Singapore (10). Microscopy showed Plasmodium parasitemia
of 0.2% (equivalent to 7,700 parasites/mmol/L blood) with morphologic features consistent with P. malariae. Results of dengue reverse
transcription–PCR (RT-PCR) on serum, 2 sets of blood cultures, and Rickettsia typhi serologic testing were negative. Results of a chest
radiograph and ultrasound of the abdomen were normal. Patient’s temperature chart showing fever spikes 24 h apart at approximately 7 PM
daily (red arrow). The black arrow denotes 38°C, and each blue arrow denotes a difference of 1°C from the neighboring arrow. Oral
chloroquine was started with an initial dose of 600 mg base, followed by 300 mg base 6 h later and another 2 doses over the next 2 days. He
defervesced rapidly; blood smears were negative 3 days after chloroquine therapy. At 2 weeks follow-up, he was clinically well. Because P.
malariae infection was not consistent with the clinical findings of the initial examination, we investigated further to determine the
etiology of this case. End-point nested Plasmodium genus- and species-specific nested PCR carried out on DNA extracted from whole blood
samples were positive for Plasmodium sp. but negative for the 4 species that cause human malaria (Table) (11). Similarly, the sample was
negative on real-time PCR for the 4 human parasites (12). P. knowlesi species-specific PCR resulted in a 153-bp fragment indicative of P.
knowlesi (5). This 153-bp PCR product was directly sequenced and verified in the BLAST database (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/Blast.cgi) to
match only P. knowlesi small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA). *PCR was carried out at the Environmental Health Institute and cycling
conditions used were as described in the references shown in parentheses. +, positive; –,negative. We confirmed the pathogen by using
previously described approaches to compare the sequences of the 5′ and 3′ ends of the circumsporozoite protein (csp) gene (13), as well as
the gene encoding of the sSSU rRNA (5) in our case sample, to other Plasmodium parasites. Sequences were obtained by direct sequencing of
PCR products and aligned by using the ClustalW method (EMBL-EBI, Hixton, Cambridge, UK); we constructed phylogenetic trees by using the
MegAlign software (DNASTAR Inc, Madison, WI, USA). The case sample (denoted as SingPk1) clustered with other P. knowlesi isolates and is
clearly distinct from other Plasmodium species (Figure 2). Phylogenetic trees comparing our case sample (denoted as SingPk1) with other
Plasmodium species, based on SSU rRNA (A) and csp (B) sequences. Species and sequences used were selected to match those previously reported
(5). Figures on the branches are bootstrap percentages based on 1,000 replicates, and only those above 80% are shown. GenBank accession
numbers are in parentheses. We describe an unequivocal case of P. knowlesi infection supported by clinical findings and laboratory
diagnostics classic for this pathogen. Similar to our patient, the classic scenario that raises the suspicion of P. knowlesi infection is a
blood smear consistent with P. malariae but with parasitemia exceeding 5,000 per mmol/L blood, daily fever spikes, and pronounced symptoms,
features atypical for P. malariae infection (1,5). The daily fever spike is due to the P. knowlesi 24-hour asexual life cycle, the shortest
of all primate malarias (8). P. malariae has a 72-hour asexual life cycle and manifests as chronic, asymptomatic infection with low level
parasitemia (5). As in this case, P. knowlesi is commonly mistaken for P. malariae by microscopy due to similarity of the blood stages (5).
P. knowlesi can be misidentified as P. falciparum if only ring forms are identified (5). The P. knowlesi–specific primers used by both
independent laboratories have previously been shown not to detect any of the 4 Plasmodium species that cause human infection or the 3 agents
that cause simian malaria: P. cynomolgi, P. fieldi, and P. fragile (5). PCR detection using P. knowlesi–specific primers, followed by
sequencing and phylogenetic analyses of the csp and SSU rRNA genes confirmed P. knowlesi infection in our patient. This report extends the
range of natural P. knowlesi human infection from East Malaysia, peninsular Malaysia, Thailand, and Myanmar to Singapore, an industrialized
country that had been declared malaria-free by WHO (3–8). Our patient likely acquired the infection in the forested area in Lim Chu Kang
where he had been training for the entire year before his illness. Experimental P. knowlesi studies show a prepatent period of 9–12 days in
humans (14). P. knowlesi has no liver hypnozoite stage and does not cause relapse (1). The patient’s pevious overseas travel 7 months before
and his visit to Bukit Batok Nature Reserve a month before onset of illness are beyond the incubation period. P. knowlesi’s natural hosts
are the macaques, M. fascicularis and Macaca nemestrina (1). Notably, the first studies on P. knowlesi were on a parasite isolated from a
macaque imported into India from Singapore (2). M. fascicularis and Presbytis femoralis are the 2 native monkeys in Singapore, with M.
fascicularis being the only species in Lim Chu Kang and Bukit Batok Nature Reserve (15). Mosquitoes of the Anopheles leucophyrus group have
been identified as vectors of P. knowlesi and are present in surrounding countries in southeast Asia (1,8). Studies are ongoing to determine
potential mosquito vectors and whether macaques are hosts of P. knowlesi in Singapore. Our patient’s condition was diagnosed within 6 days
of illness, and the infection responded rapidly to oral chloroquine. Although most patients’ infections respond well to antimalarial agents,
4 fatal cases of P. knowlesi infection were reported recently in patients ages 39 to 69 years, whose conditions were all diagnosed within 7
days of symptom onset (8). Common clinical features included fever, abdominal pain, thrombocytopenia (platelet count <30 × 109/ μL), renal
impairment, and jaundice. All of the patients received a misdiagnosis of P. malariae infection. P. knowlesi infection should be considered
as an etiologic agent of malaria acquired in Singapore, particularly in cases with daily fever spikes and blood smears suggestive of P.
malariae. Epidemiologic studies into the parasite’s reservoir and mosquito vector will be important in the prevention of this emerging
zoonotic disease. Suggested citation for this article: Ng OT, Ooi EE, Lee CC, Jarrod LP, Ng LC, Wong PS, et al. Naturally acquired human
Plasmodium knowlesi infection, Singapore. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2008 May [date cited]. Available from
http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/14/5/814.htm We thank Professor Balbir Singh for his useful comments and advice on the revision of our
manuscript; David Lye for comments on the manuscript; Sharon Chan for sharing her data on monkeys in Singapore; Kuperan Ponnudurai for the
photomicrograph; and Victor Koh, Janet Chew, and Shirley Seah for their assistance with molecular and sequence analyses. Dr Ng is currently
a registrar at the Communicable Disease Centre in Singapore. His research interests include HIV medicine and tropical disease.
