To the Editor: Respiratory viral infections can be associated with a wide range of clinical manifestations from self-limiting upper
respiratory tract diseases to pneumonia (1). However, in general, respiratory viral infections are more likely to progress to more severe
diseases in immmunocompromised patients. Human metapneumovirus (hMPV) has been reported in most parts of the world as a cause of acute
respiratory tract infections in persons of all age groups (2). Fatal hMPV infections have been reported in immunocompromised patients,
including a 17-month-old girl who had acute lymphoblastic leukemia (3) and a 33-year-old woman who had received a hematopoietic stem cell
transplant (HSCT) (4). In adult HSCT recipients, fatal pneumonia (5) and persistent hMPV infection without respiratory symptoms have been
described (6). In addition, adult lung transplant recipients have been able to clear hMPV infection despite high levels of immunosuppression
(7). We report a case of persistent hMPV infection in a child with severe combined immunodeficiency disorder (SCID) who shed hMPV during an
11-month period. The child, a girl who was born in January 2002, received an allogeneic haploidentical stem cell transplant from her father
in May 2002 after her diagnosis of SCID. Infection with influenza A virus (H3N2) was diagnosed on April 2005 and progressed to a chronic
pneumonitis of the lingula. She received successive courses of anti-influenza agents (amantadine, oseltamivir, and zanamivir) for 1 year
during which time several positive influenza cultures were obtained (8). Four years after the transplant, she was still lymphopenic (800 ×
109/L, mostly T cells) and had chronic graft-versus-host disease, which had been treated with steroids (prednisone 2.5 mg twice a day for
many months). She also had a mild chronic cough but did not need supplemental oxygen while she was receiving nebulized zanamivir (10–20 mg
twice a day). Her 2 nasopharyngeal aspirate (NPA) specimens from June and July 2006 were negative for influenza virus. However, positive
cultures for hMPV were obtained from NPA and bronchoalveolar lavage specimens collected on July 2006. After receiving this result, we
performed retrospective and prospective molecular detection studies for hMPV for this patient. HMPV was detected by reverse
transcription–PCR for the F and G genes (9) in 6 and 7 NPA samples, respectively, collected during an 11-month period from November 4, 2005,
through October 4, 2006. These samples were obtained for surveillance of influenza infection in this child with persistent cough. Amplified
hMPV G sequences were aligned by using the ClustalW program (www.molecularevolution.org/cdc/software/clustalw). A phylogenetic tree was
constructed with MEGA 3.1 software (www.megasoftware.net) by using the neighbor-joining algorithm with Kimura-2 parameters. Sequence
analysis of the hMPV G gene showed that all strains belonged to the B2 genotype, which clustered with hMPV Can98–75 and NL1/94 reference
strains (Figure, panel A). Amplified hMPV G gene sequences of the 6 samples collected in 2006 were identical, but they had 96.7% and 92.8%
nucleotide and amino acid identities, respectively, with the initial strain from November 2005, which clearly indicates 2 viral strains
(Figure, panel B). Similar results were obtained with the F gene (data not shown). Inoculation of the respiratory samples on a panel of 10
cell lines as previously described (10) showed that only 2 of 7 NPA samples were positive for hMPV by culture; 2 of the 5 remaining samples
were positive for influenza A, which may have masked the cytopathic effects of hMPV on rhesus monkey kidney (LLC-MK2) cells. A) Phylogenetic
analysis of human metapneumovirus (hMPV) strains isolated during an 11-month period based on nucleotide sequences of the G gene. Multiple
nucleotide sequence alignments were performed by using the ClustalW program (www.molecularevolution.org/cdc/software/clustalw); a
phylogenetic tree was constructed with MEGA 3.1 software (www.megasoftware.net) by using the neighbor-joining algorithm with Kimura-2
parameters. The analysis included the following hMPV reference strains: Can98/75 (GenBank accession no. AY485245), NL1/94 (AY304362), NL1/99
(AY304361), NL1/00 (AF371337), NL17/00 (AY304360), and Can97/83 (AY485253). Scale bar indicates 1 substitution for every 10 nucleic acid
residues. Boldface indicates reference isolates. B) Comparison of the partial amino acid sequences (residues 26–236) of the G protein of
hMPV isolates recovered during an 11-month period from an immunocompromised child. Asterisks denote identical residues; shaded boxes
highlight different amino acids between the hMPV variant of November 4, 2005, and the subsequent variants from January 20, 2006, to October
4, 2006. Persistent hMPV infection in asymptomatic adult HSCT recipients has been described (6). In that study, hMPV was isolated from 2
patients in 2 consecutive samples collected 12–56 days apart. However, virus evolution was not adequately investigated because it was based
on sequence analysis of a 150-bp fragment from the highly conserved nucleoprotein gene (6). Unlike in previous reports (6,7),
characterization of hMPV strains in our study was performed by sequence analysis of a 633-bp fragment from the most variable hMPV G gene.
Our findings showed 2 distinct hMPV variants of the same genotype (B2). These variants might represent a viral drift after immune pressure
but most likely was the result of 2 different infections in the immunocompromised child. The latter hypothesis is suggested by the
considerable amino acid variability (15 aa differences in the 211-aa region of the G protein) between strains collected on November, 4,
2005, and January, 20, 2006, compared with identical sequences for the strains recovered over the next 10 months. Debiaggi et al. (6)
previously suggested that persistent hMPV infection in HSCT patients was attributable to their inability to clear the virus because of
impaired immune response. By contrast, adult lung transplant recipients were found to be able to achieve hMPV clearance despite their severe
immunosuppression status (7). Because both fatal and mild or asymptomatic hMPV infections have been reported in immunocompromised hosts,
additional studies are needed to determine whether such differing outcomes are due to viral, host, or environmental factors. In conclusion,
this case of persistent hMPV infection associated with relatively mild respiratory symptoms in an immunocompromised child suggests that the
host’s immune response may play a key role in disease pathogenesis. Suggested citation for this article: Abed Y, Boivin G. Persistent human
metapneumovirus infection in immunocompromised child . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2008 May [date cited]. Available from
http://www.cdc.gov/eid/content/14/5/854.htm
