We report the diagnostic potential of cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) to visualize the time course of eosinophilic myocarditis upon
successful treatment. A 50-year-old man was admitted with a progressive heart failure. Endomyocardial biopsies were taken from the left
ventricle because of a white blood cell count of 17000/mm3 with 41% eosinophils. Histological evaluation revealed endomyocardial
eosinophilic infiltration and areas of myocyte necrosis. The patient was diagnosed with hypereosinophilic myocarditis due to idiopathic
hypereosinophilic syndrome. CMR-studies at presentation and a follow-up study 3 weeks later showed diffuse subendocardial LGE in the whole
left ventricle. Upon treatment with steroids, CMR-studies revealed marked reduction of subendocardial LGE after 3 months in parallel with
further clinical improvement. This case therefore highlights the clinical importance of CMR to visualize the extent of endomyocardial
involvement in the diagnosis and treatment of eosinophilic myocarditis. A 50-year-old man was admitted with a suspicion of an acute coronary
syndrome because of progressive dyspnea and positive Troponin I (9.5 ng/ml). A two-dimensional echocardiogram revealed severe left
ventricular hypokinesis with an ejection fraction of 27%. Upon coronary angiography, coronary artery disease was excluded. Because of a
white blood cell count of 17000/mm3 with 41% eosinophils, endomyocardial biopsies were taken from the left ventricle. Histological
evaluation showed marked endomyocardial eosinophilic infiltration and areas of myocyte necrosis (Figure 1A). Further evaluation revealed no
evidence of secondary hypereosinophilia (malignant diseases, allergy, vasculitis, parasitic infection). The patient was diagnosed with
hypereosinophilic myocarditis due to idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome. Medication with steroids and heart failure was initiated
promptly and the patient improved rapidly. (A) Endomyocardial biopsy specimen. Extensive eosinophilic infiltrate involving the endocardium
and myocardium (hematoxylin and eosin). Corresponding CMR short-axis slices (basal, middle, apical) during acute presentation (B), after 3
weeks (C), and after 3 months (D) showing marked regression of subendocardial LGE. CMR-studies at presentation and a follow-up study 3 weeks
later showed diffuse subendocardial LGE in the whole left ventricle with involvement of the papillary muscles. Upon 3 months follow up,
however, subendocardial LGE has markedly decreased in parallel with further clinical improvement (Figures 1B,C,D). Ejection fraction has
improved from 27% at baseline to 35% after 3 months and end diastolic volumes have decreased from 195 ml to 161 ml. There was no evidence of
mural thrombi at baseline and during follow-up studies and there were no signs of restrictive filling patterns in Doppler and tissue-Doppler
echocardiography. NT-pro-BNP decreased from initially 16319 pg/ml to 5305 pg/ml at 3 weeks and to 1926 pg/ml at 3 months. In conclusion,
diagnosis of eosinophilic myocarditis due to idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome was made in the early stage. Upon treatment with
steroids, CMR-studies revealed marked reduction of subendocardial LGE representing acute inflammation and necrosis. Treatment with steroids
in the early stage might have prevented further progression to the intermediate thrombotic-necrotic stage with mural thrombi and the
fibrotic stage which has been postulated as the final stage in the time course of eosinophilic myocarditis . This case highlights the
clinical importance of CMR which is the only noninvasive method to visualize the extent of endomyocardial involvement in the diagnosis and
treatment of eosinophilic myocarditis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
