Vogt–Koyanagi–Harada (VKH) disease is a granulamatous inflammatory disease affecting the eyes, auditory system, meninges and the skin .
Although headache, a prodromal sign, is present in 67% of patients , VKH disease is rarely encountered in neurology practice [3, 4]. Case 1
A 22-year-old woman reported a sudden onset of continuous severe headache followed by gradually evolved bilateral blurred vision. An MRI of
the brain and orbital were normal. Analysis of CSF revealed monocytosis. Neuroophthalmologic examination revealed swelling of the optic
disks and a cell reaction in vitreous and anterior chamber (Fig. 1a, b). She was diagnosed as incomplete VKH disease. For 10 days, 1 g/day
intravenous methyl prednisolone (IVMP) treatment was administered, following an oral dose with 2 mg/kg per day. One week later, her symptoms
were completely improved. Steroid treatment continued for 3 months with gradual decrease.Fig. 1a Pathologic funduscopic examination with
papilledema and cell reaction in vitreous and anterior chamber. b Pathologic funduscopic examination with papilledema and cell reaction in
vitreous and anterior chamber a Pathologic funduscopic examination with papilledema and cell reaction in vitreous and anterior chamber. b
Pathologic funduscopic examination with papilledema and cell reaction in vitreous and anterior chamber Case 2 A 47-year-old woman presented
with a 3-week history of diffuse and bilateral, orbito-retroorbital headache and bilateral acute vision loss. Cranial CT, MRI and MR
angiography were normal. CSF pressure was normal. Analysis of CSF revealed 90% of monocytosis. Her funduscopic examination showed hyperemia
and swelling of the optic disk. She was diagnosed with incomplete VKH. For ten days, 1 g/kg IVMP treatment was administered. In the sixth
day of the treatment headache and visual complaints were improved. Treatment continued with high dose oral steroid (2 mg/kg) and decreased
gradually. In patients with VKH disease meningeal involvement may cause severe devastating headache mimicking other types of acute
headaches. Symptoms might be interpreted as optic neuritis, pituitary apoplexy or intracranial hypertension if headache is associated with
ocular findings. Moreover, integumentary symptoms such as allopesia, poliosis, vitiligo appear only late at the convalescent stage of the
disease. Therefore, the diagnostic criteria lack sensitivity for the early diagnosis of VKH disease particularly in neurology emergencies.
If the brain MRI is normal, diagnosis could be more confusing. VKH disease should be considered in the differential diagnosis of patients
presenting with acute headache followed by bilateral blurred vision. Early diagnosis and adequate treatment are the keys to success.
Corticosteroid is essential in the management of VKH disease.
