Meniscal cysts are well-defined and documented lesions that were first reported by Nicaise in 1883 (according to Kurian, 2003)1 and are
located adjacent to the peripheral margin of the meniscus. They are almost always associated with a meniscal tear.2 Even though Barrie3
reported meniscal cysts in up to 7% of patients undergoing meniscectomy, others have stated that the true prevalence is probably about 1% of
patients who undergo meniscectomy4. In addition, while some authors have advocated that lateral meniscal cysts are three to ten times more
common than medial cysts5, others have stated that medial cysts are more frequent6;7. Meniscal cysts are most often seen in young adults and
occur more frequently in men than women.8 A 66-year-old woman had a history of mild pain in the left knee that had increased in severity
over six months. There was no history of trauma. On examination, the patient had pain in the medial aspect of the joint line, with focal
tissue swelling on the medial aspect of the knee. The swelling was large (Figure 1) and painful, but the knee did not lock or give way. On
physical examination, a consistent and large, orange-sized mass could be seen and palped. Lachman’s, McMurray’s, and Apley’s tests were
negative, and the range of motion was 0 - 110º. Magnetic resonance showed that the mass was multi-lobulated with thin septations and
surrounded the medial collateral ligament (Figures 2, 3, 4). Through a medial arthrotomy (Figure 5), the cyst was excised intact with its
correspondent meniscus (Figure 6). The specimen measured 50 x 40 x 40 mm and contained clear gelatinous material. A split retinacular graft
was performed to fulfil the capsule failure. Histological examination showed chronic inflammation without malignancy. The patient was
ordered to wear a brace with partial weight bearing for two weeks. Rehabilitation occurred uneventfully. After a 2-year follow-up, the
patient had full range of articular motion with no recurrence. The etiology of meniscal cysts is controversial. Many authors advocate that
trauma, chronic infection, hemorrhage, and mucoid degeneration may lead to the development of these entities9. Because the fluid found in
meniscal cysts is similar to sinovial fluid, the prevailing view is that cysts form from joint fluid that is forced through a peripherally
extended meniscal tear and accumulates outside the joint capsule10. Pain is most likely related to the associated meniscal tears, but
discomfort may also be due to stretching of the knee capsule and other parameniscal soft tissues11. The mass may be multiloculate and
demonstrate thin internal septations, and its consistency may vary from soft and fluctuant to firm or bone-hard. MRI is preferred for
evaluating meniscal cysts6,12 because it shows structures such as the menisci, cartilage and ligaments and is the most effective modality to
evaluate soft-tissue masses. The differential diagnosis for soft-tissue masses of the knee should include sinovial cyst formation, bursal
fluid collections, ganglion cysts, severe degenerative changes with osteophytic spurring and soft-tissue masses such as pigmented
villonodular sinovitis, lipoma, hemangioma and sarcomas9. Meniscal cysts tend to recur after aspiration or simple resection6. Therefore,
open or arthroscopic intra-articular surgery to treat the underlying meniscal tear is necessary for successful therapy13–15. In conclusion,
distinguishing meniscal cysts from other cystic lesions is important because meniscal cysts more often require surgery. In our case, the
uncommon combination of mass size and location associated with the gender and age of the host led us to report it. External aspect of the
cyst T1 coronal view T2 coronal view T1 axial view Cyst resection using the open approach Resected cyst with medial meniscus
