A 70-year-old man had undergone a complicated cataract extraction followed by repair of iris prolapse ending up with secondary glaucoma.
Refusing routine filtering surgery, patient underwent contact transconjunctival diode laser cyclophotocoagulation. This report highlights
the occurrence of corneal edema restricted to the inferior half of cornea following a diode laser cyclophotocoagulation performed in the
inferior 180 degrees. The necessity to perform a routine specular microscopy in all such cases is highlighted, especially in eyes with good
visual acuity. Transscleral diode laser cyclophotocoagulation (cyclodiode) has been established as a relatively safe and effective
intervention for glaucoma resistant to conventional management.1-4 The procedure has become increasingly popular in recent years for
refractory glaucoma as an alternative to the surgical options such as antimetabolite augmented trabeculectomy and tube shunt surgery.
Reported success rates by various criteria ranged from 38-85%.1-4 Usually, it is performed at a fixed distance from the corneoscleral limbus
with a specially designed contact probe, without visualization of the ciliary body.5,6 The desired effect (as with other lasers used in this
field) is thermal heating and coagulation necrosis of the ciliary epithelium (laser cyclophotocoagulation). However, the laser scleral
transmission is increased by the contact method (compared with the non-contact method), allowing for less total energy application while
obtaining the same desired effect.7 Complications reported include phthisis, chronic hypotony, corneal graft decompensation, macular pucker,
cystoid macular edema, hyphema, vitreous hemorrhage, loss of visual acuity, retinal detachment, conjunctival burns, uveitis, and ocular
pain.5,6 We report a case of corneal edema following contact diode laser cyclophotocoagulation. There exist very few reports of corneal
edema8 and corneal decompensation following this procedure in world literature.9 A 70-year-old male patient presented to us with pain and
redness in right eye for one month. He had undergone cataract operation elsewhere following which he had iris prolapse. Repeat surgery was
done for iris prolapse, after which he developed macular scarring and secondary glaucoma. Medications had failed to control his intraocular
pressure. Visual acuity of the right eye was finger-counting two meters. Intraocular pressure (IOP) of the right eye was 40 mm Hg on maximal
medical therapy (dorzolamide-timolol combination in twice daily dosage, bimatoprost at night, brimonidine eye drops in thrice daily dosage
and oral acetazolamide in four times daily dosage). The examination of the right eye revealed a clear cornea with a 12 oâ€²clock cataract
wound. The pupil was irregular with 6 mm dilatation and an intraocular lens (IOL) in the sulcus. The macula showed retinal pigment
epithelial changes with macular scarring. The disc revealed a cup to disc ratio of 0.6:1 in the right eye. Examination of left eye revealed
a visual acuity of 20/20 and IOP of 14 mm of Hg. The eye had undergone an IOL implantation a year back with cornea being clear, IOL in
position and the fundus revealing no abnormality. Patient refused trabeculectomy for the right eye. We performed transconjunctival diode
laser cyclophotocoagulation (Nidek DC 3300) under local anesthesia with the consent of the patient. The patient received 16 applications in
the inferior 180 degrees using power of 1700 mW for 2 seconds per application. Postoperatively, IOP ranged between 7 and 10 mm Hg on no
antiglaucoma medication. The cornea was clear on the first postoperative day but became hazy inferiorly from the third postoperative day and
covered inferior three-fourths of the cornea by the first week [Fig. 1]. The patient was started on hyperosmotic saline drops along with
frequent topical steroids and atropine eye drops. The corneal edema cleared gradually over six weeks and the patient regained preoperative
visual acuity. The IOP was maintained at 8 to10 mm of Hg without any antiglaucoma medications. The specular microscopy of the right eye was
done at six weeks when the cornea was clear enough to allow it. It revealed a gross polymorphism and pleomorphism with an endothelial cell
count of 880 cells per mm.2 We suspected poor endothelium health to be the cause and to corroborate our suspicion, we did the specular
microscopy of the left eye too. It revealed some polymegathism and pleomorphism with an endothelial cell count of 1600 cells per mm2.
Dealing with patients of secondary glaucoma is a difficult task, especially those who have already undergone multiple surgical procedures.
Diode laser cyclophotocoagulation offers a relatively easy to perform procedure which is being used with greater confidence on the seeing
eyes. There exist very few reports of corneal edema8 and corneal decompensation following this procedure in world literature.9 The
importance of this case report lies in the fact that in eyes with good visual acuity the procedure of diode laser cyclophotocoagulation
should be approached with caution and obtaining the endothelial cell status by specular microscopy would aid in determining the likelihood
of post laser corneal decompensation. Though in our case the cornea did return to normal, it may not always be so and one would then be
saddled with the task of dealing with a hazy cornea. The reported complications of diode laser cyclophoto-coagulation include graft
rejection and thus we already know that corneal endothelium is at risk during this procedure. The above report is further augmented by a
study, which has reported late endothelial changes even in fellow eyes of angle closure glaucoma undergoing YAG laser iridotomies.10 All
this does point to the vulnerability of the endothelium in dealing with external laser procedures. Factors possibly associated with corneal
decompensation include episodes of glaucoma with pressure elevations and inflammation, corneal guttate, presence of diabetes, and the need
for multiple treatments requiring a high-laser energy/ surgery. Though in our case we are not aware of any preexisting guttate, multiple
interventions along with inflammation and fluctuating IOP may have led to a lower endothelial cell count. The subsequent diode laser
cyclophotocoagulation may have finally resulted in an insult which caused the endothelial cell count to go below what is needed for the
maintenance of clear cornea. The eyes which are taken up for diode laser cyclophotocoagulation are those which have already undergone
primary surgeries or are complicated in some other manner. It thus stands to reason that we do a specular microscopy to document the health
of the corneal endothelium prior to the procedure. It would help us to predict and thereby forewarn the patient of the possible corneal
complications in case diode laser cyclophotocoagulation is the chosen option. Right eye of the patient showing inferior corneal edema
following inferior 180 degrees of transconjunctival diode laser cyclophotocoagulation
