We describe a case of neurotrophic keratitis in association with dihydroxypyrimidine dehydrogenase (DHPD) deficiency. Ocular manifestations
in patients with DHPD are rare and neurotrophic keratitis has never been reported before. A six-year- old boy who was a known case of DHPD
deficiency and born of a consanguineous marriage presented to our clinic with non- healing corneal ulcers in both eyes. Reduced corneal
sensations were detected and the patient was started on lubricating eye drops. The patient continues to be on lubricant eye drops and there
has been no recurrence of the disease. Dihydroxypyrimidine dehydrogenase (DHPD) deficiency is a rare metabolic disease. The patient usually
presents in early infancy with features of cerebral dysfunction.1 Though other ocular manifestations have been reported, to our knowledge
corneal involvement has not been documented in the past.2 This is the first case report of DHPD deficiency with corneal involvement. An
18-day-old baby with failure to thrive was referred to our clinic for eye examination. The patient was born of a consanguineous marriage.
His parents were first cousins. At birth he was lethargic with poor cry and feeble suck. He had bilateral hydrocele and large anterior
fontanelle. He was investigated for possible metabolic diseases. Blood investigations included total and differential blood count, blood
sugar, serum electrolytes, serum ammonia, serum lactate, serum pyruvate, liver enzymes, thyroid function tests and arterial blood gases.
Urine was tested for pH, ketones, odor and reducing substances. Karyotyping with G-banding studies was also performed. Though all above
investigations were within normal range urine gas chromatography showed increased thiamine and uracil levels. Fibroblast cultures indicated
deletion of the DHPD gene and diagnosis of DHPD deficiency was made. His elder brother was homozygous for the mutation and excreted
increased amount of thiamine and uracil in urine; however, he was clinically asymptomatic. His eldest sister has two normal alleles but his
mother was heterozygous for the condition. Ocular assessment at that time did not detect any pathology. On subsequent follow-up his vision
was found to be reduced to 20/100 (Cardiff Acuity Cards). Ophthalmic examination under general anesthesia was essentially normal apart from
astigmatism in both eyes. Glasses were prescribed with orthoptic follow-up. At the age of six years his visual acuities deteriorated to
20/200 and 20/120 (Sheridan Gardner) in the right and left eye respectively. Bilateral central corneal opacities were noticed along with
peripheral corneal vascularization. He subsequently developed recurrent corneal epithelial defects [Fig. 1]. Schirmerâ€²s Test revealed normal
tear secretion. An initial diagnosis of exposure keratopathy was made. However, on subsequent follow-up, he was found to have markedly
reduced corneal sensations and a revised diagnosis of neurotrophic keratitis was made. For the last three years his vision has remained
unchanged and his eyes have been managed satisfactorily with ocular lubricants with no further recurrence of the corneal epithelial defects
[Fig. 2]. The DHPD enzyme is the rate-limiting step in the metabolism of pyrimidine bases.3 It catalyses the first step in the conversion of
thymine and uracil to beta-aminobutyric acid and beta- alanine respectively [Fig. 3]. Partial or total deficiency leads to increased
accumulation of thymine and uracil in the serum as well as cerebrospinal fluid. Excess bases are also excreted in the urine. The cause for
the neurological deficit is still unclear. It has been postulated that the DHPD enzyme is required for the synthesis of beta alanine, which
is a neurotransmitter in the brain. This may explain the reduced corneal sensation and the development of neurotrophic keratitis in this
child. Various manifestations associated with DHPD deficiency have been described, but most children present with microcephaly, epilepsy and
abnormal EEG profile, however, many may be asymptomatic.4 Ocular manifestations such as microphthalmia, choroidal coloboma and nystagmus
have also been reported.2 The condition has attracted interest in the recent years as the DHPD enzyme is also the initial step for the
metabolism of widely used anti-neoplastic drug 5 Fluorouracil. Severe toxicity, including death, following administration of 5 Fluorouracil
was reported in patients with DHPD.3 Central epithelial defect Healed epithelial defect Biochemical pathway of thymine and uracil catabolism
