In the presence of severe maxillofacial trauma, management of the airway is important because this condition poses a significant threat to
airway patency. That securing the airway is not always straightforward is described and illustrated in this paper. We present the case of a
23-year-old patient who sustained severe maxillofacial injury for which airway control was necessary. A wire-guided percutaneous dilation
cricothyrotomy was performed, which was most probably the cause of an acute loss of airway patency. The literature regarding the role of
percutaneous techniques in an elective and emergency setting is reviewed. There are different techniques for creating a secure airway. Among
these are the more or less noninvasive oral and nasal endotracheal intubations, whereas cricothyrotomy, conventional open tracheostomy
(COT), and percutaneous cricothyrotomy and tracheotomy (PCT) provide a more aggressive means to this purpose. Indications for tracheotomy in
maxillofacial trauma patients include all situations with obstruction or impending obstruction of the upper airway (Table 1) . In the
presence of severe maxillofacial trauma with gross displacement of bones and extensive soft tissue lacerations, a safe and definitive airway
is crucial because this condition poses a significant threat to airway patency, and deterioration of the airway may occur rapidly. That
securing the airway is not always straightforward is described and illustrated in the following case. Table 1Indications for tracheotomy in
maxillofacial trauma patientsAcute airway obstructionProlonged mechanical ventilationMultiple facial fractures combined with basilar skull
fracturesComplete destruction of the nasal anatomy combined with multiple facial injuriesPatients admitted with preexisting cricothyrotomy
Indications for tracheotomy in maxillofacial trauma patients A 23-year-old elevator technician was transferred to the emergency ward after
sustaining severe maxillofacial trauma when the elevator he was repairing accidentally went up, thereby squeezing his face between the top
of the elevator and the roof of the elevator shaft. Upon presentation, we saw a fully alert, cooperative patient, in a characteristic prone
position with his neck somewhat anteflexed to maintain a patent airway. Endotracheal intubation at the scene was not attempted because of
severe mutilation of the oral cavity (Fig. 1). Initially, no signs of respiratory distress were observed. Oxygen saturation was adequate and
there were no signs of hemodynamic instability. Fig. 1Clinical aspect at presentation at the emergency ward Clinical aspect at presentation
at the emergency ward Clinical investigation revealed multiple extensive soft tissue injuries: in the occipital region, subnasally extending
from cheek to cheek and through the tongue, which was almost completely avulsed. There was profound arterial bleeding from the lacerations
and oral cavity. There was gross displacement of the right globe with telecanthus and abnormal mobility of the entire viscerocranium. There
were no obvious signs of injury to the neurocranium. Because of a significant risk of loss of airway patency, the risk of vomiting with
subsequent aspiration, and the need for further radiological evaluation and surgical therapy, a secure airway was necessary. Extreme
difficulties were to be expected with facemask ventilation, laryngoscopy, and endotracheal intubation. Therefore, an invasive airway access
was chosen. At that moment, the patient was still able to maintain a patent airway without signs of respiratory distress. It was decided to
perform a percutaneous wire-guided dilation cricothyrotomy (Melker Emergency Cricothyrotomy; Cook Critical Care, Bloomington, IN, USA) in
local anesthesia with the patient still in a prone position, to be followed by a surgical tracheotomy. After the application of local
anesthesia; needle puncture; placement of the guide wire; dilatation; and, eventually, placement of the tube, the patient went into an acute
respiratory failure. Physical diagnostic examination revealed that the tube was not inside the trachea as no return of carbon dioxide could
be monitored and no pulmonary ventilation could be auscultated. An emergency surgical tracheotomy was then performed. This procedure was
uneventful and a cuffed trachea cannula was inserted. The patient was then sedated. Computed tomography of the thorax revealed air in the
anterior upper mediastinum that was most likely due to false passage of the cricothyrotomy tube (Fig. 2). Fortunately, this potentially
life-threatening event was without serious consequences as no signs of neurological deficits or infection of the mediastinum became present.
Computerized tomography scanning of the head and neck revealed extensive midfacial and mandibular fractures (Fig. 3). The patient was
operated upon and transferred to the intensive care unit where he stayed for 4 days before returning to the ward. The patient was
decanulated successfully on the 16th postoperative day. Fig. 2Computerized tomography scan of the thorax with signs of mediastinal
emphysemaFig. 3Three-dimensional reconstruction of the maxillofacial skeleton showing gross destruction and displacement of the osseous
structures Computerized tomography scan of the thorax with signs of mediastinal emphysema Three-dimensional reconstruction of the
maxillofacial skeleton showing gross destruction and displacement of the osseous structures Shortly after Seldinger (1953) described his
technique of percutaneous guide wire needle placement in arteriography, the technique of percutaneous tracheotomy emerged . Shelden et al.
introduced a tracheotomy technique that consisted of a slotted needle guiding a trocar into the trachea . Over the years, several
modifications of the percutaneous technique evolved, and nowadays, there are numerous convenient PCT kits on the market based on different
methods, utilizing different dilatators, guide wires, and points of entry into the trachea [2, 12, 16, 20]. PCT has been popularized as a
safe and effective alternative to the conventional open tracheotomy technique. It is widely used in the intensive care unit setting, where
it is now outnumbering the performance of COT . In our institution, extensive experience has been gained with both the Ciaglia Blue Rhino
tracheotomy and the guide wire dilating forceps technique, showing a low major complication rate [6, 7, 9]. Various authors compare the open
and percutaneous methods in terms of complication rates, cost-effectiveness, and safety. The potential for serious complications following
PCT due to incorrect needle placement or posterior tracheal wall injury decreases with endoscopic guidance. In a meta-analysis, Dulguerov et
al. compared the peri- and postoperative complications of PCT and COT and concluded that the percutaneous variant is associated with more
peroperative complications, especially concerning cardiorespiratory arrests and peroperative deaths. In addition, false passage of the tube
was more frequent with PCT . A double-blind randomized trial by the same authors led to the conclusion that both methods are associated with
a low rate of serious and intermediate complications but that there were more minor peroperative complications with PCT and more minor long-
term complications with COT . In a prospective randomized trial, Massick et al. found no differences in peroperative complication rates
between PCT and COT, but a significantly higher postoperative complication rate with PCT was found . Goldenberg et al. found similar and low
complication rates for COT and PCT . In a review paper, McWhorter concludes that COT can be performed with equal or better outcome than PCT
. The differences between these studies can be attributed to study design, definitions, sample size, variance in patient population, and
application of different surgical and percutaneous techniques. In these studies, PCT and COT were mainly performed as elective procedures in
already intubated patients. Overall, it can be stated that both COT and PCT can be performed with low and acceptable complication rates when
performed electively, assuming that experienced operators perform these procedures. In an emergency situation where rapid airway access is
needed because of acute or impending airway obstruction and where nasal or oral endotracheal intubation is not possible or fails, a
cricothyrotomy provides the most rapid means for securing the airway (although this is not regarded as a definitive airway). The use of PCT
in an emergency situation is less clear and it has been stated that there is no role for such techniques in these situations [2, 15]. The
literature regarding this topic is sparse, although some reports assess this topic [1, 3, 4]. Ben-nun et al. describe 10 patients with
multiple blunt head and neck injuries or severe head and neck burns in which airway control was necessary. PCT was applied after oral
endotracheal intubation failed. All patients were in the supine position, and on average, it took 5.5 min to perform this procedure.
Experienced surgeons performed all procedures. No conversion to an open tracheotomy was necessary . A case series by Clarke et al. describes
PCT in four patients. Indications were inability to intubate, epiglottitis, Ludwig’s angina, and swelling of the tongue. Two of these
patients were in a semiprone position, and in all four cases, PCT was performed rapidly and safely . The performing surgeon had an
experience of over 200 elective PDT. In another two cases with airway obstruction and respiratory failure PCT, was performed successfully
and fast . Fikkers et al. compare the wire-guided Minitrach II to the catheter over needle cricothyrotomy (Quicktrach) in a pig model. A
cricothyrotomy with the Quicktrach could be performed faster (48 vs 150 s), easier, with a higher success rate, and with fewer complications
than the wire-guided technique . No clinical randomized trials are known that compare PCT with COT in a situation where urgent airway
control is necessary. In the case descriptions that are available, almost all patients were in a supine position. A limited ability to
extend the cervical spine is considered a contraindication for PCT . Utilizing the wire-guided percutaneous technique in the patient
described most probably led to a false route of the tube and loss of airway patency. In addition, computed tomography revealed air in the
upper mediastinum, which theoretically increases the probability of mediastinitis. The prone position of this patient, as well as the
experience of the performing surgeon, may have contributed to this complication. PCT has proven its merits in an elective nonemergency
situation in the supine patient. No large series are known referring to the safety and feasibility of PCT in an emergency situation. There
are, nonetheless, several reports that discuss the potential of this technique in such a situation, again in patients in the supine position
and always performed by surgeons with a large experience in PCT. Limited ability to extend the cervical spine is considered a
contraindication for PCT. In the patient described, the attempt to perform a percutaneous wire-guided dilation cricothyrotomy in a sitting
position in all probability led to acute deterioration of airway patency and mediastinal emphysema. It is therefore concluded that
percutaneous cricothyrotomy or tracheotomy in prone patients with severe maxillofacial trauma is not an appropriate first-choice method and
that either a catheter over needle cricothyrotomy or open surgical tracheotomy under local anesthesia should be performed when the situation
necessitates acute airway control. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial
License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are
credited.
