To report a case of cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis after intravitreal injection of triamcinolone acetonide (IVTA). A 77-year-old woman with
macular edema due to central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) developed peripheral retinitis 4 months after IVTA. A diagnostic anterior chamber
paracentesis was performed to obtain DNA for a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for viral retinitis. The PCR test was positive for CMV
DNA. Other tests for infective uveitis and immune competence were negative. Four months after presentation, gancyclovir was intravitreously
injected a total of 5 times, and the retinitis resolved completely. CMV retinitis is a rare complication of local immunosuppression with
IVTA. It can be managed with timely injection of intravitreal gancyclovir until recovery from local immunosuppression. Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
retinitis remains the most common opportunistic ocular infection in immunocompromised patients.1 Patients with immunosuppression caused by
various disease states including acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and those with iatrogenic immunosuppression from chemotherapy and
immune modulators are at risk.1 We present a case of CMV retinitis after intravitreal injection of triamcinolone acetonide (IVTA) in an
immunocompetent woman with no other immunocompromising diseases. A 77-year-old woman with a history of hypertension was referred to our
clinic in September 2006 for a 2-week history of blurred vision in her right eye. She had received an intravitreal injection of 4 mg of
triamcinolone acetonide in her right eye for macular edema due to central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) 4 months previously. Her right eye
visual acuity was significant for light perception only, and ophthalmic examination of the right eye showed many cells in the anterior
chamber and vitreous, multiple retinal hemorrhages and peripheral circumferential retinitis (Fig. 1). Serologic tests for infectious uveitis
caused by herpes zoster virus (HZV), herpes simplex virus (HSV), CMV, toxoplasmosis, and syphilis (VDRL), and a test for human
immunodeficiency virus, were performed. The patient tested seronegative for HZV, HSV, CMV, toxoplasma, and HIV, and VDRL was non-reactive.
Before starting an oral corticosteroid, intravenous injection of acyclovir (2000 mg/day 4 times a day) was started. Because of a presumed
diagnosis of acute retinal necrosis or CMV retinitis, diagnostic anterior chamber paracentesis was performed, and an aqueous humor sample
was sent for analysis by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for HZV, HSV, CMV and toxoplasmosis. An intravitreous gancyclovir injection (1.7
mg) was performed immediately after aqueous sampling. The aqueous humor PCR sample tested positive only for CMV. Five days after the
gancyclovir injection, the number of inflammatory cells in the anterior chamber decreased to trace amounts only, and the vitreous was
cleared. Argon laser photocoagulation between the area of retinitis and the normal retina was performed on the patient's right eye. Three
weeks after the first gancyclovir injection, the patient presented with an aggravated retinal lesion and chamber reactions in the right eye.
A second intravitreal gancyclovir (1.7 mg) injection was performed. An additional two intravitreal gancyclovir (1.7 mg) injections were
performed at 2 weeks and 6 weeks after the second injection. Two weeks after the final gancyclovir injection, examination of the right eye
revealed much improved peripheral retinal necrosis with persistent retinitis at the inferior periphery. Nine weeks after the last injection
(4 months after the patient's first visit to our clinic), the retinitis was completely resolved. Clear anterior chamber and mild sustained
vitreous opacity were noted. The patient's final resultant vision in her right eye was significant for hand motion. Her right eye has
remained free of retinitis since. CMV is a ubiquitous human virus and 50-80% of adults in the United States harbor anti-CMV antibodies.22,3
Seroprevalence among lower socioeconomic groups, residents of developing countries, and homosexual men can exceed 90%.4 Acquisition of the
virus occurs through placental transfer, breast feeding, saliva, sexual contact, blood transfusions, and organ or bone marrow transplants.
Infection with CMV leads to life-long persistence; however, in healthy individuals, the virus becomes dormant and remains latent.1
Reactivation occurs in patients with immature or compromised immune systems.1 In iatrogenically immunosuppressed patients after organ or
bone marrow transplantation, CMV retinitis is a rare complication.5,6 Recently, 4 cases of CMV retinitis after intravitreal steroid
application in immunocompetent patients have been reported.7-9 In comparison with these previously published cases, our patient had no
medical problems such as diabetes mellitus or Behcet's disease that could have impaired her immunity.7-9 Local immunosuppression may be
strong enough to allow CMV to replicate and lead to retinitis. In our case, symptomatic retinitis developed 4 months after the injection of
intravitreal triamcinolone. The retinitis was completely resolved 8 months after IVTA. The local immunosuppressive effect of IVTA is thought
to persist up to 8 months after injection. The poor visual outcome in this case was thought to be mainly due to the patient's baseline
disease. Timely treatment with intravitreal injection of gancyclovir until local immune recovery may be effective for local
immunosuppressioninduced CMV retinitis. Ophthalmologists using intravitreal triamcinolone injections should be aware of the potential risk
of subsequent CMV retinitis. Early diagnosis and treatment with intravitreal injections of gancyclovir until recovery is obtained may
prevent further complications. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis 4 months after intravitreous injection of triamcinolone acetonide (IVTA). The
patient initially presented with blurred vision and ghost vessels, multiple retinal hemorrhages, and peripheral retinitis.
