We report a 72 year-old man with dysphagia and dizziness. Aortography and Computed tomographic scans revealed the aberrant right subclavian
artery arising from a calcified aneurysm of the Kommerell's diverticulum and bilateral carotid artery disease with atherosclerotic
narrowing. Surgical relief was accomplished by excluding the aneurysm from circulation through the aortic arch and a 10 mm graft was
interposed between the aberrant artery and the ascending aorta. Aberrant right subclavian artery (ARSA) with Kommerell's diverticulum, is a
rare congenital anomaly of the aortic arch found at postmorten examination with a frequency of 0,5% . In this lesion the right subclavian
artery arises as the fourth branch of the aorta distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery, then comes to the right arm posterior to
the esophagous. This anomaly occurs as a result of abnormal regression of the fourth aortic arch and persistence of patency of the right
eight dorsal aortic segment . An aortic diverticulum is found at the site of origin of the atretic arch and this diverticulum is termed the
Kommerell's diverticulum . A patient with an ARSA and calcified aneurysm of Kommerell's diverticulum is described in whon a new surgical
approach was taken. A 72 year-old man who had a 10 – year history of hypertension, noninsulin-dependent diabetes, coronary artery disease
(right coronary stent) and dizziness was referred to our hospital for severe dysphagia. Chest X-ray films showed a mass in the upper
mediastinum (Fig 1). Computed tomographic scans (Fig 2) revealed a calcified aneurysm (5 cm) of an aberrant right subclavian artery and an
abdominal aortic aneurysm (4 cm). Aortography demonstrated that the right and left carotid arteries and the left subclavian artery arose
from the aortic arch in that order. The ARSA arose from the aneurysm of the Kommerell's diverticulum in the descending aorta. Chest X-ray
film showing a mass in the upper mediastinum. Computed Tomographic Scans revealed a large and calcified aneurysm of Kommerell's
diverticulun. Bilateral carotid artery disease with proximal atherosclerotic narrowing was present. Elective surgery was performed through a
midline sternotomy using cardiopulmonary bypass (33°) (CPB) and cold antegrade blood cardioplegic cardiac arrest. CPB was established with
cannulation to the right femoral artery, the right common and the left common carotid arteries and right atrium. The left heart was vented
through the right superior pulmonary vein. The ascending aorta was clamped and the heart was arrested, selective cerebral perfusion was
started and the two carotid arteries and the left subclavian artery were clamped. The ARSA was ligated distal to the aneurysm and behind the
ascending aorta. The perfusion through the femoral artery was stopped, the end of the aortic arch was incised and an arterial occlusion
catheter was inserted directly into the descending aorta and inflated, then we began the distal perfusion. The origin of the ARSA was
posterior and was closed with a Dacron patch using horizontal mattress sutures with pledgets, thus excluding the aneurysm from the
circulation. A right subclavian – ascending aorta bypass was performed using an 10 mm collagen-impregnated polyester graft. Postoperatively,
the patient was neurologically intact and hemodynamically stable but needed mechanical ventilation for 10 days. The patient was discharged
in good condition 22 days after operation and in the subsequent 3 years has remained well. Aberrant right subclavian artery occurs as a
result of abnormal regression of the fourth aortic arch and persistence of patency of the right eight dorsal aortic segment . This is a rare
congenital anomaly of the aortic arch found at postmorten examination with a frequency of 0,5% . Sixty percent of patients with ARSA have
Kommerell's diverticulum and aneurysm of the diverticulum have been observed in 3–8% of these patients . Most patients with ARSA are
asymptomatic, but during adulthood 5% of patients with this anomaly have symptoms because the development of atherosclerosis and dilatation
of Kommerell's diverticulum results in compression of the esophagus or the trachea . Because of the rareness of the ARSA with aneurysm of
Kommerell's diverticulum surgical indications and stategies are still unclear, however rupture and dissection of these aneurysms have been
reported. In a review of 32 patients, Austin reported a rate of rupture of 19%. Cina reported a rate of rupture of 53% and Kouchoukos
reported a rate of dissection of 20%. Based upon these reported series, early surgical intervention appears appropriate. Cina and Colls
recommended surgical treatment for aneurysms 3 cm or greater and in Ota experience your primary indication was that the diameter of aneurysm
was more than 50 mm. Surgical standards are the resection or exclusion of the aneurysm and the reconstruction of the aberrant subclavian
artery. The choice of surgical approach depends on the anatomic details, the urgency of the surgery and the surgeon's experience. In the
bibliography, the majority of procedures were two-staged operations divided into the aneurysm of Kommerell's diverticulum and the aberrant
subclavian artery through separate approaches . Kouchoukos et collbs recommended selective carotid-subclavian artery bypass, thoracotomy and
cardiopulmonary bypass as the optimal method of management of patients with this anomaly, but we decided to perform a one-stage operation
through median sternotomy and under cardiopulmonary bypass because our patient had bilateral carotid artery disease with atherosclerotic
narrowing, calcified aneurysm of Kommmerell's diverticulum and abdominal aneurysm. In patients with bilateral carotid disease, as in the
present case, the most straightforward option would be an ascending aorta – subclavian bypass. On the other hand, we chose the " no touch
technique " because the aneurysm was calcified, excluding the aneurysm from circulation through the aorta. Transluminal placed stent-grafts
offer an alternative approach to the standard surgical treatment and this is less invasive but we believed that it is associated with higher
rates of morbidity when severe atherosclerotic disease of the abdominal aorta is present, as in our case. RJ and GJ Surgeons. SJL and AB
Surgeons in charge of postoperative period. MJM Compiled the patients' records.
