Leydig tumour is rare and there are only three cases with metastatic disease reported. A 52 year-old Caucasian male was admitted, on
emergency basis to the Orthopaedic Department with six weeks history of increasing midthoracic back pain, change in gait, poor balance,
subjective weakness and numbness of the lower trunk and legs. MRI scan showed change in the signal intensity of T4 and T5 vertebral body but
their height were maintained. Urgent T4 and T5 corpectomies, decompression of the spinal cord and reconstruction of the vertebral bodies
were performed followed by radiotherapy. Neurological status significantly improved with a mild residual numbness over the dorsum of the
right foot. The histology of the excised tumour was identical to the primary. At 2 years follow-up visit the patient is neurologically
stable and disease free without other organs metastases. This is the first case in English literature, which shows that spinal metastases
could occur even in the early stage of Leydig cell tumour, without other organs involvement. Aggressive surgical management of spinal
metastases combined with post operative radiotherapy can give a better chance for long survivorship. Secondary tumours are the most common
tumours involving the spine and their incidence may be increased as further advances in cancer therapy prolong the life expectancy of
afflicted patients . Malignant primary tumours most frequently metastasizing to the spine are: bronchogenic carcinoma, breast carcinoma,
prostatic adenocarcinoma, renal cell carcinoma, thyroid carcinomas and GIT adenocarcinomas. Among those, metastases from the first 3 tumours
are the commonest . Leydig cell (interstitial cell) tumour of the testis was first described by Sacchi in 1895. The interstitial cells of
the testis, located between the seminiferrous tubules are designated by the surname of the German anatomist who first described them, Franz
von Leydig. They primarily secrete testosterone and it is an exceedingly rare tumour . Only 7â€“10% of Leydig cell tumours shows malignant
activity exclusively in adults and metastasise. Moreover, it seldom metastasizes to the spine . The tumour is generally refractory to
radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The natural course of patients with metastatic variety of Leydig cell tumour is one of progression at an
unpredictable pace. The median survival of these patients with metastatic disease is less than 2 years . We present the fourth case in
English literature of malignant Leydig cell tumour with spinal metastases and the first in the early stage of the disease. Surgical
treatment in combination with post-operative radiotherapy resulted in a very satisfactory outcome. This is the first case reported with such
a long disease free period. A 52 year-old Caucasian male was admitted, on emergency basis to the orthopaedic department with six weeks
history of increasing mid thoracic pain, change in gait, poor balance, subjective weakness, numbness of the lower trunk and legs. He didn't
report any neurogenic bladder or bowel disturbances and he was otherwise fit and well. The patient had a right sided orchidectomy 3 years
ago, for stage one well differentiated Leydig cell tumour. He was diagnosed having an enlarged right testis. No adjuvant therapy was given
perioperatively. Afterwards, he followed up periodically and Computer Tomography (CT) scans of the chest, abdomen and pelvis were performed
on the basis of evaluation and potential metastasizing of the neoplasm. Two years following the primary operation the patient complained of
back pain. Plain films of the spine showed an "ivory" vertebra at T4. CT scan depicted a definite abnormality in the body of T4 with no
evidence of general metastatic disease. There was no soft tissue extension and no vertebral body collapse. None of the visceral organs was
involved and this was the only detectable pathological sign. The bones scan showed intense uptake in T4 and no other sights of increasing
radioisotope uptake. The blood tests, including tumour markers, didn't show any abnormality. At that stage, the oncologists decided against
biopsy as they felt it was potentially hazardous and the patient will have little to gain from it. Accordingly, in absence of symptoms and
tenderness, a "wait and see" policy was adopted. Nine months later the patient admitted to the Spinal Unit in an emergency base complaining
of increasing mid thoracic pain, change in gait, poor balance, subjective weakness, numbness of the lower trunk and legs. Examination
revealed a broad base gait, able to walk in toes and heel, absence of tenderness or masses over T4 level, hypo aesthesia below T5 level more
pronounced over the left side, exaggerated tendon reflexes in the lower limbs, un-sustained ankle clonus bilaterally and normal plantar
reflexes. No objective motor weakness detected and intact perianal sensations were recorded. X-rays of the thoracic spine revealed a
sclerotic appearance of the T4 vertebral body (Figure 1 &2) and an urgent Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed quite dramatic change in
the appearance of T4 compare to the previous CT despite the maintenance of vertebral body height. Furthermore, T5 vertebral body was also
involved, but to a lesser extent. There was a soft tissue expansion into the extradural space causing spinal cord compression (Figure 3). AP
X ray of Thoracic spine. Lateral X ray of Thoracic spine. T2W MRI of Thoracic spine. Blood test, including inflammatory and tumour markers,
were within normal values and a dose of 16 mg Dexamethasone daily was started. A CT guided biopsy was performed and the histological
appearance of the lesion was identical to the primary tumour. After discussion with the patient, a decision was made to perform urgent T4
and T5 corpectomies, decompression of the spinal cord and reconstruction of the vertebral bodies. Anterior surgery was contemplated as the
compression was coming only from the front and the tension band of the posterior elements, at the involved level, were intact. Surgery was
performed through a right subscapular 3rd rib thoracotomy, and the cord function was monitored by Somatosensory Evoked Potentials (SSEPs)
throughout the procedure. After complete canal decompression, reconstruction was achieved by a Synmesh packed with bone graft obtained from
the excised rib. Anterior Universal Spine System (USS) II system was added to augment the construct (Figure 4). post op AP & Lat X rays of
Thoracic spine. The patient was then transferred to Intensive Therapy Unit (ITU) and had an uneventful recovery. He discharged one week
following operation with clear neurological improvement. Three weeks postoperatively, he developed a right-sided pneumonia, which resolved
with antibiotics. The histological evaluation of the excised tumour was identical to the primary. Because it was a solitary metastasis and
eradication of the tumour wasn't feasible by surgical excision alone as it had already extended beyond the bony limits, postoperative
radiotherapy with radical intent was applied. The duration of the radiotherapy was a daily 5 weeks course and the dose was 50 Gy in 25
fractions to the area of T4/T5. Neither side effect from radiotherapy nor skin reactions was reported. The patient was followed up
periodically by Technetium bone scans and CT scans of chest, abdomen and pelvis. At the last follow-up visit-two years and six months
postoperatively he was disease-free based according to the results of repeated scans. He complained only for a minimal numbness of the right
foot and slight winging of the right scapula. The most common sites of metastatic involvement in Leydig cell tumour are the regional lymph
nodes and then the lung, liver, and bone. The spine is very rarely involved and there are only three cases reported in the English
literature with spine involvement . In the reported cases, spinal involvement occurred late in the course of the disease and other organs
metastases had already occurred. Neurological deficit developed only as a pre-terminal event and the thoracic spine was involved in all
three patients. In our case the spine was the first metastatic area without any other detectable metastases, which hasn't described before.
Traditionally, spinal metastases treatment involves radiation therapy, either alone or in conjunction with chemotherapy and/or surgical
decompression. "Prophylactic" irradiation had not prevented local recurrence or metastatic spread within the radiation ports . Several
chemotherapeutic agents have been used in the treatment of metastatic Leydig cell tumour, with uniformly poor results . Recently , a
randomised study showed that direct decompressive surgery plus postoperative radiotherapy is superior to treatment with radiotherapy alone
for patients with spinal cord compression caused by metastatic cancer. In the reported three previous cases none treated operatively. One
patient received spinal irradiation (2000 cGy) without improvement in neurological deficit but with some amelioration of back pain . The
second one received Mitotane(1,1-dichloro-2 ethane or o,p'-DDD) chemotherapy without clear benefit . The third patient received no therapy
and developed progressive neurological dysfunction . A combination of operative treatment and radiotherapy was adopted in our case with a
satisfactory result, although the diagnosis of the metastatic disease was made at earlier stage. Our patient remained disease free at the
last follow up visit two years and six months postoperatively. It is well recognised that decompression surgery alone, whether anterior or
posterior, might actually contribute to mechanical instability of the spine. This can lead to the spinal cord compression by creating post
surgical deformity. Therefore, we believe that reconstruction should always be added. There is no consensus on whether stabilisation should
be performed through an anterior or posterior approach since deformity and instability can be improved by either. It is frequently stated
that anterior procedures give better results, but this is probably a function of patient selection . If the posterior elements are not
involved by the tumour, it is recommended to avoid disrupting the remaining intact posterior tension band. However, if the patient's general
condition can't allow an anterior approach, posterior decompression should always be augmented by at least posterior internal fixation and
reconstruction of the anterior column also, via a lateral extracavitary approach (LECA). In our case, as the compression was mainly at the
front an anterior approach with decompression and reconstruction was selected. Leydig cell tumour is a rare entity with only three reported
cases of spinal metastases. They could occur even in the early stage without other organs involvement. Aggressive surgical management of
spinal metastases combined with postoperative radiotherapy can give a better chance for long survivorship. Surgical planning should take
into consideration that the avoidance of spinal destabilisation and the restoration of normal spinal stability are very important for the
improvement of the overall outcome and quality of life. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. JL and ES concept and
design, review of manuscript. AA helped in preparation of manuscript. HF and BC reviewed the literature and prepared the manuscript. All
authors read and approved final manuscript. Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report.
