Among human neoplasms thymomas are associated with highest frequency with paraneoplastic autoimmune diseases. A case of a 42-year-old woman
with paraneoplastic pemphigus as the first manifestation of thymoma is reported. Transsternal complete thymoma resection achieved pemphigus
regression. The clinical correlations between pemphigus and thymoma are presented. Our case report provides further evidence for the
important role of autoantibodies in the pathogenesis of paraneoplastic skin diseases in thymoma patients. It also documents the improvement
of the associated pemphigus after radical treatment of the thymoma. Paraneoplastic pemphigus is rarely associated with thymic neoplasms
either alone or concomitantly with other autoimmune disorders. A case of a 42-year-old woman with paraneoplastic pemphigus as the first
manifestation of thymoma is reported. Transsternal complete thymoma resection achieved pemphigus regression. The pathogenetic and clinical
relationships between pemphigus and thymoma encountered in this case are presented with the purpose of strengthening the hypothesis that
pemphigus in the presence of a thymoma could be a thymoma-associated autoimmune disease. A 42-year-old otherwise healthy woman was admitted
to our hospital with numerous crusted, denuted and flaccid vesiculobullous lesions over her chest, abdomen, legs, toes and forehead (Figures
1, 2). Vesicles were also observed on the buccal mucosa and palate. The clinical diagnosis of pemphigus vulgaris was confirmed by biopsy.
Histological findings included interface dermatitis, apoptotic keratinocytes and focal areas of suprabasal acantholysis. Therapeutic
management consisted of successive cycles of 50 mg/day of prednisone. Medical treatment provided only transient relief of symptoms and
temporary reduction in clinical manifestations and on interruption of systemic steroid the lesions reccured. Numerous crusted, denuted and
flaccid vesiculobullous lesions over the chest and abdomen consistent with pemphigus. Close view of a pemphigus lesion. Three months later
while facing a persistent pemphigus, a chest x-ray was done and a retrosternal tumor was noted (Figure 3). CT scans and MRI of the chest
revealed a homogeneous anterior mediastinal mass consistent with a thymic tumor but with no lymph node involvement (Figure 4). In order to
perform preoperative staging of the tumor, the patient underwent CT scans of brain, abdomen and a bone scan. All were normal. An autoimmune
laboratory profile proved that desmoglein-1 (anti-DSG-1) antibodies were normal while the desmoglein-3 (anti-DSG-3) titer reached twice the
normal. A profile chest x-ray showing a retrosternal tumor. MRI of the chest revealed an anterior mediastinal mass consistent with a thymic
tumor. At operation through a median sternotomy, a solid intrathymic capsulated mass was found and a thymectomy was performed. Definitive
pathologic examination found a tumor measuring 6 × 5 × 5 cm occupying the inferior part of the thymus gland consisting of spindle cells
populated by varying numbers of lymphocytes with rounder epithelial cells (Figures 5, 6). No capsular involvement was noted (Type A non
invasive thymoma according to World Health Organization classification). Thymic tumor consisting of spindle cells. Varying numbers of
lymphocytes with rounder epithelial cells populating spindle cells consisting with a non invasive thymoma. The postoperative period was
uneventful. The patient was discharged home after 10 days Postoperatively anti-DSG-1 and anti-DSG-3 showed a transient increase. At the
outpatient visit four weeks later both desmoglein antibodies showed a significant decrease associated with almost complete resolution of the
cutaneous lesions. Twelve months later she is still disease free and with no need of steroids. The relation between thymus disease and
autoimmune disorders is well known and established . In 1987 a retrospective study among 172 patients with thymoma found fungal
mucocutaneous disease as the most common thymoma-associated cutaneous disorder . Two patients in that study were noted with pemphigus and
lichen planus respectively. Since then paraneoplastic pemphigus has been recognized as a well defined autoimmune syndrome characterized by
autoantibody formation directed against epithelial antigens . In our case pemphigus was diagnosed first by biopsy (Figure 7) and this has
led us to further diagnostic investigation. Microscopic appearance of pemphigus with epithelial cells falling away from each other and
rounding out in the fluid of the blister. Serial analysis of various case reports correlate pemphigus with thymoma and/or myasthenia gravis
although in our case there were no symptoms or signs of myasthenia gravis . The clinical course and titrations of antiepithelial,
antimuscle, and antithymus antibodies suggested a reverse relationship between the severity of myasthenia gravis and titers of antimuscle
and antithymus antibodies, and a parallel relationship between pemphigus vulgaris and antiepithelial antibody. The association of
paraneoplastic pemphigus with malignancy is strong. Only a handful of patients have had no associated diagnosis. Some patients have had
benign neoplasms, including as in our case thymoma or Castleman's disease. Only a single patient without a tumor has met the diagnostic
criteria, yet this patient had a rapid demise and may have died with an undiagnosed malignancy . Patients have developed paraneoplastic
pemphigus while in remission of their malignancy, leading some authors to prefer the term neoplasia-induced pemphigus. Treatment of the
underlying malignancy does not necessarily halt progression of the paraneoplastic pemphigus, although some have observed that clinical
manifestations improve as autoantibody titers decrease following resection of the tumor. This was also proved in our case, where anti-DSG-3
showed a significant decrease associated with almost complete resolution of the cutaneous lesions. Circulating and tissue-bound antibodies
in patients with this disease are directed against a group of molecules with sequence homology and belonging to the plakin family. These
molecules are found in the intracellular attachment plaques of desmosomes and hemidesmosomes, and they play a key role in intermediate
filament attachment. However, the number of reported target antigens has increased over time and varies between patients. This variability
likely accounts for the clinical heterogeneity of this disease. By immunoprecipitation, target antigens (in decreasing order of incidence)
include desmoglein 3, desmoglein 1, envoplakin (210 kd), periplakin (190 kd), desmoplakin I (250 kd), desmoplakin II (210 kd) and bullous
pemphigoid antigen I (230 kd). Plectin (> 400 kd) and an unidentified 170-kd protein have also been found . In our case the levels of
pemphigus-associated antibodies had increased postoperatively after thymectomy. In parallel, decreased titer of those antibodies preceded
the resolution of cutaneous lesions. A similar beneficial effect of tumor ablation has recently also been reported in the case of
Castleman's tumor, a rare lymphoproliferative disease that is sometimes associated with paraneoplastic pemphigus . our case report provides
further evidence for the important role of autoantibodies in the pathogenesis of paraneoplastic skin diseases in thymoma patients. It also
documents the improvement of the associated pemphigus after radical treatment of the thymoma. Further studies are necessary to analyze
possible pathogenetic mechanisms. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. NB, GS, DP, IB, CA, ES and KL took part in the
care of the patient and contributed equally in carrying out the medical literature search and preparation of the manuscript. CT participated
in the care of the patient and had the supervision of this report. All authors approved the final manuscript. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report
