Solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura is a rarely encountered clinical entity which may have different clinical pictures. Although the
majority of these neoplasms have a benign course, the malignant form has also been reported. We herein describe a case of 72 year-old man
with head, facial, and thoracic traumas caused by neurally-mediated situational syncope when coughing. The diagnostic work-up including
chest x-ray, CT and PET, revealed a large solitary mass of the left hemithorax. Radical surgical resection of the mass was performed through
a left lateral thoracotomy and completed with a wedge resection of the lingula. Hystological examination of the surgical specimen showed an
encapsulated mass measuring 12 × 11.5 × 6 cm consistent with a solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura. It's surgical removal definitively
resolved the neurologic manifestations. The patient had no postoperative complications. At two years follow-up the patient is free from
recurrence and without clinical manifestations. In our case its resection definitively resolved the episodes of situational syncope due, in
our opinion, to the large thoracic mass compressing the phrenic nerve First described by Klemperer and Rabin , the solitary fibrous tumor of
the pleura (SFTP) is a localized benign neoplasm arising from the submesothelial mesenchymal layer even if malignant forms have also been
described . With about 800 cases reported in the world literature, this rare entity contrast with the primary diffuse pleural mesothelioma
that have an incidence of 3000 new cases every year in the USA . In over half of patients the tumor is asymptomatic, but if symptoms occur
then chest pain, cough and dyspnea are the most common complaints. Complete en bloc surgical resection is the treatment of choice for these
neoplasms offering a cure in all patients with benign form even if tumor recurrence may occur also in tumors with benign histological
features . We describe an unreported case of SFTP, to our knowledge, manifesting with syncope episodes when coughing. A 72 year-old man was
admitted to the hospital for head injury, facial and left hemithorax contusions. The patient referred to had fainted after coughing; the
same symptoms had occurred six and three months earlier. Diverticulosis of the colon was the only disease reported by the patient in his
medical history. He denied smoking, drug or alcohol abuse. Physical examination showed dullness to percussion and decreased breath sound in
the affected hemithorax. The neurological examination was negative. Blood pressure was 170/80 mmHg, heart rate was 90 beats/minute and
rhythmic. Laboratory findings, arterial gas analysis, electrocardiogram, and brain computed tomography were negative. A chest x-ray revealed
fractures of three left ribs plus a large medium-basal opacity on the left hemithorax (Figure 1a). Computed tomography (CT) of the thorax
confirmed the presence of a well-delineated, homogeneous, solid mass of 11 × 8 cm, extending for about 10 cm on the vertical axis. The mass
presented a mild enhancement after contrast injection and calcifications in the basal part. It was close to the chest wall, adjacent to the
left pulmonary artery, pulmonary artery trunk, and left ventricle with no signs of infiltration (Figure 1b). Bronchoscopy showed an
insignificant bleeding from the upper left bronchus. Positron emission tomography (PET) revealed a mild positivity of the lesion (Figure 2).
Echocardiogram, Holter ECG monitoring, and carotid Doppler ultrasonography were negative. With suspected diagnosis of SFTP, the patient
underwent surgery. Through a left lateral thoracotomy, the neoplasm was carefully isolated, and its origin from the visceral pleura of the
pulmonary lingula segment became evident. The adhesions with the phrenic nerve were cut preserving the nerve integrity. The mass excision
was performed with clear surgical margins and completed with a wedge resection of the lingula. The postoperative course was uneventful, a
good re-expansion of the left lung was obtained, and the patient was discharged on the fifth postoperative day. Left panel: chest x-ray
showing a large opacity on the left side. Right panel: the CT scan of the chest showing a solid mass of 11 × 8 cm in the left hemi thorax,
with vertical extension of 10 cm, mild enhancement after contrast medium infusion and some calcifications in the basal part (asterisk). The
lesion is in close relation with chest wall, left pulmonary artery (LPA) and pulmonary trunk (PT), without signs of local infiltration.
Moderate activity of the mass on Positron Emission Tomography study. Pathological examination showed a 12 × 11, 5 × 6 cm encapsulated tumor
mass (Figure 3a), whitish in color, with whorled appearance and calcification on cut section (Fig. 3b). Microscopic examination showed
fibroblast-like structures within the collagen (Figure 4). The diagnosis of benign SFTP was confirmed by mmunohistochemical analysis (CD34+,
BCL-2+, SMA-, S100-). Left panel: surgical specimen with detail of the wedge resection of the lingula. Right panel: solitary fibrous tumor
of the pleura, whorled fibrous tissue is evident on the cut section. Tumor consists of elongated cells that display a storiform pattern of
growth and abundant stromal collagen (hematoxylin & eosin stain; magnification 100 ×). At higher magnification, tumor cells appear of small
size, spindle, with no cytologic atypia (insert; magnification 400 ×). After two years of follow-up the patient is in good clinical
condition without recurrence of disease or clinical symptoms. It is well known that solitary fibrous tumors of the pleura are incidentally
discovered during chest x-ray examination because these neoplasms often have a silent clinical course for several years . It has been
described in all ages, but the peak of incidence is in the sixth and seventh decades of life . The larger the tumor, the more likely it is
that there will be symptoms . Systemic symptoms such as weight loss, nocturnal sweating, chills, weakness, digital clubbing, hypertrophic
osteoarthropathy, and hypoglycemia have also been reported . Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (Pierre Marie-Bamberg syndrome) , is related to
the abnormal production of hyaluronic acid by tumor cells and affect up to 20% of patients. In less than 5% of cases, SFTP can secrete
insulin-like growth factor II which causes refractory hypoglycemia . Sometimes, large tumors might present an unusual onset, such as the
case of Shaker and et al, in which a woman with leg edema and dyspnea caused by a large SFTP compressing the right atrium and the inferior
vena cava is described. In our case, the large tumor presented with episodes of situational syncope when coughing. Situational syncope is a
neurally-mediated syncope related to a reflex response that, when triggered, determines vasodilatation and bradycardia. Neurally-mediated
syncope is usually classified as vasovagal (common faint), or situational . Suggestive for vasovagal syncope are a long history of syncope,
a youthful age, a sudden and unpleasant sight, pain or sound, prolonged standing in hot and/or crowded places. It often associates with
nausea and vomiting. Situational syncope is diagnosed if syncope occurs during or after urination, defecation, cough or swallowing . In our
case the syncope occurred immediately after coughing, without nausea and vomiting; in addition, the patient was old and reported a trauma.
We, therefore, hypothesize that coughing, due to the stimulation of the phrenic nerve, resulted in a high intrathoracic pressure producing
an exaggerated Valsalva responce that decreased venous return and, consequently, cardiac output. At this regard it should be noticed that
the accidental phrenic nerve injury produces cough and dyspnea and this evenience is well documented during right atrial catheterization
procedures . All these details ruled out the possibility of a common faint, and consequently a diagnosis of situational syncope when
coughing was made. The negative results of the cardiovascular tests associated to the presence of a large thoracic mass convinced us to
consider the cough syncope related to the stimulation of the phrenic nerve by the neoplasm. In fact, after surgical removal of the tumor,
the patient is free from syncope episodes confirming the direct implication of the solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura in the neurologic
manifestations. Generally SFTP is a localized, benign tumor which may have different clinical pictures. It is curable using a careful and
complete resection, provided that the surgical margins are free from neoplastic cells. In our case its resection definitively resolved the
episodes of situational syncope due, in our opinion, to the large thoracic mass compressing the phrenic nerve. Written and informed consent
was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available
for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. LS conceived the idea, did
supervision of manuscript preparation and proof reading initiated treatment, did surgical procedures and approved the final version of the
paper. MN, AP, LR, DT proof reading, initiated treatment, did surgical procedures. UC, MDS wrote the manuscript and carried out literature
review; MMC contributed to data management and preparing of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
