Dear Editor, A 40-year-old lady had a history of inadvertent binocular injury while using a towel infested with caterpillar setae, 12 years
back. She was treated for removal of hair from the ocular surface, the same day of injury, elsewhere. Apparently, several setae were removed
and repeated examination did not reveal any residual hair in the eyes. No documented details were available with the patient. She presented
to us with redness, pain and decreased vision in the left eye, since three years. She was being treated for intermediate uveitis with oral
and topical steroids during the same period. Her general and systemic examinations were normal. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in right
eye was 20/30 and 20/2000 (CF 2 feet) in the left. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy of the right eye revealed mild anterior chamber (AC) reaction and
a fine intralenticular caterpillar hair in the superior quadrant of the lens with early nucleus sclerosis [Figure 1]. Left eye examination
revealed 2+ cells and flare in AC, 2+ vitreous cells, a point anterior (lens) capsule rupture in the nasal quadrant with impacted
caterpillar hair and a rosette-shaped cataractous lens [Figure 2]. Intraocular pressure and iridocorneal angles of both eyes were normal.
Right eye fundus was normal except for pars plana exudates. Left fundus revealed vitreous haze, sclerosed retinal vessels in superotemporal
quadrant and pars plana exudates inferiorly. Ultrasound Biomicroscopy (UBM) did not reveal any more intraocular setae. Patient was treated
with oral steroids, posterior subtenon triamcinolone (40 mg) injection, topical steroids and cycloplegics in both eyes. At six weeks follow-
up, visual acuity was maintained in both eyes while the inflammation had subsided. The patient underwent left eye phacoemulsification,
caterpillar hair removal, (acrylic foldable) intraocular lens (IOL) implantation ′in the bag′ and a number 240 silicone band encirclage
under systemic steroid cover. Pars plana vitrectomy was deferred as preoperative UBM and peroperative fundus examination did not reveal any
more setae. At six weeks follow-up, BCVA in the left eye was 20/200 with 1+ cells in the AC and a stable IOL. Oral and topical steroids were
tapered. At one year follow-up, left eye was quiet and visual acuity was maintained; improvement being limited by chronic cystoid macular
changes. Optical coherence tomography revealed increased macular thickness with multiple intraretinal cystoid spaces [Figure 3]. Caterpillar
setae-incited inflammatory reaction has been classified into five types:1 Type 1: An acute reaction to the hair consisting of chemosis and
inflammation. This begins immediately and lasts for some weeks. Type 2: Chronic mechanical keratoconjunctivitis caused by hair lodged in the
bulbar or palpebral conjunctiva. Foreign body sensation occurs and linear corneal abrasions are seen. Type 3: Formation of grey-yellow
nodules in the conjunctiva (granulomas). Setae may be subconjunctival or intracorneal and may be asymptomatic. Type 4: Iritis secondary to
hair penetration of anterior segment. Type 5: Vitreoretinal involvement (10-20%) after hair penetrate the posterior segment via the anterior
chamber or transsclerally. This may occur some years later and effects can range from mild vitritis with or without cystoid macular edema to
a frank endophthalmitis. Pathophysiology of inflammation is assumed to be both partially mechanical2 (progression caused by distal end
oriented barbs on setae) and partly toxic2-4 (thymetopoien secreted from the venum gland connected to the hair shaft). A number of theories
have been postulated suggesting possible mechanism of migration of setae.5,6 Gunderson et al.,5 suggest that because the setae have no
propulsive power of their own, movements of the globe with versions, respirations and pulse together with the constant iris movement propel
the spines (on the setae) forward. It can be seen from the electron micrographs that the direction of the spines is vital in this, allowing
only forward movements. Ascher6 suggested that it was the inflammatory exudates pushing against the broken end of the hair that allowed it
to move along the path of least resistance. A further factor that determines the depth of penetration is the initial injury. None of the
previous literature have reported intralenticular migration of setae and the same can be incorporated in the above classification proposed
by Cadera et al. 1 The lens capsule might possibly pose resistance to intralenticular migration of setae explaining this extremely uncommon
presentation. Complete intralenticular entrapment of the setae in the right eye of this patient might have enclosed the toxins within a
closed compartment resulting in a blunted inflammatory response. Partial intralenticular penetration of setae in the left eye might have
exposed toxins to intraocular milieu allowing a more pronounced inflammatory response. This case indicates the value of a careful
examination and history-taking in a case of uveitis which allows for accurate diagnosis and treatment. Phacoemulsification with steroid
cover and periodic follow- up in the management of cataractous lens associated with intralenticular setae is of potential value in such
eyes. Dr Jyotirmay Biswas for technical help. Right eye slit-lamp picture shows intralenticular caterpillar setae with anterior bulbous end
Left eye preoperative slit-lamp (retroillumination) picture shows embedded intralenticular caterpillar seta. Inset: Postoperative slit-lamp
picture shows intracapsular posterior chamber intra ocular lens OCT scan of the left eye at one year follow-up shows intraretinal cystoid
spaces suggestive of chronic macular edema
