The surgical robotic system is superior to traditional laparoscopy in regards to 3-dimensional images and better instrumentations. Robotic
surgery for hepatic resection has not yet been extensively reported. Between March and May 2007, we performed 3 robot-assisted left lateral
sectionectomies of the liver. Case 1 had a hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), case 2 had colon cancer with liver metastasis, and case 3 had
intrahepatic duct stones. All patients had successful operation and recovered without complications. Shorter length of hospital stays,
earlier start of oral feeding and less amount of ascites were found. However, case 1 had recurrent HCC at 3 months after operation. Robotic-
assisted liver surgery is still a new field in its developing stage. In patients with small malignant tumors and benign liver diseases,
robotic-assisted laparoscopic resection is feasible and safe. Through experience, the use of robotics is expected to increase in the
treatment of benign diseases and malignant neoplsms. However, careful patient selection is important and long-term outcomes need to be
evaluated. The development of minimally invasive surgery has led to an increase in laparoscopic hepatic resection. Particularly for
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), in which the possibility of repetitive operation for tumor recurrence or liver transplantation is high,
laparoscopic approach results in less postoperative adhesion than open abdominal surgery, decreasing the difficulty of dissection in future
operation. However, laparoscopy is limited by 2-dimensional imaging and restricted instrument motion. Advanced computer-enhanced technology
has been developed to overcome these limitations. The surgical robotic system provides 3-dimensional images, allowing surgeons to operate
with advanced vision. Moreover, the robotic system utilizes EndoWrist, an instrument with a 360-degree range of motion. The da Vinci
Surgical System (Intuitive Surgical, Mountain View, CA, USA) and Zeus system (Computer Motion, Santa Barbara, CA, USA) have been the only 2
commercially available robotic systems. In 2003 Computer Motion was purchased by Intuitive Surgical, thus leaving only the daVinci in
production.1 There have been few reports discussing the indications of robotic surgery in hepatobiliary surgery, and robotic surgery for
hepatic resection has not been extensively reported. We present herein 3 cases of da Vinci robotic-assisted left lateral sectionectomy of
the liver. Between March and May 2007, we performed 3 robot-assisted left lateral sectionectomies of the liver at the Department of Surgery,
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. A 63-year-old female with a 20-year history of HBV carrier status was admitted for HCC
in liver segment II. Serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level was 559.3 IU/mL. The patient had liver cirrhosis corresponding to Child-Pugh class
A, and the Indocyanine Green retention rate at 15 minutes (ICG-R 15) was 1.4%. Imaging included CT and MRI, and hepatic angiography revealed
a 2 cm single mass in Segment II consistent with HCC (Fig. 1). We performed left lateral sectionectomy using the da Vinci robotic system. A
70-year-old female presented with a 10-month history of anal bleeding and tenesmus. Colonoscopy revealed an ulcerofungating mass in the
rectosigmoid colon, 10 - 15 cm from the anal verge and adenocarcinoma was confirmed from biopsy. CT showed an ulcerofungating mass at the
rectosigmoid junction with pericolic fat infiltration and a 1.5 cm hypodense mass on liver segment III, which was compatible with metastasis
(Fig. 2). Serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 12.7 ng/mL, and carbohydrate antigen 19 - 9 (CA 19 - 9) level 66.5 U/mL.
Simultaneous operation on the colon and metastatic hepatic lesion was planned using the da Vinci robotic system. A 59-year-old male with a
history of removal of common bile duct (CBD) stone by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) in 2004 presented acute
abdominal pain for 3 days. On admission, total and direct bilirubin was 4.3 and 3.9 mg/dL, respectively, and alkaline phosphatase was 267
IU/L. The other laboratory findings were within the normal limits. Precontrast CT revealed several radiopaque stones noted in liver segment
II and a 6 mm calcified stone in the distal CBD. Mild intrahepatic duct dilatation was noted with moderate CBD dilatation (Fig. 3). Robot-
assisted left lateral sectionectomy following ERCP removal of CBD stone was planned. Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a
supine position, and 5 trocars were used. Pneumoperitoneum to 12 mmHg was established. A 12-mm trocar for the robotic camera was placed
above or below the umbilicus by the Hassen method. Three additional 8-mm trocars were placed at the left upper quadrant (LUQ), epigastric,
and right upper quadrant (RUQ) areas under the laparoscopic guidance, respectively. A 12-mm trocar for an assistant was also placed at the
LUQ area. Insertion sites of trocars were slightly different for each case because of additional procedures. The 4-arm da Vinci surgical
robot system was brought into position and docked following port placement. The operator moved to the console to control the robotic arms.
The assistant remained at the patient's left side to change robotic instruments and perform clipping, stapling, intraoperative
ultrasonography, and choledochoscope through the 12-mm LUQ trocar site. A 30Â° robotic camera was used. After exploration of the abdominal
cavity, intraoperative ultrasonography was used to examine the remaining liver to search for undetectable lesions and obtain adequate
surgical resection margins. The undissected round ligament was used as grips to effectively retract the liver. The liver was mobilized by
dividing the left triangular ligament and lesser omentum. Parenchymal division proceeded from the anterior edge of the liver by harmonic
scalpel and electrocautery (Fig. 4). The small vessels and bile ducts exposed during parenchymal dissection were ligated and divided by
clipping. The Glisson's pedicles of segments II and III were clamped and divided by endo-GIA or suture technique (Fig. 5). Dissection
proceeded posteriorly to the left hepatic vein trunk, which was also clamped and divided by endo-GIA. Pringle's maneuver was not applied. A
closed suction drain catheter was placed in the subhepatic space. The specimen was placed in an endoscopic retrieval bag and removed through
a left subcostal mini-laparotomy incision extending from the port site. Especially for case 2, we also performed da Vinci-assisted low
anterior resection following hepatic resection. However, additional port placement was not required. For case 3, we performed an
intraoperative choledochoscopic exam, lithotripsy of the CBD stone, and cholangiography following lateral sectionectomy of the liver and
cholecystectomy. The choledochoscopic exam through the left intrahepatic duct showed a 7 mm stone. The stone was removed by Forgathy
catheter. We confirmed by cholangiography that there was no stone in the biliary tree. The left intrahepatic duct was closed with several
interrupted sutures. Three consecutive patients successfully underwent laparoscopic robot-assisted left lateral sectionectomy. Short-term
outcomes including operative factors are shown in Table 1. After hepatic resection (cases 1 and 3), hospitalization lasted for 6 days
although recovery was observed at postoperative day 4. A clear liquid diet was started on postoperative day 1. For case 2, hospital stay was
longer (total 13 days), and the diet was started later because of combined colon surgery. During the Postoperative course, all patients
recovered without complication. Pathological examination of case 1 demonstrated a 2.2-cm HCC with capsular invasion and focal microvessel
invasion. The resection margin was free of carcinoma and the distance was 0.8 cm. Pathological examination of case 2 showed a metastatic
adenocarcinoma of the liver with free resection margins. Pathological examination of case 3 showed intrahepatic duct stones with chronic
proliferative cholangitis and ductal dilatation. The patient with HCC (case 1) visited the outpatient clinic 3 months postoperatively with
left hip pain that had persisted for several days. On evaluation, AFP level was 65151.8 IU/mL, an increase from 132.09 IU/mL measured on
postoperative day 7. Follow-up CT showed multiple intrahepatic masses, compatible with recurrent HCC and tumor thrombi, in the main portal
trunk. Positron Emission Tomography (PET) showed multiple strong uptake of F-18 FDG in the liver and pelvic bone mainly on the left side.
There was no evidence of peritoneal seeding (Fig. 6). The patient was referred to a radiation oncologist. Robotic surgery enables the
operator to control the robotic system alone and to perform more precise and complex operations. The da Vinci Surgical System provides
surgeons with 1) intuitive translation of the instrument handle to the tip movement, thus eliminating the mirror-image effect, 2)
visualization with high-quality 3-dimensional images and stable camera platform, 3) scaling, 4) tremor filtering, 5) coaxial alignment of
eyes, hand, and tooltip images, 6) EndoWrist with a 360-degree range of motion, 7) comfortable, ergonomically ideal operating position, and
8) possibility of remote site surgery.2-4 These benefits are most evident when used for precise surgeries in limited spaces. Robotic liver
surgery provides access to fine structures of the liver and allows surgeons to see delicate blood vessels and ducts. Three-dimensional
vision offers the advantage of improved depth-perception and accuracy.5 Furthermore, the robotic system involves minimal intraoperative
manipulation of the tumor mass, resulting in less trauma. Robotic surgery has several limitations: 1) high cost, 2) inadequate coverage by
medical insurance, 3) lack of tactile sense, that can impair surgeons' capacity to make intuitive decisions, 4) lack of training systems, 5)
heavy robotic arms and equipments, 6) time-consuming set up, and 7) difficulty in converting to open surgery.2,3,6 Furthermore, the da Vinci
system is not attached to the operating table, requiring undocking to change table position. When perilous circumstances such as massive
bleeding occur, the assistant can compress bleeding focus with laparoscopic instruments until conversion to open surgery. Although
conversion time can be longer than in laparoscopic surgery, the difference was quite small in our simulations. Problems will most likely be
resolved as computer-enhanced technology continues to develop and surgeons accumulate experience. Currently, the da Vinci robotic system is
applied to almost every surgical procedure. Evaluation of robotic-assisted surgery in other fields such as prostate cancer or colorectal
disease was proven to be safe and feasible. Oncological and functional outcomes are promising.4,7-10 In the laparoscopic era, no randomized
clinical trials have been performed comparing laparoscopy to open hepatic resection in terms of safety, feasibility and efficacy. Simillis
et al. investigated laparoscopic versus open hepatic resection for hepatic neoplasms through a meta-analysis and concluded that operative
blood loss and duration of hospital stay were significantly reduced after laparoscopic surgery and that there was no difference in
postoperative adverse events or the extent of oncological clearance.11 Vibert et al. concluded after 10 years of experience in performing
laparoscopic liver surgery that the results of laparoscopy are similar to those of laparotomy, suggesting that laparoscopy approach could be
used for most hepatic surgeries, including major hepatectomy, for malignancy.12 Moreover, Chang et al. advocate that laparoscopic left
lateral sectionectomy for benign or malignant neoplasm is safe and feasible and can be considered as a routine approach in selected
patients.13 However, there have been few reports about robotic-assisted hepatic resection. In our experience, operative time was longer due
to unfamiliarity with robotic instruments and set-up time. However, the length of time required will continue to decrease as surgeons become
more familiar with the procedure. In patients with small malignant tumors and benign diseases, robotic-assisted laparoscopic resection is
feasible. Furthermore, we expect that accumulating experience will make it possible to safely perform other major hepatectomies. We found
shorter length of hospital stays, earlier start of oral feeding and less amount of ascites after robotic surgery compared to open surgery
for liver resection. From the oncologic point of view, the potential benefits of a minimally invasive approach in terms of curability,
recurrence, and long-term survival are inconclusive. Nevertheless to perform anatomical resection with safe resection margins,
intraoperative laparoscopic ultrasonography is indispensable and guarantees precise segmental tumor location and adjacent vascular or
biliary involvement excluding adjunctive lesions.14 Therefore, we performed laparoscopic ultrasonography on all patients. In spite of this
effort, case 1 had fulminant intrahepatic recurrent tumors and bone metastasis. Preoperative CT, MRI, and angiography did not show any signs
for early recurrence. The possibility that robotic surgery contributed to early recurrence cannot be excluded. However, the tumor mass was
less manipulated compared to conventional open surgery. Another concern is that carbon dioxide insufflation might promote cancer
dissemination, port site metastases, and peritoneal seeding.15,16 However, there is no definite evidence in the literature to show that the
spread of cancer is increased.15,17 In spite of the massive intrahepatic disseminated masses and bony metastasis in case 1, there was no
evidence of peritoneal seeding. Therefore, we believe that the route of recurrence was hematogenous with portal vein tumor thrombi.
Intrahepatic metastasis by the portal venous system is probably an important mechanism for intrahepatic recurrence either from
micrometastasis or dissemination with manipulation of tumor during hepatectomy.18,19 For patients with poor prognostic factors after
resection for HCC, a number of adjuvant therapies, such as systemic chemotherapy and radiation therapy, are available. In conclusion, da
Vinci robotic-assisted hepatic resection can open a new horizon of treatment strategies and overcome the limitations of laparoscopic
surgery. In the near future, the use of robotics is expected to increase in the treatment of benign disease and malignant neoplasm of the
liver as a minimally invasive surgery. Experience and judicious application of this new technology are important. CT (A) and MRI (B) show a
2 cm mass consistent with HCC in segment II. HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma. CT shows a hypodense, 1.5 cm mass (A) in segment III consistent
with metastasis and an ulcerofungating mass (B) with minimal pericolic fat infiltration at the rectosigmoid junction. Precontrast CT shows
IHD and CBD dilatation with several radiopaque stones in liver segment II (A) and a 6 mm calcified stone in the distal CBD (B). IHD,
intrahepatic duct; CBD, common bile duct. Operative procedures. Intraoperative ultrasonography for detecting other lesions and determining
resection margins (A). Dissection of falciform ligament and ligamentum venosum after detaching the left triangular ligament using a harmonic
scalpel (B and C). Parenchymal dissection using a harmonic scalpel and electrocautery (D). Suture for Glissonian pedicle (A) and endo-GIA
for division of hepatic vein (B). A 3-month follow-up CT showed multiple intrahepatic masses compatible with HCC with tumor thrombi in the
main portal trunk (A). PET scan shows multiple strong F-18 FDG uptakes at the liver and pelvic bone (B and C). HCC, hepatocellular
carcinoma; PET, positron emission tomography. Operative and Postoperative Outcomes RUQ, Rt. Upper Quadrant; LUQ, Lt. Upper Quadrant; RPU,
Rt. Paraumblical; LPU, Lt. Paraumbilical. *Operative time for liver surgery.
