Gas in the portal veins is rare and in most cases is associated with serious diseases and poor clinical outcome. A case of gas in the
hepatic-portal veins with gastric dilatation, as shown by CT-scanning for abdominal trauma, is reported. The condition was clinically benign
and resolved spontaneously. An abdominal CT scan documented the findings. Gas in the portal veins is rare and usually associated with
serious diseases and poor clinical outcome.1-3 Reported causes include mesenteric infarction, intestinal obstruction, necrotizing
enterocolitis, Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, suppurative cholangitis, intra-abdominal abscess, ileus, caustic ingestion, endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography and endoscopic sphincterotomy, gastric dilatation, and seizure.1-12 Herein we present a case of portal
venous gas secondary to gastric dilatation. The condition was clinically benign and resolved spontaneously. A 12-year-old female patient was
involved in a road-traffic accident. She arrived at the Surgical Casualty Department conscious and anxious , able to move all her limbs, and
bleeding from a cut wound on the scalp. Her heart rate and blood pressure were 140/minute and 120/65 mmHg, respectively. The patient could
move her neck in all directions. Chest auscultation showed no abnormality. The abdomen was soft, with no tenderness; the bowel sounds were
normal; and there was no signs of internal bleeding. The patient was started on Ringer Lactate solution. Complete blood count and kidney
function tests were normal. X-rays of the skull, cervical spine, pelvis, long bones, and chest were taken, and only a linear fracture of the
right tempero-parietal bone was found. A brain CT scan revealed a right moderate tempero-parietal extra-dural hematoma, which was removed
surgically. Six hours later, the patient developed abdominal distension with minimal tenderness in the upper abdomen. A plain X-ray showed a
hugely distended stomach (Fig. 1), and an abdominal CT scan showed air in the hepatic-portal veins (Fig. 2), while other abdominal organs
appeared normal. When a naso-gastric tube was inserted, the abdomen became soft. The patient was kept nil by mouth and observed. She was
started on oral fluid on the third day and was discharged home on the fifth day in good condition. A plain X-ray of her abdomen was taken
before discharge and showed no abnormality. Historically, portal venous gas has been associated with serious underlying disease and a high
mortality rate.4 It is often associated with intestinal pneumatosis and bowel necrosis.2 Yarze et al. summarized the literature and found
that portal venous air has been reported in 3 different clinical settings: (a) related to intra-abdominal sepsis due to various pathological
processes (b) in association with inflammatory bowel disease, intestinal obstruction, ulcer disease, and gastroenteritis (c) secondary to
"benign" conditions such as after barium enema, colonoscopy, endoscopic biliary sphincterotomy, and seizures.12 These authors suggested that
there is no single pathophysiological process that leads to portal venous air in such diverse clinical settings.12 Portal venous gas due to
blunt abdominal trauma was initially reported to signal vascular injury and bowel necrosis.13 However, cases of benign portal venous gas
seen on CT scans in patients with blunt abdominal trauma have been reported.14,15 The most likely explanation is that a sudden increase in
intra-abdominal pressure caused by the impact might force the intra luminal gas into the bowel wall, where it is absorbed into the portal
circulation. Once in the portal system, the gas may pass into the hepatic veins via the sinusoids.2,13 Our case seems to indicate an
iatrogenic complication of gastric dilatation, and these findings might not occur if the patient's gastrointestinal tract had been properly
decompressed (two reasons for decompression are blunt trauma and neurosurgical procedure). We attributed the portal vein gas to gastric
dilatation in this patient who was injured in a road-traffic accident and incurred significant head trauma. However, given the complex
background, we are not absolutely sure that it is reasonable to draw this conclusion, particularly since there may have been blunt abdominal
trauma associated with the original accident. As we mentioned before, portal vein gas can be associated with blunt abdominal trauma. Portal
vein gas secondary to gastric dilatation has been reported in previous studies.7,16-19 We speculate that the main cause of gas in the portal
vein in our case was gastric dilatation. Portal venous gas might be related to an increase in intraluminal pressure, which forces
intraluminal gas through a damaged or undamaged bowel wall, where it is absorbed into the portal circulation. This scenario has been
reported in cases of ileus or gastric dilatation, or after blunt abdominal trauma, endoscopy, or barium enema examination.20 As shown in
Fig. 2, hepatic-portal venous gas usually appears as a branching radiolucency extending to within 2 cm of the liver capsule.2 The
significance of gas in the hepatic-portal veins depends on the underlying pathology; some cases have poor prognoses,3 while others, like our
case, have good prognoses. In conclusion, gas in the portal vein in the liver may occur as a transient incidental finding with gastric
dilatation in blunt abdominal trauma. It is difficult to draw a conclusion from a single case report, but we believe that nasogastric
drainage for gastric decompression in patients with blunt abdominal trauma might prevent this complication. Plain X-ray of the abdomen
showing extensive gastric dilatation. Portal vein gas is also seen. Cross-section abdominal CT scan. Note the hepatic-portal veins gas,
which appears as a branching radiolucency extending to within 2 cm of the liver capsule.
