A patient with a solitary kidney, cysteine stones, and recurrent ureteral strictures underwent robot-assisted laparoscopic ureterectomy with
ileal ureter formation. Using a transperitoneal, 4-port robotic approach, we removed the strictured ureter and created an ileal ureter. The
ileal-pyelo and ileal-vesical anastomoses were performed using the robotic system. An extracorporeal bowel anastomosis was performed using
stapling devices. Operative time was 9 hours with negligible blood loss, and the patient was discharged after 5 days. A cystogram at 10 days
demonstrated patent anastomoses without extravasation. The patient continues to do well 48 months later. Robot-assisted laparoscopic ileal
ureter replacement is feasible with excellent long-term outcome. In patients who require complex ureteral reconstruction, one surgical
option is the creation of an ileal ureter substitution, in which a segment of diseased ureter is removed and substituted with an
isoperistaltic segment of ileum.1 In the appropriate patient, outcomes from this procedure are good.1 Based on the long-term robotic and
advanced laparoscopic experience at our institution in both urologic and colorectal surgery, we felt that use of the da Vinci Robotic System
(Intuitive Surgical, Inc, Sunnyvale, CA) in this procedure may show benefit over the conventional laparoscopic or open technique. A search
of the English language medical literature since 1950 did not find any reports of a robotic-assisted laparoscopic ileal ureter creation.
Here, we describe our technique and 48-month follow-up. A 39-year-old man with a solitary left kidney and cysteine stones had undergone 27
procedures including stents, ureteroscopies, and percutaneous nephrolithotomies over 18 months. He was on maximal medical therapy to prevent
stone formation and was otherwise healthy with a serum creatinine of 1.3mg/dL. Ureteroscopy was becoming increasingly difficult due to
ureteral strictures. The patient opted for a “stone chute” with ileal ureter replacement and chose the robotic-assisted approach after an
extensive preoperative discussion of the surgical options, risks, and benefits. The patient was secured to the table in a 45-degree, left-
flank-up position. The abdomen, flank, and genitals were included in the surgical field. A Hasson trocar was placed periumbilically and used
for the robotic camera port, specimen removal, and the bowel anastomosis. Three 8-mm da Vinci robotic trocars were placed; ports 1 and 2
were used for the superior dissection and anastomosis while ports 1 and 3 were used for the inferior dissection and anastomosis (Figure 1).
We began with the inferior dissection. Port placement for robotic ileal ureter creation: A 12-mm trocar was placed at the umbilicus with a
Hasson technique (H). Three 8-mm robotic trocars were placed (1,2,3) as depicted. The white line of Toldt was incised and the colon was
mobilized medially. Though significant peri-ureteral inflammation was present, the ureter was identified crossing the iliac vessels. The
ureter was clipped as it entered the bladder and transected. After dissecting the ureter as far superiorly as possible, the robot was
repositioned to perform the remaining superior dissection. The renal pelvis was incised circumferentially. Several renal pelvic stones were
removed, and the collecting system was flushed. The robot was undocked and wheeled away from the surgical field. A 5-mm, 0-degree lens was
placed through port 2, and the specimen was removed with a retrieval bag inserted through the Hasson trocar. Using standard laparoscopic
instruments and a Harmonic scalpel, an appropriate length of ileum was selected and transected using a laparoscopic stapling device. The
mesentery was incised with a Harmonic scalpel to allow adequate mobilization, and the ileum was swung laterally. We did not
retroperitonealize the segment by passing it through the colonic mesentery. Two long 0 silk sutures were placed on each end of the bowel and
clipped together to allow for easier identification for the bowel anastomosis. The robot was brought back into the surgical field. The
staples from each end of the ileal segment were excised. A dyed and undyed 2–0 Monocryl on an SH needle (Ethicon, Cincinnati, OH) were tied
together, and a running ileal-pyelo anastomosis was performed as described for urethral-vesical anastomosis after radical prostatectomy.2
After completing the posterior portion of the anastomosis, a 0.038 guidewire was passed through the ileal segment, over which an 8Fr, 26-cm
double JJ stent was passed. The proximal anastomosis was then completed. A cystotomy was performed in the superior-lateral bladder, and the
mucosa was everted with interrupted 3–0 Vicryl on an RB needle (Ethicon, Cincinnati, OH). The distal anastomosis was performed over the
stent using the same technique. The bladder was backfilled without evidence of extravasation. A Jackson-Pratt drain was placed near each
anastomosis and brought out through ports 1 and 3 (Figure 2). The 5-mm, 0-degree lens was again passed into port 2 and the previously placed
ileal sutures were grasped through the Hasson trocar. The bowel was brought out through this site, and bowel continuity was restored using
stapling devices. The Hasson incision was closed with interrupted 0 Vicryl sutures. Two 10-mm Jackson-Pratt drains are placed through the
8-mm robotic ports 1 and 3. Total operating time was 9 hours with negligible blood loss. Pathology revealed dense ureteral strictures with
chronic inflammation. The patient had an uncomplicated recovery and was discharged home on postoperative day 5. A cystogram at 10 days
demonstrated patent anastomoses without extravasation (Figure 3). The patient returned to his usual activities in 14 days. Serum creatinine,
electrolytes, and renal ultrasound are stable. He has not had any episodes of obstruction or renal colic and continues to do well 48 months
after surgery. Postoperative cystogram confirming patent anastomoses with no extravasation. The primary indication for ileal ureter
replacement is lengthy ureteral injury precluding simple reimplantation or a Boari flap.1,3 More common causes include multiple stones,
surgical trauma, radiation, and malignancy.1,3 The only alternatives for most patients requiring ileal ureter are a permanent nephrostomy
tube, autotransplantation, and nephrectomy.1 Given his solitary kidney and history of cysteine stones, our patient was an ideal candidate
for ileal ureter replacement. Laparoscopic techniques are being increasingly utilized for reconstructive procedures, such as radical
prostatectomy and cystectomy. With experience, this technology is being applied to an expanding number of procedures. To our knowledge, only
2 prior reports exist of ileal ureter replacement with traditional laparoscopic techniques.3,4 Robotic-assisted laparoscopic surgery offers
several advantages over conventional laparoscopic surgery and is ideally suited for longer, complex reconstructive procedures. The robotic
system offers a 3-dimensional visualization with magnification for the surgeon, who can control camera position. Ergonomically, the surgeon
is seated comfortably at a console. The surgical instruments have increased degrees of freedom that facilitate the surgeon's ability to
perform complex maneuvers in a tight space without tremor or fatigue. These factors also decrease estimated blood loss, incision length,
hospital length of stay, postoperative pain, and complication rate compared with open or laparoscopic surgery.5–7 Although the large
surgical field required for this procedure may seem to preclude the robotic approach, our technique demonstrates that the same ports can be
used with changes in the robotic position to safely complete the surgery. This surgery was done prior to the introduction of the newer da
Vinci-S system, but either system could be used today. Despite the advantages of robotics, the procedure was lengthy for several reasons.
Identification of the ureter was difficult due to severe retroperitoneal inflammation, which was not unexpected given the patient's stone
history and would have also complicated open surgery. Repositioning the robot 4 times was time-consuming. Passing the wire down the ileal
segment proved to be somewhat difficult. Lastly, surgeons and nurses were performing a new procedure, and the learning curve for
laparoscopic procedures has been demonstrated to be significant.6,7 Times for this case were similar to times for reported laparoscopic
cases.3 With advancing robotic experience, some of these drawbacks can be expected to improve.5,6 The robot-assisted approach achieved the
goals of traditional ileal ureter replacement, with maintenance of renal function and decreased stone formation, along with the usual
benefits of a minimally invasive approach.5 Because ileal ureter replacement is not a commonly performed procedure, it is unlikely a
prospective comparison of the open and laparoscopic approach will be forthcoming. However, robot-assisted laparoscopic ileal ureter
replacement appears to be a reasonable alternative to the open approach in the appropriate patient.
