Ronald Ma and colleagues discuss the differential diagnosis, investigation, and management of this patient. 50-year-old woman presented in
May 2006 with recurrent generalised convulsions. She had a history of hypertension treated with indapamide, but was otherwise well. Her
older sister and mother were known to have thyroid disease. She did not have any history of chronic alcohol use nor any recent history of
head injury. The patient had never lived outside of Hong Kong. Prior to admission, she was taken to her general practitioner by her family
for gradual onset of decreased alertness, cognitive decline, and reduced verbal communication, which worsened over the course of one week.
She was found to have hypothyroidism with TSH (thyroid stimulating hormone) 52.3 mIU/l (normal range 0.47–4.68 mIU/l) and free T4 4.2 pmol/l
(normal range 10.0–28.2 pmol/l), and was started on thyroxine replacement. Four days later, she developed two generalised seizures within
three days and was admitted into hospital. She was afebrile and had no focal neurological signs on examination. Baseline investigations,
including electrolytes, liver function tests, calcium, and phosphate, were normal. Random plasma glucose was 5.7 mmol/l. Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) of brain was unremarkable. She was subsequently transferred to our hospital for further management. On admission, she was
afebrile and had a series of seizures over a period of five hours without regaining full consciousness in between seizures. The patient was
given intravenous diazepam and phenytoin, and was intubated and transferred to the intensive care unit. The patient presented with several
days' history of decreased consciousness, followed by acute symptomatic seizures. The differential diagnosis of someone with a subacute
encephalopathy is wide, and possible causes are listed in Box 1. These include metabolic derangements such as hyponatraemia, as well as
infections, central nervous system (CNS) disorders, drugs and toxins, systemic conditions such as hepatic encephalopathy, and psychiatric
conditions. The patient was at risk of hyponatraemia in view of her use of indapamide, but her serum electrolytes were normal. She was
afebrile and had no neck stiffness, though CNS infection would still need to be excluded. There was no known history of neurological or
psychiatric conditions, though this would not preclude her from suffering from such conditions. Although there was no easily identifiable
drug or toxic cause, these remained distinct possibilities and a toxicology screen was indicated. A. Metabolic derangements Electrolyte
disturbances Hyponatraemia or hypernatraemiaHypocalcaemia or hypercalcaemiaHypomagnesaemia or hypermagnesaemiaHypophosphataemia or
hyperphosphataemia Endocrine disturbances Hypothyroidism (rarely thyrotoxicosis)Hyperparathyroidism or hypoparathyroidismInsulinomaPituitary
insufficiencyAdrenal insufficiency or Cushing's syndrome HypoxiaHyperglycaemia or hypoglycaemiaCarbon dioxideInborn errors of metabolism
PorphyriaWilson disease Nutritional deficiencies Vitamin B12 deficiencyWernicke encephalopathy Electrolyte disturbances Hyponatraemia or
hypernatraemiaHypocalcaemia or hypercalcaemiaHypomagnesaemia or hypermagnesaemiaHypophosphataemia or hyperphosphataemia Hyponatraemia or
hypernatraemia Hypocalcaemia or hypercalcaemia Hypomagnesaemia or hypermagnesaemia Hypophosphataemia or hyperphosphataemia Endocrine
disturbances Hypothyroidism (rarely thyrotoxicosis)Hyperparathyroidism or hypoparathyroidismInsulinomaPituitary insufficiencyAdrenal
insufficiency or Cushing's syndrome Hypothyroidism (rarely thyrotoxicosis) Hyperparathyroidism or hypoparathyroidism Insulinoma Pituitary
insufficiency Adrenal insufficiency or Cushing's syndrome Hypoxia Hyperglycaemia or hypoglycaemia Carbon dioxide Inborn errors of metabolism
PorphyriaWilson disease Porphyria Wilson disease Nutritional deficiencies Vitamin B12 deficiencyWernicke encephalopathy Vitamin B12
deficiency Wernicke encephalopathy B. Infections SepsisSystemic infectionsCNS infections (see below) Sepsis Systemic infections CNS
infections (see below) C. Neurological CNS infections EncephalitisMeningitisBrain abscess Epilepsy Complex partial seizuresNon-convulsive
status epilepticus Head injuryHypertensive encephalopathyCarcinomatous meningitisParaneoplastic encephalitisLimbic encephalitis associated
with anti voltage gated potassium channel antibodies CNS infections EncephalitisMeningitisBrain abscess Encephalitis Meningitis Brain
abscess Epilepsy Complex partial seizuresNon-convulsive status epilepticus Complex partial seizures Non-convulsive status epilepticus Head
injury Hypertensive encephalopathy Carcinomatous meningitis Paraneoplastic encephalitis Limbic encephalitis associated with anti voltage
gated potassium channel antibodies D. Drugs Alcohol-related Alcohol intoxicationAlcohol withdrawal Recreational drugs
NarcoticsCocaineLysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, ecstasy)PhencyclidineKetamine Poisons
MethanolEthylene glycolInsecticidesCarbon monoxide poisoning Prescription medications Alcohol-related Alcohol intoxicationAlcohol withdrawal
Alcohol intoxication Alcohol withdrawal Recreational drugs NarcoticsCocaineLysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
(MDMA, ecstasy)PhencyclidineKetamine Narcotics Cocaine Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, ecstasy)
Phencyclidine Ketamine Poisons MethanolEthylene glycolInsecticidesCarbon monoxide poisoning Methanol Ethylene glycol Insecticides Carbon
monoxide poisoning Prescription medications E. Systemic conditions Hepatic encephalopathyRespiratory failureRenal failureSevere
burnsHyperthermia or hypothermia Hepatic encephalopathy Respiratory failure Renal failure Severe burns Hyperthermia or hypothermia F.
Psychiatric disease Although the patient had been diagnosed with hypothyroidism shortly prior to her presentation, the abnormal thyroid
function tests could not fully explain her neurological state. Repeat serum electrolytes, liver function tests, and calcium and magnesium
levels were all normal. Repeat TSH was 11 mIU/l. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain on admission was normal. A lumbar puncture was
performed, which showed raised cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein 1.5 g/l. The paired CSF–plasma glucose levels were 7.0 mmol/l and 7.1
mmol/l. The CSF cell count, microscopy, and Ziehl-Neelson stain were all normal. The opening pressure was 13 cmH20. Polymerase chain
reaction of the CSF was later found to be negative for herpes simplex, enterovirus, and varicella zoster virus DNA. Toxicology screen was
negative. Her clinical seizures persisted, and intravenous infusion of propofol/thiopentone was commenced. Over the subsequent four days,
upon withdrawal of propofol and thiopental, the patient still demonstrated altered mental state. The electroencephalogram (EEG) monitoring
showed repetitive focal spikes or sharps of less than three per second, which may be abolished by combination anti-epileptic therapy with
phenytoin and sodium valproate, pointing towards non-convulsive status epilepticus (Figures 1 and 2). Ten days after successful treatment,
occasional interictal discharges within a normal background were observed. Some conditions associated with multiple seizures are listed in
Box 2. Structural brain lesions were not likely in our case, given the initial normal MRI imaging. Nevertheless, repeat imaging was
warranted if the patient's condition continued to deteriorate. Repeat CT brain performed three days after admission was normal. Results of
our investigations did not support metabolic or toxic causes. Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) can present with a similar clinical
picture including dementia, myoclonus, ataxia, personality change, psychotic phenomenon, or even recurrent seizures . However, the EEG of
our patient did not reveal the periodic sharp wave complexes typical of CJD. Detection of the 14-3-3 protein in the CSF would also support a
diagnosis of CJD, though this test was not available in our hospital. Once infectious causes were excluded, other causes of a subacute
encephalopathy, such as an autoimmune or inflammatory process, including paraneoplastic encephalitis, need to be considered. A. Withdrawal
of benzodiazepines, barbiturates, alcohol B. Acute structural injury a. Tumour or cerebral metastasesb. Encephalitis/meningitisc. Brain
abscessd. Strokee. Head injuryf. Subarachnoid haemorrhage/intra-cerebral haemorrhage/subdural haematomag. Cerebral hypoxiah. Cerebral
arteriovenous malformationsi. Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndromej. Systemic lupus erythematosusk. Sagittal sinus thrombosis a.
Tumour or cerebral metastases b. Encephalitis/meningitis c. Brain abscess d. Stroke e. Head injury f. Subarachnoid haemorrhage/intra-
cerebral haemorrhage/subdural haematoma g. Cerebral hypoxia h. Cerebral arteriovenous malformations i. Posterior reversible encephalopathy
syndrome j. Systemic lupus erythematosus k. Sagittal sinus thrombosis C. Metabolic disturbances a. Hypoglycaemiab. Hyponatraemiac.
Hypocalcaemiad. Hypomagnesaemiae. Hepatic encephalopathyf. Uraemiag. Hashimoto encephalopathy a. Hypoglycaemia b. Hyponatraemia c.
Hypocalcaemia d. Hypomagnesaemia e. Hepatic encephalopathy f. Uraemia g. Hashimoto encephalopathy D. Drugs (particularly overdose) and other
toxins a. Theophyllineb. Ciprofloxacinc. Tricyclic antidepressantsd. Lithiume. Flumazenilf. Cyclosporineg. Lidocaineh. Metronidazole a.
Theophylline b. Ciprofloxacin c. Tricyclic antidepressants d. Lithium e. Flumazenil f. Cyclosporine g. Lidocaine h. Metronidazole As there
was no other organic pathology to explain her recurrent seizures and subacute encephalopathy, a diagnosis of Hashimoto encephalopathy was
considered in view of the recent diagnosis of hypothyroidism. Anti-microsomal and anti-thyroglobulin antibodies titres were 1 in 25,600 and
1 in 400 respectively, supporting a diagnosis of autoimmune thyroid disease. Anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-DNA, anti-extractable nuclear
antigen, and anti-cardiolipin antibodies were all negative. The patient's erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were mildly
elevated at 41 mm/h (normal <20 mm/h) and 39.5 mg/l (normal <9.9 mg/l), respectively, with complement C3 of 0.84 g/l (normal range 0.62–1.87
g/l) and C4 of 0.18 g/l (normal range 0.20–0.59 g/l). The patient was started on a trial of intravenous hydrocortisone 400 mg/day. Her
neurological condition gradually stabilised, and a repeat EEG ten days after admission showed normal background with occasional interictal
activities consisting of frontal predominant sharpish discharges. She was eventually taken off glucocorticoids after 18 days. The patient
was fully orientated and able to walk unaided when discharged from hospital five weeks after admission, on maintenance phenytoin and
valproate. Six months after discharge, her anti-microsomal antibodies titre was reduced to 1 in 6,400, and anti-thyroglobulin antibodies
were undetectable. She remained seizure-free six months after discharge, and the anti-convulsants were gradually tapered off. When last seen
in January 2008, she was well and biochemically euthyroid on thyroxine 0.1 mg daily and had not had any further seizures. She gave written
consent for this case to be published. The association of Hashimoto disease with an encephalopathy was first described by Lord Brain in 1966
. Hashimoto encephalopathy (HE) is characterised by an encephalopathy with acute or subacute onset, accompanied by seizures, tremor,
myoclonus, ataxia, psychosis, or stroke-like episodes, with a relapsing/remitting or progressive course. The prevalence is estimated to be
2.1 per 100,000 , although the condition is often under-recognised. Women are more commonly affected than men. In a recent series, the mean
age at onset was 56 years, with the most frequent presenting features being tremor, transient aphasia, myoclonus, gait ataxia, cognitive
impairment, seizures, and sleep abnormalities. Misdiagnosis at presentation was common, with most cases misdiagnosed as viral encephalitis,
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, dementia, or psychiatric disorders . Recurrent seizures are a recognised presentation of this condition . Other
causes of acute symptomatic seizures with multiple seizures upon presentation are listed in Box 2. The diagnosis of HE is based on presence
of elevated antithyroid antibodies in patients with a compatible clinical presentation and exclusion of other causes of encephalopathy or
acute confusional state (Box 1). Diagnosis requires presence of high titres of anti-thyroid peroxidase and/or anti-thyroglobulin antibodies,
although this is not specific and there is no clear correlation between antibody titres and the severity of neurological symptoms . The
presence of anti-thyroid antibodies can sometimes be detected in normal individuals, though usually at lower titres. In some cases, presence
of anti-neuronal antibodies has been noted . Most patients have overt or subclinical hypothyroidism at the time of presentation, but can
also be euthyroid at the time of diagnosis. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein are elevated in some patients . In some
aspects, Hashimoto encephalopathy resembles a heterogenous group of conditions, including Sjögren syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus-
associated meningoencephalitis, which are characterised by the association with underlying autoimmune conditions as well as the unifying
feature of steroid responsiveness . CSF analysis is abnormal in around 80% of cases of HE, often with elevated protein concentrations, and
less often, a lymphocytic pleocytosis . MRI is usually normal. Non-specific EEG abnormalities are often seen in the absence of seizures,
with slowing of background activity that correlates with the clinical severity of the underlying encephalopathy. Other EEG findings reported
include triphasic waves, epileptiform abnormalities, photomyogenic response, and photoparoxysmal response. The EEG abnormalities often
paralleled the clinical course, showing improvement with the clinical condition. In one series, myoclonic jerks were recorded during the EEG
study of about half the patients . Patients with sporadic CJD may have clinical features identical to that of Hashimoto encephalopathy, when
steroid responsiveness may be the only differentiating feature . In addition, diffusion-weighted MRI imaging may also help differentiate
between the two conditions, with hyper-intense abnormalities involving cortex and deep gray matter being highly sensitive and specific for
sporadic CJD. In addition to supportive measures, use of high-dose glucocorticoids is usually associated with marked clinical improvement,
as well as improvement in EEG findings. In a review of 85 cases, the majority of patients who received glucocorticoids improved with
treatment . In some cases, additional short courses of glucocorticoids or other immunomodulatory therapy may be required to treat relapses .
In more severe cases, intravenous immunoglobulins and plasmapheresis may also be helpful . Treatment of seizures with anti-convulsant
medications may be necessary as a temporary measure, though in some cases seizures do not respond to anti-epileptic drugs but may respond to
steroid therapy. Thus, considering HE in the differential diagnosis is of paramount importance. Whilst thyroid hormone replacement is
indicated in patients with biochemical evidence of overt hypothyroidism, there is no correlation between neurological improvement and
thyroxine replacement. The treatment of subclinical hypothyroidism, on the other hand, remains controversial . As illustrated by our case,
recognition of this form of autoimmune encephalopathy and its varied presentation is important, as it is readily treatable. Presence of a
personal or family history of thyroid disorder should alert clinicians to the possibility of Hashimoto encephalopathy in patients with an
otherwise unexplained subacute encephalopathy. Measurements of thyroid function and thyroid antibodies will be helpful in this setting.
Autoimmune thyroid disease may be associated with an encephalopathy (HE) with acute or subacute onset, accompanied by seizures, tremor,
myoclonus, ataxia, psychosis, or stroke-like episodes, with a relapsing/remitting or progressive course. A diagnosis of HE should be
considered in patients with unexplained delirium, encephalopathy, or seizures. The diagnosis is based on exclusion of other causes of
delirium, and is supported by the finding of elevated titres of anti-thyroid antibodies. Other autoimmune conditions such as Sjögren
syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus may also be associated with a steroid-responsive meningoencephalitis and a similar clinical
presentation to HE. Treatment is supportive, though use of intravenous glucocorticoids is associated with improvement in neurological
features as well as EEG abnormalities. Thyroid hormone replacement is indicated in patients with biochemical evidence of overt
hypothyroidism, though there is no correlation between neurological improvement and thyroxine replacement. Author contributions. All authors
participated in the management of the patient. RCWM wrote the article, with contributions from all the authors. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
central nervous system cerebrospinal fluid computed tomography electroencephalogram Hashimoto encephalopathy magnetic resonance imaging
thyroid stimulating hormone Ronald Ma, Howan Leung, Patrick Kwan, Wing Yee So, and Chun Chung Chow are in the Department of Medicine and
Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong. Florence Yap is in the
Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, Prince of Wales Hospital, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong.
Funding: The authors received no specific funding for this article. Competing Interests: RCWM is Section Editor of the Learning Forum
section. The other authors declare that they have no competing interests. Provenance: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed
