Hepatic angiosarcoma is a primary sarcoma of the liver, accounting for only 2% of all primary hepatic malignancies. Acute liver failure is
an extremely rare presentation of a primary liver tumour. We report a case of a seventy year-old man who presented with a very short period
of jaundice leading to fulminant hepatic failure (FHF). On further investigation he was found to have primary angiosarcoma of liver. The
treatment outcomes for hepatic angiosarcoma are poor, we discuss the options available and the need for prompt investigation and
establishment of a diagnosis Hepatic malignancies include primary hepatocellular carcinoma, metastases and primary or metastatic sarcomas .
Hepatic angiosarcoma is a primary sarcoma of the liver which accounts for only 2% of all primary hepatic malignancies . Angiosarcoma is
associated with environmental or occupational exposure to carcinogens (thorium dioxide, vinyl chloride, arsenic and radiation). There is
also an association with hemochromatosis and von Recklinghausen disease . In most cases of primary hepatic angiosarcoma, no obvious risk
factor can be identified. The most common causes of fulminant hepatic failure (FHF) are drug toxicity and sero-negative hepatitis ; rarer
causes include Bud-Chiari syndrome and acute Wilson's disease. FHF can also develop very rarely as a consequence of primary or metastatic
liver tumour, this generally occurs as a result of massive neoplastic infiltration of the hepatic sinusoids leading to secondary necrosis of
hepatocytes . Rowbotham et al reported 4020 cases of FHF, malignant infiltration accounted for only 0.44% (18 cases) . There have been a
number of case series reporting FHF secondary to infiltration of the liver by malignant cells , haematological malignancies are the most
common . Other infiltrative metastatic malignancies that rarely cause FHF include adenocarcinoma, melanoma, and anaplastic tumours .
Although hepatic dysfunction due to malignancy such as hepatocellular carcinoma or metastatic infiltration is common, acute liver failure in
these cases is rare. We report a case of primary angiosarcoma of the liver which presented with FHF. A seventy year old Caucasian male, who
had no significant previous medical history, was admitted to a local hospital with a history of sudden onset jaundice and weight loss. There
was no previous history of jaundice or hepatitis. There was no significant history of alcohol in-take or exposure to arsenic, vinyl
chloride, or Thorotrast. He never used any hepatotoxic or herbal medications and his mother died of undiagnosed liver disease. Upon
examination the patient was jaundiced without encephalopathy or focal neurological findings. He had bilateral pedal oedema and hepatomegaly.
The patient did not have any other signs of liver failure. Liver function tests at admission revealed a total bilirubin of 203 mmol/dL
(normal, 5–17 mmol/dL), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 52 IU/L (normal, 4–44 IU/L), alkaline phosphatase 170 IU/L (normal, 67–213 IU/L),
albumin 2.0 g/dL, PT 22 seconds, APTT 51 seconds and platelets 113,000/cm3. An urgent ultrasound scan demonstrated hepatomegaly with
significant liver paranchymal alteration. A subsequent contrast enhanced abdominal CT showed gross replacement of liver with tumour tissue
suggestive of a primary liver tumour (Figure 1). The patient was at this point referred to our centre. Abdominal CT scan showing complete
replacement of liver parenchyma with liver tumour. The patient's initial evaluation in our Unit showed further derangement in the patients
liver functions tests; total bilirubin had risen to 401 mmol/dL, AST to 132 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase to 370 IU/L and INR to 2.1. A local
review of his CT scan raised the possibility of angiosarcoma. To confirm the diagnosis a transjugular biopsy was arranged as the clotting
abnormality had been resistant to correction with fresh frozen plasma at the referring centre. Before this could be carried out patient
rapidly deteriorated after admission and became progressively encephalopathic, consistent with FHF. He was treated conservatively with
dextrose and broad spectrum antibiotics but deteriorated further and died two days after admission to the liver unit. A post mortem liver
biopsy was carried out confirming initial suspicions that this was a primary angiosarcoma of the liver. Microscopically, tumour was composed
of poorly cohesive cells, oval to spindle shaped with high grade cytological atypia. The tumour had a sinusoidal growth pattern surrounding
clusters of hepatocytes forming cholestatic rosettes (Figure 2a). Immunohistochemistry staining was strongly and diffusely positive for
vascular endothelial markers (CD31, CD34) (Figure 2b) and for vimentin. Stains for the cytokeratins and hepatocyte specific antigen
highlighted the presence of entrapped non neoplastic hepatocyte and bile ducts. Staining for smooth muscle actin appeared to be confined to
areas of fibrotic tissue. (A) Liver biopsy showing sinusoidal infiltration by pleomorphic spindle cells typical of hepatic angiosarcoma.
There is disruption of the normal trabecular architecture with hepatocyes forming glandular structures containing bile plugs ("cholestatic
rosettes"). (B) Spindle cells are strongly immunoreactive for the vascular endothelial marker CD34. (A = Haematoxylin and eosin, B =
immunoperoxidase). Angiosarcoma usually presents in late adulthood with abdominal discomfort, distension, weight loss, and fatigue . On
examination, the patients may have jaundice, hepatomegaly, and ascites . Our patient was admitted with similar symptoms. Fulminant hepatic
failure (FHF) is defined as liver disease that results in encephalopathy within 28 days from the onset of jaundice in a patient with no
prior evidence of liver disease. Presentation as FHF is rare, Table 1 shows published reports of clinical presentation and treatment of
angiosarcoma in the current literature. In an adult FHF Study Group; acetaminophen overdose (46%), drug toxicity (11%) and hepatitis (10%)
were found to be the most common causes for liver failure . There are case reports where association of FHF with liver metastasis from other
malignancies have been reported . Primary Angiosarcoma and fulminant liver failure and treatment R = Resection, N = No treatment, C =
Chemotherapy, N/A = not available The liver is commonly involved in metastatic disease, and the degree of liver biochemistry derangement
tends to reflect the extent of parenchymal replacement with tumour . In this patient, liver function tests were only slightly abnormal two
weeks before development of FHF. Although, alteration of liver function tests in these patients is very common , liver failure is extremely
rare. CT scan is often diagnostic, demonstrating multiple hypodense areas typical of angiosarcoma. Post contrast, the lesions become partly
or completely isodense compared with normal hepatic tissue . In our patient liver parenchyma was completely replaced with tumour tissue
(Figure 1). The mechanism of liver failure is multifactorial. Evidence suggests a combination of hepatic ischaemia leading to parenchymal
infarction, vascular occlusion of portal vein by tumour thrombi and nonocclusive infarction of liver due to shock from secondary causes such
as sepsis or cardiac dysfunction plays an important role in these patients . In this patient, replacement of hepatocytes by malignant cells,
leading to secondary necrosis of hepatocytes played a significant role in development of liver failure. Angiosarcoma has very limited
treatment options, without treatment the majority of patients die within 6 months of diagnosis . Surgery has a limited role due to the
advanced stage at which these tumours present. Liver transplantation is contraindicated, as patients who have been transplanted incidentally
have not shown any survival benefit. The data from European Liver Transplant Registry on 17 patients who had undergone transplantation for
angiosarcoma had a median survival of only 7 months . Hepatic resection has been reported in patients with limited disease but these results
have also been poor. There are very few published case reports with good survival after liver resection (16 months and 10 years ). The role
of chemotherapy has been described with very limited improvement in overall length of survival . Treatment with new techniques like
transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) techniques has been described as a case report with very limited success in overall survival
improvement . Our patient presented with mild hepatic failure that rapidly progressed to FHF. In the absence of a clear aetiology for FHF
primary liver tumour must be considered in the differential diagnosis and a biopsy should be arranged to reach definitive diagnosis. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. CSB – Contributions to case selection, analysis and drafting the manuscript. ANB –
Case analysis and initial drafting of manuscript. GS – Contributions to conception, arranging histopathology, revision of the manuscript.
SGH – Histopathology evaluation, further study of slides and in depth analysis. SRB – Critical revision and final approval of the version to
be published. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this case report.
