To the Editor: The World Health Organization Polio Eradication Initiative has reduced to 4 the number of countries with endemic transmission
of wild polioviruses and has reported the widespread circulation of polioviruses that have evolved from attenuated vaccine (oral poliovirus
vaccine ), so-called vaccine-derived polioviruses (VDPVs) (1,2). VDPVs can reportedly replicate in immunocompromised persons, in whom they
produce paralysis, and can spread to contacts and produce paralytic polio in immunocompetent but incompletely immunized persons; these
viruses can even cause some polio outbreaks in areas with a low level of vaccination coverage (2). When VDPVs are detected, a careful
follow-up of VDPV cases and contacts is essential if spread is to be avoided. Because point mutations or recombination events have been
associated with reversion to neurovirulence transmission and thus a greater probability of outbreaks (2), meticulous molecular studies of
the detected strains are recommended. Spain progressively adopted vaccination with OPV for children in 2004. As a consequence, the incidence
of vaccine-like poliovirus detection in recently vaccinated children, which was relatively common up to that time (51 isolates in 2003) (3),
began to decrease (15 isolates in 2004 and none in 2005 except the case described here). In July 2005, a 14-month-old boy from Morocco with
residual paralysis and major histocompatibility class II immunodeficiency was reported through the Spanish Acute Flaccid Paralysis
Surveillance System. The patient had received 2 OPV doses at birth and at 6 months of age in Morocco; 8 months later, meningoencephalitis
developed. The case was immediately considered suspicious and was therefore monitored at least monthly until the boy died. Sampling was
conducted, coinciding with his visits to the hospital to receive therapy with immunoglobulin (γ globulin 0.5 g/kg). His contacts were
studied, environmental surveillance was conducted, and molecular analysis of all detected viruses was performed. Laboratory methods for
virus detection and characterization, including 10 new reverse-transcription–PCRs designed to cover the entire genome, are detailed in the
Table. *E, local sewage; S, stools; I, isolates; EV, enterovirus; PV, poliovirus; UTR, untranslated region; VP1, virus capsid
protein. †Sense (s) and antisense (as) primers: 5′ → 3' sequence (position according to X00595). n, nested. All reverse transcription–PCR
(RT-PCR) systems had the same conditions: 5 μL of clinical samples (case) or isolates (contacts) were added to the reaction mixture (final
volume 50 μL): AMV/Tfl 1X reaction buffer, 2 mmol/L MgSO4, 200 μM each dNTP, 1 μM each primer, 5 U of AMV RT, and 5 U of Tfl DNA polymerase
(Access RT-PCR System, Promega, Madison, WI, USA). First RT step of 45 min at 48°C, 2 min at 94°C, 45 cycles of denaturation (94°C, 2 min),
annealing (53°C, 1 min), and elongation (68°C,1 min 30 s). Serotype 2 VDPVs were detected in all 10 stool samples of the patient with
residual paralysis for 6 months, until he died, and in 3 of the 7 family contacts analyzed (father and 2 brothers, 11 and 13 years of age,
none with confirmed previous vaccination). One of the contacts, considered immunocompetent, shed virus for 216 days (5 fecal samples in
which 5 complete genomes were obtained and 1 additional fecal sample in which virus capsid protein l could be amplified); a stool sample
collected on day 284 was negative. Technical problems delayed sewage sampling. When sewage from the area in which the patient and positive
contacts lived was sampled on February 8, 2006, no polioviruses were detected; however, an echovirus 30 was detected. Poliovirus viral load
fluctuated (106–109 copies/mL in the paralysis-affected person), decreasing after each immunoglobulin therapy dose (Figure 1 in the
Technical Appendix). The corresponding level was <105 in the contacts. The highest value of viral load was recorded in the patient’s final
sample, taken before he died. Homology of the VP1 gene with respect to the original vaccine PV2 fluctuated from 97.8% to 98.6% in the case
samples but remained constant (98.4%) in the contact samples (Figure 1 in the Technical Appendix). All studied polioviruses featured the
following nucleotide substitutions in the 5′ untranslated region: G309A, T344C, T355C, T398C, A481G, T500C, and T743C (Figure 2 in the
Technical Appendix). Furthermore, the final sample from the patient had A476C, G505T, T588A, and A738C. Several nucleotide substitutions
detected in VP1–4 were common to all samples (Figure 2 in the Technical Appendix); 5 resulted in amino acid changes, including T2909C (VP1
I143T) and G3277A (VP1 V266I). All samples contained 2 noncontiguous recombination fragments Sabin 2/Sabin 1 in the nonstructural genes,
including the entire 3C gene and the 3′ half of the 3D-pol (Figure 2 in the Technical Appendix) as in other reports (7–10). Both fragments,
when compared with C species enterovirus, were closely related to Sabin 1 (99.6% and 97.9%, respectively). Specific nucleotide and amino
acid comparisons among the isolates are detailed in Figure 3 in the Technical Appendix. According to the proposed classification (2), all
the detected viruses were iVDPVs (isolated from immunocompromised patients) that spread only to close contacts because they were not
detected in local sewage. If we assume that the greater the amount of viral excretion in feces that occurs, the higher number of replicating
polioviruses (as well as the potential for greater genetic diversity), the patient had a more active infection (that responded to the
therapy) than did the contacts. Fluctuation in homology to the parental OPV strain might be due not only to the calculation method
(calculation was made on the basis of the majority-base call at each chromatogram position, and case sequences presented many mixed
nucleotide positions) but also to immunotherapy. Treatment appeared to have decreased virus replication, probably by its action mainly on
species with greater fitness and higher replication rates (those that were more similar to the original Sabin strain). As a consequence,
treatment might produce a bottleneck that unmasked more divergent species. Both the case and contact strains had intertypic Sabin 1/Sabin 2
recombination in nonstructural genes and also shared most of the nucleotide and amino acid substitutions. However, pathologic changes
occurred only in the patient whose immunologic mechanisms were affected and whose viral load was consequently much higher. A recent report
(1) suggests that VDPVs can emerge in any country that uses OPV with insufficient vaccine coverage. In a polio-free IPV-user country,
poliomyelitis can arise and spread to contacts who are not properly vaccinated. In the case we present here, the high level of vaccination
coverage in Spain and the rapid control of close contacts achieved through the surveillance and control programs prevented virus spread. In
the global pre-eradication phase, countries are recommended to change vaccination from OPV to IPV. However, IPV-adopting countries commonly
share borders with OPV-adopting countries and residents may travel back and forth; thus, although the probability of VDPV circulation
decreases, it does not reduce to zero. Therefore, active surveillance, rapid classification of isolates, and molecular characterization of
the virus are essential. Paralysis Case and Contact Spread of Recombinant Vaccine-derived Poliovirus, Spain Suggested citation for this
article: Avellón A, Cabrerizo M, de Miguel T, Pérez-Breña P, Tenorio A, Pérez JL, et al. Paralysis case and contact spread of recombinant
vaccine–derived poliovirus, Spain . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. Nov 2008 [date cited]. Available from
http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/14/11/1807.htm We thank the Spanish Poliovirus Surveillance system, in which both the National Epidemiology
and Microbiology Centres and autonomous community authorities participate, for detecting the case; the personnel of the National Centre of
Microbiology and Son Dureta Hospital for their technical assistance; and Jose Manuel Echevarria for revision of our manuscript. This
research was developed thanks to the Health Minister DGVI1429/05-2A and 2B funding.
