We report an extremely rare case of a diffuse hepatic hemangiomatosis without extrahepatic involvement in an adult. The imaging findings of
this tumor were similar to those of a hepatic hemangioma and included contrast enhancement with a centripetal filling pattern of the entire
hepatic tumor on the delayed phase of a dynamic CT and inhomogeneous diffuse uptake of the entire tumor on blood-pool images obtained five
hours later on a 99mTc-labeled red blood cell scan. Despite its rarity, diffuse hepatic hemangiomatosis can be suggested in adult patients
with diffusely involved hepatic tumors showing the radiological findings of a hepatic hemangioma. Diffuse hepatic hemangiomatosis usually
occurs in neonates with an abdominal mass and unidentified congestive heart failure. Further, diffuse hepatic hemangiomatosis is
characterized by hemangiomas of the skin and involvement of at least two visceral organs (1). However, an adult case of hepatic
hemangiomatosis, especially in its isolated form, is extremely rare. To the best of our knowledge, no cases which are similar to our
patient, and includes the involvement of the entire liver were described in the literature. We report a case of a pathologically proven
diffuse hepatic hemangiomatosis without an extrahepatic lesion in an adult. Our diagnosis was confirmed by an ultrasound-guided biopsy. A
33-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with a two-month history of abdominal distension and edema. The patient had no prior history
of drug usage, including oral contraceptives, and no relevant family medical history. Upon admission, the patient underwent a physical
examination, which revealed diffuse hepatomegaly, pitting edema in both legs, however no abnormal cardiac murmur. The laboratory findings
indicated abnormalities including a hemoglobin level of 7.5 g/dL, a platelet count of 18,000/mm3, as well as a slightly elevated serum
alanine aminotransferase (50 U/I) and aspartate aminotransferase (56 U/I). Moreover, the hepatitis B virus antigen was negative, and the
titer of the hepatitis B virus antibody and alpha-fetoprotein were normal. The clinical and radiological evaluation showed no evidence of
Rendu-Osler-Weber disease or hemangiomas in the extrahepatic region. An ultrasonography revealed a diffuse heterogeneous echoic infiltrative
mass containing numerous and various-sized hypoechoic nodules involving the entire liver (Fig. 1A). A Doppler ultrasonography revealed no
remarkable tumor vascularities except for the underlying hepatic parenchymal vascular flow (Fig. 1B). A hepatic dynamic CT was performed and
demonstrated the multifocal enhancing hepatic nodules on both the arterial and portal phases, as well as an increased area of contrast
enhancement with a centripetal filling pattern of nearly the entire hepatic tumor on a delayed phase CT (Fig. 1C-F). In addition, areas of
capsular retraction were also noted. However, there was no remarkable tumor calcification or intervening normal hepatic parenchyma in either
of the hepatic lobes. No intraabdominal metastasis or lymphadenopathy was observed. Subsequently, a 99mTc-labeled red blood cell scan was
performed and the blood pool images were taken at five hours after inhomogeneous diffuse activity in the entire hepatic mass (Fig. 1G).
However, no extrahepatic mass with abnormally increased radioactivity was observed on this 99mTc-labeled red blood cell scan. Our
differential diagnoses included a diffuse hemangiomatosis, epithelioid hemangioendothelioma, and angiosarcoma. To rule out a hepatic
angiosarcoma, an ultrasound-guided automated gun biopsy, using an 18-gauge core needle was performed in the right hepatic lobe. Before the
biopsy, the patient's platelet count was 170,000/mm3 after infusion of fresh frozen plasma. No complications, including intrahepatic or
intraperitoneal hemorrhage, were encountered following the biopsy. The patient's histology revealed prominent cavernous vascular
proliferation and fibrosis without angiosarcomatous components (Fig. 1H). Further, the patient showed no hemangiomas in other regions of the
body, including the skin. Hence, a final diagnosis of isolated diffuse hepatic hemangiomatosis was established. The patient continued to
complain about continuous abdominal distension, which rapidly progressed to the deterioration of hepatic function. Ten days following
admission, the patient expired due to hepatic failure. A hemangioma is the most common benign tumor affecting the liver. It occurs in all
age groups, although hepatic hemangiomatosis occurs predominantly in infants and may cause life threatening conditions (1). However, diffuse
hepatic hemangiomatosis in adults is very rarely encountered and moreso when observed without any other organ involvement (2-4). Although
several cases of long-term adult survival of diffuse neonatal hemangiomatosis have been reported (5, 6), the etiology and natural history of
diffuse hepatic hemangiomatosis remains unclear. The histological characteristics of hemangiomatosis includes the presence of large vascular
channels in both the normal-appearing hepatic parenchyma and the cavernous tumor region (2). The histological findings of our ultrasound-
guided biopsy specimen revealed prominently increased vascular proliferation and fibrosis with no sarcomatous change on staining (Fig. 1H),
as well as vascular endothelial cells showing positive staining on immunochemical stains, which included Masson's trichrome stain and the
Gomori reticulin stain. As no reliable clinical or radiological findings have been reported for the differential diagnosis of hepatic
hemangiomatosis from rare primary vascular hepatic tumors such as hepatic hemangioendothelioma or angiosarcoma, the diagnosis relies solely
on the histological findings (7). Also, because it is so rare, only a few reports document the imaging findings of diffuse hepatic
hemangiomatosis. However, these imaging findings are similar to those of other common hepatic hemangiomas, including variable echoic lesions
on the ultrasound, vascular pooling of contrast material within the tumor on angiography, a centripetal enhancement pattern on dynamic
enhancement studies, and bright tumor signal intensities on T2-weighted MR images (2, 3, 8). In our patient, the ultrasonography findings
included a heterogeneous echoic infiltrative hepatic mass containing numerous hypoechoic nodules. Compared to the histological findings, the
heterogeneous infiltrative echotexture may be caused by hemangiomatosis and parenchymal fibrosis. Our case showed a delayed centripetal
contrast-enhancement pattern of the tumor on a dynamic CT and diffuse uptake on vascular pooling images from a 99mTc-labeled red blood cell
scan. Because our case revealed imaging findings similar to hepatic hemangiomas, epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas, and angiosarcomas,
diffuse hepatic hemangiomatosis should be considered in the differential diagnoses (7, 9). Patients with diffuse hemangiomatosis showed
symptoms of abdominal pain and a palpable abdominal mass. The natural history and underlying etiology of diffuse hepatic hemangiomatosis is
uncertain. Although previous reports have cited the role of steroid medications in the development of hepatic cavernous hemangiomas (10) and
the administration of metoclopramide medications in a patient with diffuse hepatic hemangiomatosis (8), no history of steroid or estrogen
use was documented in the reported cases of diffuse hepatic hemangiomatosis, including our patient. The prognosis of diffuse hepatic
hemangiomatosis without extrahepatic involvement is still unclear because it occurs so rarely and has variable clinical courses in affected
patients. In the literature, various prognoses have been reported for diffuse hepatic hemangiomatosis without extrahepatic lesion in adults
(2, 3, 8, 11). In our patient, hepatic function rapidly deteriorated following admission. The cause of the hepatic failure and the patient's
death remains unclear. The possibility exists that a minimal amount of the remaining normal hepatic parenchyma with extensive hepatic
hemangiomatosis involving the entire liver may have caused hepatic failure and subsequent patient death. More cases of diffuse hepatic
hemangiomatosis are needed to establish their natural course and prognosis. Despite its rarity, we concluded that the diagnosis of diffuse
hepatic hemangiomatosis in adults can be suggested in patients with a diffusely involved hepatic tumor showing radiologic findings of
hepatic hemangioma. Diffuse hepatic hemangiomatosis in 33-year-old woman. A. Ultrasonography indicates heterogeneous infiltrative hepatic
tumor containing various-sized hypoechoic nodules. B. No remarkable tumor vascularity is observed, except for hepatic parenchymal vessels.
C-F. Dynamic CT demonstrates early nodular contrast enhancement on arterial (D) and gradual centripetal pattern of contrast enhancement in
diffuse infiltrating hepatic mass on portal (E) and delayed (F) phases. Neither intratumoral calcifications nor area of normalappearing
intervening hepatic parenchymal vessels are visible. G. 99mTc-labeled red blood cell scan reveals heterogeneous uptake of
radiopharmaceuticals throughout hepatic mass, involving whole liver on blood pool images. Diffuse tumor uptake is still noted on delayed
scan obtained five hours later. H. Histological findings reveal endothelial cell proliferation and dilated blood channels (Hematoxylin &
Eosin staining, Ã— 200).
