We report a case of central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) following Sirsasana, a head-down postural yoga. A 55-year-old male patient
presented to us, with sudden-onset loss of vision following Sirsasana, in the right eye. The patient had suffered from pulmonary
thromboembolism 5 years earlier and was receiving warfarin prophylaxis. Over 6 months of follow-up, the patient developed neovascularization
of the iris and was subjected to panretinal laser with no improvement in visual acuity. Sirsasana could be an important risk factor for CRVO
especially in predisposed patients. Sirsasana is a type of postural yoga asana (or posture) in which the body is completely inverted
(headstand), and held upright supported by the forearms, while the crown of the head rests lightly on the floor. The practice of Sirsasana
is postulated to increase blood flow to the brain, improving memory and other intellectual functions. We report a case of central retinal
vein occlusion (CRVO) following Sirsasana. Although, its effect on intraocular pressure (IOP) has been studied, there is no study reporting
occurrence of CRVO following Sirsasana. A 55-year-old male patient developed sudden loss of vision in the right eye following Sirsasana with
wall support (2 minutes) without supervision. The patient had suffered from pulmonary thromboembolism 5 years back and was receiving
warfarin prophylaxis. Patient was practicing yoga since past 2 years for 45 minutes, 3â€“4 times/week. On examination, best-corrected visual
acuity (BCVA) was finger counting 1 m in the right and 20/20 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 12 mmHg in either eye. Fundus
examination showed disc edema, scattered superficial hemorrhages, and superficial whitening in macular area in the right eye [Fig. 1],
whereas the left eye fundus was unremarkable. Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) [Fig. 2] confirmed findings of ischemic CRVO with
cilioretinal artery occlusion (Red free photos showed retinal whitening along the course of cilioretinal artery in the maculopapillary
region and non-filling of the cilioretinal artery in the early phase of angiogram) All systemic investigations (hemoglobin, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, lipid profile, blood sugar, serum homocysteine levels) were normal, and international normalization ratio (INR) was 2.0.
Over 6 months follow-up, the patient developed neovascularization of the iris and received pan-retinal laser photocoagulation with no
improvement in vision. Red-free photograph showing disc edema, scattered superficial hemorrhages and superficial whitening in the macular
area in the right eye Fundus fluorescein angiography photo: venous phase shows altered vascular caliber, blocked fluorescence at the disc
due to hemorrhages, and macular ischemia Sirsasana is a type of headstand postural yoga performed with or without wall support. This is an
advanced pose and should be attempted after practicing forward and backward bends (asanas ), under the supervision of a qualified yoga
instructor. Our patient attempted Sirsasana with wall support, without supervision, for 2 minutes. He had no previous experience with
Sirsasana but was practicing yoga since 2 years. Sirsasana is known to cause elevation of IOP, which reverts to normal after cessation of
the same.[2 ] A sudden variation in IOP has decompression effect on the eye, as after antiglaucoma surgery, causing decompression
retinopathy. The practice of Sirsasana is reported to increase the flow of blood to the brain, improving memory and other intellectual
functions. Although, increased sympathetic vasomotor and sudomotor tone is known to occur after Sirsasana, its effect on ocular hemodynamics
has not been studied. Bilateral thromobosis of conjunctival varix has been reported following habitual head standing. Instructors suggest
avoiding Sirsasana in patients with hypertension, congestive heart failure, berry aneurysms, and those above 50 years of age. However, there
is no existing study to support the above. INR was established by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the International Committee on
Thrombosis and Hemostasis for reporting the results of blood coagulation (clotting) tests. A person taking warfarin might optimally maintain
a prothrombin time of 2-3 INR. This international standardization permits the patient receiving warfarin to travel and still obtain
comparable test results. It is known that patients receiving warfarin prophylaxis may not to be protected against a CRVO, as in our patient
(INR-2). Hence, both the above, in a case of pulmonary embolism, would have predisposed our patient to CRVO. We conclude that predisposed
subjects such as those having a previous thromboembolic phenomenon and age above 50 years (as in our patient) can be warned against doing
Sirsasana or head down postures in yoga. Because of the increased popularity of yoga, a long-term study to know its impact on ocular
hemodynamics is needed.
