This article reports the case of a 19-year-old young man with Class III malocclusion and posterior crossbite with concerns about
temporomandibular disorder (TMD), esthetics and functional problems. Surgical-orthodontic treatment was carried out by decompensation of the
mandibular incisors and segmentation of the maxilla in 4 pieces, which allowed expansion and advancement. Remission of the signs and
symptoms occurred after surgical-orthodontic intervention. The maxillary dental arch presented normal transverse dimension. Satisfactory
static and functional occlusion and esthetic results were achieved and remained stable. Three years after the surgical-orthodontic
treatment, no TMD sign or symptom was observed and the occlusal results had not changed. When vertical or horizontal movements of the
maxilla in the presence of moderate maxillary constriction are necessary, segmental LeFort I osteotomy can be an important part of treatment
planning. Posterior crossbites or transverse maxillary deficiencies are relatively common dentofacial deformities that can be found alone or
in association with other maxillary problems21. Class III malocclusion caused by maxillary retrognathism is often accompanied by posterior
crossbite10. If they are detected before the adolescent growth spurt, maxillary expansion and face-mask therapy provide well-controlled
results18,19. Unfortunately, these techniques are of limited use in adult patients because the maxillary sutures are already fused. Surgical
intervention, comprehending expansion and advancement of the maxilla, can be performed in adult subjects to achieve satisfactory esthetic
and functional outcomes. In adult cases of constricted maxilla, expansion of the arch can be performed by surgically assisted rapid palatal
expansion (SARPE), or by segmenting the maxilla during the osteotomy. The former is carried out as a first stage of a two-stage surgical
treatment. Subtotal LeFort I osteotomy with midline osteotomy is conducted with an osteotome and a mallet, and thereafter expansion is
accomplished with a standard banded hyrax appliance3. Because the expansion is gradually performed, between 7 to 15 days, allowing the
palatal mucosa to adapt to the stretching, practically 7 to 14 mm of expansion can be achieved. Thereafter, 1-piece LeFort I osteotomy is
performed to advance the maxilla. When the decision is to correct the maxillary constriction concomitantly with the osteotomy, the maxilla
is segmented into pieces to allow appropriate expansion and advancement in the Class III patient. Traditionally, segmental LeFort I
osteotomy have been indicated where a transverse deficiency is associated with other maxillary problems11. Three-dimensional movements of
the segments offer versatility in obtaining better intraoperative occlusion. The limit for expansion is about 5 to 7 mm, without imposing
vascular risks to the palatal mucosa. From a practical management viewpoint, a clear advantage of the segmental LeFort I osteotomy is the
unique surgical intervention, reducing patient discomfort. Given this assumption, the present case report demonstrates a segmental LeFort I
osteotomy for expansion and advancement of the maxilla in the treatment of a Class III patient with TMD. The patient was a 20-year-old man,
who sought treatment in the private orthodontic office of Dr. MJ, due to TMD and esthetic-functional problems. The patient complained of
suffering from headache and muscle symptoms for over 3 years in addition to pain on the temporomandibular joints (TMJs) and masticatory
muscles, and muscle tenderness to palpation. A history of bruxism and clenching was also reported. Clinical examination showed maximum mouth
opening and lateral movement limitations. No clicking, popping or crepitus sound evaluated by auscultation were detected in either TMJ. No
mandibular shift during opening or closing movements was noticed. Facial esthetics and occlusal function were also concerns associated to
TMD. Cephalometric analysis showed a retrusive maxilla, and a proportionally large mandible, disguised by an increased lower anterior facial
height (Tables 1 and 2). Facial examination showed a horizontal deficiency of the midface with flattening of the malar bone and the cheeks,
and retrusion of the upper lip (Figure 1). The lower facial third showed a satisfactory horizontal relationship with the entire profile. The
face was symmetrical in the frontal aspect. The intraoral examination showed ¾ molar Class III relationship on the right and ¼ Class III
relationship on the left side1,15. In centric relation, the posterior teeth and the incisors occluded in an edge to edge relationship
(Figure 2). Satisfactory alignment of the teeth and a mild curve of Spee could be seen, and both midlines were 2 mm deviated to the right of
the midsagittal plane. The mandibular left central incisor was treated endodontically, had a composite resin restoration and was darkened,
but did not present clinical signs of ankylosis. Cephalometrically, the maxillary incisors were well positioned on the basal bone, and the
mandibular incisors were lingually tipped (Table 2 and Figure 3). The primary treatment goal was to eliminate or alleviate the TMD signs and
symptoms. Satisfactory facial esthetics and masticatory function were also objectives to be attained. Proper bilateral Class I molar
occlusion and normal overjet and overbite could be established by correcting the compensating tooth positions, and expanding and advancing
the maxilla. Attainment of ideal functional occlusion with canine and incisal guidance was an important goal. Also, maxillary advancement
and correction of tooth interdigitation would improve the retrognathic aspect of the midface and the intraoral appearance. Three treatment
options were considered. The first treatment alternative was an orthodontic approach with fixed appliances only, by means of dentoalveolar
compensation. Wider maxillary archwires would expand the constricted dental arch, and Class III elastics could be used to correct the
posterior occlusion and the anterior crossbite. The maxillary incisors would be labially tipped and the mandibular incisors would be
lingually tipped. The second option involved a surgical orthodontic approach. In this way, the overall treatment goals could be attained, in
spite of the risks inherent to the procedure. The maxillary surgical expansion and advancement could help in achieving correct static and
functional occlusion and considerable improvement in facial esthetics. In order to perform the surgical expansion of the maxillary arch, two
options were presented: it could be done in a first stage, with a subtotal LeFort I osteotomy, and thereafter a 1-piece osteotomy would be
performed for advancement; or, concomitantly with the advancement, segmentation of the maxilla in four pieces would provide expansion of the
arch. The treatment options were presented to the patient and discussed. Because esthetic appearance was a major concern, the first option
was refused and the third was chosen because it would be performed in only one surgical intervention. For the mandibular arch, the choice
was to treat with fixed appliances only, by means of decompensation of the incisors. For the maxillary arch, the choice was a segmental
LeFort I osteotomy to permit both expansion and advancement. Malocclusion was treated with conventional 0.022-in slot preadjusted edgewise
appliances. Leveling and aligning were performed with round nickel-titanium and stainless-steel archwires until rectangular 0.018 x
0.025-inch stainless-steel archwires were placed. Class II elastics were used to retract the maxillary incisors and reciprocally mesialize
the mandibular molars. After 10 months of presurgical orthodontic treatment, the maxillary archwire was segmented mesially to the canines,
in order to avoid postoperative orthodontic relapse13. Conventional orthodontic mechanics continued for 3 additional months. A LeFort I
osteotomy was performed with segmentation of the maxilla in four mobile segments. Vertical interdental osteotomies were implemented between
the maxillary lateral incisors and the canines. Two horizontal osteotomies, parallel with the septum were performed to expand the maxilla
transversally. Following the osteotomy, the maxillary segments were anteriorly repositioned and connected to the mandible in the correct
occlusal relationship. The mandibular and maxillary arches were wired together and acted as a unit, rotating around the condylar heads. Due
to the absence of condylar displacement, efforts were made to preserve the preoperative temporomandibular relationship while seating the
condyles in the most superior and anterior part of the mandibular fossa. Rigid fixation with miniplates and miniscrews fixed the maxillary
segments in the final position. No interocclusal splint or postoperative maxillomandibular fixation was used. The patient was instructed to
wear ¼ inch intermaxillary elastics for 20 h/day during 45 days and then gradually reduce the wear time. Thereafter, post-surgical edgewise
treatment continued for 14 months. After debonding, a fixed canine-to-canine retainer was placed in the mandibular anterior teeth and a
removable Hawley retainer in the maxillary arch. The overall active treatment period was 2 years and 3 months. After surgical orthodontic
treatment, headache, pain on the TMJ and jaw muscle tenderness upon palpation had ceased. Functional analysis showed normal mandibular
opening and excursive movements. The patient reported discontinuation of bruxism and clenching. The posttreatment facial photographs show
satisfactory changes in frontal and profile views by increasing the cheek support and protrusion of the upper lip (Figure 4). After
advancement, the final position of the maxilla showed an improved reciprocal balance with the mandible and the lower anterior facial height.
Bilateral Class I molar relationship and positive overjet and overbite were achieved with maxillary advancement. Segmentation of the maxilla
allowed transverse expansion and avoided molar buccal inclination (Figure 5). The cephalometric superimposition shows that the maxillary
incisors were protruded without inclination changes (Figures 6 and 7). On the other hand, the mandibular incisors had mild labial tipping.
Three years after the surgical-orthodontic treatment, no TMD sign or symptom was observed and the occlusal results had not changed.
Correction of maxillary constriction is an important part of the surgical-orthodontic treatment plan. When horizontal or vertical movements
of the maxilla are also required, segmental LeFort I osteotomy is considered an effective procedure to correct transverse deficiencies.
While SARPE is accomplished as a first step of a 2-step approach, segmental LeFort I is performed concomitantly with the osteotomy. Because
time is required for expansion and a postoperative healing period is necessary after SARPE, the entire surgical orthodontic treatment time
can be prolonged2. During treatment planning, some factors between SARPE and segmental LeFort I should be considered: presence of other
maxillary problem, magnitude of width deficiency and stability. According to Bailey, et al.2 (1997), if other surgery in the maxilla is
necessary after arch expansion, there is little reason to perform surgery twice. One exception is the magnitude of the maxillary
constriction. Because of the inelasticity of the palatal mucosa, there is limitation in the amount of expansion with segmental LeFort I5. In
the present case, which required moderate expansion of the arch and advancement of the maxilla, a single surgical approach reduced the
clinical steps of the entire treatment. The last point, stability of the expansion, should be seen with some caution. Studies have
demonstrated better stability for lateral expansion with SARPE compared to segmental LeFort I osteotomy20,24. An anticipated relapse of
about 50% could be expected with segmentation of the maxilla. However, this amount of skeletal relapse can be controlled by means of
dentoalveolar compensation, with the insertion of wide heavy archwires in the maxillary posterior teeth. Some complications associated with
segmental LeFort I have been described and that is the reason the procedure is sometimes avoided. Large spaced transversal "gaps" between
the segments can cause lacerations in the mucosa, and dehiscence and resorption of the trabecular bone. Therefore, a correct clinical
diagnosis is important. Risks for root or vascular damage, and difficulty in segment management can compromise the surgical outcome17.
Clinical expertise is mandatory in all types of surgical intervention. Skeletal modifications should not be expected after treatment because
the patient was an adult. Nevertheless, this Class III patient could be orthodontically compensated without surgery. Cases with greater
skeletal discrepancies can be solved with fixed appliances alone14,16. The result would be a Class I posterior occlusion and dentoalveolar
compensation to achieve normal overjet and overbite. For patients with muscular pain, however, an accurate final functional occlusion must
be accomplished, and precaution in this topic is mandatory. Accordingly, because of the indirect retrusive force on the mandible by the use
of Class III elastics, care was taken to avoid distal pressure on the TMJ25,28. The surgical procedures undertaken in this case were limited
to segmental expansion and advancement of the maxilla. In a first moment, the increased lower anterior facial height was supposed to be an
indication for maxillary impaction. The subsequent counterclockwise rotation of the mandible would produce a prognathic appearance and,
therefore, would require a sagittal split osteotomy. Additionally, the maxillary incisors were completely covered by the lips at rest, and
the upper lip smile line was located at the level of the gingival margin of the maxillary incisors (Figure 3). In addition, there was an
acceptable functional balance in this vertical dimension of occlusion, suggesting maintenance of the original face height. Generally,
orthognathic surgery offers beneficial outcome in the management of TMD cases8, with a success rate highly dependent on the diagnosis and
treatment modalities26. Among patients who receive orthognathic surgery, those with Class III relationships experiment greater improvement
than those with Class II27. With respect to surgical procedures, favorable outcomes are smaller in cases of bimaxillary or mandibular
surgery, while isolated maxillary surgery offers greater chances of success6,12. This is because mandibular osteotomy techniques require
rotation of the condylar axis, sometimes affecting TMJ function. Moreover, changes in the position of the condyle are normally expected to
happen after bimaxillary surgery9. Therefore, LeFort I osteotomy for maxillary advancement can be a worthwhile alternative therapy for TMD
patients with Class III malocclusions. Orthodontic finishing plays an important role in patients with muscular dysfunction. All efforts were
focused in reaching the functional treatment goals23. That is why the duration of post-surgical orthodontics was relatively longer than
usual4,7. In addition, because most surgical relapse occurs during the first year22, continuation of orthodontic treatment for some months
after surgery allowed occlusal adjustments in response to any skeletal relapse. After 3 years of follow-up, the patient maintains stable
occlusal outcomes. Segmental LeFort I osteotomy requires clinical expertise in the management of the maxillary pieces. In surgical cases
presenting moderate maxillary constriction associated with other maxillary problems, it may be an important part of the treatment plan. The
major advantage refers to the single surgical intervention, reducing the period of convalescence, the psychological impact and the treatment
costs. After the orthodontic-surgical intervention, no TMD signs or symptoms were observed.
