Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) consists of a group of genetic hereditary disorders in which patients frequently present fragile skin and mucosa
that form blisters following minor trauma. More than 20 subtypes of EB have been recognized in the literature. Specific genetic mutations
are well characterized for most the different EB subtypes and variants. The most common oral manifestations of EB are painful blisters
affecting all the oral surfaces. Dental treatment for patients with EB consists of palliative therapy for its oral manifestations along with
typical restorative and periodontal procedures. The aim of this article is to describe two dental clinical treatments of recessive
dystrophic EB cases and their specific clinical manifestations. The psychological intervention required during the dental treatment of these
patients is also presented. Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) comprises a group of genetically determined skin fragility disorders characterized by
blistering of the skin and mucosa following mild mechanical trauma18,20,21. Approximately 400,000-500,000 people are affected worldwide and
no definitive treatments have yet been developed8,7. EB is classified into distinct subtypes depending on the location of blistering within
the cutaneous dermal-epidermal basement membrane zone. Ten genes are known to harbor mutations in the major types of EB, and the level of
expression of these genes within the cutaneous basement membrane zone and in extracutaneous tissues, as well as the types and combinations
of the mutations, explain, in general terms, the phenotypic variability22. The dystrophic forms of EB are characterized by deformities of
the skin including coalescence of the fingers, blistering, scarring, nail changes and milia formation, and have either autosomal recessive
or dominant inheritance16,20. In the most severe cases, scars may cause either ankyloglossia or microglossia3,18. The major dental
complication of EB in general is the increased risk of caries3. Wright et al.24 have shown that the prevalence of caries, scored as DMFS
(decayed, missing, filled surfaces), was significantly higher in the junctional (mean 58.6) and recessive dystrophic (mean 37.6) EB types
than in controls (mean 23.2). It has been hypothesized that excessive caries is a result of the presence and severity of the soft tissue
involvement, which leads to alteration in diet (soft and frequently carbohydrate food); increased oral clearance time (secondary to limited
tongue mobility and vestibular constriction); creation of an abnormal tooth/soft tissue relationship (i.e., buccal and lingual mucosa, which
is firmly positioned against the tooth); and prevents normal oral hygiene measures3,10. Dental treatment is aimed at avoiding the formation
of new bullae during perioperative management, and the choice of anesthetic method is one of the main issues for dentists and
anesthesiologists21. Special dental concerns involve the use of soft toothbrushes and irrigation techniques. Pur√©e diets are recommended
because of the lesions involving the oral mucosa and esophagus. There is also a need for diet supplements, such as vitamins, proteins and
iron in order to avoid anemia. The use of corticoids, vitamin E and immunosuppressive drugs have also been suggested for the treatment of
EB1,2,14,19. The aim of this case report is to describe the oral health condition of two patients with recessive dystrophic EB and the
treatments provided. A 16-year-old Caucasian girl with recessive dystrophic EB presented to our dental school for routine treatment.
According to the clinical interview, hemorrhagic blisters in the mouth had been detected since early infancy. With the patient's growing and
physical development, lesions extended to the face, feet and hands. Due to her great difficulty in performing adequate oral hygiene, almost
all of her teeth had been destroyed by caries lesions and were covered with dental plaque (Figure 1A and B). Her oldest sister had died one
year before as a consequence of the same disease. The patient's mental status was appropriate for her age. However, her physical development
was delayed and her weight and height were compatible with that expected for a 9 year-old child. During physical examination, several
blisters were observed in several areas of the body, and they quickly appeared right after mild pressure on her lips. Her fingernails and
toenails were absent and her hands showed some degree of deformity. Her tongue presented no papillae. She also presented ankyloglossia and
microstomia, probably due to secondary scars from repeated episodes of blistering and subsequent healing. After evaluation of the panoramic
radiograph (Figure 2) and intraoral examination, a treatment plan was established. Extraction of maxillary right first molar, first
premolar, lateral incisor and central incisor, maxillary left central incisor, lateral incisor and first premolar, mandibular left first
molar, mandibular right first and second premolars and first molar, and restorative treatment of second premolar, canine, mandibular left
first premolar and mandibular right lateral incisor were recommended. At beginning of the dental treatment the patient was poorly
cooperative and did not permit even a simple dental examination. The option for dental extraction as part of the treatment plan was based on
the clinical limitations associated with the patient's disease. Microstomia, blister formation and the poor patient cooperation all together
made the surgical procedures even more difficult and challenging. Dental plaque was disclosed and the patient was taught how to improve her
oral hygiene through better brushing techniques and the additional use of a 0.12% chlorhexidine solution applied topically with a cotton bud
after lunch and at bed time for 7 days. Following the patient's conditioning therapy, the surgical procedures were carried out in 5 weekly
appointments (Figure 3A). At all extraction sections, first a topical local anesthetic was applied for 4 minutes. Right after, one cartridge
(1.8 mL) of local anesthetic solution, 2% mepivacaine with 1:100,000 adrenaline, was infiltrated. During the application of the local
anesthetic solution, blister formation occurred. To avoid trauma to the fragile oral mucosa, precautions were adopted, including the use of
gentle pressure during the surgeries and no suture usage. After each extraction, the healing process was very rapid and the patient did not
complain about any pain (Figure 3B). A prosthetic appliance with two central incisors was prepared to replace the four maxillary anterior
teeth, and it was delivered after the maxillary extractions had been completed (Figure 4). The delay for delivering the appliance was
purposeful, in order to give the patient motivation to cooperate with the required surgical and restorative procedures. The restorative
treatment using glass ionomer cement was accomplished within 5 weeks. The patient was followed for 3 years for control of the prosthetic
appliance and oral health. A 5-year-old African-American boy was admitted to treatment, because of white spot lesions, at our institution.
The patient had had recessive dystrophic EB since birth. There was no family history of EB. His mother's pregnancy had been full term and
uncomplicated. He presented ulceration, lesions and blister formation on the hands, feet, knees, trunk, elbows, face, scalp, lips and inside
the mouth. The fingers of both hands had become fused. Intraorally, blisters of various sizes were seen on the tongue, gingiva and oral
mucosa. The gingival tissue was red, edematous and ulcerated. The mucous membrane was extremely friable, easily yielding sloughs when
touched. The teeth had advanced white spot lesions, and there was deposition of dental plaque on all teeth (Figure 5). The patient reported
feeding difficulties only when the blisters were very painful. After the contact with the patient's physician, a panoramic radiograph was
taken and a treatment plan was developed (Figure 6). Dental plaque and white spot lesions control was weekly recommended. Thus, conditioning
sessions were adopted in order to obtain the patient's trust. Dental plaque was controlled with professional prophylaxis and use of 0.12%
chlorhexidine gel applied topically. Fluoridated varnish was applied on white spot lesions. The patient has been under control of oral
health since he was 2 years old. He uses a 0.05% fluoridated solution applied topically with a cotton bud on all teeth once daily. At the
moment, the patient is 5 years old. Physiopathologically, EB is caused by anomalous adhesion of the epithelial components. This occurs at
different levels, depending on the subtype of EB. In the junctional and dystrophic forms, the separation occurs through the lucent lamina of
the basement membrane and the lamina densa, respectively. Due to the lack of cohesion, blisters form following minor trauma. In both cases
presented in this work, blisters formed after mild pressure on the mouth15,16 and during administration of local anesthetic solution11 (Case
1). Although the clinical manifestations suggested EB diagnosis in both cases presented hereby, confirmation was granted by histopathologic
study conducted at Lauro de Souza Lima Hospital, Bauru, SP, Brazil. In some subtypes of EB, the oral cavity is susceptible to injury.
Erosions, blisters and eventually a tongue without papillae are observed in addition to ankyloglossia and microstomia2,12,17,23,24. In our
cases, the presence of polymorphic lesions involving the oral mucous membrane and tongue were present. The loss of tongue papillae and
ankyloglossia could be related both to the long duration of the disease in these patients and to the fact that they suffer from the most
severe form of epidermolysis10,13. The treatment for patients with EB is multidisciplinary and, unfortunately, no specific therapeutic
regimen can cure the disease7,8. Secondary infections must be treated with topical and/or systemic antibiotics and a protein-rich diet, iron
and zinc must be provided11,14,16,19. While systemic treatment remains primarily palliative, it is possible to prevent destruction and
subsequent loss of the dentition by means of appropriate interventions and dental therapy7,16. The dental treatment of the patient of Case 1
was not very simple, whereas the patient of Case 2 required only preventive measures. In Case 1, the patient's physical and psychological
suffering resulted in very reluctant behavior and in a special ability to involve her parents. Parents' indulgence, a common characteristic
in cases like this in which an actual life-threatening condition is present, has contributed significantly to her poor oral status4,8,15.
Treatment modalities that help decreasing patient's anxiety are advisable. They provide safer treatment and help reducing the consequent
effects of trauma to the soft tissues from dental treatment. This could also diminish the number of exposures. Although moderate sedation
was not used for treating the patient of Case 1, it is a good option for management of oral condition of anxious patients5,6 because it
allows for completion of a larger number of procedures in single session, thus reducing the number of visits, repeated oral trauma and
bullous formation. Hence, the amount of resulting scarring and constrictures, especially in a very apprehensive patient with acute dental
anxiety, is reduced5. Moreover, regular dental evaluation and treatment is imperative and should be instituted as early as possible9,15,
similarly to what has been done for the patient of Case 2. Dentists should be aware of the presentation of EB to assist in early diagnosis
and to provide the patient with the proper preventive and/or restorative treatment. The present cases emphasize the importance for
recognition of EB and the need for multidisciplinary treatment of affected patients. Due to the great difficulty and risk of providing
dental treatment to patients with EB, prevention of caries and periodontal disease must be emphasized at a very young age.
