We report a rare case of atrial tachycardia originating from the non-coronary aortic sinus. After failed radiofrequency (RF) energy
applications at right His-bundle region, the complete elimination of atrial tachycardia was achieved with an RF energy application in the
non-coronary aortic sinus. With the review of other papers, this report emphasizes the importance of mapping in the non-coronary aortic
sinus in focal atrial tachycardia near the atrioventricular node or near the Hisbundle. Catheter ablation has played an increasingly
important role in the management of atrial tachycardia and has evolved as first-line therapy in many experienced institutes. This procedure
is relatively safe with few complications. However, atrial tachycardia, with its focus near the atrioventricular node (AVN) or near the His
bundle, may bear a potential risk of atrioventricular block during the catheter ablation procedure.1-4 In this case, the earliest activation
of atrial tachycardia was observed in the non-coronary aortic sinus. After failed radiofrequency energy applications at right His-bundle
region, the complete elimination of atrial tachycardia was achieved with an radiofrequency energy application in the non-coronary aortic
sinus. This report emphasizes the importance of mapping in the non-coronary aortic sinus in focal atrial tachycardia near the AVN or near
the His-bundle. A 55-year-old woman was admitted to our center with recurrent episodes of disabling episodes of palpitation and dizziness
for 6 months. The clinical tachycardia presented with abrupt onset and offset and could be terminated by 5 mg of verapamil. She had
undergone a left modified radical mastectomy for breast cancer 21 years prior. The patient had been diagnosed with hypertension and diabetes
mellitus at that time. A chest radiograph revealed no evidence of cardiomegaly. Echocardiography revealed no evidence of structural heart
disease with a normal left ventricular function. The 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) at the time of admission demonstrated regular sinus
rhythm with a narrow QRS complex and a normal axis (Fig. 1A, left panel). An ECG recorded during an episode of palpitations revealed a
narrow QRS complex tachycardia with a cycle length of 480 ms. The P wave polarity preceding the QRS complex was negative in leads V4-6,
biphasic (initially negative and a late positive component) in leads V1 and V3, and undetermined in the limb leads (Fig. 1A, right panel).
After giving informed consent, an electrophysiological study was performed without sedation. Three catheters were introduced to the right
atrium, the right ventricular apex, and at the His-bundle region via the femoral veins. Also, a 7-Fr multipolar catheter was advanced within
the coronary sinus via the left subclavian vein. During initial ventricular pacing, the ventriculoatrial conduction was absent. A
tachycardia was induced and terminated reproducibly with incremental atrial pacing and extrastimulation. During the tachycardia, the local
electrogram recorded at the His bundle preceded the onset of the surface P wave by 40 ms and the proximal coronary sinus by 15 ms (Fig. 1B).
Ten radiofrequency applications were delivered near the His-bundle region where the atrial activation during the tachycardia recorded from
the distal electrodes of the ablation catheter, preceded the onset of the surface P wave by 45 ms. The tachycardia was terminated and
junctional beats occurred frequently and AV block was observed transiently during applications of radiofrequency energy. However, the
tachycardia was induced and sustained after radiofrequency energy deliveries at these sites. Mapping in the left atrium was performed to
find the earliest atrial activation site with retrograde transaortic approach. The earliest left atrial activation was located in the
anteroseptal region. The earliest left atrial activation was later than that in the right atrium by 5 ms. No His potential was found at this
site (Fig. 2A). To find the other earliest atrial activation site, attempts were made to map from the aortic sinus of Valsalva. Mapping was
performed using a 7 Fr quadripolar catheter with a 4-mm distal electrode (Blazer II, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA). With detailed
mapping at the aortic sinus of Valsalva using a retrograde transaortic approach, the earliest atrial activation was found within the non-
coronary sinus of Valsalva where the local electrogram during the tachycardia recorded from the distal electrodes of the ablation catheter
preceded the onset of the surface P wave by 55 ms (Fig. 2A). After confirming the location of the ostia of both coronary arteries and
identifying the contour of the aortic sinus of Valsalva by an injection of a contrast agent, (Figs. 3A, B, C and D), an radiofrequency
energy application delivered at that site using a maximum power of 30 W and maximum electrode to tissue interface temperature of 50â„ƒ
terminated the tachycardia 5.8 seconds after initiating the application (Fig. 2B). No Junctional beats occurred. No tachycardias were
inducible after the catheter ablation. With incremental atrial pacing, the paced cycle length producing AVN Wenckebach block was 280 ms,
which was the same as before the ablation procedure. A cardiac MRI was performed to determine the anatomic relationship with the other
structures (Figs. 3E and F). The patient was discharged with no need for medications, and she has done well with no recurrence of the
tachycardia during a 10-month follow-up. This is a rare case of atrial tachycardia originating from the non-coronary aortic sinus which
shows the benefit of mapping in non-coronary aortic cusp in atrial tachycardia near the AVN. The prevalence of atrial tachycardia near the
AVN has varied, ranging from 0 - 13% in all patients with atrial tachycardia.1-4 According to the experience from Hamburg, a non-coronary
aortic sinus origin was found only in 4.1% with focal atrial tachycardia.6 Atrial tachycardia near AVN may bear a potential risk of
atrioventricular block during the catheter ablation procedure. However, elimination of atrial tachycardia was achieved in non-coronary
aortic cusp avoiding a potential risk of atrioventricular block.5,6 In this case, VA conduction was absent. The tachycardia was initiated
and terminated by incremental atrial pacing and extrastimuli. The tachycardia was reproducibly terminated by a small dose of verapamil
without the development of AVN conduction block. On the basis of these findings, the tachycardia mechanism was determined to be due to
either micro-re-entry or triggered activity. During the tachycardia, the local electrograms recorded from the non-coronary sinus of Valsalva
and near the His-bundle region were earlier than those at other sites. The clinical and electrophysiological characteristics of this focal
atrial tachycardia were similar to those described in the patients with focal atrial tachycardia originating from the non-coronary aortic
sinus of Valsalva described by Tada et al.5 and Ouyang et al.6 In this case, the radiofrequency energy application near the His-bundle
region did not succeed to eliminate tachycardia even with junctional rhythm and transient AV block during the radiofrequency energy
application. Finally, the tachycardia was terminated within 5.8 minutes by an radiofrequency energy application in the non-coronary sinus of
Valsalva where the earliest atrial activation was recorded. This finding suggests that this tachycardia might have originated closer to the
non-coronary sinus of Valsalva than to the His-bundle region in the right atrial anteroseptal region. Of note, no His potential recordings
were observed at the successful radiofrequency site. This information may explain why no prolongation of the PR interval or junctional beats
occurred during the radiofrequency delivery in this case. Spatially, the aortic root occupies a central location within heart, with the non-
coronary sinus of Valsalva anterior and superior to the paraseptal region of the left and right atria close to the superior atrioventricular
junction.5 The MRI image 2 days after the ablation in this patient clearly shows that the rightward (anterior) margin of the non-coronary
sinus of Valsalva is related to the paraseptal region of the right atrial wall (Figs. 3E and F). There was no damage in aortic valve in MRI
and echocardiography after the ablation. This case strongly suggests that, in patients with focal atrial tachycardia near the AVN or near
the His-bundle region, mapping in the non-coronary aortic sinus of Valsalva can improve clinical outcome. This maneuver may avoid any
aggressive radiofrequency energy deliveries near the His bundle, with the potential consequence of AV block. Therefore, if the tachycardia
mapping were to demonstrate the earliest atrial activation at this region, especially in the patients with a previously failed ablation,
delivery through the non-coronary sinus of Valsalva might be safer than a right-sided approach. (A) Twelve-lead electrocardiograms during
sinus rhythm (Left) and the tachycardia (Right). (B) The tracings are the ECG leads I, II, V1, and intracardiac electrograms recorded from a
mapping catheter, and catheters placed at the HBE, within the CS, and at the RVA during sinus rhythm (Left) and the tachycardia (Right). The
local electrogram recorded at the His bundle preceded the onset of the surface P wave by 40 ms. ECG, electrocardiogram; CS, coronary sinus;
HBE, His bundle region; RA, right atrium; RVA, right ventricular apex. The tracings are the ECG leads I, II, V1, and intracardiac
electrograms recorded from a mapping catheter positioned in the non-coronary aortic sinus (Non-coro AS 1 to 2, Non-coro AS 3 to 4), and
catheters placed at the HBE and left anteroseptum (LA AS 1 to 2, LA AS 3 to 4). (A) The successful site with the earliest RA activation is
shown at the non-coronary aortic sinus. Note that the earliest activation preceded the onset of the surface P wave by 55 ms. (B) The atrial
tachycardia was successfully terminated after 5.8 seconds during the first radiofrequency application. AS, aortic sinus; the other
abbreviations are as in Fig. 1. Right (30Â°) and left (45Â°) oblique radiographic views showing the mapping catheter (Map) located at the
successful ablation site in the aortic sinus (A and B), another mapping catheter at the left anteroseptum, and catheters placed at the HBE,
in the RA, and in the RV. An aortic root angiogram in the right (30Â°) and left (45Â°) oblique radiographic views (C and D) showing the
mapping catheter in the non-coronary aortic sinus supero-posterior to the site where the His bundle potential was recording from the distal
one to four electrodes. An MRI in the right and left oblique views (E and F) showing the non-coronary aortic sinus. Ao, aorta; L, left
aortic sinus; LV, left ventricle; N, non-coronary aortic sinus; R, right aortic sinus; IVS, interventricular septum; the other abbreviations
are as in Fig. 1.
