We report an unusual case of an aortic type A dissection with a corpus alienum which compresses the right ventricle. The patient
successfully underwent an aortic root replacement in deep hypothermia with re-implantation of the coronary arteries using a modified Bentall
procedure and the resection of the corpus alienum. Intraoperative finding reveals 3 greatly adhered gauze compresses, which were most likely
forgotten in the operation 34 years ago. A 64-year-old patient was referred to us from another hospital with symptoms of angina pectoris and
suspicion of constrictive pericarditis. An acute myocardial infarction had already been ruled out. Further diagnostic measures were carried
out in our hospital. Due to increasing pain and hemodynamic instability, a thorax computed tomography (CT) with contrast medium was
performed. This revealed a type A dissection with suspicion of a bloody pericardial effusion (Figures 1, 2 and 3). The patient had been
healthy up to this day, only in 1974 at the age of 30, an ASD closure had been carried out via lateral thoracotomy for an atrial septum
defect. The operation was carried out at another institution and postoperative course was uneventful. CT-scan showing type A dissection with
a dissection flap. CT scan showing an adherent structure which compressing the right ventricle. CT scan showing an adherent structure which
compressing the right ventricle. The emergency operation was initiated immediately after the diagnosis was made. The patient was connected
to the heart-lung machine via the groin. A sternotomy was performed, revealing an adherent purulent structure (Figure 4), approximately 4â€“5
cm dimension that was clearly compressing the right ventricle without pericardial effusion, located in close relation to the ascending
aorta. After cautious dissection, 3 greatly adhered gauze compresses (Figure 5) were carefully removed from the pericardium. These were most
likely forgotten in the operation 34 years ago. Due to this finding, the emergency surgery was aborted due to the infectious process.
Intraoperative view of the opened pericardium with purulent structure. Three gauze compresses which were secured. The patient was
transferred to the intensive care ward and discharged on the 10th postoperative day without treatment of the type A dissection.
Postoperative microbiological tests showed no indication of bacterial colonization. During the hospital stay we started an antihypertensive
therapy. However, after the first operation at our institute the patient wanted time to think it over concerning the forthcoming high-risk
operation. Although we insistently informed the patient about the dangerous situation, she contacted us not until five weeks with the
decision that we can perform the operation. The patient was rescheduled six weeks later after the first operation at our institute to repeat
the CT-scan. This showed a progression of the type A dissection with renewed hemorrhagic pleural effusion followed by promptly surgical
treatment. Connection to the heart-lung machine was again through the groin and the thorax was reopened again. An aortic root replacement in
deep hypothermia with re-implantation of the coronary arteries using a modified Bentall procedure was carried out. The aortic valve was
replaced by a Medtronic Stentless Freestyle bioprosthesis. The supra-aortic vessels were re-implanted and the ascendeing aorta and aortic
arch were replaced with a Hemashield-prosthesis. The postoperative course was unremarkable and the patient was discharged after 14 days. A
follow-up CT-scan was carried out one month later that documented a continued good postoperative result with a decompressed right ventricle
(Figures 6 and 7). The patient is free of pain and able to function well in daily life. Follow-up CT-scan after one month with a
decompressed right ventricle. Three-dimensional volume rendered image showing the postoperative result after one month. Acute type A aortic
dissection is a catastrophic disease that requires immediate surgical intervention. The main goal of surgery in acute type A aortic
dissection is to prevent death from intrapericardial hemorrhage by resecting and replacing the diseased aorta with a graft . Aggressive
surgical approach involving extensive resection of dissected aorta for patients with aortic dissection became more popular over the recent
years . However, in this case the surgical treatment was deferred, because the adhered gauze compresses was to be suspected infectious
process. Moreover, it is well known that infections involving ascending aortic grafts are extremely difficult to eradicate and are
frequently lethal . Treatment of this complication remains a challenge for surgeons, and chances of a successful outcome are considered low.
Mortality rates range from 25% to 75%, and morbidity in surviving patients is high . Several groups currently favour replacing infected
ascending aortic prostheses with cryopreserved aortic homografts . Retrospective data have suggested that, compared with using synthetic
grafts, using cryopreserved homografts for treating vascular infections is associated with improved outcomes, including better elimination
of infection, fewer postoperative complications, and longer disease-related survival . However, one commonly cited disadvantage of using
homografts is their predisposition to progressive deterioration and ultimate need for re-replacement . Unfortunately, in many cases, a
single homograft will not reach the distal ascending aorta or transverse arch . Extensive aortic replacement can be accomplished by using
total arch homografts, but these are rarely available . Another treatment strategy to prevent recurrent infection is using a pedicled
omental or muscle flap. Omentum is particularly popular because, in patients who have not had previous abdominal surgery, omentum can be
easily accessed by extending the sternotomy incision into the abdomen for a short distance . The blood supply to the omentum is preserved by
basing the pedicle on the right gastroepiploic artery. In addition to filling dead space, the vascularised omental pedicle improves oxygen
supply to the region, enhances immunologic response, increases antibiotic delivery, and absorbs wound secretions that can serve as
substrates for bacterial growth . There are, however, many established options for managing the infected graft, but the literature on
surgical treatment of ascending aortic graft infection fails to provide even the lowest level of evidence on which to base a concrete
recommendation. Otherwise, the patient was not septic on admission. However, at that point of time the intraoperative situation was not
clear concerning the potential infection, we decided in this special case to abort the emergency operation. Delayed surgical treatment could
be an acceptable alternative to prompt intervention in aortic dissection, provided a stable clinical condition can be achieved with
conservative management consisting of rest, careful monitoring and periodic reassessment, if other conditions make the immediate operation
very dangerous. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A
copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. AP, MB, RS, JS and PK are members of surgical teams. CW and JH were the anaesthetists involved in theatre and in intensive care
unit. BR was the radiologist. FS co-wrote the manuscript and added important comments to the paper. All authors have read and approved the
final manuscript.
