The aim of this study was to describe clinicopathologic and radiographic features of two cases of schwannoma involving the oral tongue and
to review the literature of this unusual clinical entity. Case reports with review of the pathologic, radiologic and clinical data for two
patients with schwannoma of the tongue are reported. Review of the literature of case reports of schwannomas (neurilemmomas) of the tongue
from 1955 to 2006 with analysis of the patient’s age, gender, presenting symptom(s), tumor size, and surgical approach was undertaken. The
two patients in our series presented with painless swelling of the tongue. Transoral excision was performed and pathologic examination
confirmed the diagnosis of schwannoma in both the cases. A total of 126 cases of schwannoma of the tongue have been reported in the English
literature over the past 51 years. Schwannomas of the tongue typically present in the third decade of life (33%), display no gender
predilection (52.8% female; 47.2% male) and often present as a painless mass (69.6%). Schwannomas are likely to elicit distressing symptoms
when they occur in the posterior one-third of the tongue (63.2 vs. 13.5%) or approach 3 cm in greatest dimension (33.0 vs. 18.2 mm). The
vast majority of cases have been treated with transoral excision (94.8%). Recurrence after surgical excision has not been reported.
Schwannoma of the tongue is a relatively rare tumor of the head and neck. Transoral resection allows for removal of this tumor in a manner
that precludes recurrence, avoids causing morbidity of tongue function, and remains the standard approach for the treatment of the vast
majority of these tumors. Schwannoma (neurilemmoma) is a benign tumor of nerve sheath origin. These tumors can arise from any nerve covered
with a Schwann cell sheath, which include the cranial nerves (except for the optic and olfactory), the spinal nerves, and the autonomic
nervous system . When the nerve of origin is small, its association with a given tumor may be difficult to demonstrate. On the other hand,
if a larger nerve is the site of origin, the nerve fibers are found to be splayed out over the outer aspect of the capsule rather than
incorporated within the mass of the tumor . Approximately 25–45% of all schwannomas occur in the head and neck . Of these, approximately
1–12% occur intraorally [4, 5] with the tongue being the most common site [5, 6]. Although several case reports of schwannomas of the tongue
exist in the literature, there has been no comprehensive review of the literature since Hatziotis et al. . We present two cases of
schwannoma of the tongue and review the available literature of the last 51 years (1955–2006). A PubMed search of the terms “tongue
schwannoma,” “lingual schwannoma,” “tongue neurilemmoma,” and “lingual neurilemmoma” was performed with the date range of 1955–2006. The
search was limited to case reports in English. Schwannomas of the floor of mouth were not included unless the ventral tongue was also
involved. All of the case reports had histologically confirmed the identity of the masses as schwannomas. The following elements were
extracted from the case reports for data analysis: age, gender, location of schwannoma (anterior one-third vs. posterior two-thirds of
tongue), presenting symptoms, size of tumor, and treatment modality. An 19-year-old female presented to the Head and Neck Surgery Clinic
with complaints of a slowly enlarging painless mass in the back of her throat. A submucosal mass was identified at the right posterolateral
tongue. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging was obtained which illustrated a well-circumscribed mass in the right posterolateral tongue that was
isointense on T1, hyperintense on T2, and enhanced with gadolinium (Fig. 1a–c). The patient was taken to the operating room for a transoral
excision under general anesthesia. The mass was submucosal and once a mucosal flap was raised, the tumor was readily shelled out using blunt
dissection. The mass had a smooth surface, was tan-white in color, and measured 18 × 13 × 11 mm. Final pathology was consistent with
schwannoma (Fig. 2a–c).Fig. 1A well-circumscribed mass is located at right posterior tongue as illustrated by the axial T1 (a), sagittal T2
(b), and coronal T1 (c) magnetic resonance imagesFig. 2Schwannoma of the tongue. a At low power (H&E, ×4), both Antoni A and Antoni B
morphologies can be seen. b At high power (H&E, ×20), palisading nuclei and Verocay bodies are noted. c S-100 is diffusely positive (S-100,
×20) A well-circumscribed mass is located at right posterior tongue as illustrated by the axial T1 (a), sagittal T2 (b), and coronal T1 (c)
magnetic resonance images Schwannoma of the tongue. a At low power (H&E, ×4), both Antoni A and Antoni B morphologies can be seen. b At high
power (H&E, ×20), palisading nuclei and Verocay bodies are noted. c S-100 is diffusely positive (S-100, ×20) A 77-year-old male was referred
to the Head and Neck Surgery Clinic after his dentist noted an 1 cm firm, sessile mass at the right lateral border of his tongue. The
patient reported that the mass had been there for approximately 5 years and had not grown significantly over those years. The patient denied
any pain associated with the mass, dysphagia, or change in voice. The mass was excised in clinic under local anesthesia. The mass was gray-
tan in color, smooth in texture, dome-shaped, and measured 7 × 5 × 5 mm. A final diagnosis of schwannoma was ascribed. A PubMed search from
1955 to 2006 identified 124 cases of schwannoma of the tongue (Table 1). Of the 126 cases (including the two patients reported in this
paper), 106 identified the gender of the patient which showed an almost equal gender predilection with 50 males (47.2%) and 56 females
(52.8%). Tongue schwannomas were also noted at all age ranges, but had a significantly higher incidence between the second and fourth
decades of life (Fig. 3).Table 1Patient and tumor characteristics of tongue schwannomasAuthorYearAge/genderLocation of tumorSize (greatest
dimension, mm)Presenting symptomsSurgical approachCameron 195925MAnterior15Painless massTransoralMercantini et al.
195922MAnterior10Intermittent painTransoralKragh et al. 1960Report of 5 cases; patient and tumor characteristics not describedChadwick
196420FPosterior22GlobusTransoralCraig 19648FPosterior30Painless massTransoralChhatbar 196529MPosterior50Throat
discomfortTransoralPantazopoulos 196525MAnterior<10Painless massTransoral45FPosterior45Dysphagia, change in voiceTransoralFirfer et al.
196628FAnterior30AnteriorTransoralHatziotis et al. 196725MPosterior“Hazelnut size”Painless massTransoral60FAnterior“Pea size”Painless
massTransoralReport of 46 more cases (18 males, 28 females); patient and tumor characteristics not describedOles et al.
196752MAnterior10Painless massTransoralPaliwal et al. 196732MAnterior25Painless massTransoralUj 196713Fn/an/aPainless massTransoralCrawford
et al. 196824MAnterior10Painless massTransoral23MAnterior5Painless massTransoralBititci 196940MAnterior25Slight discomfortTransoralDas Gupta
196921FPosterior50PainTransoralReport of 7 more cases; patient and tumor characteristics not describedCherrick et al. 1971Report of 8 cases;
patient and tumor characteristics not describedEversole et al. 197158FAnterior25n/aTransoralSinha et al.
197123MPosterior15OdynophagiaTransoralMosadomi 197519MAnterior30PainTransoralSwangsilpa et al. 197624MAnterior30Painless massTransoralSharan
et al. 197830FAnterior15Change in voiceTransoralBarbosa 198412Mn/a5Painless massTransoralPiatelli et al.a 198418FAnteriorn/aPainless
massTransoralAkimoto et al. 198714MAnterior10Painless massTransoralMalden 198851FAnteriorn/aPainless massTransoralSiar et al.
198817FPosterior30Painless massTransoral13Fn/a44n/aTransoralWilson et al. 198878FPosteriorn/an/aTransoralFlickinger et al.
198928FAnterior30Painless massTransoralTalmi et al. 199175FPosterior10Painless massTransoralLopez et al. 199333Mn/a12Painless
massTransoral24MAnterior6Painless massTransoralWilliams et al. 199328MAnterior5Painless massTransoral58MAnterior10UlcerationTransoralHaring
199449FAnterior20Painless massTransoralNakayama et al. 199640FAnterior55Painless massTransoralSpandow et al. 199937MPosterior79Throat
discomfortTransoralde Bree et al. 200024FPosterior50DysphagiaSubmandibularPfeifle et al. 200130FAnterior10Painless
massTransoral18MAnterior20Painless massTransoralMevio et al. 200235FAnterior50Painless massTransoralBassichis et al.
20049MPosterior23Snoring, difficulty breathingTransoralCinar et al. 20047MAnterior10Painless massTransoralHwang et al.
200523MAnterior28Painless massTransoralVafiadis et al. 200518MAnterior31Painless massTransoralHsu et al. 200639FAnterior10Painless
massTransoral39FPosterior40DysphagiaTranshyoid9MAnterior12Painless massTransoral32FPosterior18GlobusTransoral25MAnterior9Painless
massTransoral15FAnterior12Painless massTransoral38MAnterior30Painless massTransoral12FAnterior16Painless massTransoral45MAnterior5Painless
massTransoral20MPosterior50GlobusTransoralMehrzad et al. 200649MPosterior22Throat discomfortTransoral CO2 laserYing et al.
200626FPosterior40Dysphagia, snoring, change in voiceSuprahyoidCohen and WangCurrent study18FPosterior18Painless
massTransoral77MAnterior7Painless massTransoralaCase report of malignant schwannoma of the tongueFig. 3Age at presentation of patients with
tongue schwannomas Patient and tumor characteristics of tongue schwannomas aCase report of malignant schwannoma of the tongue Age at
presentation of patients with tongue schwannomas The location of the schwannoma was categorized as either anterior two-thirds or posterior
one-third of the tongue. This classification was possible in 56 of the 126 cases with 37 cases occurring anteriorly and 19 cases identified
posteriorly. Descriptions of the patient’s clinical symptoms were only found in 57 case reports. The majority of patients presented with an
asymptomatic mass (39/57; 69.6%). Of the patients that did present with a symptomatic mass, the most common complaints were throat pain or
discomfort, dysphagia, and voice change (Table 2). When the location of the schwannoma and the presence of symptoms were examined, a
correlation was identified. Of the 19 patients with posterior one-third tumors, 12 patients reported symptoms (63.2%). On the other hand, in
the anterior two-thirds group, only five patients reported symptoms (13.5%).Table 2Presenting symptoms of patients with tongue
schwannomasSymptomNumber of patients (n = 56)Painless mass39Throat pain/discomfort7Dysphagia4Change in voice3Globus sensation2Difficulty
breathing2Snoring2Ulceration with pain1 Presenting symptoms of patients with tongue schwannomas The exact size of the schwannoma was
documented in 53 patients. The average size of the excised tumor in all documented patients was 24.04 mm. When the size of the tumor was
examined between the symptomatic and asymptomatic groups, a clear distinction was noted. The average schwannoma size in the asymptomatic
groups was 18.2 versus 33.0 mm in the symptomatic group. Almost all schwannomas were excised via a transoral approach (55/58; 94.8%). The
remaining patients had their tumors excised via a transhyoid, suprahyoid, or submandibular approach. One patient had a transoral laser
excision of the schwannoma. Schwannoma is a slow-growing benign tumor of the nerve sheath. It originates from the Schwann cell of the
peripheral, autonomic, and cranial nerve. It is usually a single, circumscribed, firm, painless lesion of variable size . The etiology of
schwannomas is unknown. Approximately 25–45% of all schwannomas occur in the head and neck with the parapharyngeal space being the most
common site . Less commonly, schwannomas present in the oral cavity, and of this subset, the tongue is the most frequently involved [5, 6].
In this literature review of the past 51 years, we have identified 126 cases of tongue schwannomas and elucidated some of their
characteristics. Schwannomas of the tongue demonstrate an equal gender predilection. The majority of them present as a painless mass.
However, as they approach 3 cm in greatest dimension, they are more likely to produce symptoms such as throat discomfort, dysphagia, and
voice changes. Moreover, if the schwannomas arises in the posterior two-thirds of the tongue, they are more likely to produce debilitating
symptoms. Schwannomas usually present as a solitary lesion. When multiple, however, they can be associated with neurofibromatosis. The
differentiation between schwannoma and neurofibroma is essential because an apparently “solitary” neurofibroma may be a manifestation of
neurofibromatosis . Approximately 15% of patients with neurofibromatosis will have malignant transformation in one or more lesion, which is
in marked contrast to the typical behavior of a schwannoma . Histologically, schwannomas display several features. Virtually, all of these
tumors are encapsulated. Beneath this capsule, two main patterns are seen intermingled but sharply defined from each other. The first
pattern is referred to as Antoni type A which consists of closely packed Schwann cells that form bundles or are arranged in rows with
palisading, elongated nuclei. Free bands of amorphous substance between rows of nuclei constitute the Verocay bodies. The second pattern is
known as Antoni type B and is composed of very loosely arranged Schwann cells set in a meshwork of reticulum fibers and microcysts . In
addition to these characteristic patterns, diagnosis is aided by immunohistochemical markers, S-100 and Leu 7, which support the Schwann
cell nature of these tumors . Two cases of schwannoma of the tongue were referred to as “ancient” schwannoma [12, 13]. The term “ancient”
schwannoma was introduced by Ackerman and Taylor . These authors, in addition to others, noted extensive degeneration within the schwannoma
and attributed this change to the aging process of the schwannoma. Aside from nuclear atypia, additional changes associated with the
degenerative process include formation of cysts, stromal edema, xanthomatous change, and fibrosis. The theorized mechanism is that
increasing tumor size results in vascular insufficiency. This hypothesis is supported by the finding that the degenerative changes correlate
with tumor size . It is now generally accepted that all schwannomas can demonstrate some degenerative changes and the “ancient” variety
probably represents the far end of the continuum of histologic appearance . Several cases of malignant transformation of head and neck
schwannomas have been reported [2, 17], including one occurrence in the tongue . To support a diagnosis of malignant transformation in
benign schwannoma, the following features should be confirmed: (a) the tumor demonstrates, to some extent, benign schwannoma; (b) the tumor
contains unequivocal malignant foci as manifested by the presence of increased cellularity, numerous mitoses, anaplastic cells, and
invasiveness; (c) transitional features between malignant and benign areas can be seen; and (d) the patient has no evidence of von
Recklinghausen’s disease . The imaging modality of choice for schwannomas of the tongue is MR. MR is superior to computed tomography (CT) in
several aspects. The MR image is not degraded by dental amalgam or the beam-hardening artifacts that plague CT scanning of the oral cavity.
In addition, MR allows an accurate measurement of tumor size and precise localization in relation to other structures. On MR, tongue
schwannomas appear isointense to muscle on T1-weighted images and homogenously hyperintense on T2-weighted images. Moreover, these tumors
usually appear smooth, well demarcated, and do not invade the surrounding musculature . All reported cases of schwannomas of the tongue have
been treated by surgical excision. The most common approach was the transoral route. This is an obvious choice for approaching these tumors
since most are easily accessible via this route. Several other approaches have also been reported to have success including submandibular ,
suprahyoid pharyngotomy , and transhyoid approaches. All of these approaches were used for base of tongue schwannomas that were deemed
difficult to approach by the transoral route. More recently, the use of CO2 laser for excision of a base of tongue schwannoma has also been
reported . The goal of surgical therapy is to complete resection. If this is accomplished, recurrence is rare . In evaluating a patient with
a slow-growing tongue mass that has been present for a long period of time, benign soft tissue neoplasms and reactive lesions need to be
considered. In addition to schwannomas, the differential diagnosis should include neurofibromas, granular cell tumors, irritation fibromas,
leiomyomas, rhabdomyomas, hemangiomas, lymphangiomas, lipomas, pyogenic granulomas, and benign salivary gland tumors . Malignant etiologies
should always be considered, but are unlikely to present with the slow clinical course that is typical of a schwannoma. Schwannoma of the
tongue is a relatively rare tumor of the head and neck. Transoral resection allows for removal of this tumor in a manner that precludes
recurrence, avoids causing morbidity of tongue function, and remains the standard approach for treatment of the vast majority of these
tumors. The chance of malignant transformation of these tumors is exceedingly unlikely. Conflict of interest statement None. Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited. Paper presented at the Triological
Society Western Meeting in Rancho Mirage, CA (31 January–2 February 2008).
