Scimitar syndrome is a rare condition consisting of anomalous pulmonary venous drainage from the right lung to the inferior vena cava (IVC).
The extent to which the right lung is drained by the scimitar vein varies from partial to complete. Scimitar syndrome has been associated
with a number of other abnormalities including hypoplastic right lung, anomalous systemic arterial supply to the right lung with or without
pulmonary sequestration, pulmonary hypertension, dextroposition of the heart and atrial septal defect (ASD), with ostium secundum being the
most common.1 The term scimitar syndrome derives from the shadow created by the anomalous vein on the chest radiograph. This shadow extends
from the lateral superior position of the right lung to a more medial location and increases in caliber as it descends toward the
cardiophrenic angle. The appearance closely resembles that of a curved Turkish sword or scimitar.2 This rare anomaly has an incidence of
approximately 1 to 3 per 100 000 live births;3 the true incidence may be higher because many patients are asymptomatic. A 21-year-old female
college student was admitted to the Department of Surgery with a mesenteric cyst. After performing a chest x-ray, she was referred to the
Department of Cardiology because of an incidentally detected dextrocardia. She denied shortness of breath, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea,
orthopnea, wheezing, fever, cough or any known cardiopulmonary disease. She had no history of syncope, lightheadness or diaphoresis. Her
family history was unremarkable and specifically negative for cardiopulmonary anomalies. Of note, her parents reported a history of
recurrent respiratory infections in her childhood. Physical examination revealed a well-appearing youth in no apparent distress. Chest
examination demonstrated normal chest wall excursion and clear breath sounds bilaterally. The heart was regular in rate; S1 was normal and
S2 was widely split and did not vary with respiration. Heart sounds were shifted to the right with a grade 2/6 ejection murmur. The chest
radiograph showed an abnormal shadow arising from the inferior margin of the right lung hilum and dextroposition of the heart, suspicious of
scimitar syndrome (Figure 1). Two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiography demonstrated marked ASD and true tricuspid regurgitation. Cardiac
catheterization and angiography displayed the aberrant vein inserting to the IVC (Figure 2) and hypoplasia of the right pulmonary artery
with no abnormal arterial supply to the right lung from the aorta. Oxygen saturation of the IVC and right atrium were 98.7% and 88.3%,
respectively. Systolic pulmonary artery pressure was 55 mm Hg. Pulmonary hypertension in combination with a large ASD made our patient a
candidate for surgical repair. Posterior-anterior x-ray of the chest. Note that the heart is shifted into the right chest. The right lung is
hypoplastic. Also note the “scimitar sign”-a curvilinear opacity widening in its course to the inferior vena cava. Cardiac catheterization
displaying the anomalous right pulmonary vein. At the time of surgery, under deep hypothermic circulatory arrest, the right atrium and the
IVC were opened. The end of the scimitar vein on the diaphragm was suture ligated. A 12-mm hemoshield graft was anastomosed end to side, to
a longitudinal venotomy. The other end of the graft was brought through an opening in the back of the left atrium and the end was sewn from
inside to the full thickness of the wall of the left atrium. The ASD was then closed with a pericardial patch. The right atrium was closed
and the circulation was reestablished. At 4 years, there were no post-operative complications. Subsequent trans-esophageal echocardiography
demonstrated a well-functioning graft (Figure 3). She has been treated with warfarin and aspirin. Trans-esophageal echocardiography showing
the patent Dacron graft draining into the left atrium. Functionally, scimitar syndrome resembles an ASD. It occurs more commonly in females
and is occasionally familial. The left lung is very rarely involved for unknown reasons. The indications for surgical repair include the
presence of scimitar syndrome, especially in association with ASD, pulmonary hypertension or stenosis of the anomalous vein. Various
operative approaches are used to correct scimitar syndrome. The first report of surgical therapy for scimitar syndrome was in 1950 by Drake
and Lynch, who performed a right lower lobectomy.4 To avoid lung resection and complications associated with simple ligation of the
anomalous pulmonary vein, Kirklin et al5 in 1956 tried the first total correction without cardiopulmonary bypass. Several methods with
cardiopulmonary bypass have been recommended to repair this anomaly, including direct anastomosis of the scimitar vein to the left atrium,
as reported by Honey,6 or division with reimplantation of the anomalous pulmonary vein into the right atrium, as proposed by Shumacker and
Judd.7 Alternatively, an intra-atrial patch may be used to create a tunnel, redirecting flow from the anomalous pulmonary vein to the left
atrium through an ASD, as described by Zubiate and Kay in 1962.8 Puig-Massana and Revuelta9 described use of the free wall of the right
atrium to create a tunnel from the scimitar vein to the left atrium across an ASD. There have been two case reports utilizing a 14-mm Dacron
graft10 and a 20-mm Dacron graft11 interposed between the orifice of the anomalous pulmonary vein and an enlarged ASD as an intra-atrial
conduit. During the surgery, we could not identify the entrance of the scimitar vein into the atriocaval junction. We believe that in this
case, the scimitar vein entered the hepatic venous system. Furthermore, the scimitar vein was crossing the diaphragm near its dome and was
not long enough to be directly transferred or easily released because of inserting venous collaterals. The use of a Dacron graft as an
extra-cardiac conduit between the scimitar vein and the left atrium has not been previously reported. Although the fate of a Dacron graft in
the venous position and the long-term patency is not clear, the graft in this case is patent and functioning well after 4 years. The use of
an anticoagulant and aspirin (despite patient's preference to not take these drugs) was an attempt to maximize the graft patency.
