Present address: Agharkar Research Institute, G. G. Agarkar Road, Pune, India These authors contributed equally. Competing interest: None to
declare A 53-year-old woman was admitted for persistent stomach ache. Ultrasonography examination revealed presence of gallstones and the
patient electively decided to go for cholecystectomy. She had been diabetic for past 12 years and diabetes was controlled with combinations
of drug, exercise and/or insulin injection as advised by her physician. Following cholecystectomy, gall bladder was taken to the laboratory
and processed for routine histochemistry and immunostaining. The gall bladder showed normal morphology with columnar epithelial cells (Fig.
1A). We also observed presence of a large number of (‘islet-like’) cell aggregates (Fig. 1B) in epithelial cells isolated from the gall
bladder. These aggregates were seen to be immunopositive for pancreatic islet hormones (Fig. 1C): insulin (green) and glucagon (red). The
presence of such hormone-producing cells in hepato-biliary epithelium has been documented in mice . In our laboratory, we observe the
presence of such hormone-containing islet-like cell aggregates even in non-diabetic individuals. Such aggregates show presence of islet
hormones and also contain (pro-) hormone transcript in high abundance (Supporting Fig. S1). Here, we present an unusual case wherein
insulin-producing cells were seen to be retained in the gall bladder of a diabetic woman. Co-expression of insulin and glucagon hormones in
several of these epithelial cells suggests that these hormone-containing cells may be similar to the ‘immature’ islet cells observed during
pancreas development. Pro-insulin and pro-glucagon transcripts were detectable in these cells by TaqMan based duplex real-time PCR (Fig.
1C). These observations demonstrate for the first time that hormone-containing cell aggregates present in non-diabetic human beings may be
retained in diabetic individuals. Though we presently do not understand the mechanisms that contribute to generation of hormone-producing
cells in human gall bladder, these observations reveal that gall bladder epithelial cells can be a potentially important source of islet
progenitors for cell replacement therapy in diabetes. Gall bladder epithelial cells in a diabetic woman. Paraffin sections obtained from
gall bladder of a 53-year-old woman were stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Sections show epithelial cells lining the inner layer of gall
bladder (A). Isolated epithelial cells form cell aggregates in culture dishes (B) and were seen to be immunopositive (C) for insulin (green)
and Glucagon (red). Nuclei (blue) are labelled with Hoechst 33342 dye. Quantitative duplex TaqMan-based real-time PCR was carried out on
these cells for transcript analysis of islet pro-hormones. The Δ cycle threshold (Ct) values obtained after normalization for 18S rRNA
carried out in duplex reactions in each well are indicated in upper right corner of each panel (C). A Ct value of 39 is considered to be
undetectable. Bar = 50 μm. Negative controls included RNA isolated from outer wall of gall bladder and human skin showed undetectable levels
(Ct > 39) of insulin and glucagon. The authors thank Dr. Awinash Pradhan for his assistance in histo-pathological analysis. Author
contributions: A.A.H. planned, initiated and designed the entire study. S.S. and S.M.P. carried out immunostaining of cell aggregates,
M.V.J. carried out real-time PCR studies and wrote the first draft, R.D. carried out cholecystectomies and provided case history and D.T.
contributed mainly in discussion and initiation of the project. All authors read and agreed on the final draft. This research project is
funded through the UK-India Educational Research Initiative (UKIERI) project grant (DST/INT/UKIERI/SA/P-4/2008) to A.A.H. and D.T., S.S.,
M.V.J. and S.M.P. are supported through independent research fellowship from Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Government of
India. Pancreatic hormone-containing cells are presentin human gall bladder of non-diabetic individual. Epithelial cellslining the gall
bladder were cytospun and immunostained for insulin(green), glucagon (red) and pancreatic polypeptide (magenta) andvisualized by confocal
microscopy. Nuclei (Nuc) are co-stained withHoechst 33342 dye. Quantitative duplex TaqMan-based real-time PCRwas carried out for transcript
analysis of islet pro-hormones. TheCt-values obtained after normalization for 18S rRNA carried out induplex reactions in each well are
indicated in upper right cornerof each panel (ND: not done). Quantitative PCR in these cellsconfirmed presence of insulin transcript at
levels that were800-fold lower than adult human islets. A Ct value of 39 isconsidered to be undetectable. Bar = 50 μm. Please note: Wiley-
Blackwell are not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting materials supplied by the authors. Any queries (other than
missing material) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article.
