Serviço de Cirurgia e Traumatologia Buco-Maxilo-Facial do Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo - São
Paulo/SP, Brasil. Department of Dentistry – Universidade Federal de Sergipe (UFS), Aracaju, SE, Brazil Odontogenic myxoma is a slow-growing,
painless, and site-aggressive tumor.1 Large-sized lesions may cause tooth dislodgement and cortical bone expansion.2,3 Since pain and
hypoesthesia are not common, the lesion may reach a considerable size before the patient perceives its existence and seeks treatment.4 This
lesion is not encapsulated, thus promoting significant infiltration into the adjacent medullar bone. In addition, this condition carries a
high recurrence rate. The treatment of choice for this condition is surgical excision by either enucleation, curettage, or block resection.5
The average recurrence rate is 25%, especially when more conservative treatments are used.1,6 Cryotherapy has been used in the maxillofacial
region for the removal of neoplasias or abnormal cell elements with no need for extensive segmental resection.7–9 Liquid nitrogen is the
most efficient type of freezing spray available for bone cryosurgery.10 The most commonly observed complications associated with cryotherapy
are pathologic fractures7,10,11 and bone sequestra.7,10 This paper reports the case of a recurrent mandibular myxoma diagnosed 30 years
after the initial lesion treatment, and discusses the possibility of conservative management of extensive odontogenic lesions with high
recurrence rates. A 47-year-old Caucasian female patient was referred to the Oral and Maxillofacial Trauma and Surgery Service (Brazil) in
January, 1995. The patient complained of a symptomatic volume increase in the left mandibular body that had existed for one month. The
patient reported that she underwent a surgical intervention for the removal of a tumor in the same area 30 years before. The
histopathological diagnosis of the biopsy performed in 1965 was “edematous fibroma.” On extraoral clinical examination, a slight crowning
was observed in the left mandibular body region (Figure 1) and the patient described local pain. An intraoral clinical examination showed
light swelling that was firm on palpation. There was an overlying intact mucosa and a discrete loss of definition of the left inferior
vestibular fornix. There were no tooth displacements or rotations and no related sensory disturbances (Figure 2). The panoramic radiograph
was not pathognomonic, and revealed an extensive radiolucent, multilocular area with imprecise borders that extended from the left posterior
mandibular body to the anterior contralateral mandibular body, and exhibited a “soap bubble” appearance (Figure 3). Computed axial
tomography imaging showed an area of infiltration in the medullar bone with a discrete expansion of the external mandibular cortical layer
and a thin trabecula along the entire lesion area. No cortical bone or tooth root reabsorbtion were seen. Thus, the lesion did not penetrate
the periosteum, and was not contiguous with the alveolar mucosa (Figure 4). An incisional biopsy was made and a histopathological
examination of the tissue sample exhibited rounded, spindled, and stellate cells arranged in a loose, myxoid stroma with few collagen
fibrils. These results confirmed the clinical hypothesis of odontogenic myxoma (Figure 5). Lesion excision was performed under general
anesthesia, followed by vigorous curettage of the bone lodge and three 1 min liquid nitrogen sprayings with a defrosting interval between
applications (Figure 6). Postoperative complications included hypoesthesia in the mental region, suture dehiscence, and bone sequestra. A
pathologic fracture occurred in this area 2 ½ months postoperatively (Figure 7). The sequestrated bone was removed 6 months after surgery,
and the mandibular fracture was treated with local care (irrigation) and a diet consisting of soft foods. Five years after the surgical
procedure, there were no radiographic or clinical signs of recurrence, and the patient’s ultimate rehabilitation was completed by the
insertion of osteointegrated implants. Five titanium implants with bicortical anchors were placed in the mandible. After a four-month
osteointegration period, an implant-supported denture was installed. After 10 years of postoperative follow up, the patient is rehabilitated
with no clinical or radiographic signs of lesion recurrence (Figures 8–10). There are no clinical or radiological signs that would allow a
physician to distinguish myxoma from odontogenic or non-odontogenic lesions; however, histological analysis shows several lesions that could
be misinterpreted as myxoma. Differential diagnosis, like ameloblastoma, ameloblastic fibroma, or odontogenic fibroma, could be listed as
initial diagnostic hypotheses based on the clinical and imaginological findings. Nevertheless, histologically, such lesions present a marked
epithelial presence and a scarcely gelatinous texture. Although odontogenic myxomas are always surgically managed, questions have been
raised in regard to the type of treatment modality that should be applied to each case. It is important to emphasize that, as long as the
patient is properly followed-up, an early-diagnosed recurrent lesion does not imply treatment failure; the lesion may be removed using a
relatively simple procedure, without resorting to extensive mutilating surgical interventions that pose difficulties to the patient’s
rehabilitation. A minimum of five years of surveillance is required to confirm that the lesion has healed, and periodical clinical and
radiographic follow-up should be maintained indefinitely.12 The conservative treatment established for the case of recurrent mandibular
myxoma reported in this paper was lesion excision with curettage and cryotherapy, which contrasts with the radical treatment of block
resection that is advised by most authors.1,2,4,13–15 This is due to the invasive nature, large size, and recurrence history of this lesion.
The conservative approach has several advantages over a more invasive treatment, which would consist of segmental mandibulectomy and
mandibular reconstruction with a fibular microsurgical flap. The treatment performed represented a less morbid intervention, the possibility
of intraoral access, the absence of a donor area, a shorter hospitalization time, and a lower procedural cost. In pediatric patients, this
treatment modality has the additional advantage of not interfering with facial growth,16 while the functional and aesthetic results are less
incapacitating. The criterion used to make the decision between a radical treatment (block resection) and a conservative treatment
(excision, curettage, and cryotherapy) involved the presence of the remaining basal mandibular bone, which provided a framework for
mandibular re-structuring. Several authors have indicated block resection as the treatment of choice for extensive lesions17,18 or for those
that have failed to heal after conservative management.18 Other authors advise resection with a safety margin for any case due to the high
recurrence rate of these lesions.19 Bone freezing was used to eliminate any remaining neoplastic cells, without the need for extensive
segmental resection.7–9 The reported complications in this case did not interfere with treatment success. Liquid nitrogen seems to provide
local bone devitalization without affecting the inorganic structure, thereby yielding new bone formation.8 Therefore, before liquid nitrogen
application, the tumoral mass should be excised and the surgical site should be carefully curetted. The conservative management of myxomas
by lesion excision and curettage with liquid nitrogen cryotherapy is an alternative to radical block resection. Although complications due
to bone freezing may occur, they do not compromise the success of the treatment. The proposed therapy enhances patient rehabilitation by
maintaining a satisfactory facial contour, thereby significantly minimizing the psychosocial impact to the patient. In addition, this
treatment represents a less expensive intervention compared to more radical procedures. Slight left parasymphisis and mandibular body
enlargement Discrete loss of definition on the left inferior vestibular fornix. The oral expansion of the mandibular bone was due to slowly
increase in the size of the central lesion Image of a extensive multilocular radiolucency from the lower left molar region to the right
premolar region. The radiographic appearance resemble soap bubble patterns Computed axial tomography scan showing the lesion with thin
residual bony trabeculae or septa dividing the lesion in various compartments and slight expansion of mandibular external cortical
Photomicrograph showing rounded, stellate and spindle-shaped mesenchymal cells arranged in abundant loose myxoid stroma with few collagen
fibrils (hematoxylin-eosin, original magnification X100) Frozen bone after liquid nitrogen application Panoramic radiograph 10 weeks after
the surgery. Image suggesting pathological fractures in the left molar region. Teeth within the lesional area were extracted Ten-year
postoperative aspect showing preserved mandible contour and clear chin form without any enlargement. There were no sensitive or motor nerve
impairment An intraoral ten-years postoperative view showing an implant-supported denture over a health attached alveolar mucosa Panoramic
radiograph taken after 10 years of follow-up showing absence of lesion recurrence
