Geriatrics – Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo/SP, Brazil Osteomalacia is one of the most
common osteometabolic diseases among the elderly and may be associated with osteoporosis.1 It is typically caused by lack of vitamin D and
is characterized by mineralization deficiency of the osteoid matrix in the cortical and trabecular bone, resulting in accumulation of
osteoid tissue.2 Vitamin D deficiency is a pathogenic factor of osteoporosis that can be modified.5, 9 The elderly are at particularly high
risk for developing osteomalacia, which is frequently misdiagnosed.1, 3 We report the case of a 62-year-old woman who had experienced body
pains and weakness for two years. She had suffered from multiple fractures of the ribs and the left clavicle without trauma for two months
before she was admitted to the hospital. Comorbidities included hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, depression and neurological
sequelae with left hemiparesis. The patient was using levothyroxine, omeprazole, metformin, glymepiride, milnacipran, mirtazapine and
atenolol. Radiography showed fractures of nine costal arches and of the left clavicle. Bone scintigraphy revealed multiple osteogenic
reaction areas, with predominance in the axial skeleton (Figure 1). Bone densitometry showed osteoporosis with a lumbar spine (L1–L4) T
score of −3.1 and a femur (neck) T score of −2.8. The laboratory test results showed alkaline phosphatase (AP) 491 U/L (RR-ref range < 104
U/L); parathyroid hormone (PTH) 146 pg/ml (RR 7–62 pg/ml); total serum calcium 8.5 mg/dl (RR 8.6–10.2 mg/dl); ionized calcium 4.7 mg/dl (RR
4.6–5.3 mg/dl); serum phosphorus 3.6 mg/dl (RR 2.7–4.5 mg/dl); urinary calcium 42.3 mg/24h (RR 100–320 mg/24h); and urinary phosphate 397.4
mg/24 h (RR 400–1300 mg/24h). These findings led us to hypothesize that the patient had osteomalacia. It was decided to perform a trans-
iliac bone biopsy. The patient was pre-labeled with oral tetracycline (20 mg/kg/day for 3 days) administered over two separate intervals 10
days apart. The biopsy revealed diminished trabecular volume (13.3%), increased osteoid surface (82%) and volume (43%), and confluent
tetracycline labeling (Figure 2); thus, the hypothesis was confirmed. Serum 25-OH-vitamin D levels were determined to be 11 ng/ml (RR > 40
ng/ml). The patient was prescribed calcitriol at 0.75 mg/day and 2 g of calcium carbonate to normalize PTH and alkaline phosphatase (AP)
levels. Body pains and weakness were eventually reduced. Over a follow-up period of three years, the patient did not have any new fractures.
Her bone mineral density improved by 38% in the lumbar spine (L1-L4 T-score −0.56) and 67.3% in the femur (neck T-score −1.21). Laboratory
test levels had normalized to alkaline phosphatase (AP) 81 U/L (RR-ref range < 104 U/L); parathormone (PTH) 53 pg/ml (RR 7–62 pg/ml); total
serum calcium 9.4 mg/dl (RR 8.6–10.2 mg/dl); ionized calcium 4.9 mg/dl (RR 4.6–5.3 mg/dl); serum phosphorus 4.4 mg/dl (RR 2.7–4.5 mg/dl);
urinary calcium 151 mg/24 h (RR 100–320 mg/24 h) and serum 25-OH-vitamin D 42 ng/ml (RR > 40 ng/ml). At present, the patient is using
colecalciferol at 1000UI a day with good results. Vitamin D plays a role in bone mineralization and in the regulation of circulating
calcium. Deficiency of this vitamin results in increased parathyroid hormone (PTH) synthesis and secretion.5 This secondary
hyperparathyroidism increases bone turnover, resulting in increased risk of fracture.1 Osteomalacia develops when this process is intense
and chronic and was histologically apparent in 13 to 33% of patients with osteoporotic femoral neck fractures.1, 5 Vitamin D deficiency has
been implicated in osteoporotic pathophysiology of the elderly and can cause muscle weakness as well as predisposition to falls and
fractures. Osteomalacia may be associated with fractures due to minimal stress trauma and should be suspected when laboratory exams show
increased levels of alkaline phosphatase (AP) with normal or decreased serum calcium and phosphorus, increased PTH (secondary
hyperparathyroidism), and absence of lithic lesions and neoplasic bone disease. In most cases, osteomalacia can be diagnosed by assaying for
25-OH-vitamin D,8 which can be useful for early detection of the deficiency. Vitamin D3, or cholecalciferol, is synthesized in the skin by
ultraviolet radiation from the sun. In order to become active, it must furthermore undergo two hydroxylations in the liver and kidneys.5 Low
intake, poor absorption, and insufficient exposure to the sun can all result in Vitamin D deficiency. In some cases, the defect occurs in
the receptor, and the diagnosis can only be confirmed through bone biopsy, which also allows for differentiation between osteomalacia and
osteoporosis.2 Cancer and prolonged use of anticonvulsants such phenytoin can also cause osteomalacia. The main differential diagnosis is
osteoporosis, which shows normal results on biochemical tests for calcium, phosphorus, AP and PTH. Vitamin D deficits among the elderly have
been reported in several countries,1,3,4,8 even in Brazil, despite its tropical location.5 Vitamin D deficiency has been implicated in
various pathological conditions including osteoporosis, muscle weakness and predisposition to falls and fractures.4,7,10,11 Epidemiological
studies suggest that adequate serum concentrations of Vitamin D are related to reduced risk of autoimmune diseases, falls,9 and prostate,
colon, breast and ovarian cancer.6,9 Vitamin D deficit may cause osteomalacia, which should be included in the differential diagnosis for
fractures caused by minimal trauma. It is suggested that Vitamin D assays should be included in routine assessments of the elderly and that
Vitamin D supplementation should be considered even in tropical countries. Bone scintigraphy on patient: multiple areas of osteogenic
reaction Biopsy of patient - bone trabecula; bone medulla; osteoid matrix. Absence of double tetracycline labeling
