A 59 year old man underwent mechanical tricuspid valve replacement and removal of pacemaker generator along with 4 pacemaker leads for
pacemaker endocarditis and superior vena cava obstruction after an earlier percutaneous extraction had to be abandoned, 13 years ago, due to
cardiac arrest, accompanied by silent, unsuspected right atrial perforation and exteriorisation of lead. Postoperative course was
complicated by tricuspid valve thrombosis and secondary pulmonary embolism requiring TPA thrombolysis which was instantly successful. A
review of literature of pacemaker endocarditis and tricuspid thrombosis along with the relevant management strategies is presented. We
believe this case report is unusual on account of non operative management of right atrial lead perforation following an unsuccessful
attempt at percutaneous removal of right sided infected pacemaker leads and the incidental discovery of the perforated lead 13 years later
at sternotomy, presentation of pacemaker endocarditis with a massive load of vegetations along the entire pacemaker lead tract in superior
vena cava, right atrial endocardium, tricuspid valve and right ventricular endocardium, leading to a functional and structural SVC
obstruction, requirement of an unusually large dose of warfarin postoperatively occasioned, in all probability, by antibiotic drug
interactions, presentation of tricuspid prosthetic valve thrombosis uniquely as vasovagal syncope and isolated hypoxia and near
instantaneous resolution of tricuspid prosthetic valve thrombosis with Alteplase thrombolysis. A 40 year old man underwent dual chamber
right infraclavicular pacemaker implantation for malignant vasovagal syndrome in 1988. This was complicated by two further reexplorations,
one for a slipped atrial lead, and the second for primary wound dehiscence which required a pulse generator change. This was followed, in
1993, by infection of the pacemaker pocket by Staphylococcus epidermidis requiring pacemaker removal. However, only the pulse generator
could be removed, and the percutaneous removal of the leads by traction had to be abandoned on account of cardiac arrest, in all
probability, and with the benefit of hindsight, due to perforation of right atrium by the atrial lead during attempted percutaneous removal
which consequently had to be abandoned. The patient was resuscitated successfully without taking recourse to median sternotomy, the leads
were cut short and buried under pectoralis major and the wound closed. A fresh dual chamber pacemaker was implanted in left infraclavicular
pocket, followed by an elective pulse generator change in 2001. Patient next presented in December 2006 with history of fever, rigors, night
sweats and weight loss. Examination revealed bilateral pacemaker pocket infection and discharge and unremarkable cardiovascular examination.
Chest X ray confirmed four pacing leads in the SVC, with two in right atrium and two in right ventricle, a pulse generator in the left
infraclavicular pocket only (fig 1). Routine blood examination revealed white cell count of 20.3, neutrophils 17.3 and CRP 59. Bacterial
culture of the wound discharge grew coagulase negative staphylococcus. Intravenous vancomycin and gentamycin was started. Vancomycin was
changed to intravenous flucloxacillin after two days and oral rifampicin added subsequently. Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated large
vegetations associated with the pacing leads at the atrial level, part of which prolapsed through the tricuspid valve during diastole (fig
2). Transesophageal echocardiogram revealed extensive and complex vegetation surrounding all leads in SVC, RA, RV and also involving
tricuspid valve and right atrial and right ventricular endocardium (fig 3). At median sternotomy, one of the atrial leads was densely
adherent to the under surface of the right half of the sternum just below the manubriosternal joint. It was surrounded by a large fibrous
granuloma from the point it exited from the atrium till the point of its adherence to the under surface of the sternum (figs 4, 5).
Presumably, the lead perforated the right atrium during the attempted percutaneous removal of the right sided pacing leads in 1993 which had
to be abandoned when patient had had an asystolic arrest. Pericardial cavity was obliterated by adhesions. Cardiopulmonary bypass was
established with ascending aortic and direct SVC and IVC cannulations. Caval tapes were snugged, temperature was allowed to only gently
drift and right atriotomy was made on the beating heart. Both infraclavicular pacemaker pockets were exposed and the pulse generator on the
left side removed after disconnecting the leads. The perforated atrial lead lying under the sternum, encased in the pericardial granuloma,
was dissected out within the granuloma, excised at the level of the appendage and removed (figs 6, 7). The remaining portion of the lead,
along with the other atrial lead, were removed after dissecting them out from the atrial endocardium along with the adherent thrombotic
vegetations. There were large vegetations on the posterior and septal leaflets tricuspid valve leaflets and the chordae of the two leaflets
had twined themselves around the ventricular pacing leads (fig 8). The endocardium of the inlet of the right ventricle was infiltrated by
vegetations as well. The ventricular pacing leads were dissected off from the ventricular muscle and the tricuspid valve leaflets and
chordae and removed. The tricuspid valve leaflets were excised completely, the adjoining atrial and ventricular infiltrated endocardium
debrided and a 31 mm St Jude mechanical prosthesis stitched in place using 14 pledgetted interrupted 2 O ticron sutures. Atriotomy closed in
a single layer. An epicardial pacemaker (Medtronic) was sutured in place and the pulse generator kept in a preperitoneal and retrorectus
position in left hypochondrium and set at a rate of 90/min. Post procedure TOE revealed satisfactory prosthetic valve function and no
residual vegetations in SVC, RA or RV. Patient received intravenous Flucloxacillin and oral rifampicin for a total duration of 6 weeks. Post
operative period was uncomplicated apart from the requirement for large doses of warfarin to maintain INR in the required range, possibly as
a result of antibiotic interactions. The postoperative transthoracic echocardiogram showed satisfactory tricuspid prosthetic valve function
and patient was discharged home, 5 weeks after his operation. Chest X ray (PA) showing 2 atrial and 2 ventricular pacing leads and 1 pulse
generator in left infraclavicular pocket, the right sided pulse generator having been removed previously. Transthoracic echocardiogram
showing a large right atrial vegetation. Transthoracic echocardiogram showing vegetations in relation to the endocardial pacing lead.
Intraoperative photograph showing the tip of a pacemaker lead lying outside the right atrium, surrounded by inflammatory granuloma and
densely adherent to the undersurface of the sternum. Intraoperative photograph showing the extra pericardial location of the lead.
Intraoperative photograph showing the inflammatory granuloma having been dissected to reveal the tip of the pacemaker lead. Intraoperative
photograph showing the tip of the pacemaker lead in greater detail. Intraoperative photograph showing the right ventricular pacemaker lead
surrounded by vegetations. He represented two weeks later with syncope while blood was being withdrawn for INR estimation. Examination
revealed profound hypoxia with 88% oxygen saturations, no audible metallic heart sounds and 2 cm hepatomegaly. Arterial blood gas revealed
pH 7.52, pO2 5.69, pCO2 3.64, HCO3 24.7. INR was suboptimal at 1.9. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed antegrade flow across tricuspid
prosthesis increased at 2.5 m/sec, prolonged pressure half time of 270 msec (fig 9) and an estimated effective tricuspid prosthetic orifice
area of 0.8 cm2. No obvious valve occluder excursion, in contrast to the immediate postoperative echo, was seen and a small amount of mobile
friable material was visualised on the ventricular side of the valve). Tricuspid valve fluoroscopy confirmed restricted occluder excursion.
The right atrium was dilated with bulging of interatrial septum. Both ventricles were contracting well. A contrast CT angiogram of pulmonary
arteries demonstrated a "wispy", ill defined embolus in left pulmonary artery extending into upper lobar artery which could have been
chronic (fig 10). There was also evidence of extensive backfilling of the azygous system from the superior vena cava (fig 11), with some
degree of residual stenosis both at the confluence of innominate veins and also at the junction of SVC with right atrium (fig 12). A
diagnosis of tricuspid prosthetic thrombosis was made. Whether there was recent or old embolisation into PA was difficult to establish with
certainty. Since the patient was haemodynamically stable and since his oxygenation improved somewhat with increasing the inspired oxygen
concentration, it was elected to, in the first instant, to treat with aggressive anticoagulation with intravenous heparin and oral warfarin,
aiming to keep both INR and APTT between 3.5 to 4.5. One week later, however, TOE continued to show significant prosthetic thrombotic
obstruction with no clinical improvement. Patient was, therefore, thrombolysed with100 mgs of Alteplase given as a standard 3 hr infusion.
Patient felt symptomatic improvement instantaneously, with oxygen saturations improving to 97% and later 100%, restoration of normal
pulmonary gaseous exchange. Transthoracic echo showed no gradient across the tricuspid prosthesis, with normal pressure half time (fig 13).
Fluoroscopy confirmed restoration of normal prosthetic leaflet excursions. Patient was discharged home, 2 weeks after his readmission,
requiring 12 mgs of warfarin to keep his INR between 3.5 and 4.5. Patient is being followed up regularly in outpatient clinic and continues
in NYHA class1 and has resumed all previous activities. Doppler echocardiogram showing a prolonged pressure half time of 270 msec suggestive
of severe prosthetic tricuspid obstruction. Contrast CT angiogram of left pulmonary artery showing a "wispy" ill defined embolus in the
upper lobar artery. Contrast CT angiogram showing extensive backfilling of azygous system from superior vena cava. Contrast CT angiogram
showing residual stenosis both at the confluence of the two innominate veins and at the junction of SVC with right atrium. Post thrombolysis
Doppler echocardiogram showing complete resolution of tricuspid prosthetic thrombus as suggested by a normal pressure half time. Pacemaker
system infections can be generator pocket or lead infections and complicate 0.5 – 2 percent permanent pacemaker implantations . The usual
predisposing causes of infection include haematoma, erosion, long duration of procedure, operator's inexperience and reexploration . Early
infections are most commonly caused by staphylococcus aureus and late infections most commonly by staphylococcus epidermidis, although
infections by staphylococcus lugudensis streptococcus bovis, mitis and sanguis, pseudomonas , enterococci and fungi and even Mycobacterium
fortuitum have been described. Pacemaker infections present as local discharge, inflammation or abscess, erosion of part of the pacemaker
system with secondary infection, or, more rarely, with endocarditis, sepsis and positive blood cultures. Pacemaker endocarditis refers to
the presence of infective material in relation to the pacemaker system, in the veins leading up to the heart, or the chambers or the valves
of the right heart. Pacemaker endocarditis is most commonly complicated by tricuspid valve vegetations , tricuspid regurgitation and
occasionally by secondary pulmonary embolism . Rare complications include SVC thrombosis tricuspid stenosis and paradoxical emboli . Our
patient presented 18 years subsequent to his first pacemaker implantation with bilateral pacemaker pocket and lead infection with
staphylococcus epidermidis, complicated by tricuspid valve and right ventricular endocarditis and further complicated by SVC obstruction due
to partly the sheer load of huge vegetations surrounding the 4 pacemaker leads in the SVC and partly by the stenotic changes in the vena
cava as evidenced by the extensive backfilling of the azygous system on the contrast CT. The infection of the pacemaker pocket and the lead
and the subsequent endocarditis could have been predicted on the basis of previous three reexplorations on the right side, one for slipped
lead, the second for erosion and the last for unsuccessful percutaneous lead extraction, and one on the left side for elective pulse
generator change. There is general consensus that once there is pacemaker pocket or lead infection, removal of the whole pacemaker system
followed by a course of appropriate antibiotics results in the best prospect for long term eradication of infection . When pacemaker lead or
pocket infection is complicated by vegetations on the leads, heart valves or chamber endocardium or when there is secondary pulmonary
embolism, removal of the entire device is more urgently indicated. Pacemaker leads can be extracted percutaneously or after median
sternotomy with cardiopulmonary bypass. Percutaneous extraction is preferably done under TOE guidance when there are no complicating factors
like vegetations or endocarditis. Percutaneous lead extraction has been advanced by techniques initially described by Byrd and perfected by
other operators later . The technique essentially involves counter traction to the myocardium by a plastic sheath passed over the lead while
traction is applied to the lead tip by a stylet which passes to the tip of the lead through a central channel in it and which locks it by
uncoiling it. Percutaneous extraction can fail, or may be complicated by non fatal pulmonary embolism , avulsion of tricuspid valve leaflet
or lead tip fracture with resulting vegetation . TOE has been of value not only to diagnose the above complications, with the exception of
PE, before the patient leaves the catheterization lab, but also to guide the mode of pacemaker lead removal. Generally lead removal by
percutaneous traction in the presence of vegetations less than 1 cm is considered relatively safe, although one study described successful
percutaneous traction in 9 out of 12 patients, with vegetations larger than 1 cm, with pacemaker endocarditis, with no post procedure
secondary pulmonary embolism . Authors of one study of 53 patients with pacemaker endocarditis, out of which 29 had transvenous extraction
with locking stylets and sheaths, reported one surgical conversion, no tamponade and no major pulmonary embolism. They recommended that
those patients who have vegetations that might obstruct main pulmonary artery should have removal under cardiopulmonary bypass . As a
general rule, however, in pacemaker endocarditis complicated by lead, tricuspid valve or RA or RV vegetations, removal of pacemaker leads is
best done through median sternotomy, employing cardiopulmonary bypass and debriding the right heart chambers and the tricuspid valve, under
direct vision, of the infected vegetations and debris. This offers the best method of achieving long term eradication of infection from the
chambers of heart. Although removal of infected pacemaker system without employing cardiopulmonary bypass, under inflow occlusion, has been
described , the authors would not advocate this procedure except under exceptional circumstances. However, the author (PK) has removed a
stuck right ventricular lead, in a different patient, through a purse string in the right atrial appendage, without taking recourse to
cardiopulmonary bypass, in the absence of lead, chamber or valve vegetations, and with TOE monitoring. There has been one report of removal
of a pacemaker lead sticking out of right atrium without cardiopulmonary bypass by using a purse string around the projecting lead .
Pacemaker endocarditis only rarely involves the tricuspid valve to the extent of destroying it and mostly debridement of vegetations from
the valve and preservation of the valve itself suffices. However, occasionally excision of the tricuspid valve with or without valve
replacement , tricuspid valve reconstruction with PTFE chordae and balloon dilatation 4 years after pacemaker endocarditic tricuspid
stenosis have been described. Taira reported tricuspid valve stenosis related to subvalvar adhesion of a non infected loop of an excessively
long ventricular lead and Hagers reported acquired tricuspid stenosis in a patient with recurrent pacemaker lead endocarditis, further
complicated by a paradoxical septic embolism through a PFO . Surgery for pacemaker endocarditis may be accompanied by additional procedures
apart from tricuspid valve surgery, including pulmonary embolectomy . Hong et al described removal of 6 entrapped endocardial pacemaker
leads with concomitant redo coronary artery bypass grafting . Lead perforation during implantation is a recognised but rare complication of
transvenous pacemaker implantation. It may present by a rising stimulation threshold, an RBBB pattern from an RV lead, intercostal muscle or
diaphragmatic contraction, friction rub after implantation, pericarditis, pericardial effusion, cardiac tamponade or rarely, no symptoms .
It was only at median sternotomy after dissecting the large granulomatous mass found adherent to the under surface of the sternum near the
manubrium that it was realised that there had been a perforation of the right atrium with one of the right atrial leads, the lead having
exited the right atrial appendage, and then migrated a considerable distance to lie adherent to the under surface of the sternum. This could
only have happened at the time of the previous unsuccessful attempt at percutaneous extraction of the pacemaker leads which had been
complicated by cardiac arrest after which the extraction was abandoned and a new pacemaker system implanted from the left side. Since these
leads were not connected to the pulse generator which had been removed, the lead would have got further exteriorised with cardiac
contractions without at the same time giving rise to frank bleeding into pericardial cavity. Obliteration of pericardial cavity by adhesions
at sternotomy confirms this presumed course of events. Presence of huge vegetations along the entire tract of the leads including right
atrial and right ventricular endocardium and the tricuspid valve as well as the entangling of the tricuspid valve chordae with the RV leads
mandated excision and replacement of tricuspid valve with a prosthetic valve. There has been a tremendous improvement in prosthetic valve
thrombosis in tricuspid position since Thorburn reported 20% incidence in monoleaflet models . Subsequent reports, corresponding to a
mixture of newer valve models, showed incidence lower than 0.7% per patient year . Presentation may include fatigue, syncope, distended neck
veins, signs of fluid retention, muffled valve clicks and middiastolic or pansystolic murmurs in tricuspid area. Confirmation by TTE
requires presence of the following criteria: 1) high transvalvular gradients – mean of 6 mm Hg or higher, and peak of 15 mm Hg or higher 2)
transvalvular gradients 50% or higher than observed before 3) visible thrombus on the prosthetic valve 4) inability to demonstrate 2
different mobile echoes representing the valve leaflets in a high quality image. Inability of the valve leaflets to either fully open or
close on fluoroscopy employing multiple acquisition angles including the side view, with the disks parallel to the beam is generally
considered indicative of a stuck valve. The diagnostic criteria for thrombosis on TOE were limited leaflet motion and/or visible thrombus .
The low velocity of blood across the tricuspid valve prosthesis makes it especially prone to thrombosis. There are well documented
conditions that predispose to thrombosis. Probably the commonest is a sub therapeutic INR, with the mechanical tricuspid prosthesis
requiring an INR in the range of 3 to 4. A change to low molecular weight heparin in place of heparin prior to surgery is yet another common
predisposing cause . Hypercoagulable states like pregnancy , hypereosinophilic syndromes , malignancy , low flow states like Ebstein's
anomaly and use of Biomedicus Centrifugal Pump , drugs like Rifampicin, Dicloxacillin , HRT , Phenytoin , mechanical rather than
bioprosthetic valves , all predispose to a greater likelihood of developing prosthetic valve thrombosis. Our patient, who was continued on
vancomycin and rifampicin postoperatively, required doses of warfarin in excess of 15 mg daily, in all probability due to the known
facilitation of the induction of warfarin degradation by rifampicin. He presented with intermittent syncope and profound hypoxia responsive
to increasing inspired fio2. TTE, TOE and fluoroscopy were clearly confirmatory. In addition, contrast CT scan demonstrated secondary
pulmonary embolism and residual SVC obstruction. Clinical, radiological and echocardiographic resolution after Alteplase thrombolysis was
instantaneous after one week of aggressive anticoagulation failed. Although tricuspid valve thrombosis may occasionally respond to high
intensity anticoagulation, thrombolysis should be the first line of treatment in these patients and is almost always successful. Failure of
thrombolysis in symptomatic patients, particularly when both leaflets are stuck, is an indication of surgery which shall usually involve re-
replacement, and rarely, thrombectomy with or without rotation of the disk. We believe this case report is unusual on account of the
following: 1. The fact that a perforated right atrial lead lying more than an inch outside right atrial appendage was discovered 13 years
after the attempted unsuccessful removal 2. Presentation of pacemaker endocarditis with a massive load of vegetations along the entire
pacemaker lead tract in SVC, right atrial endocardium, tricuspid valve and right ventricular endocardium, leading to a functional and
structural SVC obstruction 3. Requirement of an unusually large dose of warfarin postoperatively occasioned, in all probability, by
antibiotic drug interactions 4. Presentation of tricuspid prosthetic valve thrombosis uniquely as vasovagal syncope and isolated hypoxia and
near instantaneous resolution of tricuspid prosthetic valve thrombus with Alteplase thrombolysis. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. PK conceived, designed and drafted the manuscript and was the principal operating surgeon and consultant in charge of
patient's care. KA and KJ assisted in the operation and collected various imaging data. WB was the primary cardiology consultant responsible
for the care of the patient. All authors revised the manuscript and made important intellectual contributions. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and the accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by Editor-in Chief of the journal.
