Intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) agents have obtained acceptance as the mainstay in the management strategy of
subfoveal choroidal neovascular membranes (CNVM) due to varying etiologies. Few drawbacks include need for repeated intravitreal injections,
with its adjunct risks, and the lack of a predefined treatment end point, which can cause doubts and uncertainty in the mind of the patient.
Furthermore, it remains a significant financial burden for the patient. Herein we report our data of three patients who were reluctant for
further re-injections of anti-VEGF agents and were therefore offered surgical removal of the CNVM by submacular surgery as an alternative
treatment plan. The efficacy of intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) agents for treatment of choroidal neovascular
membranes (CNVMs) of varying etiologies as the first line of treatment, has been adequately proven by numerous trials and studies. The need
for repeated injections suggests that the neovascular complexes (especially those with mature smooth muscle and pericyte support, the
architectural component of CNVM) are not extinguished but lie dormant so long as the neovascular drive from VEGF is quelled. This could be
based on the dual component model of CNVM pathogenesisâ€“vascular and extravascular component. Both components have the potential for inducing
tissue damage individually and in concert. Anti-VEGF drugs attack the vascular component with some secondary, indirect effect on the
extravascular component, presumably due to induced ischemia. Patients often receive intravitreal injections on a regular monthly
(pegaptanib, ranibizumab) or quarterly (bevacizumab) basis for several months to years with an improvement or stability of their condition.
However, absence of a predefined endpoint in terms of the duration of treatment and the total number of injections required is vexing to a
select few patients. Some of the concerns include frequent follow-up visits, exposure to repeated risk of endophthalmitis, vitreous
hemorrhage, retinal detachment, cataract formation and other known complications of intravitreal injections, which are albeit rare.
Furthermore, there is a significant financial burden of repeated procedures and the cost of the drug. Here, we present our data of three
patients who, when faced with the ambiguity and dilemma related to these issues felt reluctant to continue with re-injections. They were
then offered surgical removal of CNVM as an alternative treatment after a full explanation of the pros and cons of the same. A 55-year-old
male patient presented to us with complaints of decreased vision and metamorphopsia, in the left eye for three weeks. He was treated in the
past elsewhere with intravitreal bevacizumab thrice for CNVM secondary to age-related macular degeneration (AMD), at four-weekly intervals.
He reported temporary subjective improvement post injections. Last injection was received ten weeks before he visited us. Upon examination,
his best corrected visual acuity was 20/120, in the left eye with normal anterior segment findings. Posterior segment clinical examination
and optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed subfoveal CNVM of half disc diameter (DD) size, with minimal subretinal blood [Fig. 1A and
B]. The need for a repeat intravitreal injection of bevacizumab was explained to the patient. Upon refusal for the same, the option of
surgical removal was discussed with the patient. Following a detailed informed consent, he underwent the procedure. Six months
postoperative, his preoperative vision of 20/120 was maintained and no intra- or postoperative complications were encountered [Fig. 1 C and
D]. (A and B) Case 1 Color fundus photograph and OCT showing small subfoveal CNVM with minimal subretinal hemorrhage despite previous
intravitreal injections of bevacizumab. (C and D) Two months post surgical CNVM removal color fundus photograph and OCT showing absence of
CNVM with some scarring and restoration of normal foveal contour with stabilized vision A 58-year-old male patient, a known case of
neovascular AMD, was treated with intravitreal bevacizumab four weeks prior to his first visit to us, elsewhere. He was dissatisfied with
the treatment and reported no subjective improvement post injection. At presentation, his visual acuity was 20/120 in the right eye with a
subfoveal CNVM with hemorrhage, of size 1 DD [Fig. 2 A and B]. Patient refused management with further injections. Following a detailed
discussion and informed consent, he underwent surgical removal of the CNVM. At six months postoperative duration, he maintained a vision of
20/120 without any intra- or postoperative complications [Fig. 2 C and D]. (A and B) Case 2 Color fundus photograph and OCT showing small
subfoveal CNVM with subretinal hemorrhage despite previous intravitreal injections of bevacizumab. (C and D) One month post surgical CNVM
removal color fundus photograph and OCT showing absence of CNVM with some scarring and restoration of normal foveal contour with stabilized
vision A 35-year-old male patient with idiopathic CNVM OS, was treated by us with two injections of intravitreal bevacizumab, at three month
intervals. We noted temporary improvement in visual acuity following injections. Five months following the second injection his vision
decreased to 20/120 from 20/30. Posterior segment clinical examination and OCT revealed active subfoveal CNVM, sized 1.5-2 DD with some sub-
retinal hemorrhage. The need for repeated injection was explained to the patient. On refusal for the same, the option of surgical removal
was discussed with the patient. Following detailed informed consent, he underwent the surgical procedure with vision stabilizing to 20/120
at final follow-up, six months post surgery. No intra- or postoperative complications were encountered. Standard 20-gauge three-port pars
plana vitrectomy including posterior hyaloid removal was done. Through a small retinotomy away from the center of the fovea, CNVM removal
was performed with a long beaked forceps. Posterior pole was temporarily tamponaded with perfluorocarbon liquid. Screening of the periphery
was carried out followed by a fluid air exchange and closure. Patients maintained face down position for three days. Certain clinical or
histopathological features may diminish the efficacy of intravitreal anti-VEGF agents on CNVMs. Patients who do not respond satisfactorily
to these agents face a dilemma due to the pros and cons of the treatment, as outlined above. Surgical CNVM removal was studied by the
submacular surgery trial (SST) group which began a decade back when the only established modality of treatment was laser photocoagulation.
The study concluded that submacular surgery did not improve or preserve visual acuity for 24 months in more eyes than just observation,
however, at one-year follow-up, 34% eyes had stabilized or improved vision in cases of neovascular AMD. Eyes eligible for SST had large
membranes with poor visual acuity and no previous treatment. Our three cases had relatively smaller membranes with no scarring, patients who
refused repeat intravitreal injections, and desired an alternative treatment for their condition. The duration between surgical treatment
and the last injection was 75 days, 30 days and 150 days respectively in the three cases. Intra- and postoperative course was uneventful in
all three cases. Preoperative vision was maintained at six months following surgery. The SST group reported that 77% eyes had some residual
blood after surgery and in a small proportion of cases it was severe enough to cause elevation of the retina. In our experience
intraoperatively, the CNVMs were non/minimally vascular and did not bleed from the bed while removal. We postulate that this may be an
effect of the previous anti-VEGF priming to the membrane. To conclude, we observed that surgical removal of CNVM may have a role in
stabilizing deteriorating vision in selected cases of small non-scarred classic CNVM, when repeated intravitreal anti-VEGF injections are
declined by the patient. However, preoperative counseling and visual prognosis should be clearly emphasized to the patients. If surgery is
planned, anti-VEGF may also reduce the risk of hemorrhage during surgical excision.
