To the Editor: Chikungunya virus is an RNA alphavirus (group A arbovirus) in the family Togaviridae. The known vectors are Aedes aegypti and
Ae. albopictus mosqitoes. Chikungunya infection, after an incubation period of 2–10 days, has the main clinical manifestations of fever,
polyarthralgia, and rash. Treatment consists of rest and medication for pain. Outcome is marked by incapacitating arthralgia, which can
persist for several weeks or months (1). Complications are rare and consist of mild hemorrhage, myocarditis, and hepatitis (2). Neurologic
manifestations are less well known (3). Infection is confirmed by the identification of genomic products in acute-phase blood specimens,
(reverse transcription–PCR ) or, more recently, by serum immunoglobulin (Ig) M or a 4-fold increase in other antibodies. In 2006,
chikungunya virus was found on Réunion Island; seroprevalence on the island was estimated to be 38.2% among 785,000 inhabitants (95%
confidence interval 35.9%–40.6%) (4). Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is an acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy; incidence
worldwide is 0.6–4/100,000 persons/year. In two thirds of patients, neuropathic GBS occurs after an infection (5,6). Cases of GBS have been
described in association with the arboviruses dengue and West Nile but not with chikungunya virus. We report 2 cases of acute and severe GBS
related to infection with chikungunya virus. The first patient was a 51-year-old woman who in 2006 was admitted to an intensive care unit in
Réunion Island’s Centre Hospitalier Departemental for treatment of polyradiculoneuropathy. Her medical history consisted of poorly treated
type 2 diabetes and hypertension. Three weeks before hospital admission, she had had fever, arthralgia, rash, and diarrhea. One week later,
rapidly progressing motor weakness and sensory disturbances developed, e.g., tingling in all limbs. She had facial diplegia, and her tendon
reflexes were absent. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) contained increased protein (1.44 g/L) but not increased leukocytes (1/mm3).
Electromyography displayed typical signs of demyelinating sensorimotor neuropathy with increased distal motor latency and reduced motor
conduction velocity. Sensory nerve action potential was absent. Antichikungunya IgM was found in serum at 15 days after onset of signs and
symptoms. This seroconversion confirms an acute infection by an alphavirus. Serum genomic product (RT-PCR, TaqMan method) (7) was negative
for chikungunya virus. Antichikungunya IgM and IgG were also found in CSF. The patient’s respiration rapidly deteriorated, and she required
tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation for 12 days. She was given intravenous immunoglobulin for 5 days (TEGELINE; LBF
Biomedicaments, Courtaboeuf, France). She recovered and was extubated on day 12. Two months after onset of symptoms, the patient reported a
satisfactory recovery; she was able to walk, and her sensory disturbances had rapidly disappeared. The second patient was a 48-year-old
woman who in 2006 was admitted to the intensive care unit in Réunion Island’s Centre Hospitalier Departemental unit for a rapidly developing
polyradiculoneuropathy. She had no relevant past medical history. Two weeks before her admission, she had been febrile and had had
arthralgia and a rash. Later, weakness with facial diplegia and sensory disturbances developed, e.g., tingling in all limbs. Tendon reflexes
were absent. CSF contained increased protein but not increased leukocytes. Electromyography displayed signs of a peripheral neuropathy and
evidence of a conduction block. At the time of hospital admission, antichikungunya IgM and IgG were detected in 2 serum samples. RT-PCR for
chikungunya virus in serum and CSF was negative. The patient’s respiration rapidly deteriorated, and she required tracheal intubation and
mechanical ventilation for 9 days. After receiving intravenous immunoglobulin for 5 days, she recovered quickly. Return of a productive
cough and satisfactory muscle tone enabled her to be removed from mechanical ventilation on day 9. For the 2 patients reported here, GBS
diagnosis was based on a typical clinical acute motor and sensory polyradiculoneuropathy, which evolved in 3 characteristic stages: rapid
deterioration, plateau, and slow recovery (6). Also typical of GBS are normal CSF counts, increased CSF proteins, and electromyography data
(peripheral neuropathy, conduction block). The widespread screening for organisms known to be associated with GBS produced negative results.
However, antichikungunya IgM was found in serum and CSF, although genomic products in serum and CSF were negative, which was not surprising,
given the brief period (4–5 days) of viremia (8). These findings strongly supported a disseminated acute chikungunya infection and enabled
us to conclude that chikungunya virus was probably responsible for the GBS. Epidemiologic data also support a causal relationship between
chikungunya infection and GBS. The incidence rate of GBS increased ≈22% in 2006 (26/787,000 persons) over the rate in 2005 (21/775,000
persons) and then declined to a rate closer to baseline in 2007 (23/800,000 persons). These 2 cases of GBS on Réunion Island were related to
an acute and documented chikungunya infection. In the absence of an effective treatment, patients with these suspected infections should
receive supportive care for classic GBS. Suggested citation for this article: Lebrun G, Chadda K, Reboux AH, Martinet O, Gaüzère BA.
Guillain-Barré syndrome after chikungunya infection . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2009 Mar [date cited]. Available from
http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/15/3/495.htm
