We describe a case of 68-year-old woman which was admitted to our hospital for mitral valve replacement (MVR), in whom acute compresion of
the vena cava inferior developed after repair of lacerated atrio-caval junction with hemostatic tissue sealant, biologic glue (BioGlue,
Cryolife, Ä±nc, Kennesaw, Ga). Removal of the BioGlue relieved the unexpected problem. Compression of intrapericardial structures is well-
known issue in cardiac surgery. Restriction of the heart by a localized mass in the pericardial space may cause atypical findings of
compression. Cardiac tamponade can be caused not only by ventricular compression . Isolated compression of the inferior vena cava by
haemostatic tissue sealant, biologic glue (BioGlue) has never been reported yet. Here, we report a case who suffered from acute heart
failure early after operation (mitral valve replacement) due to compression of the thoracal vena cava inferior by haemostatic tissue
sealant, biologic glue (BioGlue), in which clinic features of the patient mimics the pericardial tamponade. A 68-year-old woman was admitted
to our hospital for mitral valve replacement (MVR). The mitral valve was approached from the right side through an incision in the left
atrium posterior to Waterson's groove. Related to small left atrium and insufficient exposure of mitral valve due to excessive traction of
the left atrium, resulted in laceration of the vena cava inferior-right atrial connection (IVC). After mitral valve replacement (27 mm
Sorin) we closed the left atrium and repaired the injured IVC. Multiple attempts at primary suture repair were made but due to extreme
friability and brittleness, and to minimize the bleeding we decided to use the haemostatic tissue sealant, biologic glue (BioGlue). The
bleeding stopped. And the patient was transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit without any problem. During the following hour
patient's blood pressure were labile without a change of the central venous pressure (CVP) measured from the right internal jugular vein.
Postoperative second hour patient's blood pressure decreased to 70/40 mmHg and heart rate increased 135 per minute. At this period urine
output decreased too. At this time we didn't record any increasing at CVP values (CVP was 6 mmHG). Chest X-Ray didn't showed enlargement of
cardiac silhouette. The repeated echocardiography revealed a minimal amount of the pericardial effusion on the four chamber view (without
any compression of the right ventricle or right atrium was not evident at this moment), good cardiac function, and relatively under-filled
volume status. The ECG displayed no signs of ischemia. As haemodynamic stabilisation was not achieved by volume supply and inotropic
support, urgent surgical management was intended. The chest was opened emergently, even though right atrial pressure tracing did not suggest
cardiac tamponade. No significant pericardial effusion (or blood clot) was found. After detailed exploration we decided to remove the
bioglue from the around the VCI (Fig 1). After removing the bioglue we achieved a prompt disappearance of the symptoms (heart rate was
decreased from 135 to 85 beats/min and blood pressure increased to 110/70 mmHg, and all inotropes were stopped). The sternum was closed and
the patient was transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on
the postoperative day 7. Intraoperative view of compression of the vena cava inferior by the bioglue with absorbable haemostat (surgicell).
Cardiac tamponade is a potentially life-threating condition that requires prompt recognition and intervention . The ability to establish the
correct diagnosis necessitates integration of symptomatic manifestation, physical signs, and imaging features . Conventional trans-thoracic
echocardiography does not always provide good image quality soon after open-heart surgery because the transducer is placed near the surgical
wound. Furthermore, mechanical ventilation or the air trapped in the thoracic cavity interferes with ultrasound penetration. It is
especially difficult to observe the right side of the heart. When pericardial mass is loculated in an unusual location, it can be more
challenging to make diagnosis when loculated effusion (or any mass in pericardial space) is inaccessible to the TTE ultrasound beam . For
technical reason the use of the transesophageal echocardiogram was impossible in this case. This is a limitation of our case report. A
loculated, eccentric effusion or localized hematoma can produce regional tamponade in which only selected chambers are compressed. As a
result, diagnosis is challenging because the typical physical, hemodynamic, and echocardiographic signs of tamponade are usually absent.
BioGlue is a preparation of bovine albumin cross-linked with glutaraldehyde to form a strong adhesive bond. It is supplied in a 2-barrel
applicator containing albumin in 1 barrel and glutaraldehyde in 1 barrel, which are mixed at the time of application. After mixture, the
glue solidifies in approximately 2 to 3 minutes . Some experimental and clinical studies have reported the effect of BioGlue in creating
local tissue damage and local tissue damage and local inflammatory response, and increasing risk of pseudoaneurysm formation and great
vessel stenosis especially in pediatric population . There was a case report of superior vena cava stenosis as the result of an
inappropriately large amount of BioGlue placed between the roof of the left atrium, the superior vena cava, and the aortic root for
persistent bleeding . This case was an example of regional cardiac tamponade. To our knowledge this is the first reported case of an
external compression of the vena cava inferior (by the BioGlue) imitating similar symptoms and the haemodynamic consequences of a
pericardial tamponade. In regard to patient management, we believe that prompt exploration was an appropriate step in addressing of
patient's critical condition. The authors declare that they have no competiting interests. RC conceived the study. KK prepared the figures.
RC and AOE did the background literature search. RC was the cardiac surgeon. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and the accompanying image. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
