We report a case of transient abnormal myelopoiesis in a Down syndrome fetus diagnosed at 28+3 weeks of gestation that rapidly progressed to
intrauterine death 10 days later. Fetal hepatosplenomegaly with cerebral ventriculomegaly, although not specific, may be a suggestive
finding of Down syndrome with transient abnormal myelopoiesis. Prompt fetal blood sampling for liver function test and chromosomal analysis
are mandatory for early detection and management. Transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM) occurs in about 10% of newborns with Down syndrome,
but prenatal diagnoses of fetal TAM has been rarely documented. Suspicion of this disorder arises when fetal hepatosplenomegaly with or
without fetal hydrops is detected by prenatal ultrasonography (1-3). Percutaneous umbilical cord blood sampling is needed to diagnose TAM
prenatally. Hematologic characteristics of TAM are markedly increased leukocyte level with blast cells in peripheral blood, which usually
disappears spontaneously within a couple of months. Hepatosplenomegaly in TAM is thought to result from hepatic invasion of blast cells
and/or secondary hepatic fibrosis (1). Hepatic failure and/or heart failure, and true leukemic change have been suggested as the main cause
of death in fetuses with TAM (4). Here we present a report of fetal TAM in Down syndrome that resulted in a fatal outcome. A 32-year-old
Korean woman (gravida 3, para 2) was referred to our hospital at 28+3 weeks of gestation because of suspected fetal hepatomegaly. The course
of this pregnancy had been uneventful. Her previous two pregnancies had resulted in full-term, uncomplicated vaginal births. Transabdominal
ultrasonogram and Doppler examination with a 4-MHz convex transducer (GE Kretzvolusom730, NY) were performed on referral. Decreased amniotic
fluid (amniotic fluid index, 5) and a hydropic placental change were noted (maximum thickness, 6.2 cm). By biometry, the head circumference
was demonstrated as being between 90 and 97 percentile size and the femur length was normal for gestational age, but abdominal circumference
was increased due to hepatosplenomegaly (34.3 mm, larger than 97%) (5). A hypoechoic liver occupied nearly the entire enlarged abdomen and
the length of liver was 7.2 cm (90th percentile) (6) (Fig. 1A). The stomach could not be detected and mild cerebral ventriculomegaly (1.1
cm) was demonstrated (Fig. 1B). The cardio-thoracic circumference ratio (62%) increased but cardiac anatomy was normal. No other structural
abnormality was detected. The peak systolic velocity (PSV) of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) increased (64.2 cm/s). Doppler flow patterns
of all other vessels (uterine arteries, umbilical artery, umbilical vein, ductus venosus, inferior vena cava and four cardiac valves) were
normal. Percutaneous umbilical cord blood sampling (PUBS) was performed on the same day. The results are shown in Table 1. All serologic
markers for intrauterine infection were negative (Toxoplasmosis, Cytomegalovirus, Herpes simplex, Rubella, Varicella Zoster, Epstein-Barr
virus, Parvoviurs B19). The fetal blood count showed marked leukocytosis with 82% blast cells, moderate anemia and thrombocytopenia. Liver
enzymes were markedly elevated. Fetal karyotyping revealed a trisomy 21 (47,XX,+21). A follow up ultrasonography at 29+4 weeks' gestation
revealed moderate amounts of ascites, pericardial effusion and skin edema (Fig. 1C). The PSV of the MCA further increased to 80.2 cm/s.
Doppler velocimetry of other vessels including the umbilical artery, umbilical vein, ductus venosus and inferior vena cava revealed no
abnormal findings. Subsequent fetal heart rate tracing showed minimal variability with shallow deceleration and fetal death in utero was
diagnosed at 29+6 weeks' gestation. Postmortem examination showed generalized cutaneous edema with pericardial effusion and ascites. Fetal
nasal root was wide and flat. There were marked hepatomegaly (170 g; normal, 40±22 g) and splenomegaly (20 g; normal, 3.1±1.5 g) (7) (Fig.
1D). No other congenital malformations were detected and the placenta was hydropic with immature villi. Bone marrow was infiltrated with
myeloblastic cells (Fig. 1E). The association of Down syndrome and leukemia has been documented for over 50 years. Multiple studies have
established the incidence of leukemia in Down syndrome patients to be 10-20-fold higher than that in the general population (8). About 10%
of infants with Down syndrome have characteristic transient leukemoid reaction that disappears spontaneously within several months,
therefore, this disorder has been designated TAM or congenital leukemoid reaction (9). Markedly elevated leukocyte levels together with
circulating blast cells are characteristic hematological changes of an infant or fetus with TAM (2). Hemoglobin concentration is usually
normal in TAM, but can be polycythemic (10) or anemic (1, 11). Our case showed a blood cell count that was moderately anemic, which was
reflected as increased PSV of the MCA (12, 13). Hepatosplenomegaly is a characteristic ultrasonographic sign for fetal TAM (1, 4, 11, 14,
15). Only one case of fetal TAM without hepatosplenomegaly has been reported (16). Our case showed marked hepatosplenomegaly on first
ultrasonography, and fetal hydrops was evident on follow up ultrasonography. Hepatomegaly in TAM is thought to result from liver fibrosis,
infiltration of blast cells to the liver and portal hypertension (1, 2). However, fetal hepatomegaly is a non-specific finding which can be
associated with various conditions such as fetal anemia, congenital fetal infection, hepatic tumors, metabolic disorders, fetal congestive
heart failure and macrosomia (3). So, umbilical cord blood sampling should be performed for differential diagnosis. Ultrasonographic
echogenicity of the enlarged liver in our fetus was markedly hypoechoic compared with meconium inside the colon, which is a characteristic
finding in most fetuses with TAM. The mechanism for hypoechogenicity of the liver in TAM is not clear, but hepatic congestion secondary to
increased extramedullary myelopoiesis of fetal liver has been suggested (3, 4, 14). Hepatic dysfunction of enlarged fetal liver was present
in our case as in most fetuses with TAM (1, 10, 11, 15), which might be associated with liver fibrosis (1-4). In our case, the stomach
shadow was not detected by ultrasound examination but postmortem study confirmed the normal stomach. Small or absent stomach shadow is
presumed to be the result of collapse by enormous hepatosplenomegaly. Presently, there was mild cerebral ventriculomegaly, which is a
characteristic ultrasonographic marker for Down syndrome (17). To our knowledge, of the 41 fetuses with TAM including our case that have
been reported in the literature, only three fetuses with ventriculomegaly (9-11 mm) have been documented (2, 15). Although we did not
perform a brain autopsy of the fetus, postmortem examination of the other two fetuses revealed brain atrophy with periventricular
leukomalacia (2, 15). The pathogenesis of ventriculomeglay in fetuses with TAM appears to be different from that in Down syndrome fetuses
without TAM. It seems that ventriculomegaly in Down syndrome fetuses may result from reduced brain tissue secondary to altered neuronal cell
divisions early in developmental stage (18). However, ventriculomegaly in fetuses with TAM is thought to result from leukemic infiltration
or local hypoxemia secondary to leukostasis (15). This can partly explain why fetal cardiotocogram shows minimal variability and/or late
deceleration in all cases with subtle ventriculomegaly (2, 15). Fetal hydrops is another common ultrasonographic finding in TAM fetuses,
which may be associated with a poorer prognosis (1). Numerous theories have been proposed regarding the pathogenesis of fetal hydrops;
anemia that results in high output cardiac failure, congestive heart failure due to increased vascular resistance, local hypoxia secondary
to leukostasis, portal venous hypertension due to hepatic enlargement, capillary damage by hypoxia, fetal hypoalbuminemia, increased
vascular resistance, extramedullary megakaryoblastic proliferation, hepatic fibrosis and increased collagen synthesis by fibroblasts
stimulated through cytokines (1-3). In conclusion, fetal hepatosplenomegaly with cerebral ventriculomegaly, although not specific, may be a
suggestive finding of Down syndrome with TAM. Prompt fetal blood sampling for liver function test and chromosomal analysis are mandatory for
the early detection and planning of management. In addition, because ventriculomegaly as well as fetal hydrops may have poor prognostic
implications, we suggest that ventriculomegaly should be recognized in the management of fetal TAM. Transient abnormal myelopoiesis in Down
syndrome fetus. A. Longitudinal ultrasound scan of fetal abdomen shows hypoechoic liver occupying nearly entire enlarged abdomen. Liver
length of 7.2 cm represents 90th percentile size. B. Fetal cerebral ventriculomegaly measuring 1.1 cm is evident. C. Oblique ultrasound scan
of fetal abdomen. Skin edema (→) and ascites (*) are evident at 29+4 weeks' gestation. D. Postmortem picture of fetus with hepatomegaly. E.
Myeloblastic cells infiltrating bone marrow (Hematoxylin & Eosin staining, ×40 magnification). Hematologic Values Obtained by Percutaneous
Umbilical Cord Blood Sampling Note.-*References 19 and 20
