Systemic infection with Aspergillus is an opportunistic disease that affects mainly immunocompromised hosts, and is associated with a high
mortality rate. It typically occurs in patients with several predisposing factors, but Aspergillus endocarditis of native valves is rare and
experience in diagnosis and treatment is limited. We report a case of native valve endocarditis caused by Aspergillus. A 35-yr-old male
patient who underwent pericardiocentesis four months previously for pericardial effusion of unknown etiology presented with right leg pain
and absence of the right femoral artery pulse. Cardiac echocardiography revealed severe mitral insufficiency with large mobile vegetations,
and computed tomographic angiography showed embolic occlusion of both common iliac arteries. We performed mitral valve replacement and
thromoembolectomy, and Aspergillus was identified as the vegetation. We started intravenous amphotericin B and oral itraconazole, but
systemic complications developed including superior mesenteric artery aneurysm and gastrointestinal bleeding. After aggressive management,
the patient was discharged 78 days post surgery on oral itraconazole. He was well at 12 months post discharge but died in a traffic accident
13 months after discharge. Fungal endocarditis is an uncommon occurrence; its incidence was reported as 1.3 to 6% of infective endocarditis
cases (1). Aspergillus species contributes to approximately 25% of all cases of fungal endocarditis, second to the Candida species in
frequency. Several conditions predispose patients to Aspergillus infections including underlying cardiac abnormalities, prosthetic heart
valves, indwelling central venous catheters, prolonged use of broad-spectrum antibiotics, and intravenous drug abuse (1, 2). We present a
case of Aspergillus endocarditis of a native valve, presenting as a femoral artery occlusion. A previously healthy 35-yr-old male was
admitted with right leg pain. Four months previously, he underwent a pericardiocentesis for a fever and massive pericardial effusion; no
organism was found in the pericardial effusion. A precordial systolic murmur was heard during auscultation of the heart, and a right femoral
artery pulse was not detected. The transthoracic echocardiography revealed severe mitral insufficiency with large mobile vegetations on the
anterior and posterior mitral valve leaflets (Fig. 1A). The computed tomographic angiography showed an embolic occlusion of both common
iliac arteries (Fig. 1B). The patient underwent emergency replacement of the mitral valve with a 29 mm prosthetic mechanical mitral valve
(SJM masters series, St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN, U.S.A.), and bilateral ilio-femoral artery thromboembolectomy with a Fogarty catheter
through both femoral arteries. Gross findings in the surgical field revealed 1.5×1.5 cm round irregular vegetations on the middle portions
of both mitral valve leaflets. The patient recovered well during the immediate postoperative period. However, a right popliteal artery
occlusion was found four day after surgery. We performed a right popliteal artery thrombectomy through a supragenicular approach. On
histology, a fungal lesion showing the characteristic findings of Aspergillus was found. Culture of the valvular tissue on Sabouraud
dextrose agar confirmed the Aspergillus species (Fig. 1C, D). Anti-fungal medication was planned with intravenous amphotericin B for six
weeks then oral itraconazole for 12 weeks. Therefore, we started intravenous amphotericin B (5 mg/kg/day). Forty days after the first
operation, the patient complained of abdominal pain. A computed tomography showed multiple aneurysmal changes of the superior mesenteric
artery (SMA), splenic artery, hepatic artery and left iliac artery despite amphotericin B treatment (Fig. 2). The patient underwent SMA
aneurysmectomy and arterial reconstruction with bovine pericardium, and left iliac artery repair. Concomitant thromboembolectomy was
performed because of the bilateral internal iliac artery occlusions. Amphotericin B was changed to oral itraconazole (800 mg/day) at 6 weeks
after the first operation. Fifty-eight days after the first operation, the patient had hematochezia, and had a colonoscopy that revealed
multifocal intestinal bleeding. He recovered after massive transfusion and supportive care. The patient was discharged 78 days after surgery
on oral itraconazole and warfarin. On follow-up, the itraconazole was discontinued 10 weeks later. He was alive and doing well 12 months
later without recurrence. Unfortunately, he died in a traffic accident 13 months after discharge. Aspergillus is a ubiquitous mold capable
of causing several diseases in both healthy humans and immunocompromised hosts. Aspergillus species endocarditis is an ominous condition and
its prevalence is increasing in the hospital population. Men are more commonly affected than are women with a peak incidence during the
third to fourth decades of life (1, 3). Numerous risk factors have been identified in the pathogenesis of Aspergillus endocarditis. Previous
valvular surgery is the most important risk factor, and was reported in 40% to 50% of patients diagnosed with Aspergillus endocarditis (1,
2). Aspergillus endocarditis of native valves is rare and experience in diagnosis and treatment is limited (1, 4). Only 28 cases of
Aspergillus endocarditis were found in a MEDLINE search from 1995 to 2006, and the mortality rate was reported to be higher than 90% despite
aggressive surgical and anti-fungal therapies (1). In most cases, predisposing factors were found including underlying cardiac conditions,
prosthetic cardiac devices, central venous catheters, and previous antibiotic treatment. In 3.4% of cases with fungal endocarditis, no
predisposing factor was reported (1). In this case, the patient underwent pericardiocentesis for pericardial effusion, but we could not find
any predisposing factors. Because of the ubiquitous nature of the organism, establishing a definitive diagnosis of disease caused by
Aspergillus is difficult (5). The Aspergillus species is very rarely isolated from blood culture. Many cases are diagnosed on surgical
specimens or at autopsy. Recently, antigen detection methods and the polymerase chain reaction have been developed to improve the diagnosis
of invasive Aspergillosis (6). Echocardiography is a very important diagnostic modality for Aspergillus endocarditis. The vegetations in
Aspergillus endocarditis are large and highly mobile and peripheral embolization is common in early stage disease (1). In this case, the
patient presented with iliac artery occlusions and with large mobile vegetations of the mitral valve. The optimum therapy in patients with
Aspergillus endocarditis remains unclear. In general, the largest databases for Aspergillosis treatment include amphotericin B and various
surgical modalities (5). In this case, we used a combination of amphotericin B, itraconazole and aggressive surgical treatment, but severe
disseminated fungemia reappeared unexpectedly during the early postoperative period with a SMA aneurysm and peripheral artery embolic
occlusions. These complications may have been due to delay of antifungal treatment after surgery and dissemination by cardiopulmonary bypass
before antifungal therapy was started. Relapsing fungal endocarditis is a complication seen in as many as 30 to 40% of patients who have
fungal endocarditis and who survive to complete short-term therapy (7). Thus, all patients who survive long enough to complete acute
treatment are potential candidates for long-term suppressive antifungal therapy (1, 3, 8). Aspergillus endocarditis is rare and there is
limited experience with its diagnosis and treatment. Native valve Aspergillus endocarditis is uniformly fatal without immediate and
extensive surgical intervention combined with prolonged antifungal therapy. (A) Preoperative cardiac 2-D echocardiography. This shows large
mobile vegetations of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve. The estimated size of vegetation was 1.2×1 cm. (B) Preoperative computed
tomographic angiography shows focal occlusion of the iliac bifurcation and the right femoral artery. (C, D) Histological findings of
vegetation of the mitral valve (C, H&E stain ×400; D, GMS stain ×400). Note the septate hyphae consistent with Aspergillus. 3-D
reconstruction of the computed tomographic angiography at 40 days after the first operation. This shows multiple aneurysmal of the aorta,
such as the superior mesenteric artery, splenic artery, left iliac artery.
