Lacazia loboi, a cutaneous fungus, is found in humans and dolphins from transitional tropical (Florida) and tropical (South America)
regions. We report 2 cases of lobomycosis in stranded bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) and 1 case of lobomycosis-like disease in 1
free-swimming, pelagic, offshore bottlenose dolphin from North Carolina, where no cases have previously been observed. Lacazia loboi is a
fungus (order Onygenales) that has not yet been cultured (1). Infection results in dermal and subcutaneous granulomas and 6–12-μm yeast-like
bodies connected in chains by a small tubule (2); spread by the lymphatic system has been reported (3). Hematogenous spread and contiguous
spread have not been excluded as means of propagation. Infections have been reported in humans (4) and dolphins, including Guiana dolphins
(Sotalia guianensis) in tropical climates (Latin America) (5) and Atlantic bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) in transitional tropical
climates (Indian River Lagoon and Gulf of Mexico, Florida; Matagorda Bay, Texas; and Bay of Biscay, Europe) (6–8). We report 2 cases of
lobomycosis in offshore (pelagic) bottlenose dolphins stranded off North Carolina in 2005 and 2008. On August 20, 2008, a dead male Atlantic
bottlenose dolphin was found stranded on the North Carolina coast. On the basis of overall length, rostrum length, and flipper size, the
dolphin was identified as belonging to the offshore ecotype (9). Gross findings included numerous serpiginous and coalescing, raised,
ulcerated-to-papillary nodules on the dorsum anterior to the dorsal fin and extending to the mid-body (Figure 1, panel A). Other gross
lesions included verminous pterygoid sinusitis and pneumonia and mild dermal and retroperitoneal cestodiasis. A) Serpiginous dermal nodules
covering the dorsum of an offshore bottlenose dolphin (KLC020). B) Gomori methenamine silver–stained sections of dermis showing yeast-like
structures connected by neck and arranged at various angles (magnification ×400). Scale bar = 100 μm. Dermal and subcutaneous granulomas
composed of multinucleated giant cells, epithelioid macrophages, lymphocytes, and plasma cells were present in all skin sections and
surrounded yeast-like structures. Fungi (6–10 μm) were connected in chains to adjacent fungal bodies by a thin neck (Figure 1, panel B).
Other findings included parasitic migratory tracts in the brain, parasitized lungs, and pterygoid sinuses. DNA was isolated from fresh
frozen skin samples (DNeasy Tissue Kit; QIAGEN, Valencia, CA, USA) and amplified by using 28S rRNA generic primers and MicroSeq D2 LSU rDNA
primers (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Amplicons were sequenced at the University of Chicago Cancer Sequencing Facility and
were most closely (97%) related to Paracoccidiodes brasiliensis. Paracoccidioides spp., Lacazia spp., and Emmonsia spp. are related fungi;
validated sequences are not available for amplified regions for Lacazia spp. On March 5, 2005, a live male offshore Atlantic bottlenose
dolphin was found stranded on Carolina Beach, North Carolina. The dolphin was in fair-to-good body condition. The most obvious gross finding
was a few ulcerated dermal nodules scattered across the dorsum. Histologic findings from dermal nodules included granulomatous inflammation
with numerous fungal yeast-like structures as in case KLC020. The dolphin also exhibited nonsuppurative meningoencephalitis,
bronchointerstitial pneumonia, necrotizing hepatitis, and necrotizing adrenalitis associated with Toxoplasma spp.–like cysts and
tachyzooites. On May 26, 2008, a free-swimming offshore bottlenose dolphin was sighted by a vessel survey team from Duke University Marine
Laboratory at 35.66584°N, 74.79782°W, ≈60 km off Oregon Inlet on the Outer Banks of North Carolina (Figure 2). The animal had a large region
of raised epidermal gray to white nodules over the entire dorsal surface cranial to the dorsal fin. These lesions are consistent with those
seen in the other bottlenose dolphins in this report and lesions seen on bottlenose dolphins from the Indian and Banana rivers in Florida
(10). The location of this sighting suggests that this dolphin is of the offshore ecotype (11,12). Free-swimming bottlenose dolphin
(offshore ecotype) sighted off the Outer Banks of North Carolina with raised gray to white nodules over the dorsal surface, consistent with
those of lobomycosis seen in other Atlantic bottlenose dolphins. Xenobalanus sp., a barnacle, is adhered to the tip of the dorsal fin. Image
provided by Ari Friedlander, Duke University Marine Laboratory, Beaufort, NC, USA. Lobomycosis has been reported in the United States in
coastal bottlenose dolphin populations in the Indian River Lagoon on the eastern coast of Florida, in the Gulf of Mexico off the western
coast of Florida, and off the Texas Gulf coast. The Indian River Lagoon dolphin population has been assessed for temporal and spatial
prevalence of lobomycosis (10). A prevalence of 6.8% was observed in that population from 1996 through 2006, and most cases were observed in
the southern portion of this elongate body of water (10). The number of new cases per year, as determined from photograph identification
studies, ranged from 1 to 9. Resolution of lesions has not been reported. In comparison, a prevalence of 3.9% was observed in a photograph
identification study of S. guianensis from the Paranagua estuary in Brazil, a site of anthropogenic impact (5). The cases in 2 stranded
dolphins and in 1 photographed dolphin occurred in a subtropical climate of North America and involved an offshore rather than a coastal
species. Information regarding unknown factors about these diseased animals, including host and pathogen range, pathogen molecular
characterization, and environmental factors, could lead to a new range of organismal survival. The offshore ecotype of bottlenose dolphins
is generally found in waters >40 m deep but has been observed as close as 7.3 km from the coast at depths of 13 m (12). Bottlenose dolphins
with offshore characteristics have been found as far south as the Florida Keys (12), but latitudinal movements of the offshore ecotype are
not well understood. The 3 dolphins may have had a range that extended to the tropics where exposure could have occurred, rather than
occurring in the region of stranding. A better understanding of movements of offshore ecotypes is needed so that potential exposure pathways
can be inferred. During preparation of this report, dorsal fin photographs from photograph identification projects along the mid-Atlantic
coast identified 2 additional offshore T. truncatus that had skin lesions consistent with lobomycosis-like disease, a term used to describe
gross observations that cannot be confirmed histologically (5). A more expansive study of photograph identification records could provide
information on additional suspected cases. However, prevalence calculations from these studies will be negatively biased because the
objective is generally to acquire photographs of the dorsal fin only. Dart biopsy of affected animals could confirm infection of dolphins
with suspected cases but would require accuracy of sampling that may not be feasible in field conditions. Because L. loboi has not been
cultured, molecular techniques have been used to characterize the fungus. It is most related to the fungal order Onygenales, which includes
Emmonsia spp. and Paracoccioidies spp. There are limited DNA sequences from Lacazia spp. for comparison, and PCR results for suspected
Lacazia spp. are similar to those for P. brasiliensis (13), which are consistent with our findings for samples from case KLC020. The host
range of P. brasiliensis, method of exposure (inhalation), and propensity for multisystemic invasion makes this fungi an unlikely causative
agent of the disease in the 2 stranded T. truncatus dolphins. Histologic features of P. brasiliensis were also consistent with lobomycosis.
Decreased lymphocyte populations, which indicates decreased immune function, have been observed in animals with lobomycosis from the Indian
River Lagoon (14) compared with noninfected cohorts in capture-and-release studies. Systemic disease has been reported in dolphins with
lobomycosis from this lagoon (15). Of the 2 dolphins from North Carolina with lobomycosis, 1 had disseminated Toxoplasmosis spp.–like
protozoal infection, and the other had suspected parasitic migration to the brain. Despite no histologic evidence of lymphoid depletion,
lymphocytic function could not be determined for either animal. In stranded cetaceans such as dolphins, concurrent systemic disease is not
an unexpected finding. Whether the presence of the fungus predisposes the animal to infectious processes, lowers immunity, or is a sign of
decreased immunity may be best addressed in long-term capture-and-release studies in areas where the fungus is endemic and where data may be
available from animals before and after infection. Confirmation of lobomycosis in 2 stranded cetaceans off the coast of North Carolina
represents a change in the northern distribution of this organism. Additional information on distribution and movements of offshore
population(s) is needed to understand the prevalence and potential sources of infection. Suggested citation for this article: Rotstein DS,
Burdett LG, McLellan W, Schwacke L, Rowles T, Terio KA, et al. Lobomycosis in offshore bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus), North
Carolina. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2009 Apr [date cited]. Available from http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/15/4/588.htm We
thank the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission for primary response for animal KLC020; the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) Beaufort Laboratory for transport of this animal; the histopathology laboratories at the North Carolina State
University College of Veterinary Medicine and the University of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine for assistance; and Duke University
Marine Laboratory for providing the sighting information and image of the free-swimming dolphin off North Carolina (permit #08-1798). This
study was partially supported by a NOAA Prescott Stranding grant to the University of North Carolina at Wilmington, and carried out under
the University’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee protocol #2003-013. Dr Rotstein is a marine mammal veterinary pathologist at
the NOAA Cooperative Center for Marine Mammal Animal Health and an assistant professor at the University of Tennessee. His research
interests include marine mammal and ecosystem population health.
