Malignant obstruction develops frequently in advanced gastric cancer. Although it is primarily the gastric outlet that is obstructed, there
are occasional reports of colonic obstruction. Treating intestinal obstruction usually requires emergency surgery or stent insertion. There
are several kinds of complications with stent insertion, such as bowel perforation, stent migration, bleeding, abdominal pain and
reobstruction. Nevertheless, endoscopic stent insertion could be a better treatment than emergency surgery in cases of malignant bowel
obstruction in cancer patients with poor performance status. We report a case of advanced gastric cancer with carcinomatosis in which a
recurrent colonic stent was inserted at the same site because of cancer growth into the stent. The patient maintained a good condition for
chemotherapy, thus improving their chances for survival. More than 50% of patients with gastric cancer are inoperable at the time of
diagnosis.1,2 The resectability rate ranges from 31 to 66%, and the 5-year survival rate ranges from 5 to 15%.2 Malignant obstruction
develops frequently in advanced gastric cancer, mainly in the gastric outlet and duodenum.3 However, colonic obstruction has occasionally
been reported in cases of advanced gastric cancer with carcinomatosis or colonic invasion.4,5 Terminally ill patients with malignant bowel
obstruction often present with nausea, vomiting and constipation, resulting in reduced oral intake and a negative impact on the patient's
quality of life.6 Therefore, intestinal obstruction usually requires treatment by emergency surgery or stent insertion. Decompressive
surgery is the first-line therapy for the palliation of symptomatic patients. However, palliative surgery is associated with high morbidity
and mortality, and the results of surgery are not always satisfactory.7 Gastrointestinal stent insertion is performed as a palliative effort
to improve the quality of life for inoperable cancer patients with gastrointestinal obstruction. Endoscopic stent placement has been
reported as a feasible, safe, and effective alternative in patients with an especially short life expectancy, advanced disease stage, and
poor general condition.8 Endoscopic stenting was introduced 40 years ago for the treatment of malignant obstruction using polyethylene
prostheses.9 In recent years, self-expandable metal stents (SEMS) have emerged as a simple therapeutic option for non-resectable malignant
intestinal obstruction. The ideal stent should have a large internal diameter to ensure the passage of a normal diet, and should be flexible
and nontraumatic when fully expanded. It should also inhibit tumor overgrowth into the stent and remain fixed in its position.10 On the
other hand, there are several complications associated with stent insertion, including bowel perforation, stent migration, bleeding,
abdominal pain, and reobstruction. The causes of reobstruction include tumor growth, stent migration and fecal impaction, with the main
cause of obstruction due to cancer growth blocking the stent lumen or growing around the lumen.11 We report a case of advanced gastric
cancer with carcinomatosis, in which colonic reobstruction was treated by recurrent colonic stent insertion at the same site of transverse
colon. This patient maintained a good general condition, allowing for the continuation of chemotherapy. A 67-year-old woman was admitted
with constipation and abdominal pain lasting for 5 days and a history of large bowel obstruction and two previous transverse colonic stent
insertions. A plain abdominal radiograph showed dilated large bowel loops. The patient had undergone radical subtotal gastrectomy with
gastrojejunostomy 5 years earlier. The patient's pathological stage was T3N0M0 (stage II). After the operation, 12 cycles of 5-floururacil
and adriamycin were administrated for adjuvant chemotherapy. After 3 years, the patient was diagnosed with cancer recurrence in the
transverse colon and carcinomatosis, along with the development of colonic obstruction. On colonoscopy, two uncovered colonic stents (Niti-S
D type, Taewoong Inc., Seoul, Korea) were inserted in the obstructed transverse colon, followed by a palliative treatment of 10 cycles of
5-floururacil and oxaliplatin chemotherapy. Ten months after the first stent insertion, the patient showed signs of intestinal
reobstruction. Upon examination of the previous stent, we observed on colonoscopy that the malignant tumor had grown into the stent,
therefore, we inserted a 10 cm-sized Nitinol covered stent (Niti-S Comvi, Taewoong Inc., Seoul, Korea). The patient's disease progressed,
and we changed the chemotherapy regimen to paclitaxel. Two months following the reinsertion of the colonic stent, the patient again
developed increasing abdominal pain and constipation. Nasogastric Levin tube decompression was administered for 1 week, but the bowel
obstruction was not improved. On colonoscopy, the new stent was found to remain in place. However, there was a tumor growth into the stent.
Finally, a 9 cm-sized Wallflex uncovered colonic stent (Boston Scientific, MA, USA) was inserted at the same site (Figs. 1 and 2). The
procedure decompressed the bowels, and the general condition of the patient improved, allowing her to continue with chemotherapy after 6
months. Although the prognosis of recurrent gastric cancer with carcinomatosis is extremely poor, this case demonstrates that supportive
care, such as three recurrent colonic stent insertions, may help maintain a generally good condition to allow for the continuation of
chemotherapy. (Fig. 3) For malignant obstructive cancer patients, the board of directors of the European Association for Palliative Care
(EAPC) recommends surgery in patients with poor prognostic criteria such as intra-abdominal carcinoma, poor performance status, and massive
ascites.6 Endoscopic intervention is an effective and relatively safe palliative modality for patients with inoperable gastrointestinal
cancer. In 1991, Dohmoto first described palliative stenting for colorectal obstruction.12,13 Colonic stenting as a palliative aim or a
bridge to surgery for malignant colorectal obstruction is less invasive, and is associated with lower morbidity than emergency surgery. A
recent study showed that palliative malignant colonic stenting, when compared to surgical decompression, offers not only shorter times for
oral intake and hospital stay, but also less frequent complications. Furthermore, there was no procedure-associated mortality.4 In contrast,
the morbidity and mortality rates for colonic surgical bypass ranges from 9% to 39.5% and 7.5% to 20.4%, respectively.14 The use of SEMS
could be the treatment of choice in malignant obstructive cancer patients who are in a generally poor condition. Self-expandable stents are
made of metal alloys, can be covered or uncovered, and have varying sizes and shapes. An uncovered stent is limited by tumor ingrowth
through the gaps in the stent mesh. Covered stents provide several advantages; they prevent tumor ingrowth, and have no need for predilation
with a balloon, and are easy to insert. However, higher incidence of migration with a covered stent has been reported.7 A systematic review,
including 15 comparative studies, showed stenting to relieve malignant colorectal obstruction: the median rate of technical success was
96.2%, ranging from 66.6% to 100%, that of clinical success was 92%, ranging from 46% to 100%, and complication rated up to 30%. In the
palliative population, the median duration of stent patency was 106 days (range, 68-288 days).15,16 Another study reported a median survival
of 1.6 months after stent insertion in 35 malignant cancer patients with bowel obstruction.6 Our patient showed improved conditions for 2
years after the recurrence of cancer as carcinomatosis. At first, our patient was disease-free for 3 years after the postoperative adjuvant
chemotherapy of 12 cycles of 5-floururacil and adriamycin. At that time, the patient was tolerant to chemotherapy. Then, her disease
recurred and the first colonic stents were inserted. Subsequently, she started with palliative chemotherapy, including oxaliplatin, and
presented with nausea, vomiting, peripheral neuropathy and anorexia as side effects. No major adverse effects were observed. Nevertheless,
her disease progressed 10 months after the initiation of palliative chemotherapy with oxaliplatin. The chemotherapy regimen was changed to
paclitaxel and a second colonic stent was reinserted. Although the patient experienced mild dizziness during the Paclitaxel treatment, she
was still very tolerant of chemotherapy. Until the reobstruction of the previously inserted second colonic stent, her Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status was grade 1. When colonic obstruction developed again at the same site after the second time, the
patient's performance status decreased to grade 3 on the ECOG scale. A third stent was inserted into the obstructed colon. Fortunately, the
patient never experienced complications, such as bleeding, perforation, or severe abdominal pain from the three stent insertions. Finally,
the patient recovered from the malignant obstruction and her status improved to grade 1 on the ECOG performance scale. Thereafter, she
continued to being treated by paclitaxel chemotherapy for 4 months. This case shows that colonic stenting relieves malignant colonic
obstruction and can help a patient maintain a tolerable condition for chemotherapy, ultimately improving their chances for survival.
Abdominal X-ray before 3rd colonic stent. Abdominal X-ray after 3rd colonic stent. Chemotherapy Schedule. *5-Flourouracil/Adriamycin,
**5-Flourouracil/Oxaliplatin, †Disease Progression, ‡Stable Disease.
