To the Editor: Multidrug-resistant bacteria are increasing in prevalence, causing sporadic outbreaks of difficult-to-treat infections.
Klebsiella pneumoniae is a gram-negative pathogen that is known to cause both community and nosocomial infections. Infections caused by
Klebsiella that express extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs) pose a serious challenge to clinicians as they are resistant to a broad range
of β-lactams, including third-generation cephalosporins, thus complicating therapy and limiting treatment options. Furthermore, patients
infected with these strains may have higher mortality rates and may require a longer hospital stay. Patients are generally sicker and have
received more antibiotics than patients who are not infected with ESBL-producing strains.12 We treated a case of ESBL-positive Klebsiella
meningitis induced by gunshot trauma, with difficult to remove shrapnel. The patient improved with 2 weeks of tigecycline treatment. Earlier
we reported a case of multidrug resistant Acinetobacter nosocomial meningitis treated successfully with tigecycline.3 A 32-year-old male
patient not known to have any chronic illnesses, admitted on 31 August 2008 with a history of a gunshot injury to his lumbar area with
opened and shredded meninges. The large bowel was also injured; he underwent laparotomy and bowel resection with primary anastomosis with
successful outcome. Many pieces of shrapnel could not be surgically removed and were left in the meninges and spinal canal. He presented
with fever and leaking infected cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from an open lumbar wound, and was taking several different antimicrobial agents
(ceftriaxone, metronidazole and ciprofloxacin for a week) without good response. He suffered from bilateral lower limb paraplegia and
sensory loss below the umbilical level. Several debridement surgeries and meningeal repairs were attempted, but he continued to suffer from
an infected CSF leak. Surface swabs grew ESBL-positive Klebsiella pneumonia and Enterococcus fecalis. Serial CSF sampling from the upper
thoracic spine showed repeated growth of K pneumoniae with a similar antibiogram, i.e., sensitive to imipenem, ertapenem, levofloxacin, and
ciprofloxacin (tigecycline sensitivity was not available either by disk diffusion or Vitek in the specialty hospital laboratory) (Table 1).
Blood cultures taken twice one week apart showed no growth. The patient was initially started on ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacine, teichoplanin,
and pipracillin/tazobactam at different intervals during his admission, and then on imipenem plus teichoplanin, but the latter was
discontinued as soon as ESBL-Klebsiella was identified from CSF. The patient had seizures that were not controlled. Six days later imipenem
was discontinued and tigecycline 100 mg loading dose and 50 mg every 12 hours was prescribed for a total duration of 14 days. A week later,
parenteral ciprofloxacin was added for 3 days for systemic sepsis. In the meantime he was receiving tigecycline. Two days later, the CSF
culture was sterile. The patient was continued on tigecycline and showed remarkable clinical improvement. A CSF culture follow up showed
progressive improvement (Table 1). He was discharged home afebrile and in relatively good condition. He was well for 2 weeks and then was
readmitted with chest pain and shortness of breath, and diagnosed with pulmonary embolism to which he succumbed in 3 days. Results of
cerebrospinal fluid sampling. Shading represents dates when patient received tigecycline, which was continued for 2 additional weeks. ESBL:
extended-spectrum β-lactamase. P: polymorphonuclear leukocytes, L: lymphocytes. Tigecycline is relatively a novel glycylcycline molecule
that escapes the classic resistance mechanisms that bacteria harbor against tetracyclines, i.e. drug efflux pumps and protection of
ribosomes. Thus, it has expanded antimicrobial coverage and potent in vitro antibacterial activity against a wide range of clinically
important gram-positive and gram-negative aerobic bacteria and anaerobes, including Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococcus species,
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, most Enterobacteriaceae, and Bacteroides
fragilis, but it has limited or no activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and reduced activity against Proteus mirabilis. Its licensed
indications so far are skin and soft tissue infections and complicated intra-abdominal infections. Studies are currently ongoing for
diabetic foot infection, community-acquired pneumonia and nosocomially acquired pneumionia (Wyeth communication). Thus far no controlled
studies are available on treating CNS infections with tigecycline in humans.3–6 This is our second case of multidrug-resistant gram-negative
meningitis in which tigecycline was used with a successful outcome. Jamal Wadi serves as a consultant for Al Hikma Pharmaceuticals and
receives an honorarium from Wyeth, Aventis, MSD, Al Hikma Pharmaceuticals and Abbot for lectures, meetings and consultations. He is also on
an advisory board for Wyeth and Aventis. Jamal Wadi serves as a consultant for Al Hikma Pharmaceuticals and receives an honorarium from
Wyeth, Aventis, MSD, Al Hikma Pharmaceuticals and Abbot for lectures, meetings and consultations. He is also on an advisory board for Wyeth
and Aventis.
