The occurrence of autoimmune hemolytic anemia and immune thrombocytopenia in the absence of a known underlying cause led to the diagnosis of
Evans syndrome in a 9-month-old male. Subsequently, a similar diagnosis was made in two siblings (a 3-year-old boy and a 1-day-old girl).
The 9-month-old had a chronic course with exacerbations. He was treated with steroids, intravenous immunoglobulin and colchiccine with a
variable response. He died of congestive heart failure at the age of 8 years. The brother's disease course was one of remission and
exacerbation. With time, remissions were prolonged and paralleled an improvement in joint hypermobility. The sister died of sepsis after a
chronic course with severe exacerbattions. Only two families with Evans syndrome have been reported in the English medical literature. In
one report (in a Saudi Arab family), the disease was associated with hereditary spastic paraplegia. Evans syndrome is the occurrence of a
Coombs positive hemolytic anemia and immune thrombocytopenia without a known underlying etiology.1 It is a chronic immunological disorder
with a variable course, and the exact pathophysiology is unknown.2 The disease can present in the neonatal period.3 There are rare reports
of familial Evans syndrome.45 Joint hypermobility, not a disease in itself, is defined as an abnormally increased range of joint motion due
to excessive laxity of the constraining soft tissues. Hypermobility is determined according to the criteria of Beighton et al.6 Patients are
given a score of 0-9, one point being allocated for the ability to perform each of the tests: 1) passive dorsiflexion of the little finger
beyond 90°; 2) passive apposition of the thumb to the flexor aspects of the forearm; 3) hyperextension of the elbow beyond 10°; 4)
hyperextension of the knee beyond 10°; and 5) forward flexion of the trunk, with the knees straight, so the palms of the hands rest easily
on the floor. Patients are considered hypermobile if they score 4 or more out of 9. Hypermobility may be a benign syndrome or part of a
genetic disorder like Ehlers-Danlos syndrome or Marfan syndrome. All have strong genetic components. 7–9 The benign type is commonly
inherited as an autosomal dominant, although autosomal recessive and X-linked transmission also have been documented.9 We describe three
siblings with Evans syndrome, generalized joint hypermobility, and mitral valve prolapse causing mitral regurgitation. The parents of these
children are first cousins and have two other children. There was no anemia, thrombocytopenia or joint hypermobility in these other children
or their parents. The father is married to another wife, a first cousin as well, with five children. The children and their mother are free
of anemia, thrombocytopenia and joint hypermobility. A full-term Saudi male infant, a product of a first cousin consanguineous marriage,
developed jaundice in the first day of life. The mother's blood group was O and Rh negative. The infant's blood group was A positive, and
the father's blood group was A positive. Serum bilirubin was 231 μmol/L (reference range, 5-17 μmol/L). Hemoglobin was 130 g/L (reference
range, 145-185 g/L), the platelet count was 91×109/L (reference range, 150-450×109/L) and the direct agglutination test (DAT) was strongly
positive. An extended blood group (Kell, Duffy and Kid) showed no minor group incompatibility. He was diagnosed with ABO incompatibility and
treated with phototherapy for two days and discharged. He presented in January 1991, at the age of 9 months, with recurrent epistaxis and
petechiae of 3 months' duration. He was pale, jaundiced, with multiple petechiae and generalized joint hypermobility (Beighton score of
8/9). There was clinical evidence of mitral regurgitation. An echocardiogram revealed mitral valve prolapse (MVP) and severe mitral
regurgitation. There were no features of known collagen disease or syndromes involving joint hypermobility. Laboratory tests showed a
hemoglobin of 51 g/L (reference range, 114-127 g/L), WBC of 3.3×109/L (reference range, 6-17.5×109/L), a platelet count of 9×109/L
(reference range, 150-450×109/L), a reticulocyte count of 7.6% (reference range, 0-1%) and a positive Coombs test. The bone marrow was
hypercellular with an increased number of megakaryocytes. Immune-phenotyping and serum immunoglobulin levels were normal and antinuclear
antibodies (ANA) were negative. Antiplatelet antibodies were not obtained. Evans syndrome was diagnosed. He was treated with steroids,
intravenous immunoglobulin and colchicine with a variable response. He ran a chronic course with exacerbations. Episodes of epistaxis and
petechiae were observed in the presence of a platelet count of 80 to 90×109/L with no response to different modalities of treatment. He
died, at the age of 8 years, of congestive heart failure secondary to severe mitral regurgitation following chordal rupture, which was
confirmed by an echocardiogram while awaiting acceptance to a cardiac center. A brother of the first patient, this male infant, born at
term, had jaundice on the first day of life. Laboratory data showed a serum bilirubin of 211 μmol/L (reference range, 5-17 μmol/L), a
hemoglobin of 175 g/L (reference range, 145-185 g/L), white blood count of 9.7×109/L (reference range, 9.4-34×109/L), a platelet count of
114×109/L (reference range,150-450×109/L), nucleated red blood cells 14/100 white blood cells (reference range, 0-5 nucleated RBC/100 WBC)
and strongly positive DAT. The patient's blood group was O positive and the mother's blood group was O and Rh negative. An extended blood
group was not obtained. He was diagnosed as having minor group incompatibility, treated with phototherapy for one day, and discharged. He
was lost to follow-up until October 1995 (age 3 years), when he presented with epistaxis and petechiae. He was pale, with petechiae and
generalized joint hypermobility (Beighton score 8/9). There was cardiomegaly with a mitral regurgitation murmur. An echocardiogram showed
mitral valve prolapse and moderate mitral regurgitation. There were no features indicative of known collagen disorders or other syndromes
involving joint hypermobility. The laboratory data showed WBC of 8.1×109/L (reference range, 5.5-15.5×109/L), hemoglobin of 83 g/L
(reference range, 115-125g/L), a platelet count of 7.0×109/L (reference range, 150-450×109/L), a reticulocyte count of 6.3% (reference
range, 0-2%) and strongly positive DAT. The bone marrow examination revealed many megakaryocytes. Leukocyte phenotype by flow cytometry,
cytogenetic studies, immunoglobulin levels and thyroid function were normal. ANA and rheumatoid factor (Rh factor) were negative. DNA
analysis was not obtained due to parent refusal. An extended blood group (Kell, Duffy and Kid) showed no minor group incompatibility. Evans
syndrome was diagnosed based on the presence of Coombs positive hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia. He experienced recurrent and
prolonged attacks of epistaxis with a platelet count between 70 and 90×109/L. Coagulation screening was normal apart from a prolonged
bleeding time (12 minutes) (reference range, 2-7 minutes). He showed variable responses to treatment with steroids and intravenous
immunoglobulin. His clinical course was that of remissions and exacerbations. At the time of writing he was in clinical remission for 3
years without treatment. His platelet count was 70-80×109/L and he had no further episodes of epistaxis. His joint hypermobility improved
(Beighton score=4/9). The mitral valve regurgitation murmur disappeared clinically, but a mild regurgitation was found on an echocardiogram.
This coincided with improvement in Beighton score and bleeding episodes. The 1-day-old sister of the first two cases had jaundice when first
seen in October 2002. Clinical examination showed generalized joint hypermobility (Beighton score 8/9) and mitral regurgitation murmur.
Laboratory data showed a hemoglobin of 131 g/L (reference range, 145-185 g/L), a leukocyte count of 7.3×109/L (reference range,
9.4-34.0×109/L), a platelet count of 91×109/L (reference range, 150-450×109/L) and a normal reticulocyte count. The infant's blood group was
A positive with a positive DAT. An extended blood group (Kell, Duffy and Kid) showed no minor group incompatibility. She was diagnosed as
having Evans syndrome, treated with phototherapy for 3 days, and discharged. At 18 months of age, she presented with epistaxis. She was
clinically pale, jaundiced, with generalized petechiae. The Beighton joint score was unchanged (8/9). Mitral valve prolapse with moderate
regurgitation was diagnosed and confirmed by an echocardiogram. There were no symptoms or signs indicating known collagen disorder or other
syndromes involving joint hypermobility. Her laboratory data showed a hemoglobin of 71 g/L (reference range, 105-125 g/L), leukocyte count
of 3.8×109/L (reference range, 6.0-17.0×109/L), a platelet count of 7.1×109/L (reference range, 150-450×109/L), total serum bilirubin 131
μmol/L (reference range, 5-17 μmol/L) and the reticulocyte count was 7.4% (reference range, 0-2%). DAT was positive. Serum immunoglobulin
level and leukocyte phenotype by flow cytometry were normal. An HIV test and ANA were negative, and a coagulation screen was normal except
the bleeding time, which was prolonged (11.5 minutes) (reference range, 2-7 minutes). The bleeding time remained prolonged even when the
platelet count was more than 100×109/L. DNA analysis was not obtained due to parent refusal. She responded initially to intravenous
methylprednisolone and intravenous immunoglobulin, but then ran a chronic course with exacerbation. She had a mitral valve repair, for
congestive cardiac failure, with no significant bleeding. Postoperatively, she entered a chronic severe intravascular hemolytic course,
which was refractory to different modalities of treatment including cyclosporine, intermediate doses of cyclophosphamide and infliximab. She
died of Pseudomonas septicemia at 33 months of age. Neonatal Evans syndrome, reported once in the literature,3 developed in three
consecutive siblings over an 11-year period. All had jaundice, thrombocytopenia and a positive DAT on the first day of life. In the first
patient, neonatal Evans syndrome was not considered because he was thought to have a combination of an ABO incompatibility (the mother's
blood group was “O” and the baby's blood group was “A”) and rhesus isoimmunization (the mother was Rh negative and the baby was Rh
positive). In retrospect, the absence of Rh antibodies in the mother excluded Rh incompatibility, and the presence of thrombocytopenia and
strongly positive DAT favors Evans syndrome rather than ABO incompatibility. In the second patient, minor group incompatibility was a
diagnosis of exclusion, as an extended blood group was not obtained in the neonatal period. However, the positive DAT at the age of three
years can not be due to minor group incompatibility even if it was present. The normal serum immunoglobulin and the negative ANA made immune
deficiency and SLE, respectively, unlikely. In the third patient, the diagnosis of Evans syndrome was made easy by the family history. There
are two reports of familial Evans syndrome in the English literature. McLeod et al reported Evans syndrome in three siblings who had no
other inherited disorder.5 We reported two brothers, a product of a first-cousin marriage, with Evans syndrome and an autosomal recessive
hereditary spastic paraplegia.4 The addition of this family further supports a genetic predisposition, most likely an autosomal recessive
inheritance pattern, in some cases of Evans syndrome. The clinical course of multiple recurrences and the use of multiple treatment
modalities to control the disease are consistent with reported results by Matthew et al.10 However, our patients manifested attacks of
epistaxis and petechiae out of proportion to their platelet count. Mild bleeding associated with an increased capillary fragility was
reported in several genetic collagen disorders.11 Prolonged bleeding has also been reported in patients with hyperflexible thumbs (one of
the diagnostic criteria of joint hypermobility).12 The latter might explain the prolonged bleeding episodes and bleeding time despite near
normal platelets count observed in the third case. The lack of significant bleeding during and after cardiac surgery does not exclude this
possibility, as a prolonged bleeding time does not predict a bleeding risk.13 This is important to realize when Evans syndrome occurs in
patients with joint hypermobility, otherwise, the bleeding tendency might be attributed to thrombocytopenia while it is not. This
recognition might save the patient from being subject to further treatment. Generalized joint hypermobility, measured according to Beighton
criteria, was present in all patients. The lack of features suggestive of the serious genetic syndrome, and the significant reduction that
occurred in Beighton score in the second case as he grew older suggests the benign form of joint hypermobility. The presence of joint
hypermobility in the third case, a girl, excludes an X-linked transmission. The lack of joint hypermobility in the parents, who are first
cousins, favors an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance in this family. Deficiency and haploinsuffiency of tenascin-X, a large
extracellular glycoprotein, has been identified as a cause of joint hypermobility in patients with benign joint hypermobility syndrome and
the mobility type-Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.14 Tenascin-X forms a genetic unit with CYP21B, C4A, and C4B, termed the RCCX module. This region
is highly susceptible to recombination events leading to diverse diseases; for example, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a consequence
of C4A deficiency. IgA deficiency is caused by C4B mutation and a deficiency of CYP21B results in congenital adrenal hyperplasia.14 The
development of autoimmune hemolytic anemia and autoimmune thrombocytopenia is not infrequent in patients with selective IgA defiency 15–17
and SLE.18 Adult patients with SLE were more hypermobile (48%) than a control group (15%).19 This suggests a pathogenetic relationship
between Evans syndrome, not infrequently present with SLE, and joint hypermobility. In a recent report from Turkey the incidence of joint
hypermobility, as judged by Beighton score, was found to be higher in patients with mitral valve prolapse than controls.20 Our three
patients manifested joint hypermobility with mitral valve prolapse and regurgitation. The expression of mitral valve prolapse is variable
within families.21 Weakness of the valvular and restraining chordal tissue with sudden chordal rupture causing abrupt clinical deterioration
is a recognized feature.21 This was the cause of death in the first patient. Progressive mitral regurgitation causing heart failure, another
feature of mitral valve prolapse,21 developed in the third patient and was treated surgically. The second patient showed an improvement with
time, another feature of mitral valve prolapse.21 In conclusion, familial Evans syndrome, possibly an autosomal recessive disorder, may be
mistaken for alloimmune hemolytic anemia when it presents in the neonatal period. Although the association of Evans syndrome with joint
hypermobility (a genetic collagen disorder) may be a coincidence, a pathogenetic relationship needs to be considered. The authors would like
to thank Ms. Charito Samson and Ms. Junelyn Mondala for their secretarial work.
