We report a 44-year-old woman who developed a fatal pulmonary embolus after uterine artery fibroid embolisation (UAE). Bilateral UAE was
carried out through a single right-femoral artery puncture. The largest fibroid in the anterior fundal wall measured 4.5 cm, and the largest
fibroid in the posterior fundal wall measured 6 cm. The appearances after UAE were satisfactory, and the procedure was apparently
uneventful. No immediate complications were noted. The patient developed sudden-onset shortness of breath and went into cardiac arrest 19 h
after the procedure. Postmortem autopsy confirmed that the cause of a death was a pulmonary embolism. To our knowledge this is the first
reported case in the United Kingdom in which death occurred from a pulmonary embolus after UAE. Uterine artery fibroid embolisation (UAE)
has now been used in clinical practice for >2 decades in the management of symptomatic uterine fibroids [1, 2]. It is estimated that >50,000
procedures have been performed worldwide since Ravina reported his series in France in 1995 [3, 4]. UAE is emerging as an effective
alternative to hysterectomy and myomectomy in women with fibroids. Although long-term follow up data are still lacking, early reports
regarding its safety and efficacy have been encouraging, and the procedure is increasingly being accepted . However, there is a lack of
evidence on future fertility and pregnancy outcomes in women undergoing UAE . We report here a case of death from a pulmonary embolus after
UAE. A 44-year-old nulliparous woman with a body mass index of 27 underwent UAE in July 2008 for symptomatic relief of heavy menstrual
bleeding. She had previously undergone endoscopic resection of a submucous fibroid in 2002 and open myomectomy in 2003. She subsequently
underwent exploratory laparotomy and division of adhesions for relief of small-bowel obstruction in February 2007. A subsequent hysteroscopy
in November 2007 showed a large cavity distorted by fibroids. A pelvic ultrasound scan before her procedure showed an antiverted, enlarged
uterus measuring approximately 13.5 × 8 × 9 cm. The myometrium was noted to be diffusely heterogenous, containing multiple fibroids in the
anterior and posterior walls. The largest fibroid measured 6 cm. Bilateral UAE was carried out through a single right–femoral artery
puncture using a 5F sheath, a 4F catheter, and a 3F coaxial catheter. Multiple injections of contrast were administered into the internal
iliac arteries and uterine arteries. The uterus was noted to be hypervascular and supplied by hypertrophied uterine arteries. Each uterine
artery was selectively catheterised and embolised with polyvinyl alcohol particles (William Cook Europe, Bjaeverskov, Denmark). One vial of
particles 350–500 μm in diameter and two vials of particles 510–700 μm in diameter were used. The end point of the embolisation process was
near-stasis in the uterine artery. The appearances after UAE were satisfactory. The procedure lasted approximately 40 min and was apparently
uneventful. No immediate complications were noted. The patient was admitted for observation overnight. The plan was for her to be on bed
rest for 12 h for observation of the puncture site for bleeding or swelling and administration of analgesia (diclofenac sodium and
paracetamol). Nineteen hours after the procedure, the patient had sudden-onset shortness of breath and collapsed. She was noted to be
semicomatose with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of eight. She then had respiratory arrest, followed by cardiac arrest. She received
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) for >1 h. However, there was no cardiac activity throughout CPR, and she was noted to have pulseless
electrical activity on cardiac monitoring. CPR was discontinued after 1 h and 10 min, and the patient was pronounced dead. Postmortem
autopsy confirmed that the cause of a death was pulmonary embolism. To our knowledge this is the first reported case in the United Kingdom
in which death occurred from pulmonary embolisation after UAE. The embolisation procedure had appeared routine. The embolic agents used and
the quantity thereof were not unusual. The size of the uterus was not considered likely to have caused compression and stasis in the lower-
limb venous structures. Certainly, patients with symptoms from a uterus of greater size than that seen in this patient have been treated at
our institution. It is not clear from the postmortem autopsy if the origin of the embolus was from the pelvic or the lower-limb veins.
Theoretically, it is possible to surmise that pelvic veins are enlarged and engorged in the presence of multiple hyper vascular fibroids,
which consequently have decreased flow after embolisation, thus producing a potential scenario for thrombosis. Relative contrast stasis can
be visualised in veins draining the uterus during any embolisation procedure. The patient was kept for overnight observation per hospital
policy. If the treatment had been carried out as a day case, then death would have occurred at home. The precipitous nature of the events
raises the question as to whether there was a pre-existing thrombosis, which may have rapidly progressed after UAE. There was a history of
previous pelvic surgery; however, there was no clinical evidence for pelvic or lower-limb venous thrombosis or clinical history of
thrombotic tendency before the embolisation procedure was performed. At least five deaths have been reported after UAE. Two women died after
UAE from septic shock, one in the United Kingdom and the other in The Netherlands . One woman with known breast cancer died in Italy several
days after UAE from a pulmonary embolus , and two women died in the United States from pulmonary emboli after the procedure . Although the
risk of developing a fatal venous thromboembolus is considered low, there have so far been at least four reported cases in the literature.
We advocate that women undergoing this procedure should routinely receive thromboprophylaxis in the form of thromboembolic-deterrent
stockings. However, these would be of no benefit from an embolus originating in the pelvic veins. Further research is needed to assess the
role of thromboprophylaxis using heparin-like agents with this procedure. At present, there is no evidence that their use would be of
benefit. Indeed, the use of such agents to decrease the incidence of embolic events (which are already rare relative to the number of
procedures performed) may be accompanied by increased bleeding complications or more ineffective embolisation procedures (and therefore poor
clinical outcomes) that rely on inducing local vessel thrombosis as well as physical occlusion. It is not possible to say if patients with a
previous history of pelvic surgery are at greater risk of embolus after UAE. The continued reporting of all UAE cases to a National Registry
would allow us to monitor the number of women undergoing the procedure, the number and type of complications, and the fertility outcomes in
all such cases.
