Mosaic whole-chromosome tetrasomy has not previously been described as a cause of fetal malformations. In a markedly dysmorphic child with
heart malformations and developmental delay, CGH analysis of newborn blood DNA suggested a 50% dose increase of chromosomes 8 and 18,
despite a normal standard karyotype investigation. Subsequent FISH analysis revealed leukocytes with four chromosomes 8 and four chromosomes
18. The child's phenotype had resemblance to both mosaic trisomy 8 and mosaic trisomy 18. The double tetrasomy was caused by mitotic
malsegregation of all four chromatids of both chromosome pairs. A possible origin of such an error is incomplete correction of a tetraploid
state resulting from failed cytokinesis or mitotic slippage during early embryonic development. This unique case suggests that embryonic
cells may have a mechanism for tetraploidy correction that involves mitotic pairing of homologous chromosomes. Unlike meiotic non-
disjunctions, mitotic non-disjunctions are rarely observed in humans with the exception of mosaicism for trisomy 8, 9 or 20 . In some cases
mosaic trisomy of more than one chromosome have been seen . Such mosaic variegated aneuploidy is due to mitotic errors, often associated
with premature centromere division . In contrast to mosaic trisomies, the finding of mosaic whole-chromosome tetrasomy is without
precedence. Here we present such a patient; a dysmorphic newborn child with mosaicism of leukocytes containing 50 chromosomes due to
tetrasomy of chromosomes 8 and 18. This unique clinical case may have relevance concerning the origin of aneuploidy in cancer because it
indirectly suggests that there might be a mechanism for tetraploidy correction during fetal development that involves mitotic pairing of
homologous chromosomes. A baby girl was delivered by cesarean section in week 36 due to maternal hypertension with mild preeclampsia, birth
weight 2910 g, length 47 cm. Polyhydramnios was detected at the end of the pregnancy. She had persistent ductus arteriosus (PDA), a small
muscular-type ventricle septal defect (VSD) and coarctation of the aorta. The coarctatio aortae was resected at age 6 weeks, and at the same
time the PDA was ligated. She has always been short statured: At age 4 months her length was 57 cm (1 cm below 2.5th centile), at age 2 1/2
years 81 cm (4 cm below 2.5th centile). Head circumferences were about 1 cm below the 2.5th centile, e.g. 46 cm at age 2 1/2 years. Major
feeding difficulties necessitated gastrostomy at age 4 months. At current age (2 years and 10 months) she still has no interest for food and
vomits easily, but feeding her through the enteral feeding tube (Mic-Key®) keeps her weight within normal range. On barium-contrast X-ray
examination of the esophagus, peristalsis appeared normal without signs of gastro-esophageal reflux. A 24-hour esophageal pH-measurement
also gave no indications of reflux. There has been clear psychomotor delay: She started to walk without support at age 2 years and has
delayed language development, e.g. at age 2 1/2 years she spoke only 8–10 words but managed quite well by sign language. On neurological
examination mirror movements of her hands were found. She also has hearing loss, already suspected before age 2 months and confirmed by
brain stem audiometry at age 4 months. On CT-examination of the temporal bone, atretic auditory canals and no middle ear cavities were
found. There is marked facial dysmorphism with high frontal hairline, low-set and posteriorly rotated small ears with crumpled helices,
inverted epicanthus, short and down-slanting palpebral fissures, no visible eyelashes on lower eyelids, broad nasal root, thin upper lip,
small chin and a short neck (Figure 1). A transverse palmar crease was found in the right hand, and on the inside of the left thigh brownish
longitudinal streaks were seen. The right foot was deformed with the 1st toe bent in under the 2nd toe (Figure 1). On ophthalmological
examination in narcosis, the optic papillae were grayish, and there were some granulations of the retinae in the macular areas. At present,
she is an active girl that likes to play. Her only medication is for asthma. The child with double tetrasomy 8+18 mosaicism at age 7 weeks
(panels A-C) and age 1 year (panels D-E). Because the girl was dysmorphic with major feeding difficulties, blood samples were drawn two days
after birth for chromosome investigations; routine G-banding and chromosome-based high-resolution comparative genomic hybridization (HR-
CGH). The G-banded karyotype, based on screening of ten metaphases from a phytohemagglutinin-stimulated 3-day blood lymphocyte cultures, was
normal. Surprisingly, the HR-CGH result that came a few weeks later suggested a combination of non-mosaic trisomy 8 and trisomy 18 (Figure
2, panel A). An identical finding was subsequently done on a 3500 BAC-clone array-CGH platform made by the Norwegian Microarray Consortium
(for details, see ), the ratio still indicating a 50% increase in DNA amount corresponding to chromosomes 8 and 18 (Figure 2, panel B). To
investigate if uniparental disomy of other chromosomes might be present, or if abnormal copy number variants below the resolution limit of
the 3500 BAC-clone array might be found, we have recently examined DNA from the child's original blood sample (taken at age 2 days) on the
Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Assay Kit version 6.0 (Affymetrix, Inc., CA). No indication of uniparental disomy (i.e. larger regions of
homozygocity) was found, and no additional (and structural) de novo copy number abnormalities were detected. Chromosome-based high-
resolution CGH result (panel A) and 1 Mb BAC-array CGH result (panel B) on a blood DNA sample collected at age two days. The apparent 50%
increase in DNA amount corresponding to chromosomes 8 and 18 was due to double tetrasomy of both chromosomes (panel C, showing a double
tetrasomic metaphase). By interphase FISH, four copies of chromosomes 8 and 18 were detected in 15% of the cells from a 3-days PHA-
stimulated blood culture (panel D). A re-examination of the original leukocyte cell culture suspension with FISH-probes for centromeres 8
and 18 explained the surprising CGH finding: In 2% of the metaphases (100 metaphases examined) and 15% of the interphases (200 nuclei
examined) tetrasomy for both chromosomes were found (Figure 2, panels C and D). The discrepancy between the CGH-findings (50% dose increase
for 8 and 18, suggesting that 50% of the cells had four chromosomes 8 and 18) and the cell culture findings (15% of the interphases had four
chromosomes 8 and 18) were likely due to negative selection of double tetrasomic cells during PHA-stimulated culturing of blood leukocytes.
This illustrates that conventional G-banded karyotyping may easily overlook such mosaicism. To investigate other tissues for similar
mosaicism, a skin biopsy from the inside of the left thigh was collected for fibroblast culturing at age 4 months, and at age 14 months a
buccal smear was collected. In none of these tissues double tetrasomic cells were found by interphase centromere 8+18 FISH with 200 nuclei
examined in each case. At age 20 months, a new blood sample was taken, and the double tetrasomic cells could no longer be detected, neither
by CGH nor by interphase FISH. To determine the origin of the four extra chromosomes (two chromosomes 8 and two chromosomes 18) that
probably were present in around 50% of the blood leukocytes at the time of birth, microsatellite markers for chromosomes 8 and 18 were
compared between blood-DNA samples from the parents and the original child blood-DNA sample taken at age 2 days (Table 1). There was no
indication of more than two alleles for any simple tandem repeat examined, making meiotic non-disjunction an unlikely mechanism.
Furthermore, there was no systematic skewing of the ratios between maternal and paternal allele peak sizes (Table 1), which would have been
the case if three of the chromosomes in each quadruple were uniparental. Taken together, this indicates that the mosaicism was a consequence
of mitotic events, and that the origin is a mitotic division where all four chromatids of two chromosome pairs (8 and 18) segregated to one
daughter cell only. Allele sizes of polymorphic chromosome 8 and18 simple tandem repeats. The ratio between the maternal and paternal peak
heights is given in the right column, with the geometrical means of each chromosome in bold. The names of the centromeric repeats are
written in italics. The finding of tetrasomy for two autosomes in a newborn is without precedence. To the best of our knowledge, even single
chromosome tetrasomy mosaicism has not previously been reported – except in cancer cells. The reason for the uniqueness of our finding is
either that this indeed is a very rare chromosomal aberration, or that this type of malsegregation commonly occurs but is not detected due
to negative selection against aneuploid cells during embryonic development and the culturing of blood cells for routine karyotyping. We were
fortunate to observe this because we performed "unbiased" CGH analyses on leukocyte DNA from a newborn. Moreover, extra copies of both of
the involved chromosomes are known to be compatible with sustained cell growth in the embryo, increasing the likelihood that a double
tetrasomic cell line could survive to term. Notably, the initial cytogenetic investigation (G-banding) appeared normal – only a later
reexamination by FISH revealed double tetrasomic cells and metaphases (Figure 2). Apparently, the short-term PHA-stimulated leukocyte
culture decreased the number of aberrant cells from around 50% to 15%. Twenty months later the aberrant clone was undetectable in blood,
probably because it was counter-selected in the bone marrow. At a later time point we were unsuccessful in finding double tetrasomic cells
in other tissues, i.e. in squamous epithelial cells from a buccal smear and cultivated fibroblasts from a skin biopsy taken from left groin,
where skin pigment mosaicism could be seen. The reason for this, at least when the fibroblasts are concerned, can be the unpredictable
distribution of mosaicism and not necessarily a negative selection process . Even though we lack cytogenetic proof that the mosaicism
affects other tissues than the bone marrow, the clinical picture suggests this. The child's phenotype has elements of resemblance to
children with mosaicism for trisomy 8 or trisomy 18 (Table 2). In fact, there are no known physical features in the patient, with the
possible exception of poorly developed lower eyelashes, that has not been reported in patients with trisomy 8 or 18 mosaicism . The
patient's phenotypic features compared to cases with mosaic trisomy 8 or 18 This case is of particular interest because it illuminates early
events in embryogenesis that may have implications for tumor biology. Our data suggests that all four chromatids of the homologous pair were
pulled to one daughter cell only by the mitotic spindle apparatus, analogous to the syntelic attachment of the mitotic spindle that may be
seen in tetraploid yeast cells . Unlike other organisms, pairing of homologous chromosomes in somatic cells is commonly seen in Dipterians
such as Drosophila and mosquitoes . Notably, homologous pairing in both meiosis and mitosis occurs independently of synapsis and
recombination . Furthermore, the finding of (mosaic) segmental isodisomy as a disease mechanism in some cases of imprinting-related growth
syndromes (e.g. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and Russell-Silver syndrome, ) also indicates that mitotic homologous pairing takes place. That
such pairing is not limited to imprinted chromosomes are illustrated by the reports of children with recessive diseases due to homozygocity
for mutations carried by one of the parents only, the disease manifesting due to segmental isodisomy formation . We believe that the most
likely explanation for the double tetrasomy is that the starting point was a tetraploid state, which is the normal situation after S-phase,
or a tetraploid cell line. If the origin was a tetraploid state, aborted S-phase (mitotic slippage) or interrupted M-phase (failed
cytokinesis) are possible mechanisms. Chromatid non-disjunction is one suggested reason for failed cytokinesis . If the origin was a
tetraploid cell line, there are scant indications that such cells may later become diploid. In Candida albicans tetraploid strains become
diploid or near diploid through "concerted chromosome loss" . In hepatic cells being tetraploid after fusion to bone marrow stem cells, a
"reduction mitosis" appears to be able to transform tetraploid hybrids into diploids . In both cases the mechanism is unknown. A variable
number of tetraploid cells is commonly found in chorion villus or amniocyte cultures, but such cells are rarely found in liveborns . The
origin can be meiotic or mitotic errors . Conceivably, failed cytokinesis or mitotic slippage might be quite common events in early
embryogenesis, for instance during the rapid cell cycles taking place in the peri-gastrulation stage of mammalian embryogenesis . If there
exists a special mechanism to deal with this, e.g. to reinitiate the spindle apparatus after the failure has been corrected, balanced
segregation would be an advantage, and this could require pairing of the homologues. A further hypothetical advantage of such pairing is
removal of replication errors or detrimental mutations from at least one of the daughter cells by segregating both chromatids of one
homologous pair to the same daughter cell, if necessary after mitotic crossovers. In the latter case uniparental isodisomy (UPD) for the
whole or a segment of a chromosome would be the result. Our hypothesis is illustrated in Figure 3, modeling single chromosome aneuploidy due
to chromatid non-disjunction and double chromosome aneuploidy caused by paired homologues non-disjunction. A drawing that exemplifies the
hypothesized mitotic homologue non-disjunction. The upper part of the figure shows two separate homologue pairs from a conventional mitosis,
and in one chromosome a chromatid non-disjunction occurs. The lower part of the figure illustrates two pairs of homologues from a mitosis
where pairing has occurred between all homologue chromosomes, and where all (four) chromatids of one such pair segregates to the same
daughter cell. We suggest that this might have happened very early in development to two homologue pairs, made by chromosomes 8 and 18. We
also illustrate how a detrimental mutation that has arisen during replication (marked by an asterix) may be eliminated by segregation to one
daughter cell only after a mitotic cross-over that also generates a segmental (and terminal) uniparental isodisomy. This unique case
indirectly suggests that a mechanism for tetraploidy correction involving pairing of homologues may be present in somatic cells, and that
mosaicism originating in tetraploidization could be a cause of developmental abnormalities that usually remain undetected. When such a
mechanism is dysfunctional, aneuploidy is a likely result – which is commonly found in many types of cancer. The parents have given written
consent to publication of the patient's pictures, and the parents have also seen and approved the publication of the disease history. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. GH initiated the study, and was the person mainly responsible for its design and
conclusions. HL carried out the molecular genetic studies and participated in the writing of the manuscript. SG collected clinical data and
participated in the writing of the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this
paper can be accessed here: The scientific discussion and review of the manuscript by Helge Boman and Anders Molven was highly appreciated.
Noralv Breivik has provided additional clinical information. Most of the laboratory work has been done in the diagnostic DNA and cytogenetic
laboratories at Haukeland University Hospital, lead by Hanne M. Jacobsen and Kjetil Solland. This work could not have been done without the
collaboration of the child's parents, to whom we are most grateful.
