â€ The first and second author contributed equally to this work. Four small breed dogs were admitted with seizures. Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) of the brain revealed dilation of the olfactory bulb cavity as well as enlargement of the lateral ventricles. These findings
demonstrate that dilation of the olfactory bulb cavity can occur concurrent with hydrocephalus. This is the first description of the
clinical and MRI features of dilation of the olfactory bulb cavity concurrent with hydrocephalus in dogs. Hydrocephalus is characterized by
increased cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) volume and associated with dilation of the ventricular system of the brain resulting from abnormal CSF
drainage due to a congenital anomaly, secondary to mass lesions, or inflammation . There is increasing evidence that CSF drainage takes
place not only at the arachnoid villi, but also several extracranial sites . The evidences for communication between the CSF pathways and
the extracranial lymphatic system by the nasal lymphatics in various animals, including mice, rats, rabbits, sheep, pigs, monkeys, and
humans have been reported. Therefore, the nasal lymphatics might serve as a reserve mechanism for, or be primarily involved in the
absorption of CSF in hydrocephalus. A 3-year-old intact female Miniature Poodle (Case 1), a 3-year-old intact female Chihuahua (Case 2), an
8-year-old intact male Yorkshire terrier (Case 3), and a 16-year-old intact male Yorkshire terrier (Case 4) were referred to Konkuk
University Teaching Animal Hospital with seizures. The neurological examination in Case 2 revealed a left-sided head tilt, strabismus, and
decreased postural reactions. Case 4 had an elevated blood urea nitrogen and elevated creatine kinase on the serum biochemistry profile. In
the other two cases, the neurological examination and the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) results were not remarkable. The MRI of the brain
using a 0.2 Tesla magnet (E-Scan; Esaote, Italy) revealed dilation of the lateral ventricles and the olfactory bulb cavity. MRI of patients
were presented in Fig. 1. For Case 1, food was presented beneath the nose of the dog to examine olfaction and normal sniffing behavior was
observed. In addition, the dog was challenged with a piece of cotton soaked with 10% acetic acid to each nostril. Olfaction was reduced
unilaterally on the affected side. The neurological signs of these patients were improved by medication including prednisolone (Chorus
Pharma, Korea) and furosemide (Handok Pharma, Korea). In Case 3, the seizures recurred and were controlled by phenobarbital (Daihan Pharm,
Korea). Dilation of the olfactory bulb cavity in these cases was found with hydrocephalus. All of these patients were small breed dogs which
were predisposed to hydrocephalus . Both of communicating and non-communicating types were included. Therefore, the dilation of the
olfactory bulb cavity can be considered regardless of types of hydrocephalus. Even though the seizure activity was not directly related to
the olfactory bulb cavity, it could be associated with increased intracranial pressure. CSF is produced primarily in the choroid plexuses of
the cerebral ventricles, flows through the subarachnoid space, and eventually returns to the venous system . The olfactory nerve is
ensheathed by meningeal coverings that enclose a subarachnoid space. This perineurial persistence of the subarachnoid space allows CSF flow
along the olfactory nerves . The pathway of olfactory perineurial CSF drainage is outlined below. The olfactory tract leaves the brainstem
and expands into the olfactory bulbs. The olfactory nerve fibers pass the cribriform foramina in the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone.
After penetrating the cribriform foramina, the olfactory nerve fibers enter the nasal mucosa in the roof of the nasal cavity, where they
terminate. At this point the lymph within the ethmoidal lymphatics appears to be continuous with CSF in the perineurial spaces associated
with the olfactory nerves . Therefore, damage to the olfactory perineurial sheath to nasal lymphatic outflow tracts might increase
intracranial pressure (ICP). There has been a study in rats showed that nasal lymphatic CSF absorption was reduced in the hydrocephalus
model , though unclear if it was involved in hydrocephalus. Additionally, the increased ICP leads to compressive neurologic symptoms. In
humans, the increased CSF pressure expands the subarachnoid space in perineurial sheath, leading to compression of the optic nerve, and
ultimately visual dysfunction . Therefore, the elevated ICP could compromise the function of olfactory nerve. In animal patients,
examination of olfaction is difficult. We examined olfaction of one dog (Case 1), indirectly by presenting a morsel of food beneath the nose
and observing for normal sniffing behavior . Additionally, each nostril challenged with 10% acetic acid, but the adequacy of its
concentration might be questionable. In both trials, the responses were decreased unilaterally on the affected side. Hydrocephalus occurs
with several brain malformations such as the Dandy-Walker syndrome, Chiari malformations, and syringomyelia/hydromyelia, which leads to
disruption of the normal CSF flow mechanisms . However, the association of the olfactory system with hydrocephalus has not been reported
previously. Furthermore, since only four dogs were presented in this case reports, larger studies along these lines are warranted. This work
was supported by Konkuk University in 2008, the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) grant funded by the Ministry of Education,
Science and Technology, Korea (R11-2002-103). MR images obtained from patients. (A-D) Transverse T1-weighted images (WI) of Case 1, 2, 3,
and 4 show the enlarged lateral ventricles, respectively. (E-H) Dorsal T1-WI of Case 1, 2, 3, and 4 show hypointensity lesion (arrows) in
olfactory bulb, respectively.
