To the Editor: In the 1990s, patients infected with vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium were successfully treated with new
antimicrobial drugs. However, it is unlikely that new antimicrobial drugs will be available in the near future to treat patients infected
with gram-negative pathogens such as Acinetobacter baumannii (1). No new antimicrobial drugs active against this organism are currently in
clinical trials (www.clinicaltrials.gov). We report a patient infected with A. baumannii that lacked susceptibility to all commercially
available antimicrobial drugs. The patient, a 55-year-old woman, had a prolonged stay in an intensive care unit at the University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center (Pittsburgh, PA, USA) after undergoing lung transplantation. In the tenth postoperative week, ventilator-
associated pneumonia developed, which was caused by A. baumanni that lacked susceptibility to all antimicrobial drugs tested except colistin
(MIC 0.5 μg/mL). Therapy with colistin and tigecycline was begun. Colistin was administered intravenously and by inhalation. Although the
pneumonia showed radiographic response to the antimicrobial drug therapy, A. baumannii continued to be isolated from respiratory secretions
on numerous occasions. Despite another course of therapy with colistin and cefepime, the patient never recovered from respiratory failure.
She eventually died of sepsis caused by vancomycin-resistant E. faecium. An A. baumannii isolate obtained just before she died lacked
susceptibility to all commercially available antimicrobial drugs (Table). *Susceptibility testing was performed by using the Etest (AB
Biodisk, Solna, Sweden), except for colistin, for which the standard agar dilution method was used. Interpretation was according to
breakpoints provided by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI; Wayne, PA, USA). No tigecycline breakpoints for Acinetobacter
spp. are provided by the CLSI, the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (Basel, Switzerland), or the US Food and Drug
Administration (Silver Spring, MD, USA). Breakpoints of the British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy (Birmingham, UK) are indicated
for tigecycline. Multidrug-resistant A. baumannii has emerged as a substantial problem worldwide (2). Such strains are typically resistant
to all β-lactams and fluoroquinolones and require salvage therapy with colistin, amikacin, or tigecycline. Unfortunately, notably high-level
resistance to colistin and amikacin was found in the isolate we have described (Table). Tigecycline, a newly available glycylcycline
antimicrobial drug, showed intermediate susceptibility. No randomized trials have been performed to specifically evaluate combination
antimicrobial drug therapy for treatment of infection with A. baumannii. Considerable media attention has been paid to extensively drug-
resistant (XDR) strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (3). Infections with XDR strains are extremely difficult to treat and pose
considerable infection control issues. We recently proposed that gram-negative bacilli lacking susceptibility to all commercially available
antimicrobial drugs also be referred to as XDR because no therapeutic options are available (4). Numerous outbreaks of A. baumannii
infection have been reported worldwide (5). Unfortunately, multidrug-resistant A. baumannii strains have become endemic in some
institutions. Experimental and clinical isolates lacking susceptibility to colistin, often considered the drug of last resort, are
increasingly being reported (6–8). Therefore, we alert healthcare workers to the need for stringent care in adhering to infection control
precautions when caring for patients infected with XDR A. baumannii. Use of contact isolation precautions, enhanced environmental cleaning,
removal of sources of infection from the hospital environment, and prudent use of antimicrobial drugs can contribute to control of such
outbreaks (5). Fortunately, no spread of the XDR strain affecting this patient occurred. A crisis is looming should XDR A. baumannii become
established pathogens in hospitals. Suggested citation for this article: Doi Y, Husain S, Potoski BA, McCurry KR, Paterson DL. Extensively
drug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2009 Jun [date cited]. Available from
http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/15/6/980.htm Y.D. was supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) training grant T32AI007333, and D.L.P.
was supported in part by NIH research grant R01AI070896.
