Calcified peritoneal implants have been attributed to various malignant and benign causes. We present an interesting case of a 32-year-old
woman who presented with abdominal pain, distension and vaginal bleeding. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed calcified
peritoneal implants with a malignant ovarian mass. Histopathology showed an endodermal sinus tumor, a rare cause of calcified peritoneal
carcinomatosis. Metastatic calcified peritoneal implants are rarely encountered in abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT). Ovarian
carcinoma is the most common malignant cause of calcified peritoneal carcinomatosis. Serous cystadenocarcinoma produces radiographically
visible calcification in 12% of cases. Calcification in peritoneal metastasis of endodermal sinus tumor is not described in literature. We
report a case of endodermal sinus tumor of the ovary with calcified peritoneal implants at the time of presentation. A 32-year-old woman
presented with abdominal pain and distension for 2 months and vaginal bleeding of 1 month duration. She had fever off and on. There was loss
of appetite and loss of weight. On palpation, a vague mass was felt in the lower abdomen. Per vaginal examination revealed a normal
anteverted uterus. A 5×6 cm size mass was felt in the left fornix, which was firm, mobile and non-tender. A markedly elevated serum alpha-
fetoprotein (AFP) level to 11.357 ng/ml suggested the diagnosis of an ovarian yolk sac tumor. Serum human gonadotropin hormone levels and
CA-125 levels were within normal limits. All other biochemical and laboratory investigations, including serum urea and creatinine, were also
normal. The patient had no significant past or family history. Subsequently, contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen was performed, which
revealed a 4.5×5.2×6 cm size complex mass lesion in the left adenexa. A well-defined enhancing solid component was seen with cystic areas
adjacent to it. Few hyperdense calcific specks were present within the solid component. The uterine body was displaced to the contralateral
side by the ovarian mass. Enhancing soft tissue density nodular lesions were seen in the peritoneal reflections along the left paracolic
gutter and pelvis (Fig. 1a,b). Coarsened nodular and curvilinear sheetlike hyperdensities (attenuation approaching that of bone) were
present, distributed along the undersurface of the hemidiaphragm, the perihepatic region and Morrison's pouch (Fig. 2). Mild ascites was
also present in the abdomen and cul-de-sac. These findings were suggestive of yolk sac tumor of the left ovary (in view of the raised AFP
level) with calcified peritoneal carcinomatosis. Fine-needle aspiration cytology was obtained, which further confirmed the presumptive
diagnosis of endodermal sinus tumor. The smear showed tumor cells arranged in papillary groups; tight cell clusters were seen forming a
glandular patterned acinar structure with a central capillary (Schiller–Duval body). Enlarged hyperchromatic nuclei and a moderate amount of
cytoplasm were present. However, a histological diagnosis could not be ascertained as the patient did not undergo surgery. Adjuvant
combination chemotherapy was administered. Figure 1Contrast-enhanced axial CT section through the pelvis: a complex left ovarian mass with
pelvic peritoneal metastasis (arrows). Figure 2Contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen showing calcified peritoneal implants in the undersurface
of the right dome of the diaphragm, perihepatic and perisplenic region, and Morrison's pouch (arrows). Contrast-enhanced axial CT section
through the pelvis: a complex left ovarian mass with pelvic peritoneal metastasis (arrows). Contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen showing
calcified peritoneal implants in the undersurface of the right dome of the diaphragm, perihepatic and perisplenic region, and Morrison's
pouch (arrows). Peritoneal carcinomatosis is the most common route of spread of ovarian malignancy. Almost 90% cases of carcinoma ovary show
metastasis along the peritoneal surface at autopsy. Metastatic malignant peritoneal calcification is most frequently seen in serous
cystadenocarcinoma, the most common type of ovarian malignancy, which also shows histological calcification in nearly 30% cases.The other
malignancies that may cause peritoneal calcification are primary papillary serous peritoneal carcinoma, colon cancer, gastric cancer and
also squamous cell lung cancer, renal cell carcinoma, and melanoma, which induce paraneoplastic hyperparathyroidism and hypercalcemia.
Deposition of calcium in peritoneal implants occurs by metastatic and dystrophic calcification. Systemic causes of mineral imbalance, such
as uremia or hyperparathyroidism, cause metastatic calcification; local tissue injury, the aging process or disease including malignancy
cause a dystrophic type of calcification. Peritoneal calcification is classified based on its morphological features. Circumscribed or focal
calcification is described as nodular, and flat curvilinear calcification extending along the peritoneal plane as sheetlike. Although
sheetlike calcification is more commonly associated with benign causes of peritoneal calcification (peritoneal dialysis, tuberculosis) it
may be seen in its malignant counterpart (22%). Calcified peritoneal metastasis has not been described in yolk sac tumor of the ovary
before. Endodermal sinus tumor of the ovary, also known as yolk sac tumor, is a rare complex malignant ovarian tumor of germ cell origin
that occurs in girls and young women, usually in the second decade of life(mean age 19 years). All malignant germ cell tumors constitute
about 5% and endodermal sinus tumor constitute <1% of total malignant ovarian neoplasms. Yolk sac tumor is the second most common germ cell
tumor. It is unilateral in 99% of cases. The diameter of this aggressive tumor ranges from 7 to 28 cm, with a median of 15 cm. Yolk sac
tumors exhibit malignant changes in a cell line committed to extra embryonic differentiation and secrete alpha-fetoprotein. The cut surface
of the tumor shows cystic and solid areas along with large areas of hemorrhage and necrosis. Cysts of varying sizes are diffusely scattered
throughout the tissue, giving the tumor a honeycombed appearance. Microscopically, the many endodermal sinus patterns may include reticular,
papillary, solid, polyvesicular vitelline, and polyembryonal histology. Schiller–Duval bodies are characteristically also present. The
presence of calcification within the tumor often indicates its origin from a teratodermoid. Imaging features consist of a complex mass of
mixed solid and cystic nature. The tumor may be predominantly solid with areas of hemorrhage and cysts, displaying a heterogeneous
appearance. Ultrasonography reveals a pelvic mass depicting both echogenic solid and hypo/anechoic cystic components. Ultrasonography may
also show concurrent dermoid cyst of the ovary (occurring in 14% cases), ascites, or urinary obstruction. However, the cystic nature of the
mass is more easily appreciated on CT, probably because of the hemorrhage or protein content and multiple internal septations. CT is also
useful in further characterizing and staging the mass. As extensive areas of hemorrhage and necrosis are common and striking findings in
endodermal sinus tumor, identification of hemorrhage on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as high intensity foci on T1-weighted images
supports the diagnosis. Hypervascularity in the form of prominent enhancement on post-contrast CT images or signal voids on MRI may also be
seen. Metastases to the peritoneum, bowel serosa, omentum, liver or lymph nodes occur in 30% of cases. However, calcified peritoneal
implants seen in the index case are not documented in the literature. The differential diagnoses of yolk sac tumor in a young female with a
complex solid cystic abdominopelvic mass on imaging are cystic teratoma, tuboovarianabscess, appendiceal abscess, mesenteric cyst, or
gastrointestinal duplication cyst. The serum alpha-fetoprotein level clinches the diagnosis. As endodermal sinus tumor exhibits rapid growth
due its aggressive nature, a delay in diagnosis and subsequent treatment may harm the patient and sharply reduce the chances of survival,
especially in patients with advanced disease. With surgery alone, survival is rare for these radio-resistant tumors. Prior to the
introduction of effective combination chemotherapy, the prognosis for patients with endodermal sinus tumor was poor; with a 3-year survival
rate of 13%. However, now the survival rates have risen to 82.5% for patients receiving cisplatin, vinblastine, and bleomycin combination
chemotherapy. A high percentage of cases of clinically aggressive malignant ovarian germ cell tumors respond well to cisplatin-based
chemotherapy and are curable. This paper is available online at http://www.cancerimaging.org. In the event of a change in the URL address,
please use the DOI provided to locate the paper.
