Parathyroid carcinoma is a rare malignancy, and only accounts for 0.5–2% of cases of primary hyperparathyroidism. Less than 10% of
parathyroid carcinomas are non-functional, and as such, they have been rarely reported in the literature. Importantly, margin status at
resection is related to prognosis, and only a handful of case reports of non-functional carcinoma note this important parameter. Here we
report the first case of non-functional parathyroid carcinoma with negative margins, and review the literature on this rare entity. Whether
functional or non-functional, parathyroid carcinoma can often be difficult to differentiate from benign parathyroid adenoma. While diagnosis
has been based on clinical and histological criteria, recent data concerning the molecular underpinnings of parathyroid carcinoma may allow
for improved accuracy in distinguishing benign and malignant parathyroid tumors. Parathyroid carcinoma is the least common endocrine
malignancy, and accounted for only 0.005% of cases reported to the National Cancer Database (NCDB) between 1985 and 1995 . Roughly half of
cases are diagnosed between ages 45 and 60 years, but the tumor arises over a wide age range. In the NCDB case series, overall 5- and
10-year survival rates were 85.5 and 49.5%, respectively. Most patients (>90%) present with symptoms of hyperparathyroidism, including
severe hypercalcemia, an elevated serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) level, nephrolithiasis or nephrocalcinosis, osteopenia, gastrointestinal
disturbances, depression, fatigue, or memory disturbance. Despite this, parathyroid carcinoma remains a rare cause of primary
hyperparathyroidism, accounting for only 0.5–2% of cases. In comparison, benign parathyroid adenomas account for approximately 85% of cases,
with diffuse hyperplasia comprising the remainder. Parathyroid carcinoma has been associated with hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor (HPT-JT)
syndrome, familial isolated primary hyperparathyroidism, and multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes (MEN-1 and MEN-2A); patients with HPT-JT
have a 15% prevalence of the tumor . The management of parathyroid carcinoma is primarily surgical, with en bloc resection of the tumor with
involved adjacent structures being the recommended primary mode of therapy. Indeed, at least one report indicates that survival is largely
dependent on margin status of the primary resection . There has been a long debate in the literature about the effectiveness of adjuvant
therapy, largely fueled by the paucity of cases. However, three recent reports suggest that adjuvant radiation therapy may reduce tumor
recurrence after resection . There is no systematic data to suggest a role for adjuvant chemotherapy. Despite therapy, between one-third and
three-quarters of patients have recurrence or metastasis of their tumors, causing recurrent hyperparathyroidism. Re-resection is the
accepted therapy for palliative control of hypercalcemia, but seems to become less effective with continued iterations . Calcimimetic
agents, such as cinacalcet, have recently been used with success in the cases of primary hyperparathyroidism , and may also play a role in
palliative management of inoperable parathyroid carcinoma. Despite this, most patients who die of disease do so as a result of complications
of hypercalcemia. While functional parathyroid carcinoma is an uncommon tumor, non-functional parathyroid carcinoma is an exceedingly rare
disease, with less than 20 reported cases in the last 80 years. As the name implies, patients with non-functional tumors have normal serum
calcium and PTH levels, and do not present with symptoms of hypercalcemia. They typically present with a neck mass, and patients who die of
disease eventually succumb to systemic tumor burden. Here we report a recent case of non-functional parathyroid carcinoma from our
institution necessitating extensive surgery to obtain negative margins, review the past literature on this rare entity, and discuss recent
and new advances in the diagnosis of both functional and non-functional parathyroid carcinomas. The patient is a 59-year-old white man who
presented to his primary care physician in July 2008 with a chief complaint of dysphagia. His past medical history was notable for diabetes
mellitus type II, hypertension, and obstructive sleep apnea. Medications included metformin and amlodipine. He had previously undergone
cervical spine surgery in 2002, and shoulder surgery at an unknown time. His family history was notable for a half-sister with a history of
breast and gastric cancer, and an uncle with a history of an unknown head and neck cancer. He is married and works as a mechanic, rarely
used alcohol, and had previously smoked cigarettes but quit in 1975. On review of systems, he endorsed dysphagia and hoarseness, but denied
other symptoms. Physical examination showed a 6-cm firm mass in the left neck. The mass extended anteriorly to the left sternocleidomastoid
and inferiorly below the clavicle. Computed tomography, performed at an outside hospital in July 2008, was interpreted as a 6-cm left
thyroid mass. The patient was subsequently referred to Barnes-Jewish Hospital for fine-needle aspiration of the mass, and evaluation by an
otolaryngologist. Under ultrasonographic guidance, a fine-needle aspiration of the presumed left thyroid lobe tumor was performed by
radiology. A diagnosis of positive for thyroid carcinoma was returned at the end of July 2008, with a comment that the cytologic features
raised the possibility of a poorly differentiated or insular variant of thyroid carcinoma; the cytologic differential diagnosis at that time
included follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma (Fig. 1). On the basis of findings, excision for examining tissue architecture
was highly recommended.Fig. 1Fine-needle aspirate smears of non-functional parathyroid carcinoma (600×). a Ethanol-fixed, Papanicolaou
stained preparation; b air-dried, Diff-Quik stained preparation Fine-needle aspirate smears of non-functional parathyroid carcinoma (600×).
a Ethanol-fixed, Papanicolaou stained preparation; b air-dried, Diff-Quik stained preparation He was then examined by one of our head and
neck surgeons, who was concerned that the physical and radiographic characteristics of the tumor seemed more aggressive than that seen in
the types of thyroid carcinoma given in the cytologic differential diagnosis. Indeed, magnetic resonance imaging of the mass, performed at
Barnes-Jewish Hospital in early August 2008, showed a large left cervical mass that displaced the trachea to the right, extended between the
trachea and esophagus in the neck, and inferiorly into the superior mediastinum (Fig. 2). Also at that time, the patient underwent an
unremarkable laboratory work-up. Of note, the serum calcium was 10.1 mg/dl (nl = 8.6–10.3 mg/dl), and a serum thyroid function panel,
including thyroid-stimulating hormone, triiodothyronine, thyroxine, thyroglobulin, anti-thyroglobulin antibody, and calcitonin, was within
normal limits. In light of these incongruous findings, the patient was scheduled for a needle biopsy of the tumor prior to further
management.Fig. 2Pre-operative magnetic resonance imaging of non-functional parathyroid carcinoma. a T2-weighed transverse section, with
carcinoma (arrowhead) displacing the trachea (single arrow) and compressing the esophagus (double arrow); b THRIVE sequence frontal section,
with carcinoma extending across the midline and into the superior mediastinum Pre-operative magnetic resonance imaging of non-functional
parathyroid carcinoma. a T2-weighed transverse section, with carcinoma (arrowhead) displacing the trachea (single arrow) and compressing the
esophagus (double arrow); b THRIVE sequence frontal section, with carcinoma extending across the midline and into the superior mediastinum
As in the prior cytology specimen, the needle biopsy showed a poorly differentiated tumor with morphological and immunohistochemical
features suggestive of neuroendocrine differentiation (Fig. 3; see section Pathologic summary). The diagnosis was initially reported as
poorly differentiated carcinoma with neuroendocrine features; the differential diagnosis included poorly differentiated/insular thyroid
carcinoma, medullary carcinoma, parathyroid carcinoma, carcinoma with thymus-like elements, and neuroendocrine carcinoma. The common types
of thyroid carcinoma (papillary and follicular), as well as anaplastic carcinoma, were ruled out. A subsequent immunostain for PTH showed
diffuse reactivity in tumor cells, and a diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma was rendered. The patient had no symptoms of
hyperparathyroidism, and a serum intact PTH was 20 pg/ml (nl = 14–72 pg/ml). He was scheduled for en bloc resection of a non-functional
parathyroid carcinoma at the beginning of September 2008.Fig. 3Needle core biopsy of non-functional parathyroid carcinoma. a–c Hematoxylin
and eosin-stained sections at a low (20×), b intermediate (100×), and c high magnification (600×), d–f representative high-magnification
images (600×) of immunohistochemical stains for d cytokeratin AE1/AE3, e CD56, and f PTH Needle core biopsy of non-functional parathyroid
carcinoma. a–c Hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections at a low (20×), b intermediate (100×), and c high magnification (600×), d–f
representative high-magnification images (600×) of immunohistochemical stains for d cytokeratin AE1/AE3, e CD56, and f PTH At operation, a
large left cervical tumor was found, intimately involved with the left thyroid lobe. Dissection of the anterior pretracheal tissues showed
tumor adhesion to the anterior trachea; frozen section analysis of this material was reported as “Rare atypical cells; recommend additional
tissue.” Dissection of the tumor proceeded posteriorly from this point to the tracheoesophageal groove, where it appeared to invade the
trachea and esophagus. At that point, it was deemed impossible to completely resect the tumor without sacrificing these structures.
Eventually, the tumor was resected en bloc with the left thyroid lobe and isthmus, anterior cervical soft tissue, larynx, hypopharynx,
superior esophagus, and first eight tracheal rings. A completion esophagectomy was performed, a gastric conduit was brought up to re-
establish continuity, and a jejunostomy tube was placed for feeding. Portions of the manubrium, left clavicle, and left first rib were also
excised to create access for a mediastinal tracheostomy. Post-operatively, the patient was extubated and taken to the cardiothoracic
intensive care unit, where he had a relatively uncomplicated course. He was able to transfer to an observation unit on post-operative day 2,
and eventually to the floor. He was discharged from the hospital on post-operative day 18. After discharge, he was seen by our department of
radiation oncology, and initiated adjuvant radiation therapy in mid-October 2008. This has been complicated by an episode of hemoptysis
requiring inpatient observation about 1 month after initiating therapy. At the time of this report, the patient is approximately 7 months
post-operative and has completed adjuvant radiotherapy. He tolerates oral intake and exercise, and has gained 5 pounds in the last few
months. Although a computed tomogram of the chest performed February 20, 2009 showed two ill-defined “ground glass” opacities in the right
and left upper lung lobes, he has no definitive evidence of tumor recurrence. His next scheduled clinical follow-up is at 9–10 months post-
operative. Aspirate smears of the tumor (Fig. 1) were cellular and composed of crowded groups of tumor cells in a clean background. At high
magnification, individual tumor cells showed round to oval nuclei, granular chromatin with occasional small nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm.
The groups appeared cohesive and showed striking uniformity of size and shape. The needle biopsy material (Fig. 3) showed solid nests of
tumor cells separated by a dense fibrotic stroma, with tumor cells accounting for about one-quarter of the tissue examined. As in the
cytology preparation, individual tumor cells were fairly uniform, with round to oval hyperchromatic nuclei, granular chromatin with
inconspicuous nucleoli, and a small amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm. An extensive panel of immunohistochemical stains was performed to
characterize the tumor. Tumor cells were strongly and diffusely reactive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3. They also showed weak or focal reactivity
for the neuroendocrine markers synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and CD56. Stains for thyroglobulin, thyroid transcription factor-1,
calcitonin, carcinoembryonic antigen, CD45/leukocyte common antigen, and CD5 were uniformly non-reactive. As previously mentioned, a
subsequent send-out immunostain (Gen-Path; Cell Marque PTH antibody clone MRQ-29, prediluted; antigen retrieval with Ventana standard CC1
solution at 37°C for 32 min) showed diffuse and moderately strong staining for PTH, leading to the diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma. At
operation, we received a composite en bloc resection of tumor and left thyroid lobe, larynx, superior trachea, hypopharynx, and superior
esophagus (Figs. 4 and 5). The tumor and thyroid lobe was measured as 9.5 × 6.5 × 6.5 cm3. Gross sections of the specimen showed extension
of a tongue of tumor into the tracheoesophageal groove, as suggested by pre-operative imaging (Fig. 2) and operative findings. Microscopic
sections of the tumor again showed large solid nests of tumor cells separated by broad bands of dense fibrosis. At high magnification, tumor
cells showed a crowded architecture, with focal areas of individual tumor cell necrosis. No large areas of geographic tumor necrosis were
noted. Nests of tumor extensively involved the thyroid gland and anterior cervical soft tissues, with extensive lymphvascular space
invasion. In addition, tumor cells extended through the membranous posterior trachea and approached the tracheal submucosal glands. Areas of
the anterior trachea, near the area sampled by frozen section, also showed involvement by tumor. The tumor also involved the adventitia of
the hypopharynx by direct extension. Although tumor approached the inked resection margins of the anterior cervical soft tissues, no tumor
was seen at ink, and the sampled resection margins were free of tumor. A biopsy of the left recurrent laryngeal nerve submitted for frozen
section analysis showed rare atypical cells, suspicious for carcinoma, only on the permanent sections. The separately received inferior
esophagus and bones removed for tracheostomy access were free of tumor.Fig. 4En bloc resection of non-functional parathyroid carcinoma. a
Anterior view of inked and sectioned gross specimen, with tumor in relation to contiguous structures; b low-magnification image of tumor
(20×); c low-magnification image of tumor invading left thyroid lobe (20×); d high-magnification image of tumor (600×)Fig. 5En bloc
resection of non-functional parathyroid carcinoma. a Transverse section of gross specimen, with tumor invading tracheoesophageal groove; b
low-magnification image of tumor (arrow) invading membranous posterior trachea (20×); c low-magnification image of tumor (double arrow)
invading lymphvascular space of anterior trachea (20×); d high-magnification image of tumor deposit from previous panel (400×) En bloc
resection of non-functional parathyroid carcinoma. a Anterior view of inked and sectioned gross specimen, with tumor in relation to
contiguous structures; b low-magnification image of tumor (20×); c low-magnification image of tumor invading left thyroid lobe (20×); d
high-magnification image of tumor (600×) En bloc resection of non-functional parathyroid carcinoma. a Transverse section of gross specimen,
with tumor invading tracheoesophageal groove; b low-magnification image of tumor (arrow) invading membranous posterior trachea (20×); c low-
magnification image of tumor (double arrow) invading lymphvascular space of anterior trachea (20×); d high-magnification image of tumor
deposit from previous panel (400×) Table 1 lists the 19 cases of non-functional parathyroid carcinoma reported in the literature since 1929,
including the present case . One case previously considered a non-functional carcinoma is in fact a non-functional recurrence of a primary
functional parathyroid carcinoma and so is not considered here. To summarize, most patients presented in the sixth or seventh decade with a
neck mass, with an age range of 27 to 71 years. All patients were considered normocalcemic at the time of diagnosis, and had normal serum
levels of PTH in cases where this was measured. Tumor size was variable, but almost half of the cases had tumors between 5 and 11 cm in
size; in comparison, the NCDB case series reported a median tumor size of 3.3 cm . All but one patient received surgical resection as the
primary mode of therapy. The primary spread of tumor was locoregional invasion into the thyroid gland, cervical soft tissues, or superior
mediastinum. Slightly over half of patients had recurrence of their tumors by the time of case report. Sixteen of 19 patients were alive at
the time of case report, although most cases reported a relatively short follow-up period; only three of the cases have data beyond 5 years
from the date of initial therapy.Table 1Reported cases of non-functional parathyroid carcinomaReferenceAge/sexClinical presentationPre-
operative DxSerum Ca (mg/dl)Serum PTH (nl)Tumor size (cm)LN involvementCurrent study 59/MDysphagia, hoarseness, neck massYes (IHC)10.1 (nl
8.6-10.3)20 pg/mL (14-72)9.5x6.5 x6.5NoFernandez-Ranvier et al. 67/FMultinodular goiterNo (MNG)9.119 ng/dL (12-65)4.5x2 xO.8NoKirkby-Bott et
al. 66/MNeck mass, tracheal obstruction?Normal???Yamashita et al. 56/FSore throat, neck massNo (thyroid adenoma)9.2Normal3NoKlink et al.
39/MNeck mass, hoarseness, nephrolithiasisYes (parathyroid scan)9.20.4 ng/nL (0.3-2.9)7.5x5.5 x5?Collins et al. 65/MMNG, dyspnea,
dysphagiaNo (MNG)9.4?11 X5x5?Murphy et al. 51/MHoarseness, dyspnea, mediast. massNoNormalNormalExtensive?Merlano et al. 59/MNeck mass, VCP,
dysphagia, axillary LNNo (adenoma w/high Ml)NormalNormal8x6x4YesYamashita et al. 69/FNeck massNo (thyroid carcinoma)9.3?5x4x3?Hickey et al.
27/MNeck massNo (cystic thyroid mass)9.2-9.8?5.5?49/MNeck massNo????59/MNeck massNo (follicular thyroid ca)9.5?2.5YesChahinian et al.
69/FNeck mass, pleural effusionNoNormalNormal2x2, 14?Dhom and Hohbach 38/MNeck massNo (thyroid nodule)Normal?2.5x1.5?Altenahr and Saeger
50/MNeck massNo (thyroid tumor)Normal??YesPachter and Lattes 50/FChest painNoNormal?DiffuseYesSieracki and Horn 43/FNeck mass, pain,
dysphagk VCPNo9.1?5x4?McQuillan 53/FNeck massNoNormal?Golf ball?Armstrong 71/FNeck massNo (Hodgkin lymphoma)11.9?11x11 x4?Guy 29/FNeck mass,
dysphagia, painNo (thyroid adenoma)8?8x6x4YesReferenceVascular invasionClear marginsLocal invasionLocal recurrenceDistant
metastasisTreatment (initial S)SurvivalCurrent studyYesYesYes (thyroid, trachea, hypopharynx)NoNoS + R (en bloc resection)Alive at 7
monthsFernandez-Ranvier et al. Yes?Yes (thyroid)Yes (neck, mediastinum)Yes (lung)S + R (total thyroidectomy)Alive at 2 years and 7
monthsKirkby-Bott et al. ??YesYes (neck)Yes (bone, lung)S + R (neck exploration, incomplete exc)Dead at 8 years and 2 monthsYamashita et al.
No?Yes (thyroid)NoNoS + R (mass + thyroid lobe)Alive at 10 monthsKlink et al. Yes?Yes (thyroid)NoNoS (en bloc resection)Alive at 4
monthsCollins et al. ??Yes (thyroid)NoNoS (L thyroid lobectomy)Alive at 2 yearsMurphy et al. YesNoYes (mediastinum)Yes (incomplete
resection)NoS + R + C (incomplete resection)Alive at 11 monthsMerlano et al. ??Yes (mediastinum)Yes (mediastinum)Yes (axillary LN, liver,
supraclavicular LN)Pre-operative R + S + R (biopsies)Alive at 4 yearsYamashita et al. ??Yes (thyroid)NoNoS + R (completion L thyroid
lobectomy)Alive at 20 monthsHickey et al. ??YesYesYes (axillary LN, lung, brain)S + R + C (simple excision)Dead at 2 years and 4 months??Yes
(neck, mediastinum)Yes (mediastinum)Yes (lung, bone)CAlive at 9 months??YesYes (mediastinum)Yes (lung, bone, LN)S + C (total thyroidectomy,
L radical neck dissection)Dead at 1 years and 8 monthsChahinian et al. ??Yes (neck, mediastinum)Yes (neck, mediastinum)Yes (lung)S + CAlive
at 8 yearsDhom and Hohbach Yes?Yes (thyroid)??S (radical thyroidectomy)?Altenähr and Saeger ??Yes (thyroid)Yes (neck)Yes (cervical LN)S + R
(L thyroid lobectomy)Alive at 7 yearsPachter and Lattes No?Yes (mediastinum)Yes (incomplete resection)Yes (LN, skin)S (partial
excision)Alive at 5 yearsSieracki and Horn Yes?Yes (neck, thyroid)Suspicious (pericardium)Suspicious (paratracheal LN)S + R (subtotal
resection)Alive at 3 yearsMcQuillan ??Yes (thyroid)Yes (neck)NoS + R (R thyroid lobectomy)Alive at 2 years and 4 monthsArmstrong ??Yes
(neck, mediastinum)NoNoS (en bloc resection)Alive at 2 monthsGuy ??Yes (neck)Yes (neck)Yes (lung)S + R (simple excision)Alive at 2 years and
4 monthsAn entry of ? Indicates that the information was not provided in the original case reportIHC immunohistochemistry, MNG multinodular
goiter, VCP vocal cord paralysis, MI mitotic index, Ca carcinoma, S surgery, R radiation therapy, C chemotherapy Reported cases of non-
functional parathyroid carcinoma An entry of ? Indicates that the information was not provided in the original case report IHC
immunohistochemistry, MNG multinodular goiter, VCP vocal cord paralysis, MI mitotic index, Ca carcinoma, S surgery, R radiation therapy, C
chemotherapy More striking than the data presented in the above cases, however, is the data not reported. As noted in the section
“Introduction,” the recommended mode of therapy for parathyroid carcinoma (both functional and non-functional) is en bloc resection of tumor
with involved adjacent structures, and that overall survival directly correlates with the margin status of the initial resection . Indeed,
our present case report is the first non-functional parathyroid carcinoma to report negative margins after en bloc resection. Although most
case reports do not comment on final margin status, we believe it is likely that many of these cases may have had tumor at or closely
approaching the resection margins. This assumption is based on the fact that only 4 of the 19 patients received an en bloc or radical
procedure as initial therapy. This may be due to current therapeutic practices at the time of resection. However, as listed in Table 1, only
2 of the 19 patients had a pre-operative diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma; many more carried diagnoses that would not have indicated an
extensive resection. If not definitely the case, it is likely that this diagnostic uncertainty also contributed to the surgical management
of these patients. To summarize, non-functional parathyroid carcinoma is a rare endocrine malignancy that presents with mass symptoms. Due
to the paucity of cases and often limited clinical follow-up, it is difficult to compare survival to patients with functional parathyroid
carcinoma. Non-functional parathyroid carcinoma is larger at presentation, appears to be best managed surgically, is often incompletely
excised, and shows frequent locoregional recurrence and metastasis. It is likely that improvements in the accuracy of diagnosis will improve
the management and outcomes for patients with both functional and non-functional carcinomas. Clinically, a patient with primary
hyperparathyroidism is most likely to have a parathyroid adenoma. Clues that the patient may have parathyroid carcinoma include a markedly
elevated serum calcium (>14 mg/dl) or PTH (>5× the upper limit of normal), a palpable neck mass, or hoarseness (indicating involvement of
the recurrent laryngeal nerve) . Intraoperatively, a firm grey-white gland with adherence to, or invasion of, adjacent structures is
suggestive of malignancy. Much like other endocrine malignancies, the gold standard for diagnosis of carcinoma is distant metastasis. The
histological criteria for the diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma were published by Schantz and Castleman in 1973, and are still valid today.
They include: sheets or lobules of tumor cells separated by dense fibrous bands, mitotic figures, necrosis, capsular invasion, or vascular
invasion. All of these features are seen in the present case. However, over 80% of parathyroid carcinomas are well-differentiated tumors ,
and some of these histologic features can be seen in atypical parathyroid adenomas . Are there any other criteria to distinguish benign
adenomas from their malignant counterparts? Recent data have suggested that molecular testing may be useful in the cases of parathyroid
tumors with equivocal histologic features. The first step in this process was the identification of HRPT2, located on chromosome 1q, as the
gene mutated in HPT-JT . Germline mutations were found in patients with HPT-JT, and sporadic mutations were also discovered in non-HPT-JT-
associated parathyroid carcinomas. Additional studies also showed HRPT2 mutations in HPT-JT parathyroid adenomas and carcinomas, and
sporadic carcinomas, suggesting that the gene may act as a tumor suppressor, and that its loss may be an initiating event in carcinogenesis
[32, 33]. Expression of the gene product, termed parafibromin, has also been investigated in parathyroid neoplasia. Two studies suggest that
sporadic adenomas show expression of parafibromin by immunohistochemistry, whereas most sporadic carcinomas and all HPT-JT-associated
parathyroid tumors display loss of expression, in parallel with the gene mutation studies [34, 35]. The exact mechanism of carcinogenesis
induced by the loss of parafibromin remains to be elucidated. Recent data suggest that the protein associates with RNA polymerase, regulates
genes involved in cell growth and survival, acts as a cell cycle regulator, and plays a role in transducing transcriptional output from the
Wnt pathway . In addition to HRPT2, data also show that parathyroid carcinomas lose a greater proportion of tumor suppressor alleles as
compared to benign causes of primary hyperparathyroidism, indicating genomic instability . Testing for loss of these markers may supplement
HRPT2/parafibromin analysis for diagnosis of borderline parathyroid neoplasms. The status of HRPT2/parafibromin in non-functional
parathyroid carcinomas has not been investigated. Parathyroid carcinoma is a rare cause of primary hyperparathyroidism, and <20 cases of it
have been reported in the literature. In this study, we have reported the first case of non-functional parathyroid carcinoma with negative
surgical margins after en bloc resection. Diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma, whether functional or non-functional, is based on a number of
clinical and histological criteria but can be challenging to differentiate from benign adenoma in many cases. In addition to traditional
criteria, new advances in molecular diagnosis, including evaluation of HRPT2/parafibromin, may aid in improving diagnostic accuracy. We
thank Dr. Rebecca Chernock for help with processing of the gross resection specimen, Dr. Samir El-Mofty and Dr. Brian Nussenbaum for helpful
discussions on the case, and Mary Madden for assistance with manuscript preparation.
