One case of recurrent multifocal central giant cell granulomas (CGCG) is presented. Initially, the lesions presented concurrently in the
maxilla and mandible with subsequent recurrence in the mandible. Now, two recurrences are seen in the maxillary sinus and ethmoid region.
The literature regarding multifocal CGCG is reviewed. The central giant cell granuloma (CGCG) affects females more often than males, in a
2:1 ratio and is seen most frequently under the age of 30 years . One study of 38 patients shows 74% to be less than 30 years of age and 61%
to be less than 20 years of age . The lesion commonly presents as a solitary radiolucency with a multilocular appearance or less commonly, a
unilocular appearance . It is more prevalent in the anterior than the posterior jaws, often crossing the midline, and the mandible is more
commonly affected than the maxilla [2, 4]. This lesion has also been reported in the small bones of the hands and feet [5, 6]. The behavior
of CGCG is variable, most commonly producing asymptomatic expansion of the jaws . However, it can be clinically aggressive, associated with
pain, osseous destruction, cortical perforation, root resorption, and recurrence . Cases of CGCG occurring with neurofibromatosis (type 1)
[7, 9–11], Noonan-like syndrome [12, 13], or both [7, 14] have been reported. The treatment of CGCG includes simple curettage or curettage
with peripheral ostectomy; Resection for lesions of the maxilla or paranasal sinuses has been advocated as the thin bony cortices and
sinuses do not provide a good anatomic barrier . Corticosteroids and calcitonin are used for non-surgical management [16, 17]. Interferon
alpha therapy has also been used as a postoperative adjuvant and to prevent tumor progression [18, 19]. This patient’s histological slides
were referred to the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center for pathology consultation. Her medical records were subsequently obtained. The
patient was a 42-year-old female with a history of multifocal giant cell lesions in the left mandible and left maxilla. A year after her
initial diagnosis and treatment, a recurrent lesion was noted in the left mandible and subsequently curetted. Two and a half years after the
initial lesions, this was the second recurrent episode. This recurrence, the patient presented with two distinct lesions the larger,
inferior lesion filling much of the maxillary sinus and the smaller, superior lesion adjacent to the ethmoid region. A comprehensive
laboratory assessment to rule out hyperparathyroidism revealed: calcium (serum) 9.8 (normal 8.5–10.4 mg/dl), PTH (intact) 58 pg/ml (normal
12–65 pg/ml), phosphorus (serum) 2.9 mg/dl (normal 2.5–4.5 mg/dl), albumin 5.1 (normal 3.7–5.1 g/dl), urine calcium level of 6.4 mg/dl
(normal, not established), and urine 24 h calcium 185.4 mg/24 h (normal 100.0–300.00 mg/24 h). Other laboratory values were within normal
limits, except for a bilirubin of 1.8 mg/dl (normal 0.1–1.2 mg/dl). The patient had known Gilbert’s syndrome. The patient’s clinical
appearance was phenotypically normal, not that of Noonan’s syndrome. Although we are uncertain what testing was performed, a comprehensive
workup revealed the patient was negative for Noonan’s syndrome and hyperparathyroidism. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), two lesions
were seen (see Fig. 1). The lesions were heterogeneously hyperintense on T2 weighted imaging and isointense to brain on T1 weighted imaging
with enhancement. The larger of the two recurrent lesions was 3.1 × 2.9 × 2.6 cm encompassing the roots of the maxillary posterior teeth and
deviating the inferior turbinate (see Fig. 2). The second lesion was 2.4 × 2.3 × 2.1 cm and was located inferior to the medial floor of the
left orbit. Invasion of the medial wall of the left maxillary sinus with bulging into the nasal cavity and thinning of the posterolateral
maxillary sinus wall with tumor bulging into the retromaxillary fat pad was seen.Fig. 1T1 weighted MRI of the tumors on sagittal section
demonstrating proximity to the dentition and the ethmoid regionFig. 2T2 weighted MRI of the larger inferior lesion on coronal section
demonstrating deviation of inferior turbinate T1 weighted MRI of the tumors on sagittal section demonstrating proximity to the dentition and
the ethmoid region T2 weighted MRI of the larger inferior lesion on coronal section demonstrating deviation of inferior turbinate A left
endoscopic ethmoidectomy was performed using an image guidance mask. The recurrent left maxillary giant cell granuloma (GCG) was excised via
intraoral approach. The maxillary lesion was removed, followed by stripping of the maxillary sinus mucosa to bone. The maxillary sinus was
reconstructed with demineralized bone matrix and autogenous platelet rich plasma. The two pathology specimens from the left ethmoid region
and maxillary sinus were histologically similar, revealing abundant diffusely distributed multinucleated central giant cells (see Fig. 3).
The hypercellular fibrous stroma was composed of mononuclear spindle shaped cells and scattered ovoid cells. Cystic areas of extravasated
nonendothelialized hemorrhage, resembling an aneurysmal bone cyst, and minimal mitotic activity were observed but no cellular atypia was
observed.Fig. 3Photomicrograph from first recurrence of the left maxillary CGCG showing multinucleated giant cells in a spindle or ovoid
shaped fibrovascular connective tissue stroma (H&E, ×10) Photomicrograph from first recurrence of the left maxillary CGCG showing
multinucleated giant cells in a spindle or ovoid shaped fibrovascular connective tissue stroma (H&E, ×10) Much controversy surrounds the
CGCG. Initially, it was not distinguished from the giant cell tumor of the extragnathic skeleton , but later it was described by Jaffe as
the giant cell reparative granuloma . Some authorities advocate using the more neutral term “central giant cell lesion” to describe this
process, but most accept CGCG. CGCG has been proposed to be both a reactive response, to hemorrhage or trauma, and a neoplasm [2, 3, 22].
Some have proposed that giant cell granuloma of the jaws and giant cell tumors (GCT) of the extragnathic skeleton are part of a spectrum of
a single lesion, modified by anatomic site [2, 15]. However, others have viewed CGCGs and GCTs of the extragnathic skeleton as distinct
lesions [21, 23, 24]. Certain histological differences exist between the CGCG and the GCT (see Table 1). The giant cells are more evenly
distributed in the GCT, focal areas of necrosis exist, decreased fibrous tissue is present, and an accumulation of inflammatory cells may be
seen . Histologically, CGCG resembles the giant cell lesion of hyperparathyroidism, cherubism, and aneurysmal bone cyst, which must be
excluded. Multiple central giant cell lesions have been reported in association with Noonan-like/multiple giant cell lesion syndrome, and
other features of the disease include a short stature, webbed neck, cubitus valgus, pulmonic stenosis, and multiple lentigenes
.Table 1Comparison of giant cell tumor and central giant cell granulomaGiant cell tumorCentral giant cell granulomaLocationSphenoid,
temporal, ethmoid bones (endochondral ossification, not membranous in origin)Jaws in paget diseaseJaws, anterior mandibleGiant cellsEvenly
distributedFewer, smaller giant cells, unevenly distributedStromal cellsMonocytes, osteoclastsNo intercellular collagenFibroblasts producing
collagen;Numerous capillariesOsteoidNoYes Comparison of giant cell tumor and central giant cell granuloma Immunohistochemical studies on
CGCG have helped establish the lineage of the cells, but not to predict the aggressiveness of the lesion. Supporting the theory that the
multinucleated giant cells are derived from macrophages is the immunoreactive response to muramidase, α-1 antichymotrypsin, and α-1
antitrypsin . Aggressive and non-aggressive CGCGs stained for antibodies to CD34, CD68, factor Xllla, and smooth muscle actin, prolyl
4-hydroxylase, Ki-67, p53 protein, RANK, and glucocorticoid receptor alpha have revealed no phenotypic differences between the types [28,
29]. Calcitonin receptor expression, however, has been found to exhibit a statistically significant difference with more expression in the
aggressive type . Immunohistochemical staining for c-Src, a protein thought to be required for osteoclast activation, has yielded no
quantitative difference between CGCG, GCT, or cherubism . The SH3BP2 gene is commonly found to be mutated in cherubism, and its transcripts
and proteins have been found to be expressed in GCT and CGCG. The mononuclear stromal cells display strong p63 immunostaining in GCTs, but
this has not been detected in CGCGs [32, 33]. Thus, P63 is one immunohistochemical stain that may help distinguish GCT from CGCG, while also
suggesting a differing pathogenesis. Multifocal CGCG is a challenging entity. In previous reviews of the literature, different cases have
been included as multifocal CGCG [34, 35]. Previous cases of multiple giant cell lesions may represent:Unusual reports of cherubism [36,
37]Association with a syndrome or genetic condition [14, 15, 38]A single lesion of a jaw separated by normal boneAssociation with elevated
PTHrP True giant cell tumors originating in the maxillofacial region,Multifocality resulting from hematogenous spread due to inadequate
treatment Unusual reports of cherubism [36, 37] Association with a syndrome or genetic condition [14, 15, 38] A single lesion of a jaw
separated by normal bone Association with elevated PTHrP True giant cell tumors originating in the maxillofacial region, Multifocality
resulting from hematogenous spread due to inadequate treatment In total, we believe there are six convincing cases of multifocal CGCG of the
maxillofacial skeleton previously reported and not better explained by other pathologic conditions (see Table 2).Table 2Characteristics of
multifocal central giant cell granulomasReferenceAge/SexLocation at initial presentationRecurrenceDavis and Tideman 31/FR mandibular
body4 months L maxilla1 year L maxilla2 years R mandibleSmith et al. 41/FR mandibular angle9 years L maxillary sinus, nasal bone, orbital
floor and R maxillary sinusMartins et al. 35/FL maxillaR mandible5 years follow-up no recurrenceLoukota 25/FR mandible10 months L maxillaNo
additional recurrence at 2 yearsWise and Bridebord 23/ML mandibular bodyL and R nasomaxillary area4 years follow-up no recurrenceMiloro and
Quinn 37/FL maxillaAnt. mandible1 year L maxilla and ant mandibleBilodeau, Chowdhury, and Collins42/FL mandibleL maxilla1 year L
mandible2 years L maxillary sinus/ethmoid region Characteristics of multifocal central giant cell granulomas Smith et al. have proposed a
new term, “craniofacial giant cell dysplasia,” to describe the multifocal central giant cell of the jaws. Miloro and Quinn advocate dividing
multifocal central giant cell lesions into synchronous or metachronous lesions. They propose metachronous lesions are more likely to
represent a recurrence due to inadequate initial treatment or tumor seeding, whereas synchronous lesions are more likely to represent true
multifocality. Our case represents a clinically aggressive, multifocal, and recurrent CGCG that is quite bland histologically, and not
associated with other conditions or syndromes. It displays a secondary aneurysmal bone cyst component seen in 30% of CGCG as well as other
osseous lesions . Given the small number of cases available, it is difficult to draw any conclusions. However, some trends may be observed.
Similar to CGCG, there was a female predominance, representing six of the seven patients. Slightly older populations than in most CGCGs were
seen. The mean age in our review of published multifocal cases was 33 years, with only two of the seven patients younger than 30 years of
age. It is possible that occult or inadequately treated CGCGs spread hematogenously, but this is not a traditional characteristic behavior
of these lesions. Multifocal CGCGs are more aggressive than solitary CGCGs as exhibited by increased recurrence and osseous destruction.
They should be treated with more aggressive surgical therapy as in five of seven cases the patients had a recurrence. Central giant cell
granuloma remains a challenge for pathologists. There are multiple conditions that must be ruled out clinically, and the controversy
surrounding the etiology of this condition has yet to be definitively resolved. The authors would like to thank Drs. Leon Barnes, Simion
Chiosea, and Raja Seethala for their comments on this paper.
