To determine the validity of a repeat thyroid function test for preterm infants, and to investigate factors that influence thyroid function
of preterm infants, thyroid functions of 105 infants born at <32 weeks' gestational age were evaluated. Initial serum free thyroxine (fT4)
and thyrotropin (TSH) levels were measured during the first 10 days of life, and repeated tests were performed more than 2 weeks apart. We
analyzed the effects of gestational age, systemic diseases, and nutrition on the development of thyroid dysfunction. Thirty-one infants
(30%) had low fT4 levels (<0.7 ng/dL) in the absence of elevated TSH levels (<7 µU/mL). Thirteen infants (12%) had hypothyroidism (fT4 <0.7
ng/dL, TSH ≥10 µU/mL) and mean age at diagnosis was 28±17 days. Twelve infants had moderately elevated TSH (TSH 10-30 µU/mL) with normal fT4
levels after 1 week of postnatal life. The history of undergone surgical procedure which needed iodine containing disinfectants was
significantly frequent in the infant with hypothyroidism and transient TSH elevation. Repeated thyroid function tests are necessary for
preterm infants, even though they initially show normal thyroid function, and are especially important for infants who have been exposed to
excessive or insufficient levels of iodine. Postnatal thyroid function of preterm infants differs from that of term infants. Blunted
postnatal thyrotropin (TSH) surges and low serum T4 levels are frequently observed in preterm neonates; this is generally referred to as
hypothyroxinemia of prematurity (1). In contrast to typical congenital hypothyroidism, a normal TSH level upon initial screening followed by
delayed TSH elevation is observed in some preterm infants (2). The main factors that influence thyroid function in preterm infants are
immaturity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis, immature thyroid hormone synthesis, immature thyroid hormone metabolism, and systemic
diseases. Insufficient or excessive iodine intakes also influence preterm thyroid function (3). Although the survival rate of very low birth
weight infants has increased in recent years, guidelines for thyroid function monitoring have not been established for preterm infants. The
aims of this study were to examine the characteristics of thyroid function of preterm infants, to determine the validity of a repeat thyroid
function test for preterm infants, and to investigate factors that influence thyroid function of preterm infants. One hundred five preterm
infants who were born at <32 weeks' estimated gestational age (GA) at the Seoul National University Children's Hospital and the Seoul
National University Bundang Hospital between July 2004 and May 2006, and who underwent repeat thyroid function tests were included in the
study. Infants with maternal thyroid diseases, multiple congenital anomalies, or who died within a month after birth were excluded from the
study. The mean gestational age of these 105 infants was 28.4±2.2 weeks, and mean birth weight was 1,112±320 g. We had routinely performed
thyroid function test more than twice for preterm infants who were born at <32 weeks' GA. Initial serum levels of free thyroxine (fT4),
triiodothyronine (T3), and thyrotropin (TSH) were measured within the first 10 days of life using radioimmunoassays and were repeated every
2 to 4 weeks after the first test. Clinical data were retrospectively analyzed in terms of gestational age, birth weight, Apgar score at 5
min, the development of respiratory distress syndrome requiring surfactant supplementation, chronic lung disease (duration of oxygen
requirement ≥4 weeks), necrotizing enterocolitis (Bell stage ≥IIA), intraventricular hemorrhage (grade ≥3), and the history of surgical
procedures. We obtained information on prenatal treatment with dexamethasone and the use of dopamine, dobutamine or morphine on the day on
which the thyroid function test was performed. Nutritional status was estimated from the interval until tolerable feeding (≥100 mL/kg per
day) was achieved. The study was approved by the institutional ethics committee of participating institution. Hypothyroxinemia of
prematurity was defined as a free T4 level <0.7 ng/dL and a TSH level <7 µU/mL in the initial test. Hypothyroidism was defined as a free T4
level <0.7 ng/dL in conjunction with a TSH level ≥10 µU/mL or as a TSH level ≥30 µU/mL in conjunction with any level of free T4. Transient
TSH elevation was defined as normal fT4 levels with moderately elevated TSH levels (TSH 10-30 µU/mL) after 1 weeks of postnatal life and TSH
level was eventually normalized in the follow-up test without treatment. Preterm infants who did not have apparent thyroid dysfunction were
included as controls. Data were expressed as means±standard deviations. Statistical analyses were performed using the t test or the Mann-
Whitney U test. The Pearson chi-square test was used to compare categorical data. All calculations were performed using SPSS 12.0 (SPSS,
Inc., Chicago, IL, U.S.A.), and a P value <0.05 was considered statistically significant. Most infants born at <28 weeks' gestation had low
free T4 concentrations during the first week of postnatal life. Serum free T4 levels gradually increased, and at 2 months of life, reached
levels equal to those of term infants. Infants of low gestational age had a tendency to show low TSH concentrations during the first week of
postnatal life. TSH levels had a tendency to increase transiently between the second and fourth weeks of life in all groups. T3
concentrations gradually increased during the first 2 months after birth in all infants (Fig. 1). Hypothyroxinemia of prematurity was
observed in 31 preterm infants (28%). Gestational age, birth weight, and Apgar score at 5 min were significantly lower in preterm infants
with hypothyroxinemia than in the controls (P<0.01) (Table 1). Prenatal treatment with dexamethasone had no significant effect on the
results of the initial thyroid function test. The incidence of respiratory distress syndrome and the incidence of brochopulmonary dysplasia
were significantly greater in preterm infants with hypothyroxinemia than in the controls (P<0.05; P<0.01). Among 31 infants with
hypothyroxinemia of prematurity, 7 infants received L-thyroxine supplementation; the remaining 24 infants did not receive L-thyroxine
supplementation. Of 24 infants with hypothyroxinemia who did not receive L-thyroxine supplementation, three were diagnosed with overt
hypothyroidism during follow-up; free T4 levels of the remaining 21 infants normalized (≥0.7 ng/mL) during the first 3 weeks of postnatal
life. Of 105 infants, 13 (12%) were diagnosed with hypothyroidism. Their mean age at diagnosis was 28±17 days. Preterm infants with
hypothyroidism had significantly lower gestational age and birth weights than the controls (P<0.05; P<0.01) (Table 1). Among these 13
infants, 8 infants who did not have overt hypothyroidism on the first thyroid function test were diagnosed as hypothyroidism on the repeated
test. Especially infants of case 8 and 10 showed normal thyroid function on first test but turned out to have hypothyroidism on about 6
weeks of life (Table 2). Of 105 infants, 12 (11%) showed moderately elevated TSH levels (TSH 10-30 µU/mL) with normal fT4 levels (>0.7
ng/dL) after 1 week of postnatal life and their clinical findings were not significantly different from controls. The history of undergone
surgical procedure which needed iodine containing disinfectants was significantly frequent in the infant with hypothyroidism and transient
TSH elevation (P<0.01; P<0.05) (Table 1). In preterm infants with hypothyroidism, the interval until tolerable feeding was achieved tended
to be prolonged, but the increase was not statistically significant (Table 1). The incidence of thyroid dysfunction, especially
hypothyroidism in preterm infants was high in this study. Thyroid hormone is associated with the neurodevelopment of preterm infants (4, 5).
Despite many studies on thyroid function in preterm infants, its significance is still debated. Moreover, there has been much debate about
the need for routine repeat thyroid function tests for preterm infants (6, 7) and thyroid hormone replacement in hypothyroxinemia of
prematurity. In term neonates, filter paper blood specimens are used to measure TSH levels and screen for congenital hypothyroidism during
the first 2 to 5 days of postnatal life. However, the TSH surge and pituitary feedback for thyroid hormone are limited and TSH may not be
increased even though serum thyroid hormone is low in preterm infants (8). In addition, very low birth weight infants usually have various
systemic diseases and are given various drugs such as dopamine, dobutamine and morphine that affect the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroidal
axis. Thus, TSH levels are not representative of overall thyroid function in preterm infants. In this study, eight preterm infants with
hypothyroidism exhibited delayed TSH elevation and 2 of them showed normal thyroid function on the first test. The age at which
hypothyroidism developed varied, and we could not anticipate which infants were at risk. Our findings justify repeated thyroid screening
tests, including TSH and T4 measurements, in preterm infants. The incidence of persistent hypothyroidism among preterm infants does not
differ from that among term newborns, but transient hypothyroidism is considerably more prevalent (1). Mandel et al. reported that the
incidence of hypothyroidism in very low birth weight infants is 1:153 and that about half of these infants had atypical hypothyroidism (2).
Larson et al. reported the incidence to be 1:250 (9). In studies conducted in Belgium, 5% to 18% of preterm infants had hypothyroidism,
which was caused by an iodine deficiency (10, 11). The daily iodine requirement of preterm infants is more than twice that of term infants
(12), and studies conducted in Europe demonstrated that most preterm infants have iodine deficiency (13-15). In our study, the incidence of
hypothyroidism was 12%, which was much higher than expected. Iodine intakes in Korea are thought to be sufficient because most Koreans eat
various kind of seaweed, and the iodine content of human milk from lactating mothers is higher than that in other countries (12, 16).
However, it takes about one month to achieve full enteral feeding in extreme preterm infants, before which most nutrition is supplied
parenterally. According to Ibrahim et al., most extremely preterm infants who receive parenteral nutrition have iodine deficiency (14). It
is thought that preterm infants in Korea also have iodine deficiency, which might explain the high incidence of hypothyroidism in our
patients. In contrast, there is some evidence that the preterm neonate is more sensitive to the thyroid-suppressive effects of iodine
exposure than the full-term neonate (17, 18). Escape from the Wolff-Chaikoff effect, that is the capacity of thyroid to reduce iodide
trapping in response to excess iodine, does not appear until 36 to 40 weeks' gestation (19). The safe upper limit for daily iodine intake is
lower for preterm infants than for term infants (20). Topical iodine can be absorbed through the skin. The skin of preterm infants is thin
and may absorb iodine easily, and preterm infants have many chances that can be exposed to iodine-containing disinfectants. In addition,
lactating women in Korea have seaweed soup containing abundant iodine traditionally and iodine concentration of breast milk of Korean women
was reported very high (12). Although it is not clear whether such exposure to iodine can cause overt hypothyroidism in preterm infants, it
may be one of the reasons for the high incidence of hypothyroidism. Transient hypothyroxinemia is common in preterm infants and is more
severe in infants born at a low gestational age. Some studies suggest that low serum concentrations of thyroid hormone in the early period
of life are associated with poor developmental outcomes (4, 5), although a definitive causal relationship between them is unclear. Thyroid
hormone supplementation is frequently used for treatment of hypothyroxinemia, but there is no conclusive evidence that it is beneficial.
Some authors have recommended that thyroid hormone supplementation should not be used for infants with low thyroid hormone levels unless
they have elevated TSH levels (21, 22). However, in preterm infants born at <28 weeks' gestation, it usually takes more than one month for
free T4 levels to reach levels equal to those of term infants. It has been reported that thyroxine supplementation of infants born at <28
weeks' gestation results in a better neurodevelopmental outcome at 2, 5, and 10 yr of age (23-25). These findings suggest that thyroxine
supplementation may be beneficial for preterm infants born at <28 weeks' gestation who have hypothyroxinemia. In our study, free T4 levels
increased in most infants who had hypothyroxinemia and did not receive thyroxine supplementation during the first 3 weeks of postnatal life.
This suggests that thyroxine supplementation should be considered if free T4 levels are persistently low during the first 3 weeks after
birth. Further studies are needed before clinical application of this finding. It has been reported that low thyroid hormone levels are
associated with the development of respiratory distress syndrome (26). In this study, respiratory distress syndrome was more frequent in
preterm infants with hypothyroxinemia. However, gestational age was lower in preterm infants with hypothyroxinemia and specimens were
obtained between 4 and 10 days of postnatal life. Thus, the low free T4 and T3 levels might have been caused by euthyroid sick syndromes or
the low gestational age. In conclusion, preterm infants born at <32 weeks' gestation have a high incidence of hypothyroidism. Repeated
thyroid function tests are necessary for preterm infants, even though they may initially show normal thyroid function. The high incidence of
hypothyroidism in preterm infants may be associated with excessive or insufficient iodine intake. Further studies are needed to elucidate
the causal relationship between iodine balance and thyroid function in preterm infants. Serum free T4, TSH, T3 concentration of 85 preterm
infants during first 2 months after birth, grouped by gestational age. 20 infants who received L-thyroxine replacement were excluded. ●, <28
weeks (n=27); □, 28-30 weeks (n=32); ▲, 30-32 weeks (n=26). Comparison between infants with hypothyroxinemia of prematurity, hypothyroidism,
transient TSH elevation and control *Control: Preterm infants without hypothyroxinemia of prematurity, hypothyroidism and transient TSH
elevation; †Among 31 infants who had hypothyroxinemia, 7 infants who were diagnosed as hypothyroidism or transient TSH elevation during
follow-up were excluded; ‡P value: Between infants with hypothyroxinemia and controls; §P value: Between infants with hypothyroidism and
controls; ∥P value: Between infants with transient TSH elevation and controls. GA, gestational age; BW, birthweight; AS5, Apgar score at 5
min; RDS, respiratory distress syndrome; BPD, bronchopulmonary dysplasia; IVH, intraventricular hemorrhage; NEC, necrotizing enterocolitis;
NS, not significant. Clinical characteristics of 13 infants with overt hypothyroidism *Case 3: On 26 days of life,free T4 0.98 ng/dL, TSH
6.0 µU/mL. GA, gestational age; BW, birthweight; TSH, thyrotropin; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; NEC, necrotizing enterocolitis; EVD,
external ventricular drain.
