A 22-year-old man presented for orthodontic surgery because of mandibular prognathism. Clinical symptoms suggested acromegaly, and diagnosis
was verified by an endocrinologist as well as by radiograph. Bilateral mandibular prognathism often represents the first and most striking
physical characteristic of acromegaly; usually, it is also the main reason why patients seek help from orthodontists or maxillo-facial
surgeons. This case report recapitulates the clinical and histopathological findings in pituitary growth hormone (GH) adenomas and
emphasises their importance in surgical orthodontic planning. Mandibular prognatism, macroglossia and abnormal growth of hands and feet
represent strong indicators for the diagnosis of acromegaly. This disease and its complications not only affect the entire body but increase
mortality if the pituitary gland tumour remains untreated. Pituitary adenomas have a variety of clinical manifestations that are related to
excessive hormone secretion by the tumour, hormone deficits by normal pituitary gland tissue and the expansion of tumour mass. Most patients
have a 5- to 10-year history of changes in facial features before acromegaly is diagnosed . Our case report recapitulates the clinical and
histopathological findings in pituitary GH adenomas and associated acromegaly and emphasises their importance in surgical orthodontic
planning. A 22-year-old man was referred to our hospital for orthognathic surgery after 12 months of presurgical orthodontic treatment (fig.
1). Physical examination showed pronounced mandibular prognathism, a widened and thickened nose, prominent supraorbital ridges, thick and
coarsened lips and marked facial lines (fig. 2). Intraorally, macroglossia was evident, impairing speech. The patient reported that
mandibular prognathism had began to develop 4 years previously. Additionally, his shoe size and hand size had increased considerably during
the last few months (fig. 3). Initial intraoral photograph showing Angle class III malocclusion. Initial facial photographs (2a: frontal and
2b: lateral view). Initial hands and feet photograph. Lateral cephalometric radiograph examination showed massive mandibular prognathism,
prominent supraorbital ridges and an enlarged sella turcica (fig. 4). Additionally, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans confirmed the
expansively growing tumour mass within and above the sella turcica (fig. 5). Furthermore, the entire calvarian bone was thickened, thus
confirming the provisional diagnosis of acromegaly. The patient had been referred for examination by an endocrinologist. Diagnosis of a
pituitary GH producing macroadenoma was confirmed as well as reactive hyperprolactinaemia and deficiency of the gonadotropin axis. Diabetes
mellitus was not found. Lateral cephalometric radiograph. MRIs of tumour site. 5a. coronal 5b. sagittal: MRI scans show extensive growth in
and above the sella turcica with a total volume of 4.7 × 2.9 × 2.2 cm3. Endocrinological examination showed increased levels of the insulin-
like growth factor-I (IGF-I) (627.0 ng/ml; norm: 117.0 to 329.2 ng/ml), increased prolactin (63.69 μg/l; norm: 2.10 to 17.7 μg/l) and
depressed testosterone levels (0.84 μg/l; norm: 2.41 to 8.30 μg/l). Ultrasonography showed hepatosplenomegaly and an enlarged left kidney.
In addition, colonoscopy showed dilatation of the colonic lumen. Ophthalomological screening showed a large bi-temporal visual field defect
due to tumour compression of the optic chiasm. The patient underwent trans-sphenoidal surgery with complete tumour resection. Histological
examination showed a highly vascularised pituitary adenoma with a diffuse (solid) growth pattern. Higher magnification showed uniform cells
with broad eosinophilic cytoplasm and round to oval nuclei (fig. 6a). The proliferation index was very low with approximately 3% of cells
showing immunoreactivity against MiB-1 (fig. 6b). Parts of the tumour cells showed immunopositivity for prolactin in peripheral parts of
cytoplasm (fig. 6c). However, no immunoreactivity was present that provided an antibody against the human growth hormone (fig. 6d). Highly
vascularised pituitary adenoma with diffuse (solid) growth pattern. Higher magnification shows uniform cells with broad eosinophilic
cytoplasm and round to oval nuclei (Hematoxylin and Eosin, A 100×). The proliferation index is very low with approximately 3% of cells
showing immunoreactivity against MiB-1 (B 200×). Some tumour cells show immunopositivity for prolactin in the peripheral areas of the
cytoplasm (C 200×). However, no immunoreactivity was present that provided an antibody against the human growth hormone (hGH, D 200×).
Reestablishment of endocrine balance would be followed by mandibular osteotomies to reestablish facial harmony and Angle class I occlusion.
Since symmetrical mandibular prognathism can be part of syndromal growth abnormality, this disease is usually noticeable shortly after birth
or in early childhood. Non-syndromal growth abnormalities of the jaws are mainly due to genetic or unknown factors. The third group are
acquired growth abnormalities of the jaws. When symmetrical bilateral mandibular prognathism is noticed, the diagnosis of acromegaly should
always be taken into consideration . Acromegaly is a rare disease with a prevalence of 40 to 70 cases per million people in the population
and an annual incidence of 3 to 4 new patients per million . Owing to its insidious onset, acromegaly is often diagnosed late (4 to over 10
years after onset) at an average age of about 40 years. The disease affects men and women equally . In our patient, the diagnosis of
acromegaly was considered because of the patient's manifestations and symptoms at first presentation. Mandibular prognathism is amongst the
most commonly found oral manifestations of acromegaly and it was the main reason for the patient to seek orthodontic treatment. Enlargement
of the lips and the tongue, such as in our patient, may impair swallowing, chewing and speaking. Frontal bossing, prognathism, macroglossia
and an increased size of hands and feet have often been described in the literature as cosmetic changes associated with GH adenomas . All
these changes were present in our patient. Lateral cephalometric radiograph examination of our patient showed massive mandibular
prognathism, prominent supraorbital ridges and an enlarged sella turcica. Patients with acromegaly usually exhibit enlargement of all parts
of the neurocranium and orofacial bones except the maxilla. The mandible usually shows the biggest enlargement, and the ramus is more
affected than the body of the mandible . The enlargement of the sella turcica caused by the tumour expansion of the pituitary gland is a
striking manifestation that is detectable on lateral cephalometric radiographs in almost every patient with acromegaly . Other symptoms
reported by our patient included fatigue, daytime somnolence and joint pain. Decreased energy, osteoarthritis and somnolence occur in about
50% of patients . Patients also exhibit cardiovascular hypertension, congestive heart failure and impaired glucose metabolism, but these
diseases were not present in our patient. Diabetes mellitus, sleep apnea (90%), lumbar stenosis and carpal tunnel syndrome (20%) are other
possible manifestations of GH adenomas . In adolescents, GH excess manifests clinically as acromegaly and gigantism if the onset of the
disease occurs before the closure of the epiphyseal plates . Adenomas that grow upwards or expand massively, such as in our patient, may
compress the optic chiasm. Such a compression may lead to visual field defects, which begin in the superior temporal sectors and then
progress to bitemporal hemianopsia. Persistent compression may lead to blindness. Routine assessment of visual fields and acuity is
therefore essential. Measurement of GH response to glucose load is the standard diagnostic test. An increase in the serum concentration of
IGF-I, the main GH dependent growth factor, confirms this diagnosis . MRI has emerged as the imaging modality of choice for evaluating
pituitary glands . Some adenomas are mixed; mixed GH- and prolactin (PRL)-secreting adenomas occur frequently (25%). Therefore, elevated
prolactin levels, such as in our patient, are not unusual. Available treatment options include surgery, medication and radiotherapy . Trans-
sphenoidal surgery is regarded as the first-line treatment of acromegaly . Depending on the tumour size, long-term remission is achieved in
50% to 67% of patients, but safe removal of all tumour tissue can be difficult. Microadenomas (less than 10 mm in diameter) are more
amenable to cure. Preoperative GH concentration seems to be the best indicator for successful treatment and a permanent reduction of GH and
IGF-I . If surgery fails to cure acromegaly, medical treatment with somatostatin analogues is recommended rather than radiotherapy .
Regardless of the initial choice of treatment, patients should be followed up indefinitely . Our patient was treated with trans-sphenoidal
surgery, which adequately reduced GH and IGF-I levels up to six months postoperatively. After a permanent reduction of GH and IGF-I levels,
the enlarged soft tissue regresses gradually . However, only little improvement in bone changes may be expected. After a stable reduction of
GH and IGF-I levels of at least two years, bimaxillary osteotomy may be conducted for orthognatic correction and reduction of supraorbital
ridges in one single procedure. However, late relapses may occur due to a recurrence of pituitary gland adenoma . Acromegaly is a rare
disease that is responsible for bilateral mandibular prognathism in adults. Excess of growth hormone and local tumour growth of the
pituitary gland affect the entire body and increase mortality. In most patients, this disease is diagnosed far too late. Orthodontic and
maxillo-facial surgeons dealing with orthognatic surgery should be well aware of this disease as patients usually present with them first
because of striking mandibular growth. In case of mandibular prognatism in combination with enlargement of lips, nose, tongue, hands and
feet followed by visual field defects, sleep apnea, decreased energy and osteoarthritis, every clinician should consider the diagnosis of
acromegaly. Although acromegaly is a rare disease, its symptoms are striking and can hardly be misconstrued. The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. GM and MA analysed the patient's history, reviewed all patient data and drafted the manuscript. VC carried out
the histological analysis, wrote the histological part of the paper and contributed to the writing of the final version. DO, PP and KJ were
involved in revising the article. Each author reviewed the paper for content and contributed to the writing of the manuscript. All authors
approved the final report. Written consent for publication was obtained from the patient.
