Pseudomyxoma peritonei results from ovarian and appendiceal mucinous tumors. Cyst rupture results in intraabdominal mucin accumulation,
leading to abdominal distension. No effective treatment has yet been established. Pseudomyxoma peritonei is generally associated with a poor
prognosis. In a recent Mayo Clinic report, the 5-year survival rate for this disease was 53% and the 10-year survival rate was 32%, while
the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center reported 5- and 10-year survival rates of 75% and 10%. In this report, we describe 4 patients
with a laparoscopically confirmed recurrence of pseudomyxoma peritonei who subsequently underwent repeated laparoscopic mucin removal.
Because laparoscopic surgery can be performed frequently, it appears that laparoscopic surgery, a minimally invasive procedure, greatly
improves the quality of life of patients with pseudomyxoma peritonei. Pseudomyxoma peritonei, a mucinous cancer primarily of ovarian origin,
was first described by Rokitansky in 1892, although the term “pseudomyxoma peritonei” was first used by Werth.1,2 In 1901, Frankel reported
a similar pathology in association with a cyst of the appendix.3 Since then, the term has been used for various mucusproducing tumors
characterized by abundant extracellular mucin. This disease occurs most commonly in females 40 to 60 years of age and originates from
mucinous tumors of the ovary or appendix. It is a rare disease characterized by abdominal swelling caused by the mucinous material collected
in the entire abdominal cavity following cyst rupture, whether benign or malignant. In many cases, examination reveals an elevated rate of
erythrocyte sedimentation and elevated levels of carcinoembryonic antigen. Diagnostic findings of fluid collection and tumor images are
often obtained through advanced imaging technologies including supersonography or CT.4 Recently, MRI has also been reported as useful.5
However, the definitive diagnosis is made by the confirmation of intraperitoneal gelatinous mucus. Surgical resection of the primary lesion
is the conventional treatment. Recurrences may be observed, and when they are, complete removal of mucus-producing cells disseminated in the
peritoneal cavity is difficult, and multiple abdominal surgeries are often required. In some cases, prophylactic removal of pelvic viscera
is performed. The prognosis is generally poor, because many cases, whether benign or malignant initially, recur repeatedly regardless of
further treatment. Herein, we report on 4 patients diagnosed as having pseudomyxoma peritonei who underwent repeated mucus removal via
laparoscopy. This patient was a 47-year-old, G0P0 (gravidity = 0, parity = 0) female. She underwent a partial appendectomy for treatment of
appendicitis when she was 7 years old. At that time, a portion of the appendix was not resected because of intense inflammation. At age 23,
she underwent abdominal surgery in our department to remove a right ovarian tumor. The tumor was 3 cm × 3 cm in diameter with a calcified
shell and was determined to be pseudomyxoma peritonei of primary appendiceal origin. The patient was treated with oral administration of
cyclophosphamide for 2 years and was followed by ultrasonography every other year on an outpatient basis. At age 33, an abnormal shadow in
the Douglas cavum was found on ultrasonography and CT. The first laparoscopic surgery was performed, and recurrence of pseudomyxoma
peritonei localized in the uterus and uterine appendages was confirmed. Mucus was removed as much as possible under laparoscopy. No
abnormality was observed at the site of the previous tumor removal. Again, surgery was followed by oral cyclophosphamide administration for
one year. One year later, at age 34, a second laparoscopic surgery was performed with the intention of confirming the rate at which the
lesion was expanding. The lesions in the uterus and appendages remained unchanged, but additional lesions were observed around the liver.
Again, mucus was maximally removed. Then, the patient was placed under follow-up on an outpatient basis and underwent ultrasound imaging
every other year. Subsequently, at age 43, she experienced intensified abdominal distention and anorexia. CT examination revealed an
abnormal shadow (Figure 1). A third laparoscopic surgery was performed, and expansions of lesions were observed throughout the peritoneal
cavity with formation of masses on the serous surface of the sigmoid and gastric corpus. The peritoneal cavity was washed with low-
molecular-weight dextran, and mucus was removed to the maximum extent possible. During the next 2 years, the patient experienced abdominal
distention, and fourth and fifth laparoscopic surgeries were performed when she was 44 and 45 years old, respectively. On each occasion,
mucus had accumulated throughout the peritoneal cavity, and 9.6 L and 5.6 L of mucus was removed with saline at the fourth and fifth
surgeries, respectively. Computed Tomographic scan of accumulated mucus (Case 1). The patient has undergone a total of 5 laparoscopic
surgeries to date and has survived 25 years since initially presenting with pseudomyxoma peritonei. A 56-year-old, G2P2 female had been seen
in the department of internal medicine at our hospital when she was 51years of age. Her chief complaint of abdominal distention was thought
to result from pseudomyxoma peritonei, diagnosed by CT (Figure 2). Laparoscopic surgery was performed for intraperitoneal observation and
removal of mucus. A mass near the appendix and mucus spreading throughout the peritoneal cavity were confirmed, and the mucus was removed.
The second and third laparoscopic surgeries were performed when the patient was 52 and 53 years old, respectively, because of continued
complaints of abdominal distention. On each occasion the accumulated mucus was removed to the maximum extent possible, and 6.8L and 6.7L of
mucosa was removed at the second and third surgery, respectively. At present, this patient is being followed up on an outpatient basis.
Computed Tomographic image of accumulated mucus (Case 2). A 75-year-old, 2G2P, female, at age 71 was referred to our department from another
hospital where an accumulation of ascites and the presence of masses in the left lower abdominal quadrant had been observed. CT examination
revealed pseudomyxoma peritonei, and laparoscopic surgery was performed. Mucus had spread throughout the peritoneal cavity, and the
appendiceal capsule had ruptured. Laparoscopic appendicectomy was performed, and mucus that had accumulated up to the volume of 0.5L was
removed as far as possible. Two years later, at the age of 74, the patient developed abdominal distention, and CT confirmed the presence of
pseudomyxoma peritonei spreading to the upper abdomen. The second laparoscopic surgery was performed. This patient is currently being
followed up on an outpatient basis. A 61-year-old, 2G2P female, at age 60 visited her local hospital with a chief complaint of abdominal
distention and received a diagnosis of inoperable pancreatic cancer. She sought a second opinion and received a CT diagnosis of suspected
pseudomyxoma peritonei. She was referred to our hospital where laparoscopic surgery revealed masses throughout the peritoneal cavity and
abundant accumulation of mucus at the volume of 10.8 L. Mucus was removed to the maximum extent possible. Six months later, the second
laparoscopic surgery was performed because of the recurrence of abdominal distention and weight gain of 18 kg from after the previous
surgery. Mucus accumulated to the volume of 16.5 L was removed as much as possible. It was noted that the size of the previously observed
abdominal masses had increased. Six months later, the third laparoscopic surgery was performed because of increased abdominal distention and
weight gain of 20 kg from the previous time. Mucus accumulated to the volume of 16 L was removed as much as possible. Recently, the rate of
mucus accumulation has increased. Pseudomyxoma peritonei is generally considered a disease with a poor prognosis, with 5-year and 10-year
survival rates of 53% and 32%, respectively, according to a recent report from the Mayo Clinic,6 and 75% and 10%, respectively, according to
a report from the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.7 Sugarbaker et al8 reported that the treatment of pseudo-myxoma peritonei is
principally based on resection of the primary lesion and removal of mucus by laparotomy. Because complete removal of mucus-producing cells
from the peritoneal cavity is rarely achieved, laparotomy must be repeated at intervals determined by the rate of mucus accumulation. In
addition, a recurrence rate of over 90% is reported even after the removal.9 Consequently, patients with this disease, which has a poor
prognosis with repeated recurrence, must undergo multiple highly invasive procedures. Nonsurgical treatment approaches have been reported
recently, including systemic and intraperitoneal applications of chemical therapy using 5-flurouracil (5FU) or cisplatin (CDDP).6,10 Various
therapies including continuous hyperthermic peritoneal perfusion, in which the peritoneal cavity is perfused with heated saline solution,
and intraperitoneal hyperthermic chemotherapy, in which anti-cancer agents are included with the heated saline perfusion have also been
attempted.7,11–14 However, none of them can greatly improve the prognosis. The major symptom of pseudomyxoma peritonei is abdominal
distention resulting from accumulation of mucus. To alleviate this symptom, mucus removal is performed. However, the mucus is often highly
viscous, and its removal by abdominal puncture is difficult. There are various reports on mucolytic therapy. Green et al15 described a
mucolytic therapy using a 5% glucose solution to dissolve mucin-like mucus. Others16 have reported that the mucolytic effect of such
solutions was not superior to that of saline or low-molecular-weight dextran. In some of the cases presented here, in which mucus removal
through the suction tube was difficult, we used low-molecular-weight dextran or saline. Usually, intraperitoneal mucus cannot be completely
removed, and the prognosis of this disease remains poor. At present, frequent surgical laparotomy is performed. In this situation,
laparoscopic procedures have been reported for observing the peritoneal cavity.17–19 Among them, mucus removal by trocar insertion and
postoperative administration of an anti-cancer agent via that portal site have also been reported.18,19 Laparoscopy, which provides a view
of the entire peritoneal cavity, is also useful for observing the progression of the disease, which may recur repeatedly in the entire
abdominal cavity. The first trocar is inserted at the umbilicus to locate the mucus pool, and the second trocar is inserted for aspiration
and cleaning. The trocar can be inserted selectively from sites including the right and left sides of the pubic region and the upper and
lower abdomen along the median line, depending on the mucus-pooling site, to remove the mucus from the entire peritoneal cavity. In
laparotomy, on the contrary, a large incision is needed to view the entire cavity; therefore, the procedure is more invasive for the
patient. Consequently, the quality of life of patients with pseudomyxoma peritonei would be improved by repeatedly performing minimally
invasive laparoscopic surgery. In this article, we report on 4 patients who underwent repeated laparoscopic mucus removal. Based on this
experience, we recommend laparoscopic surgery as a means to alleviate the symptoms of abdominal distention. We plan to continue performing
intraperitoneal observation and mucus removal by laparoscopy in these cases.
