A 38-year-old woman was discovered to have a systolic murmur for an unrelated complaint. Transesophageal echocardiography showed no atrial
or ventricular septal defects, but multiple large collateral vessels in inter-ventricular septum. The origin of left coronary artery was not
seen at the expected site on the aortic root. The 64-multislice computed tomography confirmed the diagnosis of an anomalous origin of the
left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery. Left coronary artery was revascularized with a saphenous vein graft with an uneventful
recovery. During physical examination, a 38-year-old woman was found to have an asymptomatic systolic murmur. The electrocardiogram was
normal, and the chest radiograph showed mild cardiomegaly. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a moderately decreased systolic function
(ejection fraction = 35%), no mitral regurgitation, and multiple muscular ventricular septal defects (VSDs), i.e., a possible “Swiss cheese”
VSD. In contrast, the transesophageal echocardiogram showed no atrial or ventricular septal defects; instead, there were multiple large
collateral vessels in the interventricular septum. Because the origin of the left coronary artery (LCA) was not visualized, and to better
clarify the anatomy, a contrast-enhanced 64-multislice computed tomogragraphy (MSCT) was performed. The tomogram showed a dilated and
tortuous right coronary artery arising from the right sinus of Valsalva and giving off extensive collateral vessels coursing over the right
ventricular wall, the interventricular septum, and the apex to the LCA that originated from the proximal main pulmonary artery (Fig. 1a–c).
Therefore, the diagnosis of anomalous origin of the LCA from the pulmonary artery (ALCAPA) was confirmed. Technically, transfer of the LCA
from the PA was not feasible; thus, the LCA coronary origin was oversewn and a saphenous vein graft from the aorta to the LCA was performed.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful.Fig. 1(a) A 64-MSCT shows severe dilatation of right coronary artery. (b) Several
collateral arteries connecting left and right coronary arteries are shown. (c) ALCAPA is shown (a) A 64-MSCT shows severe dilatation of
right coronary artery. (b) Several collateral arteries connecting left and right coronary arteries are shown. (c) ALCAPA is shown ALCAPA,
also known as Bland–White–Garland syndrome, is a rare congenital anomaly and occurs in 1 in 300,000 live births (0.25% to 0.5%) [2, 4]. Few
patients survive past childhood without surgical repair, and without surgical intervention nearly 90% die within the first year of life .
Improved imaging technologies now provide accurate diagnosis and provide opportunities for treatment planning. Two-dimensional Doppler
echocardiography is considered the major diagnostic tool for ALCAPA; however, it has limitations, as illustrated by the present case . The
first echocardiographies in our patient did not show the anomaly. This may have been caused by an incomplete echocardiography examination
due to the lack of awareness of doctors of this syndrome leading to multiple collateral arteries in the interventricular septum be
misdiagnosed as multiple VSDs. In conclusion, although ALCAPA is rare and usually an isolated anomaly, a high index of suspicion is required
for diagnosis. MSCT is a useful modality for diagnosing congenital coronary anomalies. In addition, the surgeon should be aware of the
possibility of misdiagnosing the collateral arteries in the septum by multiple VSDs and should not commit to repair the VSDs before a
modality of high sensitivity for structural and vascular anomalies, such as 64-MSCT, makes the entity certain. This article is distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
