Combined cervicothoracical vascular traumas are very uncommon, mostly resulting from penetrating injuries. These injuries are accompanied
with very high morbidity and mortality rates. In this manuscript we present a case of hemodinamycally unstable trauma patient whose major
injury was penetrating trauma of both cervical and mediastinal major vessels. The standard surgical approach of median sternotomy and neck
incision was insufficient, and the patient's instability forced the authors to improvise previously not described right-sided trap-door
thoracomy. Incorporation of such incision in the surgical arsenal may be very effective in selective cases Combined cervicothoracical
vascular traumas are uncommon, mostly resulting from high energy penetrating injuries . These injuries are diagnostically and
therapeutically challenging even for a very experienced multidisciplinary trauma team. Patients suffering from hemodynamic instability are
taken immediately to the operating room. In presence of the right sided vascular injuries, the common surgical approach is via a median
sternotomy . Combination of anterolateral thoracotomy, partial sternotomy and left infra or supraclavicular incision described as "trap-
door" thoracotomy is rarely performed since it is time-consuming and results in multiple fractures ,. We present here a case of
hemodinamycally unstable trauma patient whose major injury was penetrating trauma of both cervical and major mediastinal vessels. An
improvised right sided "trap-door" thoracotomy was necessary to achieve vascular control and reconstruction. A twenty eight years white male
was admitted to the trauma resuscitation area following a gunshot assault. On admission the patient was agitated. Vital signs revealed:
blood pressure of 120/65, heart rate of 110 per minute and oxygen saturation of 94% on oxygen mask; and respiratory rate of 20 per minute.
Physical exam revealed an entry wound located at the posterior aspect of the right shoulder. The exit wound was located at the left side of
the neck, posterior to left sternocleidomastoid muscle. A large right upper chest wall hematoma, extended to the neck was found which was
not pulsating. Pulse on both carotid arteries was intact. There was no active bleeding from both entry and exit wounds. The right upper
extremity was pale and swollen, with no palpable pulse. Breath sounds were equal and of good intensity bilaterally. The rest on physical
examination was unremarkable. The patient was treated with immediately intubation and mechanical ventilation. Intravenous bolus of
crystalloids was started. Portable chest x-ray in the trauma room revealed no pneumothorax. During the initial stay in the trauma
resuscitation area, the patient became hemodynamically unstable. Despite fluid administration, he developed tachycardia, up to 136 per
minute, and blood pressure dropped to 80/44. The cervical hematoma seemed to be increasing in size. Following this deterioration, the
patient was immediately taken to the operating room. On surgery, due to clinical impression of injury to the distal subclavian artery, a
right supraclavicular incision was performed first. Following incision of the platysma and division of the right sternocleidomastoid muscle,
significant hemorrhage appeared in the surgical field that was temporally controlled by direct digit pressure application. Recognizing this
to be hemorrhage possibly arising from major vessels in Zone I of the neck, a full mid sternotomy was performed to allow proper exposure and
vascular control. However, even following sternotomy, the athletic habitus of the patient did not allow delineation and approach to the
major sources of bleeding. The incision was extended by a right anterolateral thoracotomy (Fig 1), performed through the third intercostal
space. This right-sided "trapdoor incision" allowed adequate exposure and proximal control of the mediastinal vessels. Tears of both the
right common carotid artery and the right innominate artery were found at their confluence. The right jugular vein was injured as well.
Repair of the arterial injury was achieved by placing a graft patch modified from a collagen coated knitted polyester vascular prosthesis
(Silver Graft, Datascope, Montvale, USA). The vein was repaired by primary suture of the tear. At this stage of operation the patient was
hypothermic (34Â°Celsius) and there was clinical evidence of coagulopathy. We decided not to continue with the exploration of the distal
subclavian artery. The operation was promptly terminated by packing the neck and upper mediastinum, followed by temporary closure of the
wounds. Overall, the operation lasted 2 hours and 47 minutes. Displays how the incision was extended by a right anterolateral thoracotomy,
performed through the third intercostal space. The patient was transferred to the postoperative recovery unit where he was rewarmed and
resuscitated with blood and fresh frozen plasma. Following 4 hours, he was hemodynamically stable but still dependent on fluids. Coagulation
tests returned towards normal values. The right upper extremity was ischemic. At this point, he was transferred to the angiography suite. We
assumed that the patient had an injury of subclavian artery which was not dealt with during the initial operation. Via a right groin
approach, neck vessels and selective right subclavian artery angiography was performed." This revealed massive extravasation from to tear
located at the distal part of the right subclavian artery (Fig 2). Three Fluency covered stents (Bard Corporate, Murray Hill, NJ) were
placed and no signs of contrast extravasation were demonstrated after the procedure(Fig 3). Blood flow to right upper extremity was
restored. This figure illustrates massive extravasation from to tear located at the distal part of the right subclavian artery. No signs of
contrast extravasation were demonstrated after the procedure. The patient was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit. Twenty four hours
later he was reoperated. He underwent depacking of the neck and upper mediastinum and the trap-door incision was closed in the usual
fashion. At postoperative day three he was extubated and two days later he was transferred to the surgical ward. Due to accumulation of
pleural blood which would not drain following reinsertion of a chest tube, a video-assisted thoracoscopy was performed at postoperative day
ten and significant amounts of blood clots were evacuated." The rest of hospital stay was uneventful and the patient was discharged home
after three weeks. Penetrating injuries of the thoracic great vessels are associated with high morbidity and mortality. Many patients die on
the scene from massive hemorrhage. Mortality is significant even in patients who survive the initial period of injury and are alive on their
admission to the hospital. Demetriades et al. report overall mortality of 34.2% in patients suffering from subclavian and axillary artery
injuries . Patients with innominate artery injury usually do not survive to arrive at the hospital. There are only few case reports that
describe patients who were treated for combined common carotid and innominate artery injuries . In these, the injury was located to the left
hemithorax, unlike our patient in whom these vessels were injured on the right side. Management of major vascular injuries in the base of
the neck is complex. If the patient is stable, the first diagnostic step should be cervical and chest CT-angiography. CT angiography
provides the necessary information regarding the spectrum of vascular, mediastinal and other injuries. This information is crucial, allowing
proper decision making concerning the therapeutic plan. In the hemodynamically stable patient, significant vascular injury may be treated
with endovascular stenting. If the patient is hemodynamically unstable, he/she should be taken immediately for surgery. The selection of the
incision depends on mediastinal structures that need to be explored during the surgery. In the case of a clinical suspicion for right common
carotid artery injury, the oblique incision along the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle should be performed , with extension
to median sternotomy, if proximal control of the injury is difficult. This surgical exposure usually provides excellent approach to other
injuries of the innominate and common carotid artery. In our patient, this proved to be insufficient. The patient instability forced us to
improvise a right "trap-door" thoracomy. Defined by some as being "obsolete" this incision facilitated to achieve fast control of bleeding
in this patient. In selective cases median sternotomy does not provide adequate exposure of the mediastinal great vessels. Incorporation of
right sided trapdoor thoracotomy may be very efficient in complex cervicothoracic trauma. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. BK was the
case manager and was the main writer to draft the manuscript. IA and DH helped draft the manuscript and added significant revisions. IP, DE
and RA read the manuscript and added significant revisions. All authors discussed the details of the case, implications of the case and
commented on the manuscript at all stages. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
