Pancreatic hypoplasia refers to underdevelopment of pancreatic parenchyma which arises from either the ventral or dorsal anlage. Pancreatic
hypoplasia secondary to agenesis of the dorsal pancreas is a rare congenital anomaly, with less than 20 cases reported till date. Though the
majority of these patients present with abdominal pain (which is either nonspecific or typical of pancreatitis) or diabetes mellitus, the
disorder may rarely remain quiescent and be detected only incidentally. Agenesis of the dorsal pancreas is usually associated with various
anomalies, such as polysplenia syndrome, wandering spleen, interruption of the inferior vena cava, hemiazygos and azygos continuation,
symmetrical liver, anomalous hepatic fissure or lobe, left-sided inferior vena cava, median gall bladder, inverted gallbladder and stomach,
and intestinal malrotation; there may also be a combination of multiple visceral anomalies. In this article, the authors report a rare case
of hypoplasia of the pancreas that was detected incidentally on imaging; there was no other coexisting anomaly or complication. The case is
reported because of its rarity. The emphasis is on the differential diagnosis, coexisting anomalies, and complications. A 45-year-old
alcoholic, nondiabetic male patient with clinical hepatomegaly and an unremarkable past medical history came for ultrasonography of the
abdomen. Laboratory tests, including blood glucose levels, HbAlc levels, liver function tests, and kidney function test were within normal
limits. Ultrasonography revealed mild hepatomegaly with grade I fatty infiltration. The pancreas body and tail were not optimally
visualized; however, the head of the pancreas appeared normal. The main pancreatic duct was not dilated. Contrast-enhanced computed
tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed complete absence of the neck, body, and tail of the pancreas [Figure 1]. The head of the pancreas,
though normal in attenuation and pattern of enhancement, appeared flattened and truncated at the anterosuperior part [Figure 2]. Mild
hepatomegaly was also noted. The other intra-abdominal structures, including the spleen, gall bladder, and inferior vena cava appeared
unremarkable. Axial contrast-enhanced CT image shows absence of neck, body, and tail of the pancreas; there is a truncated head (black
arrow) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image shows a normalappearing truncated head with a normal-appearing uncinate process (black arrow) Based
on the clinical and CT findings, we arrived at the diagnosis of isolated, uncomplicated, agenesis of the dorsal pancreas or hypoplasia of
the pancreas secondary to agenesis of the dorsal pancreas. Pancreatic hypoplasia refers to congenital underdevelopment of pancreas and is
often referred to as partial agenesis of the pancreas; this agenesis can involve the ventral or dorsal anlage. Figure 3 shows the ventral
and dorsal buds from which the head; and neck, body and tail of the pancreas, respectively, develop. When the dorsal bud fails to develop,
agenesis of the dorsal pancreas results. Agenesis of the dorsal pancreas is more common than ventral agenesis. Complete agenesis of the
pancreas is extremely rare and is incompatible with life. Severe hypoplasia of the pancreas can be associated with mutations involving the
HNF1Î² gene. Schematic figure shows embryonic development of pancreas from the ventral and dorsal buds arising from either side of the
duodenum The common clinical presentation is abdominal pain, which may be nonspecific or secondary to pancreatitis. Recurrent pancreatitis
is quite common. Many patients present with diabetes mellitus. Sometimes, the patient may present with steatorrhea or other signs of
exocrine insufficiency. Imaging in a case of agenesis of the dorsal pancreas reveals a short and truncated head of pancreas, with absence of
the neck, body, and tail of the organ. Based on endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), absence of the dorsal anlage is
categorized as complete (when the duct of Santorini and the minor duodenal papilla are absent) and partial (when they are remnant). ERCP and
magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography will show a short ductal system in the ventral pancreas, with absence of any ductal system in
the body and tail region. Important differential diagnoses are carcinoma of head of pancreas with secondary atrophy of the distal body and
tail of pancreas, pancreatic lipomatosis (fatty replacement of pancreatic parenchyma), and pancreatic divisum. All can be differentiated
easily by imaging. Treatment is not required in asymptomatic patients. We are highly thankful to Mr. Shivam for his kind help in acquiring
the images. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
