Malignant tumors of the small intestine are among the rarest types of gastrointestinal cancers. Due to their infrequent occurrence and the
multitude of tumor types (viz, adenocarcinomas, carcinoids, sarcomas, and lymphomas), not much is known about their natural history and
presentation, and there is often delay in the diagnosis. Adenocarcinoma is the commonest histologic type of small bowel cancer. There are no
prospective randomized trials that have elucidated the best diagnostic and therapeutic options for this rare condition. In this article, a
case of adenocarcinoma of the jejunum presenting as an abdominal lump is presented, along with a review of the literature. Adenocarcinoma of
the small bowel is a rare malignancy as compared to other malignancies of the gastrointestinal tract. However, it is the commonest amongst
small bowel cancers. It is asymptomatic in the early stages and by the time it becomes symptomatic it has usually spread to other sites.
Thus, the diagnosis is often delayed, with consequent poor prognosis. A 47-year-old male presented with the complaint of an abdominal mass
in the right lumbar region. He was admitted for evaluation. He did not have symptoms suggestive of intestinal obstruction and there had been
no weight loss. There was no history of hematemesis or melena. Physical examination revealed an intra-abdominal mass that did not move with
respiration. The mass was not ballottable. CT scan revealed a circumferential growth involving the small bowel [Figure 1]. There were no
hepatic metastases nor was there any free fluid in the peritoneal cavity. The patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy, at which the mass
was seen encircling the jejunum [Figure 2]. The involved segment was resected [Figure 3]. Postoperative recovery was uneventful.
Histopathology of the specimen revealed adenocarcinoma of the small intestine [Figure 4]. The resection margins were clear of tumor cells on
histology and there was no evidence of lymph node involvement. The lesion was T3N0M0, i.e., stage II disease. Adjuvant chemotherapy was not
given as the patient did not have metastases and the margins were clear. The patient has been followed up for 2 years and there has been no
evidence of recurrence. CT scan showing the lesion involving the small intestine Solid concentric lesion involving the jejunum Resected
specimen which has been cut open to show the mass Photomicrograph showing tumor cells arranged in irregular acini (H and E, Ã—400) The small
intestine constitutes about 90% of the mucosal surface area and 75% of the length of the gastrointestinal tract. Despite this, malignant
neoplasms are uncommon in the small intestine, constituting only 20% of all the gut tumors. Many theories have been postulated to explain
the low incidence of malignant tumors at this site. For example, it has been said that the large volumes of alkaline fluid in the small
bowel, the presence of various enzymes, and the high immunoglobulin A levels cause dilution and detoxification of potential carcinogens and
also prevent prolonged contact of such carcinogens with the mucosa. In addition, the small intestine has a very limited number of bacteria
(as compared to the colon) that are capable of transforming potential procarcinogens into their active breakdown products. Since the
incidence of small bowel carcinoma is very low, not much information is available regarding the molecular aspects of these tumors, which
could be of help in the planning, prevention, diagnosis, and management of these tumors. In general, small intestinal cancers have a low
prevalence in Asian countries as compared to the West. Males have a higher predilection for these malignancies. Increasing age is associated
with a higher incidence of small intestinal cancers. Genetic factors have been strongly implicated in the etiology of adenocarcinoma of the
small intestine. Patients suffering from familial adenomatous polyposis have a higher chance of developing duodenal adenocarcinoma. These
patients have high frequency of p53 overexpression. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer patients have a high likelihood of developing
adenocarcinoma of the small bowel. Environmental factors such as a diet rich in red meat, salt-cured or smoked foods, as well as intake of
tobacco and alcohol, have been implicated in the etiology of this malignancy. Predisposing medical conditions are Crohn disease and celiac
disease (nontropical sprue). Patients suffering from Crohn disease have a high risk of developing adenocarcinoma of the small bowel, whereas
patients suffering from celiac disease have increased risk of developing small bowel lymphoma rather than adenocarcinoma. Approximately 64%
of all small bowel tumors are malignant and 40% of the tumors are adenocarcinomas. The remaining malignancies comprise GIST
(gastrointestinal stromal tumors), carcinoids, and lymphomas). These tumors have a resemblance to large bowel adenocarcinomas.
Adenocarcinomas in the small bowel arise from premalignant adenomas. Through a stepwise accumulation of genetic mutations, these adenomas
become dysplastic and progress to carcinoma in situ and then to invasive adenocarcinomas. They metastasize via the lymphatics or portal
circulation to the liver, lung, bone, brain, and other distant sites. Small bowel adenocarcinomas tend to cluster away from the colon,
toward the gastric end of the small intestine. Approximately 50% arise in the duodenum, 30% in the jejunum, and 20% in the ileum. K-ras
mutation and p53 overexpression are common in small bowel cancers. Impaired small intestinal acyl coA thioesterase synthesis is probably
related to the adenoma-carcinoma sequence of small intestinal epithelial tumors. A significant number of small bowel tumors show moderate to
strong COX-2 and c PLA 2 expression. Small bowel cancers are asymptomatic in the early stages. As the disease progresses, symptoms develop.
The nature of symptoms is nonspecific and, as a result, there is a delay in diagnosis which averages 6-8 months. Abdominal pain and weight
loss are the commonest symptoms. Bleeding, vomiting, nausea, and obstruction are less common. Physical examination in the early stages is
unremarkable. Rarely, a palpable abdominal mass or a tender abdomen, possibly with peritoneal signs, may be found due to obstruction or
perforation. Laboratory tests may show mild anemia due to chronic blood loss. Liver function test may reveal hyperbilirubinemia in case of
duodenal tumors. Elevated transaminases may be found in case of liver metastasis. The diagnosis of small bowel adenocarcinomas may be
elusive. Upper GI series, with small-bowel follow-through, shows abnormalities in 53.83% of patients with small bowel cancers. Abdominal CT
scan will reveal the exact site and extent of local disease as well as the presence of liver metastasis. Upper GI endoscopy with small-bowel
enteroscopy may allow identification and biopsy of lesions in the duodenum and jejunum. Videocapsule endoscopy has shown promise in the
diagnosis of small bowel disorders. Surgical resection provides the only hope for cure for adenocarcinoma of the small bowel. Patients with
a lesion in the proximal duodenum should undergo pancreaticoduodenectomy. For lesions elsewhere in the small bowel, the treatment is wide
resection. Surgery, in the form of a bypass for intestinal obstruction, may also be indicated for palliation in patients with symptomatic
advanced disease. Chemotherapy is of benefit as an adjuvant to surgery, especially when there is metastatic disease. Jigyasu et al. studied
14 subjects with metastatic small bowel adenocarcinoma treated with chemotherapy regimens, mostly containing 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Two
minor responses and one partial response occurred, with a median survival of 9 months. Ouriel and Adams reported a mean survival of 10.7
months in 6 patients with metastatic disease treated with 5-FU-based regimens, compared with a mean survival of 4 months in 6 patients with
metastatic disease who received no chemotherapy. Crawley et al. reported eight patients with advanced small bowel adenocarcinoma treated
with infusional 5-FU- based regimens and found a response rate of 37.5% and a median survival of 13 months. Polyzos et al. reported minor
responses, with improvement of symptoms, using salvage irinotecan therapy for 5-FU-refractory small bowel adenocarcinoma. Bettim et al.
found that the FOLFOX-4 regimen (which is a combination of infusional 5-FU, oxaliplatin, and leucovorin) could be safely administered as
adjuvant chemotherapy in three subjects with resected small bowel adenocarcinoma associated with celiac disease. Veyrieves et al. reported
an overall 5-year survival of 38%; with palliative treatment alone the 5-year survival was 0%, while it was 54% after curative resection. In
patients undergoing curative resection, the 5-year survival was 63% when lymph nodes were not involved and 52% when they were, 57% when the
serosa was not involved and 53% when it was, 56% when the tumor was well or moderately well differentiated and 40% when it was
undifferentiated. Other factors influencing long-term survival were the emergency presentation, the site, the multiplicity, and the size of
the tumor. In conclusion, primary small bowel tumors are rare and the prognosis is generally considered to be poor. Diagnosis is often
difficult because of the infrequency of these tumors and the nonspecific symptoms. Aggressive surgical resection in an attempt to achieve
complete tumor removal should be the aim. Large tumor size, advanced histological grade, and transmural invasion are associated with
decreased survival. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
