*Current Address: Department of Urology, Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. A 70-yr-old man presented with painless gross
hematuria. He underwent right nephrectomy for benign disease 9 yr ago. Computed tomography and cystoscopy showed a mass in the distal region
of the right ureteral stump. He underwent right ureterectomy and bladder cuff resection. Pathological examination showed T1 and WHO grade 2
transitional cell carcinoma. At 6 months postoperatively, the patient is alive without any evidence of recurrence. The occurrence of primary
malignant tumor of the ureteral stump after nephrectomy for benign disease is extremely rare. With this reason, the remaining ureteral stump
does not usually receive any additional attention after nephrectomy for non-functioning kidney. We report a case of a transitional cell
carcinoma developed in a remnant ureter after retroperitoneoscopic simple nephrectomy for non-functioning kidney. A 70-yr-old man presented
with painless gross hematuria. He was an ex-smoker with 34 pack year and had a history of right retroperitoneoscopic simple nephrectomy for
non-functioning kidney due to renal pelvic stone 9 yr ago. On physical examination, he had 4 scars less than 1 cm on his right flank.
Urinalysis showed microscopic hematuria and other laboratory results were within normal range. Computed tomography revealed dilatation and
wall-thickening in the proximal region and a solid mass in the distal region of the right ureteral stump (Fig. 1). Cystoscopy revealed a
papillary mass protruding through right ureteral orifice (Fig. 2). Pathologic examination of the cold cup biopsy revealed WHO grade 2
transitional cell carcinoma of the ureter. Bone scan showed no evidence of distant metastasis. Patient underwent right ureterectomy with
cuff excision of the bladder. The gross specimen showed one papillary tumor just above the ureterovesical junction of the remnant ureter
(Fig. 3A). The pathological examination of the specimen revealed WHO grade 2 transitional cell carcinoma of the ureter. The main tumor was
infiltrated into the subepithelial connective tissue (T1). Urothelial dysplasia was detected in the distal resection margin of the specimen
(Fig. 3B). The postoperative course was uneventful. He was discharged on the 8th postoperative day. At 6 months postoperatively, the patient
is alive without evidence of recurrence. The occurrence of primary malignant tumor of the ureteral stump after nephrectomy for benign
disease is extremely rare and present a significant diagnostic problem. These tumors may be defined as tumors occurring in the remnant
ureter following nephrectomy or partial nephroureterectomy, in the absence of a tumor of the renal parenchyma, pelvis, or excised upper
ureter (1). Malek et al. (2) reviewed the outcome of the ureteral stump in 4,883 nephrectomies performed for non-malignant disease for 29 yr
and identified 4 cases of remnant ureteral stump tumor. Kim et al. (3) reported that the incidence of primary ureteral stump tumors was
2.51%, all of which occurred in patients with long standing renal diseases, such as pyonephrosis due to staghorn calculi or renal
tuberculosis. However, these studies should be considered not as a true incidence but as a possibility of occurrence of primary ureteral
stump tumors after simple nephrectomy. It is known that the peak incidence of upper tract transitional cell carcinoma is 10 per 100,000 per
year, occurring in the age range of 75 to 79 yr and that age-adjusted annual incidence rates is about 0.7 per 100,000 person-years (4).
Because renal pelvic tumors are generally not reported separately in U.S., worldwide statistics vary substantially between nations and are
not accurate (4). Therefore further study will be needed to the accurate incidence of upper tract transitional cell carcinoma and primary
tumors of the ureteral stump. It is still an unveiled issue why malignant tumors occur in the closed ureteral stump. Several etiologic
factors in the pathogenesis of genitourinary malignant tumors including chronic inflammation, leukoplakia, and exposure to carcinogenic
substances, have been postulated (2). The presence of bladder, kidney, and ureter stones can cause irritation of the bladder epithelial
wall, which was known as one of the possible causes of carcinogenesis. A 2-fold increase in bladder cancer risk was observed in patients
with a history of bladder stones in the largest case-control study to date, regardless of history of UTI (5). Though the association of
squamous cell carcinoma or adenocarcinoma with stones has been well established, that of transitional cell carcinoma with stones has not
been established so far. However, several studies have supported the evidence that transitional cell carcinoma is associated with urinary
calculus. Kaufmann et al. (6) observed 6 cases of squamous cell carcinoma and 5 cases of transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder in 62
patients with spinal cord injury on long-standing catheters and suggested that bladder stone might be a significant risk factor for these
cancers. In addition, in a prospective cohort study of patients diagnosed with kidney or ureteral stones, a standardized incidence ratio of
2.5 (95% confidence interval=1.8-3.3) was observed for renal pelvis/ureter cancer. The most common pathologic type of these tumors was the
transitional cell carcinoma (71.7%), followed by squamous cell carcinoma (17.4%) (7). These findings suggest that the whole stone must be
removed during the nephrectomy with the complete review of preoperative information. Once the fragmented stone is left, careful follow-up
should be done. In case of the diseased ureteral stump, its nature is not typical. Furthermore the ureteral stump is not visualized upon
urography therefore the successful diagnosis may not be achieved easily. In this situation suspicion is important and other diagnostic tool
such as computed tomography or retrograde ureterography can be helpful (8). In our case, an intravenous urography showed normal left calyces
and ureter and did not show any evidence of abnormality in right residual urinary tract. Hematuria may have not been detected earlier if the
mass was not protruding through right ureteral orifice. It says that the early symptom and the accurate diagnosis by proper diagnostic tool
may prevent the invasive disease. Computed tomography revealed an enhancing solid mass (arrow) in the distal region of the right ureteral
stump. Cystoscopy revealed a papillary mass protruding through right ureteral orifice. (A) Gross appearance. (B) Microscopic appearance (T1,
grade 2) (H&EÃ—200).
