Necrotizing fasciitis of the thigh due to the colon cancer, especially during chemotherepy, has not been previously reported. A 67-year-old
man admitted to the hospital was diagnosed with sigmoid colon cancer that had spread to the left psoas muscle. Multiple hepatic metastases
were also found, and combination chemotherapy with irinotecan and S-1 was administered. Four months after the initiation of chemotherapy,
the patient developed gait disturbance and high fever and was therefore admitted to the emergency department of our hospital. Blood
examination revealed generalized inflammation with a high C-reactive protein level. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis showed gas
and fluid collection in the retroperitoneum adjacent to the sigmoid colon cancer. The abscess was locally drained under computed tomographic
guidance; however, the infection continued to spread and necrotizing fasciitis developed. Consequently, emergent debridement was performed.
The patient recovered well, and the primary tumor was resected after remission of the local inflammation. Necrotizing fasciitis of the thigh
due to the spread of sigmoid colon cancer is unusual, but this fatal complication should be considered during chemotherapy for patients with
unresectable colorectal cancer. Necrotizing fasciitis (NF) is a rare and life-threatening soft-tissue infection. Aggressive surgical
management is required in the early stage in order to reduce the associated high mortality rate, which ranges from 20% to 40%; however, it
is often difficult to diagnose NF in the early stages. NF is usually caused not only by trauma to the skin, such as that induced by insect
bites, scratches, and abrasion, but also by surgical wounds in the perineum and lower extremities. Other less common causes include
perforated or penetrated diverticulitis, ruptured appendix, and inflammatory bowel diseases. To date, few reports of NF caused by colon
cancer have been published. We present a rare case of NF of the thigh during chemotherapy due to the retroperitoneal spread of sigmoid colon
cancer. A 67-year-old man, who was healthy earlier, was referred to our hospital for a month-long history anorexia. On the basis of the
results of a computed tomography (CT) scan and gastrointestinal endoscopy, the patient was diagnosed with unresectable sigmoid colon cancer
that had spread to the retroperitoneum (Figure 1); multiple liver metastases were also detected. Subsequently, combination chemotherapy with
S-1 and irinotecan was administered. Four months after the initiation of chemotherapy, he was readmitted to the hospital for dyskinesia of
the left lower extremity and high fever. Blood examination data indicated leukopenia (white blood cell count, 2500 cells/Î¼L), and a high
C-reactive protein (CRP) level (16.7 mg/dL). A CT scan showed fluid and gas collection in the retroperitoneum adjacent to the primary tumor
(Figure 2). This condition was diagnosed as a retroperitoneal abscess and emergent CT guided drainage of the abscess was performed. A
pigtail catheter was inserted into the abscess and pus with gas and odor was drained; an infection caused by gas-producing anaerobic
microorganisms was strongly suspected. The patient recovered temporarily, but high fever, crepitus, and diffuse swelling in the left thigh
appeared 4 days after the drainage. A CT scan of the pelvis and lower extremity revealed a fluid and gas tracking from the retroperitoneum
into the intramuscular plane of the grossly enlarged left thigh (Figure 3), although the size of the abscess had drastically reduced as a
result of the drainage. A presumptive diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis of the left thigh was made, and the patient was immediately taken
to the operation room. A wide debridement of the external fascia was performed to reveal the healthy tissue, the retroperitoneum was drained
again, and loop ileostomy was created. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit and administered intravenous antibiotics
(carbapenem). Microbiological culture of the pus revealed the presence of Escherichia coli and other anaerobic bacteria. The patient showed
good postoperative recovery, and the primary tumor was resected 2 months after the first surgery. The operative findings indicated that the
cancerous lesion and the tissues surrounding it were firmly attached to the left retroperitoneum. Multiple liver and peritoneal metastases
were also detected. Palliative resection of the primary tumor was performed in order to prevent the recurrence of retroperitoneal
inflammation. On the basis of the operative findings, the tumor was classified as a T4 (invading the psoas muscle), N1, and M1 (liver and
peritoneum), and the patient was clinically diagnosed with stage IV cancer according to the definitions laid down by the International Union
Against Cancer (UICC). The patient was given oxaliplatinm 5-fluorouracil, and folinic acid (modified FOLFOX6) therapy, but, he died due to
cancer 8 months after the second surgery. Sigmoid colon cancer invading to the retroperitoneum at the time of initial diagnosis.
Retroperitoneal abscess adjacent to the sigmoid colon tumor. Abnormal air accumulation in the subcutaneous space of the left thigh. NF is a
serious soft-tissue infection that causes secondary necrosis of the subcutaneous tissues. It can occur in any region of the body but most
commonly occurs in the abdominal wall, extremities, and perineum. It has been reported that NF has a high morbidity and mortality rate
because of its acute and rapidly progressive course. The outcome of NF is rendered poor most importantly by delays in its diagnosis and
surgical debridement. Thus, early diagnosis of necrotizing soft-tissue infections followed by administration of intravenous antibiotics and
surgical intervention is the best way of decreasing the mortality associated with this aggressive infection. Clinical features of NF include
high fever with chills, tenderness over the affected area along with changes in skin color, and palpable crepitus. It is well known that
perineal NF, termed as "Fournier's gangrene," is caused by rectal cancer or periproctal abscess, and there are several reports on NF due to
colorectal cancer involving the abdominal wall. However, NF of the thigh due to the spread of colorectal cancer, as observed in the present
case, is extremely rare. Literature review reveals only 3 such cases . Colon cancer usually spreads intraperitoneally, and its spread in the
retroperitoneal direction is relatively rare. In the 3 previously reported cases, symptoms of NF preceded the diagnosis of colorectal
cancer; thus, to our knowledge, this is the first reported case in which NF developed during chemotherapy for the treatment of colorectal
cancer. In the present case, we inserted only the pig tail catheter immediately after the diagnosis of retroperitoneal abscess, because we
thought that the patient may not tolerate the stress of radical surgery. However, we realized that this was a wrong strategy because NF
developed eventually and additional debridement was required. Fortunately, the patient showed good postoperative recovery, however, we
believe that NF, a serious complication, could have been avoided if the radical treatment had been initiated earlier. Recent advances in
chemotherapy for colorectal cancer (e.g., cytotoxic agents such as irinotecan, oxaliplatin, and the fluoropyrimidines, and bevacizumab and
cetuximab) have improved the median survival period of patients with unresectable colorectal cancer . Patients with unresectable colorectal
metastases who were treated with the latest multidrug systemic therapy have shown a median period of 18-20 months. Therefore, chemotherapy
is currently the first line of treatment for patients with unresectable colorectal cancer. Palliative resection of the primary lesion is
rarely performed when there are no symptoms of primary cancer, such as intestinal obstruction or bleeding. Although there are several
reports have stated that primary tumor resection contributes to prolonged survival in patients with incurable colorectal cancer, there is no
consensus on the same among medical oncologists and surgeons . Specifically, a high incidence of bowel perforation and delayed wound healing
have been observed in patients treated with bevacizumab. Therefore, adequate care should be taken to prevent perforation and penetration
following NF in such patients. In addition, NF might indicate a serious complication, and result in high mortality. Our reported case
highlights the importance of the removal of the primary tumor in an aymptomatic patient as an attempt to avoid concomitant serious
complications. Retroperitoneal abscess and NF are rare complications of colorectal cancers that can potentially be fatal, particularly in
patients who are immunocompromised because of chemotherapy. In the presence of these unclear risk factors, accurate and rapid clinical
judgment and a careful consideration of balance between the risks and benefits are necessary before performing a palliative surgery. Colon
cancer could be a cause of unexpected retroperitoneal abscess followed by NF of the thigh, and NF should be considered during the diagnosis
of colon cancer. Early diagnosis and treatment can help reduce the mortality rate associated with NF. NF: necrotizing fasciitis; CT:
computed tomography; CRP: C-reactive protein. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. YT participated in treatment of the
patient, collected case details, literature search and draft the manuscript. SI participated in treatment of the patient and helped to draft
the manuscript. MY, TH, DS, HT, YK, MS and MT participated in treatment of the patients. MO and HO participated in treatment planning of the
patient and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from
the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
