Its a dilemma to attempt a palliative procedure to debulk the tumour and/or prevent future obstructive complications in a locally advanced
intra abdominal malignancy. A 38 year old Vietnamese man presented with a carcinoma of the colon which had invaded the gallbladder and
duodenum with a sealed perforation of the second part of the duodenum. Following surgical exploration, it was evident that primary closure
of the perforated duodenum was not possible due to the presence of unresectable residual tumour. We describe a novel technique using a
covered duodenal stent deployed at open surgery to aid closure of a malignant duodenal perforation. With locally advanced intra-abdominal
malignancy the surgeon is faced with the dilemma of attempting a palliative procedure to debulk the tumour and/or prevent future obstructive
complications against limiting the impact of any surgical procedure on remaining quality of life. Unfortunately it remains extremely
difficult to assess tumours which are adherent to local structures and the decision must be made whether to continue anatomical dissection
or to leave the main tumour bulk in-situ and perform a simple bypass procedure. A 38 year old Vietnamese man was admitted with a 10 month
history of epigastric pain, fatigue, 10 kg weight loss and recent onset jaundice. He had no other significant medical history. Clinical
examination demonstrated anaemia and a tender mass in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. A computerised tomography (CT) scan of the
abdomen revealed a 7 × 5 cm thick-walled, complex mass adjacent to the second part of the duodenum, which contained fluid and air and
abutted the hepatic flexure of the colon. The working diagnosis was a collection secondary to a colonic perforation and he was treated with
intravenous antibiotics. He improved with conservative management and was discharged a month later for outpatient colonoscopy. The
colonoscopy revealed a lesion in the transverse colon, histology of which showed a mucinous adenocarcinoma. He subsequently returned to the
Accident and Emergency Department following an upper gastrointestinal bleed. On his second admission, a repeat CT scan again suggested
localised colonic perforation with formation of an abscess adjacent to the duodenum, along with thickening of the ascending colon,
predominantly centred around the hepatic flexure. Given the clinical presentation and diagnostic uncertainty a diagnostic laparoscopy was
performed which revealed a large perforated tumour at the hepatic flexure with ascites and peritoneal tumour nodules. A laparotomy was
performed via a transverse incision and following mobilisation of the hepatic flexure, a colonic tumour was found to have invaded the
gallbladder and duodenum with an abscess cavity anterior to the second part of the duodenum. At the base of the abscess cavity a large hole
was apparent in the second part of the duodenum with malignant tumour invading the duodenum. Given the size of the defect (5 cm × 2 cm) and
the presence of tumour it was not possible to resect and form a primary closure of the duodenum. The presence of metastatic spread precluded
a curative resection by pancreatoduodenectomy. A right hemicolectomy was performed to debulk the tumour and an ileotransverse anastamosis
formed. Due to the extent of the disease and associated abscess the anterior wall of the duodenum came away with the colon during this
manoeuvre. A retrograde cholecystectomy was carried out to resect the residual tumour invading the gall bladder. The ampulla was identified
with the aid of a transcystic catheter. An 82 mm expandable covered duodenal stent with a diameter of 18 mm (Hanarostent, duodenal/pyloric,
M.I. Tech Co. Ltd, Seoul, N. Korea) was manually inserted through the duodenal perforation into the proximal duodenum with the distal end of
the stent inserted into D2. A small opening into the side wall of the stent was made prior to the positioning of the stent to accommodate
the ampulla and thus facilitate drainage of bile within the stent. A per-operative cholangiogram confirmed free flow of contrast in the
duodenum. The residual duodenal wall was closed over the stent and following antrectomy a gastrojejunostomy was formed to bypass the
duodenum (Bilroth II reconstruction). The patient was discharged 7 weeks later following a prolonged, but otherwise uncomplicated recovery.
He subsequently underwent a palliative course of chemotherapy survived for a further 18 months without gastrointestinal symptoms, before
succumbing to his disease. The major risk with attempting palliative resection is the feasibility of reconstructing anatomy that has been
altered by the malignant process. In the case described separation of the main tumour bulk from the duodenum left a perforation involving
most of the anterior surface of the second part of the duodenum. Significantly sized malignant perforations of the duodenum are unlikely to
heal following simple primary closure and are at risk of resulting in high output fistulas or high level GI tract obstruction due to disease
progression. Simple duodenal closure and duodenal bypass in this case would not have been sufficient to safely defunction the perforation.
Several techniques have been described for closure of large duodenal perforations, such as duodenojejunostomy, serosal and mucosal pedical
patching without recourse to pancreatoduodenectomy. These procedures were mainly described for patients who sustained severe duodenal
trauma, rather than in the context of malignant perforation. All of these techniques would have been at high risk of anastomotic leakage
and/or subsequent obstruction in this patient due to progression of the underlying residual disease. Covered self-expanding metallic stents
have been used to treat oesophageal leaks and fistulas with clinical success ranging from 67-100%, with recurrent fistulas or leaks in 8-20%
of patients . Placement of duodenal stents in malignancy has so far been described as an endoscopic procedure to relieve obstruction and not
to aid in sealing a duodenal perforation from tumour invasion. These stents are effective in the palliation of symptoms of gastric outlet
obstruction in patients with a relatively short life expectancy. However, performing a gastrojejunostomy may be considered more appropriate
for those with a more favourable prognosis . We believe that in this case, the novel deployment of a covered duodenal stent during an open
operation negated the requirement for a major pancreatobiliary resection and permitted safe primary closure of the malignant perforation.
This allowed the early use of palliative chemotherapy and, in conjunction with tumour debulking, may have resulted in a significant gain in
symptom free survival. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. PFL helped in preparation of the manuscript and literature
search. ABC helped in preparation of the manuscript and literature search. JP helped in preparation of the manuscript, literature search and
editing the manuscript for its final content. AGP helped in preparation of the manuscript, literature search and editing the manuscript for
its final content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The publication of this case was approved by the National Research
Ethics Service, King College Hospital Research Ethics committee, as the consent from the patient and next of kin was not possible. The copy
of ethical committee approval is available with chief editor.
