A 37 year old male was referred to our centre for management of episcleritis with peripheral keratitis in the right eye. He had a history of
ocular discomfort in the right eye of 1 week duration. Slitlamp examination revealed marginal keratitis between 12'o clock to 2'o clock
positions in the right eye. Lid eversion revealed an insect wing on the tarsal conjunctiva along with an adjacent conjunctival granuloma.
The area of the marginal keratitis corresponded to the area of the foreign body and the conjunctival granuloma. The probable mechanism of
the development of marginal keratitis and the conjunctiva granuloma is speculated in this case report. We report an interesting case of an
insect wing on the right superior tarsal conjunctiva causing a localized conjunctival granuloma and marginal keratitis with pannus. A
37-year-old male was referred with a diagnosis of episcleritis with peripheral keratitis to our center for further management. He had a
history of increasing ocular discomfort in the right eye of one week duration. He was not on any medicines at the time of presentation. On
examination, his best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes. Slit-lamp examination in the right eye revealed marginal keratitis
between 12'0 clock to 2'0 clock positions along with a pannus [Fig. 1]. Eversion of the eyelid revealed an insect wing on the superior
tarsus with a localized conjunctival granuloma at the area of the foreign body [Fig. 2]. The lid margins were healthy with no evidence of
blepharitis. The marginal keratitis corresponded to the area of the foreign body and the conjunctival granuloma. Rest of the ocular
examination was normal. Left eye examination was normal. The foreign body was removed under topical anesthesia with a forceps and sent to a
microbiologist for confirmation. Confocal microscopy (Rostock corneal Module II, Heidelberg retinal tomogram, Heidelberg, Germany) at the
area of the keratitis and corneal scraping (KOH, Grams stain and culture) were negative for an infectious etiology. Topical treatment
initially with antibiotics (ofloxacin, four times a day for a week) and lubricants (1% carboxy methyl cellulose, six times a day) followed
by a course of steroids started three days later (dexamethasone, four times a day for five days) and tapered over three weeks alleviated his
symptoms and caused resolution of the conjunctival granuloma over four weeks. Slit-lamp photograph of the right eye with marginal keratitis
between 12'0 clock to 2'0 clock positions along with a pannus Slit-lamp photograph of the insect wing foreign body on the tarsal conjunctiva
causing a localized conjunctival granuloma Our case highlights the need for a complete ocular examination in every case of keratitis or
scleritis. Insect wing foreign bodies on the cornea and the peripheral limbus causing vascularization, infiltration and secondary bacterial
infections have been reported. There is only an isolated report of an insect wing tarsal foreign body causing a localized conjunctival
granuloma. However, there are no reports of marginal keratitis associated with an insect wing tarsal foreign body (Medline search). When a
foreign body gets lodged in the conjunctiva, initially, there is an acute inflammatory response in the form of exudation of plasma and
fibrin. This normally dislodges the foreign body. However, when the foreign body has a large surface area, as in this case, this mechanism
may be insufficient and the foreign body becomes embedded. This is followed by a chronic inflammatory response resulting in the formation of
a granuloma containing epitheloid and foreign body giant cells. The presence of the foreign body and the exotoxins released by the bacterial
flora around the foreign body may have resulted in sterile infiltrates (marginal keratitis) in the cornea. It is also possible that the
corneal findings were secondary to the abrasive effect of the foreign body. Any sustained paralimbal inflammation evokes a fibrovascular
proliferation in the form of a pannus as seen in our case.
