Among women with intestinal endometriosis, the sigmoid colon and rectum are the most commonly involved areas. Sometimes, the differential
diagnosis of colorectal endometriosis from carcinoma of the colon and rectum is difficult due to similar colonoscopic and radiologic
findings. From October 2002 to September 2007, we performed five operations with curative intent for rectal and sigmoid colon cancer that
revealed intestinal endometriosis. Colonoscopic and radiologic findings were suggestive of carcinoma of rectum and sigmoid colon, such as
rectal cancer, sigmoid colon cancer and gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). Anterior resection was performed in two patients, low
anterior resection was performed in one patient and laparoscopic low anterior resection was done in two patients. We suggest to consider
also intestinal endometriosis in reproductive women presenting with gastrointestinal symptoms and an intestinal mass of unknown origin.
Endometriosis is defined as the presence of endometrial glands and stroma outside the uterine cavity and musculature.1 It is a common benign
disease among women of reproductive age, and affects the intestinal tract in 3-37% of all patients with pelvic endometriosis.2 The sigmoid
colon and rectum are the most commonly involved areas in women with intestinal endometriosis.3 Sometimes, the differential diagnosis of
colorectal endometriosis from other malignancies of the colon and rectum is difficult due to similar colonoscopic and radiologic findings.
In this report, we present five cases involving patients with intestinal endometriosis, in which the initial diagnostic work-up suggested
carcinoma of rectum and sigmoid colon [i.e., rectal cancer, sigmoid colon cancer or gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST)]. From October
2002 to September 2007, five patients were admitted for the surgical resection of rectal and sigmoid colon tumors, which were subsequently
revealed to be intestinal endometriosis. The average age of the patients was 39.8 years (range, 27-47 years). There was one nullipara who
had been explored for infertility. Two patients were asymptomatic, two patients complained of hematochezia, and one patient had obstipation
revealed by colonoscopy. None of the symptomatic patients had symptoms related to menstruation. Colonoscopy was performed in all five
patients and revealed an ulcerofungating mass in two cases (Fig. 1), mucosal protrusion without mucosal abnormality in one case, luminal
narrowing with extrinsic compression in one case and a polypoid mass in one case. Colonoscopic biopsy was performed in three out of the five
patients. The biopsies showed chronic inflammation in two cases and a normal finding in one case. A computed tomography (CT) scan was also
performed in all patients, and revealed colonic and rectal wall thickening in two cases and submucosal tumor suggesting GIST in one case.
However, no masses were identified in two cases (Table 1). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed in cases with rectal involvement,
and the findings were not different from those of CT. PET scan was performed in case 5 and suggested malignant uptake in the rectum (not
documented in Table 1). All patients underwent dissection of paracolic and intermediate lymph nodes, as well as lymph nodes in the root of
the inferior mesenteric artery. The laparotomy was done by low midline incision in three patients and by laparoscopic surgery in two
patients. Two anterior resections and three low anterior resections were performed. We did not perform a frozen section at the time of the
operation because the operative finding seemed to be a malignant tumor, even though a previous colonoscopic biopsy did not reveal
malignancy. However, all surgical specimens were indicated endometriosis according to final pathology reports (Fig. 2). The symptoms of
intestinal endometriosis vary according to the site of involvement.4 Rectosigmoid endometriosis can cause alterations in bowel habit and
bleeding that resemble symptoms of colorectal cancer. Colonic endometriosis may manifest as an acute abdomen resulting from perforation and
associated peritonitis. Small bowel involvement may produce non-specific symptoms such as recurrent abdominal pain and bloating, but
terminal ileal involvement frequently results in the development of acute or chronic small bowel obstruction. The gold standard diagnostic
procedure for intestinal endometriosis is laparoscopy or laparotomy. The laparoscopic procedure is more useful for a complete and accurate
evaluation of both the genital and intestinal tracts. Moreover, surgical intervention of genital endometriosis may be performed during
laparoscopy. Thus, diagnostic laparoscopy is indicated in patients with suspicion of intestinal endometriosis. Intestinal endometriosis
often presents as a submucosal tumor or luminal stenosis because it mainly involves the muscularis propria and subserosa or mesentery.5 In
the case of mucosal involvement, a bleeding, polypoid mass may be present. These clinical manifestations are sometimes difficult to
distinguish from malignancy, inflammatory bowel disease, or ischemic colitis.5,6 Radiologic and endoscopic examinations are essential for
the diagnosis of intestinal endometriosis, which may be confused with malignancy, based on colonoscopy and CT scan, particularly in patients
with mucosal involvement.7 MRI seems to be the most sensitive imaging technique for intestinal endometriosis.8 However, these evaluations
are not diagnostic. The purpose of treatment of intestinal endometriosis is elimination of symptoms, removal of as much endometrial tissue
as possible and cessation of disease progression. Physicians should consider the patient's age and desire to maintain fertility and the
severity and complications of the disease.7 Treatment options consist of medical and surgical treatment. In severe cases, combined treatment
may be considered. The medications used in the treatment of endometriosis are danazol, high-dose progestins, and GnRH agonists, all of which
have equivalent efficacy.9 Most decisions for surgical intervention depend on the severity of symptoms and response to medical treatment.
Infertility is one of the most important symptoms to consider for operative intervention. Intestinal endometriosis may be encountered
unexpectedly during abdominal exploration. If the diagnosis of endometriosis can be confirmed by frozen biopsy and there is no significant
obstruction, the optimal treatment choice is to close the abdomen and consider definitive treatment of the patient after bowel preparation
and possible medical therapy. Recently, treatment outcomes for endometriosis have improved with the development of laparoscopic surgical
skills and medical hormonal therapy.10 We report five cases of intestinal endometriosis misdiagnosed as colorectal cancer. The symptoms of
hematochezia and abdominal pain in combination with colonoscopic and radiologic findings were suggestive of malignancy although the
colonoscopic biopsies were not confirmative. We admit that preoperative evaluations were not fully examined, and close follow-up may be
helpful to avoid false positives. The addition of diagnostic laparoscopy may be a reasonable option. However, surgical treatment should be
considered when the differential diagnosis of malignancy is not determined or medically intractable symptoms are present. In the current
case report, gastrointestinal symptoms or colonoscopic and radiologic findings resulted in the decision for surgery, and subsequent surgical
specimens revealed intestinal endometriosis. In conclusion, intestinal endometriosis is a relatively rare disease and is difficult to
differentiate from malignancy, when based on clinical symptoms, endoscopic procedure, and radiologic findings. We suggest to consider also
intestinal endometriosis in reproductive women presenting with gastrointestinal symptoms and an intestinal mass of unknown origin. This
study was supported by grants of the Korea Healthcare technology R&D project, Ministry for Health, Welfare & Family Affairs, Republic of
Korea (A040001, A040151). The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. (A) Colonoscopic finding. Ulcerofungating mass 8 cm above the
anal verge is suspicious for rectal cancer. (B) CT scan of the pelvis shows rectal mass with perirectal tumor infiltration (Case 2). (A)
Gross specimen. The polypoid mass is seen on the laparoscopically resected rectum. (B) The mass was revealed as endometriosis, which is
composed of stroma and glands of endometrium, upon microscopic analysis (Hematoxylin Eosin√ó100) (Case 5). Clinical Characteristics of Five
Patients with Intestinal Endometriosis Mimicking Carcinoma of Rectum and Sigmoid Colon AR, anterior resection; LAR, low anterior resection;
GIST, gastrointestinal stromal tumor; NED, no evidence of disease.
