The authors describe a 9 month old female with recurrent atypical central neurocytoma and leptomeningeal spread treated with high dose
chemotherapy, autologous stem cell rescue, and adjuvant therapy. She had a complete response to therapy and was disease free at 4 years of
age until a recurrence 6 months later. The use of intensive chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell rescue for atypical neurocytoma
may be considered as an adjunct to surgical therapy in young patients with atypical neurocytoma not amenable to radiation therapy. Atypical
central neurocytomas are rare central nervous system tumors in the pediatric population [1, 2]. They are treated unsuccessfully with gross
total resection and require consolidative radiation therapy or chemotherapy to prevent recurrence . The atypical nature and aggressive
behavior of the central neurocytoma we describe in our patient along with her young age led to the use of systemic chemotherapy. The use of
chemotherapy in the treatment of typical and atypical central neurocytoma is reported in adults and children . This is the second report
describing the use of high dose chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell rescue in a child with atypical central neurocytoma . We
describe a 14 month old female with episodic agitation upon awakening followed by a very intense episode of agitation with associated
respiratory compromise. She was transported to a local hospital where CT imaging demonstrated a large hemorrhagic lesion in the right
frontal lobe extending into the right lateral ventricle (see Fig. 1a). A gross total resection of this hemorrhagic lesion was completed as
demonstrated by CT imaging (see Fig. 1b). Microscopic evaluation showed an atypical neurocytic tumor (see Fig. 2a–d). The histology was that
of a mildly pleomorphic round cell tumor with diffuse, strong immunolabeling for synaptophysin. The tumor cells were negative for glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). Atypical features were noted including the presence of mitoses, glomeruloid vascular proliferation, and
necrosis. The Ki-67 labeling index was 10% overall though focally was higher. A decision to avoid consolidative radiation therapy was made
secondary to her young age.Fig. 1a Preoperative post contrast coronal CT images demonstrating a hemorrhagic lesion in the right frontal lobe
extending into the right lateral ventricle. b Postoperative post contrast coronal CT images demonstrating a gross total resection of the
right frontal lesionFig. 2a Microscopic evaluation showed an atypical neurocytic tumor composed of cells with round to oval nuclei. (H&E
400×). b Diffuse, strong immunolabeling for synaptophysin was demonstrated. (400×). c Atypical features were noted including prominent
glomeruloid vascular proliferation (H&E 400×). d The Ki-67 labeling index was approximately 10% overall (400×) a Preoperative post contrast
coronal CT images demonstrating a hemorrhagic lesion in the right frontal lobe extending into the right lateral ventricle. b Postoperative
post contrast coronal CT images demonstrating a gross total resection of the right frontal lesion a Microscopic evaluation showed an
atypical neurocytic tumor composed of cells with round to oval nuclei. (H&E 400×). b Diffuse, strong immunolabeling for synaptophysin was
demonstrated. (400×). c Atypical features were noted including prominent glomeruloid vascular proliferation (H&E 400×). d The Ki-67 labeling
index was approximately 10% overall (400×) Two months after her resection she developed a recurrence with obstructive hydrocephalus and
midline shift requiring placement of a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt. Imaging demonstrated diffuse meningeal enhancement as well as interval
development of an area of local enhancement concerning for recurrence (see Fig. 3). Her CSF was negative for evidence of malignant cells.
She subsequently received 3 cylces of chemotherapy including vincristine (0.05 mg/kg/dose, Days 1 & 8), cisplatin (3.5 mg/kg/dose, Day 2),
and etoposide (2.5 mg/kg/dose, Days 1–3). This was followed by GCSF beginning on day 3. Imaging demonstrated a partial response with
decreased leptomeningeal and local enhancement in the resection cavity. She was then given 2 cycles of temodar for (Days 1–5).Fig. 3Post
contrast coronal and axial T1-weighted images show nodular enhancement (black arrow) along the margin of the right posterior frontal
resection cavity, suggesting recurrent tumor Post contrast coronal and axial T1-weighted images show nodular enhancement (black arrow) along
the margin of the right posterior frontal resection cavity, suggesting recurrent tumor At 24 months she was noted to have development of a
cystic lesion in the resection cavity and increased leptomeningeal enhancement. As a result, she then received 2 cycles of cytoxan
(55 mg/kg/dose, Days 1–2) and MESNA; however, the second cycle was complicated by hyponatremia and seizures. She was then placed back on the
chemotherapy regimen consisting of vincristine, cisplatin, and etoposide. Repeat imaging demonstrated stable disease. At 28 months of age
prior to the completion of additional chemotherapy she underwent GCSF mobilized peripheral blood stem cell collection. A total of 12 × 106
CD34+ cells/kg were collected in anticipation of high dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell rescue. Additional chemotherapy was
provided with 3 cycles of ifosfamide (1800 mg/m2/dose Days 1–5), carboplatin (400 mg/m2/dose Days 1–2), and etoposide (100 mg/m2/dose Days
1–5). Repeat imaging was completed demonstrating stable disease. Due to a lack of significant clinical response and nephrotoxicity
(hypomagnesaemia, hypokalemia, and academia) she was then treated with cytoxan and topotecan per Pediatric Oncology Group Protocol 9464. She
received one cycle of therapy followed by imaging demonstrating interval progression of her leptomeningeal disease. At 34 months of age,
high dose chemotherapy per the consolidation phase of Children’s Cancer Group Protocol 99703 was started. This chemotherapy regimen
consisted of carboplatin (17 mg/kg, Days 0–1) and thiotepa (10 mg/kg, Days 0–1). This was followed by a day of rest, stem cell infusion, and
then GCSF. This phase was repeated every 4 weeks for 3 cycles with the infusion of 2.4 × 106 CD34+ cells/kg, 3.68 × 106 CD34+ cells/kg, and
3.86 × 106 CD34+ cells/kg, respectively. Toxicity included fever and neutropenia. At 40 months of age she was disease free by imaging
criteria and was started on isotretinoin (8 mg/kg/day, 14 days/month) and oral etoposide (3 mg/kg/day, 21 days/month) for 8 months until the
development of neutropenia. Unfortunately, 6 months later abnormal enhancement in the cervical, thoracic, or lumbar spine was noted on MRI,
suggesting recurrent disease (see Fig. 4). Surgical biopsy confirmed the diagnosis. Following her most recent relapse, a decision was made
to begin therapy with temodar (5 days per week every 2 weeks) and irinotecan (every 2 weeks). She is tolerating this therapy without
complications and is currently waiting for re-imaging.Fig. 4Post contrast sagittal T1 and axial T1-weighted images show enhancement of the
surface of the cord (white arrow), suggesting recurrent disease Post contrast sagittal T1 and axial T1-weighted images show enhancement of
the surface of the cord (white arrow), suggesting recurrent disease Central neurocytoma, first described in 1982, is a rare central nervous
system (CNS) tumor that accounts for 0.1–0.5% of CNS tumors [1, 2]. This tumor typically affects young adults in their third decade of life
[1, 2]. Neurocytomas are believed to arise from subependymal plate of lateral ventricles and are believed to be neuronal or neuroglial in
origin [1, 2]. Histologically they are divided into typical and atypical central neurocytomas [1, 2]. Microscopically they appear as small
round cells with round nuclei and scant cytoplasm and will often stain positive for synaptophisin. Typical central neurocytomas are well
differentiated and benign appearing; however, atypical central neurocytomas are less well differentiated and malignant appearing. The
presence of necrosis, increased mitotic activity, and vascular proliferation is not uncommon. Clinically they also behave aggressively.
Treatment of atypical central neurocytoma in children relies upon surgical therapy and radiation therapy . Rades and colleagues provided a
retrospective review 438 cases of central neurocytoma . Of these 438 cases 73 patients were 18 years of younger at the time of initial
surgery. The median age of the sample was 16 years. Typical central neurocytomas comprised 62 individuals in the sample and atypical central
neurocytomas only 11 individuals. A median follow up of 36 months was provided. Those individuals that had a complete resection with or
without radiation therapy had an excellent 5 year overall survival rate. Those individuals that had an incomplete resection followed by
radiation therapy achieved improved local control rates, but did not benefit from improved overall survival. This data suggests that durable
cures are likely in individuals that achieve a complete resection; however, this data did not parse out responses of atypical central
neurocytomas from typical neurocytomas. Based upon the extant literature present in Table 1, there is little experience with the use of
conventional chemotherapy for atypical central neurocytoma and high dose chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplant for
atypical central neurocytoma . Our patient was disease free by imaging criteria following the completion of high dose chemotherapy and
autologous stem cell rescue which is a notable difference when looking at the cases described previously; however, the duration of this
remission was brief. Myeloablative chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell rescue has been reported as an effective consolidative
therapy for patients with malignant brain tumors and those individuals that are not candidates for radiation therapy . Avoidance or delay of
radiation therapy use may also help limit some of the potential long-term complications of craniospinal irradiation including increased risk
of future second cancers, neuro-cognitive dysfunction, and endocrinologic deficits .Table 1Summary of reported cases of neurocytoma treated
with chemotherapyStudyAge/genderClinical history/therapyChemotherapyOutcomeAmini et al. 5 years old/male(1) Resected and treated with
adjuvant chemotherapy(1) Adjuvant therapy: VCR and cisplatin monthly alternating with cyclophosphamide. He completed 5 cyclesStable disease
with no evidence of recurrence or progression(2) Local recurrence one year later which was reselected(2) No chemotherapy(3) Disseminated
recurrence 5 months later(3) Gleevec (200 mg/m2 twice daily) with a lack of response followed by local radation and temozolamide (75
mg/m2/day) followed by maintenance (175 mg/m2/day) for 5 days every 4 w aeks, complete response(4) Local recurrence 9 months later(4) IT
liposomal Ara-C (2 courses) and radiosurgery followed by Temodar maintenance, complet(5) Spinal metastasis treated with induction
chemotherapyBrandes et al. 43 years old/femaleStereotactic radiotherapy led to a complete response Recurrence was noted six years later and
was treated with chemotherapyEtoposide (40 mg/m2/day, Days 1–4), cisplatin (25 mg/m2/day, Days 1–4), and cytoxan (1000 mg/m2, Day 4) Cycles
were repeated every 4 weeks. She completed 5 cyclesPartial repsonse for a follow-up of 15 monthsBrandes et al. 61 years old/maleLimited
field radiation was completed with a partial response noted and stable disease for 5 years Recurrent disease developed and was treated with
chemotherapy.Etoposide (40 mg/m2/day, Days 1-4), cisplatin (25 mg/m2/day, Days 1–4), and cytoxan (1000 mg/m2, Day 4) Cycles were repeated
every 4 weeks. He completed 5 cyclesStable disease for a follow-up of 18 monthsBrandes et al. 22 years old/femaleTotal resection was
completed Recurrent disease 3 years later with ventrcular disease and a spinalEtoposide (40 mg /m2/day, Days cisplatin (25 mg/m2/day, Days
1–4), and cytoxan (1000 mg/m2, Day 4) Cycles were repeated every 4 weeks She completed 3 cyclesComplete response of the spinal lesion and
stable ventricular disease Craniospinal radiation led to a complete response for a follow-up of 36 monthsCoelho et al. 6 years
old/maleRecurrent ventrile and thalamus and peritoneal dissemination 3 5 yrs after subtotal resection VP shunt for hydrocephalusEtoposide,
carboplatin, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamideDied 3 days after diagnosis of disemminationDodds et al. 15 years old/maleSubtotal resection
completed along with placement of a VP shunt Treated with chemotherapyCarboplatin (500 mg/m2, Day 1–2), etoposide (100 mg/m2, Days 1–3), and
ifosfamide (3 g/m2, Days 1–3) The etoposide and ifosfamide are repeated at week. 3 He completed 4 cyclesResponse with tumor shrinkage for 22
months until symptoms and tumor growth treated with subtotal resection and radiation therapy Stable disease with a follow-up period of 6
years. Complication of nephrotoxicityEng et al. 22 years old/femaleSubtotal resection completed along with placement of a VP shunt A local
recurrence occurred 20 months later and a second subtotal resection was done. A ventricular recurrence and leptomenningeal enhancement were
noted 14 months later and treated with chemotherapy.Cyclophosphamide, etoposide, and cisplatinNot reportedKulkarni et al. 21 years
old/maleRadiation therapy and placement of bilateral VP shunts and chemotherapyLomustine (7 doses)Partial response with follow-up for 60
months followed by deathKulkarni et al. 21 years old/femaleRadiation therapy and chemotherapyLomustine (9 doses)Subependymal spread with
increased size of primary Lost to follow-up at 15 monthsKulkarni et al. 14 years old/femaleRadiation therapy and chemotherapyLomustine (7
doses)No change in tumor with follow-up of 108 months Underwent shunt surgeryKulkarni et al. 45 years old/maleRadiation therapy and
placement of VP shunt and chemotherapyLomustine (8 doses)No change in tumor with follow-up of 90 monthsKulkarni et al. 38 years
old/maleRadiation therapy and chemotherapyLomustine (9 doses)No change in tumor with follow-up of 114 monthsKulkarni et al. 27 years
old/femaleRadiation therapy and placement of bilateral VP shunts and chemotherapyLomustine (7 doses)No change in tumor with follow-up of 96
monthsLeenstra et al. 17 years old/femaleRadiation therapy followed by 1st recurrence treated with total resection at 45 months Second,
third, and fourth recurrences with local and drop metastases treated with chemotherapy at 150, 172, and 185 months, respectivelyEtoposide
(60 mg/m2 Days 1–3, cisplatin (20 mg/m2 Days 1–5), cytoxan (500 mg/m2 Day 1 every 4 weeks She completed 7 cylces with second recurrence Four
more cycles were given for third recurence Then given Carboplatin (250 mg /m2 Day 1 and ifosfamide 1 35 g/m2 Days 1–3) with Mesna for fourth
recurrencePartial responses with 4 relapses as described Had seizures after 1 st cycle of chemotherapy and stroke after 4th cycle Died 28
months after completion of initial salvage chemotherapyLeenstra et al. 20 years old/maleTotal resection with second total resection at 3
months following local recurrence. Second relapse at 6 months treated with chemotherapyCisplatin (75 mg/m2/day, Day 1), vincristine (15
mg/m2 Days 7 and 14), cytoxan (1000mg/m2, Days 21 and 22) with MESNA. He completed 4 cyclesAlive with disease at 12 months of follow-
upLeenstra et al. 25 years old/maleSubtotal resection, radiation therapy and chemotherapyCisplatin (50 mg/m2/day, Days 1–3), and ranimustine
(50 mg/m2 D1)Stable disease, no recurrence, no progression Alive 3.7 yearsLeenstra et al. 8 years old/maleTotal resection, radiation therapy
and chemotherapyCisplatin, vincristine, and prednisone every 8 weeksNo disesase or recurrence Alive at 10.8 years Cognitive deficitsLeenstra
et al. 23 years old/femaleTotal resection, radiation therapy and chemotherapylomustine (200 mg/m2/day, Days 1), and carmustine (200 mg/m2
D1), every 6 weeks. She completed 5 cyclesAlive at 11.2 years. No disease. NorecurrenceLouis et al. 17 years old/maleSubtotal resection,
radiation therapy and chemotherapyCyclophosphamide and cisplatinAlive and well at 14 months. No recurrence or progressionLouis et al. 26
years old/femaleSubtotal resection, radiation therapy and chemotherapyCyclophosphamide and cisplatinAlive and well at 11 months. No
recurrence or progressionOgawa et al. 34 years old/maleSubtotal resection followed by radiosurgery. Continued progression followed by
raidtiation therapy and chemotherapyEtoposide, cisplatin , and cytoxan. She completed 3 cyclesParital response with eventual dissemination
and death one year after radiation therapyOgawa et al. 71 years old/femaleRadiation therapy followed by chemotherapyACNUDeveloped
disseminated disease and died 1.5 years after diagnosisSgourous et al. 19 years old/femaleResection followed by recurrence at 12 months
Second resection followed by radiation Response noted, but developed progressive disease treated with chemotherapyCarboplatinPartial
repsonse for a “few” monthsSwinson et al. 58 years old/maleRadiation therapy and chemotherapy followed by progression 5 months later treated
with subtotal resectionTemozolamide (175 mg/ 2/day Days 1–5 of 28) He completed 3 cyclesStable disease on chemotherapy. Developed symptoms
of progression 2.5 months later followed by subtotal resection No residual or recurrent tumor at 28 months of follow-upVon Koch et al. 15
years old/femaleSeveral subtotal resections over a 3 year period followed by tumor progression treated with chemotherapyProcarbazine (60
mg/m2, Days 8–21), CCNU (110 mg/m2, Day 1), and VCR (14 mg/m2 , Days 8 and 29). She completed 6 cyclesDurable response for at least 16
months of follow-up Summary of reported cases of neurocytoma treated with chemotherapy Moreover, the use of novel therapeutic agents should
be considered in these patients as we described above. As an example, the use of retinoids in the care of children with brain tumors is
under investigation [25, 26]. Their potent anti-tumor effect which occurs by induction of neuronal differentiation, growth arrest, and
apoptosis has been demonstrated in childhood cancers with neuronal differentiation such as neuroblastoma . Isotretinoin and other novel
retinoids are currently under investigation as therapeutic adjuncts in a host of childhood cancers including brain tumors. Another novel
modality used for this patient was low-dose continuous chemotherapy or “metronomic” therapy with oral etoposide. Several recent articles
have successfully utilized metronomic combinations of agents such as oral etoposide, isotretinoin, thalidomide, cyclophosphamide, and
celecoxib in children and adults with brain tumors [28, 29]. The mechanism of metronomic therapy is believed to be due in part to anti-
angiogenic effects although further research is needed to fully understand the complete biology of this approach. A recent publication
described the use of metronomic therapy for ten pediatric patients under 5 years old with malignant brain tumors following high-dose
chemotherapy and autologous stem cell rescue . Similar to our case, it was tolerated well and had encouraging activity suggesting that this
approach may warrant further evaluation in larger clinical trials. Atypical central neurocytoma is a rare central nervous system tumor in
children. Surgical resection and radiation therapy serves as the mainstay of therapy for atypical central neurocytoma. The toxicity of
radiation therapy in young children poses a risk to the use of this therapy in the treatment of atypical central neurocytomas including
examples such as neuro-cognitive deficits and second cancers. Those young patients with atypical neurocytomas that behave aggressively may
also be candidates for the use of systemic chemotherapy. Limited experience with the use of chemotherapy and myeloablative chemotherapy
followed by autologous stem cell rescue in central neurocytoma is described. We add to the literature a case describing the use of intensive
chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell rescue. Further exploration of this potentially effective modality of therapy in combination
with other novel adjunctive therapeutic agents and approaches is needed in patients with atypical central neurocytoma that is refractory to
traditional curative therapy. The authors would also like to acknowledge the support of the Brain Tumor Translational Resource, Jonsson
Cancer Center, and Brain Research Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA. Open Access This article is distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
