Three small breed dogs were referred for the evaluation of neurologic deficits. Upon physical and neurologic examination, all dogs displayed
hyperesthesia, pain, and neck stiffness. Magnetic resonance imaging was performed on the brain and spinal cord, and all three dogs presented
Chiari-like malformations and syringomyelia. These dogs were treated with prednisolone and furosemide, and showed rapid improvement of
clinical signs. Chiari malformations and syringomyelia were not improved because of congenital disorders. This case report demonstrates the
clinical and diagnostic features of Chiari-like malformations and syringomyelia in three small breed dogs. Syringomyelia (SM) of unknown
etiology is a condition in which fluid containing cavities develop within the spinal cord parenchyma . Although the cause of SM is unknown,
the condition may result from venous obstruction or distension, or may be due to mechanical disruption or shearing of spinal cord tissue
planes . Cervical pain is a predominant clinical sign of this disease, which is reported in approximately 80% of affected humans and 35% of
affected dogs , although there is some controversy as to how this disease results in pain. In addition to pain, dogs with SM often scratch
at one area of the shoulder, ear, neck or sternum, and may have other neurological deficits such as cervical scoliosis, thoracic limb
weakness, and pelvic limb ataxia . Medical treatment can help, but typically does not resolve the clinical signs. Non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs, corticosteroids, gabapentin, and oral opioids can be used for the treatment of SM . The most common procedure performed
is foramen magnum decompression, where the hypoplastic occipital bone and sometimes the cranial dorsal laminae of the atlas are removed
(with or without a durotomy) to decompress the foramen magnum . This case report demonstrates SM/Chiari-like malformation (CM) in three
small breed dogs primarily showing hyperesthesia, pain, and neck stiffness based on clinical and diagnostic findings. Case No. 1: A 6-year-
old, spayed female Poodle dog weighing 4.1 kg was presented with neck stiffness, hyperesthesia and hind limb ataxia. Uncoordinated gait of
hind limb was acutely presented 3 days ago and had maintained steadily until the admission day. No abnormalities on the complete blood count
(CBC) and serum biochemical profile were detected. Neurological examination revealed decreased postural reactions in both hind limbs, though
cranial nerves and spinal reflexes were normal. Based on the examination, myelopathy or cerebellar diseases were suspected. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the brain and spinal cord was obtained using a 0.2 Tesla (E-Scan; Esaote, Italy) in transverse, sagittal,
and dorsal, T1- and T2-weighted images. Caudal cerebellar herniation through the foramen magnum and syrinx in the spinal cord between second
and fourth cervical vertebrae were noted (Fig. 1). Based on these findings, the dog was diagnosed with Chiari-like malformations and
syringomyelia (CM/SM). The dog was treated with furosemide (Lasix, 2 mg/kg, PO, BID; Handok Pham, Korea) and prednisolone (Prednisolone, 1
mg/kg, PO, BID; Korea Pharma, Korea). The ataxia mildly improved on the third day and completely disappeared by the second week. Medication
had been tapered off over 2 months. There was no relapse for 6 months until last follow-ups. Case No. 2: A 3-year-old, intact male Maltese
dog weighing 4.16 kg was presented with the neck pain, stiffness, and weakness in the hindlimbs for 7 days. The owners also reported that
the dog had a mild tendency to scratch at its mid-cervical area and was becoming more sensitive. Physical and neurologic examinations
revealed cervical pain (including cervical stiffness), shivering, hyperesthesia, bilateral patellar luxation, and tachypnea. CBC, serum
biochemistry, and radiography were normal. Brain and spinal MRI scans was performed with 0.2 Tesla unit (E-scan; Esaote, Italy). T1- and T2-
weighted images and gadolinium enhanced T1-weighted images were obtained. On T2-weighted images, a hyperintense lesion was found on the pons
area and the syrinx formation was more obvious (Fig. 2). Based on the hyperintensity in the pons, an inflammatory status such as
granulomatous meningoencephalitis (GME) was also suspected in this case. CM/SM was observed in the midsagittal MRI (Fig. 2). The dog was
treated with furosemide (2 mg/kg, PO, BID), prednisolone (1 mg/kg, PO, BID) for 1 month. Then, prednisolone was continued to taper down for
another 4 weeks. After 5 days of treatment, the clinical signs of the dog improved to normal condition. Since then, no side effects or
relapses have occurred in over 12 months. We kept 1 mg/kg of prednisolone for 1 month and it continued to taper down for another 4 weeks.
Case No. 3: A 2-year-old, spayed female Yorkshire terrier dog weighing 2.08 kg was presented due to right-sided hemiparalysis with no
urination and defecation and cervical pain for 2 days. Upon neurological examinations, right-sided hemiparalysis with episcleral engorgement
and delayed pupillary light reflex were observed. Moreover, the dog indicated pain over the cervical area during palpation. Serum
biochemistry revealed mildly elevated creatinine kinase (265 U/L; reference range, 10 to 199 U/L). According to the owner's report, the dog
was becoming more sensitive around her right cervical area over the past month. In addition, the dog developed hyperesthesia and right-sided
limb weakness during that one month. Based on the initial examination, this dog was suspected of having a intracranial disorder. MRI scans
of the brain and spinal cord was performed with the same equipment as in cases 1 and 2. Significantly asymmetrical enlargement of lateral
ventricles was observed (Figs. 3A and B) and CM/SM was evident on both T1- and T2-weighted images. On the midsagittal MRI of cervical spinal
cord, long syrinx formation was evident (Fig. 3C). Serial transverse T1- and T2-weighted images of the spinal cord also showed
asymmetrically dilated central canals tilting to the right side (Fig. 3D). CSF evaluation revealed mild neutrophilic pleocytosis and
slightly increased protein level (47 mg/dL; reference range: < 25 to 35 mg/dL). The dog was treated with the same treatment protocol as case
No. 2. The symptoms nearly disappeared by the 7 th day of treatment and this dog had a very good response to the treatment. There were no
recurring symptoms 10 months after discontinuation of therapy. The three dogs in this case study were diagnosed with CM/SM. Cervical pain,
hyperesthesia, and neck stiffness were the only clinical signs common to all three dogs in this case report. According to the medical
history and physical examinations of this case group, it was suspected that the skin over one side of the head, neck, shoulder or sternum
might be overly sensitive to touch and the dogs frequently scratch at that area often without making skin contact. Neuropathic pain can be
defined as clinical state of pain accompanied by tissue injury of somatosensory processing in the peripheral or central nervous system,
which includes spontaneous pain, paresthesia, dysthesia, allodynia, or hyperpathia . It is hypothesized that the pain-associated behavioral
changes of dogs affected by SM are due to neuropathic pain, probably because of injured neural processing in the damaged dorsal horn . The
dorsal horn has a key role in the perception of sensory information and transmission to the brain, and sometimes the neural connections and
communications through the dorsal horn can be reorganized, resulting in persistent pain states . In this case group, the presence or absence
of the signs of probable SM associated pain was recorded. On the midsagittal T1-and T2-weighted MRIs of the three dogs, syrinxes were
observed along the cervical spinal cord. Especially, the transverse MR images through the syrinxes explained the right sided asymmetrical
region around the dorsal horn in case No. 3. It was thought that injury to the right dorsal horn might cause the right-sided hemiparalysis
in case No. 3 due to recent studies . The hyperintense lesion in the pons of case No. 2 may indicate an inflammatory process like GME, which
would be an alternative cause of neck pain. As a possible treatment option, surgical correction is recommended for CM/SM to correct the
underlying anatomical or functional abnormality. However, even after an apparently successful procedure resulting in the collapse of the
syrinx, the patient may still experience significant pain, especially if the spinal cord dorsal horn was compromised . In dogs, surgery
appears less successful than in humans because, although there may be a clinical improvement, SM is generally persistent . Until a reliable
surgical option is defined, pharmaceutical treatment of the clinical signs is likely to be the mainstay of veterinary therapy. Although the
three dogs in this case study have had no relapse of the clinical signs after discontinuation of the therapy, long-term monitoring and life-
long medical therapy are required because SM is a chronic and intractable condition. This case report demonstrates that CM/SM is clearly
related to neck pain/stiffness and hyperesthesia. Better understanding of the pain symptoms of CM/SM might lead to the possibility of more
effective medications and resolutions with dogs suffering from pain of unknown etiology in the veterinary clinics. This work was supported
by the Korean Research Foundation Grant funded by the Korean Government (KRF-2008-314-E00246). MRI features of the dog in case No. 1.
Chiari-like malformation (CM; arrow heads) and syrinx in the spinal cord between second and fourth cervical vertebrae (arrows) were noted on
the midsagittal T1- (A) and T2- (B) weighted images. Transverse T1- (C) and T2- (D) weighted images at the level of the third cervical
vertebrae revealed syrinx with an enlarged central canal (arrows). MRI images of case No. 2. On midsagittal MRIs (A and B), CM (arrow heads)
with syrinx formation (arrows), indicating syrinomyelia (SM) is more evident on the T2-weighted image (B). The hyperintense lesion in the
pons is also observed on the T2-weighted image (B). Serial transverse MRIs (C and D) reveal the dilation of the central canals (arrows). The
dilated central canal is clearer on the T2-weighted image with hyperintensity (D). MRI features of case No. 3. Marked asymmetrical dilation
of the lateral ventricle is confirmed on T1-(A) and T2-(B) weighted transverse MRIs. CM/SM (arrow) is evident on the midsagittal MRI of the
cervical spinal cord (C). Transverse T1-weighted image of the spinal cord also demonstrates an asymmetrically dilated central canal (arrow)
tilting to the right side (D).
