We report a patient with an isolated metastasis to the internal auditory canal (IAC) of bronchogenic adenocarcinoma. A 58-yr-old man who had
received 6-cycle of chemotherapy under diagnosis of non-small cell lung carcinoma (T4N2M0) two years ago was referred to our department with
vertigo, right-sided facial paralysis and right-sided hearing loss. A provisional diagnosis of vestibular schwannoma or meningioma involving
right IAC was made from magnetic resonance imaging. The patient underwent a translabyrinthine removal of the tumor. Histopathological study
of the resected lesion showed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma compatible with bronchogenic origin. The patient died 9 months after
surgery from extensive brain metastasis despite postoperative radiation therapy. In patients with a previous history of treatment of
malignancy elsewhere in the body, the possibility of IAC metastasis must be considered when an IAC lesion is detected. While bronchogenic
adenocarcinoma metastasizes to the temporal bone not uncommonly, isolated metastasis to the internal auditory canal (IAC) is extremely rare.
We recently experienced a patient with solitary metastasis of bronchogenic adenocarcinoma to the IAC. A 58-yr-old man was referred to our
department with a week of right-sided facial paralysis (House-Brackmann grade III) accompanied by three months' history of vertigo with
right-sided hearing loss. No other neurological symptoms were observed. His audiogram showed a total loss of hearing on the right ear and
normal hearing on the left side. A canal paresis in the right ear was noted on electronystagmography. Electroneurography revealed 78% of
facial nerve degeneration on the eighth day of facial palsy. Two years ago, the patient had received 6-cycle of chemotherapy under diagnosis
of non-small cell lung carcinoma (T4N2M0) at other hospital. During the last 2 yr of office follow-up, no sign of tumor recurrence was
found. One month before visiting our hospital, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed no evidence of brain parenchymal
metastasis or abnormal enhancing lesion. MRI scan with gadolinium contrast taken at our hospital showed an enhancing lesion involving right
IAC and cisternal segment with dural thickening (Fig. 1). Computed tomography (CT) of temporal bone showed no abnormality. A provisional
diagnosis of vestibular schwannoma or meningioma involving right IAC was made, although the possibility of metastasis was considered. The
patient underwent a translabyrinthine removal of the tumor. The operative finding demonstrated a lobulated, soft, pinkish mass confined to
the IAC, where it did not involve both the seventh and eighth cranial nerves directly but enclose them. Adhesion between the tumor and
cranial nerves was not severe. So it is not difficult to resect the tumor from the nerves with anatomical preservation of facial nerve. The
vestibular nerves were removed with tumor mass together. The facial palsy did not aggravated postoperatively. Histopathological study of the
resected lesion showed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma compatible with bronchogenic origin (Fig. 2) based on immunohistochemical
staining result that was positive for cytokeratin 7 (CK-7) and thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), but negative for cytokeratin 20
(CK-20) (Fig. 3). A thorough metastatic work up was completely negative. A month later, the patient received 3,000 cGy of external beam
radiation therapy to the right inner ear. The patient refused adjuvant chemotherapy. Five months after surgery, despite the absence of
evident recurrence on chest CT, follow-up brain MRI scan revealed newly found metastases in the left IAC, left cerebellum, and right
superior parietal gyrus with adjacent pachymeningeal enhancement. The patient died 9 months after surgery of complication associated with
extensive brain metastasis. The most common tumor occupying the IAC and cerebellopontine angle is vestibular schwannoma, followed by
meningioma, epidermoid cyst, glomus jugulare tumors, and facial and trigeminal neuroma (1). Primary metastasis to the IAC is rarely
reported, representing 0.7% of the CPA tumors. The most frequent site of temporal bone metastasis is the petrous apex (30%) followed by the
tegmen tympani (25%) (2). Gloria-Cruz et al. (3), in a study of 415 temporal bones of 212 autopsies of patients with primary non-
disseminated malignant neoplasms, found 76 temporal bones (18.3%) metastasis, of which 27.6% had IAC involvement, although in only 2 cases
the IAC was the sole site of metastasis. In a review of 14 cases of metastases to the cerebellopontine angle (CPA) evidenced by magnetic
resonance study, the primary tumors most often metastasizing to the CPA were lung carcinoma, breast carcinoma, melanoma, prostatic
carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma of the nasopharynx, and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (4). There are five distinct routes of tumor spread from
the primary tumor to the temporal bone: 1) hematogenous spread, 2) cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) dissemination, 3) direct extension, 4)
leptomeningeal extension, and 5) leukemic infiltration (5). The exact mechanism of spread of the malignancy to the IAC is not certain but
possible spread route of our case is that tumor cells seed into the CSF and disseminate through the subarachnoid space into the IAC. The MRI
features of the IAC metastasis were similar to those of a schwannoma except for the presence of thick linear and extranodular contrast
enhancement, not seen in the purely intracanalicular schwannomas (6). Contrast enhancement along the porus could suggest meningeal
infiltration. Metastatic lesion of the IAC must be treated more aggressively than other IAC tumors. Once metastasis is suspected, the
adequate treatment, which consists in a multidisciplinary approach with surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy, should be promoted. In the
literature, several cases of the IAC metastasis were reported, most of which died within 1 yr after diagnosis because of extensive brain
metastasis (7-10). Considered retrospectively, our patient should have received adjuvant concurrent chemoradiation therapy including whole
brain radiation rather than narrow field radiation, with aims to destroy left-over malignant cells that might have been present after
surgical excision. This case is peculiar and somewhat differs from previously reported cases of malignant metastasis to the IAC in two
aspects: 1) solitary IAC metastasis without other distant metastasis at the time of diagnosis, 2) metachronous metastasis. Our patient died
of extensive brain metastasis despite surgical excision and postoperative radiotherapy. We suggest surgical excision and adjuvant concurrent
chemoradiation therapy with careful follow up as the proper therapeutic approach in such patients. In patients with a previous history of
treatment of malignancy elsewhere in the body, the possibility of IAC metastasis must be considered when an IAC lesion is detected.
Gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted axial MRI scan showing a space-occupying lesion involving right IAC and cisternal segment with dural
thickening. Histologic section from the excised specimen of the IAC mass showing poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma (H&E, ×100). Result of
the immunohistochemical staining for the IAC mass. (A) Positive immunostaing for CK-7. (B) Positive immunostaing for TTF-1. (C) Negative
immunostaing for CK-20 (×200).
