Resistance to oseltamivir was observed in influenza A pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus isolated from an untreated person in Hong Kong, China.
Investigations showed a resistant virus with the neuraminidase (NA) 274Y genotype in quasi-species from a nasopharyngeal aspirate.
Monitoring for the naturally occurring NA 274Y mutation in this virus is necessary. Emergence of influenza A pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus,
presumably from swine to humans, has spread globally since April 2009 (1–3). This emergence prompted the World Health Organization to
declare a pandemic caused by this virus on June 11, 2009. Although most cases of infection are mild or asymptomatic, 1,462 fatal cases were
reported to the World Health Organization as of August 6, 2009 (www.who.int/csr/don/2009_09_11/en/index.html). Experimental evidence from
animal models showed that this virus was able to replicate to high titers in the lungs of infected animals (4), unlike seasonal influenza
viruses, which mainly infect the upper respiratory tract. Serologic studies found that antibodies induced by current seasonal influenza
vaccines show little cross-reactivity to pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus (5). Therapeutic options are presently limited to 2 neuraminidase (NA)
inhibitors, oseltamivir and zanamivir, because this virus has a swine-origin matrix 2 (M2) gene, which contains a mutation associated with
resistance to M2 ion channel blockers amantadine and rimantadine. Although oseltamivir has been widely used in persons infected with
pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus, resistance was not observed until recently. Three unrelated cases of resistance to oseltamivir were observed in
Denmark, Japan, and Hong Kong (www.who.int/csr/disease/swineflu/notes /h1n1_antiviral_resistance_20090708/en/index.html). Emergence of
resistance to oseltamivir by seasonal influenza A virus (H1N1) was detected in Norway in 2007. This virus has evolved into the dominant
influenza A virus (H1N1) in humans (6). This finding raises strong concerns that the 274Y resistant mutation in pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus
might circulate and become dominant. We report virologic investigation of the emergence of oseltamivir resistance in this virus in a patient
from Hong Kong. A 16-year-old previously healthy girl had a fever at the Hong Kong International Airport after her arrival from San
Francisco, California, USA, on June 11, 2009. Physical examination showed a temperature of 38.3°C, a blood pressure of 117/66 mm Hg, a pulse
rate of 94 beats/min, and an oxygen saturation of 99% at room air. Results of a complete blood count and liver and renal function tests were
normal. She had a leukocyte count of 4.69 × 109 cells/L, an absolute neutrophil count of 2.36 × 109 cells/L, and a lymphocyte count of 1.74
× 109 cells/L. Findings on her chest radiograph were normal. A nasopharyngeal aspirate (NPA) was positive for influenza A virus (H1N1)
nucleoprotein by immunofluorescence. NPA specimens on days 1 and 5 were positive for influenza A virus (H1N1) M gene and swine-specific
specific H1 gene by reverse transcription–PCR (RT-PCR). Samples obtained on days 6–8 were negative. Serum and midstream urine specimens
obtained on day 2 were negative for influenza A virus (H1N1) M gene by RT-PCR. The patient refused antiviral therapy with oseltamivir
because of fear of its potential side effects. She was then offered symptomatic treatment. Her clinical condition gradually improved and she
was discharged on day 8 uneventfully. Influenza A pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus was cultured from NPA. Subsequent drug susceptibility testing
showed that this isolate was resistant to oseltamivir (50% inhibitory concentration 197.5 nM), but susceptible to zanamivir, as determined
by enzymatic assay (Table). *50% inhibitory concentrations (IC50s) for oseltamivir and zanamivir were determined by using NA-Star influenza
neuraminidase (NA) inhibitor resistance detection kits (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Ratios of 274H and 274Y were evaluated by cloning neuraminidase (NA) gene PCR products from nasopharyngeal aspirate (NPA)
samples or MDCK cell–cultured virus into the TA vector (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and sequencing clones containing the NA gene. ND, not
done. To confirm whether the virus contained mutations associated with resistance to NA inhibitors, NA sequences from the day 1 NPA specimen
and an MDCK cell isolate were examined. Viral RNA was extracted from NPA and MDCK cell supernatants by using reported procedures (7). RT-PCR
was performed by using primers spanning position 274 of the NA gene (forward: 5′-ACACAAGAGTCTGAATGTGCATGT-3′; reverse:
5′-GTCTCCGAAAATCCCACTGCATAT-3′). Direct sequencing of PCR products was performed by using a BigDye Terminator v3.1 cycle sequencing reaction
kit on an ABI PRISM 3730 DNA analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Sequences indicated that the NA genes in the NPA and MDCK
cell virus isolates contained an H→Y mutation at the NA 274 (H3 numbering, 275 in H1 numbering) residue (GenBank accession no. GQ351316). No
other NA mutations known to be associated with oseltamivir resistance were observed. Further examination of sequences showed mixed
populations (T/C) in the NA gene from the NPA specimen (Figure, panel A). Neuraminidase (NA) 274Y (H3 subtype numbering) gene mutation in
influenza A pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus A/Hong Kong/2369/2009 isolated from a patient who arrived in Hong Kong, China, from San Francisco,
California, USA, on June 11, 2009. A) NA sequence of virus amplified by reverse transcription–PCR and sequenced directly from a day 1
specimen of a nasopharyngeal aspirate from the patient. B) NA sequence of virus grown in MDCK cells. Nucleotide sequence represents
identification of nucleotides by the sequencing machine, and the sequence trace represents the signal (peak) of each nucleotide in the
sequencing reaction. Nucleotide coordinates (812 and 827) refer to the NA gene sequence of pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus. Residue 274Y encoded
by the 3-nucleotide codon is indicated in boxes and the nucleotide substitution (C→T for amino acid change H→Y) is indicated by arrows
Colors of curves match those of specific nucleotides. Estimation of 274H and 274Y populations in the NPA specimen was performed by cloning
and sequencing PCR products. The NPA specimen contained approximately equal proportions of 274Y and 274H (52.63% and 47.37%, respectively).
Examination of sequences from the MDCK cell isolate showed predominantly the 274Y type, although a minor 274H peak was also observed
(Figure, panel B). Cloning and sequencing of PCR products from the MDCK virus isolate showed that 97.92% of the NA genes were 274Y, which
suggests that the 274Y population overtook the 274H population during MDCK cell culture. Resistance to NA inhibitors among seasonal strains
of human influenza viruses (A/H1N1, A/H3N2, and B) has been rare until recently. Development of resistance after oseltamivir treatment has
occurred in 0.33%–5.5% of treated patients (8). Oseltamivir resistance associated with the NA 274Y genotype was also observed in human
infections with avian influenza A virus (H5N1) (9,10). Low levels of 274Y quasi-species in avian influenza A viruses (H5N1) from avian hosts
has been reported (11). Oseltamivir-resistant human influenza A viruses (H3N2 and H1N1) have been found to replicate less efficiently than
oseltamivir-susceptible strains in cell culture and animal models (12–14). However, the NA 274Y resistant mutant in highly pathogenic avian
influenza A virus (H5N1) retained the high pathogenicity of wild-type virus in mammalian species (15). In 2007, an NA H274Y oseltamivir-
resistant variant of seasonal influenza A virus (H1N1) was detected in Norway (6). This virus has now become the dominant virus population
globally, overtaking oseltamivir-susceptible influenza A virus (H1N1). The molecular basis for the 274Y variant in seasonal influenza A
virus (H1N1) virus and the mechanism by which this resistant variant became the dominant population remain unknown. Lack of general immunity
to pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus in the human population, combined with the inherent adamantane resistance of the virus, indicates that NA
inhibitors constitute the primary treatment regimen for susceptible patient groups and those in whom severe diseases develop during the
current pandemic. There is great concern that an oseltamivir-resistant variant of pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus may emerge and circulate in a
manner similar to oseltamivir-resistant seasonal influenza A virus (H1N1). The patient in this study was not treated with oseltamivir.
Therefore it is unlikely that the 274Y mutation was drug-induced. Detection of mixed populations of 274Y and 274H in the NPA specimen before
antiviral treatment suggests that the mutation occurs naturally, either before or during infection. Although no experimental data exist that
show the growth properties of this resistant variant, examination of the quasi-species population in the cell culture–propagated virus
isolate showed that the 274Y variant has become the dominant population. This finding implies that the 274Y mutation does not compromise
replication of pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus in vitro. Quarantine procedures adopted by the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region in China
during the early containment phase might have limited transmission of this variant virus. Knowledge of this virus is still limited, and
characterization of transmission properties of this resistant variant in in vitro and in vivo models is needed. Moreover, pandemic (H1N1)
2009 virus should be closely monitored for emergence of resistant variants. Suggested citation for this article: Chen H, Cheung CL, Tai H,
Zhao P, Chan JFW, Cheng VCC, et al. Oseltamivir-resistant influenza A pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus, Hong Kong, China. Emerg Infect Dis [serial
on the Internet]. 2009 Dec [date cited]. Available from http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/15/12/1970.htm We thank W. Lim and her staff for
support. This study was partly supported by the Providence Foundation Limited in memory of the late Lui Hac Minh, the Research Grants
Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (7500/06M), the Research Fund for the Control of Infectious Diseases of the Food and
Health Bureau of the Hong Kong Government, University Development Fund 2001–2002 (first round) of The University of Hong Kong, and the
Clinical Infectious Diseases Research Endowment Fund. Dr Chen is an associate professor at The University of Hong Kong. His primary research
interests are molecular basis of antigenic variation and host-restricting factors of influenza virus.
