Spontaneous thrombosis of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is an uncommon condition. Chronic thrombosed AAA are related to occlusive iliac
disease and often present with intermittent claudication.1,2 However, the symptoms related to expansion of the aneurysm and risk of rupture
must be considerable, even in thrombosed aorta.1 We present our experience with three consecutive cases of chronic thrombosed aneurysms with
different clinical manifestations. The current understanding of chronic thrombosed aneurysm pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment are
reviewed. Case 1: A 71-year-old man entered our emergency department presenting with abdominal pain that had lasted for six months and had
worsened in the last week. His past medical history revealed hypertension, tabagism, dyslipidemia and epilepsy. His left lower leg was
amputated 11 years earlier, after an accident with chemicals; the right lower leg of the patient was also amputated after an episode of
acute ischemia six years before that date. His physical examination revealed a painful, palpable pulsatile mass extending from the
mesogastrium to the infraumbilical area. There was no femoral pulse, but the stumps and buttocks had a normal temperature. An abdominal
computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a thrombosed infra-renal aneurysm with a maximum transverse diameter of 10.5 cm (Pictures 1 and 2).
After cardiac evaluation, an elective laparotomy was performed. The surgery revealed an inflammatory aortic aneurysm with clearly visible
local wall necrosis (Picture 3). After clamping the aorta, the aneurysm sac was incised, releasing a great volume of thrombosed and
liquefied clots under significant pressure. The aorta and both iliac common arteries were sutured, and no bypass was performed. The
postoperative course was unremarkable, and the patient was sent home on the sixth postoperative day. He continued with ambulatory
consultations. On the 40th postoperative day, the patient returned to the emergency room in a septic state with abdominal pain, ascites and
circulatory shock. The patient expired in the emergency room before surgery could be performed, despite aggressive attempts to resuscitate
him. The post mortem examination revealed diffused peritonitis as a consequence of mesenteric ischemia and perforation of the small
intestine, associated with pancreatitis. There was neither an aortic stump blow-out nor a colon ischemia. Case 2: A 57-year-old man sought
medical attention for evaluation of spontaneous ischemic necrosis of the fifth toe of the right foot. He denied symptoms of abdominal pain,
but his general condition was extremely poor. Notable parts of his past medical history included hypertension, tabagism, coronary heart
disease and stroke. His physical examination indicated a 4-cm palpable pulsatile mass in megogastrium. There were no femoral or distal
pulses. A CT scan of the abdomen and lower extremities revealed a thrombosed 3.5-cm infra-renal AAA with occlusive arterial disease of the
iliac and femoral arteries (Picture 4). Deep femoral arteries were patent. A duplex scan of the carotid arteries showed an occlusion of the
right internal carotid artery and no significant stenosis in the left internal carotid artery. Cardiac evaluation had deemed him as high
risk for open repair. An axillobifemoral bypass using an 8-mm Dacron graft was performed under general anesthesia. The patient was sent home
on postoperative day 8. The patient is still been attentively observed to check the aneurysm. Case 3: A 58-year-old man sought medical
attention for evaluation of an infected ulcer in the calcaneous and the dorsal aspect of the left foot. He denied any symptoms of abdominal
pain. His past medical history was significant for diabetes, hypertension and 38 years of smoking. Clinical examination revealed the absence
of femoral pulses. A CT scan of the abdomen and lower extremities detected a 3.0-cm infra-renal AAA and a thrombosed 2.5-cm right common
iliac artery aneurysm with occlusive arterial disease of the external bilateral iliacs (Picture 5). Common femoral arteries were evident. An
aortic-iliac-femoral bypass was successfully performed. Following a prolonged recovery, due to an uncontrolled infection of the left foot, a
transtibial amputation was performed. The patient was discharged and sent home on postoperative day 25. Schumacker3 reported the first
thrombosed AAA in 1959, and Janetta and Roberts1,4 reported the first successful revascularization procedure in 1960. The spontaneous
thrombosis of aortic aneurysm is rare.1,5 Acute thrombosis often presents with limb ischemia or neurological deficits and carries a
mortality rate up to 50%, as reviewed by Hirose et al.2,6 There are only 51 cases of acute thrombosis of AAA reported in the literature.1–13
Manifestation of chronic thrombosis AAA is a rare but well-recognized issue in clinical practice and is present in patients with
intermittent claudication. Most of the literature that references rupture of chronic thrombosis of AAA is linked to deliberate thrombosis of
the aorta, followed by extra-anatomic bypass.1,5,7,8 Only three cases of rupture of a previous spontaneously thrombosed AAA have been
reported.1–3 Several factors appear to be associated with AAA thrombosis.9 Surgical manipulation, trauma, fever, thromboembolic disease,
dehydration, hyper-coagulation, hypotension, atrial fibrillation, neoplasm, intraplaque hemorrhage, dislodgment of mural thrombus, iliac
artery occlusive disease and AAA rupture have already been described.9 However, for thrombosed aneurysm, obstructive iliac disease plays the
most important role in chronic manifestation. The prevalence of AAA in the population with symptomatic peripheral vascular disease ranges
from 4% to 10%.10–13 The optimal procedure for managing an AAA associated with occlusive disease is endoaneurysmorrhaphy with inline aortic
reconstruction, as in our third case. Nevertheless, in high-risk patients with severe cardiac, respiratory or renal disease, extra-anatomic
axillobifemoral bypass is an acceptable alternative.8 This procedure is advantageous because it is less invasive, avoids major abdominal
surgery and can be performed with regional anesthesia.9 However, late rupture of a previously thrombosed aneurysm must be considered.
Ricotta and Kirshner5 reported a case in which a patient with a thrombosed aneurysm died of a rupture less than six months after an
axillobifemoral bypass, and Leke2 reported a case in which a patient died of a rupture seven months after an extra-anatomic bypass. In the
past two decades, some authors have advocated a non-resective approach to treating AAAs in high-risk patients that combines extra-anatomic
revascularization of the lower extremities with ligation or endovascular occlusion of the aneurysm.2,14 The purpose of such a procedure is
to induce thrombosis and decrease the risk of rupture. However, the operative mortality in these high-risk patients ranges from 13% to
31%.8,15 In our first case, although the surgical procedure was successful, the patient died in the second postoperative month due to
mesenteric ischemia. There was no clear association of the aortic ligation and the mesenteric ischemia, since the post mortem examination
revealed neither an aortic thrombosis nor the proximal propagation of aortic thrombus. We believe that the systemic atherosclerotic disease
present in this patient was the major factor that complicated his recovery. Late rupture of surgically induced thrombosed AAA has been
reported.1,5,7 Schwartz et al.15 analyzed 13 patients with AAA thrombosis and extra-anatomic bypass and reported a delayed aneurysmal
rupture of 15% in only 6 months. These reports emphasize the concept that the thrombosis of an abdominal aortic aneurysm does not absolutely
preclude rupture.7 Another technique that is described is a retroeritoneal approach using ligation of the aorta and proximal and distal
ligation of the aneurysm (exclusion), coupled with an aortic bypass. Resnikoff16 related a rupture incidence of 0.8% over ten years. We
opted for an extra-anatomic bypass in our second case because the patient had a small aortic aneurysm (3.5 cm) and was at high operative
risk. However, the assumed risk for late rupture implies that close follow-up is imperative to detect any expansion of the aneurysm. Our
third patient had an infra-renal AAA and a thrombosed 2.5-cm right common iliac artery aneurysm associated with occlusive arterial disease
of both external iliacs. Although it was not considered a true thrombosed abdominal aortic aneurysm, the outflow obstruction resulted in a
pressurization of the iliac aneurysm similar to the “water hammer” effect. We believe the physiopathology of both obstructions are similar
and because of this a definitive surgery treatment is needed. Schurink et al.17 studied the effect of thrombus on aneurysm wall pressure and
concluded that thrombus within the aneurysm does not reduce the pulse pressure near the aneurysm wall and, consequently, does not reduce the
risk of rupture. Furthermore, rupture could occur if a thrombosed sac continued to be pressurized by collateral perfusion.1,17 The symptoms
of our first patient demonstrate clearly that a chronic thrombosed aneurysm can be pressurized. The local wall necrosis and the inflammatory
aspect of the aneurysm were characteristic of an imminence of rupture (Picture 2). Takagi et al.18 measured and compared the intraluminal
and intrathrombotic pressure in three points of a thrombosed abdominal aortic aneurysm and found only a 1%–5% decrease in the mean
intrathrombotic pressure relative to intraluminal pressure. These authors concluded that the mural thrombus of an aneurysm does not
significantly decrease the pressure on the aneurysm wall, even in a thrombosed aneurysm. Recently, Dalal et al.1 concluded that the new
concept of endotension following endovascular repair of aneurysms (EVAR) can also be applied to thrombosed aneurysm. This concept describing
pressurization of the aneurysm wall demonstrates the need for surveillance to identify continued aneurysm expansion when a non-resective
approach is used to treat these thrombosed aneurysms, as in the case of EVAR. Chronic thrombosis of abdominal aortic aneurysm can be
demonstrated not only as occlusive iliac disease but also as ruptured or expanded AAA. We conclude that the thrombosis of the aneurysm does
not protect the aortic wall from pressurization and the risk of rupture. This reinforces the concept that the optimal management for AAA
associated with occlusive aortic-iliac disease is endoaneurysmorrhaphy with inline aortic reconstruction. In exceptional cases of high-risk
patients, in which extra-anatomic bypass must be chosen, surveillance for the expansion of the aneurysm must be diligently performed during
the follow-up process. Thrombosed infra-renal aortic aneurysm 3D reconstruction of the thrombosed aneurysm Operative aspect of wall necrosis
of the aneurysm Thrombosed 3.5-cm infra-renal AAA Thrombosed 2.5-cm right common iliac artery aneurysm
