Conflict of Interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists. Oxidative stress plays a major role in the pathogenesis
of both types of diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular diseases including hypertension. The low levels of antioxidants accompanied by raised
levels of markers of free radical damage play a major role in delaying wound healing. Ultra-low microcurrent presumably has an antioxidant
effect, and it was shown to accelerate wound healing. The purpose of the study is to investigate the efficacy of ultra-low microcurrent
delivered by the Electro Pressure Regeneration Therapy (EPRT) device (EPRT Technologies-USA, Simi Valley, CA) in the management of diabetes,
hypertension and chronic wounds. The EPRT device is an electrical device that sends a pulsating stream of electrons in a relatively low
concentration throughout the body. The device is noninvasive and delivers electrical currents that mimic the endogenous electric energy of
the human body. It is a rechargeable battery-operated device that delivers a direct current (maximum of 3 milliAmperes) of one polarity for
11.5 minutes, which then switched to the opposite polarity for another 11.5 minutes. The resulting cycle time is approximately 23min or
0.000732 Hz and delivers a square wave bipolar current with a voltage ranging from 5V up to a maximum of 40 V. The device produces a current
range of 3 mA down to 100 nA. Twelve patients with long standing diabetes, hypertension and unhealed wounds were treated with EPRT. The
patients were treated approximately for 3.5 h/day/5 days a week. Assessment of ulcer was based on scale used by National Pressure Ulcer
Advisory Panel Consensus Development Conference. Patients were followed-up with daily measurement of blood pressure and blood glucose level,
and their requirement for medications was recorded. Treatment continued from 2-4 months according to their response. Results showed that
diabetes mellitus and hypertension were well controlled after using this device, and their wounds were markedly healed (30-100%). The
patients either reduced their medication or completely stopped after the course of treatment. No side effects were reported. The mechanism
of action was discussed. Diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular diseases are challenging medical and social problems. Patients with diabetes
mellitus are at a higher risk of developing vascular dysfunction and hypertension. The real etiology of these diseases is not well
understood. However, cumulative evidence suggests that oxidative stress may play a key role in the development of diseases. It has been
found that oxidative stress is associated with several cardiovascular diseases, including atherosclerosis, hypertension, heart failure,
stroke, and diabetes, and plays a fundamental role in endothelial dysfunction associated with these diseases 1-6. Further, oxidative stress
plays a major role in the pathogenesis of both types of diabetes mellitus. High levels of free radicals and the decline of antioxidant
defense mechanisms lead to damage of cellular organelles and enzymes, increased lipid peroxidation, and development of insulin resistance 7.
The vascular and systemic complications in diabetes are associated with hyperglycemia-induced overproduction of reactive oxygen species 8,9.
Other studies showed that overproduction of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, lowered antioxidant defense and alterations of enzymatic
pathways in humans with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus can contribute to endothelial, vascular and neurovascular dysfunction 10.
Insulin resistance is associated with reduced intracellular antioxidant defense, and therefore diabetic patients may have a defective
intracellular antioxidant response that causes diabetic complications 11-13. The combination of the low levels of antioxidants and raised
levels of free radical play a major role in delaying wound healing in aged rate and diabetic rats 14. It has been found that chronic leg
ulcers contain localized oxidative stress 15. The recent finding revealed that insulin resistance is associated in humans with reduced
intracellular antioxidant 11. Interestingly, antioxidants improve insulin sensitivity and help in wound healing 16,17. Along with others,
the investigators have used microcurrent for treatment of chronic wounds and ulcers 18-20. In an earlier work, The Electro Pressure
Regeneration Therapy (EPRT) device which produces a current range of 3 mA down to 100 nA, was used for treatment of chronic wounds and
ulcers associated with chronic disease 21. The device used in the experiment was supposed to deliver electrons to tissues and then saturated
free radicals with required electrons. The actual tissue regeneration, along with concomitant improvement noted in the general condition of
the patient, points to a highly potent antioxidant effect on local tissues, as well as on tissues in general. This reduces free radicals and
might facilitate tissue repair. This device is used as a model to deliver electrons to the body, including mitochondria and presumably
working as an antioxidatant device. It was thought reasonable to use on patients with diabetes mellitus, hypertension and chronic wounds, to
test whether delivering electrons to the body might help eliminate underlying oxidative stress, stabilize mitochondria and prevent further
formation of excess free radicals. The EPRT device is an electrical device that sends a pulsating stream of electrons in a relatively low
concentration throughout the body. The device is noninvasive and delivers electrical currents that mimic the endogenous electric energy of
the human body. It is a rechargeable battery-operated device that delivers a direct current (maximum of 3 milliAmperes) of one polarity for
11.5 minutes, which then switched to the opposite polarity for another 11.5 minutes. The device was designed to switch the direction of
current flow halfway through the cycle. The resulting cycle time is approximately 23min or 0.000732 Hz and delivers a square wave bipolar
current with a voltage ranging from 5V up to a maximum of 40 V. The device produces a current range of 3 mA down to 100 nA. Electrodes are
applied in 2 layers, and tap water is used as the conducting medium. The wraps cover a large surface area, thus reducing resistance and
allowing an optimum number of electrons to flow freely into tissues. Case 1: The first patient was a 74 year old female with poorly
controlled non-insulin- dependent diabetes, hypertension, and hypercholesterolemia. She was seen with vomiting, diarrhea and gangrene of
second toe on left foot. Two weeks prior to admission, the patient had sustained fall in the bathroom resulting in a left ankle fracture
with vomiting and diarrhea for seven days. The patient was treated with metformin and augmentin. Upon examination, the patient was afebrile
with stable vital signs, and femoral pulses were present bilaterally. Popliteal and pedal pulses were absent bilaterally with poor capillary
refill. The left foot was red and inflamed up to and including the medial malleolus. The lateral aspect of the great toe and second toe
turned black. Laboratory investigation revealed elevated blood glucose (17.9 mmol/L) and hyponatremia (Na+ 128 mEg/L). The patient underwent
a medial forefoot amputation as part of her management. Within 28 days after surgery, the 4th and 5th toes become discolored, dusky purple
and black. The patient also developed a large blood blister over her heel. Vascular opinion was for a below knee amputation. The patient was
self- discharged against medical advice. The patient was started on treatment by Electro Pressure Regeneration Therapy device (EPRT) while
she was in hospital. She continued daily treatments on the EPRT device at home, along with a diabetic diet. The left foot continued to
improve and heal, and her remaining gangrenous toes eventually fell off. Her blood pressure at admission was 166/53 with use of Lisinopril,
which was dropped and eventually ceased as her BP continued to drop; 146/68, 129/64, 144/67 in second, third and fourth weeks after
treatment, and to 128/66 during 6th to 8th weeks post-treatment while the patient was on no medication. Her blood sugar was improved and
HbA1c was dropped from 9.8 before treatment to 7.6, 6.5, 5.9 and 5.5 during 9 months after commencement of treatment. The patient eventually
stopped diabetic and hypertensive medications. To date her HbA1c remains below 6 on diet alone. Case 2: The second patient was a 65 year old
male with a long history of non insulin dependent diabetes and hypertension. Diabetic neuropathy had affected his feet and he could not feel
the shoe rubbing. A small superficial ulcer developed on his 5th toe which became infected and subsequently, the 5th toe was amputated. His
condition rapidly deteriorated and he developed necrotizing fasciitis and osteomyelitis. Consequently, he had surgery removing tendons, skin
and the capsular linings of joints from his right foot. The patient was discharged after ten weeks in hospital with a large, infected, open
wound requiring community nurses to do wound management. The patient was treated by the Electro Pressure Regeneration Therapy device; the
wound was healed completely without further management and the diabetes was well controlled. HbA1c dropped from 7.3 to 6.6 after treatment.
His blood pressure was 202/99 before the treatment, which was dropped to 155/73 after two weeks. His blood pressure continued within normal
range with the use of the Electro Pressure Regeneration Therapy device 2-3 times weekly. Case 3: A 70 year old female was diagnosed with
hypertension, epilepsy osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis. Her blood pressure was 147/84 which was dropped to 138/72 three weeks after
the treatment with the Electro Pressure Regeneration Therapy device. She continued using the EPRT device twice weekly and her blood pressure
was under control without the use of antihypertensive medications. Case 4: A 77 year old female with hypertension, hypercholesterolemia,
hypothyroidism, and type 2 diabetes (NIDDM) was treated with the Electro Pressure Regeneration Therapy device. Her blood pressure before
treatment was 158/81 which was dropped to 125/65 after 1 week. Her blood pressure continued to be normal with use of the EPRT device despite
discontinuation of antihypertensive medications. HbA1c was 7.8 before treatment which decreased to 6.9 and continued to be low during one
year follow-up. Case 5: A 67 year old female with hypertension and osteoarthritis was treated with the Electro Pressure Regeneration Therapy
device. Her blood pressure was 157/91 which dropped to 149/86 after 3 weeks. Case 6: A 70 year old female with hypertension, fibromyalgia,
hepatitis, hypercholesterolemia, tuberculosis and a stroke was treated with the Electro Pressure Regeneration Therapy device for her
hypertension. Her blood pressure was 134/84 before treatment which was dropped to 117/73 within 4 weeks after treatment despite
discontinuation of her antihypertensive medication. Case 7: A 75 year old female with hypertension and benign postural vertigo was treated
with the Electro Pressure Regeneration Therapy device. Her blood pressure was 157/86 before treatment, which was dropped to 138/76 and
continued within normal limits while receiving one treatment per week. Case 8: A 53 year old female with type 1 diabetes (IDDM) from the age
of 12, suffered renal failure as a result of her diabetes and underwent a kidney and pancreatic transplant in 1994. She also has
hypercholesterolemia, left ventricular failure, renal failure and a history of a coronary artery bypass graft. She then started treatment
with the Electro Pressure Regeneration Therapy device. While she is not considered to currently have diabetes her HbA1c dropped over the
time period she was receiving treatments from 5.4 to 5.1. This was matched by her Blood Sugar Level (BSL) which also stabilized while she
was receiving treatment over this period of time. Case 9: A 32 year old female with type 1 diabetes (IDDM) and no other concurrent health
problems was treated with the Electro Pressure Regeneration Therapy device. She received 8 treatments over a two week period. HbA1c before
treatment was 8.1 and was dropped to 7.1 after treatment. Her insulin requirement was also reduced. Case 10: A 59 year old female with type
2 diabetes (NIDDM), hypertension, fibromyalgia, chronic active hepatitis, and Bowens disease was treated with the Electro Pressure
Regeneration Therapy device. Her blood sugar was normalized and HbA1c dropped from 7.2 to 6.3 after the treatment. Her HbA1c showed a slight
increase to 6.4 within three months after therapy was discontinued. Case 11: A 70 year old female with type 2 diabetes (NIDDM),
osteoarthritis, chronic pain and multiple operations was treated with the Electro Pressure Regeneration Therapy device. Her average Blood
Sugar Level (BSL) before treatment was 9.8, and dropped to 7.4 and 7.1 after three and six months of treatment. She was treated twice weekly
with the EPRT device. Case 12: A 68 year old male with type 2 diabetes (NIDDM), hypertension, stroke, chronic pain and polio was treated
with the Electro Pressure Regeneration Therapy device. HbA1c before treatment was 7.8, which was dropped to 6.6 during treatment. He was
treated three times per week most weeks during a six month period. Upon discontinuation of therapy HbA1c increased to 7.8. The results of
this preliminary trial showed that ultra-low microcurrent has apparent therapeutic effects on diabetes, hypertension and wound healing.
Presumably, one of mechanisms of action is its antioxidant activity. The action of EPRT is to produce electrical pressure rather than an
electrical jolt as produced by a Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulator. Whereas Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulator device can
produce a current varying from 1uA to 100 mA, the EPRT ranges from 100 nA to 3 mA. Moreover, Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulator
frequency range is from 0.5 to 40,000 Hz with a range of cycle times from 2 seconds to 0.025 milliseconds. The EPRT has a frequency of
approximately 0.000732Hz which gives a frequency time of 22.77 minutes. Namely, Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulator with power of 10
mA and a frequency of 1 Hz is delivering approximately 6x10 (14) electrons per cycle. As the cycle is 1 second all these electrons were
delivered in that period as a jolt. The EPRT at a setting of 100 nA is delivering 8.129x10 (14) per cycle. But as this amount is being
delivered over a 23 minute period (at rate of 6x10 (11) electrons per second) this behaves as a pressure instead of a jolt. This steady
stream of electrons is what makes the EPRT a super antioxidant and not only does this correct malalignments in the cells electrical system
but it also eliminates free radicals and then stimulates the mitochondria to produce ATP. Microcurrent has been successfully used to enhance
soft tissue healing and to treat fracture nonunion 22,23. Microcurrent relieves myocontracture and can enhance conventional rehabilitation
programs for children with cerebral palsy 24. Studies from the 1980s suggest that microcurrent therapy is effective at relieving the side
effects of radiation therapy 25. The investigators have found that direct electrical therapy was effective in healing gum abscess and
accelerated wound healing 20. Substances that increase electrical field, such as prostaglandin E2, enhance the wound healing rate and
increase cell division 26-28. Electrical fields stimulate secretion of growth factor 28. Low mA current stimulates adenosine triphosphate
production 26. It is discovered in another study that microcurrent stimulates dermal fibroblasts and U937 cells to secrete transforming
growth factor-β1, a major regulator of cell-mediated inflammation and tissue regeneration 29. Insulin resistance plays a major role in the
development of several metabolic abnormalities and diseases such as type 2 diabetes mellitus, obesity and the metabolic syndrome 30. In
these conditions there is an elevation of both glucose and free fatty acid levels in the blood and an increase in oxidative stress 30,31.
The high degree of oxidative stress might have an important role in decreasing insulin responsiveness 31-33. Many studies have suggested
that ß-cell dysfunction results from prolonged exposure to high glucose and elevated free fatty levels 33. High glucose concentrations
induce mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, which suppresses the first phase of glucose-induced insulin secretion 34. ß-cells are
particularly sensitive to reactive oxygen species because they are low in antioxidant enzymes such as catalase, glutathione peroxidase, and
superoxide dismutase 35. Therefore, the oxidative stress might damage mitochondria and markedly blunt insulin secretion 34. Recent studies
suggested that ß-cell lipotoxicity is enhanced by concurrent hyperglycemia and that oxidative stress may be the mediator 36,37. An increase
in insulin, free fatty acid, and/or glucose levels can increase reactive oxygen species production and oxidative stress, as well as activate
stress-sensitive pathways 33. Many studies show that postprandial hyperglycemia is associated with oxidative stress generation 38. Repeated
exposure to hyperglycemia and increased levels of free fatty acid can lead to ß-cell dysfunction that may become irreversible over time. It
has been suggested that oxidative stress might be the mediator of damage to cellular components of insulin production 33,39. A major source
of cellular reactive oxygen species is mitochondria, whose dysfunction contributes to pathological conditions such as vascular complications
of diabetes, neurodegenerative diseases and cellular senescence 40-45. Source of reactive oxygen species in insulin secreting pancreatic
β-cells and cells that are targets for insulin action is considered to be the mitochondrial electron transport chain. Hyperglycemia and
lipotoxicity in obesity and related disorders are associated with mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress 46,47. Oxidative stress-
induced activation of NF-κB signaling might be associated with the pathogenesis of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes 48-51. In obesity
and type 2 diabetes it has been reported that antioxidants and IKK-B inhibitors protect against insulin resistance 52,53. Data show that
increased lipid peroxidation in NIDDM has implications for vascular disease in diabetes 54. Oxidative stress plays an important role in the
pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases including hypertension 55. Clinical studies suggest the occurrence of increased reactive oxygen
species production in humans with essential hypertension 56,57. Oxidative stress is considered to be a unifying mechanism for hypertension
and atherosclerosis 58,59. Oxygen free radicals play a major role in the failure of ischemic wound healing, while antioxidants partly
improve the healing in ischemic skin wounds 60. Oxygen free radicals mediate the inhibition of wound healing following ischemia-reperfusion
and sepsis 61. It seems that diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, such as hypertension, and delayed wound healing have a common
important basic pathogenesis, which is related to imbalance between free radical production and removal. The use of ultra-low microcurrent
might help in stabilizing mitochondria, working as antioxidants and therefore, enhancing normal function of β-cells and vascular tissue.
Several clinical trials have demonstrated that treatment with vitamin E, vitamin C, or glutathione improves insulin sensitivity in insulin-
resistant individuals 16,62. The acute effects of hyperglycemia-dependent endothelial cells dysfunction are counterbalanced by antioxidants
63-65. But clinical trials with antioxidants, in particular with vitamin E, have failed to show any beneficial effect 66. However,
antioxidant therapy with vitamin E or other antioxidants is limited to scavenging already formed oxidants and may be considered symptomatic
instead of a causal treatment for oxidative stress 67. Interruption of the overproduction of superoxide by the mitochondrial electron
transport chain would normalize the pathways involved in the development of the oxidative stress 68. If our findings are proven by further
studies involving a larger number of patients, ultra-low microcurrent therapy might change the concept of management of chronic disease.
Conclusively, oxidative stress and oxidative damage to tissues are common pathology of chronic diseases, and using antioxidants, such as the
EPRT device used in this experiment, might change the concept of management of chronic diseases.
