We report a very rare case of trichilemmal carcinoma (TLC) involving the upper eyelid. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
report of trichilemmal carcinoma of the upper eyelid in Korea. A 51-year-old man presented to our hospital complaining of a bloody discharge
from his left upper eyelid. He had a soft and lobulated mass on the palpebral conjunctiva. An incisional biopsy revealed trabecular growth
of tumor cells with clear cytoplasm, prominent nucleoli, frequent mitoses, and foci of trichilemmal keratinization. Immunohistochemically,
the lesion was positive for p53 and negative for CD 34. A diagnosis of TLC was made, and total excision of the mass and reconstruction of
the eyelid were performed. Trichilemmal carcinoma is a rare malignant tumor, though it appears to be an indolent neoplasm with no metastatic
potential. The treatment of choice for trichilemmal carcinoma of the eyelid is complete excision with tumor-free margins due to the locally
invasive nature of the lesion. Trichilemmal carcinoma (TLC) is an uncommon malignant adnexal tumor that originates from the external hair
sheath.1 Trichilemmal carcinoma has a benign clinical course, but exhibits a malignant and invasive histological appearance.2 Eyelid
involvement of TLC has been only rarely reported. Here, we report the first Korean case of TLC involving the upper eyelid. A 51-year-old man
presented with bloody discharge from his left upper eyelid that had begun 2 to 3 days prior to presentation. One month prior to visiting our
hospital, he had noticed the presence of a nontender, palpable, movable nodule that had not changed in size since discovery (Fig. 1).
Swelling of the left upper lid was apparent. Slit-lamp examination revealed a 0.5×0.5 cm-sized protruding lesion of the left upper palpebral
conjunctiva. The mass was slightly yellow and was composed of multiple lobules (Fig. 2). An incisional biopsy was performed. On incisional
biopsy, a yellowish solid mass was observed. The mass demonstrated a trabecular growth pattern of tumor cell nests characterized by clear
cytoplasm, prominent nucleoli, frequent mitoses, few atypical tripolar mitoses, and focal necrosis. There were also foci of trichilemmal
keratinization (Fig. 3). On immunohistochemical staining, the tumor cells were diffusely distributed and were strongly positive for p53, but
were negative for CD 34 (Fig. 4). Given the histological and immunohistochemical findings, the lesion was determined to be a TLC. The mass
was completely excised with a pentagonal wedge resection of the upper lid, including a 5-mm safety margin, and the eyelid was reconstructed.
The mass lesion was first outlined in a pentagonal shape and then excised; the excision included the surrounding palpebral conjunctiva.
Tumor-free margins were ensured by frozen section analysis (Fig. 5A). The posterior lamella was reconstructed with a sliding
tarsoconjunctival flap, and the anterior lamella was repaired with a myocutaneous advancement flap (Fig. 5B-5D). After completion of the
procedure, a reverse Frost suture was inserted into the center of the upper eyelid to prevent corneal exposure. At the six month follow-up,
there was no evidence of local recurrence or metastasis. Trichilemmal carcinoma was first described in 1976 as "a histologically invasive,
cytologically atypical, clear cell neoplasm of adnexal keratinocytes which is in continuity with the epidermis and/or follicular
epithelium."3 In most patients, the tumor typically occurs on sun-exposed areas of the face and scalp,1,2,4,5 but is rare on the eyelid.5
Trichilemmal carcinoma on the eyelid was first described in 1993 in a 95-year-old woman.5,6 Trichilemmal carcinoma typically affects
individuals aged 40 years and older.7,8 Trichilemmal carcinoma can have a grossly papular, nodular, or exophytic appearance.2,8,9 All TLCs
reported to date have been less than 2 cm in diameter.2,3 Lai and colleagues10 reported an induration of the eyelid with a small area of
ulceration and keratosis, but a normal conjunctiva. In previous reports,5,10,11 there were no significant changes of the conjunctiva; in the
current case however, the upper lid mass completely penetrated into the inner side of the upper lid and was seen on the conjunctival side on
slit-lamp examination. Histopathologically, TLC demonstrates a lobular proliferation centered on pilosebaceous structures and is composed of
clear cells that are characterized by clear cytoplasm and prominent nucleoli. Trichilemmal carcinoma exhibits trichilemmal keratinization
with an abrupt or pagetoid interface and dermal invasion.8-10 Malignant proliferating trichilemmal tumors (PTTs) are often confused with
TLC. However, PTT is not synonymous with TLC.3,6,9 Proliferating trichilemmal tumors usually arise in a pre-existing trichilemmal cyst and
are frequently confined to the scalp. Proliferating trichilemmal tumors are larger than TLCs (with a diameter of up to 25 cm). Proliferating
trichilemmal tumors demonstrate sharply circumscribed convoluted lobules with pushing margins, deep dermal extensions, extensive areas of
tumor cell necrosis, abrupt keratinization, minimal pleomorphism, low mitotic activity, and foci indistinguishable from a trichilemmal
cyst.3,6 Proliferating trichilemmal tumors are apt to recur and to metastasize, as distinct from the behavior of TLCs.6,9 Trichilemmal
carcinoma must be differentiated from other skin cancers. It is easy to confuse TLC with clear cell basal cell carcinoma (BCC), but zones of
clear cells are not sufficient to diagnosis conventional BCC.9,10 Squamous cell carcinoma demonstrates cellular atypia and cells with clear
cytoplasm, similar to TLC, but differs from TLC in the absence of trichilemmal keratinization or lobular proliferation.7,10 Also, TLC
resembles trichilemmoma in the presence of a plate-like endophytic nodule extending into the dermis, but differs with respect to the
occurrence of frequent mitosis or cellular atypia.1 p53 tumor suppressor gene mutations are often found in patients with nonmelanoma skin
cancer. Complete loss of p53 on immunohistochemical staining represents the malignant transformation of PTT.11 Also, focal staining for the
presence of CD 34 is a marker of differentiation from the outer hair sheath. However, the tumor of the current patient was negative for CD
34, indicating an undifferentiated tumor cell type.12,13 Trichilemmal carcinoma is locally invasive and, histologically, appears to have
high-grade mitotic potential. However, TLC generally has a benign clinical course, and there is no evidence of recurrence after complete
excision.2,7,9,10 Masayuki et al.11 reported a case of TLC of the upper eyelid that was treated with full dose irradiation. However, the
tumor recurred and invaded the orbit. The tumor was resected in a procedure involving the eyelid and orbital contents. At the 29 month
follow-up, there was no evidence of local recurrence or metastasis. Consequently, upon presentation of an indurated nodule or an ulcerated
mass on the eyelid, it is necessary to consider the possibility of a cancerous lesion.2,6,8 Trichilemmal carcinoma should be considered in
the differential diagnosis of an eyelid mass. Trichilemmal carcinoma is a malignant tumor that usually does not metastasize, despite local
regional recurrence.1,5,14 It is important to perform a total excision of the tumor mass, with tumor-free margins, and to offer careful
follow-up to all patients.1,10,12 This paper was presented in part at the 99th annual meeting of the Korean Ophthalmological Society, April,
2008 The patient had a swelling of the upper eyelid and a palpable, nontender, movable mass on the left eyelid. A yellowish, soft, multi-
lobulated mass is shown. The mass protrudes through the lateral end of the left upper palpebral conjunctiva. (A) Gross view. (B) Slit-lamp
view. Histology of the mass. (A) The section revealed a trabecular growth pattern of tumor cell nests (H&E, ×40). (B, C) The cells were
characterized by clear cytoplasm, prominent nucleoli, frequent mitoses, few atypical tripolar mitoses, and focal necrosis. There were also
foci of trichilemmal keratinization (black arrow) (B: H&E, ×100; C: H&E, ×400). Immunohistochemical staining of the mass. (A) Negative
staining for CD 34. (B) Strongly positive staining for p53. Mass excision and reconstruction of the defect. (A) Complete mass excision using
a pentagonal shape. Tumor-free margins were confirmed by frozen section biopsy. (B) Reconstruction of the posterior lamella with a
tarsoconjunctival sling. (C) Reconstruction of the anterior lamella with a myocutaneous advancement flap. (D) Complete closure of the
defect.
