The spine is the most common site for bone metastases. Radiation therapy is a common treatment for palliation of pain and for prevention or
treatment of spinal cord compression. Helical tomotherapy (HT), a new image-guided intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT), delivers highly
conformal dose distributions and provides an impressive ability to spare adjacent organs at risk, thus increasing the local control of
spinal column metastases and decreasing the potential risk of critical organs under treatment. However, there are a lot of non-target organs
at risk (OARs) occupied by low dose with underestimate in this modern rotational IMRT treatment. Herein, we report a case of a pathologic
compression fracture of the T9 vertebra in a 55-year-old patient with cholangiocarcinoma. The patient underwent HT at a dose of 30 Gy/10
fractions delivered to T8-T10 for symptom relief. Two weeks after the radiotherapy had been completed, the first course of chemotherapy
comprising gemcitabine, fluorouracil, and leucovorin was administered. After two weeks of chemotherapy, however, the patient developed
progressive dyspnea. A computed tomography scan of the chest revealed an interstitial pattern with traction bronchiectasis, diffuse ground-
glass opacities, and cystic change with fibrosis. Acute radiation pneumonitis was diagnosed. Oncologists should be alert to the potential
risk of radiation toxicities caused by low dose off-targets and abscopal effects even with highly conformal radiotherapy. Intensity-
modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) is a powerful tool which enabled us to achieve desired dose to tumor and reducing radiation doses to critical
structures simultaneously. The encouraging and safety results of patients with various sites of malignancies in the thoracic region treated
by IMRT have been reported recently . In addition, Gong et al. reported conventionally-fractionated image-guided intensity modulated
radiotherapy (IG-IMRT) is a safe and effective treatment for cancer spinal metastasis . Helical tomotherapy (HT) is a new CT-based
rotational intensity modulated radiotherapy that can deliver highly conformal dose distributions with an ability to spare critical organs
from radiation exposure . HT is also effective and feasible for patients with multiple metastatic diseases . Radiation recall phenomenon is
characterized by an inflammatory reaction within the previously treated radiation field during chemotherapy treatment . In humans, longer-
range effects of radiotherapy occurring within or between tissues are referred to as abscopal, out-of-field, or distant bystander responses
. A combination of gemcitabine, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), and leucovorin (LV) is effective in patients with unresectable or metastatic biliary
tract or gallbladder adenocarcinoma . Gemcitabine chemotherapy, however, can cause radiation recall followed by standard radiation therapy .
Herein, we present a case of radiation recall pneumonitis with simultaneous abscopal effects following highly conformal HT and gencitabine-
based chemotherapy for metastatic spine lesion in a patient with metastatic cholangiocarcinoma. In August, 2008, a 55-year-old man presented
to the neurosurgical outpatient department of with a 2-month history of progressive claudication. The lumbar (L) -spine X-ray revealed an
osteolytic lesion in the convex posterior border of the L3 vertebra. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine demonstrated a pathologic
compression fracture with spinal canal stenosis of the thoracic (T) 9 and L3 vertebrae. Abdominal ultrasound and abdominal computed
tomography (CT) scan both revealed a tumor in the left lobe of the liver. A complete blood workup showed an elevated carcinoembryonic
antigen (CEA) level (33.9 ng/dl). An echo-guided biopsy of the liver tumor was performed. Histopathologic examination of the biopsy specimen
showed adenocarcinoma with positive CK7 and CEA, findings compatible with primary cholangiocarcinoma. The patient underwent a left lateral
sectionectomy. The pathologic diagnosis was moderately differentiated cholangiocarcinoma. Two weeks after the operation, HT with 30 Gy/10
fractions was delivered to T8-T10 for symptom relief . The vertebral bodies of T8-T10 were delineated as the clinical target volume (CTV).
The planning target volume (PTV) was defined as the CTV plus a 3-mm margin for tumor motion and setup uncertainty. The contoured organs at
risk (OARs), dose constraints/penalty functions and planning parameters are listed in Tables 1. The field width, pitch, and modulation
factor (MF) used were 2.5 cm, 0.32, and 3.0, respectively. Two weeks after the radiotherapy had been completed, the first course of
gemcitabine, fluorouracil, and leucovorin was delivered. After two weeks of chemotherapy, however, the patient developed progressive
dyspnea. Chest X-ray showed diffuse reticular interstitial processes in both lungs. Atypical infection was suspected. The patient was
transferred to the Medical Intensive Care Unit with intubation. The blood cultures, sputum cultures, and fungus cultures were all negative.
Bronchoscopy to investigate the pneumonitis was not performed at the request of the patient's family. Follow-up chest CT revealed a diffuse
irregular interlobular thickness and honeycombing of both lungs (Figure 1) indicative of chronic fibrotic change. The fibrotic change in
both lungs in transverse view was compatible with low dose irradiation of non-target OARs (Figure 2 and 3). Acute radiation pneumonitis was
diagnosed. The following empirical antibiotics were administered: Pisutam (2.25 mg) (China Chemical & Pharmaceutical CO., LTD., Taiwan) 2
vial i.v.d. q8 h; Cravit® (500 mg) (Sanofi-Aventis Deutschland GmbH, Germany) 750 mg i.v.d. qd; and Sevatrim® (480 mg) (Swiss Pharmaceutical
CO., LTD., Taiwan) 3 vial i.v.d. q12 h. Steroid therapy comprising methylprednisolone (40 mg), 20 mg iv. q8 h was administered for
inflammatory lung disease. The patient also received antioxidants and supportive treatment simultaneously. After one month in the intensive
care unit, the patient stabilized and was transferred to the hematology ward for further care. The contoured organs at risk (OARs), dose
constraints/penalty functions and planning parameters of plan was listed as below Abbriviations: PTV = Planning target volume; Max =
maximal; Min = minimal; DVH = dose-volume histogram; Vol = volume. *The ring was a dummy structure surrounded PTV with an outer margin 2.5
cm, and a gap of 2 mm from PTV. Chest computed tomography (CT) post intubation in the MICU shows interstitial pattern with traction
bronchiectasis, opacities and a diffuse ground-glass pattern, bleb formation in marginal areas, airspace consolidation and fibrosis in the
bilateral lung fields. The coronal views of chest CT. Chest computed tomography (CT) post intubation in the MICU shows interstitial pattern
with traction bronchiectasis, opacities and a diffuse ground-glass pattern, bleb formation in marginal areas, airspace consolidation and
fibrosis in the bilateral lung fields. The transverse views of chest CT. The dose distribution of radiotherapy designed for tomotherapy. The
transverse view of low dose distribution is compatible with the recall radiation pneumonitis area. Radiation therapy (RT) is a common and
safe treatment to relieve pain of symptomatic osseous metastases. In addition, RT is reserved for palliation of prevention or treatment of
spinal cord compression. Generally, RT focuses on limited area for symptom relief. However, RT also is safe and effective for multiple
symptomatic osseous metastatic patients as multi-fractionated wide-field radiation therapy (MF-WFRT) . Radiation pneumonitis in patients
undergoing treatment for lung cancer has been shown to be associated with a V20 > 20%, where V20 represents the percentage of lung volume
receiving at least 20 Gy , and a mean lung dose > 13.6 Gy . The V20 and mean lung dose in our patient were 1% and 2.7 Gy, respectively.
Therefore, our plan was a safe protocol for palliative treatment of metastatic bone disease. Although the low dose around the irradiation
target is usually overlooked, such as the V5 in the plan presented here (Figure 3) which was only 20%, it can potentially induce severe
radiation toxicity (Figure 2). Although rare, gemcitabine can induce radiation recall reactions . The time from gemcitabine administration
to the manifestation of recall reaction ranges from 3 days to 8 months . Our patient suffered from severe pulmonary toxicity 2 weeks after
gemcitabine administration. Radiographic findings characteristic of radiation-induced pulmonary changes include ground-glass opacities with
irregular linear opacity and interstitial thickening . In our patient, the opacities with ground-glass pattern and bleb formation in the
transverse views of chest CT (Figure 2) confined in the previous low dose non-target OAR field (Figure 3) indicate radiation pneumonitis
recalled by gemcitabine. The diffuse irregular interlobular thickness and honeycombing of both lungs in the chest CT (Figure 1) are
compatible with radiation-induced pulmonary changes, although no radiaiton was directed to these fields (Figure 4). The dose distribution of
radiotherapy designed for tomotherapy. The coronal views of dose distribution. Khan et al., reported that when rat lung was partially
irradiated, micronucleus formation was observed in non-irradiated areas of the lung, indicating DNA damage at these non-irradiated sites. In
humans, abscopal events such as bilateral pneumonitis have been observed in humans after unilateral irradiation . Additionally, a survival
benefit of local control by simultaneous thoracic radiochemotherapy in the case of improved distant control due to chemotherapy and
prophylactic cranial irradiation has been reported . These long-range bystander responses have also been studied in a lung reconstruction
model in which levels of the phosphorylated histone variant γH2AX, a marker of double-strand break (DSBs), were found to be increased,
reaching a maximum by 12 to 48 h after irradiation, followed by a gradual decrease over the 7-day time course . Biomolecules known to be
involved in bystander responses include interleukin 6 (Il-6), Il-8, transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1), and tumor necrosis factor-α
(TNFα), reactive oxygen species (ROS), and reactive nitrogen species . Recently, the correlation between TGF-β1 and developing radiation
pneumonitis has been reported and the observation could also partially response to the contribution of biomolecules on bystander responses.
When distant bystander responses to radiotherapy occur during cancer treatment that the potential lung injury could be happened. If
subsequent treatment is radiation recall agents that it could induce nearly fatal interstitial lung disease as the case we present here. The
low dose irradiation to non-target OARs noted in this patient is not unique to tomotherapy, rather it can occur with any technique that
creates a relatively large low dose volume such as multifield IMRT, volumetric arc therapies or stereotactic radiation therapy (SRT). For
example, inhomogeneity corrections have a large influence on the dose delivered to the PTV and OARs for SRT of lung tumors . SRT allows for
the minimization of normal tissue volume exposed to high radiation dose that is to minimize toxicity while maximizing tumor control .
However, even in SRT, the large amount of low dose irradiation to non-target OARs, the incidence of lung toxicity can become high has been
reported by Yamashita et al. Oncologists should be alert to the potential risk of low dose irradiation of non-target OARs when reviewing
plans in the lung. It is important to review the low dose volumes and include the low dose volumes in the dose distribution, especially if
there is a plan to give chemotherapy. Also, in cases in which there is a chance of recall within the thorax, a static field Posterior-
Anterior (PA) or AP/PA, or a three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy (3DCRT) approach with fewer beams and smaller irradiated volume
may be preferred for palliative (or radical treatment) to avoid this problem. In addition, even with volumetric or helical arc therapy,
strong penalty functions on the lung could reduce the volume of the lung receiving even low doses. Non-target OARs can be impacted by arc
therapy because of the low dose bath phenomenon. These effects can be magnified by agents known or unknown to be associated with recall
effects. Optimization of planning should be considered in these situations. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. CH Hsieh and PW Shueng carried out all CT evaluations, study
design, target delineations and interpretation of the study. CH Hsieh drafted the manuscript. SC Lin and HT Chang took care of patient. NS
Chong participated in data of planning preparation. YJ Chen participated in manuscript preparation. LY Wang and YP Hsieh gave advice on the
work. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Hsing-Yi Lee M.S. for her assistance with radiation planning and
management of images. This study was supported by grants of Far Eastern Memorial Hospital (FEMH-97-C-045), Taiwan.
