We describe a case of bilateral exudative retinal detachment associated with prodromal symptoms simulating the presentation of acute Vogt-
Koyanagi-Harada disease that was eventually diagnosed as acute lymphoblastic leukemia. A 42-year-old man presented with sudden visual loss
in both eyes for two weeks. He complained of intermittent headache, neck stiffness and tinnitus for a month. His best-corrected visual
acuities were 20/200 in both eyes. Fluorescein angiography, optical coherence topography and indocyanine green angiography featured
bilateral serous retinal detachments. A clinical diagnosis of incomplete type Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease was considered. However, complete
blood cell count showed a marked increase in the number of white blood cells and bone marrow examination revealed precursor B cell
lymphoblastic leukemia. The patient started on induction chemotherapy. A week later, his best-corrected visual acuities were 20/25 and the
serous retinal detachments were nearly absorbed in both eyes. Bilateral exudative retinal detachment associated with neurologic and auditory
abnormalities may be a presenting sign of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Clinicians should be aware of the possibility of leukemia in such
patients. Exudative retinal detachment, a very rare ocular finding in leukemia, has only been described in a few cases and has not been
previously reported in South Korea.1-8 This is the first case of acute lymphoblastic leukemia presenting with bilateral exudative retinal
detachment associated with prodromal symptoms of neurologic and auditory abnormalities simulating the presentation of acute stage Vogt-
Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) disease. This case is also the first to document indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) findings of serous retinal
detachments in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. A previously healthy 42-year-old man presented with sudden visual loss in both eyes for two
weeks. The decline in left eye visual acuity had begun two weeks before, followed by the right eye one week later. He was initially
diagnosed with central serous chorioretinopathy (CSC) at another clinic. His visual acuities worsened, however, and he came to our clinic
for a second opinion. His medical history was obvious for intermittent headache, neck stiffness and tinnitus for a month. Otherwise, he had
no history of any systemic disease, ocular trauma or surgery. His best-corrected visual acuities were 20/200 in both eyes, and there was no
chamber reaction in either eye. Vitreous cells were positive at grade 2+ in both eyes and fundus examination showed bilateral serious
retinal detachments with Elschnig's spots in the left eye (Fig. 1). Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed macular subretinal serous
fluids in both eyes, with a minimum foveal thickness of 944 um in the right eye and 818 um in the left eye (Fig. 2). Fluorescence
angiography (FA) in the early phase showed delayed choroidal filling and hypofluorescence in the macula, followed by mid-phase punctuate
hyperfluorescence at the level of the retinal pigment epithelium clustered along the boundaries of the detached retina (Fig. 3A). Late phase
FA was apparent for diffuse late leakage and fluorescence staining in the area of exudative retinal detachment (Fig. 3B). ICGA in the early
phase featured broad hypofluorescence due to a choroidal filling defect in the posterior pole (Fig. 3C), which was followed by mid-phase
fluorescence blockage in the area of exudative retinal detachment (Fig. 3D). A clinical diagnosis of incomplete type VKH was considered.
However, systemic evaluation revealed increased white blood cell counts (290,000/ÂµL), with an abnormally increased percentage of blast cells
(89%). Bone marrow examination confirmed the diagnosis of precursor B cell lymphoblastic leukemia. He received induction chemotherapy of
vincristine, prednisolone, daunorubicin, l-asparaginase (VPDL) and high-dose steroid therapy (prednisolone 60 mg daily). A week later, his
best corrected visual acuities were 20/25, and there was no chamber reaction in both eyes. Vitreous cells were reduced to grade 1+ in both
eyes and the serous retinal detachments were nearly absorbed in both eyes. Newly developed Roth spots and cotton wool patches near the optic
disc were found in both eyes. FA no longer showed leakages of stippled hyperfluorescence (Fig. 4). Although his best-corrected visual
acuities improved after chemotherapy, the patient died of pulmonary hemorrhage and multiorgan failure during immunosuppression, 18 days
after starting chemotherapy. Visual loss after choriocapillary occlusion in leukemia was first reported by Zimmerman in 1964.1 Beyond that,
exudative retinal detachment in leukemia has been reported in only a few cases world-wide, as a presenting sign of the disease or the first
sign of relapse.1-8 This CSC-like serous retinal detachment in leukemia has not been previously reported in South Korea. This is also the
first case showing characteristic prodromal symptoms of neurologic and auditory abnormalities. The presence of such symptoms preceding
bilateral exudative retinal detachment is a typical feature of VKH disease, fulfilling the diagnostic criteria of incomplete VKH disease as
long as there is no underlying systemic disease.9 The mechanism of serous retinal detachment in leukemia has been thought to be choroidal
ischemia and secondary retinal pigment epithelial dysfunction.3,4,6,7 The choroid is the most frequently involved ocular tissue in leukemia.
Leukemic cell infiltration or hematologic disturbances may cause partial occlusion of the choriocapillaries and delay of choroidal
circulation.10 Secondary dysfunction of the Bruch's membrane and retinal pigment epithelium may ultimately develop into serous retinal
detachments of the macula.3,8,11,12 Ocular histologic findings by autopsy in leukemic patients have documented the features of choroidal
thickening and leukemic cell infiltration that lead to choroidal ischemia.10 Although we did not have histologic evidence, the fact that
systemic chemotherapy induced a rapid remission of exudative retinal detachment, consistent with previous reports, suggests leukemic cell
infiltration as the underlying pathology.3,4,7 This case is the first to document early and late ICGA findings of serous retinal detachments
in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The early phase of ICGA demonstrated choroidal ischemia, especially in the posterior pole, whereas
choroidal filling in the normal eye always begins in the macula with initial fluorescing of subfoveal choroidal arterioles.13 After the mid-
phase, choroidal fluorescence was blocked by serous retinal detachments and the details of retinal and choroidal vessels were obscured.
Fluorescence blockage by serous retinal fluid is also seen in CSC or VKH disease, usually in the late phase of ICGA.14 However, the typical
hypofluorescent dark dots in the mid-phase usually observed in CSC or VKH disease were not seen in our case.14 This inconsistency suggests a
different pathophysiology, and the penetration of ICG dye may have been reduced by highly concentrated fluid in the subretinal space along
with thick cellular infiltrates in the choroid. Prodromal symptoms of headache, neck stiffness and tinnitus, such as in our case, followed
by bilateral serous retinal detachment, may misdirect to the clinical diagnosis of incomplete type VKH disease.9 However, several features
are helpful in making the differential diagnosis. First, anterior uveitis was absent in our case, which is frequently seen in VKH disease.15
Second, FA findings of mid-phase multiple hyperfluorescent dots were clustered along the boundaries of the detached retina, sparing the
macula; in VKH disease such dots are usually distributed in the posterior pole.14 Third, late-phase dye pooling in FA showed a unilobular
CSC-like feature, different from the multi-lobulated pooling seen in VKH disease.16 Fourth, OCT did not reveal any of the subretinal septa
generally observed in VKH disease.16 Finally, typical ICGA findings of VKH disease were absent in our case, such as mid-phase multiple
hypofluorescent dots in the posterior pole.14 The prodromal symptoms that misdirected the diagnosis may have been caused by leukemic
infiltration into the cerebrospinal fluid and microvasculopathy due to hyperleukocytosis.17,18 Leukemia may present when there is sudden
visual loss due to exudative retinal detachment, and the ophthalmologist may be the first clinician to encounter such patients. A thorough
systemic evaluation should be performed in patients presenting with bilateral exudative retinal detachment, especially in those who report
certain systemic symptoms. Initial presentation. Fundus photo of both eyes showing exudative retinal detachment. An Elschnig's spot (white
arrow) is seen in the left eye. Optical coherence tomography of the macula in both eyes showed massive subretinal exudative fluid in the
posterior pole. No subretinal septa were observed. Fluorescence angiography (FA) and indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) of the right eye.
(A) Mid-phase FA showed patchy choroidal filling and multiple punctate hyperfluorescent lesions. (B) Late-phase FA showed diffuse leakage
and unilobular fluorescence pooling. (C) Early-phase ICGA (35 sec) showed a hypofluorescent choroidal filling defect in the macula. (D) Mid-
phase ICGA (4 min) showed a larger area of macular hypofluorescence due to fluorescence blockage in the areas of exudative retinal
detachment. One week after chemotherapy. (A) Fundus photo of the left eye showed nearly absorbed serous retinal detachments with newly
appeared retinal hemorrhage (black arrow) and Roth spots (white arrow). (B) Fluorescence angiography of the left eye no longer showed
multilple hyperfluorescent lesions in the late phase.
