Acute type A aortic dissection can be complicated by visceral malperfusion and is associated with a significant surgical morbidity and
mortality. We describe a case of successful management of a complex acute type A dissection with mesenteric and lower limb ischemia treated
with endovascular thoracic stenting and femoro-femoral crossover bypass grafting followed by aortic arch repair. To accomplish this, we
applied a staged therapeutic approach using serial lactate measurements to assess the adequacy of peripheral perfusion and metabolic status
prior to surgical repair of the proximal dissection. Acute aortic dissection is amongst the most lethal surgical emergencies of the aorta.
It results from a tear in the aortic wall intima that extends into the aortic wall media to create a false lumen and a dissection flap.
Dissections of the ascending aorta are categorized as Type A according to the Stanford classification, and are complicated by visceral
malperfusion in 16-33% of cases . This is due to the antegrade propagation of the dissection from the ascending aorta to the level of the
aortic visceral branches. These complex cases are associated with a significant mortality (up to 89% of cases), particularly in the presence
of mesenteric ischemia (resulting in multi-organ failure) that renders surgical repair difficult . Recent reports have suggested that
physiological stabilization through the restoration of visceral perfusion by endovascular techniques as a beneficial strategy prior to
dissection repair . The extent of malperfusion however remains difficult to assess in view of the poor clinical signs which typically
present at a late stage. The use of biomarkers such as serum lactate has therefore been suggested as potentially useful indicators of
ischemia . We describe a case of successful management of such a complex acute type A dissection with mesenteric and lower limb ischemia
treated with endovascular thoracic stenting and femoro-femoral crossover bypass grafting followed by aortic arch repair. To achieve this, we
applied a staged therapeutic approach using serial lactate measurements to assess the adequacy of peripheral perfusion and metabolic status
prior to surgical repair of the proximal dissection. A 63-year-old Japanese man presented with sudden onset chest pain radiating to his back
and weakness in both lower limbs. Past medical history included mild coronary artery disease that did not require intervention, atrial
fibrillation, secondary polycythemia associated with smoking, psoriasis and degenerative spondyloarthirits, and no history of other
connective tissue disorders. There was no previous history of cerebrovascular or peripheral vascular disease. He was transferred to our
institution over 12 hours from initial presentation, and was assessed by our multidisciplinary team (cardiothoracic surgeon, vascular
surgeon and an interventional radiologist). On examination his blood pressure was 225/136 mmHg and there was clear ischemia of both lower
limbs with bilateral absent femoral pulses. The sensory and motor function in the lower extremities was significantly reduced and abdominal
examination was unremarkable. Computed Tomographic Angiography (CTA) revealed a complex type-A aortic dissection with the primary entry in
the aortic arch leading to a dissection flap arising within the inferior aspect of the aortic arch and distal aorta extending to involve the
entire thoracic aorta. The true lumen was small and severely narrowed beyond the level of the right renal artery, disappearing entirely just
above the aortic bifurcation (Figure 1a and Figure 2a). No contrast could be visualized in the native iliac arteries and there was reduced
blood flow in the celiac axis and the primary branches of the superior mesenteric artery which were perfused only by a very small channel of
contrast seen extending from the true lumen. The transverse colon appeared thick-walled but both liver and spleen were normal. His left
kidney was well perfused from the false lumen but there was no enhancement of the right kidney, which received its arterial supply from the
true lumen. There was no involvement of the head and neck vessels or coronary arteries and there was no pleural or pericardial effusion. (a)
Pre-operative coronal view of the aorta and the aorto-iliac segment showing contrast in the aorta but no flow in the iliac arteries. The
dissection extended into both sides. (b) Post-operative coronal view of the same segment with uncovered stent in-situ demonstrating
increased flow within the iliac system (a) Pre-operative sagittal view of the thoracic aorta showing contrast within the true and false
lumina. Note near total occlusion of the celiac and superior mesenteric arteries (SMA) denoted by white arrows. (b) Post operative sagittal
image of the same aortic segment with stent graft in-situ demonstrating increased flow within the celiac and superior mesenteric arteries
(SMA) denoted by white arrows. Arterial bloods gas analysis revealed a mild acidosis (pH 7.34 with a base excess of -5.7) and an elevated
lactate level of 11.9 mmol/lt. Blood pressure control was administered by beta-blockade and gylceryl-trinitrate infusion. Following
stabilization, surgical management took place in 4 stages: 1) Endovascular insertion of 2 stents: Through a right axillary and bilateral
common femoral approaches, a 150 mm covered stent graft (Medtronic, Santa Rosa, USA) was deployed into the thoracic aorta, distal to the
left subclavian artery. A further covered stent (14 × 14 × 60 mm) (Medtronic, Santa Rosa, USA) was deployed in the infra-renal aorta,
improving right but not left femoral circulation. The right axillary wound was temporarily closed with a conduit for cannulation use in the
subsequent repair of the aorta. This was directly followed by femoro-femoral bypass grafting. 2) Femoro-femoral bypass grafting: An 8 mm
Dacron graft was used for right to left femoro-femoral bypass restoring left lower limb perfusion. This resulted in a full complement of
palpable pulses in both lower limbs. 3) Stabilization in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU): The patient was observed closely particularly with
regards to any indicators of persisting mesenteric ischemia. The biomarker lactate played a key role in our management and was measured by
taking regular peripheral arterial samples. Having previously been >10 mmol/lt, overnight the lactate fell to 7.2 mmol/lt, then 3.1 mmol/lt
and by the next morning (during 8 hours period) returned to normal levels. The normalization of the lactate levels indicated the
stabilisation of the patient's condition with resolution of the visceral and peripheral ischemia. Based on biomarker levels and clinical
status, a decision was subsequently made to proceed to surgical repair of the dissection. 4) Surgical repair of the aortic dissection:
Following median sternotomy and cannulation via the previous right-axillary artery conduit, cardiopulmonary bypass was instituted and the
patient was cooled to 22°C. Antegrade cardioplegia and cerebral perfusion were applied. Total circulatory arrest time was 20 min and total
bypass time was 120 min. The entry point tear was located, the hemi-arch was excised, the false lumen was obliterated with 6- interrupted
Teflon felt pledgetted sutures. We specifically passed these pledgetted sutures through the proximal stent in the medial part of the
descending thoracic aorta providing extra strength in these stitches and potentially reducing the risk of stent migration or creation of
endoleak in this weak part of the aortic wall. A 28 mm Dacron conduit was then anastomosed (hemi-arch replacement) and the patient was
rewarmed to 37°C. The chest was packed and left open for delayed closure, which was performed 48 h later. The outcome of this staged
approach was very successful (Figure 1b and Figure 2b) and our patient recovered well. His progress was complicated by a hospital-acquired
pneumonia requiring prolonged intubation and formation of a tracheostomy. The total ITU stay was 33 days. He was gradually rehabilitated,
and was discharged 40 days after admission. Approximately 25% of aortic dissections have evidence of peripheral malperfusion at presentation
. In cases of peripheral malperfusion syndrome, particularly involving the superior mesenteric artery, the operative mortality is
significantly increased . In these cases with such degree of metabolic disturbance, temporary postponement in surgical repair while
peripheral reperfusion is re-established may prove beneficial . Our patient did not have clinical signs of intestinal malperfusion (although
there was significant peripheral ischemia). Lack of immediate symptoms in these patients can delay accurate diagnosis and management
contributing to the high mortality. One possible treatment option includes initial endovascular fenestration of the infrarenal aorta . In
the last few years however, biomarkers (in particular serum lactate) have become a useful tool in assessing mesenteric ischemia. Our staged
therapeutic approach (Figure 3) illustrates the diagnostic value of biomarkers in malperfusion, particularly where there is a delayed
presentation. Therapeutic approach in Type A dissection with peripheral malperfusion. If the initial lactate reading (measured quickly and
simply from an arterial blood sample) is considerably high with no other cause and there is radiological or clinical evidence of bowel
ischemia, revascularization using percutaneous endovascular techniques should first be carried out . Following this, further serial lactate
measurements should be taken to gauge the success of the intervention and monitor the improvement in peripheral malperfusion. We recommend
this method as D-lactate (a stereo-isomer of physiological L-lactate) is a sensitive marker for early mesenteric ischemia produced in large
amounts by the overgrowth of gut microbial flora . In view of the slow rate of enzymatic breakdown, it is a very sensitive early marker of
the ischemic process (where the lactate levels may be subject to several factors including ischemia-related hepatic dysfunction) . Our
approach recommends that a consistent fall in lactate during this interim period may represent the ischemia as resolving. One can therefore
perform a delayed repair of the proximal aortic dissection providing a decreased intra-operative risk to the patient. Individuals with
persistently high lactate levels may then require a revascularization procedure at that time rather than delaying intervention in
anticipation of clinical signs. Differentiating between bowel ischemia and lower limb ischemia in the absence of clinical signs and a raised
lactate can be based on radiological imaging. A persistently raised lactate level associated with clinical or radiological evidence of bowel
ischemia requires the treatment of the dynamic or static compression associated with the Type A dissection. This can be achieved by surgical
revascularization, fenestration of the dissection flap or covered endovascular stenting of the thoracic aorta followed by closure of the
dissection entry point with surgical repair (Figure 3). If it is possible to attend a patient within 6 hours of a Type A dissection, then
primary repair of the dissection is advised after locating the primary tear on preoperative CT scan (Figure 3). The optimal management for
an acute type A dissection is entry closure and in cases of central aortic repair, distal organ ischemia can be managed through
revascularization grafts such as axillary-femoral bypass. Endovascular stenting without entry closure for type A dissection has the risk of
cardiac tamponade and in our case the entry point was closed during the arch repair. In more complex Type A dissections, a tailored multi-
disciplinary strategy is required to address underlying risk in order to provide optimum perfusion and survival. Our approach in using the
biomarker lactate to guide our management of acute type A aortic dissection allows the restoration of an improved metabolic status before
the insult of the total circulatory arrest (preserving the kidneys and bowel during the subsequent surgical dissection repair). It also has
the potential to be extremely useful in terms of selecting patients who would be able to tolerate such complex operations and can improve
patient outcomes in terms of morbidity and mortality. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. AS participated in this case and contributed to its analysis. MD participated in this
case and contributed to its analysis. HA participated in this case and contributed to its analysis. CB participated in this case and
contributed to its analysis. MM participated in this case and contributed to its analysis. MH participated in this case and contributed to
its analysis. TA participated in this case and contributed to its analysis. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
