Mycobacteruim kansasii occasionally causes disseminated infection with poor outcome in immunocompromised patients. We report the first case
of disseminated M. kansasii infection associated with multiple skin lesions in a 48-yr-old male with myelodysplastic syndrome. The patient
continuously had taken glucocorticoid during 21 months and had multiple skin lesions developed before 9 months without complete resolution
until admission. Skin and mediastinoscopic paratracheal lymph node (LN) biopsies showed necrotizing granuloma with many acid-fast bacilli.
M. kansasii was cultured from skin, sputum, and paratracheal LNs. The patient had been treated successfully with isoniazid, rifampin,
ethmabutol, and clarithromycin, but died due to small bowel obstruction. Our case emphasizes that chronic skin lesions can lead to severe,
disseminated M. kansasii infection in an immunocompromised patient. All available cases of disseminated M. kansasii infection in non HIV-
infected patients reported since 1953 are comprehensively reviewed. Mycobacterium kansasii is a slow-growing acid-fast bacillius (AFB) and
belongs to the group of environmental mycobacteria, also known as atypical mycobacteria or nontuberculosis mycobacteria (NTM). Local water
supplies are considered as the major reservoir for the M. kansasii, and evidence of person-to-person transmission has not been reported. The
most common presentation of M. kansasii infection is a chronic bronchopulmonary disease, which manifests typically in adult patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or cystic fibrosis. In addition, M. kansasii can cause skeletal infections, skin and soft tissue
infection, cervical or other lymphadenitis, and disseminated infection (1). Disseminated infection by M. kansasii occurs almost exclusively
in immunocompromised patients, such as solid organ transplant recipients, HIV-infected individuals, patients with hematologic malignancy, or
patients receiving long-term steroid regimens (2). In the case of disseminated M. kansasii infection, involvement of multiple organs
including the lungs, liver, spleen, bone marrow, lymph node (LN), bowels, central nervous system, pericardium, pleura or kidneys, has been
reported (3) but disseminated M. kansasii infection associated with skin involvement is not frequent (4). Recently, we encountered a rare
case of disseminated M. kansasii infection involving multiple skin areas together with lung and multiple LNs. To our knowledge, this is the
first case of disseminated M. kansasii infection that has involved the skin in Korea. Therefore, we report this unusual case with a
comprehensive review of previously reported disseminated M. kansasii infections in non HIV-infected patients. A 48-yr-old man was admitted
with a 1-month history of fever and a 2-week history of dyspnea on exertion at Severance Hospital in Seoul, Korea. He had a history of
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) diagnosed 21 months ago prior to admission and had been treated with oral glucocorticoid (prednisolone, 10 mg
daily) with regular follow-up. A year after MDS was diagnosed, multiple erythematous tender nodules developed on both lower legs, and a skin
biopsy of the calf revealed Sweet's syndrome. He continuously had these skin lesions without complete resolution until admission. On
admission, several papulonodular skin lesions on his arms, chest, back, abdomen, buttocks, and legs were noted (Fig. 1). Multiple LNs were
palpated on the medial side of the right thigh and left cervical area. Initial laboratory tests showed leukopenia with a white blood cell
count of 1,950/µL; severe anemia with a Hb level of 6.8 g/dL; mild thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 113,000/µL; an elevated ESR (73
mm/hr) and C-reactive protein level (10.8 mg/dL). Chest computer tomography (CT) confirmed multiple LNs enlargement at the mediastium,
paratracheal area, subcarina and right perihilar bronchovascular interstitial and interlobular septal thickening. Initially, sputum AFB
smears revealed a negative finding. Meanwhile, both excisional LN biopsies, which were performed at the palpable LNs of the thigh and neck,
and skin and mediastinoscopic paratracheal LN biopsies revealed necrotizing granuloma with many AFB. Also, an AFB smear of a pus-like
discharge obtained from the paratracheal LN revealed a positive finding. With a presumptive diagnosis of disseminated tuberculosis, anti-
tuberculosis therapy was started with HERZ (isoniazid , rifampin , ethambutol , and pyrazinamide ) regimens on hospital day (HD) 16.
However, as the skin lesions progressed rapidly and high spiking fever persisted despite HERZ treatment, we assumed he had a rapidly growing
NTM such as M. Abscessus or M. fortuitum, and started him on amikacin, clarithromycin, levofloxacin and cefoxitin instead of EMB and PZA.
However, improvement of the skin lesions was not evident. Three weeks after anti-tuberculosis therapy was started, a mycobacterium culture
of skin and pus-like discharge obtained from the paratracheal LN revealed NTM, and repeated sputum mycobacterium culture also revealed NTM.
At HD 43, all NTMs cultured in sputum, paratracheal LNs, and skin were identified as M. kansasii by polymerase chain reaction-restriction
fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) of the polymorphic region of the rpoB gene. In vitro drug susceptibility testing of M. kansasii
showed that the isolate was susceptible to RFP, EMB, PZA, streptomycin, moxifloxacin, and cycloserine but resistant to INH and para-
aminosalicylic acid. At HD 43, we altered the anti-mycobacterial treatment regimens to INH, RFP, EMB, and clarithromycin. Gradual
improvement of the general condition and symptoms with regression of skin lesions was noted. Sputum AFB, which was examined at HD 51, was
converted into negative and mycobacterial culture of sputum did not identify any mycobacteria. However, during treatment for M. kansasii,
the patient developed small bowel obstruction and ischemic colitis. Although he underwent a small bowel resection and intensive conservative
management, the patient died on HD 121. M. kansasii is the second most frequently recognized NTM pathogen and second most frequent cause of
disseminated NTM disease, after M. avium complex (MAC), in the Unites States and Japan (2, 5, 6). Furthermore, in southeast England, M.
kansasii is more common than MAC (7). In South Korea, M. kansasii is the fourth most commonly isolated NTM pathogen, after MAC, M.
abscessus-chelonae complex, and M. fortuitum, but its incidence has increased, especially in highly industrialized areas (8). In agreement
with previously established risk factors (2), our patient's risk factors for disseminated M. kansasii infection included a history of
hematological malignancy and long-term steroid use. The patient had a disseminated M. kansasii infection with multiple skin lesions, as well
as lung and multiple LNs. In addition, because an abdominal CT scan revealed a splenic abscess, we speculated that splenic infection with M.
kansasii was also probable. An autopsy, however, was not performed. We comprehensively reviewed the literature written in English and
available in abstract or full text form that reported disseminated M. kansasii infection in non HIV-infected patients (3, 4, 6, 9-21). Among
a total of 67 cases including the present case, 4 cases were excluded from analysis because of insufficient information. Table 1 shows the
characteristics of the 63 remaining cases of disseminated M. kansasii infection in non-HIV infected patients. The mean age was 45 yr old and
79.7% of all patients were male. The most common underlying disease was a hematological malignancy. However, the frequency of previously
healthy persons with no underlying diseases was relatively high as 23.8%. Also, the table shows that M. kansasii caused infection in diverse
visceral organs; commonly involved sites included the lungs, LNs, spleen, liver, and bone marrow. The prognosis of disseminated M. kansasii
infection was poor as the percentage of patients that died was 60.3%. As previously known that the presence of underlying disease and/or
immunosuppression seemed to be the best predictor of outcome of disseminated M. kansasii infection (4), the mortality of patients with
underlying disease was higher than those without underlying disease (75% and 53.3% respectively). We summarized the clinical characteristics
of 18 patients with disseminated M. kansasii infection in non HIV-infected patients reported since 1990 yr at Table 2. The M. kansasii
isolates cultured from our patient were resistant to an INH in vitro susceptibility test. The concentrations of INH used in susceptibility
testing are those chosen for their usefulness with M. tuberculosis. Some M. kansasii isolates may be reported resistant to INH at 0.2 or 1.0
µg/mL. However, these isolates of M. kansasii are susceptible to slightly higher INH concentrations, and are still susceptible to achievable
blood levels. Thus, INH should be used regardless of the in vitro susceptibility test results (8). We also used anti-mycobacterial regimens
containing INH and noted a gradual improvement of skin lesions and negative sputum mycobacterial culture after this treatment. Cutaneous NTM
disease is most often caused by rapidly growing mycobacteria such as M. abscessus-chelonae complex and M. fortuitum rather than M. kansasii.
It is known that M. kansasii can rarely cause a primary cutaneous infection, which usually results from penetrating injuries or disseminated
disease (22). The patient described in this case had skin lesions for a long time before disseminated infection at the multiple LNs and lung
developed. We surmised that minor local trauma by initial skin lesions of Sweet's syndrome resulted in the inoculation of M. kansasii and
caused disseminated infection in the immunocompromised condition brought about by long-term steroid use. The natural course of untreated,
non-disseminated skin infection by M. kansasii is one of non-serious, indolent progression. However, as seen in this case, skin infection
associated with systemic dissemination in a patient with underlying disease in immunosuppressive conditions is associated with poor outcome
(22). In conclusion, our case emphasizes that chronic skin lesions can lead to severe, disseminated M. kansasii infection in an
immunocompromised patient. Particular attention to the aggressive diagnostic work-up, such as biopsy, should be given in immunocompromised
patients with chronic skin lesions to diagnose infection by an unusual pathogen, such as NTM, before the infection disseminates.
Papulonodular skin lesions on lower legs. Clinical characteristics of disseminated M. kansasii infection in non-HIV infected patients
Clinical characteristics of 18 patients with disseminated M. kansasii infection reported since 1990 yr *NA, The anti-mycobacterial treatment
was performed, but their regimens were not available. NA, not available; BM, bone marrow; LN, lymph node; PAP, pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis; INH, isoniazid; RFP, rifampin; EMB, ethambutol; STM, streptomycin; KM, kanamycin; PAS, para-aminosalicylic acid.
