A collision tumor consists of two independent neoplasms growing in close proximity until they become juxtaposed, appearing as one lesion.
This is a very rare situation with unclear physiopathology. Collision tumors should be distinguished from composite tumors, which consist of
one neoplastic clone that diverges into two cell lineages. Collisions located in the esophagus are particularly uncommon. A 51-year-old male
patient, a former smoker and former alcoholic, presented with a glottic squamous cell carcinoma and underwent a total laringectomy with
selective neck dissection (II, III, and IV). A pathological analysis of the surgical specimen confirmed a T2N0 squamous cell carcinoma, and
adjuvant radiotherapy was performed (total dosage 6000 cGy). Six months later, the patient presented with progressive dysphagia, and an
upper digestive endoscopy revealed an infiltrative tumor, approximately 2 cm long, in the distal esophagus. Biopsies revealed a poorly
differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with areas of neuroendocrine differentiation. A Positron emission tomography scan demonstrated no
extra-esophageal disease. The patient then underwent a subtotal esophagectomy with thoracic and abdominal lymphadenectomy (Ivor-Lewis
procedure). Reconstruction was performed with an intrathoracic esophagogastric end-to-side mechanical anastomosis. The surgical specimen
revealed a lesion that was 2.5 cm wide, located 2 cm above the esophagogastric junction. Microscopy confirmed an in situ proliferation of
squamous cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and high mitotic count with severe atypia in the nuclei. In very intimate contact with
these squamous cells, there was another component of the tumor with a higher nuclei/cytoplasm ratio, nuclei with a “salt and pepper”
appearance and a very noticeably invasive behavior. Immunostaining of the tumor revealed that this second component exhibited neuroendocrine
differentiation, being negative for p63 (the squamous component was p63-positive), strongly positive for Ki-67 (60%), positive for
synaptophysin and CD56, and focally positive for chromogranin A. The neuroendocrine component also exhibited a high mitotic rate (17 mitoses
per 10 high power fields). The interface between the two components of the tumor was abrupt. The squamous cell carcinoma was in situ,
whereas the neuroendocrine carcinoma invaded the submucosal layer. Neural and vascular invasions were absent. The surgical margins were
free, and there was no lymph node involvement (0/11 dissected). The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on
the 12th day after the procedure. He remains asymptomatic and disease-free after a follow-up of 26 months. Collision tumors are rare lesions
derived from two different histogenetic events.1 Two independent tumors grow in proximity until they become juxtaposed. They may be hard to
differentiate from mixed or composite tumors, when one mutated cell diverges into two clones resulting in two different neoplasms.1–3
Histopathological analysis, immunohistochemical analysis, microsatellite instability research and electron microscopy can all help
distinguish between these two situations. In the present case, the microscopic findings demonstrated an abrupt transition between the two
components, this is expected for collision tumors, differing them from composite tumors in which the two components intermingle. The
immunohistochemical analysis revealed a pattern compatible with a neuroendocrine component located next to the squamous “in situ” component.
The physiopathology of collision tumors is still unclear, but recent data suggest that the proposed accidental meeting of two independent
tumors is not in accord with what is known today about carcinogenesis. The field effect of carcinogens probably plays a major etiological
role in the process, and the present patient is a good example of this. Mucosal exposure to alcohol and smoke probably initiated various
cells in his respiratory and upper digestive tracts, allowing further mutations to originate two squamous cell carcinomas (glottic and
esophageal).7 It is also known that a neoplasm’s surrounding area is altered, influencing cancer growth and contributing to epithelial
instability.8–10 Therefore, it is plausible that a pool of initiated cells in an area may be stimulated by an altered microenvironment,
ultimately resulting in a second neoplasm that can grow until it collides with the first tumor. Although knowing which component appeared
first in this case is impossible, it is probable that the first neoplasm contributed to the rise and growth of the second. With respect to
the risk factors for neuroendocrine tumors, their occurrence is mainly attributed to genetic alterations.11 According to the most recent
World Health Organization classification, neuroendocrine tumors can be separated into three main categories with distinguished histology and
prognosis: well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors have a low malignant potential, well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas are more
aggressive lesions with metastatic potential, and poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas are high grade malignancies with poor
prognosis.12 The present case was classified as a well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma. With regard to prognosis, for in situ
squamous cell carcinomas a five-year survival rate greater than 85% can be expected.13 There is no specific staging system for
neuroendocrine carcinomas, and some authors prefer not to use the TNM system (International Union Against Cancer), instead relying on the
framework recommended by the Veterans Administration Lung Study Group, which classifies lesions into two categories: limited disease (tumor
contained within a localized anatomic region, independent of regional lymphatic involvement) and extensive disease (tumor outside
locoregional boundaries). Treatment for the limited disease is potentially curative, and surgery represents the best chance for a cure.14
Also, the best predictor of survival for neuroendocrine tumor cases seems to be the Ki-67 score and not the degree of differentiation or the
tumor site, as expected.12 It should be also noted that the esophageal lesion was probably present at the time of the first operation.
Although it was not diagnosed at that time, this situation underscores the importance of a full investigation of the airways and upper
digestive tract in patients with squamous cell carcinoma in one of these tracts. The assessment should include an upper digestive endoscopy
with chromoscopy. As for the surgical choice, a cervical approach was not considered since the patient had severe surgical and actinic
alterations in this region. Esophageal collisions are particularly uncommon and usually occur in association with Barrett’s esophagus.4–6 To
our knowledge, this is the first report of an esophageal collision between a squamous cell carcinoma and a neuroendocrine carcinoma. Panel:
The exophytic ulcerated lesion in the distal esophagus (A) and its corresponding histopathology (B–E). B – Low-magnification image showing
the squamous “in situ” component (arrowheads) and the neuroendocrine, nest-arranged component (asterisks). C – High-magnification image of
the squamous cell component. D – High-magnification image of the neuroendocrine component with typical “salt and pepper” nuclei. E –
Cheratin immunostaining showing the squamous component (positive in brown - arrowheads) and the neuroendocrine component (negative –
asterisks). F – High-magnification image of a CD56-positive neuroendocrine area. G – High-magnification image showing Ki-67 positiveness.
