The purpose of this article is to report a case of nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION) after uneventful cataract
surgery. A 53-year-old Filipina underwent cataract surgery. She had a small optic disc with cup-to-disc ratio of 0.2 in the left eye and 0.3
in the right eye. On the first postoperative day, the uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) was 20/20, with an intraocular pressure (IOP) of 20
mmHg in the left eye. At one week after operation, the UCVA was 20/20 and the IOP was 15 mmHg. Three weeks later, she underwent cataract
surgery in the right eye. On the first postoperative day, her UCVA was 20/20 in both eyes, but she complained of a visual field decrease in
the left eye. A relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) was noted and the optic disc was pallid and swollen diffusely. A red-free photo
showed defect surrounding the optic disc. A visual field test showed tunnel vision sparing the central vision. In this report, the authors
hypothesize an association between cataract extraction and delayed NAION. Since the risk of NAION in the fellow eye is 30-50%, visual
acuity, visual field, fundus exam and RAPD should be routinely checked. Cataract surgery is now regarded as a common, highly effective and
safe ophthalmic surgical procedure; however, the surgery still causes several problems. Among many complications, neuro-ophthalmologic
complications from cataract surgery are relatively uncommon and include diplopia, central nervous system toxicity, traumatic optic
neuropathy and ischemic optic neuropathy. Case reports and case series suggest that cataract extraction may be associated with an increased
incidence of nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION) . The risk of NAION after cataract extraction is low, approximately one
occurrence in every 2,000 cases . This represents a significantly greater incidence than the general population, which is estimated to be
2.3 to 10.2 per 100,000 people among patients 50 years and older [9, 10]. A history of NAION in the fellow eye may be an additional risk
factor [1, 11-13]. A diagnosis is made if the following criteria are met: 1) acute visual acuity loss and/or visual field loss consistent
with a defect in the nerve fiber layer; 2) optic nerve head edema with neural rim pallor or development of optic nerve head pallor after the
onset of visual loss; 3) relative afferent pupillary defect; and 4) elimination of all other etiologies. Treatment, including
corticosteroids and surgical optic nerve sheath fenestration, has not been demonstrated to be effective . Two types of NAION associated with
cataract extraction have been reported; an immediate type, occurring within hours to days after surgery [2, 3], and a delayed type,
occurring weeks to months after surgery following a period of normal vision . Although the immediate type is known to be related to elevated
intraocular pressure, there is limited evidence to support intraocular surgery as a cause in delayed cases. The authors of this case study
report delayed NAION after uneventful phacoemulsification and intraocular lens implantation. A 53-year-old Asian female (Filipina) received
uneventful phacoemulsification and intraocular lens implantation in both eyes, three weeks apart, under topical anesthesia. Both cataract
surgeries were uneventful. The patient had no systemic or ocular disease at the preoperative examination other than a relatively small
bilateral optic disc with a cup-to-disc ratio of 0.2 in the left eye and 0.3 in the right eye (Fig. 1). On the first postoperative day, the
patient's uncorrected visual acuity was 20/20 in the operated eye, with slight corneal edema and an intraocular pressure of 18 mmHg. Topical
antimicrobial drug levofloxacin (Cravit®; Santen, Osaka, Japan) and rimexolone (Vexol®; Alcon, Forth Worth, TX, USA) were used every 2
hours. At one week after operation, the patient presented without any ocular complaints, and the uncorrected visual acuity was 20/20.
Intraocular pressure in the operated eye was 15 mmHg by Goldmann applanation tonometer. Three weeks later, the patient underwent cataract
extraction under topical anesthesia in the right eye. On the first postoperative day, the patient's uncorrected vision was 20/20 in both
eyes but complained of a visual field decrease in the left eye. The intraocular pressures were 15 and 14 mmHg by Goldmann applanation
tonometer, respectively. The patient did not complain of any headaches, scalp tenderness, jaw claudication or neurologic symptoms. On neuro-
ophthalmic examination, a relative afferent pupillary defect was observed, and the left optic disc was pallid and swollen (Fig. 2). An
optical coherence tomography was obtained, confirming the findings (Fig. 3). The patient's color vision was normal. A red-free photo showed
a nerve fiber layer defect surrounding the optic disc (Fig. 4). The Humphrey and Goldmann visual field of the left eye showed tunnel vision
sparing the central vision (Figs. 5 and 6). Carefully timed fluorescein angiography was performed and revealed no definite filling defect at
the early stage but hyperfluorescence of the disc at the late stage (Fig. 7). An MRI of the brain and orbit showed only age-related changes
(Fig. 8). The patient underwent a complete laboratorial evaluation including erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein
measurements, and the results were all within normal limits. The patient had no symptoms suggestive of temporal arteritis, and the
laboratory workup was negative. One week after symptom onset, visual acuity was 20/20, with an afferent pupillary defect still remaining in
the affected eye. Aspirin was prescribed to prevent NAION in the fellow eye. Nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy results from
inadequate blood supply to the posterior ciliary arteries. Arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia, ischemic heart
disease, cerebrovascular disease, migraine, sleep apnea syndrome and anterior segment surgeries have been identified as risk factors for
NAION. Patients with a history of NAION are at a high risk of NAION developing in the uninvolved eye. Beri et al. showed that 18% and 35% of
patients with unilateral NAION had NAION in the fellow eye at the one-year and five-year follow-ups, respectively. Many reports have shown
that if ischemic optic neuropathy occurs in one eye after cataract surgery, the risk to the fellow eye is 30-50% with subsequent surgery [1,
11-13]. Aspirin administration has been shown to be effective in reducing the short-term frequency of recurrent event in the contralateral
eye . Fortunately, the visual acuity of the patient in the present study remained stable. However, since the risk of NAION in the fellow eye
is 30-50%, visual acuity, optic disc morphology and visual field should be routinely checked in the fellow eye. The data presented herein do
not prove a direct causal relationship between cataract extraction and delayed NAION. However, an association can be hypothesized between
cataract extraction and delayed NAION. McCulley et al. showed that cataract extraction and intraocular lens implantation are associated with
an increased incidence of NAION [1, 17] which occurs as a complication of anterior segment surgery including cataract extraction, with an
average onset of approximately 35 days, ranging widely from hours to five months postoperatively . Although the risk of NAION after cataract
extraction is low, there are currently no preventative measures to avoid the first attack of ischemic optic neuropathy related to cataract
surgery other than monitoring intraocular pressure, and no treatment is available. When considering cataract surgery to the fellow eye,
surgeons should discuss this possible risk with individuals having experienced a previous episode of NAION. In addition, for patients who
have a crowded optic nerve head with a small cup-to-disc ratio or a previous episode of NAION on the fellow eye, prescribing aspirin to
avoid NAION may be advisable [12, 14, 18]. Preoperative fundus photograph: relatively small bilateral optic disc with a cup-to-disc ratio of
0.2 in the left eye and 0.3 in the right eye. Fundus photograph of the left eye on postoperative day 1 showing optic disc pallor and
swelling. Stratus optical coherence tomography image of the left eye on postoperative day 1 showing an increase in nerve fiber layer
thickness due to optic disc swelling. TEMP=Temporal; SUP=Superior; NAS=Nasal; INF=Inferior; OS=Oculus Sinister. Red-free photo of the left
eye on postoperative day 1 showing a nerve fiber layer defect around the disc. Visual field test of the left eye with a Humphrey perimeter
on postoperative day 1. Visual field test of the left eye with a Goldmann perimeter on postoperative day 3. Fluorescein angiography of the
left eye on postoperative day 3 showing hyperfluorescence of the disc at the late stage. MRI image of the brain and orbit on postoperative
day 10 showing only age-related changes.
