A case of acquired Brown syndrome caused by surgical repair of medial orbital wall fracture is reported in the present paper. A 23-year-old
man presented at the hospital with right periorbital trauma. Although the patient did not complain of any diplopia, the imaging study
revealed a blow-out fracture of the medial orbital wall. Surgical repair with a calvarial bone autograft was performed at the department of
plastic surgery. The patient was referred to the ophthalmologic department due to diplopia that newly developed after surgery. The prism
cover test at distant fixation showed hypotropia of the right eye, which was 4 prism diopters (PD) in primary gaze, 20 PD in left gaze,
while orthophoric in right gaze. Eye movement of the right eye was markedly limited on elevation in adduction with normal elevation in
abduction with intorsion in the right eye present. Forced duction test of the right eye showed restricted elevation in adduction.
Computerized tomography scan of the orbits showed the right superior oblique muscle was entrapped between the autografted bone fragment and
posterior margin of the fracture. When repairing medial orbital wall fracture that causes Brown syndrome, surgeons should always be careful
of entrapment of the superior oblique muscle if the implant is inserted without identifying the superior and posterior margin of the orbital
fracture site. Brown syndrome is characterized by impaired elevation in the adduction of the affected eye. Forced duction test shows severe
mechanical restriction on attempts to elevate the adducted eye with no limitations of elevation in abduction . A widening of the palpebral
fissure is commonly seen with adduction. Overaction of the ipsilateral superior oblique muscle is usually absent in Brown syndrome. Brown
syndrome can be either congenital or acquired . The cause of congenital Brown syndrome is an anomaly of the trochlea and/or superior oblique
tendon. Inflammatory diseases, infection, systemic disease and trauma can cause acquired Brown syndrome . Many of the surgical procedures,
such as scleral buckling, glaucoma drainage implantation, ethmoidal sinus surgery and tucking the superior oblique tendon can lead to
acquired Brown syndrome . There are several reports of postoperative Brown syndrome after surgery for orbital wall fracture [7, 8]. However,
to the authors' knowledge, acquired Brown syndrome caused by superior oblique muscle entrapment between the implant and posterior margin of
the fracture has not been documented, thus the authors report a case of acquired Brown syndrome as well as a review of related literature in
the present paper. A 23-year-old man presented to the hospital with right periorbital injury caused by blunt trauma. When the patient first
visited our institution, ophthalmologic evaluation including visual acuity, slit lamp examination, intraocular pressure, and fundus
examination revealed no abnormal findings. The patient was orthophoric in all gaze positions on the alternate prism cover test, no
limitation was observed on version and duction test, and the patient did not complain of diplopia. Computerized tomography scan of the
orbits showed a medial wall fracture (Fig. 1). Surgical repair of the fracture using a calvarial bone autograft was performed at the
department of plastic surgery 3 days after the injury (Fig. 2). Immediately after surgery, the patient complained of newly-developed
diplopia. The patient visited the ophthalmologic department 2 months after the surgery. A prism cover test at distance fixation revealed 4
prism diopters (PD) of right hypotropia in the primary position, 20 PD hypotropia in left gaze, and orthophoric in right gaze. Eye movement
of the right eye was markedly limited on elevation in adduction while elevation in abduction was normal (Fig. 3). Fundus examination showed
intorsion of the right eye (Fig. 4). Forced duction test of the right eye demonstrated restricted elevation in adduction. A postoperative CT
scan of the orbits showed the right superior oblique muscle was entrapped between the autografted bone fragment and posterior margin of the
fracture (Fig. 2). Parks and Brown first reported on an unusual motility disorder characterized by limited elevation when the eye is in
adduction. At first, Brown attributed the limited elevation to a short or tight anterior superior oblique tendon sheath and termed this
newly discovered syndrome the "superior oblique tendon sheath syndrome". Later, Brown divided the syndrome into true sheath and simulated
sheath syndromes based on whether the congenital short anterior sheath of the superior oblique tendon is the only cause of the symptom or
not . The clinical features of true and simulated sheath syndromes are similar, but true sheath syndrome is always congenital as well as
constant, and does not show spontaneous recovery. The true sheath syndrome was further subdivided into typical and atypical forms . A
classification of Brown's syndrome can be made on the basis of onset, and congenital versus acquired. Acquired Brown syndrome is associated
with limited elevation in adduction that occurs after infancy. In certain cases, acquired Brown syndrome is idiopathic. In other instances,
Brown syndrome can be associated with a systemic disease or local orbital pathology . Inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis or
systemic lupus erythematosus, can cause acquired Brown syndrome . Local inflammation of the superior oblique tendon and trochlea can occur
as an idiopathic form without systemic disease [15, 16]. Scarring in the area of the trochlea from trauma or from periocular or sinus
surgery can also produce Brown syndrome [17, 18]. There are numerous case reports of postoperative Brown syndrome. Dobler et al. reported
Brown syndrome after implantation of a double plate Molteno valve in the superior nasal position. Coats et al. reported Brown syndrome after
Ahmed valveÂ® implantation. Ball et al. reported a case of Brown syndrome after Baevelt implantation. Munoz and Rosenbaum observed Brown
syndrome after retinal detachment surgery. Brown syndrome related to surgical repair of an orbital wall fracture has also been reported.
Lauer et al. reported Brown syndrome diagnosed following repair of an orbital roof fracture . Hwang and Lim reported Brown syndrome after
reconstruction of a medial wall fracture and observed the tendon and muscle fiber near the trochlea were hypertrophied. Surgical or
accidental trauma to the area of the trochlea has been reported to cause acquired Brown syndrome. In medial orbital wall reconstruction
surgery, the superior oblique muscle is easily damaged because of its close proximity. The superior oblique muscle and the tendon can be
injured during an operation, or adhesion can occur post-operatively. Edema or hemorrhage can also induce Brown syndrome . In the present
case study reported, the authors could confirm by CT scan of the orbits that the right superior oblique muscle was entrapped between the
autograft bone fragment and posterior margin of the fracture (Fig. 2). The indications for Brown syndrome surgery include hypotropia in the
primary position, diplopia, anomalous head posture, and downshoot during adduction . There are several surgical procedures for the treatment
of Brown's syndrome including superior oblique tenotomy, tenectomy and elongation of the superior oblique muscle . In the present case
study, removal of the bone graft was difficult, and even if successfully performed, the symptoms due to adhesion probably would not improve.
As hypotropia at the primary gaze was small and the patient did not want surgical management, the authors decided to manage the patient
conservatively. In reconstruction of medial wall blow-out fracture, there is a risk of external ocular muscle entrapment. The muscle
entrapment can occur when the implant is inserted without identifying the margin of fracture clearly. Although superior oblique entrapment
is not common, the surgeon should always consider the possibility of Brown syndrome if the implant is placed without securing the superior
and posterior margin of the orbital fracture site, at which the superior oblique may strangulate. Surgeons should also perform an
intraoperative forced duction test after inserting the implant to ensure all extraocular muscles are released. This paper was presented in
part at the 97th annual meeting of the Korean Ophthalmological Society, April. 2007. A computerized tomography scan was performed before
surgery and showed a medial orbital wall fracture (arrow). Postoperative computerized tomography scan of the orbits showed the right
superior oblique muscle was entrapped between the autografted bone fragment and posterior margin of the fracture (arrow). After repair of
the blow-out fracture, limitation of elevation in adduction of the right eye developed (arrow) while elevation in abduction was normal.
Fundus examination showed intorsion of the right eye.
