Hepatic artery thrombosis is a devastating complication after orthotopic liver transplantation often requiring revascularization or re-
transplantation. It is associated with considerably increased morbidity and mortality. Acute cognitive dysfunction such as delirium or acute
psychosis may occur after major surgery and may be associated with the advent of surgical complications. Here we describe a case of hepatic
artery thrombosis after living-donor liver transplantation which was not preceded by signs of liver failure but rather by an episode of
acute psychosis. After re-transplantation the patient recovered without sequelae. This case highlights the need to remain cautious when
psychiatric disorders occur in patients after liver transplantation. The diagnostic procedures should not be restricted to medical or
neurological causes of psychosis alone but should also focus vascular complications related to orthotopic liver transplantation. Hepatic
artery thrombosis (HAT) is the most frequent arterial complication in orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) occurring in 2.5-6.8% of adult
transplant recipients including adult living donor liver transplant recipients with an increased incidence in pediatric and ABO-incompatible
liver transplantation . The clinical presentation of HAT varies depending on the time of onset after transplantation. Severe acidosis,
fever, systematic inflammatory response syndrome, or hepatic failure may ensue in early HAT (less than one month after OLT), whereas
presentation of late HAT may vary from biliary complications such as recurrent biliary sepsis and stenotic lesions of the biliary tract, to
an asymptomatic clinical picture with a mild elevation of serum transaminases and bilirubin levels . HAT may thus be indicated by elevated
serum transaminases, prolonged prothrombin time, or elevated total bilirubin and may be confirmed by doppler ultrasonography or angiography.
Although in approximately 47% HAT requires re-OLT, cases without progressive allograft failure arterial flow may be resolved by
fibrinolysis, interventional treatment, or surgical thrombectomy . Mortality of HAT may vary from 55.6% (early HAT) to 15% (late HAT) . The
most common cause for HAT is surgical technique but hemodynamic or immunologic factors, such as reperfusion injury, hypercoagulation, and
viral infections have also been recognized . Risk factors for HAT include the number of allografts, cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection status,
high recipient/donor weight ratio, biopsy proven rejection, and combination of female donor and male recipient . A 42-year-old male patient
underwent a living-donor liver transplantation (LDLT) for progressive hepatitis B, cirrhosis with 7 points on the Child-Turcotte-Pugh scale
and a model for end-stage liver disease score of 10. He was placed on the waiting list for transplantation because of suspected
hepatocellular carcinoma. He had no history of psychiatric disorder. The donor was his 43-year-old brother who had no major medical
problems. The clinical match was appropriate (see Table 1), there were no contraindications and after further evaluation recipient and donor
were found to be suitable for LDLT. Characteristics of donor and recipient. * Recipient/Donor ratio † Body mass index ‡ Cytomegalo virus IgG
status (IgM both neg.) The donor underwent standard right lobectomy with preservation of the middle vein. In the recipient a standard total
hepatectomy was performed, but due to successive intimal dissection of the hepatic and celiac artery complex arterial reconstruction was
necessary. Due to the small diameter of the donor hepatic artery a direct anastomosis to the recipient supraceliac aorta was not feasible so
an allogenic iliac artery conduit was required. The interposition graft was obtained from a heart-beating donor of a previous OLT and stored
in histidine-tryptophane-ketoglutarate solution at +4°C for 10 days. Anastomosis of the bile duct was performed by duct-to-duct anastomosis
to the donor right hepatic duct remnant. At the time of transplantation the patient received induction immunosuppression consisting of 500
mg methylprednisolone and 20 mg basiliximab, the latter was repeated on the 4th post-operative day (POD). Immunosuppression was maintained
with oral mycophenolat mofetil from the first POD at 2 × 1 g daily and oral prednisolone with an initial daily dose of 75 mg. The latter was
tapered by 5 mg every two days. On the 5th POD oral tacrolimus was added to the immunosuppressive regimen starting with 0.5 mg on the first
day and increasing daily dose by 1 to 2 mg to achieve trough plasma level of 4-10 μg per liter. After surgery the recipient received
continuous intravenous infusion of 5000 units of unfractioned heparin per day for anticoagulation. For prevention of (re-)infection the
patient also received 103 units of hepatitis B immunglobuline at reperfusion and intravenous infusion of piperacillin/tazobactam at surgery
until the 3rd POD but no antimycotics or prophylactic CMV therapy (both donor and recipient had experienced CMV infection). In the
postoperative course serum transaminases peaked on the first and 4th POD but then decreased continuously as prothrombin time increased
(coagulation factors were not substituted). Albeit a gradual increase in total bilirubin plasma levels only a mild graft dysfunction was
suspected because bile flow over the T-drain increased. Daily doppler sonography of hepatic vessels showed unaltered graft perfusion.
Overall the patient had an uncomplicated postoperative without signs for infection or organ dysfunction. The clinical course and laboratory
findings did show mild a graft dysfunction but neither rejection nor acute graft failure were indicated. On the 9th POD the patient suffered
from acute paranoid psychosis, being alert but agitated and physically aggressive. He was mistrustful and afraid of being harmed by people
around him. The patient became unmanageable and had to be sedated with an intramuscular injection of 5 mg haloperidol and an intravenous
injection of 20 mg diazepam. Due to this unusual presentation of postoperative delirium a diagnostic workup was initiated. Patent hepatic
artery could not be shown in doppler sonography and subsequent angiography. Explorative laparotomy on the same day revealed a complete
thrombosis of the donor hepatic artery and gross ischemic infarction in all liver segments. Because progression of infarction and subsequent
graft loss was to be expected the patient was placed on the transplant waiting list for re-OLT. An acceptable organ was offered from an
18-year-old heart-beating donor on the following day and the patient underwent re-OLT 10 days after the LDLT. The hepatic artery of the new
graft was reanastomosed to the old conduit. The immunosuppressive regimen was reinitiated as described above including tacrolimus (see
Figure 1). Emergence from anaesthesia was uneventful and the psychiatric symptoms did not recur in the postoperative course. Furthermore a
clinically suspected episode of acute rejection indicated by rising transaminases was treated with a course of methylprednisolone (see
Figure 1). Daily doppler sonography of hepatic vessels showed an unaltered graft perfusion. Examination of the explant revealed thrombotic
occlusion of the hepatic artery with anaemic infarction of all liver segments. Postoperative course of the patient. Postoperative course of
the patient. Upper panel depicts aspartate transaminase (AST, solid line) and alanine transaminase (ALT, dashed line) plasma levels in units
per liter. In the middle panel total bilirubin (dashed line) and prothrombin time (PT, solid line) in activity percentage is shown. The
lower panel displays immunosuppression: methylprednisolone, black bars; prednisolone, grey upper bars; basiliximab (Simulect), diamonds;
tacrolimus trough levels, solid line and dots; tacrolimus dose, lower grey bars. Here we describe a case of HAT after LDLT preceded not by
signs of an liver failure but by acute paranoid psychosis. At transplantation the patient required a complex arterial reconstruction with an
interposition graft which is a known risk factor for HAT . Whether supraceliac or infrarenal placement of the interposition graft is
beneficial remains equivocal . LDLT itself has also been implied to be a risk factor for HAT, but Hatano et al could show increased
incidence of HAT only in ABO-incompatible grafts . In the described patient we observed a mild graft dysfunction indicated by increasing
bilirubin in the first week after LDLT but accompanied by decreasing transaminases and an increasing synthetic liver function. Daily doppler
sonography showed patent vessels until he suffered from acute psychosis on the 9th postoperative day. Psychiatric disorders are not uncommon
in the postoperative course of the liver transplant patient . Like other patients undergoing major surgery, transplant patients may suffer
from postoperative delirium. The cause of delirium is multifactorial, including predisposing factors (age, primary disease),
medical/surgical factors (length of surgery, use of a cardiopulmonary bypass, water-electrolyte imbalances, sepsis, etc), and postoperative
emotional stress, like prolonged sleep deprivation, use of physical restraints, and pain . In the described patient postoperative delirium
was unlikely because after surgery delirium typically evolves immediately after emergence from general anaesthesia or, after a lucid
interval, in the first 72 hours . Psychiatric disorders may also be drug induced. Immunosuppressive drugs like tacrolimus and
corticosteroids are known causative agents of psychiatric reactions . Neurotoxic effects are dose dependent and occur in the early phase
after initiation, e.g. within the first week . In our patient induction of the described psychiatric symptoms by immunosuppressants was also
unlikely because the psychosis occurred after the first week and doses were low, i. e., 5 ng/ml tacrolimus on the 9th postoperative day (see
also Figure 1). After re-transplantation he received tacrolimus and prednisolone again without any sign of recurrence of the psychiatric
disorder. Because of elevated bilirubin we also suspected impaired graft function could cause acute psychosis in our patient. In chronic
liver failure manifestations of encephalopathy are common and may reach from mild obtundation with dementia and movement disorders to deep
coma . In the early phase of acute liver failure agitation, delusional ideas, and hyperkinesis are also common until coma finally ensues .
Although typical laboratory findings of acute liver failure are common, only moderate alteration, as seen in our patient, is not an
exclusion criterion . In our patient ammonia was also not elevated but in patients with more advanced hepatocellular dysfunction the level
of ammonia is only poorly correlated with the severity of hepatic encephalopathy . Besides the accumulation of unmetabolized ammonia other
mechanisms have been implied as causes of encephalopathy such as imbalance of neurotransmitters, endogenous benzodiazepine ligands, or
elevation of circulating tumor necrosis factor (TNF) , some of them also involved in the pathogenesis of sepsis-associated delirium .
Besides infection and sepsis surgical complications are the most likely cause of graft dysfunction in the early post-transplant period.
Therefore we initiated further diagnostic work-up. Abdominal sonography showed no flow in the hepatic artery and subsequently HAT was
confirmed by angiography. During explorative laparotomy the liver was found to be with gross infarction and we decided to evaluate the
patient for re-transplantation. Luckily we obtained a graft within 24 hours and after re-transplantation psychosis resolved without
sequelae. We propose that in the described patient HAT is the most likely cause of an acute liver failure although laboratory findings
indicated only mild graft dysfunction. Acute liver failure was accompanied by hepatic encephalopathy apparent as acute delusional psychosis.
This case highlights the need to remain suspicious when psychiatric disorders occur in patients after liver transplantation. The diagnostic
procedures should not be restricted to medical or neurological causes of psychosis but should also focus vascular complications of OLT. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. ADG and TL collected and analyzed the data and wrote the article. GR, HB and AO
contributed substantially to the process of analyzing the data and writing the paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript The
pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2482/10/7/prepub Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review
by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
