Congenital afibrinogenemia is a very rare inherited coagulation disorder, characterized by virtual absence of plasma fibrinogen (factor I).
There are only about 250 cases reported in the world literature . We describe a case of congenital afibrinogenemia which presented as an
antenatally detected intracranial bleed. A preterm 29 weeks baby was born of second degree consanguinous marriage to a 28 year old G2A1
mother by elective lower segment caesarean section. Mother was a known case of polycystic ovarian syndrome and was on infertility treatment.
Baby was born following intracytoplasmic sperm insertion. She had underwent two intracytoplasmic sperm insertions previously which were both
failures. Mother had regular antenatal check ups. Antenatal scan at 29 weeks of gestation showed a large isoechoic intracranial extraaxial
collection causing compression of neuroparenchyma and dilatation of the lateral ventricle. A detailed evaluation with a fetal MRI confirmed
the finding and showed a fairly large extra axial collection with maximum thickness of 5.7 cms seen on the right with significant mass
effect on the ipsilateral cerebral hemisphere, brainstem and cerebellar hemisphere. There was effacement of ipsilateral lateral ventricle
and IIIrd ventricle. Significant midline shift was seen with most of the ipsilateral neuroparenchyma pushed towards left causing obstructive
hydrocephalus on the left (Fig 1). The collection was homogeneously hyperintense on T1 weighted images. The large extra axial collection
suggested hemorrhage on right side with significant mass effect evidenced by the midline shift and hydrocephalus Fetal MRI, T2 weighted
coronal section with a mass effect on the right side with mid-line shift to the left side because of sub-dural bleeding. Baby was born by
elective lower segment caesarean section for fetal indication in view of possible uncal coning. Baby was intubated and ventilated at birth
due to poor respiratory efforts. On clinical examination, she had a large head with wide fontanel. Otherwise clinical examination was
unremarkable. There was no obvious external congenital malformations. There was no obvious external bleeding tendency. Neurosonogram done
after birth showed a large right sided subdural hemorrhage occupying almost the entire right hemisphere extending to midline with gross
shift of midline to left. A Plain CT taken postnatally (after draining 50 ml of collected old bleed on day 1 showed extra-axial collection
on Rt.side with a mass effect. The brain architecture was distorted with dilated ventricles (Fig 2) Plain CT taken postnatally (after
draining 50 ml of collected old bleed on day 1). The plain CT showing extra-axial collection on Rt.side with a mass effect. The brain
architecture is distorted with dilated ventricles. A detailed blood investigation was done to identify the cause. Hemoglobin done at birth
was 8.2 mg/dL. C reactive protein, total count, differential count and micro ESR done did not suggest sepsis. Blood culture was reported
sterile. PT and APTT done on second day of life was both significantly prolonged. The initial INR was also prolonged (6.36). Platelet count
was 1.3 lakhs/cmm. The various possibilities for bleeding diathesis were considered and evaluated. Disseminated intravascular coagulation
and sepsis was ruled out as sepsis work was reported negative and platelet count was normal. The possibility of a coagulation disorder was
considered in view of the clinical profile and abnormal coagulation profile. A fibrinogen level was done to rule out the possibility of
afibrinogenemia which was reported to be undetectable. In view of the prolonged INR and APTT along with an undetectable Fibrinogen level,
the diagnosis of Congenital afibrinogenemia was made. Baby was managed with Cryoprecipitates. Packed cell transfusion was given in view of
low hemoglobin value initially. The fibrinogen activity was 64 on day 2 of life following one infusion of cryoprecipitate. Values above 100
was achieved by 9 days of life and was maintained so with alternate days of cryoprecipitate infusion. The INR and coagulation profile
transiently improved with cryoprecipitate, to subsequently revert to the previous prolonged state when stopped. The decision was made to
maintain fibrinogen activity above 100 mg/dL (Normal value - 200 to 400 mg/dL). 2 subdural taps were done on first and third days
respectively which drained liquefied blood. Ophthalmology consultation on day 2 of life showed pale disc with pale retina Baby was
ventilated for a total of 14 days and extubated once clinical condition stabilized. Cryoprecipitate was stopped from 22nd day of life to see
the magnitude of fall in fibrinogen activity. On 25th day of life, Fibrinogen level was detected to be 45 mg/dL. A repeat neurosonogram on
25th day of life showed persistence of subdural hematoma with pressure effect. There was probably a fresh episode of bleeding associated
with significant mass effect. Supportive measures was given including cryoprecipitate with which the child clinically improved. Child was
discharged after the parents were explainted regarding the need for strict neurodevelopmental follow up. Child was relatively asymptomatic
until 3 months of corrected age (6 months chronological age) when she was readmitted with one episode of right sided focal seizures along
with poor activity and lethargy. Clinical examination showed raised anterior fontanelle tension. Fibrinogen level done at the time of
admission was undetectable. Emergency CT scan showed an acute intraparenchymal bleed in left frontal lobe measuring 5 Ã— 4.8 cm (Fig 3).
There was another peripheral bleed adjacent to the larger bleed. Intraventricular extension of bleed was also noted with significant midline
shift. The subdural hygroma was seen in right convexity with a maximum thickness of 1.2 cm suggestive of residual old subdural bleed.
Seizures was controlled with appropriate anticonvulsants. An external ventricular drainage was done to evacuate the clot. She was given
supportive measures and cryoprecipitate and was discharged after 3 days of hospitalization. VEP and BERA done at review at 3 months of
corrected age was reported normal. Baby had attained social smile at 5 months of corrected age. She had partial head control at 8 months of
corrected age. Babbling was present. Child is under strict neurodevelopmental follow up and stimulation programme. Acute left frontal bleed
(At 6 months corrected age). Congenital afibrinogenemia is transmitted by an autosomal recessive gene located on chromosome 4 (q26-q28).
Partial deficiency of fibrinogen is called hypofibrinogenemia and is a milder disorder. Afibrinogenemia occurs in the homozygous state while
hypofibrinogenemia in heterozygotes . Congenital absence of fibrinogen (Afibrinogenemia) was first described in 1920 and has an estimated
incidence of 1: 1-2,000,000 . Congenital afibrinogenemia patients may present with bleeding in the newborn period manifesting as hematomas
from traumatic delivery. They may also present with hemetemesis, malena or bleeding from the umbilicus. Other manifestations include
bleeding in soft tissues, mucosa and following circumcision. Despite having totally incoagulable blood, these patients normally do not have
severe spontaneous bleeding, but the case identification is important to prevent more severe bleeding following injuries or surgery .
Intracranial hemorrhage is a rare presentation of the condition in a neonate. Antenatal detection of intracranial bleed is still a rarer
entity. Intracranial hemorrhage has been described as a frequent cause of death in this disorder . As it is a disorder with the final
substrate for formation of the clot missing, results of all screening tests such as clotting time, PT, PTT and thrombin time are abnormal.
Platelet functions such as bleeding time, adhesion and aggregation may also be abnormal. Diagnosis is evident by standard fibrinogen assays.
Afibrinogenemic patients have undetectable or nearly undetectable levels of fibrinogen (<10 mg/dL; normal 200-400 mg/dL) by activity-based
clotting assays and by measurement of immunoreactive fibrinogen. In the absence of consumptive coagulopathy, an unmeasurable fibrinogen
level is diagnostic of the condition . Hemorrhagic symptoms in fibrinogen deficiency are most significant when the plasma level is less than
50 mg/dl . Fresh bleeding was noticed in our case, when the fibrinogen fell to 45 mg/dL. Acute hemorrhagic episodes can be treated with
either fresh frozen plasma or cryoprecipitate or fibrinogen concentrate (Cohn fraction I). Each cryoprecipitate bag contains 100 to 150 mg
of fibrinogen, and therapy with 100 mg/kg of fibrinogen provides a hemostatic plasma level. The half-life of fibrinogen is 2-4 days and
frequent infusions are usually not necessary. However, our patient required frequent transfusions. There was fresh bleeding detected on
ultrasonography when cryoprecipitate was stopped temporarily. Recommendations regarding target levels for treating bleeding range from 30-50
mg/dL to 100 mg/dL . Although prophylactic treatment with regular infusions of cryoprecipitate has been advocated by some, it is not
recommended by others for several reasons. This is based on the fact that spontaneous bleeding is very rare and mild. Moreover, there is a
potential danger of acquiring infections with regular blood product infusion. Antibodies have been reported to form against fibrinogen with
resultant thromboembolic complications, particularly pulmonary embolism Acquired hypofibrinogenemia is common in disseminated intravascular
coagulation and primary fibrinolysis. The possibility of acquired afibrinogenemia is unlikely in our case due to its antenatal presentation.
A detailed sepsis screen done was unremarkable. The incidence of spontaneous abortions is high in afibrinogenemic and hypofibrinogenemic
females . Prepartum and postpartum bleeding are relatively common, and intraabdominal bleeding from ruptured corpus luteal cysts have been
reported. We had explained regarding a detailed evaluation of the mother for any Fibrinogen disorders. Maternal Fibrinogen level was
reported to be within normal limits. The parents were not willing to do any further genetic work up. We believe that the presence of
consanguinity favours the possibility of autosomal recessive inheritance, although a detailed genetic work up was not possible.
Administration of regular infusions of fibrinogen is recommended to maintain pregnancies in afibrinogenemic woman and to reduce the
incidence of postpartum hemorrhage . Therapy should be initiated as early as possible because fetal loss in the first trimester is frequent.
Fetal loss has occurred in some patients with fibrinogen levels above 50 mg/dL as well; therefore, it is recommended that levels be kept
above 100 mg/dL through out the duration of the pregnancy. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this
case report and accompanying images. A copy of of the written consent is available for review by the Editor - in - Chief of this journal The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. GK sequenced and drafted the manuscript. SR was involved in the neurodevelopment
follow up of the baby. PKR was in charge of the total patient care. All authors read and approved the final manuscript
