To the Editor: Cutis laxa (CL) is a group of inherited and acquired disorders characterized by loose and redundant skin with reduced
elasticity.1 Autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked recessive patterns have been noted in the inherited forms.2â€“4 The
autosomal dominant form has a benign course; primarily, skin involvement is present, with few, if any, systemic complications, and a normal
life expectancy. It can be caused by mutations in the elastin gene, but molecular heterogeneity cannot be excluded.23 Type I autosomal
recessive CL is characterized by pulmonary emphysema, umbilical and inguinal hernias, and gastrointestinal and vesico-urinary tract
diverticula, and has the poorest prognosis. The Type II recessive form is called CL and is associated with joint laxity and developmental
delay.4 The histopathology of the skin in patients with CL reveals loss and/or fragmentation of elastic fibers.56 All forms are very rare
and no precise data about their prevalence are available. We report an eight-year-old boy with congenital CL with umbilical and
paraumbilical hernias, emphysema, and pulmonary artery branch stenosis. The child presented with fever and cough of seven days duration and
four days of breathlessness of days duration. He was receiving treatment from a private practitioner, but was referred for increasing
breathlessness. There was a history of recurrent episodes of cough and breathlessness since infancy, with an increase in the frequency and
severity of the episodes in the past year. The patient had responded to oral medications in earlier episodes. This was the third child of
nonconsanguineous parents with no similar family history. Early development was normal and the child was currently in the third grade and
school performance was average. Increased laxity of the skin had been noticed six months of age, but a dermatology opinion was not sought.
There was no history of skin rash or reaction to any drugs in the past. On examination, the child was febrile and had respiratory distress
with intercostal and subcostal retractions. The respiratory rate was 88/min, heart rate 128/min, and blood pressure 100/70 mm Hg. There was
no cyanosis or clubbing. The face had a senile appearance with an antimongoloid slant and slightly everted nostrils. The skin was loose and
hanging in folds over the dorsum of the trunk and wrinkled over the face and on the dorsum of the hands. There was a left-sided, reducible,
inguinal hernia and a small paraumbilical hernia (Figures 1 and 2) there was no laxity of joints. The weight and height were 20.5 kg and
118.5 cm, respectively, both at the fifth percentile for that age. Chest examination revealed an increased anteroposterior diameter with a
Harrison sulcus. Rhonchi and coarse crepitations were heard bilaterally. There was no cardiomegaly; first and second heart sounds were heard
normally. A Grade II ejection systolic murmur was heard in the pulmonary area. Examination of the abdomen revealed a palpable liver, 2 cm
below the right costal margin, and a just-palpable spleen. Other systems were normal. Senile appearance of the face, everted nostril,
wrinkling over the dorsum of the hands, left-sided inguinal hernia, and small paraumbilical hernia. Laxity of skin. Tests showed a
hemoglobin of 12 g/dL, a total WBC count of 7800/mm3 with a differential count of polymorphs of 78%, lymphocytes of 20%, and eosinophils of
2%. A chest x-ray showed emphysema with patchy opacities in the right lower zone (Figure 3). Arterial blood gases showed no hypoxemia. There
was no right ventricular hypertrophy on electrocardiography. Two-dimensional echocardiography showed stenosis of both the right and left
pulmonary arteries. The child was treated with bronchodilators and antibiotics and was discharged after seven days. However, he was
readmitted two weeks later for repair of his left inguinal hernia. Postoperative recovery was uneventful. Chest x-ray showing emphysema. The
diagnosis of a CL syndrome is based on clinical assessment of the typical skin features and the associated extracutaneous findings. In our
patient, there was no history of any similar problem in any of the family members, thus ruling out an autosomal dominant inheritance. He had
no history of developmental delay nor did he have any joint laxity, as described for Type II recessive CL; our patient probably suffered
from the Type I recessive form. He had the characteristic cutaneous abnormalities described in all the varieties of CL. Additionally, he had
paraumbilical and inguinal hernias, pulmonary emphysema, and stenosis of the right and left pulmonary arteries. Cardiopulmonary
abnormalities are common in Type I recessive CL and are the main factors to determine the prognosis and life expectancy. Pulmonary
emphysema, cor pulmonale, and right-sided heart failure caused by pulmonary disease have been commonly described. Various cardiovascular
abnormalities including aortic aneurysm, pulmonary artery multiple branch stenosis, as in our patient, and pulmonary valve stenosis have
been reported with this form of congenital CL.178 We would like to thank the dean of our institution, Dr. Sandhya Kamath, for permitting us
to publish this manuscript.
