Marburg Disease, the fulminant form of multiple sclerosis, is a rare disease that typically kills within a year. We had a 38-year-old
African American male who presented with right footdrop and was pathologically diagnosed with Marburg Disease. The patient recovered
clinically after surgery and stayed stable for more than a year. The diagnosis of Marburg Disease was thus degraded. Die akute Variante
(Marburg) der multiplen Sklerose ist eine fulminant verlaufende, seltene Erkrankung, die gewöhnlich innerhalb eines Jahres zum Tode führt.
Uns stellte sich ein 38 Jahre alter männlicher Afro-Amerikaner mit einer Fußheberparese vor. Es wurde eine Marburg-Variante der multiplen
Sklerose pathologish diagnostiziert. Nach dem Eingriff erholte sich der Patient klinisch und sein Zustand blieb für mehr als ein Jahr
stabil. Die Diagnose Marburg-Variante der multiplen Sklerose wurde folglich herabgestuft. Marburg Disease is an acute form of multiple
sclerosis (MS) that is marked by rapid onset and often continual progression of the demyelination process. The National Multiple Sclerosis
Society estimates the prevalence of MS to be around 135 per 100,000 population in the U.S., and a total MS population of approximately
400,000 . Fortunately, Marburg Disease is very rare and may be encountered once in a neurosurgeon’s career. Our patient is a 38-year-old
African American male who was admitted because of right footdrop. His past medical history was significant for hypertension, diabetes
mellitus, and rheumatoid arthritis. He was on no medications at home. He was given a medication for rheumatoid arthritis back in the early
2000s but discontinued it shortly after because of side effects. He could not remember what it was. On physical exam, strength was 5/5 in
the upper extremities and left lower extremity and 2/5 in the right lower extremity. Deep tendon reflexes were 1–2 and symmetric. Sensation
to light touch and pinprick was intact. On MRI of the brain, there was a 2.9 x 2.5 x 2.3 cm cystic mass in the left superior medial frontal
lobe. This was hypointense on T1 and hyperintense on T2 with surrounding edema. After contrast administration, there was minimal peripheral
enhancement (Figure 1 (Fig. 1)). The differential diagnosis included brain tumor and brain abscess. The patient denied any headaches despite
the brain findings. The patient was given intravenous dexamethasone and a seizure medication. Metastatic workup was ordered and medical
consultation was requested for possible infectious etiology. The patient underwent bone scan and CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. They
were all negative. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 1 mm/hour and white blood count 6.64×109/L. The patient was started on
metronidazole and ceftriaxone. He eventually underwent craniotomy with decompression of the cystic lesion. Frozen section came favoring
infectious etiology over glioma. After surgery, the patient was weaned from dexamethasone but continued on intravenous antibiotics. The
final pathology report came with the diagnosis “acute demyelinating disease, known as Marburg's disease or Marburg's variant of multiple
sclerosis.” Hematoxylin and eosin sections revealed a process exclusively involving the white matter with sharp demarcation between the gray
and white matter. The white matter appeared mostly replaced by histiocytes and reactive astrocytes (Figure 2A (Fig. 2)). There was an
accompanying perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate (Figure 2A (Fig. 2)). CD68 immunohistochemistry demonstrated the histiocytes exclusively in
the white matter with sparing of the gray matter (Figure 2B (Fig. 2)). The differential diagnosis would have been subacute ischemic process,
however, neurofilament immunohistochemical tests revealed preserved axons within the lesion consistent with a demyelinating disease.
Grocott's Methenamine Silver (GMS) special stain and culture were negative for fungal infection. The patient was discharged home and a year
and a half later is happily alive and doing well. Marburg Disease, an acute, fulminant, monophasic variant of multiple sclerosis, typically
kills within a year , . Demyelination usually begins in the hemispheres or the brainstem. Distribution of the lesions is usually
indistinguishable from classical multiple sclerosis, but unlike classical MS, they occur simultaneously in all affected areas. On
histological examination, lesions are generally similar to those of classical MS though they tend to have more inflammatory infiltrates and
appear more destructive . If Marburg Disease occurs in the form of a sole big lesion it can be radialogically indistinguishable from a brain
tumor or abscess. In our case, there was no fever, the erythrocyte sedimentationr rate and white blood count were not elevated at admission,
and culture of the biopsied material was negative. The patient was withdrawn from antibiotics when the final pathology report came
confirming a demyelinating disease. It is known that multiple sclerosis is more common in whites; however, when the disease happens in
African Americans it is usually more severe . Our patient is an African American. Nobody yet knows for sure why these racial differences
exist but many researchers think it is due to differences in the immune system. The rheumatoid arthritis in our patient’s history is a
strong indicator of an autoimmune process going on in the patient’s organism. Although the pathological picture in our case was consistent
with the Marburg variant of multiple sclerosis, the diagnosis would depend on the progression of the disease. Our patient have survived the
critical stage and seems to be doing fine. The diagnosis will be downgraded to multiple sclerosis - chronic form if the patient follows a
remitting course. Three learning points can be extracted from this case: The Marburg variant of multiple sclerosis is rare and requires high
index of suspicion. The Marburg variant of multiple sclerosis should be included in the differential diagnosis of abscess- and tumor-like
lesions on MRI. The diagnosis of the Marburg variant of multiple sclerosis should be made based on disease course. The Marburg variant of
multiple sclerosis is rare and requires high index of suspicion. The Marburg variant of multiple sclerosis should be included in the
differential diagnosis of abscess- and tumor-like lesions on MRI. The diagnosis of the Marburg variant of multiple sclerosis should be made
based on disease course. None declared. A: Hematoxylin & eosin staining showing white matter with a macrophagic infiltrate and reactive
astrocytes. B: CD68 immunohistochemical staining showing positivity in the histiocytes which are exclusively in the white matter with
sparing of the gray matter.
