Sigmoid volvulus is a common cause of large bowel obstruction in western countries and Africa. It accounts for 25% of the patients admitted
to the hospital for large bowel obstruction. The acute management of sigmoid volvulus is sigmoidoscopic decompression. However, the
recurrence rate can be as high as 60% in some series. Recurrent sigmoid volvulus in elderly patients who are not fit for definitive surgery
is difficult to manage. The percutaneous endoscopic placement of two percutaneous endoscopic colostomy tube placement is a simple and
relatively safe procedure. The two tubes should be left open to act as vents for the colon from over-distending. In our opinion, this aspect
is key to its success as it keeps the sigmoid colon deflated until adhesions form between the colon and the abdominal wall. Sigmoid volvulus
is a common cause of large bowel obstruction in western countries and Africa. It accounts for 25% of the patients with large bowel
obstruction (LBO) admitted to the hospital. The acute management of sigmoid volvulus is sigmoidoscopic decompression. However, the
recurrence rate can be as high as 60% in some series. We describe a new technique called percutaneous endoscopic colostomy (PEC) with two
size 20 Fr PEC tube catheters. There are two case series and three case reports describing the technique. All describe the use of one PEC
tube of a small size. The success rate was low and therefore the technique did not gain popularity. A 93-year-old man with a background of
atrial fibrillation (AF) on Warfarin, ischemic heart disease (IHD) and asthma. Due to the associated risk from general anesthesia (GA), non-
surgical intervention was sought for the patient. He had nine documented, radiologically proven, recurrent sigmoid volvulii over a six
months period. Preoperative computerized tomography (CT) scan was performed to outline the relationship of the colon to the abdominal wall
and ensure no intervening small bowel. An informed consent was obtained. The procedure was performed under sedation (2 mg of midazolam and
25 mcg of fentanyl) administered by anesthetists. The patient was placed in modified Lloyd Davies position. A single dose of intravenous
antibiotics was given (gentamicin and metronidazole). The abdomen was prepped with aqueous Betadine. The colonoscope was introduced to the
splenic flexure and then withdrawn to the level of proximal sigmoid. The lighted tip of the endoscope was seen pressing outward against the
abdominal wall. Local anesthetic was infiltrated into the skin and the sheath. Using the PEG (percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy) kit, a
needle was used to enter the colon under direct vision. The wire was grasped by a snare (a polypectomy snare was used as the snare provided
in the PEG tube kit was short) [Figure 1]. A 20F PEG tube was then trailed into the colon, through the abdominal wall. The position was
checked with the colonoscope [Figure 2]. The same procedure was performed on the sigmoid 15 cm distally. This was slightly difficult as
translumination was not obtained easily but was ultimately successful. The guide wire been introduced under direct vision The PEC tube in
place The two tubes were left open to vent the colon and a colostomy bag was used to cover both tubes. Postoperative CT scan was done to
check the position of the tubes and to ensure the absence of free gas beyond the tube insertion [Figure 3]. The patient was discharged on
the second day. A year and eight months later the proximal tube eroded from the skin and was required removal in the clinic. Six months
later he developed recurrence of his volvulus and a proximal tube was replaced. At two years he had no further recurrence and had a good
quality of life. Post Op CT scan checking the position of the tubes and excluding major complications Percutaneous endoscopic colostomy
(PEC) has been used in other conditions such as acute colonic pseudo-obstruction and fecal constipation. The few contraindications to PEC
are similar to PEG and include, patients who are unfit for endoscopy; inability to pass the colonoscope; failure to transilluminate, and
patients with ascites owing to the concomitant potential risk of infection. Recurrent sigmoid volvulus in elderly patients who are not fit
for definitive surgery is difficult to manage. The placement of two PEC tubes is a simple and relatively safe procedure. The major risk of
the procedure is peritonitis, which carries almost 100% mortality since most of these patients are unfit for surgery. Preoperative CT scan
is useful to outline the anatomy of the sigmoid colon in relation to the small bowel, but is not mandatory. The two tubes should be left
open to act as vents for the colon preventing overdistention. In our opinion, this is the key for success. It keeps the sigmoid colon
deflated until adhesions form between the colon and the abdominal wall. The tube should be left in situ indefinitely. Our case has the
longest follow-up in published literature and we believe it can be offered as an alternative to open surgery in high-risk patients. Source
of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
