Alexander disease (ALX) is a rare neurological disorder characterized by white matter degeneration and cytoplasmic inclusions in astrocytes
called Rosenthal fibers, labeled by antibodies against glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). Three subtypes are distinguished according to
age at onset: infantile (under age 2), juvenile (age 2 to 12) and adult (over age 12). Following the identification of heterozygous
mutations in GFAP that cause this disease, cases of adult-onset ALX have been increasingly reported. We present a 60-year-old Japanese man
with an unremarkable past and no family history of ALX. After head trauma in a traffic accident at the age of 46, his character changed, and
dementia and dysarthria developed, but he remained independent. Spastic paresis and dysphagia were observed at age 57 and 59, respectively,
and worsened progressively. Neurological examination at the age of 60 revealed dementia, pseudobulbar palsy, left-side predominant spastic
tetraparesis, axial rigidity, bradykinesia and gaze-evoked nystagmus. Brain MRI showed tadpole-like atrophy of the brainstem, caused by
marked atrophy of the medulla oblongata, cervical spinal cord and midbrain tegmentum, with an intact pontine base. Analysis of the GFAP gene
revealed a heterozygous missense mutation, c.827G>T, p.R276L, which was already shown to be pathogenic in a case of pathologically proven
hereditary adult-onset ALX. The typical tadpole-like appearance of the brainstem is strongly suggestive of adult-onset ALX, and should lead
to a genetic investigation of the GFAP gene. The unusual feature of this patient is the symmetrical involvement of the basal ganglia, which
is rarely observed in the adult form of the disease. More patients must be examined to confirm, clinically and neuroradiologically,
extrapyramidal involvement of the basal ganglia in adult-onset ALX. Alexander disease (ALX) (OMIM #203450), originally described by
Alexander in 1949 , is a rare and fatal disease of the central nervous system caused by astrocyte dysfunction . The pathological hallmark of
the disease is the accumulation of ubiquitinated intracytoplasmic inclusions in astrocytes, called Rosenthal fibers, which are composed of
glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), the main intermediate filament of astrocytes, in association with the small heat shock proteins,
HSP27 and Î±B-crystallin . The clinical features of typical infantile-onset ALX, with onset before the age of two, include megalencephaly,
seizures, spastic paresis and psychomotor deterioration with leukoencephalopathy characterized by white matter abnormalities predominating
in the frontal lobes. As cases accumulate, however, atypical patients have also been described. Adult-onset ALX, with onset over the age of
12, is characterized by more slowly progressive bulbar or pseudobulbar palsy, spastic paresis, ataxia, palatal myoclonus and essentially
normal psychic and intellectual functions. Juvenile-onset ALX, with onset between age 2 and 12, bridges the gap between infantile and adult
forms of the disease. However, it is not yet clear whether these three categories are the same disease. The clinical presentations are
diverse; the only common feature is the presence of pathologically proven Rosenthal fibers . Owing to the discovery of inclusion bodies
indistinguishable from Rosenthal fibers in fatal GFAP transgenic mice overexpressing human GFAP in astrocytes , de novo heterozygous
mutations in the gene encoding GFAP, the main component of Rosenthal fibers, have been identified in patients with the infantile form of ALX
. GFAP gene mutations have also been identified in the juvenile and adult forms. These three clinically diverse forms are now widely
accepted to be part of the same spectrum . Each subtype has characteristic MRI findings. Cerebral white matter abnormalities, predominating
in the frontal lobes, are typical of the infantile form of ALX , whereas nodular brainstem lesions and a kind of "garland" along the
ventricular wall are seen, with contrast enhancement, in the juvenile form . The adult form has a unique tadpole-like feature, caused by
marked atrophy of the medulla oblongata and cervical spinal cord with an intact pontine base . Here we present a case of sporadic adult-
onset ALX with specific MRI findings: a typical tadpole-like brainstem, but also symmetric involvement of the basal ganglia, which is
unusual in the adult form of ALX. This Japanese patient, with an unremarkable past and no family history had been healthy until he was
involved in a traffic accident at the age of 46. He suffered a bilateral brain contusion in the fronto-orbital areas, predominating on the
left side. He did not lose his consciousness, but retrograde amnesia was seen. There was no hypoxia. After this accident, his character
changed. He became querellous, could no longer manage his shop, and soon retired. He gradually became taciturn and his pronunciation became
unclear, but he remained independent. At age 57, he began to drag his left foot as he walked, and this symptom gradually worsened. At the
age of 59, progressive dysphagia appeared. He was referred to our hospital at the age of 60. Neurological examination revealed pseudobulbar
palsy including aphonia, emotional incontinence and dysphagia, left-side predominant tetraparesis. The tone of the limb muscles was spastic,
with bilateral positive Babinski signs. Axial rigidity, bradykinesia and retropulsion were observed, but no tremor or palatal myoclonus.
Cerebellar ataxia was ambiguous because of spastic tetraparesis requiring use of a wheelchair, but bilateral gaze-evoked nystagmus was seen.
He was clearly demented and angrily refused everything he was asked to do by shaking his head instead of speaking because of aphonia.
Further evaluation of his dementia was impossible. Laboratory tests, including hematology, routine blood chemistry, and analyses of urine
and cerebrospinal fluid, were unremarkable. In addition to the bilateral contusion in the fronto-orbital areas, especially on the left side,
brain MRI showed a tadpole-like brainstem, caused by marked atrophy from the medulla oblongata to the cervical spinal cord, sparing the
pontine base. Marked atrophy of the midbrain tegmentum, mild cerebellar atrophy with a little enlargement of the fourth ventricle, and
slight cerebral atrophy were also seen. The typical periventricular lesions (ventricular garlands ) and leukoencephalopathy were not seen,
however, several lacunae were observed bilaterally in deep white matter. The posterior part of globus pallidus was involved bilaterally, as
shown by a signal change without contrast enhancement (Figure 1). Brain MRI of a patient with adult-onset Alexander disease. a-f:
T2-weighted axial images showing marked atrophy of the medulla oblongata (a) with slight cerebellar atrophy (a, b) but little atrophy of the
pontine base (b), enlargement of the fourth ventricle (b), atrophy of the midbrain, especially the dorsal part (c), bilateral changes in the
posterior part of globus pallidus (d), bilateral lesions of the fronto-orbital areas, predominating on the left, caused by brain contusion
(d, e, g, h), moderate cortical atrophy with ventricular enlargement (e, f), and bilateral lacunae in the deep white matter, but no
leukoencephalopathy (f). g and k: T1-weighted images of the lesions on axial (g) and sagittal (k) sections. h, i and j: FLAIR images of the
lesions on axial (h, i) and coronal (j) sections. The lesions on coronal (j) and sagittal (k) sections are indicated by arrows. Note the
absence of ventricular garlands . l: T1-weighted sagittal section showing typical tadpole-like brainstem atrophy, consisting of marked
cervico-medullary atrophy with an intact pontine base; note that atrophy of the midbrain tegmentum also contributes to the formation of the
tadpole. With informed consent, the GFAP gene was sequenced, and a heterogeneous missense mutation was detected in exon 5 (c.827G>T),
causing a change of arginine to leucine at amino acid position 276 (p.R276L). We have already described this mutation in a patient with
pathologically proven hereditary adult-onset ALX . There was no relationship between the present patient and the family previously reported
. According to an interview, however, both families originated from the same region of Japan. We have described here a new patient with
sporadic adult-onset ALX, and have identified a heterozygous missense mutation in the GFAP gene, c.827G>T, p.R276L, which was already shown
to be pathogenic in a case of pathologically proven hereditary adult-onset ALX . This mutation has not been seen for the last 7 years. Thus,
this report reconfirms the pathogenetic nature of the mutation and the clinical picture of this form of the disease. So far, the phenotype
associated with the R276L mutation is adult-onset spastic ataxia with pseudobulbar symptoms. Following identification of the GFAP gene as
responsible for ALX , the adult form has been increasingly reported . However, only a few cases have been pathologically proven ; the rest
were diagnosed as having ALX only by molecular testing. Since missense mutations may only be polymorphisms , their pathogenicity must be
accepted with caution. Indeed, the E223Q mutation, identified in a patient with neurological deficits and radiological findings atypical for
adult-onset ALX , is now classified as a polymorphism . Therefore, to avoid this kind of confusion, it is worthwhile defining the typical
presentation of adult-onset ALX, including age at onset, cardinal clinical symptoms, neuroradiological findings and clinical course, as
described in published reports [see review article, ref . To date, at least 24 reports of adult onset ALX, including over 40 patients, with
22 different missense mutations in the GFAP gene, have been published (Table 1) . There are no sex differences, and half of the cases are
familial, consistent with autosomal dominant transmission. The mean age at onset is in the late thirties, although an asymptomatic carrier
over age 60 has been described . The cardinal triad of the clinical presentation is pseudobulbar or bulbar palsy, spastic paresis (usually
hemiparesis, not paraparesis, at onset), and ataxia, each of which is observed in approximately 70% of patients. Palatal myoclonus is
observed in only one third, although it is specific to ALX, and the key finding for a diagnosis, especially in hereditary cases . Mental
function is usually preserved, although our patient was obviously demented. Dementia cannot, however, be considered a symptom of adult-onset
ALX in this patient, because of his cerebral contusion. Summary of the clinical features and MRI features of adult-onset Alexander disease
reported in the literature . As for the MRI findings [see review article, ref , most of the cases had medullary abnormalities (either signal
abnormalities or atrophy), and the marked tadpole-like atrophy of the medulla oblongata and cervical spinal cord with an intact pontine base
. We would like to emphasize that not only cervicomedullary atrophy with an intact pontine base, but also severe atrophy of the midbrain
tegmentum contributes to the formation of the tadpole. This unusual atrophy is quite specific to adult-onset ALX, and 88% of the patients
with adult-onset ALX in the literature showed marked medullary atrophy (Table 1). Thus, awareness of this MRI pattern allows effective
selection of the patients who need genetic investigations for mutations in the GFAP gene . Indeed, we could have diagnosed adult-onset ALX
in the present patient on the basis of this form of brainstem atrophy. Approximately half of the patients had deep white matter lesions or
periventricular rims, although not always with frontal predominance as in infantile-onset ALX; the absence of these abnormalities is
significantly associated with older age at onset (average age at onset; negative 43.7 Â± 14.1 (n = 18) vs. positive 30.9 Â± 12.8 (n = 18), p =
0.008), consistent with previous study . Similarly, nodular lesions in the brainstem are observed in about half of the patients, and are
significantly associated with a younger age at onset (average age at onset; positive 28.2 Â± 11.8 (n = 13) vs. negative 43.6 Â± 13.9 (n = 18),
p = 0.003). Besides the typical clinical and neuroradiological features, this case of adult-onset ALX is instructive because of the
bilateral involvement of the basal ganglia. This is not uncommon in infantile or juvenile-onset ALX, and is one of the radiological criteria
for the diagnosis , but has rarely been observed in the adult form of the disease. Symmetrical striatal lesions were observed in one
patient, however, with hypointensity on T2-weighted MRI . Basal ganglia lesions with hyperintensity on T2-weighted MRI, such as spotty
lesions and bilateral lesions in the lateral putamen , have occasionally been reported; both of these signs are ambiguous, however, and do
not resemble those of our patient. Thus, the symmetrical lesions in our patient are interesting findings in adult-onset ALX, and might be
related to a rigid-bradykinesia type parkinsonism, although this is uncertain because spastic paresis masks the parkinsonism. The clinical
signs and symptoms of basal ganglia involvement, such as parkinsonism [patient 1 of ref , diffuse bradykinesia , and rigidity of the arms
are rarely reported. The obvious parkinsonism reported in one patient was induced by valproate . We described here a new sporadic case of
genetically confirmed adult-onset ALX. The tadpole-like brainstem atrophy is quite specific for adult-onset ALX. Thus, faced with a patient
with progressive spastic ataxia, bulbar or pseudobulbar signs, and the typical tadpole on MRI, a genetic investigation of the GFAP gene is
strongly recommended. The unusual feature of our patient is the obvious symmetrical involvement of the basal ganglia, which presumably
caused a rigid-bradykinesia type parkinsonism. More cases must be studied to completely elucidate the characteristics of adult-onset ALX.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and his wife for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. ALX: Alexander disease; GFAP: glial fibrillary acidic
protein; FLAIR: fluid attenuated inversion recovery; The authors declare that they have no competing interests. This manuscript was drafted
by MN. YT and IN contributed to the references and helped to write the manuscript. JH, HS and KS sequenced the GFAP gene. All authors
contributed to the critical review and approval of the final draft. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2377/10/21/prepub We are very grateful to Dr. Merle Ruberg for critical reading of this manuscript. This
work was supported by Alexander Disease Research Grants from the Intractable Disease Research Grants, from the Ministry of Health, Labour
and Welfare of the government of Japan.
