A 41-year-old man with a history of ethanol abuse was found on the streets with his clothing saturated with fecal material. In the emergency
department (ED), he was confused and had an unsteady gait. He was sleepy and slow in responding, although easily arousable. He admitted to
being depressed and said that he tried to commit suicide by consuming vodka and “Blue Thunder”, a fuel for radio-controlled racing cars that
he had purchased from a hobby shop the day before presentation. He denied any other drug ingestion or previous medical history and was not
taking any medications. He did not have any focal neurological symptoms, visual disturbance, gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea or
vomiting, or chest discomfort. His vital signs were within normal limits: temperature 36.4°C, blood pressure 145/87 mm Hg, heart rate
95/min, respiratory rate 16/min and pulse oximetry saturation 97% on room air. His physical examination was unremarkable except for an
unsteady gait. His cranial nerves, motor, and sensory findings were grossly intact. As he had attempted to leave the ED several times
despite being ataxic, he was placed in restraints and sedated with intravenous boluses of lorazepam and admitted for further workup.
Computed tomography of his brain did not show any gross abnormalities. Initial laboratory data included: sodium 135 mmol/L, potassium
3.8 mmol/L, chloride 97 mmol/L, bicarbonate 21 mmol/L, blood urea nitrogen 7.9 mmol/L (22.0 mg/dL), creatinine 8,270 μmol/L (93.6 mg/dL),
and glucose 6.5 mmol/L (117 mg/dL). The anion gap was 17 mmol/L. Lactic acid and hepatic enzymes were within normal limits. The serum
ethanol, acetaminophen, and salicylate levels were below detection limits. Urinalysis was normal with a pH of 5.5. Serum samples were
referred to an outside laboratory for methanol, ethylene glycol, acetone, isopropyl alcohol, and paraldehyde levels. After 4 h of supportive
treatment including intravenous fluids, repeat laboratory results were: sodium 134 mmol/L, potassium 3.8 mmol/L, chloride 98 mmol/L,
bicarbonate 23 mmol/L, blood urea nitrogen 6.9 mmol/L (19.0 mg/dL), and glucose 6.5 mmol/L (117 mg/dL). The laboratory had independently
decided that nitromethane was an interfering substance and did not repeat the creatinine level. The anion gap was now 13 mmol/L and the
calculated osmolality was 282 mmol/kg. Serum osmolality determined by freezing point depression was 430 mmol/kg (reference range
275-295 mmol/kg). The osmolar gap was estimated to be 148 mmol/kg. After ingestion, the hepatic enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase converts
methanol to formaldehyde, which is then converted to formic acid by formaldehyde dehydrogenase . Although formaldehyde is more toxic than
formic acid, it does not accumulate during poisoning on account of its short half-life of about 1.5 min [3, 4]. Formic acid, an inhibitor of
cytochrome oxidases c and aa3, primarily contributes to the toxic sequelae of methanol poisoning, including ocular toxicity and the fall in
plasma bicarbonate concentration and consequent increase in anion gap . Ocular toxicity essentially identical to that produced in methanol
poisoning has been described after formate administration in animals . Also, results suggest that formaldehyde is not a major factor in the
toxic syndrome produced by methanol . The clinical manifestations of methanol ingestion include headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting,
weakness, and epigastric pain, as well as developing an elevated anion gap acidosis. The severity of symptoms secondary to methanol
poisoning appears to correlate with the degree of metabolic acidosis [7, 8]. Mortality correlates with the severity of acidosis and the
formate concentration rather than with serum methanol concentration . Although metabolic acidosis is a characteristic feature of methanol
poisoning, its onset may be delayed for 18-24 h, or even longer (up to 72 h ) with concurrent ethanol ingestion , due to competition for the
enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase. Thus, the patient may be relatively asymptomatic during the latent period . Our patient had no measurable
ethanol level, yet his acidosis was very mild with an anion gap of only 17 mmol/L and a bicarbonate level of 21 mmol/L. A significant anion
gap may not be present early in the course of methanol intoxication. In a review of 113 acute methanol exposures reported to a poison
center, metabolic acidosis was reported in only 26 cases (23%) . Therefore, the absence of acidosis does not rule out methanol ingestion.
Possible reasons for our patient not developing worsening or severe acidosis may include an inaccurate history of ingestion. He might have
ingested only a small amount of methanol, or ingested it shortly before being found. He may also have co-ingested ethanol or other types of
alcohols that are metabolized by alcohol dehydrogenase, such that the metabolism of methanol to formate was blocked. Such other alcohols
might include ethylene glycol or isopropanol. However, ethanol was not detected and there was no nail polish remover-like odor detected in
the patient, which would be present when isopropyl alcohol is metabolized to acetone. There was improvement in our patient’s anion-gap
acidosis simply with hydration, which also argues against ethylene glycol and methanol ingestions. Thus, even though our patient currently
appears relatively well, it is possible that he ingested methanol. It would be prudent to manage him as for methanol ingestion, given the
history of ingestion and the very large osmolal gap. Nevertheless, it is unusual that our patient’s anion gap and acidosis improved in the
short duration of supportive management with intravenous fluids alone. Nitromethane is a popular solvent in organic and electroanalytical
chemistry . It is also used as a fuel in racing, particularly drag racing, to enhance combustion . The oxygen content of nitromethane
enables it to burn with much less atmospheric oxygen in comparison to hydrocarbons such as gasoline. In model aircraft and remote-controlled
car fuels such as “Blue Thunder”, the primary ingredient is generally methanol with some nitromethane (up to 65%, but rarely over 30% since
nitromethane is expensive compared to methanol) and 10-20% lubricants (usually castor oil or a synthetic oil). During combustion, this fuel
produces a characteristic blue smoke . Nitromethane is highly lipid soluble, and acute exposures tend to be inadvertent dermal or ocular
exposures which generally result in local irritation but no apparent sequelae . The American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists lists the adverse health effects of nitromethane as including dermal irritation, central nervous system depression, liver and
thyroid toxicity, blood dyscrasias, and neuropathy . Following acute inhalational exposure, animal studies suggest a relatively low toxicity
of nitromethane [23, 24]. Rats and mice were exposed to nitromethane at a variety of concentrations for 6 h per day, 5 days per week, from
16 days to 2 years. In the 16-day study of rats, all those exposed to 1,500 ppm showed loss of coordination in the hindlimbs. Sciatic nerve
degeneration was found in all rats exposed to 375 ppm and above. In the 13-week study, hindlimb paralysis was seen in all rats in the
1,500-ppm group. Rats exposed to 375 ppm of nitromethane or greater had minimal to mild degeneration of the spinal cord and sciatic nerve.
In contrast, mice demonstrated no neurologic abnormalities in any of the studies . Unfortunately, oral toxicity data in animals is limited.
In a human case report, a 20-year-old woman who had worked for 2 years using a mixture of trichlorotrifluoroethane (94%), methanol (6%), and
nitromethane (0.25%) developed Parkinsonism in the absence of other potential etiologies . The authors concluded that exposure to
nitromethane could have been the cause of the Parkinsonism. A 19-year-old man developed a primary, symmetric demyelinating polyneuropathy
after a 2-month exposure to an industrial solvent composed primarily of 1-bromopropane, but also containing nitromethane and other
components . The authors attributed the neuropathy to the 1-bromopropane exposure. The limited acute toxicity of nitromethane suggests that
exposures require only supportive care with no specific therapy . Although different racing car fuels contain varying concentrations of
nitromethane and methanol, management of this mixed poisoning should focus on the appropriate treatment for methanol toxicity. Nitromethane
cause spurious elevations of the serum creatinine when the Jaffe colorimetric method is used to determine serum creatinine concentration .
This method involves injecting a sample of the patient’s serum into an alkaline picrate solution. Creatinine in the sample combines with
alkaline picrate to form a red-colored complex or chromophore, the light absorbance of which can then be measured in the 470-550 nm range
using a double-beam spectrophotometer. The rate of absorbance is directly proportional to the creatinine concentration in the serum .
Nitromethane also forms a red chromophore with alkaline picrate with an absorbance similar to that of the creatinine-picrate chromophore .
Thus, when nitromethane is present in a patient’s serum, the reaction of both creatinine and nitromethane with alkaline picrate can result
in a significantly but spuriously elevated creatinine concentration . There is a linear relationship between the concentration of
nitromethane and the rise in serum creatinine concentration measured by the Jaffe method [21, 28]. This correlation could provide a
surrogate marker for significant methanol exposure in those who ingest racing car fuel . Analysis by least-squares linear regression of ten
serum samples containing nitromethane showed the following relationship : \documentclass{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym}
\usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
\begin{document}$$ {\hbox{Apparent}}\,\left[ {{\hbox{creatinine}},\,{{\hbox{mmol}} \mathord{\left/{\vphantom {{\hbox{mmol}} {\hbox{L}}}}
\right.} {\hbox{L}}}} \right] = 0.99\left[ {{\hbox{nitromethane}},\,{{\hbox{mmol}} \mathord{\left/{\vphantom {{\hbox{mmol}} {\hbox{L}}}}
\right.} {\hbox{L}}}} \right] + 0.21\left( {\pm 0.013} \right) $$\end{document} Using this equation in our patient, with a creatinine of
8,270 μmol/L (93.6 mg/dl), we estimated a nitromethane level of approximately 8 mmol/L: Apparent (creatinine, mmol/L) = 0.99 (nitromethane,
mmol/L) + 0.21 (±0.013)8.27 mmol/L = 0.99 (nitromethane, mmol/L) + 0.21 (±0.013)(Nitromethane) = (8.27-0.21(±0.013))/0.99 = 8.13-8.15 mmol/L
Apparent (creatinine, mmol/L) = 0.99 (nitromethane, mmol/L) + 0.21 (±0.013) 8.27 mmol/L = 0.99 (nitromethane, mmol/L) + 0.21 (±0.013)
(Nitromethane) = (8.27-0.21(±0.013))/0.99 = 8.13-8.15 mmol/L A nitromethane level of 8 mmol/L would be expected to contribute only about
eight to the osmol gap, leaving a residual, unexplained osmol gap of about 140. Assuming the remaining osmol gap is due to methanol alone,
the estimated serum methanol level would be around 400 mg/dL, if multiplied by a conversion factor of 3.2 (one-tenth the molecular weight of
methanol) . The fatal oral dose of methanol is estimated to be 30-240 mL (20-150 g). The minimum toxic dose is approximately 100 mg/kg .
Serum methanol concentrations greater than 20 mg/dL (>6.24 mmol/L) are considered potentially toxic , and concentrations of greater than
40 mg/dL (>12.4 mmol/L) can be fatal, but individual sensitivity varies . Based on these estimated levels, and without the benefit of a
rapid analysis for methanol, it was decided that our patient had ingested a significant amount of methanol and he was initially treated with
a loading dose of 15 mg/kg intravenous fomepizole and 2 hours of hemodialysis. The concentration of creatinine in serum is the most widely
used and commonly accepted measure of renal function in clinical medicine. In renal failure, deterioration of renal function, results in the
accumulation of nitrogenous waste products, including creatinine . In the absence of renal failure, elevated creatinine levels may be due to
factors influencing creatine production as well as elimination. The total muscle mass is the most important determinant of the creatine pool
size and thereby of creatinine production . Hence serum creatinine is increased in people with increased muscle mass, those with a high-meat
diet, users of anabolic steroids, and weight lifters . Trauma or febrile states have been associated with significant increases in the
excretion of creatinine . Rhabdomyolysis or extensive crush injury may result in an increase of serum creatinine, at times exceeding what
can be accounted for by the decrement in renal function , the excess creatinine is generally assumed to derive from injured muscle. But it
was found that phosphocreatine was present in muscle in sufficient amounts to serve as a direct intermediate in the conversion of
phosphocreatine to creatinine . Other substances that can cause false elevations of the measured serum creatinine determined by the Jaffe
method include ketoacids, acetone, pyruvate, glucose, uric acid, proteins, creatine, ascorbic acid, dopamine, and certain cephalosporins
[46, 47]. High concentrations of bilirubin can falsely lower the serum creatinine concentration determined by the Jaffe method [46, 47].
Enzymatic methods for determining serum creatinine concentration are not affected by the presence of nitromethane in serum [21, 30, 47].
Substances that can interfere with this enzymatic method when present in the serum include creatine, bilirubin, dopamine, dobutamine,
ascorbic acid, and calcium dobesilate [38, 46, 47]. The techniques for detecting the presence of drugs include a variety of chromatographic
methods, immunoassays, and chemical and spectrometric techniques. A number of interferences resulting in “false-positive” results have been
reported . Some common, important interferences resulting in false-positive results are listed in Table 1. Table 1Examples of false-positive
results in toxicology testingDrugSome reported cause(s) of a false positive resultAmphetamines (urine)Cross-reacting stimulant drugs (MDMA,
pseudoephedrine, etc.); cross-reacting non-stimulant drugs (bupropion, labetalol, ranitidine, sertraline, and trazodone); drugs metabolized
to amphetamines (benzphetamine, selegiline)Ethylene glycolOther glycols; elevated triglyceridesLithiumUse of a green-top Vacutainer specimen
tube (contains lithium heparin, may raise Li level by 6-8 mEq/L)Methadone (urine)Diphenhydramine, verapamilOpiates (urine)May be triggered
by ingestion of poppy seeds.OsmolalityUse of a gray-top Vacutainer specimen tube (contains fluoride-oxalate) can raise measured osmolality
by up to 150 mOsm/kgPhencyclidine (urine)Diphenhydramine, dextromethorphan, venlafaxineTricyclic antidepressantsCarbamazepine,
cyclobenzaprine, quetiapineAdapted from Osterloh J and Haller CA, “Toxicology Testing,” in Poisoning and Drug Overdose, 5th edition, McGraw-
Hill, 2007, pp. 43-44 Examples of false-positive results in toxicology testing Adapted from Osterloh J and Haller CA, “Toxicology Testing,”
in Poisoning and Drug Overdose, 5th edition, McGraw-Hill, 2007, pp. 43-44 Based on the history of ingestion of “Blue Thunder” fuel which may
contain varying amounts of methanol (43-77%) and nitromethane (5-35%) and the presence of a large osmolal gap even after accounting for the
contribution of the nitromethane, we recommended treatment with fomepizole, thiamine (the patient was suspected to be an alcoholic), folate,
and transfer to a facility with dialysis capabilities. Two days later, the reference laboratory that the patient’s serum was sent out to
reported the initial serum methanol concentration to be 399 mg/dL (124 mmol/L). The methanol concentration decreased to 47 mg/dL
(1.47 mmol/L) approximately after completing 2 h after dialysis, while the apparent creatinine concentration decreased to 66.8 mg/dL.
Ethylene glycol, acetone, isopropyl alcohol, acetaldehyde, and paraldehyde were not detected in the initial serum specimen. The patient
continued to have daily dialysis (approximately 19 h of dialysis in total) until the osmolal gap narrowed and his apparent creatinine level
was reduced to 168 μmol/L (1.9 mg/dL). He was also treated orally with folic acid 1 mg, thiamine 100 mg, and a multivitamin daily. Although
the patient had no visual disturbances or any significant metabolic acidosis, he had auditory hallucinations thought to be related to
alcohol withdrawal, which was treated with benzodiazepines. He was discharged to a psychiatric facility after 9 days of hospitalization. Toy
racing car and other nitromethane-containing fuel additives often contain significant concentrations of methanol. Unfortunately, most
hospitals are not able to perform a rapid quantitative test for methanol. In addition, nitromethane causes a marked false elevation of the
serum creatinine level when measured by the Jaffe method, which can be exploited to estimate the nitromethane level. If the relative
concentrations of nitromethane and methanol in the fuel are known, then the estimated methanol level can be extrapolated. If the relative
concentrations are not known, the nitromethane level can be subtracted from the osmolal gap to provide a residual estimate of the methanol
level. Based on the extrapolated methanol level, appropriate treatment with fomepizole and hemodialysis can be recommended. This case was
not previously presented in any meetings or in abstract form. There is no financial funding or conflicts of interest for this project. This
article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
