We report a rare case of orbital swelling presenting one year after head trauma. An initial fine needle aspiration cytology revealed it to
be an infected organizing hematoma. However, broad-spectrum antibiotics did not resolve the infection and the orbital lesion continued to
grow in size, as evaluated by magnetic resonance imaging. Incisional biopsies were done, which were reported as orbital actinomycosis.
Patient has responded well to treatment with penicillin. This case is of interest due to the delayed presentation of an orbital complication
of head trauma and the rare infection with actinomyces. It also highlights the importance of using appropriate antibiotics, as well as the
need for long-term treatment. Orbital actinomycosis has been reported uncommonly in literature. The source of infection may be either from
the oral cavity or paranasal sinuses or following trauma. We report a case of this uncommon infection, which presented one year after
avulsion injury of the scalp sustained in a road traffic accident. A 20-year-old gentleman reported with inability to lift his right upper
lid following the development of a painless swelling in the right brow region of two weeks' duration. There was no history of any diplopia,
or visual disturbances and nor was there any concurrent dental, ear, nose, throat (ENT) or significant systemic illness. The patient had
sustained deep lacerations of the scalp and forehead due to a road traffic accident a year earlier. There was no history of loss of
consciousness, bleeding ENT or any visual disturbances at the time of injury. He had been treated elsewhere with wound suturing and
antibiotics novoclox and metrogyll for five days, following which he recovered well and had remained symptom-free till the present illness.
Clinical examination revealed a firm, non-tender, finely nodular swelling 2 cm × 4 cm in size, in the superotemporal region of the right
upper lid, with an accompanying moderate grade mechanical ptosis. Skin over the swelling was normal and the mass seemed to be continuous
with the supero-temporal orbital rim but not with the lacrimal gland [Fig. 1]. The frontalis muscle was acting normally. Both eyes were
normal with a visual acuity of 20/20 in each eye. Exophthalmometric readings were normal. Dental, ENT and systemic examinations were also
normal. Arrow showing superotemporal orbital swelling Orbital X-rays revealed a soft tissue shadow anterior to the orbital margin. There
were no bony abnormalities seen. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an ill-defined extraconal lesion at the superior and lateral
aspect of the right orbit which seemed to involve the lacrimal gland. The radiologist's report suggested the presence of a pseudotumor orbit
or lymphoma [Figs. 2 and 3]. Consequently, tissue samples from three different areas of the mass were obtained by fine needle aspiration
cytology (FNAC), through both skin and conjunctival approaches. The FNAC was reported as organizing infected hematoma, although the
infective organism was not identified. As treatment with intravenous cefotaxime 500 mg 12-hourly for five days produced only marginal
improvement in the ptosis [Table 1] without any perceptible change in the lid mass, a repeat MRI was done a month later. This revealed an
increase in the size of the lesion towards the orbit [Fig. 4]. Ptosis evaluation MRI sagital T1 showing soft tissue swelling in right
periorbital region MRI fat suppressed STIR sequence showing the lesion Repeat MRI fat suppressed STIR sequence showing increase in size of
the lesion Patient was taken up for anterior orbitotomy through superior lid crease approach. A small old blood clot was removed and
multiple incisional biopsies were obtained and sent for histopathological examination. Gram's staining showed gram-positive, non-acid-fast
filaments with surrounding gram-negative reaction. The lesion was reported to be a case of actinomycosis infection [Fig. 5]. Patient has
responded satisfactorily to intravenous penicillin G 30 lakh units 6-hourly for two weeks. For the prevention of recrudescence, patient is
advised oral amoxicillin 500 mg 6-hourly for six months. He has been followed up for four months and has recovered fully. Photograph showing
granulation tissue with arrows indicating Actinomycotic colonies (H & E × 40). Orbital lesions present a great challenge to
ophthalmologists. In unilateral orbital swellings following trauma, the differential diagnosis includes subperiosteal hematomas and
abscesses while pathologies like orbital pseudotumors and lymphangiomas unrelated to trauma are also to be kept in mind. Subperiosteal
hematomas are less common and generally occur in young adult males as a result of direct facial or orbital trauma, or erosion of a vessel by
orbital extension of an infectious process. They may also occur spontaneously at any age following sudden elevation of cranial venous
pressure thereby causing a tearing of subperiosteal vessels. The hematomas are frequently located in the orbital roof as the periosteum in
this area is loosely attached. In our case, although the initial suspicion was that of either an organized hematoma or post-traumatic
hyperostosis of the orbital rim, the possibility of orbital lymphoma was also entertained due to the surface nodularity of the mass. While
orbital X-rays ruled out hyperostosis, the MRI suggested a diagnosis of either pseudotumor orbit or lymphoma. However, FNAC reported the
presence of an infected organized hematoma but the infecting organism could not be identified. Despite broad-spectrum antibiotics the
swelling continued to grow. Incisional biopsies obtained through anterior orbitotomy revealed the presence of orbital actinomycosis. Orbital
actinomycosis is a very rare condition, with only a few cases reported in recent literature. Actinomyces are filamentous, branching gram-
positive bacilli normally inhabiting the oral cavity. They exhibit low pathogenicity and require mucosal barrier disruption to cause
disease. Co-pathogens assist in the spread of infection, which occurs in a progressive manner, ignoring tissue planes. Infection is commonly
caused by Actinomyces israelli. While trauma is the commonest predisposing factor, orbital involvement is often secondary to infections of
the paranasal sinuses, or the ocular adnexal structures or even the infra-temporal fossa. Although patients have presented varyingly with
acute orbital abscess and painful ophthalmoplegia, the usual presentation is as a painless proptosis with restricted extra-ocular movements,
often mimicking a malignancy. In our patient, it is likely that the intra-orbital extent of the lesion was insufficient to produce globe
displacement. The time of presentation may vary from within few weeks to a few months. Our patient presented after an unusual delay of one
year. In hindsight, it is felt that our patient probably had a primary inoculation at the time of scalp avulsion a year prior. The delayed
presentation was due to the slow progression typical of actinomycotic infections. Actinomycotic infections are best treated with intravenous
penicillin G for two weeks, followed by oral penicillin or amoxicillin for six months. In case of penicillin allergy, tetracycline is used.
Our patient showed a good response to intravenous crystalline penicillin and is presently on oral amoxicillin for six months to prevent
recrudescence. This case highlights the confusing multitude of diagnoses, the rarity of orbital actinomycosis and the need for long-term
antibiotic treatment.
