Bovine tuberculosis is a zoonotic disease, and although its incidence has dramatically decreased in developed countries where effective
control measures are applied, it still remains a potential health hazard in the developing world. Tuberculosis of the oral cavity is
extremely rare and is usually secondary to pulmonary involvement. We present the unusual case of an immunocompetent 6-year-old child
residing in an urban area with primary oral tuberculosis due to Mycobacterium bovis, which was confirmed by the application of a molecular
genetic approach. M. bovis belongs to Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex which comprises species with close genetic relationship, and for
this reason, the use of new molecular techniques is a useful tool for the differentiation at species level of the closely related members of
this complex. Both primary and secondary types of tuberculosis can cause lesions in the oral cavity . In secondary tuberculosis, lesions of
the oral cavity may accompany lesions in the pharynx, lungs, lymph nodes, or skin . When oral lesions of tuberculosis are the sole
manifestations of the disease, the clinician may face a diagnostic challenge. During the past decades, primary bovine tuberculosis of the
oral cavity became extremely rare and occurs mainly through consumption of raw milk from infected cattle in developing countries . The
purpose of this report is to present an unusual case of primary oral tuberculosis due to Mycobacterium bovis in a 6-year-old boy residing in
an urban area. A 6-year-old, previously healthy boy, presented to the Pediatric department because of a strongly positive tuberculin skin
test (34 mm) and mild chronic swelling with a skin fistula in the left submandibular area, which developed 3 months prior to admission. He
was initially treated with oral and then intravenous broad spectrum antibiotics for 3 weeks with the presumptive diagnosis of cervical
adenitis with no response at another hospital. After evaluation by an oral and maxillofacial surgeon, the diagnosis of a submandibular
abscess originating from the decayed primary second lower left molar was made (Fig. 1a). The patient underwent incision and drainage of the
abscess extraorally and extraction of the involved tooth. Postoperatively, the symptoms improved, and he was discharged. Routine bacterial
cultures were negative. The following 2 months, he had persistent moderate swelling, and a fistula developed at the incision site.
Fig. 1Radiological imaging. a Panoramic x-ray showing the decayed primary second lower left molar and (b) computed tomography showing
chronic osteomyelitis with osteoblastic subperiosteal activity and thickening around the lower mandibular border Radiological imaging. a
Panoramic x-ray showing the decayed primary second lower left molar and (b) computed tomography showing chronic osteomyelitis with
osteoblastic subperiosteal activity and thickening around the lower mandibular border The patient had no history of contact with a case of
active tuberculosis, and investigation of family contacts was negative. He lived in an urban area and had no contact with cattle or history
of consumption of unpasteurized dairy products. The child was born in Greece and never travelled abroad. Both grandparents and parents were
born in the former Soviet Union and had immigrated to Greece 20 years ago. The patient was not immunized with Bacillus Calmette–Guérin
vaccine. Physical examination on admission revealed a well-nourished boy in good clinical condition. A left submandibular firm, erythematous
swelling measuring 3 × 3 cm, was palpated with a draining sinus tract. Laboratory studies were unremarkable. Blood tests revealed a white
blood cell count of 15,200/mm3 with 74% polymorphonuclears, 18% lymphocytes, and 8% monocytes; erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 50 mm/h,
and C-reactive protein was 77 mg/L. Measurement of serum immunoglobulins, determination of lymphocyte subpopulations by flow cytometry, and
nitroblue tetrazolium test were performed and were normal. Serologic testing ruled out human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 1 and 2 (enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay method), toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, and Bartonella henselae infection. Furthermore,
chest radiography and abdominal ultrasound were normal, while culture of gastric aspirate was negative. QuantiFERON-TB Gold In-tube (QFT-IT)
test was positive. A computed tomography of the region revealed the presence of chronic osteomyelitis of the mandibular body adjacent to the
extraction site with osteoblastic subperiosteal activity and thickening around the lower mandibular border (Fig. 1b). Antituberculous
treatment was initiated with isoniazid, rifampicin, and pyrazinamide (PZA), and the patient underwent surgical excision of the submandibular
mass and the draining sinus. The histopathological examination revealed no lymphoid but only fatty and fibrous tissue with granulomatous
caseating infection. Acid fast bacilli were visualized by Ziehl–Neelsen stain. Two months later, mycobacterial growth was evident on
Lowenstein–Jensen medium. The culture isolate was identified as M. bovis subsp. bovis by means of the GenoType Mycobacterium tuberculosis
complex (MTBC) assay (Hain Lifescience, Germany). This assay is based on the DNA-STRIP technology and permits the genetic differentiation of
species belonging to the Mycobacterium complex on the basis of gyrase B polymorphisms . Our finding was subsequently verified in the central
laboratories of the kit manufacturer. Susceptibility test showed resistance to PZA, as expected. Based on these results, PZA was
discontinued, and ethambutol was added to the therapeutic regimen. By the end of a 6-month therapy, the lesion had healed and showed
complete resolution. The patient has been followed for 2 years and had no recurrence. The global prevalence of human TB due to M. bovis has
been estimated at 3.1% of all human TB cases . According to the report of the European Food Safety Authority, Greece is not officially
bovine tuberculosis-free in cattle, but no cases of human tuberculosis were confirmed, to our knowledge, during the last 10 years . As
stated by the above report, several human cases of bovine TB have been reported from other European countries which have been approved as
being free from bovine TB in cattle like Germany or Austria . It is possible that human bovine TB is under-diagnosed in our settings due to
difficulties in obtaining samples or differentiating the organism from M. tuberculosis in culture. People can be infected with M. bovis, by
inhalation of tubercle bacilli or by consumption of infected products. Pulmonary tuberculosis due to M. bovis is more common in rural
dwellers or people with occupational exposure, as a result of inhalation of dust particles or bacteria-containing aerosols shed by infected
animals . Those who live in urban areas usually acquire the infection via the gastrointestinal route due to consumption of poorly cooked
meat, unpasteurized milk, or milk products and develop extrapulmonary tuberculosis [2, 3]. Although, human-to-human transmission of M. bovis
has been reported [2, 4], this mode of transmission is rare and is likely to occur in populations particularly susceptible to tuberculosis
such as the HIV-infected people . Tuberculosis of the oral cavity is extremely rare and thus presents a diagnostic challenge. The intact
oral mucous membrane presents a natural resistance barrier to mycobacterial invasion, and any break or loss of this barrier may provide a
route of entry . It is most likely that, in the case presented, the patient had primary oral tuberculosis since there was no pulmonary
involvement. It is assumed that the mycobacterium was directly inoculated into the dental socket and the mandible through the decayed
primary tooth, causing infection and abscess formation with subsequent spread to the submandibular space . Following surgical treatment,
there was some improvement initially but since the cause of the mandibular infection was not treated, symptoms persisted, and soon,
mandibular osteomyelitis was obvious radiographically. The isolation of M. bovis from an immunocompetent child residing in an urban area
raises the question of how the infection was acquired. There was no history of unpasteurized dairy products consumption, but this
possibility cannot be ruled out since most cases with primary oral tuberculosis in the literature were due to consumption of infected milk
or milk products . By analogy, history of consumption of unpasteurized dairy products is negative in about 20% of cases with brucellosis,
another zoonosis . Human-to-human transmission from an ill person could not be excluded. However, the likelihood of reactivation of an old
bovine tuberculosis infection in family members was considered unlikely after thorough investigation. Finally, transmission of M. bovis
infection after dental manipulations has been reported, but our patient did not have such a history . The identification of MTBC isolates
depends on biochemical testing, drug susceptibility testing, and DNA techniques . Resistance to PZA is a major criterion for the
differentiation of M. bovis subsp. bovis and must raise suspicion in the appropriate epidemiological setting. The definite diagnosis and
identification was facilitated in our case by the application of a molecular genetic approach which is a useful tool for the differentiation
at species/strain level of the closely related members of MTBC. Additionally, QFT-IT test was positive in this case. This test measures
interferon gamma production from a person's white blood cells in response to stimulation with antigens specific to MTBC complex organisms
including M. bovis, but absent from all M. bovis Bacillus Calmette–Guérin strains and most nontuberculous Mycobacterium species . This
method can detect MTBC infection but can neither differentiate between species nor between infection and active disease. In conclusion, we
report a case of dental abscess due to M. bovis in an immunocompetent child who lacked epidemiological risk factors for this infection. The
inclusion of tuberculosis in the differential diagnosis of unclear pulmonary and extrapulmonary disease remains important, and tuberculosis
has to be managed according to international standards . Although, childhood tuberculosis represents an important part of the disease
burden, yet its diagnosis remains challenging . The application of molecular genetic techniques that can easily differentiate tubercle
bacilli belonging to MTBC could also specify the true prevalence of M. bovis infections that are currently underestimated. We thank the
staff of microbiology laboratory of Sotiria Chest Hospital for the isolation of the M. bovis strain. No financial support was required for
the present study. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which
permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
