Dear Editor, We read the article by Schiavon et al. in June 2009 “Septic physeal separation of proximal femur in a newborn” with great
interest. We recently encountered a similar complication in a child aged 5 years, who came to our institute 2 years back, with discharging
sinus from right mid thigh with tubular external fixator for the past 2 months. She fell from height and suffered injury to her right thigh.
She was diagnosed to have closed fracture of right femur. Open reduction and internal fixation of femur fracture were done by intramedullary
nailing. Subsequently, she developed infection at the operative site. The nail was removed, and an external fixator was applied. She came to
us with femur fracture stabilized with tubular external fixator with discharging sinus from the right thigh. Radiographs of the thigh and
hip joint revealed osteomyelitis of femoral diaphysis. Pelvis roentgenogram revealed complete separation of femoral epiphysis (Fig. 1).
There was no history suggesting injury to hip prior to the internal fixation of the femur fracture. We took the patient for debridement and
reduction of the epiphysis under general anaesthesia, where we found she had pathological fracture at the proximal femur
too.Fig. 1Radiograph of pelvis with thighs showing right-side chronic osteomyelitis of femur following traumatic fracture shaft with
pyogenic arthritis and epiphyseal separation Radiograph of pelvis with thighs showing right-side chronic osteomyelitis of femur following
traumatic fracture shaft with pyogenic arthritis and epiphyseal separation The epiphysis and the proximal fracture site were fixed with
Kirschner wires, and external fixator was left in place (Fig. 2). The wound was closed over continuous suction irrigation system. The
draining system was removed after 7 days. The external fixator was removed after 6 weeks, and hip spica was applied. Kirschner wires were
removed at 8 weeks after surgery. Radiological examination at this stage revealed that the fracture was uniting. The extremity was again put
in groin-to-toe cast. The patient’s cast was finally removed after 6 months. Patient started weight bearing with limp.Fig. 2Radiograph of
right hip with thigh showing K wire fixation of shaft and capital femoral epiphysis Radiograph of right hip with thigh showing K wire
fixation of shaft and capital femoral epiphysis After 6 months, patient again had a fall and sustained injury to right thigh. X-ray
examination revealed pathological fracture at proximal femoral diaphysis (Fig. 3). At this stage, she did not have any signs of active
infection. She was again taken up for internal fixation with bone grafting under general anaesthesia. The fracture was stabilized with
2.5-mm Kirschner wire. After suture removal, the limb was put in hip spica cast. The cast was finally removed after 3 months. Clinical and
radiological examination showed fracture union after 4 months, but femoral capital epiphysis could not be retained in its anatomical
position (Fig. 4). At present, the child is able to bear full weight on her right lower limb.Fig. 3Radiograph of pelvis with thighs showing
pathological fracture in mid shaft of the femur at the site of old united fracture showing sclerosis and epiphysio-trochanteric
separationFig. 4Radiograph of right hip with thigh showing united fracture with K wire in situ and still separated capital epiphysis
Radiograph of pelvis with thighs showing pathological fracture in mid shaft of the femur at the site of old united fracture showing
sclerosis and epiphysio-trochanteric separation Radiograph of right hip with thigh showing united fracture with K wire in situ and still
separated capital epiphysis Epiphyseal separation in neonate occurs rarely, and femoral involvement in physeal separation may occur either
proximally or distally. Complete separation of an epiphysis is described as a rare complication of neonatal osteomyelitis or septic
arthritis [1, 2]. Two cases of epiphyseal separation following neonatal osteomyelitis and septic arthritis have been reported . However, we
have not found any example of such complication in young child as seen in our patient. Partial or complete slip of the proximal femoral
epiphysis has been reported as a complication of hip infection, while to the best of our knowledge, complete separation of the epiphysio-
trochanteric nuclei complex has been described only a few times [1, 3], and in neonates rather than in young children. Consequently early
correct diagnosis and early appropriate treatment appear to be correlated with good result. Reduction and pinning with Kirschner wires is
generally reported . None. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which
permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
