A 76-year-old woman with a history of percutaneous transvenous mitral commissurotomy and repeated hospital admissions due to heart failure
was referred for an operation for severe mitral valve stenosis. She presented with hypertension, hyperlipidemia and cerebral infarction with
stenosis of right internal carotid artery, retinopathy, neuropathy and nephropathy caused by long-term uncontrolled diabetes mellitus,
hemoglobin A1c of 9.4%, and New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional classification of 3/4. Echocardiography revealed severe mitral
valve stenosis with mitral valve area of 0.6 cm2, moderate tricuspid valve regurgitation, and dilatation of the left atrium. Taking into
consideration the NYHA functional classification and severe mitral valve stenosis, an immediate surgical intervention designed to prevent
mediastinitis was performed. The approach was via the right 4th thoracotomy, as conventional sternotomy would raise the risk of
mediastinitis. Postoperative antibiotics were administered intravenously for 2 days, and signs of infection were not recognized. In patients
with long-term uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, mid-line sternotomy can easily cause mediastinitis. The choice of operative approach plays an
important role in preventing this complication. In this report, the importance of the conventional right thoracotomy for prevention for
mediastinitis is reviewed. In patients with long-term uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, mediastinitis is a critical complication of
cardiovascular surgery and may easily be caused by mid-line sternotomy. Therefore, the choice of operative approach plays an important role
in preventing mediastinitis. In this report, the importance of a minimally invasive conventional right thoracotomy approach for the
prevention of mediastinitis is reviewed. A 76-year-old woman with a history of percutaneous transvenous mitral commissurotomy and repeated
admissions due to heart failure was referred for the purpose of an operation for severe mitral valve stenosis. The patient had dyspnea,
retinopathy, neuropathy and nephropathy caused by long-term uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, Basedow's disease, hypertension, hyperlipidemia
and cerebral infarction with stenosis of the right internal carotid artery, and New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional classification
of 3/4. Laboratory examination revealed plasma creatinine of 1.06 mg/dl and a hemoglobin A1c of 9.4%. Transthoracic echocardiography
revealed severe mitral valve stenosis with a mitral valve area of 0.6 cm2, moderate tricuspid valve regurgitation, and dilatation of the
left atrium. The patient had previously delayed a mitral valve operation because of uncontrolled diabetes mellitus. Taking into
consideration the NYHA functional classification and symptoms associated with severe mitral valve stenosis, an immediate operation was
performed. Postoperative infection in the context of uncontrolled diabetes mellitus was a major concern. As conventional sternotomy would
raise the risk of mediastinitis, the right thoracotomy approach was chosen to prevent mediastinitis by avoiding the splitting the sternum.
Through the right 4th thoracotomy approach, cardiopulmonary bypass was instituted by placing two venous cannulas into the superior and
inferior vena cava, and one arterial cannula into the right femoral artery. Once on cardiopulmonary bypass, systemic temperature was
dropped, ascending aorta was cross-clamped and the heart was arrested by retrograde perfusion of cold blood cardioplegia. Mitral valve
replacement with a prosthetic valve (Mosaic Ultra Porcine Valve, 27 mm) and tricuspid annuloplasty with a prosthetic ring (Duran Ancore
Annuloplasty Band, 27 mm) were performed, and perioperative prophylactic intravenous vancomycin (1 g) was administered under differential
lung ventilation. Postoperatively, cefazolon sodium (2 Ã— 1 g per day) was administered intravenously for 2 days. Postoperative transthoracic
echocardiography revealed mild mitral valve regurgitation and, mild pericardial effusion, and an ejection fraction of 68%. In addition to
improvement of clinical data, the patient was able to walk without any complaints, indicating NYHA classification of 1/4. Postoperative
infectious signs were not recognized (Figure 1a and 1b), and the patient was discharged on day 14 after surgery. Postoperative photograph of
wound on day 10 after surgery. (a) Signs of infection are not visible. (b) Incision line is nearly concealed by the right breast. Minimally
invasive mitral valve surgical approaches consist of partial sternotomy, right parasternotomy, right thoracotomy, and left thoracotomy. With
improvement of perioheral perfusion systems, use of these approaches is expanding all over the world. In some institutions, these approaches
are standard surgical approaches for valve surgery. The 30-day mortality rate, major complications such as renal failure and neurological
deficits, and 5-year overall survival for these approaches for mitral valve are satisfactory. The advantages of these minimally invasive
surgical approaches include the avoidance of sternal division, preservation of sternal stability, reduced blood loss and transfusions,
reduced infection and hospitalizations, and avoidance of visible scarring. Disadvantages include difficulty in exposing the atrium,
ventricle and mitral valves, increased distance to mitral valve, and operation time . Sternal wound infection, either superficial or deep,
are the most significant postoperative complications in cardiovascular surgery. The latter, namely mediastinitis, can invade bone, muscle
and the retroperitoneal space and subsequently result in critical deterioration. The rate of occurrence ranges from 1 to 2% . Staphylococcus
aureus and Streptococcus epidermidis account for 70 to 80% of these infections. Risk factors for sternal dehiscence or wound infection
include diabetes mellitus, age > 75 years, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, obesity, congestive heart failure, peripheral vascular
disease, and sternal instability . In a study conducted by The Society of Thoracic Surgeons, mediastinitis accounted for a quarter of
patients with major infections, and the most common clinical predictors associated with mediastinitis were a body mass index of 30 to 40
kg/m2 , diabetes mellitus, previous myocardial infarction, urgent operative status and hypertension . Another report found that risk factors
for postoperative mediastinitis include female gender, age > 70 years, diabetes mellitus, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus .
The mainstays for prevention of mediastinitis are recognition of risk factors in patients, preoperative or intraoperative prophylatic
antibiotics, and control of blood glucose concentration. Additionally, the operative approach plays an important role in preventing
mediastinitis. In contrast to mid-line full sternotomy, mediastinitis has not been recognized with minimally invasive approaches . Because
the thoracotomy approach does not require sternal division and preserve sterna stability, it may reduce the rate of infection. The present
patient had three of the conventional risk factors associated with mediastinitis: diabetes mellitus, female gender, and old age.
Additionally, according to the analysis by Gummert et al. , mid-line full sternotomy was counter-indicated in this patient. In view of the
risk factors, a surgical approach considered more suitable for patients at risk for mediastinitis was selected. During the perioperative and
postoperative courses, prophylactic antibiotics and control of blood glucose concentration were also used to prevent mediastinitis. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. NF wrote this manuscript and revised it. NF, TH, YO, SK, YS, HF, MN and YO performed
the operation and recommended me to write this case and advised me to revise it. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
