Coronary no-reflow is defined as inadequate myocardial perfusion of a given coronary segment without angiographic evidence of mechanical
vessel obstruction. No-reflow is visualized angiographically as a reduction in thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) flow grade and
is typically accompanied by chest pain, electrocardiographic changes with ST-segment shift and possible hemodynamic compromise. No-reflow
during primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) results in increasing mortality and morbidity. Therefore, treatment of noreflow is
associated with improved clinical outcomes. Generally, the treatment of no-reflow is based on pharmacotherapy. In this case, despite maximal
pharmacotherapy and intraaortic balloon pump (IABP), refractory no-reflow accompanied with cardiogenic shock was successfully treated with
percutaneous cardiopulmonary support (PCPS). No-reflow occurs occasionally during percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) in patients with
acute myocardial infarction. Coronary no-reflow is defined as inadequate myocardial perfusion of a given coronary segment without
angiographic evidence of mechanical vessel obstruction. No-reflow during primary PCI results in increasing mortality and morbidity.1
Generally, the treatment of no-reflow is based on pharmacotherapy. In this case, even in both maximal pharmacotherapy and applying
intraaortic balloon pump (IABP), refractory no-reflow was successfully treated with emergent percutaneous cardiopulmonary support (PCPS) in
primary coronary intervention. A 51-year-old woman developed sudden chest pain and was brought to our hospital by ambulance within 1 hour of
initial onset of chest pain. At admission, blood pressure was 64/48 mmHg, pulse rate was 45/minute, and limbs were cold and cyanotic. She
was diagnosed hypertension and diabetes mellitus, however, did not take any medication. She had suffered chest pain for 3 years, and her
pain aggravated 3 days ago. An electrocardiogram showed complete atrioventricular (AV) block with significant ST-elevation on lead II, III,
and aVF and reciprocal ST depression without Q wave on leads V1-3, I and aVL. After administration of 500 mg of aspirin, 600 mg of
clopidogrel, and 100 IU/kg of heparin, the patient underwent primary percutaneous coronary intervention. After temporary pacemaker was
inserted, the left coronary angiography using the 5F Judkin left catheter revealed total occlusion in the proximal left anterior descending
(LAD) with thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) grade 0 distal flow (Fig. 1A). Right coronary angiography using 7F Judkin right
guiding catheter showed a total occlusion in the proximal right coronary artery (RCA) with TIMI grade 0 distal flow (Fig. 1B). Thrombus
aspiration using thrombuster catheter (Kaneka Medix corporation, Osaka, Japan) was performed, and a large amount of red thrombi were aspi-
rated and distal flow was improved with TIMI II flow. Then, Coronary stents (Endeavor 4.0×30 mm-distal, Endeavor 4.0×30 mm-proximal,) were
inserted and inflated up to 16 atms. Follow-up angiogram showed no-reflow phenomenon with TIMI I flow and blood pressure (BP) was dropped to
50/30 mmHg (Fig. 1C). Adenosine 30 ug and nicorandil 500 ug were injected repeatedly via intracoronary route. Abciximab (ReoPro®, Lilly
Pharma Production GmbH & Co., Hamburg, Germany); 0.25 mg/kg IV bolus and 10 ug/min IV infusion were started and IABP was applied. However,
no-reflow was not resolved, and hemodynamic instability was sustained (Fig. 1D). We decided to start 17 Fr femoral arterial sheath (DLP®;
Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) and 21 Fr femoral long venous sheath (DLP®) through the right femoral artery and vein (Fig. 1E). The
PCPS was then started using the Capiox emergency bypass system [emergency bypass system (EBS); Terumo Inc, Tokyo, Japan], which consists of
a centrifugal pump, a polypropylene hollow fiber membrane oxygenator, and a heparin-coated circuit. The patient was transferred to the
coronary care unit, and hemodynamic status was stabilized 1 hour after starting PCPS (BP 102/73 mmHg). Therefore, temporary pacemaker was
removed due to resolved AV block. Emergent echocardiography showed 14% ejection fraction, and her creatinine kinase-MB fraction (CK-MB) rose
to 1,316 mg/dL. PCPS was continued for 2 days (33 hours). After 13 days, follow up coronary angiography showed patent stent in RCA and total
occlusion in proximal LAD, which was also treated with coronary stent (Endeavor 3.0×30 mm-proximal) (Fig. 2A and B). After 15 days, the
patient was discharged. After 9 months of PCI, follow-up coronary angiography was performed due to dyspnea and chest tightness. However, but
coronary stents at LAD and RCA were patent (Fig. 2C and D), and follow-up echocardiography showed 27% ejection fraction and increased left
ventricular end systolic/diastolic dimension (41/38→63/53 mm). To our best knowledge, this is the first report that refractory no-reflow
accompanied with cardiogenic shock, was successfully treated with PCPS in the primary PCI setting, despite maximal pharmacotherapy and IABP.
The incidence of no-reflow varies according to the subgroup of patients studied, occurring in 2% to 5% of patients undergoing percutaneous
coronary interventions.2 No-reflow is visualized angiographically as a reduction in TIMI flow grade and is typically accompanied by chest
pain, electrocardiographic changes with ST-segment shift and possible hemodynamic compromise. In a large study of primary and rescue PCI,1
patients were stratified into three groups (normal reflow, reversible no-reflow, and refractory no-reflow), and 30-day mortalities were 3.7,
2.8 and 32.0% for each group, respectively. Therefore, successful treatment of refractory no-reflow is associated with improved clinical
outcomes. Treatment of no-reflow is based on pharmacotherapy. Various vasodilators and thrombolytic agents, including verapamil, adenosine,
nicorandil, nitroprusside and abciximab, have been used to treat no-reflow phenomenon.3 However, verapamil and nitroprusside are limited by
hypotension and bradyarrhythmia. When refractory no-reflow with hypotension is developed, the best management is IABP and consideration of
inotropes, because IABP improves myocardial perfusion at the tissue level and reduces the extent of no-reflow caused by microvascular
obstruction.4 If refractory hypotension persists despite insertion of IABP, however, adjunctive treatment with PCPS may be available to
maintain the hemodynamics as a conduit therapy. PCPS has an advantages of convenience and the quick start up of hemodynamic support for the
vital organs during circulatory collapse, as short term cardiac support.5 In the present patient, PCPS played an important role in
maintaining hemodynamic stability until abciximab improved epicardial flow and microvascular perfusion in patients with acute ST elevation
myocardial infarction (STEMI).6 Therefore, combined therapy of PCPS and abciximab seems to be benefitial to refractory no-reflow in
cardiogenic shock, when there is no response of maximal pharmacotherapy and insertion of IABP. The authors have no financial conflicts of
interest. (A) Coronary angiography showed total occlusion in the proximal portions (arrow) of left anterior descending. (B) Initial coronary
angiography showed total occlusion in mid portions (arrow) of right coronary artery with TIMI grade 0 distal flow. (C) Follow-up angiography
immediately after stent implantation showed no-reflow phenomenon at mid portion of RCA. (D) Catheterization showed low arterial blood
pressure in spite of IABP insertion. (E) Fluoroscopy showed PCPS apply status. TIMI, thrombolysis in myocardial infarction; RCA, right
coronary artery; IABP, intraaortic balloon pump; PCPS, percutaneous cardiopulmonary support. (A) Follow-up angiography immediately after
stent implantation at proximal portion of LAD showed successful stent implantation (arrow). (B) Follow-up angiography showed patent stents
of RCA with TIMI grade III distal flow after 13 days after stent implantation. (C) Follow up angiography at 9 months showed patent stent at
LAD. (D) Follow up angiography at 9 months showed patent stent at RCA. LAD, left anterior descending; RCA, right coronary artery; TIMI,
thrombolysis in myocardial infarction.
