We report a case of a 15-year-old boy with autoimmune hepatitis lacking common serologic markers and normal gammaglobulinemia associated
with immune thrombocytopenia and family history of psoriasis. He presented to our department with a 4-year history of a cervical posterior
lymphadenopathy and recent petechiae. Previous laboratory results 6 months before already showed hepatocellular injury. After exclusion of
other causes, the diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis was made based on clinical grounds, associated immune disorder and histological features
of liver biopsy. The authors alert for this atypical presentation of autoimmune hepatitis and associated immune thrombocytopenia. Autoimmune
hepatitis is a chronic necroinflamatory liver disorder often associated with other autoimmune diseases, like rheumatoid arthritis, Sjögren
syndrome, chronic thyroiditis, ulcerative colitis, celiac disease or others. Association with immune thrombocytopenic purpura is unusual,
especially in children . We report a 15-year-old-boy with a family history of psoriasis, who presented with cervical lymphadenopathy, severe
immune thrombocytopenia and chronic active autoimmune hepatitis successfully treated with prednisolone and azatioprine. A 15-year-old
caucasian boy presented to our emergency department with a 4-year history of a posterior left cervical lymphadenopathy and petechiae in his
legs that appeared 2 days before. Four years before the admission he noted a lump in the left posterior triangle of his neck, measuring
about 1.5 cm of diameter, no tender and without inflammatory signs. At that time he had no fever or other symptoms. The cervical echography
showed an ovoid shaped lymphadenopathy of 21 mm in the posterior cervical left triangle of the neck and laboratory evaluation revealed a
normal blood count and normal levels of liver enzymes. The serologic testing for Epstein Barr virus yielded a positive result for past
infection (IgM to the viral capsid antigen negative, IgG to the viral capsid antigen positive) as did for rubella virus (IgM antibody
negative, IgG antibody positive, he had been vaccinated). The boy kept asymptomatic, except for lymphadenopathy, and 5 months before the
admission he repeated laboratory tests and cervical echography. The left posterior cervical lymphadenopathy didn't show any change in size
and there was no abnormality in cells blood counts, but the chemistry panel demonstrated an elevation of serum alanine aminotransferase (256
UI/L (normal (NR) 10-34 U/L)), serum aspartate aminotransferase (123 UI/L (NR 10-44 U/L)), with normal serum alkaline phosphate (311 UI/L
(NR 45-122 U/L)) and lactic dehydrogenase (318 UI/L (NR 240-480 U/L)). Two days before admission the boy noted petechiae in his legs and
after being attended by his primary care physician, he was instructed to come to our emergency department. Past medical history was
remarkable for recurrent media otitis and mastoiditis at the age of 5, followed by adenoidectomy and myringotomy with 6 years old and asthma
(not medicated and without exacerbations in the last year). He had no history of drug allergies nor blood transfusion and was not taking any
medications or drinking alcohol. His immunizations were up to date. His mother and three uncles have psoriasis. His social history was
unremarkable. On physical examination, the boy appeared well, in no distress and without jaundice. His vital signs were normal. No physical
signs of chronic or acute liver disease were found, and the remaining examination was normal, except for petechiae in his legs and an ovoid
shaped cervical posterior lymphadenopathy of approximately 2 cm in diameter, rubbery consistency, no tender and without external
inflammatory signs. No other lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly were found. Laboratory results included: hemoglobin 14.5 g/dL, white
blood cell count 7.60 × 109/L (42.0% neutrophils, 2.4% eosinophils (182/μL)), platelet count 6 × 109/L, C reactive protein 0.34 mg/L,
aspartate aminotransferase 820 UI/L (NR 10-44 U/L), alanine aminotransferase 1568 UI/L (NR 10-34 U/L), gamma glutamyl transferase 84 UI/L
(NR 11-50 U/L), alkaline phosphate 223 UI/L (NR 45-122 U/L), total bilirubin 1.10 mg/dL (NR 0.2-1.0 mg/dL), unconjugated bilirubin 0.17
mg/dL (NR < 0.3 mg/dL), activated partial thromboplastin time 35.7 s (NR 25.0-35.0s) prothrombin time 15.4s (NR 8.0-14.0) (International
Normalized Ratio 1.30), albumin 4.5 g/dL (NR 3.5-5.2 g/dL), immunoglobulin G 1240 mg/dL(NR < 1550 mg/dL), ferritin 1230 ng/mL (NR 20-300
ng/mL). He was heterozygous for the H63D mutation of the HFE gene. Ceruplasmin, copper and alpha-1-antitrypsin levels were normal. Viral
serologies: Hepatitis A antibody IgM and IgG negative, Hepatitis B surface antigen negative, Hepatitis B core antibody negative, Hepatitis B
e antigen and antibody negatives, Hepatitis B surface antibody negative, Hepatitis C antibody negative and HIV I/II antibodies negatives.
Epstein Barr Virus (IgM to the viral capsid antigen negative, IgG to the viral capsid antigen positive, IgM to the early antigen negative,
and antibody to EBNA positive) and Cytomegalovirus (CMV IgM antibody negative, CMV IgG positive) serologic results showed past infection.
Testing for antinuclear, antimitochondrial, anti-smooth muscle, and liver/kidney microssomal antibodies were negative. Abdominal ultrasound
showed a normal homogeneous echo texture of liver and a normal spleen size of 11 cm. Liver biopsy was done when the patient had 63 × 109/L
platelets (5 days after admission), and revealed an inflammatory lymphocytic infiltrate in portal areas with eosinophils. Some areas showed
interface hepatitis ("piecemeal necrosis") with inflammatory lymphocytic infiltrate eroding the limiting plate of hepatocytes and bridging
fibrosis with porto-portal fibrous septa and fibrous in the peri-portal area. Bile ducts were normal. Blood smear, bone marrow aspirate and
flow cytometry of peripheral blood cells were negative for neoplasic cells and pointed to peripheral destruction of platelets cells with
increased number of megakaryocytes in bone marrow and rare but big platelets in blood smear. Anti-platelet antibodies, detected by flow
cytometry, were positive: IgG 4.32 AU(immunofluorescence arbitrary unit, normal < 0.33 AU); IgM 0.39 UA (normal < 0.29 AU). Based on all
results we establish the diagnosis of immune thrombocytopenia and autoimmune hepatitis with negative serologic markers. The patient was
initially treated with intravenous immunoglobulin for thrombocytopenia with a partial response and then with prednisolone. He started
azathioprine after the diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis. He has been followed by about two years and has been medicated with azathioprine
(1.4 mg/kg/day). After 2 months of the admission, platelets count recovered to 96 × 109/L and lymphadenopathy decreased and disappeared in
the next months. After 10 months platelet count was normal 158 × 109/L. Liver enzymes returned to normal after 2 months, aspartate
aminotransferase 15 UI/L (NR 10-44 U/L), alanine aminotransferase 18 UI/L (NR 10-34 U/L), gamma glutamyl transferase 44 UI/L (NR 11-50 U/L).
Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is a chronic and progressive necroinflammatory and fibrotic process of the liver of unknown cause that occurs in
children and adults, usually associated with the presence of autoantibodies and hypergammaglobulinemia. It has been described two main types
of autoimmune hepatitis based on differences in autoantibody patterns. AIH type I is characterized by the presence of circulating anti-
smooth muscle antibodies (SMA) and/or antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and AIH type II is characterized by circulating liver-kidney microssomal
type I antibody (LKM) or anti-liver cytosol antibody (LCA) . Eighty percent of patients with AIH type II are children. The diagnosis is made
regarding clinical and biochemical findings of hepatitis and associated autoimmune diseases, abnormal levels of immunoglobulin G, the
presence of the characteristic autoimmune antibodies and finally, the most important, the histological typical abnormalities . The
International Autoimmune Hepatitis Group proposed a scoring system to standardize the diagnosis, useful for clinical trials, but that may be
inaccurate in individual cases, especially in children . After excluding viral, toxic and hereditary aetiologies for hepatitis, in the
presence of another autoimmune disease and considering liver biopsy characteristics, the most probable cause for hepatitis in our patient
was certainly an autoimmune process. Nevertheless, we didn't find the common serologic markers of this disease (SMA, ANA, LKM and LCA),
neither characteristic hypergammaglobulinemia, nor meet the criteria for definitive diagnosis for autoimmune hepatitis according to the
International Autoimmune Hepatitis Group criteria or the simplified criteria for the diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis published in 2008 by
Hennes EM et al . According with the International Autoimmune Hepatitis Group criteria for diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis, the patient
scored 13 points before treatment and didn't fulfil the criteria for a definitive diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis (it's important to note
that we didn't test for genetic markers like HLA DR3 and HLA DR4, which positivity could mean one point more in the score, but not enough to
fulfil the criteria). Autoantibodies may be absent in about 10% of patients with autoimmune hepatitis and in children the presence of
autoantibody titers tends to be lower, and may be not detected, as in this case. They serve as markers of disease, but their pathogenic role
and their value for follow-up evaluation remains controversial . Petechiae (thrombocytopenia) were the major complain that brought the
patient to medical attention. Based on blood smear, bone marrow aspirate and positive anti-platelets antibodies we presumed an immune
destruction of platelets and assumed the diagnosis of immune thrombocytopenia. Idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura is a well recognized
complication of viral hepatitis, but the association between autoimmune hepatitis and immune thrombocytopenic purpura is not frequent,
especially in children . There are some case reports in literature showing this association, but almost all were in adults . Wong T (2007)
presented a case of a 10-year-old boy with autoimmune hepatitis and a 6 month history of gingival bleeding and epistaxis due to
coagulopathy, with elevated prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time but normal platelets count . Our boy had also a prolonged INR,
reverted by K vitamin, but no clinical manifestations of bleeding. Shibuya A (2001) presented a 19 year-old woman with typical AIH, positive
serologic markers and fulfilment of diagnostic criteria score and thrombocytopenia. Four years later the woman developed thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura and died because of multi-organic failure 9 days after the admission . In 1996, Persico M described
thrombocytopenia as a sensitive marker of immunologic activity in a patient with autoimmune chronic active hepatitis . This case is a good
demonstration of it. The appearance of thrombocytopenia was correlated with the increasing activity of hepatic lesion pointing to the
existence of a single pathophysiologic process. What triggers the necroinflammatory process of the liver, the exacerbation of the hepatic
lesion and the immune destruction of platelets remains obscure. Lymphadenopathy found in patient was probably a casual association or a
sequel of a past infection. Follow up confirmed its disappearance. In conclusion, the authors alert for the infrequent presentation and
associations of this case. First, presentation was atypical as it occurs in a male patient, (autoimmune hepatitis is much more frequent in
females) and pethechiae were the sign that brought the patient to medical attention and led to the diagnosis. Furthermore, the patient
didn't have the typical serologic markers of autoimmune hepatitis, neither the commonly associated hypergammaglobulinemia or fulfil the
diagnostic criteria for definitive diagnosis. Second, immune thrombocytopenia is not a common autoimmune disease associated to autoimmune
hepatitis and family history revealed a strong presence of psoriasis (another autoimmune disease). Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this
journal. AIH: Autoimmune hepatitis; SMA: Anti-smooth muscle antibodies; ANA: Antinuclear antibodies; LKM: Liver-kidney microssomal type I
antibody; LCA: Anti-liver cytosol antibody; The authors declare that they have no competing interests. HA had primary responsibility in
treating the patient and manuscript review. RR participated in patient treatment and was responsible for writing the manuscript. NS
participated in patient evaluation and treatment. TP contributed in the same way as Nicole Silva. AA contributed in the same way as Nicole
Silva. SM participated in patient treatment and was responsible for manuscript review. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript.
