Description of the clinical response of 12 consecutive cases of disease-active ankylosing spondylitis (AS) treated with the herbal medicine
Tripterygium wilfordii Hook f (TwHf; lei gong teng, thunder god vine), which has been reported in controlled studies to be effective in
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The clinical status of 12 patients with active AS who were started on 60 mgday-1 of a commercial tablet
preparation of TwHf extract. were monitored at weeks 1, 3, and 6. Compared to baseline, there was significant improvement in mean values of
physician assessment, Bath ankylosing spondylitis disease activity index (BASDAI), Bath ankylosing spondylitis functional index (BASFI), and
Bath ankylosing spondylitis global score (BAS-G) at weeks 3 and 6, with no changes in liver enzymes or complete blood count (CBC). A
placebo-controlled double-blind study for Tripterygium is warranted. Until then, this particular report should be considered as case reports
and not an endorsement of the use of Tripterygium in clinical practice. One of the medicinal herbs widely used used in China for the
treatment of autoimmune and inflammatory diseases is the vine Tripterygium wilfordii Hook f (TwHf), also known by the descriptive names lei
gong teng, thunder god vine, and seven-step vine . A rapid pubmed search for the keywords “Tripterygium” plus “inflammatory” yields a total
of 120 publications, while a search for “Tripterygium” and “lupus” yields 30 publications. More than 21 autoimmune and inflammatory diseases
have been reported to have been treated with extracts of Tripterygium. At least five pharmaceutical companies in China are marketing
extracts of T. wilfordii in tablet forms and have been approved by the China State Food and Drug Administration for use in rheumatoid
arthritis (RA), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and ankylosing spondylitis (AS). They are being used by many rheumatologists and
nephrologists who practice traditional medicine in China . For example, for the Jiangsu Province Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine in
Nanjing, the number of tablets of T. wilfordii prescribed in 2008 was 620,000, the average per month in 2009 has been about 50,000. At least
three controlled double-blind studies for RA with promising results have been reported, one carried out in China and the others in North
America . Beneficial effects were observed in RA as early as 4 weeks after initiation of Tripterygium. In vitro and animal model studies
suggest that Tripterygium is anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive, partly by suppressing the generation of proinflammatory cytokines
(reviewed in Ref. ). However, no pubmed abstract-available studies have been reported on AS. Search for literature in a Chinese language
database showed that the earliest report of the use of T. wilfordii in AS was in 1981 . Since then, at least four other Chinese language
papers have been published, comprising a total of 175 AS patients (reviewed in Ref. ). The efficacy of T. wilfordii was broadly described as
being nearly 90% effective. However, none of these Chinese language papers assessed patients with internationally standardized evaluation
instruments. AS is an inflammatory arthritis affecting mainly the axial skeleton. Like RA, AS also respond to treatment by nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID), sulfasalazine, and, more dramatically, to tumor necrosis factor (TNF) blockers. Unlike RA, there is no good
evidence that it responds well to methotrexate, leflunomide, or hydroxychloroquine [9, 10]. This paper describes 12 consecutive disease-
active AS patients who were started on Tripterygium and evaluated with internationally approved evaluation instruments. This paper is a case
report and not a randomized placebo-controlled study. In our analysis, we attempted to evaluate the possible significance of response to
Tripterygium by comparing the Tripterygium results to those of 26 AS patients on placebo in a controlled study for etanercept. Patients
receiving Tripterygium were those attending the Jiangsu Province Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jiangsu, Nanjing, China. The
study and informed consent followed the guidance of the Hospital Institutional Research Board (approval ref. no. 2009NL-1501). The study was
designed to arbitrarily include all consecutive patients within a period of 4 months who satisified the following criteria: They satisfied
the 1984 Modified New York Criteria for AS . Their pelvis X-ray showed a sacroiliitis score of ≥4 when combining scores of both right and
left sides. Their scores for Bath ankylosing spondylitis disease activity index (BASDAI) and for spinal pain were ≥40 on a scale of 0 to
100. They had failed NSAID. Of the 12 patients, eight had failed ≥ 1 month NSAID, while 8/12 had also failed ≥3 months of at least one
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARD). All prospective patients were advised of the antifertility effect of Tripterygium. Following
the standard practice in this institute, excluded from Tripterygium treatment, were those patients with potential family planning, or being
positive for hepatitis antigens, or showed elevated liver enzymes in blood tests. A general evaluation was also carried out to exclude those
with significant co-morbidities. None of the AS patients in this case report had psoriasis or active uveitis or had used corticosteroids
within the past 1 month. Patients who were on NSAID and DMARD were allowed to continue their medications with no increase in dosages. The
Tripterygium used in these 12 patients was manufactured by the Zhe Jiang De En De Pharmaceutical (Zhejiang, China), the supplier for this
institute. The lot number of the tablets was 0802102. The dose of the Tripterygium was 20 mg 3 times daily. Evaluations were carried out at
entry of study as well as at weeks 1, 3, and 6. After finishing the 6 weeks of observation, patients were followed by their own personal
physicians and not by the investigators. The placebo patients were derived from a randomized double-blind controlled study of etanercept
carried in the Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China. Placebo was administered subcutaneously twice a week. The selection of patients
according to their disease severity was similar to those of the Tripterygium patients in that the BASDAI score at baseline should be ≥40
(scale 0–100). Details were similar to those of another placebo/etanercept study carried out also in the Chinese PLA General Hospital
reported recently . This study also followed the guidelines of the local and national Institutional Review Boards. Evaluations included
physician and patient self-assessment (Bath ankylosing spondylitis global score, BAS-G) over the past week, joint count for swelling,
BASDAI, Bath ankylosing spondylitis functional index (BASFI), and ranges of motion included in the Bath ankylosing spondylitis metrology
index (BASMI) . Endpoints of clinical response were expressed as ASAS20 and ASAS40 . Blood tests included erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), complete blood count (CBC), and liver tests. For assessment of possible side effects, in addition to
laboratory tests and general review of systems, also was enquired patients’ own assessment of possible side effects. For statistical
evaluations, the overall significance of each parameter of clinical response was first tested by the Friedman test. Those with p
values < 0.001 were further evaluated by the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Other statistical tests used were the t test for unequal variances
and the chi-square test. All p values were corrected for multiple testing by multiplying the values with 20 (Bonferroni factor for these
data sets). Values were considered significant if the corrected p values were ≤0.05. One evaluation datum was missing and was carried
forward from the previous week. Because 8 of the 12 Tripterygium patients were on DMARD, no analysis was carried out to compare effect of
Tripterygium on patients on DMARD to those not on DMARD. The demographics and clinical characteristics of the 12 patients were listed in
Table 1. The mean age was 36.2 ± 10.9 years, mean duration of disease 6.8 ± 4.3 years, and mean BASDAI value 52 ± 11.4 (0–100 scale). While
all patients complained of spinal pain, swollen joints were detected in only three. HLA-B27 was tested in ten patients and was positive in
nine. All patients were carefully followed up for 6 weeks, except patient #6 who did not return for the 6th week apparently because of lack
of response. Patient numbering was consecutive except #5 which did not exist. Table 1Demographics and patient characteristics at
entryDesignationAgeGenderYears of ASDMARDPatient 131F2Methotrexate (MTX)Patient 242M13SulfasalazinePatient 330M6MTX + sulfasalzinePatient
428M8Patient 657M15Patient 731M3Patient 830M3MTX + sulfasalzinePatient 930M5MTXPatient 1027M10MTXPatient 1134F1.1Patient
1235F8SulfasalazinePatient 1359M7Sulfasalazine + thalidomideMean36.26.8SD10.94.3Median31.06.5 DesignationBASDAIBASFIBASGPhysician
assessmentSpinal painPatient 149.543505462Patient 245.430.8455048Patient 349.0730.4465072Patient 444.7542.5576045Patient
644.6542.7455058Patient 754.441.2505465Patient 87045.1455065Patient 945.853.9726064Patient 1080.459.3858282Patient 1146.2534.535350Patient
1248.531.9313075Patient 1344.959.5727070Mean52.042.952.853.858.83SD11.410.316.013.921.28Median47.442.648.052.064.5 DesignationESRCRPSwollen
jointsTragus to wall distanceSchober testPatient 1154.20203Patient 24613.090172Patient 3166.020172.5Patient 45826.60152.5Patient
61010142.5Patient 786.331104Patient 843100102.5Patient 9108.72181Patient 101411.21151Patient 11335.16104.5Patient 12346.070123.5Patient
13346.070102Mean26.88.70.8314.002.58SD16.76.51.753.571.06Median24.56.2014.52.5There is no patient #5. Units of measurements are in text.MTX
was at 10 mg week-1, sulfasalazine at 1.5 g day-1, and thalidomide at 100 mg day-1. Demographics and patient characteristics at entry There
is no patient #5. Units of measurements are in text. MTX was at 10 mg week-1, sulfasalazine at 1.5 g day-1, and thalidomide at 100 mg day-1.
By week 3 of treatment, the percent of patients showing ASAS20 and ASAS40 response were 91.7% and 33.3%, respectively. These appeared to be
sustained to week 6 (Fig. 1). Statistically significant improvement as assessed first by Friedman test (p < 0.001), followed by Wilcoxon
signed-rank test, followed by correction for multiple testing was observed with BAS-G, BASDAI, and BASFI starting at week 1 (Fig. 2). For
BAS-G and BASDAI, the improvement at week 6 exceeded those at week 3. Statistically significant improvement for physician assessment was
observed at weeks 3 and 6. Although there was improvement in BASMI, it was not statistically significant after correction for multiple
testing. At week 6, the ESR decreased from 26.8 ± 16.7 at week 0 to 9.8 ± 5.8 (p = 0.007 before Bonferroni correction). The decrease in CRP
became statistically significant at week 6 (p = 0.04 after Bonferroni correction; Fig. 2). Fig. 1Percent of patients achieving ASAS20 or
ASAS40 in response to treatment by TripterygiumFig. 2Changes in parameters in response to Tripterygium. Error bars represent standard
deviations. The p values shown are in comparison to corresponding values at week 0. Where p values are not shown, they are more than 0.05.
All p values have been corrected for multiple testing. Numbers inside squares represent median values of the corresponding points Percent of
patients achieving ASAS20 or ASAS40 in response to treatment by Tripterygium Changes in parameters in response to Tripterygium. Error bars
represent standard deviations. The p values shown are in comparison to corresponding values at week 0. Where p values are not shown, they
are more than 0.05. All p values have been corrected for multiple testing. Numbers inside squares represent median values of the
corresponding points There were no clinically significant changes in CBC and liver function tests. None of the patients reported of any side
effects such as headache or abdominal discomfort. In a separate study, a total of 26 patients were given placebo in a randomized double-
blind controlled study for etanercept. In this placebo group, NSAID, DMARD, and corticosteroids were also maintained at the same doses as in
the baseline. The mean age of these patients was 30.1 ± 7.7 years, and the mean duration of disease was 9.7 ± 6.1 years. Out of 26 patients,
25 were male. The mean BASDAI, BASFI, and BAS-G values are shown in Table 2. At the entry of study, there were no statistically significant
differences between this placebo group and the Tripterygium group in age, duration of disease, BASDAI, and BASFI. In the placebo group,
after 6 weeks, even on placebo, there were 10–20% decrease in the values of BASDAI, BASFI, and BAS-G. These decreases were statistically
significant in BASDAI and BAS-G (p = 0.0001 and 0.01), but not BASFI (p = 0.09; Table 2). The decreases in values of BASDAI, BASFI, and
BAS-G at week 6 of the Tripterygium group were about 60%, and compared to the corresponding values of the placebo group, they were
significantly lower in the Tripterygium group (p = 0.0001 for all three parameters; Table 2 and Fig. 1). At week 6, the percent of patients
in the placebo group who achieved ASAS20 and ASAS40 were 30.8% and 3.8%, respectively. These were significantly less than the corresponding
values in the Tripterygium group (p < 0.01 and <0.001, respectively). Table 2Changes in disease status in patients on placeboWeek 0Week
6BASDAI57.3 ± 11.244.7 ± 17.4BASFI50.4 ± 21.145.1 ± 24.8BAS-G72.8 ± 21.160.3 ± 19.4Scores are in scale 0–100Changes in BASDAI and BAS-G were
statistically significant Changes in disease status in patients on placebo Scores are in scale 0–100 Changes in BASDAI and BAS-G were
statistically significant Extracts of T. wilfordii are being distributed in tablet form as patent medicines by at least six pharmaceutical
companies in China. The cost is about US $0.50 per day, which is much lower than that of the biologics. They are widely used by physicians
practicing traditional medicine and accepted by patients in China as standard treatment for several inflammatory and autoimmune diseases,
especially RA, AS, SLE, and nephritis. A large number of publications, mostly in the Chinese language, have been reported [2–4, 6]. It is
also being used for AS. A total of 175 AS patients treated with T. wilfordii have been reported in Chinese language papers . None of them
used internationally standardized evaluation instruments. Nevertheless, the drug was reported as being 90% effective. Since a major side
effect of this drug is antifertility in male and amenorrhea in female, and because many AS patients are in the reproductive age, it is
imperative to understand the risk/benefit ratio more precisely before continuing such indiscriminate use . Although the Jiangsu Province
Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine has been using this drug routinely for AS resistant to conventional therapies, this study is also
the first in this institute to use internationally standardized evaluation instruments to describe 12 consecutive disease-active AS
patients. The particular commercial preparation used in this study was one which has been used in this hospital for the past 5 years. The
compilations of results of these 12 patients do show significant improvement in BAS-G, BASDAI, BASFI, and physician assessment. One needs to
be cautioned that all these are subjective parameters. Since these are case reports, no placebo-controlled data were collected. In a recent
placebo-controlled study of etanercept in AS, also carried out in China, data are available from 26 patients who received 6 weeks treatment
with placebo. At week 6, only 31% of those placebo-treated patients showed an ASAS20 response. The results from three separate published
placebo-controlled study for TNFα carried out in Caucasian countries also showed that the ASAS20 response for placebo at weeks 4–8 are about
20% . Hence, the observation that about 90% of patients on Tripterygium achieved ASAS20 at week 6 is very encouraging. Because such
comparisons across studies provide very little degree of confidence, we also attempted to document the response to Tripterygium more
objectively using the acute phase reactants. There appears to be statistically significant improvement in the serum CRP, with some
suppression also in ESR, although not to a statistically less significant degree. Each of our patients was also questioned for possible
drug-related side effects. Surprisingly, none of the patients complained of side effect, perhaps because this drug is widely accepted by
patients as a standard therapy in a traditional medicine hospital. Also, perhaps because of the short duration of the study, none of the
three female patients reported the expected amenorrhea. From numerous reports in Chinese journals, the most serious side effect of
Tripterygium is that on fertility. In one study of 97 women treated for dermatological diseases, hypomenorrhea was observed in 39 patients,
and amenorrhea in 9. There are less documentations of the effect of Tripterygium on male fertility. In the same study on dermatological
diseases, abnormalities of sperm were detected in 24 of 66 male patients. All these occur within 3–5 weeks after starting Tripterygium .
There is no assurance that this adverse effect on fertility is not permanent. In addition to adverse effect for fertility, the frequency of
liver toxicity has been reported to be as high as 30% and marrow suppression to be 15% . We did not observe these side effects in any of our
12 patients perhaps because of the brevity of the study. Our results carry a high risk of observer and patient bias. The high degree of
response might reflect such errors in a culture where Tripterygium has been accepted as standard therapy. Based on the reports on toxicity,
Tripterygium should not be initiated for any diseases by physicians with no experience with this medication. AS patients should regard the
usefulness of Tripterygium with skepticism. For it to be continued to be used in AS in any country, a placebo-controlled study should be
carried out to evaluate the risk/benefit ratio. At the minimum, our results can provide some basis for power analysis for such future
studies. We gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Dr. Wenfeng Tan in co-coordinating this project. The project is supported by The
Leading Talent Project of Traditional Chinese Medicine of Jiangsu Province. Disclosures None Open Access This article is distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
