An 18-year-old male presented for a routine dental examination with an incidental finding in the left posterior maxilla. Imaging studies
revealed a well-circumscribed, unilocular radiolucency preventing eruption of the left maxillary second molar and displacing it in a
superior and posterior direction, into the maxillary sinus (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Well-defined unilocular radiolucency prohibiting the eruption of
the left maxillary second molar Well-defined unilocular radiolucency prohibiting the eruption of the left maxillary second molar The area
was treated with thorough curettage and the associated maxillary second molar was extracted. Histological evaluation revealed multiple
fragments of richly cellular mesenchymal tissue containing round drop-like islands and long narrow anastomosing cords of odontogenic
epithelium. The epithelial islands and cords were characterized by peripheral columnar or cuboidal hyperchromatic cells and were frequently
only two cell layers thick (Fig. 2). The mesenchymal component contained evenly distributed plump ovoid and stellate cells in a loose myxoid
to predominantly eosinophilic matrix, resembling the primitive dental papilla. Mitotic activity was not appreciated.Fig. 2Round islands and
narrow cords of odontogenic epithelium in a cellular, primitive mesenchymal background Round islands and narrow cords of odontogenic
epithelium in a cellular, primitive mesenchymal background Ameloblastic fibromas are neoplasms of odontogenic epithelium and mesenchymal
tissues, and as such are categorized as mixed odontogenic tumors. Other mixed odontogenic lesions, such as ameloblastic fibro-odontomas and
odontomas share some clinical, radiographic and histologic similarities with ameloblastic fibroma. In the past, it was suggested that these
lesions represented a spectrum of a single entity, with ameloblastic fibromas, the least differentiated of the tumors, maturing and
developing into ameloblastic fibro-odontomas and later odontomas . This theory has been refuted with the support of the tumors’ associated
demographics. The least differentiated lesion, ameloblastic fibroma, actually occurs, on average, at an older age then the more
differentiated ameloblastic fibro-odontoma and odontoma . Further more, ameloblastic fibro-odontomas and odontomas are better categorized as
hamartomas and as a result, unlike the ameloblastic fibroma, have little chance of recurrence or malignant transformation . For these
reasons, despite many similarities, it is essential to differentiate the ameloblastic fibroma from other mixed odontogenic lesions because
it has true neoplastic qualities. Ameloblastic fibromas are rare and comprise approximately 2% of odontogenic tumors [2, 3]. The tumors are
considered a tumor of childhood and adolescence and occur almost exclusively in the first and second decades of life [3, 4]. A slight male
predilection has been noted [4, 5]. The most common location for the tumor is the posterior mandible, followed by the posterior maxilla.
Patients often present with painless swelling of the jaw and the lesion may affect the normal eruption of teeth in the area. An impacted
tooth may be associated with the tumor in approximately three quarters of the cases [2, 5, 6]. Some lesions are asymptomatic, with up to 20%
of cases initially detected upon review of routine dental radiographs [1, 3, 4, 6]. Radiographically, ameloblastic fibromas are unilocular
lesions, occasionally multilocular when larger, with smooth well-demarcated borders. Cortical expansion may or may not be discernable on
plane film. Because lesions are frequently associated with unerupted teeth they may initially be interpreted as dentigerous cysts [1, 3, 4,
7]. Grossly, ameloblastic fibroma appears as firm, lobular soft tissue mass with a smooth surface . If a tooth is associated with the lesion
it may accompany the specimen. A capsule is generally not appreciated. Microscopically, an ameloblastic fibroma is composed of a connective
tissue background that appears to recapitulate dental papilla, resembling stellate reticulum [1, 3, 7]. This tissue is composed of spindled
and angular cells with little collagen, imparting a myxomatous appearance. The epithelial component is made up of thin branching cords or
small nests of odontogenic epithelium with little cytoplasm and basophilic nuclei. Larger nests may show a central area of stellate
reticulum. Mitoses should not be a feature of ameloblastic fibroma [1, 3]. The presence of mitosis should expand the differential diagnosis
to include malignant entities, to include ameloblastic fibrosarcoma. Finally, immunohistochemistry generally does not aid in differentiating
ameloblastic fibroma from other mixed odontogenic tumors. Surgical excision or thorough curettage with removal of affected teeth is the
treatment of choice [1, 2]. The recurrence rate varies among sources, but is considered to be low [5, 7]. While uncommon, the possibility of
malignant transformation of ameloblastic fibroma into ameloblastic fibrosarcoma is well documented [8, 9]. This article is distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited. The opinions and assertions expressed herein are those of the author
and are not to be construed as official or representing the views of the Department of the Navy or the Department of Defense.
