Sirs: High levels of serum low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and low levels of high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) are
well-known risk factors for premature atherosclerotic vascular disease [1, 2]. They are targets for primary and secondary prevention.
Interpreting lipid profiles is part of the daily routine for a cardiologist. The most common cause of low HDL-C in western society is
metabolic syndrome. More rare are primary lipid disorders (e.g., Tangier syndrome due to an ABCA transporter deficiency or deficiency of
apolipoprotein A1) and secondary causes like (ab)use of androgens (Table 1). Extremely low serum HDL levels are associated with an increased
risk of death, sepsis and malignancy . A rare but important cause is interference in the biochemical assay by paraproteins, yielding an
artifactually low HDL-C measurement result. We present the case of a patient who had his lipid profile repeatedly tested over the course of
4 years and had progressive decline in HDL-C measurements.Table 1Differential diagnosis: Causes of low HDL-C values [adapted from
4–7]Primary disorders (rare) Familial primary hypoalphalipoproteinemia Nonfamilial hypoalphalipoproteinemia Familial
hypoalphalipoproteinemia with hypertriglyceridemia Familial HDL-cholesterol deficiency and Tangier disease Elevated CETP
activity Lipoprotein lipase deficiency LCAT deficiencySecondary disorders Insulin resistance (elevated triglyceride levels, overweight and
obesity, physical inactivity, type 2 diabetes) Acute infections and other inflammatory conditions Drugs (beta blockers, benzodiazepines,
anabolic steroids, progestins, diuretics) Cigarette smoking Low-fat diet Artifactually low in gammopathies Differential diagnosis: Causes of
low HDL-C values [adapted from 4–7] A 74-year-old man presented with fever, cold chills, vomiting, diarrhea and shortness of breath. He did
not use any chronic medication. Upon physical examination, he was dyspnoeic with a respiratory rate of 30 per min, an oxygen saturation of
87% at ambient air, a temperature of 39°C, and a blood pressure of 170/120 mmHg with a heart rate of 135 bpm. On auscultation of the heart,
there was a regular tachycardia without murmurs. Crackles and rhonchi were present at the base of the right lung. There was no
lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly. The chest X-ray revealed a large infiltration in the right lung. Respiratory insufficiency and
evolving sepsis required admittance to the ICU with mechanical ventilation and vasopressive medication. Initial antibiotic treatment
consisted of moxifloxacin with a switch to penicillin G after blood cultures grew Streptococcus pneumonia. The patient developed renal
insufficiency due to an acute tubulus necrosis, requiring temporary continuous veno-venous haemofiltration. After 1 week, he could be
transferred to the internal medicine ward. Recovery and mobilization were relatively slow in part due to a parapneumonic effusion. When the
patient was discharged to a revalidation center (37 days after admission), vital parameters and renal function were normalized. Three months
after his first hospitalization he was re-admitted with pneumonia. Re-evaluation of the laboratory reports of the first hospital episode
revealed at presentation an ESR of 132 mm/h and normochromic anemia with a hemoglobin value of 6.0 mmol/l. Three months before admission, a
low HDL-C of 0.1 mmol/l had been measured. Because of the recurrent nature of the infection, an immune compromising condition was suspected.
Multiple myeloma with paraproteinemia was detected with a monoclonal IgG-λ of 41.7 g/l (Fig. 1) and a plasma beta-2 microglobuline of
7.2 mg/l; plasma calcium was normal. The skeletal survey showed no signs of lytic activity. A peripheral blood smear showed rouleaux
formation (pseudo agglutination) of erythrocytes.Fig. 1Densitometric scan of protein electrophoresis (left) with five protein fractions from
left to right: albumin, alpha 1, alpha 2, beta and gamma. Electrophoresis (ELP) and immunofixation of serum (right) with anti-IgG (G), anti
IgA (A), anti IgM (M), anti-kappa (K) and anti lambda (L) Densitometric scan of protein electrophoresis (left) with five protein fractions
from left to right: albumin, alpha 1, alpha 2, beta and gamma. Electrophoresis (ELP) and immunofixation of serum (right) with anti-IgG (G),
anti IgA (A), anti IgM (M), anti-kappa (K) and anti lambda (L) The bone marrow biopsy was hypercellullar, mainly consisting of plasma cells.
There was a monoclonal plasma cell proliferation (47.2%), consistent with multiple myeloma. Immunophenotyping and in situ hybridization
showed a monoclonality for IgG-λ. Flow cytometry showed CD56, CD38, CD138 positivity and CD19 and CD45 negativity (Fig. 2). According to the
criteria of the International Staging System for multiple myeloma, there was a stage 3 multiple myeloma . Therapy was started with melfalan,
prednisolon, thalidomide and later bortezomib with dexamethason with good hematologic response: IgG-λ dropped to 3 g/l. After correction of
the paraproteinemia with this therapy HDL-C restored to a level of 1.0 mmol/l (Table 2). Because of the prothrombogenic side effects of
thalidomide, acetylsalicylic acid was added for prophylaxis. Besides a short hospital admission due to leucopenic fever after 8 months, the
patient was symptom-free at 1-year clinical follow-up.Fig. 2Immunophenotyping of bone marrow aspirate by flow cytometry. FACS (fluorescence
activated cell sorting) plots of CD 56–CD 19, CD 138–CD 38, CD 117–CD 45 were consistent with the diagnosis multiple myeloma IgG-λ. Myeloma
cells are typically CD56, CD38, CD138-positive and CD19 and CD45-negative Table 2Chart with results of laboratory testsReference valuesYears
before and after
presentation−4−3−101Cholesterol3.5–5.0 mmol/l4.94.13.83.65.5HDL-C0.9–1.7 mmol/l0.90.80.50.11.0LDL-C<4.4 mmol/l2.82.52.002.9Triglycerides0.6–2.2 mmol/l2.61.82.81.83.5IgA0.70–4.00 g/l0.220.30IgG7.0–16.0 g/l60.36.9IgM0.40–2.30 g/l0.070.24M-proteinAbsent
(g/l)41.73.7Total protein60–80 g/l11157Both total and HDL-cholesterol concentrations decrease over the years until very low HDL-C levels
were measured. After correction of the paraproteinemia with successive therapy of melfalan-prednisolon and later bortezomib-dexamethason,
cholesterol levels restored to initial values Immunophenotyping of bone marrow aspirate by flow cytometry. FACS (fluorescence activated cell
sorting) plots of CD 56–CD 19, CD 138–CD 38, CD 117–CD 45 were consistent with the diagnosis multiple myeloma IgG-λ. Myeloma cells are
typically CD56, CD38, CD138-positive and CD19 and CD45-negative Chart with results of laboratory tests Both total and HDL-cholesterol
concentrations decrease over the years until very low HDL-C levels were measured. After correction of the paraproteinemia with successive
therapy of melfalan-prednisolon and later bortezomib-dexamethason, cholesterol levels restored to initial values HDL-C measurements were
initially performed on a Hitachi 917 analyzer (Roche Diagnostics, Switzerland) with HDL-C reagent (HDL-C plus second generation, Roche
Diagnostics, Switzerland). A reanalysis of the serum sample with high paraproteins with a conventional precipitation method (sodium
phosphotungstate-MgCl2) yielded a normal value for HDL-C of 1.2 mmol/l. The case presented contains several learning points. First, the
laboratory charts disclose a steady decline of HDL-C values over a period of 4 years, reflecting the development of increasing amounts of
paraproteins which interfered in the HDL-C assay. Secondly, interference of paraproteins with HDL-C measurement can occur in various
automated analyzers . Paraproteins may have unusual specificity for various antigens, including actin, double-stranded DNA, thyroglobulin,
insulin, and apolipoprotein . Furthermore, paraproteins may also interfere with the measurement of HDL-C in homogeneous automated assays .
Interference is most probably due to the formation of a precipitate with the first reagent . The first reagents used in this assay consists
of dextransulphate, MgSO4 and α-cyclodextrin. These reagents are used to block the low density lipoproteins (i.e. to make them inaccessible
for the later added cholesteroloxidase). In this way, only cholesterol of HDL particles can be converted in cholestenone and H2O2. Using
peroxidase, the formed peroxide can finally be converted into color, which can then be colorimetrically detected and used as a measure for
the amount of HDL-C . Interference of paraproteins by precipitate formation in the first step gives falsely increased absorbance of the
blank and falsely decreased HDL-C values after subtraction from the final absorbance. This interference is unpredictable and independent of
the quantity or isotype of paraprotein . In the conventional precipitation method for measuring HDL-C, MgCl2 and sodium phosphotungstate are
manually added reagents to serum. They cause low density lipoproteins like chylomicrons, VLDL and LDL to precipitate and separate from high
density lipoproteins, which remain in the supernatant. Total cholesterol is measured in the supernatant as a measure for the amount of
HDL-C. This manual one-step precipitation assay is not interfered by paraproteins. The difference in HDL-C between the homogenous assay
(0.1 mmol/l) and the manual precipitation assay (1.2 mmol/l) is therefore most probably due to the presence of paraproteins. This suggestion
is supported by the improvement of HDL-C (1.0 mmol/l) after correction of the paraproteinemia in response to therapy. Thirdly, according to
some reports, measuring (almost) undetectable HDL-C values is extremely rare. In 2002, only 16 (0.06%) out of 247.111 HDL-C measurements in
the Clinical Laboratory of the San Francisco Medical Center (University of California) yielded undetectable values ; paraprotein
interference associated with undetectable HDL-C values was identified in 3 (16%) of 19 paraprotein-containing specimens. In another small
series of patients with known monoclonal paraproteins, an extremely low or undetectable HDL-C value was found in 4 out of 13 patients .
Recently, Roche Diagnostics has replaced the second generation HDL-C test by a new third generation test with an improved start reagent
(R1). Although the frequency of the interference is further reduced we have observed few other cases with falsely low HDL-C caused by
paraprotein interference since this replacement. Fourthly, because of the anemia (and extremely high ESR) on the first day of acute illness,
an underlying chronic condition could have been considered earlier. Would a more earlier recognition of the underlying multiple myeloma have
benefitted the patient? The extremely low HDL-C values were measured 3 months before the first hospital admittance by the general
practitioner. The initial treatment of the patient would not have been different, but a recurrence of the pneumonia might have been
postponed by an earlier treatment of the multiple myeloma. Thus, when measuring extremely low HDL-C levels on routine cardiovascular
screening, cardiologists and other physicians may consider the presence of multiple myeloma as a relatively rare but clinically important
differential diagnosis. No conflict of interest reported. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
author(s) and source are credited.
