In recent years, the synchronous occurrence of tumors of different histotypes arising in the same organ has been reported more frequently in
the literature. In the stomach, adenocarcinoma has been described with coexisting primary rhabdomyosarcoma, carcinoid, and low-grade B-cell
lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue. The simultaneous development of adenocarcinoma and gastric mesenchymal tumor has been
documented rarely. We report one such case. A 65-year-old male was diagnosed with a proximal gastric adenocarcinoma and underwent subtotal
gastrectomy. Subsequent histopathological examination revealed the presence of another tumor at the gastric antrum. This was a
gastrointestinal stromal tumor of low risk category (GIST). The literature has only a few previous reports of this very rare association. It
is not known whether this synchronicity is incidental or there is a causative factor inducing the development of tumors of different
histotypes in the same organ. Pathologists, oncologists and surgeons should be aware of this interesting condition. Adenocarcinoma is the
most common histological type of gastric tumor. It may coexist with another synchronous tumor of different histological type in a different
part of the stomach. Gastric adenocarcinoma may coexist most commonly with lymphoma and less commonly with carcinoid and gastrointestinal
stromal tumor (GIST). Rarely, cells of different histological types may intermix and form a collision tumor in the stomach. We present here
the very rare combination of a synchronous proximal gastric adenocarcinoma and a GIST. A 65-year-old gentleman presented with a five month
history of dyspeptic symptoms, and weight loss. Endoscopy showed ulceration along the lesser curvature of the proximal stomach. Multiple
mucosal biopsies were obtained from ulcerated areas and histopathology revealed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Subsequently, the
patient underwent an elective subtotal gastrectomy. Macroscopic examination of subtotal gastrectomy specimen showed firm texture of the
proximal stomach and an excavating ulcerative growth measuring 40×30×12mm along the lesser curvature. Interestingly, a nodule of firm white
tissue measuring 25 mm diameter, was present adjacent to the ulcerated area. Microscopically, the ulcerated area showed glands and sheets of
neoplastic cells which had reached the serosal surface [Figure 1]. Histological examination of adjacent nodule revealed GIST of low risk
category [Figure 2], which was composed of cytologically bland spindle cells that were demonstrated by immunohistochemistry to be uniformly
positive for CD117 [Figure 3]. Histological assessment of malignancy in GIST is based on tumor size and mitotic count and is classified into
four categories as shown in the following Table 1. H and E stained, ×40 section shows cytologically bland spindle cells in fascicles Section
from stomach nodule showing glands and sheets of neoplastic cells, H and E, ×40 Section from stomach nodule showing diffuse positivity for
CD117 of spindle cells, Immunohistochemistry, ×40 Risk Stratification of GIST In our case, GIST tumor size was 2.5 cm and mitotic count was
less than 5/50hpf. Applying these criteria, GIST was classified into low risk category as mentioned above. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors
(GISTs) are rare mesenchymal neoplasms of the digestive tract. Synchronous occurrence of a gastrointestinal stromal tumor with a tumor of
different histogenesis is very rare and has been documented in the literature mainly in case reports. There are only a few previous reports
of simultaneous adenocarcinoma and GIST in the stomach. In most of the reported cases of synchronous gastric adenocarcinoma and GIST, the
preoperative biopsy fragments showed only adenocarcinoma. GISTs were detected only following laparotomy and examination of the resected
specimens. In our case the total gastrectomy was performed for the proximal gastric adenocarcinoma and a small GIST was found incidentally
with the histopathological examination of the specimen. The simultaneous finding of epithelial and stromal gastric tumors raises the
question of whether such an occurrence is a simple incidental association or the two lesions are connected by a causal relationship. The
suggestion that the stomach harboring a leiomyosarcoma may have a tendency to develop malignant epithelial lesions was put forward by Tada
et al. Various hypotheses have been proposed regarding the simultaneous development of GIST and adenocarcinoma. Coincidence alone could
easily account for such an association, particularly in countries that exhibit high incidence rates of gastric cancer, such as Japan. The
possibility that gene mutations might underlie tumor predisposition in patients harboring a double gastric neoplasia cannot be theoretically
discarded. Evidence of familial disease was derived in only one case. At present, however, no data are available to support such a
hypothesis. An interesting hypothesis is that a single carcinogenic agent might interact with two neighboring tissues, inducing the
development of tumors of different histotypes in the same organ. Experimental evidence for this possibility has been provided. N-methyl-
N’-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine induces the development of gastric adenocarcinomas after oral administration in rats. However, when the same
compound is combined with agents that alter the gastric mucosal barrier, such as aspirin or stress, leiomyosarcomas develop in conjunction
with epithelial tumors. Equally compelling, although also experimental, are reports on the induction of gastric tumors in rats after
9,10-dimethyl-1,2-benzanthracene (DMBA) injection. Whereas administration of DMBA alone induces the development of adenocarcinomas,
treatment with DMBA and cellophane plate causes mainly the induction of gastric sarcomas. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None
declared.
