Limb girdle muscular dystrophy type 2 (LGMD2) is a genetically heterogeneous autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in 15 known
genes. DNA sequencing of all candidate genes can be expensive and laborious, whereas a selective sequencing approach often fails to provide
a molecular diagnosis. We aimed to efficiently identify pathogenic mutations via homozygosity mapping in a population in which the genetics
of LGMD2 has not been well characterized. Thirteen consanguineous families containing a proband with LGMD2 were recruited from Saudi Arabia,
and for 11 of these families, selected individuals were genotyped at 10,204 single nucleotide polymorphisms. Linkage analysis excluded all
but one or two known genes in ten of 11 genotyped families, and haplotype comparisons between families allowed further reduction in the
number of candidate genes that were screened. Mutations were identified by DNA sequencing in all 13 families, including five novel mutations
in four genes, by sequencing at most two genes per family. One family was reclassified as having a different myopathy based on genetic and
clinical data after linkage analysis excluded all known LGMD2 genes. LGMD2 subtypes A and B were notably absent from our sample of patients,
indicating that the distribution of LGMD2 mutations in Saudi Arabian families may be different than in other populations. Our data
demonstrate that homozygosity mapping in consanguineous pedigrees offers a more efficient means of discovering mutations that cause
heterogeneous disorders than comprehensive sequencing of known candidate genes. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1007/s10048-010-0250-9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Limb girdle muscular dystrophies
are a heterogeneous group of disorders, with the autosomal recessive type 2 (LGMD2) caused by mutations in at least 15 genes [1, 2].
Characterization of the mutational spectrum of a disease in diverse populations is necessary to understand its pathogenesis and
epidemiology. The frequencies of different LGMD2 subtypes and mutations vary considerably by population , but to our knowledge, the genetic
profile of LGMD2 in Saudi Arabian patients has not been previously described. However, it can be costly and time consuming to screen all
known LGMD2 genes (TTN alone has at least 312 exons), and screening only the seven most commonly mutated genes can fail to yield a mutation
in approximately 30–40% of patients [3, 4]. Homozygosity mapping is an effective technique for localizing rare recessive mutations, as
consanguineous pedigrees provide disproportionately high power for linkage analysis relative to the number of individuals genotyped . In
addition, high-density microarrays that assay thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) allow a more informative and inexpensive
genomewide linkage scan than conventional microsatellite panels . We hypothesized it would be cost effective to focus the discovery of
pathogenic LGMD2 mutations by performing SNP-based linkage analysis on consanguineous families, including those insufficiently informative
to achieve suggestive or significant LOD scores. Here, we report the discovery of five novel mutations in four genes via homozygosity
mapping in 11 Saudi Arabian families, accomplished at a fraction of the cost required to sequence all 15 LGMD2 genes. Thirteen families of
Saudi Arabian descent in which patients appeared to be affected with LGMD2 were recruited via King Khalid University Hospital and Security
Forces Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Written informed consent was obtained for all subjects, and de-identified genomic DNA samples were
transferred to Children’s Hospital Boston, in accordance with the Institutional Review Boards of the above institutions. The presumed
diagnosis of LGMD2 was made on the basis of clinical presentation, serum creatine kinase levels, and muscle biopsy findings (including
immunohistochemistry when available), as summarized in Table 1. Table 1Clinical presentation of 13 families with autosomal recessive
muscular dystrophy or myopathyFamilyAge of onsetFirst symptomsAge at loss of ambulation (years)Calf pseudohypertrophyCreatine kinase
(U/L)Cardiac involvementPulmonary involvementImmunohistochemistryMolecular diagnosis118615 months–4 yearsFrequent falling, fatigue in
playingAmbulant at 9–17Yes3,861–16,876NoneNoneSGCs α, β, δ neg; γ posLGMD2D11879 months–8 yearsFrequent falling, delayed walking15, ambulant
at 5–18Yes2,214–11,065Dilated cardio-myopathy, noneNoneSGCs α, β, δ pos; γ weakLGMD2I11881–6 yearsFrequent falling, difficulty rising and
running9, ambulant at 8Yes2,698–6,296NoneNoneSGCs α, β, γ posLGMD2I11891 yearFrequent falling10Yes, slight2,294NoneNoneNot
doneLGMD2I11901–5 yearsFrequent falling, difficulty walking, abnormal gait12, ambulant at 9Yes2,453–13,770Dilated left ventricle,
noneBronchial asthmaSGC α negLGMD2F11914 yearsFrequent falling, difficulty rising13YesElevatedNoneNoneSGCs α, β neg; δ, γ
weakLGMD2D12238–9 monthsCrawling with head down, delayed walking13, ambulant at 9No87–147NoneTracheostomy at 9, noneSGC α
posCMD/MmD12246 yearsTip-toe walkingAmbulant at 11Yes, slight7,860Mild mitral regurgitationNoneSGCs α, β, γ negLGMD2D12254 yearsDifficulty
running14Yes4,265NoneBronchial asthmaSGCs α, β, δ pos; γ negLGMD2C12261 yearFrequent falling, tip-toe walking8 following heel cord
surgeryNo4,268NoneDifficulty in sleep, breathingSGCs α, β, γ negLGMD2E12272 yearsAbnormal walkingAmbulant at 8Yes10,000NoneNoneSGCs α, β, δ,
γ posLGMD2I12281 yearDelayed walking, tip-toe walking9Yes11,580NoneNoneSGCs β, γ negLGMD2E12292 yearsFrequent falling, delayed walking7, 8,
ambulant at 5Yes664–19,487Dilated cardio-myopathy, noneNoneSGCs α, β, γ negLGMD2EMultiple entries or ranges of values encompass multiple
affected individuals. Reference ranges for normal creatine kinase levels varied by age and testing laboratory, but all fell within the range
140–239 U/L. All tested patients had a proximal pattern of weakness, were positive for Gowers’ sign (if ambulatory), had dystrophic muscle
tissue, and stained positive for dystrophin on immunohistochemistryLGMD2 limb girdle muscular dystrophy type 2, CMD congenital muscular
dystrophy, MmD multiminicore disease, SGC sarcoglycan, pos positive, neg negative Clinical presentation of 13 families with autosomal
recessive muscular dystrophy or myopathy Multiple entries or ranges of values encompass multiple affected individuals. Reference ranges for
normal creatine kinase levels varied by age and testing laboratory, but all fell within the range 140–239 U/L. All tested patients had a
proximal pattern of weakness, were positive for Gowers’ sign (if ambulatory), had dystrophic muscle tissue, and stained positive for
dystrophin on immunohistochemistry LGMD2 limb girdle muscular dystrophy type 2, CMD congenital muscular dystrophy, MmD multiminicore
disease, SGC sarcoglycan, pos positive, neg negative Samples from 11 families were genotyped at 10,204 SNPs using the GeneChip Human Mapping
10K 2.0 Array (Affymetrix). To minimize costs, we genotyped primarily affected individuals, with unaffected subjects genotyped as needed
(Fig. 1). Genomewide multipoint parametric linkage scans were performed using MERLIN v1.1.2 . The disease allele frequency was set to
0.0001, and we used a full penetrance, zero phenocopy model. Marker map positions and Caucasian allele frequencies were provided by
Affymetrix. The error checking and Pedwipe functions of MERLIN were used to remove unlikely genotypes. Based on results from families
1186–1191, families 1223–1229 were screened for mutations in SGCA (also known as adhalin) and FKRP prior to 10K genotyping; two families
(1224 and 1227) in which mutations were identified were therefore not genotyped. Amplification of candidate gene exons and splice junctions
by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and sequencing of purified products were performed by standard protocols, and sequence data were analyzed
using Sequencher v4.8 (Gene Codes) and SeqScape v2.5 (Applied Biosystems). Mutations were genotyped in DNA samples from unrelated control
subjects using Custom TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assays (Applied Biosystems). Multi-species sequence alignments were performed in ClustalW , and
the impact of amino acid substitutions on protein function was predicted by PolyPhen . Fig. 1Pedigrees of 13 families with autosomal
recessive muscular dystrophy or myopathy. Squares males, circles females, filled symbols affected individuals, partially black-filled
symbols obligate heterozygous carriers, partially gray-filled symbols possible heterozygous carriers, open symbols unaffected individuals.
Double bars represent consanguineous unions. Asterisks denote individuals genotyped for genomewide linkage analysis Pedigrees of 13 families
with autosomal recessive muscular dystrophy or myopathy. Squares males, circles females, filled symbols affected individuals, partially
black-filled symbols obligate heterozygous carriers, partially gray-filled symbols possible heterozygous carriers, open symbols unaffected
individuals. Double bars represent consanguineous unions. Asterisks denote individuals genotyped for genomewide linkage analysis The
clinical presentations and laboratory results were generally typical of LGMD2, except in the case of family 1223, in which creatine kinase
levels were not elevated and calf pseudohypertrophy was absent (Table 1). The kindreds 1186–1191 and 1223–1229 were consanguineous and
displayed autosomal recessive inheritance (Fig. 1). Mutations were identified in all 13 families, and for the 11 genotyped families, the
mutations were in genes implicated by homozygosity mapping (Table 2). Five families produced one or more linkage peaks that together
contained a single known LGMD2 gene, including one family (1225) with a maximum LOD score of 1.8 in which we genotyped only two affected
siblings. Four families generated linkage peaks containing two known LGMD2 genes, including a family (1228) with a maximum LOD score of 1.2
in which only a single affected individual was genotyped. For three families in which two linked genes resided in different intervals, the
LOD score was appreciably higher for the peak containing the gene in which a mutation was found. In family 1191, two linked genes in a
single interval, SGCA and TCAP, were both sequenced and TCAP was negative for mutations. Table 2Results of linkage analysis and mutation
screeningFamilySamples genotypedLinked known genesMaximum possible LOD scoreMaximum actual LOD scoresGene with mutationMutationAmino acid
substitutionNovel?Controls genotyped11865SGCA4.9414.940SGCAc.101G>Ap.R34HNoNA11874FKRP2.5332.533FKRPc.941C>Tp.T314MYes37911884FKRP,
POMT13.1353.132, 2.240FKRPc.1012G>Tp.V338LYes36811895FKRP4.0384.038FKRPc.941C>Tp.T314MYesa(379
above)11904SGCD2.5332.533SGCDc.97C>Tp.R33XYesNA11914SGCA,
TCAP1.5791.578SGCAc.584+5G>ANAYes49112238SEPN11.8291.828SEPN1c.467T>Cp.L156PYes37512240NANANASGCAc.101G>Ap.R34HNoNA12252SGCG1.8061.804SGCGc.525delp.F175LfsX20NoNA12261SGCB,
SGCA, TCAP, DYSF1.2041.204, 1.162, 0.607SGCBc.541_551delp.S181XNoNA12270NANANAFKRPc.941C>Tp.T314MYesa(379 above)12281SGCB, SGCG1.2041.202,
0.662SGCBc.541_551delp.S181XNoNA12293SGCB, POMT12.4082.408, 1.359SGCBc.541_551delp.S181XNoNALOD scores for each family are reported only for
genomic intervals containing linked known genes, and are listed in the same order as those genes. A single interval contained both SGCA and
TCAP in families 1191 and 1226. All mutations were homozygous in affected individuals, heterozygous in obligate carriers, and absent from
all genotyped controls. Mutations were detected in DNA; predicted mutations in protein sequence were inferredNA not applicableaAn additional
occurrence of a novel mutation reported herein Results of linkage analysis and mutation screening LOD scores for each family are reported
only for genomic intervals containing linked known genes, and are listed in the same order as those genes. A single interval contained both
SGCA and TCAP in families 1191 and 1226. All mutations were homozygous in affected individuals, heterozygous in obligate carriers, and
absent from all genotyped controls. Mutations were detected in DNA; predicted mutations in protein sequence were inferred NA not applicable
aAn additional occurrence of a novel mutation reported herein Family 1226 showed linkage at four known LGMD2 genes, but families 1226, 1228,
and 1229 shared a haplotype in common across a portion of their linkage peaks containing SGCB (Online Resource 1), allowing us to correctly
predict that all three families carried the same ancestral mutation in SGCB and thus avoid sequencing the other five total candidate genes.
Two genotyped families with the c.941C>T (p.T314M) mutation in FKRP also shared an identical haplotype across FKRP (data not shown), again
implying that these families inherited their mutation from a common ancestor. A third, ungenotyped family carried this novel mutation as
well, suggesting that c.941C>T may be a founder mutation in Saudi Arabia. In the 11th genotyped family, 1223, preliminary linkage results
from a single affected individual produced intervals containing CAPN3 and DYSF. The proband was homozygous for a mutation in DYSF, c.6062G>A
(p.R2021Q), previously reported (as p.R2000Q) to be compound heterozygous in conjunction with a nonsense mutation in a family with Miyoshi
myopathy . However, c.6062G>A was homozygous in a confirmed unaffected sibling in family 1223 and was heterozygous in three of 368 unrelated
Kuwaiti control subjects, indicating either that this variant is a benign polymorphism or is only pathogenic when combined with a more
severe mutation. Genomewide genotyping of additional family 1223 members excluded both CAPN3 and DYSF by linkage, but a linked interval on
chromosome 1 contained the gene SEPN1, in which mutations cause several muscle diseases, including congenital muscular dystrophy (CMD) and
multiminicore disease (MmD) [11, 12]. Though affected members of family 1223 showed the typical pattern of weakness for LGMD, careful review
of their clinical data also revealed scoliosis, respiratory difficulty treated by tracheostomy, and focal areas of myofibrillar
disorganization and Z-band streaming in biopsy tissue, consistent with a diagnosis of CMD or MmD. We identified two novel homozygous
missense variants in SEPN1 that segregated with the disease: c.467T>C (p.L156P) and c.1654G>A (p.E552K). However, the c.1654G>A variant was
heterozygous in eight of 374 unrelated Kuwaiti controls, the p.E552 residue was not completely conserved (Online Resource 2), and the
p.E552K substitution was predicted to be less detrimental by PolyPhen than p.L156P (data not shown). Together, these data strongly suggest
that c.1654G>A is an uncommon polymorphism and c.467T>C (p.L156P) is the pathogenic mutation in family 1223. Finally, mutations in two
commonly mutated genes (SGCA and FKRP) were found in two additional families that were not subjected to linkage analysis. In total, we
identified eight pathogenic mutations in six genes in 13 families, of which five mutations in four genes were novel, while three mutations
were previously reported . The three novel missense mutations were absent from at least 368 Kuwaiti control DNA samples, and the novel
splice site mutation was absent from 386 Kuwaiti controls and 105 Southeastern European controls. All four novel pathogenic missense or
splice mutations were completely conserved in all vertebrate species analyzed (Online Resource 2). We conducted, to our knowledge, the first
genetic characterization of LGMD in a Saudi Arabian population. Seven cases of Miyoshi myopathy from Saudi Arabia have been described
clinically, and though mutations were not identified in these patients , mutations in DYSF have since been shown to cause both Miyoshi
myopathy and LGMD2B . In our study, homozygosity mapping via linkage analysis was used to efficiently identify five novel and three known
mutations in five commonly mutated LGMD2 genes (SGCA, SGCB, SGCD, SGCG, and FKRP) and a congenital myopathy gene (SEPN1). Multiple
alternatives to linkage analysis are frequently used for homozygosity mapping [2, 18, 19], usually because they are technically simpler or
computationally faster than a linkage scan, especially with very large pedigrees or exceptionally dense marker panels . However, for a trait
for which many genes have been previously identified, the probability that any particular family will contain a mutation in a known gene is
high, so in this scenario, it is likely more cost effective for pedigrees with known consanguinity to limit genotyping to only a select few
informative individuals on the most inexpensive SNP-based platforms. Our study confirms that under these conditions, homozygosity mapping
can be readily accomplished by standard parametric linkage analysis , which has the benefits over other methods of distinguishing blocks of
autozygosity from blocks of uninformative markers (which are not uncommon on high density SNP arrays) when parents and/or unaffected
siblings are genotyped, as well as providing a measure of the statistical significance of linkage peaks interpretable by conventional
standards. We further highlight the utility of linkage analysis as a screening method even in families of marginal informativity. Nine of 11
genotyped families produced maximum LOD scores below the threshold of 3.3 for significant genomewide linkage, and five of those families
fell below the threshold of 1.9 for suggestive linkage . Nevertheless, linkage analysis excluded at least 13 of the 15 known genes in nine
of ten families with LGMD2, and the LOD scores favored a specific gene in four of five families in which multiple known genes were linked.
Comparison of haplotype data in linkage peaks shared among families further improved the power of our analyses by identifying families with
evidence of carrying the same mutation inherited from a common ancestor. Accordingly, a mutation was identified in nine of ten genotyped
LGMD2 families by sequencing a single gene; we thereby saved considerably on time and sequencing costs by conducting linkage scans.
Surprisingly, none of the families showed linkage to CAPN3 or DYSF, though they are the two most commonly mutated genes among LGMD2 patients
in some populations [3, 4, 23], suggesting that LGMD2 subtypes A and B may be less common in Saudi Arabia than elsewhere. Since both CAPN3
and DYSF require at least 30 amplicons to sequence their exons, the cost of PCR and bidirectional Sanger sequencing of either one in a
single patient exceeds the cost of processing one 10K SNP array ($280 at Children’s Hospital Boston), further illustrating the economy of
our approach. Moreover, the exclusion of all 15 known LGMD2 genes in family 1223 and the subsequent discovery of mutations in the myopathy
gene SEPN1 demonstrate the application of linkage analysis to assist in resolving ambiguous clinical diagnoses, which may help account for
the high failure rate when searching for mutations by sequencing alone. Another alternative to comprehensive sequencing is to attempt
molecular diagnosis by protein analysis, as six of the seven most commonly mutated LGMD2 genes (CAPN3, DYSF, SGCA, SGCB, SGCD, and SGCG)
encode proteins that are absent or severely reduced by immunoblot or immunohistochemistry in the corresponding LGMD2 subtypes . While this
strategy depends on the availability of well-preserved biopsy tissue, it may be inexpensive and effective in some cases and thus
advantageous for non-consanguineous families or sporadic patients. However, protein-based diagnostic testing can be time consuming and
laborious, require separate optimization of conditions for each test, or lead to ambiguous findings, as when a single missing sarcoglycan
subunit causes disruption of other subunits. Like Sanger sequencing, protein assays involve individual testing of each hypothesis, and the
frequency with which a particular test will succeed in identifying the molecular defect depends on the LGMD2 subtype distribution in the
population. For infrequently studied populations, the distribution may be unknown or unusual, and for patients in which protein tests are
unsuccessful, genetic analyses may then be necessary, possibly negating any initial cost savings. By contrast, genomewide homozygosity
mapping offers a single, unbiased, simultaneous test of all possible loci, and in cases where the most obvious candidate genes are excluded,
linkage data can direct attention to novel genes or genes associated with similar phenotypes. While homozygosity mapping is most effective
in families known to be consanguineous, it can also be applied successfully to outbred populations when higher density SNP arrays are used .
Homozygosity mapping may therefore provide a faster and less expensive approach to molecular diagnosis of genetically heterogeneous traits
in many families than comprehensive screening of candidate genes by traditional sequencing methods. Below is the link to the electronic
supplementary material. Haplotype comparison of a shared linkage peak in families 1226, 1228, and 1229. The homozygous haplotypes from
affected individuals in three families showing linkage to the SGCB gene are indicated for markers spanning the overlapping portion of the
linkage peaks. The haplotype was identical in all families and carried the c.541_551del mutation. Alleles for all biallelic SNP markers are
arbitrarily assigned as “A” and “B.” (PDF 13kb) Evolutionary conservation of novel mutations. Protein or DNA sequence flanking five missense
or splice site mutations not previously reported is aligned across multiple species. Mutated amino acid or base is indicated by arrow and in
red for Homo sapiens. (A) Protein sequence alignment for FKRP missense mutations p.T314M and p.V338L. (B) DNA sequence alignment for SGCA
splice mutation c.584+5G>A. (C) Protein sequence alignment for SEPN1 missense mutation p.L156P. (D) Protein sequence alignment for SEPN1
missense mutation. (PDF 11kb) The authors thank the patients and their families for their participation in this study and Kyriacos Markianos
for helpful discussions. This work was supported by K08 NS048180 (PBK), the Genise Goldenson Fund (PBK), the Howard Hughes Medical Institute
(LMK), the Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research (LMK), and the Bernard and Alva B. Gimbel Foundation (LMK). Microarray genotyping and
DNA sequencing experiments were performed in the Molecular Genetics Core Facility at Children’s Hospital Boston, supported by
NIH-P30-HD18655 through the Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center and NIH-P50-NS40828 through the Neuromuscular
Disease Project. Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. Open Access This article is distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited. Steven E. Boyden and Mustafa A. Salih contributed
equally to this work.
