Dear Editor, End ileostomy, introduced by Brooke in 1952, has become a popular procedure in colorectal surgery. Reported postoperative
complication rates range from 5 to 100% . The most common complications include prolapse, necrosis, parastomal hernia and peristomal skin
erosions. Stomal prolapse, as a long-term complication, occurs in 22% of adults and 38% of children . It is caused by the invagination of
proximal redundant bowel through the distal part in patients with ileostomy or colostomy. A loop stoma poses a greater risk of prolapse than
an end stoma. Loop colostomy is more prone to prolapse than is ileostomy. Prolapse rates ranging between 3 and 42% have been reported [4,
5]. Immediate postoperative stomal prolapse is very rare. We present a case of small bowel obstruction caused by prolapse and
intussusception through end ileostomy in a 36-year-old woman who underwent urgent laparotomy due to Crohn’s disease of the terminal ileum
close to the ileocaecal valve. The patient was diagnosed with Crohn’s disease in 2008. She was treated conservatively (Salofalk, Metypred,
PPI, Scopolan). Despite increasing symptoms of obstruction, the patient was not treated surgically. She slowly deteriorated and lost weight.
At admission in July 2008, the patient’s BMI was 14.5 (body weight 42 kg), and her serum albumin level was 2.28%. The patient presented with
signs and symptoms of small bowel obstruction. After a short-term preparation, the patient underwent laparotomy. At laparotomy, a 19-cm-long
loop of distal ileum was found to be narrowed, inflamed, edematous, congested, thickened and causing ileal obstruction. The ileum, 11 cm in
diameter and 30–40 cm long, was distended and inflamed. Proximal small bowel loops looked normal. The patient underwent partial resection of
the diseased ileum. End ileostomy was performed to avoid primary anastomosis, because the patient was considered high-risk, with
hypoalbuminemia and malnourishment. It was difficult to perform end ileostomy with eversion due to extensive inflammation. In addition, the
everted ileostomy was fixed with through-and-through u-sutures to prevent de-eversion. The free edge of the ileal mesentery was sutured to
the lateral parietal peritoneum. On postoperative day 2, a marked prolapse (30 cm) of small bowel through the ileostomy occurred. Manual
reduction of the prolapse was unsuccessful. The patient was taken to the operating room (OR), where the prolapse was reduced under general
anesthesia. On postoperative day 6, marked prolapse of at least 30 cm in small bowel recurred. The patient underwent laparotomy, and the
prolapse and ileal intussusception were reduced. The terminal 40 cm of the ileum was thickened and distended up to 9–11 cm. A modified
Reymond’s intestinal plication of 4 ileal loops, each about 15 cm long, was performed. A single row of interrupted 3–0 Vicryl stitches
(Ethicon Inc., Cincinnati, USA) was placed on mesentery approximately 1 cm away from its attachment to the bowel. The fixation of the
terminal 60–70 cm of ileum prevented a subsequent prolapse and intussusception of the narrowed proximal ileal loops into a wide and stiff
terminal ileum. On the day following this procedure, the patient began to tolerate a normal diet, and she was discharged 1 week later. At
2-week follow-up, the patient was in very good condition with an almost normal looking ileostomy. The preventive procedure used in our case
of a 36-year-old female patient with 2 episodes of early postoperative ileostomy prolapse resembles the Nobel procedure that has been used
in a similar case described by Irving et al. in 1955. As this was the first case of this nature I encountered in my 47-year surgical
practice, I have the following 2 questions:Is it better to perform end or lateral ileostomy in a wide, inflamed, stiff ileum?How can the
invagination of peristaltic and narrow proximal small bowel into the distended terminal ileum be prevented? Is it better to perform end or
lateral ileostomy in a wide, inflamed, stiff ileum? How can the invagination of peristaltic and narrow proximal small bowel into the
distended terminal ileum be prevented? Any comments and remarks concerning the aforesaid questions will be greatly appreciated. This article
is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
