The safe and reversible nature of deep brain stimulation (DBS) has allowed movement disorder neurosurgery to become commonplace throughout
the world. Fundamental understanding of individual patient’s anatomy is critical for optimizing the effects and side effects of DBS surgery.
Three patients undergoing stereotactic surgery for movement disorders, at the institution’s intraoperative magnetic resonance imaging
operating suite, were studied with fiber tractography. Stereotactic targets and fiber tractography were determined on preoperative magnetic
resonance imagings using the Schaltenbrand–Wahren atlas for definition in the BrainLab iPlan software (BrainLAB Inc., Feldkirchen, Germany).
Subthalamic nucleus, globus pallidus interna, and ventral intermediate nucleus targets were studied. Diffusion tensor imaging parameters
used ranged from 2 to 8 mm for volume of interest in the x/y/z planes, fiber length was kept constant at 30 mm, and fractional anisotropy
threshold varied from 0.20 to 0.45. Diffusion tensor imaging tractography allowed reliable and reproducible visualization and correlation
between frontal eye field, premotor, primary motor, and primary sensory cortices via corticospinal tracts and corticopontocerebellar tracts.
There is an apparent increase in the number of cortical regions targeted by the fiber tracts as the region of interest is enlarged. This
represents a possible mechanism of the increased effects and side effects observed with higher stimulation voltages. Currently available
diffusion tensor imaging techniques allow potential methods to characterize the effects and side effects of DBS. This technology has the
potential of being a powerful tool to optimize DBS neurosurgery. Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has tremendously changed the field of
functional neurosurgery from one of ablative techniques to adjustable and reversible applications. While DBS has revolutionized the
treatment of various brain disorders, the mechanisms of side effects, such as eye deviation, dysarthria, face, and hand activation are
coming to light. The application of diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging has enhanced the ability to view anatomical detail beyond
what is seen by conventional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography scans. Indeed, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) allows in
vivo imaging of fiber tracts in humans.[1, 12, 14] Water diffusion in white matter is directionally dependant, allowing the formation of
anisotropic maps and evaluation of their movement vectors. Fiber tracts (e.g., axons) can be deduced by calculating the cumulative molecular
water diffusion vectors. When there is no net diffusion, as in some gray matter regions or crossing white matter tracts, the region may be
isotropic and fiber tracking in these regions with this technology is not possible. This type of imaging has been validated with known fiber
tracts and animal models.[6, 13, 16] In this study, we sought to better understand the mechanisms of side effects from DBS in patients
undergoing treatment for movement disorders. After institutional review board approval, we retrospectively reviewed 18 sequential MRI image
sets of patients who underwent DBS for movement disorders between March and July 2007. Most of these patients had DTI imaging preoperatively
performed in the 1.5 Tesla Sonata intraoperative MRI (iMRI) suite (Siemens AG, Munich, Germany) at the UCLA Medical Center. Medtronic 3389
Deep Brain Stimulator Leads (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN) were placed in all patients. Diffusion tensor source imaging acquisition was
undertaken before placement of the Leksell stereotactic frame (Elekta Instrument AB, Stockholm, Sweden) that was placed parallel to Reid’s
line under propofol sedation. A detailed description of the stereotactic procedure, as well as the imaging acquisition for targeting, had
been previously reported.[3, 9] The side effects obtained during surgery were registered to all patients and their respective targets.
During surgery, the threshold for clinical improvement was noted and the amplitude of electrical stimulation was increased until the side
effects appeared. Thresholds for side effects were noted for each patient. The protocol for intraoperative stimulation in our institution
was previously reported.[2, 3, 5, 9, 11, 15] To be included in this study, we evaluated the preoperative MRI sequences to be certain that
the entire brain was scanned with high-quality DTI fractional anisotropy maps for determination of white-matter fiber tracts. Patients who
had the devices removed postoperatively due to infection or malfunction were excluded. Patients who were lost to follow-up or did not have
postoperative recording data were excluded. After screening these 18 patients for the inclusion criteria, 5 were deemed appropriate for
analysis and 3 were chosen to for a detailed performance of fiber tracking on the three different targets commonly selected for deep brain
stimulation (DBS) cases, namely, subthalamic nucleus (STN), globus pallidus interna (GPi), and ventral intermediate nucleus (VIM). The three
patients selected for this report had 12-directional DTIs performed before placement of the frame. DTI data were acquired using single-shot
spin-echo echo-planar imaging with TR = 10,000 ms, TE = 90 ms, acquisition matrix = 128 × 128 and field of view = 25.6 cm. Using a slice
thickness of 2 mm with no gap, diffusion-sensitizing gradient encoding was applied in 12 directions by using a diffusion-weighted factor
b = 700 s/mm2, and one image was acquired without use of a diffusion gradient, i.e., b = 0 s/mm2. The DTI imaging time was approximately
4 min. BrainLab’s iPlan Stereotaxy 2.6 software (BrainLAB Inc., Feldkirchen, Germany) was used in all the analyses. The preoperative DTI
sequences were fused with the postoperative T1 sequences. Final electrode placement was analyzed postoperatively, and final trajectories
were traced based on artifact location using postoperative magnetic resonance scans. The measuring tool was then used to pinpoint the
location of the desired lead by using probe view and centering the location at the appropriate distance. Due to data acquisition
limitations, the smallest region of interest (ROI) attainable was a 2-mm cube. Patient 1 underwent DBS of the STN for Parkinson disease
treatment. Fiber tractography was performed at right lead 1 (Fig. 1a) where improvement in motor function was seen at 1.5 V. The threshold
for uncontrollable arm movement was noted at 3.4 V. Final coordinates for the tip of the electrode were 10.6 mm lateral to the AC/PC line,
1.6 mm posterior to the AC/PC midcommisural plane, and 3.6 mm ventral to AC/PC plane. Fig. 1a Diagram of the Medtronic 3389 intracranial DBS
lead orientation and measurements. b Color-coded diagram of ROI voxels used for fiber tractography at specific locations surrounding the
case electrode lead. The yellow boxes demonstrate the 2 × 2 × 2 mm small ROIs. The purple boxes demonstrate the total of 2 × 2 × 8 mm large
ROI (including the original 2 × 2 × 2 mm ROI). Fiber tractography demonstrated in Figs. 3–5 adhere to this color scheme a Diagram of the
Medtronic 3389 intracranial DBS lead orientation and measurements. b Color-coded diagram of ROI voxels used for fiber tractography at
specific locations surrounding the case electrode lead. The yellow boxes demonstrate the 2 × 2 × 2 mm small ROIs. The purple boxes
demonstrate the total of 2 × 2 × 8 mm large ROI (including the original 2 × 2 × 2 mm ROI). Fiber tractography demonstrated in Figs. 3–5
adhere to this color scheme Patient 2 underwent DBS of the ventral intermediate nucleus (VIM) for treatment of essential tremor. Fiber
tractography was performed at left lead 0 (Fig. 1a), where tremor arrest was noted at 1.8 V. Facial pulling and dysarthria was noted at
3.6 V. Final coordinates for the tip of the electrode were 11.3 mm lateral to the AC/PC line, 8.14 mm posterior to AC/PC midcommisural
plane, and 0.45 mm dorsal to AC/PC plane Patient 3 had cerebral palsy and underwent DBS of the globus pallidus interna (GPi) for dystonia
treatment. Fiber tractography was performed at left lead 0 (Fig. 1a), where facial pulling was noted at 8.0 V. Dystonia improvement was
unable to be assessed intraoperatively as the patient was secured to the stereotaxic frame. Therefore, intraoperative therapeutic data were
not recorded for this patient. Final coordinates for the tip of the electrode were 15.5 mm lateral to the AC/PC line, 3.31 mm anterior to
the AC/PC midcommisural plane, and 2.49 mm ventral to AC/PC plane. The object creation tool was then used to draw the cortical areas of
interest, namely, the premotor, primary motor, supplementary motor, primary sensory, secondary sensory, and frontal eye field cortices based
on the Brodmann areas model and the Schaltenbrand–Wahren atlas for definition and confirmation in the iPlan software (BrainLab). Fiber
tractography was performed next using the software’s fiber tractography function. Specific electrodes per patient were selected based on the
most therapeutic intraoperative and clinical symptom relief. Therefore, patient 1 was evaluated at lead 1, and fiber tracks were centered at
4.25 mm from the distal end of the lead, and patients 2 and 3 both were evaluated at lead 0, and fiber tracks were centered at 2.25 mm from
the distal end of the lead (Fig. 1a). Patients 1 and 3 were analyzed at a fractional anisotropy threshold of 0.2, while patient 2 was
analyzed at 0.45 at the lateral and ventral locations and 0.4 elsewhere. A minimum fiber length of 30 mm was used for all patients. Volume
of interest (VOI) was defined at the region of interest (ROI). VOI cubical 2 × 2 × 2 mm voxels were placed immediately anterior, posterior,
lateral, medial, dorsal, and ventral of the desired lead. Each voxel was extended radially to 2 × 2 × 4 mm, 2 × 2 × 6 mm (2 × 3 × 6 mm for
patient 1), and 2 × 2 × 8 mm (2 × 4 × 8 mm for patient 1). Fiber tractography was performed for each dimension and location. The differences
in voxel size for patient 1 were due to gantry angle differences during the imaging. We opted to use this “radial rectangle” method in lieu
of simply enlarging the voxel area around the ROI in order to better discern the anatomical location of fibers (Fig. 1b). This method
decreased the “noise” that was recorded compared with full-volume ROI tractography. The rectangular enlargement was used to simulate the
possible relationship between fiber distance and voltage; larger voxels would capture fibers that were stimulated at higher voltages and
possibly adverse side effects. Fiber tractography demonstrates that, globally, the majority of fiber tracts were medial to GPi, lateral to
VIM, and encased in STN. This correlates to known anatomically defined pathways of the internal capsule and the corona radiata. There were
varying pathways seen as the region of interest (ROI) was expanded. This is demonstrated with three-dimensional rendition of hemispheric
fiber tractography per each DBS target (Fig. 2). Notice the broader spread of fibers passing in proximity of the GPi target (yellow) as
compared with STN (pink) and mostly to the specific focallity of the fibers en passage close to the VIM target. Fig. 2Three-dimensional
demonstration of fiber tractography with STN, VIM, and GPi targets in anteroposterior (a), craniocaudal (b), and lateral (c) views. The ROI
was a 4-mm cube centered around the targets as calculated from the AC/PC coordinates. There is significant variability in fiber tract
targets, particularly between GPi and STN DBS targets Three-dimensional demonstration of fiber tractography with STN, VIM, and GPi targets
in anteroposterior (a), craniocaudal (b), and lateral (c) views. The ROI was a 4-mm cube centered around the targets as calculated from the
AC/PC coordinates. There is significant variability in fiber tract targets, particularly between GPi and STN DBS targets Patient 1, who had
undergone DBS placement in the STN, demonstrated fiber tracts leading to the precentral and premotor cortices, particularly at the level of
the hand region with a small ROI (2 × 2 × 2 mm). However, additional fiber tracts were incorporated using a large ROI (2 × 2 × 8 mm)
laterally, including tracts leading to the prefrontal cortex, the parietal cortex, and the inferior occipitofrontal fasiculus. In addition,
the frontal eye fields region (Brodmann area 8) appeared to have approaching tracts (Fig. 3). Fig. 3Fiber tractography of lead 1 in patient
1 (STN DBS). Three-dimensional depiction (a) of the small (yellow) and large (purple) ROIs demonstrating increased cortical fiber tract
targets. The pink object is the primary motor cortex (based on anatomical landmarks). Axial (b) and coronal (c, d) slices of source images
with color-coded diagrams depict the large ROI fiber tracts (purple—arrows) extending to the prefrontal and parietal cortices, possibly
including the frontal eye fields in addition to the fiber tracts of the small ROI (yellow—arrowheads). The pink region is the motor cortex
region Fiber tractography of lead 1 in patient 1 (STN DBS). Three-dimensional depiction (a) of the small (yellow) and large (purple) ROIs
demonstrating increased cortical fiber tract targets. The pink object is the primary motor cortex (based on anatomical landmarks). Axial (b)
and coronal (c, d) slices of source images with color-coded diagrams depict the large ROI fiber tracts (purple—arrows) extending to the
prefrontal and parietal cortices, possibly including the frontal eye fields in addition to the fiber tracts of the small ROI
(yellow—arrowheads). The pink region is the motor cortex region Patient 2 had undergone DBS placement in the VIM. Tractography demonstrated
tracts leading to the motor and premotor cortices with a small ROI. The large ROI tractography demonstrated additional tracts leading to the
prefrontal, supplementary motor, and parietal cortices as well as the cerebellum (Fig. 4). Fig. 4Fiber tractography of lead 0 in patient 2
(VIM DBS). Three-dimensional depiction (a) of the small (yellow) and large (purple) ROIs demonstrating increased cortical fiber tract
targets. The pink object is the primary motor cortex (based on anatomical landmarks). Axial (b) and coronal (c, d) slices of source images
with color-coded diagrams depict the large ROI fiber tracts (purple—arrows) extending to the prefrontal and parietal cortices in addition to
the fiber tracts of the small ROI (yellow—arrowhead) Fiber tractography of lead 0 in patient 2 (VIM DBS). Three-dimensional depiction (a) of
the small (yellow) and large (purple) ROIs demonstrating increased cortical fiber tract targets. The pink object is the primary motor cortex
(based on anatomical landmarks). Axial (b) and coronal (c, d) slices of source images with color-coded diagrams depict the large ROI fiber
tracts (purple—arrows) extending to the prefrontal and parietal cortices in addition to the fiber tracts of the small ROI (yellow—arrowhead)
Patient 3 had a DBS placed in the GPi. Fiber tractography demonstrated tracts leading to the motor, prefrontal, sensory, and parietal
cortices when a small ROI was used. The large ROI demonstrated additional tracts leading to the frontal eye fields and the cerebellum
(Fig. 5). Fig. 5Fiber tractography of lead 0 in patient 3 (GPi DBS). Three-Dimensional depiction (a) of the small (yellow) and large
(purple) ROIs demonstrating increased cortical fiber tract targets. The pink object is the primary motor cortex (based on anatomical
landmarks). Coronal (b) and axial (c, d) slices of source images with color-coded diagrams depict the large ROI fiber tracts (purple—arrows)
extending to the prefrontal cortex, possibly including the frontal eye fields in addition to the fiber tracts of the small ROI
(yellow—arrowheads) Fiber tractography of lead 0 in patient 3 (GPi DBS). Three-Dimensional depiction (a) of the small (yellow) and large
(purple) ROIs demonstrating increased cortical fiber tract targets. The pink object is the primary motor cortex (based on anatomical
landmarks). Coronal (b) and axial (c, d) slices of source images with color-coded diagrams depict the large ROI fiber tracts (purple—arrows)
extending to the prefrontal cortex, possibly including the frontal eye fields in addition to the fiber tracts of the small ROI
(yellow—arrowheads) There were no concrete associations with side effects and cortical regions targeted by the “High Voltage” ROI. However,
some of the motor side effects (i.e., facial pulling and uncontrolled arm movement) correlated with the fiber tracts leading to the SMA or
premotor cortical regions (Table 1). Table 1Motor side effectsPatientTargetInitial side effectFiber tractography “low voltage” ROIFiber
tractography “high voltage” ROI1STNUncontrolled arm movementsPrimary motor cortexFrontal eye fieldsPremotor cortexPrefrontal cortexParietal
cortex2VIMFacial pullingPrimary motor cortexPrefrontal cortexDysarthriaPremotor cortexSMAParietal cortex3GPiFacial pullingPrefrontal
cortexSMAPremotor cortexParietal cortexPrimary motor cortexPrimary sensory cortex Motor side effects Diffusion tensor tractography, a method
of visualizing white-matter fiber tracts in vivo, has numerous applications in neurosurgery. For DBS, this technology has yielded
information beyond what has been previously utilized. Theoretical models have suggested that white-fiber tracts are the limiting factor for
side effects during DBS. For example, Shields et al. demonstrated through clinical data that the common side effect of eye deviation during
STN stimulation is due to white-matter fiber tracts being activated in the anterior limb of the internal capsule leading to the frontal eye
fields. With the help of voltage vectors and anatomical atlases, the authors diagram a possible model describing the electrical field in
relation to the internal capsule. Various other authors have deduced similar anatomical models based on clinical data.[7, 10] With fiber
tractography, such anatomical models can be confirmed with MRI. However, variations of electrical field density over anisotropic tissue
types (e.g., large diameter axons, small diameter axons, and gray matter) may not allow a direct correlation when compared with
tractography.[4, 8] We have shown in this study the proximity of these white fiber tracts to various leads. Fibers of motor, premotor,
supplementary motor, and frontal eye field regions are very intimately associated with STN and GPi stereotactic locations, more so than for
VIM. Patient 1 demonstrated intraoperative arm movement as an initial side effect. This may correlate with fiber tracts leading to the hand
region of the motor cortex as seen with fiber tractography. Patients 2 and 3 both had facial pulling as intraoperative side effects, which
could also be correlated with fiber tracts leading to the face region of the motor cortices. In addition, patient 2 experienced dysarthria
intraoperatively, which could be explained by the fibers leading to the prefrontal cortex and to the cerebellum, possibly involving the
brainstem (Table 1). Other known side effects of DBS overstimulation, such as eye deviation and parasthesias, could be explained by the
fiber tracts incorporated by the larger ROIs leading to the frontal eye field region of the premotor cortex as well as the postcentral
gyrus. This finding supports the theory that higher amplitude stimulation leads to recruiting of larger volume of tissue, therefore larger
number of fibers, as demonstrated in this fiber tracking study of enlargement of the volume of tracking surrounding the stimulating lead.
Based on the extent of fiber tractography in different targets, one can speculate the level of side effects observed in each target. For
example, fiber tractography of the VIM area leads to specific projections to premotor and motor areas, in accordance with the mostly
exclusive motor side effects when the VIM is stimulated. Conversely, fiber tractography of the STN and GPi leads to more diffuse spread of
fibers throughout the cortex, possibly explaining the multitude of side effects observed when stimulating these targets, including conjugate
eye deviation, paresthesias, and mood changes. The latter most likely is related to the projections to prefrontal areas. Limitations to this
preliminary study are related to the DTI image acquisition methods, technical details of the BrainLab tractography software as well as the
deduction methods applied to the data. A higher resolution DTI acquisition sequence could allow for smaller ROIs, potentially improving the
tractography resolution. In addition, the tractography software was unable to follow tracts that were intersected by large tracts (such as
the superior longitudinal fasciculus). This prohibited evaluating tracts leading to the medial superior cortices. In addition, stimulation
of thalamic and basal ganglia nuclei could not be characterized with this technique, although they certainly can explain side effect
patterns in DBS patients. It is evident that fiber tracts leading to varying cortices explained the side effects in certain patients, but
did not explain the absence of other side effects. Perhaps this is due to the varying effects of voltage increases as the field crosses
white matter borders. Further studies are necessary to better characterize the above. Nevertheless, fiber tractography analysis of DBS
targets may theoretically impact stereotactic targeting and trajectory planning during DBS placement, perhaps optimizing the treatment of
symptoms while reducing the risk for side effects. This study is an initial attempt to develop computer-based imaging models to characterize
brain stimulation in its therapeutic and side effect profiles. The authors would like to acknowledge the University of California, Los
Angeles (UCLA) Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center and the UCLA department of Neurosurgery Operating Department staff. This project was
done in accordance of UCLA IRB protocol #G07-09-091-01. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
author(s) and source are credited. Presented at the American Society of Stereotactic and Functional Neurosurgery meeting, Vancouver, 2008
