Communicated by Mireille Claustres Plectin is a cytoskeletal linker protein which has a long central rod and N- and C-terminal globular
domains. Mutations in the gene encoding plectin (PLEC) cause two distinct autosomal recessive subtypes of epidermolysis bullosa: EB simplex
(EBS) with muscular dystrophy (EBS-MD), and EBS with pyloric atresia (EBS-PA). Previous studies have demonstrated that loss of full-length
plectin with residual expression of the rodless isoform leads to EBS-MD, whereas complete loss or marked attenuation of expression of full-
length and rodless plectin underlies the more severe EBS-PA phenotype. However, muscular dystrophy has never been identified in EBS-PA, not
even in the severe form of the disease. Here, we report the first case of EBS associated with both pyloric atresia and muscular dystrophy.
Both of the premature termination codon-causing mutations of the proband are located within exon 32, the last exon of PLEC.
Immunofluorescence and immunoblot analysis of skin samples and cultured fibroblasts from the proband revealed truncated plectin protein
expression in low amounts. This study demonstrates that plectin deficiency can indeed lead to both muscular dystrophy and pyloric atresia in
an individual EBS patient. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc. Plectin is a 500-kDa protein of the plakin family, which interlinks different element of
the cytoskeleton (Rezniczek, et al., 2010). Plectin is prominently expressed in muscle and in stratified and simple epithelia, including in
the skin and gastrointestinal tract (Rezniczek, et al., 2010). In skin, plectin localizes to the inner plaque of the hemidesmosomes, at the
site of interaction with intermediate filaments (Smith, et al., 1996). Plectin has a unique dumbbell-like structure with a central rod
domain and N- and C-terminal globular domains (Wiche, et al., 1991). Various types of plectin transcripts, including rodless ones, that do
not encode for a central rod domain have been reported (Elliott, et al., 1997). Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) comprises a group of
heterogeneous congenital disorders characterized by dermal- epidermal junction separation. EB is subdivided into the three major groups of
EB simplex (EBS), junctional EB and dystrophic EB, and the one minor group of Kindler syndrome, based on the level of blister formation
(Fine, et al., 2008). So far, mutations in 14 different genes have been identified as underlying the EB subtypes (Fine, et al., 2008;
Groves, et al., 2010). Among them, mutations in the gene encoding plectin, PLEC (MIM# 601282), have been known to be causal for two subtypes
of autosomal recessive EBS (EBS with muscular dystrophy (EBS-MD) and EBS with pyloric atresia (EBS-PA)) and for one subtype of autosomal
dominant EBS (EBS-Ogna) (Fine, et al., 2008). Characteristic manifestations of EBS-MD are generalized skin blistering and late onset muscle
weakness. Previous studies revealed defective expression of plectin in EBS-MD skin samples (Gache, et al., 1996; Shimizu, et al., 1999a;
Shimizu, et al., 1999b) and mutations in PLEC in EBS-MD patients (McLean, et al., 1996; Pulkkinen, et al., 1996; Smith, et al., 1996;
Takizawa, et al., 1999). The PLEC mutations detected in EBS-MD patients are mainly within exon 31, which encodes the large-rod domain of
plectin (Natsuga, et al., 2010; Pfendner, et al., 2005; Sawamura, et al., 2007). In contrast to patients with EBS-MD, those with EBS-PA
typically develop a more severe phenotype that includes more generalized blistering and pyloric atresia (PA) (Nakamura, et al., 2005). The
prognosis of EBS-PA is very poor, and affected patients usually die within months after birth (Nakamura, et al., 2005; Pfendner, et al.,
2005; Pfendner and Uitto, 2005). PLEC mutations of EBS-PA were mostly located outside of exon 31 (Natsuga, et al., 2010). Although both EBS-
MD and EBS-PA are autosomal recessive EBS caused by PLEC mutations, the pathomechanisms distinguishing two subtypes were unclear. Recently,
our group and others demonstrated that EBS-MD patients typically express a rodless plectin isoform, although the full-length plectin is
absent (Koster, et al., 2004; Natsuga, et al., 2010). In contrast, both full-length and rodless plectin isoforms are deficient in EBS-PA
patients, leading to the more severe disease phenotype (Natsuga, et al., 2010). In light of these findings, it has been postulated that EBS-
PA patients could develop muscular dystrophy (MD) if they survived longer (Natsuga, et al., 2010). However, to our knowledge, there have
been no EBS patients who suffered from both MD and PA. Here, we report the first patient with EBS who developed both PA and MD. Both of the
mutations identified in the patient were within the last exon (exon 32) of PLEC. Immunofluorescence and immunoblot analysis confirmed
diminished and truncated plectin expression, using several antibodies against different domains of plectin. This study gives further insight
toward improving our understanding of the genotype-phenotype correlation in EBS patients with PLEC mutations. Skin biopsy samples were fixed
in 2% glutaraldehyde solution, post-fixed in 1% OsO4, dehydrated, and embedded in Epon 812. The samples were sectioned at 1 um thickness for
light microscopy and thin-sectioned for electron microscopy (70 nm thick). The thin sections were stained with uranyl acetate and lead
citrate, and examined by transmission electron microscopy. Genomic DNA (gDNA) was isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes of the proband
and her parents. The mutation detection was performed after polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of all PLEC exons and intron-exon
borders, followed by direct automated sequencing using an ABI PRISM 3100 genetic analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The
oligonucleotide primers and PCR conditions used in this study were derived from a previous report (Nakamura, et al., 2005). The gDNA
nucleotides, the complementary DNA (cDNA) nucleotides and the amino acids of the protein, were numbered based on the GenBank sequence
information (accession no. NM_000445.3 ). PCR amplification of two parts of exon 32 was performed using the following primers. Primers
5′-GTGGAGACCACGCAGGTGTAC-3′ and 5′-GGAGCCCGTGCCATAGAGG-3′ for a single part of exon 32 synthesized a 420-bp fragment including c.10735 to
c.11154. Primers 5′- AGCGGCTGACTGTGGATGAGG-3′ and 5′-TGCGTGTCCTTGTTGAGGT-3′ for another single part of exon 32 synthesized a 283-bp fragment
including c. 11230 to c. 11512. Both of the mutations in the proband were confirmed by restriction digestion of PCR products. c.10984C>T and
c.11453_11462del caused the generation of new restriction enzyme sites for BsrI and BbvCI, respectively. The mutation nomenclature follows
the journal's guidelines (http://www.hgvs.org/mutnomen) according to the reference sequence NM_000445.3, with +1 as the A of the ATG
initiation codon. Genotype analysis of this family to establish the de novo nature of c.11453_11463del in the proband was performed using
three chromosome 8 markers (D8S272, D8S264, D8S270) and six non-chromosome 8 markers (D1S468, D1S252, D1S2842, D3S1297, D3S1566 and
D3S1311). All microsatellite markers (ABI Prism Linkage Mapping Set Version 2.5; Applied Biosystems, Warrington, UK) were amplified with
fluorescently labeled oligonucleotides and used under conditions recommended by the manufacturer. Electrophoretic analysis was performed on
an ABI Prism 310 Genetic Analyzer with Performance Optimized Polymer 4 (POP4) using GeneScan software (Applied Biosystems). The allele sizes
were analyzed using Genotyper software (Applied Biosystems). Immunofluorescence analysis was performed using skin specimens from the proband
as previously described (Natsuga, et al., 2010). Briefly, fresh-frozen skin specimens were embedded in optimal cutting temperature (OCT)
compound and quickly frozen in isopentane cooled over liquid nitrogen. 5-μm cryostat sections were incubated with primary antibodies. After
washing in phosphate-buffered saline, the sections were incubated with secondary antibodies conjugated with fluorescein-isothiocyanate. The
following antibodies against basement membrane zone (BMZ) components were used: monoclonal antibody (mAb) PN643 against the N-terminal
actin-binding domain of plectin; mAb HD1-121 against the rod domain of plectin; C20 and mAb PC-815 against the C-terminal globular domain of
plectin (Fig. 1A); mAbs GoH3 and 3E1 (Chemicon International, CA) against α6 and ß4 integrins, respectively; mAb GB3 (Sera-lab, Cambridge,
UK) against laminin 332; mAb LH7.2 (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) against type VII collagen; mAb PHM-12+CIV22 against type IV collagen (NeoMarkers,
Fremont, CA); and S1 193 and mAb HDD20 against BP230 and type XVII collagen, respectively. mAbs PN643, HD1-121 and PC815 were generously
donated by Prof. K. Owaribe of Nagoya University, and antibody S1 193 by Prof. J. R. Stanley of the University of Pennsylvania. C20, a goat
polyclonal antibody against the C-terminus of plectin, was purchased from Santa Cruz. Anti-beta-actin mAb (AC15, Sigma, St. Louis, MO) was
used to confirm equal protein loading. Plectin structure, antibodies against plectin, specific primers to amplify the full-length and the
rodless plectin transcripts and PLEC mutations of the proband. (A) Plectin protein is composed of an actin-binding domain, N- and C-terminal
globular domains, an intermediate filament (IF)-binding domain and a central rod domain. The C-terminal globular domain has 6 plectin repeat
domains. The IF-binding domain is located between C-terminal repeats 5 and 6. PN643 is a monoclonal antibody (mAb) against the N-terminal
actin-binding domain of plectin. HD1-121 is a mAb against the rod domain of plectin. PC815 is a mAb and C20 is a polyclonal antibody against
the C-terminal globular domain of plectin. (B) The specific primers used to detect the presence of transcripts for full-length (30F/31R and
31F/32R) and rodless plectin (30F/32R) on cDNA synthesized from mRNA of normal humans and the proband's fibroblasts. (C) c.10984C>T and
c.11453_11462del are located in the PLEC encoding C-terminal plectin repeat 4. (D) Normal humans express both full-length and rodless
plectin. In our case, the PLEC mutations produced diminished and truncated plectin protein without the IF-binding domain. Cell culture and
immunoblot analysis was performed as previously described (Natsuga, et al., 2010). Cultured fibroblasts were obtained from skin biopsies of
a normal human volunteer and the proband. Cultured fibroblasts were maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 10%
(v/v) fetal bovine serum. For sample preparation, cultured cells were lysed in Nonidet-40 (NP-40) containing buffer (1% NP-40, 25mM Tris-HCl
(pH 7.6), 4mM EDTA, 100mM NaCl, 1mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), and proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma, St. Louis, MO)); cell
debris was removed by centrifugation; and the supernatant was collected. Supernatants were boiled in Laemmli's sample buffer (Laemmli,
1970), applied to a 4–12% gradient Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), and transferred to a PVDF membrane. The membrane was incubated
with PN643, HD1-121, C20 and AC15 followed by incubation with horseradish peroxidase (HRP) conjugated anti-mouse IgG (for PN643, HD1-121 and
AC15) and HRP-conjugated anti-gout IgG (for C20). The blots were detected using ECL Plus Detection Kit (GE Healthcare, Fairfield, CT). Semi-
quantitative reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) analysis was performed as previously described (Natsuga, et al., 2010). Total RNA was
isolated from cultured fibroblasts (from normal human volunteers and the proband, using RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA)), and first-strand
cDNA was made using Superscript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). First-strand cDNA was then amplified by PCR with
primers specific for the exon boundaries flanking the rod domain of plectin as described previously (Koster, et al., 2004; Natsuga, et al.,
2010). The following primers were used (Fig. 1B): 30F, 5′-CATCAGCGAGACTCTGCGGC-3′; 31R, 5′- TGCGCCTGTCGCTTTTGTGC-3′; 31F,
5′-AGCTGGAGATGAGCGCTGA-3′; 32R, 5′- TGCTGCAGCTCCTCCTGC-3′. To ensure equal loading, a housekeeping gene (GAPDH) was simultaneously
amplified. The PCR products were assessed on a 2% agarose gel. The images were obtained with LAS-4000 mini (Fujifilm, Tokyo, Japan). The
medical ethics committee of Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine approved all of the described studies. The study was conducted
according to The Declaration of Helsinki Principles. Participants gave their written informed consent. The proband was a first child of non-
consanguineous Japanese parents. There was no family history of bullous diseases. He was born by cesarean section after a 39-week gestation
because of non-reassuring fetal status. Clinically the proband showed extensive blistering and aplasia cutis on the extremities (Fig. 2A,
B). Routine abdominal X-ray revealed a single bubble sign, suggesting the presence of PA (Fig. 2C). Generalized muscle hypotonia, dysphagia
and difficulty in breathing were also observed from birth. Laboratory examination at birth revealed markedly elevated levels of creatine
kinase (CK) (11,852U/L, normal value; 60-400U/L). The skeletal muscle isoform of CK (CK-MM) was 84% of total CK (CK, 2058U/L at age 12
days). Elevated levels of muscle enzymes including CK and aldolase (normal value; 1.7-5.7U/L) persisted over the course of his life (CK,
1924U/L; aldolase, 40.0U/L at age 25 days). Based on the clinical features and laboratory data, the presence of MD was confirmed. Muscle
biopsy and reconstructive surgery for PA was not performed because the parents did not consent. The proband died 3 months after birth.
Permission for autopsy was refused. Clinical and ultrastructural features of the proband. (A) Aplasia cutis is observed on the left lower
leg at birth. (B) Vesicles and erosions are scattered on the right knee. (C) Abdominal X-ray reveal single bubble sign (arrows), which
indicated pyloric atresia. (D) Electron microscopy of the skin specimens from the proband reveals skin detachment within basal
keratinocytes. Hemidesmosomes are hypoplastic and are observed at the base of the blisters (arrows) (Bar=1μm). Electron microscopy of the
skin samples from the proband showed that the skin separation localized to the base of the basal keratinocytes (Fig. 2D). Hemidesmosomes
were hypoplastic and found at the base of the intraepidermal split (Fig. 2D). Keratin clumps were not observed. PLEC mutational analysis
demonstrated that the proband was compound heterozygous for maternal c.10984C>T (p.Glu3662X) and de novo c.11453_11462del in exon 32, the
last exon of PLEC (Fig. 3A, 3B, 1C). The latter mutation is predicted to result in a frameshift that causes 88-amino-acid missense sequences
followed by a premature termination codon (PTC). Both of the mutations were novel. c.10984C>T was confirmed by BsrI restriction enzyme
digestion (Fig. 3C). c.11453_11462del was also confirmed by BbvCI restriction enzyme digestion (Fig. 3D) and TA-cloning (data not shown).
Haplotype analysis of this family using micro satellite markers excluded false paternity as well as false maternity (data not shown) to
establish the de novo nature of c.11453_11463del. The father's sperm has not been tested, although it might be beneficial to exclude the
small possibility of paternal germ-line mosaicism through analyzing the father's sperm for any future prenatal diagnosis. In addition,
c.7587G>A (p. =) transition in exon 32 was also detected in one allele of the proband and his father. This c.7587G>A transition was found in
3 of 100 normal unrelated alleles (50 healthy Japanese individuals), and was likely a polymorphism. The novel PLEC mutations detected in the
study. Maternal c.10984C>T (p.Gln3662X) (A) and de novo c.11453_11462del (B) in exon 32 were found in genomic DNA derived from the proband.
A thymine substituted for a cytosine in the former mutation is indicated by the red character (A). Deleted nucleotides in the latter
mutation are underlined (B). (C) c.10984C>T mutation caused the generation of a site for BsrI restriction enzyme. BsrI digestion of the
420-bp PCR product with and without the mutation resulted in a single band of 420-bp and in double bands of 246-bp and 174-bp, respectively.
c.10984C>T was a maternal mutation. (D) c.11453_11462del caused the generation of a site for BbvCI. The 283-bp PCR product without the
mutation was not digested by BbvCI. BbvCI digestion of the 273-bp PCR product with the deletion mutation showed two bands of 150 and 123-bp.
c.11453_11462del was not detected in the parents' gDNA. We performed immunofluorescence analysis of the skin specimens from the proband
using several antibodies that react with molecules of the dermo-epidermal junction (DEJ). To check plectin expression patterns in the skin
specimens from the proband, we used four antibodies: PN643 (N-terminal globular domain), HD1-121 (rod domain), PC815 (C-terminal globular
domain) and C20 (C-terminal globular domain) (Fig. 1A). Normal human control shows bright DEJ staining of all the antibodies tested (Fig.
4F-I). DEJ labeling of PN643, HD1-121 and PC815 was markedly diminished in the skin specimens from the proband (Fig. 4A-C). Staining of C20
was absent in the proband's skin (Fig. 4D). Immunostaining for type VII collagen (Fig. 4E), laminin 332, type IV collagen, type XVII
collagen, α6 and β4 integrin, and BP230 revealed normal DEJ labeling patterns (data not shown). Immunofluorescence analysis of the proband's
skin sample. In normal human skin, immunofluorescence shows that all of the antibodies against plectin (PN643, HD1-121, PC815 and C20)
tested in this study bound to the dermal epidermal junction (DEJ) (F - I). DEJ labeling of PN643, HD1-121 and PC815 are weakly positive in
the proband (A - C). In contrast, staining with C20 is negative in the proband's skin sample (D). Type VII collagen shows normal linear
labeling in the proband and in the normal control (E, J). Weak labeling is indicated by arrowheads (Bar=100μm). Immunoblot analysis of
lysates from normal human cultured fibroblasts revealed that two closely spaced bands, corresponding to two forms of plectin (500kDa full-
length and 390kDa rodless), reacted with PN643 and C20 antibodies recognizing the N- and C-termini of plectin (Fig. 5), as previously
described (Natsuga, et al., 2010). HD1-121 against the rod domain reacted only with full-length plectin in normal human fibroblasts (Fig.
5). Lysates from cultured fibroblasts from the proband showed a faint band of PN643 and HD1-121 between 500kDa and 390kD, corresponding to
truncated full-length plectin. C20 failed to react with lysates from the proband's cells (Fig. 5). Immunoblot analysis of cultured
fibroblasts from the normal human control and the proband. Immunoblot analysis of extracts from fibroblasts of the normal control and the
proband by using PN643 against the N-terminal actin- binding domain, HD1-121 against the rod domain and C20 against the C-terminal plectin
repeats. Rodless plectin (arrows), detected with PN643 and C20, migrates just below full-length plectin (arrowheads) in normal human
fibroblasts. Using HD1-121, only full-length plectin is observed in the normal control. In contrast, fibroblasts of the proband contained
smaller proteins than 500-kDa full-length plectin, the putatively truncated full-length plectin (asterisks), which was detected with PN643
and HD1-121. C20 did not react with lysates of the proband's fibroblasts. Equal protein loading was confirmed by reprobing with AC 15 (anti-
beta-actin antibody). Using RT-PCR, the presence of mRNA that encodes full-length or rodless plectin was demonstrated in the normal human
control as well as in the proband's cultured fibroblasts (Fig. 1B, 6). Judging from the PCR analysis results, the quantity of full-length
and rodless plectin transcripts was markedly reduced in the proband's fibroblasts compared with those of the normal human control (Fig. 6).
Semi-quantitative RT-PCR for full-length and rodless plectin transcripts. The quantity of full-length (30F/31R and 31F/32R) and rodless
(30F/32R) plectin transcripts in the proband's cultured fibroblasts is reduced in comparison to those of the normal control. GAPDH mRNA
expression was used as the loading control in these experiments. The negative control reaction (DNA-free water instead of cDNA) shows no PCR
products. The molecular weight standard (lane M) is a 100-bp ladder. This is the first report of EB complicated with both MD and PA. Skin
detachment within basal keratinocytes was demonstrated by electron microscopy, which indicated the simplex subtype of EB. The proband's skin
sample and cultured fibroblasts showed reduced and truncated plectin expression (Fig. 1D). Both of the premature termination codon
(PTC)-causing mutations detected in our case are within exon 32, the last exon of PLEC. Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is a quality-
control mechanism that selectively degrades mRNAs with PTCs (Holbrook, et al., 2004). When the mRNA has a PTC more than a certain range
upstream of one exon-exon junction, the transcript is down-regulated by NMD. In contrast, when PTCs are located in the last exon, NMD does
not generally occur and abnormal mRNA is translated into truncated protein. However, some exceptions were described in a study in which
transcripts underwent NMD despite having a PTC in the last exon (Chan, et al., 1998). Reduced amounts of full-length and rodless plectin
transcripts in the proband's cells are explained by NMD, even though the PTCs of the proband are in the last exon. One reported EBS-MD case
was homozygous for a PTC-causing mutation (c.13458_13473dup) in exon 32 (Schroder, et al., 2002). c. 13458_13473dup is at the downstream of
the 6th plectin repeat and is predicted to cause a frameshift followed by a premature termination codon. The age of onset for MD in the
patient with c.13458_13473dup was 4 years (Schroder, et al., 2002); in our case, severe muscle weakness was observed immediately after
birth. This clinical difference might be explained by the length of truncated proteins identified in each patient. Compound heterozygous
mutations of c.10984C>T and c.11453_11462del encode truncated plectin protein that does not include the intermediate filament (IF) binding
site that was mapped to an approximately 50- amino-acid sequence between the 5th and 6th plectin repeat (Nikolic, et al., 1996; Rezniczek,
et al., 2010). Therefore, the truncated plectin in our case might not have bound to IF including desmin in muscle tissues, which might
account for the congenital muscle weakness. In contrast, the truncated plectin produced by c.13458_13473dup harbors the IF-binding site
described above. Although the amount of plectin protein was slightly diminished, it may be that substantial amounts of truncated plectin
with the residual IF-binding site delayed the development of muscular dystrophy and prevented pyloric atresia in the previous patient
(Schroder, et al., 2002). EBS-MD patients do not have muscular symptoms at birth, but muscle weakness appears later in their life. The type
of PLEC mutations (PTC-causing mutations or in-frame insertions/deletions) influences the timing of MD onset (Chiaverini, et al., 2010).
Also, it may be that, in most EBS-MD cases, the presence of residual rodless plectin resulting from PTC-causing mutations in exon 31 delays
the onset of MD because of the remaining IF-binding site in rodless plectin. It has been postulated that two pathologic elements are
involved in the development of PA in EB patients: 1) the integrity of basement membrane and hemidesmosomes, and 2) the control of the normal
process of fibrosis in the course of wound healing (Maman, et al., 1998). The sequence of events might be initiated by the separation of the
intestinal mucosal layer as a result of disintegration of basement membrane and hemidesmosomes. Inflammatory responses cause massive
fibrosis, which might lead to the obstruction of the intestinal lumina, especially in anatomically narrow passages, such as pylorus (Maman,
et al., 1998). Previously described EBS-MD patients do not suffer from PA, which suggests that residual rodless plectin can prevent the
development of PA. In our case, both full-length and rodless plectin proteins are quantitatively reduced and the shortened plectin might not
have functioned normally, which might have lead to the PA phenotype. It had been predicted that some cases of EBS-PA would develop MD,
although no such case had been reported in the literature (Natsuga, et al., 2010). One possible explanation is that the poor systemic
condition of EBS-PA and the limited observation period due to the patient's very short lifespan prevented the diagnosis of MD. Our data
suggests that surgical correction of PA is insufficient to treat EBS-PA patients because they would most likely go on to develop MD even if
they survive surgery. Therefore, we should look to develop more fundamental therapeutic options for those patients. In summary, this study
clearly shows that plectin mutations lead to both MD and PA phenotypes in an individual EBS patient. We thank Ms. Yuko Hayakawa and Ms. Yuki
Miyamura for their technical assistance. This work was supported by Health and Labor Sciences Research grants for Research on Measures for
Intractable Diseases from the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare of Japan (to H.S.). Contract grant sponsor: The Ministry of Health,
Labour and Welfare; Contract grant number: H20-Nanchi- Ippan-028.
