We report a case of corneal perforation with preseptal cellulitis in a patient with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL). A 17-yr-old female
patient who was undergoing combination chemotherapy for ALL was referred due to upper lid swelling and pain in the right eye for 2 days.
Visual acuity in the right eye was 20/20. Initial examination showed no abnormal findings, other than swelling of the right upper eyelid.
Computed tomography showed a finding of preseptal cellulitis. Microbiologic study of bloody and purulent discharge revealed Serratia
marcescens. Corneal melting and perforation with iris prolapse were detected in the right eye on the 16th day. Emergent tectonic
keratoplasty was performed. Seven months after surgery, visual acuity in the right eye was 20/300, and the corneal graft was stable.
Systemic chemotherapy can lead to a variety of ocular complications, such as cicatricial ectropion, nasolacrimal duct stenosis,
conjunctivitis, keratitis, cataract, macular edema, retinopathy, and optic neuropathy (1, 2). Although bulbar perforation with orbital
cellulitis has been reported in an immunocompromised patient, corneal perforation has not been documented in patients undergoing systemic
chemotherapy (3). We report a case of corneal perforation with preseptal cellulitis in a patient treated with systemic chemotherapy for
acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL). A 17-yr-old female patient undergoing systemic chemotherapy for ALL was referred to our hospital due to
swelling and pain of the right upper lid for two days. Laboratory examination showed leukocytes 40 cells/µL, erythrocytes 3.6×103 cells/µL,
hemoglobin 10.8 g/dL, hematocrit 30.6%, and thrombocytes 33×103 cells/µL. The patients received induction chemotherapy (vincristine,
prednisolone, daunorubicin, and L-asparaginase). Visual acuity in the right eye was 20/20. There were no abnormal findings, other than
diffuse swelling of the right upper eyelid. Orbital computed tomography showed findings of preseptal cellulitis in the right upper lid.
Intravenous empirical antibiotics (teicoplanin, meropenem, and amphotericin B) were administered. Serratia marcescens was isolated from
blood culture on the following day. Slit lamp examination on the 7th day revealed superficial punctate erosions in both corneas. Artificial
tear eye drops were used for the treatment of superficial punctate erosions. On the 12th day, spontaneous bloody and purulent discharge from
the upper palpebral conjunctiva occurred in the right eye. The patient was treated with topical levofloxacin eyedrops. Culture from the
discharge was isolated from S. marcescens. Systemic antibiotics (meropenem) were maintained per the antibiotic sensitivity test. On the 16th
day, periorbital swelling decreased, however, corneal melting and perforation with iris prolapse was noted in the right eye (Fig. 1).
Emergent tectonic keratoplasty was performed. Seven months after surgery, visual acuity in the right eye was 20/300, and intraocular
pressure was 14 mmHg. The corneal graft was stable, with mild haziness. Ocular complications associated with systemic chemotherapy can be
divided into complications in the adnexa, anterior segment, and posterior segment. Previously reported complications in the anterior segment
include conjunctival injection, conjunctivitis, corneal edema, keratitis, and corneal opacity (1, 2). Anticancer agents such as cytosine
arabinoside, 5-flurouracil, carmustine, deoxycoformycin, and tamoxifen have been known to cause corneal toxicity (1, 2, 4, 5). In our case,
vincristine, prednisolone, daunorubicin, and L-asparaginase were used for combination chemotherapy. To the best of our knowledge, corneal
toxicity associated with these anticancer agents has not been reported. Serratia marcescens, a motile, Gram-negative coccobacillus, is an
emerging opportunistic pathogen noted for causing urinary, respiratory, blood stream, and ocular infections (6). Preseptal cellulitis in the
present case was caused by S. marcescens because the patient was immunocompromised. Rapid progression of stromal infiltration and ulceration
is a clinical feature of Serratia keratitis. Extracellular protease produced by S. marcescens is considered a major corneal destructive
factor. In an experimental study of rabbit cornea, Serratia protease preparations have caused rapid and extensive liquefactive corneal
necrosis, descemetocele formation, and corneal perforation (7). The exact mechanism of corneal melting and perforation in this case is
unclear. It is possible that S. marcescens in the purulent discharge directly invaded the cornea with superficial punctate erosions and
caused corneal melting and perforation in the immunocompromised patient. This hypothesis is supported by two facts: First, S. marcescens is
a virulent organism. Second, corneal melting and perforation occurred in the area in direct contact with the infected upper palpebral
conjunctiva. In conclusion, physicians should consider the possibility of serious ocular complications, such as severe bacterial keratitis
or corneal perforation in cases of preseptal cellulitis caused by a virulent organism, particularly in immunocompromised patients. Slit lamp
photographs in a 17-yr-old female patient receiving systemic chemotherapy for acute lymphocytic leukemia. (A) Marked congestion and
inflammation of the upper tarsal conjunctiva and a melting lesion with sharp demarcation observed in the upper part of the cornea. (B) The
iris was prolapsed at the perforated site.
