To the Editor: Several recent studies have shown massive colonization of livestock (especially pigs) and livestock workers by methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) in western Europe, Canada, and the United States (1,2). Livestock MRSA isolates belong almost
exclusively to a single sequence type, ST398. Evidence of zoonotic and interhuman transmission of methicillin-resistant and methicillin-
susceptible variants of this hitherto unusual sequence type was recently reported (1,3). S. aureus ST398 infections in humans with or
without a history of contact with livestock include bacteremia, endocarditis, ventilator-associated pneumonia, and wound infections, none of
which involve the expression of specific toxins. Indeed, ST398 isolates are negative for all major virulence factors, with the exception of
some rare isolates that harbor the genes that encode the Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL) (1), a toxin that is usually associated with
community-acquired MRSA (4). We report a case of lethal necrotizing pneumonia caused by a PVL-positive methicillin-susceptible ST398 S.
aureus isolate. A previously healthy 14-year-old girl came to the emergency room with influenza-like illness, cough, fever, and a 2-day
history of severe abdominal pain. She was given intravenous antibacterial chemotherapy with cefotaxime and amikacin. An exploratory
laparotomy showed no signs of abdominal disease. Immediately after surgery, acute respiratory distress syndrome with hemodynamic instability
developed in the patient; mechanical ventilation and inotropic support were required. A chest radiograph showed bilateral pulmonary
infiltrates and pleural effusion. S. aureus was isolated by bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and blood culture, and staphylococcal necrotizing
pneumonia was diagnosed. Clinical features, including the preceding influenza-like illness, were highly consistent with those previously
reported (5). However, viral cultures and immunofluorescence assays were negative for all common respiratory viruses, and, although the
patient had positive serologic test results for influenza B virus, antibody titers were too low to affirm influenza B infection. Severity
factors were present (5), including leukopenia, airway bleeding, and multiorgan failure. She died 6 days after symptom onset, with
refractory shock and respiratory failure caused by bilateral pneumothorax. The S. aureus strain, which was susceptible to all tested
antimicrobial agents except macrolides, was agr1/ST398, spa-type t571 and nontypeable by SmaI pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, which showed
its relatedness to livestock-associated strains. The origin of the infection could not be determined. The presence of the genes encoding PVL
was confirmed by PCR. Thus, the spread of S.Â aureus ST398 among livestock is a matter of increasing concern because strains of this sequence
type were able to acquire PVL genes and cause necrotizing pneumonia in a young immunocompetent patient. Transmission control and
surveillance efforts are urgently needed to prevent further spread of such strains. Suggested citation for this article: Rasigade J-P,
Laurent F, Hubert P, Vandenesch F, Etienne J. Lethal necrotizing pneumonia caused by an ST398 Staphylococcus aureus strain . Emerg Infect
Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2010 Aug [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1608.100317
