Intraspinal rib head dislocation is an important but under-recognized consequence of dystrophic scoliosis in patients with neurofibromatosis
1 (NF1). To present clinical and imaging findings of intraspinal rib head dislocation in NF1. We retrospectively reviewed clinical
presentation, imaging, operative reports and post-operative courses in four NF1 patients with intraspinal rib head dislocation and
dystrophic scoliosis. We also reviewed 17 cases from the English literature. In each of our four cases of intraspinal rib head dislocation,
a single rib head was dislocated on the convex apex of the curve, most often in the mid- to lower thoracic region. Cord compression occurred
in half of these patients. Analysis of the literature yielded similar findings. Only three cases in the literature demonstrates the MRI
appearance of this entity; most employ CT. All of our cases include both MRI and CT; we review the subtle findings on MRI. Although
intraspinal rib head dislocation is readily apparent on CT, sometimes MRI is the only cross-sectional imaging performed. It is essential
that radiologists become familiar with this entity, as subtle findings have significant implications for surgical management.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), also known as von Recklinghausen disease, involves the spine in 10% to 69% of patients [1, 2].
Kyphoscoliosis is the most common spinal deformity and presents in dystrophic and nondystrophic forms [2, 3]. Nondystrophic scoliosis
resembles idiopathic scoliosis and is usually a long-segment biconvex curve secondary to leg length discrepancy . Dystrophic scoliosis, on
the other hand, is characterized by progressive, sharply angulated short-segment curvature with severe wedging, rotation and scalloping of
the apical vertebral bodies . Foraminal enlargement, spindling of the transverse processes and penciling of the apical ribs can also be seen
with dystrophic scoliosis . A few case reports have described spinal canal penetration by dislocated ribs in patients with NF1 and
dystrophic scoliosis. Although most are asymptomatic, spinal cord compression with resultant paraparesis and paraplegia have been documented
both before and after spinal instrumentation [1, 4–15]. We report the clinical and radiographic findings of four cases of rib head
dislocation into the spinal canal in patients with dystrophic scoliosis secondary to NF1, including radiographs, CTs and MRIs, as well as
clinical manifestations and management strategies in this uncommon but important entity. This study was conducted with IRB review and
approval. We conducted a retrospective review of imaging studies performed on four children with NF1 referred for surgery at our
institutions with rib head protrusion into the spinal canal identified on preoperative imaging and confirmed at surgery. Clinical history,
imaging studies, reports and operative reports, and post-operative courses were reviewed. We also present an analysis of children with this
entity in the English literature from 1986 to 2009. Between 2003 and 2009, rib head dislocation into the spinal canal was found at our
institutions in four children, ranging in age from 9 to 14 years old. Radiographs, CTs, MRIs, and operative reports were available in all
four, along with clinical follow-up from several months to 6 years. Table 1 summarizes clinical and imaging findings. Table 2 summarizes the
17 cases that have been reported in the English literature. Table 1Summary of clinical and imaging findings (4 cases)Age (yrs)SexCurve
(Apex, Cobb angle); displaced rib(s)Signs & symptomsDiagnosis made onCord impingement/compressionPresence of
neurofibromaManagement14MLevoscoliosis (61°); convex side left 4th ribBack pain; mild lower limb hyperreflexia and ankle clonusCT,
MRINoYesT4 laminectomy with rib head resection and posterior fusion/instrumentation11FHemivertebra T9; Dextroscoliosis T9 (123°); Kyphosis
(62°); convex side right 10th ribAsymptomaticCT, MRIYesNoMultilevel diskectomies, T9 laminectoy and posterior fusion with resection of 10th
rib head11MDextroscoliosis (90°); Kyphosis (85°); convex side right 9th ribAsymptomaticCT, MRINoNo9th rib head resection, anterior and
posterior fusion and T9 laminectomy9FDextroscoliosis (60°); convex side right 6th ribBack pain; right foot weakness, hyper-reflexia and
clonusCT, MRIYesYesResection of neurofibroma and 6th rib head; combined anterior and posterior fusion and instrumentationTable 2Summary of
17 cases from literature reviewAuthorsAge (yrs)SexCurve (Apex, Cobb angle); displaced rib(s)Signs & SymptomsDiagnosis Made onCord
impingement/compressionPresence of Neuro-fibromaManagementFlood et al.15MDextroscoliosis T4–T8 (80°); multiple ribs on convex sideKnee &
ankle clonusCT-MNoYesTwo-stage vertebral wedge resection with rib excision and fusion. Traction used perioperatively. Curve decrease to 45
degrees with resolution of clonusMajor et al.13FLevokyphoscoliosis (T9, 52°); convex 8, 9 & 10th ribsTransient loss of sensation below the
waist and inability to move lower extremities after fall on rib humpCT-MNoNoTwo-stage: anterior fusion with resection of rib heads followed
by 2nd stage posterior fusion and segmental spinal instrumentation5FLevoscoliosis (T7, 75); two ribs on convex sideNoneCTNoNoTwo-stage:
anterior interbody fusion with resection of rib heads followed by 2nd stage posterior fusion and segmental spinal instrumentation11MDouble
thoracic scoliosis (29°); convex side 4th ribNoneCT-MNoNoPosterior fusion with resection of rib headDeguchi et al.12FDextrokyphoscoliosis
T4–T7 (T5, 90°); convex side 5 & 6th ribsWeakness of the lower extremities, difficulty walking with eventual paraparesis, hyperesthesia
below waist, ankle clonus and knee/ankle hyperreflexiaCT-MYesNoTwo-stage combined anterior and posterior spinal fusion and instrumentation.
Dislocated rib head was resected. 2 yr f/u with normal neurological statusDacher et al.10FDextroscoliosis (T8, 48°); convex side 8th
ribBilateral ankle clonus and daytime micturitionCT-MNoNoTwo-stage spinal fusion with Cotrel-Dubousset instrumentation. 1 yr f/u with normal
neurological statusKamath et al.13MDextroscoliosis T7–T11; convex side 10 h ribNoneCTNoYesIntraspinal rib head resection with right T9–10
hemilaminectomy and posterior fusion/instrumentationKhoshhal et al.16MDextroscoliosis T3–T6 (T5, 83o); convex side 5th ribPostoperative T5
paraparesisCTYesNoInitially performed in situ posterior fusion without correction or instrumentation. Anterior decompression with rib head
resection was performed after T5 paraparesis developedMukhtar et al.10MDextroscoliosis T4–T12 (76o); convex side 9th ribBack pain; right leg
weakness and radiculopathy down to toes when he rolled to his right sideCT and CT-MYesNoPartial rib resection with rib head left in situ.
Posterior fusion from T6 to L1 was performedGkiokas et al.13FLevokyphoscoliosis T4–T10 (T8, 75o); convex side 8th ribGait difficulty,
bilateral Bobinski, ankle clonus, right foot drop, decreased sensation/hyperreflexia in lower limbs, and daytime micturitionCT, MRIYesNoRib
head resection with posterior spinal fusion/instrumentation from T1 to L2. Cobb angle postoperatively was 65 and patient neurological status
returned to baselineCrawford et al.5aCervicothoracic kyphoscoliosis Protrusion of three rib headsaCTaaaaaProtrusion of one rib
headaCTaaaaaProtrusion of one rib headAsymptomaticCTaYesaYalcin et al.14MDextroscoliosis; convex side two ribsNoneCT,
MRIYesYesHemilaminectomy followed by rib head resection and posterior fusion with instrumentation12FDextroscoliosis T8–L1; convex side
ribNoneCTNoYesHemilaminectomy followed by vertebral translation and pedicle screw fixation. Rib head was not resected6MLevoscoliosis TL
spine; convex side 10 & 11th ribsNoneRadio-graphs & CTYesYes5-level annulotomy with resection but not removal of displaced rib heads.
Deformity correction with fusionless instrumentation with pedicle screwsCappella et al.14MDouble thoracic kyphoscoliosis (kyphosis 120o);
convex side 5th ribPreoperative weakness of lower limbs. Postoperative weakness and paraparesisCT, MRIYesNoInitially performed two-stage
anterior and posterior instrumentation and arthrodesis. Subsequently, rib head resected and posterior cord decompression after postoperative
paraparesis developedaImages are demonstrated in a review article on NF1 spine, but additional information is not availableCT-M CT
myelography Summary of clinical and imaging findings (4 cases) Summary of 17 cases from literature review aImages are demonstrated in a
review article on NF1 spine, but additional information is not available CT-M CT myelography Case 1 is a 14-year-old boy with severe
progressive scoliosis who complained of neck and upper back pain. He was mildly tender to palpation at the apex of his curve. He had slight
hyperreflexia of the left lower extremity (3+) and a few beats of ankle clonus bilaterally. The preoperative spine radiograph (Fig. 1)
demonstrates penciling and displacement of the fourth and fifth ribs at the apex of the curve, although only the fourth was in an abnormal
position on CT and MRI. Rib head resection can be seen on the postoperative spine radiograph. Fig. 1Case 1. a Radiograph shows levoscoliosis
of the upper cervical spine with penciling deformity and medial positioning of the left fourth rib head (arrow) relative to the pedicle.
Note that the fifth rib is also malpositioned, although it was not intraspinal on cross-sectional imaging. b, c Axial CT and T2-W MR images
demonstrate intraspinal displacement of the left fourth rib head (arrow) with narrowing of the spinal canal but without cord impingement. d
Post-operative spine radiograph shows interval spinal rod and pedicular screw placement with improved levoscoliosis. The displaced left
fourth rib head has been resected (arrow) Case 1. a Radiograph shows levoscoliosis of the upper cervical spine with penciling deformity and
medial positioning of the left fourth rib head (arrow) relative to the pedicle. Note that the fifth rib is also malpositioned, although it
was not intraspinal on cross-sectional imaging. b, c Axial CT and T2-W MR images demonstrate intraspinal displacement of the left fourth rib
head (arrow) with narrowing of the spinal canal but without cord impingement. d Post-operative spine radiograph shows interval spinal rod
and pedicular screw placement with improved levoscoliosis. The displaced left fourth rib head has been resected (arrow) Case 2 is an
11-year-old asymptomatic girl with severe kyphoscoliosis. The preoperative spine CT and MRI demonstrate rib head displacement into the
spinal canal at the apex of the curve, with cord impingement on MRI (Fig. 2). Fig. 2Case 2. a Axial CT shows intraspinal dislocation of the
right 10th rib with marked narrowing of the spinal canal. b Coronal T1-W MR image demonstrates displacement of the rib head (white arrow)
intraspinally with narrowing of the canal and impingement of the cord (black arrow) Case 2. a Axial CT shows intraspinal dislocation of the
right 10th rib with marked narrowing of the spinal canal. b Coronal T1-W MR image demonstrates displacement of the rib head (white arrow)
intraspinally with narrowing of the canal and impingement of the cord (black arrow) Case 3 is an 11-year-old boy with progressive but
asymptomatic scoliosis and kyphosis. Spine CT and MRI demonstrate no evidence of enlarged neural foramina or vertebral scalloping, but
displacement of the right ninth rib with spinal canal narrowing (Fig. 3). Fig. 3Case 3. a Axial CT demonstrates displacement of the right
ninth rib head intraspinally. b, c Contiguous post-contrast axial T1-W MR images show the dislocated rib head (white arrow) with narrowing
of the spinal canal but no cord compromise. The cord (black arrow) is located at the concave side of the curvature Case 3. a Axial CT
demonstrates displacement of the right ninth rib head intraspinally. b, c Contiguous post-contrast axial T1-W MR images show the dislocated
rib head (white arrow) with narrowing of the spinal canal but no cord compromise. The cord (black arrow) is located at the concave side of
the curvature Case 4 is a 9-year-old girl with progressive scoliosis who developed back pain and right foot weakness as well as
hyperreflexia of both lower extremities and sustained ankle clonus. CT and MRI reveal a neurofibroma destroying portions of the T4 to T6
vertebral bodies and filling adjacent neural foramina, with intraspinal displacement of the right sixth rib (Fig. 4). MRI also shows cord
compression by the displaced rib head. Fig. 4Case 4. a Axial CT shows widening of the neural foramina with intraspinal displacement of the
right sixth rib head (black arrow). Linear ossific density to the right of the displaced rib head represents the superior articulating facet
of the lower vertebrae. b Coronal T1-W post-contrast MRI reveals an enhancing right paraspinous neurofibroma (arrows) extending into the
spinal canal at the apex of the curve. There is displacement of the cord to the left by the dislocated right sixth rib head (arrowhead) Case
4. a Axial CT shows widening of the neural foramina with intraspinal displacement of the right sixth rib head (black arrow). Linear ossific
density to the right of the displaced rib head represents the superior articulating facet of the lower vertebrae. b Coronal T1-W post-
contrast MRI reveals an enhancing right paraspinous neurofibroma (arrows) extending into the spinal canal at the apex of the curve. There is
displacement of the cord to the left by the dislocated right sixth rib head (arrowhead) Dystrophic scoliosis in children with NF is
typically characterized by a short-segment, sharply angulated curve with associated wedging and scalloping of the vertebral bodies. It can
be accompanied by vertebral body rotation, widening of the intervertebral foramina and penciling of rib heads. These abnormalities
predispose children with dystrophic scoliosis to intraspinal rib head dislocation . To our knowledge, a total of 21 (including our four)
cases of intraspinal rib head dislocation in NF1 patients have been reported in the English literature. The majority of documented cases of
intraspinal rib head dislocation in NF1 occur during the teenage years (ages range from 5 to 16 years) [1, 4–15], with no gender
predisposition. Although generally asymptomatic, the clinical presentation of intraspinal rib displacement varies. Two of our patients had
moderate symptoms; the other two were essentially asymptomatic. This parallels the cases we found in the literature, with nine of the 15 for
whom this information was available being essentially asymptomatic. The other six had neurological symptoms ranging from mild sensory and
motor deficits to paraplegia and paraparesis. Both Khoshhal and Ellis and Cappella et al. describe the postoperative complication of rib
head dislocation in NF patients who developed paraparesis several weeks after posterior spinal fusion without recognition of or attempt at
correcting rib head protrusion. In retrospect, rib head protrusion had been present on a preoperative MRI in Cappella’s patient but had not
been recognized. Both cases illustrate the importance of delineating the presence of intraspinal rib head dislocation preoperatively since
surgical correction of the scoliosis can bring the displaced spinal cord to its more anatomical location and result in higher risk of cord
impingement by the unrecognized dislocated rib head. Although paraparesis caused by intraspinal rib head dislocation is rare, it remains a
diagnostic consideration in NF1 patients who develop acute or progressive neurological symptoms. Of the 17 cases presented in the literature
for which clinical information is available, six had evidence of cord compromise or impingement by the displaced rib head. Our case series
reveals a similar incidence, with two of our four patients demonstrating such findings. In our cases, as in the literature, rib head
dislocation occurred at the convex side of the apex of the scoliosis, most often involving the mid- to lower ribs. Furthermore, a single rib
was involved in the majority of cases (10 out of 17) [5, 8–15], and in all of our patients. There is no clear consensus regarding the
treatment of intraspinal rib head dislocation in dystrophic scoliosis, with most favoring excision of the rib head (under unusual
circumstances, the rib head may be left in place) . However, preoperative recognition is essential for surgical planning so that the
relationship of rib to cord can be assessed intra-operatively and manipulation performed with appropriate caution. Spine radiography is
usually the initial imaging for scoliosis, but radiographic diagnosis of intraspinal rib head dislocation is extremely difficult. All
reported intraspinal rib head dislocations have been reliably demonstrated by CT, and our cases are no exception. CT myelography accurately
depicts the relationship between the spinal cord and the dislocated rib, but MRI demonstrates this noninvasively. However, MRI – excellent
for delineating cord and paraspinous soft-tissue pathology – is sometimes the only cross-sectional preoperative imaging performed. Concern
over radiation exposure might limit preoperative CT further in the future, especially if critical findings like rib head dislocation can be
diagnosed accurately with MRI. Delineation of bony anatomy is certainly more difficult with MRI than with CT, but MRI can demonstrate
intraspinal rib head dislocation, as in our four patients. In our experience, intraspinal displacement of rib heads is best shown on
T2-weighted images in the axial and coronal planes. Intraspinal rib head dislocation in NF1 is an uncommon entity with significant clinical
and surgical implications. Although affected patients are generally asymptomatic, presentation ranges from mild back pain to weakness and
other myelopathic symptoms. Clinical diagnosis is difficult, and radiological diagnosis requires close scrutiny for subtle findings, such as
medial and superior positioning of a penciled rib head – and even then it is extremely challenging. Intraspinal rib head dislocation is
reliably diagnosed with CT in all reported cases in the literature and in the cases we present. However, MRI – with its excellent
delineation of soft tissues and cord, as well as its lack of radiation – is often performed without CT in the work-up of children with
scoliosis, and coronal and axial T2-W sequences can demonstrate intraspinal rib head dislocation. Evaluation of osseous structures with MRI
is certainly more difficult than with CT, and it is essential that radiologists become familiar with rib head displacement, as subtle
findings have significant implications for surgical management. We thank Mrs. Julie A. Ostoich-Prather for her assistance with the
preparation of the images. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License
which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
