Adrenocortical carcinosarcoma is an extremely rare and aggressive variant of adrenocortical carcinoma characterized by the presence of both
carcinomatous and sarcomatous components, with the latter often showing heterologous differentiation. Due to the rarity and unusual
histology, it may pose a diagnostic challenge. In order to increase awareness and identify potential diagnostic pitfalls, we report the
ninth case of non-functioning adrenocortical carcinosarcoma in a 45-year-old man who presented with worsening epigastric pain and a left
large retroperitoneal mass in close proximity to the body/tail of pancreas and third portion of the duodenum with displacement of the kidney
without parenchymal invasion and multiple liver nodules detected by computed tomographic scan. On en bloc resection, the tumor grossly did
not involve the pancreas, kidney or colon. Histologically, the tumor was composed of two distinct components - an epithelioid component with
granular cytoplasm that stained for synaptophysin, Melan-A, calretinin, and vimentin compatible with adrenocortical differentiation, and a
pleomorphic to spindled component that was positive for desmin and myogenin, compatible with rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation. A wedge
biopsy of a liver nodule showed morphologic features similar to the epithelial component of the primary tumor. The patient died three months
after surgery due to locoregional and distant recurrence. Adrenocortical carcinosarcoma is a rare malignancy that adds to the differential
diagnostic considerations for a retroperitoneal epithelioid malignancy. Awareness of this as a possibility will help in distinguishing this
tumor from other carcinomas, melanomas, and true sarcomas. Adrenocortical carcinoma is a rare but highly aggressive malignancy with an
estimated annual incidence of between 1.5 to 2 per million population . Women are more commonly affected. There is a bimodal age
distribution with cases a peak occurring before age 5 years and a second in the fourth to fifth decades . The prognosis is poor with a
significant proportion (21% to 39%) of patient having distant metastasis at the time of presentation and a 5 year overall survival ranges
between 38% to 60% . Even after an apparently curative resection, the majority of patients develop early tumor recurrence or distant
metastasis . Carcinosarcomas are defined as malignant neoplasms showing both epithelial and mesenchymal differentiation with heterologous
features including rhabdomyoblastic, chondroid, or osteogenic differentiation . We report a case of primary adrenal carcinosarcoma and
review the literature to raise awareness of this extremely rare variant of adrenal carcinoma with worse prognosis presenting high
differential diagnosis difficulties. A 45 year-old African American male with no past medical history of hypertension or prior malignancy
was admitted to the hospital with worsening epigastric pain, low-grade fever, nausea, vomiting, decreased appetite, and 9 kg loss of weight
over three months. On physical examination, his blood pressure was 189/119 mm Hg. His abdomen was mildly distended. A dynamic, contrast-
enhanced abdominal computed tomography scan revealed a large (19 × 15 cm) irregularly and peripherally enhancing predominantly necrotic left
retroperitoneal mass in close proximity to the body/tail of pancreas and third portion of the duodenum with displacement of the kidney
without parenchymal invasion (Fig 1). Extensive bilobar hepatic metastatic lesions were also noted but no lymphadenopathy was seen. The
laboratory studies did not show significant steroid hormone or catecholamine excess. No other mass lesions were noted in the patient. CT
scan of adrenocortical carcinosarcoma. Necrotic left adrenal mass in close proximity to the body/tail of pancreas and third portion of the
duodenum with displacement of the kidney An en-bloc resection of the mass which included a left radical nephrectomy, splenectomy, distal
pancreatectomy, left partial colectomy, and wedge biopsy of one of the hepatic lesions were performed. However, despite this, at 3 months,
the patient had a locoregional recurrence and progression of liver disease. Due to his poor performance status (Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group performance status 3), no chemotherapy was performed. The patient died 3 months after the surgery. Autopsy was not performed. The
gross specimen consisted of a centrally necrotic, peripherally viable appearing, heterogenous gray to pink-yellow friable suprarenal mass,
17.0 × 6.0 × 6.0 cm, 2974 grams, completely effacing the adrenal gland (Fig. 2A). Pancreas and kidney were adherent to tumor but otherwise
uninvolved by tumor (Fig 2B). Spleen and colon were uninvolved by tumor. Adrenocortical carcinosarcoma gross appearance. A. Tumor adherent
to pancreas (arrow) without apparent parenchymal involvement. B. Tumor compressing the adjacent left kidney (arrow) without parenchymal
involvement. The tumor showed extensive necrosis (over 70%). Two components were noted, an epithelioid component, and a pleomorphic/spindled
component. The epithelioid component consisted of sheet and nests of loosely cohesive polygonal cells with clear and eosinophilic cytoplasm
resembling adrenocortical cells (Fig. 3A). These cells showed highly atypical nuclei and large eosinophilic nucleoli (Fuhrman's grade III)
with high mitotic activity (average of seven mitoses per 10 high-power fields). The pleomorphic/spindled component, comprising approximately
75% of viable tumor, showed predominantly spindle-shaped cells arranged in fascicular pattern with highly pleomorphic nuclei with dense
irregularly clumped chromatin and prominent dense eosinophilic nucleoli (Fig. 3B) and occasional anaplastic multinucleated neoplastic giant
cells. Also identified in these areas were large elongated or ovoid cells with abundant deeply eosinophilic cytoplasm and eccentrically
located nuclei and prominent nucleoli, suggestive of rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation (Fig. 3C). The mitotic count in these areas was
even higher (30 mitoses/10 high-power fields). Adrenocortical carcinosarcoma histological appearance. A. Carcinomatous component showing
epithelioid cells with clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm arranged in nested pattern (40×). B. Sarcomatous component composed of uniform
spindle cells arranged in a fascicular pattern (40×). C. Sarcomatous component showing elongated or ovoid rhabdomyoblastic tumor cells with
eccentrically located nuclei and deeply eosinophilic cytoplasm (20×). Histologically as well, there was no involvement of the pancreas,
kidney, or colon, and the surrounding adipose tissue was unremarkable. The liver wedge biopsy showed a tumor nodule morphologically
identical to the epithelioid component of the retroperitoneal tumor. An extensive immunohistochemical panel was performed to evaluate both
epithelioid and pleomorphic spindled components of tumor (Table 1). The epithelioid component was strongly and diffusely positive for
vimentin, synaptophysin (Fig. 4A), and Melan-A (Fig. 4B) and focally positive for calretinin (Fig. 4C). The pleomorphic/spindled component
was strongly and diffusely positive for vimentin, focally strongly positive for synaptophysin, Melan-A, and focally weakly positive for
calretinin. The cells resembling rhabdomyoblasts were immunoreactive for smooth muscle markers, desmin (Fig. 4D), myogenin, and myoglobin.
Immunohistochemical stains for AE1/AE3, S-100, HMB-45, tyrosinase, inhibin, PLAP, CD99, and chromogranin were negative in both carcinomatous
and sarcomatous components. Adrenocortical carcinosarcoma immunohistochemistry. A. The carcinomatous areas are strongly positive for
synaptophysin (40×). B. Melan-A shows patchy positivity in the carcinomatous areas (40×). C. Calretinin immunostain showing diffuse
cytoplasmic and nuclear positivity in carcinomatous areas (40×). D. Desmin immunostaining highlighting rhabomyoblastic cells in sarcomatous
area (40×). Adrenocortical carcinosarcoma immunohistochemical profile Based on the histologic and immunohistochemical profile, the tumor was
diagnosed as an adrenocortical carcinosarcoma. Adrenocortical carcinoma containing a component of sarcoma or sarcoma-like (spindle cell)
differentiation is extremely rare, with only 8 prior cases described . According to WHO classification 2004 in other epithelial malignant
neoplasms, these tumors are classified as sarcomatoid carcinoma. Within the broad category of sarcomatoid carcinoma, tumors with
histological areas of both carcinoma and sarcoma containing differentiated sarcomatous elements, such as malignant cartilage, bone or
skeletal muscle are subclassified as carcinosarcoma. To our knowledge, only 3 prior cases of carcinosarcoma have been reported . The
clinicopathologic findings of all adrenocortical sarcomatoid carcinomas, including our patient, are summarized in Table 2. The 9 patients
ranged from ages 29 to 79 with a mean age of 53, which appears similar to conventional adrenocortical carcinoma (mean age 40-50 years old).
Although most studies of conventional adrenocortical carcinoma have a female preponderance , sarcomatoid carcinoma show nearly equal
distribution of two sexes. Initial clinical presentation is most often flank/abdominal pain or discomfort (six of 9 cases). Tumors tend to
be very large at the time of initial presentation (mean size 13.0 cm, weight 1113 grams). Two of 9 (22%) tumors were functional with
production of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate or aldosterone. All nine cases were treated with surgical resection often combined with
systemic adjuvant chemotherapy, however, all patients died within 1 year (mean postoperative survival 5 months). Including our case, only
four of 9 tumors (44%) were actually carcinosarcomas most often with rhabdomyosarcoma (3/4) followed by mixture of osteosarcoma and
chondrosarcoma (1/4). Though difficult to say based on small numbers, adrenocortical carcinosarcomas and other sarcomatoid carcinomas
without heterologous elements show similar distribution of age (mean age 48.7 versus 56.2), tumor size (13.3 cm vs. 12.8 cm), and outcome
(mean survival: 6 months vs. 5.4 months). Clinicopathologic features of adrenocortical sarcomatoid carcinoma Radiographically and even
grossly, it is often difficult to confirm adrenal origin for these tumors due to the advanced presentation. Indeed, in two of 9 cases of
sarcomatoid carcinoma, imaging studies could not correctly locate the adrenal origin of tumor. As such, the differential diagnostic
considerations include other aggressive retroperitoneal malignancies including other carcinomas, particularly renal cell carcinoma, true
sarcoma, large cell lymphoma, and metastases. Although some adrenocortical neoplasms produce steroid hormones, others are non-functional,
which makes it difficult to identify specific adrenocortical tumor markers. In our case, hormone levels were unremarkable. Here, a thorough
clinical history and precise characterization of structures involved may be useful in narrowing possibilities. In our case for instance, the
pancreas, and kidney on thorough examination were grossly uninvolved arguing against these as primary sites of origin. There was no
lymphadenopathy arguing against lymphoma, and there was no history of a prior malignancy or any other masses arguing against a metastasis.
The diagnosis of adrenocortical carcinosarcoma on histologic examination is often challenging as well. It requires thorough sampling of the
specimen to confirm the biphasic pattern and identify a well differentiated carcinomatous component allowing to prove the adrenal origin as
well as to rule out retroperitoneal sarcoma or poorly differentiated carcinoma. The adrenal phenotype of this tumor was verified by the
immunopositivity for a panel of immunohistochemical markers, namely, Melan-A , synaptophysin , calretinin , particularly on the well
differentiated carcinomatous component. Of note, in contrast to most carcinomas, adrenocortical carcinomas are notoriously negative or only
focally weakly positive for cytokeratins. In this study, we showed that sarcomatous component of the tumor also focally retains positivity
for Melan-A, synaptophysin and calretinin, supporting the notion that sarcomatous area of the tumor has indeed originated from the
adrenocortical carcinoma rather than representing a collision tumor. The sarcomatous component seen in our case contains frequent foci of
rhabdomyoblastic cells. These foci could be sharply highlighted by desmin, myogenin and myoglobin, which is both a sensitive and specific
marker for myogenic differentiation . Similar to the clinicoradiographic diagnostic considerations, the histologic differential diagnostic
considerations include 3 basic categories - other carcinosarcomas from other sites, most notably sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma, true
primary retroperitoneal soft tissue tumor, and metastases with sarcomatoid elements such as a germ cell tumor or rarely melanoma.
Sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma or hepatocellular carcinoma with sarcomatoid dedifferentiation both may show morphologically similar
appearance with clear and eosinophilic cytoplasm. However, positive staining of CD56, inhibin, Melan-A, synaptophysin, calretinin and
negative staining of pan-cytokeratin, EMA, Hepar-1 in adrenocortical sarcomatoid carcinoma may be of help in the differential diagnosis . A
primary retroperitoneal sarcoma such as liposarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, or malignant peripheral nerve sheet tumor also needs to be excluded
by careful histological and immunohistochemical analysis. The lack of well-differentiated liposarcomatous component and presence of well-
differentiated adrenocortical carcinoma component excludes the possibility of de-differentiated liposarcoma. In difficult cases,
immunohistochemical, fluorescence in situ hybridization or quantitative PCR analysis for CDK4 and MDM2 status may be of interest .
Rhabdomyosarcoma is usually a neoplasm of children/infants and lacks well-differentiated adrenocortical carcinoma component. Malignant
peripheral nerve sheet tumor with rhabdomyoblastic elements (Triton tumor) can be excluded by morphology as well as negativity of Melan-A,
synaptophysin, and calretinin and positivity of S-100 . Metastatic melanoma with heterologous elements might enter the differential
diagnosis since this will also be positive for Melan-A and negative for cytokeratin. This can be distinguished from an adrenocortical tumor
by positivity for other melanocytic makers such as S-100, HMB-45, tyrosinase and negativity of calretinin, synaptophysin and inhibin . It is
of note, however, that Coli et al. reported unusual positive staining of S-100 and HMB-45 in adrenocortical sarcomatoid carcinoma, which has
not been reported previously for adrenocortical tumors. Although they interpreted this immunohistochemical pattern as aberrant melanocytic
differentiation, further studies may be needed to confirm this unusual expression of S-100 and HMB-45. Mixed germ cell tumor, most often
metastasis from testicular primary, with somatic teratomatous malignancy (rhabdomyosarcoma) can be excluded by positive staining of PLAP and
cytokeratins and negative staining of vimentin, Melan-A and calretinin . Together, based on our literature review, carcinomatous component
of adrenocortical sarcomatoid carcinoma is immunoreactive for Melan-A (2 of 3 cases, 67%), synaptophysin (2 of 4 cases, 50%), calretinin (2
of 4 cases, 50%), inhibin (1 of 3 cases, 33%), vimentin (5 of 5 cases, 100%), Neuron-specific enolase (NSE) (2 of 2 cases, 100%),
occasionally positive for AE1/AE3 (1 of 5 cases, 20%), and negative for chromogranin (0 of 3 cases, 0%), EMA (0 of 2 cases, 0%), and
neurofilament (0 of 2 cases, 0%). Sarcomatous component is positive for desmin (4 of 4 cases, 100%), myogenin (2 of 2 cases, 100%), HHF35 (2
of 2 cases, 100%), vimentin (6 of 6 cases, 100%), myoglobin (1 of 1 case, 100%), caldesmon (1 of 1 case, 100%), smooth muscle actin (1 of 2
cases, 50%), calretinin (1 of 2 cases, 50%), Melan-A (1 of 3 cases, 33%), occasionally synaptophysin (1 of 4 cases, 25%) and negative for
AE1/AE3 (0 of 5 cases, 0%), EMA (0 of 2 cases, 0%), HMB-45 (0 of 2 cases, 0%), inhibin (0 of 3 cases, 0%), chromogranin (0 of 3 cases, 0%).
In conclusion, we have reported the ninth case of adrenocortical sarcomatoid carcinoma with rhabdomyoblastic differentiation
(carcinosarcoma). This lesion is often difficult to distinguish from other retroperitoneal neoplasms by radiographic imaging and is a highly
aggressive form of adrenocortical malignancy. Thorough sampling, careful histological examination and widely extensive immunohistochemical
investigation are often necessary to confirm adrenocortical origin and distinguish this tumor from other retroperitoneal sarcomatoid
neoplasms. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
KS designed the study, performed the histopathological evaluation, literature review, acquired photomicrographs, and drafted the manuscript.
MD, HRR and GJH participated in analysis and interpretation of data. RRS conceived and designed the study, gave and reviewed the final
histopathological diagnosis, and revised the manuscript for important intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
