To describe a case of a young adult with severe H1N1 influenza illness associated with hypothalamic abnormalities and post-influenza
parkinsonism. Case report. A 22-year-old woman with H1N1 influenza infection developed encephalopathy followed by diverse hypothalamic
dysfunction manifestations, sleeplessness, and persistent parkinsonian features. CSF analysis, brain imaging and EEG ruled out hypoxic brain
injury or other illnesses. A number of viruses have been associated with both acute and chronic parkinsonism. A link between parkinsonism
and influenza viruses is somewhat controversial. This is the first reported case of parkinsonism following an H1N1 influenza infection. The
full incidence of neurologic complications and sequelae from the 2009 influenza A (H1N1) pandemic has yet to be determined. There is a large
body of evidence that influenza can directly lead to encephalitis; however, a link with Parkinson's disease is somewhat controversial . Many
of the influenza viruses have not demonstrated clear neurotropism, and they rarely produce a true neuroinvasive disease. For this reason, a
possible connection between postencephalic Parkinson's disease and influenza is based only on simultaneous occurrence. The recognition of
neurologic post-influenzal disease has been based on coincidental occurrence with influenza pandemics, and to date there are no diagnostic
serological, animal or electrographical confirmation tests. In 1974, Gamboa et al found antigen material related to neurotropic influenza
strain A0 in some neurons of the hypothalamus and substantia nigra in postencephalitic parkinsonian brains. Other reports have also found
Influenza viral RNA in cerebrospinal fluid . However, these findings have not been consistent. Moreover, the failure to demonstrate
differences in influenza virus H1 antibodies between postencephalic Parkinson patients and idiopathic Parkinson patients, carefully matched
many years after the epidemic, weighs against the persistence of influenza virus in postencephalic Parkinson patients and its possible
pathogenic role. In recent years, many cases of influenza-associated acute encephalopathy have continued to emerge . The question arises as
to whether there is any evidence that points to a relationship between the virus and the concurrently neurologic emergent disease. We
describe a patient with parkinsonian neurologic complications associated with severe H1N1 influenza infection. A previously healthy 22-year-
old Hispanic female was admitted to a local hospital after two weeks of fever of 39.5°C (103.1°F), non-productive cough, dyspnea and
cyanosis. Community acquired pneumonia or influenza H1N1 was suspected, and treatment with clarithromycin, ceftriaxone and oseltamivir was
initiated. She required intubation and mechanical ventilation, and was referred to our institution. Upon her arrival, she was moderately
agitated despite sedation. Her blood pressure was130/90 mmHg, with a heart rate of 100 beats per minute, a temperature of 37°C and an O2
saturation of 80%. Her WBC was 13,500 cel/mm3, with 86% neutrophils and 7.9% lymphocytes; serum glucose was 129 mg/dL, sodium 132 mEq/L, and
creatinine 0.49 mg/dL. A thoracic CT scan showed bilateral infiltrates consistent with pneumonia. Ceftriaxone treatment was changed to
piperazillin and tazobactam, while treatment with clarithromycin and oseltamivir was continued. She also received amantadine for 3 days, but
this was discontinued after detection of H1N1 influenza RNA by RT-PCR (CDC Realtime rTPCR, dual-labeled hydrolyisis TaqMan® probes, 2009 CDC
protocol for detection and characterization of swine influenza) in a nasopharyngeal swab. Over the following days, her sodium levels
increased to 151 mEq/L despite treatment with free water. As the urine osmolality was persistently low, diabetes insipidus was suspected,
and intranasal desmopressin was initiated. Twenty days later she was extubated. While fentanyl and midazolam were being titrated down, she
became severely agitated and was treated with haloperidol. Around that time a generalized resting tremor was noted, predominately on the
left leg and left arm, as well as masked face, decreased blinking, and cogwheel phenomena. She did not have elevated temperature or
elevation of serum CPK levels. Haloperidol was discontinued, but the tremor did not subside. EEG and brain MRI were normal; specifically,
there were no signs of pontine myelinolysis or basal ganglia abnormalities. CSF analysis was normal, with 0 cells/mm3, protein 39 mg/dL and
glucose 47 mg/dL (serum glucose 75 mg/dL). Seven days later she developed severe autonomic cardiovascular fluctuations consistent with bouts
of hypertension alternated with hypotension, brady and tachyarrhythmias. Her blood pressure ranged from 160/100 mmHg to 80/40 mmHg and her
heart rate ranged from 180 beats per minute to 35 beats per minute (Figure 1). Soon after clonidine was started, her heart rate and blood
pressure became stable. Blood pressure and heart rate changes. (A) Five days after norepinephrine infusion was stopped, the patient was
stable and was weaned off the ventilator; (B) and (C) heart rate and blood pressure show random elevations, the patient was afebrile; (D)
after initiating clonidine the vital signs were more stable. BP: blood pressure, HR: heart rate, BPM: beats per minute. Six months later she
still complains of diurnal somnolence, insomnia and hyperhidrosis. She is alert and answers questions appropriately, although her behavior
is disinhibited at times. Cranial nerve examination is normal. Muscle strength is 3/5 in upper and lower extremities, and there is muscle
atrophy. Deep tendon reflexes are globally diminished. Plantar reflexes are flexor. She displays parkinsonian features despite the use of
biperiden and clonazepam (Additional file 1). We describe psychomotor agitation at onset, several hypothalamic abnormalities, sleeplessness
and changes in conduct occurring in an otherwise healthy young adult with H1N1 influenza infection. The findings of neurogenic deficiency of
arginine-vasopressin (AVP), autonomic hyperactivity, loss of the circadian rhythm, behavioral inappropriateness, and hyperhidrosis support
the involvement of the hypothalamus. The patient still displays post-encephalic parkinsonian motor symptoms consistent of bradykinesia,
tremor and "mask like" face months after the acute illness. Paroxysmal autonomic instability has been associated with encephalitis among
other intracranial catastrophes. It consists of severe blood pressure fluctuations with wide pulse pressure, tachyarrhythmias, hyperthermia
and hyperhidrosis with or without dystonia . This dramatic response reflects direct excitation, disinhibition, or both, of
sympathoexcitatory areas of the hypothalamus or the medulla . Neurogenic pulmonary edema, neurocardiogenic injury, cardiac arrhythmias, and
sudden death are among the most dreaded possible complications . Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) is a severe idiosyncratic reaction
resulting from impaired central dopaminergic transmission in the hypothalamus and basal ganglia. Two common triggers are drug-induced
blockade of D2-dopaminergic receptors and sudden withdrawal of dopaminergic agonists. While the use of haloperidol and amantadine withdrawal
have been linked to NMS, the lack of full recovery and the absence of CPK elevations does not support NMS in our patient. Neurologic
complications of the influenza virus are uncommon complications of a very common infection. The pathogenesis is still not fully understood.
The absence of a significant inflammatory response in the CSF supports para-infectious or post-infectious immune mechanisms. The
hypothalamus coordinates many complex patterns of neuroendocrine outputs, circadian rhythms, homeostatic mechanisms and behavior. Although
acute hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis responses to stress are generally adaptive, excessive responses can lead to deleterious effects.
Specialized brain regions that lack an effective blood-brain barrier include the hypothalamus and circumventricular areas. The capillary
endothelium is fenestrated to allow free passage of large proteins and other molecules. These structures are densely vascularized and may be
the site of action of interleukins to elicit both fever and ACTH secretion. Several studies have proposed a central role for various
inflammatory cytokines in the genesis of influenza-associated neurologic illness . Rather than a direct neuroinvasion, it is possible that
the hypothalamus and surrounding structures are vulnerable to the massive cytokinemia produced in patients with more severe forms of
influenza. However, it is also likely that a spectrum of illnesses or underlying factors is at play, and more research needs to be done.
Sporadic cases clinically diagnosed as H1N1-associated neurologic complications attract close attention, not just as a matter of historical
curiosity, but as observational evidence to obtain objective data. The severity of neurologic sequelae warrant efforts to investigate these
sporadic cases to better understand various chronic neurologic conditions, especially parkinsonism. In summary, our patient displays several
hypothalamic abnormalities and post-encephalic parkinsonian features. The exclusion of other possible etiologies of acute neurologic
illness, combined with supportive evidence of acute influenza virus infection, suggests that these are influenza-associated complications.
Case reports like ours highlight the threat of CNS involvement. Although rare, these neurologic manifestations may be overlooked in patients
with H1N1 influenza. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. AGD participated in the evaluation and care of the patient, analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript. LMG participated in
acquisition of data. All authors contributed in the evaluation and care of the patient and review of the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. Video 1 3GPP movie Video 1 showing persistent unilateral tremor. The patient displays an involuntary
oscillating rhythmic tremor in her left arm that is present at rest, although it is better visualized for video purposes while she is
stretching her arms. A masked face is also present. These features were not present before her hospital stay. Click here for file The
authors would like to thank all the intensive care unit doctors for the care and support of the patient. This work was supported by the
Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia (CONACYT) through the Fondo Sectorial de Investigación en Salud y Seguridad Social in aids to the
H1N1 influenza pandemic research.
