To the Editor: Since the discovery of Toscana virus (TOSV) in 1971 in Tuscany (1), sandfly-borne TOSV has become recognized as a leading
cause of acute meningitis in central Italy during the summer (2). France, Spain, Portugal, Greece, and Cyprus have also reported cases of
TOSV infection (2). Although TOSV has been detected in sandflies in Sicily (3), we are not aware of any historically documented human
infection with TOSV in this southernmost region of Italy. We report TOSV infection of an American male physician, 65 years of age, who
traveled to Sicily for 3 weeks and returned to the United States in October 2009. Two days after his return, he awoke with a headache, and
hours later he noticed difficulty finding words. His headache progressed, and during the next few hours, he experienced severe expressive
dysphasia. At admission to the hospital, he denied having fever, nuchal rigidity, photophobia, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. Other than
changing planes in Milan, the patient had remained in Sicily during the entire 3 weeks of his visit. He had sustained both mosquito and what
he thought were flea bites while in Sicily. He had no known exposure to bats, rabid animals, or ticks. Computed tomographic scan and
magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed no mass lesions or abnormality of the cerebral vessels. A sample of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
obtained at admission showed 14 leukocytes/mm3 (reference range 0–5 leukocyte/mm3) with 100% lymphocytes, a protein level of 126 mg/dL
(reference range 15–45 mg/dL), and a glucose level of 63 mg/dL (reference range 50–80 mg/dL). A nasopharyngeal swab specimen was negative
for influenza A and B virus antigens. Other than a decreased thrombocyte count and an elevated serum glucose level, the results of complete
blood count, comprehensive chemical panel, and coagulation studies were within normal limits. PCR results for CSF were negative for herpes
simplex virus, enterovirus, and parechovirus. Test results for acute-phase and convalescent-phase serum specimens performed at the
Washington State Department of Health Laboratory were negative for West Nile virus and St. Louis encephalitis virus immunoglobulin M. Serum
and CSF were sent to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Fort Collins, Colorado. TOSV RNA was detected in a CSF sample
collected on day 1 of illness by using reverse transcription–PCR (4). Plaque-reduction neutralization assays demonstrated a >4-fold rise in
TOSV neutralizing antibodies between paired serum specimens collected on days 1 (titer <1:10) and 21 (titer 1:320) of illness. No similar
rise in neutralizing antibodies to serologically related phleboviruses (e.g., sandfly fever Naples virus and sandfly fever Sicilian virus)
was detected. The patient received supportive care only. He had a complete neurologic recovery in 10 days and was able to return to work.
Phylogenetic analyses indicate that 2 geographically distinct genotypes, the Italian and Spanish lineages of TOSV, circulate throughout the
Mediterranean region (5). To determine the lineage of the infecting strain, we performed advanced molecular analyses of TOSV RNA isolated
from the infected traveler’s CSF. These analyses used published consensus primers that target the small (S) segment (4) as well as primers
newly designed to target the medium (M) segment: M 851F, 5′-ACCAAATACAACCATAGCCCC-3′ (forward) and M 1327c, 5′-ATACAATTCCCACAGTCGTTAG-3′
(reverse) of the multisegment TOSV genome. Reverse transcription–PCR amplification and nucleotide sequencing generated 2 nt sequences of 332
(S segment) and 424 (M segment) nucleotides in length. Phylogenetic analyses of the newly determined sequences and sequences previously
determined for Mediterranean TOSV isolates of diverse origin were carried out by using MEGA version 4 (6). According to phylogenetic
inference, the TOSV RNA identified in the returning traveler is of the Italian lineage (Figure). Of interest, the TOSV M segment sequence
generated from this patient aggregates with extreme bootstrap support along with that generated previously from a strain of TOSV that was
isolated from sand flies in Palermo, Sicily, in 1993 (Figure), indicating that the infecting strain is likely representative of strains that
have circulated in Sicily for years. Phylogeny of Toscana viruses (TOSVs) of diverse origin. Partial small (S) and medium (M) segment
sequences of interest were aligned by using ClustalW (www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/clustalw2/index.html), and neighbor-joining and maximum-parsimony
trees were generated by using 2,000 bootstrap replicates with MEGA version 4 (6). Highly similar topologies and confidence values were
derived by all methods, and a neighbor-joining tree generated from a comparison of 424 nt of the M segment polyprotein gene open reading
frame is displayed here. GenBank accession numbers appear after the location and source of isolation for each taxon. Scale bar represents
the number of nucleotide substitutions per site. Of interest, the 2009 Sicilian TOSV described in this study (Sicily, human, 2009)
aggregates with extreme support along with other Italian viruses, including an isolate that was derived from sandflies in Palermo, Sicily,
in 1993. This case represents the third report of meningitis or meningoencephalitis caused by TOSV infection in a US traveler to the
Mediterranean (all acquired in Italy) (7,8). As is shown by this and other recent reports of TOSV infections in the Mediterranean islands
surrounding Italy (9), the geographic range of TOSV human infections is larger than previously known. Reports of TOSV infection among
European travelers returning from disease-endemic regions have provided additional evidence of the emergence of TOSV-related illness on a
global scale (10). Although the clinical course varies from asymptomatic infection to severe meningoencephalitis, TOSV should be included in
the differential list of viral pathogens among patients who seek treatment with symptoms consistent with meningitis or encephalitis if the
patients have recently traveled to Mediterranean areas, including Sicily. Because neither a vaccine nor specific antiviral drug treatment is
available to prevent or treat TOSV infection, travelers to TOSV-endemic areas should be advised to take all precautions to prevent insect
bites. Suggested citation for this article: Kay MK, Gibney KB, Riedo FX, Kosoy OL, Lanciotti RS, Lambert AJ. Toscana virus infection in
American traveler returning from Sicily, 2009 . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2010 Sep [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1609.100505 We thank Jeffrey S. Duchin and Tao Sheng Kwan-Gett for their outstanding help with this case
report.
