Dear Editor, A 58-year-old woman presented with a 1-month history of abdominal pain and weight loss. Positron emission tomography
computerized tomography (PET-CT) showed markedly thickened and hypermetabolic small bowel (standardized uptake value maximum, SUVmax: 8.7)
associated with multiple abdominal and pelvic lymphadenopathy (Fig. 1a). Intestinal obstruction soon developed, necessitating small bowel
resection. Histologic examination showed enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma. She was treated with three cycles of chemotherapy
comprising steroid, methotrexate, ifosphamide, l-asparaginase, and etoposide . Interim reassessment PET-CT showed complete resolution of the
abdominal and pelvic lesions (Fig. 1b). However, new pretracheal, precarinal, subcarinal, and left hilar lymphadenopathy (SUVmax, 7.4;
Fig. 1b, arrows) developed. The patient was afebrile with no respiratory symptoms. Owing to discrepant responses of lymphadenopathy to
chemotherapy, further diagnostic evaluation was pursued. To avoid general anesthesia necessary for mediastinoscopy, endobronchial ultrasound
guided transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) was performed under local anesthesia with conscious sedation. Multiple mediastinal lymph
nodes located in the upper, lower paratracheal, and subcarinal area were aspirated. Conventional fiberoptic bronchoscopy was also performed
with no endobronchial abnormality detected. Both cytologic and histologic specimens obtained from all sampled lymph nodes demonstrated
epithelioid-like cells and multinucleated giant cells, with no atypical lymphoid cells found. Roundish spore-like organisms were indentified
(Fig. 2a, arrows). These organisms were positive for the fungal mucicarmine (Fig. 2b, arrows) and Grocott stains. The histopathologic
features were consistent with cryptococcal lymphadenitis. Serum cryptococcal antigen was also positive at 1:16. The cerebrospinal fluid was
normal. She was treated with oral fluconazole (400 mg daily). A PET-CT scan after 6 weeks of fluconazole showed that the mediastinal
lymphadenopathy had largely resolved. Fig. 1Positron emission tomography. a Before treatment, showing massive bowel and pelvic involvement
(arrows). b After chemotherapy, showing resolution of all previous lesions, but matted mediastinal lymphadenopathy of similar metabolic
activity as the original lymphomaFig. 2Lymph node findings. a Histologic examination showed numerous spore-like organisms (arrows). b The
organisms were positive for the fungal stain mucicarmine (arrows) Positron emission tomography. a Before treatment, showing massive bowel
and pelvic involvement (arrows). b After chemotherapy, showing resolution of all previous lesions, but matted mediastinal lymphadenopathy of
similar metabolic activity as the original lymphoma Lymph node findings. a Histologic examination showed numerous spore-like organisms
(arrows). b The organisms were positive for the fungal stain mucicarmine (arrows) Cryptococcal infection usually results from inhalation of
fungal spores, and may be confined to the lungs or disseminate systemically. Radiologically, pulmonary cryptococcosis may present as a
single well-defined consolidation or mass, diffusely scattered nodules or reticulonodules . Cryptococcal lymphadenopathy, especially
affecting the mediastinum, is infrequent and mainly reported in patients infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) [3, 4].
Radiologically, in HIV-negative patients, pulmonary cryptococcal infection usually presents as large nodular lesions or alveolar
infiltrates. In HIV-infected patients, lymphadenopathy and interstitial infiltrates are instead the common findings . In cryptococcal
lymphadenitis, lymph nodes are generally <1.5 cm and accompanied by pulmonary parenchymal changes . Hence, the extensive multifocal
mediastinal lymphadenopathy without parenchymal lesions in our patient was more consistent radiologically with lymphoma progression.
However, suitable investigations finally revealed the correct diagnosis. Conventional transbronchial needle aspiration with a histology
needle in immunocompromised patients with intrathoracic lymphadenopathy has a poor diagnostic yield . EBUS-TBNA with a designated 22-gauge
needle has significant advantages. In addition to a high diagnostic yield for mediastinal lymphadenopathy, both histologic and cytologic
specimens can be obtained. A histological specimen aids in the diagnosis of non-malignant mediastinal lymphadenopathy such as sarcoidosis,
as well as eliminates the possibility of false-positive microbiologic results from contamination by airway colonization. Our case
illustrated well the utility of EBUS-TBNA as a minimally invasive technique in clinching the diagnosis. Open Access This article is
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
