Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) is an autosomal dominant hereditary disorder that is difficult to diagnose because of its rarity and
variable clinical features. The magnitude of RTH is caused by mutations in the thyroid hormone receptor beta (TRβ) gene. We recently treated
a 38-yr-old woman with RTH who had incidental papillary thyroid carcinoma. She presented with goiter and displayed elevated thyroid hormone
levels with an unsuppressed TSH. She was determined to harbor a missense mutation of M310T in exon 9 of the TRβ gene, and diagnosed with
generalized RTH. This mutation has not yet been reported in Korea. RTH is very rare and easily overlooked, but should be considered in
patients who present with goiter and elevated thyroid hormone levels with an unsuppressed TSH. The association between thyroid cancer and
RTH needs further study. Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) is a rare an autosomal dominant hereditary disorder (1). In the majority of
cases, RTH is caused by mutations in the thyroid hormone receptor beta (TRβ) gene. The clinical presentation is variable, but common
features include goiter, an absence of the classic thyrotoxic symptoms and metabolic consequences of elevated thyroid hormone levels, and a
normal or exaggerated thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) response to thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH). Until now over 1,000 cases have
been identified around the world, and nine cases have been reported in Korea (2-9). We recently encountered a case of RTH with incidental
micropapillary thyroid carcinoma. The association between RTH and thyroid cancer has not yet been clarified, but there is evidence to
suggest that RTH may play a contributory role. Here, we present a case of RTH with thyroid cancer along with the mutation analysis for the
TRβ gene. A 38-yr-old Korean woman visited a private clinic for the evaluation of anterior neck swelling. The initial laboratory examination
revealed an elevated levels of serum thyroid hormone without accompanying TSH suppression (free T4 2.67 ng/dL [range, 0.64-1.72] and TSH
1.82 µIU/mL [range, 0.4-4.5]). She had no signs or symptoms of typical thyrotoxicosis except diffuse goiter and mild palpitations. However,
due to findings of elevated serum thyroid hormone levels and goiter, she was diagnosed with Graves' disease, and prophylthiouracil (PTU) was
prescribed. After three months of PTU (100 mg three times daily), she complained of generalized weakness, a weight gain of about 3 kg, and
generalized edema. Consequently, she was referred to our hospital. When first seen at our hospital on December 9, 2008, her height and
weight were 162 cm and 49 kg, respectively, with a blood pressure of 97/68 mmHg and a pulse rate of 96 beats/min. Her thyroid gland was
symmetrically enlarged, and exophthalmos and myxedematous skin lesions were absent. Past medical history was significant for goiter first
detected at age 13. At that time, the physician recommended regular checks for thyroid function because of elevated levels of thyroid
hormones, but she was lost to follow-up. Her family history included one sister who had a diffuse goiter and a thyroid nodule. The
laboratory examination revealed an elevated level of TSH despite an elevated levels of thyroid hormone [total T3 181 ng/dL (range, 76-190),
free T4 2.50 ng/dL and TSH 10.23 µIU/mL]. Thyroid autoantibodies against thyroperoxidase, thyroglobulin, and TSH-receptor were all negative.
Thyroid ultrasonography (USG) revealed several micro-nodules in both lobes. USG-guided fine-needle aspiration was performed for the nodule
which showed suspicious features of malignancy in the right thyroid lobe (Fig. 1), and the cytologic diagnosis was papillary thyroid
carcinoma. A 99m technetium thyroid scan showed diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland with increased uptake (10.1%) (Fig. 2). PTU was
discontinued due to TSH elevation and the occurrence of hypothyroid symptoms. After PTU was stopped for one month, hypothyroid symptoms
disappeared and thyroid function tests (TFTs) revealed elevated thyroid hormone levels [free T4 2.20 ng/dL and total T3 141 ng/dL] and a
nearly normal level of TSH (5.60 µIU/mL). The differential diagnosis at this point was between RTH and a TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma
based on the TFTs findings. TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma was ruled out because the patient had no clinical features of thyrotoxicosis, a
negative MRI of the pituitary gland, a normal level of the α-subunit of TSH (0.36 mIU/mL, range, 0-0.9), and an exaggerated response of TSH
to a thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) stimulation test (Fig. 3). Accordingly, genomic DNA was isolated from the peripheral blood
leukocytes of the patient with a G-DEX™ Ilb Genomic DNA Extraction Kit (Intron Biotechnology, Seongnam, Korea). PCR amplification was
conducted on seven coding exons (from exon 4 to 10) of the TRβ gene. The sequences were analyzed using the computational software ABI 3730
XL (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, USA). A point mutation was detected in exon 9 of the TRβ gene that caused the substitution of threonine
(ACG) for methionine (ATG) at codon 310 (M310T). This mutation has not yet been reported in Korea. The patient's sister had normal TFTs and
no mutation by DNA sequencing analysis (Fig. 4). Ultimately, the patient was diagnosed with RTH and papillary thyroid carcinoma. She
underwent a total thyroidectomy and the pathologic diagnosis was two micropapillary thyroid carcinomas in both lobes (0.4 cm in the right
and 0.2 cm in the left lobe). After surgery, she received levothyroxine (L-T4) at 150 µg/day). After three months of L-T4 therapy, her TSH
level was still elevated (TSH 45.1 µIU/mL) and she complained about symptoms of hypothyroidism; therefore, we increased the dose of L-T4 to
200 µg/day. After two months, her TSH level decreased to 15.5 µIU/mL, and most of her hypothyroid symptoms disappeared. Ultimately the dose
of L-T4 was increased to 250 µg/day titrated to achived a TSH level comparable to the preoperative value. Inappropriate secretion of TSH and
the co-existence of elevated thyroid hormone has been noted in several circumstances, including intermittent administration with L-T4, TSH-
secreting pituitary adenoma, and RTH (10). RTH is distinguished from TSH-secreting pituitary adenoma by an exaggerated response to TRH,
normal levels of the TSH α subunit, and a normal pituitary gland on sella-MRI. RTH is characterized by reduced clinical and biochemical
manifestations of thyroid hormone action relative to the elevated circulating thyroid hormone levels. The linkage between RTH and the TRβ
gene was detected in 1988 (11). About 90% of RTH patients carry mutations in the T3-binding domain between exon 4 and exon 10 of the TRβ
gene. The majority of previously described mutations were missense mutations that induced single amino acid substitutions. Most patients of
RTH are clinically euthyroid, some individuals may appear to be hypothyroid or hyperthyroid. Furthermore, the same subject can manifest
signs and symptoms of hypothyroidism in one tissue, while the findings may be suggestive of thyrotoxicosis in other tissues (1). On the
basis of clinical features, three different forms of RTH have been described: generalized RTH (GRTH), pituitary RTH (PRTH), and peripheral
tissue RTH (PTRTH). GRTH patients, the most common form, appear eumetabolic despite elevated level of thyroid hormones maintained by the
hypersecretion of TSH in response to hypothalamic TRH. PRTH patients generally display thyrotoxic. Administration of an anti-thyroid drugs
may improve the symptoms. PTRTH patients manifest symptoms and signs of hypothyroidism, despite of normal serum thyroid hormone and TSH
levels (12). Treatment of RTH should be aimed at maintaining a normal metabolic status. In our case, administration of anti-thyroid drugs
under the misdiagnosis of Graves' disease resulted in an increase in serum TSH and the appearance of symptoms of hypothyroidism, while
thyroid hormone levels remained elevated. As expected, large amounts of L-T4 were needed in our patient after total thyroidectomy. Titration
should be achieved by assessing tissue responses. Restoration of the preoperative levels of TSH is the recommended target in GRTH. The RTH
in our patient was accompanied by two small papillary thyroid cancers. The precise contribution of RTH to thyroid tumorigenesis is not fully
understood, but there is evidence to suggest that they may play contributory roles. About 95% of RTH patients have diffuse goiter, and
continuous stimulation of the thyroid by excess TSH may be related to the formation of thyroid nodules and the growth of thyroid cancer
(13). Previous pathological examinations of the thyroid in RTH cases have revealed hyperplasia of the follicular epithelium, sometimes
accompanied by papillary proliferation probably due to continuous stimulation by TSH (12). Not only the effect of thyroid, but the cases of
co-existence of pituitary tumor were reported (14). TRβ mutants may also have oncogenic actions. Abnormal expression and somatic mutation at
various sites of the TRβ gene have been described in human cancers of the liver, kidney, breast and colon (15-19). Puzianowska-Kuznicka et
al. (16) conducted the sequencing of TRβ1 and TRα1 cDNAs. TRβ1 and TRα1 mutations were found in 93.8% and 62.5% of papillary cancer cases,
respectively. But no mutations were found in healthy thyroid controls, and only 11.1% and 22.2% of thyroid adenomas had such TRβ1 or TRα1
mutations. Suzuki et al. (20) generated a mouse model (TRβPV/PV mice) of thyroid cancer that harbored a C-terminal 14 amino acid frame-shift
mutation in the TRβ gene. Despite accumulating evidence for a possible role for TR mutants in thyroid tumorigenesis, an elevated rate of
thyroid cancers in RTH patients has not yet been observed. It may be that most cases of RTH in humans have heterozygous mutations of TRβ,
unlike the TRβPV/PV homozygous mouse model. Other genetic alterations such as BRAF mutation, which is commonly detected the Korean patients
with PTC, may also be required to initiate thyroid cancer. Unfortunately, analyses of BRAFV600E mutation or activities of PI3K could not be
conducted in our case. In conclusion, RTH is very rare and easily overlooked, but must be considered in patients who present with goiter and
elevated thyroid hormone levels with unsuppressed TSH. Further studies to address the association between thyroid cancer and RTH will shed
insight on the molecular and cellular mechanisms of thyroid tumorigenesis. The ultrasonography of thyroid showed 0.6 cm hypoechoic nodule in
the right lobe with taller-than-wide appearance, which was suspicious for malignancy. The 99mTechnetium thyroid scan showed diffuse
enlargement of both lobes of the thyroid with homogenously increased uptake (10.1%). Exaggerated response of TSH to TRH stimulation was
observed in the patient with resistance to thyroid hormone. The DNA sequence analysis of the TRβ gene showed a substitution of threonine
(ACG) for methionine (ATG) at codon 310 (M310T) of exon 9.
