Measles Mumps Rubella (MMR) vaccination is known to cause some serious adverse events, such as fever, rash, gland inflammation and
neurologic disorders. These include third and sixth cranial nerve palsies. The case reported describes a partial recurrent oculomotor palsy
associated with systemic symptoms following MMR vaccination in a healthy young child. The oculomotor palsy did not recover completely during
the follow-up. Most of the times, measles, mumps and rubella cause mild illness and discomfort; but can also have serious or fatal sequelae.
MMR vaccination has been proved to be safe and to reduce significantly the number of reported infections due to these viruses. However,
significant adverse events can occur and paediatricians and public health operators should be aware of this aspect. Sir, Measles Mumps
Rubella (MMR) vaccination is known to cause some serious adverse events. These can include fever, rash, gland inflammation and neurologic
disorders like epilepsy, encephalitis, aseptic meningitis and autistic disorders . The case reported below describes a partial recurrent
oculomotor palsy following MMR vaccination in a healthy young child. A 20-month-old Italian boy received a MMR (MMR VAX PROÂ®) vaccine dose
according to the normal vaccination schedule. Twenty days later he presented fever and cutaneous rash, which resolved spontaneously in one
day, and left eye (LE) eso-hypotropia, which also lasted 24-48 hrs until complete self-recovery. This episode recurred 20 days later: the
ophthalmological examination showed a deficit of elevation in adduction of the LE and was diagnosed as "acquired palsy of the inferior
oblique muscle" [Fig. 1]. The remaining neurologic examination was normal. EEG, brain MRI with and without gadolinium, blood count, blood
chemistry were normal. Serum titres against main viral agents (Citomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr, Herpes Simplex, Varicella Zoster, Papovavirus
B19, Influenza, Parainfluenza, Respiratory Syncytial) were negative, except for a positive IgG titre for Rubella virus. A week later the
symptoms partially disappeared without any treatment. The following scheduled neurological controls continued to be normal, while the
orthoptic examination showed persisting, but inconstant, weakening of LE inferior oblique muscle function. At the last control, when the
child was 5 years old, visual acuity and stereopsis tests were normal, but a mild deficit of the inferior oblique muscle function persisted,
with orthophoria in primary position. Deficit of elevation in adduction of the LE. MMR viruses are neurotropic. Therefore, although the
vaccine is obtained by live attenuated viruses, vaccination may produce neurological disorders. Only a few cases of benign, recurrent
cranial nerve palsies, secondary to immunization, have been described. Patients with complete palsy of the third or sixth cranial nerve have
been reported. In our case, the oculomotor nerve palsy is incomplete i.e. only the inferior oblique muscle is involved in one eye. The
previously reported cases resolved spontaneously and completely within several months. In our case, however, a mild deficit of the muscle
has persisted several years following vaccination and may be considered permanent. In conclusion, public confidence in immunization must be
maintained because safety and efficacy of MMR vaccination is clearly demonstrated; however potential adverse events must be strictly and
carefully monitored.
