Neonatal lupus erythematosus is an immune-mediated disease caused by transplacental passage of maternal autoantibodies, primarily anti-Ro
(SSA) and anti-La (SSB). The major clinical manifestations are congenital heart block, cutaneous lupus lesions, and hematologic problems.
Hepatic, pulmonary, and neurological involvements are rare. We report a 5-day-old male neonate, born to a clinically asymptomatic mother,
presenting with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, cutaneous lupus lesions, congenital heart block, and thrombocytopenia. Both the neonate and
his mother had high titers of antinuclear antibodies (1:640), anti-Ro (SSA), and anti-La (SSB) antibodies. The thrombocytopenia improved
with prednisolone (2 mg/kg/day) for 14 days. The skin lupus rashes and bilirubin resolved 2 months later, and liver enzymes were completely
normal by 6 months. Neonatal lupus erythematosus (NLE) is a rare immune-mediated disease characterized by the transplacental passage from
the mother to the fetus of autoantibodies, in particular SSA or SSB or both. The common clinical manifestations of NLE include cardiac
disease, cutaneous lesions, and hematologic problems.1 Recently, it has become clear that hepatobiliary disease may also occur as a
manifestation of NLE. Although biochemical evidence of liver disease is common in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), clinical
liver disease is uncommon. A 5-day-old male neonate presented with generalized jaundice. He had been born by vaginal delivery at term with a
birth weight about 2100 g. The mother (gravida: 6, para: 6, living: 6) was healthy with no significant past medical history other than mild
photosensitivity. The baby had no history of passing clay-colored stools or of fever and had not been given any drugs. On admission,
physical examination revealed pale conjunctiva, icteric sclera, generalized jaundice, a few erythematous lesions in the periorbital areas,
and mild splenomegaly. He had an irregular pulse, with a heart rate of about 75 beats per minute. The electrocardiogram showed third-degree
atrioventricular block; echocardiography showed a patent foramen ovale but no other abnormality. Hematological investigation revealed anemia
(hemoglobin 9 g/dL) and thrombocytopenia (platelets 80 000/mm3). A blood smear showed erythrocyte hypochromia, anisocytosis, and
poikilocytosis. The reticulocyte index, C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were normal. Liver function tests showed
increased values, as follows: aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 760 U/L (normal:1-46 U/L); alanine aminotransferse (ALT), 187 U/L (normal:
1-49 U/L); alkaline phosphate, 2045 U/L (normal: 64-306 U/L); total bilirubin, 12.4 mg/dL (normal: 0.1-1.3 mg/dL); and direct bilirubin, 6.2
mg/dL (normal: 0.1-1.3 mg/dL). Prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time were not prolonged. TORCH titers, viral hepatitis markers,
and thyroid function tests were normal. For both mother and neonate, blood and urine cultures were negative. Tests for metabolic diseases,
including galactosemia, tyrosinemia, and phenylketonuria, were negative. Abdominal ultrasound revealed a normal-sized liver and gall
bladder, no bile duct dilation, and no sludge in the biliary tree. The spleen was mildly enlarged but showed a normal echo pattern.
Hepatobiliary scintigraphy showed decreased hepatic uptake, with no passage through the intrahepatic bile ducts. At first, the cutaneous
lesions consisted of a few nonscarring erythematous annular plaques in the periorbital areas. Over the next few days, they spread to the
nasal bridge and the upper parts of the cheeks and had sharp and slightly hyperkeratotic borders. Serologic studies of the infant and mother
were positive for antinuclear antibodies (ANA; 1: 640), anti-Ro/SSA: >4 index (normal: <1 index) and anti-La/SSB antibodies: >4 index
(normal: <1 index). Anti-ds DNA antibodies, anti-SM antibodies, anti-U RNP antibodies were not detected. More detailed studies in the mother
revealed a low C3 level of 0.71 g/dL (normal: 0.9-1.87 g/dL), leukopenia (WBC: 2900 mm3), and anemia (hemoglobin: 10.6 mg/dL). We diagnosed
NLE. Earlier studies have reported beneficial effects of glucocorticoids on different manifestations of NLE such as thrombocytopenia and
cholestasis, and we therefore prescribed prednisolone (2 mg/kg/day) for 2 weeks along with ursodeoxycholic acid. The parents were advised to
avoid exposing the neonate to the sun and to use sunscreen agents and topical hydrocortisone creams. After the platelet count had returned
to normal the patient was discharged and was then followed up in the outpatient clinic. Within 2 months both the jaundice and the skin
rashes had resolved. At 6 months of age, liver function tests were normal. During the follow-up period, the patient had a normal heart rate
and there was no evidence of heart failure. NLE results from maternal transfer of IgG autoantibodies between the 12th and 16th week of
gestation.2 Ninety-eight percent of NLE babies have anti-Ro antibodies but only 1% to 2% of mothers with SSA/Ro antibodies have neonates
with NLE, irrespective of whether the mothers are symptomatic or not. A considerable proportion of mothers of affected infants are
asymptomatic (40% to 60%), while the remaining women have clear evidence of SLE, Sjögren syndrome, or of some undifferentiated connective
tissue disease. The clinical manifestations of NLE may include congenital heart block (CHB), cutaneous lesions, thrombocytopenia, pulmonary
and neurologic disease, and hepatitis. Of these, CHB and cutaneous lesions are the most common, occurring in 54% and 37% of cases,
respectively.2 The characteristic skin lesions of NLE have a predilection for the upper and lower eyelids, giving rise to a typical ‘owl-
eye’ appearance in the majority of babies. The trunk and extremities are also commonly affected. These lesions may be erythematous, annular,
raised or flat, and sometimes show fine scales. They develop within hours to several days after delivery and follow exposure to sunlight.3
The lesions typically disappear spontaneously, without the disappearance of the serum antibodies. However, a few cases of persistent
telangiectasia, atrophy, or pigmentation have been reported. The most common cardiac manifestation of neonatal lupus is CHB, which is most
commonly diagnosed between 18 and 24 weeks of gestation and may be of first, second, or third degree. Established third-degree block appears
to be irreversible. In some cases, cardiomyopathy occurs together with CHB. Most cases have been noted at birth, but delayed dilated
cardiomyopathy has also been reported.4 Treatment of the heart block is not necessary unless the patient has heart failure.5 CHB carries a
significant mortality (15% to 30%) and morbidity, with 50% to 70% of patients requiring permanent pacing. In early studies, liver
involvement in NLE was mentioned as a rare condition, but now it appears that about 10% to 24% of NLE cases have liver involvement. Three
types of hepatobiliary disease have been described: 1) severe liver failure occurring during gestation or in the neonatal period; 2)
conjugated hyperbilirubinemia with mild or no elevation of aminotransferases, occurring during the first weeks of life; and 3) mild
elevation of aminotransferases occurring at 2 to 3 months of age.6 Various forms of hepatic pathology related to SLE have been described,
including fatty liver, chronic persistent hepatitis, portal inflammation, hepatic vasculitis, and granulomatous hepatitis. Although these
liver abnormalities may have been related to SLE, the majority of the biochemical abnormalities seen in these studies were usually secondary
to other causes such as drug-induced liver dysfunction, alcoholic liver disease, congestive heart failure, infection, or metabolic
disturbances.7 NLE liver disease may present as an isolated disorder or in association with other manifestations of NLE.8 The diagnosis of
NLE liver disease requires that bilirubin and liver enzyme levels are consistent with cholestasis and hepatitis, along with detection in the
infant of maternal antibodies to SSA/Ro and/or SSB/La. Liver biopsy is usually not indicated and should be reserved for the infants with
clinical evidence of severe dysfunction or with persistent moderate dysfunction.3 Our patient had cutaneous lesions of NLE, with the classic
‘owl eye’ distribution. Also, CHB, cholestatic jaundice, anemia, and thrombocytopenia were present. The mother had no obvious history of
systemic erythematosus lupus. The presence of anti-Ro/SSA and anti-La/SSB antibodies with high ANA titers in both the patient and the mother
confirmed the diagnosis of NLE. Up to 60% of mothers of infants with NLE may be clinically asymptomatic when their children develop NLE.
Also, it has been observed that the elevation of ANA titer may be an important risk marker for liver involvement in NLE,9 which is
consistent with the findings in the present case. It is noteworthy that in the majority of reports, cholestasis and elevated liver enzymes
were detected in NLE patients at around 1 month of age and later,23810 whereas in the present case direct hyperbilirubinemia was noticed
very early, i.e., about 5 days after birth. Hematologic problems usually resolve in 2 to 3 weeks without treatment, but they may persist in
some cases. There is evidence that steroids are beneficial for the patients with persistent cholestasis and pancytopenia.3 Our patient
received prednisolone (2 mg/kg/day) for 14 days and showed improvement of thrombocytopenia. Bilirubin resolved 2 months later and liver
enzymes were completely normal by 6 months. In NLE cases, CHB is the main cause of death. Fortunately, our patient had a normal heart rate
with no sign of heart failure and required no treatment. His cutaneous lupus rashes disappeared in 2 months on following the recommendations
mentioned earlier. The long-term prognosis for the children who have had NLE is still under investigation. Some cases have developed other
autoimmune diseases later in childhood. In summary, NLE can present with cholestasis within a few days of birth and NLE should be considered
when there is early conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, particularly if there are other associated findings. Our special thanks to H. Khajehei
for his linguistic copy editing.
