Academic Editor: Duncan Spalding Case Summary. A 25-year-old caucasian lady presented to the Accident & Emergency department complaining of
acute onset severe epigastric pain radiating through to the back with associated nausea and vomiting. A diagnosis of acute pancreatitis was
made. Symptoms commenced after the third dose of Metronidazole therapy prescribed for a recurrent periodontal abscess. The patient described
a similar episode 10 months previously. On neither occasion were any other medications being taken, there was no history of alcohol abuse
and no other gastro-intestinal aetiology could be identified on imaging. Symptoms resolved quickly upon discontinuation of the antibiotic
agent. We conclude therefore that Metronidazole can reasonably be identified as the only potential causative agent. Discussion. The
proportion of cases of pancreatitis caused by drugs is estimated to be around 2% in the general population. The exact mechanism of action of
Metronidazole induced pancreatitis is unclear but a trigger role for the drug seems likely. Conclusion. This case provides the eighth report
of Metronidazole induced pancreatitis. All of the cases were reported in females and ran a benign course.Early diagnosis, discontinuation of
the drug and supportive care will lead to a successful recovery in the majority of cases. Metronidazole is a nitroimidazole antibacterial
medication used mainly in the treatment of infections caused by anaerobic bacteria and protozoa. It is commonly known by the trade name
Flagyl. Systemic Metronidazole is indicated for the treatment of many anaerobic infections which can clinically present as gynaecological
conditions; bacterial vaginosis, and abdominal conditions; Crohn's disease, necrotizing pancreatitis and gastritis. Metronidazole is also
commonly prescribed in the treatment of acute gingivitis and periodontal infections . The adverse side effects of Metronidazole include
gastrointestinal upset, metallic taste , urticaria , headache, peripheral neuropathy , and rarely pancreatitis. There are only seven
reported cases of Metronidazole-induced pancreatitis in the English language literature to date (Table 1). Acute pancreatitis is an
inflammatory disease with a wide spectrum of severity . It is clinically characterized by acute constant abdominal pain and elevated
pancreatic enzymes . Alcoholism and biliary tract stone disease account for 95% of cases . Acute pancreatitis is classified as mild,
moderate, or severe, the differentiation of which is made by using disease severity scores such as Imrie , Ranson, and more recently APACHE
II. We report a case of recurrent mild-acute pancreatitis, Imrie score I, associated with just 3 doses of Metronidazole therapy prescribed
for a periodontal abscess. A 25-year-old caucasian lady presented to the Accident & Emergency Department of a general hospital complaining
of acute onset severe epigastric pain radiating through to the back with associated nausea and vomiting. History, examination and
biochemical analysis confirmed a diagnosis of acute pancreatitis, Imrie score 1 . Symptoms commenced after the third dose of Metronidazole
therapy prescribed by the patient's dentist for treatment of a periodontal abscess. Amylase was 810 on admission and CRP was 70. CRP peaked
to 248 on day 4 and rapidly declined thereafter. Relative negatives in the history included no other concurrent medications, no known drug
allergies, alcohol consumption of 3â€“6 units weekly, and the patient was a nonsmoker. Relevant past surgical history included; (1)
laparoscopic cholecystectomy (June 2006) for symptomatic treatment of suspected biliary colic although gallstones were not identified on
imaging and (2) first episode of acute pancreatitis requiring hospital admission (Septmber 2009) following 5 doses to Metronidazole therapy
prescribed for dental abscess. Ultrasound scan, Computed Topography of abdomen, and Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangio-Pancreatography all
failed to demonstrate gallstones as potential aetiology at that time. On this admission, a detailed history and biochemical evaluation
excluded other risk factors for pancreatitis-gallstones, increased alcohol intake, recent ERCP, hypercalcaemia, hypercholesterolaemia, or
viral infections. She was not taking any regular medications nor did she have any known drug allergies. Imaging by ultrasound scan reported
previous cholecystectomy, normal common bile duct, and once again no gallstones were visualized. Magnetic Resonance Cholangio-
Pancreatography also demonstrated normal intra- and extrahepatic biliary anatomy. These factors combined with past surgical history provided
convincing evidence of Metronidazole as the most probable aetiological factor. Supportive management of IV fluid resusitation, analgesia,
antiemetic and, nil per oral was instituted and Metronidazole therapy was immediately discontinued. Her clinical course was uncomplicated
and amylase returned to normal on day 4 post admission (Table 2). She began to tolerate light diet on day 5 and was discharged on day 7. The
proportion of cases of pancreatitis caused by drugs is estimated to be around 2% in the general population, with much higher proportions in
high risk groups, such as children and HIV positive patients . Specific criteria to support drug-induced illness was first described by
Mallory et al. in 1980; case reports with the strongest evidence are those that (1) clearly diagnose pancreatitis and exclude common
aetiologies, (2) provide the dose and time interval between the start of treatment with the suspected drug and the development of
pancreatitis, (3) document response to withdrawal of the drug, and (4) demonstrate recurrent pancreatitis upon rechallenge with the drug .
The majority of cases are mild , but severe and even fatal cases of drug-induced pancreatitis may occur, thus making identification of the
offending agent critical . Although there are only 7 previous case reports of Metronidazole-induced pancreatitis in the English literature,
the drug meets the above criteria and can be classified as having a probable association with the onset of acute pancreatitis [15, 16]. Our
patient developed pancreatitis after the third dose of Metronidazole on two different isolated occasions 10 months apart. On neither
occasion could any other aetiology be identified, in particular gallstones were clearly outruled by radiological imaging on both admissions
and symptoms resolved quickly upon discontinuation of the antibiotic agent. We conclude therefore that Metronidazole can reasonably be
identified as the only potential causative agent. This case provides the eighth report of Metronidazole-induced pancreatitis in the English
language literature as shown in Table 1 . All of the cases were reported in females and ran a benign course in continuity with most drug-
induced pancreatitis . There was a variable interval between exposure to Metronidazole and development of pancreatitis ranging from 12 hours
to 38 days , it should therefore be considered in patients presenting after minimal exposure to Metronidazole, in our case just 3 doses. A
rechallenge is not to be recommended but this requires early recognition on the part of the clinician. The mechanism of action of
Metronidazole-induced pancreatitis is unknown but the high incidence of concurrent illnesses known to induce acute pancreatitis makes a
trigger role or cofactor role for the drug seem most likely . One speculative mechanism of action is that under aerobic conditions
Metronidazole may undergo redox cycling and yield hydrogen peroxide, superoxide, and other free radicals which are toxic to the pancreatic
beta cells and induce pancreatitis . It is interesting that due to good penetration of Metronidazole in the pancreas and the degree of
coverage provided against the typical bacterial flora of the pancreas it is paradoxically indicated in the treatment of infected pancreatic
necrosis . Severe pancreatitis requiring hospital admission appears to be a rare adverse reaction ; however, in a recent population-based
case-control study of 3083 cases and 30830 controls, Metronidazole was associated with a threefold increased risk of acute pancreatitis when
used in combination with other drugs for H.Pylori eradication . Like any drug-induced reaction, management of Metronidazole associated acute
pancreatitis requires quick withdrawal of the offending agent and supportive care . Pancreatitis is a disease with a wide variety of
aetiologies, severity, complications, and outcomes. Metronidazole is commonly used in the hospital and community setting as it is a potent
and effective treatment for many anaerobic infections. GI upset is a well- documented side effect of the drug. The incidence of severe
Metronidazole-induced pancreatitis is relatively rare; however, it can cause serious morbidity in patients after minimal exposure, and
identification of Metronidazole as the causative agent is the key to recovery. Early diagnosis, discontinuation of the drug, and supportive
care will lead to a successful recovery in the majority of cases. Rechallenge should always be avoided. Progression of biochemical and
haematological values during admission.
