Two rare cases of adenocarcinoma of the caecum and ascending colon concomitant with tuberculosis at the same site are reported. The
plausibility of an aetiological relationship between the two pathological conditions has been discussed along with a review of the relevant
literature. Tuberculosis complicating malignant disease is a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge; and the likelihood of the two occurring
together should be kept in mind especially in tuberculosis endemic areas and in patients with equivocal symptoms. The coexistence of
carcinoma and tuberculosis is unusual and their association has bewildered surgeons and scientists alike for over two centuries. World
literature reports only 67 cases of tuberculosis (TB) and colonic carcinoma occurring simultaneously. A few examples of the same in the
Indian context are on record but adenocarcinoma and tuberculosis occurring at the same site is exceedingly rare. This prompted us to report
these two cases and review the possibility of an etiological relationship between the two pathological conditions. In the first case, a
65-year-old female presented with complaints of low-grade fever and abdominal pain for 3 days and history of similar intermittent episodes
for the preceding 6 months. The pain was dull, aching, and continuous in character. The patient also reported fatigue and weight-loss over
the past 6 months. Examination revealed a 5 cm × 3 cm well-defined firm lump in the right iliac fossa. Hematological investigations showed
normocytic normochromic anemia with a raised ESR. Chest roentgenogram was normal. A Mantoux test resulted in an induration of 15 mm.
Polymerase chain reaction of blood for Mycobacterium tuberculosis showed a positive result. A diagnosis of ileocaecal tuberculosis was made
and antitubercular therapy was instituted. However, the lump did not resolve and the patient returned with development of frank obstructive
symptoms. Laparotomy was undertaken. A large mass involving the terminal ileum, caecum, and part of the ascending colon with multiple lymph
nodes along the draining vessels was discovered. A limited colectomy was performed with diagnosis of tuberculosis. The postoperative period
was uneventful. Histopathology revealed moderately differentiated mucinous infiltrating adenocarcinoma. Epithelioid granulomas with Langhans
and foreign body giant cells were present. The lymph nodes also showed epithelioid granulomas with Langhans and foreign body giant cells,
two among them showing caseation. None revealed metastatic carcinomatous deposit. A diagnosis of moderately differentiated mucin-secreting
infiltrating Duke’s stage A adenocarcinoma of the ileo-caecum and ascending colon associated with tuberculosis was made. The patient
completed the full course of anti-tubercular drugs and was followed up with serial CEA levels, which remained within normal limits. The
second case was a 45-year-old man who presented with iron deficiency anemia and hepato-splenomegaly but no bowel irregularities or symptoms
suggestive of tuberculosis. He underwent an extensive hematological evaluation but no abnormality was found. Five months later he developed
a lump in the right iliac fossa. A colonoscopy revealed a concentrically thickened wall of the ascending colon and a biopsy confirmed an
adenocarcinoma. He underwent a right hemicolectomy. A large cauliflower growth (7 cm) was found in the caecum. Histopathology revealed a
well-differentiated adenocarcinoma with subserosal invasion but no angiovascular involvement. Surprisingly, there was evidence of
granulomatous inflammation with caseous necrosis, epithelioid cell granuloma, and Langhans-type giant cells [Figure 1]. Similar granuloma,
but without metastasis, was seen in the lymph nodes. The margins of the specimen were free of tumor. The patient was on anti-tubercular
medication, and on follow up and on serial CEA examinations he was found to be doing well. Figure 1Grade I adenocarcinoma coexisting with
tuberculosis Grade I adenocarcinoma coexisting with tuberculosis Arguably, the first published description of coexisting tuberculosis and
carcinoma was that of Boyle who described “cavitation cancereuse” as one of the six types of tuberculosis. The association of tuberculosis
and cancer has since been recorded in most organs by various authors. Carcinoma in different parts of the colon with intestinal tuberculosis
have been reported by Paustian. Kaplan et al. found TB complicating neoplastic disease in only 4 out of 6472 patients with carcinoma of the
colon, a prevalence of 6/10,000. Indian researchers have found a higher frequency of coexistent disease. Some Indian authors have proposed
that the association of carcinoma and tuberculosis is coincidental; the argument being that compared to the high incidence of abdominal
tuberculosis in India, the cases of coexisting tuberculosis and carcinoma are very few. This may be true in some cases particularly when the
neoplasm originates at a site distant from the tubercular focus. However, to put the simultaneous occurrence of the two conditions at the
same site down to mere coincidence is far too simplistic. Some diseases like ulcerative colitis, Crohns disease, and schistosomiasis
predispose to malignancy. Chronic inflammatory mucosal damage initiating a sequence of metaplasia and dysplasia results in neoplastic
change. Evidence also suggests that pulmonary scarring of tuberculous etiology play a role in the generation of some lung cancers, usually
adenocarcinomas originating in the peripheral portion of the lung. Drawing parallels it may be postulated that the ulcerative lesions of
intestinal tuberculosis are precursors of carcinomas and this possibility was suggested by Japanese researchers. These carcinomas arose as a
result of repeated insults by way of erosions, ulceration, and consequent regeneration. On the other hand, it is also universally accepted
that factors that disturb host immunity increase susceptibility to active tubercular infection, either exogenously or endogenously. Severe
weight loss or malnutrition related to an advanced neoplastic disease is such a factor. Conceivably invasion of a dormant tubercular lesion
by carcinoma could lead to activation and endogenous reinfection. Locally produced tumor peptides or antigens may also upset the milieu of a
granuloma and allow the TB organisms to proliferate. We are inclined to believe that this is true in our case given the age of the patient
and the lack of a previous history of active tuberculosis. The other question is whether this patient needed to have a reoperation to
complete the right hemicolectomy oncologically. There have not been any reports of patients presenting with anemia with an underlying
colonic carcinoma with coexisting tuberculosis. So, the second case highlights the need for a complete evaluation of patients with
unaccounted iron deficiency anemia. This should include an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and colonoscopy even in the absence of obvious
gastro-intestinal symptoms. The best treatment in these cases is difficult to decide as pre-operative diagnosis of such a coexisting dual
pathology is virtually impossible. The primary pathology is a matter of conjecture. Since a preoperative diagnosis in such cases is usually
not possible, a case of right iliac fossa lump with evidence of tuberculosis should also be treated with a suspicion of co-existing
malignancy especially in patients who fail to respond to anti-tubercular drugs. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
