This case is reported with the intention of highlighting the presentation of cutaneous myxosporidiasis in Australian tree frog (Litoria
caerulea) caused by genus Myxobolus. The morphology and morphometric characteristic of the spores were determined using light microscopy and
differential interference contrast microscopy. Spores were pyriform in shape in frontal view and oval in lateral view, and the average size
was respectively 11.4 × 6.0 × 4.5 μm (12.1 − 9.5 × 6.3 − 5.4 × 5.0 − 4.1 μm). To the best of our knowledge, this is the second case of skin
invasion caused by myxosporeans in amphibians. Myxosporidiasis are invasions caused by parasites Myxosporea. According to National Center
for Biotechnology Information, they are currently classified as the Myxozoa and are closely related with phylum Cnidaria. These are
intracellular organisms, which may be localized in the internal organs or on surface of the body. Over 2,180 species of Myxosporea belonging
to approximately 60 genera have been described. Myxosporeans are common parasites of cold-blooded vertebrates, particularly fishes. Thus
far, only 15 species were found in 83 representatives of the class amphibians, most of them in frogs and toads (Eiras 2005). A single adult
Litoria caerulea was delivered to Sub-Department of Parasitology and Invasive Diseases, University of Life Sciences in Lublin in order to
diagnose skin lesions observed by the owner. The animal was bought about 2 weeks earlier, in good condition, and without noticeable
dermatological problems. According to medical history, the frog was in good condition all the time from purchase. It was the only animal in
owner’s collection. Detailed husbandry information such as cage temperature, humidity, water quality, and eating habits has been
established. All these environmental parameters were generally appropriate for this species. Microscopic examination material from the
lesions revealed a myxosporidian plasmodium containing numerous mature spores. Morphometric characteristics of the spores (based on 30
mature spores from the skin lesions of the examined frog) were determined with the aid of a light microscope with Screen Measurement
package. The morphological details were established using a differential interference contrast microscopy (DIC). The physical examination of
the frog skin showed two types of lesions: a several-millimeter-sized, polymorphic, gray-white cyst with partially liquid-filled content and
ulcers which, according to the owner, were the consequence of rupture of the primary cyst (Fig. 1). The lesions were located on the head,
back, and legs of the frog. During routine examinations, other signs of the disease were not observed. Fig. 1Photgraph showing the
macroscopically visible lesions in the skin of Litoria caerulea. a, b Primary lesions (black arrowhead). c, d Ulcers on the skin (black
arrowhead) Photgraph showing the macroscopically visible lesions in the skin of Litoria caerulea. a, b Primary lesions (black arrowhead). c,
d Ulcers on the skin (black arrowhead) Spores were pyriform in shape in frontal view, and oval in lateral view, and the average size was
respectively 11.4 × 6.0 × 4.5 μm (12.1 − 9.5 × 6.3 − 5.4 × 5.0 − 4,1 μm). Each spore contains two unequal polar capsule. The average size of
the large polar capsule was 6.04 × 2.05 μm (6.8 − 5.4 × 2.5 − 1.6 μm), while the smaller one was 4.66 × 2.04 μm (5.4 − 4.0 × 2.7 − 1.4 μm).
Inside the spore body, a sporoplasm with two nuclei and vacuoles were seen (Figs. 2 and 3). Based on the morphology of spores isolated from
the examined L. caerulea, the lesions on the skin were the consequence of myxosporean invasion from the genus Myxobolus. Fig. 2The spores of
Myxobolus sp. isolated from the skin of Litoria caerulea. a Differential interference contrast microscopy (DIC). b Fresh isolated spores
from skin lesions in light microscopeFig. 3Line diagram of Myxobolus sp. spores isolated from Litoria caerulea skin according to a
differential interference contrast microscopy (DIC). a Frontal view, b lateral view The spores of Myxobolus sp. isolated from the skin of
Litoria caerulea. a Differential interference contrast microscopy (DIC). b Fresh isolated spores from skin lesions in light microscope Line
diagram of Myxobolus sp. spores isolated from Litoria caerulea skin according to a differential interference contrast microscopy (DIC). a
Frontal view, b lateral view Six genera of Myxosporea have been described from amphibians (Myxobolus, Myxidium, Hoferellus, Chloromyxum,
Caudomyxum, and Spherospora) which were mainly observed in the gonads, deferent ducts, oviducts, kidneys, urinary bladder, ureter,
gallbladder, and liver. Only two genera have been described in genus Litoria. Myxidium and Myxobolus species cause many pathological changes
in the liver, gallbladder, bile ducts, and in the gonads (Eiras 2005). There are three reports on the occurrence of Myxosporea in the
Australian tree frog (L. caerulea). Delvinquier et al. (1992) described Myxidium immersum in the gallbladder in 32 species of tree frogs
belonging to genus Litoria including L. caerulea. Hill et al. (1997) found trophozoites of Myxidium sp. in the bile ducts of several farmed
Australian tree frogs with associated hepatitis. According to these authors, pathological changes in the liver and bile ducts could lead to
the death of the host. Zwart has observed pathological effects of Myxobolus sp. in L. caerulea ovary (Sitjà-Bobadilla 2009). So far, only
one report has described cutaneus myxosporidiasis in amphibians. Guyénot and Naville (1922) described species of Myxobolus ranae infecting
the skin of the anuran Rana temporaria in Switzerland. Skin diseases caused by Myxosporea are common in fish. Cutaneus myxosporidiasis in
fish are usually caused by species belonging to genera Myxobolus (Myxobolus squamae, Myxobolus ellipsoides, Myxobolus sandrae,and Myxobolus
cotlani), Spherospora (Spherospora carassii and Spherospora molnari), Thelohanellus (Thelohanellus dogieli), and Henneguya (Henneguya
wolinensis). It seems that most myxosporeans occurring in amphibians are characterized by little host specificity. Several species of
Myxosporea were observed infecting several host species often living in separate geographical land (Eiras 2005; Sitjà-Bobadilla 2009).
However, there are no reports about the presence in amphibian species of myxosporeans occurring in fish or reptiles. To the best of our
knowledge, this case is only the second reported case of cutaneus myxosporidiasis in amphibians. Location and morphometric characteristics
of the spores isolated from the skin lesions of described Australian tree frog do not fit into any of the known species of the genus
Myxobolus found so far in amphibians (Table 1). We can conclude that the present material represents a species not yet described.
Table 1Members of the genus Myxobolus isolated from amphibians (Eiras 2005; Sitjà-Bobadilla 2009)SpeciesHostGeographic locationParasite
locationThe shape of the sporesThe size of the spores (μm) length, width, and thicknessThe size of polar capsule (μm)Myxobolus bufonisBufo
regularisEgyptTestes, kidneys liver, gallbladderDisk-shaped9.2 × 8.9 × 4.04.1 × 3.2Bufo maculatusCameronMyxobolus chimbuensisLitoria
darlingtonNew GuineaTestesOvoid11.9 × 8.4 × 6.24.7 × 2.2Litoria thesaurensisMyxobolus fallaxLitoria
fallaxAustraliaTestesOvoid13.4 × 9.5 × 6.84.2 × 2.4Myxobolus hylaeHyla aureaAustraliaTestes, oviduct, kidneysOval, egg-
shaped13.9 × 9.1 × 7.24.2 × 2.6Myxobolus sp.Bufo regularisTogoTestes–––Myxobolus sp.Ptychadena maccarthyensisTogoTestes–––Myxobolus
sp.Litoria caeruleaAustraliaOvaries–––Myxobolus sp.Litoria infrafrenataIndonesiaTestes, ovaries–––Myxobolus sp.Litoria
leuseriIndonesiaOvaries–––Myxobolus ranaeRana temporariaSwitzerlandSkinOvoid11.1 × 8.14.5 × 2.5Myxobolus sp.Litoria
caeruleaPolandSkinPyriform11.4 × 6.0 × 4.54.66 × 2.046.04 × 2.05 Members of the genus Myxobolus isolated from amphibians (Eiras 2005; Sitjà-
Bobadilla 2009) We do not know what really had happened to the invasion in the described Australian tree frog because little is known about
the life cycles of myxosporeans in amphibians. Most of the available knowledge about the details of the development of these parasites is
based on the disease caused in fishes. It is possible that anurans may become infected in aquatic environment (as tadpoles or as adults) in
a similar way as the fishes, either by oral route or through the skin. This mode of infection by Myxobolus sp. in the Australian tree frog
seems to be possible because this species spends most of its adult life in the treetops outside the water environment. There are various
reports on the pathology of myxosporean invasions in amphibians. Some species seem to be not pathogenic like Chloromyxum salamandrae which
has been isolated from the gallbladder from healthy salamanders (Eurycea multiplicata griseogaster, Eurycea multiplicata and Eurycea
neotenes) (Upton et al. 1995). Myxozoan infection associated with host reproductive system and gonads reduce fertility (Browne et al. 2002;
Mubarak and Abed 2001; Upton et al. 1992). The most serious symptoms and pathological changes, which could lead to the death of the host,
were associated with hepatic and renal myxosporidiasis (Duncan et al. 2004; Mutschmann 1999). Lesions of the skin caused by myxospreans seem
to have relatively the lowest health consequences for amphibians. During this invasion, we have observed only the skin lesions with no clear
impact on the general condition of the animal. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and
source are credited.
