Laparoscopic splenectomy in a pediatric patient was performed through a single umbilical incision by using 3 ports. Single incision
laparoscopic surgery (SILS) is an emerging technique that has been used as an approach for appendectomy, cholecystectomy, and splenectomy.
We describe the technique of single incision laparoscopic splenectomy for hypersplenism in a 5-year-old boy with spherocytosis. The patient
required blood transfusions for anemia secondary to hypersplenism. His spleen measured 9.8 cm in cranio-caudal length on ultrasound. SILS
splenectomy was performed through a 2-cm umbilical incision by using 3 ports. The splenic attachments were taken down using an
electrosurgical sealing and cutting device, and the hilum was transected with an endosurgical stapler. The spleen was placed in an
endosurgical bag, morcellated, and removed from the abdomen via the umbilical incision without complications. Operative time was 84 minutes;
blood loss was minimal. SILS splenectomy is feasible in pediatric patients. More experience is needed to assess advantages and disadvantages
compared with the standard laparoscopic approach. Single incision laparoscopic surgery (SILS) is an emerging endosurgical approach in which
the entire operation is performed through abdominal trocars placed via a single skin incision in the umbilicus. It has been used
successfully for both appendectomy and cholecystectomy. So far, splenectomy using this technique has been reported in 2 adult patients.1 We
describe single incision laparoscopic splenectomy in a 5-year-old boy with splenomegaly and hypersplenism secondary to hereditary
spherocytosis. A 5-year-old boy with hereditary spherocytosis who had begun to require blood transfusions for symptomatic anemia was
referred for splenectomy. Abdominal sonography showed splenomegaly with a craniocaudal dimension of 9.8 cm. Preoperative pneumococcal and
meningococcal vaccines were given. The patient was placed supine with the left flank elevated on a 10-cm gel cushion. A 2-cm vertical
incision was made through the umbilical skin. The underlying fascia was exposed circumferentially with a radial dimension of approximately
2.5 cm. A small fascial defect was found in the center of the umbilicus through which the Veress needle was introduced to insufflate the
capnoperitoneum to a pressure of 14 mm Hg. After insufflation, the defect was closed using a figure-of-eight stitch. A 5-mm camera port was
placed in the 7 o'clock position, and 5-mm working ports were placed at 4 and 11 o'clock (Figure 1). Lifting the lower tip of the spleen
upward with the left hand, the splenocolic ligament was taken down with a 5-mm EnSeal tissue sealing and cutting device (SurgRx Inc, Redwood
City, CA). The spleen was then rotated laterally by tilting the bed left side down. The stomach was grasped with gentle medial and upward
traction to facilitate division of the gastrosplenic ligament including the short gastric vessels to the level of the diaphragm. The patient
was then tilted right side down, and the spleen was rotated medially, providing access to the splenorenal and splenophrenic ligaments
(Figure 2). After dividing the more caudal portions with the EnSeal device, the cranial attachments were taken with a 5-mm hook
electrocautery, because this provided a better working angle and finer dissection. With only the hilar vessels remaining, the 7 o'clock
trocar was upsized to 12 mm, and the camera was changed to the 4 o'clock position. The caudal tip of the spleen was lifted upward, exposing
the hilum, and a 12-mm reticulating endosurgical stapler with a 4.5-cm long vascular load was introduced. The stapler was articulated to a
45° angle, and the open jaws were slid across the hilum (Autosuture Covidien Ltd., Mansfield, MA). Once the stapler head was positioned, it
was used to suspend the lower part of the spleen upward, while the left hand grasper was repositioned to elevate the cranial portion of the
spleen. The hilum was divided with a single firing of the stapler. Subsequently, the 12-mm trocar was removed and exchanged for a 15-mm
endosurgical retrieval bag that was introduced directly through the fascia without a trocar. The spleen was “scooped” into the bag with the
help of the left hand grasping forceps. Once the bag was closed, all endoscopic equipment was removed. The 3 fascial incisions were
connected to create a single fascial incision. The spleen was then morcellated inside the bag and removed in pieces by using ring forceps.
The fascial incision was then closed using a running 2-0 polydioxanone (PDS) suture. The skin was closed using subcuticular 4-0
Poliglecaprone (Monocryl) suture (Figure 3). There were no intra- or postoperative complications, and the patient was discharged home on
postoperative day 2. Trocar positioning in the umbilical incision. Division of the splenophrenic ligament. Note parallel alignment of
instruments. Umbilical incision after closure. Because the navel is a natural scar, single incision laparoscopic surgery (SILS) is
attractive in that it results in a virtually scarless operation. Scarless surgery has been the appeal of natural orifice transluminal
endoscopic surgery (NOTES) as well. Currently, both of these new approaches are mostly performed in the adult population, and a state-of-
the-art review of SILS and NOTES for cholecystectomy was published recently.2 Pediatric surgeons have performed laparoscopic splenectomy for
well over a decade3 and have developed extensive experience, resulting in a conversion rate of around 2% and a total complication rate of
around 11%.4 This is the standard against which newer operative approaches, including SILS splenectomies in children, should be compared.
The previously described SILS splenectomies were in young adult females (22 and 28 years of age) with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura.1
The initial trocar placement was similar to what we used, with three 5-mm trocars in a 2-cm vertical umbilical incision. In contrast to this
report, we did not use reticulating graspers or instruments except for the endosurgical stapler, because we have not found a clear advantage
over straight instruments in our single-site laparoscopic approach to appendectomy, cholecystectomy, and pyloromyotomy. Our operative time
of 84 minutes was shorter than the previously reported adult cases (110 and 150 minutes, respectively). SILS poses significant ergonomic
challenges. Grouping all 3 trocars into the same incision leads to spatial interference of the camera and working instruments. The freedom
of motion can be improved by spacing the ports in the periumbilical fascia as far away from each other as possible. Furthermore, the trocars
should be introduced at different depths, so that collision of the valve heads is minimized. Additionally, using instruments and a camera of
different lengths, minimizes interference of the surgeon's and assistant's hands. An angled scope is essential. Compared with our standard
laparoscopic approach, no special instruments were required for the SILS procedure. Using a tissue sealing electrosurgery device and a
vascular stapler for the splenic hilum minimized the operative blood loss, which was recorded as <10 mL. We recommend that during a SILS
procedure, the surgeons are ready to introduce additional trocars to aid in visualization, dissection, or reconstruction if they perceive
that a maneuver cannot be performed safely for the patient through a single incision. In our practice, we always have additional trocars
ready to convert to dual incision laparoscopic surgery (DILS) or standard laparoscopy anytime. Although some dissection of the splenic
attachments was slightly more cumbersome than during the standard laparoscopic procedure, we did not encounter any moment where we perceived
an increased risk to the patient because of the SILS approach. Using a tissue sealing electrosurgery device and a vascular stapler for the
splenic hilum minimized the endovascular blood loss, which was recorded as <10 mL. The splenic hilum was well dissected before the
endostapler was applied, and only one 4.5-cm vascular load was required. The SILS approach did not seem to compromise our visualization or
the ability to identify accessory spleens. Compared with our standard laparoscopic approach, no special instruments were required for the
SILS procedure, so that there is no economic disadvantage using SILS. Subjectively though, operating time may have been increased by placing
all trocars in the umbilicus, although this remains to be shown once we have a larger series for comparison. Our report shows that single-
incision splenectomy is feasible even in young children. Further experience with this evolving technique is needed to determine specific
risks and benefits.
