The authors stress that there should be a low threshold to add additional ports during single-incision laparoscopic surgery to ensure the
procedure is completed safely. Numerous recent reports describe the performance of laparoscopic procedures through a single incision.
Although the feasibility of this approach for a variety of procedures is currently being established, little data are available regarding
safety. A 65-year-old female patient who was transferred from an outside institution had undergone a single incision laparoscopic
cholecystectomy that resulted in biliary tract and vascular injuries. The patient was transferred with a known bile duct injury on the first
postoperative day following single incision laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Review of her magnetic resonance imaging and percutaneous
transhepatic cholangiogram studies showed a Bismuth type 3 bile duct injury. Hepatic angiogram demonstrated an occlusion of the right
hepatic artery with collateralization from the left hepatic artery. She was initially managed conservatively with a right-sided external
biliary drain, followed 6 weeks later by a Hepp-Couinaud procedure to reconstruct the biliary tract. As new techniques evolve, it is
imperative that safety, or potential side effects, or both safety and side effects, be monitored, because no learning curve is established
for these new techniques. In these initial stages, surgeons should have a low threshold to add additional ports when necessary to ensure
that procedures are completed safely. The first video-laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed by Phillipe Mouret in 1987,1 and
laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) has become the gold-standard procedure for gallbladder surgery since 1992. Numerous reports have evidenced
a lower incidence of postoperative pain, shorter recovery times, and significantly lower mortality and morbidity rates after LC compared
with open procedures.2–5 The incidence of bile duct injury following LC is about 0.6%, which remains approximately twice that of its open
counterpart.6–8 Injury to the hepatic artery has been reported in 12% to 32% of patients with LC related biliary tract injuries.8,9–12
Chapman et al11 demonstrated a 13.8% incidence of combined hepatic artery injury in patients with biliary tract injury following open
cholecystectomy. This case report is the first documentation of a combined bile duct and right hepatic artery injury during single incision
laparoscopic (SILS) cholecystectomy. A 65-year-old female patient was referred to our institution for definitive treatment of a recognized
bile duct injury on postoperative day (POD) 1 after a SILS cholecystectomy. Her past medical and surgical history was significant for
hypertension, for which she was on metoprolol, peptic ulcer disease, and tubal ligation. Contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
showed a normal hepatic morphology with a moderate to severe heterogeneous pattern of perfusion during the arterial phase sequence (not
shown). Marked intrahepatic bile duct dilation with narrowing at the confluence of the right and left hepatic ducts is evident (Figure 1).
The common hepatic duct was not seen on the magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography images, consistent with a Bismuth type 3 injury. A
small amount of soft tissue thickening was seen at the site of the narrowing. The gallbladder was absent. Magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography showing Bismuth Type III injury. Arrow points to the nonvisualization of the common bile duct. CBD=Common Bile
Duct. Serological evaluation showed a low potassium level of 3.1mmol/L, mildly elevated liver function tests (ALT: 1.16 mcKat/L, AST: 1.26
mcKat/L), increased total bilirubin at 106.2 mcmol/L, and a low albumin level at 29 g/L. A PTC was done on POD 3 with the placement of an
external biliary drainage catheter. It confirmed the presence of a bile duct injury with nonvisualization beyond the right and left hepatic
duct confluence (Figure 2). There was no filling of the common bile duct, and there was associated moderate dilation of the intrahepatic
ducts. No bile leakage was observed. Due to the heterogeneous perfusion of the right lobe on arterial phases (MRI) and the presence of
multiple surgical clips, a hepatic angiogram was done on POD 10 to rule out associated vascular injury. It demonstrated an occlusion of the
right hepatic artery at the point of the bifurcation from the proper hepatic artery (Figure 3). The presence of a cross-circulation from the
left to the right hepatic artery was also noted. Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram showing Bismuth Type III injury. RHD=Right Hepatic
Duct, LHD=Left Hepatic Duct. Angiogram showing right hepatic artery injury. Note the presence of a left hepatic artery that bifurcates into
lateral and medial branches with the latter creating an anastomosis to supply the right lobe. Note the stump of the original right hepatic
artery. Clips in the place corresponding to the take-off of the right hepatic artery. A percutaneous gastrostomy tube was placed on POD 11,
because the patient was malnourished, and bile-refeeding therapy was instituted. The patient was discharged home on oral antibiotics with
appropriate instructions about refeeding her bile. After 6 weeks, a Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy was performed, also known as a Hepp-
Couinaud procedure. The patient was discharged on POD 5. She exhibited excellent progress in her postoperative follow-up. Postoperative
computed tomography scan showed expected postsurgical changes, and a postoperative cholangiogram via the existing drainage catheter
demonstrated a patent anastomosis with no ductal dilation or leak (Figure 4). The drain was removed at this time and the patient's
laboratory tests showed complete normalization. Postoperative percutaneous transhepatic cholangiogram showing patency of the new
bilioenteric anastomosis. Several techniques have been described to enable reliable ductal identification during LC so as to decrease the
incidence of bile duct injury.13,14 A few of them being the “infundibular” technique, the “critical view” technique, recognition of the
cystic and the common bile duct junction, and intraoperative cholangiography. Most commonly described and cited in operative notes is the
“critical view of safety” technique, first described by Strasberg in 1995.15 As it delineates the anatomical structures in Calot's triangle
and protects against bile duct injuries, it has been routinely applied in LCs. Schmidt et al16 reported that the outcome of biliary tract
reconstruction was worse in patients with concomitant vascular injuries and recommended the assessment of patients with major biliary tract
injuries for additional vascular injuries. They also stated that further studies would be necessary to evaluate the importance of early
hepatic artery reconstruction, to the long-term outcome of biliary tract reconstruction. Li et al12 commented that combined bile duct and
hepatic artery injury during LC led to a complicated clinical course with a high mortality rate. Because the level of biliary tract injury
is more proximal following LC than following an open cholecystectomy, a higher incidence of concomitant hepatic artery injury can be
anticipated.15,16 According to Bilge et al,17 the frequency of high-level biliary injury was increased in patients with concomitant hepatic
artery injury compared with those with an isolated iatrogenic biliary tract injury. However, there was no effect on the mortality and
medium-term outcome of biliary reconstruction. The lack of evidence of an increase in mortality was reiterated in a review by Tzovaras et
al18 who also stated that combined injuries may cause increased morbidity and jeopardize the long-term results of biliary reconstruction by
delayed anastomotic strictures. Single incision approaches were developed to reduce the number of incisions needed on traditional
laparoscopic surgery. Authors have reported the feasibility of the SILS approach in commonly performed abdominal procedures, such as
cholecystectomy,19 appendectomy,20,21 urologic procedures,22–24 bariatric procedures,25,26 adrenalectomy.27 These early reports describe
preliminary results in case series, but safety and the learning curve have not been studied. Tacchino et al2 discussed the need to avoid
conflict between the operative instruments and the camera and added that new technology might be helpful for this goal. We agree that these
cases can be accomplished with current instrumentation but concede that there is a loss of triangulation and diminished retracting
abilities, which may lead to suboptimal exposure. Published reports do not describe any degradation of the “critical view”; however, this
would need to be measured objectively. Leaking pneumoperitoneum with existing instruments is another potential problem. Navarra et al19
reported no significant difference in the postoperative pain or cost effectiveness between SILS and standard LC with a considerably longer
average procedure time. So far, a systematic objective assessment of postprocedural pain as well as procedure-related complications is
lacking and obviously needed. Cugura et al28 stated that the benefits of transition from the standard laparoscopic approach to SILS will not
be as obvious as was the transition from open cholecystectomy to LC. The use of SILS for cholecystitis is less understood. According to
Hodgett et al,29 single-site cholecystectomy is feasible for uncomplicated biliary pathology and biliary anatomy not distorted by
inflammation. On the other hand, Tacchino et al2 have reported that neither cholecystitis nor body mass index >30 are to be considered as
contraindications to SILS cholecystectomy. Of 21 SILS cholecystectomies done by Merchant et al,25 all except 2 patients were reported to
have biliary colic, and 1 of the 2 who had acute cholecystitis required placement of an accessory port to achieve safe dissection. These
techniques likely represent a significant advancement in minimally invasive surgery and an integral part of surgical practice in the future.
With advances in surgical instrumentation and technology, these techniques will be applicable to the surgical treatment of an increasing
number of diseases. We feel that, at present, care must be taken to ensure that these techniques uphold patient safety and that demand for
these procedures does in fact come from patients.
