Khurshid Guru, MD is a speaker for Intuitive Surgical, Inc. Results of this study suggest that robotic-assisted laparoscopic ureterolysis is
a safe and effective procedure for patients with idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis. To evaluate our case of robot-assisted ureterolysis
(RU), describe our surgical technique, and review the literature on minimally invasive ureterolysis. One patient managed with robot-assisted
ureterolysis for idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis was identified. The chart was analyzed for demographics, operative parameters, and
immediate postoperative outcome. The surgical technique was assessed and modified. Lastly, a review of the published literature on
ureterolysis managed with minimally invasive surgery was performed. One patient underwent robot-assisted ureterolysis at our institution in
2 separate settings. Operative time (OR) decreased from 279 minutes to 191 minutes. Estimated blood loss (EBL) was less than 50mL. The
patient has been free of symptoms and both renal units are unobstructed. According to the published literature, 302 renal units underwent
successful laparoscopic ureterolysis (LU), and 6 renal units underwent RU. There were 9 open conversions (all in LU). Mean OR in LU was 248
minutes for unilateral and 386 minutes for bilateral cases. In RU, mean OR was 220 minutes for unilateral and 390 minutes for bilateral
cases. EBL averaged 200mL in LU and 30 mL in RU. Our data reveal that robot-assisted ureterolysis is safe and feasible. Published data
demonstrate the advantages of minimally invasive surgery. Ureteral obstruction secondary to extrinsic compression results from both benign
and malignant processes. Retroperitoneal fibrosis (RPF) and ureteral endometriosis (UE) are 2 uncommon conditions that cause ureteral
obstruction.1–25 First described in 1905 by Albarran and then by Ormond in 1948, RPF is a chronic inflammatory process characterized by
deposition of dense fibrous tissue within the retroperitoneum.26–28 Possible causes of RPF include medications, infections, malignancy,
inflammatory conditions, trauma, prior surgeries, and radiation therapy. About two-thirds of cases are considered idiopathic.10,25
Endometriosis, defined by the ectopic presence of endometrium, is another entity that can cause ureteral obstruction. Ureteral endometriosis
occurs in <1% of patients with endometriosis and is classified as extrinsic or intrinsic. Symptoms are often nonspecific and can be
associated with silent loss of renal function.22 Treatment of both RPF and UE has classically been to relieve urinary tract obstruction,
preserve renal function, and minimize the morbidity associated with surgery.17 Open ureterolysis is effective in relieving ureteral
obstruction, but can be associated with complications.28 Minimally invasive surgery offers rapid convalescence, lowers the need for
postoperative analgesic use, the need for blood transfusions, and is associated with quicker return of bowel function.10 In 1992, Kavoussi
performed the first laparoscopic ureterolysis (LU), and since then the minimally invasive approach has been an accepted surgical
alternative.1 Moreover, with the advent of robotics, and its advantages, surgeons are now leaning toward its use in ureterolysis. We report
on our first patient who underwent robot-assisted laparoscopic ureterolysis (RU), describe our technique, and review the published
literature on ureterolysis via the minimally invasive approach. In February 2009, one male patient (2 renal units) underwent robot-assisted
laparoscopic ureterolysis. He presented initially with complaints of bilateral flank pain and was found on an ultrasound, CT scan, and a
MAG-3 renal scan to have bilateral ureteral obstruction secondary to presumed idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis. He subsequently failed
conservative management including ureteral stent placement and steroid therapy. He was initially scheduled to undergo bilateral
ureterolysis; however, secondary to a prolonged operative time, right ureterolysis was performed first, followed by left ureterolysis 3
months later. The right renal unit was operated on first because of the predominant function of 80% on renal scan. Both renal units were
stented and percutaneously drained preoperatively. Demographic information, operative parameters and short-term outcome were assessed.
Operative technique is briefly described below. A literature search of on-line databases including PubMed and Ovid MEDLINE (1950 through
July 2009) for studies describing laparoscopic and robot-assisted laparoscopic ureterolysis was then conducted. Only articles published in
English were included. Thirty studies were identified. We excluded 2 initial studies to prevent possible overlap of patients during the same
time frame by the same authors. Two additional studies excluded were a case report complicated by a pneumothorax secondary to a congenital
defect, and a case report complicated by multiple gynecologic procedures. Hence, 26 series of LU and RU published between 1992 and 2008 were
reviewed, comprising 319 renal units (mean patient age, 44 years). These are summarized in Table 1.1–25 We then tabulated operative
parameters and outcome success. Laparoscopic and Robotic Ureterolysis The patient was placed in a high flank position after endotracheal and
nasogastric intubation. A Foley catheter was placed, bony prominences were padded, and the table was then slightly flexed. Pneumoperitoneum
was initiated with a Veress needle. A 12-mm trocar was placed in the midline just superior to the umbilicus. Two 8-mm robotic trocars were
placed, 4 cm cephalad and caudad to the initial site, in the midclavicular line. A 5-mm trocar was placed 4cm cephalad to the initial site
in the midline. The two 8-mm and the 5-mm ports were placed under direct visualization. The white line of Toldt was then incised, and the
peritoneal structures reflected medially after the robot was docked. Gerota's fascia was identified and used to localize normal ureter
proximally. The ureter was then traced to the encased area and sharply dissected free with round tip scissors. The assistant provided
retraction with a suction device. A biopsy of the fibrotic mass was sent for frozen section. The remainder of the fibrotic mass was sent for
permanent evaluation. A portion of posterior peritoneum was mobilized and placed to “peritonealize” the ureter. A 10-mm Jackson-Pratt drain
was placed and the trocar sites closed. The ureteral stent was left in place. The right percutaneous nephrostomy tube was clamped
postoperatively. The patient was positioned and prepped as previously described. However, after the pneumoperitoneum was established with
the Veress needle, the 12-mm trocar was placed 2 cm below the costal margin in the anterior axillary line. The two 8-mm ports were placed in
the same position described above. The 5-mm assistant trocar was placed superior to the umbilicus in the midline. The trocars again were
placed under direct visualization. The white line of Toldt was incised and reflected medially. We decided to change the approach due to our
past experience, and approach the distal ureter in the pelvis first. The ureter was mobilized superiorly to the encased portion down to the
level of the fibrotic mass. The ureter was traced superior to the encased segment and mobilized down to the level of the fibrotic mass. A
biopsy of the fibrotic mass was sent for frozen section. The ureter was then dissected free using round tip scissors. All of the remaining
fibrotic mass was excised and sent for permanent evaluation. Indigo carmine was given intravenously, and no extravasation was visualized
from the ureter. The ureter was “peritonealized” as previously stated. Trocar sites were closed, and the ureteral stent was removed
cystoscopically prior to endotracheal extubation. The percutaneous nephrostomy tube was manually occluded at surgical completion. A single
patient (2 renal units) age 68 years old at our institution underwent successful robot-assisted ureterolysis in 2 separate encounters. Both
renal units were prestented and had preoperative nephrostomy tubes in place. Bilateral ureteral obstruction was secondary to idiopathic
retroperitoneal fibrosis. The patient was diagnosed with hydronephrosis seen on renal ultrasound secondary to a rise in the creatinine level
from baseline. Subsequently, a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated external compression of both ureters with medial deviation and
bilateral hydronephrosis. A preoperative MAG 3 renal scan was performed that documented bilateral obstruction [T1/2 = 23 minutes (right),
>60 minutes (left)]. The patient was also noted to have differential function of 85% versus 15%, respectively. Operative time was 279
minutes in the first surgery and decreased to 191 minutes in the second. EBL was 50 mL and 20 mL, respectively. There were no intraoperative
complications. Average length of hospital stay was 1 day. Follow-up in our study was 6 months. Ureteral stents were removed one week
postoperatively followed by nephrostomy tube removal the following week. Replacement was not required. Postoperatively, a renal scan
demonstrated an unobstructive pattern (T ½ <10 minutes) on the right renal unit, and an improved T ½ time on the left. A postoperative renal
ultrasound showed resolution of bilateral hydronephrosis. The patient has been free of symptoms, and both renal units remain unobstructed.
Biopsy results of the retroperitoneum were benign, with evidence of dense fibrous tissue. In the laparoscopic/robotic review, 252 cases (319
renal units) of ureterolysis were initially identified. A total of 308 renal units underwent successful ureterolysis. There were 9 (3.5%)
conversions (11 renal units) to open surgery, all within the LU group. Among the 308 renal units, 302 were pure LU and 6 were RU. All
patients in the LU and RU groups were either prestented or had intraoperative ureteral stents placed prior to ureterolysis. In addition,
several had nephrostomy tubes in place. In the LU group, mean patient age was 44 years (range, 15 to 66), and in the RU group it was 53
years (range, 48 to 58). Ureteral obstruction was secondary to RPF in 95 patients, and secondary to endometriosis in 153 patients. Three
patients were diagnosed with ovarian vein syndrome and one with Erdheim-Chester disease, a rare progressive, non-Langerhans cell
histiocytosis. The left side was more commonly involved than the right side (54% vs. 46%). Unilateral disease was more prevalent, while
bilateral disease was seen in 43 patients. Table 2 summarizes intraoperative data including mean operative time, EBL, and operative
technique for LU and RU. Mean OR in LU was 248 minutes for unilateral and 386 minutes for bilateral cases. In RU, mean OR was 220 minutes
for unilateral and 390 minutes for bilateral cases. EBL averaged 200 mL in LU and 30 mL in RU. There were 12 intraoperative complications in
the LU group, including various injuries to the ureter, renal pelvis, iliac vein requiring open conversion, and subcutaneous emphysema. No
intraoperative complications occurred in the RU group. Average hospital stay was 4 days for LU and 3 days for RU. Intraoperative Data In
both MIS groups, pre- and postoperative radiographic evaluation was variable. Evaluation included one or a combination of these modalities:
renal ultrasound (40%), IVP (30%), CT scan (20%), and diuretic renography (20%). Mean follow-up for LU was 21 months and 5 months for RU.
Recurrence was demonstrated in 12% of patients (12% in RPF and 12% in UE). Those with recurrence were managed with indwelling ureteral
stents, or balloon dilatation of the ureter in one patient.15,25 RPF and UE are 2 conditions that can lead to ureteral obstruction.1–25 In
RPF, the fibrotic mass encases and compresses the ureters leading to hydronephrosis. Only 30% of cases have an identifiable cause, with the
remaining 70% being idiopathic.10,25 Management first entails decompression of the obstructed system, followed by discontinuation of
offending agents if known and if not consideration for medical management with corticosteroid therapy. Ruling out potential malignancy is
important in the evaluation.24,29 Traditionally open ureterolysis with deep tissue biopsy, and repositioning the ureters laterally,
“intraperitonealizing” them or performing an omental wrap has been the gold standard in surgical management.4,24 A recent multi-
institutional survey of laparoscopic surgeons by Duchene et al30 demonstrated that there is no uniform treatment algorithm for RPF and that
most institutions recommend an attempt at steroids followed by laparoscopic ureterolysis. Ureteral endometriosis is another rare process,
most commonly diagnosed in women of childbearing age, which can result in ureteral obstruction. It is usually unilateral and involves the
lower one-third of the ureter.22 As previously mentioned, there is an extrinsic and intrinsic type and they can coexist. Management of UE is
controversial.11 Treatment modalities have included medical therapy alone, such as with progestin or danazol, or in combination with
ureteral stent placement, ureterolysis, segmental ureterectomy, and nephroureterectomy.11,22 With the advent and advantages offered by
minimally invasive surgery, ureterolysis is now performed using laparoscopy with or without robot assistance. Frenna and associates20
reported on the benefits of laparoscopy in patients with UE including the magnified image, superior exposure, and greater ability to
identify disease in the pelvis and retroperitoneal space as well as in the lower urinary tract. Operative times are reasonable despite often
requiring additional procedures. Additional procedures include hysterectomy, salpingo-oophorectomy, excision of endometrioma, bowel
resection, nephrectomy, ureterectomy with ureteroureteroneostomy, ureteroneocystotomy, boari flap, ileal ureter, and others. Since the first
case report of laparoscopic ureterolysis by Kavoussi et al1 in 1992, several reports have been published that demonstrate the efficacy and
safety of the laparoscopic approach.1–25 In 2008, Srinivasan and colleagues24 published one of the largest series of ureterolysis, comparing
open and laparoscopic techniques with respect to morbidity and treatment efficacy. In their study, the authors did not find any specific
diagnosis or preoperative variable that influenced conversion to open surgery, or predicted poor postoperative outcomes following
laparoscopic surgery. Complication rates were comparable in both groups at 8% and postoperative imaging demonstrated resolution of
obstruction in both patient groups, 94% LU and 97% open. In 2006 Mufarrij and Stifelman31 performed the first robot-assisted laparoscopic
ureterolysis with laparoscopic omental wrap. Two years later, they reported on their initial series of 5 patients. Their 2 most recent
surgeries were performed entirely robotically. They reported on the advantages offered by robotics, including working in magnified
3-dimension and the better articulation of instruments in assisting with dissection and freeing the diseased ureter circumferentially.25,32
We are only the second institution to publish on robot-assisted laparoscopic ureterolysis. The primary surgeon (KG) has strong robotic
pelvic surgical experience, having performed over 700 robot-assisted pelvic procedures including radical cystectomy and prostatectomy.
Utilizing the robot outside the pelvis contributed to the initial prolonged operative time and demonstrated the typical learning experience.
Modifications were made to our technique. This included an alteration in port placement as well as our operative approach. Dissecting the
ureter first beginning in the pelvis, instead of in an antegrade fashion led us to a much easier and efficient second experience. Utilizing
that foundation of robot-assisted surgery within the pelvis assisted the surgeon to operate from a more familiar region as expected for a
pelvic surgeon to an area less encountered. Our experience, however, may be different than that of nonpelvic surgeons whose comfort level
may be the opposite. Our data reveal that robot-assisted laparoscopic ureterolysis is feasible and can be performed safely. Published data
demonstrate the clinical advantages of minimally invasive surgery. Close monitoring and long-term follow-up are essential given risk of
recurrence.
