The prevalence of primary cardiac tumour ranges from 0.0017-0.28% and papillary fibroelastoma is rare but not uncommon benign cardiac
neoplasm. Currently, with the advent of higher-resolution imaging technology especially transoesophageal echocardiography such cases being
recognized frequently. The clinical presentation of these tumours varies from asymptomatic to severe ischaemic or embolic complications. We
herein, present a 50-year-old female patient with a papillary fibroelastoma of the aortic valve arising from the endocardium of the right
coronary cusp very close to the commissure between the right and non-coronary cusps. The patient presented with angina-like chest pain and
was investigated using echocardiography and CT angiographic modalities in addition to the usual investigations. The differential diagnosis
considered was a thrombus, myxoma, Lambl's excrescence and infective vegetation. The surgical management included a prompt resection of the
tumour on cardiopulmonary bypass avoiding injury to the aortic valve. The patient recovered well. A review of the literature suggests that
the cardiac papillary fibroelastoma is a rare but potentially treatable cause of embolic stroke and other fatal complications, therefore, a
strong suspicion; appropriate use of imaging modality, preoperative anticoagulation and urgent surgical resection is warranted. Also,
possibility of this diagnosis should be kept in mind while managing cardiac or valvular tumours. Although the prevalence of primary cardiac
tumors ranges from 0.0017-0.28%, the papillary fibroelastomas (PFE) are second most common benign neoplasm of the cardiac valves after
myxomas . Currently, with the advent of higher- resolution imaging technology such cases are diagnosed more frequently . We herein, present
a 50-year-old female patient with PFE arising from the endocardium of the right coronary cusp of the aortic valve that presented with
recurrent angina-like chest pain and successfully managed with valve-sparing resection of the tumor on cardiopulmonary bypass. This report
not only highlights typical presentation of this tumor but also reminds us to keep this possibility in patients who present with mass in the
ascending aorta, aortic valve or those associated with angina-like or neurological symptoms. A 50-year-old female presented to our hospital
for evaluation of chest pain. She had history of recurrent, vague, central chest pain with radiation to inter-scapular area. The pain was
compressive and mild in nature and was not associated with effort. The clinical examination and routine blood laboratory investigations were
unremarkable. The electrocardiography including stress test was also inconclusive. The chest x ray was normal. A 2-D and transoesophageal
echocardiography (TEE) revealed presence of an echodense supra valvular, pedunculated, spherical mass of 1.2 × 1 cm in size about 1.2 cm
above the aortic annulus (Figure 1). This supra valvular echogenic mass was found to be moving and displaced during each phase of the
cardiac cycle and it was very close to the orifice of the right coronary artery (RCA) (Figure 2 and 3). However, the aortic valve and other
cardiac structures were normal. There was no regurgitation of the aortic valve. A contrast-enhanced computerized tomography scan of the
chest confirmed the presence of a mildly ill-defined, non-enhancing, hypodense nodular lesion of approximate size 1.0 × 0.8 × 0.7 cm in the
aortic root, just adjacent to the origin of right coronary artery (Figure 4). Based upon the findings as above, a differential diagnosis was
made which included, thrombus, myxoma, fibroelastoma and inflammatory mass. Trans-oesophageal echocardiography showing a mobile, spherical
pedunculated tumour mass of 1.2 × 1 cm in size at the right coronary aortic cusp (ME AV short-axis view). Trans-oesophageal echocardiography
showing supra valvular tumour during diastole near the right coronary artery (RCA) ostium (ME AV long-axis view). Trans-oesophageal
echocardiography showing supra valvular tumour during early systole moving away from the right coronary artery (RCA) ostium (ME AV long-axis
view). Contrast computerized tomography image showing a filling-defect (tumour) attached to the aortic valve near the origin of the right
coronary artery (RCA). In view of the possibility of embolism and unknown nature of the pathology, the patient was taken for urgent surgical
resection under standard cardiopulmonary bypass at systemic hypothermia (32 degree Celsius) and systemic heparinisation. The ascending
aortic and right atrial cannulation was done before institution of cardiopulmonary bypass. The aortic cross clamp was applied and heart was
arrested using antegrade blood cardioplegia via the root. Subsequently, a transverse aortotomy was performed proximal to the aortic root. On
exploration a 1 × 1 cm pedunculated tumor mass was found to be attached to the right coronary cusp very close to the commissure between the
right and non-coronary cusp of the aortic valve. The tumor mass was firm, glistening, friable and looked filamentous on gross examination
(Figure 5). The aortic valve was tri-leaflet and structurally and functionally found to be normal. A complete resection of the tumor was
achieved which was confirmed by postoperative TEE (Figure 6). The aortic valve was found to be competent and functionally well without any
residual defect or perforation after the procedure. The patient had an uneventful weaning from the cardiopulmonary bypass and recovered well
in the immediate post operative period. Gross specimen of resected mass. Postoperative trans-oesophageal echocardiography confirming
complete resection of the tumour and normal aortic valve (ME AV long-axis view). Histopathology examination of the resected tumor revealed a
papillary proliferation including few fibroblasts, collagen and elastic fibers, covered with hyperplastic endothelial cells. These features
confirmed the diagnosis of papillary fibroelastoma (Figure 7). The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged in a
satisfactory condition on 7th day. Histological section of the excised mass showing benign papillary lesion comprised of a single layer of
endocardial cells overlies a thin layer of mucopolysaccharide matrix and underlying, almost acellular, avascular stroma composed
predominantly of elastic fibers and a small amount of collagen. (Hematoxylin and Eosin stain, magnification × 40) Cardiac papillary
fibroelastomas are classified as primary benign endocardial tumours arising from the normal component of the endocardium like fibrous
tissue, elastic fibers or smooth muscle cells. Characteristically they have a short pedicle and multiple papillary fronds similar to a sea
anemone . They often (85%) originate from the valvular endocardium. The aortic valve (29%), mitral valve (25%), tricuspid valve (17%) and
pulmonary valves (13%) are involved in that order . However, PFE arising from semilunar valves are located with equal frequencies on the
ventricular and arterial sides of the valves. In addition, non-valvular origin was observed in approximately 16% cases that included left
and right ventricular septal and mural endocardial surfaces, atrial endocardium, papillary muscles, chordae tendinae or intima of the right
coronary ostium . In addition, multifocal "tepete" (carpet-like) PFE of the left ventricular cavity has also been reported . The origin of
PFE is unclear and various possible causes have been mentioned in the literature. They have been considered as hamartomas, organized
thrombi, iatrogenic (post radiation, surgery) or inflammatory foci due to unusual endocardial responses to infection or hemodynamic trauma .
However, some authors believe that PFE's are true neoplasms . Clinical presentation of PFE's varies from asymptomatic to severe
thromboembolic complications, myocardial ischemia, infarction and stroke. However, pulmonary embolism, congestive heart failure, near-
syncope, ventricular fibrillation and sudden death have also been reported . Embolisation may occur from fragments of the fronds of the
tumour or from a thrombus that frequently forms on the tumour 'nidus' due to platelet or fibrin aggregates. In our patient, the atypical
vague chest discomfort and pain could have been due to the partial, intermittent obstruction or limitation of blood flow through the right
coronary artery orifice in the aortic root due to the strategic location and variable mobility of the tumour mass during various phases of
cardiac cycle (Figure 2 and 3). Therefore, this could be considered as angina-like symptom. The diagnosis is usually made by 2-dimentional
or transoesophageal echocardiography. Recently, 3-D echocardiography, magnetic resonance imaging and multislice spiral computed tomography
have also been used for better delineation of similar tumors . Typical echocardiographic features include a small (1-4 cm), highly mobile
mass with a pedicle attached to the valve or endocardial surface and a frond-like appearance with or without multifocal involvement. The
contrast CT image typically shows a filling defect in the aortic root adjacent to the origin of coronary artery . Despite the benign nature
of this tumour, it carries very high risk of embolic complications including neurological deficit. The fragile nature and frond-like
papillary tissues of the tumour itself is prone to thromboembolism . Therefore, once diagnosed, urgent surgical management is indicated even
in the asymptomatic patients . The management of such tumours also includes early anticoagulation. The surgical management requires
extracorporeal circulation and an aortotomy which is similar to that used in typical aortic valve replacement procedures. The PFE's are
usually pedunculated and may be easily removed with associated endocardial tissue. Care should be taken to avoid fragmentation of the tumour
tissue. Also, aortic valve should be preserved preferably. In case, if there is resultant valve defect, it should be repaired, otherwise a
valve replacement is warranted. The surgical resection is curative, safe and well tolerated . Intraoperative TEE is essential to assess
valvular function after tumour resection. Re-growth of the tumour after resection has not been reported, and it requires long-term TEE
follow-up studies to confirm. Law 'et al' have done a review of the English language literature using 'Pub Med' (US National Library of
Medicine) to identify previously published cases of PFE from 1997 up to 2008 . They found 833 cases published so far with a male
preponderance (58%) and mean age of 56 years. The tumour size ranged from 2 to 70 mm. The two most preferred locations were aortic (44-52%)
and mitral valve (35-40%). In majority of the cases echocardiography was the imaging modality (98%) and excision of the tumour (79%) as
preferred treatment. We have tried to update the review of literature including recently published reports (Table 1). Previously reported
cases of cardiac papillary fibroelastoma AV-aortic valve, IVS-interventricular septum, MV-mitral valve, CVA-cerebrovascular accident, TIA-
transient ischemic attack, VSD-ventricular septal defect, AF- atrial fibrillation, LVOT-left ventricular outflow tract, LA- left atrium, LV-
left ventricle, MVR-mitral valve repair, TVR-tricuspid valve repair, AVRp-aortic valve replacement, MVRp-mitral valve replacement, AVR-
aortic valve repair Cardiac PFE's are not uncommon tumours and should be considered in the differential diagnosis of cardiac masses. A
strong suspicion, appropriate use of imaging modality, pre operative anticoagulation and urgent resection of the tumour is not only life
saving but also avoids tumour-related vascular, embolic or neurological complications. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. All authors have contributed in case management, manuscript preparation and image acquisition. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying image. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
