Hereditary angioedema is characterized by sudden episodes of nonpitting edema that cause discomfort and pain. Typically the extremities,
genitalia, trunk, gastrointestinal tract, face, and larynx are affected by attacks of swelling. Laryngeal swelling carries significant risk
for asphyxiation. The disease results from mutations in the C1 esterase inhibitor gene that cause C1 esterase inhibitor deficiency. Attacks
of hereditary angioedema result from contact, complement, and fibrinolytic plasma cascade activation, where C1 esterase inhibitor
irreversibly binds substrates. Patients with hereditary angioedema cannot replenish C1 esterase inhibitor levels on pace with its binding.
When C1 esterase inhibitor is depleted in these patients, vasoactive plasma cascade products cause swelling attacks. Trauma is a known
trigger for hereditary angioedema attacks, and patients have been denied surgical procedures because of this risk. However, uncomplicated
surgeries have been reported. Appropriate prophylaxis can reduce peri-operative morbidity in these patients, despite proteolytic cascade and
complement activation during surgical trauma. We report a case of successful short-term prophylaxis with C1 esterase inhibitor in a 51-year-
old man with hereditary angioedema who underwent redo mitral valve reconstructive surgery. Attacks of hereditary angioedema (HAE) are
characterized by sudden episodes of brawny, nonpitting edema, causing discomfort and pain. Areas of the body typically affected include the
extremities, genitalia, trunk, gastrointestinal tract, face, and larynx. Untreated patients with HAE are at risk for deadly attacks of
laryngeal swelling, where up to 30% may asphyxiate. HAE is an inherited autosomal dominant disorder resulting from any number of mutations
in the C1 esterase inhibitor (C1 INH) gene that cause C1 INH deficiency. Approximately 85% of cases are type 1 HAE, which is characterized
by reduced levels of circulating C1 INH. The remaining 15% of cases are type 2 HAE, which is characterized by dysfunctional circulating C1
INH. A child will have a 50% chance of inheriting HAE if one parent has the disease; however, 25% of cases arise from de novo mutations.
Inherited angioedema with normal C1 inhibitor levels has been described and is thought to be a separate disease resulting from a factor XII
missense mutation that leads to bradykinin overproduction. Histamine mediated allergic inflammation is not involved in HAE. Instead, HAE
attacks result from contact, complement, and fibrinolytic plasma cascade activation, where C1 INH is a suicide inhibitor. People with HAE
have defective C1 INH synthesis with typical C1 INH levels that are 5%-30% of normal.2 Bradykinin is generated in large quantities via the
contact pathway once C1 INH is depleted (Figure 1). Excess bradykinin production leads to acute HAE attacks as a result of increased
vasodilatation, vascular permeability, and contraction of nonvascular smooth muscle. C1 INH action in plasma cascades. Depletion of C1 INH
due to plasma cascade activation allows bradykinin overproduction in patients with hereditary angioedema. Bradykinin mediates acute swelling
in these patients. Reproduced with permission from Weis. HAE affects 1:50,000 people. Fifty percent of patients will develop symptoms by age
10, although attacks have been reported in children as young as 2 years old. Symptom frequency and severity may be extremely variable, even
within families. There may be no obvious trigger for attacks and no correlation between attack severity and subtype of disease. However,
local trauma, stress, and hormonal fluctuations in women may be responsible for many attacks. Despite the inherent risks of performing
surgery on patients with HAE, the cardiovascular surgery literature provides examples of uncomplicated surgery in patients who were
methodically prophylaxed with different agents. Appropriate choice of a prophylactic agent and its judicious use can help surgeons reduce
peri-operative morbidity to patients, despite multiple sources of proteolytic cascade and complement activation known to occur with surgical
trauma, and more specifically, with cardiac pump bypass surgeries. Previous agents used for prophylactic treatment of HAE patients
undergoing surgery include fresh frozen plasma, high-dose attenuated androgens, and anti-fibrinolytic agents. No agent is currently approved
for short-term procedural prophylaxis. However, newer agents are approved for long-term prophylaxis (C1 esterase inhibitor ) and acute
attacks (C1 esterase inhibitor [Berinert P®] and kallikrein inhibitor, ecallantide ). Here we report a case of successful short-term
prophylaxis using C1 INH in a 51-year-old man with HAE undergoing redo mitral valve reconstructive surgery. A 51-year-old man with type 2
HAE, a history of acute respiratory failure, chronic airway obstruction, adhesive pericarditis, congestive heart failure, chronic pulmonary
heart disease, and previous mitral valve annuplasty was scheduled for redo surgery six months after the initial surgical procedure due to
severe mitral valve regurgitation. During the initial surgical procedure, the patient was successfully prophylaxed with C1 INH and his peri-
operative course was uneventful. Details of the initial surgery were previously published in abstract form. The patient reported onset of
HAE symptoms beginning at age 12. Previous attacks consisted of abdominal, facial, extremity, and painful genital swelling. He reported two
previous episodes of severe laryngeal edema secondary to oral surgeries. The patient was controlled on long-term prophylaxis with the
attenuated androgen, danazol 400 mg daily, under the care of an allergist. However, even while on this medication, he reported breakthrough
swelling including laryngeal edema. Historically, his C1 INH levels were normal, but the C1 INH was dysfunctional, and he had a persistently
low C4 level - typical findings in type 2 HAE. Two months after the initial mitral valve reconstruction and annuloplasty surgery, the
patient presented to the emergency department in heart failure due to pericardial effusion. The patient's surgeon and allergist were
consulted prior to any procedure. As a result, the patient was prophylaxed with C1 INH 1000 units prior to pericardiocentesis, where one
liter of pericardial fluid was removed. A transesophageal echocardiogram showed moderated-to-severe mitral valve regurgitation secondary to
failure of previous repair. The procedure was tolerated without swelling. The patient was scheduled for redo mitral valve repair six months
later. Laboratory studies prior to surgery preparations were unremarkable except for chronic anemia. Cardiac catheterization was performed
48 hours prior to repeat mitral valve reconstruction. C1 INH 1000 units was administered six hours before cardiac catheterization. Since the
patient was on danazol 400 mg daily, his functional C1 INH levels were within the normal range, but his C4 level remained low. C1 INH 1000
units was again administered intravenously twelve hours before repeat mitral valve reconstruction. During the redo surgery, the patient
underwent sternotomy with lysis of extensive mediastinal adhesions, redo mitral valve repair with resection of chordae tendineae, and
closure of dehisced prior leaflet closure; removal of annuloplasty band and insertion of 32 CardioMedics annuloplasty ring; and
intraoperative 2-D esophageal echocardiogram for aortic ultrasound. The surgery was uncomplicated without excessive blood loss. The patient
experienced no postoperative complications associated with the surgery or HAE. He was extubated, the Swan-Ganz was discontinued, and danazol
400 mg daily prophylaxis was resumed on postoperative day one. Chest tubes were removed on postoperative day two, and the patient was
transferred to the regular nursing floor. He was discharged on postoperative day 4 and instructed to follow-up with the allergist caring for
his HAE as an outpatient. Three medications are available for acute treatment of HAE: Berinert-P® (plasma-derived C1 esterase inhibitor,
approved in the US and Europe), KALBITOR® (ecallantide, a kallikrein inhibitor, approved only in the US currently), and Firazyr® (icatibant,
bradykinin β2-receptor inhibitor, approved only in Europe currently). Two medications are available for long-term prophylaxis: CINRYZE™ (C1
esterase inhibitor , approved in the US) and the attenuated androgen, danazol (approved in the US and Europe). The newer medications target
the underlying pathology of HAE and have less potential for long-term side effects than androgens. No medication is currently approved for
procedural prophylaxis. However, consensus guidelines recommend the use of C1 INH (Table 1) and there are now many case reports of using C1
INH pre-operatively in Europe and the US . Consensus guideline C1 INH dosages for procedural prophylaxis Administer 1 hour before procedure.
Have additional doses available if needed during and after surgery. C1 INH = C1 esterase inhibitor. This case demonstrates that major
surgery can be performed on HAE patients if care is closely coordinated. One week after surgery, this patient's long-term danazol
prophylaxis dosage was reduced to 200 mg once daily. With close management, this patient now experiences only a few breakthrough symptoms
during normal activity, and he has needed procedural prophylaxis with C1 INH for a dental procedure only once since his mitral valve
surgery. This case also demonstrates that typical long-term prophylactic doses of C1 INH may be sufficient for prophylaxis prior to major
surgery. Prior to his initial mitral valve replacement, the patient received 2000 units of C1 INH. However, after consulting an HAE expert,
the doses for subsequent procedures were reduced to 1000 units with comparable results. Procedural prophylaxis protocols should include a
thorough patient history, coordinated efforts among medical specialties, family education, and use of an appropriate prophylactic
medication. The successful use of a procedural prophylaxis protocol in this case will hopefully encourage the use of appropriate prophylaxis
in patients with HAE who may be otherwise denied surgery. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this
case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors received honoraria
for the development of this manuscript. SC has received research support from ViroPharma Incorporated. AB has received speaker fees from
Merck, Genentech/Novartis, and GlaxoSmithKline. JB, SC, and AJB contributed to the initial concept and design of the manuscript, provided
the data presented, performed critical review of the medical concepts, and read and approved the final version. Clay Isbell and Innovative
Strategic Communications Inc. assisted in the preparation of this manuscript and provided editorial services paid for by ViroPharma
Incorporated.
