The clinical significance of the Enterobacter nimipressuralis as human pathogens remains unclear. The microbiologic culture monitoring
system of sterile body fluids revealed on an episode of Enterobacter cloacae and Enterobacter amnigenus in blood culture results on the same
day; the antibiotic sensitivity and MIC were nearly the same for both species. First patient was a healthy woman with postmenopausal
syndrome, while second patient with herpes zoster. Both patients had febrile sensations without signs of bacteremia. E. amnigenus was also
cultured from the unused package of salined cotton in the container through epidemiologic investigation. The cultured Enterobacter species
were all identified as E. nimipressuralis through hsp60 gene sequencing and infrequent-restriction-site PCR (IRS-PCR). When an unusual
microorganisms such as E. nimipressuralis is isolated from blood of a patient with no clinical signs of sepsis, a pseudobacteremia should be
suspected. When the antibiogram and MIC test results of bacterial cultures from two or more patients are nearly the same, although the
species involved may appear different, it may be necessary to prove that they are the same species through molecular methods. The
microbiologic cultures monitoring system will probably help to detect pseudobacteremia and other pseudo infections through reliable and fast
identification. Chosun University Hospital, Gwang-ju, Korea, is a 650-bed, tertiary care teaching hospital. Every day in our hospital, an
infectious disease specialist monitors all the results of the hospital's microbiologic cultures from sterile body fluids such as blood,
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), pleural fluid, ascites, joint fluid and localized fluid collection using a computerized monitoring system. This
monitoring system revealed an episode of Enterobacter nimipressuralis pseudobacteremia caused by contaminated saline cotton during the
preparation of blood culture samples. Here we describe two cases of Enterobacter species pseudobacteremia. A 54-year-old female patient
presented with myalgia and febrile sensation to outpatient Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology in Chosun University Hospital. She
had a history of liver cirrhosis due to hepatitis B virus, and had gone surgery because of a pituitary adenoma 1 year ago. The patient did
not have any limitations of daily living without major health issues after the surgery. Her physical examination revealed newly formed
painful grouped vesicles on the trunk. Blood culture resulted in the growth of Enterobacter amnigenus. The vital signs and laboratory data
did not correlate with the finding of the bacteremia. Antiviral agent for the herpes zoster was used with improvement in pain and crust
formation of the vesicles. The patient was treated with ciprofloxacin according to the culture results. The follow up blood culture revealed
no sign of any growth of bacteria. The patient was discharged on the 10th hospital day without any complications. A 41-year-old female
presented with febrile sensation, hot flush, and general weakness for two months to outpatient Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology. The
patient had no significant medical history prior to the visit to the hospital. Physical examination was normal, and there was no clinical
signs of infection. However, blood culture resulted in the growth of Enterobacter cloacae. Ciprofloxacin was started according to the
culture results. There was no sign of fever or systemic bacteremia, and the patient was discharged on the 5th hospital day with an
impression of postmenopausal syndrome. When the above two patients visited outpatient clinic, the doctors who were in charge just ordered
blood culture afraid of systemic infection, because they had complained of febrile sensation in spite of ambiguous clinical signs or
symptoms. The microbiologic cultures monitoring system revealed that Enterobacter species were isolated from the blood cultures of two
patients, which was performed in the outpatient blood sampling room. One species was classified as E. cloacae and the other E. amnigenus,
yet the sensitivity and MIC test results were almost same. A common source of contamination or "pseudobacteremia" was suspected because the
both patients had positive cultures and no clinical signs of sepsis. An epidemiologic investigation was initiated to determine the origin
and cause of the Enterobacter species bacteremia. We reviewed clinical records of the two patients, and examined the medical procedures that
they had undergone. One patient was a healthy woman, while the other was a woman with liver cirrhosis. The laboratory findings were within
the normal range. No common exposures that might be related to the positive blood cultures other than venipuncture in the outpatient blood
sampling room were noted. When reviewing the procedure for drawing blood and the disinfectant used, suspicion fell on the salined cotton
because new supplies of salined cotton had not been delivered for the past five days. We took environmental specimens, including samples
from the antiseptic solution and the salined cotton, for examination, and bacteria classified as E. amnigenus were cultured from the unused
packages of salined cotton in the container that had been used in the blood sampling room for wiping the skin with disinfectant prior to
venipuncture for blood culture. The clinical isolates classified as E. cloacae and E. amnigenus were initially identified with a VITEK II
automated system (bioMeÂ´rieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France). Antimicrobial susceptibility determinations including the MICs were performed
automatically with the VITEK II system. The Kirby-Bauer disk diffusion method was used next as a confirmatory tool. The isolates from both
patients and the salined cotton container gave similar antibiogram and MIC results (Table 1). Enterobacter clinical isolates could not be
identified in species level by 16S rRNA sequence due to the differences of sequence similarities among four species showing more than 99.0%
identity with corresponding type strains. Previously, Tang YW et. al. also reported that the analysis of 16S rRNA gene is even though widely
used for the bacterial identification, but it is poorly discriminatory for closely related members especially for the members of
Enterobacter genus . Hence, we performed sequence analysis of the protein encoding hsp60 gene and draw phylogenetic tree (Figure 1). The
hsp60 gene sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of amplification products revealed that clinical isolate shared maximum of 96.7% sequence
similarity with E. nimipressuralis ATCC 9912T(GenBank accession number AJ567900). Hence, we assigned the clinical isolate as E.
nimipressuralis species because it showed highest % similarity with this species, and clustered together in the same branch of the
phylogenetic tree with E. nimipressuralis (Figure 1). Furthermore, we also performed infrequent-restriction-site PCR (IRS-PCR)
fingerprinting to confirm that the same bacterial strain had been isolated from the two patients and the salined cotton pad. Figure 2 shows
that the three isolates yielded identical DNA banding patterns. Therefore all isolates were identified as E. nimipressuralis by hsp60 gene
sequencing and IRS-PCR. Antibiotic susceptibility results showing MIC ((mg/ml) of the isolated Enterobacter species Phylogetetic tree based
on partial hsp60 gene sequences. Neighbour-joining tree based on partial hsp60 gene sequences showing relationships among clinical isolate
and members of the genus Enterobacter and Buttiauxella. Numbers at nodes indicate the level of bootstrap support (%) based on a neighbour-
joining analysis of 1000 resampled datasets; only values above 50% are given. Bar, 0.1 or 0.01 substitutions per nucleotide. IRS-PCR
electrophoretic patterns of the Enterobacter species isolated. Lane 1, negative control; lane 2, clinical isolate Enterobacter
nimipressuralis,(Case 1); lane 3, Clinical isolate Enterobacter nimipressuralis (Case 2); lane 4, salined cotton isolate classified as E.
nimipressuralis; M, DNA ladders. Enterobacter species causes opportunistic infections, and could be primary human pathogens . In the present
study, although the clinical significance of the E. nimipressuralis remains unclear, the use of contaminated salined cotton at the
venipuncture sites where blood was drawn seems the most likely explanation for the pseudobacteremia. Sterile salined cotton has been used
instead of boric acid in the blood sampling room and Opthalmology Department since 2001. Boric acid cotton has not been used in our hospital
since 2001 because of its weak antiseptic properties and significant toxicity . Instead, sterile salined cotton is used before swabbing
iodine to sample blood for culture. Sterile salined cotton should be supplied daily from the central supply department of our hospital:
however, at the time of the outbreak, the salined cotton container had not been supplied adequately to the blood sample room. When E.
amnigenus or E. nimipressuralis is isolated from the patient who has no clinical signs of sepsis, a pseudobacteremia should be suspected,
especially in cases where sensitivity testing and MIC results of bacterial cultures from two or more patients are nearly same, even though
they appear to be different species. The microbiological culture monitoring system of sterile fluids by an infectious disease specialist may
help to detect early other cases of pseudobacteremia. No further cases of E. amnigenus or E. nimipressuralis bacteremia have been occurred
since we recommended using alcohol cotton for disinfection for sampling for blood culture and prohibited to use salined cotton for that
purpose. Unusual microorganisms, such as E. amnigenus or E. nimipressuralis, isolated from blood of a patient with no clinical signs of
sepsis should raise suspicion of pseudobacteremia. The microbiological culture monitoring system might be helpful to detect pseudobacteremia
at early. The phoenotypic identification method Vitek II as well as the DNA sequence based typing methods with 16sRNA are not discriminatory
enough to identify E. cloacae complex isolates, while sequencing a fragment of the hsp60 gene is more reliable for proper identification of
Enterobacter species. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. DMK conceived of the study, participated in its design and
coordination and drafted the manuscript, SJJ drafted the manuscript, took epidemiologic investigation, GPN, SHK and MSJ contributed in
revision of the manuscript, SWK made a substantial contribution to draft the manuscript, and revised the draft all over the course of
submission, WYK perform isolation and identification of Enterobacter spp. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-
publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/10/315/prepub "Written consent was obtained
from the patient or their relative for publication of study". "This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF)
grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) through the Research Center for Resistant Cells (R13-2003-009)." "This work was supported by
Korea Institute of Medicine (KIOM)."
