A 53-year-old woman visited the Department of Rheumatology with a chief complaint of a 3-day history of fever and chills and also presented
with pain occuring in both knees at the time of outpatient visit. Based on rheumatologic and hematological lab studies, ultrasonography, and
a needle aspiration biopsy of the articular cavity, the patient was diagnosed with reactive arthritis. On hospitalization day 3,
consultation with the Department of Ophthalmology was requested regarding decreased visual acuity lasting for 3 days. Upon ophthalmologic
examination, the corrected visual acuity was 0.1 in the right eye and 0.05 in the left eye. Upon slit lamp microscopy, there were no
abnormal findings in the anterior segment. Upon fundus examination, however, there were yellow-white lesions in the macular area of both
eyes. Fluorescein angiographywas performed to assess the macular lesions, and the findings were suggestive of macular infarction in both
eyes. Due to a lack of other underlying disease, a past surgical history, and a past history of drug administration, the patient was
diagnosed with macular infarction in both eyes associated with reactive arthritis. To date, there have been no other such cases reported. In
a patient with reactive arthritis, we experienced a case of macular infarction in both eyes, which occurred without association with a past
history of specific drug use or underlying disease. Herein, we report our case, with a review of the literature. Reactive arthritis is an
acute nonpurulent arthritis that develops from complications following the infection of other body areas and can occur due to various
bacterial causes . It is well known that reactive arthritis occurs due to the provocation of autoimmune responses because of sexual contact
or bacterial infection via the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. To date, however, its overall pathophysiology has not been clarified. In 1986,
Lee et al. reported that the ophthalmic manifestations were present in 58% of 113 patients with reactive arthritis. Conjunctivitis was the
most commonly reported ophthalmic manifestation of reactive arthritis. The occurrence of uveitis has also been reported in association with
reactive arthritis . In these cases, permanent loss of visual acuity can also occur. Other ophthalmic manifestations, such as keratitis,
cataract, glaucoma, macular edema, papillitis, and scleritis have also been reported . To date, however, no cases have been reported of
reactive arthritis associated with macular infarction. In association with sickle cell disease, the use of dapsone, snake venom poisoning,
the concomitant use of photodynamic therapy and an intravitreal injection of triamcinolone, an intravitreal injection of ganciclovir and an
intravitreal injection of amikacin, the occurrence of macular infarction has been reported . In a patient with reactive arthritis, who
complained of the decreased visual acuity in both eyes, we experienced a case of macular infarction. Herein, we report our case, with a
review of the literature. A 53-year-old woman visited the Department of Rheumatology with the chief complaint of a 3-day history of fever
and chills and also presented with pain occuring in both knees at the time of the outpatient visit. The patient's past history included no
notable medical and surgical findings. Upon hematology performed following the hospitalization, the parameters were elevated to WBC
14,730/mm2, ESR 55 mm/hr, and CRP 13.29 mg/dL. Such negative results as ANA 1:80 (+), lupus anticoagulant 1.6, and HLA B27 were also
reported. A blood culture test was also negative. Upon ultrasonography, a great amount of the effusion was present within the articular
cavity. A fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the intra-articular cavity showed that the WBC count was increased to 900/mm3. No other abnormal
laboratory findings than these findings were noted. Based on these findings and ruling out other rheumatic diseases, a diagnosis of reactive
arthritis was made. On hospitalization day 3, consultation with the Department of Ophthalmology was requested regarding decreased visual
acuity lasting for 3 days. Upon ophthalmic examination, her corrected visual acuity was 0.1 in her right eye and 0.05 in her left eye.
Intraocular pressure was 12 mmHg in both eyes. Upon slit lamp microscopy, there were no abnormal findings in the anterior segment. Upon
fundus exam, however, there were yellow-white lesions in the macular area of both eyes (Fig. 1). Optical coherence tomography (Stratus OCT;
Carl Zeiss Meditec, Oberkochen, Germany) of both eyes revealed the hyperreflectivity of the inner retina (Fig. 2). Upon fluorescein
angiography, the avascular area of the fovea was markedly enlarged (Fig. 3). Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with macular
infarction in both eyes. Due to a lack of other causative factors, such as other underlying diseases, a past surgical history, a past
history of ophthalmic trauma, and a past history of drug administration, the patient was diagnosed with macular infarction in both eyes
associated with reactive arthritis. After 4 weeks, corrected visual acuity was 0.1 (-1) in her right eye and finger count discrimination
occurred in her left eye. Reactive arthritis is a joint disease associated with HLA-B27, which also occurs in association with GI tract
infections or urogenital tract infections. A cell-mediated immunity is induced by the infectious pathogenic antigens. It has been postulated
that the antigen-specific CD4 T-cells and CD8 T-cells are activated within the articular cavity, and this causes the inflammatory response
within the tissue. It causes the inflammations in such areas as the joints, insertions of tendons, skin, mucosa, GI tract, and eyes. Such
ophthalmic manifestations as conjunctivitis or uveitis have been commonly reported to occur in association with the concurrent presence of
ophthalmic problems . To date, however, there are no cases of macular infarction which has been developed in association with reactive
arthritis. Macular infarction can develop due to these hematological problems. In sickle cell anemia, sickle-shaped RBCs increase the blood
viscosity and thereby can trigger such symptoms as vascular obstruction, ischemia, hypoxia, and tissue necrosis . Snake venom can also cause
tissue necrosis because of the derangement of blood coagulation cascades . By contrast, macular infarction due to dapsone or amikacin occurs
as a result of the drug toxicity itself . In our case, however, there were no causative factors that have previously been reported to be
related to macular infarction. However, one of the causative factors, if any, for macular infarction in this case would be the increased
level of lupus anticoagulant, one of the anti-phospholipid antibodies, among laboratory findings. Based on these laboratory findings, it can
be inferred that this case is associated with anti-phospholipid syndrome. Antiphospholipid syndrome is a disorder characterized by a wide
variety of clinical manifestations. Virtually any organ system or tissue may be affected by the consequences of large- or small-vessel
thrombosis. A broad spectrum of disease exists among individuals with antiphospholipid antibodies . A review of the literature found a
correlation between reactive arthritis and antiphospholipid syndrome . It has also been reported that such ophthalmic manifestations as
ocular ischemic syndrome, anterior ischemic optic neuropathy, central retinal vein occlusion, branched retinal vein occlusion, and retinal
vasculitis have occurred in association with antiphospholipid syndrome . Also, in our case, the serum level of lupus anticogulant was
elevated upon laboratory tests. It is probable that macular infarction occurred due to macular thrombosis, because the increased level of
lupus anticoagulant exacerbated the mechanisms of blood coagulation. However, other than the elevated level of lupus anticoagulant, such
laboratory findings associated with blood coagulation as prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time were all normal. Besides, the
patient had no past history of thrombosis. Therefore, our patient's case could not meet all of the criteria for a diagnosis of
antiphospholipid syndrome. Still, although rare, a greater number of cases will be needed to establish the causal relationship between the
two diseases. This paper has been presented via poster at the 96th Korean Ophthalmologic Society Meeting. No potential conflict of interest
relevant to this article was reported. Yellow-white lesions around fovea are shown in both eyes. Stratus OCT of both eyes revealed the
hyper-reflectivity of the inner retina. Fluorescence angiography showing a marked increase in size of the foveal avascular zone.
