Unlike small inguinal and femoral bladder hernias, massive bladder hernias into the scrotum, also named scrotal cystoceles, are rare. We
describe and discuss the clinical appearance and management of a patient with a micturation related unilateral swelling of the scrotum.
Unlike small inguinal and femoral bladder hernias, massive bladder hernias into the scrotum, also named scrotal cystoceles, are rare. We
describe and discuss the clinical appearance and management of a patient with a micturation related unilateral swelling of the scrotum. A
54-year-old man, without a significant medical history was seen in our outpatient clinic because of an intermittent right-sided scrotal
swelling. At physical examination an apparently healthy, obese man was seen without further abnormalities. An ultrasound of the scrotum was
scheduled for further evaluation. One week later he visited the emergency department with a sudden progression of the scrotal swelling.
History revealed the swelling increased and decreased in size related to micturation, but was progressive for the last couple of days and
caused significant mechanical complaints. Physical examination showed a massive swelling of the right hemiscrotum, which was painful at
palpation. After voiding, however, the swelling dramatically decreased in size. Filling the bladder with normal saline using a transurethral
catheter again resulted in an increased swelling of the scrotum (Fig. 1). Ultrasound of the scrotum and lower abdomen showed herniation of
the bladder into the right hemiscrotum. A computed tomography (CT) scan performed with contrast in the bladder showed a massive fluid
collection in the right hemiscrotum (11.7 × 4.4 cm) in continuity with the bladder through a small hole (1.1 cm) in the groin. These images
revealed that more than 70% of the total volume of the bladder was herniated into the scrotum through the medial canal (Fig. 2). A
laparotomy was performed. A wide external inguinal annulus was seen with bladder herniation into the scrotum (Fig. 3). After preparation and
repositioning, a Lichtenstein mesh repair was performed. The right testicle could be preserved during the procedure. Postoperative outcome
was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the first postoperative day. At the outpatient clinic he presented in good condition
without any complaints.Fig. 1Unilateral scrotal swelling after filling the bladder with salineFig. 2Saggital computed tomography (CT) image
with contrast in the bladder demonstrates bladder herniationFig. 3Hernia sac during operation Unilateral scrotal swelling after filling the
bladder with saline Saggital computed tomography (CT) image with contrast in the bladder demonstrates bladder herniation Hernia sac during
operation The differential diagnosis of a painless unilateral scrotal swelling includes a hydrocele, spermatocele, varicocele (usually left
sided), epididymal cyst, tumour, intestinal or omental hernia. This case report reminds us that if scrotal swelling is not apparent during
examination it can be difficult to identify a scrotal cystocele. Although mostly asymptomatic, larger hernias can cause voiding complaints
related to bladder outlet obstruction and swelling of one side of the scrotum before micturation . Patients frequently describe the need to
manually compress the scrotum to empty the bladder . This is an almost pathognomonic sign of a cystocele. Additional diagnostic tools to
detect this condition are ultrasound, which features further differential diagnosis from other extratesticular cystic abnormalities [3, 4].
CT scan is also described as an important aid in diagnosing and outlining the anatomy of the affected area [5, 6]. Typically this condition
affects obese men over 50 years of age. Pathophysiological causes include decreasing bladder tonus or increasing laxity of the surrounding
tissue in combination with bladder outlet obstruction. Increased abdominal pressure due to obesity is an important factor [1, 7, 8]. If
there is a true hernia of the bladder, patients can have uni- or bilateral hydronefrosis, and renal failure can even occur . Other
complications described are the formation of calculi in the herniated part of the bladder , bladder tumour , urosepsis , vesicocutaneous
fistula and bilateral vesico-ureteral reflux . There are several treatment options, such as repositioning the protruded part of the bladder
into the pelvis, or excising the affected part of the bladder. The latter should be done in case of a diverticula or tumour , but in other
cases the best treatment option remains debatable. With a lower abdominal transverse incision, good exposure of the bladder and the inguinal
area can be obtained at the same time . Different methods of repairing the inguinal floor have been described. In this case report we used a
Lichtenstein procedure, which has been shown to be effective . In summary, when confronted with a case of a painless unilateral scrotal
swelling, include a scrotal cystocele in the differential diagnosis. To identify this condition at physical examination the patient should
be evaluated with and without a full bladder. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial
License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are
credited.
