Pseuodaneurysms are an extremely rare complication of osteochondromas. We describe a case of traumatic pseudoaneurysm of the brachial artery
presenting as a soft tissue mass in a patient who was treated for an osteochondroma 3 years earlier. This case demonstrates that
radiographic follow-up of large osteochondromas is mandatory and that, in patients with soft tissue masses and a history of osteochondroma,
pseudoaneurysms should be included in the differential diagnosis. Osteochondromas are hamartomas derived from an aberrant subperiosteal germ
of the physeal cartilage and grow by normal enchondral ossification . They are the most common benign tumors of bone, accounting
approximately for one third of benign lesions of the skeleton . Nevertheless, as they are usually asymptomatic, the real incidence is
probably higher . Patients usually present during the second decade of life . Malignant transformation has been reported as a very rare
complication, accounting for <1% and occurring after puberty more frequently in the limb girdles [1, 4, 5]. In cases of hereditary multiple
osteochondromas, the risk of sarcomatous change is higher [1, 6, 7]. The radiographic appearance of this tumor is often diagnostic: as a
matter of fact, the continuity of the lesion with the underlying native bone cortex and medullary canal is pathognomonic of osteochondroma.
Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging are useful for identifying and studying complications such as malignant
transformation, bone fracture, vascular compromise, neurologic sequelae, and overlying bursa formation. The thickness of the cartilage cap
is typically 1–3 cm in young patients, whereas in adults, it is often only a few millimeters thick or entirely absent [4, 8–10]. A
continuously growing lesion and a hyaline cartilage cap >1.5-cm thick, after skeletal maturity, suggest malignant transformation. Cortical
bone is devoid of mobile protons and shows low signal intensity in all pulse MR sequences, whereas the medullary component has the
appearance of yellow marrow. MR imaging is the best radiologic modality for visualizing the effect of the lesion on surrounding structures
and evaluating the hyaline cartilage cap. The high water content in nonmineralized portions of the cartilage cap has an intermediate to low
signal intensity on T1-weighted MR images and very high signal intensity on T2-weighted images. These features typically allow accurate
measurement of the cartilage cap thickness and distinction from overlying muscle on MR images [4, 11–13]. Surgical excision is limited to
symptomatic osteochondromas; as a matter of fact, when the tumor is asymptomatic, surgery is not recommended [1, 14]. Indications for
surgical resection are pain, deformity, compression to a neurovascular bundle, continuous growth, and suspected malignant transformation [1,
14, 15]. However, when a child presents with a large osteochondroma close to a neurovascular bundle, surgery is indicated to avoid further
enlargement, which would make surgery more challenging with a higher risk of neurovascular complications. Pseudoaneurysm represents an
extremely rare complication of osteochondroma and typically involves the popliteal and femoral arteries [16, 17]. We present a case of
posttraumatic pseudoaneurysm of the brachial artery occurring after incomplete resection of an osteochondroma and presenting as a soft
tissue mass. A 14-year-old boy referred to our department for a slowly growing, nonpainful swelling in the medial upper right arm that he
had noticed for 8 months. He had undergone partial resection of an osteochondroma in the posterior aspect of the proximal humerus 3 years
earlier. Follow-up was unremarkable. He recalled a blunt trauma in his right upper arm while riding a horse; however, swelling presented
some weeks later and was characterized by a gradual enlargement. An X-ray was performed and showed a large sessile osteochondroma in the
median side of the proximal humerus. An MRI was performed to study the cartilaginous cap of the osteochondroma for malignant transformation
and the soft tissues for a soft tissue tumor. MRI was considered suggestive of a soft tissue tumor, and the patient was referred to our
department. Physical examination demonstrated a firm, nonpulsatile, 8-cm swelling in the medial upper arm that was painless during palpation
(Fig. 1). There were no signs of vascular or neurologic failure. No enlarged lymph nodes were palpable in the axilla. Bone scan revealed
increased uptake at the site of the osteochondroma. MRI performed in our Institute revealed a large, complex mass close to the
osteochondroma and the humeral artery. The nonhomogeneous lamellar structure of the mass on MRI, the hyperintensity on T1-weighted
sequences, and the regularly capsulated aspect of the contours were suggestive of hematoma–thrombosis (Figs. 2a–c, 3a). Due to these
characteristics, the hypothesis of malignant transformation was difficult to asses. The MR angiography facilitated the diagnosis, as it
showed a pseudoaneurysm arising from the compressed brachial artery with extravasation of contrast medium into the mass (Fig 3b).
Angiography confirmed the diagnosis of pseudoaneurysm measuring 35 mm of patent lumen and provided a useful map for surgical planning
(Fig. 3c). On T2-weighted MRI, an aspect of concentric rings was observed due to the presence of thrombus into the pseudoaneurysm that did
not diffusely enhance with contrast material. In this case, the difficulty of recognizing the cartilage cap on T2 sequences because of the
overlying pseudoaneurysm, hyperintensity on fat-suppressed proton density (PD)-weighted sequences, and enhancement of the medulla after
contrast media could not exclude malignant transformation (Fig. 4a– d). Therefore, surgical exploration was mandatory. At operation, a
longitudinal incision was made on the right medial upper arm. The nerve was identified and preserved. The brachial artery was controlled
above and below the pseudoaneurysm with nylon tape (Fig. 5a). The pseudoaneurysm sac was opened and the thrombus removed (Fig. 5b). After
retrograde flow was restored, a 7-cm arterial segment that included the pseudoaneurysmal region was resected, and marginal resection of the
osteochondroma was performed (Fig. 5c, d). Reversed saphenous vein interposition graft was then performed (Fig. 5d). The wound was closed
and a suction drain was left in situ. At the end of the procedure, there were good radial and ulnar pulses palpable. Specimens of the sac
wall and thrombus were negative following histopathological and microbiological examination. Histopathological diagnosis was osteochondroma.
The patient was discharged and followed up in the outpatient clinic. Patient gave consent to the publication of this
report.Fig. 1Preoperative clinical imageFig. 2Axial magnetic resonance image (MRI) T2 (a), T1 (b) and T1 turbo spin echo (TSE) fat-
saturation (c) sequences. The mass has inhomogeneous signal on T2- (a) and T1- (b) weighted sequence, concentric aspect, regular contours
(a, b) and did not diffusely enhance due to the presence of pseudoaneurysm, thrombus, and hematoma (c)Fig. 3Coronal magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) T1 turbo spin echo (TSE) (a), MR angiography (b), and digital angiography (c). MR angiography (b) identifies the
pseudoaneurysm arising from the compressed brachial artery, with extravasation of contrast medium into the mass, well demonstrated also by
the angiography (c)Fig. 4Axial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) T2 (a), proton-density fat saturation (PD fat-sat) (b), T1 turbo spin echo
(TSE) (c), T1-TSE fat-sat (d) sequences of the osteochondroma underlying the pseudoaneurysm. Note hyperintensity of the medulla adjacent to
the lesion on PD sequences (b) and enhancement of the medulla itself after contrast media (arrow) (d)Fig. 5Intraoperative images (a–c). The
brachial artery and the pseudoaneurysm were isolated and the artery was controlled with nylon tapes (a); the pseudoaneurysmal sac was opened
and the thrombus removed (b); a 7-cm arterial segment including the pseudoaneurysm was resected, highlighting the underlying cartilaginous
spur (arrow) of the osteochondroma, which probably caused the pseudoaneurysm (c); the osteochondroma was resected, and a reversed saphenous
vein interposition graft was then performed (d) Preoperative clinical image Axial magnetic resonance image (MRI) T2 (a), T1 (b) and T1 turbo
spin echo (TSE) fat-saturation (c) sequences. The mass has inhomogeneous signal on T2- (a) and T1- (b) weighted sequence, concentric aspect,
regular contours (a, b) and did not diffusely enhance due to the presence of pseudoaneurysm, thrombus, and hematoma (c) Coronal magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) T1 turbo spin echo (TSE) (a), MR angiography (b), and digital angiography (c). MR angiography (b) identifies the
pseudoaneurysm arising from the compressed brachial artery, with extravasation of contrast medium into the mass, well demonstrated also by
the angiography (c) Axial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) T2 (a), proton-density fat saturation (PD fat-sat) (b), T1 turbo spin echo (TSE)
(c), T1-TSE fat-sat (d) sequences of the osteochondroma underlying the pseudoaneurysm. Note hyperintensity of the medulla adjacent to the
lesion on PD sequences (b) and enhancement of the medulla itself after contrast media (arrow) (d) Intraoperative images (a–c). The brachial
artery and the pseudoaneurysm were isolated and the artery was controlled with nylon tapes (a); the pseudoaneurysmal sac was opened and the
thrombus removed (b); a 7-cm arterial segment including the pseudoaneurysm was resected, highlighting the underlying cartilaginous spur
(arrow) of the osteochondroma, which probably caused the pseudoaneurysm (c); the osteochondroma was resected, and a reversed saphenous vein
interposition graft was then performed (d) Pseudoaneurysms are a rare complication of osteochondromas and they are more frequent after the
end of the enchondral ossification phase, when the cartilaginous cap become bony and sharp . A hard swelling is the most common pattern of
clinical presentation . The most frequent site of this complication is the distal femur, whereas the arm is an extremely rare site, with
only a few cases of pseudoaneurysm of the brachial artery reported in the literature . Repair of the arterial injury is seldom possible.
When an end-to-end anastomosis cannot be performed, graft replacement with the autologous saphenous vein or with a synthetic graft is
preferred . As a matter of fact, in our case, the extent of the pseudoaneurysm made the brachial artery non-reparable, and the vascular
surgeon opted for a reconstruction with a saphenous vein graft. The case presented here is quite unusual, but the clinical presentation
reflects the typical case found in the literature: an adolescent male, already treated for a large osteochondroma in an area with high risk
of neurovascular compression, reporting a sport-related injury. The differential diagnosis included malignant transformation and Ewing’s
sarcoma, so we performed contrast-enhanced MRI and angiographic MRI to rule out these diagnoses. MRI is mandatory for evaluating such
atypical masses in children and adolescents . Moreover, malignant transformation is extremely rare in adolescence , and Ewing’s sarcoma
often presents with other signs and symptoms, such as fever, increased serum lactate dehydrogenase and erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
leukocytis, and anemia , which were not present in our patient. Therefore, according to the patient’s history of blunt trauma, to MRI
features, and to the surgical findings of close proximity of the pseudoaneurysm to a cartilaginous spur, the diagnosis was traumatic
pseudoaneurysm caused by an osteochondroma. This case shows how important it is to perform adequate resection of a large osteochondroma
arising in close proximity to neurovascular structures. On the other hand, osteochondromas in adolescence may spontaneously regress or
recur, even after adequate resection, so that a radiographic follow-up is mandatory . In conclusion, we emphasize the importance of correct
treatment and follow-up of large osteochondromas in dangerous regions in order to avoid such complications. We also encourage the orthopedic
oncologist to include pseudoaneurysms in the differential diagnosis of soft tissue masses, especially when there is a history of
osteochondroma resection. None. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which
permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
