Intussusceptions are rare but well-known causes of the small bowel obstruction in adults and an underlying cause is present in the majority
of cases. Lymphoma’s involvement of the ileum is one of the rare causes of intussusception. CT is a sensitive examination that diagnoses
intussusceptions and provides an excellent pre-operative evaluation including possible extension and dissemination especially in intestinal
lymphomas. The treatment is almost always surgical and the pathological study is needed for diagnostic confirmation. Authors present an
unusual case of intestinal intussusception due to lymphoma of the terminal part of the ileum in a 49-year-old man. Computed tomography
confirmed the diagnosis of intussusception and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma of B-cell was diagnosed by histological examination after surgical
treatment. Primary intestinal lymphomas differ from gastric lymphomas in clinical features, treatment, and prognosis. They are not well
characterized and the standardized concepts for their clinical diagnosis and management are absent. The aim of this rare observation is to
shed light on NHL of the small bowel, its clinical and radiological diagnosis and its treatment especially in forms revealed by
intussusceptions in adults. An Intussusception is defined as the telescoping of one segment of the gastrointestinal tract into an adjacent
one. It is a relatively a common entity in childhood in which it is presented as an acute illness. Most cases in childhood occur
idiopathically. In adults, an underlying cause is present in 80% of cases. These causes include malignant process, lipomas and polyps as
well as oedema and fibrosis from recent or previous surgery. Authors present an unusual case of intestinal intussusception due to a primary
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) of B-cell of the terminal part of ileum. The primary ileal localization of NHL is rare, it occurs 23 to 30% of
gastrointestinal lymphomas and approximately 5% of peripheral NHL . It differs from gastric lymphomas in clinical features, treatment, and
prognosis. Although substantial progress has been achieved in the diagnosis and treatment of gastric lymphomas in recent years [2, 3]
primary intestinal lymphomas are not well characterized, and standardized concepts for their clinical diagnosis and management are absent.
The aim of this observation is to shed light on NHL of the small bowel, its clinical and radiological diagnosis and its treatment especially
in forms revealed by intussusceptions in adults. A forty-nine year old Moroccan patient with a medical history of repeated abdominal
cramping pain especially in the right iliac fossa and a constipation of 1 year’s duration, was presented to the emergency department because
of a three days history of incomplete intestinal obstruction with an acute abdominal pain cramp-like localized in the right iliac fossa with
no particular radiation and no aggravating factor. He had no fever, no vomiting and no bleeding. The patient was not using any specific
medication. His medical history did not suggest any major disease, as well. He had no prior history of abdominal surgery or trauma. The
physical examination revealed a conscious man whose temperature was 37°C, a pulse rate 90 beat per minute (bpm), a blood pressure 120/70 mm
Hg. The abdominal examination revealed tenderness with a large not reducible mobile mass measuring approximately 12cm in the right iliac
fossa. There was no liver enlargement and no splenomegaly or lyphadenopathy. A rectal examination showed no stool. Vital signs and the
remaining of the physical examination were normal. Initial management of the patient involved intravenous fluid resuscitation, nasogastric
tube insertion, routine bloods, supine chest and abdominal x-rays. Laboratory data revealed a hematocrit of 31%, hemoglobin of 10,6g/dl,
white blood cells of 10100 elements/mm3, a blood urea of 0, 25 g/L, and a creatinine level of 10 mg/L. Coagulation, lipase, and Liver
enzymes laboratory data were normal. A chest radiograph showed clear lung fields. A supine abdominal x-ray revealed multiple dilated small-
bowel loops with air-fluid levels, but with no free air. Ultrasonography (US) of the abdomen revealed a typical image of an intussusception
in the right iliac fossa with dilated small bowel loops and no free intra-abdominal fluid. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) confirmed
results of US and concluded to an ileocaecal intussusception (Figure 1). Based on the imaging findings, we made a decision to perform a
laparotomy. During the surgical exploration, the peritoneal cavity was filled with 200cc of blood-stained serous fluid while numerous
dilated loops of small bowel were present. There was an ileo-colic intussusception of 14 cm in length realizing a large mass of the right
iliac fossa. There was no mesenteric adenopathies. CT with Intravenous contrast material, showed a round mass lesion of soft tissue with
fatty tissue within it in the right iliac fossa. This soft tissue strands within the fat represent mesenteric blood vessels within the
invaginated mesenteric fat. Some dilatation of the small bowel is also seen An ileo-coecal enbloc resection was performed with continuity
restored by ileo-colic end-to-end anastomosis (Figure 2). The specimen examination revealed a tumor of the terminal part of ileum with no
mesenteric adenopathies. No complications occurred and the patient was discharged on the fifth day postoperatively. Specimen of the ileo-
ceacal resection Histological examination of the specimen demonstrated non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma of the diffuse large B-cell type ( B-Cell NHL)
which has a uniform, round-to-oval nuclei with vesicular chromatin and one or multiple conspicuous nucleoli (Figure 3). Histological
examination demonstrating non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma of the diffuse large B-cell type, which has uniform, round-to-oval nuclei with vesicular
chromatin and one or multiple conspicuous nucleoli (×200). Cells were positive for B-cell marker (CD20 +) at the immunohistochemical study
(Figure 4). The disease was staged as primary ileal Stage 1 disease according to the Ann-Arbor classification. A postoperative chemotherapy
(CHOP-R) stands for cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin (Adriamycin), Oncovin (vincristine), and prednisolone combined with the monoclonal
antibody rituximab was recommended but refused by the patient. Photomicrograph showing cells positive for B-cell marker (CD20+) at the
immunohistochemical study (×200) Intussusception is a rare disease in adults when compared with children; one case of adult intussusception
for every 20 childhood ones . In infants, intussusceptions are primitive in the majority of cases ; however, in adults, an organic lesion is
found in 80% of cases mostly in the benign and malignant disease in the ileum and the colon. These organic lesions are represented by the
Gastro intestinal stromal tumors (GIST), lipomas, polyps or adenopathies especially in the ileocaecal localization. More rare are
intussusceptions caused by lymphoma’s involvement of the ileum. Few cases were reported in the literature . Small bowel lymphomas are rare
due to several reasons ; however, the incidence of this disease has been rising in recent years particularly among immunocompromised
patients [8, 9]. Associations of small bowel B-cell lymphomas with post-transplantation, inflammatory bowel disease and some
immunodeficiency syndromes have been reported [10, 11]. Nevertheless, one of the particularities of our case is that the medical history of
our patient did not suggest any one of these diseases or syndromes. Intestinal T-cell non Hodgkin’s lymphomas (T-Cell NHL) have been
described as often multifocal and most frequently localized in the jejunum or proximal ileum. Many cases of association of intestinal T-Cell
NHL to the celiac disease have been reported . The primary follicular lymphoma of the small intestine is a distinct entity that originates
from local antigen-responsive B cells whereas little is known about the pathogenesis of primary small bowel lymphoma. A wide range of
clinical presentations can occur for primary small bowel non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma including non-specific abdominal pain, ileus and weight
loss. Diarrhea and fever are present in approximately one third of patients with T-Cell NHL but are rare in patients with B-Cell NHL .
Abdominal palpable mass is found in only 15% of cases . Acute surgical conditions, such as perforation, bleeding and obstruction especially
intussusseption -which is the case of our patient-are initial complications which can be the revealing mode of the small bowel lymphomas.
These initial complications occurred up to 70% of cases in recent prospective studies; the predominant complications in patients with B-Cell
NHL and T-Cell NHL were intestinal obstruction and perforation, respectively . Concerning the intestinal intussusceptions, it is defined by
the telescoping and penetration of an intestinal segment in the downstream segment. Its evolutionary mode is usually sub-acute or chronic.
Anatomically, in adults and regardless of the cause, the ileum is regarded as a preferential area of intussusceptions. The colo-colic
intussusceptions present only 27% of cases and the colorectal forms are more rare . The hyperperistaltism result from the presence of a
pedunculated or non-pedunculated mass acted on an intestinal segment. Hyperperistaltism would be triggered by neurovegetatif reflexes and
would be responsible for the formation of the width of intussusception which is the anatomicofunctional condition for the establishment of
intussusceptions [15, 16]. Radiological diagnosis of intussusception especially the ileo-ceocal one caused by lymphoma can be suspected in
ultra sonography (US) which can show a typical image of intussuception, but the computed tomography (CT) appearance of it is characteristic.
It helps diagnose obstructive syndrome, its mechanism, the presence of the intussusception, its precise location and show its causes. It can
also detect the organic cause in 71% of cases . The most common finding in CT is a thickened segment of bowel with an eccentrically placed
crescent-like fatty area, representing the intussusception and the intussuscepted mesentery. They appear either as a round target mass or as
an oblong sausage shaped mass. Another common finding is a rim-shaped accumulation of contrast material in the periphery of the mass. In
addition, air bubbles in the uppermost part of the intussusception can be observed in some cases .The role of CT is more important in cases
of suspected abdominal lymphoma and polyps. It can objective a thickening of the wall associated with digestive adenopathies in lymphoma or
a tissue density in the event of polyp. Appropriate management of primary small bowel lymphoma is, therefore, still under discussion. One
aspect of this discussion is that the surgical approach is necessary. Another aspect is that surgery is necessary but in combination with
chemotherapy. According to few cases and to the absence of randomized trials in primary small bowel lymphoma, the optimal treatment strategy
is not known . However, the treatment of intussusceptions is always surgical and the resection may be necessary to some extent . If
contraindications of laparoscopy are not present, laparoscopic resection can be performed safely and should be considered for diagnosis and
treatment for intussusception in ileoceacal lesions in adults. The most important rule in treatment is the avoidance of tumor emboli spread
during manipulation . If the primary small bowel lymphoma is diagnosed before or at laparotomy, surgical resection should be preferred in
order to limit the risk of serious complications, such as perforation, bleeding and obstruction. In early-stage patients, complete resection
surgery is more advantageous in some reports . After the surgery, not only can the histological diagnosis of the lymphomas be established
but also accurate staging can be made. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy have been used either alone or in combination with surgery . Some other
studies do not support the need for radiotherapy in intestinal B-cell lymphoma patients . The results have not been evaluated adequately and
the efficacy of these procedures is not known yet. Treatment strategies for primary small bowel lymphoma have been established but the
debate about them persists . However Radical tumor resectability had a highly significant effect on survival. In addition surgery in
combination with chemotherapy was superior to any other treatment combination in localized disease and in disseminated cases .
Unfortunately, our patient refused post operative chemotherapy. In small case series, few retrospective studies of small bowel lymphomas
have been reported. In recent years some progress has been achieved in the diagnosis and treatment of gastric lymphomas, but the primary
small bowel lymphomas are not well characterized and there is little information on their clinical diagnosis and management. However the
treatment of ileal NHL revealed by intussusceptions in adults should always be surgical but preferably in combination with chemotherapy. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed consent was obtained for publication of this case report and
accompanying images. KIM is a surgeon who was drafting the manuscript and revising it critically for content. HE, AA and AO were involved in
literature research and were major contributors in writing the manuscript. KM, KA were surgeons treating of the patient and were involved in
revising the draft critically for content. MB and ST realized US and interpreted CT of the patient. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
