Foreign bodies in the appendix are a rare but well described clinical entity and may cause perforation. Presented here is the case of a 13yr
old Ugandan boy who had features of acute appendicitis, was sent for appendicectomy and during the operation was found to have perforation
of the appendix due to a seed. The boy was treated with broad spectrum antibiotics and made an uneventful recovery. Foreign bodies in the
appendix are well recognised but rarely found. The author is not aware of any other reported cases of a foreign body causing perforation of
the appendix in a child in Africa. Presented here is the case of a 13yr old Ugandan boy with abdominal pain who was found to have a
perforated appendix with a seed sitting in the perforation. A 13 years old male presented to hospital with intermittent abdominal pains for
one month associated with watery diarrhoea and mild fever. He had recently taken a course of albendazole. Examination revealed mild
tenderness in the right iliac fossa (RIF) and right upper abdomen. A stool sample was negative for parasites and oocysts. It was thought
that he was having acute appendicitis and was admitted to the surgical ward. He was treated with oral metronidazole and ciprofloxacin but
after two days his symptoms improved and he was discharged home. Eighteen days later he re-attended surgical clinic complaining of right
sided abdominal pain. Again he was tender in the RIF but there was no guarding or signs of peritonism. He was readmitted to the surgical
ward and again put on oral metronidazole and ciprofloxacin. His Hb was 8.6g/dl. Three days after admission the patient was sent for
appendicectomy. On the day of the operation his abdomen was soft with mild RIF tenderness and active bowel sounds. There were no features of
peritonism. The appendix was located via a grid iron incision and was found to be laying retrocaecally. It was inflamed with a distal
perforation and an oval shaped, 13x8 mm seed was seen to be partially protruding from the perforation (Figure 1). No pus was seen in the
abdomen. Peritoneal lavage was performed with warmed 0.9% saline. The patient was put on X-Pen and gentamicin 160 mg with IV fluids. The
patient made an uneventful recovery and was discharged home three days post-op in a stable condition. The patient didn’t recognise the seed
nor could he recall eating it. The seed was sent to Makerere University and the photograph showed to local people but it was not able to be
identified. The perforated appendix and seed Abdominal pain in children is a common problem seen by doctors all over the world. Pain in the
abdomen has a broad differential diagnosis encompassing relatively benign conditions such as urinary tract infection or constipation to life
threatening emergencies such abdominal perforation . Appendicitis is the most commonly performed emergency abdominal surgery and the leading
cause of acute paediatric surgical admission yet determining which patients have appendicitis is difficult . Various scoring systems based
on clinical signs have been shown to be of use in identifying patients at high risk of appendicitis . Foreign bodies in the appendix are
very uncommon with one study showing a frequency of 0.005% in 13,228 patients . The literature has described many causes of foreign bodies
in the appendix such as seeds, needles, tongue studs, parasitic worms, bullets and dental drill pieces . Long, thin, sharp and pointed items
are thought to be most likely to cause perforation after ingestion whilst seeds are thought to present a medium risk of perforation .
Appendicitis can even occur after appendicectomy, a phenomenon known as ‘stump appendicitis’ so surgeons still need to consider a diagnosis
of appendicitis in patients who have had their appendix removed . Acute appendicitis is a surgical emergency and delay in performing
appendicectomy increases the risk of perforation. Perforation of the appendix due to a foreign body can occur without classical signs and
symptoms of perforation. Surgeons all over the world should be aware of the potential operative findings of a foreign body and be able to
deal with them appropriately. The patient and his family gave consent for the article to be written. The author declared they have no
competing interests.
