A 14-year-old girl presenting with visual loss in both eyes was diagnosed to have healed toxoplasma retinochoroiditis in the right eye with
active choroidal neovascularization (CNV) secondary to toxoplasmosis in the left. She underwent combination photodynamic therapy (PDT) and
intravitreal bevacizumab as primary treatment. PDT was performed as per the ‘Treatment of Age-related Macular Degeneration by Photodynamic
therapy’ study protocol and was followed by intravitreal bevacizumab after 2 days. CNV regressed at 8 weeks of follow-up and remained stable
at 8 months of follow-up. The initial visual acuity improved from 20/120 to 20/30. Combination therapy with PDT and intravitreal bevacizumab
appears to be effective in the treatment of CNV secondary to toxoplasma retinochoroiditis. Ocular toxoplasmosis is an important cause of
choroidal neovascularization (CNV) in the pediatric age group. The development of CNV adjacent to retinochoroidal scars is a well-known late
complication contributing to loss of useful vision due to foveal involvement. Treatment modalities for CNV secondary to toxoplasma
retinochoroiditis include laser photocoagulation, submacular surgery, photodynamic therapy (PDT) and anti-vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) agents. We report a case of CNV secondary to ocular toxoplasmosis treated with a combination of verteporfin–PDT and intravitreal
bevacizumab. Combination therapy for CNV secondary to toxoplasmosis has not been reported in the past. A 14-year-old girl presented with a
1-year history of deterioration of vision in both eyes. There were no significant ocular problems in the past. Medical and family history
and systemic examination were unremarkable. On ocular examination, her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) at presentation was CF 1 mt, N36
in the right eye and 20/120, N18 in the left eye. Biomicroscopic examination did not show any evidence of intra-ocular inflammation and the
anterior segment was unremarkable in both eyes. Fundus evaluation of the right eye showed the presence of a punched-out pigmented lesion
with well-demarcated borders at the macula that was suggestive of a healed toxoplasma lesion [Fig. 1A]. Clinical findings were confirmed on
fluorescein angiography [Fig. 1B] and Optical coherence tomography [Fig. 1C]. Left eye examination not only showed a punched-out pigmented
lesion at the macula but also a choroidal neovascular membrane with adjacent subretinal fluid and hemorrhage just medial to the pigmented
scar [Fig. 2A]. At presentation, right eye color fundus photograph (A) reveals a punched-out pigmented lesion with well-demarcated borders
at the macula suggestive of a healed toxoplasma scar. Fluorescein angiography (B) reveals staining of the retinal scar. Optical coherence
tomography reveals retinal atrophy corresponding to the lesion (C) At presentation, left eye color fundus photograph (A) reveals a pigmented
lesion at the macula along with a choroidal neovascular membrane, adjacent subretinal hemorrhage and fluid medial to the pigmented scar.
Fluorescein angiography (B, C) reveals an active, subfoveal classic choroidal neovascular membrane with profuse leakage. Blocked choroidal
fluorescence due to the overlying hemorrhage is also noted. Optical coherence tomography reveals subfoveal choroidal neovascular membrane
and subretinal fluid adjacent to a subretinal scar The clinical findings were confirmed on fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) and optical
coherence tomography (OCT). The FFA of the left eye revealed an active subfoveal classic choroidal neovascular membrane with profuse
leakage. Blocked choroidal fluorescence due to the overlying hemorrhage was also noted [Fig. 2B]. OCT revealed subfoveal choroidal
neovascular membrane (CNVM) and subretinal fluid adjacent to a subretinal scar [Fig. 2C]. The routine hemogram, kidney function tests and
liver function tests were within the normal range. Mantoux test was negative and chest X-ray was normal. The anti-toxoplasma IgM titer was
negative; IgG titer was however equivocal. A diagnosis of healed toxoplasma retinochoroiditis in the right eye and subfoveal CNVM secondary
to toxoplasma retinochoroiditis in the left eye was arrived at. The nature of the disease and treatment options were explained. The patient
underwent verteporfin-PDT as per the ‘Treatment of Age-related Macular Degeneration by Photodynamic therapy’ protocol. This was followed by
an intravitreal injection of bevacizumab (1.25 mg/0.05 ml) after 2 days. At 8 weeks follow-up, the CNV showed regression with no evidence of
subretinal fluid or hemorrhage on clinical examination or OCT. The BCVA improved to 20/30, N6 and the fundus remained stable up to the
eighth month of follow-up [Fig. 3]. No adverse ocular or systemic event related to the treatment procedure was encountered. At 8 months of
follow-up, color fundus photograph (A) reveals a regressed choroidal neovascular membrane. Optical coherence tomography reveals (B) a high
reflective subfoveal scar The natural history of CNV secondary to toxoplasmosis reveals a poor visual prognosis. The CNV originates adjacent
to the retinochoroidal scars and leads to central visual loss due to foveal involvement. The different treatment modalities described for
CNV secondary to toxoplasmosis in children include laser photocoagulation, submacular surgery, PDT and anti-VEGF agents. Laser
photocoagulation is no longer preferred as it results in a permanent scotoma. Uemura et al. assessed the efficacy of surgical removal of
membranes in a series of 14 children with subfoveal CNV of which one was secondary to toxoplasmosis. The initial visual acuity of 20/100 in
this patient improved to a final visual acuity of 20/20 at 27 months follow-up. The favorable outcome is attributed to the solitary
subretinal site of ingrowth that is easily amenable to surgery. However, surgery can have its own complications and does not prevent
recurrences. The use of verteporfin–PDT, although initially used for the treatment of age-related macular degeneration and myopic CNV, has
now been extended beyond these indications to inflammatory and infectious etiologies. Mauget Faysse et al. have found verteporfin–PDT to be
efficacious for subfoveal CNV associated with toxoplasma retinochoroiditis. In their study of eight patients, the mean visual acuity
improved from 20/225 to 20/123 during a mean follow-up period of 25 months. Ben Yahia et al. recently reported the resolution of two CNVMs
secondary to toxoplasma retinochoroiditis following administration of a single intravitreal injection of bevacizumab as primary treatment or
as rescue treatment following unsuccessful PDT. There is however no report of any patient with CNV secondary to toxoplasmosis who has been
managed with combination PDT and intravitreal bevacizumab as a primary treatment. The combined regime is postulated to have a beneficial
synergistic effect that could reduce the need for repeated injections. Combination therapy using PDT and bevacizumab as the first-line
management in such cases could be a viable option. Larger studies with longer follow-up may reveal that visual outcome with combination
therapy could be better than PDT alone.
