Sirs: Cardiac tumors are rare in children. Prevalence varies between 0.0017 and 0.027% in autopsy studies . Approximately, 90% of the
pediatric primary cardiac tumors are benign. Rhabdomyomas are the most common subtype accounting for about 60% while hemangiomas are rare
with about 5% . Diagnosis in the neonatal age group may be difficult because of nonspecific symptoms such as murmur, dysrhythmia, hypoxia,
or congestive heart failure. Transthoracic echocardiography is the most important diagnostic tool allowing rapid diagnosis and assessment
for the need for surgical intervention. A male infant was born at 36 + 6 weeks of gestation after an uneventful pregnancy by caesarean
section because of pathologic cardiotokography. He was noted to have cyanosis, tachypnea, and signs of poor perfusion in the first hour of
life. On chest radiograph, an enlarged heart with a prominent right atrium was evident (Fig. 1). Echocardiography revealed a large mass in
the right atrium adhering in large parts to the atrial wall causing severe inflow obstruction to the tricuspid valve (Fig. 2). Low cardiac
output and metabolic acidosis were resistant to fluid supplementation. Emergent cardiac surgery was performed using cardiopulmonary bypass.
The tumor could be removed in toto by peeling it off the atrial wall. Surgical reconstruction of the dilated atrium was performed. The tumor
had an extension of 4.5 × 3.5 × 2.8 cm. Histologically, it consisted mostly of blood, lined by a thin strip of tissue that was diagnosed as
benign cavernous hemangioma.Fig. 1Initial radiograph demonstrating an enlarged heart with a prominent right atrium without signs of
pulmonary congestionFig. 22-D echocardiogram, subxiphoidal view, showing a large tumor in the dilated right atrium attached to the atrial-
free-wall with inflow obstruction to the tricuspid valve. LA left atrium, LV left ventricle, RV right ventricle, T tumor Initial radiograph
demonstrating an enlarged heart with a prominent right atrium without signs of pulmonary congestion 2-D echocardiogram, subxiphoidal view,
showing a large tumor in the dilated right atrium attached to the atrial-free-wall with inflow obstruction to the tricuspid valve. LA left
atrium, LV left ventricle, RV right ventricle, T tumor The postoperative course was complicated by a multifocal atrial tachycardia resulting
in a ventricular heart rate of 270–290/min refractory to medical treatment and cardioversion. Because of severe hemodynamic compromise
extracorporal membrane oxygenation support was required for 5 days, until sufficient heart rate control could be achieved by amiodarone and
overdrive pacing. Cardiac function and rhythm normalised in the following weeks. The patient was discharged home without residual
arrhythmias and normal cardiac function. Until now, there are no signs of relapse or hemangiomas in other locations. Hemangiomas are a known
but rare entity of primary cardiac tumors in childhood . There are reports of tumors diagnosed prenatally in screening ultrasound
examinations . Pregnancy in our patient had been unremarkable. Retrospectively, the pathologic cardiotokography just before birth may have
been the first sign of hemodynamic compromise in this patient. It is likely that an initially rather small hemangioma ruptured just before
birth resulting in a rapid expansion of the tumor, as it was filled with blood, that subsequently caused the significant inflow obstruction
to the tricuspid valve. Immediate surgical intervention was necessary due to imminent low output failure of the right heart. The tumor was
peeled off the atrial wall causing a large area of endothelial and myocardial trauma. The intractable atrial arrhythmia that developed
postoperatively was probably caused by this necessary procedure. Arrhythmias due to right atrial surgery are a known but often unavoidable
complication. This tachycardia required initial extracorporal membrane oxygenation support . Subsequently, it could be controlled by
amiodarone and overdrive pacing, and finally it resolved completely after 2 months. As in all patient described so far, there are no signs
of recurrence of the hemangioma in our patient up to date. This case report describes a hemangioma as a rare cause of a neonatal
intracardiac tumor. In this patient, the large atrial mass resulted in severe inflow obstruction to the tricuspid valve requiring emergent
surgical relief. The postoperative course was complicated by rapid atrial arrhythmias probably due to large atrial endothelial and
myocardial trauma. No grants or other financial support was received for this work. Conflict of interest No conflict of interest exists for
any of the authors. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which
permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
