We report a 29 week-gestation preterm infant who presented during his second week of life with cardiogenic shock. Clinical presentation and
first diagnostics suggested myocardial infarction, but echocardiographic features during follow-up pointed to a diagnosis of enteroviral
myocarditis. The child died of chronic heart failure at 9 months of age. Autopsy showed passed myocardial infarction. No signs for active
myocarditis were found. We discuss the difficulties in differentiating between neonatal myocardial infarction and myocarditis. Recognizing
enteroviral myocarditis as cause for cardiogenic shock is of importance because of the therapeutic options. Neonatal myocardial infarction
(MI) is a rare occurrence and mostly associated with congenital heart disease, abnormal coronary arteries, or thromboembolic events. We
present a preterm neonate with cardiac failure due to myocardial ischemia. Diagnostic findings suggested enteroviral myocarditis as the
precipitating condition. We discuss the differentiation and possible association between neonatal MI and myocarditis, referring to several
medical databases (Cochrane, Sumsearch, Trip, and Pubmed). Baby A. was born preterm at 29 + 3 weeks’ gestation by spontaneous vaginal
delivery after an uncomplicated pregnancy to a healthy 33-year-old G2P1 mother. His birth weight was 1650 g (90th percentile). He required
ventilatory support and surfactant for infant respiratory distress syndrome. An umbilical artery catheter was in site for a couple of days
to monitoring blood pressure, and no umbilical venous catheter was inserted during admission. The further course was uneventful, and on day
8 he was transferred to a local hospital. Within 1 day, patient was readmitted to our neonatal intensive care unit because of suspected
septicaemia and cardiac arrhythmias. He exhibited alternating tachycardia and bradycardia with a mean blood pressure of 33 mm Hg, weak
peripheral pulses, and prolonged capillary refill. He showed mild respiratory distress, grunting, and oxygen saturation of 90% in room air.
There was no heart murmur; the lungs were clear on auscultation; and the abdomen was soft without hepatosplenomegaly. Circulatory support
was given by intravenous fluids. Antibiotics were started for suspected septicaemia. Blood cultures remained negative, but rectal and sputum
cultures were positive for Coxsackie B III virus. Chest X-ray showed no significant abnormalities. An electrocardiogram revealed ST-
depression in right precordial leads and aVR, and ST elevation in I and II (Fig. 1) Laboratory data showed increased cardiac enzymes
consistent with myocardial damage (Table 1). Echocardiography revealed left-ventricular dysfunction with a severely hypokinetic
posterolateral wall, a hyperkinetic septum, and some pericardial effusion. Abnormal coronary anatomy as cause of MI was excluded. No sources
for thromboemboli were found by echography, and clotting studies showed no abnormalities.Fig. 1ECG in baby A at first
presentationTable 1Serial cardiac enzymes in baby AEnzymeEnzyme levelNormalt = 0 (onset)t = 12 ht = 24 ht = 48 ht = 240 hCK
(U/l)134518261322667340–200CK-MB (U/l)225318186118190As % of CK1717141855<4LDH (U/l)975131013671127331<250ASAT
(U/l)22333532120518<40Troponine-T (μg/l)4.846.528.074.060.5<0.03 ECG in baby A at first presentation Serial cardiac enzymes in baby A
Respiratory distress increased, and mechanical ventilation was instituted. Circulatory support consisted of inotropics, diuretic therapy,
and milrinone, which was later switched to captopril. The course was complicated by necrotizing enterocolitis, which was managed with
antibiotics and parental nutrition. After 11 weeks of hospitalization, the patient was discharged home, still requiring nasogastric tube
feeding and medication for chronic heart failure (diuretics, beta blocker, ACE inhibitor). During the following months, echocardiographic
follow-up showed a persisting pattern of decreased left-ventricular function with increased right ventricle pressure. No compensatory
hypertrophy of noninfarcted regions was seen. Instead, global impairment of ventricular function was found, suggesting post–myocarditis
cardiomyopathy rather than remodeling after myocardial infarction. Within 5 months, progressive left-ventricle dilatation became apparent
together with suprasystemic pressure in the right ventricle. We attempted to evaluate the patient for possible heart transplantation. During
this admission, heart function deteriorated, and at the age of 9 months he died from progressive and medication-resistant heart failure.
Autopsy revealed increased heart weight (80 g [expected weight for length = 42 g]). At autopsy, intracardiac anatomy was normal as was the
origin and anatomy of the coronary arteries. The lumen of the coronary arteries was patent. Microscopy of the coronary arteries showed focal
intima hyperplasia, a universal response of blood vessels to injury. Furthermore, microscopy showed global subendocardial fibroelastosis
with scar tissue in the lateral wall of the left ventricle, including the papillary muscles, associated with loss of myocytes and
hypertrophy of residual myocytes (Figs. 2, 3). There were no signs of active myocarditis. The wall of the right ventricle was thickened, and
the pulmonary trunk was dilated. Microscopy of both lungs demonstrated alveolar and septal hemorrhage as well as hemosiderophages as a sign
of long-standing venous congestion due to left-ventricular failure. (Fig. 3). Signs of (primary) pulmonary arterial hypertension were not
present.Fig. 2Fibrosis in the postlateral wall of dilated left ventricle with hypertrophy of right ventricle and septumFig. 3Left panel
Postlateral wall of the left ventricle with scar tissue (blue) and residual myocytes (Masson staining ). Right panel Lung with alveolar and
septal hemosiderophages (blue), consistent with venous congestion (Prussian Blue staining ) Fibrosis in the postlateral wall of dilated left
ventricle with hypertrophy of right ventricle and septum Left panel Postlateral wall of the left ventricle with scar tissue (blue) and
residual myocytes (Masson staining ). Right panel Lung with alveolar and septal hemosiderophages (blue), consistent with venous congestion
(Prussian Blue staining ) Baby A. was readmitted with the clinical presentation of cardiac shock and arrhythmias. Myocardial infarction was
diagnosed based on the acute onset of symptoms and the results of laboratory tests, electrocardiography (ECG), and echocardiography. Yet
findings at follow-up echocardiography suggested myocarditis. We will discuss possible association, diagnostics, therapy, and prognosis of
both disorders. MI in neonates is rare but has been described in cases of congenital heart disease, abnormal coronary arteries,
thromboembolic events, and perinatal asphyxia (Table 2). Furthermore, several cases of neonatal MI in the presence of enteroviral
myocarditis have been reported (Table 3). Association might be coincidental because enteroviral infections are common, and the course often
subclinical. However, enteroviral myocarditis might mimic MI by producing similar diagnostic findings . Otherwise, myocarditis might
precipitate MI in susceptible subjects. Postulated mechanisms include coronary thrombosis, coronary artery spasm, coronary artery embolism,
and large-vessel and microvascular coronary arteritis [9, 15]. In a case of neonatal enteroviral myocarditis, occlusion of the left
circumflex coronary artery was found by cardiac catheterization . Another case report of neonatal myocarditis shows a fixed perfusion defect
of the myocardium on technetium-99 scan . Finally, an autopsy in a young woman who died from myocarditis showed thrombotic occlusion of a
coronary artery and MI in its vascular territory . These findings support the theory that MI might present as a complication of enteroviral
myocarditis.Table 2Previous case reports of neonatal MIProven MIMI suggested by laboratory, ECG, and echocadiogram
findingsInvestigatorDiagnosisOutcomeInvestigatorDiagnosisOutcomeFerns ThrombusSurvivedFerns 3× unclear3× survivedTakeuchi ThrombusDiedSaker
UnclearSurvivedMurugan ThrombusDiedTometzki UnclearSurvivedTilett ThrombusDiedHruda UnclearSurvivedAbdurrahman ThrombusDiedBoulton
UnclearSurvivedLucas ThrombusDiedBaldew UnclearSurvivedBoulton ThrombusSurvivedKilbride UnclearSurvivedBernstein ThrombusDiedFagan
UnclearSurvivedSandhyamani 4× asphyxia4× diedKilbride AsphyxiaDiedSapire ThrombusDiedIannone AsphyxiaDiedFletcher ThrombusDiedBerry
ThrombusDiedArthur [3 ]ThrombusDiedVan der Hauwert ThrombusDiedGault AsphyxiaDiedSubtotal18/20 died0/10 diedTotal18/30 diedTable 3Previous
case reports of neonatal myocarditisInvestigatorDiagnosisOutcomeMI suggested?Nathan EnterovirusSurvivedNoInwald 7× enterovirus4×
survivedNo3× diedMurugan EnterovirusSurvivedYesHornung EnterovirusSurvivedYesHu Coxsackie B virusSurvivedYesGarel Coxsackie B
virusSurvivedYesLehoullier Coxsackie B virusSurvivedYesTotal3/13 died5 suggested MI Previous case reports of neonatal MI Previous case
reports of neonatal myocarditis Clinical presentation and diagnostic findings of neonatal MI and myocarditis are similar. Clinical
presentation of cardiac dysfunction in a neonate is nonspecific and includes poor feeding, dyspnoea, and shock. Findings highly associated
with cardiac disease are cyanosis, hypotension, friction rub, and arrhythmia. Reich et al. . described ECG criteria that can be used for
diagnosing MI in children (Table 4). However, similar ECG abnormalities may occur in myocarditis [15, 21]. Increased cardiac enzymes are
indicative for myocardial damage but occur in MI as well as in myocarditis [15, 21]. ECG is important in ruling out congenital heart disease
and abnormalities of the coronary arteries. Regional wall-motion abnormalities can indicate local myocardial ischemia, but they have been
described in myocarditis as well [13, 21]. Follow-up echocardiography will show thin, fibrotic myocardium caused by infarction with
compensatory hypertrophy in the noninfarcted regions. More global abnormalities are found in myocarditis. However, these differences in
remodeling can only be observed during the course of several months.Table 4ECG findings significant for MI in childrenWide Q waves
(>35 m s): particularly in I, aVL, V5, and V6 but any lead other than aVRST segment changes >2 mm: elevation in any lead, especially in the
presence of reciprocal changes and ST depression in V1–V3Ventricular arrhythmias calculated as QTc > 0.48 ECG findings significant for MI in
children Additional diagnostics are restricted. Endomyocardial biopsy remains the “gold standard” for diagnosing myocarditis and will show
inflammatory infiltrate in direct association with myocyte necrosis. Its use in infants is uncommon because it is an invasive procedure, and
false-negative results are possible when inflammation is focal or patchy . Coronary catheterisation or perfusion scan to detect coronary
occlusion are not suitable for preterm or low–birth-weight infants. The same applies for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) under narcosis,
which can be used in myocarditis, which will show increased cardiac signal and enhancement of contrast in the myocardium . In our patient,
no abnormal anatomy of heart or coronary arteries, nor signs of thromboembolic events, were found as the cause for MI. Positive rectal and
sputum cultures for Coxsackie B virus and findings at follow-up echocardiography suggest myocarditis as the precipitating condition.
Additional diagnostic tools (MRI, coronary catheterization, perfusion scan) could not be performed at the onset of symptoms because of
prematurity and low birth weight of the child. Unfortunately, additional diagnostic procedures were again not considered during follow-up.
At autopsy, regional pattern of scarring was consistent with MI. No signs of active myocarditis were found. The presence of subendocardial
elastosis might be suggestive of past viral myocarditis . The signs for (venous) pulmonary hypertension found at autopsy are consistent with
longstanding left-ventricular failure. Recognizing the cause for cardiac dysfunction is important to optimize therapy. Aggressive cardiac
support seems to be life saving and can be given by pharmacotherapy (antiarrhythmics, diuretics, inotropes, afterload-decreasing agents) and
extracorporal membrane oxygenation. Other supportive measures include pain relief, oxygen therapy, and parenteral feeding to protect the
ischemic gut. In contrast to possible therapeutic interventions in adult MI (thrombolysis, percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty),
few options exist for neonatal MI. Thrombolysis was performed in two case reports of neonatal MI, but both attempts were unsuccessful, and
the patients died [1, 32]. Review of previous case reports of neonatal MI show that mortality is high, especially when caused by a
thromboembolic event. However, this statement should be interpreted with caution because diagnosis is almost always determined by autopsy.
Prognosis of myocarditis appears to be better, but dilated cardiomyopathy is a common complication. When enteroviral myocarditis is
suspected, few therapeutic options are available in the acute phase of presentation. Immunoglobulin infusions might improve the outcome of
enteroviral disease in neonates, but evidence is lacking . Antiviral therapy with pleconaril (preventing exposure of viral RNA) should be
considered but currently remains an experimental therapy . We presented a preterm infant who suffered of neonatal myocardial infarction
possibly precipitated by enteroviral myocarditis. It remains uncertain whether these two disorders are truly related to each other. An
overlap in clinical presentation and restrictions in additional diagnostics in neonates makes it hard to differentiate. When enteroviral
myocarditis is suspected, immunoglobulins and antiviral therapy should be considered although experience in neonates is limited. Aggressive
supportive measures are always necessary in neonatal cardiac dysfunction because they can be life saving. This article is distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
