This report describes an unusual EBV-negative lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma of the vulva in a 73-year-old patient. The lesion was
localised at the right minor labium and was resected by partial vulvectomy. A synchronous sentinel lymph node biopsy revealed a single
micrometastasis in the right inguinal region, which prompted local radiotherapy. Follow-up nine months later showed only slight vulvar
atrophy, without signs of local recurrence or distant metastases. Although lymphoepithelioma-like carcinomas of the skin and the female
genital tract are presumed to have a better prognosis than their counterparts in the upper aerodigestive tract, possibly due to earlier
detection and therapy, this case documents their potential for early metastasis. Lymphoepithelial carcinoma is an aggressive EBV-associated
neoplasm of the nasopharyngeal region. Lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma (LELC) of the skin, however, is a rare condition and only three
cases have been reported in the vulvar region . The same is true for other sites of the female genital tract with some cases described in
the uterine cervix , two reports each in the ovary , the endometrium , and the vagina , and only one in the Bartholin gland . In contrast to
LELC of the nasopharynx, there is usually no evidence for an association with EBV, but cervical LELC is commonly associated with human
papilloma virus . Although LELC is said to be less aggressive in extranasal sites , regional lymph node metastases can occur . In this case
of a 73-year-old woman, a small inguinal metastasis was detected by sentinel node technique. The patient had undergone hysterectomy for
uterine leiomyomas 20 years ago. At the age of 62, she had been diagnosed with lobular breast carcinoma. She had received adjuvant radiation
and endocrine therapy and there were neither local recurrence nor metastases. A gynaecological check-up at the age of 72 years was without
pathological findings, but one year later she consulted her gynaecologist because of a weeping painful vulvar lesion. A slightly elevated
and eroded area with a diameter of 1.5 cm was detected, localised at the right minor labium with a minimal distance of 2 mm to the clitoris.
A small biopsy showed a non-keratinizing poorly differentiated carcinoma NOS. The patient was hospitalised, preoperative computed tomography
of the pelvis was inconspicuous and there were no signs of distant metastases. Ultrasonography showed normal sized inguinal lymph nodes,
which were not indurated in physical examination. The surface epithelium apart of the lesion was intact, atrophy or lichenoid changes were
not seen, so the clinicians decided for partial vulvectomy. Using sentinel technique before surgical intervention a lymph node could be
marked in the right inguinal region. Though the frozen section was negative, one micrometastasis of 1 mm was detected in the paraffin
embedded material. The postoperative course was normal. Due to the fact that the histological invasion depth of the tumor did not exceed 2
mm, the patient did not receive adjuvant treatment, but underwent radiaton of the right inguinal region with a focal dose of 5000cGy in 25
fractions because of the lymph node micrometastasis. Nine months after treatment she developed pruritus and scaling which disappeared with
local steroid therapy, and at the next follow-up visit only minimal local skin atrophy was visible. The total specimen measured 6.5:3:1 cm,
the margins of resection were inconspicuous, and the oval tumorous lesion itself measured 1.5:1 cm. Histology revealed solid non-
keratinizing sheets of tumor cells with high numbers of intraepithelial and stromal lymphocytes (Figure 1). The epithelial component did not
show squamous or glandular differentiation, so the patient was diagnosed with lymphoepithelial- like carcinoma of the vulva (Figure 2). The
depth of infiltration measured 2 mm, and there were no signs of angioinvasion or perineural spread. The lesion was completely resected.
After processing the sentinel node in a complete series we found one micrometastasis of the same tumor type with a diameter of 1 mm (Figure
3). The staging was summarised pT1b, pN1mi(sn), L0, V0, R0, G3. Right minor labium infiltrated by LELC, H&E 100×. LELC, H&E 200×.
Micrometastasis of LELC in right inguinal lymph node, H&E 100×. The antibodies used are listed in Table 1. EBV was analysed with in-situ
hybridisation (ISH) using EBER probe, ready to use, Ventana. Staining for IHC and ISH was processed on Ventana Benchmark automated
immunostainer (Ventana Medical Systems Inc. Tucson AZ 85755, USA). List of antibodies used for Immunohistochemistry. Immunohistochemistry
showed positivity for Cytokeratin 5/6 and p63 indicating basal cell differentiation of the tumor. Wide spectrum cytokeratin did not react as
strong and neuroendocrine markers like CD56, Synaptophysin und Chromogranin A were negative. Intraepithelial Lymphocytes were predominantly
T-Lymphocytes, strongly staining for CD3, CD5 and CD8 with a positive CD8/CD4 ratio. The stromal lymphocytes mainly reacted positive for
CD20, only a few with CD3 and CD8. MLH-1, MSH-2 and MSH-6 had clear nuclear expression. Staining for p16 was evenly strong but HPV was not
detected by immunohistochemistry, the in-situ-hybridisation of EBV was negative. IGH and T/gamma rearrangement of the lymphocytic tumor
component proved polyclonality. Lymphoepithelioma-like carcinomas in extranasal or extrapharyngeal sites are uncommon tumors, and are rarely
diagnosed in the gastrointestinal tract, the breast and the skin. Some scarce reports exist about LELC as a gynaecological neoplasm. LELC
differs from its pharyngeal counterparts in some biological characteristics. Whereas the neoplasms of the upper aerodigestive tract are EBV-
related, the most cases of LELC described so far were EBV negative , especially those in the skin and extracervical gynaecological sites .
Only very few reports could figure out a correlation between EBV and LELC of the uterine cervix . With a negative EBV in-situ hybridisation
this pathway could be excluded for our patient. In the present case histology apart from the main lesion showed intact squamous epithelium,
there were no signs of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN). Despite of the fact of a strong p16 positivity, immunohistochemistry of HPV
was negative. There is some controversy about HPV related LELC , but a few reports give evidence for this possible pathogenesis in the
uterine cervix . Lichen sclerosus is a further precursor lesion of vulvar carcinoma, but we did not find lichenoid changes in the stromal
compartments of the excision specimen. In this case of LELC, tumor associated lymphocytes were typically split up in T-lymphocytes
dominating in the intraepithelial component, and B-lymphocytes and some plasma cells in the stromal areas. Intestinal LELC frequently are
microsatellite instable tumors, but normally these patients do not feature a clinical history of hereditary cancer. With strong positivity
of MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 this tumor can be assumed to show microsatellite stability. Though the lesion was not advanced, one micrometastasis
of 1 mm could be detected by sentinel node technique. Lymphoepithelioma-like carcinomas of the skin and the female genital tract are
supposed to be associated with a better clinical outcome than their nasal or pharyngeal counterparts , but concerning local spread,
angioinvasion and lymph node metastasis the results might not be so diverse . Lymphoepithelial carcinomas of nasal or pharyngeal origin are
sometimes detected by their local lymph node metastases exhibiting only small primaries, so early lymphatic angioinvasion is evident. Except
for the present case there were only three reports about vulvar lymphoepithelioma-like carcinomas so far . Two of them were locally excised
without lymph node staging, and one patient had a long observation period and suffered from advanced disease with well known metastases
before treatment . Summarised this could mean that apart from the pathogenesis, malignancy of vulvar LELC might not be so different from
lymphoepithelial carcinoma of the nasal tract. Sentinel lymph node technique is appropriate for vulvar carcinomas and gives a good idea
about aggressiveness and local spread. In this case of vulvar LELC sentinel technique indicates early metastasising potential, and leaves
some reasonable doubts about the consistently maintained favourable outcome of this entity. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. EBV: Epstein-Barr virus; HPV: human papilloma virus; LELC: lymphoepithelioma like carcinoma; NOS: no other
specification; VIN: vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. HB conceived the case
presentation. SH carried out histology and immunohistochemistry. CG participated in merging clinical data. FR carried out surgical therapy.
WS conceived surgical and oncologic treatment. GW performed molecular analyses. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
