Spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma is an uncommon cause of cord compression in children, especially in infants. An 8-month-old infant was
admitted to our hospital for a 40-day history of paraparesis in the lower extremities. This rapidly progressed to paraparesis with an
inability to move the lower extremities. MRI of the cervicothoracic spine revealed an epidural mass with compression of the spinal cord. The
infant underwent C7-T3 total laminectomies. The pathology and postoperative MRI confirmed spinal epidural hematoma from a vascular
malformation. We present the case to highlight the significance of recognizing this chronic spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma and discuss
the diagnosis, treatment options and prognosis. Spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma is a relatively rare but disabling disease. Its
incidence was found to account for 0.3% to 0.9% of all spinal epidural space-occupying lesions.1 Spontaneous cervicothoracic epidural
hematomas of the spinal canal during childhood are less rare. We report the rare case of spontaneous chronic cervicothoracic epidural
hematoma in an infant. Our literature review revealed that this case is the youngest patient reported to have spinal cord compression
secondary to spontaneous epidural hematoma. The hematoma and spinal cord compression were diagnosed by MRI, and the pathology was confirmed
by postoperative histopathological analysis. An 8-month-old infant was admitted to our hospital for a 40-day history of paraparesis in the
lower extremities. This rapidly progressed to paraparesis with an inability to move the lower extremities. The initial symptoms were
manifested as irritability and crying. His parents found that the infant's lower extremities were very stiff and hence sent him to the local
hospital for treatment. During the treatment in the hospital, symptoms resolved spontaneously over a period of hours. Twenty days later, the
patient rapidly progressed to paraparesis with an inability to move the lower extremities. The clinic presentations led the doctors to make
an incorrect diagnosis of cerebral palsy. Familial and past medical history was not significant for any major illnesses, congenital
abnormalities or genetic syndromes. The infant had never undergone any invasive spinal procedures. Physical examination revealed normal
upper extremity motion. There was tone in the left leg but no antigravity movement, and the right leg had only flicker movements. Muscular
tone of the lower extremities was high. The sensory functions were impaired in all modalities evaluated. Because the patient was too young
to act in concert with our doctors, we could not assess the sensory level accurately. Normal upper extremity reflexes were present. Patellar
reflexes and deep tendon reflexes were active. Bilateral positive Babinski signs were present. All blood and coagulation tests (platelet
counts, prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time) showed normal values at that time. Plain radiographs of the spine and chest were
normal. MRI of the cervicothoracic spine revealed an epidural mass with compression of the spinal cord. On sagittal T1-weighted images and
T2-weighted images (Figures 1a, 1b), the mass was epidural and within the spinal canal and spanned four vertebral segments (C7-T3). On axial
images (Figure 2), the mass caused marked compression of the spinal cord, displacing it anteriorly and to the right. The mass appeared to be
inhomogeneous. The presence of low-signal hemosiderin in the inhomogeneous mass revealed the epidural hematoma had formed some days
previously. These findings were consistent with an epidural hematoma. (a,b) On sagittal T1-weighted images and T2-weighted images: the
hyperintense mass spanned four vertebral segments (C7-T3), and appeared to be inhomogeneous. The presence of low signal hemosiderin revealed
the chronic SEH. On axial images: The mass caused marked compression of the spinal cord, displacing it anteriorly and to the right. The
infant underwent C7-T3 total laminectomies. Upon removal of the laminae, there was an angioma-like vascular mass on the dorsal surface of
the spinal dura mater. After incision of the angioma-like vascular mass, there was an egress of liquefied and solid blood (Figure 3a). The
mass had no vascular connection to the spinal cord and did not penetrate the dura mater. The lesion was totally resected from the dural
surface. The epidural space was irrigated free of blood, and a small rubber catheter was passed cephalad and caudal to assure complete
spinal cord decompression. The mass material was coated with blood, and no vessels could be grossly seen. Histopathological analysis of the
mass revealed a vascular malformation (Figure 3b). Postoperative MRI of the cervicothoracic spine revealed extradural vascular malformation.
After incision of the angioma-like vascular mass, there was an egress of liquefied and solid blood. Histopathological analysis of the mass
revealed a vascular malformation The patient had an uneventful postoperative course. The pain abated within the first 72 hours. Neurological
examination revealed resolution of hyperreflexia, and he gradually regained strength, making a satisfactory recovery during the 20 days of
follow-up. Four months after the C7-T3 total laminectomies, an MRI revealed no evidence of the compression of the spinal cord on serial
imaging. The patient returned to live as a normal child with no significant symptoms and remains neurologically intact. Spontaneous spinal
epidural hematoma (SSEH) is an idiopathic accumulation of blood in the vertebral epidural space. It has been reported in all age groups, but
it is most frequent after the fourth or fifth decade.2 It is much less common in children, especially in infants. The most common site of
SSEH in children, as recently documented in 27 cases, is C5-T1.3 This was also the level involved in our patient. SSEHs can be acute or
chronic. Chronic SSEH is defined as spinal compression for months or years. Compared to acute SSEHs, chronic forms are more rarely described
and are generally located in the lumbar spine.14 The rare chronic SSEHs of the cervical and thoracic spine described in the literature have
a shorter progression of neurological symptoms,5 probably due to the narrower spinal canal and the lower tolerance of the cervical and
thoracic neurological structures to the space-occupying effect of an organizing hematoma.67 Our patient had chronic spontaneous
cervicothoracic epidural hematoma. The rare case was probably because our patient was unusual in that he was too young to verbalize
complaints of the pain and the neurological deficits. The symptoms resolved spontaneously during the first treatment, and a suspicion of
cerebral palsy delayed the correct diagnosis. Predisposing factors for spinal epidural hematoma are found only in 50% to 60% of cases.
Although often being suspected as a cause of spontaneous epidural hemorrhage, vascular malformations have rarely been demonstrated. In our
patient, histopathological analysis of the mass and postoperative MRI of the cervicothoracic spine revealed a vascular malformation. The
case may be an important piece of evidence that confirms vascular malformation as a cause of spontaneous epidural hemorrhage. The clinical
symptoms depend on the level of the hematoma.2 The first symptom is usually pain, and it can either be localized to the level of the
hematoma or be radicular in nature. In younger children, the initial symptoms can be nonspecific and can manifest as irritability and
crying, especially in an infant.3 Neurological deficits such as severe weakness and a change in sensory level may develop some hours or even
days after the initial pain. Although our patient had similar initial symptoms and progression of neurological symptoms, he was too young to
verbalize complaints of the pain and the neurological deficits. Similar clinical presentations lead some doctors to suspect cerebral palsy.
Without a correct diagnosis and early surgical intervention, our patient rapidly progressed to paraparesis with an inability to move the
lower extremities. MRI represents the diagnostic gold standard for SSEH.7â€“9 The T1 and T2 intensity patterns are both equally helpful in
discriminating against almost all other vertebral space-occupying lesions. Chronic epidural hematomas typically appear hyperintense in both
T1- and T2-weighted images.10 Due to the doctor suspecting cerebral palsy, our patient only had MRI of the skull before he was admitted to
our hospital. In general, the bleeding episode should be self-limited; and in most cases of acute spinal epidural hematomas, symptoms arise
immediately in proportion to the size of the lesion and according to its location along the spinal cord. However, chronic spinal epidural
hematomas could occur such that they produce few or no immediate symptoms or signs and even then go on to very slowly evolve over months.
Compared to acute SSEHs, in which surgical decompression must be carried out rapidly,41112 in the rarer chronic SSEHs, the time before
decompression procedures are undertaken does not seem to be critical for the recovery of neurological function and, finally, a good clinical
outcome. Coz et al13 suggested that spreading of a hematoma remains possible until blood clotting has been completed. In most cases of
chronic SSEHs, epidural hematoma frequently was small or moderate. Immediate conservative therapy can prevent progression of the hematoma,
allowing for the regression of neurological signs and symptoms without operation.14 However, in cases with repeated bleeding, one might
expect a larger hematoma to occur, with serious and progressive neurological deterioration. The time that is available for reversal of the
neurological deficit is limited, and surgical intervention is necessary before it is too late.15 In our patient, satisfactory recovery was
possible as children may have a better potential than adults for neurological recovery, and the patient received surgical intervention in
time. A high index of suspicion can lead to an early diagnosis and intervention and hence to improvement of the overall prognosis.
