A 29-year-old man presented to his primary care physician with nausea, severe weight loss and muscle weakness. He had a hard, fixed neck
swelling. He was severely hypercalcaemic with 10-fold increased parathyroid hormone (PTH) concentrations. A diagnosis of primary
hyperparathyroidism was established and the patient was referred for parathyroidectomy. At neck exploration, an enlarged parathyroid gland
with invasive growth into the thyroid gland was found and removed, lymph nodes were cleared and hemithyroidectomy was performed. A suspected
diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma was confirmed histologically. Serum calcium and PTH levels normalised post-operatively, but
hyperparathyroidism recurred within 3 years of surgery. Over the following 17 years, control of hypercalcaemia represented the most
difficult challenge despite variable success achieved with repeated surgical interventions, embolisations, radiofrequency ablation of
metastases and treatment with calcimimetics, bisphosphonates and haemodialysis using low-dialysate calcium. In this paper, we report the
challenges and pitfalls we encountered in the management of our patient over nearly two decades of follow-up and review recent literature on
the topic. Parathyroid carcinoma is a rare disorder, accounting for 0.1% to 5.0% of all cases of primary hyperparathyroidism . The disease
presents at a mean age of 50 years and is equally likely to occur in males as in females (Table 1). Clinical and biochemical manifestations
are those of severe primary hyperparathyroidism often with renal and skeletal complications [2–5, 7]. A palpable neck mass can be felt in
30–76% of patients [3, 5, 8, 9]. Parathyroid carcinoma is associated with germline and somatic mutations in the HRPT2 gene [3, 10] and with
irradiation of the neck for other pathologies [3, 11]. Table 1Overview of cases of parathyroid carcinoma published between 2001 and
2010AuthorAge/sexNumber of operationsRadiotherapyChemotherapyEmbolisationRadiofrequency ablationPTH
immunisationCalcitoninCinacalcetBisphosphonatesDevelopment of local recurrence or distant metastasisOutcomeFollow-up (years)Savli
47/F1NoA/FOD1Tyler 44/M2YesYesA/FOD5.5Dotzenrath 43/M4YesYesDOD1243/F12YesYesA/WD862/F2YesD/other9.5Yamashita 43/M2YesA/WD12Eurelings
45/F1YesYesYesDOD4Brown 51/M2NoA/FOD2Bhansali 40/M2YesYesYesNoDOD0.5Hundley 33/F5YesA/FOD20Schmidt 76/F1NoA/FOD1Schoretsanitis
55/F1NoA/FOD2Dionisi 35/M2YesYesDOD4Rufener 67/M3YesA/FOD4Munson
41/F1YesNoA/FOD5.546/F1YesNoA/FOD4.549/F1YesNoA/FOD5.557/F1YesNoA/FOD4.5Dogan 50/F1NoA/FOD1.5Betea 50/F2YesYesYesYesA/WD11Kern
54/F2YesYesDOD2.5Kirkby-Bott
44/M2YesYesYesDOD3.570/M1YesNoA/FOD736/F1YesNoA/FOD566/M2YesYesDOD846/M1YesYesYesA/WD125/F1NoA/FOD144/M1NoA/FOD1Lin 38/M1NoA/FOD0.5Ahmad
42/F1YesYesA/FOD1Chiofalo 66/M1YesNoA/FOD1Cheah 32/M2NoA/FOD0.542/F1NoA/FOD0.552/F2YesA/FOD5.5Yoshida 61/F2YesYesA/WD18.5Ikeda
48/M4YesYesA/WD6Pahlavan 21/M2YesNoA/FOD2Agarwal 22/F2YesA/FOD9Mezhir 64/F7YesYesYesYesA/FOD8Placzkowski
51/F4YesYesYesYesYesA/FOD12Sahasranam 53/M1NoA/FOD2Tkaczyk 55/M2YesNoA/FOD1Tan 55/F1NoA/FOD0.5Iwata 61/M1NoA/FOD3Montenegro
50/M2YesYesYesDOD5Rathi 45/F1NoA/FOD0.5Artinyan 71/M2YesYesYesYesYesA/FOD0.5Cetani 53/M3YesYesA/FOD2Temmim 63/F1NoA/FOD2Tamura
70/M1YesA/WD0.5Schoretsanitis 72/M1NoA/FOD478/F1NoA/FOD455/F1NoA/FOD671/M1YesDOD275/M1NoA/FOD4Kung 72/F1NoA/FOD2Marcy 42/F1NoA/FOD1Yuan
38/F2NoA/FOD4Rock 60/M1YesNoA/FOD0.5Yong 23/M1YesYesNoA/FOD2Chaychi 79/F1NoA/FOD0.5Tochio 42/M2YesYesYesA/WD8.551 ± 2/30M:32F1.9 ± 0.218/62
(29%)4/62 (6%)1/62 (2%)3/62 (5%)1/62 (2%)3/62 (5%)5/62 (8%)14/62 (23%)27/62 (44%)4.3 ± 0.5Results are expressed as mean ± SEDOD dead of
disease, D/other dead of other cause, A/WD alive with disease, A/FOD alive free of disease Overview of cases of parathyroid carcinoma
published between 2001 and 2010 Results are expressed as mean ± SE DOD dead of disease, D/other dead of other cause, A/WD alive with
disease, A/FOD alive free of disease A diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma is suggested by the presence of intra-operative features of local
invasion and the diagnosis is confirmed by the World Health Organization histopathological criteria for parathyroid carcinoma. These include
the presence of vascular invasion, perineural space invasion, capsular penetration with growth into adjacent tissues and/or metastasis .
Although parathyroid carcinoma is a slow-growing tumour, it inevitably metastasises and is invariably fatal due to the eventual inability to
control hypercalcaemia. Survival is estimated to range from 50% to 86% at 5 years and 35–70% at 10 years [1–6, 13, 14]. The most effective
treatment for parathyroid carcinoma is radical surgery with en bloc removal of the lesion together with the ipsilateral thyroid, thyroid
isthmus and lymph nodes [2, 3, 5, 13, 15]. Surgery is also the treatment of choice in case of local recurrence or development of metastases
[5, 7, 16], although radiotherapy [2–5, 8, 9], chemotherapy [3, 5, 9, 17, 18], embolisation or radio frequency (RF) ablation may also be
attempted. We report here the nearly two decades’ odyssey of a male patient with multiple metastases from parathyroid carcinoma, describing
in the process the challenges and pitfalls we encountered in the management of this difficult malignancy. We also review all original case
reports and case series on parathyroid carcinoma, fulfilling the WHO criteria and with a follow-up of at least 6 months after initial
parathyroidectomy, which were published in the English literature since the last large review on this topic in 2001 . The literature search
was conducted in PubMed using the keywords (“Parathyroid Neoplasms” OR “Parathyroid carcinoma” OR “Parathyroid cancer” OR “Parathyroid
cancers”) AND (“Case Reports” OR “case report” OR “case” OR “cases”). The last search was conducted on June 2, 2010. Patients with changes
suggestive of carcinoma in the context of autonomous (tertiary) hyperparathyroidism were excluded because of the controversy in diagnosing
malignancy in this case. Of an initial 872 publications, only 45 fulfilled the WHO criteria for parathyroid carcinoma and follow-up as per
our search criteria, and were selected for further analysis. A 29-year-old man presented to his primary care physician with a 2-month
history of severe weight loss (20 kg) associated with polyuria, polydipsia, nausea, muscle weakness, difficulty in concentrating and
debilitating tiredness. On physical examination, he was clinically dehydrated and had a palpable hard, fixed swelling in the left side of
the neck. He was using no medication and had no significant past or family history. Laboratory investigations revealed a severe
hypercalcaemia of 4.9 mmol/l (normal range 2.15–2.55 mmol/l), a decreased creatinine clearance of 45 ml/min (normal >120 ml/min) and a
10-fold increased serum intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) concentration: 88 pmol/l (normal <8 pmol/l). These findings suggested a diagnosis
of severe primary hyperparathyroidism probably due to parathyroid carcinoma. No further investigations were requested; the patient was
intensively rehydrated and referred for parathyroidectomy. At neck exploration, an enlarged parathyroid gland (3.5 × 3 × 3.5 cm) invading
the ipsilateral thyroid lobe was found and removed from the left side of the neck (Fig. 1). A left hemithyroidectomy was also performed. The
diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma was confirmed histologically by the finding of capsular and vascular invasion. Serum calcium and PTH
concentrations normalised within a few days of surgery associated with a significant improvement in renal function. A second surgery was
performed within 1 month of the first surgery to ensure complete removal of all malignant tissue and provide a negative surgical margin. The
patient was started on a course of radiotherapy, which had to be discontinued before completion because of severe pharyngitis and
oesophagitis. Fig. 1Disease course of our patient spanning over 17 years Disease course of our patient spanning over 17 years A recurrence
of hyperparathyroidism was documented on routine laboratory control 3 years after parathyroidectomy. This was mild, with a serum calcium
concentration of 2.74 mmol/l, a PTH concentration of 8.4 pmol/l and a stable creatinine clearance of 75 ml/min. The patient was completely
asymptomatic. Tc99m-MIBI-SPECT and ultrasonography identified a lesion in the left side of the neck, which was found to be a local
recurrence of the primary tumour at extensive bilateral neck exploration. The recurrent tumour had invaded the oesophagus, part of which was
excised and reconstructed using tissue from the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The edges of the excised specimen were tumour free and resected
draining lymph nodes were clear of tumour tissue. DNA analysis of the resected recurrent tumour demonstrated a somatic HRPT2 mutation,
c.165delC located on exon 2 . Despite the radical nature of the surgery, mild hyperparathyroidism persisted post-operatively, suggesting the
presence of residual probably metastatic tumour tissue. No further localisation studies or surgery were planned principally because of the
patient’s reluctance to undergo further surgery but also because of the mild nature of the hyperparathyroidism. Closer clinical monitoring
was arranged. Over the following 4 years, serum calcium and PTH concentrations and bone turnover markers slowly increased, and periods of
dehydration were associated with transient worsening of renal function, which remained, however, on the whole stable despite persistent
hypercalciuria and development of nephrocalcinosis. Progressive bone loss, predominantly cortical, was also documented and treatment with
the non-nitrogen-containing bisphosphonate clodronate was started, resulting in normalisation of bone turnover and stabilisation of BMD
measurements. Rehydration and treatment with bisphosphonates eventually failed in controlling hypercalcaemia and bone loss. Localisation
studies were undertaken to identify the source of PTH production. Ultrasound (US), selective venous sampling for PTH (SVS) and CT scan of
the neck succeeded in localising a small dense lesion in the left supraclavicular region. CT scan of the thorax also revealed a small
solitary lesion of 1-cm radius in the inferior lobe of the right lung (Fig. 2a). The patient refused to undergo a thoracotomy, but did agree
to a fourth neck exploration at which a lymph node metastasis was excised from the left supraclavicular region (Fig. 1). Although less
severe, hyperparathyroidism persisted post-operatively, as expected due to the unresected lung metastasis. Two attempts at embolisation of
the lung metastasis failed to reduce tumour load. In contrast, radiofrequency ablation (RFA) of the lesion, although complicated by an
episode of severe pleuritis, was very successful in achieving biochemical remission, with serum PTH concentrations decreasing from
265 pmol/l to <1 pmol/l (Fig. 2), suggesting that the metastasis targeted with RFA was the only source of PTH secretion. However, remission
was not permanent and PTH levels started to rise within 9 months of RFA. The patient finally agreed to undergo a right inferior lobectomy
(Fig. 3), which was complicated by multiple small cerebral infarcts resulting in right haemianopia, dysphasia, acalculia and transient
epilepsy. Disappointedly, there was also only partial improvement in serum calcium and PTH concentrations, which continued to increase
within 2 months of lobectomy (Fig. 3). Fig. 2Radiological (a pre-RF ablation, b after RF ablation) and biochemical changes after RF ablation
of the lung metastasis, demonstrating a severe drop in serum PTH concentrations, which persisted for almost a yearFig. 3Radiological and
biochemical changes following lobectomy of the lung metastasis, which resulted in only partial improvement in serum calcium and PTH
concentrations Radiological (a pre-RF ablation, b after RF ablation) and biochemical changes after RF ablation of the lung metastasis,
demonstrating a severe drop in serum PTH concentrations, which persisted for almost a year Radiological and biochemical changes following
lobectomy of the lung metastasis, which resulted in only partial improvement in serum calcium and PTH concentrations Further localisation
studies, in the form of Tc99m-MIBI-SPECT and a CT scan of the neck and thorax, were unable to localise any residual pathological parathyroid
tissue suggesting the presence of (micro)metastasis. The now available calcimimetic cinacalcet was prescribed eventually at a maximum dose
of 90 mg twice daily, which decreased PTH concentrations from 120 pmol/l to 85 pmol/l, stabilised calcium concentrations to about
2.80 mmol/l and stabilised creatinine clearance at 51 ml/min. In the course of the following year, serum calcium and PTH concentrations
further increased, however, despite maximal doses of cinacalcet and intermittent intravenous bisphosphonates. Repeat Tc99m-MIBI-SPECT and CT
scan of the thorax, now demonstrated a new large (4 × 3 × 2 cm) subcarinal mediastinal metastasis, which was successfully excised using a
transpericardial approach (Fig. 4). The elimination of the source of PTH secretion was associated with a very severe hungry bone syndrome
for which the patient needed intensive care for over 2 months, requiring very large doses of iv administered calcium (up to 14 g/day) and
maximal doses of active vitamin D metabolites. Remission lasted for more than 1 year, after which PTH levels started to rise again and a new
metastatic lesion was localised pretracheally in the upper mediastinum on CT scan of the thorax. There was also suggestion of a second
subcarinal lesion at the site of the previously excised metastasis. Fig. 4CT scan of the thorax demonstrating a large (4 ×3 × 2 cm)
subcarinal mediastinal lymph node metastasis (white arrow) (a, b), which was successfully excised using a transpericardial approach (c) CT
scan of the thorax demonstrating a large (4 ×3 × 2 cm) subcarinal mediastinal lymph node metastasis (white arrow) (a, b), which was
successfully excised using a transpericardial approach (c) In view of the complications associated with his previous surgeries, the patient
was at that stage again reluctant to undergo any further surgery. Within the next few months, PTH steadily increased associated with
uncontrollable hypercalcaemia and deteriorating renal function eventually requiring haemodialysis using a very-low-dialysate calcium
concentration. Localisation studies confirmed the two previously identified pretracheal and subcarinal mediastinal lesions. The pretracheal
lesion was accessible from the neck and was radically removed by a cervical approach (Fig. 1). There were no post-operative complications
and serum PTH concentration decreased from 590 pmol/l to 155 pmol/l, as expected due to the remaining subcarinal mediastinal metastasis.
Surgical removal of this metastasis would have required a third thoracotomy, which would be associated with too high an operative risk,
especially in view of the patient’s poor clinical condition. Excision of the metastasis by mediastinoscopy was also not considered to be an
option because of multiple scarring due to previous surgeries. The patient remains on haemodialysis and is still treated with cinacalcet,
with intermittent courses of intravenous bisphosphonates. The patient was not considered to be a candidate for PTH immunisation [23, 24]
because of surgical clearance of cervical and mediastinal lymph nodes, poor general immune status and recurring infections. Sixty-two new
cases have been reported in the literature since the last published review in 2001 , and data of these cases are summarised in Table 1. The
median age of the reported patients was 50 years (21–79) and there was an equal number of men and women reported. Data on initial
presentation were available in 43 of the 62 patients (69%), 37 of which were symptomatic (86%). Polyuria and polydipsia were reported in
nine patients (21%), constipation in seven (16%), tiredness in 13 (30%), bone and joint pain in 17 (40%), muscle weakness in seven (16%),
nausea and vomiting in 10 (23%) and weight loss in seven patients (16%). Seventeen patients (40%) had renal stones and six patients (14%)
had sustained a documented fracture. A palpable neck mass was reported in 22 of 27 patients in whom this was checked (81%). Similar to the
review of 2001, surgery is still the most frequently chosen therapy for the initial treatment of parathyroid carcinoma but also for the
treatment of recurrent or metastatic parathyroid carcinoma (Table 1). It is of note that the use of both chemotherapy and radiotherapy has
decreased over the last 10 years, likely due to several reports and reviews which showed disappointing results . The last case report on the
use of chemotherapy and radiotherapy dates from 2005 and 2008, respectively (Table 1). In contrast to the review of 2001, reports on the use
of the newer techniques embolisation (n = 1), radiofrequency ablation (n = 3) and PTH immunisation (n = 1) have been recently published,
although the number of cases reported is still very limited. Use of the calcimimetic, cinacalcet, has increased over the last few years
after the first report in 2007, while the use of bisphosphonates has remained stable. The median follow-up reported in the 62 cases is
relatively short at 3 years (range 0.5–20 years), considering that the average time to a first recurrence is also approximately 3 years [1,
3]. This could explain why only 27 of the 62 patients (44%) developed a local recurrence and/or distant metastasis and nine patients (15%)
died as a result of parathyroid carcinoma during the reported follow-up period. To our knowledge, we report here one of the longest survival
and follow-up in one centre of a patient with recurrent metastatic parathyroid carcinoma. Although parathyroid carcinoma is a slow-growing
tumour, it is associated with a relatively high incidence of local recurrence (40–82% within 5 years) [1–3, 5, 6, 13]. Metastases tend to
occur later in the course of the disease with spread to cervical nodes (30%), lung (40%) and liver (10%), via both lymphatic and
haematogenous routes . Survival is estimated to range from 35% to 70% at 10 years [1–6, 13, 14], with an average survival of 6 years after
local recurrence, and of 4.5 years after the development of distant metastases . In patients with parathyroid carcinoma, determinants of
survival include delay in diagnosis, the presence of locally invasive features, distant metastasis at diagnosis and the radical nature of
initial surgery [3, 6, 13, 14]. A further important determinant of survival and disease-free survival is the due care taken at initial
surgery to avoid rupturing the capsule of the gland to prevent local seeding of tumour tissue . Initial surgery has been reported not to be
radical in up to 48% of patients because of failure to establish the diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma pre- or intra-operatively [6, 14].
This was also the case in our patient at initial surgery, despite very suggestive clinical features of parathyroid carcinoma, in the form of
severe hyperparathyroidism in a young male patient, palpable neck swelling and intra-operative features of local invasion. A second surgery
had to be performed within 1 month of the first to ensure complete removal of all malignant tissue and to provide a negative surgical
margin. The main determinant of survival in all patients remains, however, the eventual inability to control hypercalcaemia [2, 5] and its
association with fatal renal and cardiovascular complications [1, 2, 5, 7]. End-stage renal failure has been reported in up to 84% of
patients due the deleterious effects of severe persistent hypercalcaemia on kidney function [2, 5, 7]. A persistently elevated circulating
PTH level is also associated with increased bone turnover and bone loss predominantly at cortical sites and with increased risk of
fractures. In parathyroid carcinoma, the main goal of treatment is control of hyperparathyroidism by eradicating the source of PTH secretion
[7, 16]. Although the morbidity associated with re-exploration of the neck is estimated to be 6–17% , that of re-exploration of the
mediastinum or lungs is clearly much higher. In our patient, the recurrent laryngeal nerve had to be unavoidably sacrificed during the
second surgical intervention due to invasive growth of remnants of the primary tumour, resulting in transient loss of voice and permanent
hoarseness. Subsequent lung surgery was associated with severe thrombo-embolic complications. The increasing morbidity attached to repeated
surgical interventions has led to the search for other treatment options, such as radiotherapy, chemotherapy, RF ablation, embolisation, use
of the calcimimetic cinacalcet and PTH immunisation. Although parathyroid tumours are relatively resistant to radiotherapy , this management
approach showed some promise as adjuvant treatment for microscopic residual disease [8, 9]. In our patient, the prescribed course of
radiotherapy could not be completed due to the development of severe side effects in the form of pharyngitis and oesophagitis. Embolisation
of localised and/or ectopic parathyroid adenomas has been reported to have only limited success [19, 25–27], and in metastatic parathyroid
carcinoma, embolisation has only been described in combination with RF ablation in one patient . In our patient, the outcome of twice
attempted embolisation of a lung metastasis was disappointing, largely because it was not technically possible to selectively embolise the
arterial branch that fed the lung metastasis. The outcome of combined embolisation and RF ablation in a patient with liver metastasis due to
parathyroid carcinoma , and the effectiveness of RF ablation in various types of cancer has led us to consider RF ablation in our patient.
This approach was indeed very successful in eradicating PTH production by the metastasis, as has also been subsequently reported in two
patients with parathyroid carcinoma and lung metastases [20, 21]. The beneficial effect was unfortunately transient, lasting only 9 months
after the procedure, when PTH production was documented to resume from the same site. In parathyroid carcinoma, attempts at reducing tumour
load are not always successful, in which case control of serum calcium by other means becomes central to prevent the deleterious effects of
hypercalcaemia on various organ systems. Intensive rehydration, use of medications such as bisphosphonates and calcimimetics and use of
dialysis represent diverse means to control hypercalcaemia and are often used in combination. Bisphosphonates decrease the skeletal efflux
of calcium from bone by suppressing osteoclast-mediated bone resorption and overall bone turnover . These agents, however, have no effect on
renal tubular reabsorption of calcium so that they improve hypercalcaemia but do not normalise serum calcium [3, 29]. Cinacalcet is a
calcimimetic, which reduces parathyroid hormone secretion by binding to the calcium-sensing receptor on parathyroid cells, increasing the
sensitivity of these cells to extracellular calcium concentrations [15, 30, 31]. These agents are widely used in the management of secondary
and tertiary hyperparathyroidism in renal failure and have been also recently registered for the management of primary hyperparathyroidism,
including that due to parathyroid carcinoma. In our patient, combined treatment with bisphosphonates and cinacalcet resulted in reasonable
control of the hypercalcaemia initially, but eventually failed to do so, even when used at maximal doses. Dialysing against low-dialysate
calcium became necessary in order to better control the hypercalcaemia. The very high operative risks associated with a third thoracotomy,
the patient’s poor lung function and current metabolic status despite regular dialysis, preclude the option of further surgery to remove the
identified source of PTH secretion. PTH immunisation is being explored as a potential non-invasive option, although experience with this
approach is still limited and the patient’s general condition may not permit its use [23, 24, 32]. Although we are rapidly running out of
options in the management of our patient, we believe that we have nonetheless managed to secure for him a longer albeit not disease-free
survival. This clinical case with a follow-up spanning over 17 years illustrates that the long-term management of patients with metastatic
parathyroid carcinoma remains indeed a daunting task, despite all recent imaging, surgical and medical advances. Declaration of Interest
There is no conflict of interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the research reported. Funding This research did
not receive any specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sector. Open Access This article is
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
