Midgut carcinoids are neuroendocrine tumors that commonly metastasize to the intestinal mesentery, where they predispose to intestinal
obstruction, ischemia and/or congestion. Because of their location, many mesenteric carcinoid tumors are deemed unresectable due to the risk
of uncontrollable bleeding and prolonged intestinal ischemia. We report the case of a 60-year-old male with a mesenteric carcinoid tumor
obstructing his superior mesenteric vein, resulting in intestinal varices and severe recurrent GI bleeds. While his tumor was thought to be
unresectable by conventional techniques, it was successfully resected using intestinal autotransplantation to safely gain access to the
tumor. This case is the first described application of this technique to carcinoid tumors. Intestinal autotransplantation can be utilized to
safely resect mesenteric carcinoid tumors from patients who were not previously thought to be surgical candidates. We review the literature
concerning both carcinoid metastases to the intestinal mesentery and the use of intestinal autotransplantation to treat lesions involving
the mesenteric root. Carcinoid tumors are the most common neuroendocrine neoplasm, typically arising in the respiratory and midgut
gastrointestinal tracts . While midgut carcinoid tumors are usually slow growing, they are often associated with severe complications from
early metastasis to the liver and the small bowel mesentery . These mesenteric carcinoid tumors release serotonin and other growth factors
which induce a desmoplastic reaction causing diffuse mesenteric fibrosis and encasement of critical mesenteric vasculature, which in turn
predisposes to intestinal obstruction, hypoperfusion and/or congestion . Several groups have published surgical strategies for debulking
mesenteric carcinoid disease . However, complete encasement of the mesenteric vasculature has traditionally been considered an absolute
contraindication to surgery given the risk of uncontrollable bleeding or inducing prolonged intestinal ischemia . Here we describe a novel
technique to resect extensive mesenteric root carcinoid metastases using partial abdominal evisceration and intestinal autotransplantation.
A 60-year-old man presented to our unit in January 2008 with a mesenteric carcinoid tumor compressing the superior mesenteric vein,
resulting in recurrent episodes of GI bleeding from mesenteric varices. His relevant medical history began in 2005, when he underwent a
work-up at another institution for chronic diarrhea at that time. He complained of up to 15 watery bowel movements a day for the past
several years. He underwent an unrevealing esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy, but an abdominal CT scan showed a 4.6 Ã— 2.5 cm
mesenteric soft tissue mass encasing the superior mesenteric vein and extending along the mesenteric root to the base of the pancreas
(Figure 1). Multiple mesenteric varices were noted on this original CT scan, and several small bowel loops appeared thickened with probable
venous congestion. Both 24-hour urine 5-HIAA (14.7 mg, normal 2-6 mg) and chromogranin A levels (76.7 ng/mL, normal < 36.4 ng/mL) were
elevated, consistent with a diagnosis of mesenteric carcinoid tumor. His tumor was deemed inoperable after the outside institution's
evaluation, and he was referred to a medical oncologist at our hospital. Additional studies then included an EGD with endoscopic ultrasound
(EUS) and a fine needle-aspiration biopsy of the mass. These showed a 3.5 cm mass encasing the SMV, and the biopsy confirmed that he had a
chromogranin-positive, synaptophysin-positive, keratin AE1/AE3-positive, NSE-negative well-differentiated carcinoid tumor without evidence
of atypia (no mitoses or necrosis, ENETS grade G1). Mesenteric angiography revealed severe stenosis or occlusion of multiple SMA branches
such as the ileocolic artery, which was reconstituted distally by jejunoileal collaterals (Figure 2). Staging chest/abdomen/pelvis CT scans
showed no evidence of metastatic disease. He was offered participation in a clinical trial but declined, choosing instead to receive
standard therapy with octreotide long-acting release (LAR). Preoperative abdominal CT scan demonstrating large mesenteric soft tissue mass
(white arrows) encasing the mesenteric vasculature with evident bowel wall and mesenteric edema, along with trace ascites fluid. Pre-
operative mesenteric angiogram. Whereas the celiac and inferior mesenteric arteries were patent, cannulation of the superior mesenteric
artery shown here reveals severe stenosis or occlusion of multiple SMA branches (black arrows) from extrinsic compression by the carcinoid
tumor. Flow to the ileocolic artery is occluded proximally and reconstituted distally from jejunoileal collaterals His disease remained
fairly stable for almost two years on octreotide, with only slight progressive enlargement of his mesenteric mass on interval abdominal CT
scans. Starting in August 2007, however, he required multiple hospital admissions for GI bleeding. Colonoscopy was unremarkable, and an EGD
showed thickened folds in the second portion of the duodenum. A video-capsule endoscopy revealed diffuse congested mucosa throughout the
jejunum, with a few localized erosions. A push enteroscopy was performed, but his duodenal and jejunal varices were not amenable to
intervention. By January 2008, he was requiring 2-4 units of red blood cell transfusions a week due to continued GI bleeding; a palliative
care consult was obtained and preparations were made to proceed with home hospice. At this point he was referred for a second surgical
opinion. Given his otherwise state of good health and his desire for aggressive treatment of his carcinoid tumor, it was determined that we
should attempt a palliative resection including partial abdominal evisceration for resection of his mesenteric carcinoid tumor and
reconstruction via intestinal autotransplantation. Laparotomy was performed through a bilateral subcostal incision. The carcinoid tumor was
confirmed to involve the root of the small bowel mesentery, extending down to the aorta and vena cava, accompanied by lymphadenopathy of the
para-aortic nodes. There was no evidence of hepatic metastasis, but the duodenum and head of the pancreas were involved. The mesentery of
the ileum and jejunum was investigated to find suitable vessels for anastomosis. The tumor extended past the confluence of the ileocolic
artery with the first jejunal artery branch, therefore requiring that the intestine be autotransplanted in two separate segments. The distal
ileocolic artery was deemed suitable to support the cecum and terminal ileum, and the jejunal artery was selected to support a large segment
of jejunum and proximal ileum. The Kocher maneuver was performed, followed by a radical lymphadenectomy along the vena cava and aorta. A
pre-pyloric division of the stomach was made, and the jejunum was divided just distal to the ligament of Treitz. The common hepatic bile
duct was divided distally and the pancreaticoduodenectomy was completed by dividing the neck of the pancreas. At this time, both the
ileocecal and ileojejunal segments of bowel were removed and transported to the back table, where they were each flushed with 2 L of UW
preservation solution and kept on ice. The resection continued by transecting the superior mesenteric artery, leaving a stump of about 2 cm
behind. The portal vein was dissected free and then the superior mesenteric vein was divided 2 cm proximal to its confluence with the
splenic vein. The descending colon was stapled off just distal to the splenic flexure. The resected specimen included the mesenteric root,
pancreatic head, duodenum and ascending/transverse colon. The ileojejunal segment of intestine was then brought back to the field and was
revascularized via the retained superior mesenteric artery stump and the transsected distal superior mesenteric vein. The bowel reperfused
well. Next, the infrarenal vena cava and the aorta below the take-off of the inferior mesenteric artery were utilized to complete end-to-
side vascular anastomosis for the ileocolic segment of bowel. This bowel segment also reperfused well. GI tract continuity was completed
using a pancreaticojejunostomy, gastrojejunostomy and choledochojejunostomy and an end-to-end ileoileostomy to connect the two segments of
autotransplanted bowel. The descending colon was left stapled off, and a Bardex cecostomy tube was brought out through the skin to
temporarily drain the cecum (Figure 3A). The abdomen was irrigated and closed in layers. A. Initial postoperative anatomy. Both ileocecal
and ileojejunal segments of bowel were removed to permit access and resection of the mesenteric carcinoid tumor. The ileojejunal autograft
was revascularized by anastomosing the jejunal artery and vein to the residual stumps of the SMA and SMV. The ileocecal segment was
revascularized by anastomosing the ileocolic vessels to the abdominal aorta and IVC. The GI tract was reconstructed with a
pancreaticojejunostomy, hepaticojejunostomy, gastrojejunostomy and ileoileostomy. B. Final postoperative anatomy. Due to SMA thrombosis, the
jejunoileal bowel autograft was lost. The ileocolic segment was explanted and revascularized using the SMA and SMV stumps. GI tract
continuity was restored with a pancreaticoileostomy, hepaticoileostomy, gastroileostomy and cecocolostomy Final pathology revealed well-
differentiated multifocal carcinoid of the small bowel with metastases to the mesentery (where a 6.5 cm mass was identified) and mesenteric
lymph nodes (9 of 18 nodes positive). All resection margins were negative for malignancy. By TNM staging (as defined by ENETS), his tumor
was stage IIIB. The patient had a complicated post-operative course. A second-look laparotomy performed on postoperative day 1 revealed all
of the bowel to be viable. The patient was brought back to the operating room on postoperative day 4 with plans to connect the cecum and
descending colon. At this laparotomy, the ileojejunal segment of bowel looked dusky, albeit not frankly necrotic. The ileocolic segment
remained pink and well-perfused. A near-occlusive clot was found at the superior mesenteric artery anastomosis. Fogarty thrombectomy
restored good flow to that bowel segment. Continued acidosis and hemodynamic instability required re-exploration the next day, at which
point a large thrombus was again palpated in the SMA, and the ileojejunal segment of bowel was found to be nonviable. This segment of
transplanted bowel was therefore resected, requiring take-down of the pancreaticojejunostomy, choledochojejunostomy and gastrojejunostomy.
Reconstruction could not be performed with the ileocecal segment of bowel in its current location, so this segment was explanted, flushed
with ice-cold lactated Ringer solution containing mannitol and then kept on ice. The venotomy and arteriotomy on the vena cava and abdominal
aorta were patched with pieces of ileal vein and artery, respectively. The ileocecal segment (including ~70 cm of ileum) was then
revascularized via the superior mesenteric artery and vein. The bowel was pink immediately upon reperfusion. A pancreaticoileostomy,
gastroileostomy and choledochoileostomy were then performed in the standard fashion. Reconstruction was completed by anastomosing the cecum
to the descending colon (Figure 3B). Postoperatively, he was started on a heparin drip to prevent further thrombosis and he was successfully
extubated the next day. His subsequent hospital course was remarkable for periodic febrile episodes requiring first IR drain placement into
a pelvic fluid collection (which grew Candida albicans) and a final laparotomy for abdominal washout with saline containing amphotericin B
and gentamicin. He did have a small leak at his pancreaticoileostomy that was managed conservatively with NPO status and initiation of TPN.
He was discharged on TPN on POD 72, tolerating some tube feeds and enteral intake. Over the ensuing months the patient required several
short hospitalizations for central venous line infections related to his TPN, in addition to endocarditis. He was ultimately weaned off
parenteral nutrition and his weight has stabilized. He had recovered well enough to undergo an aortic valve replacement in December 2009.
Currently, 2.5 years after his carcinoid resection, he is completely independent of parenteral nutrition or tube feeds. He continues to have
mild diarrhea, well-controlled with cholestyramine. Surveillance abdominal CT scans reveal no evidence of carcinoid recurrence or
metastasis, and his chromogranin A in March 2010 was within normal limits (93 ng/ml, reference < 225 ng/ml). Of the gastrointestinal
carcinoids, those arising from the midgut (e.g. small intestine and appendix) are by far the most common, with tumors distal to the jejunum
representing 96% of carcinoids located in the gastrointestinal tract . These midgut carcinoids secrete serotonin and are responsible for the
carcinoid syndrome, the intractable flushing and diarrhea associated with metastasis to the liver. In addition to hepatic metastasis, midgut
carcinoids also commonly metastasize to the small bowel mesentery . Indeed, radiographic studies indicate mesenteric involvement in 40-80%
of patients with abdominal carcinoid tumors . Carcinoid metastases to the mesentery often grow far larger than the submucosal primary tumors
in the small bowel wall, and they are responsible for much of the morbidity and mortality of gastrointestinal carcinoid tumor that is not
attributable to carcinoid syndrome itself. Many patients with mesenteric carcinoid present with small bowel obstructive symptoms due to
tethering and kinking of the small bowel to the rigid mesentery. In several surgical case series of patients with midgut carcinoids, 62-67%
required laparotomy for either intestinal obstruction or abdominal pain, and of these patients, 67-79% had evidence of extensive mesenteric
fibrosis upon surgical exploration . In other cases, the mesenteric vasculature (e.g. superior mesenteric artery and vein) can become
completely encased in tumor, causing regional portal hypertension and arterial insufficiency . The encasement of the visceral vasculature
may manifest as episodes of post-prandial acute abdominal pain or as GI bleeds (noted in 5% of midgut carcinoid patients in one case series)
. Although somatostatin analogs such as octreotide remain the mainstay of carcinoid therapy, surgical resection has emerged as a vital
treatment in disease management. For metastatic disease, palliative cytoreductive surgery has been employed by some groups to specifically
address mesenteric carcinoids. While some symptomatic improvement is often reported, long-term outcomes are compromised by recurrent disease
. Unfortunately, large mesenteric carcinoids have often been considered unresectable due to their position abutting critical vascular
structures in the abdomen. Recently, however, several groups have published reports outlining the use of intestinal autotransplantation to
safely gain access and resect tumors that encase the vasculature of the mesenteric root. Utilizing techniques from intestinal
allotransplantation, the patient's small intestine is harvested en bloc and maintained in cold preservative fluid to limit warm ischemia
injury. The mesenteric mass is then fully excised, and the intestine is autotransplanted back into the patient. This strategy was first
employed by David Lai and colleagues to treat a nonfunctioning islet cell carcinoma . That patient also underwent a total pancreatectomy,
gastrectomy, splenectomy and hepatic revascularization (as his proximal hepatic artery was also resected). Vascular anastomoses were
performed between the hepatic artery and aorta, distal superior mesenteric artery and aorta, and between the distal superior mesenteric vein
and cephalad portal vein. A similar approach was employed by Tzakis and colleagues to treat four patients with lesions involving the root of
the mesentery. The indications for resection in these patients were pancreatic head fibroma, vascular malformation at the mesenteric root,
desmoid tumor of the pancreatic tail, and locally advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma . Whereas we employed in situ resection of the
carcinoid tumor, the patients in Tzakis' case series had ex vivo resection of their lesions on ice on the back table after their organs had
been removed en bloc. The mesenteric lesions of his series did not apparently extend into the distal branches of the SMA, obviating the need
to autotransplant multiple segments of intestine as in the case we present here. All of his patients had good outcomes except for the
patient treated for pancreatic cancer, who died of hepatic metastases 7 months postoperatively. Two additional case reports of intestinal
autotransplantation to treat locally-advanced pancreatic cancer extending into the mesenteric root were also complicated by rapid recurrence
of hepatic or peritoneal metastases, and early death after the procedure . These reports cast doubt on whether this aggressive surgical
strategy is warranted for cases of pancreatic cancer. Here we present the first description of partial abdominal evisceration and intestinal
autotransplantation used to treat a mesenteric carcinoid tumor. This method may prove particularly useful for midgut carcinoid tumors, as
this malignancy frequently extends into the mesenteric root, with enormous clinical consequences. While stenting of the superior mesenteric
vein was recently described to palliate the symptoms of intestinal congestion that often accompany mesenteric spread of midgut carcinoids ,
intestinal autotransplantation permits tumor resection with possible curative results. In conjunction with earlier studies, this report
demonstrates that intestinal autotransplantation is a surgical strategy that can be used to successfully treat a variety of lesions
involving the mesenteric root, including many that were previously thought to be unresectable. EGD: esophagogastroduodenoscopy; EUS:
endoscopic ultrasound; SMA: superior mesenteric artery; SMV: superior mesenteric vein; TPN: total parenteral nutrition The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. WHK prepared the manuscript and all illustrations contained therein. MH was the primary surgeon and
helped to develop the surgical technique. ABC and NE were co-surgeons involved in the development of the surgical technique, and ABC also
provided critical help revising the manuscript. LSB was the medical oncologist of the patient and contributed to his preoperative and
postoperative care. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this case report and the accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
WHK is supported by an ASTS-Roche Laboratories Scientist Scholarship from the American Society of Transplant Surgeons.
