Whilst bony luno-triquetral coalitions are known to be asymptomatic, fibro-cartilage unions can cause ulnar-sided wrist pain. The purpose is
to present the rare case of painful pseudarthrosis after traumatic disruption of an incomplete luno-triquetral coalition. Recommendations
for proper diagnosis and treatment options will be discussed. The case of a 35-year-old male patient is reported, where disruption of a
fibro-cartilaginous luno-triquetral coalition resulted in a painful pseudarthrosis. Luno-triquetral fusion with a corticocancellous wedge
from the iliac crest and a Herbert screw was undertaken. Using this method pain was relieved but resulted in minor loss of range of motion.
We recommend luno-triquetral fusion in the rare case of fracture or pseudarthrosis of a luno-triquetral coalition. The use of a
corticocancellous wedge should be considered depending on gap formation after resection of the pseudarthrosis. Während lunotriquetrale
Synostosen üblicherweise keine Symptome verursachen, können fibrokartilaginöse Koalitionen ulnarseitige Handgelenksbeschwerden verursachen.
Ziel dieser Arbeit ist die Darstellung einer schmerzhaften Pseudarthrose nach traumatischer Läsion einer inkompletten lunotriquetralen
Koalition. Des Weiteren sollen Diagnose- und Therapiemöglichkeiten diskutiert werden. Der Fall eines 35-jährigen Mannes wird beschrieben,
bei dem die Verletzung einer fibrokartilaginären lunotriquetralen Koalition zur schmerzhaften Pseudarthrose führte. Es erfolgte eine
lunotriquetrale Fusion mit Einbringen eines kortikospongiösen Beckenkammspanes und Osteosynthese mittels Herbert-Schraube. Dadurch kam es
zur Schmerzfreiheit bei geringgradiger Bewegungseinschränkung. Wir empfehlen die lunotriquetrale Fusion im seltenen Falle einer Fraktur oder
Pseudarthrose bei zugrundeliegender lunotriquetraler Koalition. Abhängig von der Größe der Spaltbildung nach Pseudarthrosenresektion sollte
die Interposition eines kortikospongiösen Spanes in Erwägung gezogen werden. Luno-triquetral coalition is a congenital carpal anomaly that
is most often diagnosed as an incidental finding in asymptomatic patients and can be associated with other synostoses or malformations. It
is the most common coalition representing nearly 90% of all carpal fusions, followed by the capito-hamate coalition with 5.6% . The
prevalence in the general population averages 0.1% but is thought to be 100 times higher in Africans . This anomaly is found more often in
females with a ratio of 2:1 , . Embryological carpal coalition represents a failure of cavitation of the cartilaginous hand bud precursor
during the 4th to 8th week of gestation, which later develops to an osseous, fibrous or cartilaginous union . It is classified according to
the degree of union and is often found bilateral. According to literature, the biggest collective has been reported from Senegal, where 32
luno-triquetral coalitions in 20 patients were examined in a retrospective study. The complete form (type III of Minaar's Classification)
was the most frequent (46.8%), followed by the incomplete osseous fusion (type II of Minaar's Classification) with a distal notch (28,1%) ,
. Whilst synostosis of the lunate and the triquetrum is known to be asymptomatic, fibro-cartilaginous bonding can present an uncommon cause
for ulnar-sided wrist pain , . This is the case of a pseudarthrosis after traumatic disruption of a fibro-cartilaginous luno-triquetral
coalition type I of Minaar's Classification causing severe wrist pain. A 35-year-old right-hand dominant white male launderer presented in
our policlinic with right-sided wrist pain since 7 months after he had fallen on the same hand. He described an ulno-dorsal intermittent
stabbing pain on twisting his hand, particularly when bearing loads. Physical examination revealed tenderness located in the luno-triquetral
joint. No swelling or ache in other locations of the right hand could be found. On examination, the left wrist was completely asymptomatic
and there was no pathologic “shuck” and “shear” test between the lunate and the triquetrum . The range of motion of the right wrist was
40-0-30 degrees for extension and flexion whereas the left wrist showed no restricted functionality. Plain radiographs showed a right-sided
coalition of the lunate and triquetrum (Figure 1 (Fig. 1)), as well as an incomplete fibro-cartilaginous coalition type I on the left side
(not shown). Radial and ulnar clenched fist views of both wrists showed no anomaly. A CT scan of the right wrist revealed a narrowing and
irregularity of the proximal luno-triquetral joint space indicating a fibro-cartilaginous coalition type Minaar I which could not be
classified in conventional radiographs before (Figure 2 (Fig. 2)). Magnetic Resonance Imaging showed a bone marrow edema adjacent to the
fibro-cartilage coalition as well as hyaline cartilage in the distal notch (Figure 3 (Fig. 3), Figure 4 (Fig. 4)). Dynamic fluoroscopy
demonstrated a widening of the luno-triquetral region upon ulnar movement and clenching of the wrist. We recommended to fuse the lunate and
triquetrum. Using the approach from the 5th extensor tendon compartment, a pseudarthrosis could be visualized and resected (Figure 5 (Fig.
5)). Due to gap formation of approximately 3 millimeters and the inability to approximate the bones without tension, we decided to make use
of a corticocancellous wedge from the iliac crest (Figure 6 (Fig. 6)). A 24-millimeter Herbert screw was used for stabilization.
Immobilization was continued until 6 weeks after the operation. Plain radiographs and a CT scan after this time showed an advanced bony
consolidation with the Herbert screw in correct position and length. The patient still suffered from some swelling of the hand. Range of
motion was 30-0-10 degrees for wrist extension/flexion and 70-0-90 degrees for supination/pronation of the forearm. At this stage we
discontinued immobilization of the wrist and the patient began with exercises without loading. Three months after luno-triquetral fusion the
patient was almost painless and range of motion had improved to 40-0-40 degrees for wrist extension/flexion. Plain radiographs showed bony
consolidation. Another CT-scan was planned at 6 months after the intervention. The joint between lunate and triquetrum is the most common
location for carpal coalition. Depending on the degree of cellular apoptosis, different types of bonding can develop, which can range
anywhere between complete coalition or normal joint development. Minaar classified this anatomical variation in 4 types. Type I represents
an incomplete fusion with a strong fibro-cartilaginous component, type II an incomplete osseous fusion, type III a complete osseous fusion
(os lunato-triquetrum) and type IV a complete osseous fusion associated with other carpal anomalies , . Whilst some authors believe that all
types of luno-triquetral bonding are asymptomatic, others differentiate Minaar's type I conditions from the bony coalitions of Minaar's type
II–IV. To their opinion, fibro-cartilaginous coalitions are likely to cause wrist pain . Fractures of osseous coalitions have been reported.
However these might have been symptomatic fibrocartilaginous situations as suggested by Resnik et al. . For proper diagnosis we suggest to
perform anterior-posterior and lateral radiographs as well radial and ulnar clenched fist views of both wrists. Scapho-lunate joint space
widening is commonly associated with luno-triquetral coalition but was not present in our case . Cineradiography can be added if abnormal
motion of the carpal bones in relation to each other is suspected. We recommend a CT scan in case of difficulty evaluating the stability of
the bonding between the affected carpal bones in symptomatic wrists. To our opinion the only reasons to justify Magnetic Resonance Imaging
are to exclude concomitant pathologies of the wrist and to gain some information about the condition of articular cartilage in incomplete
luno-triquetral coalition. Only 6 cases of disrupted luno-triquetral coalitions have been described in literature, three of which were
treated operatively using K-wires or a screw , , , , , . In our patient gap formation occurred after resection of the luno-triquetral
pseudarthrosis and the carpal bones could not be approximated without tension. In such a case we strongly recommend the use of a
corticocancellous wedge to avoid alteration of the carpal framework and the translation of carpal bones to each other. This is the first
time to describe a technique which is usually applied for treatment of scaphoid non-union with a favourable outcome in luno-triquetral
coalition. We recommend limited carpal fusion in symptomatic fracture or pseudarthrosis of luno-triquetral coalition. If gap formation after
resection of the pseudarthrosis is present, a corticocancellous wedge should be interposed. The authors disclose the absence of any conflict
of interest following the guidelines of the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors.
