To the Editor: Hantaviruses (family Bunyaviridae, genus Hantavirus) cause 2 clinical syndromes in humans: hemorrhagic fever with renal
syndrome (HFRS) in the Old World and hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in the New World (1). Humans are infected by inhaling the excreta of
infected rodents. Persons at increased risk for infection are farmers, loggers/forest workers, and soldiers. Bulgaria is a country in
southeastern Europe with 8 million inhabitants. Two types of hemorrhagic fevers are endemic to Bulgaria: Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever and
HFRS. Both diseases have been subject to mandatory reporting since 1953. During the past decade, 36 cases of HFRS have been reported, mainly
in the areas of the Balkan and Rila-Pirin-Rodopa mountain ranges in southwestern Bulgaria. Diagnosis was based on clinical symptoms and
serologic test results. We report 3 HFRS cases, 2 of which were fatal. Apart from serologic diagnosis, genetic detection of hantaviruses was
also achieved, resulting in gaining insight into the genetic relationships of hantavirus sequences from Bulgaria with respective sequences
retrieved in neighboring countries. On September 2, 2009, high fever, chills, headache, and myalgia developed in a 21-year-old man who lived
in Simitli town (Blagoevgrad Province, southwestern Bulgaria). Five days after symptom onset, he was admitted to the regional hospital of
Blagoevgrad. His condition rapidly deteriorated. Clinical signs were pharyngeal hyperemia, oliguria, and febrile toxic syndrome. The patient
became hypotensive, reporting abdominal pain in the liver and spleen. Laboratory findings showed the following: leukocyte count 11.8 × 109
cells/L, hematocrit 51%, blood hemoglobin 161 g/L, platelet count 10 × 109 cells/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 118 U/L, alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) 89 U/L, urea 26.4 mmol/L, and creatinine 501 µmol/L. An echograph showed enlarged kidneys, liver, spleen, and
pancreas, and abdominal and bilateral pleural effusions. Urine analysis disclosed proteinuria and microscopic hematuria. The patient was
admitted with acute renal failure and multiple organ insufficiency. Despite multiple blood transfusions and hemodialysis, he died 14 days
after hospitalization. On April 9, 2010, a 54-year-old man, a resident of Kirkovo village (Kardjali Province, southern Bulgaria), was
admitted to the regional hospital in Kardjali City with a 7-day history of fever, weakness, and myalgia in the lower extremities and a 4-day
history of abdominal pain and diarrhea. At admission, physical examination showed skin petechiae, subconjunctival and gingival hemorrhages,
and oliguria. Laboratory findings showed the following: leukocyte count of 23 × 109 cells/L, platelet count of 50 × 109 cells/L, AST 96 U/L,
ALT 167 U/L, urea 58.7 mmol/L, and creatinine 1,033 µmol/L. Urea and creatinine levels continued to rise. Proteinurua and hematuria were
present. After 3 sessions of hemodyalisis, the patient gradually improved, and he was discharged without sequelae. On May 7, 2010, a
28-year-old man, a resident of Smilyan village, (Smolyan Province, southern Bulgaria) was admitted to the Infectious Diseases Clinic in
Smolyan Regional Hospital with a 4-day history of fever, vomiting, and diarrhea. Physical examination on admission showed skin petechiae and
gingival hemorrhages. Laboratory findings showed the following: leukocyte count of 6 × 109 cells/L, platelet count of 50 × 109 cells/L, urea
10.5 mmol/L, creatinine 230 mmol/L, AST 1697 U/L, and ALT 1,119 U/L. Proteinuria and hematuria were present. The patient became anuric and
underwent hemodialysis. On May 9, the patient died. Serum samples from these 3 patients were tested for immunoglobulin (Ig) G and IgM
against Hantaan virus (HTNV) and Puumala virus by ELISA (Progen, Biotechnik GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany). High titers of HTNV IgM were
detected in all 3 patients; in 1 patient HTNV IgG was also detected; antibodies against Puumala virus were not detected. Thus, a HTNV-like
infection was suggested. Viral RNA was extracted from the earliest available serum sample, and a 1-step SYBR Green real time reverse
transcription–PCR (RT-PCR) (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) (2) and 2 nested RT-PCRs amplifying partial small (S) and medium (M) RNA segments
were applied (3,4). Dobrava/Belgrade virus (DOBV) RNA was detected by RT-PCR. Sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of the nested RT-PCR
products showed that the causative agent in all 3 cases was DOBV (Figure). Phylogenetic trees based on a 560-bp fragment of the small RNA
segment (A) and a 224-bp fragment of the medium RNA segment (B) of hantaviruses. Hantaan virus (HTNV) was used as the outgroup. The numbers
at the nodes indicate percentage bootstrap replicates of 100; values <60% are not shown. Horizontal distances are proportional to the
nucleotide differences. Sequences in the tree are indicated as GenBank accession number, strain name, country. Strains from this study are
shown in boldface. Scale bars indicate 10% nucleotide sequence divergence. Sequences were submitted to GenBank under accession nos.
HQ174468–HQ174473. Bulgarian sequences cluster with respective sequences retrieved from Apodemus flavicollis mouse tissues or from HFRS
cases from central and southeastern Europe. Briefly, the closest genetic strains in S and M RNA segments are strains isolated from A.
flavicollis mice in northeastern Greece, near the border with Bulgaria (5). The genetic difference at nucleotide level among the Bulgarian
strains is 1.2%–2.1% and 2.2%–7.4% in the S and M segments, respectively. HFRS is endemic to the Balkan Peninsula. Severe HFRS cases caused
by DOBV have been reported in Greece (4–6), Slovenia (7,8), Serbia and Montenegro (9), the Czech Republic (3), and Hungary (10). Our results
confirm that DOBV also circulates in Bulgaria and causes severe HFRS cases; thus, clinicians have to include HFRS in differential diagnosis
of febrile cases accompanied by acute nephropathy. Further studies on patients and small mammals in Bulgaria will elucidate the hantavirus
epidemiology in this Balkan region. Suggested citation for this article: Papa A, Christova I. Genetic detection of Dobrava/Belgrade virus,
Bulgaria . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2011 Feb [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1702.101275 We thank N. Kalvatchev
and E. Papadimitriou for excellent technical assistance.
