Neurofibromatosis is a genetically-inherited disorder of the nervous system that primarily affects the development and growth of neural
(nerve) cell tissues and also causes cafe-au-lait spots on the skin, dysplastic abnormalities of the skin, nervous system, bones, endocrine
organs and blood vessels. The two major classifications are NF-1, a generalized form, is the commonest and affects peripheral nerve tissues
and NF-2, a rare central form, affects the central nervous system. An unusual finding of oral hamartomas may occur as part of NF-1 and here
we presented one such rare case of oral hamartomas in a patient with Von-Recklinghausen's disease. Von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis type
I (vRNF-1), first described by Frederick Von Recklinghausen in 1882, is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in chromosome
17.12 This inherited systemic disease affects approximately 1 in 3500 individuals. Typical dysplasias in NF-1 patients involve the skeletal
system (sphenoid wing dysplasia, tibial pseudarthrosis), the skin (café-au-lait spots), and the nervous system (optic pathway gliomas,
neurofibromas, astrocytomas, pheochromocytoma and meningeomas). A 65-year-old male reported to the Department of Oral Medicine with a chief
complaint of multiple nodules of varying size all over the body and also in the mouth for the previoux 30 years. The patient admitted that
initially the small nodule appeared on his back and then gradually increased in size with development of other nodules all over the body
including the mouth, which was occasionally associated with an itching sensation. The patient had no relevant medical history. On
examination the nodules were either sessile or pedunculated, with a smooth surface of varying size ranging from millimeters to centimeters
with normal skin color, soft to firm, non tender and present over the whole body. Yellowish-tan to dark-brown macules were also noticed in
the vicinity of the nodules, which were smooth-edged and varied in diameter from 1 to 2 millimeter to several centimeters (café-au-lait
spots). An ocular examination performed by an ophthalmologist for Lisch nodules using a slit lamp test was positive. Intra-oral examination
revealed the presence of multiple nodules in the anterior part of the hard palate of variable size and normal mucosal color, soft to firm in
consistency, nonulcerated and nontender (Figure 1) and the presence of macroglossia. Radiographical examination revealed no contributory
finding by periapical and occlusal radiographs. A panaromic radiograph revealed widened mandibular canals with bifurcation in the premolar
region, pathognomic of neurofibromatosis type I (Figure 2). A sample of tissue taken from the intraoral palatal nodule was sent for
histopathological tissue examination. It revealed that the dermis and subcutaneous tissue had diffuse spindle cell tumors composed of cells
with tapering ends and wavy nuclei. There was evidence of pleomorphism or mitosis suggestive of neurofibromatosis. Nodular or
neurofibromatous growths of palate and alveolar ridge. Orthopantomogram showing widened mandibular canals bilaterally along with bifurcation
in premolar region. On the basis of history, clinical and radiologically evidence along with the histopathological investigation, the case
was diagnosed as von Recklinghausen disease. Neurofibromatosis type I (NF-1), commonly known as von Recklinghausen disease, is a human
genetic disorder caused by a single gene.There is no racial, gender or age predilection for the development of oral neurofibromas in NF-1.1
NF-1 is a tumor disease that is caused by the malfunction of a gene on chromosome 17 that is responsible for control of cell division. It
often presents with scoliosis (bone disease) and eye problems.34 NF-1 is caused by a mutation of a gene on the long arm of chromosome 17
that encodes a protein known as neurofibromin, which plays a role in intracellular signaling. Neurofibromin regulates many of the pathways
responsible for overactive cell proliferation, learning impairments, skeletal defects and plays a role in neural development. Neurofibromin
is a negative regulator of the Ras oncogene. The mutant gene is transmitted with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, but up to 50%
of NF-1 cases arise due to spontaneous mutation. The incidence of NF-1 is about 1 in 3500 live birth.5 A neurofibromatosis is a mass lesion
of the peripheral nervous system. Its cellular lineage is uncertain, and may derive from Schwann cells, other perineural cell lines, or
fibroblasts.6 A cutaneous neurofibroma manifests as a solitary or as multiple firm, as rubbery bumps of varied size on the skin and their
presence in the oral cavity is very rare. The hallmark lesion of NF-1 is the plexiform neurofibroma.7 Malignant peripheral nerve-sheath
tumor, commonly known as neurofibrosarcomas, can arise from degeneration of a plexiform neurofibroma, but this is a rare complication,8 with
a lifetime risk of 8% to 12% of transformation neurofibroma. Patients with NF-1 develop flat pigmented lesions of the skin called cafι au
lait spots and also freckles of the axillae (Crowe sign). Intracranially, NF-1 patients have a predisposition to develop glial tumors of the
central nervous system, primarily optic gliomas. Lisch nodules (dome-shaped, pigmented nodules of the iris) are present in 90% of type 1
patients at the age of 5 years. Other significant dysplasias in NF-1 patients involve the skeletal system (sphenoid wing dysplasia, tibial
pseudoarthrosis) and the nervous system (optic pathway gliomas, neurofibromas, astrocytomas, pheochromocytoma and meningeomas).910
Radiographically, oral neurofibromas present with a wide mandibular canal, mandibular foramen and mental foramen. Neurofibromas may seldom
be primarily intraosseous; in that case they usually appear as a unilocular, with a well-defined radiolucency. Most neurofibromas show low
attenuation in CT scans, although some of them may show soft tissue density. Low-density lesions contain a variable amount of Schwann cells
rich in lipids, cystic degeneration and xanthomatous alterations. High-density areas are thought to represent collagen rich or cellular
areas. On MRI, lesions show a low signal in T1 and a high signal in T2, with a variable highlighting with the contrast. A high peripheral
signal with a low central signal in T2 weighted images (bull's eye sign) is a typical sign of neurofibromas. A similar sign can also be seen
in CT.1112 Histologically, neurofibromas are composed of a mixture of Schwann cells, perineural cells, and endoneural fibroblasts, without a
capsule. Schwann cells account for about 36% to 80% of lesional cells. These constitute the predominant cellular type and they usually have
widened nuclei with an undulated shape and sharp corners. On electronic microscopy, Schwann cells can be seen embracing axons. It is
estimated that between 0.7% and 31% of cells are perineural cells. In seldom cases this type of cell can predominate.13 The National
Institute of Health created seven specific criteria for the diagnosis of NF-1 in 1987, including six or more café-au-lait macules, two or
more neurofibromas, freckling, optic glioma, two or more Lisch nodules, a distinctive osseous lesion and a first-degree relative with NF-1
by the above criteria. Two of these seven “cardinal clinical features” are required for positive diagnosis.14 There is no cure for the
disease itself except for the symptomatic treatment followed by a team of specialists to manage complications. Surgery can be attempted when
the tumors compress organs or other structures. Less than 8% to 12% people with neurofibromatosis develop cancerous growth; in these cases,
chemotherapy could be beneficial.14 It is important that oral physicians and surgeons keep this disease under consideration when oral
lesions characteristic of NF-I are present. These patients must be reviewed long term because of eventual complications, particularly
malignant transformation.
