Laparoendoscopic single-site radical nephrectomy may be feasible in select patients. Suture-assisted retraction of the ureteral and lower
pole attachments facilitate safe dissection. To describe our technique of suture-assisted ureteral retraction during Laparoendoscopic
Single-Site (LESS) radical nephrectomy. A healthy, 39-year-old woman with an incidental 5-cm enhancing left renal mass elected to undergo
radical nephrectomy. A 2-cm skin incision was made in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen, and a Covidien SILS port was introduced using
standard Hasson techniques. Straight and angled laparoscopic instruments were used to mobilize the kidney outside of Gerota's fascia. To
place the renal vessels on stretch and facilitate hilar dissection, the ureter and lower pole attachments were encircled with a 0-Vicryl
suture inserted percutaneously via a disposable fascial closure device. The kidney was bagged and removed intact. The procedure was
performed without complication with a total operative time of 265 minutes. EBL was minimal at 25mL. The patient was discharged home on
postoperative day 1, and final pathology revealed stage pT1b chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with negative surgical margins. LESS radical
nephrectomy is feasible in select patients. Suture-assisted retraction of the ureter and lower pole attachments using a fascial closure
device facilitates safe dissection and control of the renal hilum. Laparoendoscopic Single Site (LESS) surgery continues to be investigated
in the management of a variety of surgical disorders. Some reports suggest LESS surgery may be associated with improved cosmetic results
compared with standard multi-port laparoscopic surgery.1 Surgery continues to be the most common treatment in the management of renal cell
carcinoma, and standard multi-port laparoscopic radical nephrectomy is widely performed for large renal tumors. To date, most LESS
nephrectomies have been performed for benign disease.2–4 We present our technique of LESS radical nephrectomy with technical modifications
to replicate standard multi-port laparoscopic methods. A healthy, 39-year-old woman was found to have a solid 5×3-cm left midpole enhancing
renal mass on evaluation for chest wall pain. CT scanning demonstrated an accessory upper pole renal artery. The patient's preoperative
creatinine was 0.7mg/dL, and the metastatic workup was negative. She elected to undergo a left laparoscopic radical nephrectomy. The patient
was placed in the full flank position with modest table flexion. A 2-cm skin incision was made in the left upper quadrant in the
midclavicular line about 5cm below the costal margin. A SILS port (Covidien, Mansfield, MA) was introduced via standard Hasson techniques
(Figure 1). This device allowed introduction of 3 low-profile 5-mm cannulas through which a straight laparoscope, angle-locking laparoscopic
instruments (CambridgeEndo, Framingham, MA), and standard laparoscopic instruments were inserted as appropriate. Covidien SILS Port is
placed in the left upper quadrant and allows introduction of 3 cannulas from 5mm to 12mm in diameter. The colon was mobilized, and the
spleen was released laterally. The gonadal vein was clipped and divided, and the ureter was elevated to expose the psoas muscle. Next, a
Carter-Thomason fascial closure device was inserted percutaneously in the left lower quadrant, and a 0-Vicryl suture was encircled around
the ureter and lower pole attachments to retract them cephalad (Figure 2). This facilitated safe hilar dissection by placing the renal
vessels on stretch and allowing use of both working instruments for this critical portion of the procedure. Next, one of the 5-mm cannulas
was replaced with a 12-mm cannula. This allowed a lumbar branch of the renal vein to be ligated with 10-mm Hem-o-lock clips. The entire
hilum (2 renal arteries and 1 renal vein) was controlled using a linear stapler. The adrenal gland was left in place. To retrieve the
kidney, the initial incision was extended, and a 15-mm Endo-Path XL bladeless trocar was inserted adjacent to the SILS port. The specimen
was placed inside an Endocatch bag and removed intact through the single site. After hemostasis was confirmed, the access port was removed,
and the 4-cm incision was closed. Retraction of ureter and lower pole attachments via percutaneously introduced Vicryl suture exposes psoas
muscle and facilitates safe hilar dissection. LESS radical nephrectomy was performed without complication with a total operative time of 265
minutes. EBL was minimal at 25mL. The patient was discharged in <24 hours and only required oral analgesia. Final pathology revealed stage
pT1b chromophobe renal cell carcinoma with negative surgical margins. On postoperative day 4, the patient returned to work and her baseline
activities. Laparoscopic surgery is widely performed in urology, general surgery, transplant surgery, and surgical oncology because of its
ability to reduce morbidity and decrease recovery times.5 In recent years, LESS surgery has been investigated as a further refinement to
laparoscopic surgery. Experience with LESS cholecystectomy, the most commonly performed LESS procedure, suggests that this technique can be
used routinely with equivalent outcomes to standard multi-port laparoscopic cholecystectomy.6 However, to date, there is not enough
literature to show any significant advantage of LESS in terms of hospital stay, analgesia requirements, or overall recovery. We have
therefore begun to offer select patients with renal masses a LESS approach to help further define the advantages and disadvantages of this
approach versus standard multi-port transperitoneal or retroperitoneal laparoscopy. In the current study, we report our technique of LESS
radical nephrectomy for a patient with renal cell carcinoma. To our knowledge, <30 LESS radical nephrectomies have been published to
date.1–5,7–13 The current study is the first LESS nephrectomy to use the Covidien SILS port. This port allowed the introduction of low-
profile cannulas that were at staggered heights, minimizing external clashing of instruments. Additionally, we chose to place this port
directly overlying the kidney rather than in a periumbilical location, which facilitated performance of the procedure. However, this port
location may be less cosmetic than a periumbilical site. Oncological principles were strictly adhered to; the kidney was mobilized outside
of Gerota's fascia, and the specimen was removed intact. Intact retrieval is important for accurate staging and evaluation of margins.
Because the incision was to be lengthened at the end of the surgery, in this case, placement of additional trocars adjacent to the SILS port
earlier in the surgery could have provided additional instrumentation for retraction. However, our goal has been to develop a LESS
nephrectomy technique that is also useful for benign disease, where specimen morcellation is acceptable, and the skin incision is not
normally lengthened. One challenge to this operation was gaining access to the renal hilum for safe dissection of the structures without
losing a working instrument. To overcome this, a Carter-Thomason device was inserted percutaneously to facilitate extracorporeally
controlled suture retraction of the ureter and lower pole attachments. Similar methods of percutaneous retraction have been described using
the Keith needle in retracting bowel and the liver.14,15 Hodgett et al6 routinely use Keith needles to retract the gallbladder during LESS
cholecystectomy. We believe the technique of percutaneous ureteral elevation presented in the current study provides the surgeon with a
“critical view” of the renal vessels, as is common during standard multi-port laparoscopic nephrectomy, and should not be compromised. A
similar “critical view of safety” concept is widely advocated in general surgery to avoid bile duct injuries during laparoscopic
cholecystectomy.5 A future solution to achieving appropriate retraction during LESS surgery might be the Magnetic Anchoring and Guidance
System (MAGS). MAGS, still in development, allows for complete insertion of a camera into the abdominal cavity that is secured through the
abdominal wall by using a magnetic handle. This handle also allows for manipulation of the system from the outside without the need for an
additional incision or port. Caddedu et al have reported laboratory and human experiences with this technique, which has the potential to
improve the safety and ease of LESS surgery.7,14 LESS radical nephrectomy is feasible in select patients. Suture-assisted retraction of the
ureter and lower pole attachments using a fascial closure device facilitates safe dissection and control of the renal hilum.
