Chronic paroxysmal hemicrania (CPH) is a rare primary headache syndrome, which is classified along with hemicrania continua and short-
lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing (SUNCT) as trigeminal autonomic cephalalgia (TACs).
CPH is characterised by short-lasting (2–30 min), severe and multiple (more than 5/day) pain attacks. Headache is unilateral, and fronto-
orbital-temporal pain is combined with cranial autonomic symptoms. According to the International Classification of Headache Disorders, 2nd
edition, the attacks are absolutely responsive to indomethacin. CPH has been only rarely and incompletely described in the developmental
age. Here, we describe two cases concerning a 7-year-old boy and a 11-year-old boy with short-lasting, recurrent headache combined with
cranial autonomic features. Pain was described as excruciating, and was non-responsive to most traditional analgesic drugs. The clinical
features of our children’s headache and the positive response to indomethacin led us to propose the diagnosis of CPH. Therefore, our
children can be included amongst the very few cases of this trigeminal autonomic cephalgia described in the paediatric age. Headache is a
notable and common somatic complaint in paediatric age [1, 2]. Although migraine and tension-type headache show the highest incidence, other
primary headaches are much rarer and poorly recognised, thus representing a clinical and therapeutic challenge. Chronic paroxysmal
hemicrania (CPH) is a rare and well-characterised headache, classified amongst the trigeminal autonomic cephalgias (TACs) . CPH is
characterised by short-lasting (2–30 min) and multiple pain attacks, with a typical attack frequency of more than 5 per day . Pain is
unilateral, located on the fronto-orbital-temporal region, it has rapid onset and it is described as excruciating. Attacks occur in
combination with al least one ipsilateral autonomic symptom, such as conjunctival injection, lachrymation, miosis, ptosis, eyelid oedema,
and nasal congestion or rhinorrhea [3, 7]. The standard CPH treatment is based on the use of indomethacin. The absolute pain responsiveness
to indomethacin represents one of the diagnostic criteria for CPH (Table 1).Table 1Diagnostic criteria for paroxysmal hemicrania (ICHD-II)A.
At least 20 attacks fulfilling criteria B–DB. Attacks of severe unilateral supra-/orbital temporal pain lasting 2–30 minC. Headache is
accompanied by at leats 1 of the following: 1. Ipsilateral conjunctival injection and/or lachrymation 2. Ipsilateral nasal congestion and/or
rhinorrhea 3. Ipsilateral eyelid oedema 4. Ipsilateral forehead and facial sweating 5. Ipsilateral miosis/ptosisD. Attacks with a frequency
of >5/day for more than half the timeE. Attacks completely prevented by therapeutic doses of indomethacin (mg kg−1 day−1)F. Not attributed
to another disorder Diagnostic criteria for paroxysmal hemicrania (ICHD-II) Because of its typical onset between 20 and 30 years of age [5,
6], CPH has been extensively studied in adult population. The disease can occur, although more rarely, also in children , as early as from
the age of 3 [9, 12]. However, few reports in paediatric age fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for CPH [9, 10, 12] according to the
International Classification of Headache Disorders, 2nd edition (ICHD-II) (Table 2). In particular, the presence of autonomic signs and
response to indomethacin has not been discussed adequately [11, 14, 15, 18]. Some unilateral short-lasting paediatric headaches without
autonomic signs have been diagnosed as CPH [15, 18]. Moorjani described a case of unilateral, short-lasting and severe headache responsive
to indomethacin, but the attack duration and the autonomic symptoms were not specified . Despite the complete response to indomethacin is
one of the diagnostic criteria , in some CPH children, the response to indometachin was not tested [11, 14] or this was done only in part .
Moreover, even one case of headache symptomatic of a cerebral infarction has been reported as CPH .Table 2Characteristics of previously
described children with paroxysmal hemicraniaCase reportVieira Talvik aAlmeida Gladstein Klassen Kudrow Shabbir (2 cases)Moorjani Broeske
Seidel aBlankenbug a (8 cases)Age (years)/gender9/M3/F10/F8/M6/M9/M13/F14/F4/F3/F17/M7 mean3F/5MAttack duration
(min)5–305–1515–4015–30<1010–20− several min− <15Not specified>4510–1515–45Attack frequency/dayNot specified5–20Not specified31–3 in a
weekEvery 1.5 h8–922–5105–20Autonomic signs:AbsentYesYesYesYesYesNot specifiedNot specifiedYesYesYes 1.
LachrymationAbsentYesYesYesYesYesNot specifiedNot specifiedYesNoYes 2.  Conjunctival injectionAbsentNoYesNoYesYesNot specifiedNot
specifiedYesYesYes 3. Eyelid oedemaAbsentNoYesNoNoNoNot specifiedNot specifiedNoNoYes 4.      Nasal
congestion/rhinorrheaAbsentNoNoYesNoYesNot specifiedNot specifiedYesYesYes 5.     Miosis/ptosisAbsentNoNoNoYesYesNot specifiedNot
specifiedYesNoYesTriggerAbsentNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedStressNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedNot specifiedQuick head
movementsStressSymptomatic PHNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoCerebral infarctionNoNoIndomethacin responseNot administeredYesYesYesNot administeredNot
administered (baby aspirin)Incomplete (+verapamil)YesYesYesYesF female, M maleaCPH cases fulfilling the ICHD-II criteria Characteristics of
previously described children with paroxysmal hemicrania F female, M male aCPH cases fulfilling the ICHD-II criteria Here, we describe two
children, referred to our Headache Centre, with typical CPH features and a positive response to indomethacin therapy. L., a 7-year-old boy,
was referred to our Headache Center because of a headache that had started 1-year earlier. He suffered from unilateral pain, located in the
right orbito-frontal region without side shift; pain intensity was excruciating, and its quality was described as throbbing. Attack duration
was variable, ranging from 5 to 30 min. Headache occurred 1–3 times per day, during daytime and night-time, without circadian rhythm. Pain
was combined with ipsilateral autonomic symptoms, such as conjunctival injection, eyelid oedema and rhinorrhea. During the attacks, the
patient cried and found difficult to lie still showing marked agitation and restlessness. Moreover, migraine-like features, such as vomiting
and photophobia, were also present. No trigger factors were detected. Psychomotor development and neurological examinations did not suggest
any neurological damage. Skull CT scan, brain MRI, also including the angiographic sequences, and EEG, were normal. In addition, the blood
tests and the blood pressure were normal. The boy had a positive familiar history of headache. In particular, his mother had migraine
attacks when she was young. L. was submitted to psychological screening tests (SAFA A, D, S scales) which showed normal anxiety, depression
and somatization indices . During the headache attack, pain intensity was not affected by most non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), including acetaminophen, ketoprofen, and aspirin. A prophylactic treatment with amitriptyline 16 mg/day was attempted, with no
improvement in attack frequency, nor in pain intensity. When considering the headache characteristics, the clinical history and the failure
of most analgesic drugs, a prophylactic treatment with indomethacin was started, at the initial dose of 25 mg/day. The attack frequency
immediately showed a strong reduction, decreasing from 1 to 3 attack/day to 2–3 attacks/month. Moreover, the child’s parents were invited to
use indomethacin 25 mg for each single pain attack, and they reported a strong pain relief. After 6 months, the parents discontinued the
treatment voluntarily, and the headache worsened considerably. Over the following 9 months, flunarizine 5 mg/day was attempted, as suggested
by another Headache Centre, without any amelioration. Conversely, a satisfactory improvement was obtained after the resumption of
indomethacin 25 mg/day (attack frequency of 3–4 per months). A further reduction in headache attack frequency up to 1–2 months was obtained
when topiramate was added at the dose of 45 mg/day (corresponding to 1.5 mg/kg/day). However, due to an attentive performance reduction,
probably caused by topiramate, this drug was discontinued and replaced by sodium valproate at the dose of 600 mg/day. The new treatment
obtained positive effects, without major adverse events. When L. was 9 years, the dose of indomethacin was increased up to 50 mg/day, with a
mean attack frequency of 1 per month and without any side effect, as also confirmed by periodic blood examinations. A., a 11-year-old
Romanian boy, presented with a 3-year history of recurrent daily headache. He described episodes of severe throbbing pain attacks in the
left fronto-orbital-temporal region. Attacks were short-lasting (ranging from 5 to 40 min), and they occurred 3–4 times per day. Attacks
occurred during daytime and night-time, without nocturnal predominance, nor circadian rhythm, and most of them were combined with
ipsilateral lachrymation, conjunctival injection, ptosis and nasal congestion. Pain was not accompanied by nausea, vomit nor other migraine-
like features, but the child reported osmophobia during some headache attacks. Owing to his headache, the child had stopped practicing
sport. At the time of the first consultation in our centre, A. was assuming paracetamol 500 mg/day as a prophylactic treatment, without any
positive effect. Moreover, his parents referred that other NSAIDs were attempted, unsuccessfully. Neurological examination was normal; brain
MRI and blood tests did not show any abnormality. A. had a positive familiar history of headache, as his mother suffered from migraine
attacks. No triggers factors were identified. A psychological screening was not possible, as the child could not speak Italian. Paracetamol
and ibuprophen treatment were attempted without any positive effect, because pain resolved in 30–40 min also without medication. To reduce
the frequency of pain attacks, a prophylactic treatment with topiramate (50 mg/day) was started, but it proved ineffective. The clinical
characteristics of our child’s headache and the failure of the traditional symptomatic and prophylactic treatments led us to consider the
diagnosis of CPH. Therefore, indomethacin 50 mg/day was started, soon affecting the frequency of the attacks, which were no longer present
after the second administration. A., who is continuing the indomethacin therapy at the same dose, has not suffered from any headache attack
for the last 6 months. This has brought a significant improvement to his quality of life. The present study describes two cases of CPH in
paediatric age. Clinical symptoms and pain characteristics of our children are similar to those found in typical adult CPH. L. and A.
presented with a long history of severe and unilateral pain, which occurred in the fronto-orbital region without side shift. As required by
the current CPH definition , attacks were accompanied by at least one autonomic symptom, ipsilateral to pain. During the attacks, besides
conjunctival injection, eyelid oedema and rhinorrhea, L. also presented vomiting and bilateral photophobia, which are typical migraine
features, common in CPH [5, 7, 10]. The main differential diagnosis of CPH is cluster headache (CH). The relationship between CPH and CH is
uncertain. In the ICHD-II, there is a considerable overlapping between the diagnostic criteria for CPH and CH, mostly concerning headache
duration (from 15 to 30 min) and attack frequency (from 5 to 8), thus complicating the differential diagnosis. Moreover, also the
behavioural characteristics may not be useful in distinguishing CPH from CH, since agitation, restlessness and aggressive behaviour during
pain attacks, typical of CH , have been described also in some CPH cases [7, 12]. Pain site and associated autonomic phenomena are similar
in both headaches, but the higher frequency of the attacks, their shorter duration and the absolute response to indomethacin may help in
distinguishing CPH from CH . Although CPH is commonly considered to prevail amongst female patients, many CPH cases in paediatric age are
males [9–11, 13], as the children we described. In line with the previous cases of CPH reported during developmental age, our patients
showed some atypical features, not fully meeting the ICHD-II criteria. First, although the ICHD-II criteria require an attack frequency
higher than 5 attacks per day, in our patients, the attack frequency was lower. This could be in favour of a diagnosis of CH, but an attack
frequency lower than the one required by the ICHD-II criteria has been described in CPH of both childhood [11, 13, 18] and adulthood .
Moreover, according to ICDH-II criteria, the attack frequency needed for diagnosing CPH should be higher than 5 per day, not constantly, but
for at least half the time of observation. Second, attack duration was variable in both our children, but in A. it was sometimes longer than
30 min, which represents the maximal duration for a CPH attack, according to the ICHD-II criteria. However, several reports showed CPH
patients with attack duration longer than 30 min in both adults [5, 7] and children [8, 9]. Frequency and duration of the attacks,
nevertheless, are commonly different between paediatric and adult population also in more common primary headaches, such as migraine and
tension-type headache. If attack duration and frequency can make the diagnosis more difficult, especially in paediatric age, the absolute
response to indomethacin represents the diagnostic key for CPH in both adults and children (indotest) [3, 21]. Indeed, it is noteworthy that
our children showed a dramatic response to indomethacin. In particular, L. did not respond to amitriptyline, as a prophylactic drug, nor to
common NSAIDs. Moreover, after an initial response to indomethacin, the headache attacks increased their frequency after the voluntary
discontinuation of the drug. They were markedly reduced when indomethacin was resumed. To avoid a prolonged treatment with a high
indomethacin dose, topiramate was added, with a satisfactory clinical response, as suggested by previous studies on CPH [9, 22, 23]. Owing
to cognitive adverse events, topiramate was replaced with valproate, which was effective, as well. To our knowledge, there are no studies
showing the efficacy of valproate in CPH. A. did not show any improvement when treated with paracetamol and topiramate, whereas headache
attacks disappeared after indomethacin was started. In none of the patients, triptans were tested, since both of them are under 12, and at
their age the use of triptans is not allowed in Italy. Long-term therapy with indomethacin is generally well tolerated , but adverse side
effects may occur both in adulthood and childhood [9, 22]. Nevertheless both our children tolerated the therapy without any problem. In
conclusion, the characteristics of our children’s headache, particularly the positive response to indomethacin, led us to consider the
diagnosis of CPH. However, the frequency and duration of our patient attacks did not fulfil the ICHD-II criteria. CPH diagnosis can be
difficult in developmental age, due to the frequency and duration of attacks. Although attacks should not be longer than 30 min , in
children’s CPH, the headache duration can exceed 40 min [8, 9, 16]. Moreover, although the ICHD-II criteria for CPH require an attack
frequency higher than 5 per day, many CPH children show a lower attack frequency (2–3 per day or less) [8, 11, 13, 18]. These elements
suggest that a revision of the current CPH diagnostic criteria, possibly with the inclusion of special notes for developmental age, would be
necessary. Conflict of interest None. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
which permits any use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
