Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA)-associated systemic vasculitides have a variety of presentations, but cardiac valvular
involvement is rarely diagnosed and its management is not established. We report the case of a 44 year old man who presented with an ANCA-
associated systemic vasculitis and aortic regurgitation of unusual mechanism. Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography disclosed
septal hypertrophy preventing a complete closure of the aortic valve and thus responsible for a massive aortic regurgitation. After 4 months
of immunosuppressive therapy, the valve lesion did not subside and the patient had to undergo aortic valve replacement. This report also
reviews the 20 cases of systemic ANCA-associated vasculitis with endocardial valvular involvement previously reported in the English
language medical literature. Valvular involvement in ANCA-associated systemic vasculitides is rarely reported. Most of these lesions are due
to Wegener's granulomatosis and half are present when the diagnosis of vasculitis is made. The valvular lesion is usually isolated, aortic
regurgitation being the most frequent type, and often requires valve replacement in the months that follow it's discovery. Antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA)-associated systemic vasculitides are a group of small vessel vasculitic syndromes including Wegener's
granulomatosis, microscopic polyangiitis and Churg Strauss syndrome. These diseases share a common pathology with focal necrotizing lesions
that affect different vessels and organs. Wegener's granulomatosis and Churg Strauss syndrome have additional granulomatous lesions. They
have a variety of presentations, but cardiac valvular involvement is rarely reported. In this report we describe the case of a patient with
an ANCA associated systemic vasculitis who presented with aortic regurgitation of unusual mechanism requiring surgical replacement. The
patient was a 44-year-old man from Bangladesh who immigrated to France twenty years ago and worked in several dusty embroidery workshops.
Eight months prior to his admission in our hospital, he developed right chronic headaches resisting usual painkillers with right hypoacusia
and tinnitus. The right ear examination was consistent with chronic otitis media. A sinus CT scan showed pansinusitis predominating on the
right side with right mastoiditis and otitis media. A cerebral MRI showed pachymeningitis of the cerebellopontine angle. Right myringotomy
yielded culture-negative drainage. The patient underwent several unsuccessful antibiotic treatments. Eight months after the onset of the
disease, the patient was referred to our ward, complaining, in addition to the other symptoms, of signs of severe intracranial hypertension
(persistant right headaches and vomiting), significant weight loss, and a change in his voice. Otorhinological examination showed an
unchanged right ear, a paralysis of the left vocal cord responsible for the dysphonia, an abolition of the gag reflex, and a palatal
paralysis. The blood pressure was 140/65 mmHg, the heart rate of 75 bpm and the general examination was normal aside from a three out of
four diastolic murmur of aortic regurgitation, without any other cardiac signs and a normal electrocardiogram. An abdominal CT-scan showed a
focal thickening of the aortic arch and an identical thickening of the superior mesenteric vein, interpreted as focal aortic and mesenteric
vasculitis. A mesenteric panniculitis was also apparent. Laboratory studies included the following values: C-reactive protein 35 mg/l, serum
urea nitrogen 4.6 mM/l, creatinine 86 mcM/l, total leukocyte count 10.3 × 10^9/l, polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia, negative
antiphospholipid antibodies, positive antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) with positive antimyeloperoxidase antibodies and negative
antiproteinase 3 antibodies. The cerebrospinal fluid contained 60 cells per mm3 with 28% lymphocytes and 1.11 g/l of protein; the bacterial,
fungal and mycobacterial cultures were negative. The cerebral MRI performed on admission was unchanged. Inferior nasal concha biopsies
showed nonspecific inflammation; temporal artery biopsies were normal. Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography revealed septal
hypertrophy leading to a restriction of aortic valvular closure and thus to massive aortic regurgitation (Figure 1). Transesophageal
echocardiography showing septal hypertrophy (white arrows) and lack of central coaptation of aortic valve (yellow arrows), resulting in
massive aortic regurgitation. Ao = aorta. LA = left atrium. LV = left ventricle. The presumptive diagnosis was ANCA-associated systemic
vasculitis, most probably Wegener's granulomatosis, with aortic valvular involvement. Treatment with prednisone (1 mg/kg) and intravenous
cyclophosphamide (700 mg/m2 every two weeks during one month then every four weeks) was started. With this immunosuppressive therapy the
palatal paralysis subsided, the headaches lessened and the patient, slowly regaining weight and energy, was able to return home. Four months
after the beginning of treatment there was an absence of echocardiographic improvement of the septal hypertrophy and aortic regurgitation
and the patient had developed congestive heart failure, so the decision was made to perform an aortic Bicarbon™valve replacement. Upon
inspection, the aorta wall and the aortic valve leaflets appeared diffusely thickened. There was a focal thickening of the interventricular
septum covered with fibrous tissue. Fibrous tissue was also found on the aortic ring and on the large mitral leaflet. No vegetations were
seen. At the end of surgery the patient was in persistent complete heart block requiring a pacemaker implantation. The microscopic
examination of the septum showed chronic remodelling with fibrous and hyaline tissue, and an intense polymorphic inflammatory infiltrate.
Fibrosis as well as a local fragmentation of the elastic fibers was found in the intima and media of the aortic wall. No inflammatory
infiltrate nor granuloma were seen in the aortic specimens. Two years after surgery, the patient is doing well on azathioprine (see Table
1). Symptoms, severity score index and main lab and imagery results of the patient described in the case report. BVAS: Birmingham Vasculitis
Activity Score In this patient, the diagnosis of ANCA-associated systemic vasculitis, most probably Wegener's granulomatosis, was based on
the association of pansinusitis, otitis, mastoiditis, chronic lymphocytic meningitis, aortitis and positive ANCA. This diagnosis was
assessed at the National Referral Center for Rare Systemic and Autoimmune Diseases, Necrotizing Vasculitides, and Systemic Sclerosis
(Hôpital Cochin, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Université Paris-Descartes, Paris). Although Pr3-ANCA, found in 70 to 90% of
patients with Wegener's granulomatosis, is often considered to be a seromarker of this disease, MPO-ANCA has been reported to be predominant
in Asian patients . This could explain the positive p-ANCA and negative c-ANCA in this patient who is from Bangladesh. The very unusual and
unique feature in this patient was the particular mechanism of aortic valve involvement that required a valve replacement. Using a Pubmed
search we looked for reported cases of ANCA-associated systemic vasculitis with a valvular involvement, using the keywords "valve",
"cardiac", "heart", "endocarditis", "mitral", "aortic", "tricuspid", "pulmonary", "ANCA", "antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies",
"Wegener's granulomatosis", "microscopic polyangiitis" and "Churg Strauss" in different combinations. We completed this search by cross-
referencing published articles. We thus selected 19 articles in English reporting 20 cases consistent with a systemic ANCA-associated
vasculitis with endocardial valvular involvement, i.e. valvular lesions for which infective endocarditis had been excluded and no other
aetiology found . The general characteristics of the patients and of their vasculitides are reviewed in Table 2. Their average age tends to
be younger than that of the other patients presenting an ANCA-associated-vasculitis (40 versus 47 years old ) and the male predominance is
greater (80% versus 53% ). One case excepted , all reported cases were diagnosed as Wegener's granulomatosis and presented with at least one
of the three most common involvements, i.e. renal, pulmonary and otolaryngological. Eye, skin or joint involvement was present in about half
the cases. Only 6 patients out of 20 experienced another cardiac lesion, such as pericardial effusion or adhesions , conduction disorders
and coronary artery stenosis . General characteristics of patients with systemic vasculitides and valvular involvement. ANCA: antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibodies; ENT: ear, nose and/or throat involvement; PR3: proteinase-3. Table 3 details the characteristics of the valvular
lesions in the 20 different cases. The most commonly encountered disorder is aortic regurgitation . Seven cases of mitral regurgitation ,
and one of aortic stenosis were also reported along with two cases of valvular vegetations , two of a mass involving a mitral leaflet
responsible for mild mitral stenosis and moderate mitral regurgitation , and one of multiple atrial masses without valvular insufficiency or
stenosis . Six patients had polyvalvular involvement . Several mechanisms responsible for these valvular lesions have been reported:
vegetations , leaflet thickening , valvular perforation and unique or multiple endocardial masses . Valvular lesion characteristics in
patients with systemic vasculitides. ?: Unknown; AR: aortic regurgitation; Ao: aortic; AS: aortic stenosis; AVR: aortic valve replacement;
CYC: cyclophosphamide; IST: immunosuppressive therapy; LV: left ventricular; M: mitral; Mo: months; MP: mitral prothesis; MR: mitral
regurgitation; MS: mitral stenosis; MVR: mitral valve replacement. Half the valvular lesions were present at initial presentation and when
the diagnosis of vasculitis was made . In six of the ten remaining cases, the valvular disease occurred while the patient was on
immunosuppressant drugs . In two of these five cases, the onset was less than a week after the treatment was initiated suggesting that the
pathological process was already taking place when the drugs were started . In only four cases valvular disease began more than a year after
the first signs of the vasculitis . A valve replacement was required in most cases . In only two cases did immunosuppressive therapy allow a
complete resolution of the valvular lesions ; and in one of these the patient had nonetheless to undergo an aortic valve replacement because
of secondary left ventricular dilatation and a shrunken leaflet. The pathological findings were nonspecific in almost all cases; i.e.
showing inflammation and/or scarring without abscess, giant cells, vasculitis, or granuloma. In two cases, granuloma, necrosis and/or micro
abscess were described in the valvular tissue . To conclude, although it might be underdiagnosed due to the lack of patent clinical signs
and the absence of systematic screening, valvular involvement in ANCA-associated systemic vasculitides is rarely reported. Most of these
valvular lesions are due to Wegener's granulomatosis and half are present when the diagnosis of vasculitis is made. The valvular lesion is
usually unique, aortic regurgitation being the most frequent type, and often requires valve replacement in the months that follow its
discovery. written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. CL wrote the paper; NM conducted the cardiological expertise; CGG, conducted the
neurological expertise; MB,.PC and LG conducted the patient's evaluation at the National Referral Center for Rare Systemic and Autoimmune
Diseases, Necrotizing Vasculitides, and Systemic Sclerosis (Hôpital Cochin, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Université Paris-
Descartes, Paris); TH is taking care of this patient and supervised the writing of this paper. All the authors have made substantial
contributions to acquisition and analysis of data and have been involved in revising the manuscript critically for intellectual content. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2474/12/50/prepub We are thankful to Dr Rebecca J. Spencer, MD-PhD, for editing the manuscript.
