We report a case of dilated episcleral vein with secondary open angle glaucoma. A 65-year-old female presented with redness of both the eyes
without any prior systemic history. Her ocular examination revealed dilated episcleral veins and a high intraocular pressure (IOP) of 38 mm
Hg in the right eye. Systemic examination was negative for carotid cavernous fistula, low-grade dural arteriovenous fistula, dysthyroid
ophthalmopathy, and primary pulmonary hypertension. During follow-up, her IOP remained in high thirties despite maximum medications. She
underwent right eye trabeculectomy with partial thickness sclerectomy with sclerotomy. In the beginning, the sclerotomy incision was not
deepened into the suprachoroidal space. She developed choroidal effusion during surgery and the sclerotomy was deepened into suprachoroidal
space and straw color fluid was drained. Postoperatively, she developed choroidal effusion, which resolved with conservative management.
This case highlights the importance of sclerotomy in such cases of high episcleral venous pressure. There can be various causes for increase
in episcleral venous pressure, including venous obstruction, arteriovenous shunts or fistulas, Sturge-Weber syndrome, scleritis, dysthyroid
orbitopathy, orbital tumors and idiopathic dilated episcleral veins (IDEV). Secondary glaucoma related to dilated episcleral veins is
difficult to manage medically and surgical complications are also high. We report a 65-year-old woman with dilated episcleral vein of
unknown etiology with secondary open angle glaucoma of only 1 year duration. A 65-year-old female visited our institute in January 2007 with
the chief complaint of redness of both the eyes. She had noticed redness of eye for last 9-10 months. She was a known case of hypertension
for last 12 years. On ocular examination, her best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20, N6 in both the eyes. Intraocular pressure (IOP) by
applanation tonometry was 38 mm Hg in the right eye (RE) and 24 mm Hg in the left eye (LE). Anterior segment examination showed dilated
episcleral vessels in both the eyes [Fig. 1a and b]. The RE episcleral veins were more dilated compared to that of LE. Gonioscopy showed
open angles with blood in Schlemm’s canal in both the eyes. Dilated fundus examination showed cup to disc ratio (CDR) to be 0.6 with
inferior rim thinning in the RE. In the LE, CDR was 0.5 with healthy neuroretinal rim. Peripheral retina showed normal caliber retinal
vessels with no sign of choroidal hemangioma. Central corneal thickness was 588 μm in the RE and 586 μm in the LE. Automated perimerty (HFA
24-2) showed normal field. As her IOP was high, she was diagnosed as having ocular hypertension and was started on timolol 0.5% for both the
eyes (BE) and Latanoprost eye drop at night in the RE. (a, b) Anterior and lateral views of the RE, showing dilated episcleral veins She was
examined again after 3 days by an orbit specialist. Ocular examination was negative for any signs suggestive of thyroid eye disease. The
ultrasound (USG) of orbit showed normal caliber of superior ophthalmic vein in both the eyes. Her thyroid profile (T3, T4, TSH, TSH receptor
antibody) was repeated twice and was normal. Her magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) orbit was not
suggestive of carotid cavernous fistula (CCF) and low flow dural arteriovenous fistula (AV fistula). Provisional diagnosis of idiopathic
elevated episcleral venous pressure was made. She was also given a course of systemic steroid (Tab Omnacortil 60 mg once a day with tapering
of 10 mg dosage every week) in tapering dose, which did not reduce dilated episcleral vein. During follow-up visit, her IOP always remained
in high thirties in the RE and mid-twenties in the LE. She was given in addition topical alpa-2 agonist (brimonidine tartarate three times a
day) and topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (CAI) (dorzolamide twice a day) in the RE. On maximum medical therapy, her IOP fluctuated
between 32 and 42 mm Hg in the RE and 24 and 32 mm Hg in the LE between Jan 2007 and May 2007. In May 2007, her repeat visual field, optic
disk and retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) scanning with Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) findings were similar to her first visit
findings. In view of her persistent elevated IOP and dilated episcleral veins, she underwent digital subtraction angiography (DSA) to rule
out low-grade dural AV fistula. The DSA showed normal brain vasculature. She was asked to have the opinion of a chest physician to rule out
primary pulmonary hypertension and/or tumor at the apex of lung. The chest X-ray and computerized tomography (CT scan) of chest were normal.
In December 2007, as her IOP was always in high thirties in RE despite maximum medications, she was advised trabeculectomy. It was thought
that due to high episcleral venous pressure, she would have high chances of uveal effusion after trabeculectomy, so partial thickness
sclerectomy with sclerotomy in infero-temporal region was planned. Right eye trabeculectomy with partial thickness sclerectomy with
sclerotomy in infero-temporal region was performed on 7 January 2008. Initially, partial thickness sclerectomy with sclerotomy was
performed; however, the incision was not deepened into the suprachoroidal space. Subsequently, routine fornix based trabeculetomy with
mitomycin C (large surface area technique) was performed superiorly. After completion of trabeculectomy, there was difficulty in forming the
anterior chamber. It was thought that the patient has developed chroidal effusion and the sclerotomy was deepened into suprachoroidal space
and straw color fluid was drained. After the choroidal fluid drainage, the anterior chamber was formed. Postoperatively, on day 1, her IOP
was 12 mm Hg, and she had a good bleb and shallow anterior chamber with collerate iridocorneal touch. On fundus examination, she had bullous
choridal detachment which was documented on ultrasonography. As the choroidals were not kissing and central anterior chamber was formed, she
was treated conservatively. She was given systemic steroids for 15 days. After 3 weeks of surgery, her choroidals subsided with conservative
management. Her IOPs on 23rd day of surgery were 20 and 25 mm Hg in the RE and LE, respectively. On anterior segment examination, she had a
good bleb and well-formed anterior chamber. Seven months after the surgery, when she was seen last, her IOP was 22 mm Hg in the RE without
any medicines and 25 mm Hg in the LE on anti-glaucoma medications. Dilated episcleral vein with secondary glaucoma is always difficult to
diagnose and manage. IDEV is considered congenital in origin and diagnosis of exclusion. However, all pathologies which lead to dilated
episcleral vein require non-invasive or invasive investigations for diagnosis. In patients with IDEV, a congenital abnormality in
vasculature and familial predisposition have been suggested as the cause; however, some reports suggest that the ocular injection is
acquired. Most of the studies in literature report this entity in the second or third decade. It is actually a diagnosis of exclusion;
however, in our case, the presentation was late and despite normal investigation we do not think it could be IDEV. Radius-Maumenee syndrome
is another possibility but it is usually unilateral and the episcleral veins usually regress in caliber and congestion after trabeculectomy,
which did not happen in our case. Low AV grade fistula would come very close to as a first differential. The gold standard to rule out the
presence of a low-grade dural AV fistula is an angiography as in a small percentage of cases; it can be missed on MRA. Both MRA and DSA were
normal and we could not confirm the diagnosis. However, it is possible that a low-grade fistula can spontaneously get closed and does not
show any abnormality on angiography. We did not measure the episcleral blood flow or episcleral venous pressure in our patient, which we
feel, would not have led to any specific diagnosis. The management is always difficult in these cases. Some argue for early filtration
surgery. It is argued that drug that works on uveoscleral pathway may be able to reduce better than a aqueous suppressant. However, in our
patient, prostaglandin analogue did not reduce IOP. It is thought that due to high episcleral venous pressure, the surgery would have higher
complication rate. We assumed that higher episcleral venous pressure and sudden IOP lowering after trabeculectomy would lead to a uveal
effusion like syndrome. From this perspective, we decided partial thickness sclerectomy and sclerotomy during trabeculectomy to take care of
cilliochoroidal detachment and choroidal effusion. However, we thought that entering into the suprachoroidal space before trabeculectomy
will lead to hypotony and will make surgery more difficult and did not enter into suprachoroidal space. This led to sudden hypotony and
development of choroidal effusion intraoperatively which resolved very slowly. To conclude, this case highlights that in some cases with
dilated episcleral veins, we may not be able to diagnose the exact etiology despite thorough investigation. It also highlights the
importance of sclerotomy in such cases of high episcleral venous pressure. It may be better to do sclerotomy and enter the suprachoroidal
space before trabeculectomy as sudden hypotony after trabeculectomy may lead to transudation of fluid into suprachoroidal space and massive
choroidal effusion during surgery.
