A 79-year-old male presented with left ocular pain. Evisceration and silicone ball implantation were performed after a diagnosis of
phthisis. He returned six weeks later because of left facial erythematous swelling, tenderness, mild fever, chills and cough. His condition
was diagnosed as orbital cellulitis. Despite two weeks of empirical antibiotic therapy, the symptoms worsened. A subsequent orbital computed
tomography scan revealed enhanced soft tissue infiltrations in his left orbit and eyelid. Biopsy showed a diffusely infiltrating tumor of
signet ring cell cytology. A systemic evaluation revealed multiple bone metastases. Based on this evidence, the patient was diagnosed with a
very rare case of histiocytoid variant eccrine sweat gland carcinoma with multiple bone metastases. The histiocytoid variant of eccrine
sweat gland carcinoma is very rare, although the histiocytoid variant of eccrine sweat gland carcinoma (specifically, infiltrating signet
ring carcinoma) occurring in the eyelid has been reported . The histiocytoid variant is a malignant tumor diffusely infiltrating the dermis
and subcutaneous tissue without epidermal involvement. Here, we report the first Korean case of a histiocytoid variant of eccrine sweat
gland carcinoma, showing infiltrations of signet ring cell cytology and multiple bone metastases. The symptoms were initially misdiagnosed
as orbital cellulitis after surgery. A 79-year-old male visited our clinic for the evaluation of left ocular pain that had recently
worsened. His left eye was phthitic due to glaucoma. The patient had also previously undergone an endoscopic rectal polypectomy.
Evisceration and silicone ball (18 mm) implantation were performed. He returned six weeks later with symptoms of mild fever, cough, and
chills, as well as left facial erythema, swelling, and tenderness (Fig. 1). We diagnosed the symptoms as orbital cellulitis induced by
recent evisceration surgery and the common cold. However, despite two weeks of empirical antibiotic therapy, the patient's symptoms
worsened. An orbital computed tomography (CT) scan revealed enhanced soft tissue infiltrations in his left extraconal and intraconal spaces
and a thickening of the left eyelid (Fig. 2). An incisional biopsy of the orbital tissue was performed through the superomedial portion of
the conjunctiva. The tumor was gray-white colored and was not separated from the surrounding tissue on gross examination. Histopathology
demonstrated cells with round to oblong nuclei, small distinct nucleoli, and relatively abundant granular amphophilic cytoplasm. Some cells
had signet ring cytology, with a dominant cytoplasmic vacuole and an eccentrically placed, crescent-shaped nucleus (Fig. 3).
Immunohistochemistry revealed that the tumor tissue was positive for cytokeratin and cytokeratin 7 but negative for cytokeratin 20. Results
of an abdominal ultrasound, abdominal-pelvic CT, and a whole body bone scan suggested no systemic involvement. Additionally, tumor marker
tests were all within the normal ranges. However, brain magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission tomography revealed metastatic
lesions on the left frontal and temporal lobes of the skull; nasal bone; left basal skull; right mandibular ramus and sternum; vertebra in
the cervical, thoracic, lumbar and sacral regions; and the left ischium (Fig. 4). To rule out a secondary tumor from the previous rectal
lesion, rectal biopsy was performed and revealed a benign adenoma confined to the mucosal layer. Consequently, the lesion in question was
diagnosed as a primary malignant eccrine sweat gland carcinoma of the eye (a histiocytoid variant of eccrine sweat gland carcinoma) with
multiple bone metastases. Although the patient was fully functional on the first visit, his general condition declined during the subsequent
three months. The patient became bedridden, refused all recommended treatments, and received only conservative treatment. Primary eccrine
sweat gland carcinoma is a very rare tumor that most typically occurs in the eyelids of the elderly. There are three variants of this type
of carcinoma: mucinous, adenoid cystic, and ductal . The present case is of the third variant, ductal carcinoma. Ductal carcinomas are
further classified into two categories based on the type of cell differentiation: well-differentiated ductal carcinoma featuring numerous
signet ring cells are classified as signet ring carcinoma, while poorly-differentiated ductal carcinoma is classified as the histiocytoid
variant. The tumor in question showed the characteristics of the latter form . This histiocytoid variant of eccrine sweat gland carcinoma
showed a histiocyte morphology rather than a signet ring cell morphology in the tumor burden, although histiocytoid tumors may contain foci
of signet ring cell morphology, and vice versa . Tumor cells in this case exhibited eosinophilic cytoplasm with intracytoplasmic
vacuolations, characteristics similar to those of a histiocyte. The majority of tumor cells did not have the distinct, eccentric, scimitar-
like nuclei of signet ring cells. A primary histiocytoid variant of eccrine sweat gland carcinoma is a very rare neoplasm, with only eight
cases having been reported in the literature . In the cases reported, most tumor cells had abundant eosionophilic cytoplasm with
intracytoplasmic vacuolations resembling histiocytes and a signet ring appearance . The diagnosis of primary histiocytoid variant of eccrine
sweat gland carcinoma is one of exclusion. Common primary foci include the breast, gastrointestinal tract, lung, skin, and urogenital tract.
The most common sites are breast in women and lung in men . Previously reported cases of the histiocytoid variant of eccrine sweat gland
carcinoma follow an indolent course with slow and painless growth . Only one of the eight cases showed metastasis, recurrence, and mortality
. However, these tumors can exhibit rapid growth with consequent pain. The case reported here had an unfavorable outcome with rapid
progression, ocular pain, facial pain, and multiple bone metastases. Most cases of primary eccrine sweat gland carcinoma described in the
literature mainly appeared in the eyelid. However, Kramer et al. described the eccrine sweat gland carcinoma in the orbit. Like Kramer et
al. , the imaging studies in this case showed soft tissue infiltrations primarily involved in the orbit. Moreover, the subcutaneous
infiltrations of the eyelid were also noted on the imaging studies. These facts suggested that the tumor mass in this case affected both the
orbit and the eyelid. The orbital imaging studies were not performed before the evisceration surgery because it was believed that the
patient's accelerated ocular pain was induced by glaucoma. At his preoperative assessment, the patient's left eye was phthitic and appeared
stable. After the evisceration surgery, the patient's facial pain and erythema were believed to be caused by orbital cellulitis. He had
multiple risk factors for orbital infection: advanced age, recent evisceration surgery, silicone ball implantation, and symptoms of the
common cold. In hindsight, the increased ocular pain could have been caused by the tumor growth occurring at the time of the evisceration
surgery, rather than glaucoma. In other words, the ocular pain could have been cancer-related pain associated with the rapid tumor growth.
It is difficult to determine the exact time of tumor occurrence because orbital imaging was not performed before the surgical procedure. We
presumed that the patient's pre- and post-operative pain and orbital cellulitis may be related to the tumor growth. Furthermore, the rapid
progression of the tumor may have been accelerated by the surgical procedure. As a result, the interval from the patient's initial visit
with simple left ocular pain to the eventual diagnosis of primary eccrine sweat gland carcinoma was only three months. After the diagnosis,
multiple metastases were also detected along the spine. To our knowledge, this is the first Korean case of a histiocytoid variant of eccrine
sweat gland carcinoma in the eye. Based on this case, we suggest taking an orbital imaging study prior to evisceration surgery in cases of
abnormal ocular pain or rapid progression. In refractory cases of orbital cellulitis, aggressive follow-up may be necessary, including
diagnostic confirmation through orbital imaging and tissue biopsy. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
Clinical photograph of the erythematous swelling of the left eyelid. Enhanced extraconal and intraconal infiltrations in the left orbit, and
an inferolateral view of the silicone ball sphere in the eyelid. The tumors were composed of cells with hyperchromatic eccentric nuclei
(suggesting signet ring cells), prominent eosinophilic cytoplasm, and intracytoplasmic vacuolations (H&E, Ã—400). A positron emission
tomography image revealed the multiple intense hypermetabolic foci on the left orbit and the skull as well as along the spine.
