To the Editor: Eating raw or undercooked marine fish may lead to infection with several helminths. Members of the Pseudoterranova decipiens
species complex are the second most common nematodes found in humans (most common are nematodes of the Anisakis simplex complex) (1,2). The
P. decipiens species complex consists of at least 5 sibling species (genetically but not morphologically distinguishable): P. decipiens
sensu stricto, P. azarasi, P. cattani, P. krabbei, and P. bulbosa. In northern Japan, human infection with Pseudoterranova spp. is not rare;
by the mid-1990s, as many as 769 cases had been reported (3). Pseudoterranovosis has also been encountered in North and South America and
Europe (4,5). However, possible biologic and geographic differences of the sibling species of genus Pseudoterranova in relation to human
infection remain unknown. We report a case of pseudoterranovosis for which the sibling species was confirmed as P. azarasi. In 2009, a woman
in Japan coughed up a nematode and expelled it through her mouth. Her medical history was unremarkable, and she had not traveled abroad for
the past few years. Measurements of the worm were as follows: body 35 mm long and 0.85 mm wide; esophagus 1.88 mm long; ventriculus 1.05 mm
long; and intestinal cecum 0.95 mm long, extending anteriorly along the ventriculus. The anterior end of the worm contained 3 lips. The tail
was conical, 0.21 mm long, and had a small, knob-like process at the posterior end. On the basis of morpohologic features, the worm was
identified as a 4th-stage larva of P. decipiens (sensu lato) roundworms. DNA was extracted from the isolate from the patient (clinical
isolate) and from isolates of P. decipiens (sensu lato) larvae from Pacific cod purchased at a local market. PCR was performed and the
amplification products were directly sequenced. Primers used were 5′-CCGGGCAAAAGTCGTAACAA-3′ and 5′-ATATGCTTAAATTCAGCGGGT-3′ for a region
that spans the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) 1, ITS2, and 5.8S rRNA; 5′-CTACTACTAAGAATTTGCGT-3′ and 5′-AATCCAAATACTTACGAGGA-3′ for
cytochrome oxidase subunit 1; and 5′-CAGCGTATTGGTCCTAATAA-3′ and 5′-AGCATAAACAAAAGTAAACTCA-3′ for NADH dehydrogenase subunit 1. Nucleotide
sequences for the clinical and Pacific cod isolates (GenBank accession nos. AB576756–AB576761) were compared with those in DNA databases
available to the public. The ITS1 and ITS2 sequences of the clinical and Pacific cod isolates were identical to those of P. azarasi
roundworms; however, the ITS sequences of these 2 isolates also showed close similarity to those of P. decipiens (sensu stricto) worms and
differed by only 1 nt in ITS2. However, phylogenetic tree analyses of NADH dehydrogenase subunit 1 and cytochrome oxidase subunit 1
sequences showed that the clinical and Pacific cod roundworm isolates clustered with P. azarasi and were clearly distinguished from P.
decipiens (sensu stricto), showing that the clinical isolate belonged to P. azarasi (Figure). Phylogenetic analysis of members of
Pseudoterranova decipiens species complex roundworms. Genetic relationships between NADH dehydrogenase subunit 1 sequences in clinical and
Pacific cod isolates and species were inferred by using the neighbor-joining method. Bootstrap values (1,000 replicates) are shown next to
the branches. The final dataset contained 498 positions. *P. decipiens sensu stricto. Scale bar indicates nucleotide substitutions per site.
Geographic distribution of the 5 sibling species of the P. decipiens complex differs somewhat. P. azarasi and P. bulbosa are found in
northwestern Pacific (including Japan), P. decipiens (sensu stricto) and P. krabbei in northeastern Atlantic, P. decipiens (sensu stricto)
in northwestern Atlantic, and P. cattani in southeastern Pacific waters (1). Given this distribution, it is not surprising that the clinical
isolate and the larvae from the Pacific cod were identified as P. azarasi, 1 of 2 species found in water near Japan. Adult worms live in the
intestines of seals and sea lions, and infective larvae live in the tissues of various marine fish, including cod, pollack, and smelt (1).
In Japan, most patients infected with Pseudoterranova spp. have acute or subacute abdominal pain, and larvae are extracted from the stomach
endoscopically. However, for some patients, diagnosis is made when 4th-stage larvae are expelled from the mouth, indicating that the larvae
developed from the 3rd to 4th stage during the time of infection, as did the worm reported here. Expulsion of Pseudoterranova spp. larvae
from the mouth in the absence of severe gastric symptoms occurs more commonly in Chile (5). Whether the varied symptoms triggered by
infection with Pseudoterranova spp. larvae reflect different responses of individual hosts to the worms or whether the pathogenicity of
Pseudoterranova spp. in humans differs among worm species remains to be elucidated. Because of the increasing worldwide popularity of eating
sushi and sashimi made of raw marine fish, consumers should be made aware of the possible risk for fish-borne parasitoses. Freezing and
storing fish at −20°C for 7 days or freezing at −35°C until solid and storing at −35°C for 15 hours is sufficient to kill parasites (6).
Suggested citation for this article: Arizono N, Miura T, Yamada M, Tegoshi T, Onishi K. Human infection with Pseudoterranova azarasi
roundworm . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2011 Mar [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1703.101350 This work was
supported in part by grants-in-aids from the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan (H20-Shinko).
