Short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing (SUNCT) syndrome is a rare headache syndrome
classified among the trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias. It is usually idiopathic, although infrequent secondary forms have been described.
Recently, the term short-lasting unilateral headache with cranial autonomic symptoms (SUNA) has been defined by the International Headache
Society (ICHD-2) as similar to SUNCT with less prominent absent conjunctival injection and lacrimation. We report a patient with paroxysmal
orbito-temporal pains, phenotypically suggesting SUNA, secondary to epidermoid cyst in the cerebellopontine angle which disappeared after
tumor resection. Neuroimaging should be considered in all patients with SUNA, notably in those with atypical presentation as our patient who
presented on examination trigeminal hypoesthesia and tinnitus. Realization of a brain MRI would rule out injuries that causes this type of
syndrome. Short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache with conjunctival injection and tearing (SUNCT) is a rare form of trigeminal
autonomic cephalalgia (TAC) mostly described as a primary headache syndrome. The acute headache is usually accompanied by ipsilateral
conjunctival injection, lacrimation, rhinorrhoea, nasal congestion, ptosis, miosis and facial redness or sweating. Short-lasting unilateral
neuralgiform headache with autonomic symptoms (SUNA) has been defined by the International Headache Society (ICHD-2) as similar to SUNCT
with less prominent or absent conjunctival injection and lacrimation . SUNCT syndrome has been described secondary to other causes .
Posterior fossa lesions, including ipsilateral cerebellopontine angle arteriovenous malformations, brainstem cavernous haemangioma and base
of skull bony abnormalities have been described anecdotally to be associated with SUNCT. The patient was a 36-year-old woman with pain from
a deep area of the right eye to the temporal region as the primary symptom. In August 2009, attacks of pulsating and stabbing pain in the
right orbital to temporal region with a sudden onset and duration of about 30 s began to occur 8–12 times almost daily. It did not occur
more frequently during any particular period of the day. She denied having any triggers for these attacks. Photophobia and phonophobia were
noted during the attacks, but there was no nausea, vomiting, conjunctival injection, or tearing. Nasal congestion was the only autonomic
symptom. The patient was prescribed carbamazepine and ibuprofen, but there were no changes in the symptoms. The patient also consulted an
ophthalmologist, but there was no evidence ocular pathology. She visited the outpatient clinic of our department in the late October 2009.
She was previously healthy and had no familial history of migraine. The examination was performed in an attack-free period, no swelling or
reddening of the scalp arteries including the superficial temporal artery was noted, and no herpetic rash was observed on her face or head.
No particular neurological abnormality was noted, except a hypoesthesia in the first and second right trigeminal branches territories and
tinnitus. Blood test showed no abnormality in peripheral blood or general biochemical analysis, no sign of inflammatory reaction, and no
abnormality related to collagen disease or any hypothalamohypophyseal hormones such as prolactin or thyroid hormones. Treatment was changed
to gabapentin (1,600 mg/day) and indomethacin (75 mg/day) without improvement. Brain MRI (Fig. 1) revealed an extraaxial lesion at the right
cerebellopontine angle with edges well defined, hypointense on T1 (relative to the cerebral cortex), hyperintense on T2, heterogeneous in
FLAIR sequences, which does not capture contrast. The lesion displaces the VII and VIII cranial nerve, and produces imprint on the brain
stem and adjacent right cerebellar hemisphere, without signs of infiltration. All these features are suggestive of an epidermoid
cyst.Fig. 1Brain MRI in axial plane and T2 sequences: extraaxial lesion at the right cerebellopontine angle, heterogeneous, hyperintense
with edges well defined. The lesion produces imprint on the brain stem without signs of infiltration. All these features are suggestive of
an epidermoid cyst Brain MRI in axial plane and T2 sequences: extraaxial lesion at the right cerebellopontine angle, heterogeneous,
hyperintense with edges well defined. The lesion produces imprint on the brain stem without signs of infiltration. All these features are
suggestive of an epidermoid cyst A total resection of the lesion was carried out by retrosigmoid craniectomy without complications. During
surgery no evidence of any vascular loop on the trigeminal nerve was observed. SUNA episodes gradually disappeared in less than a week. When
the patient was asymptomatic the gabapentin was stopped. In reviews at 6 and 12 months she continued asymptomatic. TACs are a group of
primary headache disorders characterized by unilateral pain in the trigeminal nerve distribution, associated with ipsilateral cranial
autonomic features. Despite their similarities, these disorders differ in their clinical manifestations and response to therapy. We excluded
paroxysmal hemicrania based on the lack of response to indomethacin . Additionally, the patient does not have trigger points or response to
carbamazepine, and the pain duration is longer than that usually observed in trigeminal neuralgia . Primary idiopathic stabbing headache is
another differential diagnosis we considered. However, in 80% of cases with this diagnosis, the pain lasted less than 2 s, and in 40% of the
cases, patients report other migraine features. Additionally, the pain is usually (but not always) responsive to indomethacin and cranial
autonomic features are absent in this syndrome . In view of the absence of conjunctival injection or tearing, our patient satisfies the
definition of SUNA (Table 1).Table 1Classification of SUNA according to the second edition of the International Classification of Headache
DisordersA At least 20 attacks fulfilling criteria B–EB Attacks of unilateral orbital, supraorbital or temporal stabbing or pulsating pain
lasting from 2 s to 10 minC Pain is accompanied by one of 1. Conjunctival injection and/or lacrimation 2. Nasal congestion and/or
rhinorrhea 3. Eyelid oedemaD Attacks occur with a frequency of ≥1 per day from more than half of the timeE No refractory period follows
attacks triggered from trigger areasF Not attributed to another disorder Classification of SUNA according to the second edition of the
International Classification of Headache Disorders Recently, criteria have been proposed to establish a causal relationship between the
associated lesion and the headache syndrome (Table 2). Our patient satisfied all of them. Even clinically typical TACs can be caused by
structural lesions. Neuroimaging should be considered in all patients with TACs or TAC-like syndromes, notably in those with atypical
presentation as our patient who presented on examination trigeminal hypoesthesia and tinnitus.Table 2Criteria for determining causal
relationship between associated pathology and headache1.Close temporal relationship between the associated disease and the onset of
pain2.Side concordance between the unilateral pain and the lesion, if localized3.Surgical remission, if the patient was operated on, or
prompt remission after aetiological medical therapy, if indicated, without the need of constant indomethacin administration4.Prolonged post-
treatment follow-up, in order to exclude a relapse of the headache attacks or improvement due to spontaneous remission Criteria for
determining causal relationship between associated pathology and headache Most cases of SUNCT are idiopathic, but there are a few cases in
the literature that are secondary to intracranial lesions. They are either due to pituitary lesions or posterior fossa lesions as vascular
compression of trigeminal nerve. However, symptomatic SUNA cases are rare in the literature. They have been described secondary to multiple
sclerosis , vertebral artery dissection, cortical dysplasia and post-traumatic. In a study , there were no SUNA patients whose attacks could
be triggered by touch, as opposed to 63% of SUNCT patients in whom touching the face could trigger attacks. These authors reported that uni
or bilateral activation of the hypothalamus was noted during headache attacks in patients with SUNCT, but that no activation of the same
regions was noted in those with SUNA. Microvascular decompression of the trigeminal nerve in medically intractable SUNCT and SUNA in
patients that demonstrate aberrant arterial loop imprint could be effective . To our knowledge, this patient is the first case of SUNA
secondary to epidermoid cyst and causality is strengthened by disappearance of episodes of pain after tumor resection. There are no
conflicts of interest in this manuscript. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License which permits any use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
