Axial myopathy is a rare neuromuscular disease that is characterized by paraspinal muscle atrophy and abnormal posture, most notably
camptocormia (also known as bent spine). The genetic cause of familial axial myopathy is unknown. Described here are the clinical features
and cause of late-onset predominant axial myopathy and encephalopathy. A 73-year-old woman presented with a 10-year history of severe
paraspinal muscle atrophy and cerebellar ataxia. Her 84-year-old sister also developed late-onset paraspinal muscle atrophy and generalized
seizures with encephalopathy. Computed tomography showed severe atrophy and fatty degeneration of their paraspinal muscles. Their mother and
maternal aunt also developed bent spines. The existence of many ragged-red fibers and cytochrome c oxidase-negative fibers in the biceps
brachii muscle of the proband indicated a mitochondrial abnormality. No significant abnormalities were observed in the respiratory chain
enzyme activities; however, the activities of complexes I and IV were relatively low compared with the activities of other complexes.
Sequence analysis of the mitochondrial DNA from the muscle revealed a novel heteroplasmic mutation (m.602C>T) in the mitochondrial tRNAPhe
gene. This familial case of late-onset predominant axial myopathy and encephalopathy may represent a new clinical phenotype of a
mitochondrial disease. Camptocormia, a term coined by Souques and Rosanoff-Saloff from two Greek words (kamptos meaning bent and kormos
meaning trunk), is characterized by involuntary trunk flexion in the erect position that disappears in the supine position. Camptocormia was
initially described as a hysterical phenomenon that occurred in male soldiers during World Wars I and II [1, 16]. However, in the last
20 years camptocormia has been reported to be present with various organic diseases, including muscular dystrophies, inflammatory
myopathies, dystonia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, myasthenia gravis, paraneoplastic syndrome, Parkinson’s disease, multiple system
atrophy, and spinal deformities, as well as in an idiopathic form. Camptocormia is also referred to as “bent spine syndrome” [1, 32]. Axial
myopathy has been described as the selective involvement of the paraspinal muscles in camptocormia or dropped head. Axial myopathy has
heterogeneous etiologies, including primary and various other neuromuscular disorders. Primary axial myopathy is characterized by the
insidious and progressive weakness of the extensor muscles of the spine, normal or slightly elevated serum creatine kinase (CK) levels, and
a myogenic pattern on electromyography in the elderly. Muscle biopsies show nonspecific myopathic changes with fibrosis, fatty replacement,
and variations in fiber size. In addition, some ragged-red fibers and complex I and III deficiencies have been observed; these findings are
considered to be the age-related accumulation of various mitochondrial abnormalities [21, 31]. Some cases of autosomal dominant inheritance
patterns of familial primary axial myopathy were reported several years ago; however, the genetic analyses that were used have not been
described . Recently, a novel heterozygous dominant mutation in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor gene was identified in the central
cores of muscle biopsy specimens that were excised from sporadic cases of axial myopathy . Furthermore, facioscapulohumeral muscular
dystrophy with isolated axial myopathy has also been reported . Five cases of axial myopathy that were associated with mitochondrial
dysfunction have been previously reported; however, no familial cases of mitochondrial gene mutation have been reported [8, 11, 28, 30, 32].
In this paper, we have reported about a mitochondrial disease that is characterized by familial late-onset predominant axial myopathy and
encephalopathy. In addition, the pathogenicity of a novel, familial, mitochondrial tRNA gene mutation is discussed. A 73-year-old woman
(Fig. 1, III-8) presenting with abnormal posture and gait disturbance. Since the age of 63, the patient had a slight stooping posture and a
pushed-out waist. At 68 years of age, she started using a walking stick because of her unstable gait. She was diagnosed with hypothyroidism
by her family physician and administrated with 25 μg/day levothyroxine; however, her symptoms did not improve. At 70 years of age, it
gradually became more difficult for her to climb the stairs. At 71 years of age, she was admitted to another hospital. Doctors suspected
myopathy because of elevated serum CK levels. She visited our hospital presenting with prominent paraspinal muscle atrophy and mild proximal
weakness of limbs. Hypothyroidism-related myopathy was suspected in her, and hence, the levothyroxine dose was increased to 50 μg/day;
however, her symptoms did not improve. She had a family history of bent spine, i.e., in her elder sister (patient 2, Fig. 1, III-5), mother
(Fig. 1, II-3), and maternal aunt (Fig. 1, II-4). Physical examination on arrival revealed a marked atrophy of the paraspinal muscles and
abnormal posture (Fig. 2a, b). She also presented with right ptosis, dysarthria, bilateral cataracts, and hearing loss. Her eye movements
were normal. But there was moderate weakness of the neck flexion and mild weakness of the proximal limb muscles. Tendon reflexes were
symmetrical, and Babinski’s sign was absent. She had poor balance with tandem gait without limb ataxia. Sensory systems were intact and
Romberg’s sign was negative. She scored poorly on the attention and calculation tests that are a part of the Mini-Mental State Examination
(score: 25 points).Fig. 1Pedigree of the family. The arrow indicates the proband. The affected individuals are represented by the solid
black symbols; open symbols represent healthy individuals. Gray symbols indicate individuals with elevated CK levelsFig. 2a The full-length
figure indicates the posture of patient 1 showing her pushed-out waist. b The dorsal view shows the marked atrophy of the paraspinal muscles
in patient 1. CT of T10 of c patient 1 (age 71), e patient 2 (age 82), and g a healthy female (age 74) reveals the profound atrophy of the
paraspinal muscles in c patient 1 and e patient 2, but not in g the healthy female. Brain MRI studies revealed several differences between
the patients 1 and 2. d Axial FLAIR images of patient 1 show moderate cerebellar atrophy and some cerebral cortical atrophy. f The same
images of patient 2 revealing hyperintense lesions around the white matter Pedigree of the family. The arrow indicates the proband. The
affected individuals are represented by the solid black symbols; open symbols represent healthy individuals. Gray symbols indicate
individuals with elevated CK levels a The full-length figure indicates the posture of patient 1 showing her pushed-out waist. b The dorsal
view shows the marked atrophy of the paraspinal muscles in patient 1. CT of T10 of c patient 1 (age 71), e patient 2 (age 82), and g a
healthy female (age 74) reveals the profound atrophy of the paraspinal muscles in c patient 1 and e patient 2, but not in g the healthy
female. Brain MRI studies revealed several differences between the patients 1 and 2. d Axial FLAIR images of patient 1 show moderate
cerebellar atrophy and some cerebral cortical atrophy. f The same images of patient 2 revealing hyperintense lesions around the white matter
Laboratory data were as follows: serum CK level was 290 IU/l (normal range 45–163 IU/l), resting blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) lactate
levels were normal, thyroid-stimulating hormone levels were slightly low at 0.47 μIU/ml (normal range 0.5–5.0 μIU/ml). Under the
administration of 50 μg/day levothyroxine; antithyroglobulin antibody levels were high at 7.0 U/ml (normal range <0.3 U/ml), antithyroid
peroxidase antibody levels were high at 46.5 U/ml (normal range <0.3 U/ml), rheumatoid factor levels were high at 152.3 IU/ml (normal value
<15.0 IU/ml), antinuclear antibody levels were mildly elevated (titer of 1:80). Autoimmune analyses, including anti-Jo-1, anti-RNP, anti-
SS-A, and anti-SS-B, were negative. The oral glucose tolerance test (75 g) was within normal limits, but Holter monitoring revealed high-
frequency premature contractions. Pure-tone audiometry indicated sensorineural and high-frequency hearing loss. Needle electromyographic
findings of the biceps brachii and rectus femoris muscles indicated mild myopathic features. Computed tomography (CT) of the thoracic spinal
nerve 10 (T10) revealed severe atrophy and fatty degeneration of the paraspinal muscles (Fig. 2c). Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
with fluid-attenuated inversion recovery imaging showed moderate cerebellar and temporo-parieto-occipital lobe atrophy (Fig. 2d). MR
spectroscopy revealed the absence of increased lactate peaks. 123I-IMP single photon emission CT revealed hypoperfusion that was indicative
of atrophic brain lesions. The elder sister of patient 1 was an 84-year-old woman with a stooping posture presenting with tremors since the
age of 60. In her 70s she started walking with the aid of a walking stick. At 82 years of age, she was hospitalized for generalized seizures
and disturbed consciousness. CT of T10 revealed severe atrophy and fatty degeneration of the paraspinal muscles (Fig. 2e). Brain MRI
revealed hyperintense lesions around the white matter (Fig. 2f); elevated serum and CSF lactate levels were also noted at this time. The
mitochondrial DNA analysis of the lymphocytes did not indicate MELAS (m.3243A>G) or MERRF (m.8344A>G) mutations. The patient’s condition
remained undiagnosed and she died at the age of 84. CK levels in all her four sons were found to be elevated and her third son was diagnosed
with epilepsy. She and her fourth son had also been previously diagnosed with Hashimoto thyroiditis (Fig. 1). Patient 1 was examined using
pathological, biochemical, and genetic analyses. The Institutional Review Board of Kagoshima University approved this study. Patient 1 gave
the written and informed consent for her participation in this study. Frozen biopsies of the biceps brachii muscle specimens were obtained
from patient 1. The specimens were sliced into 8 μm sections and placed on aminosilane-coated slides. Histochemical and immunohistochemical
procedures were performed as previously described . Enzyme activity levels, blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (BN-PAGE), and
other biochemical measurements of the frozen muscle specimens from patient 1 were performed as previously described [6, 33, 36]. In case of
patient 1, the total DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood leukocytes and the frozen muscle specimens using the DNeasy Blood & Tissue
kit (Qiagen). MitoChip v2.0 (The GeneChip® Human Mitochondrial Resequencing Array 2.0), which provides a standard assay for the complete
sequence analysis of human mitochondrial DNA, was obtained from Affymetrix. The patient’s entire mitochondrial DNA was sequenced using
MitoChip v2.0 as previously described . Analysis of the microarray data obtained with MitoChip v2.0 was performed using GeneChip Sequence
Analysis Software v4.0 (Affymetrix) . In order to reveal the mutations that were confirmed by MitoChip v2.0, a 465-base pair PCR product
that spanned all of the mutation sites was screened by DNA sequencing. In brief, 50 ng of the patient’s genomic DNA was amplified using the
hot-start PCR method and a forward (5′-CACCATTCTCCGTGAAATCA-3′) and reverse primer (5′-AGGCTAAGCGTTTTGAGCTG-3′) [5, 29]. Each PCR product
was generated under the following conditions: 15 min at 95°C, 42 cycles of amplification (95°C for 30 s, 61°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 1 min),
and 30 min at 72°C. Using a presequencing kit (USB, Cleveland, OH, USA), the patient’s PCR products with abnormal elution profiles were
purified, and the appropriate PCR products from relatives and control chromosomes were obtained and sequenced by dye-terminator chemistry
using an ABI Prism 377 sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The resulting sequences were then aligned and any mutations
were evaluated using the Sequencher sequence alignment program (Gene Codes, Ann Arbor, MI, USA). The polymorphic and pathogenic natures of
the confirmed mutations were checked against two databases: the MITOMAP (http://www.mitomap.org/) and GiiB-JST mtSNP database
(http://mtsnp.tmig.or.jp/mtsnp/index.shtml). The muscle fibers ranged from 10 to 80 μm in diameter. Sixty-nine of the 609 Gomori trichrome
stained muscle fibers (11.3%) were ragged-red fibers (Fig. 3a). Cytochrome c oxidase (COX) activity was deficient in many of the ragged-blue
fibers that were stained with succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) and COX (233 of 881 muscle fibers, 26.4%) (Fig. 3b, c), and no blood vessels
showing strong SDH reactivity were observed. In NADH dehydrogenase-reactive sections, focal decreases and increases in oxidative enzyme
activities were observed. Adenosine monophosphate (AMP) deaminase activity was normal. The random checkerboard distribution of the
histochemical fiber types was preserved as shown in the ATPase-reactive sections. Acid phosphatase activity was slightly high in some
fibers. Muscle fiber glycogen contents appeared normal and the lipid contents were slightly high in some fibers. Electron microscopy showed
abnormal proliferation of mitochondria with paracrystalline inclusions (Fig. 4).Fig. 3Histochemical analysis of the right biceps brachii
muscle. a Gomori trichrome staining reveals typical ragged-red fibers. Histochemical analysis of serial sections of samples stained with b
SDH or c COX shows a number of ragged-blue fibers with COX deficiency. a−cBar 100 μmFig. 4Electron micrograph of abnormal mitochondria in
the right biceps brachii muscle. Abnormal mitochondria with paracrystalline inclusions that are suggestive of mitochondrial myopathy are
shown. abar 1 μm, bbar 500 nm Histochemical analysis of the right biceps brachii muscle. a Gomori trichrome staining reveals typical ragged-
red fibers. Histochemical analysis of serial sections of samples stained with b SDH or c COX shows a number of ragged-blue fibers with COX
deficiency. a−cBar 100 μm Electron micrograph of abnormal mitochondria in the right biceps brachii muscle. Abnormal mitochondria with
paracrystalline inclusions that are suggestive of mitochondrial myopathy are shown. abar 1 μm, bbar 500 nm All respiratory chain enzyme
activities, which are expressed as a percentage of the normal control values relative to the citrate synthase activity, were greater than
20% (Table 1). BN-PAGE revealed no abnormalities in either the respiratory chain complexes or their molecular assembly
structures.Table 1Enzymatic activities for mitochondrial respiratory complexes in patient 1CI activity (CI/CS)CII activity (CII/CS)CIII
activity (CIII/CS)CIV activity (CIV/CS)CS activityPatient 10.1938 (0.7027)0.2723 (0.9874)1.2737 (4.6192)0.0579 (0.21)0.2757Control0.3194
(1.6183)0.2751 (1.3444)1.3132 (6.5512)0.0826 (0.3840)0.2151Patient 1/control ratio60.7% (43.4%)98.9% (73.4%)97.0% (70.5%)70.1%
(54.7%)Enzymatic activities for individual mitochondrial respiratory complexes are given in nmol/min protein, and represent percentage of
normal control (n = 10) mean relative to a reference enzyme of citrate synthase (CS)The activities are relatively low in complex I and
complex IV compared with other complexesCI complex I, CII complex II, CIII complex III, CIV complex IV Enzymatic activities for
mitochondrial respiratory complexes in patient 1 Enzymatic activities for individual mitochondrial respiratory complexes are given in
nmol/min protein, and represent percentage of normal control (n = 10) mean relative to a reference enzyme of citrate synthase (CS) The
activities are relatively low in complex I and complex IV compared with other complexes CI complex I, CII complex II, CIII complex III, CIV
complex IV Using MitoChip v2.0, 37 missense variants were detected in the mitochondrial DNA of the peripheral blood lymphocytes. All of
these variants show polymorphisms and are listed in the MITOMAP and GiiB-JST mtSNP databases. Two additional missense variants were detected
in the mitochondrial DNA of the muscle homogenate; the variants were m.602C>T in the tRNAPhe gene and m.16111C>G in the D-loop. The variant
m.16111C>G is listed as a polymorphism, but the variant m.602C>T is not reported in either database. The m.602C>T variant was also confirmed
by direct sequencing. The sequence chromatogram showed a heteroplasmic m.602C>T transition in the muscle homogenate mitochondrial tRNAPhe
gene (Fig. 5a). The proportion of mutant mitochondrial DNA in the muscle was 64.7 ± 1.2% (mean ± SD; the operation was performed thrice).
Mutant mitochondrial DNA was not detected in the blood lymphocytes when measured using real-time amplification refractory mutation system
quantitative PCR analysis (RT-ARMS qPCR), as previously described [2, 10]. Healthy Japanese controls (n = 100) did not show these mutations
in their blood lymphocytes, at least not within the limits of Sanger’s method for DNA sequencing.Fig. 5a Sequence chromatogram of the
mitochondrial DNA region that encompasses the m.602C>T alteration (asterisk) that was obtained from the skeletal muscle of patient 1
(reverse complement). b Schematic diagram of the mitochondrial tRNAPhe cloverleaf structure showing previously reported mutations and the
m.602C>T alteration in the D-stem. c Comparison of mitochondrial tRNAPhe from different species. Base pairs, including the 602 nucleotides,
are shown in boxes a Sequence chromatogram of the mitochondrial DNA region that encompasses the m.602C>T alteration (asterisk) that was
obtained from the skeletal muscle of patient 1 (reverse complement). b Schematic diagram of the mitochondrial tRNAPhe cloverleaf structure
showing previously reported mutations and the m.602C>T alteration in the D-stem. c Comparison of mitochondrial tRNAPhe from different
species. Base pairs, including the 602 nucleotides, are shown in boxes A novel mitochondrial tRNAPhe gene mutation was identified in a
patient with late-onset predominant axial myopathy and cerebellar ataxia (patient 1). She presented with a maternal history of bent spine,
and her elder sister presented with elevated lactate levels, severe paraspinal muscle atrophy, and epilepsy. Furthermore, the sister’s four
sons presented with elevated CK levels, among which one had epilepsy. Patient 1 also presented with other symptoms associated with
mitochondrial disease, including mild blepharoptosis, cataracts, hearing loss, and arrhythmia. Morphological examination revealed many
ragged-red fibers and a partial deficiency in COX activity. One of the major diagnostic criteria for respiratory chain disorders in adults
is less than 20% activity in any of the tissue complexes, but the data of the present study did not fulfill this condition . However, the
activities of complexes I (43.4%) and IV (54.7%) were lower than those of the other complexes. The decreased activities of complexes I and
IV are probably due to the deficiency in COX activity that was measured in the muscle fibers. These clinical, morphological, and biochemical
manifestations indicate that the patient most likely had a mitochondrial disease. The marked atrophy of the paraspinal muscles was the most
interesting feature found in patients 1 and 2. Axial myopathy has been defined as muscle weakness that is limited to the spinal and neck
muscles . Therefore, the symptoms of patient 1 are incompatible with pure axial myopathy because of the muscle weakness and mitochondrial
abnormalities that were observed in the biceps brachii muscle. The most characteristic feature of axial myopathy is the remarkable atrophy
of the paraspinal muscles rather than the atrophy of the muscles of the limbs, which is different from the clinical symptoms of conventional
mitochondrial myopathy. Thus, based on the available evidence, we believe that patients 1 and 2 can be diagnosed with mitochondrial
predominant axial myopathy. Axial myopathy may occur secondary to various diseases. However, only five cases of mitochondrial axial myopathy
associated with the prominent involvement of the extensor muscles of the spine have been previously reported (Table 2) [8, 11, 28, 30, 32].
All these cases presented with abnormal trunk flexion that developed during walking and disappeared when the patient was in a supine
position. In the cases described here, only patient 2 presented with camptocormia. These common symptoms, including late-onset, mildly
elevated serum CK levels, ragged-red fibers, and the partial deficiency in COX activities, were observed in patient 1 and also in the above
mentioned cases. However, biochemical analysis was performed in only one case that showed deficiencies in complexes I and III . No case has
been previously reported that describes a family history of similar symptoms. In addition, no genetic cause of any mitochondrial axial
myopathy has been previously reported.Table 2Clinical characteristics of patients with paraspinal muscle atrophy from mitochondrial
myopathyAge/sex Onset ageFamily historyCK (IU/l)RRFCOX deficiencymtDNA mutationNeurological deficit73/F [patient 1]63+290++602C>TCerebellar
ataxia84/F [patient 2]60+474NENENEEncephalopathy65/M 59−245++NR−65/M 62NRNR++NRParkinsonism78/M 78NR501++NR−64/M NRNRElevated++NR−55/M
NRNRNormal++NR−M male, F female, CK creatine kinase, RRF ragged-red fiber, NR not reported, NE not evaluated, COX cytochrome c oxidase,
mtDNA mitochondrial DNA, Ref reference Clinical characteristics of patients with paraspinal muscle atrophy from mitochondrial myopathy M
male, F female, CK creatine kinase, RRF ragged-red fiber, NR not reported, NE not evaluated, COX cytochrome c oxidase, mtDNA mitochondrial
DNA, Ref reference This study is unable to conclusively prove or disprove the pathogenicity of the m.602C>T mutation. However, three reasons
that support the pathogenicity of this mutation are apparent. First, the heteroplasmic m.602C>T point mutation disrupts a conserved
Watson–Crick cytosine–guanine (C–G) base pairing within the D-stem of the mitochondrial tRNAPhe gene, which would most likely affect the
stability of the secondary structure of mitochondrial tRNA (Fig. 5b). Almost 94% of mitochondrial tRNA pathogenic mutations occur in this
stem structure, and the disruption of Watson–Crick C–G base pairing is a significantly more common feature of pathogenic mutations than
neutral variants . Second, after performing a sequence homology search using CLUSTALW (http://clustalw.ddbj.nig.ac.jp/top-j.html), it was
determined that this base pairing is largely conserved in other species as C–G or adenine–thymine base pairings (Fig. 5c). Third, the
mutation is heteroplasmic and present in the affected skeletal muscles but not in the peripheral blood lymphocytes. Almost all pathogenic
mitochondrial tRNA mutations in clinically affected tissues have a high proportion of heteroplasmy compared with unaffected tissues .
However, the decreased activities of complexes I and IV that were observed during the biochemical examination cannot be completely explained
by the disruption in mitochondrial protein synthesis that could have been caused by the mitochondrial tRNA mutation. In addition, data
obtained from the single muscle fiber analyses were limited due to the small sample size, and therefore, are not sufficient to prove the
pathogenicity of the m.602C>T mutation. Any additional evidence of the pathogenicity of the cybrid cells was not obtained. Therefore, 10
points (out of a maximum score of 20 points) was applied to the scoring criteria of the mitochondrial tRNA mutations listed in MITOMAP,
which indicated that the m.602C>T mutation is possibly pathogenic . The mechanism of late-onset axial myopathy induced by mitochondrial
dysfunction is unclear. Nine pathogenic mutations in the mitochondrial tRNAPhe gene have been previously described in various diseases
(Fig. 5b), including a late-onset neuromuscular disease but not axial myopathy [7, 9, 12, 14, 17, 18, 22, 25, 34, 35]. A probable
etiological mechanism for the presentation of such a myopathy in the elderly is the accumulation of mitochondrial tRNA pathogenic mutations
that affect aging tissues . If it is possible to get any information on the pathological status of the primarily affected muscles, this
would perhaps be as informative as the differential involvement of the biceps and paraspinal muscles. Unfortunately, these data could not be
obtained due to the remarkable fatty degeneration of the paraspinal muscles. The patients described in this report are characterized by the
combination of axial myopathy and CNS involvement. One report about a parkinsonian patient with mitochondrial axial myopathy suggested that
mitochondrial dysfunction may lead to both axial myopathy and parkinsonism . In the patients described here, CNS involvement was similar to
that observed in myoclonus epilepsy with ragged-red fiber (MERRF) due to the accompanying cerebellar atrophy and epilepsy. In fact, MERRF
has been previously reported to be associated with pathogenic mutations of the mitochondrial tRNAPhe gene . Finally, mitochondrial
dysfunction might be implicated in the development of Hashimoto thyroiditis in patients 1 and 2 and in the fourth son of patient 2; the
relationship between mitochondrial diseases and Hashimoto thyroiditis has been previously described [3, 20, 26, 27]. In summary, this is the
first report about familial mitochondrial disease with late-onset predominant axial myopathy and encephalopathy, which were confirmed by
clinical and histological findings. This case expands the phenotypic spectrum of mitochondrial diseases. Future studies on the novel
mitochondrial tRNAPhe 602C>T mutation may contribute to the understanding of late-onset predominant axial myopathy and encephalopathy. We
wish to thank Dr. A. Sano and Dr. M. Nakamura for performing the quantitative PCR studies. We also wish to thank Ms. A. Yoshimura, Ms. N.
Hirata, Ms. Y. Shirahama, and Ms. M. Ishigami for their excellent technical assistance. This study was supported in part by grants from the
Nervous and Mental Disorders and Research Committee for Ataxic Disease of the Japanese Ministry of Health, Welfare and Labor (grant 19A-1,
H.T.) and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (grant 21591095, H.T.; 21591094, I. H.). Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
