Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour (IMFT) is a relatively uncommon neoplasm with unpredictable malignant potential known to occur anywhere
in the body. IMFT involving the omentum is a very rare entity with less than 15 cases reported so far. We report a case of omental IMFT in a
15-year-old girl who presented with multiple peritoneal masses on imaging and the diagnosis was confirmed on histopathology. In addition to
its uncommon location, its presentation as multiple masses is extremely uncommon. This uncommon presentation as multifocal masses needs to
be distinguished from other causes of peritoneal carcinomatosis. Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour (IMFT) more commonly known as
inflammatory pseudotumour is a relatively rare tumour with variable malignant potential. Typically seen in children and young adults it can
occur anywhere in the body but is commonly described in the lungs, mediastinum and orbits. Intraabdominal IMFT commonly involves liver,
stomach, bowel and spleen. We report a case of multifocal intraabdominal IMFT involving the omentum and mesentery presenting as multiple
peritoneal masses similar to peritoneal carcinomatosis. Omental IMFT itself is a relatively rare form of abdominal IMFT; less than 15 cases
have been reported in the world literature. Omental IMFT presenting as multiple masses is extremely uncommon and to the best of our
knowledge, a similar case has not been reported to date. A 15-year-old adolescent girl was referred to our hospital with abdominal pain,
intermittent fever and loss of weight for the past 3 months. She also had amenorrhoea for the last 4 months. Physical examination revealed
pallor. A vague lower abdominal mass was felt on clinical examination. Laboratory investigations showed reduced haemoglobin (9.3 g/dl);
other investigations (total leukocyte count, differential count, eosinophil sedimentation rate (ESR), serum proteins) were within normal
limits. Ultrasound (US) of the abdomen showed a solid hypoechoic mass in the pelvis along the left superior aspect of the uterus with
intralesional vascularity on colour Doppler (Fig. 1a,b). Multiple lesions with similar features but of varying sizes were also seen on the
parietal peritoneum with mild free fluid in the pelvic cavity (Fig. 1c,d). The uterus and ovaries were visualized separately. Figure 1US
images show heterogeneous hypoechoic lesions in the pelvis (a) and on the parietal peritoneum (c). Note internal vascularity on colour
Doppler (b,d). US images show heterogeneous hypoechoic lesions in the pelvis (a) and on the parietal peritoneum (c). Note internal
vascularity on colour Doppler (b,d). Following US, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was done to characterize and assess the extent
of the mass. It showed a large (7.2×6.3 cm), lobulated, well-marginated, hypervascular mass in the pelvis displacing the pelvic bowel loops
with minimal ascites (Fig. 2a). In addition, multiple peritoneal-based lesions with similar characteristics but of varying sizes were also
noted (Fig. 2b–d). Radiologically the lesions mimicked those of carcinomatosis. A differential diagnosis of sarcoma, gastrointestinal
stromal tumour (GIST), leiomyoma, lymphoma, inflammatory pseudotumour and Castleman’s disease was made. US-guided fine needle aspiration
cytology revealed scattered spindle cells and occasional multinucleated giant cells with no evidence of malignancy. As a definite diagnosis
could not be reached, exploratory laparotomy was planned. Intraoperatively, a large lobulated vascular mass was seen arising from the
greater omentum adherent to the sigmoid colon which was excised completely. Multiple pelvic deposits with ascites were also noted which were
too numerous for resection. The patient recovered uneventfully from surgery. Figure 2Contrast-enhanced CT images show a lobulated
hypervascular lesion in the pelvis with free fluid (a). Note multiple peritoneal-based lesions (arrows) (b–d). Contrast-enhanced CT images
show a lobulated hypervascular lesion in the pelvis with free fluid (a). Note multiple peritoneal-based lesions (arrows) (b–d).
Histopathological evaluation of the resected tumour showed a well-circumscribed mass with a dominant spindle cell tumour admixed with
moderate chronic inflammatory cells. The spindle cells were arranged haphazardly in a myxoid background but some areas were arranged in
fascicles (Fig. 3a–d). Occasional cells showed a moderate eosinophilic cytoplasm indicating their myofibroblastic nature. These cells
demonstrated anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) (Fig. 3c, inset top left) and smooth muscle actin (SMA) positivity (Fig. 3d, inset top right).
There were no significant mitotic figures seen in the spindle cell areas. A diagnosis of IMFT was made. The lesions being numerous no
further treatment (surgical, radiotherapy or chemotherapy) was offered. The patient is on radiologic surveillance. Figure 3(a) The periphery
of the tumour with infiltration into fat (H&E); (b) spindle-shaped tumour cells in short interlacing fascicles admixed with moderate chronic
inflammatory cells rich in plasma cells (H&E); (c) spindle cell populations with plasma cell infiltrate with the tumour cells showing
cytoplasmic ALK positivity (inset: ALK immunostaining); and (d) some tumour cells are elongated with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm (H&E)
showing SMA positivity (inset: SMA immunostaining) indicating the myofibroblastic nature. (a) The periphery of the tumour with infiltration
into fat (H&E); (b) spindle-shaped tumour cells in short interlacing fascicles admixed with moderate chronic inflammatory cells rich in
plasma cells (H&E); (c) spindle cell populations with plasma cell infiltrate with the tumour cells showing cytoplasmic ALK positivity
(inset: ALK immunostaining); and (d) some tumour cells are elongated with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm (H&E) showing SMA positivity
(inset: SMA immunostaining) indicating the myofibroblastic nature. IMFT is a rare tumour of intermediate biologic potential as described in
the recent WHO classification. It has been variously called inflammatory pseudotumour, inflammatory fibrosarcoma, plasma cell granuloma,
pseudosarcoma, and atypical fibromyxoid tumour. Initially described in the lungs and orbit as a reparative postinflammatory process, it has
now been reported in many other extrapulmonary sites. The pathogenesis of this condition has been variously described as an excess
inflammatory response to infection, trauma, and surgery. The abdomen is a relatively uncommon site for IMFT; the liver is the organ most
often involved. It can occur in both genders and is seen in children and adolescents. Historically these tumours were considered benign
until Meis and Enzinger published a series of 38 cases, primarily intraabdominal, with follow-up data showing significant recurrences. They
renamed the pathology inflammatory fibrosarcoma. Omental IMFT has been described as a distinct entity from the common inflammatory
pseudotumour of the abdomen as pathologically it represents a form of clonal expansion rather than a postinflammatory response. Abdominal
IMFTs are more confusing from both diagnostic and therapeutic aspects, as they are commonly mistaken for malignant tumours such as
peritoneal carcinomatosis, sarcoma or lymphoma. Patients generally present with nonspecific systemic symptoms such as fever, weight loss,
and vague abdominal pain. Specific symptoms depend on the size of the tumour and the mass effect on the adjacent structures. Laboratory
evaluation may reveal hypergammaglobulinemia, false-positive Widal test, increased ESR, thrombocytosis, and microcytic anaemia. Radiologic
findings of omental-mesenteric IMFT are indistinguishable from other malignant lesions. On sonography they are seen as solid iso- to
hypoechoic masses with vascularity on Doppler. On CT they are variously described as homo- or heterogeneous hypervascular lesions showing
moderate to intense enhancement. Calcification, haemorrhage and necrosis are reported in a few cases. The top differentials include sarcoma,
lymphoma, GIST, Castleman’s disease and all causes of peritoneal carcinomatosis in the case of multiple masses. It is important to
differentiate as many of these close differentials need aggressive treatment with cytotoxic drugs, which may be harmful and could be avoided
if a correct diagnosis is established. The diagnosis can rarely be made with imaging alone. Histology findings of diffuse inflammatory
infiltration, prominent plasma cells on microscopy and actin, vimentin positivity on immunohistochemistry confirm the diagnosis. After the
diagnosis is made it becomes necessary to assess the prognosis. There are limited data available on the natural history of this disease.
Features suggesting more aggressive behaviour include multifocal tumours, retroperitoneal location, infiltration of adjacent structures and
incomplete excision. Pathologic features such as tumour cellularity, mitosis and necrosis do not correlate with outcome. Recently ALK
positivity has been shown to predict lower risk of metastasis. Treatment includes complete excision of tumour. The role of radiotherapy and
chemotherapy is very limited. Resection is the treatment of choice even for recurrences. Recurrences have been reported even after many
years, so regular follow-up is essential for early diagnosis of tumour recurrence. This paper is available online at
http://www.cancerimaging.org. In the event of a change in the URL address, please use the DOI provided to locate the paper.
