A new healing procedure has been developed on the basis of the successful treatment of therapy-resistant hypoxic (and practically anoxic)
leg ulcerations located within a heavy dermatoliposclerosis. The procedure involves an initial intra-ulceral application of haemoglobin
followed by the intermittent administration of normobaric oxygen via inhalation. Haemoglobin is capable of externally supplying the
granulating wound bed with oxygen at low partial pressure in a physiological manner, like a micro lung, so that oxidative stress can be
avoided. A long-term daily administration of oxygen from within – including the peri-ulceral skin – is achieved by intermittent normobaric
oxygen inhalation (INBOI) regularly throughout the day in the form of 1-hour sessions. Using this combined healing treatment during
haemoglobin applications the ulcerations healed within about 1 month, and subsequently with INBOI therapy within further approx. 4 months
the peri-ulceral skin regenerated as far as the oxygenation status was concerned: The peri-ulceral transcutaneous oxygen partial pressure
(tcPO2) of zero (measured during breathing of normal air) rose to a satisfactory value of approx. 35 mmHg. After 28 months of treatment, the
completely hypoxic and degenerated skin on the leg had practically returned to normal with a PO2 of 45 mmHg. Furthermore, the skin
dermatoliposclerosis regressed. The skin regeneration was long-lasting, which was probably related to cellular tissue regeneration with an
increase in the capillary density, whereby it had to be maintained by regular oxygen inhalation (INBOI maintaining treatment). By unintended
intra-individual therapy variations it is evidenced that local hypoxia was the reason for skin degeneration: 3 x 1 h oxygen inhalation were
sufficient for the healing treatment; 2 x 1 h sufficed for maintenance, whereas 2 x 0.5 h did not. The new procedure carries practically no
risks, is simple, cheap and effective. Whereas the application of haemoglobin requires professional supervision, the oxygen inhalation can
be carried out at home following initial guidance and monitoring by a physician. Using this novel method, the therapy-resistant ulceration
could be closed within 5 months, during which daily outpatient care was only necessary for 1 month. The successful outcome of the treatment
in terms of improvement of oxygen supply can monitored at any time using peri-ulceral tcPO2 measurements, whereby, due to the inhomogeneity
of the values, measurements at a minimum of two locations at the wound edge are strongly recommended and more measurements at more skin
locations would be preferable. Besides its use in the healing of ulcers, the new procedure is also suitable for the prevention of ulceration
development (prophylactic INBOI treatment) in skin rendered susceptible due to the presence of hypoxia. Here, peri-ulceral transcutaneous
oxygen partial pressures of below 10 mmHg should be considered as being critical and are an indication for a prophylactic oxygen inhalation
treatment. The new procedure may also be suitable even before the peri-ulceral oxygen partial pressure falls below 10 mmHg. Four measures
for rehabilitation, conservation, and prevention with regard to a healed chronic wound are proposed. Anhand einer erfolgreichen Behandlung
Therapie-resistenter hypoxischer (praktisch anoxischer) Unterschenkel-Ulzerationen in einem Areal gravierender Dermatoliposklerose wurde ein
neues Heil-Verfahren unter Anwendung zuerst von Hämoglobin (intra-ulzeral) und dann von Sauerstoff in Form intermittierter, normobarer
Sauerstoff-Inhalationen (INBOI) entwickelt. Hämoglobin kann die Zellen des Wundbodens aus seiner Bindung unter geringem Partialdruck – und
somit oxidativ unschädlich – von außen mit Sauerstoff in physiologischer Weise versorgen; eine langzeitige, täglich stundenweise Sauerstoff-
Inhalation vermag dies von innen und versorgt darüber hinaus auch die peri-ulzerale Haut. Unter einer initialen kombinierten Heil-Behandlung
kam es innerhalb etwa eines Monats mit Anwendungen der Hämoglobinlösung zum Abheilen der Ulzeration, anschließend unter INBOI innerhalb von
etwa 4 weiteren Monaten zu einer Regeneration des umgebenden Gewebes bezüglich des Sauerstoffzustandes: Der peri-ulzerale transkutane
Sauerstoffpartialdruck (unter Luftatmung) von ursprünglich null erreichte wieder einen ausreichend hohen Wert (etwa 35 mmHg). Nach 28
Monaten INBOI-Behandlungen war der Sauerstoff-Status der anfangs völlig degenerierten Beinhaut mit absoluter Hypoxie praktisch normalisiert,
nämlich 45 mmHg. Sogar die Dermatoliposklerose bildete sich zurück. Die Haut-Regeneration war nachhaltig, was vermutlich auf einer
zellulären Gewebe-Regeneration mit Zunahme der Kapillardichte beruht, musste aber durch ständige Sauerstoff-Inhalationen (sprich Nachsorge)
aufrecht erhalten werden (INBOI-Erhaltungsbehandlung). Durch unbeabsichtigte intra-individuelle Therapie-Variationen ergab sich der
Nachweis, dass die lokale Hypoxie für die Degenerationen ursächlich war: 3 x 1 h Sauerstoff-Inhalation waren zur Heilbehandlung ausreichend;
2 x 1 h genügten für die Erhaltung, 2 x ½ h dagegen nicht mehr. Das neue Behandlungs-Verfahren ist praktisch risikolos, einfach, preiswert
und effektiv. Die Anwendung von Hämoglobin erfordert eine ärztliche Betreuung; die Sauerstoff-Inhalationen können dagegen – nach einer
initialen Uberwachung durch einen Arzt – zu Hause erfolgen. Die Therapie-resistente Ulzeration konnte mit dem neuen Verfahren in 5 Monaten
geschlossen werden, wovon nur ein Monat täglicher ambulanter Behandlungen (auch mit dem Hämoglobinspray) nötig war. Der Erfolg der
Behandlung bezüglich der Regeneration der Sauerstoffversorgung ist durch transkutane Messungen des peri-ulzeralen Sauerstoffpartialdruck
(tcPO2) jederzeit überprüfbar, wobei wegen der Inhomogenität der Werte immer wenigstens an zwei verschiedenen Stellen des Wundrandes
gemessen werden muss; besser ist die Messung an 4 Hautstellen, bei sehr großen Wunden an 6 Stellen. Das neue Verfahren eignet sich, neben
der Heilbehandlung, insbesondere auch zur Behandlung hypoxisch gefährdeter Haut zur Prävention (prophylaktische INBOI-Behandlung), um eine
drohende Ulzeration abzuwenden, wobei peri-ulzeral transkutane Sauerstoff-Partialdrücke unter 10 mmHg als kritisch zu sehen sind und eine
Indikation für prophylaktische Sauerstoff-Inhalationen darstellen. Das neue Verfahren kann auch mit Nutzen angewendet werden, wenn der
Sauerstoff-Partialdruck noch nicht unter 10 mmHg abgefallen ist. Vier Nachsorge-Maßnahmen zur Erhaltung einer abgeheilten chronischen Wunde
werden vorgeschlagen. Chronic wounds can occur which are refractory to treatment and in which the peri-ulceral transcutaneously measured
oxygen pressures are practically zero (as is true in this case), whereas partial pressures of more than 40–50 mmHg can be found in healthy
skin. We argue that such wounds can be treated only successfully by an oxygen substitution, because without sufficient oxygen no new tissue
can be build up. Previously, we have shown that it is possible to bring about the closure of chronic wounds showing oxygen deficiency by the
use of externally (topically = intra-ulcerally) applied haemoglobin. In this setting, the healing was seen to take place more slowly, the
lower the peri-ulceral transcutaneous oxygen partial pressure was . A different approach therefore needs to be used if a practically anoxic
ulceration is to be treated (as in this case): We have developed a concept in which a combination of a topical application of haemoglobin
and intermittent inhalation of normobaric oxygen (INBOI) is used. Due to its damaging oxidative effects and the technical complexity, we
decided that the use of hyperbaric oxygenation (HBO) was not an appropriate option in this setting. The new therapy modality consisted of
two parts: (1) Initially, as described previously (see ), a haemoglobin solution was applied intra-ulcerally (daily) as a thin film in order
to improve the external oxygen delivery and initiate wound healing. (2) Thereafter or simultaneously, the internal oxygen delivery is
increased by means of intermittent normobaric oxygen inhalation (INBOI) which is carried out for one hour several times per day over a
prolonged period of time. An example of such a treatment is described below. By this procedure the oxygen partial pressure is demonstrably
increased . In principal, cleaned chronic wounds can be considered as being hypoxic cell cultures, which need to be additionally supplied
with oxygen (both internally and externally) in a physiological manner if healing is to be achieved. The patient was a 78-year-old male
(born in 1927) who weighed 88 kg, was 174 cm tall and had suffered a fracture of the right lateral malleolus in 1982, which had been
operatively treated. A resulting approx. 15 cm-long scar was evident above the ankle. In 1997, the patient suffered a left-side apoplexy
with right-sided hemiparesis; in 1998 a left carotid stenosis was treated operatively, as was a right carotid stenosis in 2002. Over the
course of time, the patient developed a type 2 diabetes mellitus with diabetic polyneuropathy and neuropathy (serum creatinine
concentration: 2.8 mg/dL, clearance: 30 mL/dL). Blood pressure (RR) was noted as being 180/90. In 2004, stage IV peripheral arterial
occlusive disease (PAOD) was diagnosed. Subsequent to occlusion of the popliteal and tibial arteries in the right leg, and with the existing
ulcer above the lateral malleolus in the scar from the earlier operation, a percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) of both arteries was
performed, but further surgical vessel restoration was deemed to be impossible. The patient received 2 x 20 drops of Novalgin® (metamizole
sodium) for the severe and persistent pain. An ulceration above the right lateral malleolus had been treated since 1998 in a dermatologist's
practice. Previously (1997), erysipelas occurred during an eczematic reaction. Both the perfusion of the skin and the cutaneous oxygen
partial pressure deteriorated steadily. Appropriate stage-related local treatment with rheological measures and gait training was carried
out; at the beginning of 1999 a healing of the ulceration had been achieved. In November 2003 however, spontaneous ulcerations again became
evident on the right lateral malleolus and by February 2004 the ulcerated areas has a length of 5 cm in total, with breadths and depths of 1
cm. An ozone/oxygen infusion therapy resulted in no improvement. We saw the patient for the first time on 24.05.2004, when examination
revealed a blood glucose content of 122 mg/dL, a blood pressure (RR) of 127/82, and a pulse rate of 58 min–1. Figure 1 (Fig. 1) shows the
ulceration in question, located above the right lateral malleolus. The ulcerated area is in fact composed of two dehiscences which are only
separated by a bridge of tissue. The distal ulceration showed pronounced undermining at the edges. Additionally, a distinct inflammatory
dermatoliposclerosis with pronounced desquamation was present on the lower leg. The leg was oedematous and appeared as if it were mummified.
The patient complained of severe and persistent pain (especially during the night) which occurred in particular when weight was put onto the
leg, so that the patient could no longer sleep and at the same time was practically immobilized. After an initial cleaning, we commenced
daily treatment as described previously : Coverings were carefully softened with highly concentrated urea preparations (30 to 40%) and
thereafter the wound was cleaned by rinsing, and, if necessary, by mechanical debridement. Local disinfection and short-term oxygen delivery
was achieved by placement of the foot in an oxygen chamber (plastic bag) for 30 minutes; this method of disinfection does not cause an
allergic reaction . The cleaned wound bed was treated daily with a 10% haemoglobin solution applied as a spray to produce a thin film and
covered with an appropriate wound dressing (e.g., Chitoskin®, ). The peri-ulceral skin was protected from maceration by the application of
Vaseline® or an ointment containing 10% urea. Prior to getting out of bed in the morning, the oedematous leg was bandaged with a compression
dressing such that it was still comfortable for the patient. So, the necessary additional standard measures we took at every wound treatment
were: (1) cleaning the wound with highly concentrated chaotropic urea gel, (2) supplementary mechanical debridement, where required in local
anaesthesia, (3) rinsing with isotonic solutions, (4) oxygen disinfection, (5) combined with haemoglobin solution moisture treatment (which
is at the same time an amino acid substitution, as haemoglobin is hydrolised by the metalloproteases of the chronic wound), (6) application
of hydroactive coverings to keep the hydrobalance, (7) protection of the wound edges, (8) adapted compression. Whilst undergoing oxygen
substitution (by intra-ulceral haemoglobin solution) combined with these treatments, the patient was free of pain during the night for the
first time on 03.06.2004. On 09.06.2004, measurements performed during normal air breathing showed that the transcutaneous peri-ulceral
oxygen partial pressure (see ) caudal to the lower dehiscence above the ankle (measurement point M3, see Figure 2 (Fig. 2)) was practically
zero, as was the case with the dehiscence dorsal to the bridge of tissue (measurement point M2). The measurement of the tcPO2 values at the
different locations could only be performed successively with one electrode. In order to determine whether the supply of oxygen to the peri-
ulceral skin was improved during oxygen inhalation in this patient, we carried out the following orienteering investigation: With the
patient seated and inhaling oxygen via a mask covering the mouth and nose and the use of a puffer bag (oxygen flow was 15 L/min with gas
overflow), the transcutaneous oxygen partial pressure at the M3 location (see Figure 2 (Fig. 2)) was seen to increase to 200 mmHg. On
14.06.2004, the patient was completely free of pain, could walk without any problems and was taking walks outdoors. Figure 3 (Fig. 3) shows
the ulceration on 16.06.2004. A newly developed wound bed can be seen at both of the open areas; the tissue bridge was reepithelialised.
Daily wound treatment by a health professional was no longer necessary; instead, treatment could be carried out at home by the patient’s
relatives. The topical application of haemoglobin was discontinued. At this point in time, the peri-ulceral transcutaneous oxygen partial
pressure as measured ventral to the tissue bridge (measurement location M1) rose to a normal value of 49 mmHg during inhalation of oxygen
from an oxygen concentrator (5 L/min gas flow) using a mask with a puffer bag. After termination of the inhalation the quantity again fell
to zero. For a therapeutic, temporary improvement of the peri-ulceral oxygen supply using intermittant normobaric oxygen inhalation (INBOI),
three hours inhalation per day were prescribed for the patient (one hour in the morning, at midday and in the evening, with the patient
quiet and seated), who carried this out regularly at home. On 20.10.2004 (after 5 months), the initially practically anoxic ulceration was
almost closed (see Figure 4 (Fig. 4)) and wound care was no longer necessary. Nevertheless, bandaging of the leg was continued. At this
point in time, the oxygen partial pressures measured during air breathing were 18 and 36 mmHg for the ventral and dorsal sides of the tissue
bridge, respectively (see also Figure 5 (Fig. 5)). Therapeutic oxygen inhalation was continued with the aim of complete healing. The peri-
ulceral tissue underwent regeneration over the 5 months of oxygen inhalation therapy. Consequently, the decision was made to continue the
oxygen inhalation in an effort to further increase the tcPO2 values. Up until 04.05.2005 (after 11 months), the ventral value measured
during air breathing (at measurement location M1) increased further to 39 mmHg, whereby the dorsal value (measurement location M2) was 31
mmHg (see also Figure 5 (Fig. 5)); at this point, the oxygen treatment was discontinued. Both wounds were completely closed, the surrounding
skin did not appear to be irritated and felt soft again, i.e., the skin sclerosis was no longer evident. On 14.10.2005 (after 17 months) the
patient came back for a check-up. During air breathing, the transcutaneous oxygen partial pressure at the measurement locations M1 and M2
were now only 5 and 10 mmHg, respectively, i.e., the condition of the peri-ulceral tissue 6 months after discontinuation of the oxygen
inhalation had deteriorated again (see Figure 5 (Fig. 5)). Figure 6 (Fig. 6) shows (see arrow), however, that no appreciable wound formation
had occurred, although a small defect of the skin was visible and the peri-ulceral skin was distinctly reddened. The patient therefore
resumed the regular intermittent oxygen inhalation – 3 hours per day – from 21.10.2005 onwards. One month later, on 21.11.2005 (after 18
months), the transcutaneous oxygen partial pressure (tcPO2) was again measured at the measurement locations M1 and M2. During air breathing,
the values obtained were 8 and 15 mmHg, i.e., the values had risen again by 3 and 5 mmHg, respectively (see Figure 5 (Fig. 5)). The skin
defect had healed again and the redness was considerably reduced. On 21.12.2005 (after 19 months), the transcutaneous oxygen partial
pressure measurements at the M1 and M2 locations were repeated with values of 30 and 40 mmHg, respectively, being obtained. This meant that
within two months, the values from 04.05.2005 had again been reached (see Figure 5 (Fig. 5)). The wound area can be seen in Figure 7 (Fig.
7) where the inflammation is seen to be considerably reduced. On 20.01.2006 (after 20 months), the transcutaneous oxygen partial pressures
were again measured and values of 43 and 33 mmHg obtained for the M1 and M2 measurement locations, respectively. The redness had regressed
further. Compared to the measurements on 21.12.2005 only a slight increase in the partial pressure was evident (see Figure 5 (Fig. 5)).
Since previously, without treatment the partial pressure had decreased, a maintenance treatment was now considered necessary. Oxygen
inhalation was prescribed, to be carried out two times per day (30 minutes each in the morning and evening). At the check-up on 21.04.2006
(after 23 months), values of 21 and 9 mmHg were obtained for the M1 and M2 locations, respectively (see also Figure 5 (Fig. 5)), i.e., the
maintenance treatment of 2 x ½ h oxygen inhalation proved not to be adequate. This trend was confirmed in the further measurement taken
after 25 months: The tcPO2 values for M1 and M2 were now only 2 and 10 mmHg, respectively, and had therefore, on average, declined further.
In an attempt to obtain a further regeneration, O2 inhalation was increased to 3 x 1 h per day. Within 1 month (i.e., after a complete total
of 26 months), the M1 and M2 values in the healed wound rose to 43 and 47 mmHg, respectively. After a further 2-month continuation of
treatment, the values were 46 and 43 mmHg, i.e., no further increase was observed (see Figure 5 (Fig. 5)). In order to maintain this status,
the O2 inhalation was set at 2 x 1 h. After a further 6 months, the M1 and M2 skin locations exhibited tcPO2 values of 44 and 40 mmHg,
respectively and had thus remained practically constant. It would therefore appear that 2 x 1 h O2 inhalation daily is adequate for
maintenance of the tcPO2 values in the peri-ulceral skin, whereas treatment with 2 x ½ h is not. The complete inhalation therapy in this
patient continued for 34 months, i.e., almost 3 years. After 28 months, the oxygen status of the skin on the leg had returned to normal,
with a value of 45 mmHg. The described individual case exemplarily shows how by the topical application of haemoglobin together with
intermittent oxygen inhalation (INBOI) hypoxic, therapy-resistant wounds can be healed, and that after 1 year of treatment even a severe
dermatoliposclerosis of the skin has disappeared. Both of these measures improve the supply of oxygen. This, in turn, facilitates wound
closure by means of epithelialisation starting at the wound edge. In addition to the repair of the tissue defect, this treatment also
resulted in a sustained rise in the oxygen partial pressure and thus to an improved oxygen supply to the skin area so that an enduring
regeneration of the ulcer skin could be achieved. As is well known the most serious microvascular degenerations are found in
dermatoliposclerosis and in chronic venous insufficiency, this is coiling or balling of the capillaries (, and accordingly ). The evident
linkage between oxygen supply (as assessed by tcPO2 measurements) and the state of the peri-ulceral skin (dermatoliposclerotic changes,
existence of an ulcer) proves that in this case oxygen deficiency was the cause of the ulceration. That this was the case could be
furthermore shown since the method used was able to reveal intra-individual variation (which is otherwise hardly ever possible in the
medical field), albeit unintentionally, since after the first regeneration, the skin was seen to degenerate twice more, whereby on each
occasion a further regeneration could be achieved by renewed application of this novel treatment. As the decrease of the tcPO2 value
precedes the wounding (see Figure 6 (Fig. 6)) this quantity is an appropriate early indicator of chronic wounding, and enables an effective
and controlled prophylaxis. Several reports on the successful treatment of chronic wounds using hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) support the notion
that hypoxia is an important causal factor in this setting . At the same time however, reports have been made in the literature claiming
that an ulceration is never the result of oxygen deficiency . These claims are, however, based on false assumptions . To be able to plan an
adequate individual and effective therapy it is essential that a chronic wound is characterised on the basis of its oxygen status. For this
purpose, the only parameter that comes into question is the tissue oxygen partial pressure, since this represents the decisive driving force
for the diffusion of oxygen to the cells mitochondria (where oxygen is primarily needed) and at the same time it is the decisive driving
force for the signal of the electrode. Therefore, the tissue partial pressure is an analytical endpoint for the cellular oxygen supply and a
measure of the tissue pressure is the transcutaneously assessed oxygen partial pressure of the skin (tcPO2). Only the peri-ulceral
measurement can be considered to provide a reliable and non-invasive assessment of the oxygen status in a chronic wound (since the
ulceration itself is a local occurrence). However, measurement of the tcPO2 at two locations is not sufficient for “medium size” or bigger
wounds (and even less so at only one location); much more information will be obtained by using simultaneous measurements at 4 peri-ulceral
locations, or even at 6 locations, especially around large chronic wounds. For the success and risk containment of intermittent O2
inhalation, it is important that this treatment is applied carefully and in a controlled manner. In order to ensure a maximum inspiratory O2
concentration, a mask similar to that shown in Figure 8 (Fig. 8) must be used. Tubes (so-called nasal cannulae) inserted into the nostrils
to supplement the inhaled oxygen are not sufficient for INBOI. To prevent room air from being inhaled, the oxygen flow must be at least 7
L/min (i.e., the normal ventilation rate in humans), with 10 L/min being preferable since this rate would ensure an overflow. Appropriate O2
concentrators are commercially available. Nevertheless, momentary flow rates of up to 10 L/s can occur during normal quiet breathing. In
order to buffer these high rates, it is necessary to use the shown bag. The first O2 inhalation session should definitely be carried out
under medical supervision, in case the patient’s breathing drive is oxygen-dependent. Even though this phenomenon is seldom, if it were to
be present, it would lead to a breathing arrest. By means of the attached O2 electrodes, it should be ensured that the inhaled oxygen really
reaches the peri-ulceral skin , otherwise no success can be expected. If the oxygen status of therapy resistant wounds is more frequently
assessed in the future, it will be possible to see what proportion of such wounds are anoxic or hypoxic, whereby this is presumably very
high. This is to be expected since both microvascular degeneration and oedematous tissue changes rapidly lead to cell hypoxia, since in both
instances the intercapillary distance is increased and the already critical diffusion conditions for oxygen deteriorate further. The healing
of the ulcer and the regeneration of the surrounding skin are rather remarkable, when the reaction of normal tissue is considered, since
intact tissue capable of regulation (with the exception of the lungs) reacts to an excess supply of oxygen with a blood vessel constriction.
A peri-ulceral, extremely hypoxic tissue area showing vessel degeneration is, however, presumably in a functionally decompensated state, in
which the above-mentioned physiological mechanisms for oxygen-regulation no longer operate since the controlling elements responsible for
this regulation are unable to fulfil their task. The result of this situation is a favourable shift of the perfusion into the decompensated
hypoxic tissue. Pure or too highly concentrated oxygen is – when present permanently – oxidatively toxic for any type of tissue . During
hyperbaric oxygenation (HBO), the organism is confronted with an excess pressure of up to 2–2.5 bar, which in the case of pure oxygen
results in a very unphysiological oxygen partial pressure of more than 2000 mmHg; this imparts to oxygen a very high oxidative potential,
e.g., resulting in detrimental lipid oxidation. The lungs are particularly affected and – due to oedema development and a resulting
disturbance of the pulmonary diffusion – a paradoxical systemic oxygen deficiency can develop. For this reason, our treatment (topically
applied haemoglobin and intermitted normobaric oxygen inhalation, INBOI) involves the use of oxygen in a much less unphysiological manner:
Haemoglobin releases its bound oxygen locally to the cells under the usual relatively low partial pressures and regenerates the wound bed at
the cellular level. An increase in the oxygen partial pressure to approximately 50–60 mmHg is sufficient for wound healing. Due to the known
toxicity of oxygen, a significant extension of the duration of normobaric oxygen inhalation is not to be advised, especially in the case of
elderly persons, who are already often weakened as far as pulmonary function is concerned; nevertheless, maximum treatments of 3 to 4 hours
per day did not result in lung damage; here, the intermittent form of treatment represents a safety measure as opposed to an equivalent
period of continuous inhalation in one session. In this context, the findings reported by Alleva et al. are of considerable interest. The
authors found that wound healing during hyperbaric therapy (HBO) could be further improved when a course of antioxidative medication was
given at the same time. This indicates that a hyperbaric therapy, besides having a healing effect, can at the same time cause (oxidative)
damage. It would therefore seem advisable to initially try and heal therapy-resistant wounds with an isobaric, physiological, oxygen
therapy, before an attempt is made with a more complicated, more expensive and higher risk hyperbaric oxygenation treatment. It may also be
appropriate to use an anti-oxidative medication as a preventive measure even during normobaric O2 inhalation. Strictly speaking, due to the
risk of pulmonary oedema, the maximum reasonable daily inhalation time for a long-term treatment should be limited to 3–4 hours. In critical
cases, however, inhalation may also be performed during sleep, but even here, the O2 inhalation must remain intermittent and should never
exceed 1 hour. The primary aim of intermittent normobaric O2 inhalation is to subject the hypoxic tissue to “healing periods” with
sufficient oxygen supply under conditions as close to the physiological situation as possible, in this case for up to 3 individual hours per
day. It is astonishing that under such treatment, the tissue appears to improve its oxygen supply. If this were not the case, the rise in
the peri-ulceral oxygen partial pressure (during air breathing) from 0 to approx. 30 mmHg and finally to above 40 mmHg as found in this case
would be incomprehensible. During long-term, normobaric treatment it therefore seems that the tissue receives assistance which allows it to
further help itself, so that even when treatment is not actually being applied, the oxygen status of the ulcer tissue gradually improves,
which in turn accelerates the healing process; this also explains the effectiveness of the relatively short treatment times of only a few
hours per day. Presumably first a functional regeneration is taking place (metabolic regeneration: 1st phase of skin regeneration, see
below). Besides the 3 “fast” augmentations (over months), the course of the tcPO2 values additionally shows (as a 2nd phase of skin
regeneration) a slower increase over 28 months from approx. 35 to 45 mmHg (see the blue dotted line in Figure 9 (Fig. 9) demonstrating
this), i.e., ¾ of the total effect occurs “quickly” and ¼ slowly. Such a slow regeneration also explains why the treatment-induced increase
in tcPO2 (on a total of three occasions, see Figure 5 (Fig. 5)) takes place with increasing rapidity. A very similar behaviour is seen when
external oxygen supply is increased to improve skin with cellulite (3 treatments per week) and the elasticity is measured cutometrically: A
“fast” relative increase in the elasticity of 40% (⅔) was seen after 4 weeks, with a slower increase of 20% (⅓) requiring a further 6 months
. It is generally known that firstly, collagen makes up 80% of the skin mass and therefore determines skin elasticity and secondly, that
collagen synthesis is strongly oxygen-dependent . In both of the mentioned cases, the skin regeneration was seen to occur in two phases: a
“fast” and a slow phase, whereby the slow phase in the case of dermatoliposclerosis lasted 28 months. We interpret the fast regeneration as
being metabolic-functional and the slower as being a cellular-structural e.g., growth of arterioles and capillaries (a proof for this would
be an improvement of the state of capillaries regarding structure and density). The obvious difference is that in the case of
dermatoliposclerosis skin regeneration lasts years, whereas in the case of cellulite this time takes only weeks. In our case however, the
tcPO2 increases were not self-perpetuating; the peri-ulceral oxygen partial pressure during air breathing was repeatedly seen to decrease to
between 5 and 10 mmHg, while at the same time initial tissue defects again became apparent (see Figure 6 (Fig. 6)), suggesting that a
(permanent) healing was not occurring, but rather a (at least predominant) functional compensation with healing of the ulcer. That the
microvascular regeneration does not endure in the long-term can be explained – in this case of stage IV peripheral arterial occlusive
disease – by the fact that the macrovascular oxygen supply is not sufficient to maintain the therapeutically achieved microvascular
regeneration permanently. This is due to the fact that the macrovascular circumstances are presumably not improved by oxygen inhalation.
Since the therapy effects are not self-perpetuating, our patient required a maintenance treatment with oxygen capable of ensuring that the
oxygen supply to the peri-ulceral tissue did not deteriorate again. Most probably a graded medium (maintenance) therapy would be
appropriate, considering the fact that without treatment the tissue condition worsened, whereas with 3 hours of treatment per day it
improved. At the moment it is not possible to say exactly how many hours are necessary for a maintenance therapy, though it is surely less
than that used for the healing and prophylactic treatments. A maintenance treatment probably needs to be individually “titrated” using
transcutaneous measurement of the oxygen partial pressure. In our case, a maintenance therapy of 2 x ½ h (in the morning and evening) proved
not to be sufficient, whereas a treatment of 2 x 1 h was. Even a maintenance therapy should be controlled from time to time (approx. every 2
months). Certainly, also chronic wounds exhibiting oxygen tensions not smaller than 5 mmHg will heal faster, if the new method is used for
support. It is evident from Figure 5 (Fig. 5) that from month 19 to 20 and from month 26 to 28 no further increase in the peri-ulceral
partial pressure was achieved. Apparently, a further rise in the peri-ulceral partial pressure once treatment was discontinued was not
possible in the given clinical situation. Only slow cellular regeneration processes, i.e., a microvascular tissue regeneration, have the
ability to achieve this, as the increase of approx. 7 mmHg from month 19 to 28 shows (see Figure 5 (Fig. 5)) The successful re-regeneration
seen in this case study also suggests that prophylactic oxygen inhalation could be appropriate as a therapy form. An indication for this
would be hypoxic skin which is beginning to show signs of tissue degeneration, e.g. pigmentation and/or white atrophia. Apparently, the
reduction in the peri-ulceral oxygen partial pressure precedes the formation of the ulcer (see Figure 6 (Fig. 6)), so that this can serve as
an early warning and be the signal for such a preventative O2 inhalation. So, in principle there are therefore 3 treatment types for oxygen
inhalation with different initial situations or objectives: (1) the actual healing treatment to assist wound healing, (2) when necessary, a
maintenance treatment with reduced inhalation duration following healing of the ulcer, and (3) a prophylactic (preventative) therapy for
different grades of hypoxia and the threat of tissue degradation, aimed at preventing ulceration. All of these treatments can be carried out
(inexpensively) at home. Maybe, INBOI is of special interest for homes for the aged, where preventive measures have to be taken against
bedsore, which is caused by local tissue compression hypoxia. In aged skin geometrical conditions for oxygen diffusion already have changed
to the worse due to distortion of capillaries, which are seen in capillary microscopy. But this has to be figured out clinically.
Bongiovanni et al. report that they successfully treated 231 patients with venous ulcers also using oxygen . Alongside a consistent therapy,
they exposed the leg bearing the chronic wound to 2.5–3.0 bar pure oxygen while at the same time, for 4 hours per day, the patient breathed
pure oxygen via a mask. The leg was simultaneously positioned in a local oxygen positive pressure chamber, which is quite a complicated
procedure. We consider a treatment of 4 h continuous systemic and local oxygen treatment with stoppage of the leg circulation, together with
the subsequent reperfusion damage, to be a far too great oxidative burden for the organism. At the initial examination we saw – in addition
to a pronounced dermatoliposclerosis – that the complete critical skin area showed a distinct redness (see Figure 1 (Fig. 1)). The
physicians who had previously treated the patient had classified this as an eczematous erysipelas. By the time the wound was completely
healed, the redness was no longer evident, but reappeared with the deterioration of the oxygen situation in the intact skin (see Figure 6
(Fig. 6)). The redness subsided again after oxygen inhalation concomitant with an improvement in the oxygen partial pressure (see Figure 7
(Fig. 7)). It seems appropriate to assume that this was a hypoxia-induced, non-bacterial inflammation. If this is indeed the case, it is
further evidence for an anti-inflammatory effect of oxygen, as has previously been described (see ). Only a single case has been presented
here, nevertheless, as discussed here, the observation of the course of events and the unintended therapy variations provide a considerable
degree of reliability regarding the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. The new method needs to be tested and evaluated in further
clinical cases and case series. Nevertheless, when a serious, problematic case in the form of a therapy-resistant, hypoxic (practically
anoxic) ulceration presents, therapists can apply this treatment since, in the hands of professionals, it is practically free of risk.
Besides, after our application of oxygen inhalation, we found speculations from M. von Ardenne concerning wound healing with oxygen
inhalation treatment . Whenever it is possible to successfully close a chronic therapy-resistant wound with the new treatment, measures
against a recurrence – depending on the cause – should already be taken during the treatment. Four steps (which may be combined) should be
considered: (1) instructions to the patient concerning his/her own welfare (e.g., diet, weight reduction, exercise), (2) consistent
compression (bandage, support stockings) – as far as it makes sense, (3) vascular surgical intervention, and (4) a lasting, intermittent
oxygen inhalation therapy (INBOI), whereby, depending on the results in each individual case, this should commence with 2 x 1 h oxygen
inhalation per day, accompanied by the assessment of the oxygen partial pressure. It is possible that the described method using
intermittent normobaric oxygen inhalation (INBOI) may also be suitable for a successful treatment of hypoxia in other (internal) organs such
as the heart, brain or ear or in conditions such as hypoxic kidney or liver failure. Such treatments should obviously be attempted using a
suitable control appropriate to the given case. At the moment there is no evidence to suggest that a metabolic and cellular regeneration is
not possible in other tissues. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
