We present a rare case of microgranular variant acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) associated with ider(17)(q10)t(15;17)(q22;q12) of an old-
age patient. The initial chromosome study showed a 46,XX,del(6)(?q21q25),der(15)t(15;17)(q22;q12),ider(17)(q10)t(15;17). FISH signals from a
dual color dual fusion translocation PML-RARA probe were consistent with the results of conventional cytogenetics. Because of the rarity of
ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) in microgranular APL, further studies on both gene dosage effect of this chromosomal abnormality and the influence of
ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) on clinical features such as prognosis, survival, and treatment response of APL cases are recommended. Acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is one of the most characteristic subtypes of AML in which abnormal promyelocytes predominate within peripheral
blood or bone marrow . Also, t(15;17)(q22;q21) shows a characteristic chromosomal translocation in APL, observable in 70-90% of APL
patients. Owing to all trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) combined with chemotherapy, APL has one of the highest cure rates of all types of AML.
Seventy to eighty percent of newly diagnosed APL patients with the PML-RARA rearrangement are cured or under long-term remission, yet some
of them have a poor prognosis . Because cytogenetics is one of the most powerful prognostic factors for the outcome of AML, cytogenetic
abnormalities can cause change in treatment response, relapse, and clinicopathological characteristics . Incidence of secondary cytogenetic
abnormalities has been observed in ~40% of APL cases , but their prognostic significance is still unclear . About 1% of the reported
secondary cytogenetic abnormalities in APL patients are ider(17)(q10)t(15;17)(q22;q12), an infrequent type of additional recurrent
chromosomal abnormality, according to a recent study . However, ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) associated with the PML-RARA rearrangement in
microgranular variant APL is even more rare. As far as we know, only 2 cases of the ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) abnormality in microgranular APL
have been previously reported [8, 9]. Here, we describe an unusual microgranular APL case associated with ider(17)(q10)t(15;17), identified
by both conventional cytogenetics and FISH analyses at the initial diagnosis. A 59-yr-old woman who had previously been diagnosed with
cerebral infarction was brought to our hospital due to right side weakness in November 2007. The initial complete blood count showed
pancytopenia, Hb level of 9.9 g/dL (reference range 12-16 g/dL), platelet count of 83,000/µL (reference range 150,000-350,000/µL), and white
blood cell count of 1,000/µL (reference range 4,000-10,000/µL). Bone marrow aspiration showed a hypercellular marrow replaced by increased
promyelocytes with a paucity or absence of granules, accounting for 36% of all nucleated cells (Fig. 1). The results of special staining of
bone marrow specimens were as follows: Myeloperoxidase, positive; periodic acid Schiff, negative; Nonspecific esterase, negative. Flow
cytometric analysis was conducted and showed that the blasts were positive for CD13 (91.1%), CD33 (83.9%), CD117 (59.2%), CD2 (43.9%), and
CD45 (25.4%), and negative for HLA-DR (3.4%), CD3 (1.3%), CD7 (0.6%), CD10 (1.8%), CD14 (2.4%), CD19 (5.1%), CD34 (1.4%), CD41 (2.9%), CD56
(1.2%), and TdT (0.9%). Bone marrow chromosome analysis revealed a 46,XX,del(6)(?q21q25),der(15)t(15;17)(q22;q12),ider(17)(q10)t(15;17)
(Fig. 2). FISH signals from PML-RARA probes (Abbott Molecular/Vysis, Des Plaines, IL, USA) yielded the results of nuc ish(PML, RARA)×4(RARA
con PML×3), (PML, RARA)×6(RARA con PML×5), (PML, RARA)×3(RARA con PML×2), consistent with the abnormal fusion signal patterns seen in 37% of
the nuclei examined (Fig. 2). The patient was diagnosed with APL and treated with induction chemotherapy consisting of daunorubicin,
cytosine arabinoside, and ATRA. After completing induction chemotherapy, follow up bone marrow examination in January 2008 showed no
evidence of morphologically visible residual leukemia. The concurrent karyotype analysis result was 46,XX in all analyzed cells; and PML-
RARA FISH showed "nuc ish (PML, RARA)×2 " in which the abnormal signal pattern was not observed. There was no evidence of a PML-RARA fusion
gene in the reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR) analysis. As indicated by follow-up bone marrow biopsies conducted until September 2008, the
patient remained in complete remission. During this period, the RT-PCR analysis did not show any signs of the PML-RARA fusion gene while
other cytogenetic studies also indicated normal findings. APL is a distinct subtype of AML and constitutes about 5-8% of all cases of AML
diagnosis. According to the 2008 WHO classification, APL can be diagnosed when there is a t(15;17) or a PML-RARA rearrangement, even if
peripheral blood or bone marrow studies show less than 20% promyelocytes . As recently reported by Manola et al. and our study group, the
ider(17)(q10)t(15;17), an isochromosomal abnormality that occurs on the long arm of ider(17)t(15;17) after reciprocal translocation of
t(15;17), is a relatively rare type of an additional recurrent cytogenetic abnormality that has been reported in 62 APL patients worldwide .
According to these studies, the influence of ider(17)(q10)t(15; 17) on the prognosis of adult APL patients is less significant than its
effect on children. Indeed, 4 previously reported APL cases in children were all related to poor prognosis [8, 13-15], inferring that a more
close and careful interpretation is necessary for childhood APL cases . What is interesting is that so far, reports of ider(17)(q10)t(15;17)
from microgranular variant (AML-M3v) type are extremely rare. Out of 62 total cases, information on APL morphology type were available in 42
cases, and most of these cases (40/42) were of the hypergranular APL type, except for 2 cases that clearly indicated AML-M3v (Table 1) [8,
9]. Therefore, further research is required to determine whether ider(17)(q10) and AML-M3v have a low association, and more careful
observation should be conducted to prevent underestimating AML-M3v patients among ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) cases. Furthermore, double ider(17)
(q10)t(15;17) is so rare in the International Public Databases that only 2 cases of APL patients indicating double ider(17)(q10)t(15;17)
chromosomal abnormalities have been reported (Table 2) [16, 17]. In double ider(17)(q10)t(15;17), a gene dosage effect is observed owing to
chromosomal abnormalities such as the PML-RARA fusion gene on chromosome 17 or the quadruplication of der(17q). In addition, since the
deletion of the tumor suppressor gene TP53 occurs by the loss of 17p, further research is necessary to resolve the adverse prognosis of the
APL group related to such copy number variations. Owing to the limited amount of clinical data in the literature, the relatedness between
double ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) and an adverse prognosis is still unclear [16, 17]. In the case of our patient, it was hard to determine a
strong association between the additional genetic aberration and prognosis because of the small clonal size of the "double
ider(17)(q10)t(15;17)" abnormality. Nevertheless, at least from a diagnostic perspective and as indicated in the authors' recent studies
[13, 18], minimal residual disease detection using such multiple abnormal fusion signals through the PML-RARA FISH analysis in APL patients
associated with ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) or double ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) would be considered to be a useful follow-up marker in clinical
laboratories or hospitals. Additional study would contribute toward a better understanding of the influence of ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) on the
prognosis, survival, and treatment response of such APL cases in adults or children. To the best of our knowledge, however, this is the
third case report of microgranular variant APL associated with ider(17)(q10)t(15;17). This research was supported by Basic Science Research
Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science, and Technology (2010-0023093).
No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Bone marrow aspiration showing abnormal promyelocytes with sparse
and/or fine granulation (dotted arrows), bilobed or "butterfly"-shaped nucleus (a horizontal arrow), cerebriform nucleus (an oblique arrow)
and "salmon pink"-colored cytoplasm (a vertical arrow) at diagnosis (Wright-Giemsa stain,×1,000). Chromosome and FISH studies at initial
diagnosis. (A) Full karyogram of the bone marrow cells (major clone) at diagnosis:
46,XX,del(6)(?q21q25),der(15)t(15;17)(q22;q12),ider(17)(q10)t(15;17). The arrows indicate abnormal chromosomes in this karyogram. (B)
Partial karyograms (chromosomes 15 and 17) of the bone marrow cells at diagnosis: Upper image: t(15;17)(q22;q12) associated with
ider(17)(q10)t(15;17). Lower image: t(15;17)(q22;q12) associated with double ider(17)(q10)t(15;17). (C) FISH study using a PML-RARA dual-
color, dual-fusion translocation probe (Abbott Molecular/Vysis, USA) at diagnosis. The arrows indicate the PML-RARA or RARA-PML fusion
signals. Left image: ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) clone (3 fusion signals). Right image: double ider(17)(q10)t(15;17) clone (5 fusion signals).
Comparison between previous 2 reports and present study with microgranular variant acute promyelocytic leukemia associated with
ider(17)(q10)t(15;17)(q22;q12) *Full karyotype was not available and published karyotype was slightly modified to simplify nomenclature.
Abbreviations: M, male; F, female; WBC, white blood cell; NA, not available; FISH, fluorescent in situ hybridization; RT-PCR, reverse
transcriptase-PCR; CR, complete remission; ATRA, all trans retinoic acid; Y, yes. Summary of acute promyelocytic leukemia patients with
double ider(17)(q10)t(15;17)(q22;q12) from the literature and this study *Some published karyotypes were slightly modified to simplify
nomenclature. Abbreviations: FISH, fluorescent in situ hybridization; RT-PCR, reverse transcriptase-PCR; ATRA, all trans-retinoic acid; CR,
complete remission; M, male; F, female; NA, not available; Y, yes; N, no.
