To the Editor: Carriage of Staphylococcus aureus sequence type (ST) 398 has primarily been reported as occurring among persons in contact
with livestock, including swine and cattle (1,2). This association has given rise to the characterization of this strain as livestock
associated (3). However, ST398 colonization or infection in persons lacking identified livestock-associated risk factors have been reported
(4,5). We report ST398 colonization in a childcare worker in Iowa, USA. As part of a surveillance study of S. aureus carriage in child
daycare facilities, samples were collected from employees, children, and environmental surfaces. Nasal samples were taken from participating
children, and nasal and pharyngeal samples were taken from participating employees. All samples were cultured, and S. aureus isolates were
examined by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, spa typing, and antimicrobial drug susceptibility testing and tested for the Panton-Valentine
leukocidin gene. One participant was colonized in the nose and throat with t571, a spa type previously reported to correspond to ST398 (1).
The isolates were nontypeable when SmaI was used, also a characteristic of ST398 (6). They were digested with Cfr9I and found to be closely
related to an ST398 isolate of spa type t034 of swine origin but distinct from S. aureus isolated from 2 other employees at the facility
(Figure). Both ST398 isolates were susceptible to methicillin. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis of Staphylococcus aureus. Isolates were
digested with Cfr9I. Lanes 1 and 7, molecular mass ladder; lane 2, t034 sequence type (ST) 398 isolate from pig; lane 3, t571 ST398 nasal
isolate from colonized childcare employee; lane 4, t571 ST398 throat isolate from colonized childcare employee; lanes 5 and 6, non-ST398
isolates (t2228 and t084, respectively) from 2 other childcare employees. The colonized employee was a 24-year-old woman who had worked at
the facility for â‰ˆ5 years. She reported a history of melanoma but was not currently taking any chemotherapy drugs and had not been
hospitalized in the previous 12 months. She reported having a family member who worked in a hospital and had direct contact with patients,
but the employee lived alone and responded negatively to questions about whether she or immediate family members had had contact with
animals or worked in a processing plant. ST398 may be transmitted from livestock to community members and then from person to person. It can
potentially be transmitted in food; several studies have documented ST398 in raw meats (7,8), and we identified this strain in retail meat
products in Iowa (T.C. Smith et al., unpub. data). Secondary transmission of ST398 from colonized persons to contacts has also been
suggested, but the few publications reporting this suggest that ST398 seems to be less transmissible by this route than are common human
strains (9). We cannot be sure whether either of these routes played a role in acquisition of ST398 by this employee. Although no other
tested persons in this childcare facility were found to carry ST398, only 24 (40%) of the 60 employees and 8 (4.8%) of the 168 children
participated, suggesting the possibility of a reservoir in the facility among those who were not tested. Of the 24 employees who
participated, 2 reported occupational contact with any animals, 2 reported contact with swine, and 3 reported contact with cattle. However,
no participant reported having animals other than cats or dogs on their property. It is possible that >1 sampled employee may have been a
transient ST398 carrier but negative at the time of our sampling. Reports of ST398 in persons who had no direct contact with livestock in
the United States are rare (10). To provide a better understanding of the epidemiology of this novel strain, further examination of the
emergence of this isolate in community settings and on farms is needed. Suggested citation for this article: Moritz ED, Smith TC. Livestock-
associated Staphylococcus aureus in childcare worker . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2011 Apr [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1704.101852 We thank the childcare centers for allowing us to study their children and employees, and we thank
Blake Hanson for laboratory support. Research was approved by the University of Iowa Institutional Review Board (no. 200805708). This
project was funded by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health through a small project grant provided by the Heartland
Center for Occupational Health and Safety and by general funds through the Center for Emerging Infectious Diseases at the University of
Iowa. Fellowship support was provided by the Occupational Epidemiology Training Program within the National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health-funded Heartland Center for Occupational Safety and Health (T42 OH008491-03).
