Schwannomas are rare and seldom extend into the anterior cranial fossa. Herein, we report a case of schwannoma arising from the olfactory
groove in a 16-year-old girl who presented with generalized seizures without olfactory dysfunction or other neurologic deficits.
Computerized tomography (CT) scan showed a large mass with abundant calcification located in the olfactory groove, which was confirmed as a
schwannoma by histology and totally resected via basal subfrontal approach. The presentation, imaging findings and histogenesis of the tumor
are discussed along with a review of the pertinent literature. Intracranial schwannomas arise predominantly from the vestibular branch of
the eighth cranial nerve and rarely from the olfactory groove. Olfactory groove schwannomas are rare and likely to be misdiagnosed as
olfactory groove meningiomas, dural-based metastasis or neuroblastomas. Only about 30 cases of olfactory groove meningioma have been
reported in the world literature, and most of these cases were associated with olfactory dysfunction, while only 13 cases were reported to
have no olfactory dysfunction. In this article, we discuss a rare case of schwannoma arising from the olfactory groove in a 16-year-old girl
who presented with generalized seizures without olfactory dysfunction. A 16-year-old girl presented with episodes of generalized seizures in
the past 15 years, and the attacks became more frequent in recent 2 years prior to admission in a local hospital, where a large subfrontal
mass was noticed on computerized tomography (CT) scan (Fig. 1a). The patient was transferred to our hospital for further evaluation and
treatment. Neither significant abnormality was elicited from the general physical examination on admission nor was any focal neurologic
deficit detected on neurologic examination.Fig. 1a CT scan shows a large mass located in the right frontobasal region adjacent to the
anterior falx. The mass is heterogeneously intense, with a large amount of calcification. b Axial T2-weighted MRI shows a huge subfrontal
heterogeneously hyperintense mass. c Sagittal T1-weighted MRI with gadolinium shows strong contrast enhancement of the lesion a CT scan
shows a large mass located in the right frontobasal region adjacent to the anterior falx. The mass is heterogeneously intense, with a large
amount of calcification. b Axial T2-weighted MRI shows a huge subfrontal heterogeneously hyperintense mass. c Sagittal T1-weighted MRI with
gadolinium shows strong contrast enhancement of the lesion CT scan demonstrated a 5 × 4 × 3 cm mass located in the right frontobasal region
adjacent to the anterior falx, accompanied with minimal perifocal edema (Fig. 1a). The mass was heterogeneously intensed with a large amount
of calcification around the rim. T2-weighted magnetic resonance images revealed a heterogeneously hyperintensed mass in the right frontal
region near the midline, causing elevation of the right frontal lobe. The mass was heterogeneously enhanced after IV administration of
gadolinium (Fig. 1b, c). No evidence of dural tail or extension into the ethmoid sinus was seen. Right frontal craniotomy was performed. A
5-cm extra axial tumor was found at the base of the anterior cranial fossa and totally resected. The tumor was solid, moderately vascular
and firmly adhered to the right olfactory groove with abundant calcification. The right olfactory tract was not identifiable. After total
resection of the tumor, the cribriform plate of ethmoid bone was seen erosive. The gross appearance of the tumor looked like an olfactory
groove meningioma. Histologic examination revealed that the resected tissue was composed of spindle-shaped cells, with elongated nuclei and
fibrillary cytoplasm (Antoni A pattern), and less cellular and loosely textured tumor areas (Antoni B). Immunohistochemistry showed that the
tumor cells were positive for S-100 protein, confirming the diagnosis of schwannoma (Fig. 2).Fig. 2a Photomicrography shows the
characteristic features of schwannoma composed of benign spindle-shaped cells, with elongated nuclei and fibrillary cytoplasm (Antoni A
pattern), and less cellular, loosely textured tumor areas (Antoni B) (H&E 200×). b Immunohistochemistry shows that the tumor cells are
positive for S-100 protein (400×) a Photomicrography shows the characteristic features of schwannoma composed of benign spindle-shaped
cells, with elongated nuclei and fibrillary cytoplasm (Antoni A pattern), and less cellular, loosely textured tumor areas (Antoni B) (H&E
200×). b Immunohistochemistry shows that the tumor cells are positive for S-100 protein (400×) The postoperative course was uneventful.
Postoperative imaging confirmed gross-total resection of the tumor (Fig. 3). The patient was discharged 7 days after surgery without new
neurologic deficits, and follow-up visits demonstrated normal neurologic function.Fig. 3Postoperative sagittal and coronal enhanced T1WI MRI
and T2WI MRI shows complete removal of the tumor Postoperative sagittal and coronal enhanced T1WI MRI and T2WI MRI shows complete removal of
the tumor The PubMed database was searched online (Pubmed, http://pubmed.com/) in the English language. Search query using the terms
olfactory schwannoma and subfrontal schwannoma in titles and/or abstracts revealed additional 34 cases (Table 1). It was found that the age
and sex distributions of the 35 patients including ours with subfrontal schwannomas were different from those of patients with ordinary
intracranial schwannomas. The mean age of the 35 patients was 32.7 ± 14.0 years, which was younger than that of patients with schwannoma in
other common sites. In addition, there were more males (57.1%) than females, the male/female ratio being 1.14:1 versus 1:1.5–2 for ordinary
intracranial schwannomas.Table 1Summary of 35 cases of olfactory groove schwannomaNo.AuthorYearAge (years)SexMain initial
symptomOlfactionCalcificationEnhancedAspectBone erosionAttachmentDetection of intact olfactory nerve(s)1Our
case201016FConvulsionNormalYesHeteroSolidYesOGNot detected2Mirone et al. 200938MHeadacheLeft hyposmiaUnknownHeteroCystic-solidYesOGNot
detected3Martine-Soto et al. 200954MHeadache, dysphasiaNormalNoHeteroSolidYesCPNot detected4Figueiredo et al.
200949MHeadacheAnosmiaUnknownHeteroCystic-solidYesUnknownBoth were involved and adherent to skull base dura5Choi et al.
200939FHeadacheAnosmiaYesHeteroCystic-solidYesCPRelateted to the tumor6Saberi et al. 200835FConvulsion, diplopia and headacheLeft
hyposmiaYesHeteroCystic-solidYesUnknownInvolved in tumor7Kanaan et al. 200814MHeadache, decling school performance and weight
lossHyposimaUnknownHeteroCystic-solidYesEthmoid sinusUnknown8Daglioglu et al. 200821MHeadache, aggressive
behaviorUnknownUnknownHeteroCysticYesRight OGAdhere to the tumor9Bezircioglu et al.
200833FHeadacheAnosmiaUnknownHeteroSolidYesUnknownUnknown10Adachi et al. 200722FConvulsionNormalYesPartialSolidUnknownCPThinned11Yako et al.
200514MHeadache, vomitingAnosmiaYesHeteroCystic-solidNoLeft OGOn the right olfactory nerve was detected12Komoribayashi et al.
200537FConvulsionAnosmiaNoTotalSolidNoSkull base duraNot detected13Prasad et al. 200419MConvulsionAnosmiaUnknownHeteroCystic-
solidUnknownLeft OGUnknown14Sano et al. 200444MHeadacheNormalNoHeteroSolidUnknownDura of the skull baseUnknown15Shenoy et al.
200455MConvulsionNormalNoHeteroCysticUnknownLateral to the CPThinned16Murakami et al. 200450MHeadacheNormalNoTotalSolidYesCPThinned17Yuen et
al. 200433FConvulsionNormalUnknownTotalSolidYesCPInvolved in tumor18de-Souza et al.
200327MHeadacheAnosmiaNoTotalMulticysticUnknownUnknownUnknown19Amador et al. 200224FHypoesthesia on the left side of face, impaired
visionUnknownNoHeteroCysticYesOGNot detected20Carron et al. 200259FHeadacheNormalNoTotalSolidYesLeft OGAdhere to the tumor21Tsai et al.
200131FHeadache, convulsionUnknownNoHeteroSolidUnknownOGUnknown22Tan et al. 200121MConvulsionNormalUnknownWellSolidYesLateral to the
CPUnknown23Gelabert et al. 200019MConvulsionNormalUnknownUnknownUnknownUnknownCPUnknown24Praharaj et al. 199945MHeadache,
convulsionUnknownNoWellSolidUnknownCPNot detected25Timothy et al. 199933FConvulsionNormalUnknownWellSolidUnknownCrista galliNot
detected26Boyd et al. 199729FHeadache, convulsionHyposimaNoHeteroCysticYesCPSurrounded tumor27Huang et al. 199733MHeadache, leathargy, LOC
decreased eye visionNormalUnknownWellSolidUnknownCPUnknown28Sabel et al. 199517MConvulsionUnknownNoWellSolidUnknownSkull base duraNot
thinned29Bando et al. 199255FHyposmia, defect of visual fieldHyposimaYesHeteroUnknownYesNot detectedNot detected30Harada et al.
199233MHeadacheHyposimaNoHeteroSolidUnknownOGThinned31Nagao et al. 199163FRecent memory disturbedNormalNoHeteroCysticNoLateral to the
CPUnknown32Sato et al. 198522MConvulsionAnosmiaNoWellSolidNoOGThinned33Vassilouthis et al. 198017MDifficulty in maintaing concerntration,
forgetfullness, headache, dizziness and amaurosisHyposimaNoWellCysticYesFalxUnknown34Ulrich et al. 197819MEpilesy, partially blind, anosmia,
diminished corneal reflex, hypestheniaAnosmiaUnknownUnknownUnknownUnknownSkull baseNot detected35Harano et al.
197426FConvulsionNormalUnknownUnknownCysticUnknownSkull baseTumor distant from olfactory tractCP cribriform plate, OG olfactory groove
Summary of 35 cases of olfactory groove schwannoma CP cribriform plate, OG olfactory groove Schwannomas are benign tumors derived from
Schwann cells. Theoretically, the olfactory nerve, as part of the central nervous system, does not contain any Schwann cells and cannot
develop schwannomas. Thus, the origin of olfactory schwannomas is enigmatic. Various developmental and non-developmental hypotheses have
emerged in an attempt to explain the possible origin of olfactory schwannomas. The developmental theories include transformation of
mesenchymal pial cells into ectodermal Schwann cells , and migration or displacement of neural crest within the substance of the central
nervous system . On the other hand, the non-developmental theories argue that olfactory schwannomas arise from Schwann cells normally
present on adjacent structures such as anterior ethmoidal nerves innervating the anterior cranial fossa and the olfactory groove, the
meningeal branch of the trigeminal nerve , the filia olfactoria which develop a Schwann cell layer about 0.5 mm beyond the olfactory bulbs,
adrenergic nerve fibers innervating cerebral arterioles , a kind of ‘ensheathing cell’ of the olfactory nerve that expresses phenotypic
features of both astrocyte and Schwann cell , and terminal nerve (cranial nerve 0) . In addition, post-trauma reactive changes including
formation of schwann cells from multipotential mesenchymal cells in patients with pathological changes like multiple sclerosis or infarction
have also been described [9, 10]. Olfactory groove meningioma should be highly suspected in differential diagnosis of an extra-axial
anterior cranial fossa mass involving the cribriform plate. However, subfrontal schwannoma can have similar neuroradiological features to
olfactory groove meningioma, including extra-axial location, calcification, contrast enhancement and perifocal edema, thus making pre-
operative differentiation of the two conditions difficult. Clinically, young age at presentation, the presence of bone scalloping on CT, the
absence of dural tail sign and low vascularity may help us to make differential diagnosis between schwannoma and meningioma before surgery.
In addition, bone erosion in olfactory schwannomas is usually destructive (17 of 35), while meningioma tends to induce hyperostosis
(Table 1). Esthesioneuroblastoma and carcinoma of the paranasal sinus tend to be more aggressive, though they should be excluded from the
differential diagnosis. Immunohistochemically, schwannomas always showed strong positive for S-100 and negative for EMA. Olfactory groove
schwannomas are classified into two main types by Adachi et al. : schwannomas arising from the olfactory site such as the olfactory groove
or cribriform plate, and those arising from non-olfactory sites. Accordingly, our case should belong to the first type as evidenced by the
intraoperative findings. Recently, some researchers doubted whether these olfactory groove schwannomas are truly schwannomas. Yasuda et al.
individualized the first case of olfactory ensheathing cell tumor (OECT) based on immunohistochemical findings and suspected OECs as one of
the origins of olfactory schwannoma. Embryologically, OECs derive from olfactory placodes, whereas Schwann cells originate from the neural
crests. Despite the different origin of their cells, olfactory groove schwannoma and OECT have similar clinical, imaging, and histologic
features, and can only be distinguished by immunohistochemical staining. Olfactory groove schwannomas are extremely rare tumors, occurring
less frequently than any other intracranial nerve schwannoma. Complete removal is curative, but subtotal resection may be an acceptable
option for the slow-growing nature of these tumors. Schwannoma should be kept in mind in differential diagnosis of anterior cranial fossa
neoplasms, especially in young males. Further research on the pathogenesis and the origin of olfactory groove schwannoma is needed. This
article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited. An erratum to this article can be
found at http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10072-011-0707-0.
