Drug-induced acute interstitial nephritis (AIN) represents a growing cause of renal failure in current medical practice. While
antimicrobials and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are typically associated with drug-induced AIN, few reports have been made on the
involvement of other analgesics. We report our experience in managing a 17-year-old female with AIN and subsequent renal injury following an
acetaminophen overdose in conjunction with acute alcohol intoxication. It is well established that acetaminophen metabolism, particularly at
high doses, produces reactive metabolites that may induce renal and hepatic toxicity. It is also plausible however, that such reactive
species could instead alter renal peptide immunogenicity, thereby inducing AIN. In the following report, we review a possible mechanism for
the acetaminophen-induced AIN observed in our patient and also discuss the potential involvement of acute alcohol ingestion in disease
onset. The objective of our report is to increase awareness of healthcare professionals to the potential involvement of these commonly used
agents in AIN pathogenesis. Drug-induced acute interstitial nephritis (AIN) represents a common cause of renal injury in today's medical
practice. AIN is characterized by cellular infiltration of the interstitium (including CD4+ T cells, macrophages, eosinophils and plasma
cells) and is accompanied by interstitial edema in the absence of glomerular or capillary damage. The majority of AIN cases have been linked
to the use of antimicrobials and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs); however the number of drugs implemented in AIN pathogenesis
continues to expand . Animal models of drug-induced AIN provide evidence for an immune-mediated mechanism of disease. On the basis of
observed cellular infiltrate composition and physiological signs (fever, malaise, rash, eosinophilia and arthralgia), a T-cell mediated
delayed hypersensitivity reaction has been proposed . In this model, drugs are assumed to elicit reactions targeted to endogenous renal
antigens through a hapten-like manner or through native renal protein imitation . The following report describes a patient who experienced
AIN after consumption of high doses of acetaminophen with concomitant acute alcohol intoxication. While hepatic and renal toxicity have been
well associated with acetaminophen overdose , few reports have been documented on the involvement of the analgesic in AIN onset. Of the few
cases reported, most patients, if not all, have also suffered from chronic alcoholism . The documentation of AIN associated with
acetaminophen overdose and acute alcohol ingestion is unprecedented. Thus, the purpose of our report is to increase awareness of the
potential adverse affects of acetaminophen overdose; even in the case of acute alcohol consumption. A 17-year-old Caucasian female presented
to local hospital with a history of acute alcohol intoxication and ingestion of large quantities of acetaminophen. The patient complained of
nausea for 2 days and subjective increase in thirst and urine output for a day. She did not notice any dysuria, abdominal pain or change in
the colour of her urine. She did however report a remarkable increase in lower back pain that she had attributed to strenuous exercise. Two
days prior to her presentation to the emergency department, the young lady had attended a party where she consumed over 300 mL of vodka and
ingested twenty 500 mg tablets of acetaminophen later that night. Past medical history revealed that she had experienced an episode of rash
after having taken liquid acetaminophen as a child. She had not taken acetaminophen since infancy and also denied regular use of any other
analgesic. Family history was non-contributory for relevant physiological and psychological illness. The patient reported feeling stressed
due to a recent slip in school grades, however denied any suicidal ideation. Physical examination in the emergency department revealed blood
pressure of 140/92 mmHg, pulse 80 bpm, temperature 36.9°C, respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation of 100% at room
air. Height and weight were recorded at 170 cm and 63 kg. Physical examination was otherwise unremarkable. No rash, joint swelling or sign
of dehydration was detected. Initial renal function tests at the local hospital revealed serum creatinine and BUN levels of 1.6 mg/dL and
19.3 mg/dL, respectively. Other laboratory results included: glucose 112 mg/dL, sodium 141 mEq/L, potassium 4.3 mEq/L, chloride 104 mEq/L,
bicarbonate 29 mEq/L, albumin 43 g/L, aspartate transaminase 20 IU/L, alkaline phosphate 66 IU/L and total bilirubin 1.11 mg/dL. Her INR was
reported to be normal at 0.9. Toxicity screens on admission showed acetaminophen level at 9.06 μg/mL. Urine dipstick showed trace amount of
blood and 2 plus protein. Microscopy revealed 25 red blood cells per high power field and was otherwise non-contributory. Abdominal
ultrasound revealed increased hepatic echogenicity and the kidneys were normal in appearance. At the outside hospital, she was given
morphine, ondansetron and lansoprazole for her back pain and gastrointestinal symptoms. Acetylcysteine was not administered as the patient
presented more than 24 hours after the ingestion of acetaminophen. Renal function tests were repeated later that evening and monitored
frequently thereafter. Over the course of 36 hours, the patient's serum creatinine and BUN levels elevated from 1.6 mg/dL and 19.3 mg/dL to
5.7 mg/dL and 49.6 mg/dL, respectively. Urine output was reported to be 2.7 mL/kg/hour. At this time, the patient was transferred to our
Children's Hospital for rapidly progressive renal insufficiency. Physical examination upon admission showed normal vital signs: blood
pressure 115/74 mmHg, pulse 60 bpm, temperature 36.6°C, respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute and 100% oxygen saturation at room air. Serum
creatinine and BUN levels were measured at 6.3 mg/dL and 52.4 mg/dL, respectively. Furthermore, her electrolytes were recorded as follows:
random glucose 86 mg/dL, sodium 134 mEq/L, potassium 5.7 mEq/L, chloride 104 mEq/L and bicarbonate 22 mEq/L. Coagulation study revealed an
INR of 1.0 and an APTT of 28 seconds. Other investigations including blood counts and liver functions tests were within normal range. The
patient's daily urine output was 3.3 mL/kg/hour at this time. Urinalysis revealed small amounts of protein and blood in her urine. Staining
for eosinophils on the random urine sample was positive. Renal biopsy was performed to further delineate the underlying cause of rapidly
progressive renal insufficiency. Figure 1 depicts the histological findings. The biopsy showed no evidence of glomerulonephritis. The
interstitium was mildly edematous with small aggregates of inflammatory cells, mainly lymphocytes and eosinophils. Immunofluorescence and
electron microscopy were both negative for immune deposits. The histological findings were compatible with acute interstitial nephritis.
Renal biopsy of the patient that shows eosinophils infiltration in the interstitium. The patient was managed supportively by careful
monitoring of fluid intake and output. Corticosteroids therapy was considered if no improvement of her renal function was observed. However,
her serum creatinine and BUN levels peaked at 7.0 mg/dL and 60 mg/dL two days after admission then began to improve without further medical
intervention. Her serum creatinine and BUN levels upon discharge were 4.7 mg/dL and 48 mg/dL respectively. Outpatient follow-up at two weeks
after discharge showed that she had completely recovered; her creatinine was 1 mg/dL and BUN was 18 mg/dL. Drug-induced AIN represents a
growing cause of acute renal failure in today's medical practice . This particular report illustrates a case of AIN induced by a widely
consumed analgesic that otherwise has little documented correlation with disease pathogenesis. At therapeutic dosages, little evidence
suggests that acetaminophen may cause significant harm to liver or kidney. However it is well established that in large quantities, the drug
may induce renal and hepatic toxicity leading to tissue necrosis and organ failure . Although this disease presentation differs from what is
described in our case (interstitial nephritis), the pathogenesis of this organ failure is important to consider. It is generally thought
that a portion of acetaminophen metabolism occurs via CYP 450 enzymes in both the liver and the kidneys. The resultant reactive metabolites
are then reduced by glutathione (GSH) and are excreted as benign compounds in the urine. At higher doses however, more acetaminophen is
shunted through these pathways leading to the increased production of reactive metabolites and gradual GSH depletion. The reactive species
which are left unbound when GSH is fully depleted may then form adducts with cellular proteins leading to cell death and organ failure. In
renal tissues specifically, prostaglandin synthetase and N-deacetylase enzymes are also thought to play a role in reactive metabolite
formation and overall disease outcome . In our particular case however, renal biopsy did not reveal tissue necrosis. Instead, the presence
of cellular aggregates, namely lymphocytes and eosinophils, as well as peripheral hypersensitivity symptoms (i.e. eosinophiluria) was
suggestive of AIN with an allergic etiology. Furthermore, the lack of immunoglobulins and immune complexes indicated a cell-mediated
mechanism. With this in mind, it is interesting to note that an established model of drug-induced AIN is a delayed hypersensitivity reaction
involving small reactive compounds known as haptens (or pro-haptens) . Essentially, this model suggests that the drug or one of its reactive
metabolites may act as a hapten and bind to and modify the immunogenicity of native renal proteins. Consequently, cell-mediated responses
targeted to the foreign protein-hapten complexes are initiated . This pro-hapten mechanism is what we propose in the reviewed case; where
high doses of acetaminophen may have lead to increased reactive metabolite formation and subsequent modification of renal peptides. While
this proposed mechanism of acetaminophen-induced AIN is plausible, further research is of course necessary to establish an exact model of
pathogenesis. Additional research should also focus on adverse renal outcomes following concurrent acetaminophen and alcohol ingestion. Our
patient received one dose of lansoprazole when she presented to the local emergency room and lansoprazole has also been linked to AIN. In a
recent systematic review on proton pump inhibitor (though not specific for lansoprazole) as the possible cause of AIN, among the sixty-four
reported cases in literature, the mean duration of treatment before the onset of nephritis was 13 weeks (range: 2 to 52 weeks) . As the
patient has already been symptomatic with elevated serum creatinine of 1.6 mg/dL (normal: less than 1.0 mg/dL) before she received her dose
of lansoprazole, and only 1 dose was administered, the authors do not think her present illness was related to this medication. In terms of
AIN management, identification and removal of the drug responsible for the pathology is the single most important principle . Supportive
therapies that include close monitoring of intravascular volume and maintenance of electrolyte balance are also essential. On the other
hand, the therapeutic roles of corticosteroids remain controversial. Few large retrospective or prospective controlled studies have been
conducted with inconsistent conclusions. While some studies report a more rapid and complete recovery of renal function with steroid
administration, others have failed to confirm these results . In this particular case of acetaminophen overdose however, corticosteroids
were not needed, and baseline renal functions were reestablished within 2 weeks time. As stated, few reported cases of acetaminophen
associated AIN exist to date. Those that are reported most often involve patients who suffer from chronic alcoholism . This makes our report
an important illustration of acetaminophen-induced AIN with concurrent acute rather than chronic alcohol ingestion. Given our findings, we
believe that healthcare professionals should be aware of the less recognized adverse affects of acetaminophen overdose. They should also
consider AIN in their differential diagnosis when presented with patients suffering from acute renal injury associated with acetaminophen
overdose; especially in conjunction with acute or chronic alcoholism. AIN: acute interstitial nephritis; NSAIDs: Non steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs; GSH: glutathione. The first draft of the paper was written by LF and KL together. IA was responsible for the pathology
section. KL was involved in extensive review and revision of the manuscript. The authors have read and approve the final version of this
manuscript. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
