Irreducibility of the knee following complete dislocation is a rare event determined by the interposition of various capsulo-ligamentous
structures in the joint space. Such cases often require urgent surgical treatment. We report the case of a healthy 70-year-old man with a
sprain of the left knee that occurred after a sports trauma. The patient showed knee dislocation with multiple ligamentous injuries and
articular block due to interposition of a portion of the vastus medialis muscle. After arthroscopic evaluation, we performed surgical
treatment to free the muscle, regularize the medial meniscus and suture the posterior and medial capsule and ligaments; the cruciate
ligaments were not treated. The most interesting aspect of the articular damage in this case was a wide detachment of the vastus medialis
muscle with intra-articular dislocation. The decision to treat only the posterior lesions and allow the healing of the front ones by
rehabilitation treatment was supported by full functional recovery and return to sports activity. Knee dislocation is a complex trauma often
characterized by association of several capsulo-ligamentous lesions; its treatment remains controversial . For rational planning and
treatment, it is important to define exactly the degree of dislocation and the complexity of the associated lesions. Various scales have
been proposed, based either on the position of the dislocation (defined from the relation between femur and tibia) or on the type of the
associated ligamentous lesions . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) seems to be the most appropriate radiological examination [3, 4].
Sometimes, clinical appraisal under anaesthesia can be useful . Arteriography and electroneuromyography are indicated in case of suspicion
of neuro-vascular lesions, which may need immediate surgical treatment . Other cases of knee irreducibility determined by interposition of
various capsulo-ligamentous structures have been previously described. Nevertheless, to our knowledge, there are very few reports of
interposition of the vastus medialis muscle. G.R., a healthy, sporty (skiing), 70-year-old man, had a sprain of the left knee with a valgus-
external spin trauma after a crash against another skier at low–medium speed. He reported immediate pain and loss of function at the knee
and was immediately taken to the emergency room. The clinical appraisal showed that the left knee was fixed in a valgus-flexed attitude,
with pain on the medial compartment and a large skin depression on the medial side of the joint line (Fig. 1). Severe reduction of range of
motion was reported (maximum flexion 60° and 30° of lack of extension). Valgus stress test, medial meniscus tests, Lachman test, front
drawer and posterior drawer tests were all positive. Neuro-vascular lesions were absent.Fig. 1Skin pucker with recess at the level of the
medial joint line Skin pucker with recess at the level of the medial joint line The radiographic evaluation showed a subluxation of the knee
with abnormal wideness of the medial joint space. The MRI showed anterior subluxation of the medial femoral condyle with intra-articular
dislocation of the anterior-medial soft tissues. It also showed: complete lesion of both anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments (ACL and
PCL), alteration and fragmentation of the medial meniscus (MM), rupture of the medial collateral ligament (MCL) and, finally, lateral
subluxation of the patella. The MRI also showed, in the medial side, a muscular-density-like structure, which turned out to be intra-
articularly located and to enter in contact with the medial femoral condyle (Fig. 2).Fig. 2MRI showing muscular-density-like structure
(indicated byarrows), which turned out to be intra-articularly dislocated MRI showing muscular-density-like structure (indicated byarrows),
which turned out to be intra-articularly dislocated Given the diagnosis of knee dislocation with multiple ligamentous injuries (ACL, PCL,
MM, MCL) and muscle interposition, surgical treatment appeared to be necessary. During the arthroscopy, a wide medial capsular lesion with
intra-articular dislocation, a complex bucket-handle injury of MM and proximal disinsertion of PCL and ACL were observed. Specifically,
dislocation of the vastus medialis was revealed (Fig. 3).Fig. 3Arthroscopy showed the intra-articular dislocation of the vastus medialis
Arthroscopy showed the intra-articular dislocation of the vastus medialis Because it was impossible to reduce the dislocation of the vastus
medialis by arthroscopy, a medial access arthrotomy was performed. It was thus possible to appreciate the following lesions: a distal
complete laceration of the MCL, of the popliteal oblique ligament (POL) and of the posterior-medial capsule and a complete laceration of the
meniscus-femoral ligament. Moreover, there was a dislocation of the vastus medialis muscle, whose distal portion was dislocated into the
intra-articular space through the capsular lesion. Firstly, the release of the muscle belly from the notch was performed. This restored the
mobility and the alignment of the knee joint and gave a better view of the capsular and ligamentous lesions. Then, selective partial
regularization of the MM was performed. Finally, plastic suture of the posterior-medial and medial capsule, re-insertion of the POL with
detached points and suture of the MCL with small anchor type “T-corkscrew” were performed (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Intra-operative reconstruction of
vastus medialis muscle and of the MCL:a, medial condyle;b, damaged medial meniscus, dislocated in the intercondylar notch;c, tibia;d, MCL;e,
vastus medialis muscle Intra-operative reconstruction of vastus medialis muscle and of the MCL:a, medial condyle;b, damaged medial meniscus,
dislocated in the intercondylar notch;c, tibia;d, MCL;e, vastus medialis muscle After the surgery, the knee showed a correct alignment and
the varus-valgus stress tests were negative. The rehabilitation program was immobilization with 20° of flexion for 15 days, then progressive
recovery of range of motion in an articulated knee brace for 30 days. Partial weight-bearing was allowed after 15 days, and full weight-
bearing after 45 days. We evaluated the patient at 6 months after the trauma through a clinical and instrumental evaluation with MRI and
ultra-sonographic examination (US). The MRI showed the rupture of ACL, an altered morphology of PCL and a thickness increase with residual
oedema of the MCL that appeared completely re-inserted (Fig. 5). To obtain a more detailed evaluation of the muscular situation, US was
performed; it confirmed the thickness increase in MCL and showed continuity of vastus medialis with minimal oedema. It also showed no
significant differences between right and left knee regarding the morphology of the vastus medialis muscle.Fig. 5MRI at 6 months showing the
healing of the MCL, with residual oedema MRI at 6 months showing the healing of the MCL, with residual oedema The clinical examination
showed a complete range of motion (full extension, flexion of 130°) with no lateral instability; Lachman and posterior drawer tests were
minimal positive. This minimal instability was completely asymptomatic in the patient’s daily life. The quadriceps fully recovered after the
rehabilitation. The patient walked, hiked, cycled and ran after 6 months and returned to alpine skiing after 10 months, as an active,
healthy, 70-year-old man can do. During the most recent clinical examination, the patient gave his consent for publication of this case
report. The interesting aspect of these types of knee dislocations is a wide lesion of the medial capsulo-ligamentous structures and their
interposition between the femoral condyles, which causes the irreducibility of the dislocation itself. It is usually the result of a sprain
in posterior-lateral sense. The presence of a cutaneous retraction on the medial joint line and eventual signs of cutaneous suffering are
characteristic clinical signs [7, 8]. The few cases described in the literature generally refer to the interposition of various medial
capsulo-ligamentous structures, and their authors propose diverse surgical solutions without general agreement, particularly concerning the
repair of ACL and PCL . The particularity of our case is a wide detachment of the vastus medialis muscle with intra-articular dislocation.
This lesion clinically corresponded to an articular block with a forced valgus deviation of the limb and, specifically, to a cutaneous
retraction at the level of the joint line. The intra-articular muscular interposition was detected by MRI and confirmed by the arthroscopy.
The first arthroscopic step is advised in the literature, because it allows direct appraisal of the lesions and their eventual repair , but
generally, in case of multiple complex lesions such as that described herein, arthrotomy is necessary [1, 11, 12]. Concerns remain regarding
the treatment of the capsulo-ligamentous lesions. To our knowledge, very few cases presenting a similar condition can be found in the
literature. Kilicoglu et al. in 2001 reported the case of a patient with an irreducible knee dislocation with interposition between the
femoral condyles of the vastus medialis muscle. The clinical appraisal and the radiologic findings were similar to our case. In contrast to
our approach, their surgical choice was to section the muscle to allow reduction of the knee dislocation and to perform the reconstruction
of the ACL . Silverberg et al. published a similar case in 2004. In this case the surgical choice was to remove the border of the vastus
medialis, to reduce the dislocation and to insert the MCL through small anchors. In that case, a PCL repair was performed . The difference
in our case is that we chose to repair the rupture of the vastus medialis muscle and to relocate it in its anatomical site. This procedure
allowed us to reduce the knee dislocation and to repair the medial capsulo-ligamentous lesions. In addition, in our case a lesion of the
popliteus oblique ligament (POL) was also present and was repaired, in accordance with the literature . Another difference is that we
decided not to treat the ACL or PCL. This decision was taken in accordance with the literature and in consideration of the age of the
patient, as well as his functional demands. After the first 45 days, the patient underwent the same rehabilitation protocol that we apply
after arthroscopic reconstruction of the ACL. This choice was supported by the results: immediate lateral stability, full functional
recovery and complete return to sports activity as before the trauma. In the end, what we have found in our experience is that, in this kind
of lesion, lateral and rotational stability must be achieved immediately with reconstruction or suture of the ligaments, while
reconstruction of the cruciate ligaments can be postponed and even avoided in elderly patients or those not engaged professionally in
sports. In this case the rehabilitation protocol and the stability provided by the reinforcement of the muscles play a fundamental role. The
authors declare that there is no conflict of interest in writing this article. The authors declare that no sources of support exist,
including pharmaceutical and industry support. The authors did not receive funds for this work. In particular, we did not receive funds from
the National Institutes of Health (NIH), Wellcome Trust or Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI). This article is distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
author(s) and source are credited.
