Pleomorphic adenoma (PA), the most common salivary gland tumor, accounts for 54 to 65% of all salivary gland neoplasias and 80% of the
benign salivary gland tumors. It most frequently affects the parotid gland, followed by the submandibular and the minor salivary glands.
Microscopically, mucous, sebaceous, oncocytic and squamous metaplasia, sometimes with the formation of keratin pearls, may be present, but
the latter rarely results in the formation of extensive keratin-filled cysts lined by squamous epithelium. Extensive squamous metaplasia can
be mistaken for malignancy, including mucoepidermoid carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. Here, we present an unusual case of PA with
extensive squamous metaplasia and keratin cyst formations in a minor salivary gland, and discuss its microscopic features, including the
immunohistochemical characteristics, and differential diagnosis of this uncommon presentation. Pleomorphic adenoma (PA) affecting minor
salivary glands presents a female predilection29. It occurs over a wide age range, but the mean age is 43.6 years and the peak incidence is
between the fourth and fifth decades of life30. PA is clinically characterized by a slow growing, sessile-based, firm, painless mass, which
occasionally has an ulcerated surface22. The most common site for minor salivary gland tumors is the palate4. Microscopically PA exhibits a
great diversity of morphological aspects20, showing varying combinations of epithelial and myoepithelial cells in a mesenchymal or stromal
background. The duct-like formations exhibit ductal luminal cells in the inner layer and abluminal cells (myoepithelial cells and
myoepithelial-like cells derived from them) in the outer layer. The capsule varies in thickness and presence, and many tumors show finger-
like processes projecting into the capsule13. Squamous metaplasia, with the formation of keratin pearls may be present13, but rarely results
in extensive keratin-filled cysts lined by squamous epithelium5,7,28. This microscopic finding may represent a diagnostic dilemma for
pathologists. Wide local excision is recommended as the treatment of choice11. Recurrence, which is estimated to occur in 5-30% of cases, is
associated with incomplete surgical excision due to the presence of finger-like tumor extensions outside the capsule or satellite
tumors13,22. PA presents a risk of malignant transformation, usually giving rise to a carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma and the frequency of
this transformation increases as a result of the tumor persisting without being treated23. A close follow-up is necessary postoperatively11.
Reports of PA presenting multiple and large squamous epithelium-lined keratin cysts are scarce. Here, we present an unusual case of PA with
extensive squamous metaplasia and keratin cyst formations in a minor salivary gland. We discuss the microscopic features, including the
immunohistochemical characteristics, and differential diagnosis of this unusual presentation. A 37-year-old white man presented at the
clinic with a 10-year history of a painless mass in the upper vestibule. There was no history of local surgery, trauma, or infection. On
intraoral physical examination, there was a soft tissue mass in the right upper vestibule, near lateral incisor and canine teeth. The nodule
was movable and firm on palpation (Figure 1). No abnormality was detected on radiographic examination. Intraoral photograph at initial
examination showing well circumscribed and sessile nodule in the right upper vestibule, measuring 2.0 cm in diameter and with a normal-
appearing oral mucosa surface A provisional diagnosis of benign salivary gland lesion was made. At surgery, the solid mass was encapsulated,
well circumscribed and not adhered to the surrounding tissues, and was easily and completely excised. The specimen was submitted for
microscopic examination. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained sections revealed a well circumscribed encapsulated lesion composed of multiple
squamous epithelium-lined cysts. The epithelium of the cystic spaces was covered by layers of para- and orthokeratotic cells, usually
without a granular layer (Figures 2A and 2B). Focally, the outer layer of epithelium demonstrated bud-like protrusions. Scattered and rare
mitotic figures were present but limited to the outer layer of the epithelium. The cystic spaces contained keratotic lamellae, which, in
some areas, exhibited small calcification foci or cholesterol crystals. Although the cystic structures were variable in size and shape, most
of them were large and round. Rare areas of mucous cells were observed in the cystic epithelial lining, which were confirmed by Periodic
acid-Schiff (PAS) with or without diastase digestion and Alcian blue stains. Encapsulated lesion composed of multiple keratin cysts of
variable size (A). Cysts lined by stratified squamous epithelium (B), which is intensely positive for high-molecular-weight cytokeratins
(CKs; C). Numerous duct-like formations (D), lined by a double layer of cells (E). Intense expression of CK7 in luminal cells of the duct-
like structures (F). Hematoxylin and eosin stain (A,B,D,E). Immunoperoxidase stain (C,F) In other areas, tumoral epithelial cells formed
solid sheets, nests, cords and ductal structures, the latter presenting a lumina lined by a double layer of cells and frequently containing
eosinophilic material (Figures 2D and 2E), which rarely presented small foci of calcification. PAS reactions and Alcian blue staining
revealed the presence of mucin inside the ductal structures. The ductal structures occurred in variable sizes and shapes. Some epithelial
nests exhibited foci of squamous metaplasia with formations of keratin pearls. In addition, some epithelial nests were formed by clear
cells, with scarce central keratin pearls. The epithelial formations were intermingled with the fibrous stroma (mesenchymal areas), which
was characterized by fibrosis and foci of moderate mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate, as well as cholesteatoma and foci of foreign-body
giant-cell reaction against keratin material probably caused by the rupture of the cysts. Some fat cells and areas of intense mononuclear
inflammatory infiltrate were also identified specially in the periphery of the lesion, which was fully lined by a fibrous capsule,
presenting hyperemic blood vessels. No chondroid, osseous, myxoid or mucoid areas were identified within the lesion. These microscopic
aspects were suggestive of PA with extensive squamous metaplasia. However, an immunohistochemical study of the lesion was performed to
establish the immunoprofile of the neoplastic cells, in order to confirm the initial diagnosis. The reactions were performed using the
streptavidin-biotin-peroxidase method. The primary antibodies, their clones and dilutions are summarized in Figure 3. Negative controls were
obtained by the omission of primary antibodies, which were substituted by 1% PBS (phosphate buffered saline)-BSA (bovine serum albumin).
List of antibodies used for immunohistochemical staining CK (cytokeratin), Hmw (high-molecular-weight), EMA (epithelial membrane antigen),
CEA (carcinoembryonic antigen), GFAP (glial fibrillary acidic protein), SMA (smooth muscle actin), MSA (muscle specific actin) Source: *
Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA Novocastra Laboratories Ltd, Newcastle, UK The squamous epithelium covering the keratin cysts was homogeneously
positive for high-molecular-weight cytokeratins (Figure 2C). Only in focal areas of the cystic epithelial lining did cells present
immunostaining for CK7, CK19 and EMA in the inner layers, and p63 in the basal layer. In the ductal structures, the luminal cells were
identified by intense and frequent positivity for CK7 (Figures 2F and 4A), CK19 (Figure 4B), EMA and S-100, as well as focal immunostaining
considered moderate for CK8 (Figure 4C) and intense for both polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies to CEA. Some abluminal cells were
frequently positive for myoepithelial cell markers such as high-molecular-weight CKs (Figure 4D), p63 (Figure 4E), S-100 and vimentin
(Figure 4F), and occasionally for SMA, MSA and GFAP. The luminal and abluminal cells, i.e. glandular phenotype-cells, were negative for
CK20. Immunoprofile of duct-like structures. Luminal cells intensely positive for cytokeratin (CK) 7 (A) and CK19 (B) and moderately
positive for CK8 (C). Abluminal cells moderately positive for high-molecular-weight (CKs) (D), p63 (E) and vimentin (F). Immunoperoxidase
stain Solid sheets, nests and cords presented immunopositivity that was either focal for CK7, CK19, vimentin, GFAP and S-100, or frequent
for high-molecular-weight CKs. Cells in the basal layer of the epithelial cords were positive for p63. The epithelium lining the cysts and
the solid areas were surrounded by collagen IV-positive material. The proliferative index of the lesion, expressed as the percentage of
Ki-67-positive neoplastic cells among the total number of cells counted in 10 randomly selected fields, was low (2.63%) and proliferation
was mainly localized in the outer layers of the epithelial lining of the large keratin cysts. Expression of p53 was observed in rare
neoplastic cells, throughout the lesion. The mesenchymal areas presented S-100- and vimentin-positive cells and the blood vessels were
collagen IV-, MSA-, SMA- and vimentin-positive. Most inflammatory cells were Ki-67 positive. The immunohistochemical features of the lesion
are summarized in Figure 5. Immunohistochemical features of the neoplastic cells Immunostaining was graded as (-) negative; (+) weakly
positive; (++) moderately positive; (+++) strongly positive Considering the morphological and immunohistochemical findings a final diagnosis
of PA with extensive squamous metaplasia was made. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient has been reviewed regularly, with
no evidence of recurrence 3 years after excision. PA presenting extensive squamous metaplasia is uncommon7 and can signify a potential
pitfall in the histopathological diagnosis. Focal squamous metaplasia, probably related to ischemia16, may be present in about 25% of the
PA24. The cases of PA presenting extensive keratin-filled cysts lined by squamous epithelium are referred to in the literature as "cystic PA
with extensive adnexa-like differentiation", since the histologic features mimic cutaneous appendages7,25. In our case, many glandular cells
were transformed into squamous cells through a process of squamous metaplasia, resulting in multiple squamous epithelium-lined cysts
containing keratotic lamellae and some solid squamous cell islands presenting keratin pearls. The epithelium lining the keratin cyst
formations was homogeneously positive for a set of high-molecular-weight CKs, commonly expressed in squamous epithelium, while some cells
presented immunostaining for p63, EMA and low-molecular-weight CKs (CK7 and CK19), representing glandular cells which probably had not yet
undergone squamous metaplasia. Extensive squamous metaplasia in PA, especially in the absence of chondromyxoid stroma, can mistakenly lead
to a diagnosis of benignity, such as choristoma24 or keratocystoma21, and malignancy13, including mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC) and
squamous cell carcinoma, especially when sampling the tissue by fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) and incisional biopsy, due to limited
and selective sampling5,7,12,16,26. It is important to discuss the diagnostic pitfall of this unusual presentation of a common benign
entity, particularly the differential diagnosis with these malignant lesions. Microscopically, MEC presents mucous, intermediate and
squamoid (epidermoid) cells and is usually multicystic. Unlike our case, the cystic spaces of MEC are usually lined by mucous cells and
prominent keratinization is rare13, with scarce epidermoid cells associated with keratin production including keratin pearl formation8,15.
Furthermore, the presence of a fibrous capsule in our case favors the diagnosis of a benign lesion. In addition to the above mentioned
morphological findings, the immunopositivity for S-100, SMA and vimentin found in the reported lesion could help to exclude the diagnosis of
MEC3,17,19. Regarding the differential diagnosis with squamous cell carcinoma, the absence of cytological atypia, metastasis, necrosis,
invasion, as well as minimal cellular proliferative activity and the presence of a fibrous capsule in the case presented here weigh against
the diagnosis of malignancy. Moreover, the neoplastic cells of CEC, differently from PA, are immunonegative for CK7, S100, SMA and
vimentin10,18. A choristoma resembling a trichoadenoma (a type of hair follicle tumor), described in the parotid gland by Seifert, Donath
and Jautzke24 (1999), also presents multiple cystic spaces limited by a multilayered squamous epithelium and filled with keratotic lamellae.
It also exhibits solid squamous cell islands, keratinized masses outside the cysts with multinucleated giant cells and focal calcification.
Nagao, et al.21 (2002) described two cases histologically identical to the choristoma previously reported, both of the parotid gland, but
the authors proposed a new designation for the lesions: keratocystoma, since they believe that the choristoma described by Seifert, Donath
and Jautzke24 (1999) is a peculiar variety of salivary gland tumor. Although our case presents similar morphological aspects to those
described for choristoma24 or keratocystoma21, these lesions are mainly composed of squamous cells and lack the neoplastic structures with
glandular phenotype, including duct-like formations and myoepithelial cells, which were demonstrated in our case by means of morphology and
immunohistochemistry. Moreover, the cystic spaces of the keratocystoma are lined by a stratified squamous epithelium without a granular cell
layer21, unlike our case, which showed some areas of granular layers. Similar to our findings, the squamous cells lining the cystic
formations were negative for CK8, focally immunoreactive for CK19, and surrounded by collagen-IV material. Based on the morphological
aspects, we are inclined to believe that the PA reported here and the keratocystoma may constitute related lesions, representing different
stages in the evolution of a specific type of salivary gland tumor, although the latter previously demonstrated immunonegativity for S100
and SMA21. Immunohistochemical features of the lesions included in the differential diagnosis of PA with extensive squamous metaplasia are
included in Figure 6. Immunohistochemical features of the lesions included in the differential diagnosis of PA with extensive squamous
metaplasia PA (Pleomorphic adenoma), MEC (Mucoepidermoid carcinoma), SCC (Squamous cell carcinoma), KC (Keratocystoma), Vim (Vimentin) (-)
negative; (+) positive; (a) variable expression; (nf) data not found The immunohistochemical analysis of the current case helped to define
the nature of the tumor cells, adding support to the diagnosis of PA. It identified the luminal cells of the duct-like structures by
immunopositivity for low-molecular-weight CKs, including CK7, CK8 and CK19, as well as CEA and EMA9, whereas the abluminal cells were
identified by heterogeneous positivity for myoepithelial cell markers such as p63, high-molecular-weight CKs, S-100, vimentin, SMA, MSA and
GFAP. This immunoprofile of the luminal and abluminal cells of the duct-like formations observed is similar to those described in other
articles in the literature9,14. In addition to the abluminal cells, the luminal cells were also positive for S-100, which is in agreement
with the findings of other authors14. The solid sheets, nests and cords presented immunoreactivity either for CK7 and CK19, suggesting a
luminal cell phenotype, or for vimentin, GFAP and p63, in this case demonstrating a myoepithelial cell phenotype. Although not accompanied
by myxochondromatous elements, the glandular phenotypic profile associated with the morphological features reinforces the diagnosis of PA.
Degrees of stromal changes, such as chondroid, osseous, myxoid or mucoid changes vary widely in PA6,13, however the absence of these
changes, as in our case, is an unusual finding. Ki-67 expression was sporadic (2.63%), which is consistent with the literature data
describing PA as having a low proliferative rate2,27. Interestingly, the epithelial lining of the large keratin filled cysts presented a
higher proliferative index than the other areas. It may signify that the squamous metaplasia resulting in large keratin filled cysts in PA
may be clinically significant, probably related to an important growth potential, although our data are insufficient to support this
hypothesis. Further studies are required to clearly establish this relationship. Our case, as also indicated in previous reports1,2,
presented scarce p53-positive cells, which are associated with changes in the apoptotic mechanism. In conclusion, the localization, gender
and microscopic features of the presented case are unusual. PA with extensive squamous metaplasia and keratin cyst formations can pose a
significant diagnostic challenge. It is important to be aware of this possibility to distinguish it from malignant lesions and to avoid
unnecessarily aggressive therapy. The morphological features, as discussed above, must be carefully evaluated in order to exclude other
lesions and to define the diagnosis of PA. Additionally, the immunohistochemical analysis, in addition to establishing the nature of the
tumor cells, may also be helpful for the differential diagnosis, reinforcing the morphological diagnosis, especially when PA has an unusual
presentation. The authors are grateful to Fátima Aparecida Silveira (Department of Stomatology, Bauru School of Dentistry, University of São
Paulo), Daniel de Amorim and Éverson Moretti (Institute of Anatomopathology of Bauru - ANATOMED) for their technical support and Gareth
Cuttle and Margery Galbraith for their English language services in copy editing the manuscript.
