Radiation enteritis is a significant complication of external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) to the pelvis, particularly in patients having high
dose radiotherapy (>80 Gy) and in those with a low pelvic peritoneal reflection allowing loops of small bowel to enter the radiation field.
Laparoscopic insertion and subsequent removal of a pelvic tissue expander before and after external beam radiotherapy is a relatively
convenient, safe and effective method for displacing loops of bowel out of the pelvis. We report on a patient with prostate cancer who
ordinarily would not have been a candidate for EBRT due to loops of bowel low in the pelvis. With laparoscopic insertion and subsequent
removal of a tissue expander, he was able to have radiotherapy to the prostate without developing radiation enteritis. Prostate cancer is
the second most common cancer in men. With the increasing use of primary radiotherapy for prostate cancer and improved survival, chronic
radiation enteritis is an increasing problem occurring in over 20% of patients. The very high doses of 80 Gy radiotherapy required for
prostate cancer, which is double that given for most other pelvic malignancies, puts those patients with a low peritoneal reflection and
low-lying loops of small bowel in the pelvis, at particular risk of radiation enteritis. Laparoscopic insertion and subsequent removal of a
tissue expander before and after radiotherapy is a relatively convenient and minimally invasive procedure that may be an option for
displacing loops of bowel from the radiation field. The patient was a 75 year old man with prostate cancer, confirmed by FNA to investigate
a raised PSA. He had stage 2 disease with a Gleason score of 3+4, and required primary radiotherapy. He was relatively fit and healthy, with
a BMI of 29. He had a previous upper midline laparotomy for gastric lymphoma, and open appendicectomy for perforated appendicitis, and a
laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Radiation planning CT demonstrated a low pelvic peritoneal reflection with loops of bowel in the pelvis within
the planned radiation field of the prostate (Figure 1). Planning sagittal CT in 75 year old man with prostate cancer. Opaque planning
fiducial marker visible in prostate with adjacent loops of small bowel within the planned radiation field. These loops of bowel would not
move out of the planned radiation field despite several manoeuvrers including extreme prone and Trendelenburg positioning, bladder filling,
and use of an open table-top device (belly board). Laparoscopic insertion of a tissue expander into the pelvis to displace loops of bowel
was his only option. No bowel prep was required. A 12 mm infra-umbilical incision was made and an open Hasson technique used to achieve
pneumoperitoneum, with the placement of a 12 mm port at the umbilicus and 5 mm ports in both iliac fossa (Figure 2). Adherent loops of bowel
from previous surgery were divided by scissored dissection. Four incisions used for laparoscopic insertion of a tissue expander in the
pelvis: 12 mm umbilical, 20 mm pfannenstiel, and 5 mm iliac fossa incisions. In lithotomy and steep Trendelenburg positioning, the
suprapubic incision was dilated up to 20 mm with the aid of a medium Alexis® wound retractor (Figure 3). Insertion of tissue-expander
through medium Alexis® ring retractor in the 20 mm supra-pubic incision: this was facilitated by prior lubrication with water-soluble K-Y
Jelly®. A TRD 500 ml Nagor® tissue expander made of silicone with attached silicone tubing (Figure 4) was then rolled tight, lubricated with
water soluble hydroxyethylcellulose and glycerine based (K-Y Jelly®) lubricant and inserted via the 20 mm suprapubic port and placed
laparoscopically in the pelvis, leaving the normal-saline inflation port attached externally. A 500 ml TRD Nagor® silicone tissue expander
with attached inflation port: this allows for filling with normal saline. A running dissolvable 3/0 polydiaxanone (PDA) purse-string stitch
was then sutured to the peritoneum of the sacral promontory, and anterior and side walls of the pelvis below the level of the common iliacs,
and tied snug to keep the expander in the pelvis. With a Huber® needle inserted into the inflation port, the tissue expander was then filled
with 350 ml of normal saline until the expander began to bulge against the retaining stitch (Figure 5). Tissue expander secured in pelvis
with dissolvable running 3/0 polydiaxanone (PDA) purse string stitched to peritoneum of sacral promontory, anterior and pelvic side walls:
the expander was subsequently filled with normal saline until it began to bulge against the retaining stitch. The abdomen was then deflated
of gas and the fascia of both the Pfannenstiel and umbilical port closed. The port of the expander was then placed in a small subcutaneous
pocket and sutured to the fascia of the anterior abdomen. Skin incisions were closed in the usual manner. Subsequent CT confirmed adequate
placement of the expander device in the pelvis with loops of bowel now well out of the pelvis and the planned radiation field (Figure 6). CT
following tissue expander insertion. The loops of bowel are now well out of the pelvis and planned radiation field. His recovery was
uneventful being discharged home without complication after opening his bowels. Two weeks later he went on to have external beam
radiotherapy to his prostate (80 Gy in 39 fractions over 8 weeks), achieving a good response without any side effects or symptoms. Repeat CT
prior to removal of the expander showed a well placed expander within the pelvis, with no evidence of radiation injury to small bowel or the
prosthesis. The tissue expander was removed laparoscopically 6 weeks after completing radiotherapy using the same initial incisions, with a
good cosmetic result. There were no adhesions to the silicone implant, and the PDA retaining string was intact, but easily broke with a
gentle tug. These two factors facilitated its easy laparoscopic removal. Radiation enteritis causes considerable disability, and in many
cases can be avoided. Any patient having external beam pelvic radiotherapy should have a planning CT, with particular attention given to
those patients with a low peritoneal reflection, and loops of bowel within the planned radiation field. Methods of reducing injury to small
bowel include multi-field conformal therapy with prior three dimensional planning where the profile of the radiation beam is shaped to fit
the target. The delivery of intensity-modulated radiotherapy can also be adjusted and improves the ability of treatment volumes to conform
to the shape of the tumour. Despite these techniques, loops of bowel still occasionally get injured from being in the radiation field. If
available, brachytherapy or cryotherapy may be reasonable alternatives to external beam radiotherapy. Where external beam radiotherapy is
the preferred or only option, various methods for removing small bowel from the radiation field exist. Conventional non-operative manoeuvres
to remove small bowel from the pelvis at the time of giving radiotherapy include extreme prone or Trendelenburg positioning, bladder
distension, abdominal wall compression or the use of an open table-top device (belly board). The response of such manoeuvres is not always
reproducible. More extreme measures described only in case reports include the surgical insertion of a peritoneal dialysis catheter and
creation of a temporary artificial pneumoperitoneum or ascites with the installation of gas or normal saline into the abdominal cavity.
These are time consuming, painful, and need to be repeated, and do not reliable remove bowel from the radiation field. Early surgical
procedures to keep small bowel out of the pelvis were aimed at abdomino-pelvic partitioning, either with the use of native tissue or
prosthetic material. Native tissue partitioning frequently involves the use of the peritoneum, bladder, uterine broad ligaments and omentum.
In 1979, Freund described suturing the anterolateral peritoneum to the bladder and to the anterior rectum. In women, the uterus and broad
ligaments may be used in addition to the posterior tissue. In 1985, DeLuca and Ragins described the omental envelope technique (also called
an abomino-pelvic omentopexy), where omentum is draped over the small bowel as an apron, and the lower edge sutured to the sacral
promontory. The lateral borders are sutured to the ascending and descending colon. In 1995, Choi and Lee described the omental pedicle
hammock technique where a pedicle of omentum based on the left gastroepiploics is sutured circumferentially to the peritoneum at the level
of the sacral promontory and umbilicus. This creates a sling, or hammock, which keeps small bowel out of the pelvis. Partitioning with
prosthetic material has also been described, and includes the use of absorbable mesh slings. There are many difficulties with partitioning
techniques. Firstly, native tissue is frequently not sufficiently adequate or strong enough to achieve partitioning, and prosthetic
materials run the risk of infection or adherence to loops of bowel or the creation of a fistula. Partitioning of the pelvis from the abdomen
may also create an empty pelvic space. Loops of bowel may get caught beneath the partition resulting in an internal hernia and obstruction.
The cavity beneath the partition may also fill with fluid, and this has the potential to become infected resulting in a chronic pelvis
abscess. Pelvic-space occupying techniques avoid some of the problems inherent to partitioning techniques. In 1984, Russ described using an
omental pedicle flap based on the left gastroepiploic vessels, which is placed along the left para-colic gutter with the distal tip packed
into the pelvis. This is particularly suitable during open colorectal surgery where mobilisation of the omentum off the colon is required.
But this procedure is difficult to perform laparoscopically, and in the thin patient, the omentum is usually frequently not sufficient to
fill or reach the pelvis. Normal saline filled silicone tissue expanders are easy to insert and remove and have the benefit of being non-
adherent to both peritoneum and small bowel, as well as radioresistant to degradation, and when filled with normal saline, are similar in
density to human tissues, therefore do not alter the isodose distribution of radiotherapy. In 1983, Sugarbaker first described the open
insertion of a normal-saline-filled silicone breast implant into the pelvis to exclude small bowel from the pelvis to prevent injury from
post-operative radiotherapy. Sugarbaker described covering the implant with a mesh which was sutured to the peritoneum of the pelvic brim to
prevent migration or extrusion of the expander. However, over the years, mesh was found to be associated with an increased risk of small
bowel adhesions and fistula formation. Therefore, there has been a trend away from the use of mesh, with fixation of the expander to the
peritoneum with a suture the commonest and safest method. Some expanders have suture tabs for this purpose. Since Sugarbaker's first
description, there have been over 160 reported cases of tissue expanders used in the pelvis or the abdomen to prevent radiation injury to
small bowel (Table 1). All of these were inserted at open laparotomy. Lasser first described its use prior to radiotherapy for rectal cancer
. Many reported cases involved the use of large tissue expanders for patients requiring post-operative adjuvant radiotherapy for large
retroperitoneal sarcomas or gynaecological malignancies. For all of these types of malignancies the radiation dose received was usually less
than 50 Gy (Table 1). Cases to date of intra-abdominal or pelvic insertion of a normal saline-filled silicone implant prior to external beam
radiotherapy Early experience with tissue expanders found that complications were more common when large expanders where left in the pelvis
long term, with the potential for bladder, ureteric and iliac vessel compression. Heaviness is a common complaint of very large expanders.
Deep vein thrombosis with pulmonary embolism and constipation due to obstructive defecation have been reported. More recent reports using
smaller implants show them to be associated with fewer complications. Infection, with abscess formation and fistulisation, have been
reported to occur in up to 7% of cases. Wound infections associated with large laparotomy incisions are not uncommon, particularly when the
incision extends into the radiation field. The other disadvantage of tissue expanders, is that they do very little to prevent radiation
injury to the bladder or rectum, with radiation cystitis and proctitis still common complications. Ours is the first report in the
literature of a totally laparoscopic insertion and removal of a tissue expander prior to and following primary prostatic radiotherapy. In
this case, a much higher dose of 80 Gy radiotherapy was given. Previous major surgery was not a contraindication to this procedure. In our
case, a conventional 500 ml normal-saline-filled silicone tissue expander without suture tabs, was used, and it was kept in the pelvis by
means of a polydiaxanone (PDA) purse string suture. This monofilament has a tensile-strength half life of 5 weeks, with significant
degradation of the suture at 10-12 weeks. Therefore removal of the expander was performed easily by gentle traction alone. However there is
a risk with dissolvable sutures of tissue expander migration, therefore a non-dissolvable suture may also be appropriate. The choice of a
conventional sized expander and the avoidance of overfilling were because of literature reports of the risks of ureteric and iliac vessel
compression. The ease, simplicity, reversibility, and minimally invasive nature of laparoscopic tissue expander insertion are its main
appeal. It should be considered as an option for excluding small bowel from the pelvis prior to radiotherapy of the prostate. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. GM wrote the
manuscript, KW did literature review and organised planning CT and radiotherapy; DK inserted and removed the tissue expander and supervised
writing of manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
