Dear Editor, A 52-year-old man was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) with septic shock due to pneumonia. Two months before he had an
oesophago-gastrectomy because of carcinoma of the distal part of the oesophagus. The post-operative course was complicated because of
ischaemic lesions in the transverse colon and suture dehiscence of the ileotransversostomy. An ileostomy and colostomy were constructed
(Fig. 1).Fig. 1Schematic drawing of patient’s changed anatomy after surgery. Resection of esophagus and stomach, replaced by a colon segment
with a Roux-Y reconstruction. After suture dehiscence of the ileotransversostomy the suture was opened, transversectomy was performed
because of multiple ischaemic lesions. An ileostomy and colostomy were constructed Schematic drawing of patient’s changed anatomy after
surgery. Resection of esophagus and stomach, replaced by a colon segment with a Roux-Y reconstruction. After suture dehiscence of the
ileotransversostomy the suture was opened, transversectomy was performed because of multiple ischaemic lesions. An ileostomy and colostomy
were constructed Apart from antibiotic treatment, he received selective decontamination of the digestive tract (SDD) as described previously
by De Smet et al . SDD was administered four times daily as a 2% oral paste, containing amphotericin B, tobramycin and colistin. Four times
daily a 10 ml (containing 500 mg amphotericin B, 100 mg colistin, 80 mg tobramycin) suspension was given nasogastrically. Additionally,
twice daily a suppository (containing 500 mg amphotericin B, 40 mg tobramycin, 100 mg colistin) was administered in the colostomy of the
descending colon. He recovered but because of ICU-acquired weakness he needed prolonged mechanical ventilation. Thirty days after admission
he became oliguric and developed renal failure with renal acidosis without further clinical signs of haemodynamic instability. His
creatinine level gradually increased from 50 to 263 μmol/l. Physical, laboratory and radiological examination ruled out sepsis, hypovolaemia
and post-renal obstruction. Medication-induced nephrotoxicity was suspected. Serum tobramycin level was elevated (18.9 mg/l). SDD was
discontinued. After haemodialysis and veno-venous haemofiltration tobramycin levels became undetectable again. However, renal insufficiency
persisted and he remained dependent on dialysis. Elevated serum tobramycin levels during SDD have been shown in patients with normal renal
function and pre-existent renal insufficiency [2, 3]. Several mechanisms might explain increased serum levels of non-absorbable
antimicrobial agents in this patient. First, the integrity of the mucosal barrier might have been compromised by the initial sepsis causing
increased permeability for tobramycin . Secondly, our patient was malnourished as a result of chronic illness and frequent periods of
retention of enteral feeding. Malnutrition is associated with increased movements of large molecules through the paracellular tight junction
in jejunal epithelia . Thirdly, our patient had a blinded jejunal loop which could act as reservoir for tobramycin. The amphotericin B
levels were not measured but could also be increased. The nephrotoxic effect of parenteral administration of amphotericin B is well known.
No other medication could explain the acute renal failure. This case indicates that patients with altered abdominal anatomy and/or
perforations and/or malnutrition might be at risk to develop nephrotoxicity from SDD, especially when SDD is administered via several
routes. Besides the current debate about the effects of SDD on antibiotic resistance, no complications of tobramycin-related toxicity are
reported in more than 50 randomized controlled trials. Future studies on SDD should also incorporate such safety analyses. This article is
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
