Results of this study suggest that single incision laparoscopic subtotal pancreatectomy may be safely performed in centers experienced with
advanced laparoscopic procedures. Transumbilical single incision laparoscopic surgery (SILS) offers excellent cosmetic results and may be
associated with decreased postoperative pain, reduced need for analgesia, and thus accelerated recovery. Herein, we report the first
transumbilical single incision laparoscopic pancreatectomy case in a patient who had renal cell cancer metastasis on her pancreatic corpus
and tail. A 59-year-old female who had metastatic lesions on her pancreas underwent laparoscopic subtotal pancreatectomy through a 2-cm
umbilical incision. Single incision pancreatectomy was performed with a special port (SILS port) and articulated equipment. The procedure
lasted 330 minutes. Estimated blood loss was 100mL. No perioperative complications occurred. The patient was discharged on the seventh
postoperative day with a low-volume (20mL/day) pancreatic fistula that ceased spontaneously. Pathology result of the specimen was renal cell
cancer metastases. This is the first reported SILS pancreatectomy case, demonstrating that even advanced surgical procedures can be
performed using the SILS technique in well-experienced centers. Transumbilical single incision laparoscopic pancreatectomy is feasible and
can be performed safely in experienced centers. SILS may improve cosmetic results and allow accelerated recovery for patients even with
malignancy requiring advanced laparoscopic interventions. Pancreatic surgery is an extremely challenging field, and the management of
pancreatic diseases continues to evolve. The application of laparoscopic surgery for the treatment of pancreatic diseases is only recently
gaining widespread popularity, owing, in no small part, to the retroperitoneal location of the pancreas. Studies involving small numbers of
patients suggest that it is as safe as open surgery, with the additional advantages of a shorter hospital stay and a faster return to normal
activity.1 Although the laparoscopic approach decreases surgical morbidity, it still requires 3 to 4 incisions each at least 1cm to 2cm in
length. In addition, each working trocar has morbidity risks of bleeding, hernia, visceral organ damage, or all of these, and incrementally
decreases cosmesis.2,3 Improvement of a new minimally invasive technique called “single incision laparoscopic surgery” (SILS), which is less
invasive than standard multiport laparoscopy, is a challenging idea. SILS has several unique difficulties for the laparoscopic surgeon.
First, triangulation and retraction are significantly limited. The introduction of a camera and several instruments parallel to each other
results in decreased range of motion and “clashing” of instruments. This decreased freedom of motion increases the technical complexity of
the operation and results in a significant learning curve for performing SILS. Critics also mention the need for new and specialized
instrumentation, thereby increasing the cost of the operation.4 We are the team that performed the first SILS splenectomy, and we now
present the first SILS subtotal pancreatectomy case. A 59-year-old woman was admitted to our clinic for abdominal pain. In her medical
history, she had previously undergone a left radical nephrectomy for clear cell renal cancer 11 years earlier. Laboratory tests were totally
normal including the tumor markers CEA and CA 19-9. Ultrasonography (US) revealed 2 hypodense lesions in the corpus and the tail of the
pancreas. A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed 2 hypervascular lesions, 30mm x 22mm in the body and 15mm x 14mm in
the tail of the pancreas (Figure 1). In addition, positron emission tomography also revealed pancreatic involvement, increasing the
suspicion of malignancy in the pancreas. Because splenectomy would be added to pancreas resection, the patient was vaccinated against
pneumococci (Pneumovax 23, Boehringer) 2 weeks before the operation, and received 1g of sulbactam/ampicillin intravenously as a preoperative
prophylaxis. The patient was informed about the details of the surgical procedure, and informed consent was obtained. Computed tomographic
view of pancreatic lesions. The patient was placed in a supine and reverse Trendelenburg position (30 degree) with open legs. The surgeon
stood between the legs; the first assistant was on the left side of the patient with the monitor placed on the patient's cranial side. With
the patient under general anesthesia, a completely transumbilical 2-cm skin incision was performed. A special SILS port having 4 working
channels was placed through this abdominal incision of the umbilicus. Pneumoperitoneum was applied through this port. After the maintenance
of 12mm Hg CO2 pneumoperitoneum, the three 5-mm cannulas were inserted inside this special SILS port (Figure 2). We used a rigid 30-degree,
5-mm laparoscope, and 2 standard rigid but articulating 5-mm laparoscopic instruments for all SILS procedures. Once the laparoscope,
grasper, and dissector were placed, the overall procedures were similar to the procedures performed in a 5-port laparoscopic pancreatectomy.
The most difficult part of this technique was that the working instruments were crossing each other and roticulated. The 5-mm telescope is
introduced under both of the working instruments and sometimes over them, changing according to the surgical step of the procedure. After
less invasive entry into the abdomen, nothing different from the multi-trocar laparoscopic pancreatectomy technique was performed. During
all these steps, at least one of the pieces of equipment, roticulated grasper and dissector, was used. Following a diagnostic laparoscopy,
the lesser sac was entered by dividing the gastrocolic ligament using the advanced LigaSure probe (Valleylab, Boulder, CO, USA). The whole
pancreatic body and tail were exposed, and the 2-cm lesion on the corpus was defined. Before starting pancreatic dissection, we placed a
loop encircling the stomach corpus by crossing the lesser curvature and greater curvature for preoperative continuous retraction. We
prepared the loop by using polypropylene suture covered with a plastic tube of IV serum set to prevent a possible stomach injury. Two tips
of this suture were taken out of the abdominal cavity with a suture passer placed under the xiphoid process. During the entire procedure,
stomach retraction was provided with this tensed loop Prolene securing the stomach. The “medial-to-lateral” technique for tumors in the body
and proximal tail of the pancreas was the chosen method. The peritoneal lining along the inferior edge of the pancreas was dissected at the
point where transection of the pancreas would be carried. An adequate window was created; a roticulated grasper was passed around the body
of the gland. The splenic vein was identified and ligated with LigaSure at this level (Figure 3). One of the 5-mm trocar sites on a Simport
device was replaced by a 15-mm trocar to be able to introduce a linear stapler. The pancreas was then transected by using two 45-mm Endo-GIA
staplers (US Surgical Corp, Norwalk, CT, USA) (Figure 4). Dissection of the pancreas from the pancreatic bed was started after ligation of
the splenic artery near the celiac trunk. Dissection was carried out in a medial-to-lateral fashion from the tail towards the hilum of the
spleen. Retroperitoneal dissection took time because of dense fibrosis of the region caused by a previous left nephrectomy. In this manner,
the distal portion of the pancreas containing the tumor was removed together with splenic vessels and the spleen itself and its
retroperitoneal attachments and thus freed. Once the distal pancreas was mobilized, the stapled closure of the proximal pancreatic stump was
reinforced with fibrin glue. The splenic part of the specimen was retrieved using the Endo-Catch 15 (US Surgical Corp, Norwalk, CT, USA) by
morcellation, and then, the pancreatic part of the specimen was delivered through the umbilical port site as an intact piece. A closed
suction drain was placed in the lesser sac. The umbilical site was sutured with 0 polypropylene, and the skin was closed with a stapler
(Figure 5). Special SILS port with roticulated instruments. Pancreatic mass and splenic vein view. Removed pancreas. Postoperative view of
umbilical incision. The patient started oral intake at the sixth postoperative hour. She had a low-volume (20mL/day) pancreatic fistula, for
35 days that ceased spontaneously with only a drain. She was discharged on the seventh postoperative day with her drain. Pathology results
revealed the 2 foci of clear cell type renal cell cancer metastases in pancreatic tissue. Surgical margins were clear 1.5cm away from the
tumor. During the 2-month follow-up, we did not identify any complications from the surgical procedure. The laparoscopy revolution in the
early 1990s changed standard procedures in the treatment of human diseases. Surgeons aimed at limiting the number of abdominal incisions (as
in SILS) or eliminating them completely (as in natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery ).5 The first attempts at single-incision
laparoscopic cholecystectomy were performed by Navarra et al (1997) and Piskun & Rajpal (1999). A single incision was made through the
umbilicus and two trocars or ports were inserted through the opening with a bridge of fascia (soft connective tissue) between them.6,7 In
addition, recent reports3,4 of single incision donor nephrectomies and other urologic applications have been described, as well as single
incision sleeve gastrectomies for morbid obesity.8 SILS poses unique challenges for the laparoscopic surgeon. First, triangulation and
retraction are significantly limited. The introduction of a camera and several instruments parallel to each other results in decreased range
of motion and “clashing” of instruments. This decreased freedom of motion increases the technical complexity of the operation and results in
a significant learning curve for performing SILS. Laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy is an acceptable treatment option for most benign and
indolent tumors located in the body or tail of the gland, but the current techniques describe transection of the pancreas at the region of
the body regardless of the actual location of the tumor. The advantage of a more proximal transection is that the splenic vessels have not
branched considerably at this point, and there is theoretically a lower risk of hemorrhage from small splenic branches. The disadvantage of
such a proximal transection, however, is that for very distal lesions, a large amount of normal pancreatic tissue must be sacrificed.10 In
this case, due to 2 suspected tumoral foci, we performed a subtotal pancreas resection including splenectomy. Although this patient had
previously undergone a nephrectomy, we were able to perform a SILS pancreatectomy. This may mean that technically a surgical procedure could
be easier and shorter in undo cases. Today, single incision is becoming popular and serves both for the less minimally invasive procedure
wishes of surgeons and the more cosmesis requests of patients. As clinical experience with SILS increases, it is imperative that we
critically evaluate 3 important questions: First, does SILS compromise on current standards of surgical care? Second, are the true benefits
of SILS restricted to only improved cosmesis, or are there benefits with respect to convalescence and postoperative recovery? And third, can
advanced procedures be performed with this technique. The major problem with the SILS technique is that all instruments are closely packed
together; clashing of instruments and the laparoscope is common. SILS has a unique learning curve, principally in navigating the instruments
within a limited range of motion and it requires significant coordination between the surgeon and the camera holder. The surgeon also has to
be adapted to counterintuitive movements due to frequent crossing of the instrument shafts at the point of entry into the abdominal cavity.
Other than nephrectomy, prostatectomy, gastrojejunostomy, sigmoidectomy, adrenalectomy, and splenectomy have also been successfully
performed.9–11 A randomized controlled trial not only to document safety and feasibility but also patient satisfaction, postoperative pain,
and cosmesis should be performed to clarify the feasibility of the technique. Application of SILS in solid organ surgery like nephrectomy
and splenectomy can be accomplished. After gaining sufficient experience in SILS splenectomy, we decided to perform SILS pancreatectomy.
Herein, we describe a single incision pancreatectomy performed in a previously nephrectomized renal cell cancer patient. To our knowledge,
this is the first SILS pancreatectomy case reported in the literature. Single-port or single incision laparoscopy, even with flexible
instrumentation, is technically more challenging than straight laparoscopy. Performed by expert hands, SILS pancreatectomy is equally as
efficacious as conventional laparoscopic pancreatectomy without compromising surgical standards of care. Although pancreas surgery itself is
a risky and difficult procedure, SILS pancreatectomy may offer a subjective cosmetic advantage. Validated patient-outcome data are required
to more objectively address this final comment. Prospective comparison between SILS and conventional laparoscopic procedures is sine qua non
to more clearly define the certain benefits of single incision surgery. This report can only declare that even pancreas resection together
with splenectomy could be performed technically in well-experienced tertiary referral centers. However, a question like “Should it be
applied?” is another topic of debate that could be solved after evaluation of long-term results of SILS cases.
