Primary central nervous system Burkitt lymphoma (PCNSBL) is rare. Few cases of primary central nervous system involvement with sporadic
Burkitt lymphoma have been reported and its treatment is now controversial. Here, the authors report a case of a 14-year-old boy suffering
from non-immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) translocation PCNSBL. To the authors' knowledge, this is the second case report describing primary
Burkitt lymphoma involving cerebral ventricles. After receiving combination treatment with surgery, stereotacticradiosurgery, and a
chemotherapy regimen including high-dose methotrexate, the patient had a disease-free survival of 18 months. Burkitt lymphoma (BL), rare and
aggressive, is a form of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma with a tendency to disseminate to the bone marrow and meninges . Central nervous system
involvement occurs in about 13% to 17% of adults and 12% of children with BL . However, primary central nervous system Burkitt lymphoma
(PCNSBL) is very rare. An extensive search of the literature showed that just a few cases of PCNSBL have been reported in the past 30 years;
only one reported that the tumor located in the third ventricle and the left temporal horn . Here, we present a case study about a 14-year-
old boy who complained of intermittent blunt headache caused by PCNSBL and had a long-term survival after combination therapy. A 14-year-old
boy complained of intermittent blunt headache without obvious cause for 2 months. He had no vomiting, myasthenia, or hypoesthesia, no stool
and urine problems, and no fever, night sweats, or weight loss. On admission, he was found to be in good physical condition with a Karnofsky
performance score of 90, having neither systemic nor neurological signs. Laboratory studies, including routine blood tests, liver and kidney
function, and serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), showed results within the normal range. Serum tests for virus infections, including those
caused by hepatitis B or C, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), were negative. Contrast-enhanced magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) of the head detected a mass measuring 3.4 × 2.3 × 2.4 cm in size, isointense on T1- and T2-weighted pulse sequences,
affecting the right anterior horn and body of the lateral ventricle with ring enhancement, with slight edema of white matter in the right
frontal and parietal lobes, the right basal ganglia, the external capsule, and the callosity, and with left shift of the midline (Figure 1).
A giant cell astrocytoma or ependymocytoma was strongly suspected. Brain magnetic resonance imaging of the patient before treatment. (A) A
3.4 × 2.3 × 2.4 cm mass in the anterior horn and body of the lateral ventricle with isointensity on the T1-weighted axial image. (B)
Sagittal view of the same fragment. (C) Mass with slight edema on the T2-weighted image. Surgery was preformed in December 2008 in our
hospital and revealed a tumor, solid in nature, firm, fish-shaped, and having an affluent blood supply. The tumor, which was located in the
right lateral ventricle, laterally closely adherent to the thala-mus, was removed entirely. Postoperative hematoxylin and eosin (HE)
staining of the tumor tissue showed a characteristic starry-sky appearance and medium-sized lymphocytes. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated
CD20+, CD 10+, CD79a+, BCL-6+, TdT−, MPO−, BCL-2−, CD3−, and Ki-67+ (>95%) (Figure 2). Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis
(c-myc dual-color break-apart rearrangement probe; Vy-sis) found that MYC/IGH fusion probe was negative but MYC break-apart probe was
positive for the tumor cells (Figure 3). Owing to interventricular foramen adhesion after his surgery, the boy repeatedly had intracranial
hypertension, so a ventriculoperi-toneal shunt was inserted 2 days after the initial operation. In order to exclude systemic non-Hodgkin
lymphoma, whole-body positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scan, bone marrow biopsy, and testicular ultrasound were
performed and no abnormal findings were obtained. Furthermore, spinal MRI and cere-brospinal fluid (CSF) cytological examination yielded
normal results. The diagnosis of PCNSBL was established. Histology and immunohistochemistry. (A) Tumor tissue showed “starry-sky” appearance
with medium-sized lymphocytes. Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stain, original magnification × 200. (B) Positive CD79a on the membrane of the
tumor cell (magnification × 400). (C) More than 95% of cells expressed Ki-67 (magnification × 400). A break-apart probe showed that tumor
cells have c-myc translocations. (A) Tricolor fusion probe for c-myc/IgH showed that tumor cells were negative for t(8;14), which (B)
indicates that the partner of myc was probably IgL or some other gene. After surgery, the symptom of headache disappeared and no nervous
disturbances were observed. Gamma-knife therapy was carried out with border dose of 16 Gy, covered by a 45% isodose curve. Later
chemotherapy was administered in a 21 -day cycle with a methotrexate (MTX)-based protocol (MTX 3 g/m2, day 1, intravenous ; vin-cristine 1.4
mg/m2, day 1, i.v.; prednisone 100 mg, days 1–5 per os ; leucovorin 15 mg/m2, every 6 hours on days 2,3, and 4, i.v.). A total of 6 cycles
of chemotherapy were delivered. No grade 2 or higher toxicities were found. Up until now, the patient has been disease-free for 18 months.
Primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) is an aggressive form of non-Hodgkin lymphoma developing in the brain, spinal cord, eyes, or
leptomeninges without evidence of systemic involvement . Overall, PCNSL accounts for 0.5% to 2% of all primary brain tumors and 0.7% to 0.8%
of all lymphomas. More than 90% of PCNSLs are histologically classified as high-grade B-cell lymphomas, the remaining cases are T-cell
lymphomas (2% to 5%), mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma, and others . PCNSBL is rare and few cases have been reported [4,
6–18]. It often appears in cerebral hemisphere, basal ganglial, thalamus, and corpus callo-sum lesions . Until now, only one case has been
reported to involve the cerebral ventricles . The diagnosis of Burkitt lymphoma was made by typical “starry-sky” appearance in HE stain and
immunohistochemical findings according to the World Health Organization classification of tumors of lymphoid tissues . Although most of the
cases of BL have c-myc translocations, up to 10% of cases maybe c-myc negative. In about 80% of cases the translocation is between c-myc and
the IgH genes, and in the remaining 20% the translocation is between c-myc and the non-IgH genes . In our patient, FISH analysis showed that
c-myc/IgH fusion probe was negative but c-myc apart probe was positive for the tumor cells, which implies the translocation is between c-myc
and some non-IgH genes. Intensive short-course chemotherapy combining with intrathecal injection regimen was recommend to treat systemic BL
, whereas for PCNSL, the high-dose MTX-based chemotherapy regimen has been commonly used, which improves median disease-free and overall
survival of up to 30 to 40 months from the survival of 12 to 18 months usually seen after using cranial radiotherapy (CRT) alone . Some
studies use CRT plus high-dose MTX as first-line therapy , but more researches recommend CRT after some form of initial chemotherapy,
especially to patients older than 60 years. Moreover, a pediatric series of PCNSL has reported that immunocom-petent and immunodeficient
children with PCNSL may be cured with chemotherapy alone without CRT . So the role and the timing of CRT are intriguing yet controversial.
To date, 14 sporadic PCNBL cases have been reported in the English literature [4, 6–18]. Of the 15 cases, 5 are involving children
(including ours) [8, 10, 13, 14], although the treatment regimens were different, including surgery, radiotherapy, and systemic and
intrathecal chemotherapy. It seemed that the patients who received a combination management of MTX-based chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and/or
surgery had much longer overall survival time than did those who only received surgery [6, 12]. However, the best regimens are still under
discussion. Our patient had an isolated brain mass <3.5 cm in diameter at the age of 14 years and his spinal MRI and CSF cytology were
negative. Thus we used gamma-knife therapy instead of CRT to decrease the risk of CRT-related neuropsychological sequelae . During the whole
6 cycles of chemotherapy, no grade 2 or higher toxicities were found. Up to now, the tumor has been in complete remission for 18 months and
our patient is attending school with no problems. In summary, PCNSBL is a rare type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, which has no specific clinical
manifestations and imaging features. Treatment is still controversial. Our case report demonstrates that for isolated PCNSBL cases without
spread to cerebrospinal fluid, the combination therapy of surgery, gamma-knife, and high-dose MTX-based protocol without intrathecal
injection is effective and acceptable for children. This strategy reduced the risk of CRT and intrathecal injection and need to be studied
for more details. The authors report no conflicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of the paper.
