We report herein a case of hyperacute onset of spontaneous cervical spinal subdural hematoma treated with methylprednisolone pulse therapy
that showed good results. A 57-year-old man was admitted for posterior neck pain and paraparesis which occurred an hour ago. MRI revealed a
ventral subdural hematoma distributed from the level of C1 down to T3, compressing the spinal cord. Conservative management with
methylprednisolone pulse therapy was administered considering the patient's poor general condition. Although emergent surgical decompression
is necessary in most cases of spinal subdural hematoma, conservative management with steroid therapy could be effective. Spinal subdural
hematoma (SSH) may be caused by major or minor trauma or lumbar puncture.1 Spontaneous SSH often develops in patients with coagulation
defects or on anticoagulants therapy. SSH rarely involves the cervical region, and to our knowledge few such cases have been previously
reported in the literature.2-4 Preferable treatment of SSH is surgical decompressive laminectomy and drainage of hemorrhage,5 however,
conservative care also resulted in spontaneous resolution of hematoma in some cases.4 We report a case of hyperacute onset of spontaneous
cervical SSH in a patient with no coagulopathy and its treatment with methylprednisolone pulse therapy which produced good results. A
57-year-old man was admitted to the hospital with sudden and severe posterior neck and shoulder pains extending to the suboccipital region
that developed paraparesis one hour ago. He denied any antecedent trauma, exertional activity, sneezing, valsalva maneuver, coitus, or
vomiting. The patient had been on hypertension medication for 10 years and was diagnosed with chronic renal failure seven years ago. He had
received hemodialysis three times per week for the past five years. The patient's last hemodialysis was performed two days before the
admission. He had no previous history of bleeding tendency including taking antiplatelet or anticoagulant agents. At admission, blood
pressure was 160/100 mmHg and pulse rate was normal range. Neurological examination of the cranial nerve function showed normal results.
However, the patient showed motor weakness; Medical research council (MRC) grade 1/1 and spasticity in both upper and lower limbs. Sensory
modality was normal, including pain, temperature, joint position, and vibration sense in feet and perineal region. Neck stiffness and
Kernig's sign were observed. Deep tendon reflexes were mildly hyper-reflexed. Anal sphincter and bulbocarvenosus reflex were intact.
According to the blood analysis, hemoglobin was 10.1 g/L, blood urea nitrogen was 54 mg/dL, and serum creatinine was 9.39 mg/dL. The white
blood cell count, platelet count, bleeding time, prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, homocysteine, protein S, protein C
antithrombin III, fibrinogen, and d-dimer were within the normal limits. Anticardiolipin antibody, lupus anticoagulant, and activated
protein C resistance were negative. MRI of the cervical region at admission revealed a ventral subdural hematoma distributed from the level
of C1 down to T3, compressing the spinal cord (Fig. 1). The lesion was hyperintense on the T2-weighted and isointense T1-weighted images.
Brain CT imaging, excluding only associated cerebral hemorrhage, revealed old cerebral infarction in pons and ischemic change in bilateral
periventricular white matter. Conservative management with methylprednisolone pulse therapy was administered, despite the extensiveness of
the lesion, because of the patient's poor general condition and difficulties associated with general anesthesia and surgery. One g of
methylprednisolone per day was intravenously infused for five days. Then he was placed on oral prednisolone 60 mg/d, which was tapered to 20
mg per day over the following two months. Hemodialysis was continued three times per week. The paraplegia of this patient was rapidly
recovered after two days of steroid infusion. After the third day of steroid pulse, the patient regained good motor power in both upper and
lower limbs (MRC grade 40/40), although he could not walk. After four weeks from first developed weakness, the patient was fully recovered
motor weakness (MRC grade 4+/4+). He had minimal spasticity in both lower legs, but did not show bladder nor bowel control problems. The
light touch, pain, position, and vibration sensations remained normal. Follow up spine CT scan revealed that subdural hematoma at C3-C4,
left paramedian area and other levels were relatively intact (Fig. 2). Several cases of acute spontaneous subdural hematoma have been
published.2-19 They mostly occur in the thoracic spinal area between the ages of 40 and 60 years old. There are no differences in gender.
The sudden onset back pain radiating limbs or trunk is frequently observed. Motor, sensory and autonomic deficit are also commonly detected.
The time interval from symptom onset to developing neurologic abnormality is various. Moreover, neurologic deficit is presented to
multifarious from mild motor or sensory abnormality to severe weakness or bladder dysfunction. In this case, pain and motor deficit
occurred, but it was not severe. A few cases reported cervical involvement only,2-4 and one case had cervical and brain subdural
hemorrhage.12 All of these cases were treated with conservative management, however, most of them had poor prognosis except one.4; in one
case, the patient showed rapid recovery even though he was treated with methylprednisolone pulse therapy only. Two articles on spontaneous
SSH had previously been reported in our country. One case4 was similar to this case, including cervical involvement, no special treatment
and good prognosis. On the other hand, dorsal side hemorrhage was different between them. The other case revealed SSH in thoracic level and
treated with lumbar drainage without surgery.6 The spinal MRI revealed iso-signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity
on T2-weighted images. In the present case, the symptoms developed hyperacutely, and MRI findings supported the hyperacute occurrence.
Moreover, hyperacute MRI findings of this case excluded the possibility that systemic heparin employed during hemodialysis two days prior to
the onset of symptoms caused SSH. In the cases presenting acute deterioration and severe neurological deficit in SSH, emergency surgical
decompression is generally required. In our case, conservative care was provided since the patient's general condition was very poor, he was
not fit for general anesthesia, and the subdural hemorrhage could have been aggravated due to hemodialysis. In this case, we cannot exclude
the possibility of spontaneous resolution of SSH. However, the patient showed rapid recovery, and follow up CT scan also revealed improved
findings after steroid injection. These findings suggest that the steroid infusion may decrease the mass effect of SSH and assist
spontaneous resolution of SSH. Further investigation on steroid treatment for SSH is necessary. In conclusion, although emergent surgical
decompression is mandatory in most cases of spinal subdural hematoma, conservative management with the steroid infusion could be an option
for patients presenting mild neurological deficits, early progressive improvement, and poor general condition.12,20 The authors have no
financial conflicts of interest. (A) MR imaging taken two hours after the onset of symptoms shows subdural hematoma distributed from C1 to
T3 as high signal intensity on T2 weighted image (arrows). (B) The hematoma is revealed as isointensity on T1 weighted image at the C1 to T3
levels (arrows). (A) CT imaging taken one month after the onset of symptoms shows subdural hematoma in C3 lesion (arrow). (B) The spinal
cord at the C7 level is relatively intact.
