Cases of cytomegalovirus colitis are exceptionally reported in immuno-competent infant. The pathogenesis is uncertain but breast-feeding is
considered as a main source of postnatal infection. Here we report a full-term, formula-fed infant who developed a severe cytomegalovirus
anaemia and colitis when aged 2 months. Even if the molecular identity between the cytomegalovirus-isolate of the infant and the maternal
virus could not be demonstrated, we confirmed through laboratory investigation that cytomegalovirus infection was acquired postnatally.
However, the source of cytomegalovirus infection remained unclear. Alternative modes of cytomegalovirus transmission are discussed.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a ubiquitous agent that determines a wide spectrum of diseases in children and adulthood. Severe cytomegalovirus
infection is often reported when disease is congenital , acquired in premature infants or in immuno-compromised patients. Cases of CMV
gastrointestinal disease have been exceptionally observed in immuno-competent infants. Congenital origin could not be ruled out in all
reported cases. Infants were breast fed and most of them presented CMV-disease between 5 to 8 weeks after birth, with severe diarrhoea and
fever. Possibly, the CMV transmission occurred at birth or soon after, as the incubation period of CMV infection generally ranges between 4
and 12 weeks. Risk factors and pathogenesis of CMV gastrointestinal disease which affects term infants during the first months of life are
poorly defined. A Chinese male infant was delivered at term by emergency caesarean section because of foetal distress. The mother was at
first pregnancy and presented with membrane rupture 24 hours before delivery. Maternal CMV primary infection was diagnosed at the 27th week
of gestation (negative serum specific CMV IgG in early pregnancy. Positive serum specific CMV IgM at 27th weeks of gestation. Positive CMV
IgG antibodies 2 weeks later). Family pedigree was negative for atopy, immuno-deficiencies and gastrointestinal diseases. Birth weight was
3255 g, cranial circumference 34 cm and length 51 cm; APGAR score was 9 and 10 at the 1st and 5th minute respectively. An urine polymerase
chain reaction (P.C.R.) was CMV negative at birth. Fourteen hours after birth the newborn presented with a severe abdominal distension and
breast feeding was soon and permanently discontinued. When 2 days old the newborn was referred to our neonatal intensive care unit because
of acute intestinal occlusion and ileum-cecal valve atresia. Two consecutive urine shell vial assays, obtained after admission, were CMV
early antigen negative as like as specific serum CMV-IgM antibodies. In the 4th day of life the baby underwent intestinal resection. No
blood products were administered and no inclusion bodies were found in the intestinal biopsy. Three weeks later the baby was discharged
home; he was formula-fed and healthy appearing. When aged 10 weeks the infant showed fever, irritability and decreased milk intake. Physical
examination revealed a lethargic infant, pale-greyish skin, marbled limbs, severe hepato-splenomegaly and tachycardia. Blood analysis
showed: white blood cell count 7.63 per 109/L (31% neutrophils; 61% lymphocytes; 7% monocytes), haemoglobin 6.8 g/dl, hematocrit 21%,
platelet count 181 per 109/L, aspartate-aminotransferase 62 U/L, alanine-aminotransferase 39 U/L, albumin 1.8 g/dl, with normal clotting
time test. Serum specific CMV immunoglobulin levels (IgG and IgM) were consistent with a primary infection. The infant showed a clinical
improvement by therapy (intravenous fluids, broad spectrum antibiotics, albumin and packed erythrocytes), but 6 days after admission he
presented a severe haemorrhagic diarrhoea. No parasites were found by stool examination and Rotavirus/Adenovirus chromatographic immunoassay
was negative. Stool cultures for Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter and Yersinia species were also negative. A large intestine biopsy
showed a chronic inflammation with lymphatic hyperplasia and colic crypt lesions. Urine shell vial assay was CMV early antigen positive.
P.C.R. was positive in the biopsy (quantitative CMV-DNA 2620 copies/100.00cells), in bone marrow (quantitative CMV-DNA 2275 copies/ml) and
in peripheral blood (determined 7 days after start of antiviral therapy: quantitative CMV-DNA 240 copies/ml). Brain ultrasound scans,
cranial computed tomography, ophthalmologic examination and auditory brainstem responses were normal. Intravenous ganciclovir (GCV) (10
mg/kg/day) was administered for 3 weeks. The diarrhoea improved after 3 days of GCV. Formula-feeding was rapidly increased and the baby was
discharged 37 days after admission. Detailed investigation did not reveal any underlying primary immunodeficiencies (normal lymphocyte
subsets studies, serum immunoglobulin and IgG sub-class levels). Urinary shedding of CMV ceased during the second year of life and neuro-
developmental outcome at 2 years of age is normal. In immuno-competent host, acquired CMV infection is usually asymptomatic or may determine
a mild disease. Severe gastrointestinal disease can be observed in congenital infections , in children with AIDS, or in children receiving
immunosuppressive therapy post-transplantation. CMV may also cause relapses of intestinal disease in infants affected by inflammatory bowel
diseases . Additional sources are blood transfusions or contact with genital tract secretions at delivery, whereas viral shedding from
maternal pharynx or urinary tract, during the first months after birth, is not associated with perinatal transmission . Finally, breast
feeding is a recognized source of CMV in the perinatal period and an important cause of "sepsis-like" infection in very preterm infants .
Cheong and co-workers reported 11 cases of postnatal CMV infection with gastrointestinal manifestations. All infants were breast fed, 10
were delivered preterm (range 24 to 32 wks of gestation) and one, low birth weight newborn, was affected by Rothmund-Thomson syndrome.
Premature newborn is an immunocompromised host and CMV gastrointestinal disease may result from enteral acquisition after infected fresh
milk feeding. In contrast, severe CMV gastrointestinal disease have been exceptionally reported in immunocompetent infants . Congenital
origin could not be ruled out, therefore the pathogenesis is still unclear. Common findings include breast feeding, the need of antiviral
therapy (4 of 5 cases) and the onset of symptoms between 5 to 8 weeks after birth (Table 1). The incubation period of CMV infections
generally ranges between 4 and 12 weeks; it is therefore likely that most of these infants acquired infection at or soon after birth. Severe
gastrointestinal cytomegalovirus infection in immuno-competent infants born at term GCV = Ganciclovir; VGCV = Valganciclovir; PCR =
polymerase chain reaction; i.v. = intravenous ° The infant was breast fed for 4 weeks, then he was formula fed § Melena occurred at the age
of 7 months The infant here described had no clinical signs of the disease at birth and laboratory testing for CMV (at birth) were negative,
therefore we could firmly exclude congenital infection. No recognizable underlying illness or risk factor for CMV were found. Unlike
previous reports, the infant was breast-fed for a few hours at birth, and then formula-fed. Horizontal CMV transmission from another child
in the household was unlikely, as the infant was an only child. The mother, who suffered from primary infection in late pregnancy, was the
likely source of CMV (perhaps at birth, as a consequence of prolonged membrane rupture). Perhaps intestinal surgery during the first week of
life increased disease severity. We speculate that mucosal injury possibly led to increased permeability with a massive intestinal and blood
CMV invasion. The hypothesis of mucosal injury is supported by the observation of CMV colitis in immunocompetent children with inflammatory
bowel disease or cow's milk allergy . Further, the disease could have been worsened by the lack of breast milk and maternal protective
factors (namely IgA antibodies). Biopsies and P.C.R. assays confirmed severe bone marrow and intestinal CMV involvement, which promptly
recovered after antiviral therapy. This study has some limitations. Indeed, we could not demonstrate a molecular identity between the CMV-
isolate of the infant and the maternal virus. Therefore the source of CMV remains speculative, though a transmission from the maternal
source it is likely. Further, no amniocentesis was performed and some information on maternal infection (DNAemia, viral shedding in urine or
saliva) was lacking. The characterization of maternal primary infection during pregnancy was therefore incomplete. Nevertheless, this case
report contribute to understand CMV end-organ-disease and related symptomatic infection of term infants during the first months of life. It
shows that severe disease may be acquired after birth, even in immunocompetent, formula-fed, full-term infant. Intractable diarrhoea may
need ganciclovir therapy. CMV: cytomegalovirus; P.C.R.: polymerase chain reaction; GCV: ganciclovir; VGCV: Valganciclovir. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. All authors contributed to conception and design, acquisition of data, analysis or
interpretation of data and gave final approval of the version to be published. In detail:AB and FV drafted the manuscript; CR, VF, CR and NG
conceived of the study, participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript; PP and TL carried out the
immunoassays and molecular studies; FF have been involved in revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content. The pre-
publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2431/11/52/prepub
