Dengue hemorrhagic fever leading to hemorrhage in pituitary adenoma is not reported till date: We herein report the first case of bilateral
visual loss secondary to pituitary adenoma hemorrhage associated with dengue hemorrhagic fever. Urgent transnasal trans sphenoidal
decompression of the macroadenoma prevented permanent visual loss in this patient. Pituitary apoplexy should be considered as differential
diagnosis of visual deterioration apart from retinal hemorrhage, maculopathy, and optic neuropathy in cases of dengue hemorrhagic fever.
Early decompression of optic nerves helped in the restoration of vision. Dengue hemorrhagic fever may cause low platelet counts, but a case
leading to apoplexy in pituitary adenoma is not reported in literature till date. Here one interesting case of pituitary apoplexy due to
dengue fever and low platelet count has been described. The differential diagnosis and management has been discussed. A 31-year-old Indian
woman, with a history of hypothyroidism (on levothyroxine tablets 100 μg/day) presented with a history of fever of 104°F of 5-day duration
to the Department of Internal Medicine; investigations done at a laboratory of Paras Hospital, Gurgaon, showed low platelet counts
(45,000/cumm) with positive dengue serology both immunoglobulin G and M). One day after admission in the hospital, she had sudden loss of
vision in both eyes with headache and vomiting. On neurosurgery consultation, she was conscious, oriented with bilateral complete loss of
vision (no perception of light) and no direct or consensual light reflex with a pupil size of 4 mm in diameter. Optic disc/retinal
examination of both eyes was normal. Rest of the neurological exam was normal; magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed
pituitary macro adenoma of 16 × 22 mm size with evidence of acute hemorrhage (iso- to hyperintense on T1 and hypointense on T2) with
enhancement of the tumor on contrast [Fig. 1]. Serum prolactin was 11.68 ng/ml (normal 4-30 ng/ml) and serum thyroid stimulating hormone
(TSH) was 4.649 μIU/ml (normal 0.3–3.0 μIU/ml) on thyroxin replacement therapy. Urgent transnasal trans sphenoidal decompression of the
macroadenoma was done, after replacing platelets (>100,000/cumm). Intraoperatively, there was evidence of bleed inside the tumor. There was
progressive improvement in vision from the second postoperative day till 3 months. Vision was 20/60 and 20/40 in the right and left eye,
respectively, with residual bilateral temporal field defects after 3-month follow-up. Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted saggital scan showing
pituitary tumor with hemorrhage Dengue hemorrhagic fever is one of the causes of low platelet count leading to petechial rash and
spontaneous bleeding from mucosal surfaces. Pituitary apoplexy is spontaneous hemorrhage into the pituitary adenoma. Our case was a patient
diagnosed with dengue hemorrhagic fever with a low platelet count without any rash or systemic bleeding. This patient had sudden loss of
vision with headache. MRI of the brain revealed pituitary macroadenoma with apoplexy. This catastrophe had arisen due to bleeding into the
pituitary adenoma, probably predisposed by the low platelet count due to dengue hemorrhagic fever. In medical literature, this association
has never been reported. By pointing out this rare association, authors want to emphasize that a low platelet count due to dengue
hemorrhagic fever may cause pituitary adenoma apoplexy. Under this condition, the patient may present with sudden loss of vision with
headache. MRI of the brain should be done and pituitary hormones levels should be checked to rule out pituitary apoplexy. Other causes of
visual deterioration in patients with dengue fever are optic neuropathy, maculopathy, retinal capillary occlusion, foveolitis, and retinal
hemorrhage. If the diagnosis is made in time, urgent treatment in the form of decompression of optic nerves through transnasal trans
sphenoid route may help to save vision as in the presented case.
