Recent reports indicate that refractory central nervous system (CNS) metastases of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are improved by high-
dose gefitinib or erlotinib administration. We describe a Japanese woman with NSCLC and CNS metastases who was resistant to 75 mg daily
erlotinib, but the metastases were improved by 150 mg daily erlotinib. We investigated the plasma and CSF concentrations of erlotinib at
each dose as well as the correlation between the plasma and CSF concentrations of erlotinib. Including this patient, we administered 150 mg
erlotinib daily to nine NSCLC patients with CNS metastases and measured the plasma and CSF concentrations just before administration on day
8. The concentrations were determined using high-performance liquid chromatography with ultraviolet detection. The plasma and CSF
concentrations of erlotinib at a dose of 75 mg were 433 and 14 nM, respectively. The plasma and CSF concentrations of erlotinib at a dose of
150 mg were increased to 1,117 and 44 nM, respectively. The mean ± standard deviation of CSF concentrations and penetration rates were
106 ± 59 nM and 4.5 ± 1.5%, respectively. There was a good correlation (R2 = 0.84) between plasma and CSF concentrations (P = 0.0005). This
study indicates that CSF concentrations of erlotinib depend on its plasma concentration. As seen in this patient, high CSF concentrations of
erlotinib can be achieved by high-dose administration, and this finding suggests the efficacy of high-dose administration, especially to
refractory CNS metastases of NSCLC patients. Patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who have somatic activating mutations of the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene (EGFR mutations) generally respond to EGFR-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs, e.g.,
gefitinib and erlotinib) [1, 2]. Nevertheless, the majority of these patients experience eventual disease progression, despite an initial
dramatic response to treatment. The central nervous system (CNS) is a common site of recurrence, which is thought to be due to penetration
of the agents into the CNS [3, 4]. A previous report described refractory CNS metastases of NSCLC that were improved by high-dose gefitinib
. Several cases in which CNS metastases resistant to gefitinib were improved by erlotinib have been also reported . In addition, in several
articles, intermittent, high-dose erlotinib improved CNS metastases that were resistant to continuous, normal-dose erlotinib . These
challenges are based on the hypothesis that high cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations may be achieved by high-dose administration of
EGFR-TKIs, with higher CSF concentrations achieved by erlotinib compared with gefitinib. We previously reported the CSF concentrations of
erlotinib and its penetration rates in four NSCLC patients with CNS metastases . In this article, we describe a Japanese woman with NSCLC
and EGFR mutation having CNS metastases that are resistant to 75 mg daily erlotinib. The metastases were subsequently improved by 150 mg
daily erlotinib. We investigated the plasma and CSF concentrations of erlotinib at each dose. Furthermore, including previous data, we
investigated the correlation between plasma and CSF concentrations. A 66-year-old Japanese woman was diagnosed with advanced lung
adenocarcinoma and EGFR mutation (L858R) 3 years prior. Erlotinib had been administered as fourth line of treatment. Before the initiation
of erlotinib, the patient had no CNS metastases. Although partial response (PR) was achieved, the erlotinib dose was reduced from 150 to
75 mg daily due to grade 3 fatigue. After progression-free survival (PFS) of 12 months, the patient experienced recurrent CNS metastases.
The plasma and CSF concentrations of erlotinib just before administration of the 75-mg dose were 433 and 14 nM, respectively. The patient
received whole-brain radiotherapy (WBRT), but the CNS metastases did not improve (Fig. 1a). The dose was subsequently increased to 150 mg
daily; the plasma and CSF concentrations just before administration of erlotinib on day 8 erlotinib were 1,117 and 44 nM, respectively. Four
weeks after the initiation of 150 mg administration of erlotinib, CNS metastases improved (Fig. 1b).Fig. 1Brain magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) in the 66-year-old Japanese female patient. a Brain MRI after whole-brain radiotherapy demonstrated stable brain metastases
(arrowheads). At this point, 75 mg daily erlotinib was administered. b Four weeks after initiation of 150 mg daily erlotinib, the metastases
were improved (arrowheads) Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the 66-year-old Japanese female patient. a Brain MRI after whole-brain
radiotherapy demonstrated stable brain metastases (arrowheads). At this point, 75 mg daily erlotinib was administered. b Four weeks after
initiation of 150 mg daily erlotinib, the metastases were improved (arrowheads) We previously reported the plasma and CSF concentrations of
four NSCLC patients with CNS metastases (cases 1–4) . In addition to these patients, we investigated the plasma and CSF concentrations of
four other NSCLC patients with CNS metastases (cases 5–8) (Table 1).Table 1Patient characteristicsCasesAge (yr)SexPSHistologyEGFR
geneSmoking statusPrevious chemotherapy regimenPrevious gefitinib (length of PFS)Previous WBRT159F3AdNENever3Yes (10 months)Yes282F4AdWild
typeNever0NoNo370F3AdWild typeNever1NoYes486F3AdEx 21; L858RNever1Yes (7 months)No567F1AdEx 21; L858RNever1NoNo672M0AdEx 21;
L858RFormer1NoNo781M1AdEx 19 deletionFormer1Yes (46 months)Yes885F2AdEx 21; L858RNever1NoYes a66F1AdEx 21; L858RNever3NoYesPS performance
status, EGFR epidermal growth factor receptor, PFS progression-free survival, WBRT whole-brain radiotherapy, F female, M male, Ad
adenocarcinoma, NE not evaluated, Never never-smoker, Former former-smokeraA 66-year-old Japanese female patient in this study Patient
characteristics PS performance status, EGFR epidermal growth factor receptor, PFS progression-free survival, WBRT whole-brain radiotherapy,
F female, M male, Ad adenocarcinoma, NE not evaluated, Never never-smoker, Former former-smoker aA 66-year-old Japanese female patient in
this study Blood and CSF samples were obtained just before the administration of 150 mg erlotinib on day 8 when steady-state plasma
concentrations of erlotinib were assumed to be achieved. Plasma and CSF concentrations of erlotinib were determined using high-performance
liquid chromatography with ultraviolet detection as previously reported . Before the collection of samples and analysis, we obtained written
informed consent from all patients. Linear regression was performed on the data in Fig. 2 by fitting a straight line. The R2 value was used
to measure the strength of the relationship between the plasma and CSF concentrations of erlotinib. The 150-mg daily erlotinib data from
this 66-year-old Japanese female patient were analyzed, and the 75-mg daily erlotinib data were excluded. Linear regression analysis,
performed using JMP 8 software (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA), was two-tailed, and P values less than 0.05 were considered statistically
significant.Fig. 2Correlation between plasma concentrations and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations of erlotinib. A good correlation
(R2 = 0.84) was demonstrated (P = 0.0005) Correlation between plasma concentrations and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations of
erlotinib. A good correlation (R2 = 0.84) was demonstrated (P = 0.0005) The clinical characteristics of all patients (n = 9) are summarized
in Table 1. In CNS lesions, 7 of the 9 patients achieved PR (78%) and 5 of the 6 patients with EGFR mutations achieved PR (83%). Gefitinib
was administered to three patients prior to erlotinib therapy; these patients achieved PR but had CNS recurrence after a long PFS of more
than 6 months. Two of these three patients achieved PR after erlotinib therapy in spite of gefitinib resistance. The plasma and CSF
concentrations are summarized in Table 2. The mean ± standard deviation (SD) of CSF concentrations and penetration rates were 106 ± 59 nM
and 4.5 ± 1.5%, respectively. As seen in Fig. 2, there was a good correlation (R2 = 0.84) between plasma and CSF concentrations
(P = 0.0005).Table 2Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of erlotinib, and central nervous system metastases responseCasePlasma
concentration (nM)CSF concentration (nM)Penetration rate (%)CNS responsea12,082984.7Partial response24,0592025.0Stable
disease34,9221563.2Partial response4544427.7Stable disease52,575983.8Partial response61,314473.5Partial response71,886985.2Partial
response85,3761723.2Partial response(75 mg erlotinib)b433143.3Progressive disease(150 mg erlotinib)b1,117443.9Partial
responseMean ± SDc2,653 ± 1,734106 ± 594.5 ± 1.5CSF cerebrospinal fluid, CNS central nervous system, SD standard deviationaResponses were
assessed by magnetic resonance imaging with use of the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumor version 1.1bA 66-year-old Japanese female
patient in this studycWe analyzed the mean ± SD from all data except for the data from the 66-year-old Japanese female patient at a dose of
75 mg erlotinib Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of erlotinib, and central nervous system metastases response CSF cerebrospinal
fluid, CNS central nervous system, SD standard deviation aResponses were assessed by magnetic resonance imaging with use of the Response
Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumor version 1.1 bA 66-year-old Japanese female patient in this study cWe analyzed the mean ± SD from all data
except for the data from the 66-year-old Japanese female patient at a dose of 75 mg erlotinib This study demonstrated that there is a good
correlation (R2 = 0.84) between plasma and CSF concentrations of erlotinib (P = 0.0005), which indicates that high CSF concentrations can be
achieved by high plasma concentrations. That is, high CSF concentrations can be achieved by high-dose erlotinib administration. CNS
metastases of the 66-year-old Japanese female patient responded to 150 mg daily erlotinib despite resistance to 75 mg daily erlotinib,
likely because of higher CSF concentrations. There are several reports based on the hypothesis that high CSF concentrations may be achieved
by high-dose erlotinib administration , and our study supports this hypothesis. The mean ± SD of CSF penetration rates were 4.5 ± 1.5%, and
this result was similar to that of recent another study . However, the rates of our study were ranged from 3.2 to 7.7% and those of another
study ranged from 2.5 to 13.3%, which indicates that there seem to be difference in the penetration rate between individuals. Recently, it
has been reported that some transporters restrict brain penetration of erlotinib [13, 14]. Polymorphisms of these transporters can be
associated with this individual difference in the penetration rate. Since systemic chemotherapy is thought to play a limited role in CNS
metastases because of the belief that the brain is a pharmacological sanctuary, patients with NSCLC who showed initial good responses to
EGFR-TKIs often had recurrent CNS metastases. Considering CSF concentrations, high-dose EGFR-TKIs can be effective for such refractory
metastases. Furthermore, the association between CNS responses/recurrence and CSF concentrations should be investigated in the future. We
declare that we have no potential conflict of interest related to this article. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of
the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
