Blood lead (B–Pb), one of the most used toxicological biomarker all kind, has serious limitations. Thus, the objective is to evaluate
whether plasma lead (P–Pb) is more adequate. A long-term follow-up study of five cases of lead poisoning. P–Pb was analysed by inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometry. Kinetics after end of exposure was modelled. P–Pb at severe poisoning was about 20 μg/L; haematological
effects at about 5 μg/L. Biological half-time of P–Pb was about 1 month; B–Pb decay was much slower. P–Pb is a valuable biomarker of
exposure to and risk, particularly at high exposure. The lead (Pb) concentration in whole blood (B–Pb) is probably—next to ethanol in
blood—the most widely used biomarker for assessment of toxic exposure and risk. However, it has clear limitations, in particular because
there is saturation with increasing exposure, in particular at B-Pbs > 700 μg/L (Bergdahl et al. 1999), and because Pb induces anaemia
(Skerfving and Bergdahl 2007), which will make the use of B–Pb problematic, because Pb is mainly present in erythrocytes, the volume of
which will decrease. Pb in plasma (P–Pb) or serum is an attractive alternative, which would avoid these problems (Schütz et al. 1996; Costa
de Almeida et al. 2010; Montenegro et al. 2006; Hirata et al. 1995). The concentrations are very low, but the developments in analytical
technique now allow adequate determination. However, P–Pb has up to now been used only occasionally. There are indications that the
toxicokinetics of Pb are affected by genetic polymorphism in the enzyme δ-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (ALAD), which is the main binding
site for Pb in erythrocytes, and inhibition of which is at least partly responsible for the anaemic effect of Pb (Skerfving and Bergdahl
2007). In spite of centuries of preventive attempts, Pb is still a major health problem. It induces clinical poisoning in occupational
settings, but sometimes also by other exposures (Skerfving and Bergdahl 2007). The aim of this study was to scrutinise the usability of P–Pb
as a biomarker in cases of clinical Pb poisoning. We evaluated data from five cases of clinical Pb poisoning, four non-occupational and one
occupational (Table 1). They had been exposed to Pb for 1 month–12 years. The intakes of Pb were estimated by self-reported consumption of
tablets or drink, and the measured contents of Pb in those media. Four had anaemia. They were followed for 21–316 months. In all subjects,
the symptoms and signs disappeared during the initial part of the follow-up.Table 1Histories of five cases of lead poisoningCaseSexGenotype
ALAD G379CAgeLead exposureTime from end of exposure to sampling/diagnosis (d)Blood haemo-globin (g/L)Symptoms and signsFollow-up time
(mo)SourceDurationEstimated daily intake (mg)Gastro-
intestinalFatigueOther1FGG47Ceramic34 day48a192b++++–332MGG59Ceramic46 day10a12108+++Weakness343FGG57Ayurvedic
prep.23 month3374111b+++++Insomnia DepressionPain404MGG19Ceramic3 month14a5139+++–355MCG49Polyvinyl chloride—and storage battery
factories12 yearUnknown192b+++++Gingival Pb lineWeight lossPainPeripheral neuropathy316M Male, F Female. + to +++ denotes severity of
clinical symptoms/signs, – lack of sucha Based on intake of and level in juice eluted for 8 h. In standard procedure with 2% acetic acid for
24 h were the levels 150–860 mgb Microcytic sideroblastic anaemia in bone marrow biopsy Histories of five cases of lead poisoning M Male, F
Female. + to +++ denotes severity of clinical symptoms/signs, – lack of such a Based on intake of and level in juice eluted for 8 h. In
standard procedure with 2% acetic acid for 24 h were the levels 150–860 mg b Microcytic sideroblastic anaemia in bone marrow biopsy Blood
and urine for Pb and haemoglobin (B-Hb) determinations were sampled daily during the first week(s), later on weekly, monthly or more rarely.
All cases gave written informed consent for the use of their data for this study. Because of uncertainty in the diagnosis, and whether the
exposure had ceased, frequent sampling was made initially. Cubital venous blood was collected in evacuated metal-free heparinised tubes. To
obtain plasma, the tubes were centrifuged at 2,000g for 10 min. Samples with haemolysis at inspection were deleted. In connection with most
blood sampling occasions, spot urine samples were collected in 10 mL polypropylene tubes the same day or the day before. All samples, but
those from case 5, were analysed by inductively coupled plasma–mass spectrometry (ICP-MS; Barany et al. 2002); for the samples from case 5,
electro thermal atomic absorption spectrometry (ETA-AAS) was used. All samples were prepared in duplicate. Quality control was strict,
especially at method changes (ETA-AAS vs. ICP-MS, r = 0.98, n = 29; Strömberg et al. 2008). The analytical accuracy was checked against
reference material, (Seronorm, SERO AS, Billingstad, Norway) with the recommended values for lead in blood, plasma and urine being 393, 0.9
and 40 μg/L, respectively. Our results for the lead determination in the reference samples during the follow-up time were 98, 106 and 101%
for blood, plasma and urine, respectively. Our laboratory is accredited for lead analysis in blood according to the Swedish Board for
Accreditation and Conformity Assessment (SWEDAC), and during the period, we also produced good results in the UK National External Quality
Assessment Service (Birmingham, UK); our mean accuracy was 96% with coefficient of variation <5%. Blood haemoglobin (B-Hb) was analysed by a
standard clinical method. Creatinine (crea) was analysed in urine samples by a modified kinetic Jaffé method (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim,
Germany). Both B-Hb and crea were analysed by an accredited clinical laboratory with scrupulous quality control. Detection limit for crea
was 0.1 mmol/L and total imprecision 1.6%. For B-Hb measurements, the imprecision within the working range of 1–250 g/L was ≤1.0%. Non-
linear regression analysis was performed with SPSS version 15.0, according to Eq. (1). The first exponential term describes the fast
elimination phase, the second one, the slow elimination of Pb.1\documentclass{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym}
\usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
\begin{document}$$ C_{\text{Pb}} (t) \, = \, C_{1} *{\text{e}}^{{( - R_{1} *t)}} + C_{2} *{\text{e}}^{( - 0.000146*t)}
$$\end{document}CPb(t), lead concentration at a given time (μg/L), t, time (days), C1, constant (concentration of the fast phase at t = 0),
C2, constant (concentration of slow phase at t = 0), R1, elimination constant of phase 1 (days−1). The follow-up time was not sufficient to
calculate the half-time in the slow phase. Nilsson et al. (1991) found it to be 13 years in a long-term study of Pb workers. Therefore, that
value was used. The sum of C1 and C2 describes the modelled Pb content at the end of exposure (t = 0). The half-time of Pb in the fast phase
has been calculated according to Eq. (2).2\documentclass{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts}
\usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$
T_{{{\raise0.5ex\hbox{$\scriptstyle 1$} \kern-0.1em/\kern-0.15em \lower0.25ex\hbox{$\scriptstyle 2$}}}} = {\raise0.7ex\hbox{${\ln 2}$}
\!\mathord{\left/ {\vphantom {{\ln 2} {R_{1} }}}\right.\kern-\nulldelimiterspace} \!\lower0.7ex\hbox{${R_{1} }$}} $$\end{document}For three
cases, there were sufficient data to describe the relationship between B–Hb and P–Pb after end of exposure. Inspection of the curves
(Fig. 4) indicated that one component did not give a satisfactory fit. Regression lines were calculated on the left and right sides of the
division line (x = 5 μg P–Pb/L), and statistical significance of the difference between the pairs of slopes was examined. After that the
threshold between the two components was calculated as the crossing point of the two lines. DNA was isolated from whole blood by minicolumn
purification (E.Z.N.A DNA extraction kit, Omega Bio-Tek, Norcross, GA, USA) and diluted to a concentration of 5 ng/μL. The ALAD G379C
polymorphism (Asn59Lys, rs1800435) was genotyped by Taqman allelic discrimination assay (ABI 7000 instrument, Applied Biosystems, Foster
City, CA, USA), using the following primers and probes for ALAD: primers forward: 5′-TGC CTT CCT TCA ACC CCT CTA-3′ and reverse: 5′-CCA AGG
GCC TCA GCA TCT C-3′; MGB-probes: ALAD-G: 5′-Fam-TGT GAA GCG GCT GG-3′ and ALAD-C: 5′-Vic-TGT GAA CCG GCT GG-3′. The total volume of the PCR
was 25 μL. Primers were added to a final concentration of 0.05 μM, probes to 0.9 μM in an 80% concentrated TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix
(Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The PCR samples were incubated at 50°C for 2 min and at 95°C for 10 min. The samples underwent
40 cycles of 15 s at 95°C and 1 min at 60°C. Controls for each genotype as well as blanks were included in each run. Samples were analysed
in duplicate and concordance rate was 100%. The median P–Pb at first sampling (median 5, range 1–74 days after end of exposure) was 17
(range 2–42) μg/L (Fig. 1a). The modelled median value for P–Pb (C1 + C2) was 23 (range 3–38) μg/L at time t = 0. In Cases 1–4, the median
of C2 was 0.65 (range 0.6–0.8) μg/L, in Case 5 1.6 μg/L.Fig. 1Lead elimination from plasma (P–Pb; a) and whole blood (B–Pb; b) during the
first 800 days after end of exposure in five cases of poisoning Lead elimination from plasma (P–Pb; a) and whole blood (B–Pb; b) during the
first 800 days after end of exposure in five cases of poisoning In the two-compartment model, the median biological T1/2 of the fast P–Pb
phase was 27 (23–69) days (Table 2).Table 2Two-compartment modelling of lead in plasma and whole blood after end of exposure in five cases
of lead poisoningCasePlasmaWhole bloodFirst componentSecond componentFirst componentSecond componentC1 (CI) (μg/L)T1/2 (CI) (d)C2 (CI)
(μg/L)C1 (CI) (μg/L)T1/2 (CI) (d)C2 (CI) (μg/L)130 (25, 35)23 (18, 30)0.6 (0.0, 1.8)770 (720, 810)77 (63, 87)83 (41, 120)222 (19, 25)27 (22,
35)0.8 (0.0, 1.6)700 (660, 750)87 (77, 120)140 (120, 190)337 (0, 91)23 (15, 43)0.7 (0.5, 0.8)660 (640, 1,100)58 (46, 77)170 (170, 190)43 (2,
4)46 (24, 350)0.6 (0.3, 1.1)560 (500, 620)63 (46, 87)230 (190, 270)530 (23, 37)69 (46, 170)1.6 (0.0, 7.2)1,100 (1,000, 1,100)120 (120,
140)290 (250, 330)C1 and C2 are concentrations at t = 0 for the fast and slow components. T1/2 half-time. CI 95% confidence interval Two-
compartment modelling of lead in plasma and whole blood after end of exposure in five cases of lead poisoning C1 and C2 are concentrations
at t = 0 for the fast and slow components. T1/2 half-time. CI 95% confidence interval The median B–Pb at first sampling was 790 (520–1,600)
μg/L (Fig. 1b). The modelled median value for B–Pb (C1 + C2) was 840 (range 790–1,300) μg/L at time t = 0. In Cases 1–4, the median of C2
was 155 (range 83–230) μg/L and in Case 5, it was 290 μg/L. Median T1/2 for the fast B–Pb component was 77 (58–120) days (Table 2). The
relationship between B–Pb and P–Pb was approximately linear at low levels (ratio about 100); at P-Pbs above about 5 μg/L, the B–Pb levelled
off (Fig. 2). In Cases 1 and 2, the ratio at the highest P-Pbs was about 40, in Case 5, it was about 60.Fig. 2Relationship between lead
levels in whole blood (B–Pb) and plasma (P–Pb) in sequential samples from five cases of poisoning Relationship between lead levels in whole
blood (B–Pb) and plasma (P–Pb) in sequential samples from five cases of poisoning There seemed to be a rectilinear relationship between U–Pb
and P–Pb; the former expressed as μg/g crea was 22 times higher than the latter (R2 linear = 0.5; p < 0.001), expressed as μg/L
(Fig. 3).Fig. 3Relationship between lead levels in urine (U–Pb) and plasma (P–Pb) in sequential samples from five cases of poisoning. The
association between U–Pb and P–Pb follows the equation U–Pb = 12 + 22*P–Pb Relationship between lead levels in urine (U–Pb) and plasma
(P–Pb) in sequential samples from five cases of poisoning. The association between U–Pb and P–Pb follows the equation U–Pb = 12 + 22*P–Pb
The median B-Hb rose after end of exposure, from a median of 108 (range 92–139) g/L (Table 1) at the time of the first blood sampling to 138
(122–155) g/L at end of follow-up (not in table). In all patients, B-Hb values recovered to a stable level for each individual within a
median time of 176 (range 145–230) days. In three cases, there was sufficient information for a meaningful study of the relationship between
B–Hb and P–Pb (Fig. 4). The association seemed to have two components, an initial fast increase at relatively low P-Pbs, and a slower one at
high ones (all Ps for pairs of regression lines ≤ 0.01). The threshold P–Pb between the two components was calculated at 4.3, 6.6 and
5.0 μg/L, in Cases 1, 2 and 5, respectively.Fig. 4Relationship between haemoglobin levels in blood (B-Hb) and lead in plasma (P–Pb) in
sequential samples from three cases of poisoning Relationship between haemoglobin levels in blood (B-Hb) and lead in plasma (P–Pb) in
sequential samples from three cases of poisoning Case 5, who was the only heterozygote for ALAD G379C (earlier denoted as ALAD 1–2;
Table 1), had the longest T1/2 for B–Pb, as compared to the others, who were homozygotes for the more common G-allele, while he did not
differ from the others in P–Pb kinetics (Table 2). Also, he had higher initial both B–Pb and P–Pb (Fig. 1), and a higher B–Pb/P–Pb ratio
(Fig. 2). The most important finding was that P–Pb at poisoning was about 20 μg/L. Biological half-time of P–Pb was about 1 month; decay in
B–Pb was much slower. P–Pb displayed a non-linear relationship with B–Pb, but rectilinear with U–Pb. The number of cases was small; in
particular, we had only three cases with valid information on long-term B-Hb, which must be taken into consideration when drawing
conclusions. Since Pb content in red blood cells is much higher than in plasma, there is a risk that even a rather limited haemolysis, which
may occur because of the haemolytic tendency at high Pb exposure, may contaminate the P–Pb. We eliminated the few plasma samples with
haemolysis. A very slight red colour occurs before there is a serious problem of Pb carryover. The present determination of P–Pb by ICP-MS
was accurate. However, there is still uncertainty, which is reflected in the large confidence intervals in the estimates of kinetic
parameters for P–Pb, which is wider than for B–Pb. In particular, Case 5 was studied before development of that method. Hence, ETA-AAS was
used for P–Pb analyses, which was less sensitive. This is also obvious from the much greater variation of his data points in the elimination
and B–Pb/P–Pb, U–Pb/P–Pb and B–Hb/P–Pb curves. This also explains why his first and third measurements are higher than the modelled C1 + C2.
However, it is most unlikely that the analytical method explains his higher P–Pbs in general, which are more likely due to his greater
skeletal Pb pool. The elimination of Pb from both plasma and whole blood displayed at least two phases. The fast one reflects the soft
tissues, the slow one the skeleton (Schütz et al. 1987; Nilsson et al. 1991). In spite of the long follow-up times, they did still not allow
accurate estimates of the slow phase. Thus, we choose to use the better value obtained in our earlier study. The present P–Pbs are much
higher than those in Swedes with no particular exposure (0.1–0.3 μg/L (Schütz et al. 1996; Bergdahl et al. 1999), and remained so long after
end of exposure. Therefore, we did not subtract a level in Swedish subjects without excessive exposure. The method for determination of P–Pb
with ICP-MS has been further developed. Hence, at our laboratory, the limit of detection is now 0.02 μg/L and the precision 6%. Hence, it is
possible to use P–Pb as a biomarker in environmental health. The number of cases is small, in particular we had only three cases with valid
information on long-term B-Hb, which must be taken into consideration when drawing conclusions. In addition, the time of exposure and the
total amount of Pb absorbed varied between the individuals; in particular, Case 5 differed. Hence, the body burden (mainly the skeletal
content) of Pb differed, which will affect the elimination pattern after end of exposure (Nilsson et al. 1991). This was accounted for by
the use of a two-component elimination model on an individual basis. The relationship between the initial levels of the two components will
vary depending upon the bone pool versus recent exposure. The pattern of P–Pb fits better with exposure data than B–Pb, which may be because
it better reflects uptake and body burden, especially at these high uptakes. Only after careful comparison of the patterns did we merge the
information into combined conclusions. The T1/2 for P–Pb of about 1 month is much longer than that reported after intravenous injection of
Pb salt (Campbell et al. 1984). The present T1/2s for B–Pb are longer than previously reported (Schütz and Skerfving 1976; Rabinowitz et al.
1976; Schütz et al. 1987). This is certainly because the present cases had B-Pbs much higher than in the earlier studies. Thus, our subjects
initially had anaemia, with an attenuation of the rate of B–Pb decline when the effect on the blood cell formation and survival decreases as
the body burden decays. Further – and more important – the curvilinear relationship between B–Pb and P–Pb, at the initial decrease of the
body burden, will not be reflected in a simultaneous decay of B–Pb. Hence, our T1/2s of B-Pbs are fully compatible with both the earlier
reports on B–Pb and our T1/2s for P–Pb. Also, the non-linear B–Pb/P–Pb relationship means that the B–Pb/P–Pb ratio will differ between
individuals and over time. In spite of the time to diagnosis being long in some of the cases, the modelling resulted in estimates of both
the B–Pb and the P–Pb content at t = 0, which marked the actual end of exposure. Poisoning with gastrointestinal, neurological and
haematological symptoms and signs occurred at P–Pbs of about 20 μg/L as indicated by extrapolation of the P–Pb curves. In one of the cases
(no. 4), the P–Pb at diagnosis was much lower. However, we are less certain of the relevance, since the symptoms and signs were less
convincing for intoxication. The present data clearly show the well-known anaemic effect of Pb exposure (Bergdahl et al. 2006). Previous
authors have described the relationship between exposure and B-Hb by use of B–Pb as a biomarker (Gennart et al. 1992). However, this may
lead to spurious results, because the effect causes a decrease of the assumed indicator of exposure/risk, caused by the anaemia-induced
decrease of binding possibilities for Pb in blood, and the saturation of binding sites. Our data clearly show the usefulness of P–Pb as an
indicator of the risk of haematological effects. The shape of the B-Hb/P–Pb seemed to have at least two components. This is probably
because, as said above, Pb has several different modes of action: inhibition of haem synthesis, inhibition of nucleotide synthesis and
haemolysis. The present data does not allow allocation of these mechanisms to the B-Hb/P–Pb curve, but it is obvious that there is a
dramatic effect at a P–Pb of about 5 μg/L. Interestingly, Case 5, who was the only heterozygote for ALAD G379C, had the longest T1/2 for
B–Pb, as compared to the others, who were homozygote for the C-allele, while he did not differ from the others in P–Pb kinetics. Also, he
had a higher B–Pb/P–Pb ratio and higher initial B–Pb, which is in accordance with earlier findings (Bergdahl et al. 1997; Fleming et al.
1998; Schwartz et al. 2000; Montenegro et al. 2006). However, the high B–Pb observed may be due to a higher exposure, compared to the other
cases. The present B-Pbs at onset of poisoning are high, well above occupational and other biological exposure limits (Skerfving and
Bergdahl 2007). However, the present results are still relevant for evaluation of cases of poisoning. It is then important to consider that
B–Pb, despite being one of the most used toxicological biomarkers all kind, has serious limitations because of the saturation at high
exposure. Then, P–Pb is a more adequate biomarker of Pb exposure and risk than B–Pb, which is in accordance with a closer association
between P–Pb and markers of haem synthesis, as compared to B–Pb, especially at high exposure (Hirata et al. 1995). P–Pb at severe poisoning
was about 20 μg/L. Biological half-time of P–Pb was about 1 month; whole blood decay was much slower. The ALAD genotype seemed to modify the
toxicokinetics (higher level and slower elimination in whole blood), though only one of our cases was a heterozygote. The authors thank Ms.
Anna Akantis for skilful technical assistance, Dr. Anna Oudin, Dr Med Sci and Dr. Ulf Strömberg PhD for statistical advice. This work was
supported by the European Union (PHIME, contract no FOOD-CT-2006-016253). This publication reflects only the author’s views; the European
Community is not liable for any use that may be made of the information contained therein. Further, the work was supported by the Swedish
Council for Working Life and Social Research (METALUND project), the County Councils of Southern Sweden and the Medical Faculty, Lund
University. Conflicts of interest The authors report no conflicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing
of the paper. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which
permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
