Gestational malaria is a multi-factorial syndrome leading to poor outcomes for both the mother and foetus. Although an unusual increasing in
the number of hospitalizations caused by Plasmodium vivax has been reported in Brazil, mortality is rarely observed. This is a report of a
gestational malaria case that occurred in the city of Manaus (Amazonas State, Brazil) and resulted in foetal loss. The patient presented
placental mixed-infection by Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum after diagnosis by nested-PCR, however microscopic analysis failed
to detect P. falciparum in the peripheral blood. Furthermore, as the patient did not receive proper treatment for P. falciparum and
hospitalization occurred soon after drug treatment, it seems that P. falciparum pathology was modulated by the concurrent presence of P.
vivax. Collectively, this case confirms the tropism towards the placenta by both of these species of parasites, reinforces the notion that
co-existence of distinct malaria parasites interferes on diseases' outcomes, and opens discussions regarding diagnostic methods, malaria
treatment during pregnancy and prenatal care for women living in unstable transmission areas of malaria, such as the Brazilian Amazon. In
severe cases of Plasmodium falciparum infection, clinical complications are associated with the sequestration of P. falciparum-infected
erythrocytes (Pf-iE) within microvasculature and placental syncytiotrophoblasts . Vivax malaria has long been considered a benign infection;
however, the malaria pigment of this species has been detected in the placenta of Plasmodium vivax-infected women . Further, pregnant women
infected with P. vivax experience maternal anaemia, and some of their babies present a low birth weight , which are clinical features
frequently associated with Pf-iE placental adhesion . Despite the adverse pregnancy outcomes associated with P. vivax infection ,
information concerning epidemiology and clinical consequences of vivax malaria during pregnancy is lacking. In Brazil, where malaria
incidence is almost exclusively restricted to the Amazon (99.8% of the cases), P. vivax was responsible for the majority (83.7%) of
registered cases in 2008. Plasmodium falciparum infections accounted for 16.3% of cases, and Plasmodium malariae infection was rarely
observed . Additionally, chloroquine-resistant strains of P. vivax have emerged in the Brazilian Amazon . A 19-year-old pregnant woman,
estimated to be 35 weeks of gestation (WG), living on the boundary of the city of Manaus - Amazon State (3.09S, 59.58W), surrounded by the
Amazon rainforest, was diagnosed for P. vivax infection at the nearest Health Center and showed approximately 90,000 parasites/mm3. In
Brazil, the microscopic examination of Giemsa-stained thick blood smear is the official method for malaria diagnosis. This was her fourth
pregnancy, and she had no medical history of previous abortion, stillbirth or pre-term delivery. The patient had three previous malaria
episodes, the last occurring two years ago. Additionally, she reported a plasmodial infection during her third pregnancy. At the time, the
patient was treated and no further complications were observed. She was given a three-day regimen (25 mg/kg) of oral chloroquine, with four
pills (150 mg each) administered in the first day, followed by three pills on the two subsequent days. However, after the second dose, the
patient presented with vomiting, which led to cessation of the drug treatment. The patient was subsequently transferred to a tertiary-care
maternity hospital in Manaus, where she was hospitalized until delivery. At the maternity hospital, the patient presented symptoms of fever,
headache, jaundice, anorexia, chills and hypertension. Urine sediment analysis revealed that bilirubin and biliary pigments were three-fold
above the standard levels. Furthermore, blood analysis revealed slight anaemia (Ht 29.3%, Hb 10.1 g/dL) and leukocyte count were normal
(4,200 cells/mm3), with 67% lymphocytes. Serological tests for syphilis, toxoplasmosis, measles and HIV were negative. Two days after
patient admission, another thick blood smear was performed and no patent parasitaemia was observed. Ultrasound analysis showed that foetal
heart rate tracings were stable and normal. While foetal centralization was not observed, the ultrasound did reveal oligohydramnios
(amniotic fluid index < 5.0 cm), abnormal foetal symmetry and abnormal placental texture. Although pregnancy was estimated to be 35 WG, with
a foetal weight of 2,500 g, according to the patient's last menstruation date, foetal growth was approximately 38-39 WG. Thus, the estimate
of 35 WG after ultrasound analysis might represent impairment of intra-uterine growth. Two days later in a routine follow-up, an abnormal
foetal heart rate was observed. Another ultrasound analysis was performed, and no foetal heartbeat was detected, and oligohydramnios was
observed. Next, labour was induced by administration of oxytocin, and foetal loss of a male weighing 2,670 g was confirmed. No foetal
autopsy was performed due to the lack of authorization by relatives. Macroscopic examination of the placenta revealed an abnormal dark
colour; following patient consent, a sample of the placental tissue was collected for further microscopic and molecular analysis. Molecular
analysis of the placenta revealed a mixed infection with P. falciparum and P. vivax. Taken together, these findings suggest placental
dysfunction most likely associated with plasmodial infection, as other common infectious diseases that cause the same phenomenon were ruled
out. Because of the absence of parasite forms in the thick blood smear performed at the maternity, the patient did not receive any anti-
malarial treatment during her stay and immediately after being released from the hospital. In the second month after foetus loss, nested-PCR
analysis was conducted on the asymptomatic mother's peripheral blood and a P. falciparum-specific PCR product was detected, despite the
maintenance of negative thick blood smears. At the time, the patient was treated with artemether/lumefantrine for three days. Figure 1
summarizes, in a chronological manner, the major events reported in this case. Schematic representation of the major events reported in this
case. Diagnosis, treatment and symptoms are reported as they occurred in a chronological manner. Following the P. vivax positive blood smear
diagnosis, the patient remained hospitalized until delivery, when placental tissue and mother's peripheral blood samples were collected and
molecular analyses were performed. Two months after foetal loss, a new blood sample was collected, allowing P. falciparum molecular
diagnosis by nested-PCR. A small fraction (1 × 1 × 1 cm) of maternal placenta was collected, frozen in liquid nitrogen and crushed in 2 mL
of digestion buffer (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 25 mM EDTA and 0.5% SDS) before incubation overnight at 37°C in the presence of proteinase
K (0.1 mg/mL, Sigma). The DNA used for PCR amplification was purified by two phenol/chloroform extractions, followed by ethanol
precipitation; DNA samples were resuspended in water. Two samples of the patient's peripheral blood were collected, the first one at few
hours after the foetus loss and other approximated two months later. Genomic DNA (gDNA) was purified using the Charge Switch gDNA Blood Kit
(Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. To determine and discriminate the presence of Plasmodium spp. gDNA in the blood
sample, sensitive nested-PCR was performed using species-specific oligonucleotides based on human malaria parasite genes for the 18S small
subunit ribosomal RNA (ssrRNA) as described previously . Important, this set of oligonucleotides amplifies small amounts of genetic material
only from viable parasites . As a negative control, gDNA purified from a healthy placenta or from the peripheral blood of a non-infected
individual was used. The products of these reactions were analyzed on a 2% agarose gel stained with ethidium bromide. To ensure nested-PCR
specificity, amplification products were directly cloned into the pGEM-T cloning vector kit (Promega) and then analysed with the aid of the
MegaBace 500 automatic sequencer (GE - Health care). Nested-PCR results conducted with patient's placental tissue were also confirmed by
semi-nested multiplex malaria PCR (SnM-PCR) (Additional file 1) assays as described . Because of the poor conditions of the placental tissue
collected histological analyses were not conducted. Written and informed consent was sought and granted from the patient who attended the
tertiary-care maternity hospital. The patient was diagnosed for P. vivax infection by thick blood smear performed in a Health Center during
her pregnancy. To confirm this diagnosis and to investigate placental vivax infection, we conducted nested-PCR analysis of the placental
tissue using species-specific oligonucleotides. As expected, specific amplification of P. vivax 18S ssrRNA gene was detected (Figure 2).
However, a positive reaction was also observed after incubation with P. falciparum-specific oligonucleotides (Figure 2); thus revealing a
mixed-species placental infection. Despite the positive nested-PCR result, P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes were not detected in
peripheral blood by the thick blood smear before delivery. Nested-PCR analysis of peripheral blood was also performed immediately after
foetal loss, and neither P. vivax- nor P. falciparum-specific fragments were observed (Figure 2). The presence of P. falciparum- and P.
vivax-infected erythrocytes in the placenta collected after foetal loss. Agarose gel electrophoresis of nested-PCR amplified products in the
presence of species-specific human malaria parasite oligonucleotides (VIV or FAL, specific for P. vivax or P. falciparum, respectively)
based on the parasite small subunit ribosomal RNA (ssrRNA) gene. Both P. vivax and P. falciparum gDNA were found in the placenta; no
plasmodial gDNA was detected in peripheral blood after delivery. Abbreviations are as follows: MW, molecular weight; bp, base pair; B,
patient peripheral blood sample; niB, non-infected human peripheral blood; P, patient placenta sample; niP, non-infected human placenta; C-,
negative control, absence of nuclear material; Pv+ and Pf+, positive controls representing amplification product of P. vivax (120 bp) and P.
falciparum (200 bp) ssrRNA gene. Recent efforts by Brazilian authorities have led to a significant reduction in malaria cases (456,000 in
2007 to 314,000 in 2009) and in the Amazonian Annual Parasitological Index (API; 31.9 in 1999 to 12.8 in 2008) over the last few years .
Nevertheless, disease incidence in women and children less than 10 years of age increased from 2003 to 2008; disease in women increased from
34.9 to 38.6%, while the incidence in children under 10 increased from 22 to 25.2% . Indeed, in Manaus, an unusual augmentation in the
number of hospitalizations of P. vivax-infected individuals has been reported over the past years . Brazilian malaria treatment policy
restricts the use of antimalarials to confirmed parasitological cases. A combination of chloroquine and primaquine is used in uncomplicated
P. vivax infections, while artemether-lumefantrine is the choice to treat uncomplicated P. falciparum infections. In severe falciparum
malaria, intravenous administration of artemisinin derivatives is recommended . The relationship between P. vivax infection and pregnancy
outcomes such as stillbirth and miscarriage remains unclear in the literature. However, studies conducted in Southeastern Asia indicate a
correlation between P. vivax infection and adverse pregnancy outcomes, eventually leading to maternal anemia and low birth weight, and with
the presence of malaria pigment in the placenta . Furthermore, it has been shown an increase in the frequency of P. falciparum infections in
pregnant women in a cohort of 1,699 childbearing women in the Brazilian Amazon . This is a case report of gestational malaria with foetal
loss, in which DNA of both P. vivax and P. falciparum were amplified from infected placental tissue. In contrast, only P. vivax-infected
erythrocytes (Pv-iE) were found in patient peripheral blood following diagnosis by Giemsa-stained thick blood smear. Although the patient's
chloroquine treatment was incomplete, the utilized diagnostic method failed to detect P. vivax in the peripheral blood after treatment; thus
showing some efficacy of the drug treatment against this species of parasite. Moreover, as the nested-PCR analysis conducted by us detects
only viable parasites, we assume that both of these species of parasites were accumulated or sequestered in the placenta and played a role
in pathology. During the months that followed foetus loss, even without a clear symptom, the patient was further tested for malaria
infection by thick blood smear in the health center, and parasites were not detected in the peripheral blood. However, a molecular diagnosis
by nested-PCR performed in the patient's peripheral blood collected two months after delivery detected only P. falciparum (Additional file
2). Although immunological analyses were not carried out, microscopically undetectable levels of peripheral parasitaemia might suggest that
this woman presents an important acquired immunity against P. falciparum. It is not known by which means P. vivax can lead to severe
complications in pregnancy; even though a recent report has shown the ability of Pv-iE to cytoadhere to placental cryosections . However,
several reports have shown that mixed-malaria species infection attenuates the severity of P. falciparum pathology in Asia and in Brazil .
Moreover, it has been recently shown that in malaria mixed-species infections patients develop higher levels of fever and antisera against
P. vivax and P. falciparum in comparison to patients with a single infection , and competition between co-infecting parasites for limited
resources within a host consists in a form of selective pressure directed from one species to another . Given that the patient was
hospitalized soon after chloroquine administration, it is most likely that by disrupting the equilibrium between these two parasites an
exacerbation of the clinical signs by the most virulent species contributed to foetal death. Nonetheless, the possibility that P. falciparum
erythrocytic infection has occurred in the period between chloroquine treatment and delivery cannot be ruled out. Collectively, this case
reinforces the notion that by interfering in the homeostasis of two distinct species of Plasmodium parasites in mixed-infections symptoms
provoked by the more virulent species can exacerbate. Moreover, it demonstrates the necessity during pregnancy to consider asymptomatic
plasmodial infections as a potential complication, and urges careful patient follow-up even when peripheral parasitaemia seems absent
following drug treatment. Highly sensitive techniques are available and must be used as diagnostic tools, especially in high-risk groups
such as pregnant women. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. BOC, JSM, PAN were enrolled in collecting the clinical
records and in interviewing the maternity and malaria health center staff. BOC, JAL, FF, PPO, GBG and SLBL set up the placental tissue DNA
extraction and fragments cloning, performed and interpreted nested-PCR and sequencing data. BOC, MVGL, FEM and PAN conceived the study,
contributed in its coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. FTMC contributed to the study design and coordination, helped to
interpret the data and to draft the final version of the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. Presence
confirmation of P. falciparum- and P. vivax-infected erythrocytes in the placental tissue collected after foetal loss. Agarose gel
electrophoresis of semi-nested multiplex PCR (SnM-PCR) amplified products in the presence of species-specific human malaria parasite
oligonucleotides specific for P. ovale, P. malariae, P. vivax or P. falciparum ssrRNA gene. Both P. vivax and P. falciparum gDNA were found
in the placenta. Abbreviations are as follows: MW, molecular weight; bp, base pair; S, patient placental sample; C-, negative control,
absence of nuclear material; Po+, Pm+, Pv+ and Pf+, positive controls representing amplification product of P. ovale (436 bp), P. malariae
(269 bp), P. vivax (499 bp) and P. falciparum (395 bp) ssrRNA gene. Click here for file Molecular diagnosis of Plasmodium falciparum
infection performed two months after delivery. Agarose gel electrophoresis representing nested-PCR performed in the presence of patient's
peripheral blood collected two months after delivery and species-specific human malaria parasite oligonucleotides (VIV or FAL, specific for
P. vivax or P. falciparum ssrRNA gene, respectively). Only P. falciparum gDNA was detected in peripheral blood. Abbreviations are as
follows: MW, molecular weight; bp, base pair; B, patient peripheral blood sample; niB, non-infected peripheral blood sample; C-, negative
control, absence of nuclear material; Pv+ and Pf+, positive controls representing amplification product of P. vivax (120 bp) and P.
falciparum (200 bp) ssrRNA gene. Click here for file Many thanks to Dr. Risoneide da Silva Henriques for giving us the placenta sample, and
we are grateful to Wanessa C. Souza-Neiras for her critical comments. This work received financial support from the Fundação de Amparo à
Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP), the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado do Amazonas (FAPEAM) and the Conselho Nacional de
Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq). BOC and JAL were sponsored by FAPESP fellowships. FTMC is a CNPq fellow. The sponsors had
no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
