Laparoscopic repair of paraesophageal hernia is safe and feasible and can provide comparable results for patients with type IV
paraesophageal hernia. We report a rare case of mediastinal seroma in an 80-year-old gentleman who had a giant type IV paraesophageal hernia
and was eventually admitted to our hospital for elective laparoscopic repair and recovered very well after surgery with resolution of the
atelectatic lungs and air-fluid collection in his chest. Type II to Type IV paraesophageal hernia (PEH) is a rare type of hiatus hernia with
reported incidence of 2-5%. Type IV is the least common, representing approximately 5â€“7% of all paraesophageal hernias. Without surgical
intervention, catastrophic complications including torsion, gangrene, perforation, and massive hemorrhage may occur and result in high
mortality up to 26%. In recent years, laparoscopic repair of paraesophageal hernia became the operation of choice. It is a safe and feasible
procedure with few minor complications. We report a rare case of mediastinal seroma following laparoscopic repair of large type IV
paraesophageal hernia. An 80-year-old gentleman who had a long-standing history of chest pain, early satiety and shortness of breath
especially after large meals presented to the emergency department with chest pain. Preoperative investigations included a chest X-ray which
showed multiple fluid levels within the mediastinum [Figure 1], and an abdominal CT scan which showed a giant type IV paraesophageal hernia
with most of the stomach and transverse colon herniated into the chest [Figure 2]. He was eventually admitted for elective repair of the
large paraesophageal hernia. Chest radiograph showing multiple air fluid level within the chest Computed tomography showing intrathoracic
herniation of the stomach and transverse colon with cardiac displacement interiorly The patient underwent a laparoscopic repair of his
paraesophageal hernia using five-port incision. Pneumoperitoneum was established at the left upper quadrant. Gastrohepatic omentum was
incised and the herniated stomach and colon were reduced into abdomen. The hernial sac was dissected from the mediastinum and then excised.
Mediastinal dissection of the esophagus was done to obtain more intrabdominal length. The crura were closed primarily by using silk
stitches. The fundus of the stomach was sutured to the right crus of the diaphragm. Gastropexy was done to prevent future herniation of the
stomach. Surgery was uneventful until four days post-operation, when he started to complain of shortness of breath and a pressure sensation
in his chest. At that time, his oxygen saturation was 95% with 3L of inspired oxygen per minute, respiratory rate of 24/min, heart rate of
110 bpm and BP of 127/74 mmHg. Chest examination revealed decreased air entry in the lower zone of both lungs. Blood works were all normal.
Chest CT scan was done to rule out pulmonary embolism, which showed a large mediastinal seroma with surrounding atelectasis and anterior
displacement of the mediastinal structure [Figure 3]. He was taken back to the operating room for left thoracoscopic drainage of his
mediastinal seroma. Intraoperatively, we found a large cyst causing atelectasis of the lower lobe of the lung with anterior displacement of
the mediastinal structures. We opened the mediastinal pleura above the cyst and drained around 450 cc of serosanginous fluid. Chest tube was
inserted at the site of the sac. The patient recovered very well after surgery and was sent home with a follow up chest X-ray which showed
resolution of the atelectatic lungs and air-fluid collection in his chest [Figure 4]. Computed tomography showing large mediastinal seroma
Chest radiograph showing resolution of lung atalactasis after repair of the large paraesophgeal hernia Complications following repair of PEH
are usually minor and ranged from 8% to 28% in most large series. Mediastinal seroma is a rare complication reported after repair of large
paraesophageal hernias. It is usually an incidental finding in patients who have had CT chest to rule out other causes of respiratory
distress after surgery, such as pulmonary embolism. Failure to excise the hernial sac may be a major contributing factor to the seroma
formation. Sac excision eliminates the serous membrane lining the cavity in the mediastinum and reduces the chance of a symptomatic
collection. Unmobilized sac can act as a lead point on the stomach and cause it to be pushed back into the chest. In our case report,
although the sac was excised, patient still developed a large symptomatic mediastinal seroma. This could be related to the significant
atelectasis of the lung, which is not filling the space of the hiatus hernia, or to the tight crural closure preventing the drainage of the
residual fluid into the peritoneal space. Complete sac excision, avoiding tight crural closure along with aggressive post-operative chest
physiotherapy could prevent such complication in the future. Most patients with mediastinal seroma are asymptomatic and surgical
intervention is unnecessary, but a few patients become symptomatic and require some form of percutaneous drainage. Source of Support: Nil
Conflict of Interest: None declared.
