Epidermal nevus syndrome is a rare congenital sporadic neuro-ectodermic disorder, characterized by the presence of epidermal nevi in
association with various developmental abnormalities of the skin, eyes, nervous, skeletal, cardiovascular and urogenital systems. We
describe a 5-year-old boy with conjunctival lipodermoid, cervical and facial sebaceous nevi who presented at 3 years of age with
hypertension due to bilateral renal artery stenosis together with multiple vascular anomalies (aorta, celiac trunk, superior mesenteric
artery) as shown by magnetic resonance angiography. Systemic arterial hypertension was difficult to control despite combined anti-
hypertensive drugs and the surgical repair of the aortic coarctation. Epidermal nevus syndrome is a group of congenital neuro-ectodermic
disorders characterized by epidermal nevi in association with cerebral, ocular, skeletal, and sometimes cardiac and renal abnormalities. In
1968, Solomon et al. reported the first case of epidermal nevus syndrome. While universal diagnostic criteria have not yet been defined, the
diagnosis is usually based on epidermal or sebaceous nevus on the scalp, face, trunk or extremities present at birth or appearing in early
childhood, accompanied by various anomalies of the central nervous system, bones, and eyes . Vascular anomalies associated with epidermal
nevus syndrome are rare findings, including aneurysm, arteriovenous malformation, vascular coarctation, patent ductus arteriosus, and
vascular dysplasia [3, 4]. Only one case of arterial hypertension secondary to renal artery stenosis and narrowing of abdominal aorta in
association with epidermal nevus syndrome has been described so far . We report on a 5-year-old boy with epidermal nevus syndrome who
presented with arterial hypertension due to bilateral renal artery stenosis in association with other severe vascular malformations. A
5-year-old boy with epidermal nevus syndrome without neurological abnormality, diagnosed at birth because of right hemifacial and cervical
nevi together with conjunctival lipodermoid, is reported. The skin biopsy of the cervical nevus at birth found sebaceous nevi, which
confirmed the diagnosis of epidermal nevus syndrome. High blood pressure (140/70 mmHg) was incidentally discovered at 3 years of age, at the
time of surgery for cervical nevi excision. Clinical examination revealed a systolic cardiac ejection murmur of 3/6 at the right upper
sternal edge without radiation, weak bilateral femoral pulses, and asymmetrical arterial blood pressure between upper and lower limbs. The
neurological examination did not show any deficits or musculoskeletal anomalies. Echocardiography examination revealed a mild coarctation of
the aorta at the isthmus with a nadir pressure gradient of 50 mmHg, so that antihypertensive drug therapy (beta-blocker + ACE inhibitor) was
initiated. One year later, the echocardiography was repeated because of persistent elevated blood pressure, but no significant change was
noted. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed dilated ascending aorta (20 mm in diameter) with a hypoplastic transverse arch (7 mm) and
descending aorta (10 mm). Surgical repair of the aortic coarctation was carried out at 5 years of age by modified Crafoord technique. Post-
surgical echocardiography showed improved blood flow velocity (3 m/s) and maximal pressure gradient (36 mmHg) at the aortic isthmus.
However, the treatment with beta-blocker and ACE inhibitor could not be discontinued because of ongoing systemic hypertension (140/80 mmHg).
Six months later, the patient was referred to our department for further investigation of persistent arterial hypertension (135/82 mmHg).
There was no clinical evidence of post-surgical recurrent stenosis of the aorta (symmetrical blood pressure in both upper and lower limbs).
There was no sign of impairment of renal function and serum creatinine was within the normal range for age. Renal Doppler ultrasound
revealed normal kidney size with normal differentiation, an accelerated blood flow velocity at the right renal artery ostium and proximal
left renal artery (2 m/s), at the ostium of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA; 3 m/s) and as well as the coeliac trunk (4–5 m/s). These
findings were confirmed by MRA, which showed multiple stenoses at different levels of the aorta without signs of wall thickness or
inflammation (Figs. 1, 2, 3), but with stenosis at the ostium of the left subclavian artery (5.7 mm, then 10 mm), narrowing of the
descending thoracic aorta at the isthmus (8 mm, then 10 mm), proximal stenosis of the coeliac trunk, SMA, right and left renal arteries.
Fig. 1Left lateral oblique thoracoabdominal aorta–iliac MR angiogram, maximum intensity projection image showing: ArrowA left subclavian
artery ostial stenosis, ArrowB the surgical repair site of the coarctation of the thoracic aorta, and ArrowC very mild mid-abdominal aorta
narrowing at the level of the coeliac trunk, superior mesenteric artery (SMA), and renal arteriesFig. 2Frontal view of maximum intensity
projection reconstruction image of MR angiogram shows a left renal artery ostial stenosis (arrow)Fig. 3Axial–oblique view of maximum
intensity projection reconstruction image of MR angiogram shows a right renal artery ostial stenosis (arrow) Left lateral oblique
thoracoabdominal aorta–iliac MR angiogram, maximum intensity projection image showing: ArrowA left subclavian artery ostial stenosis, ArrowB
the surgical repair site of the coarctation of the thoracic aorta, and ArrowC very mild mid-abdominal aorta narrowing at the level of the
coeliac trunk, superior mesenteric artery (SMA), and renal arteries Frontal view of maximum intensity projection reconstruction image of MR
angiogram shows a left renal artery ostial stenosis (arrow) Axial–oblique view of maximum intensity projection reconstruction image of MR
angiogram shows a right renal artery ostial stenosis (arrow) Treatment with beta blocker and ACE inhibitor was continued with a progressive
dose increase and close observation of renal function until acceptable control of blood pressure was achieved (120/70 mmHg). At last follow-
up, i.e., at 10 years of age, the boy had no overt organ damage with normal growth (height 25th to 50th centile, body weight 75th to 97th
centile), no remarkable developmental delay, and normal renal function (serum creatinine 38 μmol/l, estimated GFR 130 ml/min/1.73 m2). Since
blood pressure control was currently acceptable under treatment with beta-blocker and ACE inhibitor (120/67 mmHg), surgery had been
postponed under close surveillance. This strategy was decided according to a surgical team, a radiology team, a nephrology team, and
parental input. Epidermal nevi are circumscribed congenital lesions in the arrangement or quantitative composition of otherwise normal
cutaneous elements, and are caused by somatic mutations producing mosaicism . Most often they are linear, following the Blaschko lines, but
segmental distribution can be found. The term “epidermal nevus syndrome” refers to sporadic neuro-ectodermic disorders in which epidermal
nevi are found in association with deformities and dysplasia of the skin, eyes, brain, skeleton, and heart. Both the cardiovascular and
skeletal systems are derived from the mesoderm; thus, epidermal nevus syndrome may result not only from ectodermal, but also from mesodermal
defect . Bilateral renal artery stenosis is an unusual vascular malformation associated with epidermal nevus syndrome. In the literature
several vascular malformations were reported: coarctation of the aorta, ventricular septal defect, pulmonary artery stenosis, azygos
anterior cerebral artery, internal carotid artery occlusion, bilateral vertebral artery occlusion, and unilateral renal artery stenosis [4,
7, 8]; bilateral renal artery stenosis has not been reported so far. However, such an abnormality has been more commonly reported in other
neuro-ectodermic diseases, for example, neurofibromatosis type 1, in which renal artery stenosis can be detected in 61.5% of patients . In
our patient, the MRA should have been performed earlier to search for another cause of the secondary hypertension in addition to the mild
coarctation of the aorta, since blood pressure was not controlled by medical treatment prior to surgery. Although conventional arteriography
could have been more informative than MRA, this might be done later if the situation changes. As the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system
(RAS) is often activated in patients with renal artery stenosis, our patient had been treated with a regimen including ACE inhibitor and
beta-blocker. Although RAS inhibition may induce acute renal failure in some patients with bilateral renal artery stenosis or high-grade
stenosis in one kidney, the probability of such a complication appeared to be low, and in most cases, it was reversible with discontinuation
of treatment . A percutaneous transluminal angioplasty was not attempted because of known poor results in other neuro-ectodermic diseases
such as neurofibromatosis, and also because of bilateral involvement with a risk of thrombosis and further renal damage compared with
acceptable control of blood pressure by medical therapy . The overall therapeutic attitude was made with the motto “primum non nocere” as
long as the situation is stable for several years. Advice was gathered from local experts to make the final decision, which was a consensus
among nephrologists, vascular surgeons, and radiologists in addition to the approval and support of the parents. The optimal treatment
strategy for renal artery stenosis remains unclear. There are no randomized clinical trials comparing the effects of angioplasty stenting
versus medical therapy alone in such patients with vascular dysplasia. In fact this technique had been attempted in a patient with epidermal
nevus syndrome and unilateral renal artery stenosis and failed because of the rigidity of the stenotic lesion . According to the guidelines
of the Society of Nuclear Medicine and the European Association of Nuclear Medicine, the DMSA scan is not indicated for our patient in the
absence of clinical, biological or radiological signs of renal function impairment or deterioration, although it would have been of great
value if it had been done earlier as a baseline for renal function evaluation and follow-up. In addition to arterial hypertension, the
associated diffuse segmental narrowing of the aorta and its branches indicated the association of middle aortic syndrome in this patient,
which is a clinical condition generated by segmental narrowing of the descending thoracic and abdominal aorta and their branches, which
could be acquired or congenital owing to a developmental anomaly in the fusion and maturation of the paired embryonic dorsal aorta . Careful
screening of renovascular arterial hypertension is strongly recommended in individuals with neuro-ectodermic diseases, especially epidermal
nevus syndrome. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which
permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
