We report a 72-year-old patient with chronic diarrhoea and histologic evidence of gastrointestinal histoplasmosis. He had no history of HIV
or of taking immunosuppressive drugs. The patient was found to be a carrier of Human T-lymphotropic virus-1, a condition associated with
inflammatory, lymphoproliferative, and opportunistic infectious diseases. To our knowledge, there are only three previous cases reporting
this coinfection and this is the first documented case with gastrointestinal involvement. Histoplasmosis is a systemic fungal disease caused
by Histoplasma capsulatum, a dimorphic and ubiquitous fungus. The disease is endemic in certain areas of North, Central, and South America,
as well as Africa and Asia . In Peru, H. capsulatum is most prevalent in tropical forest areas, where up to 43% of seroprevalence to H.
capsulatum has been reported [2, 3]. Most primary infections with H. capsulatum are either asymptomatic or result in mild influenza-like
illness; however, certain forms of histoplasmosis can cause life-threatening infections with considerable morbidity [1, 4, 5].
Gastrointestinal histoplasmosis (GH) usually develops in the context of a disseminated infection and it is associated with severely
immunosuppressed patients, especially those with AIDS [5, 6]. Human T-lymphotropic virus 1 (HTLV-1) is a retrovirus of global distribution,
endemic in Japan, sub-Saharan Africa, the Caribbean and South America, where more than 1% of the general population is infected . In Peru,
prevalence has varied from 1.3% to 3.8% in studies from coastal and highland regions . Chronic infection with HTLV-1 is associated with
diverse diseases that can be divided into three categories: 1) neoplastic diseases (adult T-cell leukemia /lymphoma); 2) inflammatory
syndromes (HTLV-1 associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis); and 3) opportunistic infections secondary to an impaired immune
response, due to organisms such as Strongyloides stercoralis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Sarcoptes scabiei . Although it has been
estimated that the life-time risk of developing any of the HTLV-1 associated diseases could approximate 10%, the vast majority of people
remain asymptomatic . We report a case of GH associated with HTLV-1 infection. To the best of our knowledge, it is the fourth case of HTLV-1
and H. capsulatum coinfection reported in the literature and the first one with gastrointestinal involvement. A 72-year-old male patient
with no previous medical history was admitted at Arzobispo Loayza Hospital in November 2007, after moving to Lima from Tarapoto, a tropical
forest region of Peru. For approximately one year he had intermittent episodes of diarrhoea without blood or mucus, which progressively
worsened to persistent diarrhoea accompanied by hyporexia, nausea, and oral intolerance. During the two months prior to the onset of
gastrointestinal symptoms, he was febrile (38-39 °C) every other day and had marked weight loss. Physical exam on admission revealed a
cachectic man with normal vital signs with the exception of fever (39°C). He was found to be alert, anicteric, chronically ill and
emaciated. The liver was found to be two centimeters below the right ribe border, and no palpable masses were detected. Edema with fovea in
the lower limbs was noted. His laboratory tests revealed the following abnormal results: hemoglobin 8.38 gr/dL, albumin1.93 gr/dL, globulins
2.99 gr/dL, prothrombin time 60 seconds, and platelet count 75,000 µ/L. Giemsa-stained blood smears for Plasmodium sp. and Bartonella
bacilliformis, and Ziehl-Neelsen stains of sputum and feces for evidence of mycobacteria were negative. Serologic tests were negative for
Echinococcus granulosus, Leptospira, Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, Toxoplasma gondii, and, notably, H. capsulatum. The case patient tested
negative for HIV using the The ARCHITECT HIV Ag/Ab Combo assay (Abbott Diagnostics, IL, USA), which is a chemiluminescent microparticle
immunoassay for the simultaneous detection of HIV p24 antigen and antibodies. However, the patient’s result was positive for antibodies
against HTLV1/2, using the ARCHITECT rHTLV-I/II (Abbott Diagnostics) assay for detection of antibodies against recombinant antigens (gp21
from HTLV-2) and synthetic peptides (gp46 from HTLV-1/2). An abdominal ultrasound showed a 40 mm mass in his right flank. Contrast
radiographic intestinal assessment showed fragmented and disorganized progression of the barium suspension to the jejunum and partially to
the ileum. The upper endoscopy procedure showed superficial gastritis with deformation of the duodenum folds and the colonoscopy showed
multiple ulcerative lesions of the proximal colon with ileal involvement. Multiple biopsies were taken during both exams and results
revealed partial disruption of the third portion of the duodenum. Macrophages were found to contain intracytoplasmic round microorganisms
2-4 µm in diameter that had capsules and cell nuclei suggestive of H. capsulatum (Figure 1). A biopsy of the colon also revealed partially
disrupted and ulcerated mucosa with macrophages containing the same intracellular microorganisms found in the duodenum (Figure 2). The
specimens were not sent to either the Microbiology or Mycology Department for culture because H. capsulatum was not in the differential
diagnosis at that time. The biopsies were consistent with the diagnosis of GH and consequently the patient was treated with amphotericin B
at a dosage of 1 mg/kg/day. Unfortunately, after five days of treatment, the patient developed respiratory insufficiency and leukocytosis.
The presence of bilateral alveolar infiltrates that were not observed upon intial presentation were noted on chest X ray. The results of
blood cultures that were taken to rule out a bloodstream infection were negative. The patient died from irreversible shock nine days after
the diagnosis was made. His relatives refused to authorize an autopsy. H. capsulatum was first described as a cause of disease by Darling in
1906 . The natural habitat of this fungus is soil that has been contaminated with bird or bat droppings. Pulmonary infection usually
develops through inhalation [1, 3], followed by haematogenous spread to the reticuloendothelial system within a few weeks before the onset
of specific cellular immunity [1, 5]. The majority of individuals newly infected with H. capsulatum remain asymptomatic and fewer than 5%
complain of mild subacute pulmonary symptoms weeks to months following exposure [1, 5]. However, patients with underlying conditions that
impair the immune system develop progressive disseminated histoplasmosis (PDH), which is defined as a clinical illness associated with
extrapulmonary tissue involvement that does not improve after at least three weeks of observations . Reported risk factors for PDH include:
AIDS, primary immunodeficiency, immunosuppressive medications such as corticoids, methotrexate, TNF-alpha inhibitors, and advanced age [1,
4–6]. Approximately 70% of patients with PDH show gastrointestinal disease at autopsy; however, this is rarely recognized because only 3-12%
of patients are symptomatic [2, 4–6]. Among symptomatic individuals, 30-50% are febrile and complain of weight loss or diarrhoea [1, 4–6].
Upon physical examination, splenomegaly or hepatomegaly is found in 30 – 100% of cases and abdominal lymphadenopathy is described in 66% of
CT scans . Gastric involvement is found in only 4% of autopsies and intestinal complications may vary from gastrointestinal bleeding,
perforation, and peritonitis to malabsorption syndrome . Inflammatory masses mimicking a malignancy have been described in immunosuppressed
patients with colonic obstruction . Small bowel obstruction with segmental strictures and ulcerations has also been reported . GH in our
patient was characterized by chronic diarrhoea, weight loss, fever, and ulcerations involving the ileocecal segment. Although the entire
gastrointestinal tract may have been involved, the distal ileum segment was the region predominantly affected, as indicated by the abundance
of lymphoid tissue in this area . A variety of diagnostic exams for histoplasmosis have been described with diverse results. In general,
serology tests for the detection of antibodies are less sensitive in patients with disseminated disease or severe immunosuppression , which
may explain the sero-negativity of our case patient. Histoplasma antigens can be detected in the urine of 90% of patients with PDH, but
false-negative results are common when the disease is localized in areas such as gastrointestinal mucosa [1, 4–6]. Although cultures are
positive in about 85% of PDH, multiple tissue or blood culture specimens are required to achieve high sensitivity and 4-6 weeks are required
for definitive results . Histopathology provides a rapid diagnosis but is less sensitive than culture and requires the diagnostic skills of
an experienced pathologist [1, 4]. Pathologically four forms of intestinal histoplasmosis have been described as follows: 1) no gross
abnormalities at endoscopy, fungal forms observed within the lamina propia; 2) small pseudopolyps and plaques caused by conglomerates of
infected macrophages; 3) ulceration with tissue necrosis; and[4) localized inflammation . In tissue sections, H. capsulatum is often found
in clusters within the cytoplasm of macrophages and appears as uniform ovoid-to-spherical 2-4 µm uninucleate yeast with narrow base buds .
The HTLV-1 virus, first isolated in 1979 from a patient with a T-cell malignancy , is endemic in Peru with a reported prevalence of 2.3% in
pregnant women from Quillabamba and 18.6% in HIV-positive men from Lima . On the other hand, the rare reports of HTLV-2 infections in Peru
have included the following: 2 of 64 (3.1%) of indigenous Peruvians living in the Amazon Jungle ; 35 of 2,703 (1.3%) and men who have sex
with men. Of interest, no HTLV-2 infections were detected among 200 female sex workers in Iquitos . Confirmatory testing with line
immunoassays, Western Blot immunofluorescence assays or molecular methods are recommended; however, these tests are expensive and often not
accessible in developing countries. A recent study in Lima, Peru, was undertaken to determine the positive predictive value of three
different ELISA assays and their accuracy in differentiating between HTLV-1 and HTLV-2 infections . No false-positive results were found and
results showed that 98.93% of cases were HTLV-1 infected . These findings indicate that an accurate diagnosis of HTLV-1 can be made with an
ELISA test in a high-prevalence setting. The pathogenic effect of HTLV-1 on the immune system is associated with a predominant Th1 response
with a high amount of IFN-γ production, which predisposes infected individuals to helmintic infections such as S. stercoralis 15]. This
effect, however, does not explain the predisposition of patients to developing fungal infections. HTLV-1 can have a detrimental effect on
cellular immunity by affecting the interaction between T cells and macrophages, as suggested by the high prevalence of tuberculosis among
people infected with HTLV-1 and a reduced delayed-type hypersensitivity response to PPD . The mechanism of such immunosuppression remains
unknown, but may provide a plausible explanation for the association between HTLV-1 and H. capsulatum coinfection. There are only three
previous cases with HTLV-1 and H. capsulatum coinfection reported in the literature: the first was a lymphoma with multiple opportunistic
infections (H. capsulatum in addition to Pneumocystis jirovecii, S. stercoralis, Giardia lamblia, and Cytomegalovirus) ; the second was
pulmonary histoplasmosis with a right upper lobe cavitary lesion ; and the third was disseminated histoplasmosis with spinal chordoma, brain
granulomas, and submaxillary adenitis. In all cases there was no evidence of gastrointestinal dissemination . Our case and the previous
reports suggest a relationship between HTLV-1 infection and histoplasmosis. Interestingly, the severity and presentation of the
gastrointestinal complications in the patient described here has only been reported in patients with severe immunosuppression. This may
suggest that the effect of HTLV-1 on the immune system in this case report was more profound than usual. In severe untreated disseminated
histoplasmosis mortality is about 80%, but treatment with amphotericin B reduces mortality to 25% . Although the patient presented here died
from irreversible shock, the etiologic cause of death was not determined. Considering the negative results of the sputum and blood cultures,
and the temporal association with amphotericin exposure, an inflammatory response to therapy cannot be disregarded. In addition, the
possibility of pulmonary infection should also be considered. In summary, we conclude that the diagnosis of GH is probably underreported in
Peru, as exemplified by the high prevalence of H. capsulatum infection in certain areas in Peru and in other countries. The clinical
manifestations of HTLV-1 infection are frequently unrecognized by general practitioners and the pathogenic mechanisms remain poorly
understood due to the diverse effects of this virus on the immune system. From a public health perspective, there must be an increased
awareness in developing countries of the association of HTVL-1 carriers with increased susceptibility to contracting histoplasmosis and
other infectious diseases in both apparently healthy or immunosuppressed individuals. The authors wish to thank Carmen Asato MD for his
assistance in reading intestinal biopsies. We are indebted to Kelika A. Konda MHS for her help in preparation of the manuscript for
publication. Conflict of interests: No conflict of interests is declared. Disseminated histoplasmosis of the small bowel. The section
revealed macrophages in the lamina propia which contains small budding yeast 2-4 µm in diameter (PAS 40X magnification). Disseminated
histoplasmosis of the colon. The specimen revealed myriads of budding yeast 2-4 µm in diameter within the lamina propia, the basophilic
cytoplasm is retracted from the wall of the yeast, producing a “halo like” appearance (PAS 40X magnification).
