Sir, A 40-year-old male patient presented to emergency department with massive bleeding per rectum. He used to be chronically constipated
and many a time either self digitation or spoon was required to remove the stool. Per abdominal examination was normal. Per rectal
examination revealed clotted blood. He was hemodynamically unstable with pulse rate of 120/min, blood pressure of 80/60 mmhg, and
respiratory rate of 24/min. Ultrasonography and skigram of abdomen were normal. Blood chemistry revealed hemoglobin of 6 gm% with
leukocytosis and shift to left. Patient was resuscitated with Hartman's solution and 4 unit of packed cells .Colonoscopy was performed after
stabilizing the patient. Colonoscopic finding revealed single, large ulcer involving whole circumference at 8 cm from the anal verge [Figure
1]. Histopathological examination of biopsy specimen showed mucosal thickening, elongation and distortion of the gland, proliferation of
fibroblast, and obliteration of lamina propria by fibroblast. Circumferential solitary rectal ulcer Solitary rectal ulcer syndrome (SRUS) is
an uncommon colorectal condition. The reported incidence is 1 in 100,000/year in 10 year study. It is characterized by bleeding per rectum,
perianal pain, mucous discharge, and difficulty in passing stool. Diagnosis of SRUS depends on clinical manifestations, colonoscopic
finding, and typical histopathological features. The terminology SRUS is misnomer; SRUS patients can have a single ulcer, multiple ulcers,
or a non-ulcerated lesion. Non-ulcerated lesions may have polypoid and erythematous appearance. The ulcer is usually located on the anterior
rectal wall. Men and women are equally affected. The syndrome is common in young adults. It is frequently associated with rectal prolapse.
Occult and overt rectal prolapse along with paradoxical contraction of pelvic floor muscles is the principle mechanism involved in the
development of SRUS. The trauma to prolapsed mucosa may either be direct or due to shearing force. Self-rectal digitation has been suggested
as a cause of SRUS and incidence varies from report to report with 100% being in one report. Although colitis cystica profunda is a closely
related diagnosis, it is a pathological diagnosis. Biopsy helps in differentiating it from adenocarcinoma and prevents unnecessary
operation. Defecography is the radiologic procedure of choice and reveals intussusception in 45â€“80% of patients. Other common findings on
defecography are paradoxical puborectalis syndrome and thickened rectal mucosal fold. Rarely SRUS is associated with massive bleeding per
rectum. It may also be associated with rectal stricture. Treatment modalities include dietary management, biofeedback, salicylate enema,
steroid enema, and local injection of corticosteroid. Severe symptoms (e.g. massive bleeding, spasm, and severe pain) may require temporary
colostomy. Surgical therapy to correct rectal prolapse is indicated in highly symptomatic patients who do not respond to conservative
management.
