Primary tumours of the middle ear are much less commonly encountered in clinical practice than non neoplastic lesions. Middle ear
adenocarcinoma is a very rare, locally invasive neoplasm assumed to arise from the middle ear mucosa. Because the natural course and
clinical behavior of this neoplasm are far from established, the sporadic reports of such cases continue to provide basis for better
understanding. A case of low grade adenocarcinoma of the middle ear is described in details with regard to its clinical presentation,
radiological findings, histopathological, immunohistochemical and ultrastructural findings. The tumour recurred four times. As a consequence
of their rarity, middle ear neoplasms may be difficult to classify, for both clinicians and pathologists (Devaney etal.2003) . Middle ear
adenocarcinoma is a very rare, locally invasive neoplasm assumed to arise from the middle ear mucosa. Although endolymphatic sac tumor
(aggressive papillary middle ear tumor) and jugulotympanic paraganglioma may show brain invasion, intracranial extension of histologically
confirmed middle ear adenocarcinoma has not been previously reported (Paulus etal 199) . A male patient presented at age 24 with a mass in
the right middle ear extending to the external auditory meatus. He underwent surgery and the mass was diagnosed as a simple polyp. One year
later he presented with a recurrent bleeding mass. The mass was re-excised and the surgeon informed him that it was adherent to the facial
nerve and the patient ended up with a facial paralysis. The mass was diagnosed as a middle ear adenoma. The patient was free of symptoms for
5 years when he presented with a recurrent reddish mass in the previous mastoid cavity filling it completely and peeping through the
Eustachian tube. The mass was completely excised in September 2000 and the biopsy revealed a middle ear adenoma. The patient was followed up
and was free until 2003 when routine MRI showed a huge mass extending behind the mastoid cavity into the posterior cranial fossa. The
previous mastoid cavity was free of recurrence. A posterior fossa craniotomy was performed and the mass partially excised as it was
extremely bloody and adherent to the cerebellum and brainstem. The biopsy revealed it to be a middle ear adenocarcinoma. The patient
received post-operative radiotherapy on the remnant and repeat follow-up MRI revealed it to be stable. In 2005 a follow-up MRI was ordered
for recurrent headaches and revealed a large mass in the middle cranial fossa above the tegmen. The previous middle ear and mastoid cavities
were still free of recurrence. The mass was excised by a middle fossa craniotomy and the last biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma as well. The
patient has no family history of similar condition Histologically the tumour cells are arranged in islands, cords or form glandular spaces.
The latter contain brightly eosinophilic secretory material. Tumour cells are cuboidal or oval with finely granular eosinophilic cytoplasm
and centrally placed cytologically bland nuclei. (Figure 1) A photomicrograph of the tumor. It is made up of epithelial cells with
eosinophilic cytoplasm, arranged in trabeculae and glandular spaces containing eosinphilic material. (H& E stain) Immunohistochemistry
revealed that the tumour cells are positive for keratin (Figure 2), vimentin (Figure 3), and S100 protein but negative for chromogranin.
Electron microscopy revealed evidence of exocrine differentiation in the form of apical membrane bound vesicles and electron dense granules.
Surface microvilli have also been found (Figure 4). The proliferation index was assessed by Ki 67 immunostaining and it was about 1%.
(Figure 5). positive immunohistochemical staining of the tumor cells for cytokeratin. Positive immunohistochemical staining of the tumor for
vimentin. An electron micrograph of the tumor cells showing apical vesicles (thick blue arrows) and electron dense granules (thin arrows).
(original magnification 6000, urinyl acetate and lead citrate) Ki-67 immunostaining showing low proliferation index. As epithelial tumors as
a group are rarities in the middle ear, epithelial tumours of the middle ear of variable degrees of aggressiveness have been considered
together in several reports . Moreover an entity designated aggressive papillary middle ear tumour has been recognized; this term describes
a middle ear tumour which may, in contrast to middle ear adenoma, act in a particularly aggressive fashion with intracranial extension .
Clearly, for the term middle ear adenoma to have any meaning in isolation, it must refer to a tumor which does not exhibit either light
microscopic or clinical/radiologic evidence of aggressive or malignant behavior . In this case report the light microscopic,
immunohistochemical and electron microscopic findings were similar to those of middle ear adenoma. This tumor is considered to be low grade
based on histology and low proliferation index but malignant based on aggressively invasive behavior, as it recurred four times and it was
invasive to the petrous bone, posterior cranial fossa and middle cranial fossa. The differential diagnosis of this tumour include papillary
adenocarcinoma (aggressive papillary tumor) of the middle ear which has a papillary-to-glandular appearance and may produce a colloid-like
substance and resemble papillary carcinomas of the thyroid. It has been suggested that this may be the same tumor as low grade
adenocarcinoma of endolymphatic sac origin, which has locally extended into the middle ear. These tumors are immunohistochemically positive
for cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen, and S100 protein. In the present case the tumour showed no papillae, and it remains to be
verified whether similar tumours can originate from the middle ear. Paulus etal. 1999 described a 53-year-old man who suffered from otalgia
and tinnitus for more than 10 years and from neurological deficits for 1 year due to a large temporal bone tumor that invaded the temporal
lobe. A combined neurosurgical and otolaryngological resection was performed. Pathological analysis revealed a low-grade adenocarcinoma of a
mixed epithelial--neuroendocrine phenotype, which showed a close histological similarity to, and topographical relationship with, middle ear
epithelium. The authors conclude that middle ear adenocarcinoma belongs to the spectrum of extracranial tumors that have possible local
extension to the brain. Every individual case of middle ear adenomatous tumor requires a detailed clinical and radiological workup. All
cases should be managed aggressively with an attempt at tumor removal. Regular follow-up with sequential radiology is essential. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of written consent is
available for review by the Editor- in- Chief of this journal. The author declares that they have no competing interests. The author is
responsible for data collection, and interpretation, literature search and manuscript preparation. She read and approved the final
manuscript.
