A 31-yr-old man with abdominal pain was diagnosed with a pancreatic endocrine tumor and multiple hepatic metastases. Despite optimal
treatment with interferon alpha, a somatostatin analog, local therapy with high-intensity focused ultrasound ablation for multiple hepatic
metastases, and multiple lines of chemotherapy with etoposide/cisplatin combination chemotherapy and gemcitabine monotherapy, the tumor
progressed. As few chemotherapeutic options were available for him, sorafenib (800 mg/day, daily) was administered as a salvage regimen.
Sorafenib was continued despite two episodes of grade 3 skin toxicity; it delayed tumor progression compared to the previous immunotherapy
and chemotherapy. Serial computed tomography scans showed that the primary and metastatic tumors were stable. Thirteen months after
beginning targeted therapy, and up to the time of this report, the patient is well without disease progression. We suggest that sorafenib is
effective against pancreatic endocrine tumors. Pancreatic endocrine tumors are uncommon, with an annual incidence of 1-2 cases/100,000, but
their frequency is on the rise (1). In younger individuals, hereditary cancer syndromes such as multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN-1)
may contribute to these cases. Pancreatic endocrine tumors are classified as functioning or non-functioning based on the presence or absence
of a clinical symptom. Endocrine tumors of the pancreas are a heterogeneous group of neoplasms with natural histories varying from a
frequently indolent course for tumors that are well differentiated to a much more aggressive form for poorly differentiated tumors (2). Due
to their heterogeneity and rarity, improving the management of these tumors is particularly difficult. In general, surgical resection is the
procedure of choice for patients with localized disease or limited metastases (3). In patients with advanced disease, clinical trials of
immunotherapy and cytotoxic chemotherapy have demonstrated the efficacy of several drugs, including interferon alpha, somatostatin,
streptozocin, doxorubicin, fluorouracil, dacarbazine, and temozolomide (4). To date, however, systemic therapies for endocrine tumors have
been largely ineffective. Although treatment with somatostatin analogs can usually decrease hormonal symptoms, it rarely results in tumor
shrinkage. Therefore, although pancreatic endocrine tumors are indolent, the prognosis of patients with advanced tumors is poor,
particularly when the condition progresses to a stage at which cytotoxic agents are not effective. Presently, drugs targeted to particular
molecules involved in endocrine tumors are in clinical trials. Herein, we report on a patient with advanced pancreatic endocrine tumors and
liver metastasis who responded favorably to sorafenib after the failure of biotherapy and conventional chemotherapy. A 31-yr-old man visited
our hospital following 10 days of abdominal pain on February 14, 2006. His past history was unremarkable, as was his family history. His
initial computed tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography scans showed a 6.8 cm lobulated mass in the uncinate process of the
pancreas without invasion of the adjacent vessels and the common bile duct. The tumor showed focal cystic and necrotic areas, and
heterogeneous enhancement. Multiple hematogenous metastases were also noted in the liver (Fig. 1A). Percutaneous needle biopsy of a hepatic
nodule was performed to establish histological diagnosis. Atypical cells with an acinar formation were noted but their histological origin
was unknown. Multiple hepatic segmentectomy and pancreatic mass resection were performed to confirm the histological diagnosis. The tumor
cells were arranged in trabeculae and solid nests separated by a fibrous or loose fibrovascular stroma. All tumor cells were large and
polygonal in shape with abundant, eosinophilic, and finely granular cytoplasm. The final pathologic examination reported well-differentiated
(grade 2) pancreatic endocrine tumor and metastasis in the liver. This was supported by the immunohistochemical study that showed the tumor
cells were positive for neuron-specific enolase, chromogranin, and synaptophysin (Fig. 2). The tumor had 5% Ki-67-positive cells, and the
number of mitoses was 1/10 high-power fields. The 24-hr urine 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid levels were 10.4 mg/day (normal, < 10 mg/day). The
patient had normal levels of serum chromogranin A (37.6 ng/mL; normal, 27-94 ng/mL), parathyroid hormone (51.2 pg/mL; normal, 13-60 pg/mL),
and gastrin (74.5 pg/mL; normal, 0-100 pg/mL). Interferon alpha (6 million IU) was administered subcutaneously three times a week as first-
line therapy. Subsequently, a combination etoposide/cisplatin chemotherapy, a somatostatin analog (SandostatinÂ® LAR, 1 million IU), and
gemcitabine monotherapy were administered; these therapies, however, failed to demonstrate tumor shrinkage or stabilization. Therefore,
high-intensity focused ultrasound ablation (HIFU) with palliative intent was performed for nodules in segments 6 and 8. However, 2 months
after HIFU treatment, the size of the hepatic nodules increased. The disease status rapidly deteriorated, but the patient's general
performance was sufficient to allow considering further chemotherapy. We chose sorafenib (800 mg/day, daily) as the salvage treatment. DNA
from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded primary tumors was used for BRAF mutation analysis. The mutation in exon 15 of the BRAF gene was not
found. After 3 weeks of sorafenib treatment and two episodes of grade 3 skin toxicity, the dose was reduced to 600 mg/day. When the skin
toxicity resolved to less than grade 1, we increased the dose of sorafenib to 800 mg/day; the skin toxicity did not increase and did not
limit the dose. Our patient tolerated sorafenib well. A follow-up contrast-enhanced CT scan after 2 months of sorafenib therapy revealed
that the lobulated mass in the uncinate process had become smaller; the maximal diameter was now 5.4 cm (Fig. 1B). Post-chemotherapy, a
contrast-enhanced CT scan showed that the target liver lesions had a density of 16 Hounsfield units. Thirteen months after beginning
sorafenib, no disease progression was observed and the patient was well. Pancreatic endocrine tumors account for less than 5% of pancreatic
cancers (1). They are believed to be derived from amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation stem cells and arise from cells producing
insulin (B cells), glucagon, somatostatin (D cells), and pancreatic polypeptide (5). Pancreatic endocrine tumors are histologically
classified on the basis of tumor cell differentiation as well differentiated endocrine tumors (benign or low-grade malignancy), well
differentiated endocrine carcinomas, poorly differentiated endocrine carcinomas (small-cell carcinomas), mixed exocrine and endocrine
carcinomas (such as adenocarcinoids), and several extremely rare neuroendocrine-like lesions (5). Immunohistochemically, these tumors are
positive for markers of neuroendocrine tissue including neuron-specific enolase, chromogranin, and synaptophysin (6). Well differentiated
endocrine tumors/carcinomas of the pancreas, as in our patient, stain abundantly and diffusely for both chromogranin and synaptophysin,
whereas poorly differentiated endocrine carcinomas stain abundantly and diffusely only for synaptophysin. Pancreatic endocrine tumors are
clinically classified as being functioning or non-functioning. The incidence rate of non-functioning pancreatic endocrine tumors is between
15% and 82%; they are pancreatic tumors with endocrine differentiation that lack a clinical syndrome of hormone hypersecretion (7, 8).
Clinical presentation of non-functioning pancreatic endocrine tumors is related to the mass effect of the tumor, and symptoms resemble those
of pancreatic adenocarcinoma; these include jaundice, abdominal pain, weight loss, and the appearance of an abdominal mass. Radiologically,
non-functioning tumors are usually manifested as large well-defined masses with moderate to strong enhancement without invasion of adjacent
vessels (9). In our case, the lesion showed a large enhancing pancreatic mass with no invasion of adjacent vessels and the common bile duct;
cystic degeneration of multiple hypervascular metastases was observed. These findings were suggestive of non-functioning endocrine carcinoma
rather than pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The median survival time of patients with metastatic pancreatic endocrine tumors was only 23 months,
but the recent impact of multimodality treatments has prolonged the survival duration to a median of 70 months (8). Poor prognosis is
associated with a high-grade tumor, a high mitotic rate, the presence of necrosis, and lymph node and liver metastasis. No difference in
survival duration exists between patients with functioning and non-functioning forms of the tumors (2). Surgical resection is considered to
be the optimal treatment for localized disease. It remains the only curative treatment with a reported 5-yr survival rate for 75% of cases
of non-functioning tumors (10). In patients with locally advanced and surgically unresectable non-functioning tumors in the absence of
extrapancreatic metastatic disease, the appropriate management remains a difficult therapeutic dilemma due to the indolent natural history;
median survival is approximately 5 yr. However, more than 70% of patients with pancreatic endocrine tumors have metastatic disease at the
initial presentation (7). In these patients, trials of immunotherapy and cytotoxic chemotherapy have established the activity of several
drugs, including interferon alpha, a somatostatin analog, streptozocin, doxorubicin, fluorouracil, dacarbazine, temozolomide, and
combinations of these modalities. Streptozocin-doxorubicin combination chemotherapy has been considered the standard of care for patients
with metastatic, non-functioning tumors (4). However, relatively few patients with pancreatic endocrine tumors participated in the clinical
trials due to the low incidence of the disease, the performance status of the patients and their previous therapeutic management, and the
heterogeneity and stage of progression of their tumors. Moreover, retrospective studies have raised questions about the value of
streptozocin-based chemotherapy because of a low response rate (11). Hence, more effective and less toxic therapies are clearly needed for
metastatic pancreatic endocrine tumors. The molecular pathogenesis of endocrine tumors of the digestive tract is largely unknown and does
not involve mutations in classical oncogenes such as Ras, Myc, Fos, and Jun, or tumor suppressors like p53 and the retinoblastoma
susceptibility gene. Recent investigations of neuroendocrine tumors have indeed shown attractive potential molecular targets such as
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) (12), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and its receptor (VEGFR) (13), insulin-like growth
factor receptor (IGFR) (14), and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway kinases (15). These findings suggest a role for molecular
targeted agents in treatment of these tumors, and several targeted agents directed against neuroendocrine tumors are currently in clinical
trials. In a phase II trial of imatinib therapy for carcinoid tumors, Carr et al. (16) reported that only one of 27 patients achieved an
objective response, but a significant number of patients with progressive disease achieved stabilization and an encouraging median
progression-free survival duration of 24 weeks. In a phase II study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of sunitinib, the overall objective
response rate in patients with unresectable neuroendocrine tumors was 16.7% (11 of 66 patients), and 68% (45 of 66 patients) had stable
disease (17). Everolimus, an inhibitor of mTOR, showed an overall objective response rate of 9.6% in 115 patients with carcinoids or islet
cell tumors in a phase II trial (18). The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is pivotal for the regulation of proliferation and
protection from apoptosis in many cell types. In endocrine and melanoma cells, MAPK is activated by the Raf kinases B-Raf and Raf-1, which
are in turn stimulated by small G-protein Rap1. B-Raf is highly expressed and has been shown to be the main activator of MAPK signaling in
neuroendocrine cells (19). These findings imply a possible role for targeted agents against B-Raf for the treatment of pancreatic endocrine
tumors. However, no published clinical data exist on the use of a B-Raf inhibitor as therapy for patients with these tumors. The orally
administered targeted-agent sorafenib (NexavarÂ®, Bayer Pharmaceuticals Corporation, West Haven, CT, USA) was approved for patients with
advanced renal cell carcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma. It inhibits tumor-cell proliferation and tumor angiogenesis, and increases the
rate of apoptosis in a wide range of tumor models. It acts by inhibiting the RAF serine/threonine kinases (RAF-1, wild-type BRAF, V600E
BRAF), the receptor tyrosine kinase activity of VEGFRs 1, 2, and 3, and platelet-derived growth factor receptor Î² (PDGFR-Î²). A study by
Wilhelm et al. (20) demonstrated that sorafenib inhibited the MAPK pathway in neuroendocrine cell lines; MAPK activation and proliferation
were inhibited by high concentrations of sorafenib. Nonspecific effects of sorafenib such as the inhibition of the tyrosine kinase receptors
of VEGFR, PDGFR-Î², and c-KIT may have the potential to increase the effect of specific Raf kinase inhibition in a clinical setting. The
efficacy of sorafenib was also observed in wild-type and mutant BRAF. The present patient had an advanced pancreatic endocrine tumor and his
clinical features suggested a poor outcome. The tumor was progressing and showed no response to biotherapy and conventional cytotoxic
chemotherapy. We used sorafenib as a salvage alternative. The overall response to sorafenib was stable. Since beginning targeted therapy and
up to the time of this report, the patient has received sorafenib and remains well without progression of disease. Stabilization of disease
without tumor shrinkage may represent a meaningful benefit and has become an important issue since the introduction of molecular targeted
agents in clinical trials. In conclusion, this is the first case report indicating that sorafenib may be effective against pancreatic
endocrine tumors. Further clinical studies are needed to explore sorafenib efficacy in the treatment of these tumors. Radiologic images of
pancreatic, non-functioning, well-differentiated, endocrine carcinoma and multiple liver metastases. (A) Contrast enhanced CT scan
(02/19/2009) shows a 6.8 cm lobulated mass in the uncinated process of the pancreas (arrow). The tumor shows focal cystic and necrotic
areas, and heterogeneous enhancement. Multiple hematogenous metastases are also noted (arrowheads). (B) Follow-up contrast enhanced CT scan
(03/31/2009) shows the lobulated mass in the uncinated process measuring 5.4 cm in maximal diameter. A comparison with the previous CT scan
(A) reveals interval partial regression of the primary tumor mass in the uncinate process (arrow) and hematogenous hepatic metastases
(arrowheads). Pathologic findings of the pancreatic, non-functioning, well-differentiated, endocrine carcinoma. (A) Histologic examination
shows that the tumor cells were arranged in trabeculae and solid nests separated by a fibrous or loose fibrovascular stroma (H&E, Ã 100).
(B) All tumor cells were large and polygonal in shape and had abundant, eosinophilic, and finely granular cytoplasm containing round to oval
nuclei with finely stippled chromatin (H&E, Ã 400). (C) Tumor cells were strongly positive for chromogranin (IHC, Ã 400).
