Paradoxical embolism due to pulmonary arteriovenous malformations is the main mechanism of brain infarction in patients with hereditary
hemorrhagic telangiectasia. International Guidelines have recently been published to clarify the performance of screening tests and the
effectiveness of treatment for pulmonary arteriovenous malformations. We present two cases of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia patients
of our hospital who experienced an acute stroke secondary to paradoxical embolism. These two cases show that the guidelines must be followed
to prevent the occurrence of ischemic stroke in patients with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, and that although they may be adequate
in most cases, there are some patients who need a more personalized approach. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is an autosomal
dominant disease with variable penetrance and an estimated prevalence of 1/5000 . Strokes are a major complication, occurring in 10 to 19%
of HHT patients . Paradoxical embolism due to pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (PAVMs), which are present in approximately 15-50% of
patients with HHT, is the main mechanism of brain infarction . Embolization of PAVMs has proven to be a safe and effective treatment in this
situation . We present two cases of acute ischemic stroke secondary to paradoxical embolism in HHT patients in order to discuss the
performance of screening tests and the effectiveness of treatment for PAVMs published in the HHT International Guidelines in 2009 . In
February of 2003, an abnormality was detected on a chest x-ray by an occupational physician. A thoracic CT scan showed asymptomatic PAVMs
with a feeding artery diameter (FAD) of 2.4 mm (Figure 1A). One month later, the patient had sudden-onset weakness in the right hand and
Wernicke aphasia which spontaneously resolved in 1 hour. The diffusion-weighted MRI showed a left temporal infarct (Figure 1B), and right
apex lobe PAVMs were confirmed by pulmonary angiography. Thrombophilia work-up and venous ultrasonography were normal. Other etiologic
investigations were negative and the stroke was attributed to paradoxical embolisms. Embolization of the PAVMs was successfully performed
(Figure 1C) and antiplatelet therapy was started. No stroke recurrence or complications were observed during 7 years of follow-up.
Radiological features of patient 1. A: Contrast-enhanced thoracic CT scan shows PAVMs (arrow); B: Brain MRI diffusion hyperintensity in the
left temporal cortical region; C: Pulmonary angiography showing PAVMs after embolization (arrow). This patient was diagnosed with HHT in
1995 and was regularly followed-up in the Otorhinolaryngology and Pneumology departments. In 2005, she complained of dyspnea and repeated
hemoptysis that led to the discovery of a PAVM in the right pulmonary lobe, which was treated by coil embolization. In October 2009, the
patient experienced gait disturbance and weakness of the right arm which lasted for 60 minutes. The clinical examination revealed a skew
deviation of gaze that disappeared in 48 hours. The transthoracic contrast echocardiography showed an extracardiac shunt and the venous
ultrasonography revealed a bilateral deep venous thrombosis (DVT) in both legs. The diffusion-weighted MRI showed right midbrain and
anterior-medial thalamic infarctions (Figure 2A). New PAVMs were found in the right lower lobe using a thoracic CT scan (Figure 2B). Other
investigations were negative. A paradoxical embolism from the DVT was thought to be the cause of stroke. A coil embolization was
successfully performed (Figure 2C) and treatment with warfarin started. No recurrence or complication has been observed in the following 2
years. Radiological features of patient 2. A: Brain MRI diffusion hyperintensity in the right anterior-medial thalamus region; B: Contrast-
enhanced thoracic CT scan shows PAVMs (arrow); C: Pulmonary angiography shows second PAVMs embolized (arrow). International Guidelines were
published in 2009 to clarify the performance of screening tests and the effectiveness of treatment for PAVMs. The selection of PAVMs for
embolization is based on feeding artery diameter, generally 3 mm or greater, though targeting PAVMs with a feeding artery diameter as low as
2 mm may be appropriate . Asymptomatic PAVMs were discovered in the first patient with an FAD less than 3 mm. He was not treated in
agreement with the international recommendations. Unfortunately a stroke occurred one month later and embolization was finally performed.
This confirms that a paradoxical embolism may occur when the FAD is less than 3 mm and embolization of PAVMs should always be discussed. For
patients who have PAVMs, the expert panel recommends that clinicians provide long-term follow-up, consisting of a first screening 6 to 12
months after treatment, then screenings approximately every 3 years after embolization with a multidetector thoracic CT scan, in order to
detect growth of untreated PAVMs as well as reperfusion of treated PAVMs. A first screening 6 to 12 months after treatment then
approximately every 3 years after embolization with a multidetector thoracic CT scan . The second patient had a past medical history of
PAVMs embolized in May 2005. Regular follow-ups with respiratory functional explorations and pulmonary x-rays were performed, but they could
not prevent the occurrence of stroke. This case confirms the importance of monitoring patients using the multidetector thoracic CT with
thin-cut (eg.1-2 mm) reconstructions and not with other methods that appear less efficient. Therefore, this work show first, the necessity
of closely monitoring patients with HHT in accordance with the international guidelines, and second, that treatment of PAVMs with
transcatheter embolotherapy should be discussed on a case by case basis no matter the size of the FAD. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patients for publication of these cases reports and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review
by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. PAVMs: Pulmonary arteriovenous malformations; HHT: Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia; MRI:
Magnetic resonance imaging; DVT: Deep venous thrombosis; FAD: Feeding artery diameter; CT: Computed tomography. The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. ER was responsible for overall study design, management, analysis, and writing. JC was equally responsible
for the design, management, and analysis in the study. EB, FV, and GD provided technical oversight to the study, which included reviewing
writing parts of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript The pre-publication history for this paper can be
accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2377/11/84/prepub We thank Meggie Chochol for editing the manuscript.
