We report 9 ciprofloxacin-resistant Salmonella enterica serotype Typhi isolates submitted to the US National Antimicrobial Resistance
Monitoring System during 1999–2008. The first 2 had indistinguishable pulsed-field gel electrophoresis patterns and identical gyrA and parC
mutations. Eight of the 9 patients had traveled to India within 30 days before illness onset. Typhoid fever, caused by Salmonella enterica
serotype Typhi, is a systemic bacterial illness that has been rare in the United States in the era of modern sanitation (1,2). However,
typhoid fever remains common in many developing countries. In the United States, 72%–81% of patients with typhoid fever report international
travel in the month before illness onset (1,3–5). Highest risk has been associated with travel to southern Asia (1–5). Fluoroquinolones
(e.g., ciprofloxacin) are frequently used to treat typhoid fever in adults (4,6). Ciprofloxacin resistance is rare; however, resistance to
the quinolone nalidixic acid in the US National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System (NARMS) increased from 19% of isolates tested in
1999 to 59% in 2008 (7). Nalidixic acid resistance in S. enterica serotype Typhi, which has been associated with overseas travel,
particularly to southern Asia, correlates with decreased susceptibility to ciprofloxacin (MIC >0.12 µg/mL) (4–6,8). Increased risk for
fluoroquinolone treatment failure has been demonstrated in Salmonella infections from strains with decreased susceptibility to ciprofloxacin
(6,8,9). Chromosomal point mutations in the gyrA and parC topoisomerase genes are mechanisms of quinolone resistance in Salmonella spp.
Other resistance mechanisms include efflux pumps, reduced outer membrane permeability, and plasmid-borne genes (e.g., qnr, aac-6′-Ib-cr
genes) (6,8,10–12). We report 9 ciprofloxacin-resistant (MIC >4 µg/mL) S. enterica serotype Typhi isolates detected in the United States
during 1999–2008. State public health laboratories receive Salmonella isolates from clinical diagnostic laboratories as part of routine
surveillance. State and local health department officials report demographic, clinical, and travel information about laboratory-confirmed
typhoid fever on a standard form to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, Atlanta, GA, USA). Participating states began
submitting all S. enterica serotype Typhi isolates to NARMS in 1999; since 2003, all state public health laboratories have participated.
Isolates were tested for susceptibility by using broth microdilution (Sensititre; Trek Diagnostics, Westlake, OH, USA). MICs were determined
for 15 antimicrobial agents and interpreted by using Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) criteria when available (Table 1)
(7,13). For ciprofloxacin-resistant isolates, subtyping by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) was performed by using the protocol
established by the National Molecular Subtyping Network for Foodborne Disease Surveillance (PulseNet) (14). PFGE pattern similarity was
assessed by cluster analysis (Dice, UPGMA [unweighted pair group method using arithmetic averages]) and band-matching applications of
BioNumerics software (Applied Maths, Sint-Martens-Latem, Belgium) and confirmed by visual comparison (Figure). For ciprofloxacin-resistant
isolates detected for 1999–2005, sequencing of the quinolone resistance–determining region (QRDR; defined as amino acids 67–106 for gyrA)
was performed according to the methods described by Crump et al. (6), and additional patient information (e.g., antimicrobial drug
treatment) was requested by using a questionnaire with institutional review board approval. *Classes of antimicrobial agents defined by the
Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) were used to categorize agents (7,13). MICs were interpreted by using CLSI criteria when
available (7,13): ciprofloxacin (resistance breakpoint, >4 µg/mL); nalidixic acid (>32); amikacin (>64); gentamicin (>16); kanamycin (>64);
amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (>32/16); cefoxitin (>32); ceftiofur (>8); ceftriaxone (>4); sulfamethoxazole/sulfisoxazole (>512);
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (>4/76); ampicillin (>32); chloramphenicol (>32); and tetracycline (>16). For streptomycin, resistance was
defined as MIC >64 µg/mL (7). If growth was not inhibited by the highest concentration of the agent in the panel, the MIC was reported as
above the highest concentration. †Isolate was cultured from a blood specimen. Another isolate was cultured from fecal samples, which had MIC
<0.5 µg/mL for amikacin and same MICs for other agents tested. ‡Sulfamethoxazole was used during 1999–2003 and sulfisoxazole since 2004 to
represent sulfonamides. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) XbaI (A) and BlnI (B) patterns of 9 ciprofloxacin-resistant Salmonella
enterica serotype Typhi isolates detected in the National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System, 1999–2008. PFGE pattern similarity was
assessed by cluster analysis (Dice, UPGMA [unweighted pair group method using arithmetic average]) and band-matching applications of
BioNumerics software (Applied Maths, Sint-Martens-Latem, Belgium) and confirmed by visual comparison. PulseNet only considers band markings
found within the scale of the global standard, which are all bands between 20.5 kb and 1,135 kb. The cluster parameters are Dice coefficient
and UPGMA with the tolerance of band position of 1.5% and optimization of 1.5%. During 1999–2005, we detected 2 (0.1%) cases of
ciprofloxacin resistance among 1,690 S. enterica serotype Typhi isolates. Case reports follow. In 2003, a 1-year-old girl had onset of fever
1 day before arriving in the United States from India. A blood specimen collected 3 days after fever onset yielded S. enterica serotype
Typhi. Diarrhea or vomiting at time of specimen collection was not reported. Information about antimicrobial drug treatment was not
available. The child was hospitalized for 14 days. In 2005, a 2-year-old girl had onset of diarrhea, which was treated with ofloxacin, 2
days before she arrived in the United States from India. Seven days later, she continued to have diarrhea, and fever, vomiting, and
abdominal cramps developed. She was hospitalized and treated with antimicrobial agents, including ciprofloxacin. Blood and fecal specimens
collected 3 weeks after illness onset yielded S. enterica serotype Typhi. The patient was discharged after 14 days of hospitalization. She
had lived in India for 6 months before traveling to the United States. The S. enterica serotype Typhi isolates were resistant to
ciprofloxacin (Tables 1, 2) and had indistinguishable PFGE patterns when restriction enzymes XbaI and BlnI were used: PulseNet-designated
XbaI pattern JPPX01.0026 and BlnI pattern JPPA26.0110 (Table 2; Figure). QRDR sequencing showed gyrA mutations resulting in a serine to
tyrosine substitution at codon 83 and an aspartic acid to asparagine substitution at codon 87, and a parC mutation conferring a serine to
isoleucine substitution at codon 80. *PFGE, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. State/local public health laboratories that submitted
isolates: MA, Massachusetts; CA, California; TX, Texas; AZ, Arizona; NYC, New York City; NJ, New Jersey; LAC, Los Angeles County,
California. Resistance to antimicrobial agents other than ciprofloxacin: Cot, trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole; Fis, sulfamethoxazole or
sulfisoxazole; Nal, nalidixic acid; Tet, tetracycline; Amp, ampicillin; Chl, chloramphenicol; Str, streptomycin. †National Molecular
Subtyping Network for Foodborne Disease Surveillance (PulseNet)–designated PFGE patterns using restriction enzyme XbaI (data as of 2009 Oct
21): JPPX01.0026, the most common XbaI pattern among 3,233 isolates with reported XbaI pattern in PulseNet, was detected in 486 (15.0%);
JPPX01.0465 and JPPX01.0506 each were detected in 12 (0.4%) isolates. ‡PulseNet-designated PFGE patterns using restriction enzyme BlnI (data
as of 2009 Oct 21): JPPA26.0002, the most common BlnI pattern among 409 isolates with reported BlnI pattern in PulseNet, was detected in 61
(14.9%) isolates; JPPA26.0110 was detected in 5 (1.2%), JPPA26.0187 was detected in 3 (0.7%), and JPPA26.0170 was detected in 1
(0.2%). §Travel outside the United States reported in the 30 d before illness onset; patient 4 also traveled to Bangladesh and the United
Arab Emirates. Seven (0.6%) ciprofloxacin-resistant infections were detected among patients from whom 1,131 S. enterica serotype Typhi
isolates were submitted during 2006–2008 (Table 2). The 7 cases occurred in 2006 and 2007. Patients were a median of 22 years of age (range
5–48 years); 5 (71%) were male. All 6 patients with known travel histories reported travel to India in the 30 days before illness onset. In
addition to XbaI JPPX01.0026 and BlnI JPPA26.0110, 3 different XbaI and BlnI pattern combinations were detected in the 7 isolates (Table 2;
Figure). We describe ciprofloxacin-resistant S. enterica serotype Typhi isolates from 9 patients in the United States. The first 5 cases
were reported previously in aggregated form, without molecular characterization of the isolates (5). The first 2 patients were young
children apparently infected in India in 2003 and 2005. Six additional patients, who were detected in 2006 and 2007, also reported travel to
India. Travel to the Indian subcontinent has been associated with nalidixic acid–resistant S. enterica serotype Typhi infection; however,
ciprofloxacin-resistant infections are rarely reported by using current CLSI criteria (4,5,11). Other resistance patterns were first
described in southern Asia, where the incidence of typhoid fever is high and antimicrobial agents are widely available without prescription,
providing the opportunity for the development and selection of resistant strains (8). Other than reports by 8 patients of travel to India,
we have no information about possible shared exposures, such as specific locations visited, sources of food or water, or contact with
carriers of S. enterica serotype Typhi. However, the indistinguishable PFGE XbaI and BlnI patterns and identical gyrA and parC mutations of
isolates from the first 2 patients suggest that, although typhoid fever occurred nearly 2 years apart, the same ciprofloxacin-resistant
strain is likely to have been involved. After 2005, different XbaI and BlnI patterns have been identified in ciprofloxacin-resistant
isolates, indicating independent selection of ciprofloxacin resistance in different strains. The gyrA and parC mutations of isolates from
the first 2 patients were reported in ciprofloxacin-resistant S. enterica serotype Typhi in India (11). The 2 gyrA mutations are well
characterized and known to be associated with quinolone resistance; 2 point mutations in gyrA and 1 in parC confer fluoroquinolone
resistance (8,10–12). Further studies, including characterization of other resistance mechanisms, are needed to track the evolution of
fluoroquinolone-resistant S. enterica serotype Typhi. Although the ciprofloxacin resistance we detected using current CLSI criteria is rare
in S. enterica serotype Typhi, nalidixic acid resistance, which correlates with decreased susceptibility to ciprofloxacin, has increased
(7). Clinicians should be aware that infection with Salmonella spp. with decreased susceptibility to ciprofloxacin may not respond
satisfactorily to this agent (6,8,9,13,15). In addition, identification of ciprofloxacin-resistant cases has been increasing. In the
presence of quinolone resistance, third-generation cephalosporins, such as ceftriaxone, can be used (2,6,8,15). Recent clinical trials
suggest that azithromycin might be useful for treating uncomplicated typhoid fever (2,8,9,15). Recommendations for empiric treatment of
typhoid fever in the United States are best developed by using information about antimicrobial resistance trends in isolates from countries
where the infection was acquired. Suggested citation for this article: Medalla F, Sjölund-Karlsson M, Shin S, Harvey E, Joyce K, Theobald L,
et al. Ciprofloxacin-resistant Salmonella enterica serotype Typhi, United States, 1999–2008. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2011
Jun [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1706.100594 We thank the health departments and public health laboratories in the 50 states;
Los Angeles County, California; New York City, New York; and Houston, Texas, for their participation in NARMS, the National Typhoid Fever
Surveillance System, and PulseNet. We are grateful to Matthew Mikoleit, Susan Van Duyne, Nancy Garrett, and Efrain Ribot for their
assistance. The US Food and Drug Administration provides funding support for NARMS. Dr Medalla is an epidemiologist with the Division of
Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. Her main research interests include antimicrobial resistance in foodborne pathogens.
