Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common malignant tumor in the nasal and paranasal sinus area at childhood. Multimodal treatment for this
disorder has severe side effects due to normal tissue damage. As a result of this treatment, facial growth retardation and oral
abnormalities such as malformation of teeth and microstomia can cause esthetic and functional problems. Two cases are presented of patients
with severe midfacial hypoplasia and reduced oral function as a result of treatment of rhabdomyosarcoma of the nasopharyngeal and
nasal–tonsil region. With a combined surgical (osteotomy, distraction osteogenesis, implants) and prosthetic (implant-based overdenture)
treatment, esthetics and function were improved. Nasopharyngeal rhabdomyosarcoma is usually treated with a combination of chemotherapy,
radiotherapy, and surgery . Surgical resection of rhabdomyosarcoma is challenging and can result in large maxillofacial defects with loss of
function and esthetics of the surrounding tissues. Radiotherapy may result in facial growth retardation, neuroendocrine dysfunction due to
radiation injury of the pituitary gland, visual problems, and hearing loss [2, 3]. In addition, both chemotherapy and radiotherapy have
widespread effects on oral tissues. These effects include delayed eruption of the teeth, root stunting, microdontia, hypodontia,
discoloration, incomplete calcification of the teeth, microstomia, trismus, velopharyngeal insufficiency, and xerostomia . As a result of
the above-mentioned sequelae, it is not uncommon in childhood cancer survivors that teeth are lost at a later age . Furthermore, the risk of
developing dental caries among others can be increased due to reduced salivary flow, changes in the morphology of the enamel and dentine,
and restricted possibilities for oral hygiene (microstomia, trismus). Loss of teeth in these patients will aggravate the already existing
loss of oral function and poor esthetics. Moreover, with the loss of teeth, prosthetic treatment becomes even more challenging. Among
others, the retention and stability of prostheses are likely to be impaired because the bone volume for good support and the tolerance of
the denture-bearing mucosa to mechanical loading are reduced. Implant-based prosthodontics might resolve many of the limitations of
conventional prosthodontics in a compromised oral situation . In this paper, we present two cases of adult patients that were treated for
rhabdomyosarcoma during childhood. Both patients had compromised oral function and esthetics due to severe side effects of their therapy.
For both patients, a multidisciplinary treatment plan was made. A 24-year-old male was treated for a nasopharyngeal rhabdomyosarcoma at the
age of four. Treatment consisted of surgical debulking of the tumor, followed by chemotherapy and interstitial radiotherapy (cumulative dose
44 Gy). This therapy resulted in a complete remission of the tumor. No recurrences occurred and neither did the patient develop metastases
during a 20-year follow-up period. The late effects of the cancer treatment were delayed growth of the patient, hypoplasia of the midface
(Fig. 1a), microdontia with root malformation (Fig. 1c), velopharyngeal insufficiency, and frequent ear infections with impaired hearing.
Fig. 1a Patient at the age of 19 with hypoplasia of the midface due to delayed growth. A rigid external distraction frame (RED) was placed
to correct this hypoplasia. b Patient at the age of 23 after correction of the midfacial hypoplasia and completion of prosthetic treatment
showing a more ventral position of the midface and improved esthetics. c Rotational panoramic radiograph of the patient at the age of 13
showing hypodontia, conical shape of the crowns, and nearly complete absence of roots of the maxillary teeth. d Rotational panoramic
radiograph at the age of 23 after treatment showing four maxillary implants and a milled titanium superstructure a Patient at the age of 19
with hypoplasia of the midface due to delayed growth. A rigid external distraction frame (RED) was placed to correct this hypoplasia. b
Patient at the age of 23 after correction of the midfacial hypoplasia and completion of prosthetic treatment showing a more ventral position
of the midface and improved esthetics. c Rotational panoramic radiograph of the patient at the age of 13 showing hypodontia, conical shape
of the crowns, and nearly complete absence of roots of the maxillary teeth. d Rotational panoramic radiograph at the age of 23 after
treatment showing four maxillary implants and a milled titanium superstructure At the age of 12, a partial prosthesis (both dental and
mucosal supported) with a velopharyngeal obturator was made to improve speech. The retention of this prosthesis was impaired due to the
conical shape of the teeth and insufficient bone volume to support the prosthesis. The partial prosthesis had to be renewed after 4 years
because of the growth of the maxillary complex resulting in a reduced fit of the prosthesis. Orthodontic therapy to correct the midfacial
hypoplasia was contraindicated because of the already shortened roots of the teeth. At the age of 18, i.e., after completion of facial
growth, a combined surgical and prosthetic treatment plan was made to improve esthetics by correcting the midface hypoplasia and restoring
the oral function. The treatment plan consisted of: Hyperbaric oxygen (HBO; 20 dives before and 10 dives after orthognatic surgery)Le Fort
III osteotomy with placement of a rigid external distraction frame (RED) (KLS-Martin L.P., Jacksonville, FL, USA) with rigid plates secured
to the infraorbital rim with transcutaneous wires to gradually distract the bones of the midface ventrally (Fig. 1a)Reconstruction of the
hard and soft palate with a temporalis muscle flapRemoval of the remaining upper teeth because of dental caries and mobility of the teeth
due to the very short, underdeveloped rootsDental implant placementProsthetic rehabilitation Hyperbaric oxygen (HBO; 20 dives before and 10
dives after orthognatic surgery) Le Fort III osteotomy with placement of a rigid external distraction frame (RED) (KLS-Martin L.P.,
Jacksonville, FL, USA) with rigid plates secured to the infraorbital rim with transcutaneous wires to gradually distract the bones of the
midface ventrally (Fig. 1a) Reconstruction of the hard and soft palate with a temporalis muscle flap Removal of the remaining upper teeth
because of dental caries and mobility of the teeth due to the very short, underdeveloped roots Dental implant placement Prosthetic
rehabilitation The patient agreed with this treatment and the surgical procedure started at the age of 19. Ten days after placement of the
RED frame, the distraction started at a rate of 0.5 mm once daily (Fig. 1a). The vector of distraction osteogenesis (DO) was parallel to the
Frankfort horizontal plane. Because of little progression, the rate of DO was increased to 0.5 mm twice a day from day 11. After 25 days,
active DO was stopped because a satisfying esthetic result was achieved according to the patient and the surgeon (Fig. 1b). The total
advancement measured on lateral radiographs at the central incisors was 15 mm. After a 3-month consolidation period, the frame was removed.
As a result of the forward movement of the maxilla, speech had deteriorated due to worsening of the velopharyngeal insufficiency. Thereupon,
the hard and soft palate were reconstructed using a temporalis muscle flap. During that procedure, both coronoid processus were removed to
improve mouth opening, and the remaining upper teeth and the maxillary osteosynthesis plates were removed. Because of several nose bleedings
that occurred post surgery, a tracheotomy had to be placed for one and a half months. Fifteen months after the reconstruction of the palate,
four dental implants (Brånemark TiUnite regular platform, 13 mm) were placed in the maxilla. Six months later, a maxillary overdenture on a
milled titanium superstructure on four implants (Fig. 1d) was made. The patient was very satisfied with the final result and no problems
occurred during the 3-year follow-up. A 25-year-old female had been treated for a rhabdomyosarcoma in her nasal–tonsil region at the age of
three. She was first treated with chemotherapy and subsequently with external beam radiotherapy (cumulative dose 59.4 Gy). This treatment
resulted in a complete remission of the tumor. No recurrences or metastases were observed during a 22-year follow-up period. The late
effects of the oncologic treatment were thin hair, development of cataract, impaired hearing at both sides, trismus, maxillary hypoplasia
(Fig. 2a, b), hypodontia, microstomia, and malformation of teeth. Fig. 2a In profile image of the patient during treatment of the
rhabdomyosarcoma at the age of 36 months. b In profile image of the patient at the age of 21 after oral rehabilitation, still showing
midfacial hypoplasia. c The milled titanium superstructure on three implants. d The implant-based maxillary overdenture in situ a In profile
image of the patient during treatment of the rhabdomyosarcoma at the age of 36 months. b In profile image of the patient at the age of 21
after oral rehabilitation, still showing midfacial hypoplasia. c The milled titanium superstructure on three implants. d The implant-based
maxillary overdenture in situ At the age of 20 years, the same combined surgical and prosthetic treatment plan was proposed to this patient
as in patient 1 to correct the midface hypoplasia and to restore oral function. The patient, however, did not want to change her facial
appearance, needing an alternative surgical treatment plan. This alternative plan consisted of a Le Fort I osteotomy with ventralization and
down grafting of the maxilla to improve esthetics and jaw relationship for prosthetic rehabilitation instead of midface distraction with the
RED frame. The patient also refused this treatment and asked for dental rehabilitation only. Notwithstanding this suboptimal approach, it
was assumed that the patient would greatly benefit from an implant-based prosthetic rehabilitation. After 20 treatments with HBO, the
remaining maxillary teeth were removed. As the bone volume of the maxilla was insufficient for implant placement, 3 months after teeth
extraction, bone from the iliac crest was used to lift the nasal floor and to broaden the maxilla to create bone volume allowing for a
reliable placement of dental implants at the sites preferred by the prosthodontist. Three months later, four dental implants (Brånemark
TiUnite regular platform, 10 and 13 mm) were placed in the anterior maxilla with the help of a template, followed by ten treatments with
HBO. After 5 months of osseointegration time, abutment connection was done and an impression was made. During this procedure, one implant
appeared not to be osseointegrated and had to be removed. A milled titanium bar superstructure (Fig. 2c) and an overdenture (Fig. 2d) were
made on the remaining three implants. The patient was very satisfied with her prosthesis and experienced no problems with her prosthetic
rehabilitation during a two and a half-year follow-up. Radiotherapy in the head and neck region at a young age, either solely or combined
with chemotherapy, can have severe side effects due to normal tissue damage as is obvious from both cases. When radiotherapy is delivered to
the midface, facial growth retardation can cause esthetic and functional problems. Often, teeth are lost in spite of thorough oral hygiene
care. Our first case shows that DO to correct midfacial hypoplasia can result in improved esthetics and can be beneficial to oral
rehabilitation. Dental implant placement facilitates prosthetic treatment. The second case illustrates that if the patient refuses optimal
treatment, a satisfactory result can occasionally also be obtained by implant-based prosthodontics. The main advantage of applying DO is
simultaneous soft tissue histogenesis that accompanies distraction of the bone . DO in patients after tumor resection has been described for
the mandible with varying results . However, DO of the midface in irradiated patients is rarely reported . The parameters of DO are
empirically used in this case. Our patient showed satisfactory and stable bone formation and had improved facial esthetics. Prosthetic
rehabilitation of patients with a compromised oral situation can greatly benefit from placement of dental implants. In both patients
described in this paper, a planning of a prosthetic rehabilitation with four implants was made in a multidisciplinary setting in cooperation
with the surgeon and prosthodontist. When planning prosthetic rehabilitation, the most optimal position of the teeth should be the starting
position. As both patients were able to maintain the teeth in the lower jaw, the dental configuration of the lower jaw was leading for the
position of the teeth and the implants in the upper jaw. A removable implant-based prosthesis was chosen in both of our patients because of
more flexibility in positioning the teeth and fewer implants are needed compared to a fixed bridge. Also, in case of velopharyngeal
insufficiency, a removable prosthesis allows for closing the defect, e.g., by combining the implant-retained removable prosthesis with an
obturator. Good satisfaction levels can be achieved with removable implant-based prostheses as shown in our cases. Both patients were
treated with HBO before and after surgery. We used HBO treatment according to the Marx protocol, consisting of 20 dives before surgery and
10 dives after surgery . In the literature, there is no consensus on the use of HBO to prevent osteoradionecrosis and to improve the success
of implant treatment . Most studies on these topics suggest a beneficial role for HBO, but these results need to be interpreted with
caution. In the presented cases, we used HBO mainly to improve soft tissue healing after surgery . Midfacial hypoplasia and loss of oral
function resulting from the treatment of childhood maxillofacial rhabdomyosarcoma can be rehabilitated by a combination of orthognatic
surgery, distraction osteogenesis, and implant-based prosthetics. A satisfying esthetical and functional result can be achieved with this
treatment. Conflict of interest None. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and
source are credited.
