To the Editor: Catabacter hongkongensis is a newly described anaerobic agent that is likely an intrinsic component of normal gut flora; it
was first reported by Lau et al. in 2007 (1). We report a fatal case of infection caused by C. hongkongensis that was identified by 16S rRNA
sequence. A man 52 years of age was admitted to an intensive care unit in France for septic shock. He was a retired service member, smoker,
and alcohol drinker. He had a history of hypertension but no previously known gastrointestinal disease. He sought treatment for acute
abdominal pain and diarrhea of several hours’ duration. On admission, he had persistent abdominal pain with generalized abdominal
distension, arterial hypotension, and hypoxemia but was not febrile. Two sets of anaerobic and aerobic blood cultures were performed at a
1-hour interval, and empiric treatment with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and gentamicin was started. Biochemical screening showed severe
metabolic acidosis, acute renal insufficiency, and systemic inflammatory response syndrome. An abdominal radiograph revealed massive
pneumoperitonitis. Laparotomy showed multiple lesions and intestinal perforation at the ascending and first part of the transverse colon,
with a large amount of purulent fluid in the peritoneal cavity. A complete colectomy was performed, with rectum closure and end ileostomy.
Despite fluid resuscitation and catecholamine infusions, hemodynamic instability worsened rapidly and led to the patient’s death.
Microbiological analysis of abdominal fluid revealed the presence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, and Enterococcus spp., but no
anaerobic agent. On day 3 postincubation, 1 of the 2 anaerobic blood cultures grew a motile gram-positive bacillus, which grew only in
strictly anaerobic conditions. Phenotypic analysis showed catalase production but not indole positivity or nitrate reduction. Standard
phenotypic tests were performed with the rapid ID 32A and api20A strips (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France). The numeric profiles obtained
were 0002000010 and 4030121, respectively. The bacteria produced acid from arabinose, glucose, mannose, and xylose, was negative for
glycerol fermentation and leucine arylamidase and positive for rhamnose fermentation. Despite these results, phenotypic tests failed to
identify the isolate. Antimicrobial drug susceptibility was determined by disk diffusion method and Etest for MICs. The isolate showed
susceptibility to metronidazole (MIC <0.016 µg/mL), vancomycin, and colistin (MIC <0.016 µg/mL) and resistance to penicillin (MIC 2 µg/mL),
gentamicin, netilmycin, kanamycin, amikacin, and cefotaxime (MIC >32 µg/mL) according to Eucast clinical breakpoints (www.eucast.org). No
other bacteria were isolated in the blood cultures. Genetic analysis was performed by 16S rRNA gene sequencing of a 1,265-bp fragment by
using DG74 and RDRO80 primers (2). The nucleotide sequence obtained was compared with known sequences in GenBank by multiple sequence
alignment using the ClustalW program (3). It was 100% identical to C. hongkongensis (GenBank accession no. AY574991). The first 4 case-
patients with C. hongkongensis infection were described by Lau et al. in 2007 (1). Two of these patients lived in Hong Kong and the 2 others
in Canada. As in our case, only 1 patient died. Since there was a high degree of phenotypic and genetic difference with other anaerobic
agents, the authors proposed a new genus and species and affiliation with a new family, Catabacteriacae. The 2 isolates from Canada differed
from the 2 others by being negative for glycerol fermentation and positive for rhamnose fermentation and leucine arylamidase, similar to our
case, except for leucine arylamidase, which in our case was negative. In the previously reported cases, C. hongkongensis was susceptible to
metronidazole, vancomycin, and kanamycin; variably susceptible to penicillin (MICs 0.5–4.0 µg/mL); and resistant to colistin and cefotaxime
(1). Whether C. hongkongensis belongs to the intestinal flora, as do Bifidobacterium, Eggerthella, Eubacterium, and Lactobacillus spp.,
remains undetermined. Codony et al. recently investigated by real-time PCR the presence of Catabacteriaceae in 29 water samples in the
vicinity of Barcelona, Spain. Four samples were positive, demonstrating presence of this organism in the European environment and its
probable enteric origin (4). Because our patient sought treatment with severe infection associated with isolation of other pathogenic
bacteria, whether blood infection by C. hongkongensis may be responsible for such a fatal outcome is unknown. Nevertheless, we can exclude
sample contamination by this anaerobic bacteria for the 2 following reasons. First, anaerobic contaminants are rare in blood cultures and
generally involve Propionibacterium acnes. Furthermore, the rapid growth of the present isolate in blood cultures within 3 days suggested a
relatively high bacterial load in the blood sample. Our report confirms that C. hongkongensis can be found in blood culture associated with
gastrointestinal disease and may reflect intestinal perforation. Identification may be difficult. Isolation of motile gram-positive
anaerobic bacillus together with catalase positivity should lead to suspicion of C. hongkongensis in clinical laboratories. Full
identification of this pathogen requires 16S sequencing. Environmental reports have demonstrated the presence of this organism in human
wastewater in Europe, which suggests that it may be universally present as part of the normal human gastrointestinal flora. Suggested
citation for this article: Elsendoorn A, Robert R, Culos A, Roblot F, Burucoa C. Catabacter hongkongensis bacteremia with fatal septic shock
. Emerg Infec Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2011 Jul [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1707.101773
