We describe melioidosis associated with travel to Nigeria in a woman with diabetes, a major predisposing factor for this infection. With the
prevalence of diabetes projected to increase dramatically in many developing countries, the global reach of melioidosis may expand. A
46-year-old woman sought treatment in the emergency department of St Thomas’ Hospital, London, UK. She described a 2-day history of frontal
headache, fever, and painful swelling in the right postauricular region. She had received a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes mellitus 5 months
before admission, for which she took metformin (500 mg 2×/d). She did not smoke or drink alcohol. She was born in Ogun State, Nigeria, and
had moved to the United Kingdom at the age of 31 years. She recently had visited relatives in Sagamu City, Ogun State, and returned to the
United Kingdom 6 weeks before onset of her illness. She had no history of travel outside the United Kingdom or Nigeria. Examination at
admission indicated a temperature of 39.5°C, a heart rate of 108 beats per minute, and a blood pressure level of 132/84 mm Hg. Other
examination findings were unremarkable, apart from a tender, firm, erythematous, and hot swollen area (4 cm × 3 cm) in the right
postauricular region. Initial investigations found a leukocyte count of 6.1 × 109 cells/L (neutrophils 4.4 × 109 cells/L) and a C-reactive
protein level of 406 mg/L; renal and liver profiles were normal. Results of a hemoglobin A1c blood test for diabetes were 13%, which is
consistent with poorly controlled diabetes, and results of an HIV test and malaria screen were both negative. Ultrasonography of the swollen
area showed localized, superficial, enlarged lymph nodes, posterior and inferior to the right pinna. Blood was drawn for culturing, and a
course of intravenous flucloxacillin treatment was begun. Subsequently, the aerobic bottles of 2 sets of blood cultures were positive for
gram-negative bacilli, and subculturing yielded an oxidase-positive, gram-negative bacillus that grew rapidly on blood agar as a gray colony
with a metallic sheen. The organism was subsequently identified as Burkholderia pseudomallei (see characterization of blood culture
isolate). The antimicrobial drug therapy was changed to intravenous co-amoxiclav (1.2 g 3×/d), and 3 days later, when the identification of
the organism was confirmed, the patient’s treatment was switched to intravenous meropenem (2 g 3×/d). Results of a computed tomography scan
of the chest and abdomen were normal. The patient’s fever and lymphadenopathy subsequently resolved, and after 9 days of receiving
meropenem, she was discharged with a 12-week course of oral co-trimoxazole (1,920 mg daily). The patient did not attend her scheduled
outpatient appointment. Two microbiology laboratory workers were judged to have had low-risk exposure to the organism before its
identification (1). They were counseled, and both chose not to receive antimicrobial drug prophylaxis. Serologic follow up at 2 and 6 weeks’
postexposure for 1 worker showed no evidence of seroconversion to B. pseudomallei. The other did not attend her scheduled occupational
health outpatient appointment. Because the isolate could not be definitively identified by using API20NE (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile,
France), it was sent to the UK Health Protection Agency reference laboratory for further analysis. The appearance of the organism in
colonies on Ashdown agar was typical of B. pseudomallei. Moreover, the same identification was reached through fatty acid methyl ester
analysis by gas chromatography with the rapid bioterrorism database (MIDI Sherlock, Newark, NJ, USA). PCR amplification, using primers that
specifically detect the type III secretion system gene cluster of B. pseudomallei (2), produced the predicted 115-bp band for our isolate
and the positive control, B. pseudomallei strain 204 (3). Multilocus sequence typing, performed by using PCR amplification conditions and
primers as previously described (3), generated an allelic profile (1, 1, 10, 2, 5, 2, 1) that was compared with those of strains of B.
pseudomallei, B. mallei, and B. thailandensis stored in the database (http://bpseudomallei.mlst.net). This profile was unique among strains
in the multilocus sequence typing database and therefore represents a novel sequence type (ST), ST707. An evolutionary analysis of ST707
with eBURST version 3 (http://eburst.mlst.net) suggested that it was most closely related to other strains of B. pseudomallei, including
ST26 from Niger, ST82 from France, and ST7 from Vietnam (Figure). eBURST analysis showing the evolutionary relationship of sequence type
(ST) 707 to Burkholderia pseudomallei, B. mallei, and B. thailandensis strains on the multilocus sequence typing database. Each circle and
square (the latter indicate subfounders) represents an ST, with size being proportional to the number of isolations of that particular ST.
The primary founder is ST48 (triangle). The lines directly linking STs represent strains that differ at a single locus in their allelic
profile. B. pseudomallei is the causative agent of melioidosis, a severe illness usually characterized by fever, lymphadenopathy, and
suppurative lesions in skin, liver, spleen or the lung. The organism is present in the soil in disease-endemic areas, and infection is
thought to be acquired through breaks in the skin. The disease is endemic to many parts of Southeast Asia, with most cases being reported
from Thailand (4). The infection is also a well-recognized pathogen in the Northern Territory of Australia (5). In addition, sporadic cases
have been described in Central and South America and the Pacific islands. By contrast, strikingly few human cases of melioidosis have
previously been reported in Africa. Wall et al. reported a case in The Gambia in a patient originally from Sierra Leone (6), and
Bremmelgaard et al. noted a case in a Danish patient who had probably acquired the infection in Kenya (7). Despite the paucity of clinical
cases reported from Africa, serologic surveys suggest that the organism is present in several countries, including Burkina Faso (8) and
Uganda (9). Moreover, B. pseudomallei has been isolated from the soil and from animals in several African countries (10,11). Although we
cannot be certain, the patient reported here likely acquired her infection in Nigeria, the most populous country on the African continent.
To our knowledge, no documented cases of melioidosis acquired in Nigeria have been reported. Most cases imported into the United Kingdom
originate in Southeast Asia and the Indian subcontinent (12). Given the frequency of travel between the United Kingdom and Nigeria, the
absence of imported cases from that country until now is striking. However, the patient’s strain appears to be related to a strain that was
isolated from neighboring Niger ≈40 years earlier. Although the case we report here may represent a recent introduction of the organism into
Nigeria, the disease may also be underdiagnosed because of the difficulty of identifying the organism in a resource-limited setting.
Although melioidosis may affect healthy persons, infection is strongly associated with underlying diseases and with diabetes in particular.
In a case–control study in Thailand, diabetes was associated with an adjusted odds ratio of 12.9 (13). With the prevalence of diabetes
projected to increase dramatically over the next few decades in the developing world (14), melioidosis may become more common in countries
such as Nigeria. Finally, from a clinical standpoint, the patient reported here highlights the need to consider the diagnosis of
melioidosis, even in the absence of travel to traditional disease-endemic countries. Suggested citation for this article: Salam AP, Khan N,
Malnick H, Kenna DTD, Dance DAB, Klein JL. Melioidosis acquired by traveler to Nigeria. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2011 Jul
[date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1707.110502 We thank Peter Staves for his help with the eBURST analysis. Dr Salam is a specialist
registrar in infectious diseases and general internal medicine at Guy’s and St. Thomas’ National Health Service Trust, London.
