To describe the management of bilateral oral ranulas with the use of the da Vinci Si Surgical System and discuss advantages and
disadvantages over traditional transoral resection. Case Report and Review of Literature. A 47 year old woman presented to our service with
an obvious right floor of mouth swelling. Clinical evaluation and computerized tomography scan confirmed a large floor of mouth ranula on
the right and an incidental asymptomatic early ranula of the left sublingual gland. After obtaining an informed consent, the patient
underwent a right transoral robotic-assisted transoral excision of the ranula and sublingual gland with identification and dissection of the
submandibular duct and lingual nerve. The patient had an excellent outcome with no evidence of lingual nerve paresis and a return to oral
intake on the first postoperative day. Subsequently, the patient underwent an elective transoral robotic-assisted excision of the incidental
ranula on the left sublingual gland. We describe the first robotic-assisted excision of bilateral oral ranulas in current literature. The
use of the da Vinci system provides excellent visualization, magnification, and dexterity for transoral surgical management of ranulas with
preservation of the lingual nerve and Wharton's duct with good functional outcomes. However, the use of the robotic system for anterior
floor of mouth surgery in terms of improved surgical outcomes as compared to traditional transoral surgery, long-term recurrence rates, and
cost effectiveness needs further validation. The ranula is an extravasation mucocele that arises from the sublingual gland, either from a
ruptured main salivary duct or from ruptured acini following obstruction. In a study of 580 ranulas, most patients with oral ranula
presented with a gradually increasing round or oval, fluctuant swelling of the floor of the mouth. Majority of ranula ranged between 2 to 3
cm in size. Ranulas most commonly occurred as a unilateral swelling but were found to be bilateral in 1.5% cases (9/580). The occurrence as
bilateral and simultaneous ranulas was even more uncommon (0.5%; 3/580), as seen in our case . A more advanced presentation of ranula is the
plunging ranula that is an extension of the oral ranula into the neck along the deep lobe of the submandibular gland between the mylohyoid
and hyoglossus muscles or through congenital dehiscence in the mylohyoid muscle . The therapeutic options for oral and plunging ranulas are
aimed at either surgical excision of the lesion or attempts at inducing fibrosis and scarring that would eliminate the formation of the
ranula . These interventions can range from simple incision, marsupialization with or without packing, excision of the ranula with or
without the sublingual gland, laser vaporization and the use of sclerosing agent OK-432. Excision of the ranula with the associated
sublingual gland is associated with the best outcomes with lowest recurrence rates . Usually, this can be accomplished via a transoral
route. The challenges of ranula excision and of floor mouth surgery involve the identification and preservation of the submandibular duct
(Wharton's duct), lingual nerve and its terminal branches, and excision of the entire sublingual gland transorally. Transoral excision can
be challenging especially when faced with difficult anatomy. It also requires an experienced assistant. We present a novel modification to
the traditional transoral resection using the da Vinci Si Robotic Surgical System. The use of the da Vinci robotic system for tumors of the
head and neck is a new technological advance. Current validated indications for the use of the robot in head and neck surgery include the
management of benign and malignant tumors of the tonsil and base of the tongue and for distant access trans-axillary surgery for removal of
the lesions within the thyroid gland. The da Vinci robotic system has also been reported to be useful for the surgical management of
hypopharyneal, laryngeal and parapharyngeal space tumors . This is the first description of the use of surgical robot for management of oral
floor of mouth ranulas. We present our experience and discuss advantages and disadvantages of the da Vinci robotic system in managing
anterior floor of mouth lesions. A 47-year old woman was referred to the Head and Neck Center at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical
Center in Baton Rouge, LA and to the Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center,
New Orleans, LA to be evaluated for a right floor of mouth swelling (Figure 1). The swelling was associated with progressive discomfort in
speech. There were no symptoms suggestive of an infective or obstructive process within the submandibular system such as pain, fever, or an
association of the swelling with meals. At this time, a computerized tomography (CT) scan confirmed a right oral ranula that measured 2.4 ×
1.6 × 1.0 cm in size (Figure 2). In addition, an incidental ranula of the left floor or mouth was identified. After discussing the surgical
options with the patient that included marsupialization, resection of the ranula, and resection of the ranula and sublingual gland, the
patient decided to opt for the surgical removal of the right-sided ranula that was symptomatic with the ipsilateral sublingual gland. The
informed consent also included the use da Vinci Si Surgical System to optimize surgical exposure and access. The patient underwent an
uneventful procedure with identification of the lingual nerve and submandibular duct using the robotic unit. The patient had an uneventful
post-operative course without any evidence of lingual nerve paresis and a return to oral intake on the first postoperative day.
Consequently, the patient underwent an elective resection of the left-sided early ranula and excision of the sublingual gland. This was
accomplished with the da Vinci Si surgical robot as well without complications. The patient did not have any evidence of submandibular duct
or lingual nerve injury as evidenced by the patient's symptoms and post-operative evaluations. Final histopathology was benign sublingual
gland ranula on both sides. Clinical picture showing a right floor of mouth ranula (* indicates the lesion). An axial contrast enhanced CT
image depicting bilateral floor of mouth ranula. The transoral resection of the ranula was performed using the da Vinci Si Surgical System.
The oral cavity and surgical site were exposed using a self-retaining retractor (Jennings's mouth gag) and a Sweetheart tongue retractor.
The robotic arms of the da Vinci Si-System were placed into position in the patient's mouth, while the surgeon controlled the instruments
from the control console within the room. The robotic arm controlled by the surgeon's left hand contained a 5 mm Maryland dissecting
forceps, while the arm controlled by his right hand contained a 5 mm monopolar cautery spatula. These instruments were interchanged as
dictated by the need for surgical dissection. Retraction of the tongue and suction were provided by the first assistant at the head end of
the patient as described for transoral robotic surgery. The initial incision was made using cautery in the floor of the mouth. The
sublingual gland was meticulously dissected and separated from the lingual nerve and the Wharton duct (Figure 3). The lingual nerve was
dissected along its length to confirm identification of terminal branches and to separate it from the salivary duct. The sublingual gland
and ranula were excised. The mucosa of the floor mouth was also approximated with four interrupted 3-0 absorbable stitches. The total
procedure times were 44 and 59 minutes for the right and left side, respectively. The time required for exposure including robot "docking
time" was 6 and 8 minutes, respectively. The procedure times for the right and left side were 38 minutes and 51 minutes, respectively. There
were no major intraoperative complications. The patient tolerated the procedure well and was discharged home the same day in both instances.
Dissection of the left sublingual gland (SLG) with identification of the terminal branches of the lingual nerve and delineation of the
Wharton's duct. Transoral resection of the ranula with the involved sublingual gland provides the best outcomes for ranula surgery with the
least recurrence rates . In a study of 606 procedures in 571 patients, Zhao et al reported the most common complications associated with
transoral ranula surgery included recurrence of the lesion (34.6%), sensory deficits of the tongue associated with lingual nerve injury
(29.3%), and damage to the Wharton's duct (14.6%) . These complication rates can be reduced or minimized by improving visualization,
magnification, illumination, and reducing intraoperative hemorrhage. Guerrissi and Taborda reported their experience with endoscopy assisted
transoral submandibular gland excision. In this article, the authors found that the use of the endoscope allowed improved illumination,
visualization, and magnification of the operative field and also provided better visual access to the vascular pole of the submandibular
gland . Lai et al (2009) in their study describing the use of carbon dioxide laser for the management of oral ranulas, suggested that their
improved outcomes and early recovery rates were influenced by the use of the laser which allowed precise cutting, minimal thermal damage,
better visualization of the operative site due to reduced intraoperative hemorrhage . In a similar fashion, we found that the use of the
robotic unit provides certain advantages while performing transoral floor of mouth surgery. First, the da Vinci Si Surgical System
incorporates two separate high definition optical channels that merge to produce a high-definition, three-dimensional image at the surgeon's
console . Second, the magnification and dexterity provided by the robot in the confined space of the oral cavity allow precise dissection
and preservation of delicate floor of mouth structures namely, the lingual nerve and Wharton's duct. Third, the 5 mm wristed instruments
that have 6 degrees of articulation that facilitate surgical dissection and delicate handling of floor of mouth structures. Fourth, the
surgeon and assistants can work in tandem as all surgical steps are visualized by the surgical team and the operating room staff. This not
only improves surgical efficiency but also serves as an excellent teaching tool for residents, medical students, and operating room staff.
The camera in the docked position provides a direct view of the floor of the mouth, medial aspect of the floor of the mouth, and the lingual
surface of the mandible. This view can be difficult to obtain in routine transoral surgery based on the shape of the mandible, size of the
teeth, extent of pathology, tongue size, and availability of adequate surgical assistance. Due to the above mentioned factors, the authors
experience suggests that the use of the robotic system also makes transoral floor of mouth dissection more predictable due to a stable
operating view with reduced effort due to improved exposure, dexterity, and comfortable surgeon position at the surgeon console. The da
Vinci robotic system is currently used in the head and neck for the management of tumors of the tonsil and tongue base and the thyroid gland
. We recently reported the first description of the use of the da Vinci Si Surgical system to facilitate a transoral removal of a
submandibular gland megalith. We have found the robotic system to similarly provide significant advantages in surgery of the anterior floor
mouth. The use of the da Vinci system provides excellent visualization, magnification, and dexterity for transoral surgical management of
ranulas with preservation of the lingual nerve and Wharton's duct with good functional outcomes. However, the use of the robotic system for
anterior floor of mouth surgery in terms of improved surgical outcomes as compared to traditional transoral surgery, long-term recurrence
rates, and cost effectiveness needs further validation. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. RW: Performed the
procedure, wrote the manuscript the First Author and is the Corresponding author for the manuscript. GP: Assisted in the procedure,
manuscript preparation and editorial review. EH: Helped in literature review, formatting images, and data collection. LA: Editorial review
and helped in literature search. FS: Pathologist, provided pathology inputs and diagnosis, editorial review of manuscript. DA: Radiologist,
reviewed images and provided images, editorial review. MD: editorial review, manuscript critical review. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. The authors would like to thank Dr. Daniel W Nuss, Professor and Chairman, Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck
Surgery, LSU Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA for his support. The authors also thank Rich Myer, Intuitive Surgical and the Surgical
Robotics Team at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center, Baton Rouge, LA (Lindsey Booty, RN BS; Monica Moody, RN BS; Elinor Rappold,
RN BS; Brock Holtzclaw, CST; April Arnone, CST; Rose Savant, CST). Grant Support: None
