In light of research carried out in recent years, it seems that aldosterone may produce a complex proinflammatory effect. Theoretically,
excessive aldosterone release may stimulate the development and/or progression of autoimmune disorders. In this article, we report a case of
a female in whom primary aldosteronism coexisted with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. Surgical removal of an aldosterone-producing tumor improved
thyroid function and decreased thyroid autoimmunity. We describe in details diagnostic and treatment strategies applied in our patient and
their impact on the course and outcome of thyroiditis. We also present monocyte and lymphocyte cytokine release in the index subjects before
and after surgical treatment. We conclude that primary aldosteronism may exacerbate the clinical course of autoimmune thyroiditis and
probably also of other autoimmune disorders. Primary aldosteronism is one of the leading causes of secondary hypertension, particularly in
women. It may be responsible for as much as 5–13% of all cases of arterial hypertension and about 20% cases of treatment-resistant
hypertension [1, 2]. The pathophysiological role of aldosterone in cardiovascular disorders is mediated not only by its hypertensive effect
but also by its proinflammatory action through the mineralocorticoid receptor in non-epithelial cells . Chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis,
often referred to as Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, belongs to the most common human disorders, particularly in women, with the incidence
estimated at 3.5 cases per 1,000 women per year [4, 5]. As in other autoimmune disorders, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is characterized by a
lymphocytic infiltration of the thyroid and the presence of specific antibodies [4, 5]. Interestingly, only one previous study assessed the
coincidence of the two disorders in the same patient . In our article, we report that primary aldosteronism may affect the course of chronic
thyroiditis. A 36-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital to determine the reasons for arterial hypertension she had suffered for
6 years and which was resistant to standard antihypertensive therapy. Hypertension was accompanied by muscle weakness, acral paresthesias,
polyuria and polydipsia, observed irrespective of the time of the day. In view of significant hypokalemia (2.8 mmol/l) with kaliuresis
112 mEq/l (reference range: 25–100 mmol/l) and hyperglycemia (6.8 mmol/l), primary aldosteronism was suspected and investigated. Supine
plasma renin activity was 0.02 ng/ml/h, (reference range: 0.3–2.8 ng/ml/h), while supine plasma aldosterone was 648 pg/ml (normal values:
30–150 pg/ml). After standing for 4 h, plasma renin activity and plasma aldosterone levels increased only slightly to 0.03 ng/ml/h and
687 ng/dl, respectively. Provocative tests, the saline infusion test (2 l during 4 h) and the fludrocortisone with salt loading test
revealed unsuppressed plasma aldosterone levels (389 and 426 ng/dl, respectively; normal values in both these tests <5.0 ng/dl). Computed
tomography examination demonstrated a minimally enhancing hypodense mass (16 mm in diameter) in the left adrenal gland. A 1 mg dexamethasone
suppression test significantly decreased plasma cortisol levels (to 0.6 μg/dl). Urinary-free cortisol, plasma dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate
as well as diurnal urinary excretion of metanephrines were also normal. Because of contraindications (allergy to contrast dye), bilateral
adrenal vein sampling was not performed. Owing to the presence of concomitant weight gain, depressive symptoms and cold intolerance, we also
investigated thyroid function and autoimmunity. Increased plasma TSH levels (23.2 mIU/l, reference range: 0.4–4.5) and reduced plasma levels
of free thyroxine (8.8 pmol/l, reference range: 12.0–22.0) and free triiodothyronine (2.6 pmol/l, reference range: 2.8–6.0) supported the
presence of hypothyroidism. In turn, very high titers of both thyroid peroxidase antibodies (3,200 U/ml, normal values <32) and
thyroglobulin antibodies (3,400 U/ml, normal values <100), diffused thyroid hypoechogenecity on sonography as well as extensive lymphocytic
infiltration and numerous Askanazy cells on fine needle aspiration biopsy all were compatible with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. Cultures of
human peripheral blood monocytes and lymphocytes,1 performed as described previously [7, 8], showed increased monocyte release of TNF-α
(3,870 pg/ml, reference range: 580–860), interleukin-1β (440 pg/ml, reference range: 51–79), interleukin-6 (30.2 ng/ml, reference range:
4.3–8.7) and monocyte chemoattractant protein (36.4 ng/ml, reference range: 10.1–14.5), as well as increased lymphocyte release of TNF-α
(810 pg/ml reference range: 145–225), interferon-γ (180 ng/ml reference range: 21–45) and interleukin-2 (10.1 ng/ml reference range:
1,4–4.4). To normalize thyroid function, the patient required levothyroxine supplementation at the daily dose of 125 μg. Three months later
after pretreatment with spironolactone, the patient underwent laparoscopic left adrenalectomy. Interestingly, after the following 4 months,
the patient noticed weight loss despite increased appetite, hyperactivity, heat intolerance, irritability and tachycardia. TSH levels were
found suppressed (0.002 mU/l), while free thyroxine and free triiodothyronine were found increased (24.2 and 7.4 pmol/l, respectively).
Thyroid peroxidase antibodies and thyroglobulin antibodies (345 and 420 U/ml) were only moderately elevated, and thyroid hypoechogenecity
was much less expressed than seven months earlier. Only after reducing the daily dose of levothyroxine to 50 μg, all his clinical symptoms
resolved and thyroid function returned to normal. Post-surgery monocyte release of TNF-α (1,020 pg/ml), interleukin-1β (89 pg/ml),
interleukin-6 (9.8 ng/ml) and monocyte chemoattractant protein (16.1 ng/ml) as well as lymphocyte release of TNF-α (285 pg/ml), interferon-γ
(59 ng/ml) and interleukin-2 (5.1 ng/ml) was only slightly elevated and much lower than observed after spironolactone pretreatment (monocyte
release of TNF-α—2,780 pg/ml, interleukin-1β—245 pg/ml, interleukin-6–28.3 ng/ml and monocyte chemoattractant protein—27.2 ng/ml; lymphocyte
release of TNF-α—630 pg/ml, interferon-γ—172 ng/ml and interleukin-2–8.8 ng/ml). In this paper, we report for the first time that primary
aldosteronism may exacerbate the course of autoimmune thyroid disease. Taking into account that both primary aldosteronism and Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis are common disorders in the general population, it cannot be excluded that their coincidence in the same patient was only
accidental. However, it is as well possible that excessive aldosterone release may lead to the development of thyroid infiltration by
inflammatory cells in predisposed individuals. Even if there are controversies concerning the relationship between high aldosterone and the
development of thyroiditis in the index subjects, there are no doubts that primary aldosteronism exacerbated the clinical course of chronic
thyroiditis. Taking into account the pattern of cytokine release (tumor necrosis factor-α, interleukin-2, interferon-γ), chronic thyroiditis
is classified as a Th1 disorder . In our patient, both monocyte and lymphocyte release of proinflammatory cytokines were more pronounced in
the time when thyroiditis coexisted with an aldosterone-producing adrenal tumor than after spironolactone pretreatment and after surgery.
Our finding is in line with the results by Bendtzen et al. , who observed that spironolactone reduced tumor necrosis factor-α and
interferon-γ production in patients with rheumatoid and juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Therefore, our results show that surgical removal of
the tumor may inhibit the cell-mediated immune response in the similar way as spironolactone does. This effect seems, however, to be
stronger than that of spironolactone because post-surgery cytokine release in the index subject was reduced when compared with that after
spironolactone pretreatment and only slightly higher than observed in healthy population. Although our patient suffered from chronic
thyroiditis, similar relationships may exist between primary aldosteronism and other coexisting autoimmune disorders. It seems that such
patients may benefit more from surgical than pharmacological treatment of primary aldosteronism. Fortunately, as our case shows, if treated,
the proinflammatory state induced by aldosterone excess may be, at least to some degree, reversible. To sum up, primary aldosteronism may
exacerbate the clinical course of autoimmune thyroiditis and probably also other autoimmune disorders. Therefore, patients with resistant
arterial hypertension coexisting with autoimmune disorders should be assessed for the presence of primary aldosteronism. None. This article
is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited. Blood samples were collected when blood pressure
was within normal limits (the patient was treated with verapamil and prazosin).
