Multiple semicircular canal dehiscences are clinical entities characterised by vestibular and cochlear symptoms induced by enhanced
sensitivity of labyrinthine receptors due to a multiple bone defect of the otic capsule. The case is presented of a 38-year-old male with
bilateral posterior semicircular canal dehiscence associated with unilateral (right) superior semicircular canal dehiscence. The man
suffered from vestibular (recurrent Tullio Phenomenon or sound-induced vertigo) and cochlear symptoms (persistent aural fullness associated
with mixed hearing loss and disabling tinnitus). Le deiscenze multiple dei canali semicircolari sono entità cliniche recenti, caratterizzate
da un corteo clinico e sintomatologico della sfera vestibolare e di quella cocleare. I sintomi in special modo sono provocati dall'aumentata
sensibilità dei recettori labirintici dovuta proprio alla molteplicità dei difetti ossei della capsula labirintica. Si presenta il caso di
un uomo di 38 anni con deiscenza bilaterale del canale semicircolare posteriore associata ad una deiscenza del canale semicircolare
superiore destro. Il soggetto lamentava sintomi tanto della sfera vestibolare (fenomeno di Tullio ricorrente altrimenti definito come la
vertigine indotta dall'esposizione al suono) che della sfera cocleare (fullness auricolare persistente con associata ipoacusia di tipo misto
ed acufene disabilitante). In 1998, Lloyd B. Minor et al. 1 described, for the first time, a new clinical entity characterised by the onset
of unspecific vestibular and cochlear symptoms induced by an enhanced sensitivity of labyrinthine receptors due to a bony defect usually
located in the external wall of the superior semicircular canal. The exact incidence of posterior semicircular canal dehiscence (PSCD) is
unknown. In a radiographic survey of 112 temporal bones, known to have a high jugular bulb, this was detected in 4 patients 2. In contrast,
the incidence of superior semicircular canal dehiscence (SSCD) in a temporal bone survey was 0.7% 3. In this report, a case of association
between two alterations of the otic capsule is presented supporting the notion that there is probably a developmental abnormality underlying
the SSCD and PSCD syndromes. A 38-year-old male was referred to our tertiary referral neurotological centre with vestibular (recurrent
Tullio Phenomenon or sound-induced vertigo) and cochlear symptoms (persistent aural fullness) with mixed hearing loss (Fig. 1) associated
with disabling pulsatile tinnitus. Audiogram showing bilateral mixed hearing loss (conductive component of low-middle frequencies). A
detailed case history revealed oscillopsia related to intense exertions and "Tullio Phenomenon" evoked by loud sounds. The patient did not
remember closed cranial trauma. The patient also referred to and reported pulsatile tinnitus which was particularly irritating and
disabling. Otoscopy findings were normal. All the symptoms mentioned by the patient were then evaluated with a standardized set of tests
including those during "Bed-side examination" with a video oculography (VOG) recorder. The pattern of horizontal, torsional and vertical eye
movements was evaluated and recorded with three-dimensional infra-red video oculography (50 Hz sampling; Torsio VNG Ulmer; Synapsys,
Marseille, France): spontaneous nystagmus, head shaking nystagmus, research of the position and positioning nystagmus (Dix-Hallpike
manoeuvre and head roll manoeuvre), observation under VOG of the nystagmus after Valsalva manoeuvre, observation after hyperventilation test
and after exposure to 110 dB sound stimulation, at a frequency of 3 kHz, for the detection of the so-called "Tullio Phenomenon" and,
finally, after mastoid vibration at 100 Hz. The patient was then submitted to a specific set of instrumental audio-vestibular tests: caloric
tests showed a normal pattern (methodology of stimulation according to Fitzgerald-Hallpike), Fz bone conducted ocular and cervical
vestibular evoked myogenic potentials (VEMPs) performed with a short tone burst of 500 Hz lasting 7 milliseconds with a repetition frequency
of 4 Hz for 50 times (Fig. 2A, B) showing enhanced responses in terms of amplitude. Stapedial reflexes and auditory brainstem response were
present. Recordings of bone conducted vibratory Fz ocular VEMPs (A) and cervical VEMPs (B) from patient, showing bilaterally enhanced
amplitudes of n-10 in oVEMPs and p-13/n-19 complex in cVEMPs. For this reason, the patient was first referred to a tertiary radiology centre
for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the posterior cranial fossa using paramagnetic contrast enhancement. This radiological evaluation
revealed a normal and symmetrical eighth cranial nerve. At this point, and on account of the ocular and cervical VEMPs results, it was
necessary to perform high resolution computed tomography (CT) that revealed bilateral dehiscence of the posterior semicircular canal (Fig.
3c, d) and right SSCD with marked thinning of the bone covering the left superior semicircular canal dehiscence. This last imaging result
was fundamental in explaining the vestibular symptoms (Fig. 3 a, b). CT scan, sagittal projections showed bilateral dehiscence of posterior
semicircular canal in right ear (3c) and left ear (3d), and unilateral right dehiscence of the superior semicircular canal (3a white arrow).
White arrows in 3b instead show the bone covering the left superior semicircular canal. In 1998, Minor et al. 1 described, for the first
time, a new clinical entity characterized by the onset of non-specific vestibular and cochlear symptoms induced by hypersensitivity of the
labyrinthine receptors due to a bony defect usually located in the external wall of the superior semicircular canal. Diagnosis can be based
on characteristic symptoms, as the latter may include dizziness, Tullio Phenomenon, positional vertigo, pulsatile tinnitus, conductive
and/or sensorineural hearing loss, etc.; the possibility of canal dehiscences must be considered in the presence of certain signs (Hennebert
sign, nystagmus induced by Valsalva manoeuvre, etc.) and may be confirmed by the results of some instrumental investigations (essentially,
cervical vestibular evoked myogenic potentials (c-VEMPs) with threshold analysis) 4. However, the final confirmation requires cross-
sectional imaging by means of high resolution computed tomography (HR CT) able to follow, and tracing, the circumference of the superior and
posterior semicircular canal. The contrast between bone and soft tissue obtained by a bone dedicated window provides excellent definition of
bone structure. However, all projections help the clinician and radiologist to identify dehiscences (Fig. 3). CT scans also provide
diagnostic information not only in genetic but, especially, as in the present case, in lifestyle counselling. HR CT has proven to have a
sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 99% for the diagnosis of canal dehiscences 4. The bilateral nature of the defect supports the
hypothesis of a developmental abnormality, even if of a mild degree, as already suggested for SSCD 5. The aetiology of SSCD is debated 5.
The independent development of the individual semicircular canals in relation to the cochlea and vestibule is a complex embryologic process
rather than merely an arrest in development 6. This syndrome may also result from an abnormal vascular anatomy and may present late in life
without further evidence of precipitation 3 7 8. SSCD caused a significant reduction in sound-induced round-window velocity at low
frequencies, small but significant increases in soundinduced stapes and umbo rates, and a measurable fluid velocity inside the dehiscence.
Findings from the cadaveric temporal-bone preparation were consistent with the thirdwindow hypothesis. The present case, with its
association of two lesions 10, with no previous history of trauma, confirms the hypothesis that congenital and/or genetic factors are
involved in some cases. The present case also alerts clinicians about associations of auditory and vestibular symptoms. In the absence of
reports of such cases 11 12, it was deemed important to obtain CT scans in order to reach a diagnosis and a differential diagnosis (for
example with PSCD in patients presenting with vertigo, sensorineuronal hearing loss) 13. The management of superior semicircular canal
dehiscence syndrome involves conservative and surgical approaches. Surgical options for patients with disabling vestibular symptoms include
a middle fossa craniotomy 14 or a viable alternative to this technique, trans-mastoid superior semicircular canal occlusion 14. Primary
middle fossa or trans-mastoid superior semicircular canal occlusion repair are not associated with sensorineural hearing loss and, in some
cases, can lead to a return to normal of the conductive hearing loss 14. In conclusion, this case also demonstrates the need, for the
clinician, to be highly suspicious of the associations between auditory and vestibular symptoms. The bilateral nature of the defect would
appear to suggest a developmental abnormality or a more complex embryologic process 6, albeit mild, as already suggested for SSCD 5.
