The case is presented of a 73-year-old male with a history of right-sided nasal obstruction, hyponasal speech and three episodes of
recurrent epistaxis. On examination, there was a tumour in the right nasal cavity. Computed tomography showed a mass in the right nasal
cavity extending to the right maxillary sinus, ethmoidal cells and right sphenoid sinus. The patient underwent a functional endoscopic
removal of the tumour. Biopsy revealed a small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma. This is an extremely rare tumour of the nasal cavity and
sinuses. Because of the aggressive behaviour of this tumour, he was also treated with combined chemotherapy and radiation. Ten months later,
he remains free of disease. Viene presentato il caso di un uomo di 73 anni con una storia di ostruzione nasale destra persistente, rinolalia
chiusa, e tre episodi di epistassi ricorrente. All'esame obiettivo, era presente una neoformazione della fossa nasale destra. La tomografia
computerizzata ha evidenziato la presenza di una massa della cavità nasale destra estesa al seno mascellare, alle cellule etmoidali e al
seno sferoidale omolaterali. Il paziente è stato sottoposto a rimozione della massa nasale per via endoscopica. L'esame istologico ha
evidenziato un carcinoma neuroendocrino a piccole cellule, che rappresenta un tumore estremamente raro delle fosse nasali. A causa del
comportamento aggressivo di tale tumore, è stato necessario eseguire un trattamento combinato radio-chemioterapico. Il paziente è libero da
malattia a dieci mesi dall'esordio. Primary small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (SNEC) of the nasal cavity and sinuses is an extremely rare
tumour and difficult to diagnose by conventional methods of histological examination. Not many cases are reported in the literature and thus
analysis of the cases is not an easy procedure. Ray Chowdhuri first described SNE C as a differentiated histological entity in the paranasal
sinuses in 1965 1. By 2000, 154 incident cases of primary SNEC (International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems) with histological confirmation had been identified. A crude incidence rate of 0.73 SNEC cases per 100,000 inhabitants was
estimated using the 2001 Census data for the denominator (1.19 per 100,000 among men and 0.30 per 100,000 among women). Although these
tumours exhibit morphological features similar to those of anaplastic small cell carcinomas of the lung and, at first, were thought to arise
from the lung, they are now considered to be completely different entities due to their behavioural differences in relation to metastasis
and local spread. Also SNEC shows similar clinical and morphological features to olfactory neuroblastoma (ONB) and must also be
distinguished from this tumour. The diagnosis of SNEC of the head and neck region is based on the recognition of the typical neuroendocrine
architecture and morphology and on the immunohistochemical confirmation of neuroendocrine differentiation. In the World Health Organization
(WHO) classification of endocrine tumours, SNECs are subdivided into welldifferentiated tumours, well-differentiated carcinomas, and poorly
differentiated carcinomas depending on their histopathological and biological characteristics. No specific treatment exists, at present, for
neuroendocrine tumours of the head and neck region, and despite the improved histological classification they are mostly treated as
conventional squamous cell carcinomas or, less often, as small cell carcinomas of the lung 2. In this article, a rare case of SNEC, arising
from the nasal septum, and its management are presented. A 73-year-old man presented at the ENT department of Hippokration General Hospital
with a long-standing history of right-sided nasal obstruction, hyponasal speech and three episodes of recurrent epistaxis. Physical
examination revealed an exophytic tumour mass of the right nasal cavity. Colour of the mucosa over the growth varied from white to pink.
There were no obvious, palpative lymph nodes and no distant metastasis was found. The computed tomography (CT) scan that was carried out
showed a mass of the right nasal cavity extending to the right maxillary sinus, ethmoidal cells and right sphenoid sinus. General
examination revealed that the patient was moderately built and nourished, with normal gait and satisfactory vital signs. From his past
medical history, he had hypertension and diabetes mellitus. The patient denied smoking, drinking and exposure to radiation or environmental
irritants. Functional endoscopic sinus surgery was used in order to remove the mass. Upon surgery, a large tumour of the right nasal cavity
was revealed adjacent to the posterior part of the nasal septum and medial wall of the right maxillary sinus, invading the middle nasal
turbinate. The tumour was translucent and polypoid in structure (Fig. 1). During the operation, repeated biopsies were taken and were found
to be positive for malignancy. Debulking of the tumour carried out in order to define the site of origin, showed that the tumour arose from
the posterior-superior part of the septum. Therefore, complete excision of the mass was performed and intra-operative biopsies revealed that
the margins of the excision were without signs of disease. Intra-operative endoscopic image of the tumour. The final histological
examination showed a small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma with poor differentiation. The tumour was extremely cellular and composed of sheets
or nests of small cells. The shape and size of cells were similar and regular with small amounts of cytoplasm, round nuclei, and high
mitotic rate. Vascular structures and foci of necrosis were also present. Immunophenotypic examination showed staining for synaptophysin
(Fig. 2), CD56 and Ki67 (+90%) (Fig. 3), while no staining appeared for cytokeratin (CK) AE1/ AE3, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CK34bE12,
leukocyte (LCA) or chromogranin. Immunohistochemical reaction for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) was not necessary because of
thorough examination of thyroid and lung by CT scan. Positive synaptophysin immunoreactions in neoplastic cells. Positive Ki67
immunoreaction in neoplastic cells (90%). The post-operative course was uneventful. Due to the aggressive behaviour of this tumour, combined
chemotherapy and radiation were also performed. Close follow-up 10 months after treatment, through endoscopic examination did not reveal any
sign of local recurrence. Small cell carcinoma is a very rare and aggressive tumour of the sinonasal tract. Histologically, it is
undistinguishable from the anaplastic small cell carcinoma of the lung. They both exhibit similar morphological features, as described by
Koss et al. 3. They are both solid tumours composed of sheets, nests and cords of small to intermediate-sized cells with high
nucleo/cytoplasmic ratio, hyperchromatic nuclei with absent or occasional basophilic nucleoli. They also have a high mitotic rate with
frequent abnormal mitotic figures, necrosis and haemorrhage. They are both characterized by the presence of electron-dense, membrane bound,
neurosecretory granules 4. Differential diagnosis must include other malignant tumours such as lymphoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, undifferentiated
nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and undifferentiated sinonasal carcinoma. Of great importance is to distinguish SNEC from ONB. Their relationship
remains confusing and controversial. Hyams et al. 5 proposed a histological grading for ONBs based on their degree of cellular and
architectural differentiation. In most cases, SNEC should be readily distinguished from low-grade ONB. Sinonasal SNEC lacks lobular
architecture, fibrovascular septa, neurofibrillary stroma, and does not contain neural or olfactory rosettes. The anaplastic cells of SNEC
have neglible cytoplasm, high nucleo/cytoplasmic ratio, round or oval dense hyperchromatic nuclei, numerous mitotic figures, and apoptotic
cells accompanied by extensive areas of necrosis. In contrast, the cells of low-grade ONBs show moderate amounts of cytoplasm, round nuclei,
low nucleo/cytoplasmic ratio, and low mitotic activity. Necrosis is uncommon in low-grade ONBs 6. High-grade ONBs 5 6 show marked nuclear
anaplasia and high mitotic activity accompanied by prominent necrosis. They also retain the lobular architecture of well-differentiated
tumours, and foci of neurofibrillary stroma with rosette formation are usually identified 7. These findings are absent in SNEC. Furthermore,
prominent nucleoli are not found in SNEC. Immunohistochemistry has not been consistently used to distinguish these two entities. SNEC lacks
the S-100-positive cells seen at the periphery of the cell nests of ONB and is negative for NF 6. SNEC usually shows staining with AE1:AE3
or Cam 5.2 antibodies, which is uncommon in ONB 6 7. So far, no study appears to have been presented specifically investigating the
immunohistochemical features of these tumours. Strong staining with synaptophysin and CD56 nerve cell adhesion molecule has been reported
and weak staining with chromogranin A and CAM 5.2/AE-1 as appears also in our case 8. Perez-Ordonez et al. showed strong staining for CAM
5.2 or AE1:AE3 in a series of 6 patients. Expression of neuroendocrine markers, such as NSE, synaptophysin, and chromogranin, although
positive in all cases, was variable and may be weak with individual markers, particularly synaptophysin 9. This pattern of staining is
similar to that found in pulmonary small cell carcinoma. Clinical manifestations and behaviour of small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma do not
differ from other tumours of the sinonasal tract. It usually presents with epistaxis, nasal obstruction, followed by ophthalmic signs
(exophthalmos, visual acuity trouble and limitation of eye mobility) due to orbital involvement. Less frequently, other signs suggesting
loco-regional invasion have been reported, such as local pain and anosmia. Cervical node metastasis has also been described 10.
Radiographically, the tumour always involves the nasal cavity and multiple paranasal sinuses 11. In our case, the mass of the right nasal
cavity extended to the right maxillary sinus, ethmoidal cells and right sphenoid sinus. CT scan can help to diagnose the malignant nature of
the tumour, as it can reveal the presence of an osteolytic lesion. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with T1, T2 using i.v. gadolinium
improves differentiation between inflammatory reaction, tumour and liquid retention; MRI also identifies the anatomical relationship between
the tumour and the meninges. Little is known about the management of these tumours. Different therapeutic approaches have been used over
time. In the 1980s, surgery followed by radiotherapy was preferred by the Authors of the largest study 10 and has also been recommended more
recently 12. In the late 1990s, the combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy, with or without surgery was shown to have promising
results, for neuroblastoma and SNECs of the nasal and paranasal cavities. A retrospective study by E. Babin et al. 13 suggests the use of
the same protocol that was proposed in the 35th Congress of the French Cervico-facial Carginological Society (November 2003) and is
presented in Figure 4. Protocol of the French Cervico-facial Carcinological Society. Although it has no significant effect on tumour growth,
biotherapy with somatostatin analogues and/or interferon-α is recommended both for well-differentiated and functioning tumours. On the other
hand, chemotherapy, usually with cisplatin and etoposide is effective in the treatment of tumours with poor differentiation grade and high
proliferation rate. Currently, the most used therapeutic options are: surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy as we performed in our case,
endoscopic removal of the tumour with margins free of disease followed by adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Novel therapies, new
pharmacological formulations and more selective somatostatin analogues are now under clinical investigation for the treatment of
neuroendocrine tumours 14. Extra-pulmonary small cell carcinoma is usually a fatal disease with a 13% 5-year survival rate 15. In the same
retrospective study of 20 patients 13, recurrences and metastasis have been reported to occur after three years in 70% of the patients and 4
out of 5 patients in the combined experience of Koss et al. 3 and Weiss et al. 16 died of disease after a follow-up ranging from 8 months to
2 years. 80% of patients suffering from relapses or metastasis within the first two years. The median survival time was between two and
three years. Common metastatic locations are brain, lungs, bones and skin. Four out of 6 patients, in the above-mentioned series of Perez-
Ordonez et al. 9 had recurrent disease or died after a mean follow-up of 37 months. In a study carried out by the Mayo Clinic 15, the median
overall survival of 14 patients with primary head and neck tumours was only 14.5 months. Unfavourable prognostic factors, such as invasion
of the lamina cribosa, have been discussed 10. The ectopic hormone syndrome is a predictor of bad prognosis and increased mortality of
pulmonary SNE C patients because of the higher risk of cerebral metastasis. The endocrine syndrome also seems to negatively affect the
prognosis in cases of head and neck SNEC 17. Other factors, such as size of the tumour and number of mitoses, show no correlation with
recurrence, metastasis or survival 10. Because of the small number of cases in the literature, no conclusions or therapeutic recommendations
can be made. However, there is the need for a multidisciplinary treatment approach combining surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy. In
conclusion, sinonasal small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma is a very rare neoplasm with an aggressive clinical behaviour and poor prognosis.
It exhibits similar morphological and immunohistochemical features to those of anaplastic small cell carcinoma of the lung. It must be
distinguished from olfactory neuroblastoma. The use of current diagnostic ancillary techniques such as, electron microscopy and
immunohistochemistry can be helpful in studying the morphological and biological characteristics of the tumour. There are no treatment
protocols. However, a combined therapy is advantageous.
