Recent case reports describe multidrug-resistant influenza A pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus infection in immunocompromised patients exposed to
neuraminidase inhibitors because of an I223R neuraminidase mutation. We report a case of multidrug-resistant pandemic (H1N1) 2009 bearing
the I223R mutation in an ambulatory child with no previous exposure to neuraminidase inhibitors. The neuraminidase inhibitors (NAIs)
oseltamivir and zanamivir are antiviral agents approved for treatment of infections caused by pandemic (H1N1) 2009 influenza virus. Since
the 2008–09 influenza season, almost all seasonal influenza (H1N1) viruses have been oseltamivir resistant because of an H275Y (histidine to
tyrosine NA mutation, N1 NA numbering) mutation. Despite widespread use of oseltamivir during the 2009 pandemic, NAI resistance is rare in
pandemic (H1N1) 2009 viruses (1). Zanamivir resistance is also rare in influenza viruses. A Q136K (glutamine to lysine mutation, N2 NA
numbering) mutation conferring zanamivir resistance in influenza (H1N1) viruses has been described in an in vitro study but has not been
detected in clinical specimens from patients (2). An influenza B strain carrying a R152K (arginine to lysine) mutation and resistant to
oseltamivir and zanamivir has been reported (3). Recent case reports described multidrug-resistant pandemic (H1N1) 2009 infection in
immunocompromised patients exposed to oseltamivir and zanamivir because of an I223R (isoleucine to arginine) mutation in NA (4–6). We report
a case of infection by multidrug-resistant pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus bearing the I223R mutation in an ambulatory child with no previous
exposure to NAI. On October 30, 2009, a 15-year-old girl with a history of asthma sought treatment at an emergency department in the Greater
Toronto area after 3 days of cough and rhinorrhea and 1 day of chest pain. Several children at her school also had respiratory symptoms. On
arrival, she was febrile to 39.6°C and mildly dehydrated; physical examination was otherwise unremarkable. Blood count and chest radiograph
showed no abnormalities. The child received intravenous rehydration in the emergency department, was discharged home with a prescription for
oseltamivir therapy, and recovered uneventfully. A nasopharyngeal swab was forwarded to Ontario Agency for Health Protection and Promotion
(OAHPP) for influenza testing. Pandemic (H1N1) 2009 was detected by real-time reverse transcription PCR (7). Subsequently, the specimen was
screened by a single-nucleotide polymorphism assay distributed by Canada’s National Microbiology Laboratory and the World Health
Organization pyrosequencing protocol for the presence of the H275Y mutation (8). Both assays confirmed the isolate was wild type (histidine)
at aa 275 of NA. As part of pandemic surveillance, the specimen was cultured in rhesus monkey kidney cells and whole genome sequencing was
performed by using a modified World Health Organization protocol (9). Sequences were deposited into GenBank under accession nos.
CY060619–CY060626. In comparison with A/California/7/2009 (H1N1), several nonsynonymous mutations were identified: I201V and E538K in
polymerase; S220T, D239E, and K465R in hemagglutinin; V100I and M316I in nucleoprotein; S99P and I123V in nonstructural protein; T16I,
V106I, I223R, N248D, and N369K in NA. Apart from I201V, which is of unknown significance and has not been previously documented in pandemic
(H1N1) 2009, these mutations were detected in 22% to 72% of pandemic (H1N1) 2009 strains circulating in Ontario at the same time that
underwent whole genome sequencing. The I223R mutation results from a 1 nucleotide substitution at codon 223 of NA. To rule out the
possibility of acquisition of I223R during culture in rhesus monkey kidney cells, the NA gene of the primary sample and its first passage
were sequenced. Both had 100% identical nucleotide composition. The 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) values for oseltamivir carboxylate
and zanamivir, determined by chemiluminescent NAI assay (NA-Star; Applied Biosystems Ltd., Foster City, California, USA) at OAHPP, were 9.49
(SD ± 2.19) nmol and 2.46 (SD ± 0.30) nmol, respectively (Table 1, Table 2) (oseltamivir carboxylate and zanamivir supplied by Hoffmann-La
Roche Ltd [Basel, Switzerland] and GlaxoSmithKline [Brentford, UK], respectively). Compared with a wild-type control, the I223R mutant
exhibited 28- and 12-fold increases in IC50s for oseltamivir and zanamivir, respectively. The oseltamivir IC50 of the I223R strain was
elevated, but not as much as observed in an H275Y control, which had a 168-fold IC50 elevation compared to the wild-type strain and was 6×
higher than that of the I223R strain when tested in parallel. Similar results were obtained when the sample was retested at the National
Microbiology Laboratory (Table 1, Table 2). *NA, neuraminidase; OAHPP, Ontario Agency for Health Protection and Promotion; NML, National
Microbiology Laboratory; IC50, 50% inhibitory concentration. †Mutations presented in N1 numbering. ‡For 7 and 4 experiments done by OAHPP
and NML, respectively. §For 17 and 1,446 experiments done by OAHPP and NML, respectively. ¶For 13 and 14 experiments done by OAHPP and NML,
respectively. *NA, neuraminidase; OAHPP, Ontario Agency for Health Protection and Promotion; NML, National Microbiology Laboratoy; IC50, 50%
inhibitory concentration. †For 7 and 4 experiments done by OAHPP and NML, respectively. ‡For 15 and 1,446 experiments done by OAHPP and NML,
respectively. §For 9 and 14 experiments done by OAHPP and NML, respectively. The clinical significance of the I223R mutation is poorly
understood because the IC50s for oseltamivir and zanamivir are well below achievable serum levels when administered at recommended doses.
Oral oseltamivir at a dose of 75 mg 2×/d resulted in a maximum serum concentration (Cmax) of 348 ng/mL (1,115 nmol). Repeated inhalation of
10 mg of the dried powder formulation of zanamivir produced a Cmax of 39 to 54 ng/mL (117.5–162.7 nmol) at 1 to 2 h postdose, with an
elimination half life of 4–5 h (10). Intravenous zanamivir at a dose of 600mg resulted in a Cmax of 32,000–39,000 ng/mL (96,300–117,360
nmol). I223 is recognized as one of the framework residues responsible for stabilizing the NAI active site; type-specific mutations at these
residues have resulted in reduced susceptibility to NAIs (11,12). Although the exact mechanism by which mutations at the framework residue
alter susceptibility to particular NAIs is not clear, simulation studies suggest that the NA electrostatic potential plays a major role in
the interaction and stabilization of NAIs within the NA cavity (13). Nonhomologous substitution of a nonpolar hydrophobic amino acid,
isoleucine, with the positively charged (polar) hydrophilic amino acid, arginine (I223R), seems to be a key point in alteration of the NA
cavity. These changes most likely result in active site endpoint interactions affecting drug binding affinity and could disturb the proposed
electrostatic binding funnel instrumental in directing NAIs into and out of binding sites on NA (14). Three independent case reports
described infections caused by multidrug-resistant pandemic (H1N1) 2009 in immunocompromised patients who received prolonged treatment with
oseltamivir followed by zanamivir; 2 of the infections were fatal. In 2 patients, infection developed (H275Y followed by I223R alone with
simultaneous reversion to wild type at position 275) (4,5); dual H275Y/I223R mutations developed in the third patient (6). Our patient is
unique because she was immunocompetent, had no prior exposure to NAIs, and had an uneventful recovery. A similar resistance profile was seen
in the published case exhibiting I223R alone, where IC50s for oseltamivir, zanamivir, and peramivir were elevated by 45-, 10-, and 7-fold,
respectively (4). The origin of the multiresistant isolate in this patient’s case could not be established. The I223R mutation may have
occurred spontaneously in our patient. Alternatively, she acquired infection in the ambulatory setting, possibly as part of a school
outbreak. Resistance may have evolved following random mutation, or during NAI therapy in another patient. We could not investigate this
further because no samples were submitted from contacts. Using reverse genetics, it has been recently shown that an I223V NA change
increased oseltamivir and peramivir resistance in pandemic (H1N1) 2009 and also restored NA substrate affinity and replication fitness in
vitro (15). Although the I223 residue is highly conserved across pandemic (H1N1) 2009 strains, the global distribution of pandemic (H1N1)
2009 was made possible by the virus adapting for stable circulation through genetic changes contributing to fitness and facilitating
transmissibility from person to person. This report of community acquisition of a multidrug-resistant strain of pandemic (H1N1) 2009
reinforces the need to continue close monitoring for the emergence of resistant viruses and incorporation of screening for newly discovered
resistance mutations into clinical diagnostics. Suggested citation for this article: Eshaghi A, Patel SN, Sarabia A, Higgins RR, Savchenko
A, Stojios PJ, et al. Multidrug-resistant pandemic (H1N1) 2009 infection in immunocompetent child. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the
Internet]. 2011 Aug [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1708.102004 Phenotypic resistance testing was partially funded by a research
grant provided to Ontario Agency for Health Protection and Promotion (J.B.G. and D.E.L.) by GlaxoSmithKline Inc. Dr Eshaghi is a research
technologist in the Molecular Research department at The Public Health Laboratories, Ontario Agency for Health Protection and Promotion. His
research interests focus on molecular evolution and characterization of respiratory viruses, including emergence of resistance in influenza
viruses.
