In 2007, nonsuppurative encephalitis was identified in a killer whale at a Texas, USA, marine park. Panviral DNA microarray of brain tissue
suggested West Nile virus (WNV); WNV was confirmed by reverse transcription PCR and sequencing. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated WNV
antigen within neurons. WNV should be considered in cases of encephalitis in cetaceans. West Nile virus (WNV) is a single-stranded RNA virus
of the genus Flavivirus that is transmitted by mosquitoes. In humans and animals, WNV has been associated with a spectrum of clinical
conditions from asymptomatic infections to sudden death. These have been identified in a variety of animal species. Among marine mammals,
WNV infection has been reported in a harbor seal (Phoca vitulina) (1). We describe WNV infection in a killer whale (Orcinus orca) and
seroprevalence in conspecific cohort and noncohort groups. In 2007, a 14-year-old male killer whale at a marine park in San Antonio, Texas,
USA, died suddenly without notable premonitory signs. On gross examination, mild multifocal meningeal hyperemia and petechial parenchymal
hemorrhage were noted in the right cerebrum and cerebellum. The left hemisphere of the brain appeared normal. Focally extensive tan
discoloration and fibrosis were present in the right accessory lung lobe with associated hemorrhage and congestion. Both lung lobes were
mildly and diffusely heavy and wet. All thoracic and abdominal lymph nodes were moderately enlarged and edematous. The second gastric
chamber displayed numerous chronic and active ulcerations of 1.5–2 cm. Fresh and buffered 10% formalin-fixed specimens were collected. Fresh
tissues were stored at –80°C. Tissues fixed in 10% buffered formalin were processed routinely and stained with hematoxylin and eosin for
histologic examination. Histologic review demonstrated moderate multifocal subacute vasculitis and nonsuppurative encephalitis. Inflammatory
lesions of the central nervous system were focused in gray matter of the medulla oblongata, pons, mesencephalan, and cerebellum. Lesions
were bilateral but more severe on the right side. Meninges demonstrated moderate focally extensive and multifocal areas of acute meningeal
congestion and hemorrhage. Mild multifocal lymphocytic infiltrates expanded the leptomeninges. Blood vessels demonstrated mild to moderate
acute necrosis and lymphocytic and contained plasmacytic and neutrophilic infiltrates within vascular walls. Encephalitis was characterized
by perivascular lymphocytes and fewer plasma cells expanding the Virchow-Robbins spaces. Small, scattered, perivascular ring hemorrhages
were noted. A few multifocal loosely arranged glial nodules were within cerebral white matter. Predominant lesions in the lungs were areas
of chronic and active abscessation amid a focally extensive area of mixed inflammation and fibrosis. There was moderate diffuse acute
pulmonary edema and congestion. Gastric ulcerations were present in the first gastric chamber and were chronic and active. They were
characterized by central ulcerations with necrosis and a mixed inflammatory infiltrate surrounded by variable fibrosis and a rim of
epithelial hyperplasia. Changes in spleen, lymph node, and kidney included acute edema, congestion, and vascular dilation. Conventional
diagnostic assays were performed for aerobic, anaerobic, and fungal microbes in liver, lung, kidney, cerebrospinal fluid, and brain. All
yielded minimal growth of Escherichia coli. The final diagnosis was fulminant peracute bacteremia and septicemia secondary to a primary
viral infection associated with nonsuppurative encephalitis. Published etiologic considerations for cetacean nonsuppurative encephalitis
include morbillivirus and protozoal infections (2). A DNA microarray with highly conserved sequences from >1,000 viruses was selected to
screen for known and novel viruses (3). Total RNA was extracted from brain tissue and hybridized to a microarray as described (4). Analysis
of the resulting hybridization pattern demonstrated a strong hybridization signal to many oligonucleotide probes on the microarray from the
family Flaviviridae, in particular to WNV. Consensus reverse transcription PCR primers (5) targeting WNV were used to confirm the microarray
results. Sequencing of the 261-bp amplicon (GenBank accession no. HQ610502) yielded a sequence with 99% nt identity and 100% aa acid
identity to WNV strain OK03 (GenBank accession no. EU155484.1), a strain originally identified in Oklahoma, USA. To further support a WNV
diagnosis, we performed immunohistochemical staining on brain tissue. The immunoperoxidase stain used was a commercial rabbit polyclonal
antibody (BioRelience Corp., Rockville, MD, USA) with peroxidase-tagged goat antirabbit immunoglobulin G (DakoCytomation, Carpinteria, CA,
USA) bridge and 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole (DakoCytomation) as the chromogen. This staining demonstrated abundant WNV antigen within the
cytoplasm of a small number of neurons and glial cells and in fewer macrophages in the brain tissue (Figure). Brain specimen from killer
whale (Orcinus orca) with West Nile virus infection that died at a marine park, San Antonio, Texas, USA, 2007. Neurons and glial cells
demonstrate abundant intracytoplasmic West Nile viras antigen. Blood vessel demonstrates mild vasculitis and perivascular lymphocytic
infiltrate. Original magnification ×200. We evaluated WNV exposure within the same cohort, as well as a geographically distant cohort of
whales by using serologic testing. All testing was performed at the same laboratory by using a standard plaque-reduction neutralization
test. In this assay, a 90% neutralization cutoff was used (6). A 90% plaque-reduction titer >10 was considered positive. Serum from the
affected whale and 5 cohort killer whales from the same marine park in San Antonio as well as 5 whales housed at another facility in
Orlando, Florida, USA, were evaluated. In each facility, the animals have regular contact with each other. The facilities are geographically
separated so the animals do not have exposure to those in the other park. All 6 animals from Texas had 90% plaque-reduction titers >10,
ranging from 40 to 80. The 5 whales housed together in Orlando had no measurable titer. We demonstrate that WNV can infect and cause disease
in killer whales. These findings broaden the known host tropism of WNV to include cetaceans in addition to previously known pinnipeds.
Although we cannot definitively attribute the cause of death of this whale to WNV, the observed lesions are consistent with those caused by
WNV in other animals. The serologic results demonstrate that subclinical infections can occur and that exposure can be variable. We did not
determine specific dates of exposure for these populations. Both Bexar County, Texas, and Orange County, Florida, have had WNV in wildlife
since 2002. We continue annual serology on previously negative animals to document seroconversion. Mosquito management practices are similar
in both facilities and have been expanded since this diagnosis. Differences in WNV prevalence or mosquito numbers may have played a role in
the different serologic results. Health evaluations of free-ranging and captive cetaceans should include WNV serology to assess exposure
rates. This report focuses on killer whales, but the “loafing” behavior (stationary positioning at the water’s surface) is commonly seen in
many coastal dolphins, thereby increasing the likelihood of mosquito bites and exposure to WNV. Serologic screening of bottlenose dolphins
(Tursiops truncatus) from the Indian River Lagoon demonstrated WNV titers (7). WNV-associated disease in these animals has not been
reported. Active screening for WNV may enhance diagnostic investigations. As with many species of birds and mammals, WNV infection carries a
risk for zoonotic transmission. Until the implications of this infection in marine mammals are better understood, biologists and
veterinarians working with cetaceans should consider this possibility. Potential viral shedding can occur through the oropharygeal cavity
and feces as well as through blood and organs during necropsies. Finally, our study demonstrates the broad applicability of using panviral
microarray-based diagnostics. Even though PCR diagnostics are well developed for WNV, the agent was not initially considered as a potential
pathogen in this species. Panviral microarray can be used not only to identify novel viruses but also to detect unsuspected agents.
Suggested citation for this article: St. Leger J, Wu G, Anderson M, Dalton L, Nilson E, Wang D. West Nile virus infection in killer whale,
Texas, USA, 2007. Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2011 Aug [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1708.101979 This work was funded
by National Institutes of Health grant U01 AI070374. Dr St. Leger is the director of pathology and research for SeaWorld Parks and
Entertainment, serves on the editorial board of the journal Veterinary Pathology, and is a board member of the CL Davis Foundation. Her
primary research interests are comparative pathology and infectious disease investigations of marine and aquatic animals.
