Dear Sirs, Heparin is the primary acute therapy for cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT) , but in a subset of patients, endovascular treatment
(ET) or decompressive craniotomy (DC) can be considered. ET is often reserved for patients with a severe course of the disease or who
deteriorate despite heparin treatment, although data from randomised studies regarding its efficacy are lacking . Small case series suggest
that DC can be life-saving in patients with impending transtentorial herniation due to space-occupying lesions [3, 4]. The combined use of
ET and DC in a single patient has only been described once . This case report describes a second patient treated with both DC and ET. A
37-year-old woman was admitted with a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. She had been suffering from a progressive headache and vomiting
since 1 week. On examination she was comatose [Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) E1M5V1]. Her pupils were equal and responsive to light. Plantar
reflexes were extensor bilaterally. CT-scan of the brain (Fig. 1a) revealed a left frontal hemorrhagic infarct surrounded by a zone of
hypodensity and early signs of transtentorial herniation. CT-venography (CT-v) showed thrombosis of the left transverse and superior
sagittal sinuses (Fig. 1b). The patient was started on low-molecular weight heparin (nadroparin, 5,700 IU twice daily). One hour later she
deteriorated (E1M1V1). Because of impending herniation, an emergency left-sided decompressive hemicraniectomy was performed. Despite an
uncomplicated procedure her clinical condition only slightly improved after surgery (E1M3Vtube) and she was transferred to a university
hospital specialized in CVT. In the following 2 days she barely improved and, therefore, decision for endovascular treatment was made.
Thrombolysis was considered too hazardous because of the recent operation, and therefore thrombosuction was performed using an Angiojet
catheter. After the procedure, the sinuses were recanalised, but both the superior sagittal and transverse sinus reoccluded the next day. In
the following days her consciousness gradually improved (E4M6V3). Initially she was severely disabled with aphasia and a hemiparesis. Three
months later, however, she had only a mild aphasia and was independent in all daily activities (modified Ranking Scale 2).Fig. 1a admission
CT-scan showing left hemispheric haemorrhage surrounded by a zone of hypodensity due to venous infarction. b CT-venography showing occlusion
of the superior sagittal sinus a admission CT-scan showing left hemispheric haemorrhage surrounded by a zone of hypodensity due to venous
infarction. b CT-venography showing occlusion of the superior sagittal sinus Evidence supporting the efficacy of endovascular thrombolysis
or decompressive hemicraniectomy in CVT is limited. No randomised studies on ET were identified by the a authors of a Cochrane review . A
systematic analysis of 72 case series concluded that ET appears to be reasonably safe and can be considered in severe cases that do not
respond to heparin therapy . Patients with impending transtentorial herniation, however, do not appear to benefit from endovascular
thrombolysis. Probably the effect of endovascular treatment comes too late and cannot prevent further brainstem compression . In such cases,
successful results of DC have been reported [3, 4, 8]. The combination of ET and DC has been reported once before in a case report . Despite
successful recanalisation of the major sinuses after local thrombolysis, the patient clinically deteriorated. Decompressive hemicraniectomy
in that patient eventually resulted in improvement of the patient’s condition and at 3 months she had a favourable outcome. In a single
center cohort of CVT patients, one patient also underwent both ET and DC, but no specific details on this patient are provided . In our
patient, hemicraniectomy was performed first to arrest impending herniation. Since she remained comatose after the procedure, mechanical
thrombectomy was performed subsequently. The fact that the patient recovered despite reocclusion of the major sinuses is not easily
explained. Possibly, the temporary opening of the sinuses may have restored venous flow sufficiently to prevent further infarction or
haemorrhage. It is also possible that the endovascular treatment did not influence the clinical evolution after the hemicraniectomy. In
patients treated with heparin only there is, surprisingly, no clear correlation between recanalisation and clinical outcome . In summary,
the combination of decompressive hemicraniectomy and endovascular thrombectomy in our patient appeared to be safe and resulted in a good
clinical outcome. None. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License
which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
J. M. Coutinho, A. D. Hama-Amin contributed equally.
