A patient with anaplastic meningioma and lung metastases resistant to conventional treatment underwent radiopeptide therapy with 177Lu-
DOTA-octreotate in our institute. The treatment resulted in significant improvement in patient's quality of life and inhibition of tumor
progression. This case may eventually help to establish the value of radiopeptide therapy in patients with this rare condition. Meningiomas
are generally slow-growing lesions that arise from intracranial and spinal meninges. They are usually perceived as benign tumours for which
radical surgery is the treatment of choice . However, they may occasionally behave aggressively in atypical or malignant meningiomas,
invading the brain and/or metastasising outside the CNS, which occurs in only 0.01% of all cases . The most common extracranial location of
metastasis is the lung followed by liver, lymph nodes and bones . Meningiomas present ideal targets for somatostatin receptor scintigraphy
(SRS) with 111In-DTPA-octreotide. However, the value of the radioreceptor therapy using radiolabeled somatostatin analog 177Lu-DOTA-
octreotate is not yet well established in patients with metastasized or inoperable meningiomas . Here, we present a patient with metastatic
anaplastic meningioma who benefited from radiopeptide targeting. A 62 year old female with intracranial anaplastic meningioma was referred
to our department for a restaging with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET/CT. The patient suffered from a protrusio bulbi of the left eye and
progressive facial pain. No conventional treatment option could be offered to the patient, who had undergone multiple surgical resections
and percutaneous radiation before. The fused PET/CT images (Biograph; Siemens Medical Solutions Inc) manifested multifocal accumulation in
the left temporal region with local bone infiltration. Furthermore, they demonstrated multiple pulmonary metastases in the upper lobe of the
left lung (Figure 1). In view of these findings, including the diagnosis of pulmonary metastases, the patient was referred for SRS to
evaluate the option of a palliative radiopeptide therapy with 177Lu- DOTA-octreotate. SRS images showed strong uptake in the left temporal
region as well as in the upper lobe of the left lung, consistent with the PET/CT findings (Figure 2). Due to the abundance and high affinity
of somatostatin receptors (sstr), we performed radiopeptide therapy with 177Lu- DOTA-octreotate consisting of 3 cycles (cumulative dose: 691
mCi) without any serious side effects (Figure 3). The patient experienced a dramatic reduction of facial pain assessed by visual analogue
scale (VAS) as well as a significant improvement in quality of life with a 30% increase in her performance status using karnofsky scoring 6
weeks after commencement of the treatment. Disease stabilization could also be achieved, according to functional MD Anderson criteria,
evaluated 3 months after termination of radiopeptide therapy Maximal intensity projection visualisation of PET/CT demonstrating the
intracranial meningioma and its pulmonary metastases. SPECT/CT images of somatostatin receptor scintigraphy display avid uptake in the
intracranial meningioma (2a and b) as well as in the pulmonary metastases (2c and d). Post-therapeutic 177Lu- DOTA-octreotate images show
radiopeptide accumulation in the tumors (A: anterior view, B: posterior view). The local recurrence rate of meningioma is determined by the
extent of the resection, histopathological grade and biological aggressiveness of the tumor . Once a meningioma recurs, it is more likely to
recur again later, resulting in a poor prognosis of the patient . 18F-FDG-PET/CT has been commonly used in patients with primary tumours of
central nervous system including meningioma for tumor grading, determination of the prognosis and discrimination of tumor recurrence from
radiation necrosis . With their high sstr density and location outside the blood-brain barrier, meningiomas also present ideal targets for
SRS with 111In-DTPA-octreotide which is the main imaging technique for neuro endocrine tuomors (NETs) but may be also used in other tumors
expressing somatostatin receptors such as neuroblastoma, pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma . This procedure is used apart from staging and
monitoring the effect of treatment for selecting patients for peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT), primarily used in
gastroenteropancreatic NETs with very encouraging results. The value of PRRT is not yet well established in patients with meningiomas . Our
patient experienced a dramatic symptomatic relief as well as a significant improvement in quality of life following the PRRT along with
inhibition of tumor progression. The presented case may help to establish the value of PRRT in patients with the rare condition of
anaplastic meningioma. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Conception of the case report: A.S., S.E., HJ.B.;
Collection and assembly of data: H.A., W.W., U.H.; Literature review and interpretation of data: A.S. S.E., H.A.; Drafting of the article:
A.S., HJ.B., S.E.; Critical revision of the article for important intellectual content: U.H., H.A. W.W. All authors have read and approved
the final manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
