We report here on a case of localized lymphoid hyperplasia of the pancreas in a 70-year-old man which manifested as double lesions (uncinate
process and tail) in the organ. The lesions were incidentally detected as hypoechoic lesions on ultrasonography and they appeared as delayed
enhancing lesions on the contrast-enhanced dynamic CT and MRI. Total pancreatectomy was performed, because malignant tumor could not be
excluded according to the preoperative imaging studies and the endoscopic ultrasound-guided biopsy failed. Pathology revealed localized
lymphoid hyperplasia. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course. He has been alive for 18 months after surgery. Localized lymphoid
hyperplasia is also called "pseudolymphoma", and this has been found in various organs, including the skin, orbit, thyroid, breast, lung,
gastrointestinal tract, liver and pancreas (1-6). It is characterized by the presence of hyperplastic lymphoid follicles with populations of
polymorphic and polyclonal cells, and these cell populations are composed of small mature lymphocytes, mature plasma cells, macrophages and
stromal fibrosis. Localized lymphoid hyperplasia of the pancreas is extremely rare and it has rarely been described in the literature (1-3).
The imaging findings of pancreatic localized lymphoid hyperplasia are not well known. Thus, it is still indistinguishable from other
pancreatic neoplasms both clinically or radiographically. To the best of our knowledge, only three cases of pancreatic localized lymphoid
hyperplasia have been reported in the English medical literature (1-3). Moreover, these reports included solitary localized lymphoid
hyperplasia of the pancreas and the imaging findings were briefly described as a hypoechoic lesion on ultrasonography (US) with a normal
arterial distribution on angiography (2). We report here on a case of double localized lymphoid hyperplasia of the pancreas with an emphasis
on the imaging findings of ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. A 70-year-old man was admitted to
our hospital for the evaluation of a pancreatic mass that was incidentally detected during a screening abdominal sonographic examination. He
was asymptomatic and he did not have any specific medical history. He had a habit of drinking one or two cups of alcohol daily for several
decades. The laboratory tests at the time of admission revealed that the CA19-9, CEA, alpha-fetoprotein, amylase and lipase levels were
within the normal limits. The ultrasonographic images showed a hypoechoic mass in the uncinate process of the pancreas, and this was not
accompanied by dilatation of the main pancreatic duct. There was no discernible vascularity within the mass on the color Doppler image (Fig.
1A). We then performed contrast-enhanced multidetector-row CT. The contrast-enhanced dynamic CT images revealed two round masses with one
each in the uncinate process (about 2 × 1.8 cm for the mass size) and tail (about 1.8 × 1.5 cm for the mass size) of the pancreas; these
isodense masses on the unenhanced CT images were slightly hypodense, slightly hyperdense and slightly hyperdense, respectively as compared
to the pancreas parenchyma on the contrast-enhanced arterial, portal, and delayed-phase CT images that were obtained at 30 seconds, 75
seconds and 180 seconds, respectively, after the injection of contrast agent (Fig. 1B, C). There were no enlarged lymph nodes in the
abdomen. MR imaging was performed to further evaluate these pancreatic masses. The MR images demonstrated that the two masses were
hypointense and hyperintense on the T1-and T2-weighted images, respectively (Fig. 1D). Although subtle enhancement of the two masses was
detected, these lesions were shown to be of slight hypointensity as compared to the intensity of the pancreas parenchyma on the gadolinium-
enhanced arterial phase T1-weighted image obtained at 25 seconds after the injection of contrast agent (Fig. 1E). Meanwhile, the mass
lesions were more enhanced than the pancreas parenchyma on the portal and delayed-phase T1-weighted MR images (Fig. 1F) obtained at 60
seconds and 180 seconds, respectively, after the injection of contrast agent. Several imaging findings of these tumors, such as the delayed
enhancement, the double lesions and the normal caliber of the main pancreatic duct, resulted in the preoperative tentative diagnosis of
neuroendocrine tumor or lymphoma. Under this impression, endoscopic US-guided biopsy was performed, but this failed. Finally, total
pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed for these masses because the malignant potential of these masses could not be ruled out. The gross
surgical specimen showed two well circumscribed yellowish masses in the uncinate process and tail of the pancreas (Fig. 1G). Microscopic
examination revealed lymphoid follicles with enlarged germinal centers and dense, rich collagenous fibrous tissue admixed with a
lymphoplasma cell infiltration (Fig. 1H). The immunohistochemical stains demonstrated that the follicular lymphocytic infiltrate of a
polyclonal origin was composed of germinal centers with cells expressing B-cell characteristics and these germinal centers were surrounded
by rims of cells expressing T-cell characteristics. No immunoreactivity for IgG4 was noted. These histologic features resulted in the
diagnosis of localized lymphoid hyperplasia of the pancreas. He had an uneventful postoperative course and he has been alive for 18 months
after surgery. Localized lymphoid hyperplasia can manifest as a focal mass-like lesion that is well-defined from the surrounding tissue (2).
Localized lymphoid hyperplasia has been described as a hypoechoic mass on ultrasonograms and as a well demarcated mass on CT images (2, 4,
5). In our case, the localized lymphoid hyperplasia was visualized in the form of a discernible mass with delayed enhancement on the imaging
studies. Given that the border between the localized lymphoid hyperplasia and the surrounding pancreas parenchyma was sharply demarcated on
the pathologic specimen, it seems to be natural that the localized lymphoid hyperplasia was seen as a circumscribed round mass on all
imaging studies. In the previous reports (4, 5) on lymphoid hyperplasia of the liver, the lesions appeared to be hypo- and hyperintense
nodules on the T1- and T2-weighted images, respectively, which is similar to our case. In regard to contrast enhancement, reactive lymphoid
hyperplasia of the liver showed a variety of dynamic enhancement patterns from arterial hypervascularity followed by washout to arterial
hypovascularity with slight enhancement. In our case, the localized lymphoid hyperplasia of the pancreas showed arterial hypovascularity
with delayed enhancement. We think that the enhancement pattern in our case was attributed to the presence of a rich fibrous matrix in the
lesions. The dilatation of the pancreatic duct is one of valuable additional findings for characterizing any pancreatic tumor. The presence
of dilatation of the pancreatic duct that is induced by a pancreatic mass usually increases the possibility of malignant tumor. According to
the previous reports (2, 3), pancreatic localized lymphoid hyperplasia was accompanied with the dilatation of the pancreatic duct or common
bile duct, and this was interpreted to be the result of the mass effect of localized lymphoid hyperplasia on the pancreatic duct or the
common bile duct. In our case, the diameter of the pancreatic duct showed a normal caliber. This may reflect that pancreatic localized
lymphoid hyperplasia is unrelated to the pancreatic duct for its origin and the tumor has a benign histology. In addition, the one mass that
was located in the uncinate process seemed to have no mass effect or a minimal mass effect on the main pancreatic duct. Localized lymphoid
hyperplasia is not considered to have any malignant potential (4, 5). Given that pseudolymphoma may denote a low-grade mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma, and malignant transformation of pseudolymphoma has been sporadically reported in the literature (5, 7), the
term "localized lymphoid hyperplasia" seems to more accurately reflect the pathologic findings of our case than the term "pseudolymphoma".
The differential diagnosis of localized lymphoid hyperplasia of the pancreas includes neuroendocrine tumor, autoimmune pancreatitis,
lymphoma and solid pseudopapillary tumor. Although neuroendocrine tumors are usually thought to be seen as hypervascular masses on the
arterial phase images, the degree, uniformity and temporal change of the enhancement on the dynamic contrast-enhanced images can be highly
variable (8). Especially, more attention needs to be paid to distinguish between a delayed-enhancing, nonfunctioning neuroendocrine tumor
and localized lymphoid hyperplasia. Given the imaging findings of localized lymphoid hyperplasia of the pancreas in this case, the presence
of cystic or necrotic change in the mass may favor a diagnosis of neuroendocrine tumor. The localized form of autoimmune pancreatitis may
present with a focal mass-like lesion and it share several imaging features with our case, such as delayed enhancement, a nondilated
pancreatic duct and tumor multiplicity (9). However, the localized form of autoimmune pancreatitis was reported to be often accompanied by
wall thickening and enhancement of the common bile duct and upstream dilatation, and particularly in the cases whose pancreatic head was
involved (9), which may be diagnostic points to differentiate it from localized lymphoid hyperplasia. Pancreatic lymphoma sometimes
manifests as a localized, well circumscribed mass in the pancreas, and this is not accompanied by dilatation of the pancreatic duct (10). In
contrast with pancreatic localized lymphoid hyperplasia, pancreatic lymphoma appears as a heterogeneous mass with low to intermediate signal
intensity on the T2-weighted images and as a hypovascular mass on the contrast-enhanced images. Finally, solid pseudopapillary tumor (SPT)
needs to be included in the list of the differential diagnoses because small (less than 3 cm) SPTs can appear as well-defined solid lesions
with delayed enhancement (11). In summary, we present here an interesting case of double pancreatic localized lymphoid hyperplasia with the
US, CT and MR imaging findings. Although it is rare, localized lymphoid hyperplasia of the pancreas should be included in the differential
diagnosis of pancreatic tumor, and especially when the imaging studies show a localized, delayed enhancing mass of the pancreas without any
dilatation of the pancreatic duct. Localized lymphoid hyperplasia of pancreas in 70-year-old man. A. Color Doppler ultrasonographic image
shows hypoechoic mass (asterisk) in uncinate process of pancreas without discernible vascularity within mass. A = aorta, S = superior
mesenteric vein. B, C. Contrast-enhanced 3-minute delayed phase CT images reveal two localized masses in uncinate process (about 2 × 1.8 cm
for mass size) and tail (about 1.8 × 1.5 cm for mass size) of pancreas without peripancreatic stranding (arrows in B and arrowheads in C),
and these masses show slightly more enhancement, as compared to that of pancreatic parenchyma. D. T2-weighted MR image shows localized
hyperintense mass without peripancreatic stranding in uncinate process of pancreas (arrow). E, F. Gadolinium-enhanced dynamic T1-weighted
images show slightly hypointense mass (arrow in E) on arterial phase image (E) in uncinate process of pancreas, and mass appears as slightly
hyperintense on portal phase image (F). G. Photograph of resected specimen shows well circumscribed yellowish mass (arrowheads) in uncinate
process of pancreas. H. Photomicrograph shows lymphoid follicles (asterisk) surrounded by dense collagenous tissue. Lymphoid follicles are
composed of enlarged germinal centers surrounded by rims of small lymphocytes (Hematoxylin & Eosin staining, × 100). On immunohistochemical
staining, neither lymphocytic infiltrate with monoclonal cell proliferation nor immunoreactivity for IgG4 was found in lesions.
