The World Health Organization (WHO) recently defined systemic Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (LPD)
of childhood as a life-threatening illness. However, this rare disease has not been extensively studied. Here we report a case of systemic
EBV-positive T-cell LPD in a previously healthy middle-aged man with a chief complaint of chronic diarrhea. The initial colon biopsy showed
focal infiltration of EBV-positive small lymphocytes without any atypia. However, the disease rapidly progressed and the patient required a
total colectomy due to severe gastrointestinal bleeding. Three and half months after admission, the patient died from a complication of
disseminated intravascular coagulation. The resected colon showed diffuse infiltration of EBV-positive atypical lymphocytes with ischemic
change. Most atypical lymphocytes were CD3+ or CD5+. The monoclonality of EBV was demonstrated by sequence variation analysis of the latent
membrane protein 1 (LMP1) gene in the colectomy specimen as well as in the initial biopsy. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated
lymphoproliferative disorders (LPDs) are common in immunocompromised patients, particularly in a post-transplantation setting. More than 90%
of these disorders are EBV-associated lesions of B-cell origin in the setting of pharmacologic immunosuppression (1) or after an organ
transplantation (2). Resting memory B cells are thought to be the site of EBV persistence within the body (3), but it has become
increasingly apparent that EBV can also infect T-lymphocytes (4). This conclusion is supported by the frequent detection of EBV in T-cell
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and cultures of peripheral blood lymphocytes from patients with chronic active EBV infection (CAEBV) (4). EBV
infection is also associated with natural killer (NK)/T-cell lymphomas and aggressive NK cell leukemia (5). Two major types of EBV-positive
T-cell LPDs of childhood have recently been defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) (6). One is systemic EBV-positive T-cell LPD of
childhood with a fulminant clinical course, and the other type is hyroa vacciniforme-like lymphoma with an indolent clinical course.
Systemic EBV-positive T-cell LPDs develop shortly after primary, acute EBV infection in previously healthy children and young adults.
Although it is a systemic disease, it mostly involves the liver and spleen, and rare cases have illustrated the involvement of the lymph
nodes, bone marrow, skin, and lungs (4, 7). All patients present with acute viral respiratory disease, jaundice or slight lymphadenopathy
(4) and die within days up to a year after diagnosis (7). Most reported cases show a monoclonal pattern of T-cell proliferation, either with
wild-type or a 30 bp deleted product of latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) gene (4, 7). Here, we report a fatal case of systemic EBV-positive
T-cell LPD with unique clinical presentation that mimicked inflammatory bowel disease, and with a monoclonal pattern of EBV LMP1 gene. A
45-yr-old male presented with diarrhea lasting for 45 days and weight loss (7 kg/month). He was healthy prior to experiencing these
symptoms. The laboratory findings showed elevated C-reactive protein (CRP; 6.8 mg/dL), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR; 80 mm/hr), white
blood cell count (WBC; 12.28 × 109/L), and platelet count (453 × 109/L). The patient had decreasing numbers of red blood cells (RBC; 4.19 ×
1012/L), and hemoglobin (12.5 g/dL), but his liver function test was normal with alanine aminotransferase (ALT) at 20 IU/L and aspartate
aminotransferase (AST) at 13 IU/L. A peripheral blood smear (PBS) showed normocytic normochromic anemia with no immature cells. There was no
ova nor parasite in stool examination. The patient did not have a fever or symptoms of an upper gastrointestinal disorder. The first
colonoscopy revealed multiple, variable sized, irregular shallow ulcerations from the rectum to the ileocecal valve (Fig. 1A). The
microscopic findings showed minimal crypt distortion with focal aggregation of normal looking lymphocytes (Fig. 2A). Empirical oral
metronidazole for the treatment of infectious colitis was prescribed. Three weeks after treatment, the patient's diarrhea progressed.
However, the follow-up colonoscopy and microscopic evaluation of the biopsies did not show any interval change (Fig. 2B). The treatment of
infectious colitis continued with intra-venous (IV) antibiotics. A follow-up colonoscopy, performed a week after the initiation of IV
antibiotic therapy, showed the ulcers were progressively getting worse (Fig. 1B, C). A combination of a high dose of steroid (budenofalk)
and antibiotics (salazopyrin) were prescribed under the presumptive diagnosis of ulcerative colitis. Unfortunately, three weeks after
beginning steroid therapy, the patient developed a fever (38.2℃) and hematochezia, and liver function tests were abnormal (ALT 85 IU/L and
AST 339 IU/L). The laboratory findings showed severe pancytopenia (WBC, 0.18 × 109/L; RBC, 1.72 × 1012/L; platelet count, 7 × 109/L; and
hemoglobin, 12.5 g/dL) with few atypical lymphocytes in the peripheral blood smear (PBS). The last colonoscopy showed extensive ulcerations
along the whole colon with fresh blood (Fig. 1D). The pathologic findings of the last colonoscopy showed severe infiltration of small to
medium sized lymphocytes with slight atypia (Fig. 2C, D). We confirmed the diagnosis of EBV-associated fulminant T-cell LPD from the last
biopsy by immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization for EBV early RNA (EBER). The immunohistochemical stains were positive for CD3 and
CD5. In addition, we were able to rule out the possibility of both B-cell LPD by negative staining of CD20, and NK/T-cell lymphoma by
negative staining of CD56. The patient underwent a total colectomy due to uncontrolled hematochezia, with an excisional liver biopsy for
pathological evaluation. The resected colon showed diffusely scattered multiple geographic ulcers of variable size involving the whole colon
from the ileocecal valve to the rectum. The ulcers extended to muscle layers (Fig. 3A, B), but no significant wall thickening or mass-like
lesions were present. There were several lymph nodes of variable size in the pericolic fat tissue. Microscopically, the slides from the
resected colon showed loss of glands and diffuse infiltration of medium- to large-sized pleomorphic atypical lymphocytes with an ischemic
change of the colon (Fig. 3C). The cytological lymphocyte atypia was slightly increased compared with previous biopsies. All lymph nodes
from the pericolic fat showed infiltration of atypical lymphocytes in the sinusoids (Fig. 3D, E). The liver biopsy showed mild infiltration
of lymphocytes in the portal tract and sinusoid (Fig. 3F). The atypical lymphocytes in both the colon and liver were CD3 positive (CD3+)
mixed with several CD5+ lymphocytes. There were no CD20+ or CD56+ cells (Fig. 4A, B, D). In situ hybridization for (EBER) was positive in
almost all of the lymphocytes (Fig. 4C, E). Analysis for gamma T-cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangement revealed a polyclonal pattern.
However, agarose gel electrophoretic analysis of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products of LMP1 gene in the resected colon and lymph nodes
demonstrated a monoclonal pattern (Fig. 4F). Three days after surgery, the patient died with accompanying disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC) and massive gastrointestinal bleeding. Monoclonality of the EBV genome was shown by retrospective sequence variation
analysis of the initial and follow-up biopsies (Fig. 4F). Systemic EBV-positive T-cell LPD is a life-threatening disease that has recently
been categorized in the spectrum of EBV-related T-cell LPDs by the WHO (6). This disease mostly occurs with an apparent primary EBV
infection, or more rarely, is associated with severe CAEBV in children or young adults. The survival rate is extremely low due to
hemophagocytosis and multiple organ failure occurring over the course of days to weeks. Awareness of this disease category and accumulation
of patient data will be necessary to reach an understanding of this fatal disease and to develop new modalities for early diagnosis and
treatment. In patients with a normal immune system, sustained T-cell infection by EBV occurs rarely, raising the possibility that the
infection of T lymphocytes and their subsequent unregulated growth is due, at least in part, to a defect in immune surveillance (7). The
clinical course of EBV-induced T-cell LPD reported by Quintanilla-Martinez et al. (7) is similar to the time course of cases that have been
described in EBV-induced LPDs in immunocompromised patients that developed B-cell proliferation, mainly in the post-transplantation setting
(8). The CAEBV infection and T-cell involvement of EBV show shorter survival times than those with B-cell infections (9). In a review of the
literature, we found that most cases of T-cell LPD following primary infection with EBV were reported in East Asian patients (6, 7), mostly
in children and young adults. The clinicopathologic descriptions were similar to our current case, with the exception of the patient's age
and presenting symptoms. All cases were monoclonal, as demonstrated either by TCR gene rearrangement or clonality of the EBV genome (10-12).
The clinical course for all reported patients was fulminant with patients dying within days and up to a few months after their diagnoses.
The organs most commonly involved in EBV-associated LPD were the liver, spleen (7) and heart (4). Although some cases of intestinal
involvement in EBV-associated B-cell LPDs have been reported (2, 13, 14), to our knowledge, the case described here is the first case of
EBV-positive T-cell LPD in a previously healthy patient presenting with intestinal involvement. The clinicopathological findings of this
case showed that adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma, extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma, enteropathy associated T-cell lymphoma and aggressive NK
cell leukemia could be considered as a differential diagnosis. Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma is associated with human T-cell leukemia virus
type 1 (HTLV-1) rather than EBV. Several cases of intestinal NK/T-cell lymphomas have been reported, most of which involved the small
intestine (5). Immunohistochemically, the atypical lymphocytes of this case were CD56- and CD3+. The patient showed features of
hemophagocytosis and multiple organs were involved without upper respiratory system infection or gross occurrence of mass-like lesions.
Neither a previous history, nor histologic evidence of enteropathy was found. The clinicopathologic features of aggressive NK cell leukemia
show some overlap with systemic T-cell LPD. The cells showing CD56 negativity with strong membranous staining of CD3 as well as the PBS test
for this case were compatible with systemic T-cell LPD. The remarkable clinical features of this case were: (i) the presence of EBV-
associated T-cell proliferation in a middle-aged, healthy patient without detectable immunodeficiency; and (ii) the patient's presentation
with intestinal involvement. The correct diagnosis of this patient was delayed because of minimal cytologic atypia of the lymphocytes.
However, EBER+ and monoclonality of the EBV genome were detected in the initial biopsies despite the unremarkable histologic atypia. We
therefore conclude that in situ hybridization for EBER and sequence variation analysis of the EBV LMP1 gene, together with awareness of this
rare and fatal disease are helpful for its early diagnosis. Endoscopic findings. (A) The first endoscopy revealed multiple ulcerations
scattered along the whole colon and ileocecal valve. (B, C) Endoscopy performed after antibiotic therapy showed that the ulcers had
increased in size and depth. (D) After steroid therapy, the ulcers continued to progress and were covered with fresh blood. Pathologic
findings of the biopsies. (A) The first biopsy showed normal colon mucosa with a slight increase in lymphocytic infiltration. No cytological
atypia of the lymphocytes are found (hematoxylin-eosin stain, × 200). (B) The biopsies from the follow-up colonoscopy showed edematous
stroma with vessel proliferation and irregularly shaped, dispersed crypts with minimal lymphocytic infiltration (H&E stain, × 200). (C, D)
The biopsies taken after the patient developed hematochezia showed severe small to medium sized lymphocytic infiltrations in the mucosa,
splitting muscle fibers, and cuffing blood vessels (H&E stain, × 400). Pathologic findings of the resected colon and liver. (A) The resected
specimen showed diffusely scattered multiple geographic ulcers of variable size involving the whole colon from the ileocecal valve to the
rectum. (B) On cut sections, the ulcers were shallow without any mass formation. (C) The microscopic findings showed a loss of glands and
diffuse infiltration of atypical lymphocytes with an ischemic change of the colon wall (H&E stain, × 200). (D) The pericolic lymph node
showed severe sinusoidal involvement of lymphocytic infiltration (H&E stain, × 200). (E) The lymphocytes were large and pleomorphic (H&E
stain, × 400). (F) The liver biopsy showed mild infiltration of lymphocytes in the portal tract and sinusoid (H&E stain, × 200).
Immunohistochemical stain, in situ hybridization and PCR findings. Immunohistochemical stains and in situ hybridization showed that most of
the atypical lymphocytes in colon and liver were EBER+, CD3+ or CD56- (colon: A, CD3; B, CD56; C, EBER ISH; and liver: D, CD3; E, EBER ISH;
× 400 H&E counterstained). Agarose gel electrophoresis analysis of the PCR products corresponding to the LMP1 gene showed a monoclonal
pattern. (F; lane 1: positive control [243 bp] "B cell lymphoma cell line BJAB", lane 2: negative control, lane 3: initial biopsy [273 bp],
lane 4: second biopsy [273 bp], lane 5 & 6: colectomy [273 bp]).
