Low intraabdominal pressures are recommended for laparoscopic procedures in patients with lower extremity venous valve agenesis. Peritoneal
inclusion cysts are uncommon lesions that usually occur in the pelvis of reproductive-age females. The case of a 7-year-old girl with an
inflamed peritoneal inclusion cyst with unusual right paracolic localization and congenital lower extremity superficial and deep venous
valve agenesis is presented. Inflammation of the peritoneal inclusion cyst was responsible for the signs of acute abdomen and subsequent
presentation at our center. The cystic structure was initially diagnosed using ultrasonography, and its complete extent (8cm x 6.5cm x 4cm)
was evident after magnetic resonance imaging. The minimal access approach was opted for to resect the entire cyst from the lateral border of
the ascending colon. Afterwards, the cyst was punctured to reduce its size and to retrieve the cyst wall using an endoscopic specimen
retrieval bag. Minimal access surgery precautions in this patient with congenital lower extremity venous valve agenesis are discussed.
Peritoneal inclusion cysts are uncommon lesions that occur in the pelvis of reproductive-age females with the average age of 32 years
(range, 17 to 61) at the time of diagnosis.1,2 Furthermore, in adult females a prior history of abdominal surgery, pelvic inflammatory
disease, or endometriosis is present. The common presenting symptom is lower abdominal or pelvic pain. Acute presentations, frequently
simulating appendicitis, have been described in adult females diagnosed with peritoneal inclusion cysts in previous reports.3,4 The cysts
are often multiple and can range from 1cm to 20cm in diameter with some forming confluent masses that cover the entire pelvis. Peritoneal
inclusion cysts can be free floating in the abdomen or adherent to pelvic or abdominal structures. There are no reports in the literature to
date on peritoneal inclusion cysts in a prepubertal female. Also, the literature is void on the minimal access management of patients with
congenital lower extremity venous valve agenesis. A 7-year-old girl was referred with acute, severe, right lower quadrant abdominal pain
with symptoms similar to those of acute appendicitis. The girl had a history of congenital agenesis of the superficial and deep venous
valves of the lower extremities. An ultrasound examination was performed that detected a large cystic structure in the right paracolic
recess. Further investigations with magnetic resonance imaging revealed the full size (8cm x 6.5cm x 4cm) and extension (lateral paracolic
extension from the cecum to the hepatic flexure along the length of the ascending colon) of the cyst (Figure 1). The laboratory
investigations were not remarkable, and infection parameters were elevated. Tumor markers were normal: α-feto protein (AFP)-1.4ng/mL (normal
<15), carcino embryonic antigen (CEA)-1.3ng/mL (normal <5), and ß-Human chorionic gonadotropin (ßhCG)-2mIU/mL (normal <50). Magnetic
resonance imaging demonstrating the right paracolic localization of the peritoneal inclusion cyst (arrow); axial view (top) and coronal view
(bottom). With the differential diagnosis of colonic duplication, mesenterial cyst, or peritoneal inclusion cyst, a minimal access approach
was opted to diagnose and resect the cystic structure. The patient was placed in a supine position, and the procedure was performed using a
5-mm 30° scope along with two 5-mm instruments. Access was gained into the abdominal cavity by using an open access technique with an
incision through the left umbilical fold and the open placement of a 10-mm port for the scope. Insufflation pressure was maintained at 8mm
Hg with a flow of 0.5L/m considering the congenital lower extremity valve agenesis manifestation, to prevent excessive venous stasis of the
lower extremities during the procedure. Two 5-mm working ports were introduced into the upper abdominal and lower abdominal cavity under
vision. Dissection was commenced at the lower pole of the peritoneal inclusion cyst located lateral to the cecum (Figure 2). The adhesions
were dissected using the LigaSure (Covidien, Mansfield, MA) device (Figure 3). No communication existed between the lumen of the colon and
the cyst. However, due to the chronic inflammation of the peritoneal inclusion cyst, severe adhesions were encountered throughout and at
times obscuring the plane of dissection (Figure 4). When the cyst was dissected free from its attachments, a needle was introduced through
the cyst wall to aspirate the cystic contents. An endoscopic specimen retrieval bag was used to remove the cyst wall. Care was also taken to
identify the right ureter and to prevent injury during dissection between the cyst extended along the entire length of the ascending colon
up to the hepatic flexure (Figure 5). A concomitant elective appendectomy was also performed. The procedure was completed in 75 minutes.
Histology demonstrated an epithelial fibrous cyst wall with a chronic recurrent phlegmonous inflammatory reaction. Laparoscopic view of the
peritoneal inclusion cyst (arrow) approximated along the lateral border of the cecum (C). The LigaSure device was used to dissect between
the plane of the peritoneal inclusion cyst (arrow) and the cecum (C). Severe adhesions were encountered between the peritoneal inclusion
cyst and the colon closer to the hepatic flexure obscuring the plane of dissection. The retroperitoneal space (RP) exposed after the cyst
resection. The dissection was performed up to the level of the liver (L)/Hepatic flexure along the lateral length of the ascending colon
(AC). Peritoneal inclusion cysts have not been observed or reported to date in prepubertal females. Although these cysts have been reported
to occur in multiples,3 the case presented herein demonstrates a solitary cyst with a paracolic extension. The paracolic extension of the
cyst and its proximity to the lateral wall of the ascending colon led to the presumption of colon duplication in the differentials. It was
also presumed that the inflammation of the duplicated colon was responsible for the acute abdominal pain. However, no luminal continuity
between the cysts and the colon could be identified, and the reason for the infection of the cyst was not confirmed. Bacterial translocation
from the colon can be hypothesized to be the cause of recurrent inflammation of the cyst. The minimal access approach toward the management
of peritoneal inclusion cysts has been reported in an adult female with removal and drainage of the mass.5 Further reports with minimal
access surgical options for these cysts do not exist for either the adult or the adolescent population. The laparoscopic approach enabled
direct visualization of the cyst and complete dissection and removal with the advantages associated with minimal access surgery. The
application of a tissue-sealing device was advantageous in this surgery. Because the patient presented with known congenital lower extremity
venous valve agenesis, minimal abdominal insufflation pressures were used to prevent venous stasis in the lower extremities. Congenital
lower extremity venous valve agenesis with the absence of valves both in the superficial and deep veins is seldom reported in the
literature, and it has been suggested that this may be because the condition is underdiagnosed.6 This type of valve agenesis is genetic,
because familial congenital absence of valves in the deep leg veins has been reported.7 Although this condition has relevance for minimal
access surgery with the consequences of prolonged venous stasis during prolonged procedures, the literature is void of reports of the
association between laparoscopic surgery and the clinical condition of congenital lower extremity venous valve agenesis. Critical review of
laparoscopic procedures has shown its association with thromboembolic complications.8 Thrombosis may be caused by detrimental effects of
pneumoperitoneum on venous flow (increased abdominal pressure and negative Trendelenburg position) and activation of the hemostatic system.
The effect of pneumoperitoneum on the venous flow of lower extremities has been further investigated and significant differences were found
when pressures of 11mm Hg were compared with 14mm Hg with a significant increase in cross-sectional areas of the femoral and saphenous vein
when high pressures were used.9 Because our patient was a child, the lower pressure of 8mm Hg was used for the surgical procedure, because
the risk factor of congenital lower extremity venous valve agenesis was known. However, if this condition is previously known in adolescents
or adults, it may be beneficial to use intermittent sequential compression of the lower limbs to prevent venous stasis in laparoscopic
surgery as suggested for colorectal procedures.10 Although, there were no complications and our patient had a 2-year follow-up, the possible
impact of thrombotic complications in patients with congenital lower extremity venous valve agenesis in the development of thrombosis after
laparoscopic surgery must be carefully considered.
