Sir, Jejunal diverticula are uncommon, acquired lesions which are usually asymptomatic. When symptomatic they present with chronic
nonspecific symptoms like pain, nausea, malnutrition and sometimes with acute presentation like gastrointestinal hemorrhage, peritonitis and
obstruction. While chronic pain and malabsorption occurs in 40% of cases, perforation occurs only in 2.3–6.4% of all diverticula-bearing
patients. We report a case of 60-year-old male, who presented in the emergency with generalized abdominal pain, distension and constipation
since four days. The patient had a past history of frequent abdominal pain since three years. On general physical examination he had
tachypnea, tachycardia and blood pressure was within normal range. Per abdominal examination revealed distension, generalized tenderness,
guarding and rigidity. Routine laboratory investigations were within normal limits. Abdominal X- ray displayed air under both the domes of
the diaphragm. On laparotomy, multiple jejunal diverticula were present on the mesenteric side. A perforation measuring 0.5 × 0.5 cm was
found in the diverticulum which was approximately 2 feet distal to the duodenojejunal junction [Figure 1]. Peritoneal lavage with resection
of only perforation-bearing segment with end to end anastomosis was done. Postoperative course was uneventful. Perforation of jejunal
diverticulum along with multiple diverticula on the mesenteric side Jejunal diverticula are pseudo diverticula which were first described by
Somerling in 1794 and by Sir Astley Cooper in 1807. Their incidence on enteroclysis is 2.0–2.3% and on autopsy it is 0.06–4.6%. They are
more common in elderly males (58%). The most common part of the small bowel to be affected by diverticula is the proximal jejunum (75%),
followed by the distal jejunum (20%) and the ileum (5%). Coexistent diverticula can be present in the colon (30-75%), duodenum (15-42%),
esophagus (2%), stomach (2%) and urinary bladder (12%) of patients. Jejunal diverticula are usually found incidentally on small bowel
radiography such as double-contrast enteroclysis or at surgery. Perforation of jejunal diverticula is a rare complication. Peritonitis
caused by perforated jejunal diverticula can be localized and self-limiting because the diverticula are at the mesenteric border of the
bowel and readily allow the small bowel mesentery to wall them off. The treatment of choice for perforated jejunal diverticulum with
peritonitis is segmental intestinal resection with primary anastomosis including non-inflamed diverticula. If the diverticula are extensive,
resection may have to be limited to the segment containing the perforated diverticulum to avoid short bowel syndrome. Other procedures like
simple closure, excision, and invagination, are associated with an approximately three times greater mortality rate. Simple diverticulectomy
may impair blood flow because of its mesenteric location, and therefore may lead to anastomotic breakdown or fistula formation. The reported
overall mortality rate is 24%, with a mortality rate of 14% in cases where resection of the involved segment with primary anastomosis was
done. The high mortality appears to be related to the advanced age of the patients as well as to delayed diagnosis and treatment.
