Stenting of the central veins is well established for treating localized venous stenosis. The techniques regarding catheter preservation for
central venous catheters in the superior vena cava have been described. We describe here a method for stent implantation in the superior
vena cava and the left brachiocephalic vein, and principally via a single jugular venous puncture, while saving a left sided jugular central
venous catheter in a patient suffering from central venous stenosis of the superior vena cava and the left brachiocephalic vein. Central
venous stenosis (CVS) is a common problem in patients with a long standing implanted central venous catheter or a compressing mediastinal
mass and this can lead to a critical situation with facial and neck swelling, distended neck veins, headache due to cerebral edema, dyspnea
and in severe cases stridor and mental changes (1). In this situation stenting of the affected venous vessels (superior vena cava , left
brachiocephalic vein , right brachiocephalic vein left/right internal jugular vein and left/right subclavian vein ) via the endovascular
approach is an effective treatment option (2). However, in-situ catheter-material such as port- or hemodialysis catheters pose the problem
of catheter-fixation to the vessel wall and this is possibly followed by functional deficiency due to catheter compression or catheter
defects caused by the expanded stent (3). Therefore, the catheter material may temporarily be removed before stent implantation. So far this
procedure has only been described for the SVC (3-6). In this case report we describe a complex procedure with an in situ port catheter which
was temporarily repositioned for stent implantation in the SVC and LBV. A 54 year-old male patient with a central bronchial carcinoma (UICC
stage IIIb) was referred to our clinic with symptoms of CVS, including distended neck veins, plethora of the face and upper extremities and
dyspnea, for palliative SVC stenting. He had undergone left-sided subclavian port implantation nine months before for chemotherapy with
Cisplatin and Vinorelbin in combination with external beam radiotherapy. Since there was no sufficient response to the first-line therapy,
the medication was replaced by second-line therapy with Gemzar and Navelbine. Because of tumor progression, his CVS symptoms were considered
to be due to tumor-related SVC stenosis and the patient was referred to our hospital for SVC stenting. The RJV was punctured with an 18G
needle and biplane diagnostic angiography revealed a compression of the SVC at the level of the tumor which was causing a high grade SVC
stenosis (Fig. 1A, G). Thereafter, a 7 Fr-introducer sheath (Pinnacle Introducer sheath, Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted and additional
diagnostic angiography of the LBV was performed: this showed a subtotal stenosis of the LBV in its central two-thirds (Fig. 1B, G). After
repositioning the tip of the port-catheter into the RBV using a 15 mm Andra-snare (Angiopro, Speyer, Germany), a self-expandable stent (14
mm diameter; 40 mm length Sinus-Repo-stent, Optimed, Ettlingen, Germany) was placed in the SVC without prior balloon dilatation (Fig. 1C,
H). Balloon dilation was performed after placement of the self expandable stent in the SVC using a 10 mm diameter, 40 mm length Fox balloon
(Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL) (Fig. 1C, D). Thereafter, the LJV was punctured and a 7 Fr-introducer sheath (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan)
was introduced (Fig. 1D). Using the same 15 mm Andra-snare, the port-catheter was repositioned in the distal part of the LBV and it was
fixed there by keeping the loop-wire of the snare around the port catheter, while the catheter of the snare was removed (Fig. 1E, I). Then
the LBV stenosis was crossed with a guide-wire via the same sheath while the loop wire remained in place and two stents (12 mm diameter/40
mm length, and 12 mm diameter/60 mm length, respectively, Sinusflex-Repo, Optimed, Ettlingen, Germany) were placed via the same introducer
sheath in the LBV, extending from the SVC to the LBV after pre-ballooning the stenosis with a 8 mm diameter/40 mm length Fox balloon (Abbott
Laboratories) (Fig. 1I). Finally, the snare's catheter was inserted again and the port catheter was repositioned through the newly implanted
catheter into the SVC (Fig. 1F, J). After manual compression the introducer sheaths were removed. The signs of CVS regressed within a few
hours and the patient was discharged the same day with markedly short- and midterm symptom relief. The patient died two months later due to
tumor progression without any signs of CVS. Central venous stenosis is a common problem in patients with mediastinal tumors and/or central
venous catheters with an incidence of 11% to 50% depending on the catheter type and access route (6-8). Interestingly, catheter associated
stenosis occurs more often in patients with a subclavian central venous access (42%) than in patients with an internal jugular venous access
(10%). CVS is more often seen with left sided central venous catheters than with right sided central venous catheters, and this is possibly
due to a longer and more tortuous course of the left-sided catheters through the LBV (9). The treatment of CVS using percutaneous
transluminal angioplasty (PTA) and stenting is a well accepted technique with usually rapid symptom relief in these patients (2, 5, 8). The
complications of this procedure, including rupture of the SVC or stent migration, are rare (2). An in situ central venous catheter is
usually removed before stenting to prevent catheter fixation between the stent and the vessel wall with the associated risk of catheter
dysfunction or catheter loss (3). To avoid catheter removal and the associated strain and risks of a new central venous puncture (e.g.
bleeding, pneumothorax and air embolism) for the patient, a technique that allows stenting of the SVC without removal of central venous
catheters has been proposed by several authors (5, 6). In this case report we describe the combined stenting of the SVC and the LBV with an
in-situ central-venous catheter in a patient with SVC stenosis due to bronchial cancer, which was treated with external beam radiation
therapy and multiple courses of chemotherapy, and a second stenosis in the proximal two-thirds of the LBV in the presence of a central
venous port catheter. Due to the coincidence of the stenosis and catheter position in the LBV, we suspected the LBV stenosis as being the
result of catheter-related scarring (Fig. 1B, G). To prevent the removal of the central venous catheter, it has to first be dislocated in
the RJV before SVC stent implantation (Fig. 1H). Thereafter, it was dislocated in the distal LBV using a snare (Fig. 1E, I). The removal of
the snare-catheter while the central venous catheter was held in place with the snare-wire allowed the simultaneous introduction of the
stents through the same 7 Fr sheath and this avoided another venous puncture and sheath insertion (Fig. 1F, I). Further, another
angiographic control procedure of the central venous catheter could be avoided prior to repositioning because the central venous catheter
was constantly fixed with the snare and it was ready to be advanced in its original position. This approach is on the one hand convenient
for the experienced interventionalist and it is also convenient for the patient since no new central venous catheter has to be placed.
Further, one venous puncture and sheath insertion were avoided by using one sheath for the snare and the stents, and this reduced the risk
of pneumothorax, bleeding and air embolism. Additionally, this procedure is cost-effective compared to the standard procedure since no new
port system has to be implanted. The first introducer sheath was inserted in the RJV because of the known SVC stenosis. Due to the lack of
proper preinterventional imaging, the LBV stenosis was discovered on the first diagnostic angiograms. In retrospect, the puncture of the RJV
was not necessary since all the stent and snare insertions could have been performed via a single introducer sheath placed in the LBV, which
highlights the value of adequate pre-interventional imaging, such as contrast-enhanced CT, for treatment planning. In contrast to the
previous reports by Bovenschulte et al. (3) and Palmi√© et al. (4) we used an internal jugular venous access route instead of a femoral
venous access route. This approach is known to reduce the rate of venous thrombosis and post-punctional infections (10). It also facilitated
proximal catheter displacement. In conclusion, SVC and LBV stenting in a patient with CVS while preserving existing ventral venous catheters
is feasible via a single venous access. The procedure is safe and it improves the patient's quality of life, while omitting the need for a
second intervention for central venous catheter re-insertion. Angiographic and schematic illustration of procedure. A. Diagnostic
angiography showing severe stenosis of superior vena cava (arrow). B. Diagnostic angiography of left brachiocephalic vein reveals subtotal
stenosis (arrows). C. After repositioning tip of port-catheter into right brachiocephalic vein using 15 mm Andra-snare, self-expandable
stent is placed in superior vena cava (arrows). D. Left jugular vein is punctured and 7 Fr introducer sheath is introduced (arrowhead).
Released stent in superior vena cava (arrow). E. Using Andra-snare (arrow), port-catheter (arrowhead) is repositioned in distal part of left
brachiocephalic vein and is fixed there by keeping loop-wire of snare around port catheter, while snare's catheter is removed. F. Left
brachiocephalic vein stenosis is crossed with guide-wire via same sheath while snare's loop wire remains in place and two 12 mm stents
(arrow) are placed via same introducer sheath in left brachiocephalic vein, extending from superior vena cava to left brachiocephalic vein.
Finally snare's catheter is inserted again and port catheter is repositioned into superior vena cava (arrowhead). G-J. Schematic drawing of
procedure. Initial situation with stenosis in superior vena cava and left brachiocephalic vein and in situ port catheter (G). Port catheter
is repositioned in right brachiocephalic vein using snare before stent is placed in superior vena cava (H). Then port catheter is positioned
in distal part of left brachiocephalic vein and two stents are placed in left brachiocephalic vein and superior vena cava via same sheath
(I). Final situation with preserved port catheter (J).
