This article explores how imaging can be used to investigate a patient with suspected early dementia This series provides an update on the
best use of different imaging methods for common or important clinical presentations. The series advisers are Fergus Gleeson, consultant
radiologist, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, and Kamini Patel, consultant radiologist, Homerton University Hospital, London. To suggest a topic
for this series, please email us at practice@bmj.com. All patients with suspected dementia should have structural brain imaging Structural
imaging is useful not only for excluding intracranial space occupying lesions, but also for arriving at a specific dementia subtype
diagnosis The pattern of regional brain atrophy—particularly using high resolution volumetric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—has value in
distinguishing the common neurodegenerative causes of dementia T2 weighted and fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI sequences are
highly sensitive to ischaemic damage in the cerebral white matter Other MRI sequences and imaging modalities (including positron emission
tomography (PET) and dopamine transporter (DAT) scans) have diagnostic value in particular clinical settings. A 58 year old right handed
woman was referred with a three year history of word finding difficulty and poor memory. Problems with reading, calculation, and spelling
had emerged more recently. She could find her way around and was still driving. She was more irritable and less outgoing. Her symptoms were
slowly progressive with a suggestion of day to day variability. There was no significant past medical history and she took no medications.
There was a family history of cardiovascular disease but not of dementia. She did not drink alcohol to excess but had a 25 pack year smoking
history. The physical examination was unremarkable. The mini mental state examination score was 25/30: she could recall all three items
after a delay, but lost points on orientation, naming, calculation, and for following a three stage command. Initial investigations,
including full blood count, electrolytes, liver function, thyroid function, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, vitamin B12, folate, and a chest
x ray, were normal. As with many patients presenting with early cognitive problems, the differential diagnosis is wide. Anxiety and
depression are associated with cognitive symptoms and they also complicate established dementia. Space occupying lesions including tumours,
though unlikely, require consideration. Dementia—acquired, progressive cognitive impairment sufficient to impair activities of daily
living—is more typically encountered in older people, but is not uncommon at younger ages.1 In an ex-smoker with a family history of
cardiovascular disease, vascular cognitive impairment, which can be associated with focal cognitive symptoms, depression, and insidious
rather than stepwise cognitive decline, should be considered. Alzheimer’s disease is the most common neurodegenerative cause of dementia.
The history of memory and executive decline in the context of fluctuations makes dementia with Lewy bodies possible, even without
parkinsonism or visual hallucinations. Naming and behavioural problems are commonly seen within the frontotemporal lobar degeneration
spectrum, which includes behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (previously Pick’s disease), progressive non-fluent aphasia, and
semantic dementia (fluent speech with loss of word meaning). Critically, distinguishing these causes from one another has implications for
management, as acknowledged in UK national dementia guidelines.2 Surgery for an intracranial mass lesion is potentially curative, as is
pharmacotherapy for depression. Even in the absence of disease modifying therapies, other dementia disorders still require specific
treatment strategies, such as modification of vascular risk factors in vascular cognitive impairment, and acetylcholinesterase inhibition
for Alzheimer’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies, for example. Accurate diagnosis facilitates prognosis and counselling, referral to
appropriate services and voluntary organisations, applications for relevant benefits, and important lifestyle, occupational, and legal
decisions, including those related to driving. Although a detailed clinical assessment remains the mainstay of the evaluation of a patient
with early dementia, UK, European, and US guidelines recommend that all patients with cognitive impairment should undergo structural imaging
as part of the diagnostic work up.3 4 5 Brain imaging is increasingly used to help distinguish different forms of dementia from one another,
whereas in the past it was principally undertaken to exclude treatable intracranial mass lesions, haematomata, and hydrocephalus, which
account for less than 1% of all cases of dementia.3 Where magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is not available or contraindicated, computed
tomography (which does involve exposure to ionising radiation) can usefully exclude major space occupying lesions, hydrocephalus, and large
infarcts. Modern multidetector computed tomography scanners make it possible to acquire volumetric imaging data of the whole brain in a few
seconds, which allows high resolution multiplanar reconstructions to be performed. Images reconstructed in the coronal plane allow detailed
assessment of the medial temporal lobe structures(fig 1 ). Fig 1 Bilateral medial temporal lobe atrophy (right hippocampus illustrated with
arrows) in the same subject with Alzheimer’s disease demonstrated on coronal images acquired with: (A) 64 detector row computed tomography
scanning; (B) 1.5 tesla MRI volumetric T1 weighted sequence (adapted from Wattjes MP, Henneman WJ, van der Flier WM, de Vries O, Träber F,
Geurts JJ, et al. Diagnostic imaging of patients in a memory clinic: comparison of MR imaging and 64-detector row CT. Radiology
2009;253:174-83, with permission) MRI, with its superior contrast resolution, is increasingly preferred over computed tomography in the
evaluation of suspected dementia.2 A basic dementia sequence including a high resolution structural volumetric T1 weighted scan and T2
weighted or fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences can be obtained in approximately 20 minutes. MRI does not involve ionising
radiation, but claustrophobia may be a limiting factor in some patients. MRI is contraindicated in patients with pacemakers and certain
metallic implants, and earplugs should be worn to prevent the possibility of cochlear damage. T1 weighted volumetric MRI scanning provides a
very detailed assessment of brain structure, allowing for the assessment of the presence or absence and pattern of brain volume loss, ie,
atrophy. When evaluating a patient with cognitive impairment it is particularly valuable to assess for medial temporal lobe atrophy on
coronal reformats, either qualitatively or using simple rating scales. The presence of bilateral, symmetrical hippocampal atrophy
distinguishes mild Alzheimer’s disease from controls with approximately 80-85% sensitivity and specificity (fig 2A ).4 6 Alzheimer’s disease
is also associated with relatively greater and more disproportionate hippocampal atrophy than dementia with Lewy bodies (fig 2B).7 In
contrast, asymmetric temporal lobe atrophy with an anterior>posterior gradient is at least 85% specific for frontotemporal lobar
degeneration,8 and focal left inferior/anterior temporal lobe atrophy is highly suggestive of semantic dementia (fig 2C).9 The presence of
medial temporal lobe atrophy in patients with isolated memory impairment (mild cognitive impairment) has high predictive value for the
subsequent development of Alzheimer’s disease,10 and this has been incorporated into new proposed diagnostic criteria.11 12 However, the
absence of medial temporal lobe atrophy does not exclude a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease, and patients with young onset Alzheimer’s
disease may have prominent posterior atrophy with relative sparing of medial temporal lobe structures. Fig 2 (A) T1 weighted coronal
volumetric MRI at 1.5 tesla showing symmetrical medial temporal lobe (MTL) atrophy (circled) in postmortem proven Alzheimer’s disease; (B)
T1 weighted coronal volumetric MRI at 1.5 tesla showing relative sparing of MTL structures (circled) in postmortem proven dementia with Lewy
bodies; (C) T1 weighted coronal volumetric MRI at 3 tesla showing highly asymmetric inferior left temporal lobe and hippocampal atrophy
(arrows) in frontotemporal lobar degeneration, semantic dementia subtype; (D) T2 weighted coronal volumetric MRI at 1.5 tesla showing
symmetrical MTL atrophy (circled) and small vessel white matter disease (arrows) in a patient with clinically diagnosed mixed
vascular/Alzheimer’s disease (D: adapted from Bastos Leite AJ, Scheltens P, Barkhof F. Pathological aging of the brain: an overview. Top
Magn Reson Imaging 2004;15:369-89, with permission) T2 weighted or FLAIR sequences are highly sensitive for detecting white matter
abnormalities, which can reflect demyelination but, much more commonly in this age group, cerebrovascular disease. As well as detecting
major strokes, these sequences allow visualisation of small strategic infarcts (such as within the thalamus and other subcortical nuclei)
and small vessel ischaemic white matter damage. Although an increased white matter lesion load suggests vascular disease, particularly in
combination with lesions in the basal ganglia and brain stem, the pathophysiology and cognitive consequences of MRI white matter
hyperintensities remain the subject of ongoing research,13 and it is important not to over interpret minor vascular disease that commonly
accompanies ageing. Significant white matter and other ischaemic changes in the presence of hippocampal atrophy support a diagnosis of mixed
vascular cognitive impairment/Alzheimer’s dementia (fig 2D). MRI scanning using a variety of additional sequences can provide other valuable
diagnostic information. Thus, in the correct clinical context, the presence of temporal lobe signal change is suggestive of infection or
inflammation (fig 3A );14 diffusion weighted imaging can help distinguish acute from chronic vascular disease, and the finding of
neocortical or striatal abnormalities can aid the diagnosis of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (fig 3B);15 and T2* sequences sensitive to iron
deposition can demonstrate microhaemorrhages due to amyloid angiopathy (fig 3C) or vascular disease.16 Fig 3 (A) Axial FLAIR MRI showing
left hippocampal swelling and hyperintensity (arrow) in voltage gated potassium channel complex antibody associated limbic encephalitis; (B)
Axial diffusion weighted MRI in a patient with sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease demonstrating widespread areas of confluent bilateral
cortical restricted diffusion with similar restricted diffusion in the caudate nuclei and left putamen; (C) axial gradient—echo T2* weighted
imaging demonstrates multiple microbleeds (examples circled) indicating cerebral amyloid angiopathy in a patient with familial Alzheimer’s
disease (A: adapted from Barkhof F, Fox NC, Bastos-Leite AJ, Scheltens P, eds. Neuroimaging in dementia. Springer-Verlag, 2011, with
permission; B: image courtesy Harpreet Hyare, MRC Prion Unit, University College London; C: adapted from Ryan NS, Bastos-Leite AJ, Rohrer
JD, Werring DJ, Fox NC, Rossor MN, et al. Cerebral microbleeds in familial Alzheimer’s disease. Brain 2011: Jun 17, with permission)
Although metabolic or functional imaging is typically not performed routinely, it can provide valuable diagnostic information in certain
circumstances. Where dementia with Lewy bodies is suspected, demonstration of central dopamine depletion using positron emission tomography
(PET) (fig 4A ) or single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) dopamine transporter (DAT) scanning has good diagnostic sensitivity
and specificity (78% and 90% in one study17), and is now included as a suggestive feature in diagnostic criteria.18 The demonstration of
temporoparietal hypometabolism using fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET or SPECT scanning supports a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease over
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (fig 4B);19 and in patients with personality or behavioural change in whom structural scanning is normal,
the demonstration of focal frontal hypometabolism using FDG-PET scanning supports a diagnosis of frontotemporal lobar degeneration.20
Currently research tools, new PET tracers appear to have very high sensitivity and specificity for detecting cerebral amyloid pathology (Fig
4C, D), and are likely to find clinical utility in the near future.21 All these techniques involve the injection of radioactive tracers,
with a small exposure to ionising radiation. Fig 4 (A) Dopamine transporter imaging shows symmetrical reduced basal ganglia uptake (dot-
like, rather than comma-like, in appearance) in a patient with clinically probable dementia with Lewy bodies; (B) FDG-PET shows right
frontotemporal hypometabolism (arrow) in a patient with clinically probable behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia. Warm colours
represent high glucose uptake; (C, D) F18 (florbetapir) amyloid PET imaging shows absence of significant binding in (C) a normal control;
and (D) significant amyloid deposition (warm/hot colours) in a patient with clinically diagnosed Alzheimer’s disease (images courtesy of
AVID Radiopharmaceuticals, Inc.) Our patient underwent MRI, which revealed no evidence of a space occupying lesion, and very minor vascular
load. There was highly asymmetric left temporal lobe atrophy with an anterior>posterior gradient (fig 2C). Neuropsychometric testing
confirmed profound anomia and semantic memory impairment. A diagnosis of frontotemporal lobar degeneration, semantic dementia variant was
made. Treatment with acetylcholinesterase inhibition was not indicated;2 the patient contacted the driving authorities and stopped driving;
and was referred for speech and language therapy and to the Pick’s Disease Support Group. Neuroimaging in dementia. Barkhof F, Fox NC,
Bastos-Leite AJ, Scheltens P, eds. Springer-Verlag, 2011 Contributors: JMS conceived and drafted the manuscript, which was revised by the
other authors who have all approved the final version. JDW selected the patient. JMS is the guarantor. Competing interests: All authors have
completed the Unified Competing Interest form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf (available on request from the corresponding author) and
declare: no support from any organisation for the submitted work; this work was undertaken at University College London Hospitals/University
College London, which received a proportion of funding from the Department of Health’s National Institute for Health Research Biomedical
Research Centres funding scheme. The Dementia Research Centre is an Alzheimer’s Research UK Coordinating Centre and has also received
equipment funded by Alzheimer’s Research UK. JMS is a UK Higher Education Funding Council for England clinical senior lecturer. JDW is a
Wellcome Trust senior clinical fellow. NCF is a Medical Research Council senior clinical fellow. MNR and NCF are National Institute for
Health Research senior investigators. The funders did not influence the writing of this review. JMS will shortly be commencing a study with
AVID Radiopharmaceuticals Inc. who manufacture florbetapir (fig 4); the authors report no other relationships or activities that have
influenced the submitted work. Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed. Patient consent obtained. Cite this
as: BMJ 2011;343:d5568 Previous articles in this series Investigating suspected subarachnoid haemorrhage in adults (2011;342:d2644) Role of
brain imaging in early parkinsonism (2011;342:d638) Imaging transient ischaemic attack with diffusion weighted magnetic resonance imaging
(2010;340:c2215) Investigating suspected bone infection in the diabetic foot (2009;339:b4690)
