Dear Editor, In transfusion medicine, it can be a challenge to obtain compatible blood for patients who have clinically important
alloantibodies to high-prevalence antigens. We describe a case which examples the decision process for autologous blood deposition in the
Dutch health care system. In September 2006, a 56-year-old man was admitted to the emergency room after a serious accident. Coagulation and
hematology parameters were in normal range except for a low hemoglobin of 7.9 g/dL. His blood group was determined as O, Rhesus D-positive
and antibody screening (DiaMed) was negative. Transfusion anamnesis was also negative. Two units of packed erythrocytes were administrated.
Eight days later hemoglobin had dropped to 7.1 g/dL. Upon a negative antibody screening, 2 units of erythrocytes were transfused. After
20 days, the patient had to undergo surgery. Now, antibody screening and identification, using standard and papain enzyme-treated panels
(DiaMed), demonstrated strong positive reactions with all cells. These results were suggestive for the presence of an alloantibody against a
high-prevalence antigen. Further serologic and genetic analysis revealed that C/c and E/e antigens were completely absent on the surface of
the patient's erythrocytes, indicating the presence of the rare -D-/-D- phenotype . Adsorption and elution studies revealed the presence of
anti-C, -E, -e, -Ce, and -cE alloantibodies and antibodies against the high-prevalence antigens of the RhCcEe polypeptide (anti-Rh17
antibodies) . Furthermore, we identified alloantibodies against Jka and Lea. Hemolytic transfusion reactions due to anti-Lea are rare .
Anti-Rh17 and anti-Jka antibodies, however, can lead to massive hemolysis. Therefore, only erythrocytes of donors with the -D- phenotype,
negative for Jka, could be selected for transfusion. The -D- haplotype is rare, ranging in frequency from 0.0005 in Sweden to 0.0032 in
Japan , and homozygosity for RHCE-D-CE hybrid genes appears to account for several examples of -D- . Worldwide, only two suitable donors
were registered. Since the risk of substantial blood loss was low, the patient underwent surgery in the absence of compatible donor
erythrocytes. The patient was encouraged to donate autologous blood to be stored at the Sanquin Bank of Frozen Blood (SBFB). In November
2009, the patient was scheduled for coronary artery bypass graft surgery. It was estimated that, by optimal use of intraoperative cell
salvage, the patient would maximally need 1 unit of blood. Five weeks before surgery, the patient's hemoglobin was 15.1 g/dL, allowing
preoperative donation of 2 units of fresh blood. In case of need, frozen units of the SBFB could also be thawed. During surgery in December
2009, 1 unit of fresh autologous blood and 400 mL of cell salvage blood was transfused to the patient. Postoperatively the patient's
hemoglobin level was 11.1 g/dL. He was discharged from the hospital 9 days later. To date the clinical relevance of the -D- phenotype has
been predominantly described in pregnant women, causing mild to fatal hemolytic disease of the newborn [4, 7–10]. We describe the successful
treatment of a patient with recurrent need of transfusions despite the presence of antibodies against the high-prevalence antigens of the
RhCcEe polypeptide combined with anti-Jka. The authors would like to thank Peter Ligthart (Department of Immunohaematology Diagnostic
Services, Sanquin Blood Supply, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) for his consultancy. The authors declare to hold no conflict of interest with
the publication of the results included in this manuscript. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and
source are credited.
