Because dermoid cysts can rupture and cause chemical granuloma or undergo malignant degeneration, surgical excision is the standard of care.
Dermoid cysts are rare well-differentiated benign tumors derived from ectodermal cell origins. Usually caught incidentally, they have the
potential for mass effect, malignant degeneration, and rupture. Dermoid cysts can often present a unique surgical challenge. A 69-year-old
male brought to the emergency department after a motor-vehicle accident had a preperitoneal incidental mass discovered on imaging. The
patient was asymptomatic from the mass, though it was expanding in size. He was advised to have the mass removed, because of the possibility
of malignant degeneration and rupture, and he was taken for laparoscopic surgical excision of the mass. Dermoid cysts develop from embryonic
migration of ectodermal tissue to aberrant locations or implantation of epidermal tissue. Dermoid cysts in the abdominal cavity are rare,
and only case reports exist characterizing these tumors. Rupture can result in a chemical granuloma when localized and can cause peritonitis
when the rupture is throughout the entire abdomen. Rare reports of malignant degeneration are also reported in the literature. Surgical
excision is the standard of care minimizing risk of rupture with removal. An asymptomatic tumor that is discovered incidentally while a
workup is being conducted for other complaints is called an incidentaloma. It is a common problem, and up to 7% of all patients over 60 may
harbor a benign growth, often of the adrenal gland. With the increased use of different forms of CT scanning, the chance of finding
incidentalomas is expected to increase. Thirty-seven percent of patients receiving whole-body CT scan may have abnormal findings that need
further evaluation.1 In this report, we describe a mature cystic teratoma of the inner abdominal wall discovered incidentally during workup
for blunt abdominal trauma. During a workup for blunt abdominal trauma, a 69-year-old male was found to have an incidental mass on the inner
aspect of the left abdominal wall that measured 8cm x 5cm (Figure 1). The mass appeared to be arising in the preperitoneal space with no
evidence of invasion into any of the intraperitoneal structures. A follow-up CT performed after 3 months showed an increase in the size of
the mass by 2cm. A CT scan guided biopsy revealed complex fluid with keratinous material. While this finding raises suspicion for epidermal
inclusion cyst, malignant tumors could not be ruled out. Tumors that express keratin include carcinomas, mesotheliomas, thymomas, sarcomas,
and trophoblastic tumors.2 The patient was advised to have the mass removed, because of the possibility of malignant degeneration,
infection, rupture, or all of these together. The patient was taken to the operating room for laparoscopic surgical excision of the mass. CT
abdomen/pelvis showing well-circumscribed mass arising from the anterior abdominal wall on the left side. The mass appears to be free of
intraabdominal structures and not involving the fascia. 8cm x 5cm in size. Intraoperative dissection of the mass from the surrounding soft
tissue keeping the cystic wall intact by using a Harmonic scalpel and grasper. A pneumoperitoneum was established by a Veress needle without
injury. A supraumbilical 5-mm trocar was placed. Two more 5-mm ports were placed superior and inferior to the supraumbilical port. A grasper
and Harmonic scalpel were used to dissect a plane circumferentially around the mass taking the peritoneum and preperitoneal fat. The mass
was placed into an EndoCatch plastic bag, and extracted through the superior trocar site after it was extended to 3cm in length. The patient
tolerated the procedure well. He was monitored in the recovery unit and was discharged home the same day. Final pathology revealed mature
cystic teratoma. Dermoid cysts (cystic teratomas) are a rare cause of an isolated abdominal cyst. With only case reports identified in the
literature, it is difficult to determine their true incidence within our population. While they are commonly found as ovarian cysts, dermoid
cysts can occur anywhere in the body including the central nervous system,3 abdominal cavity and organs,4 bones, oropharynx,5 and
retroperitoneum.6 They are often discovered incidentally or through mass effect on nearby structures. Some may have the potential for
malignant degeneration, infection, and rupture.7 Dermoid cysts develop from embryonic migration of pluripotent cell lines to aberrant
locations or implantation and seeding most commonly from ovarian follicles. The origin is likely due to a nondisjunction during meiosis,
which explains their predominance in women and ovarian origin. They are often referred to as mature teratomas, epidermal cysts, or dermoid
cysts. They are true cysts containing an epithelial lining and contain tissue from all 3 germinal layers. Dermoid cysts are a subclass that
contain mostly ectodermal components and often have keratin deposition within the cyst. Dermoid cysts are best characterized as ovarian
cysts and are rarely found in the abdomen. They comprise 25% of all ovarian neoplasms and most commonly occur in women younger than 40 years
old. Complications include torsion (11%), rupture (1% to 4.6%), infection (<1%), and malignant degeneration (<1%).7 Torsion is typically
more common when involving organs on a long pedicle like the ovaries or appendix and is rare in abdominal wall or retroperitoneal
structures. Rupture can result in a chemical granuloma when localized and can cause peritonitis when the rupture is throughout the entire
abdomen.8 Abdominal dermoid cysts are rare, and only case reports exist in the literature. Reported cases in the abdomen involve the cecum,
mesentery, appendix, and ileum. Symptoms are rare, and usually the masses are found incidentally. Symptoms can vary depending on the organ
involved, but are usually vague including abdominal pain, indigestion, nausea, back pain, bloating, changes in bowel habits, and bleeding.
They can invade into adjacent structures secondary to rupture, chronic spillage of contents resulting in a localized inflammatory response,
adhesion formation, and rarely fistulization.9,10 Malignant degeneration is a rare complication and is most commonly squamous cell carcinoma
though malignant melanoma has been reported in the literature.11 The goals of management are early surgical excision and prevention of
rupture; minimal resection of adjacent organs is ideal. Marsupialization of the cysts has been attempted in the past, but has led to fistula
formation and is not recommended. A case of enucleation of a dermoid cyst involving the cecum4 has been described with good results.
Complete surgical excision remains the preferred option and is curative given the benign nature of these tumors. Laparoscopy is the
procedure of choice when amenable and is generally dependent on size, location, involved structures, and the comfort of the operating
surgeon.
