This report describes 2 cases of ureteral obstruction secondary to endometriosis managed with robotic-assisted laparoscopic partial
ureterectomy and ureteroneocystostomy. Endometriosis is the leading cause of female pelvic pain and infertility and affects approximately
10% of women. Lesions involve the urinary tract in up to 6% of cases with ureteral involvement in a smaller subset of .08% to 1%. Multiple
authors describe open and laparoscopic approaches to management of ureteral endometriosis; howeve, this report describes 2 cases of ureteral
obstruction secondary to endometriosis managed with robotic-assisted laparoscopic partial ureterectomy and ureteroneocystostomy.
Endometriosis is the leading cause of female pelvic pain and infertility and affects approximately 10% of women.1 Lesions involve the
urinary tract in up to 6% of cases2–4 with ureteral involvement in a smaller subset of .08% to 1%.4,5 Extrinsic endometriosis lesions invade
the ureteral adventitia, while intrinsic lesions invade the ureteral muscularis. Both types can severely compromise urinary tract function
and lead to renal failure.6 Presentation is often asymptomatic (50%), though it may be associated with abdominal pain (17% to 26%), flank
pain (17% to 26%), and hematuria (13% to 18%).7 Ureteral endometriosis can be managed either medically or surgically, though medical
management is generally considered palliative. Surgical management of extrinsic lesions involves ureterolysis and excision of endometriosis,
while intrinsic disease causing ureteral obstruction due to invasion of the ureteral muscularis or severe fibrosis necessitates resection of
the affected ureteral segment. In cases of severe renal compromise, a nephrectomy should be considered. Historically, ureteral resection and
repair for infiltrating endometriosis have been performed via laparotomy, though laparoscopic approaches have been reported.8–10 However,
ureteral reimplantation involves precise movements and suturing with fine caliber suture, and as such, requires advanced laparoscopic skills
to be performed successfully. Given that advocates of robotic-assisted surgery revere the system's wristed instrumentation, ergonomic
positioning, and 3-dimensional high-definition vision system as significant improvements over the laparoscopic approach, ureteral resection
and reimplantation for gynecologic surgery may provide a good application for robotic-assistance in gynecologic surgery. Thus, this report
presents 2 cases of ureteral obstruction secondary to endometriosis managed with robotic-assisted laparoscopic partial ureterectomy and
ureteroneocystostomy. The technical aspects of this procedure and its potential benefits over open and laparoscopic approaches are
discussed. Patient 1 is a 26-year-old referred for management of stage IV endometriosis. She had a history of 3 laparoscopic procedures for
excision of endometriosis, though previous surgeons were not able to remove all visible disease, and the patient suffered persistent
dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, and infertility. In November 2007, the patient underwent laparoscopic excision of endometriosis, bilateral
ureterolysis, chromotubation, and an ovarian cystectomy for a left endometrioma. In July of 2009, she presented with flank pain to an
outside hospital, where a CT scan revealed a right ureteral obstruction and multiple ovarian cysts. A ureteral stent was placed and removed
2 weeks later. She followed up at our institution where a diuretic radionucleotide scan revealed mild right renal cortical thinning, and a
right kidney function contribution of 44%. A retrograde pyelogram and ureteroscopy showed a focal stricture of the distal right ureter. A
double-J stent was placed. In August 2009, the patient underwent laparoscopic excision of endometriosis and robotic-assisted laparoscopic
partial ureterectomy and ureteroneocystostomy. At the time of surgery, the patient was noted to have extensive fibrosis overlying the right
pelvic sidewall, including the ureter. The proximal ureter was moderately dilated at the level of the iliac bifurcation. The cul-de-sac was
obliterated, and there were severe adhesions of the bowel to both adnexa and a right endometrioma. We used a laparoscopic approach to
perform right ureterolysis from the pelvic brim to the level of the uterine artery. Frozen section of a biopsy of periureteral tissue
yielded endometriosis. Adhesiolysis was performed, and visible endometriosis implants were excised from the anterior abdominal wall. The
decision was made to proceed with resection of the affected ureteral segment due to the extensive peritoneal fibrosis and stricture of the
right ureter. A Boari flap was planned given the location of the stricture just distal to the bifurcation of the iliac vessels. The partial
ureterectomy and Boari flap were performed using a da Vinci Si surgical system to facilitate the reimplantation, which requires precise
movements while handling delicate tissue and suturing with small-caliber material. This was achieved by resecting the affected 3-cm segment
of ureter, then mobilizing and spatulating the remaining ureteral segments. The bladder was mobilized anteriorly and a wide-based Boari flap
created. The flap was brought to the ureteral remnant off tension. The ureter was then anastamosed to the apex of the flap by using
interrupted 4-0 braided absorbable sutures. A double-J stent was inserted, and the remainder of the bladder defect was closed using a 3-0
braided absorbable suture. Irrigation of the bladder confirmed a watertight closure. A JP drain was placed. The case was completed in 6
hours and 38 minutes. A JP creatinine on postoperative day 2 was 0.8mg/dL, suggesting integrity of the ureteroneocystostomy anastomosis
site. A cystogram was performed on postoperative day 11, demonstrating no extravasation at the anastamotic site. The JP drain and Foley
catheter were removed. The stent was removed 1 month postoperatively. Two months postoperatively, a diuretic nucleotide scan demonstrated
50% contribution from each kidney and no obstruction. Pathology of both the excised ureteral segment and surrounding tissue revealed
endometriosis (Figure 1). At 1 year, the patient was evaluated by her local physician and underwent a renal ultrasound that revealed no
evidence of hydronephrosis. Her creatinine was within normal limits. Endometriosis involving peri-ureteral soft tissue. Endometrial
glandular epithelium with surrounding endometrial stromal cells (single arrow) adjacent to the ureter (double arrow). Patient 2 is a
49-year-old perimenopausal woman with a history of 3 surgical procedures for excision of endometriosis. On initial presentation to our
clinic in December 2007, a pelvic ultrasound obtained for a history of menometrorrhagia revealed moderate dilation of the left renal pelvis
with a possible ureteropelvic junction obstruction. There was no atrophy of the renal parenchyma. Upon urology follow-up, the patient
reported mild flank pain and a history of 2 urinary tract infections in the previous 6 months. A CT urogram and MRI in January 2008 showed a
distal ureteral obstruction at the site of an infiltrative soft tissue lesion. A diuretic radionucleotide scan demonstrated that renal
function was equivalent bilaterally. A repeat scan in May 2008 showed a persistent left-sided obstruction. This prompted evaluation with
cystoscopy, ureteroscopy, and stenting. No intraluminal pathology was noted, though the patient had persistent moderate hydronephrosis
proximal to the level of the iliac bifurcation. Leuprolide depot was administered and the stent removed. Nearly 1 year later, ultrasound
images revealed persistent moderate left hydronephrosis. In August 2009, the patient underwent laparoscopic excision of endometriosis,
ureterolysis, and partial ureterectomy with robotic-assisted laparoscopic left ureteroneocystostomy. Intraoperatively, there was moderate
ureteral dilation proximal to the pelvic brim, though no visible endometriosis was in the pelvis. Ureterolysis was performed
laparoscopically, revealing dense fibrosis of the left pelvic sidewall from the level of the iliac bifurcation to the midpelvis. A stricture
of the ureter was visualized just beyond the level of the midpelvis. Given the relatively distal level of the lesion, the decision was made
to proceed with a ureteroneocystostomy. The da Vinci Si surgical system was used for the remainder of the procedure to facilitate
visualization and suturing during the reimplantation. The strictured segment of ureter was excised and the bladder mobilized. An incision
was made in the bladder dome, and the ureter was anastomosed to the defect using interrupted sutures of 4-0 braided absorbable suture. A
double-J stent was then placed during the anastomosis. The bladder was irrigated, and no extravasation was noted. The case was completed in
3 hours and 15 minutes. A JP drain placed intraoperatively was removed on postoperative day 1 after a JP creatinine level of 0.8mg/dL
suggested integrity of the anastomosis site. Final pathology revealed endometriosis in the pelvic sidewall peritoneum overlying the ureter.
The stent was removed 1 month postoperatively. Repeat diuretic radionucleotide scans 3 and 10 months postoperatively revealed stable renal
function and no evidence of obstruction. The patient was advised to return in 2 years for a repeat diuretic radionucleotide scan and
determination of creatinine level. To evaluate the extent of ureteral endometriosis, surgical management should begin with dissection of the
peritoneum off the ureter and ureterolysis. Resection of the surrounding endometriosis and fibrotic tissue may successfully relieve a
ureteral obstruction in patients with superficial, extrinsic disease, though lesions invading the ureteral wall or inducing extensive
fibrosis require resection of the involved ureteral segment. Lesions located at the level of the distal ureter should be resected and a
ureteroneocystostomy performed. If the lesion is at the level of the midpelvis, a psoas hitch or Boari flap is generally recommended.11,12
Segmental ureterectomy with ureteroureterostomy is acceptable in select cases, though some authors advocate ureteroneocystostomy in all
cases of extensive pelvic endometriosis, given the high risk of disease development or recurrence in the distal aspect of the ureter.13
Excision of endometriosis and ureterolysis are rather straightforward laparoscopic procedures. However, ureteroureterostomy and
ureteroneocystostomy require more advanced laparoscopic suturing skills with fine caliber suture and thus may not be feasible for surgeons
with more limited laparoscopic experience. Robotic-assisted surgery offers 3-dimensional visualization, wristed instrumentation with 7
degrees of freedom, motion scaling, and tremor filtration, as well as ergonomic positioning. This is in contrast to laparoscopic equipment's
4 degrees of freedom and 2-dimensional scope that demands the surgeon stand for the entire procedure. These features may contribute to
increased precision with robotic tasks compared to laparoscopy features, as was observed in one study14 comparing speed and precision on
multiple tasks using robotic assistance versus conventional laparoscopy. Multiple studies have also found that novices achieve suturing and
knot tying competency faster with robotic assistance than with conventional laparoscopy.15,16 Thus, learning this type of advanced
laparoscopic procedure may be easier with robotic assistance than with conventional laparoscopy. However, multiple retrospective
studies17–19 have shown robotic assistance is more costly than a conventional laparoscopic approach. In the cases described here, robotic-
assisted laparoscopy provided an alternative, potentially advantageous approach to ureteral resection and repair in these patients with
endometriosis inducing ureteral obstruction. Both patients underwent successful minimally invasive robotic-assisted laparoscopic
ureterectomy and ureteral reimplantation and were discharged from the hospital in under 48 hours. At 12-month follow-up, both were
asymptomatic and doing well. These cases suggest that robotic assistance is feasible and safe in women undergoing surgery for endometriosis
involving the upper urinary tract. However, further investigation with larger comparative cohorts and longer follow-up that include cost
analyses is needed to define the role of robotics for ureteral reconstruction.
