Pulmonary artery aneurysms are a rare condition, frequently associated with pulmonary hypertension. However, the evolution and treatment of
this pathology is still not clear. The authors report a case of a 65-year old patient with pulmonary artery aneurysm associated with
pulmonary arterial hypertension. Due to a positive vasoreactivity test, treatment with calcium channel blockers was started with near
normalization of the right cardiac pressures. Nevertheless, after 20 months of treatment, the pulmonary artery aneurysm size remained
unchanged with an associated severe pulmonary regurgitation and causing extrinsic compression of the main left coronary artery. Surgical
correction was successfully performed. This is the first case report of a pulmonary artery aneurysm described to be associated with
vasoreactive pulmonary hypertension in a living patient. Although medical therapy for pulmonary hypertension was started, surgical
correction of the aneurysm was executed in order to prevent its future complications. Pulmonary artery aneurysm refers to dilatation of the
Pulmonary Artery (PA). Although some authors have proposed a cut-off of 4 cm in diameter in the past , a clear definition of PA aneurysm is
not available as for aortic aneurysms . It used to be an autopsy finding due to its asymptomatic course in the majority of the cases .
Several etiologies have been described in the pathogenesis of PA aneurysm, namely, pulmonary hypertension (PH), congenital heart disease,
Beh√ßet disease, infections such as the formerly prevalent syphilis, arteriovenous fistulas, connective tissue diseases, atherosclerosis and
trauma . Since the introduction of antibiotics non-infective causes of PA aneurysms have become more common . With the technological
advances in medicine, PA aneurysms have been diagnosed in living patients by computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging . The
pathophysiology of the PA aneurysm is related to vessel wall stress that leads to vessel progressive dilatation or even rupture. Thus, once
formed, an aneurysm tends to gradually enlarge . Aneurysm dissection is a potentially fatal complication in about one third of the patients
, but other serious complications of large PA aneurysms can also occur, namely, airway compression and thrombus formation on the PA .
Nonetheless, due to the low prevalence of PA aneurysms the optimal management is still unclear. A 65-year old woman was referred in January
of 2009 to our pulmonary hypertension unit. She presented with a six-month history of dyspnea on major exertion without dizziness, syncope
or chest pain. Her prior medical evaluation revealed PH and a PA aneurysm. At examination the patient was found to have a palpable systolic
impulse within the second left anterior intercostal space, a grade 3/6 systolic murmur and a 2/6 diastolic murmur at the lower and upper
left sternal border, respectively. Her chest radiography showed cardiomegaly and dilation of the main pulmonary artery and its branches
(Figure 1A). Imaging exams displaying the pulmonary aneurysm and associated features. A) Chest radiograph (posteroanterior view) shows
cardiomegaly, dilated main pulmonary artery and right pulmonary artery. B) Ecocardiography: paraesternal view, at great vessels level.
Color-Doppler shows severe pulmonary regurgitation. C) Multislice contrast computed tomographic scan of the thorax on axial projection shows
a close contact of the main pulmonary artery to the chest wall, dilated main pulmonary artery and both of its branches which have a fusiform
morphology. D) On sagital projection the widest diameter of the aneurysm can be measured. Secondary causes for PH were excluded according to
the protocol described in the PH guidelines of the European Society of Cardiology . A transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated a dilated
right atrium and a dilated, hypertrophied right ventricle with severe systolic dysfunction (TAPSE 13), mild tricuspid regurgitation with PH
(pulmonary artery systolic pressure, 80 mmHg), an aneurysmally dilated main PA (76 mm) and right (56 mm) and left (35 mm) PA branches and
severe pulmonary regurgitation. The left sided-chambers were normal. A posterior and lateral moderate pericardium effusion could be seen.
NT-proBNP was 1746 pg/mL. A right cardiac catheterization showed a mean PA pressure of 61 mmHg with a cardiac output of 3.2 L/min. After
vasoreactivity testing with intravenous epoprostenol, carried out on April of 2009, mean PA pressure dropped to 39 mmHg and concomitantly
the cardiac output increased to 4.7 L/min. Calcium channel blockers were initiated, with excellent hemodynamic response and normalization of
NT-proBNP values after five months of treatment. The control right cardiac catheterization after 20 months of follow-up showed a mean PA
pressure of 26 mmHg with a cardiac output of 5.54 L/min. Regardless of the near normalization of right cardiac pressures and the improvement
of right ventricle function the patient maintained a severe pulmonary regurgitation (Figure 1B) and dilation of main PA and its branches on
transthoracic echocardiography. In order to evaluate the pulmonary vasculature the patient underwent a computed tomographic angiography
showing an aneurysm affecting the main PA (65 mm on axial plane and 93 mm on sagital plane) and bilateral branches (right 41 mm, left 36 mm)
(Figure 1C, D). A coronary angiography was carried out demonstrating an extrinsic compression of the left main coronary artery in relation
to the PA aneurysm. Surgery to correct the aneurysm was performed on December of 2010, with resection of the main PA and its two branches
and their substitution by allograft tissue (Figure 2). There was no PH crisis after the surgery and also no residual pulmonary
regurgitation. The patient has had an uneventful postoperative recovery, being asymptomatic and in NYHA class I. Surgical procedure and
imaging exams after corrective surgery. A) Pulmonary artery aneurysm surgery: transverse aortotomy and visualization of the dilated
pulmonary trunk. B) Post surgical chest radiograph (posteroanterior view) showing a narrower cardiac silhouette, without visualization of
the main pulmonary artery. C) Post surgical echocardiogram showing only mild pulmonary regurgitation. In our patient, the PA aneurysm was
associated with PH, this being the most prevalent association, described in 66% of the cases . Diagnosis of the PA aneurysm was done during
the investigation of PH, as no specific symptoms were present except for dyspnea that occurs in both PH and PA aneurysm. Other symptoms that
may be present in patients with PA aneurysms are hemoptysis, cyanosis, clubbing, chest pain and cough . However, none of these were present
in our patient. Imaging such as computed tomography, echocardiography and coronary catheterization aided on the diagnosis and establishment
of complications. Intensive medical treatment has been one possible approach for PA aneurysms with clinical improvement of signs and
symptoms and so treatment for PH was started. However, despite being responsive to therapy with calcium channel blockers and near
normalization of pulmonary vascular resistance, the aneurysm showed no size reduction after 20 months of treatment, suggesting that PH and
PA aneurysms progress independently. Boerrigter et al have described that the normally observed progressive dilatation of PA is independent
of hemodynamic changes in PH, such as, PA pressure and cardiac output. Rather, it can be related to changes on the vessel wall . Although
other authors have reported such giant PA aneurysms , this is the first described in a patient with vasoreactive severe PH. Moreover, it
would be challenging to ascertain whether pulmonary regurgitation was the cause of pulmonary dilation or on the contrary, if it was a
consequence of the progressive dilation of the pulmonary trunk; severe pulmonary regurgitation with volume overload might play a role on the
persistence of the pulmonary aneurysm. Surgical correction has also been described . In fact, there are no clear guidelines on PA aneurysm
treatment and patients have been handled individually. Surgery does not always have a formal indication, but as complications were already
present, the authors decided to submit the patient to surgical correction. Coronary stenting could have been a potentially less invasive
option to address the main left coronary artery compression. However, pulmonary artery surgery also corrects the severe pulmonary
regurgitation and reduces the risk of rupture that was nonetheless present in our patient, due to the width of the aneurysm (over 9 cm).
Currently, the patient has had an uneventful 10-month period follow-up. The case report presented illustrates a case of PA aneurysm
diagnosed on a living patient with PH. Although this association is rather frequent, this is the first case described associated with
vasoreactive PH. Despite medical therapy for PH being commenced no size reduction was observed on PA aneurysm. Aneurysmectomy was then
performed and PA aneurysm was successfully replaced by allograft tissue. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. NYHA: New York Heart Association; PA: pulmonary artery; PH: pulmonary hypertension; TAPSE: tricuspid annular plane systolic
excursion. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. IA and PE have done the patient's follow-up and drafted the
manuscript. MJLG and JC have done the surgery and provided the photographs of the surgery. CJLG and MAS have documented the aneurysm by
echocardiography and computed tomography, have done the imagiological follow-up and have provided the respective photographs. MJRC and JD
have helped on the manuscript drafting and revision. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for
this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2261/11/64/prepub All authors report no disclosures.
