We report a case of a patient with multiple, intracranial superficial calcified tumorous lesions with focal amyloid deposition. On the basis
of the first neuronavigated needle biopsy, the tumors were originally assessed as amyloidomas. Additional data was obtained from a second
biopsy and supplementary neuroimaging information and the tumors were diagnosed as of vascular origin, probably cavernomas. The report
exemplifies how only one diagnostic tool may sometimes be misleading in establishing a final diagnosis. The additional imaging may
thoroughly enhance, supplement and improve the diagnostic process. The brain can be affected by a varity of disorders associated with
amyloid deposition . Rarely, intracranial mass lesions containing amyloid may be found, occurring either in association with focal amyloid
angiopathy and called amyloidomas or as smaller amyloid deposits in the vessel walls of vascular malformations [1, 2, 3]. We report a case
of a female patient with multiple, intracranial superficial calcified tumorous lesions with focal amyloid deposition. On the basis of the
first neuronavigated needle biopsy, the tumors were originally assessed as amyloidomas. After additional data was obtained from a second
biopsy and supplementary neuroimaging information, the tumors were diagnosed as of vascular origin, probably cavernomas. A 46-year-old
female patient with unremarkable medical history was admitted to the neurology department in 2005 due to a first grand-mal epileptic
seizure, which was successfully treated by intravenous application of diazepam. No abnormalities were found during the neurological
examination, with the exception of a partial lower right quadrantanopia on confrontational visual field testing. A native CT scan of the
brain revealed multiple calcified tumors in both cerebral hemispheres, without surrounding edema (Figure 1A). On a contrast CT scan, no
additional enhancement of the lesions was seen (figure not shown). In addition to the superficial larger tumors, MRI disclosed smaller foci
scattered in the deep brain tissue, all hyperintensive on T2 weighted sequences and hypointense on T1 weighted sequences (Figure 1B, C). A
small needle biopsy of the largest occipital tumor revealed hypocellular connective tissue with focal tinctorial and optical characteristics
of amyloid deposits (Figure 2A, B, C). Immunohistochemistry with antibodies against amyloid b, immunoglobulin light chains, amyloid
associated protein and transthyretin (TRT) showed diffuse labeling of the tissue with antibodies against both light chains and TRT, which
was considered non-specific. A few months later, the patient underwent an open biopsy of the same stony-hard tumor in order to get an
additional, rather small amount of tissue. Microscopic examination of the second biopsy revealed dilated blood spaces, separated by unevenly
thick, hyalinized and focally calcified connective tissue, consistent with a diagnosis of a vascular malformation, most likely cavernous
hemangioma (Figure 2d). No amyloid was present in the specimen. This finding prompted further radiological examinations on T2-weighted
gradient-echo (T2*) MRI (Figure 1D), which supported the microscopic diagnosis of a vascular malformation. In addition, the hypointense
peritumoural rim, irregular hypointense intratumoural foci corresponding to hemosiderin deposition, and the multilocular distribution of
small hypointense foci supported the diagnosis. The patient is currently in good condition without neurological deficits or symptoms. The
control MRI did not show any change. The most common form of amyloid deposits in the brain is cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), with or
without Alzheimerâ€™s neurodegenerative changes, preferentially affecting the cortical and leptomeningial blood vessels. CAAs do not usually
show any changes on neuroimaging but rare pseudotumors in association with CAAs have been reported [4, 5]. In cerebral amyloidomas, in
contrast, amyloid angiopathy is focal, usually of periventricular location, presenting as mass lesions [1, 6, 7]. In addition to amyloid
deposits, focal calcifications may also be present in amyloidomas [1, 6]. Since only a small part of the tumor tissue can be achieved by
needle biopsy, as in our case, we believe that various proportions of amyloid deposited in the vessel walls, which were randomly scattered
across different regions of the tumor, may therefore be encountered in amyloidomas. The second small biopsy of the stony-hard tumor in the
right occipital lobe revealed the vascular nature of the lesions. Calcified cavernomas are the most likely possibility, on the basis of the
negative three-dimensional CT angiography and T2* MRI [8, 9]. Since cavernomas have no arteriovenous shunts, they are angiographically
occult . In contrast to CT, which nicely detects fresh bleeding and calcifications, the MRI technique has been recognized as a useful tool
for diagnosing even small cavernomas and old intracranial hemorrhages with hemosiderin build-up [8, 9, 10]. In doubtful cases, T2* MRI is
especially helpful. Amyloid that may be randomly deposited in pre-existing vascular malformations, as happened in the first biopsy in our
case, can be misleading, especially if the biopsy is tiny. This may therefore mask the histological diagnosis of the lesion, especially in
the absence of characteristic features of a vascular malformation. Even though CT and MRI scans of amyloidomas have typical features, the
diagnostics should be supported by microscopic examination . On a CT scan, amyloidomas appear as solitary or multiple hyperintense nodules
with irregular margins, located preferentially in the subventricular white matter, with little or no mass effect on the surrounding brain
parenchyma. The tumors are enhanced after application of gadolinium contrast [1, 6]. Cavernomas appear as hyperintense or heterogeneous
lesions with calcifications and a variable degree of peripheral contrast enhancement on a CT scan . MRI studies show well-defined lesions,
sometimes with hemorrhage, which may be surrounded by peripheral edema. Hemosiderin deposits resulting from old hemorrhage may produce a low
peripheral and heterogeneous central signal on both T1- and T2-weighted images . Despite the presence of multiple intracranial masses, the
patient was asymptomatic, except for an epileptic seizure and visual field defects. This suggests that the tumors were longstanding, with
little or no mass effect on surrounding structures. Supratentorial cavernomas may be associated with chronic epilepsy, which is generally
the most frequent manifestation of the disease. The most common complication of cavernomas is bleeding, resulting from rupture of ectatic
blood vessels [9, 11]. In comparison with AVM, bleeding in cavernomas is not as instant and as devastating but might recur over an extended
period of time. Extralesional blood is resorbed with time, leaving a rim of hemosiderin pigment. Intralesional bleeding might lead to the
formation of larger collections that often calcify [11, 12]. Frischer et al. reported that the histology of cavernomas is not diagnostic in
18.4% of cases, probably due to symptomatic hemorrhage, which destroys the vascular malformation. The tissue attained during the first
needle biopsy was not diagnostic for a cavernoma and the focal amyloid deposits represented a diagnostic pitfall, which lead to an incorrect
diagnosis. In such cases, the radiological signs of peritumoural hemorrhage are particularly useful, since histological examination may not
lead to a straightforward and definite diagnosis of the lesion. Amyloid aggregates may be found in 16.1% of cavernomas deposited in and
around vessel walls of highly variable thickness . The present report illustrates how only one diagnostic tool may sometimes be misleading
in establishing a final diagnosis and how imaging may thoroughly enhance, supplement and improve the diagnostic process. In our case, only a
small needle biopsy of the focal amyloid deposits in multiple intracranial vascular tumors, which were probably cavernomas, was misleading.
Additional biopsy and T2-weighted gradient-echo MRI were needed for accurate final diagnosis.
