Mycobacterium genavense is a rare nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM). Human infections are mostly disseminated in the setting of the AIDS
epidemic or the use of aggressive immunosuppressive treatments. M. genavense culture is fastidious, requiring supplemented media. Pulmonary
involvement rarely occurs as a primary localization. We report here two patients with pneumonia as the predominant manifestation of M.
genavense infection: one kidney transplanted patient and one HIV-infected patient. Both patients were initially treated with anti-
tuberculous drugs before the identification of M. genavense on sputum or broncho-alveolar lavage fluid culture. A four-drug regimen
including clarithromycin and rifabutin was started. Gamma interferon has been helpful in addition to antimycobacterial treatment for one
patient. Clinicians should be aware that M. genavense could be the etiologic agent of sub-acute pneumonia mimicking tuberculosis in patients
with cellular immunodeficiency status. Host defenses against mycobacteria need an immune cellular response (Th1/Th17) activated by cytokines
and chemokines produced by innate immunity cells . Consequently, non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) could cause life threatening infection
in immunocompromised patients with profound cellular immune deficiency in particular those who are HIV-infected . M. genavense, is a
fastidious growing mycobacteria found in water with birds and pets being occasionally infected . Human infections were initially described
in HIV-infected patients . Thereafter, few cases have been observed in non-HIV immunocompromised hosts including only two reports in solid
organ transplant recipients . M. genavense infection preferentially involves bowel and abdominal lymph nodes, a fact being ascribed to the
presumed digestive contamination. Mortality of patients with disseminated M. genavense infection is high, ranging from 44% to 71% in 2
series . Herein we report two cases of M. genavense infected patients with pulmonary involvement as the main clinical manifestation, one
kidney transplant recipient and one HIV-infected patient. A 43-year-old woman, of Moroccan origin, was admitted in August 2005 for seizure,
an 8 kg loss of body-weight, slowly increasing dyspnea, productive cough, and fever lasting for 4 months. She had been known to be infected
by HIV since 1996, but lost to follow-up. Physical examination revealed left lower limb palsy, pulmonary ronchi, hepatomegaly and
oropharyngeal candidiasis. Cerebral computed tomography (CT) imaging demonstrated multiple abscesses. Cerebral toxoplasmosis was suspected
and treatment with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine was initiated. Biological results were: C-Reactive Protein (CRP) 19 mg/L, leukocyte count
3940/mm3, hemoglobin 11,1 g/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 88 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 40 U/L, gamma glutamyl transferase 310 U/L,
alkaline phosphatases 210 U/L, lactico deshydrogenase 268 U/L. Her peripheral blood CD4+ cell count was 110/mm3 and HIV viral load was 6.39
log copies/mL. Serological tests for hepatitis B and C were positive. A chest radiograph demonstrated diffuse bilateral pulmonary
infiltrates (Figure 1A). The thoracic CT-scan showed mediastinal lymphadenopathies, numerous diffuse pulmonary nodular infiltrates with a
cavitation in the left upper lobe (Figure 2). Bronchial endoscopy did not show abnormalities. Three sputa were smear positive for acid-fast
bacilli (AFB). Broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) fluid cytological analysis confirmed the presence of AFB but was negative for other
microorganisms. Isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide were therefore started. Despite the anti-tuberculous regimen, fever persisted and
respiratory symptoms progressively worsened requiring continuous nasal oxygenotherapy. After 10 weeks, mycobacterial culture from the
respiratory specimen grew M. genavense. The initial anti-tuberculosis treatment was changed for a multidrug regimen with moxifloxacin (400
mg/d), clarithromycin (500 mg b.i.d), ethambutol (20 mg/kg/d) and amikacin (15 mg/kg/d, during 3 weeks) and HAART (tenofovir, emtricitabine,
efavirenz) were introduced. Clarithromycin was increased to 1000 mg b.i.d after 2 weeks of treatment because the treatment was well-
tolerated and optimal treatment recommendations were sparse. HIV viral load decreased to 3 log copies/mL after 1 month without increase in
CD4+ count (60 cells/mm3). Despite 3 months of this antimycobacterial treatment, the patient's clinical course worsened and infiltrates in
the upper lobes on chest X-ray increased. A second bronchoscopy was performed and BAL fluid cytologic analysis showed the persistence of 20
to 30 AFB/field, which were again identified as M. genavense, without other pathogens. Then gamma interferon (IFN-γ) was started (50 μg/m2
sub-cutaneously 3-times a week). The HAART therapy was continued with undetectable viral load but a persistent CD4 lymphopenia (50/mm3). The
patient's general condition gradually improved within 1 month of IFN-γ treatment with oxygen weaning, radiological improvement and negative
respiratory specimens mycobacterial culture. The CD4 cell count reached 300/mm3 after twelve months of antimycobacterial treatment, so IFN-γ
was withdrawn. The anti-mycobacterial treatment was withdrawn after 2 years. We decided to continue the treatment more than 6 months after
immune reconstitution and 12 months after negative culture of respiratory specimen because chest radiograph demonstrated continuous
regression of pulmonary infiltrate until 24 months, with minimal sequelae at the end of treatment (Figure 1B). At the last medical visit in
June 2011, the patient remained in good health, without relapse of the mycobacterial disease. Chest radiograph of case 1. A: At
presentation, diffuse bilateral pulmonary infiltrates predominant to upper right and lower left lobes. B: Major improvement after 2 years of
treatment. Thoracic CT Scan of case 1 at presentation. A: Mediastinal lymphadenopathies. B: Bilateral ground glass opacities and areas of
consolidation. A 44 year-old renal transplant Guinean patient was admitted in September 2008 for fever, weight loss and non-productive cough
worsening gradually for one month. He had undergone renal transplantation 3 years earlier because of focal segmentary hyalinosis. His
immunosuppressive regimen included mycophenolate mofetil 1500 mg/d, prednisone 10 mg/d and tacrolimus 6 mg/d without any modification since.
Blood test results were: CRP 28 mg/L; white blood cells 11300/mm3; hemoglobin 10.9 g/dL. CD4+ lymphocyte count was 230 cells/mm3.
Serological tests for HIV-1 and HIV-2 were negative. Chest radiograph (Figure 3A) and thoracic CT-scan showed areas of alveolar
consolidation and cavitations in both lungs, multiple mediastinal and enlarged hilar lymph nodes (Figure 4). Bronchial endoscopy revealed
complete stenosis of the left lower bronchi and corresponding histological analysis revealed an epithelioid cell granuloma without necrosis.
The BAL fluid analysis revealed 670,000 cells/ml with 45% neutrophils, 27% macrophages, 27% lymphocytes, and 1% eosinophils. The
microbiological studies did not provide evidence for bacterial, fungal or viral infection neither in BAL fluid nor in biopsy specimens. The
patient then underwent an open lung surgical biopsy. Lung histological analysis revealed multiple parenchymal epitheloid gigantocellular
granulomas with some eosinophilic necrosis. An anti-tuberculous regimen (isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol) was started. Amplification of the
rDNA 16S allowing detection of a broad range of bacteria, the IS6110 of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and the 16S-23S rDNA gene spacer
targeting all mycobacteria, were negative on pulmonary biopsy. After surgery, the patient developed abdominal pain with no intestinal
transit. Abdominal CT scan revealed two mesenteric necrotic lymphadenopathies, colic dilatation, bowel-wall thickening, and gastric stasis.
A colonoscopy showed apthoid ulcerations from the caecum to the transversal colon. Biopsies disclosed ulcerative colitis with epithelioid
cell granulomas. An esogastric endoscopic examination was normal. A few days later, one in three post fibroscopic sputum samples grew in one
month (10 days after the thoracic surgery) on Mycobacteria Growth Indicator Tube (MGIT) liquid medium. M. genavense was identified by INNO-
LiPA probe identification on the product of the 16S-23S rDNA gene spacer region amplification. Anti-mycobacterial therapy was thus modified
for clarithromycin (500 mg b.i.d), moxifloxacin (400 mg/d), rifabutin (5 mg/kg/d) and ethambutol (15 mg/kg/d). The immunosuppressive regimen
was tapered with withdrawal of mycophenolate, tacrolimus was replaced by cyclosporin A, so the daily dose of prednisone was increased to 20
mg. Blood and bone marrow cultures were negative. Bone scan showed no additional localization. Intestinal malabsorption and anorexia
required prolonged parenteral nutrition. After 3 months of treatment, the patient's condition gradually improved; fever, respiratory and
digestive symptoms had resolved. The patient was no longer able to produce sputum for mycobacterial culture. Colonoscopic control after 2
months of treatment showed the regression of ulcerations. After 6 months, lung lesions and mesenteric lymphadenopathies had decreased on
thoracic and abdominal CT scan. At the last medical visit, in October 2010, abdominal CT scan showed resolution of adenopathies. On thoracic
CT scan, pulmonary consolidations had resolved. One right hilar lymph node (13 mm) remained unchanged. The antimycobacterial treatment was
continued because of the sustained immunosuppressive regimen for chronic graft rejection. Chest radiograph of case 2. A: At presentation,
alveolar consolidations predominant to right lung and parahilar left area. B: Major improvement after 2 years of treatment. Thoracic CT Scan
of case 2 at presentation. A: Right hilar lymphadenopathy. B: Multiple nodules in right lung. Areas of consolidation with cavitation in left
lower lobe. We here emphasize the predominant thoracic involvement that revealed severe M. genavense infection in two patients with cellular
immune deficiency. Secondary dissemination occurred in one case. M. genavense infection has previously been reported in only two solid organ
(kidney and heart) transplanted patients . Both had intestinal involvement leading to secondary dissemination and death in one case . In
HIV-infected patients, disseminated M. genavense infection associates weight loss, fever, anemia, digestive manifestations and
hepatosplenomegaly . Pulmonary symptoms such as cough and dyspnea are rarely at the forefront. A retrospective multicenter French study of
25 patients with M. genavense infection (of whom 20 were HIV positive) reported five patients with pulmonary symptoms in combination with
extra-respiratory symptoms in all cases . However, M. genavense remains a rare cause of NTM infection. In the Microbiology Department of
Foch Hospital, Suresnes, our two cases were the only two patients with M. genavense isolation among 176 patients with NTM isolated from
clinical specimens between 2005 and 2008. The other mycobacteria identified were: Mycobacterium avium complex: 56; M. gordonae: 42; M.
xenopi: 37; M. kansasii: 21; M. fortuitum: 8; M. abscessus complex or M. chelonae: 7; M. celatum: 1; non-identified: 2. M. genavense can be
cultured from stools, sputum, urine and blood samples and tissue biopsy . However, culture of M. genavense is fastidious, making
microbiological diagnosis frequently difficult, requiring mycobactin J supplementation for optimal recovery on culture. Culture must be
prolonged up to 4 months with a median positive culture time of 43 days (min. 10 days- max. 6 months) depending on the culture medium . Our
observations are in agreement with these findings, In our first case, diagnosis was delayed because the time to positive culture was 70
days. Molecular tools such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) are of interest in two ways before cultures become positive. Firstly, M.
genavense can eventually be detected on clinical specimens with PCR . Secondly, a negative result for M. tuberculosis PCR on a positive AFB
smear specimen is useful to exclude tuberculosis earlier. In case one, NTM treatment would have been considered if M. tuberculosis PCR had
been performed on sputum. Furthermore, we think that M. genavense should be envisaged in immunocompromised patients with mycobacterial
pulmonary disease and digestive involvement or negative mycobacterial culture lasting for more than one month. Infection control requires
decrease of the immunosuppressive regimen in patients who receive such treatment in combination with appropriate antimycobacterial
treatment. Human and mouse models have pointed out the role of CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes in M. genavense infection . Explaining the
crucial role of T lymphocytes, the bacterial load was significantly higher in organs from athymic mice compared to normal mice . During HIV
infection, the risk of M. genavense disease is correlated with CD4 cell count. Indeed M. genavense infection occurs in patients with
profound CD4+ lymphopenia (50 cells/mm3 or less). However, CD4+ cell count is not a reliable marker of immunosuppression in non-HIV patients
receiving immunosuppressive treatment. For example, Pneumocystis pneumonia is frequently observed in organ transplanted patients with more
than 400 CD4+ cells/mm3 . In our patient, the CD4+ T cell count was moderately diminished (230/mm3). Thus, M. genavense infection may occur
in non-HIV patients under an immunosuppressive regimen with a much higher CD4+ cell count than seen in HIV-infected patients. The optimal
anti-mycobacterial therapy in M. genavense infection is unknown. The high effectiveness of clarithromycin and rifabutin has been
demonstrated in a murine model . Multidrug therapies including clarithromycin are recommended . Even with appropriate treatment, clinical
evolution is long before resolution of symptoms, and patients have to be treated for at least 12 to 24 months . As recommended in ATS/IDSA
guidelines for Mycobacterium avium intracellulare infection, treatment was continued 12 months after immune restoration was achieved for
Case 1 . Concerning Case 2, antimycobacterial treatment cannot be withdrawn because of reinforcement of immunosuppressive therapy. In the
case of our first patient, despite HAART introduction and appropriate anti-mycobacterial treatment, the infection was not controlled. The
administration of IFN-γ was temporally associated with a significant clinical improvement and bacteriological clearance of infection. IFN-γ
is essential for the control of M. genavense. Indeed, mice deficient for IFN-γ are unable to clear M. genavense infection . In HIV-infected
individuals the monocytes-macrophages phagocytic function is impaired. IFN-γ can restore deficient functions of HIV-infected macrophages and
has already been used in the management of M. avium intracellulare complex infection . The classic pathway of IFN-γ-dependent activation of
macrophages by T helper 1-type responses is a well-established feature of immune response to infection with intracellular pathogens, such as
M. tuberculosis and NTM . Finally clinicians should be aware 1) That the main clinical manifestation of M. genavense infection may be a
slowly progressive pneumonia mimicking tuberculosis in patients with cellular immunodeficiency; 2) Thus, this diagnosis should be evoked in
an immunosuppressed patient who receives empirical anti-tuberculous therapy without improvement; 3) Extra-thoracic manifestations can be
absent; 4) the microbiological diagnosis requires prolonged cultures and may be helped by PCR analysis of bronchial and lung specimens; 5)
IFN-γ may be useful to control M. genavense pneumonia in addition to the anti-mycobacterial regimen; 6) CD4+ T cell count is not a reliable
marker of the risk of M. genavense infection in non-HIV imunocompromised patients. Th: T helper lymphocyte; HAART: Highly active anti-
retroviral therapy; AFB: Acid fast bacilli; BAL: broncho-alveolar lavage; HIV: Human immunodeficiency virus; PCR: Polymerase chain reaction;
NTM: Non tuberculous mycobacteria; IFN-γ: Interferon-gamma. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal BR, EC, OL, LJC made substantial contributions to conception and design. ER, PH,
DZ, MFM, PC, ML participated in acquisition of data. BR, EC drafted the manuscript. OL, LJC, ER, PH, DZ, MFM, PC, ML revised it critically.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/11/311/prepub The authors thank Polly Gobin for English revision.
