Sir, Bone metastases from stomach cancer relates closely to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and has a tendency to occur in people with
high lymph node involvement. Recurrence more that 8 years after surgery is extremely rare. Here, we present a case of bone metastasis
occurring after 8 years of surgery. A 68-year-old woman was admitted with a 4-month history of diffuse lower back pain and weight loss.
Eight years ago, she was diagnosed as having gastric adenocarcinoma poorly differentiated with areas of signet ring cell carcinoma [Figure
1a]. Twenty-six lymph nodes were examined, of which 16 were found metastatic; she then underwent total gastrectomy, but no complementary
chemotherapy was administered. She was under surveillance for 8 years, which includes abdominal ultrasound, chest X-ray, blood count, liver
function test; tumor markers [carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), Ca 19.9] were normal, with apparent remission. (a) Histology of primary tumor
showing poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with signet ring cells, and (b) bone marrow biopsy showing poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma
with signet ring cells Physical examination yielded normal results. Laboratory studies showed the following findings: Hb 9 g/dl; white blood
cell count, 6,500/μL; platelets, 87,000 μ/L; lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 578 U/L; alkaline phosphatase, 1,350 U/L; CEA, 7.1 ng/mL; and Ca
19.9, 1,580 U/ml. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest and abdomen, and lumbar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple mixed
osteolytic-osteoblastic lesion on the lumbar spine and pelvis without evidence of extra-osseous metastasis. Transiliac bone biopsy revealed
an infiltrating adenocarcinoma poorly differentiated with signet ring cell [Figure 1b]. The outcome was unfavorable, chemotherapy was
discarded, and the patient died 2 months after diagnosis. Metastasis to the bone from gastric tumors is rare and has been estimated to
appear in 1.2%-13.4% of the cases. The difference depends on whether the observation were clinical or at autopsy, and are a late
complication occurring years after total removal of primary tumor. These are usually osteolytic or, less commonly, mixed
osteolytic–osteoclastic; diffuse osteoblastic lesion may be an unusual feature of this tumor. Thoracic and lumbar vertebrae are the most
frequent sites of bone metastases. Main symptoms of metastasis are pain (70%), fractures (8.5%), and paraplegia (8.5), but 21% of the cases
are asymptomatic. Laboratory tests showed normocytic, normochromic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and increased levels of serum alkaline
phosphatase and Ca 19.9. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy provide the evidence of malignancy. Prognosis of patients with osseous metastasis
is not good and the median survival time is about 5 months after appearance of symptoms. Radiotherapy has been advocated as the best
therapeutic alternative for pain control, with a response rate of 75%, and chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) have been employed.
Nevertheless, prognosis remains poor and therapy is mainly aimed at relieving pain and discomfort.
