Hydatid cysts commonly affect the liver and the lung. However, they rarely involve bones with vertebral column. We hereby report a case of a
female patient with cystic echinococcosis of the hip bone and ilium. She presented with a long history of frequent recurrences highlighting
the dismal prognosis at this rare site. Resection of the hydatid cyst from the sacroiliac region was done with allograft and autograft (rib
graft) with lumbosacroiliac fixation. Follow-up of the patient at 6 months showed no detectable abnormality on radiology and the patient was
doing well. Cystic echinococcosis of the bone is rare with an incidence of 0.5 to 2.5% , and as compared to other sites, osseous hydatidosis
presents late, as it is usually not suspected clinically because of its rare occurrence at this site. Bone hydatidosis is difficult to treat
and carries high morbidity due to frequent recurrences, especially in certain locations, like ilium and hip, where radical surgery is
difficult. We herein report a case of cystic echinococcosis of the hip bone and pelvis for its uncommon site and frequent recurrences
depicting a poor prognosis and high morbidity at this site. Only a few case reports of long term follow-up of such cases are available in
literature. A 31-year-old Asian Indian female presented to the outpatient department of Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, New Delhi, India with a
history of increasing pain in the right hip and pelvis for the last 3 years. Pain was progressively increasing in intensity, radiating to
the right lower limb and back, increased on movements and associated with tingling sensation since last 3 months. The patient had become
quite incapacitated due to painful restricted movements. Her past history showed that at 22 years of age, she had presented with a large
abdominal mass. Her CT at that time showed a multicystic lesion measuring 18.0×9.8×7.6 cm in the right abdomen, which appeared to be arising
from the right ovary. The liver and other organs, including the uterus, kidneys, and left ovary, were normal. Her lung x-ray at that time
was normal. Thus, with a clinical diagnosis of a right ovarian tumour, she underwent surgery which showed a hydatid cyst which was confirmed
on histopathology. Peroperatively her ovaries were normal with presence of paraovarian cystic masses which were densely adherent to the
right ovary. After remaining asymptomatic for 3 years, in 2007, she again gradually developed pain in the right pelvic region. This time MRI
showed a large solid cystic mass measuring 10×6.3 cm in the right iliac fossa and right gluteal region. It was arising from the right iliac
bone, involving right sacroiliac joint and adjacent marrow of the sacrum. All other pelvic organs were unremarkable. With a clinical
possibility of tumour or tuberculosis, a diagnostic laparatomy was planned. Peroperatively, multiple cysts in the iliac bone with osteolysis
were seen. Two cystic pieces were removed which were diagnosed as hydatid cyst. In view of the complicated nature of cysts and location it
could not be completely excised. The patient continued with the pelvic pain although postoperative MRI showed reduction in size of the
lesion along the right iliac bone and sacroiliac joint. No new lesion was, however, seen. The x-ray of the pelvis and hips revealed cortical
irregularity with ill defined lytic defects and linear areas of patchy sclerosis along the right iliac blade (Fig. 1). She continued with
pain and follow-up CT reviewed after 8 months revealed extension of the disease. The patient was then referred to our hospital. On physical
examination, local tenderness was present on the back of the right limb and hip. The range of motion of the right hip was painful and
restricted. No distal neurovascular deficits were present. Blood investigations were within normal range. Surgery was planned for removal of
the residual disease. The preoperative MRI and CT showed progression of the disease. The CT showed a multiloculated cystic lesion (Fig. 2)
involving the medullary cavity of the right iliac bone resulting in irregular lytic destruction and extending across the right sacroiliac
joint into the right half of the sacrum, right sacral foramina, and adjacent soft tissues. Resection of the hydatid cyst of sacroiliac
region with allograft and autograft (rib graft) with lumbosacroiliac fixation was done. Histopathology results revealed hydatid cysts of the
bone. Fragments of the osseous tissue with hyaline and laminated membranes of hydatid cysts were seen admixed with lymphocytes and monocytes
(Fig. 3). Focal areas of necrosis, calcification, palisading histiocytes, and numerous foreign body granulomas were observed in the
intertrabecular spaces. The serological and molecular identification of the parasite, however, could not be performed due to non-
availability of the facility in the hospital. She was also put on a medical treatment with albendazole for 1 month. The postoperative period
was uneventful and patient was discharged on the 10th day of surgery. The follow-up of the patient at 6 months showed no detectable
abnormality on radiology, and she was doing well. Cystic echinococcosis is caused by a parasitic tapeworm, echinococcus. In humans, 3 forms
of echinococcosis are known to occur; cystic echinococcosis (CE), caused by Echinococcus granulosus, alveolar echinococcosis (AE), caused by
Echinococcus multilocularis, and polycystic echinococcosis (PE), due to Echinococcus vogeli or Echinococcus oligarthrus. The liver and lung
involvement together account for at least 90% of the cysts. Other organs, which may rarely be infected, are the kidney, spleen, muscles and
skin, and bones . Bone involvement of echinococcosis rarely occurs. Common reported sites of bone involvement were the vertebra, femur, and
pelvis . Occasional cases have been reported in the rib and humerus.The disease in the bone starts when scolices settle there. Skeletal
cystic echinoccocosis lesions may be single or multiple. Most of the patients become symptomatic at an advanced stage with symptoms of pain
and tenderness at the affected site and rarely with fracture. The disease slowly destroys the bone with trabecular resorption. Bone
hydatidosis is usually diagnosed by roentogenographic studies . MRI is the most helpful of all the imaging modalities and should be done to
evaluate the extent of the disease and planning of the treatment . Immunological studies are not much helpful. At times, however, radiology
may mimic a variety of benign and malignant lesions of the bone. In all these cases, histopathology gives the correct diagnosis. The
principal treatment of cystic echinococcosis of the bone is surgery with wide excision followed by mebendazole therapy. Chemotherapy is more
useful for inoperable cases. Bone hydatidosis commonly present with recurrences as was seen in the present case leading to high morbidity.
The results of treatment of osseous hydatidosis are satisfactory only in locations where complete and wide excision is possible. In the
pelvis and hip, where radical surgery is almost impossible, the results are disappointing even after aggressive treatments, hence, they
present with frequent recurrences and a long term follow-up is therefore recommended. The purpose of this study is to be aware of this
disease at this rare location. This will help early diagnosis and planning of the treatment. It also highlights that a more aggressive
treatment is needed to minimize recurrences in bone involvement by cystic echinococcosis and a long-term follow-up of these patients needs
to be done. X-ray of pelvis and hips revealed ill-defined lytic defects and linear areas of patchy sclerosis along the right iliac blade
(arrows). CT revealed a multiloculated cystic SOL involving the medullary cavity of the right iliac bone and causing irregular lytic
destruction extending into the right SI joint, right half of the sacrum, and right sacral foramina. Hydatid cyst wall fragments (C)
interspersed within the bone (B) (H-E, ×400).
