A leukemoid reaction is defined as reactive leukocytosis exceeding 50,000/mm3, with a significant increase in early neutrophil precursors,
and can be a paraneoplastic manifestation of various malignant tumors. A 71-year-old male patient complained of decreased appetite, fatigue,
and abdominal fullness. He had a palpable, firm liver, and laboratory investigations suggested leukemoid reaction. Liver dynamic computed
tomography revealed a hypervascular mass, and an ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of the mass confirmed hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) with a sarcomatoid component. The leukocyte count of the patient had increased to 147,800/mm3, and he died 10 days after admission.
This is a rare case of leukemoid reaction in a patient with sarcomatous HCC. A leukemoid reaction refers to a reactive leukocytosis
exceeding 50,000/mm3. Leukemoid reactions are generally benign and not fatal of themselves, but leukemoid reaction can imitate more serious
condition such as chronic myelogenous leukemia. Leukemoid reaction can also be a paraneoplastic manifestation of several cancers such as
lung, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, ovarian, head and neck cancers,1 and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).2 Sarcomatoid hepatocllular
carcinoma likely forms a larger tumor than ordinary HCC but prognosis of this disease is as yet unclear. Leukemoid reaction in patients with
sarcomatoid hepatocelluar carcinoma was fatal in our case. A 71-year-old male patient was admitted to hospital due to right upper quadrant
discomfort. Seven months ago, he had been referred to the Department of Surgery because of huge liver mass. Liver dynamic computed
tomography (CT) revealed 20 cm sized huge liver mass looked like hepatocelluar carcinoma (Fig. 1A), but had not undergone further diagnostic
evaluation and treatment due to unresectability and refusal of the patient. For recent three weeks, he had experienced diminished appetite,
fatigue and abdominal fullness. Abdominal examination showed palpable firm liver, 4 cm below the right costal margin without tenderness. His
body temperature was normal. Laboratoy investigation revealed a hemoglobin of 8.0 g/dL, total leukocyte count of 68,800/mm3 with a
differential count of neutrophils 95%, lymphocytes 3% a monocytes 2%. Peripheral blood smear showed leukemoid reaction (Fig. 2). Other
laboratory tests showed, bilirubin 0.5mg/dL, serum aspartate aminotransferase 60 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 10 U/L, alkaline phosphatase
2,820 U/L, total protein 5.8 g/dL with albumin 2.4 g/dL, prothrombin time 1.49 (INR), C-reactive protein (CRP) 21.63 mg/dL. Platelets, blood
glucose, creatinine, electrolytes were within normal limits. Alpha fetoprotein (AFP) level was 1.3 ng/mL (normal range below 8.1), and
protein induced by the absence of vitamin K or antagonist II (PIVKA II) was over 2,000 mAu/mL (normal range below 40). Viral markers were
negative. He had normal chest X-ray and normal urine analysis results. The blood culture sets, urine and sputum culture sets were all
negative. All of our work-up of infective etiology were negative. Liver dynamic CT examination on admission showed increased size of
hypervascular mass (from 20 cm to 24 cm) with central necrosis in right hepatic lobe with newly developed multiple small attenuated lesion
in both hepatic lobes and enhancing peritoneal nodules (Fig. 1B) compared with previous CT of 8 months ago. An ultrasound guided fine needle
aspiration from liver lesion was performed and confirmed HCC with sarcomatoid component (Fig. 3). The patient was treated with systemic
antibiotics, nutritional support and non-opioid analgesics. After three days of admission, he complained of aggravated abdominal pain and
laboratory investigation showed extreme leukocytosis of 110,000/mm3 with a differential count of neutrophils 97%, lymphocytes 2% a monocytes
1%. Therefore, the pain was managed with morphine. In spite of supportive management, anorexia and lethargy were aggravated. The leukocyte
count had increased to 147,800/mm3, and the patient succumbed after 10 days of admission. A extreme leukocytosis can be caused by severe
infection, a malignancy or use of certain drugs and a leukocytosis exceeding 50,000/mm3 with a significant increase in early neutrophil
precursors is referred to as a leukemoid reaction.3 Not much is known and studied about the incidence and course of leukemoid reaction.4
Cancer associated leukemoid reaction can be caused by increased granulocyte colony stimulating factor, or other growth factors, which are
considered to be produced by the malignant cells.5 A paraneoplastic leukemoid reaction can be seen in patients with various cancers like
bronchus carcinoma, urinary tract carcinoma, oropharyngeal carcinoma, esophageal carcinoma, cholangicarcinoma, cervix or ovarian carcinoma,
melanoma, multiple myeloma.1 However, HCC rarely presents with leukemoid reaction.2 HCC with sarcomatous feature is a rare neoplasm that is
found about 2% of surgically resected HCCs.6-8 Some kind of anticancer therapy, such as transarterial chemotherapy or chemoembolozation,
radiofrequency ablation, are presumed to promote sarcomatous change in HCC.9 The patient in the present case had not undergone anticancer
therapy, but huge mass can lead to ischemic change similar to the effect of anticancer therapy. Therefore, we suspect that huge mass may
effect on the emergence of sarcomatous change. Sarcomatous HCC has a high incidence of metastasis and likely forms a larger tumor than
ordinary HCC, the interior of the tumor often shows hemorrhage and necrosis like present case.10,11 It is likely that tumor progression and
necrosis may be associated with an increase in inflammatory cytokine response resulting in leukemoid reaction. Only a few cases of leukemoid
reaction in patient with ordinary HCC has been reported,12-14 and leukemoid reaction in various kinds of sarcoma have been reported.4,15,16
Due to the limited data and case reports, we are not able to conclude the association between sarcomatous HCC with leukemoid reaction, but,
this is the first report in the English literature of leukemoid reaction in a patient with sarcomatous HCC. hepatocellular carcinoma
computed tomography C-reactive protein alpha fetoprotein vitamin K absence or antagonist II granulocyte colony stimulating factor Computed
tomography (CT) findings. (A) 7 months prior to the patient's admission. (B) CT scan obtained on admission showing a hypervascular mass of
increased size with central necrosis in the right hepatic lobe. Peripheral blood smear showing a leukemoid reaction. Left-shifted neutrophil
series with neutrophils, band-form neutrophils, metamyelocytes, and myelocytes (Wright stain, ×200). Microscopy features of hepatocellular
carcinoma revealing a typical area with pseudoglandular pattern (right half) and a sarcomatoid area with spindle-shaped and scattered
undifferentiated cells (left half; H-E stain, ×100).
