Small retrospective case series suggest that decompressive hemicraniectomy can be life saving in patients with cerebral venous thrombosis
(CVT) and impending brain herniation. Prospective studies of consecutive cases are lacking. Thus, a single centre, prospective study was
performed. In 2006 we adapted our protocol for CVT treatment to perform acute decompressive hemicraniectomy in patients with impending
herniation, in whom the prognosis with conservative treatment was considered infaust. We included all consecutive patients with CVT between
2006 and 2010 who underwent hemicraniectomy. Outcome was assessed at 12 months with the modified Rankin Scale (mRS). Ten patients (8 women)
with a median age of 41 years (range 26–52 years) were included. Before surgery 5 patients had GCS < 9, 9 patients had normal pupils,
1 patient had a unilaterally fixed and dilated pupil. All patients except one had space-occupying intracranial hemorrhagic infarcts. The
median preoperative midline shift was 9 mm (range 3–14 mm). Unilateral hemicraniectomy was performed in 9 patients and bilateral
hemicraniectomy in one. Two patients died from progressive cerebral edema and expansion of the hemorrhagic infarcts. Five patients recovered
without disability at 12 months (mRS 0–1). Two patients had some residual handicap (one minor, mRS 2; one moderate, mRS 3). One patient was
severely handicapped (mRS 5). Our prospective data show that decompressive hemicraniectomy in the most severe cases of cerebral venous
thrombosis was probably life saving in 8/10 patients, with a good clinical outcome in six. In 2 patients death was caused by enlarging
hemorrhagic infarcts. The standard treatment for cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT) is heparin and most patients recover well with this
therapy. Approximately 20% of patients, however, remain handicapped or die . The main cause of death is transtentorial herniation due large
hemorrhagic infarcts . Retrospective case series suggest that decompressive hemicraniectomy can be life saving and result in good clinical
outcome in such patients [2, 9], sometimes even in seemingly hopeless cases . A retrospective multinational registry of acute CVT cases
undergoing decompressive surgery included 38 patients . Twelve patients (32%) recovered completely [modified Rankin Scale (mRS) 0–1] and
only 3 patients (8%) were severely dependent (mRS 4–5). Six patients (18%) died. Retrospective studies, however, may overestimate the
efficacy because of recall and selection bias. Confirmation in prospective studies is therefore required, but at present, these studies are
not available. We prospectively examined all CVT patients who underwent decompressive hemicraniectomy in our hospital since 2006. Here we
report the results of the first 5 years. We included all consecutive patients with CVT who presented to the Academic Medical Centre in
Amsterdam, a tertiary care university hospital, between July 2006 and March 2011. Patients had decompressive craniectomy if they fulfilled
the following criteria: (1) CVT confirmed by brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with MRI venography or computed tomographic venography
(CT-V). (2) Clinical signs of impending herniation, as defined by the presence of unilateral third nerve dysfunction and/or deterioration on
the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS). (3) The deterioration had to be the result of cerebral mass lesions (venous infarction or brain edema) and not
attributable to seizures. The majority of the patients were transferred from other hospitals to our centre because of clinical
deterioration. In 1 patient (case 10), CVT was diagnosed 1 day after evacuation of a 6 × 3 × 3 cm intracerebral hemorrhage from the left-
sided temporal lobe. Because we considered decompressive craniectomy after July 2006 a standard treatment option for CVT patients with
impending herniation, approval from the ethical committee was not required. As with any therapy, patients and family were counselled on the
possible risks and benefits before treatment. The first cases have been published as a case report previously . Patients were admitted to
the department of neurology, neurosurgery or intensive care. Patients received heparin (unfractionated or low-molecular weight heparin) in
therapeutic doses immediately after they were diagnosed with CVT. During decompressive surgery, therapeutic heparin treatment was
discontinued and continued only in prophylactic dose for at least 24 h post-operatively. Thereafter therapeutic dose heparin was restarted.
In some patients prophylactic doses were given for a longer time because full dose heparin was considered too hazardous. Decompressive
hemicraniectomy consisted of the excision of a large bone flap and duraplasty. In summary, a large skin incision in the shape of a question
mark based at the ear was made. A bone flap with a diameter of at least 12 cm including frontal, temporal and parietal bones was created.
Since hemorrhagic infarcts in CVT are often large and frequently extend into the temporal lobe, we made special effort to extend the
decompression toward the temporal skull base (Fig. 1). The dura was opened widely to ensure maximal decompression. We did not resect any
hemorrhagic infarcts, hematoma or brain parenchyma, except in case 10 where the diagnosis of CVT was made after evacuation of a hematoma.
The cortical surface was covered with the unapproximated dural flaps and absorbable hemostatic cellulose (Surgicel®), after which only the
skin was closed. In cases of severe intra-operative brain swelling, an ipsilateral intraparenchymatous intracranial pressure (ICP)
transducer was implanted. Patients underwent post-operative brain CT within 24 h. Re-implantation of the bone flap was performed within
12 months.Fig. 1a Admission CT scan (of patient 4) shows left temporo-parieto-occipital hemorrhagic infarct, b Direct post-operative CT
scan, large decompression extending toward the temporal skull base a Admission CT scan (of patient 4) shows left temporo-parieto-occipital
hemorrhagic infarct, b Direct post-operative CT scan, large decompression extending toward the temporal skull base Follow-up visits were
performed at 6 and 12 months after the diagnosis. We assessed the outcome with the modified Rankin Scale (mRS; 0 = complete recovery,
6 = dead). We considered a mRS of 0, 1 or 2 (no disability or minor handicap) at 12 months the primary outcome. In case of missing values we
imputed the last known score. Continuous variables are reported as medians. We used univariate logistic regression analysis to examine the
association between clinical and radiological variables and outcome. The following variables were examined: age; gender; comatose before
surgery; fixed and dilated pupil(s) before surgery; comatose after surgery, fixed and dilated pupil(s) after surgery; new or increased
hemorrhagic lesion after surgery. Out of 56 CVT patients admitted in specified period, 10 patients (8 women and 2 men) were included.
Compared to patients who did not receive decompressive surgery, those who underwent decompressive surgery had significantly more often
intracranial hemorrhagic lesions, midline shift and were more frequently comatose (Table 1). Table 2 shows the individual baseline
characteristics of the 10 included patients. The median age was 41 years (range 26–52 years). Median time from onset to diagnosis was 5 days
(range 2–14 days) and from diagnosis to surgery was 2 days (range 0–4 days). Five patients were comatose before surgery and one had a
unilateral fixed and dilated pupil. Six patients had one or more seizures before surgery.Table 1Comparison of baseline characteristics
between CVT patients who did and did not undergo decompressive hemicraniectomy during 2006–2011No DCDCNumber of patients4610Median
age4241Gender (% female)6780Comatose (GCS < 9) at admission (%)730*Epileptic seizure(s) (%)2240Hemorrhagic lesion(s) (%)35100*Midline shift
(%)13100*Endovascular treatment (%)910GCS Glasgow Coma Scale, DC decompressive craniectomy* p < 0.05Table 2Baseline characteristicsPatient
numberSex (M/F)Age (years)Onset to diagnosis (days)Diagnosis to surgery (days)Before surgeryGCSBefore surgeryPupilsBefore
surgerySeizures1M3942E1M4Vt+/+–2F3632E3M6V4+/++3F4272E1M5V1+/++4F5280E3M5V2+/+–5F3651E3M5V2+/++6M5220E1M4Vt+/++7F3760E1M1Vt+/++8F2920E3M6V4−/+–9F26144E2M5V2+/++10F5244E1M4Va+/+–GCS
Glasgow Coma Scale, t tube, a aphasia Comparison of baseline characteristics between CVT patients who did and did not undergo decompressive
hemicraniectomy during 2006–2011 GCS Glasgow Coma Scale, DC decompressive craniectomy * p < 0.05 Baseline characteristics GCS Glasgow Coma
Scale, t tube, a aphasia Results of the radiological examinations are shown in Table 3. The pre- and post-operative CT scans of all patients
are shown in Fig. 2. Six patients had left-sided hemorrhagic infarcts, 2 patients had right-sided hemorrhagic infarcts and 2 patients had
bilateral lesions. All patients had space-occupying intracranial hemorrhagic infarcts except 1 patient. This patient (case 9) had extensive
subarachnoid bleeding and obliterated basal cisterns, and a bilateral craniectomy was performed. The median preoperative midline shift was
9 mm (range 3–14, Table 4). The median diameter of the bone flap was 15 cm (range 12–17 cm). Because of considerable brain swelling, an ICP
transducer was implanted at the end of the procedure in 3 patients (cases 4, 6 and 9). The median post-operative midline shift was 4 mm
(range 0–9). Three patients were comatose after surgery. Post-operatively, 8 patients had normal pupils; 2 had bilaterally fixed and dilated
pupils. New hemorrhagic lesions occurred in 4 patients. In 1 patient (case 4), this new lesion occurred in the region of the ICP transducer,
after its removal.Table 3Radiological findingsPatient numberThrombosed sinusesHemorrhagic infarctsVolume lesion (cm3)Midline shift pre
operative (mm)Bilateral lesionsLocation hemorrhagic infarcts1STL, SSL, CV+11012–Left temporal2SSS, CV+1339–Right parieto-occipital3SSS, SR,
CV+394–Left frontal4STL, SSL, SR, DCS, CL, CV+7814–Left temporo-parieto occipital, cerebellar5STL, SSL, SR, DCS, CL, CV+16512–Left temporo-
occipital, cerebellar6SSS, SR, JL, CV+1027+Left fronto-parietal, right parietal7SSS, STR, SSR, CV+585–Left frontal8STR, SSR, CV+1619–Right
temporo-occipital9SSS, STL, STR, SSL, SSR, SR, JL, JR, CV+1a3+Left parietal, right parietal extensive subarachnoid bleeding10STL, SSL, JL,
CV+15210–Left temporo-parieto-occipitalSSS superior sagittal sinus, ST transverse sinus (R right, L left), SR sinus rectus (straight sinus),
SS sigmoid sinus (R right, L left); CV cortical vein, DCS deep cerebral venous system, C cerebellar vein (R right, L left), J jugular vein
(R right, L left)aExtensive subarachnoid bleeding and obliterated basal cisternsFig. 2Pre- and post-operative CT scans of all 10 cases. All
patients had space-occupying intracranial hemorrhagic infarcts except case 9. Case 9 had extensive subarachnoid bleeding, small bilateral
hemorrhages, generalized cerebral edema and obliterated basal cisterns. Case 3 had besides the hemorrhagic infarct obliterated basal
cisterns due to increased bilateral cerebral edemaTable 4Surgical characteristics and outcomePatient numberInterventionMidline shift
(mm)GCSPupilsNew hemorrhageAdditional
interventionsmRS6 monthsmRS12 months1U7E4M6Va+/+––212U4E4M6V5+/+––113U0E1M5Vt+/+––114U3E3M5Vt+/++–335U2E3M6V2+/+––116U9E1M1Vt−/−+Enlarging
hemicraniectomy667U4E3M5Vt+/++Thrombosuction228U0E4M6V5+/+––209B4E1M1Vt−/−+Enlarging hemicraniectomy6610U0E4M6Va+/+–Evacuation subdural
empyema5aU unilateral hemicraniectomy, B bilateral hemicraniectomy, GCS Glasgow Coma Scale, t tube, a aphasia, mRS modified Rankin Scale,
a12 month outcome not yet available Radiological findings SSS superior sagittal sinus, ST transverse sinus (R right, L left), SR sinus
rectus (straight sinus), SS sigmoid sinus (R right, L left); CV cortical vein, DCS deep cerebral venous system, C cerebellar vein (R right,
L left), J jugular vein (R right, L left) aExtensive subarachnoid bleeding and obliterated basal cisterns Pre- and post-operative CT scans
of all 10 cases. All patients had space-occupying intracranial hemorrhagic infarcts except case 9. Case 9 had extensive subarachnoid
bleeding, small bilateral hemorrhages, generalized cerebral edema and obliterated basal cisterns. Case 3 had besides the hemorrhagic infarct
obliterated basal cisterns due to increased bilateral cerebral edema Surgical characteristics and outcome U unilateral hemicraniectomy, B
bilateral hemicraniectomy, GCS Glasgow Coma Scale, t tube, a aphasia, mRS modified Rankin Scale, a12 month outcome not yet available Patient
7 underwent endovascular trombosuction 2 days after the hemicraniectomy because of lack of clinical improvement after decompressive
hemicraniectomy, despite an uncomplicated procedure. She recovered with a minor handicap (mRS 2). Four patients needed additional
operations. Two patients (cases 6 and 9) required re-operation because of progressive edema, expansion of the hemorrhagic infarcts and
pathologically elevated ICP. Both underwent enlargement of the decompressive craniectomy, but both died. Patient 10 developed a cerebral
abscess and subdural empyema at the site of the hemicraniectomy which was surgically removed. She also developed bacterial meningitis and
hydrocephalus, and needed an external ventricular drain, which was later converted to a ventricular peritoneal shunt. Patient 4 developed an
epidural hematoma after re-implantation of the bone flap and subsequently had two re-operations. Two patients died during the primary
hospital admission (Table 3). Six patients had a good clinical outcome (mRS 0–2) at 12 months. Two patients had a moderate or severe
residual handicap: patient 4 had a severe expressive aphasia and a right-sided homonymous hemianopia (mRS 3). Patient 10 is still bedridden
and incontinent after 6 months (mRS 5). All surviving patients received oral anticoagulation for a period of 6–12 months. Six patients had
seizures during follow-up, 5 of them still at 12 months. Despite the small sample size we attempted to identify prognostic variables using
univariate logistic regression analysis. There was a trend that new hemorrhagic lesions after surgery was associated with a poor outcome at
12 months (odds ratio 0.07, 95% CI 0.003–1.51, p = 0.09). No other prognostic factors were identified. This is the first prospective cohort
study of ten CVT patients with impending transtentorial herniation undergoing decompressive craniectomy. Six patients had good functional
recovery after 1 year. Two patients died despite intervention. The largest study so far on this subject is a combination of a retrospective
multinational registry and systematic review of published cases , with outcome data of 69 patients. Forty-five patients had decompressive
craniectomy, 7 hematoma evacuation, and 17 patients underwent both types of surgery. Compared to our study, both mortality (16 vs. 20%) and
the percentage of patients who were functionally independent at follow-up (57 vs. 60%) were similar (Table 5). However, patients from this
retrospective study were generally in a worse clinical condition prior to surgery: 72% were comatose, compared to 50% in our study, and 57%
had single or bilateral fixed and dilated pupils, compared to 10% in our cohort.Table 5Comparison of outcomes with retrospective dataFerro
et al. Current studyDesignRetrospectiveProspectiveNumber of patients6910Median age4241Comatose before surgery (%)7250Fixed and dilated
pupil(s) before surgery (%)5710Hemorrhagic lesions (%)90100Independence at follow-up (mRS 0–2) (%)5760Mortality (%)1620mRS modified Rankin
Scale Comparison of outcomes with retrospective data mRS modified Rankin Scale Transtentorial herniation is the most common cause of death
during the acute stage of CVT . Prior to 2006, before we adopted our policy to perform decompressive craniectomy, most of our CVT patients
with impending transtentorial herniation died despite maximal conservative treatment and endovascular thrombolysis . A recent French study
also showed a large difference in mortality between patients who did or did not undergo decompressive craniectomy, in favor of surgical
intervention . The most plausible explanation is that craniectomy removes the immediate threat of fatal herniation, analogous to the effect
of craniectomy in ischemic stroke . We tried to make the craniectomy wide and to extend decompression toward the temporal skull base. If the
craniectomy is too small, the decompressive effect may not be sufficient to prevent or reverse transtentorial herniation. Re-operation to
enlarge the decompression was performed in 2 patients who did not clinically improve after craniectomy and in whom post-operative ICP
remained pathologically elevated. Nevertheless, both patients died from intractable expanding cerebral hemorrhagic infarcts. The large
number of patients who underwent decompressive craniectomy in our study (10 out of 56; 18%) cannot be extrapolated to CVT patients in
general. Our hospital serves as a tertiary care centre for CVT patients in the Netherlands. While milder cases are usually treated at local
hospitals, neurologists tend to refer severe cases to our centre. Therefore, the percentage of all CVT patients undergoing decompressive
surgery is certainly much lower than the 18% in our study. A reason why clinicians may be reluctant to perform decompressive craniectomy
could be the fear that it may reduce mortality at the expense of an increase of severely disabled survivors. A randomized trial on
decompressive craniectomy for ischemic stroke indeed showed a fivefold increase in severely disabled patients (mRS 4 or 5) . This concern
does not seem warranted in CVT patients. While the decision to perform decompressive craniectomy must still be carefully weighed in each
case, the large percentage of patients with a good functional outcome justifies a positive stance regarding this intervention. Moreover,
withholding craniectomy in these patients will result in death by herniation in nearly all cases. The relatively low number of severely
disabled survivors is probably due to the fact that venous infarcts in general have more potential for recovery than arterial infarcts . For
the same reason, we prefer not to evacuate the venous infarct or hematoma during the decompressive surgery, except when this is considered
the last resort to reverse the herniation process. New hemorrhagic lesions were identified on post-operative imaging in 4 out of 10 patients
and tended to be associated with poor outcome. Both patients who died had expanding hemorrhagic infarcts with new hemorrhagic areas after
surgery. The etiology of new lesions is unclear. One possibility is that the elevated pre-operative ICP prevents the development, or
enlargement, of hemorrhagic lesions, and that new hemorrhagic lesions develop when the ICP decreases following craniectomy. We did not
systematically measure ICP during surgery, so we cannot examine whether there was an association between ICP and new hemorrhagic lesions.
Another possibility is that developing collateral venous systems draining to the skull or scalp may be damaged during surgery . Thirdly, we
cannot exclude that new hemorrhagic lesions resulted from direct manipulation of the cortex during surgery or during post-operative removal
of ICP transducers. Finally, the need to interrupt or reduce the heparin might cause extension of the thrombus and occlusion of (new)
cortical veins. The currently available evidence suggests that decompressive craniectomy often results in good functional outcome in CVT
patients with impending transtentorial herniation. Obviously, additional prospective data on its efficacy are needed. However, we believe
that a randomized controlled trial faces insurmountable ethical objections since most of these patients will die if left untreated [1, 6,
9]. Instead, an international prospective registry of consecutive cases would be preferable. Currently, efforts are being undertaken to
initiate such a project. Until that time, however, we believe that decompressive craniectomy should be strongly considered in CVT patients
who have both clinical and radiological sign of impending herniation. We thank C.L. Vleggeert-Lankamp, MD PhD, for her contribution. S.M.
Zuurbier is supported by “Netherlands Heart Foundation” grand number 2009B016. J.M. Coutinho is supported by “The Netherlands Organisation
for Scientific Research” (NWO) grand number 021.001.045. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. This article is
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited. Susanna M. Zuurbier and Jonathan M. Coutinho
contributed equally.
