While umbilical hernias frequently occur during pregnancy, the few reported cases of uterine or fibroid incarceration in ventral hernias
during pregnancy all involved incisional abdominal wall defects from prior laparotomies and Cesarean sections; none involved umbilical
hernias. We discuss the case of a 42-year-old well-developed, well-nourished grand multiparous woman (G8P7) with a huge umbilical hernia
containing a 38-week gravid uterus, as well as her management and the avoidance of known complications that have occurred in similar
incisional hernia cases. Successful pregnancy outcomes can occur in cases of pregnancies in ventral hernias, even in resourcepoor settings
that have Cesarean section capabilities. While umbilical hernias frequently occur during pregnancy, the few reported cases of uterine or
fibroid incarceration in ventral hernias during pregnancy all involved incisional abdominal wall defects from prior laparotomies and
Cesarean sections; none involved umbilical hernias . Given the reported risks of pregnancies in anterior wall defects, we present a case
where no permanent ill effects, to either the baby or mother, resulted from a fullterm pregnancy in an umbilical hernia. A 42-year-old well-
developed, well-nourished grand multiparous woman (G8P7) with a huge umbilical hernia (Figure 1) presented to the outpatient clinic stating
that she was in labor. She had vaginally delivered her previous children at home with the assistance of a traditional birth attendant. All
were healthy. She had never had surgery. On examination, she had normal vital signs and an unremarkable heart and lung exam. Abdominal
examination revealed a huge protruding mass through the umbilical region with a 5-cm X 5-cm ulceration of the overlying skin. The uterus
could be felt subcutaneously with a complete lack of overlying abdominal wall fascia and musculature. The fetus lay in a longitudinal
position with the fetal head at the uterine fundus in the most dependent part of the umbilical hernia. Laboratory examinations were normal.
Ultrasonography showed a full-term (38 weeks, 1 day) fetus with a normal heart rate, no gross congenital abnormalities, and the placenta in
the upper uterine segment. Since uterine contractions were observed, the patient was prepared for emergency surgery. Under general
anesthesia, the skin over the umbilical mass was incised. This exposed the subcutaneous uterus (Figure 2). The redundant skin over the
uterus, including the ulcerated skin, was excised and the uterus entered through the posterior-lower segment. The baby was delivered (Apgar
8/10; 9/10) and hemostasis achieved. After performing a bilateral tubal ligation, the uterus was replaced in its normal pelvic position; the
widely separated fascia was dissected and reapproximated. The skin was closed primarily. Umbilical hernias (protrusions of ≥5 mm and
diameters of ≥10 mm from the abdominal skin surface) are present in about 15% of pregnant West African women . The rate for Cesarean
sections is less than 5% in most of sub-Saharan Africa . Yet, while some reports exist of fibroids and gravid uteri in incisional hernias
resulting from C-sections or laparotomies, there has been no prior report of a gravid uterus in an umbilical hernia. Finding a gravid uterus
in an anterior abdominal wall hernia is rare, and is usually found, as in this case, in multiparous patients . The presentation and course
of this pregnancy within an umbilical hernia was similar to prior reported cases of pregnancies in incisional hernias, albeit with minimal
complications. Complications Multiple complications have been reported in association with pregnancies in anterior abdominal wall defects.
The only previously reported complication that occurred in our patient was excessive stretching of the skin, causing ulceration due to
friction between the hernia sac and other parts of the patient’s body and clothing. Other reported complications, many of which can threaten
the mother or fetus, include incarceration, miscarriage, premature labor, intrauterine hemorrhage, intrauterine growth retardation,
intrauterine death, rupture of the lower uterine segment, ruptured abdominal wall, and death . Herniorrhaphy during C-Section It has been
suggested that the laxity of the abdominal wall and the presence of an enlarged, hypertrophied uterus could weaken a repair. Despite these
theoretical concerns, herniorrhaphy has been successfully performed as part of the Caesarean section with no increase in wound infection
rates and no recurrences . As in some previous cases, we chose to repair the hernia during the Caesarean section, since we could excise the
redundant skin surrounding the pressure ulcer. Even though the recurrence rate after simple repair of anterior abdominal wall hernias is
more than twice the rate when mesh is used, we did not use mesh in our repair, since it was unavailable at that time in our hospital .
Follow-up Our patient’s repair was intact at follow-up >1 year after surgery; the baby was healthy and developing normally. Advanced
pregnancies developing in ventral hernias can pose multiple risks. Yet even in resource-poor settings, successful pregnancy outcomes can
occur in such cases, including the rare situation of a pregnancy in an umbilical hernia, if Cesarean section capabilities exist. There are
no financial or competing interests associated with this manuscript. This manuscript has not been submitted elsewhere. All authors
participated in vital aspects of producing this article and approve the final version for publication. 38-week gravid uterus in umbilical
hernia-before surgery. Full term pregnancy in umbilical hernia - uterus exposed during surgery.
