Abstract Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is rarely associated with antiphospholipid syndrome. The treatment of these patients is a
clinical challenge. We report the observations of 2 young adults (1 woman and 1 man), admitted in our acute care unit for acute myocardial
infarction (AMI). A coagulopathy work-up concludes the existence of antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) in the 2 cases. APS syndrome was
considered primary in 2 cases. All patients presented an intense inflammatory syndrome (high level of CRP). Anticardiolipine was present in
the 2 cases. However, anti B2 glycoprotein I antibodies were detected in only one case. Emergency percutaneous transluminal coronary
angioplasty (PTCA) with direct stenting had been performed successfully only in the first case, and the follow-up was uncomplicated.
Thereafter, long-term oral anticoagulant appeared to be effective. The last patient was admitted because of peripheral acute ischemia of
legs. Standard electrocardiogram showed signs of previous silent anteroseptal wall myocardial infarction confirmed by echocardiography. The
latter revealed an apical thrombus and a very low left ventricular ejection fraction. Amputation of the right leg was necessary because of
consultation occurred too late. However, he died four weeks later. Primary antiphospholipid syndrome should be considered as a cause of
acute myocardial infarction in young adults, and PTCA with anticoagulant treatment is effective for initial treatment of this complication.
Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is an autoimmune disorder of acquired hypercoagulability characterized by the association of vascular
thromboses (venous, arterial, small vessels) and or pregnancy morbidity (foetal loss, premature birth or recurrent embryonic losses) and
persistent elevated serum levels of Antiphospholipid antibodies (anticardiolipin, lupus anticoagulant or anti- B2glycoprotein I) It is also
considered as a multisystemic disorder with a wide spectrum of presentations cutting across all subspecialties of medicine. Acute myocardial
infarction (AMI) is rarely associated with this syndrome with a frequency of approximately 4%. The treatment of these patients is a clinical
challenge. Herein, we report two cases of antiphospholipid syndrome in young adults revealed by acute myocardial infarction. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication of this case report and accompanying images Case 1 A 30 years old woman with
a history of recurrent spontaneous abortion was admitted with severe midsternal chest pain, associated with sweating, nausea, and
breathlessness. She had no risk factors for atherosclerosis (diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidaemia, hypertension, and smoking). She had never
previously experienced chest pain at rest or on exertion. During physical examination, she was pale and sweaty with a tachycardia of 120
beats/min. Her blood pressure was 80/40 mm Hg. There was no peripheral oedema and all peripheral pulses were present. She had a systolic
apical murmur and symptoms of left heart failure. A 12 lead electrocardiogram revealed ST-segment elevation in leads V1, V2, V3, V4, V5, and
V6. We diagnosed acute anterior myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. Two-dimensional echocardiography revealed a markedly
reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (30%) and akinesis of the anterior, lateral inferior wall, and inferior interventricular septum
consistent with infarction in the left anterior descending area. Emergent coronary angiography was performed, the left anterior descending
artery presented thrombosis and stenosis at the level of the proximal section (figure 1). Left ventriculography revealed that the left
ventricle was dilated and markedly hypo kinetic. Therefore, percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PCTA) with direct stenting was
performed, with successful recanalisation (figure 2). Serum creatine kinase peaked at 3500 U/l, haematological tests were normal, other
laboratory tests of liver and renal functions and lipid profiles were normal. Anticoagulation by intravenous heparin infusion was performed
for the next 10 days, Clopidogrel, aspirin, pravastatine were also administrated. Congestive heart failure was controlled by diuretics,
nitrate, and low doses of dobutamine. We performed haematological tests for thrombotic disorders. Blood platelet count was 119 000 /ml and
prothrombin time was normal. Levels of protein S, C, ATIII were normal. Lupus anticoagulant was negative. ACL were searched by for enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA). ACL levels were expressed in IgM and IgG units with positive levels > 20 Units (U). Anti-2GPI
antibodies (IgG and IgM) were also detected by ELISA. Anti-2GPI antibodies and ACL were detected at positive levels. The levels of
Anticardiolipin antibodies (Ig M antibodies) and anti-B2-glycoprotein titres were 23.41 MPL and 26.74 U/ml respectively. There was no
evidence for infection or any other triggering event before the MIs in this patient. Antinuclear antibodies and Anti DNA antibody were
negative. Antiphospholipid antibodies tests repeated 12 weeks later remained positive. These findings satisfy the update Sapporo
Classification criteria for the diagnosis of antiphospholipid syndrome. This latter was considered primary because the patient had no signs
of other systemic auto-immune diseases, particularly systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). We decided to treat the patient with oral
anticoagulation for life. The follow-up (24 months) was uncomplicated. Effort tests performed 3 and 6 months after PCTA were negative. Case
2 A 30-year-old Caucasian man was admitted in our intensive care unit because of bilateral acute ischemia of the two legs. He was regularly
treated for Basedow disease. Smoking was the only risk factor of atherosclerosis disease. Physical examination showed a skinny patient.
Peripheral pulses of the legs were absent. Arterial pressure was normal. The electrocardiogram showed a QS pattern in leads V1, V2, V3, and
V4. Echocardiography revealed an apical large thrombus measuring 38 by 18 mm associated with a thinning left ventricular wall, suggesting
painless myocardial infarction. It also demonstrated a markedly reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (19%) (Figure 3). The patient was
immediately brought to the cardiovascular surgical department where bilateral Embolectomy to Fogarty probe was effectuated. Then amputation
of the right leg was done because of so late consultation. Intravenous heparin was administrated with oral aspirin and clopidogrel.
Haematological tests showed normal levels of C, S and ATIII Protein. While FT4, FT3 were high, TSH was low. The patient was found to have a
positive Lupus anticoagulant LA and a false positive VDRL. Anticardiolipin antibodies were also tested and subsequently came back positive
for anticardiolipin antibody of the IgM isotype with a low level (19.25 MPL). The patient had no evidence for infection or any other
triggering event before the MIs. The patient was also found to have a false positive VDRL. Antinuclear antibodies, anti DNA, antiSm, anti
SSA and anti SSB were negative. This was consistent with a primary antiphopholipid syndrome. Unfortunately, the patient died 15 days after
his admission because of the failure of many of his organs (heart failure, acute renal failure, cytopenia). The most common features of
thrombotic disorders in antiphospholipid syndrome are deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary thromboembolism, and stroke. This syndrome is rarely
initiated in the coronary arteries. On the other hand, acute myocardial infarction is unusual in young adults, but it has been reported in
patients with antiphospholipid syndrome. Antiphospholipid antibodies are the hallmark of the antiphospholipid syndrome which is
characterized by thrombosis. It was first described in patients with systemic lupus erythmatosus and antiphospholipid antibodies
Antiphospholipid antibodies refer to auto antibodies that react to naturally occurring membrane bound phospholipids in human cells such as
endothelial cells. These antibodies may be of IgG or IgM isotypes and consist of the lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibody, and
false positive VDRL. Antiphospholipid antibodies are associated with autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus, Patients
often exhibit positive lupus anticoagulant activity but they infrequently suffer from the typical systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) that
satisfies diagnostic criteria. When they occur in isolation, this is known as primary antiphospholipid syndrome. The main antiphospholipid
antibodies implicated in thrombosis and atherosclerosis are the anticardiolipin antibody, the lupus anticoagulant, and Ig G antibodies
against plasma phospholipid â€“binding protein such as B2-glycoprotein I and prothrombin. Lupus anticoagulants were strong risk factors for
both arterial and venous thrombosis and they are better predictors of thrombosis than anticardiolipin antibodies. Separate analysis of the
different types of thrombosis showed anticardiolipin antibodies were associated with cerebral stroke and myocardial infarction but not with
deep vein thrombosis. Anticardiolipin antibody isotypes and titers are 2 important issues. Most studies investigated only IgG antibodies or
did not distinguish between isotypes. With these limitations, IgM anticardiolipin antibodies were not associated with thrombosis, which
limits their value in clinical practice. Anti-b2-glycoprotein I antibodies (anti-b2-GPI) represent one of the main subgroups of
anticardiolipin antibodies (aCL) associated with antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). Positivity for anti-beta-2-glycoprotein I (anti-B2GPI) has
been shown to be more closely associated with clinical manifestations of APS, including thrombosis. Our two patients had both positive Ig M
Anticardiolipin antibodies in a low level, but one had positive anti-B2-glycoprotein and the other had positive LA and so satisfied the
criteria of primary APS. This can explain the occurrence of this coronary event. Systemic arterial and venous thromboses are prominent and
typical features of APS. Vianna et al reported episodes of deep vein thrombosis in 54% and arterial occlusions in 44% of cases. The major
cardiac manifestations of APS include valve disease, myocardial infarction, intracardiac thrombus and myocardial microthrombosis The
frequency of myocardial infarction in patients with APS is reportedly 4%, and the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies has been
associated with myocardial infarction in young patients. In a multicenter prospective Cohort of 1000 patients with APS, MI was the
presenting manifestation in 2.8 % and appeared during the follow-up in 5,5% of the Cohort There is an increased risk of myocardial
infarction in patients with APS caused by coronary thrombosis rather than by premature atherosclerosis. In table 1 we summarise reports of
cases of antiphospholipid syndrome with myocardial infarction since the report of Harris The actual mechanism of the thrombosis in APS is as
yet unknown, but numerous mechanisms have been proposed. It has been attributed to inhibition of prekallikrein by the lupus anticoagulant
or, as recently postulated, to interference with the activation of the protein C and protein S anti-coagulant pathways. Recent data show
that the biding of certain autoantibodies to endothelial cells and platelets is dependent upon the presence of B2 glycoprotein I (B2GPI).
Autoantibodies binding to B2GPI on the surface of endothelial cells induce expression of adhesion molecules and enhance monocyte adhesion to
the endothelial cells Current data are supporting an association between these autoantibodies and atherosclerosis as well. Human studies
suggest that anti-cardiolipin antibodies and anti-beta2-glycoprotein-I antibodies are elevated in patients having coronary artery disease
compared with controls Anticardiolipin antibodies are also associated with typical chest pain, significant coronary artery stenosis on
angiography and are predictive of myocardial infarction. Laboratory studies and murine models support the pro-atherogenic role of these
autoantibodies, as they are involved in uptake of oxidized LDL into macrophages, and immunization of mice with them results in enhanced
atherosclerosis There is some evidence that high anti-beta2-glycoprotein-I antibodies can present a risk factor for atherosclerosis, but
more epidemiological data are required in order to confirm whether the pro-atherogenic properties of anti-phospholipid antibodies signifies
an independent risk factor for atherosclerosis and its complications. Hamsten et al studied 62 patients who were survivors of acute
myocardial infarction under the age of 45, and found that 21% of these patients had anticardiolipin antibodies. In those surviving with
positive antibodies, 61% experienced additional cardiovascular events in the subsequent 5 years compared with those without elevated
anticardiolipin antibodies. Mattila et al demonstrated an increase in anticardiolipin antibodies in 52% of patients within three months of
an acute myocardial infarction. Thus, the interaction of these atherosclerotic and prothrombotic risk factors substantially increased the
risk of myocardial infarction in the young patients. Subjects at risk of developing early coronary artery disease often have clustering of
multiple risk factors (case 2).The optimal management of AMI in APS is still under debate Primary angioplasty may be considered the
treatment of choice in case of myocardial infarction. However, patients with APS have higher rates of complications after coronary
angioplasty or CABG, such as early failure or recurrent coronary stent thrombosis Anticoagulant therapy started immediately after the PTCA
may contribute to cause long term coronary patency and to prevent acute stent occlusion. Therefore, long-term oral anticoagulant appeared to
be effective. When thrombi are diffuse as in the second case, PTCA could not be done in emergency; intravenously platelet glycoprotein
IIbIIIa receptor inhibitor may be effective. Fibrinolysis may be effective as initial treatment for acute thrombotic disorder including
acute myocardial infarction (Harpaz et al and Ho et al) When patients presented catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome with diffuse
thromboembolism (like our second case), treatment with methylprednisone under a broad spectrum of anti-infective therapy may be effective.
We didnâ€™t practice it in our case. More aggressive therapy modalities may be necessary to save the patientâ€™s life, such as plasmapheresis,
immunoglobulin and cyclophosphamide. For chronic management, the Committee consensus recommends aggressive treatment of all risk factors for
atherosclerosis (hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, and smoking) and liberal use of folic acid, B vitamins and cholesterol-lowering drugs
(preferably statins) in patients suffering from APS. Hydroxychloroquine for cardiac protection in APS patients may be considered. The
Committee also recommends warfarin anticoagulation for those who have a history of thrombosis in the absence of atherosclerosis, but it
recognizes that developing data may support the use of antiplatelet agents instead. In presence of intracardiac thrombi, the Committee
recommends intensive warfarin anticoagulation ; but in a recent study, high-intensity warfarin therapy (INR 3 to 4) was not superior to
moderate-intensity warfarin for thromboprophylaxis in patients with APS and previous thrombosis Acute myocardial infarction is unusual in
young adults; antiphospholipid syndrome may be one of the aetiologies. Thus, immunological tests should be performed (lupus anticoagulant,
anticardiolipin antibodiesâ€¦), especially when there is a history of recurrent foetal loss or in the presence of symptoms of an associated
connective tissue disorder. In such a case, PTCA followed by antithrombotic therapy is effective when angiographic data are favourable. Long
term anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapies are recommended. Given the high rate of mortality of catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome in
some cases, this report emphasizes the need for rapid diagnosis and effective multimodal treatment in an intensive care unit setting for
these patients. The authors declare no competing interests. ICMJE authorship criteria met. All the authors contribute to the management of
the patient and the writing up of the manuscript. The final version of the manuscript was reviewed and approved by all the authors.
