* Zhenyu Fu and Kan Xu contributed equally to the work. Conflict of Interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Lateral ventricular meningiomas presenting with primary intraventricular hemorrhage are extremely uncommon. We report here a case of primary
intraventricular hemorrhage attributable to a lateral ventricular meningioma. This case concerns a 46-year-old female patient who presented
with sudden onset of headache. Computed tomography (CT), computed tomography angiography (CTA) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
examinations showed hemorrhage from a ruptured tumor mass, which was pathologically confirmed as a transitional meningioma. The patient
underwent surgical treatment and had a good prognosis. A retrospective review of eight previous cases of hemorrhage from ruptured lateral
ventricular meningiomas revealed that hemorrhage of lateral ventricular meningiomas and hemorrhage of meningiomas at other intracranial
sites have similar causes. The clinical and pathological features of ruptured lateral ventricular meningiomas are consistent with those of
unruptured lateral ventricular meningiomas. As this clinical entity is extremely rare, attention is called for while performing differential
diagnosis. Lateral ventricular meningiomas are rare, with an incidence of approximately 0.5-3% out of all intracranial meningiomas 1-2.
Lateral ventricular meningiomas usually have no notable clinical symptoms when they are small. As they grow larger, however, they often
present with chronic elevation of intracranial pressure, visual field defects, ataxia, memory impairment, and limb weakness 3-6. Lateral
ventricular meningiomas presenting with intraventricular hemorrhage are even more uncommon, and little is known about this clinical entity.
Here we report such a case. To identify the clinical features of this type of meningioma, we also conducted a literature review of eight
similar cases. A 46-year-old female was admitted to the hospital due to a sudden onset of headache that had lasted for 5 hours. Physical
examination showed neck stiffness and Kernig's sign but no other positive signs of the nervous system. Computed tomography (CT) showed a
high-density space-occupying lesion in the trigone of the left lateral ventricle. Hemorrhage surrounded the lesion and formed a hematoma,
which extended forward into the contralateral ventricle and affected the third and fourth ventricles (Figure 1). Computed tomography
angiography (CTA) showed no intracranial artery malformation. The medial blood vessels of the lesion in the trigone of the lateral ventricle
were disordered, and the lesion was supplied by anterior and posterior choroidal arteries. Maximum intensity projection clearly revealed a
high-density calcification shadow at the rear of the lesion, and the surrounding brain tissues were mildly compressed (Figure 2). Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the area of the lesion was 2.86 cm Ã— 2.68 cm with mixed T1WI and T2WI signals. The lesion was
heterogeneous in density, and its center was cystic. Slightly high abnormal T1WI and T2WI signals were noted in the bilateral lateral
ventricles, and fluid was visible in the occipital horn of the left lateral ventricle (Figure 3). An initial diagnosis of a space-occupying
lesion with hemorrhage in the trigone of the left lateral ventricle was given based on the medical history, physical examinations, and
auxiliary examinations. However, the nature of the lesion remained undetermined, and lesion resection was scheduled. The lesion was accessed
using the left temporoparietal approach. After old blood clots were partly removed, a well-defined, red, parenchymatous tumor with a
complete capsule was exposed. The tumor had abundant blood supply, and adhered slightly to the walls of the lateral ventricle. The central
part of the tumor was cystic, and the root originated from the choroid plexus and had a clear arterial blood supply. After controlling
arterial blood supply, the surgery was successful, and the tumor was completely removed. Postoperatively, the patient recovered well.
However, at day 7 the patient became depressed and then entered a confused state of mind. Physical examination revealed a dilated left pupil
(4.5 mm in diameter), lack of a pupillary light reflex, and a paralyzed right limb accompanied by pathological reflex. Head CT showed severe
edema surrounding the surgical field. The ipsilateral ventricle was compressed and deformed and the midline had shifted to the opposite
side, which was considered to be brain herniation caused by cerebral edema. Emergency treatment with decompression via bone removal was
performed (Figure 4). Postoperatively, the patient recovered well but developed left homonymous hemianopia. The patient was in a good state
at the 6-month follow-up, but the hemianopia did not resolve. Postoperative pathological results showed that the tumor was composed of
fusiform cells. In addition to the observed hemorrhage and cystic changes, dilated, tortuous vessels were visible within the tissues. The
shape of the cells was between that of endothelial and fibroblast types. Thus, the lesion was diagnosed as transitional meningioma (WHO-
Grade I) (Figure 5). Meningiomas of the ventricular system are rare; most of these tumors arise in the left lateral ventricle and over 90%
occur in the trigone 3,6,7. The clinical manifestations of lateral ventricular meningiomas depend largely on tumor size: A small tumor often
causes no symptoms because the lateral ventricle has a relatively large compensating space, but notable symptoms, such as increased
intracranial pressure and local neurological deficits, may appear when the tumor is large 8,9. However, lateral ventricular meningiomas
presenting with intraventricular hemorrhage are extremely rare: Eight such cases have been reported to date 10-13. Herein we described one
such case and conducted a review of other cases to increase our understanding of this disease. The cause of hemorrhage from intraventricular
meningioma is unknown. Several hypotheses have been proposed 14,15. First, the vascular network within the meningioma may rupture due to its
abnormal development 16. Second, a rapidly growing meningioma or internal necrosis after venous thrombosis may lead to hemorrhage 17. Third,
arteries that feed the meningioma are dilated and tortuous and thus lose the ability to regulate blood pressure fluctuation 18. Fourth,
expansive growth of the meningioma stretches and tears bridging veins 19. Other factors, such as coagulation disorder inside the meningioma,
peritumor edema, infarction within the tumor, and malignant transformation of the tumor may also result in hemorrhage of intracranial
meningiomas 14. Of these hypotheses, the first one is the most widely accepted, but it still cannot explain all meningioma hemorrhages
because not all meningiomas demonstrate abnormal blood vessel development 18,19. Thus, a combination of the aforementioned factors may play
a part in this process 14. Our analysis of the present case revealed the following: The meningioma was composed of fusiform cells; the shape
of the cells was between that of endothelial and fibroblast types and no high grade malignant tumor cells were noted; dilated tortuous
vessels surrounded by hemorrhage were visible in the tissues; and no necrosis or infarction was observed in the tumor tissues adjacent to
the hemorrhagic area. Therefore, we concluded that the hemorrhage in this meningioma resulted from ruptured blood vessels, and that the
hemorrhage infiltrated the tumor tissues due to the pressure gradient. Accordingly, the first and third hypotheses best explain the
hemorrhage of this meningioma. When an intraventricular meningioma is small, it may be easily overlooked because it can be submerged in an
intraventricular hematoma once it ruptures. This is a common scenario for other ruptured intraventricular tumors causing hemorrhage. For
example, Nishibayashi reported a case of central neurocytoma in the lateral ventricle 20, and Donovan described a case of teratoma in the
lateral ventricle 21, both of which involved a small tumor with massive bleeding. The tumors could have been easily missed. The meningioma
reported herein was located in the trigone of the lateral ventricle. No direct clinical symptoms resulting from the meningioma were shown,
and the initial presenting symptom was from intraventricular hemorrhage. For the meningiomas of the trigone of lateral ventricle, there are
several approaches used, such as superior parietal lobe approach and parieto-occipital approach 22. In our case, we chose the
temporoparietal approach instead of other approaches, because as shown by the CTA image, the lesion was supplied by anterior and posterior
choroidal arteries, and maximum intensity projection clearly revealed a high-density calcification shadow at the rear of the lesion. It was
convenient to control the arterial blood supply using the temporoparietal approach. The surgery was successful, and the tumor was completely
removed after the control of arterial blood supply. However, at day 7 the patient became depressed and entered a confused state of mind. CT
showed brain herniation due to the occurrence of cerebral edema. The mechanism of postoperative edema surrounding the surgical field in this
case is different from the edema surrounding meningioma, which is associated with venous compression, tumor-related pressure, arterial blood
supply and secretion of angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor 23. In this case the postoperative edema surrounding
the surgical field mainly resulted from surgical trauma after tumor removal. By conducting a literature review, we identified eight
previously reported cases of hemorrhage caused by ruptured lateral ventricular meningioma (Table 1). Among these, six were in females (75%),
revealing a female predominance; age of onset ranged between 14 and 64 years (mean 43); five cases were located on the left side and three
cases on the right side; and all were located in the trigone of the lateral ventricle. When stratified by pathology, five cases were
fibroblastic type (62.5%), two cases were endothelial type, and one case was psammomatous type. The present case had similar age of onset,
gender, location, and affected side as those of the previous cases, but it had a transitional pathological type, which differed from other
cases. Overall, the clinical and pathological features of ruptured lateral ventricular meningioma causing hemorrhage are comparable to those
of unruptured lateral ventricular meningioma without hemorrhage 3-6. In summary, meningiomas of lateral ventricles and those occurring in
other intracranial sites share similar causes of rupture and hemorrhage, and ruptured lateral ventricular meningiomas manifest similar
clinical and pathological characteristics as unruptured meningiomas in the lateral ventricle. Nevertheless, lateral ventricular meningiomas
presenting with primary intraventricular hemorrhage are rarely seen. A small lateral ventricular meningioma is likely to be submerged in the
hematoma once it bursts; hence, when patients present with meningiomas particular attention is warranted to avoid missed diagnosis and
delayed treatment. CT at the time of onset of intraventricular hemorrhage. A-B: A space-occupying lesion in the trigone of the left lateral
ventricle was observed; it had a low-density cystic shadow in the middle (arrow). A high-density calcification shadow was detected at the
rear of the lesion, and the surrounding brain tissues were mildly compressed. C: Hemorrhage surrounded the lesion and formed a hematoma,
which extended forward into the lateral ventricle, and the hemorrhage affected the third ventricle (arrow). D: The hemorrhage also affected
the fourth ventricle (arrow). CTA after the onset of intraventricular hemorrhage. A: No intracranial artery malformation was observed;
medial blood vessels of the tumor in the trigone of the lateral ventricle were disordered, and the tumor was supplied by anterior and
posterior choroidal arteries (oval area). B: Maximum intensity projection revealed a high-density shadow in the trigone of the left lateral
ventricle; the surrounding vessels were disordered, and a high-density calcification shadow was detected at the rear of the lesion (arrow).
MRI examination. A-B: A 2.86 cm Ã— 2.68 cm space-occupying lesion was detected in the trigone of the left lateral ventricle; T1WI and T2WI
showed mixed signals, and a cystic shadow was noted within the lesion. Slightly high abnormal T1WI and T2WI signals in the bilateral lateral
ventricles were observed, and fluid was visible in the occipital horn of the left lateral ventricle (arrow). Postoperative CT. A: Re-
examination at day 7 post operation showed that the tumor had been removed but that severe edema surrounded the lesion and the midline had
shifted to the opposite side. B: After decompression, there was still edema surrounding the trigone of the lateral ventricle, but the
midline was located in the middle. Pathological examination. A: The tumor was composed of fusiform cells; the shape of the cells was between
that of endothelial and fibroblast types (i.e., transitional type; WHO-Grade I). B: Cystic cavities were seen in the tumor tissues (arrow).
C: Patchy hemorrhage was observed inside the tumor, within which dilated tortuous blood vessels were observed (arrow). Patients presenting
with the hemorrhage from lateral ventricular meningiomas
