Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an autoimmune disorder characterized by autoantibodies against acetylcholine receptors. MG is generally an
isolated disorder but may occur concomitantly with other autoimmune diseases. We describe an eighteen-year-old girl with MG who was admitted
to our clinic with secondary amenorrhea and diagnosed as autoimmune oophoritis. Since her myasthenic symptoms did not resolve with
anticholinesterase therapy, thymectomy was performed. After thymectomy, her menses have been regular without any hormonal replacement
therapy. To our knowledge, this is the first report on a patient with autoimmune ovarian insufficiency and MG in whom premature ovarian
insufficiency resolved after thymectomy, without hormonal therapy. Conflict of interest:None declared. Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an
autoimmune disorder characterized by autoantibodies against acetylcholine receptors (1). MG is generally an isolated disorder but a minority
of patients may develop MG in conjunction with other autoimmune organ failures such as autoimmune thyroid diseases, rheumatoid arthritis,
pernicious anemia and systemic lupus erythematosus (2,3,4,5). Premature ovarian failure (POF) has been very rarely reported in association
with MG. We report a case with MG in whom POF has resolved after thymectomy. An eighteen-year-old girl with a six-month-history of secondary
amenorrhea was admitted to our pediatric endocrinology clinic. Her past medical history was remarkable for MG, presenting with ptosis and
generalized muscle weakness developing at the end of the day. She was fifteen years old when she was diagnosed as having autoimmune MG. Her
symptoms were partially resolved with pyridostigmine bromide (120 mg/day) and at the eleventh month of this therapy, prednisolone (60
mg/day) was added. After two months of prednisolone treatment, psychiatric symptoms appeared which were attributed to drug-induced bipolar
affective disorder and steroid treatment was gradually discontinued. The antipsychotic olanzapine (15 mg/day) was started. Her menstrual
cycles had started when she was twelve years old and were regular until thirteen months after the diagnosis of MG and at the third month of
olanzapine therapy, when menstrual irregularity had appeared. Her family history was unremarkable. There was no pathologic finding in her
physical examination. Her pubertal development was evaluated as Tanner stage 5. Since neuroleptic drugs can increase serum prolactin levels
and cause menstrual irregularity, the patient’s prolactin level was checked and found normal. Her gonadotropin and inhibin B levels were in
postmenapausal ranges (follicle stimulating hormone: 56.23 mIU/mL, luteinizing hormone 25.43 mIU/mL, inhibin B<10 pg/mL) and estrogen level
was 18 pg/mL. The patient’s hormonal levels are shown chronologically from the beginning of the menstrual irregularity in Table 1. Primary
ovarian insufficiency was evident with these hormonal levels. Her suprapubic pelvic ultrasonography revealed a large cystic formation
(57x95x112 mm) in her left ovary. For etiological investigation of autoimmune POF (APOF), we checked antiovarian antibodies and the
antibodies against the 21-hydroxylase enzyme. They were all negative. Acetylcholine receptor antibodies were found to be positive at the
beginning of the myasthenic symptoms. Antithyroid peroxidase and antityroglobulin antibodies were also negative. We could not measure
steroidogenic cell antibodies. The patient’s myasthenic symptoms did not resolve with anticholinesterase therapy, and thymic enlargement was
detected by thorax magnetic resonance imaging. Since there is a general consensus that patients with generalised MG between puberty and 60
years of age may benefit from thymectomy, this surgical procedure was performed and pathologic examination revealed follicular thymic
hyperplasia. Three months after thymectomy, her regular menses started. Gonadotropin levels decreased to normal ranges, but her left ovarian
cyst persisted. Six months after thymectomy, her left ovarian cyst was removed. Pathological diagnosis was benign mucinous cyst. Her
menstrual bleeding has been regular since thymectomy, without any hormonal replacement therapy. POF is characterized by amenorrhea,
hypoestrogenism and elevated serum gonadotropin levels in women younger than 40 years (6). Among a total of 266 POF patients, 4% of patients
with spontaneous POF were diagnosed to have autoimmune oophoritis (AO) (7). An autoimmune mechanism was described in some patients with
lymphocytic and plasma cell infiltration in developing follicles (8,9,10). The only validated marker to detect AO is the presence of
steroidogenic cell autoantibodies (7, 11). Coexistence of autoimmune ovarian failure and other autoimmune diseases was reported to be
between 10% and 55% (6,12,13). APOF could be seen as a part of autoimmune 1polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APGST1) (72%) and APGST2 (10%) at
the age of 40 years (14). It was also reported that 12-33% of women who presented with APOF had autoimmune thyroid disease as well
(13,15,16,17). APOF was also observed in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus and MG (4,18,19,20). APOF and adrenal autoimmunity
coexistence is the best known but not the most frequent association. Histological confirmation of APOF was first reported in a patient with
autoimmune adrenal insufficiency (8). There was lymphocytic infiltration in the secondary and antral follicles, but primordial follicles
were spared (21). Lymphocytic infiltration was most intense in the theca layer of the developing follicles and related with the intense
luteinization of the follicles (7,8,9,10). Ovarian biopsy is not recommended for the confirmation of the diagnosis in APOF. In one study
(22), highly elevated total inhibin and inhibin B serum levels were reported in patients with APOF compared to patients with idiopathic POF
and natural menopause. Increased inhibin B level was thought to be a result of the initial preservation of granulosa cell functions. As the
disease advances, ovaries can become atrophic. In our patient, inhibin B level was in postmenauposal range and estrogen levels were low. We
thought that this postmenopausal inhibin B level was the result of an advanced stage of the ovarian destruction in our patient. We did not
perform ovarian biopsy at the time of diagnosis. However, six months after thymectomy, a benign mucinous ovarian cyst was removed. The
pathology of the cyst showed no lymphocytic and plasma cell infiltration. At the time of the ovarian operation, our patient had been having
regular menstrual bleeding and normal gonadotropin and sex steroid levels for six months. We thought that this was the reason we could not
find lymphocytic and plasma cell infiltration representing AO. However, it has been recently reported that lymphocytic and plasma cell
infiltration may be absent and selective mononuclear cell infiltration free of lymphocytes may be observed in AO (23). Antibodies against
steroid cell antigens obtained from adrenal tissue substrates are the most validated marker for the diagnosis of APOF that correlates with
ovarian inflammation (7). We could only study anti-21-hydroxylase and antiovarian antibodies and they were negative. The predictive value of
the commercially available antiovarian antibody test is poor. One study (24) showed that these tests use animal ovarian tissues and have an
unacceptably high false-positive rate. Large ovarian cysts have been reported in several patients with AOF. As a result of follicular
dysfunction, impaired negative feedback lead to elevated gonadotropin levels which overstimulate the ovarian tissues and lead to the
development of large luteinized ovarian cysts (25,26,27,28,29). Initially, we thought that our patient’s large ovarian cyst had developed
with this mechanism. However, we did not observe any regression in this large ovarian cyst after thymectomy although her regular
menstruation resumed. On the other hand, thymectomy has been reported to induce autoimmune ovarian dysgenesis and autoimmune dacryoadenitis
in mice. However, the significance of this finding in humans especially in the setting of MG is not clear (30). Coexistence with another
autoimmune disease is not a criterion for the diagnosis of APOF. However, our patient had primary ovarian failure and her ovarian
insufficiency resolved after thymectomy. For this reason, we thought she had AO. There is no controlled research about the treatment of AOF,
but steroid therapy 20-40 mg/day and cyclic estrogen-progesterone replacement therapy have been reported to be successful in several case
reports and case series in adults (31). We did not use steroid therapy, because our patient had developed steroid-related bipolar affective
disorder during the therapy for MG. In 1969, Lundberg and Person reported a 25-year-old MG female patient with POF and her menstrual cycles
became regular eight weeks after thymectomy (5). The authors thought that her ovarian failure had an autoimmune etiology. In 1993, a
27-year-old patient with POF and MG was reported to have had thymectomy one year after the initial diagnosis during which she received
pyridostigmine and hormone replacement therapy. Spontaneous pregnancy occurred three years after thymectomy (32). Our patient was not on
hormonal replacement before and after thymectomy. Her regular menses started three months after thymectomy. To our knowledge, this is the
first report on a patient with autoimmune ovarian insufficiency and MG in whom premature ovarian insufficiency resolved after thymectomy
without hormonal therapy. We therefore suggest that treatment of MG including thymectomy if indicated may lead to resolution of the ovarian
failure and hormonal therapy may not be necessary. If hormonal therapy had been introduced before MG was successfully treated; a trial of
discontuniation of cyclic hormone replacement may reveal ovarian recovery.
