The purpose of the study was to determine the sites and types of mutations associated with type I neurofibromatosis (NF1) in the NF1 gene in
a family with NF1 patients. The blood samples obtained from this family (four patients and one normal healthy individual) were analyzed by
performing polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and DNA sequencing for mutation screening. We found synonymous mutations in exons 7, 38, 50, and
56 of the NF1 gene. This implied that the third codon had a new SNP that did not lead to a change in the amino acid coding. The exon 19
mutation was CAG homozygous, while it was C/TAG heterozygous in normal individuals. The stop codon led to nonsense-codon-mediated decay of
the mRNA (NMD), thus resulting in only one copy of the NF1 gene that encodes the normal protein in individuals. The synonymous mutations in
the NF1 gene occur in exons 7, 38, 50, and 56. The CAG homozygous mutations may occur in exon 19, and the C/TAG heterozygous mutations may
occur in the others. This mutation may be responsible for NF1 in patients in this family and may warrant extensive research on the NF1 gene.
Neurofibromatosis (NF) is a common dominant genetic disease that is caused by an aberration in a dominant gene and manifests as tumors of
neuroectodermal and mesodermal origin. It is characterized by multi-system and multi-organ involvement, especially involvement of the
central nervous system, and a variety of tumors. Type I NF, also known as the Von Recklinghausen disease, is the most common type. The gene
located on chromosome 17q11.2 is the main cause of multiple nervous system tumors characterized by pigmented skin lesions and multiple NF;
it may also be associated with mental retardation, neurological changes, and neurofibroma-like and sarcoma-like changes. NF1 is currently
reported to be associated with a total of 728 mutations, including base substitutions, major mutations, insertions, deletions, nonsense
mutations, missense mutations, and frameshift mutations. Most mutations can lead to the production of truncated proteins. By using
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and DNA sequencing, we screened members of a Chinese family for NF gene mutations and found that four
members had NF1 and one was normal and healthy. We collected the dossiers on a family with patients having type I NF from the Shandong
Cancer Hospital between 2009 and 2010. We had data on eight people in the family, of whom six were diagnosed with type I NF. All the
patients were diagnosed on the basis of the US NIH diagnostic standard of the year 1987. The clinical data of three generations of the
family has been shown in Fig. 1. The proband (III1) was a 21-year-old woman who had undergone a surgery at the age of 9 years because of a
swelling and pain in her left lower extremity along with coffee-with-milk spots (Fig. 2); the pathological diagnosis was NF (Fig. 3). Case I
1 was of a 69-year-old man who had lesions on his abdominal wall, arms, angle of the eyes, and other sites (Fig. 4), and case I 2 was of a
healthy female family member. Case II 1 was of a 36-year-old woman with a 1-year history of NF, and case II 2 was of a 40-year-old man with
dorsal neurofibroma (Fig. 5). Case II 1 was of a 40-year-old woman who was a healthy subject, and case II 2 was of a 7-year-old girl showing
coffee-with-milk spots; she did not have NF. Case III 3 was of a 1-year-old female child with coffee-with-milk spots and no NF.Fig. 1A
diagram showing the affected members of the familyFig. 2Patient III 1. A diagram showing the affected members of the family axillary coffee-
with-milk spotsFig. 3Patient III 1. Postoperative pathological examinationFig. 4Patient I 1. Neurofibroma on the anterior chestFig. 5Patient
III 2. Dorsal neurofibroma surgery A diagram showing the affected members of the family Patient III 1. A diagram showing the affected
members of the family axillary coffee-with-milk spots Patient III 1. Postoperative pathological examination Patient I 1. Neurofibroma on the
anterior chest Patient III 2. Dorsal neurofibroma surgery Our study was approved by the medical ethics committee of the hospital, and we
obtained informed consents from the family members before collecting peripheral blood samples from four patients diagnosed with NF (I 1, II
1, II 2, III 1) and one normal healthy subject (II 3) of the same family. We stored the blood samples at −85°C in an ultra-low temperature
freezer. We extracted the NF1 gene DNA by using a modified salting-out and precipitation techniques and measured the DNA concentration by
using a spectrophotometer. We used the NCBI database to obtain the NF1 salting-out and precipitation techniques salting-out and
precipitation techniques gene sequence salting-out and precipitation techniques and the Primer 5.0 software for designing the primers
required to amplify the region coding for the NF1 gene (Table 1).Table 1Primer sequences of the target geneExonsPrimer sequence (5′→3′)PCR
product length (bp)E1GAGCCTGCACTCCACAGACCC297TCCTCCAGAGCCTGAGGCAGCE 2ATGGCAAGTAAGTTATTTATGGTC331TATCCAAAGTCCACAGAAAATCAE
3GAGGTAAAATGGAAGACTATTGTTG363AAAATTGTCTGTCACCAGGTCAGE
4TGGTAAGGATGGCAGGGGGATTG465TCCCATGTGGATTTACACACTAACCE5GATGTCTTGCTATGTTGCCCAGG479ATTGCCAAGATTTAAAATGCTCAE6–7AATCATTGATGTCCAAGGCATAT723TTTCCTATTTGACACCAGTTGACE8CCAGGGATTTTGTTCCTATCTAA483CAGAGGTATCGTTTAGTCTTCTCAGAE9TTCTTTATAGTATGAGTTTTAGAGGC402GAACTTATCAACGAAGAGTCAGAE10–11GGGTGCTTTGTGCTTCTTCTGGC651AAGAAATACGCAAAGAAAAGAAAGAE12TGGAAATCATGGTGTGTGTTTGC361AAAATAACCAAAGCAGCAGGAATE13AATACTGACCTTATGCTTACTATTGA384TATCCTCAAGGTCTTGGCGTTTCE14TTGAAGTTTCCTTTTTTTCCTTGCA221AAACCACACACCAAAGGAACATCATE15AATGAAAGAGCTCAATTTCTTAGCA315AAACCATAAAACCTTTGGAAGTGTAE16CTCTAAACTTGTATTCATTATGGGAGA288ATCTCTCACCATTACCATTCCAAE17ATTCCTCTTGGTTGTCAGTGCTT260AACAAACAGAGCACATAAAATGATACAE18TTATACATAAAATTACCCAAGTTGCA337ACTGAGTAAAAAAAACCACTATTCACAE19–20TGGCAGGCAGGGCTCTAAGTG473TAACAGACAAAAGTCAACTTTACAGAE21TAAGGTTTAATTCATGCTTTGCA516ATAGAGAAAGGTGAAAAATAAGAGAACE22–23CTCTAGGGGGTCTGTCTTCTGGG518TGGACCATATTCCCAAGCACACGE24TGTCACTTAGGTTATCTGGCAAA453CTGTAGACTATTCTTCATAAACTGACAACE25TTTAAGGTAGCCATTTTGCCAAGAT400TTGCTTTATGTTTTTTGGTGACTE26–27TTGTTTTGGAATGTCTGGTTAGC622ACTTTTCTTCCCCGCTTACTCTAE28–29TTCCTACCTAAGAATAAAAATGGGA502AACAGCGGTTCTATGTGAAAAGATE30CGTAAGCCATCCAGCCCTGTCAA460CAATTCTCAATGTATTATTCATCCAAACE31TGTTGCTGTATGTAGTCGGTGCT226TTTACAGTGAAGGTCAAATAGGCE32GGACTGATTGATTCAGAGTTTTTATG389GCACATAACTGAAAACCATAGGGE33TATTTGGGAAGGTTAGAAACACT305GAGCAACTGAGTAAGTGGCAAGAE34ATAAGTCTGGGTGTATCTGGTGT459AAAGAGCAAATCTGTGATTTCTTE35GGGAAAAGTAGTGGACTGTGAAGC452GTGGCAAACTCTCCTTCTCAACCE36TACCCTTTAGAATGCCTGTTGCT318AACTTGCCATCTCTCTATATTTGCTAE37ATTCCCACTGTTTTCTTCCTTTC776GAGGCCAGGATATAGTCTAGTTAGTCAE38ATTCTTCTCCACTTCACCCCGTC417ACCCCAAATCAAACTGAAGAGAAE39AAGGGGTATTTTGGTTTTACTGTAG622TAAAGTACCAAACTCTTGCCGCTE40CAGGCCTGATTCTAGGTAATAGTCTT432ACTGTGTTTTTTACAACTCTATCCCTAE41–42ATCTCTTAATCTCTGAAGGAGTCAA865TCAGGTGAAGTAAAATGGAGAAAE43AATACTCAGTGCCAGTTGACCAT676ATGCCTAAAAAAGGGGATACTCTE44–45CAATATGTATTCAGAGTATCCCCTTT384ATATTTGGGAGAAGTGAGGGCGGE46TCCGAGATTCAGTTTAGGAGTTA342CTAATATGACTACTTCAAACAACTAAAE47GAAGAATCAACAAACCTTGGTGA480GCAACAAGAAAAGATGGAAGAGTACE48AAGAAAGCTACTGTGTGAACCTCAT511GCTCAAGCAATCCTTCCATCTATE49GTCAGGGAAGAAGACCTCAGCAG333ACTGTGAACTTTCTGCTCTGCCAE50GTTTCTCTACTCAGCAACACTTAGC754AGCACAATCAGACTGGAAGAATAAE51ACTTGGAAGGAGCAAACGATGGT496AGCAAAGGCAAAACAAAATAAGGE52TTAAACACTTTATGTCCAAACATTT437TGGCTACCTATTTACAATGCTGTE53–54GGTGAAGTGATTATCCAGGTGTT515TTAACTTAAAGACAGGCACGAAGE55–56AATGAAGAAATGCCCCAGAAAG769CATTGTGTGTTCTTAAAGCAGGCE57TATTTTTGGCTTCAGATGGGGAT439AAAGTCAAGTCAGTTACAAGGTAE58AATGTGTCCCCGTTGTTAAGCGA310GGGCAAGGACAGGGAAGGGG
Primer sequences of the target gene The PCR reaction setup has been shown in Table 2. This reaction was set up in the Biometra PCR
instrument, and the reaction conditions were as follows: polymerization at 95°C for 5 min, followed by cooling in an ice bath, a quick spin,
addition of 1 μl Taq DNA polymerase, and a final quick spin for mixing. The thermal cycling amplification conditions were as follows: pre-
denaturation reaction at 96°C for 3 min, denaturation at 96°C for 30 s, annealing at 55°C for 55 s, extension at 72°C for 30 s, and lastly a
final extension at 72°C for 10 min. The PCR amplification products were analyzed by performing agarose gel electrophoresis. We used Exon I
and the shrimp alkaline phosphatase enzyme for purification.Table 2PCR reaction system setupPCR reaction systemVolume (μl)Phusion® high-
fidelity DNA polymerase0.5Phusion® HF buffer pack (5×)10Deoxynucleotide solution mix (10 mM)1DMSO (100%)1.5F primer (2.5 μM)1 lR primer
(2.5 μM)1DNA template1H2O34Total volume50 PCR reaction system setup DNA was sequenced by DNA dideoxy sequencing method by using Biomek FX
Beckman fluid moving workstation and a NanoDrop 8000 spectrophotometer. We then transferred the reaction plate to the Applied Biosystems
3730 XL fully automatic DNA sequencing instrument and electrophoresed the samples. When we obtained abnormal DNA sequencing results, we used
the TA cloning system kit (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA) and directly sequenced the PCR products; we then constructed a color map representing
the DNA sequence. We detected NF1 gene mutations in five blood samples from this family by direct sequencing and DNA cloning methods, and we
found totally synonymous mutations in four NF1 exons—exon 7, exon 38, exon 50, and exon 56. These mutations were new single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), located on the third codon position, and the amino acid coding did not change. We used a combination of specific
primers and universal primers for sequencing, but the peaks were disordered, which indicated that this part of the exon possibly had an
indel mutation and should be sequenced. On comparison of the forward and reverse sequencing results, we observed that this part of the exon
had a more complex structure and had both an SNP and a deletion mutation, which should be sequenced. Cloning and sequencing of exons 18, 19,
20, 22, 23, 26, 27, and 36 showed that these exons were completely normal and that there was a nonsense mutation in exon 19 (CAG >TAG [stop
codon]) (see Fig. 6). The normal healthy individual was a CAG homozygote, and the patients were C/TAG heterozygotes. The stop codon led to
nonsense-codon-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), which led to the formation of only one copy of the NF1 gene that encodes the normal protein in
individuals.Fig. 6Exon 19 Exon 19 NF is a common autosomal dominant genetic disease manifested as neuroectodermal abnormalities. There are
approximately 15 million NF patients worldwide with a clear family history, often involving multiple systems and organs . In Von
Recklinghausen disease (or NF1-type), the aberrant gene is located on human chromosome 17q11.2 and has a length of 350 kb, with 60 exons;
the transcription length is about 11–13 kb, also a 315-kb region of chromosome that is composed of three untranslated regions. Kang et al.
found that specific methylation can occur at the transcription-factor-specific binding sites on the NF1 gene promoter, which is parallel and
conformal to tumor cell genome hypomethylation. NF1 gene mutations mainly include DNA replication errors, point mutation, and other
mutations, with replication errors accounting for 20% to 30% gene mutations. The addition or deletion of a small direct repeat sequence in
the open reading frame can result in deletion of a terminal inverted repeat sequence during replication, or when skipped reading phenomenon
in gene sequence occurs and DNA hairpin-like structure is formed, which eventually leads to the deletions of some DNA sequences. The
mechanism underlying these two mutations—in which a single-base substitution results in a missense or a nonsense mutation known as gene
point mutation—is fairly complex and unclear. The point mutations are missense mutations with an incidence of about 5–10%, and nonsense
mutations have an incidence of approximately 30–38%. The incidence of missense mutations or nonsense mutations that may affect RNA splicing
is 20% to 35%. Our study showed that synonymous mutations can occur in the following exons in NF1: exon 7, exon 38, exon 50, and exon 56.
Thomson et al. reported the first new exon mutation in exon 26 of the NF1 gene (A4435G, Ser1479Gly). Analysis of exons 24 to 29 showed that
a new mutation in exon 26 affecting RNA splicing resulted in skipped reading phenomenon of the first 68 amino acids in exon 26, which caused
a reading frameshift mutation, as analyzed by RT-PCR technique. Messiaen et al. found that a mutation (A1466G) in the region of exon 10 also
had a dormant splicing receptor, which can lead to frameshift mutations. The effect of mutations on gene transcriptional levels has been
reported in recent years [1, 7]. The rates of occurrence of other mutations, including large gene-fragment insertions and large gene-
fragment deletions, are less than 5%. Chromosomal translocation and inversion are rare types of mutations. The rate of occurrence of
mutations caused by large gene-fragment deletions, covering the whole NF1 gene and the neighboring genes, is about 2% to 10%, and it mainly
leads to a deletion through simple sequence repeats [2, 8]. Studies confirmed that deletions of 112 Mb and 114 Mb are, presently, the most
common types of deletions. Other researchers also reported one case in which 2-Mb fragments of the NF1 gene was absent; this fragment was
absent mainly in the paternal chromosome. The patient with deleted type of mutations may show disease manifestations at a relatively early
age and will have malformations and mental retardation . In this study, we detected point mutation in the exonic region of the NF1 gene in
four type I nerve fibroma patients and one normal healthy subject in a family by using DNA direct sequencing and cloning techniques. We
found a new SNP in the NF1 exon, which was located on the third codon with an unaltered amino acid sequence encoding for synonymous mutated
exons, such as exons 7, 38, 50, and 56. Cloning and sequencing confirmed that the mutation in exon 19 is CAG homozygous, and that in other
samples is C/TAG heterozygous. The presence of the terminal codon led to degradation of the NF1 mRNA under the NMD mechanism, which in turn
resulted in a unique copy of the NF1 gene encoding for the normal NF1 protein. We believe this to probably be the first report on NF1
mutation, and our data will supplement genetic and clinical databases and further enrich NF1 pathogenic genetic mutation map. Our study has
provided new data on patients with NF1 and will help understand the genetic mechanism underlying this condition. Our data will also provide
a basis for future investigations involving NF1 genetic screening and subsequent diagnosis and treatment. This work was financially
supported by Grant No. 2011CB504302 from the 973 of China, Grant No.30940087 and No. 30872318 from the National Natural Science Foundation
of China. We appreciate the valuable comments from other members of our laboratories. The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any
noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited. Ming Lv and Wenhua
Zhao contributed equally to this work.
