An 80-year-old woman (PI) has been suffering of late onset progressive weakness and wasting of lower-limb muscles, accompanied by high
creatine kinase levels in blood. A muscle biopsy, performed at 63 years, showed myopathic features with partial deficiency of cytochrome c
oxidase. A second biopsy taken 7 years later confirmed the presence of a mitochondrial myopathy but also of vacuolar degeneration and other
morphological features resembling inclusion body myopathy. Her 46-year-old daughter (PII) and 50-year-old son (PIII) are clinically normal,
but the creatine kinase levels were moderately elevated and the EMG was consistently myopathic in both. Analysis of mitochondrial DNA
sequence revealed in all three patients a novel, homoplasmic 15 bp tandem duplication adjacent to the 5′ end of mitochondrial tRNAPhe gene,
encompassing the first 11 nucleotides of this gene and the four terminal nucleotides of the adjacent D-loop region. Both mutant fibroblasts
and cybrids showed low oxygen consumption rate, reduced mitochondrial protein synthesis, and decreased mitochondrial tRNAPhe amount. These
findings are consistent with an unconventional pathogenic mechanism causing the tandem duplication to interfere with the maturation of the
mitochondrial tRNAPhe transcript. Human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is a circular double-stranded molecule of 16.6 kb, which contains 27 genes
encoding 13 subunits of the respiratory chain (RC) complexes, 22 tRNA and 2 rRNA transcripts, and a ≈ 1 kb non-coding control region, the
D-Loop, between the mt-tRNAPro and mt-tRNAPhe genes. Whilst pathogenic single-base missense mutations are frequent in mtDNA, small
rearrangements such as micro-deletions or micro-duplications are rare. In particular, duplications of a few base pairs in the D-Loop
regulatory region have been reported as somatic changes related to aging, but none has been associated with a specific clinical syndrome.
Likewise, no rearrangements of tRNAPhe gene are known, whereas single-base missense changes have been associated with a wide spectrum of
clinical manifestations, including tubulo-interstitial nephritis and stroke, MELAS, epileptic syndromes in childhood, myoclonic epilepsy and
migraine, ataxia and deafness, progressive neurodegeneration with dementia and parkinsonism, myopathy with acute rhabdomyolysis, exercise
intolerance associated with retinal dystrophy or progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO) (see http://www.MitoMap.org). Here we report the
identification of a 15 bp homoplasmic tandem duplication, between the mt-tRNAPhe gene and the D-loop, determining reduced amount of tRNAPhe
gene transcript and reduced mtDNA translation products, associated with late-onset, isolated myopathy. From 60 years of age the index
patient, a woman now 80 years old, has been developing slowly progressive muscle weakness and hypotrophy of the lower limb muscles,
including the ileopsoas, quadriceps, glutei and gastrocnemius. She complained neither of exercise intolerance nor myalgia, myoglobinuria or
dysphagia. The family history is negative for neuromuscular disorders. The neurological examination consistently showed progressive, severe
weakness of the lower limb muscles with bilateral hypotrophy of the quadriceps, and absence of the tendon reflexes, without fasciculations.
She has neither PEO, nor pyramidal signs, nor ataxia. The CK levels were consistently elevated, about four-fold the upper normal limit.
Electromyography (EMG) showed myopathic features, and a muscle tomography showed connective and adipose substitutions in the proximal
muscles of the lower limb. A brain NMR was normal. The disease progressed up to the present condition, characterized by anserine gait,
inability to stand up unaided from a chair, need of a cane to walk, and bilateral foot drop. Although her 46-year-old daughter (PII)
consistently showed moderate increase of CK levels and myopathic features at the EMG, she does not complain of fatigue or muscle weakness
and her neurological examination is normal. A myopathic EMG was also found in her 50-year-old asymptomatic brother (PIII). Quadriceps muscle
and skin biopsies were obtained after written informed consent from PI and PII. Cryostat sections were analyzed using standard techniques .
Cybrids , skin fibroblasts and 143B cells were grown in D-MEM glucose medium. Biochemical assays of the individual MRC complexes and citrate
synthase (CS) were carried out as described . Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) measurements were taken every 4 min after a 4 min mix period in
a XF 96-well apparatus (Seahorse Bioscience) on 15–20 × 103/well cells . Quantitative Real-time PCR was carried out on an ABI Prism 7000
apparatus (Applied Biosystems). Circularization and cDNA amplification of mtDNA regions were carried out as described elsewhere . Briefly,
RNA extracted from isolated mitochondria was circularized by incubation for 2 h at 37 °C with T4 RNA ligase. In order to obtain all the cDNA
species containing the tRNAPhe and 12S-rRNA genes, the circularized RNAs were then retrotranscribed and PCR-amplified using divergently
oriented primers (available upon request). The PCR products were cloned in a TOPO-TA vector (Invitrogen) and sequenced. For mt-tRNA
Northern-blot analysis mitochondrial RNA was extracted in acidic conditions , electrophoresed through a 10% polyacrylamide/8 M urea gel,
electroblotted onto a Zeta-Probe membrane (Bio-Rad) and hybridized with different γ-ATP labeled probes . For in organello aminoacylation
assays , mitochondria were incubated for 15′ at 37 °C in 10 mM Glutamate, 2.5 mM Malate, 1 mg/ml BSA, 1 mM ADP, a mixture of all amino acids
10 μM each (except the labeled one) and 75 μCi of -labeled aminoacid. For mitochondrial protein synthesis analysis , cybrids were labeled
for 2 h with -methionine-cysteine in the presence of 100 mg/ml emetine. Equal amounts of total cellular protein were loaded on a 20–15%
exponential gradient SDS–polyacrylamide gel. Autoradiography was performed with a PhosphorImager apparatus and densitometric analysis was
carried out by using Quantity One software (BioRad). A muscle biopsy of PI, performed at 63 years, demonstrated the presence of mild fiber
size variability with no type grouping, scattered ragged-red fibers (RRF) and focal COX deficiency (Fig. 1a–c). A second biopsy, performed
7 years later, confirmed the previous findings, and, in addition, the presence of sparse rimmed vacuoles, type grouping, and fibro-adipose
substitution, but neither acid-phosphatase positive fibers, nor inflammatory cells (Fig. 1d–f). A muscle biopsy performed in PII was
morphologically normal (not shown). Southern-blot analysis of mtDNA showed neither depletion, nor multiple or single large-scale
rearrangements. Sequencing analysis of the entire mtDNA form PI and PII muscle and fibroblasts, and PI-PII-PIII lymphocytes, revealed a
homoplasmic tandem direct duplication in the D-loop encompassing the first 11 bp at the 5′ end of the mtDNA–tRNAPhe gene and four
nucleotides at the end of the D-loop (Fig. 2). This mutation has never been described previously and was absent in 100 consecutive control
mtDNA samples. Analysis of the GNE gene, associated with inherited IBM, failed to detect mutations in PI and PII DNA samples. Individual RC
complex activities measured by standard spectrophotometric assays, and normalized to the activity of citrate synthase, showed isolated,
partial COX deficiency in the second muscle biopsy of PI (Fig. 3A), consistent with the histochemical findings (Fig. 1), whereas fibroblasts
from PI and PII, as well as cybrid derivatives, showed no defect (not shown). However, the oxygen consumption rate (OCR) was ≈50% decreased
in both PII homoplasmic mutant fibroblasts, compared to wt fibroblasts, and transmitochondrial mutant cybrids, compared to 143B parental
cells or a wild type cybrid cell line, taken as suitable controls (Fig. 3B). The mtDNA translation analysis showed ≈50% reduced amount of
mtDNA-specific proteins in mutant cybrids vs. control cybrid cells (Fig. 4A). Total and aminoacylated mt-tRNAPhe transcript from isolated
mt-RNA of homoplasmic mutant cybrids was reduced by ≈50% relative to that of 143B control cells, whereas mt-tRNAArg and mt-tRNAVal
transcripts were present in comparable amount in both (Fig. 4B). Likewise, the amount of other H-strand dependent transcripts located
downstream from the mt-tRNAPhe, including 12S rRNA, 16S rRNA, COI and cyt b, was measured by RT-PCR and compared to the values obtained from
the L-strand dependent ND6 gene transcript. The values were comparable in the two cell types, with the exception of the 12S rRNA/ND6 ratio
that was higher in the mutant than in control cells (Fig. 4C). Taken together, these data indicate no impairment of H-strand polycistronic
transcription in mutant mitochondria. A total of 20/20 cDNA clones, obtained by retrotranscription and circularization (see Section 3), all
corresponded to the normal mt-tRNAPhe species, suggesting that aberrant maturation of tRNAPhe is a rare event leading to rapid degradation
of the anomalous transcript. Our index patient had a relatively mild clinical presentation characterized by late-onset myopathy restricted
to the lower girdle and limbs. Interestingly, whilst a first muscle biopsy at the very onset of disease showed a mitochondrial myopathy with
scattered COX-negative fibers, a second biopsy performed years later showed the additional presence of sparse rimmed vacuoles, resembling
those found in inclusion body myopathy (IBM). Molecular abnormalities of mtDNA have been reported in IBM, including mtDNA multiple
deletions, partial mtDNA depletion and point mutations, but have been considered secondary, unspecific alterations . However, the following
evidence points to a primary mitochondrial myopathy in our patient. First, the timing of the morphological alterations demonstrates the
onset of a mitochondrial myopathy several years before the appearance of the IBM-like alterations. Second, we excluded mutations in the GNE
gene, which are the most common cause of autosomal recessive IBM , whereas the absence of skeletal alterations and cognitive impairment
exclude the possibility of a mutation in the VCP gene . Third, rimmed vacuoles can be secondary to a series of myopathic conditions,
including LGMD1A, LGMD2J, oculopharyngeal myopathy, myofibrillary myopathy and myophosphorylase deficiency. Fourth, we found a novel,
homoplasmic, peculiar mtDNA mutation that is clearly associated with reduced amount of total and aminoacylated tRNAPhe in primary
fibroblasts and transmitochondrial cybrids, leading to reduced mtDNA translation and mitochondrial respiration. Importantly, the mutation
preceded the onset and progression of symptoms in the index patient and in her two children, both of whom had laboratory signs of muscle
involvement, but no overt clinical symptoms, in agreement with the very late onset of the disease in the proband. The clinical features
suggest that the functional effects of the homoplasmic mtDNA duplication are mild. Accordingly, the spectrophotometric assays of individual
RC complex activities showed only partial COX deficiency in skeletal muscle of PI, concordantly with the presence of scattered COX-defective
muscle fibers. This uneven distribution of the COX reaction again suggests a dynamic disease mechanism, characterized by slow progression of
the biochemical impairment over time, so that at the time of the biopsy, some, but not all, fibers had eventually overreached the threshold
for histochemical detection. Although no obvious defect was found by spectrophotometric assays of individual RC complexes in cultured cells,
the overall mitochondrial respiration was significantly reduced in both mutant fibroblasts and transmitochondrial cybrid derivatives, which
contain homoplasmic mutant mtDNA on a heterologous nuclear background. This result unequivocally attributes the biochemical defect to the
mtDNA gene complement derived from the mutant fibroblast cell line. Human mtDNA encodes two rRNAs, 22 tRNAs, and 13 polypeptides. These
genes are non-randomly distributed along the molecule: with a few exceptions, the tRNA genes are interspersed between the protein-encoding,
and the rRNA, genes, with no intervening non-coding sequences . Transcription of these genes is initiated from each mtDNA strand at three
promoters, two for the heavy strand, H1 and H2, and one for the light strand, L1. H1 and L1 are contained in the D-loop region, the major,
non-coding “regulatory” segment of the mtDNA molecule , whereas H2 is contained in the adjacent tRNAPhe gene. Transcription gives rise to
large polycistronic RNA precursors, in which mRNA and rRNA sequences are punctuated by tRNAs. According to the current model for RNA
processing in human mitochondria, the mt-tRNAs act as cleavage signals for their own excision, and the concomitant release of mature rRNA
and mRNA species . The cleavage is carried out by two endonucleases, RNase P and RNase Z, operating at the 5′ and 3′ ends of the tRNA,
respectively, and is followed by the addition of a CCA triplet at the 3′ end of each mt-tRNA, mediated by the tRNA-nucleotidyl transferase .
The novel mutation found in our family is a 15 bp perfect tandem duplication immediately adjacent and identical to the first 11 nucleotides
of the mt-tRNAPhe 5′ end, plus a 4 bp sequence of the D-loop. One possibility is that the duplication, which is in close proximity to the H1
and H2 promoters, can interfere with transcription initiation of the corresponding polycistronic pre-mRNAs. However, with the exception of
the mt-tRNAPhe transcript, other mtDNA-heavy strand transcripts measured in mutant cybrids were present in amount comparable to that of 143B
cells, suggesting that the overall synthesis of the polycistronic H-strand dependent RNAs is unaffected by the mutation. A second
possibility is that the duplication creates an aberrant 5′-end cleavage site for mt-tRNAPhe, next to the normal one. This mechanism could
interfere, for instance by steric hindrance, with the cleavage of the mt-tRNAPhe at the normal 5′-end site, but it could also generate a
structurally aberrant, non-functioning and highly unstable RNA species, that would rapidly be degraded. This is a common mechanism for
pathogenic mutations in mt-tRNA genes . Both mechanisms would result in decreased steady-state levels of mt-tRNAPhe transcript, which is
what we observed experimentally. Decreased availability of mt-tRNAPhe can in turn explain the observed decrease of mitochondrial protein
synthesis and eventually the defect of respiration documented in mutant mitochondria. Taken together, these data prove a causative link
between an unusual mtDNA mutation and a partial defect in mitochondrial respiration, through an unconventional mechanism involving mtDNA
translation, and affecting either the maturation or the stability of mt-tRNAPhe (or both). The clinical and morphological features of the
disease raise the interesting, but still unproven, possibility that the mitochondrial dysfunction associated with the mtDNA mutation can
eventually evolve into an IBM-like condition. This work was supported by the Pierfranco and Luisa Mariani Foundation Italy, Ricerca 2000;
Fondazione Giuseppe Tomasello ONLUS and Fondazione MitoCon ONLUS; and Fondazione Telethon-Italy grants number GGP07019 and GPP10005, to MZ.
Morphological analysis: PI muscle biopsies at 63 (A) and 70 (B) years of age. Panels a, d: H&E; note the fiber size variation and numerous
centralized nuclei in a, with severe worsening in d. Panels b, e: Gomori trichrome; a pre-ragged red fiber is present in b, whereas several
fibers contain rimmed vacuoles in e. Panel c, f: COX + SDH histochemistry; numerous SDH-positive, COX-depleted blue fibers are present in
both samples. Magnification of panels A (a, b, c), referring to the first biopsy, is 20×. Magnification of panels B (d, e, f), referring to
the second biopsy, is 40×, due to the scarcity of muscle tissue. MtDNA analysis: (A) Electropherogram and schematic representation of the
15 bp duplication. Arrows indicate the H1 and H2 promoters with the corresponding nucleotide positions. Underlined letters indicate the
duplicated stretch. The same color code is used in the scheme and sequence letters to indicate the D-loop (ocre) and tRNAPhe gene (lilac).
(B) Scheme of the human mtDNA. Hooked arrows indicate the two promoters of the heavy strand (H1, H2) and that of the light strand (L1). The
mt-tRNAs are denominated as the corresponding aminoacid residues expressed in the single-letter code. Biochemical analysis: (A) RC complex
activities normalized to CS and expressed as percentage of the mean control value. (B) Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) in cells. Note that for
fibroblasts, values were measured as O2 fmol/min/cell, whereas for cybrids values were measured as O2 fmol/min normalized to the amount of
mtDNA. Ctrl: control. Vertical bars indicate the standard deviations. Unpaired, two-tail Student’s t test: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.0005. In
organello translation and tRNA analysis: (A) Mitochondrial protein synthesis. -labeled mtDNA translation products. ND: subunits of complex
I; CO: subunits of complex IV (COX); cyb: cytochrome b (complex III); ATPase: subunits of complex V (ATP synthase). Note the reduced
intensity of the bands from mutant cybrids compared to 143B cells. (B) Northern-blot analysis of total and aminoacylated mt-tRNA
transcripts. Top panel: Northern-blot analysis indicating the total amount of each mt-tRNA transcript. Bottom panel: aminoacylation assay.
Analysis of the aminoacylation capacity in mutant and control cells performed using 3H-labeled amino acids. (C) Quantitative analysis of mt-
RNA transcripts. Quantitative real-time PCR of mitochondrial H-strand transcripts relative to ND6 mRNA in mutant cybrids and 143B control
cells.
