G. Lanzi and D. Moratto contributed equally to this paper. R.S. Geha and S. Giliani contributed equally to this paper. A homozygous mutation
that gave rise to a stop codon in the WIPF1 gene resulted in WASP protein destabilization and in symptoms resembling those of Wiskott-
Aldrich syndrome A female offspring of consanguineous parents, showed features of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS), including recurrent
infections, eczema, thrombocytopenia, defective T cell proliferation and chemotaxis, and impaired natural killer cell function. Cells from
this patient had undetectable WAS protein (WASP), but normal WAS sequence and messenger RNA levels. WASP interacting protein (WIP), which
stabilizes WASP, was also undetectable. A homozygous c.1301C>G stop codon mutation was found in the WIPF1 gene, which encodes WIP.
Introduction of WIP into the patient’s T cells restored WASP expression. These findings indicate that WIP deficiency should be suspected in
patients with features of WAS in whom WAS sequence and mRNA levels are normal. The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS OMIM 301000) is an X-linked
disorder characterized by thrombocytopenia, eczema, and immunodeficiency (Thrasher and Burns, 2010). T lymphocytes from WAS patients fail to
proliferate and secrete IL-2 in response to cross-linking of the TCR–CD3 complex. Moreover, they exhibit actin cytoskeletal defects
illustrated by defective F-actin polymerization after TCR–CD3 cross-linking, reduced ability to spread upon contact with anti-CD3–coated
surfaces, impaired chemotaxis in vitro, and poor homing in vivo to lymphoid organs (Thrasher and Burns, 2010). NK cell function and immune
synapse formation with target cells is also impaired in WAS (Orange et al., 2002; Gismondi et al., 2004; Stabile et al., 2010). In T
lymphocytes, WASP is almost totally complexed with the WASP-interacting protein (WIP; de la Fuente et al., 2007). A major function of WIP is
to stabilize WASP and prevent its degradation. WASP protein levels, but not mRNA levels, are severely reduced in T cells from WIP-deficient
mice. Introduction of full-length WIP, but not of WIP that lacks the WASP binding domain, restores WASP levels in these cells (de la Fuente
et al., 2007). We describe for the first time a patient who presented in early infancy with a phenotype of WAS who was found to have a
homozygous mutation in the WIPF1 gene, which encodes WIP. The index patient was the second female child of consanguineous Moroccan parents.
She was referred at 11 d of age with poor weight gain, an eczematous rash, papulovesicular lesions on the scalp, and ulcerative lesions on
the hard palate and tongue. A previous female sibling suffered from ulcerative and vesicular skin lesions and died of sepsis at 4 mo of age.
Laboratory findings included thrombocytopenia (59 × 103/µl platelets) with normal platelet volume and elevated levels of C reactive protein
(10.3 mg/dl; Table S1). Blood and urine cultures were negative. Stool cultures revealed no pathogenic organisms. S. epidermidis and K.
pneumoniae grew from the skin vesicular lesions. The patient developed respiratory distress and required oxygen supplementation. A tracheal
aspirate was positive for respiratory syncytial virus by PCR. She was placed on wide-spectrum antibiotic therapy, fungal and viral
prophylaxis, immunoglobulin replacement, and platelet and red cell transfusions as needed. She developed rotavirus enteritis at 2 mo of age,
and acute hepatitis of unknown etiology at 3 mo of age. No clinical manifestations of autoimmunity or bleeding tendency were noted. Because
of persistent deterioration, failure to gain weight, and poor T cell function, at the age of 4.5 mo she underwent unrelated cord blood
transplantation. 16 mo after the procedure, she is alive and well with >98% of T cells, >98% of B cells, 94% of NK cells, 50% of monocytes,
and 41% of granulocytes of donor origin. The oral ulcerations resolved after bone marrow transplant, suggesting that they were secondary to
deficient immune function. Analysis of peripheral blood revealed low percentages and numbers of CD3+ cells (809 cells/µl), with CD8+ cells
more affected than CD4+ cells (Fig. 1 A and Table S1). 90% of CD3+ cells were TCRαβ+, and 7% were TCRγδ+. B cell number was low (319
cells/µL), whereas the percentage and number of CD16+CD56+ NK cells were increased (2,485 cells/µl; Fig. 1 A and Table S1), as reported in
patients with WAS (Gismondi et al., 2004). Serum immunoglobulins were normal, except for elevated IgE (32 IU/ml). Functional
characterization of WIP deficiency. (A) Evaluation of the proportion of T, B, and NK cells on gated lymphocytes in whole blood (top and
middle row), and of CD4- and CD8-expressing cells on the CD3+ gated cells (bottom row) of a control (Ctrl), the patient (Pt), and a WAS-null
patient. Data are representative of three independent analyses. (B) T cell proliferation to PHA and anti-hCD3 with or without rIL-2, as
assessed by CFSE dilution. PBMCs were used and FACS analysis was performed on CD3+ gated cells. The solid gray histogram represents
exemplificative profile of unstimulated cells. An overlapping profile was obtained from unstimulated cells of control and WAS patients (not
depicted). The red, gray, and blue profiles represent CFSE content in stimulated cells from patient, control, and a WAS-null patient,
respectively. Data are representative of two independent experiments. (C) PBMCs were stimulated with IL-2, and gated CD3+ cells were
analyzed by FACS for intracellular pSTAT5 using anti-pY694STAT5. The solid line represents the signal in unstimulated patient’s cells, which
was comparable to that of unstimulated control and WAS-null patient cells (not depicted). The pSTAT5 signal in the rIL-2 stimulated cells
from patient, control, and WAS patient are indicated in red, gray, and blue, respectively. Data are representative of three independent
experiments. (D) Migration of PHA blasts from a healthy control, the patient and from a WAS-null patient toward the chemokine IP-10. The
gray, red, and blue histograms represent migration of cells from control, patient, and WAS-null patient, respectively. Data are
representative of two independent experiments. (E) Expression of the IP-10 receptor CXCR3 on PHA blasts from patient, control, and WAS-null
patient. Isotype control staining of patient PHA blasts is shown by the filled histogram and was comparable to that of control T cells and
WAS patient (not depicted). The CXCR3 signals in cells from patient, control, and WAS patient are indicated in red, gray, and blue,
respectively. Data are representative of two independent experiments. (F) Expression of CD56, NKp30, NKGD2, and NKp46 on NK cells from
patient (red) and control (gray). The filled histogram represents isotype control staining of patient NK cells, and was comparable to that
of control NK cells (not depicted). Data are representative of two analyses. (G) Cytolytic activity by patient and control NK cell lines
against the LCL 721.221 target cells, measured as the percentage of net 51Cr release at effector (E) to target (T) ratios of 3:1 and 6:1.
Data are representative of two independent experiments on the same expanded NK cells. Because of the clinical similarities between our
patient and WAS patients we studied in parallel the function of her T cells and those from a WAS patient who expressed no detectable WASP
protein. Analysis of T cell proliferation by CFSE dilution revealed normal proliferation to PHA, but completely defective proliferation to
immobilized anti-CD3 in the patient (Fig. 1 B). In contrast, the proliferation of T cells from the WAS patient to anti-CD3 was only
partially decreased. Addition of IL-2 failed to correct the inability of the patient’s T cells to proliferate to anti-CD3 (Fig. 1 B), and
induced only modest STAT5 phosphorylation compared with control T cells (Fig. 1 C). In contrast, IL-2 completely corrected the proliferation
of WASP-deficient T cells to anti-CD3 (Fig. 1 B) and caused normal STAT5 phosphorylation in these cells (Fig. 1 C). Migration toward the
C-X-C motif chemokine immune protein-10 (IP-10) was abolished in PHA blasts from the patient at all three concentrations tested (Fig. 1 D).
WASP-deficient PHA blasts responded to the highest concentration of IP-10 tested, but not to the lower two concentrations. Expression of the
IP-10 receptor CXCR3 was lower in the patient’s T cells (Fig. 1 E), and may have contributed to their failure to migrate toward IP-10.
Analysis of cytolytic activity of freshly isolated NK cells from the patient was precluded by the amount of blood that could be drawn. To
circumvent this limitation, NK cells were expanded by stimulating T cell–depleted PBMCs from patient and a control with PHA and rIL-2 in the
presence of feeder cells (Castriconi et al., 2007). The resulting cell lines contained >90% CD56+ NK cells, which expressed comparable
levels of CD56 on their surface. However, expression of NKp30, NKp46, and NKG2D, all of which are implicated in NK cytotoxicity, were
reduced on the patient’s cells (Fig. 1 F). Analysis of cytolytic activity against LCL 721.221 target cells demonstrated a drastic reduction
in the functional activity of the patient’s NK cell line compared with that from control (Fig. 1 G). Previous studies have shown impaired
cytotoxicity of freshly isolated NK cells from WAS patients (Gismondi et al., 2004). We have been unable to derive NK cell lines from the
WAS patient for direct comparison with the NK cell line from our patient. Although the WAS gene is located on the X-chromosome, several
cases of WAS in females caused by extreme lyonization or biallelic WAS mutations have been described (Lutskiy et al., 2002; Proust et al.,
2005). Western blot analysis revealed no detectable WASP in lysates of the patient’s PHA T blasts (Fig. 2 A). WASP expression in the PHA T
blasts from both parents was reduced to ∼50% of normal as assessed by Western blot compared with the mean of four controls (Fig. 2 A and not
depicted). Similar results were obtained by flow cytometric analysis of PBMCs from the patient and her parents (unpublished data). The
levels of WAS mRNA in PHA T blasts from the patient and her parents were within the normal range of 25 controls (Fig. 2 B). Sequencing of
the WAS gene in the patient revealed no mutations. WIP is mutated in the patient. (A and C) Western blot analysis of WASP (A) and WIP (C) in
lysates of PHA T cell blasts. Numbers at the bottom indicate densitometric quantification corrected for the actin signal. Data are
representative of two experiments. (B and D) qPCR analysis of mRNA expression of WAS (B) and WIPF1 (D) in PHA T blasts, relative to the
housekeeping gene GAPDH, normalized to 1 for the mean of 25 controls. The gray area indicates the range for the 25 controls. Data are
representative of three experiments conducted on triplicates. (E) Genomic organization of WIPF1 (top) and protein structure (bottom) of WIP
showing the localization of the mutation and the resulting amino acidic change (in red) from Serine to a premature termination codon
(S434X). The genomic organization shows coding exons, indicated with Roman numbers, and 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions (UTR). Protein
structure includes known WIP-interacting protein domains and WASP homology 2 (WH2). (F) Electropherogram depicting the homozygous c.1301C>G
mutation in exon 6 in the patient and the presence of the same mutation in the heterozygous state in the mother. The absence of WASP
expression in the patient’s cells, despite normal WAS sequence and mRNA expression level, suggested that WASP was being degraded. Because
WIP stabilizes WASP, we examined its expression. Western blot analysis of PHA T blasts from the patient revealed no detectable WIP (Fig. 2
C). WIP expression in the PHA T blasts from both parents was reduced to ∼50% of normal (n = 4). These results were confirmed by flow
cytometric analysis of PBMCs from the patient and her parents (unpublished data). Quantitative PCR analysis revealed that the WIPF1 mRNA
level in the patient’s PHA T blasts was at the lowest limit of the normal range of 25 controls (Fig. 2 D). WIPF1 mRNA levels in the parents
were in the lower range of normal. Sequencing of genomic DNA revealed that the patient had a homozygous point mutation c.1301C>G in exon 6
of the WIPF1 gene located on chromosome 2 (Fig. 2, E and F). This mutation results in a change from serine to premature termination in codon
434 (S434X), situated immediately upstream of the region encoding the WASP-binding domain of WIP (451–485 aa; Ramesh et al., 1997). Both
parents were heterozygous for the c.1301C>G substitution, confirming the autosomal recessive inheritance of the mutation. We examined
whether expression of human WIP (hWIP) in the patient’s cells corrects their defective WASP expression. PHA T blasts from the patient and a
control were transfected with vectors expressing EGFP-hWIP fusion protein or EGFP alone, and their content of WIP and WASP was determined by
FACS analysis of intracellular staining. As expected, introduction of EGFP-hWIP, but not EGFP, in the patient’s T cells resulted in WIP
expression, as indicated by the detection of WIP+ cells in the EGFP+ gate (Fig. 3 A). More importantly, introduction of EGFP-hWIP, but not
EGFP, in the patient’s T cells resulted in increased WASP expression by EGFP+ cells (Fig. 3 B). WASP expression in the EGFP-hWIP–transfected
cells from the patient correlated with WIP expression (Fig. 3 C). These findings indicate that the absence of WIP in the patient’s T cells
resulted in WASP instability and degradation. Because the patient was transplanted at 4.5 mo of age and because of the limited amounts of
blood we could obtain pretransplant, we were not able to examine whether transduction of WIP in the patients T cells would restore their
function or examine the cortical actin meshwork in the patient’s T cells, which is severely attenuated in WIP−/− but not WASP−/− mice (Antón
et al., 2002). Introduction of WIP restores WASP levels in the patient T cells. (A and B) Two-color FACS analysis of expression of WIP (A)
and WASP (B) versus EGFP in PHA T cell blasts transfected with vectors encoding EGFP-hWIP for patient and control and with EGFP alone for
the patient. Histograms depicting WIP and WASP expression in gated EGFP+ cells are shown in the right panels. (C) Two-color FACS analysis of
WASP versus WIP expression in gated EGFP+ cells. Data are representative of two different analyses. Several of the clinical characteristics
and laboratory findings in the patient resemble those found in WAS. They include recurrent infections, eczematous skin rash,
thrombocytopenia, T cell lymphopenia affecting CD8+ lymphocytes more severely, impaired T cell proliferation to immobilized anti-CD3,
defective T cell chemotaxis, and increased NK cell number but decreased NK cell function. In addition, the patient displayed immune
abnormalities that are observed in WIP-deficient mice, but not in WAS patients or WASP-deficient mice. They include complete failure to
proliferate to TCR ligation with anti-CD3, impaired response of T cells to IL-2, and complete abrogation of T cell chemotaxis (Fig. 1;
Haddad et al., 2001; Gallego et al., 2006; Le Bras et al., 2009). In contrast to WAS patients, platelet volume was normal in the patient,
like in WIP-deficient mice (Curcio et al., 2007). However, we hesitate to draw a firm conclusion on platelet size in human WIP deficiency
based on a single patient. Despite undetectable WASP in the patient, no mutations were detected in the coding region of the WAS gene and WAS
mRNA levels were normal, findings strongly indicative of WASP instability. WIP, which is critical for the stability of WASP, was
undetectable in the patient’s cells, and a homozygous mutation that introduces a premature stop codon in the WIPF1 coding sequence was
identified in the patient. The same mutation was found in the heterozygous state in both parents, indicating that WIP deficiency was
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. This is consistent with an older sibling having died from a similar condition. The fact that both
parents showed reduced levels of WIP, to approximately half of normal, suggests a gene dose effect. The correspondingly reduced WASP level
in the parents suggests that WIP tightly regulates WASP levels. We have observed a similar reduction of WASP levels in mice heterozygous for
a WIP-null allele (unpublished data). Importantly, we demonstrated that reconstitution of the patient’s T cells with WIP restores WASP
levels, indicating that loss of WIP expression was the cause of WASP instability in the patient’s cells. Collectively, the data indicate
that WIP deficiency is responsible for the immune dysfunction in the patient. Based on our findings, WAS cannot be diagnosed solely on the
basis of lack of WASP expression, but requires sequence analysis of WAS. WIP deficiency should be suspected in patients with features of WAS
in whom WAS sequence and mRNA levels are normal, and the diagnosis should be confirmed by sequencing WIPF1. Patient’s samples were obtained
upon informed consent by the local Institution Review Board and in respect to the Helsinki declaration. Human studies were approved by the
Ethical Committee of Azienda Ospedaliera Spedali Civili, Brescia. Isolation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and of specific
cell populations and establishment of cell lines were performed as follow: to obtain PHA T blasts, PBMCs were stimulated with 5 µg/ml PHA
(Sigma-Aldrich) and 600 U/ml rIL-2 (Cairon-Novartis) in RPMI medium containing 10% FCS, 1% l-glutamine, and 1X antibiotics (EuroClone). To
generate NK cell lines, NK cells were purified by NK cell separation cocktail (Rosette Sep; StemCell Technologies). The purity of NK cells
was >96% as assessed by flow cytometric analysis of cells stained with a mixture of CD56-PC5 and CD3-FITC (Beckman Coulter). CD3
contamination was <1%. Purified NK cells were cultured on irradiated feeder cells in the presence of 100 U/ml of rIL-2 and 5 µg/ml of PHA
(Invitrogen) to obtain activated polyclonal NK cell populations. Activated polyclonal NK cells were maintained in complete RPMI medium
containing 1,200 U/ml of rIL-2. Genomic DNA was isolated using the automatic DNA extractor Maxwell 16 (Promega). Sequencing of genomic DNA
corresponding to the coding regions of WAS (ENSG00000015285) and WIPF1 (ENSG00000115935) genes was performed by direct sequencing after PCR
amplification of exons with flanking intronic regions. Primers and conditions are reported in Table S2. Total RNA was isolated from PBMCs
using the RNeasy Mini kit (QIAGEN) and transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA). Quantitative PCR experiments were performed by reverse
transcription of 200 ng of DNase-treated total RNA to synthesize the first strand of cDNA by the GeneAmp RNA PCR kit (Applied Biosystems).
Analysis of WASP, WIPF1, and GAPDH gene expression was assessed by RealTime PCR using Assays-on-Demand products and TaqMan Master Mix from
Applied Biosystems. The level of expression was normalized using GAPDH as a reference. Cell lysates from PHA T blasts were prepared and 10
µg protein were loaded on a 10% SDS-PAGE and transferred onto a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane (GE Healthcare). Specific proteins were
detected using mouse IgG1 anti-WIP mAb (3D10; Koduru et al., 2007), mouse IgG2a anti-WASP mAb 5A5 (BD), and mouse anti-actin mAb (US
Biological). Flow cytometry for surface and intracellular proteins was performed on 100 µl of whole blood or isolated cells (1.5 × 106)
resuspended in 100 µl of the appropriate medium. To assess WASP and WIP expression, cells were treated with the Fix and Perm kit
(Invitrogen) for FACS analysis. Cells were stained with mouse IgG1 anti WIP (3D10; Koduru et al., 2007) and mouse IgG2a anti-WASP (5A5; BD),
followed by anti IgG1PE and biotinylated anti–IgG2a-streptavidinPECy5, respectively. Acquisition was performed using a FACSCalibur (BD), and
data were analyzed with FlowJo Software v7.5 (Tree Star). Standard flow cytometric methods were also used for CFSE assay. CFSE labeling (100
nM) was performed in PBS for 6 min at 37°C. Cells were then washed twice in RPMI 10% FCS. Cells were cultured for 96 h in the absence of
stimulation or stimulated with anti-CD3 (clone OKT3, 100 ng/ml) and anti–human CD28 (1 µg/ml) or PHA (5 µg/ml) and then analyzed for CFSE
dilution. For the characterization of NK cells, the following mAbs, which were produced in our laboratories, were used in this study: BAB281
(IgG1anti-NKp46), AZ20 (IgG1, anti-NKp30), c218 (IgG1, anti-CD56), BAT221 (IgG1, anti-NKG2D), and 289 (IgG2a, anti-CD3). For
cytofluorimetric analysis, cells were stained with mAb PE-conjugated isotype-specific goat anti–mouse secondary antibody (SouthernBiotech).
Cell acquisition was performed on a FACScan flow cytometer (BD), and data were analyzed using the CellQuest software (BD). Analysis of STAT5
phosphorylation in T cells in response to IL-2 was assessed by flow cytometry: 100 µl of whole blood was incubated with or without 100 ng/ml
rIL-2 (Proleukin-Chiron) for 10 min at 37°C. Activation was stopped using Lyse/Fix buffer (BD). After washing, the samples were
permeabilized by PBIII Buffer (BD) for 30 min on ice and incubated with anti–phospho-STAT5 (Y694)-PE and CD3-FITC, or with isotype-matched
mAb PE (BD) for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were then washed and resuspended in 200 µl of BD CellFix and analyzed with FACSCalibur
instrument (BD). To analyze NK cytolytic activity, PBMCs were depleted of T cells and expanded in vitro with rIL-2, resulting in highly
enriched (>95%) CD56+ NK lymphocytes, which were tested for cytolytic activity against the NK-susceptible tumor target cell line LCL 721.221
in a 4-h 51Cr-release assay. Target cells were used at 5 × 103 cells/well with final E/T ratios of 6:1 and 3:1. In vitro chemotaxis of PHA T
blasts toward IP-10 was examined using a standard Transwell chamber assay: a total of 3 × 105 PHA T blasts were added to the upper chamber
of a plate 6.5 mm in diameter with a pore size of 5 µm (Costar). 600 µl of RPMI 1640 with 0.1% FCS was added to the bottom chamber with or
without IP10 (250, 500, and 1,000 ng/ml; PeproTech). After 2 h at 37°C, cells that migrated to the lower chamber were collected and counted.
The experiment was performed in duplicates. Expression of the IP-10 receptor CXCR3 was examined by FACS using a mouse anti–CXCR3-FITC mAb
(R&D Systems). hWIP cDNA was generated from normal PBMCs by RT-PCR and cloned into the BglII–PstI cloning sites of the pAC-EGFP vector.
Confirmation of the WT WIP sequence and its in-frame insertion in the vector was obtained by direct sequencing. PHA T blasts were
transfected using the Amaxa nucleofection technology (Lonza) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, which is optimized for stimulated
human T cells. In brief, 2–3 × 106 cell suspension was mixed with 1 µg/106 cell of both mock and hWIP-containing plasmid DNA, transfected
using the T-020 program, then cultured for 48 h in the growth medium. Mock- and hWIP-transfected cells were treated with the Fix/Perm kit
(Invitrogen) for FACS analysis. Cells were stained with mouse IgG1 anti WIP (3D10) and mouse IgG2a anti WASP (5A5), followed by anti–IgG1-PE
and biotinylated anti–IgG2a-streptavidin-PECy5, respectively. Acquisition was performed using a FACSCalibur (BD), and analysis was performed
by FlowJo software (Tree Star). Transfected PHA-T cells were evaluated for WASP and WIP expression level gating on EGFP+ cells. Table S1
provides the Laboratory data of the patient at 3 wk of age. Table S2 provides the list of the primers used for the amplification of the
WIPF1 gene. Online supplemental material is available at http://www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20110896/DC1. This work was supported by
Fondazione ‘A. Nocivelli’ to S. Giliani; United States Public Health Services grant 5PO1HL059561 to S. Giliani, L.D. Notarangelo, and R.S.
Geha; Fondazione C. Golgi to A. Plebani; the Jeffrey Modell Foundation; and the Perkin fund. D. Vairo is recipient of a Rotary Brescia
fellowship. The authors have no conflicting financial interests. Abbreviations used: CFSE carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester hWIP human
WIP IP10 C-X-C motif chemokine immune protein-10 rIl-2 recombinant IL-2 WAS Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome WASP WAS protein WIP WASP interacting
protein carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester human WIP C-X-C motif chemokine immune protein-10 recombinant IL-2 Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
WAS protein WASP interacting protein
