The coexistence of CCND1/IGH and MYC rearrangements in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a rare finding associated with a very poor prognosis.
In this study, a patient with blastoid variant (MCL) is reported. The disease was clinically aggressive and refractory to chemotherapy, and
the patient only survived for 1 month following diagnosis. Conventional cytogenetic study, FISH, and multicolor FISH (mFISH) demonstrated
the involvement of the BCL1/CCND1 locus in a complex translocation, t(3;11)(q25;p15)t(11;14)(q13;q32). In addition, subclonal abnormalities
in the 8q24 region, manifested as a t(8;14)(q24;q32)/MYC rearrangement, were identified. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first MCL
case in Korea bearing these complex genomic aberrations. Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a distinct subtype of mature B-cell lymphoma,
constituting 5-10% of all non-Hodgkin lymphoma cases. Patients with MCL have a poor prognosis, with a median survival of 3 to 5 yr. The
blastoid variant of MCL occurs in 10-20% of all MCL patients, and a more aggressive clinical course has been reported in patients with this
variant. MCL is typically positive for B-cell associated markers in addition to bcl-2, cyclin D1, CD5, and/or CD43 and is negative for
bcl-6, CD10, and CD23 on immunohistochemistry [1, 2]. The genetic hallmark of MCL, the translocation t(11;14)(q13;q32), juxtaposing the IGH
on 14q32 with the BCL1/CCND1 gene on 11q13, results in constitutional overexpression of CCND1 and cell cycle dysregulation, in virtually all
cases . Although most CCND1/IGH gene rearrangements result from balanced translocation t(11;14), complex variants of this translocation have
been reported, involving additional partner chromosomes leading to various unbalanced translocations . It is believed that the
overexpression of CCND1 is not, on its own, sufficient to induce malignant transformation of lymphoid cells. Molecular genetic studies have
confirmed that additional genomic aberrations are found in the majority of MCL cases, and these aberrations are thought to play a major role
in the development and progression of this lymphoma [4, 7, 8]. The 8q24/MYC translocation, t(8;14)(q24;q32), has been described as the
driving oncogene in Burkitt's lymphoma (BL). However, abnormalities in MYC have been recognized in other non-Hodgkin lymphomas as well,
mainly as a secondary karyotypic change . A few cases of MCL with both t(11;14) and MYC rearrangements have been reported . To the best of
our knowledge, coexistence of a complex variant of the t(11;14) and MYC aberrations has not been previously reported in Korea. In this
study, we report a CD5-negative blastoid variant of MCL with a rare association of a complex translocation,
t(3;11)(q25;p15)t(11;14)(q13;q32) involving CCND1, and subclonal MYC aberrations due to t(8;14)(q24;q32). An 83-yr-old Korean man was
admitted to a university hospital for evaluation of leukocytosis, which had been found during an examination for spinal stenosis. The
initial complete blood count results were as follows: hemoglobin level, 10.5 g/dL; platelet count, 176×109/L; and white blood cell count,
125.8×109/L, comprising 5% segmented neutrophils, 7% lymphocytes, 2% monocytes, 2% myelocytes, 3% metamyelocytes, 2% band forms, 3%
basophils, 1% atypical lymphocytes, and 75% blast-like lymphoid cells (medium to large-sized with polymorphous nucleus, prominent nucleoli,
and a small quantity of basophilic cytoplasm) (Fig. 1). Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy analysis revealed a normocellular marrow with
significant infiltration of similar-looking blastoid cells. Immunophenotyping of the bone marrow specimens using flow cytometry demonstrated
that the blastoid cells were positive for CD19, CD20, cCD22, CD23, CD79a, HLA-DR, and kappa-restricted surface immunoglobulin, but negative
for CD5, CD10, and TdT. Chromosome study revealed 45-47,XY,-9,-11,der(14)t(11;14)(q13;q32),-22,+2~3mar (Fig. 2A). Because the
der(14)t(11;14) detected by G-banding gave rise to the suspicion that a cryptic t(11;14) might be present, FISH was performed using dual-
color dual-fusion BCL1 (11q13) green/IGH (14q32) orange probes (Kreatech Diagnostics, Amsterdam, the Netherlands). The FISH analysis
revealed "nuc ish (BCL1×3),(IGH×4),(BCL1 con IGH×2)/(BCL1,IGH)×3,(BCL1 con IGH×2)/(BCL1×2),(IGH×3),(BCL1 con IGH×1)/(BCL1,IGH)×2(BCL1 con
IGH×1)," showing that more than 60% of the cells harbored 2 BCL1/IGH fused signals representing the 2 derivatives (Fig. 2D). These findings
were most compatible with the blastoid variant of MCL. To further characterize the marker chromosomes and identify another submicroscopic
CCND1/IGH rearrangement that was undetectable by the G-banding technique, multicolor FISH (mFISH) analysis was performed with a human
24XCyte probe (MetaSystems, Altlussheim, Germany). Hybridization and post-hybridization washes were performed according to the protocols
provided by the manufacturers. Image acquisition, processing, and evaluation were performed under a fluorescence microscope (Carl Zeiss
MicroImaging GmbH, Jena, Germany) by using Isis/mFISH imaging software (MetaSystems). mFISH analysis revealed derivative chromosomes,
der(11)t(3;11)(q25;p15)t(11;14)(q13;q32), der(17)t(8;17)(q?;q?), and der(14)t(8;14)(q24;q32) in 3 metaphase cells (Fig. 2B, C). This result
led us to conclude that the 2 marker chromosomes seen in G-banded metaphases were derived from the complex translocation t(11;14)
additionally involving chromosome 3 and the translocation between 8q and 17q. The status of the MYC/IGH rearrangement t(8;14) was confirmed
using FISH with a dual-color dual-fusion MYC (8q24) green/IGH (14q32) orange probe (Kreatech Diagnostics). Abnormal patterns with 1 fusion
signal were observed in 61% of total cells analyzed. The patient was treated with cytarabine, hydroxyurea, vincristine, and dexamethasone.
However, he was refractory to chemotherapy and died 28 days after admission. The CCND1/IGH gene rearrangement is the most important factor
in the diagnosis of MCL, and the microscopic or submicroscopic translocations resulting in complex t(11;14) translocations have only been
reported in a few MCL cases [5, 8, 11]. MYC overexpression is significantly associated with negative prognostic influence, more aggressive
phenotypes, lower response rates, and shorter overall survival in non-BL patients . The coexistence of complex t(11;14), involving
additional partner chromosomes and MYC rearrangement, has been previously reported [5, 8, 11]. Although the presence of multiple chromosome
abnormalities in addition to t(11;14) is well known to be associated with blastoid variants and poor prognoses in MCL , cases reported with
complex t(11;14) and MYC overexpression have tended to show an accelerated course [10, 13-15] (Table 1). The activation of MYC may have a
synergistic effect in the MCL progression . In addition, deletions in chromosome 9, consistently detected in this case, are also associated
with poor prognosis in MCL . In the present case, conventional cytogenetic analysis provided evidence of 2 marker chromosomes of unknown
origin and a translocation t(11;14) (Fig. 2A), and FISH analysis revealed 2 BCL1/IGH fusion signals (Fig. 2D). mFISH analysis was employed
to define the discrepancy between the 2 methods, and it revealed that 1 of the marker chromosomes was a derivative chromosome 11, formed by
14q32 fused to 11q13, and the 11p15 end fused to 3q25, which probably caused another fusion signal in the FISH analysis (Fig. 2B). MCL is
one of the malignant lymphoid neoplasms with the highest level of clonal heterogeneity, which is indicative of a multistep process of
lymphomagenesis . Although every G-banded metaphase cell harbored derivative chromosomes 11 and 14, representing the population showing 2
BCL1/IGH fusion signals in FISH, FISH results showed heterogeneous populations of cells; about 10% of total analyzed cells that showed 1
BCL1/IGH fusion signal and they can be a subclone harboring unbalanced t(11;14). The lack of variation in metaphase G-banding could be due
to its lower sensitivity compared with interphase FISH analysis, or to the mitotic error of subclones with unbalanced and more complex
karyotypes, or perhaps both. The mFISH is a powerful tool that facilitates the karyotyping of complex chromosomal rearrangements, cryptic
translocations, and marker chromosomes not identifiable by conventional cytogenetics. In this study, mFISH complemented G-banding by
identifying several derivative chromosomes. However, it did not clarify the juxtaposition of 14q32 on der(11) and the translocated region of
14qter on chromosome 8 (Fig. 2B). This is attributed to the resolution limit of mFISH, which has been reported to range from 500 to 1,500 kb
. The presence of these translocations was completely identified by FISH analyses. Although the immunophenotype of MCL is relatively
characteristic, immunophenotypic heterogeneity in MCL has been described in blastoid variants, including the absence of CD5 and the
expression of CD10, BCL6, and CD23 [19, 20]. In conclusion, we report a rare case of MCL, with coexistence of a complex t(11;14)
translocation involving CCND1 and MYC aberrations in the blastoid variant of MCL, atypically lacking in CD5 expression. The combination of
mFISH and FISH with conventional karyotyping has enabled the elucidation of the compex chromosomal aberrations. No potential conflict of
interest relevant to this article was reported. The peripheral blood smear shows an increased number of medium- to large-sized blastoid
cells with polymorphous nuclei and basophilic cytoplasm (Wright-Giemsa stain, ×1,000). (A) Giemsa-banding karyogram of bone marrow cells:
45-47,XY,-9,-11,der(14)t(11;14)(q13;q32),-22,+2~3mar. M1 and M2 indicate marker chromosome 1 and 2, respectively. (B) Single color galleries
of mFISH analysis showing der(14)t(11;14)(q13;q32), der(11) t(3;11)(q25;p15)t(11;14)(q13;q32), der(14)t(8;14)(q24.1;q32), and
der(17)t(8;17)(q?;q?) respectively. (C) Diagrammatic representation of der(11)t(3;11)(q25;p15)t(11;14)(q13;q32). The arrows indicate
breakpoints in chromosomes 3, 11, and 14. (D) FISH analysis using a dual-color dual-fusion BCL1(green)/IGH(orange) probe, a subclone
harboring 2 fusion (F), 1 BCL1(G) and 2 IGH (R) signals. The corresponding chromosomes are marked as F, G, and R on the karyogram (A).
Summary of reported cases of concomitant complex CCND1/IGH and MYC aberrations in MCL patients Abbreviation: NA, not available.
