Frameless stereotactic biopsies are replacing frame-based stereotaxy as a diagnostic approach to brain lesions. In order to avoid a sampling
bias or negative histology, multiple specimens are often taken. This in turn increases the risk of hemorrhagic complications. We present the
use of 5-aminolevulinic acid (5-ALA)-induced protoporphyrin IX fluorescence in frameless stereotaxy to improve the procedure duration and
yield, and thereby reduce the risk of complications. Patients with suspected high-grade brain tumors are given 5-ALA 4 h prior to
stereotactic biopsy. The biopsy needle is guided to the target using frameless stereotaxy based either on preoperative images or combined
with intraoperative MRI sequences. The specimen is illuminated with blue light to look for fluorescence. In case of a positive fluorescence
within the tissue sample, no frozen sections are obtained, and no further specimens are taken. The samples of 13 patients revealed a
positive fluorescence and were histologically confirmed as malignant or high-grade brain neoplasms. four cases were fluorescence-negative,
requiring frozen section confirmation and/or multiple samples. In theses cases histology was either nonspecific gliotic changes or low-grade
tumors. There were no complications related to the additional use of 5-ALA. 5-ALA fluorescence in stereotactic biopsies can increase the
safety and accuracy of these procedures by reducing sampling errors and eliminating the need for multiple samples and/or frozen section
verification, creating a more accurate, faster and safer procedure for cases of suspected malignant or high-grade brain tumors situated in
deep or eloquent areas. Over the last few years, frameless stereotactic biopsies have progressively replaced frame-based stereotactic
procedures as a first line diagnostic approach to various brain lesions. The combined use of intraoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
further increases the spatial resolution of the probe target correlation in these procedures . Yet, despite the increasing accuracy of
frameless stereotactic procedures, failure to correctly establish tumor histology and dignity occurs in approximately 25% of cases, mainly
due to tissue heterogeneity and sampling bias [3, 7]. In cases where the frameless stereotactic biopsy is based solely on preoperative
computertomographic (CT) or MRI images, the results are even less favorable with 37% to 49% of incorrectly diagnosed gliomas. In order to
avoid sampling bias, obtaining multiple specimens has been advocated . Since stereotactic procedures are the diagnostic method of choice for
deep-seated lesions, within the brain stem, or within the so-called eloquent areas, taking additional samples during the same procedure to
improve the diagnostic accuracy can be risky or even impossible. A precise histological diagnosis, however, is crucial for appropriate
treatment guidance and prognosis. To decrease the morbidity and mortality risks associated with multiple sampling, we introduced
fluorescence-controlled stereotaxy in our department ; additional cases were published in support of the concept by others . We here present
a series of 17 consecutive patients where we combined 5-aminolevulinic acid (5-ALA)-induced fluorescence with frameless stereotaxy for rapid
biopsy accuracy verification in cases of suspected malignant or high-grade brain tumors. Four hours prior to surgery the patient is given an
oral dose of a 20-mg/kg body weight aqueous solution of 5-aminolevulinic acid hydrochloride (Gliolan® medac GmbH, Hamburg, Germany) . The
MRI data used for biopsy planning and guidance are obtained either preoperatively using a standardized high-resolution imaging protocol or,
if available, intraoperatively after the patient has been positioned on the operating table. After general anesthesia, burr hole placement
and dural opening at the determined entry point are performed in the usual fashion. Using frameless stereotaxy navigation (StealthStation®,
Medtronic, Louisville, KY, USA), the biopsy needle is then advanced into the targeted lesion, guided by the MRI data, and a first sample is
taken. After removal of the needle it is placed under a 405–440-nm blue light source (either a dedicated light source or the light source of
an operating microscope fitted for 5-ALA-induced PpIX fluorescence) with the specimen still in place to look for fluorescence. In case of
strong positive fluorescence, no frozen section is obtained, and no further samples are taken. A 71-year-old male (Table 1, case 01) with
multiple intracerebral lesions of unknown origin underwent a frameless stereotactic biopsy in the periventricular area of the right frontal
horn. As a proof of concept, the accuracy of the calculations and needle placement was verified by obtaining an intraoperative MRI scan with
the titanium biopsy needle (Pajunk Medizintechnologie, Geisingen, Germany) still in place. After removal of the needle and blue light
illumination of the tissue sample, a positive red fluorescence could be observed. As the opening of the biopsy needle (10 mm) was larger
than the target lesion (5 mm), and the needle itself has a 2-mm forerun (Fig. 1, top), only the distal part of the actual specimen was
expected to hold pathological tissue, which was confirmed by visible 5-ALA-induced protoporphyrin IX (PpIX) fluorescence only within the
tumor tissue (Fig. 1, bottom). Histology and immunohistochemistry revealed a malignant lymphoma (B-cell lymphoma), and showed the border
between the target lesion and the surrounding brain (Fig. 2) as predicted by fluorescence and MRI.Table 1Demographic data, detected
fluorescence and final pathology of 17 patients who underwent a frameless stereotactic brain biopsy after oral administration of Gliolan®
(5-ALA). Fluorescence was assessed under a 440-nm blue light sourcePatientSexAge (years)FluorescenceFinal histology01M71PositiveB-cell
lymphoma02M60PositiveGlioblastoma multiforme03M79PositiveGlioblastoma multiforme05M70PositiveGlioblastoma multiforme07F38PositiveB-cell
lymphoma09M25PositiveGerminoma10M49PositiveAstrocytoma WHO grade III11F72PositiveAstrocytoma WHO grade III12F76PositiveB-cell
lymphoma13M65PositiveB-cell lymphoma15M72PositiveGlioblastoma multiforme16M65PositiveGlioblastoma multiforme17F39PositiveGlioblastoma
multiforme04M30NegativeAstrocytoma WHO grade II06F71NegativeAstrocytoma WHO grade II08M52NegativeUnspecific gliosis14M82NegativeUnspecific
gliosisAge in years, M = male, F = female.Fig. 1The opening of the biopsy needle (10 mm) is larger than the target lesion (5 mm), and the
needle itself has a 2-mm fore-run (Fig. 1, top). Only the distal part of the actual specimen was expected to hold pathological tissue, which
was confirmed by visible 5-ALA-induced protoporphyrin IX (PpIX) fluorescence only within the tumor tissue (Fig. 1, bottom)Fig.
2Immunohistochemistry revealed a malignant lymphoma (B-cell lymphoma), and showed the border between the target lesion and the surrounding
brain (CD 20) Demographic data, detected fluorescence and final pathology of 17 patients who underwent a frameless stereotactic brain biopsy
after oral administration of Gliolan® (5-ALA). Fluorescence was assessed under a 440-nm blue light source Age in years, M = male,
F = female. The opening of the biopsy needle (10 mm) is larger than the target lesion (5 mm), and the needle itself has a 2-mm fore-run
(Fig. 1, top). Only the distal part of the actual specimen was expected to hold pathological tissue, which was confirmed by visible 5-ALA-
induced protoporphyrin IX (PpIX) fluorescence only within the tumor tissue (Fig. 1, bottom) Immunohistochemistry revealed a malignant
lymphoma (B-cell lymphoma), and showed the border between the target lesion and the surrounding brain (CD 20) Seventeen biopsies using a
combination of frameless stereotaxy and 5-ALA-induced fluorescence were performed (Table 1). In 13 cases a positive fluorescence was
detected and histological examination confirmed a malignant or high-grade brain neoplasm in all cases. The specimens of the remaining four
biopsies were fluorescence-negative and required frozen section confirmation and/or further samples. In these cases histology showed either
nonspecific gliotic changes or low-grade tumors, both of which are known not to induce any fluorescence after 5-ALA application. In the
fluorescence-positive cases the procedure time could be reduced by 30–45 min, since no frozen sections needed to be obtained and no
resampling was necessary. In this small series of patients there were no complications related either to the use of 5-ALA or to the surgical
procedure itself. Stereotactic brain biopsies carry a morbidity and mortality risk of 4% and 0.9%, respectively, and lead to an inaccurate
or imprecise diagnosis in one third to one half of glioma cases . Further improvement can be achieved by obtaining multiple specimens and/or
the additional use of intraoperative imaging . Since patients with malignant gliomas fare better with gross total resection , bioptic
procedures are usually limited to inoperable or small lesions that are deeply located (e.g., brain stem) or situated in eloquent cortical
areas. Unfortunately, these typical areas for biopsy are the least suitable for multiple tissue sampling. Intraoperative frozen sections can
aid the neurosurgeon in verifying the adequate biopsy sampling location, but they are time consuming and also prone to errors. 5-ALA is a
non-fluorescent “pro-drug” that, due to a metabolism disturbance, is transformed into fluorescent PpIX in the tumor cells of high-grade
gliomas and other highly proliferative neoplasms. This property is used to achieve radical tumor resection and thereby extend progression-
free survival in high-grade glioma patients . In the case of stereotactic brain biopsy, the use of protoporphyrin fluorescence does not aim
at optimal resection, but allows the procedure to be time-efficient and as minimally invasive as possible by reducing the risk of multiple
tumor samplings. The sensitivity and specificity of malignant tissue detection have been reported to be 85% and 100%, respectively . The PPV
of observable intraoperative PpIX fluorescence for non-normal tissue is found to be as high as 98.9% . Therefore, a sample showing strong
positive fluorescence most likely represents the targeted lesion. Although we used intraoperative MR imaging (PoleStar N20®, Medtronic,
Yokneam Elit, Israel) for navigation to assess the accuracy of the method described and to rule-out an acute hemorrhagic complication, the
same methodology is applicable to frameless stereotactic procedures based on preoperative CT or MR images, the main purpose being that no
further samplings are required in case of a positive fluorescence. Negative fluorescence can either be due to a sampling error (small
lesion, preoperative imaging not accounting for brain shift) or to the histological nature of the pathology (non-fluorescent tumor or
lesion). In these cases frozen sections are required to assess the adequacy of the sampling location; if available, intraoperative imaging
can also be used to correct the needle position relative to the intended target and can be of invaluable help in very small lesions. The
addition of 5-ALA-induced PpIX fluorescence proved useful in frameless stereotactic biopsies of malignant or high-grade brain tumors where
immediate strong intraoperative fluorescence was observed. The procedure time could be reduced and its safety increased by eliminating the
need for multiple samples. In these cases frozen section verification may not be mandatory, since the final pathology was conclusive in all
instances of positive fluorescence. The method is easy to implement and requires no modification to the biopsy procedure itself.
Fluorescence-negative cases represent either a missed target or a non-fluorescent pathology, and therefore do require frozen sections and/or
intraoperative imaging to verify the adequacy of the sampled target. None. Comment The authors obtained frameless stereotactic needle
biopsies from brain lesions of 17 patients 4 h after 5-ALA administration. In the operating room, biopsy samples still in the needle were
placed under blue light (405–440 nm), which is generally available on operation microscopes fitted for the 5-ALA method. Samples of 13
tumors became pink, and all 13 were histologically malignant. The practical point is—taken that pink almost always indicates a malignant
tumor—that no further samples are needed after a pink one. The authors saved 30 to 45 min of procedure time, not needing to wait for frozen
section diagnoses and not taking more samples. This is a clever diagnostic extension of the 5-ALA method. In the next wave of intraoperative
diagnostics with biologically targeted fluorescent molecules, we should have light sources in the operation microscopes that provide
illumination and excitation at desired and changeable wave length bands, and we should have spectral analysis tools to better distinguish
diagnostic fluorescence among the light that reflects/scatters from the tissues in the operative field. Juha E. Jääskeläinen Kuopio, Finland
