Dear Editor, A 29-year-old woman presented with proteinuria. Renal biopsy showed features consistent with lupus nephritis, although she had
otherwise no symptoms of systemic lupus erythematosus. Treatment with cyclophosphamide and corticosteroid led to remission of the
proteinuria. However, the globulin level gradually increased, reaching 76 g/L after 11 years. Generalized lymphadenopathy was also found.
Biopsy of a cervical lymph node showed amorphous materials that were salmon pink on Congo red staining, with apple green birefringence under
polarized microscopy. Serum immunoelectrophoresis showed an immunoglobulin G lambda paraprotein. Treatment with thalidomide was ineffective.
On referral 3 years later, the patient had marked sicca symptoms. Bilateral parotid enlargement was found (Fig. 1a). There was generalized
lymphadenopathy affecting the head and neck (arrows, Fig. 1b), axillae (arrows, Fig. 1c), epitrochlear (arrow, Fig. 1d), and groin regions.
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography computed tomography (PET/CT) showed calcified parotid glands (arrows, Fig. 1e)
with mild FDG uptake. There was generalized lymphadenopathy showing fine specks of calcification (arrows, axillae, Fig. 1f), with minimal
FDG uptake. The para-aortic and groin lymphadenoapthy (arrows, Fig. 1g) showed similar features. Marrow examination showed 14% monotypic
lambda expressing plasma cells. The overall features were consistent with generalized lymph node amyloidoma due to plasma cell dyscrasia,
associated with an underlying Sjögren syndrome.Fig. 1Patient with marked sicca symptoms. Bilateral parotid enlargement was found (a). There
was generalized lymphadenopathy affecting the head and neck (b, arrows), axillae (c, arrows), epitrochlear (d, arrow), and groin regions.
FDG PET/CT showed calcified parotid glands (e, arrows) with mild FDG uptake. There was generalized lymphadenopathy showing fine specks of
calcification (f, arrows, axillae), with minimal FDG uptake. There was also para-aortic and groin lymphadenoapthy (g, arrows) Patient with
marked sicca symptoms. Bilateral parotid enlargement was found (a). There was generalized lymphadenopathy affecting the head and neck (b,
arrows), axillae (c, arrows), epitrochlear (d, arrow), and groin regions. FDG PET/CT showed calcified parotid glands (e, arrows) with mild
FDG uptake. There was generalized lymphadenopathy showing fine specks of calcification (f, arrows, axillae), with minimal FDG uptake. There
was also para-aortic and groin lymphadenoapthy (g, arrows) Amyloidoma refers to the unusual local depositions of amyloid, which present as
apparent tumor masses. There is a predilection for the upper respiratory tract, central nervous system, long bones, and the spine.
Generalized lymph node amyloidoma is highly unusual, due almost invariably to immunoglobulin M paraproteinemia, arising from an underlying
lymphoproliferative disease [1, 2]. The unique features in this case include immunoglobulin G paraproteinemia due to a plasma cell
dyscrasia, association with Sjögren syndrome, and massive lymph node involvement. On PET/CT, lymph node amyloidoma usually shows dystrophic
calcification with minimal to no FDG uptake. This feature distinguishes nodal amyloidoma from nodal tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, or metastatic
cancers, where calcified lymph nodes are hypermetabolic . This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
