We describe a successful living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) using a lymphocytotoxic crossmatch highly positive graft. A 41-year-old
woman with alcoholic liver cirrhosis was referred as a potential candidate for LDLT, and her husband was willing to donate his partial
liver. As the T-lymphocytotoxic crossmatch titer was over 10,000×, the patient was first infused with rituximab for preoperative
desensitization, and then five rounds of plasmapheresis were performed. After the third plasmapheresis, the lymphocytotoxic crossmatch test
was negative. A left liver graft including the caudate lobe was implanted, and anti-CD25 antibody (basiliximab) was administered on
postoperative days 1 and 4. The postoperative course was uneventful except for an episode of mild acute cellular rejection on postoperative
day 27. Although the impact of a lymphocytotoxic crossmatch-positive liver graft on acute cellular rejection and graft survival in LDLT
remains controversial, perioperative desensitization may provide benefits when using a highly sensitized liver graft. Renal transplantation
rates are low among patients highly sensitized to human leukocyte antigen (HLA) because of the high rate of antibody-mediated rejection and
subsequent graft loss. It was recently reported, however, that preoperative desensitization using an anti-CD 20 antibody (rituximab) and
intravenous immunoglobulin improved transplantation rates in patients highly sensitized to HLA . In contrast, the significance of a positive
lymphocytotoxic crossmatch in living donor liver transplantation (LDLT) is controversial. Successful LDLT using a liver graft in which the
lymphocytotoxic crossmatch was highly positive is reported. The recipient was a 41-year-old woman with end-stage liver disease due to
alcoholic liver cirrhosis (model for end-stage liver disease score 21). At the age of 20, she was gravida one, para one. She was considered
a candidate for liver transplantation because of repeated episodes of encephalopathy. Because of the severe shortage of cadaveric donor
grafts in Japan, we planned an LDLT, and her husband was willing to donate his partial liver. The ABO blood type was identical, but the T
lymphocytotoxic crossmatch titer was over 10,000× and the B lymphocytotoxic crossmatch titer was 128× (complement method with the dilution
technique according to the standard National Institutes of Health technique) . In addition, an examination of anti-HLA antibodies using
fluorescent microspheres revealed that the recipient had donor specific antibodies (B51 and B52). The number of HLA mismatches was three.
After obtaining written informed consent from the patient and donor and the approval of the intra-institutional committee, we proceeded to
the preoperative preparations. For preoperative desensitization, the patient was first infused with rituximab 2 weeks before the scheduled
surgery (due to a catheter-associated infection, however, the operation was postponed and LDLT was performed 21 days after initiation of the
rituximab therapy). As the antibody to hepatitis B core antigen was positive, entecavir (0.5 mg/day) was administered for 3 weeks
preoperatively to prevent a possible hepatitis B virus breakthrough. Five rounds of plasmapheresis were performed. After the third
plasmapheresis, the lymphocytotoxic crossmatch test was negative, and was sustained as negative thereafter. A left liver graft including the
caudate lobe was implanted. During the LDLT, splenectomy was performed. On postoperative days 1 and 4, 20 mg of anti-CD25 antibody
(basiliximab) was administered in addition to the routine methylprednisolone and tacrolimus, as we were anxious about hyperacute rejection.
Besides, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF; 2,000 mg/day) was started on postoperative day 7. The postoperative course was uneventful except for an
episode of mild acute cellular rejection (Banff score 3) on postoperative day 27, which responded promptly to steroid recycle therapy. The
liver biopsy specimen obtained at the time of the acute rejection showed mild infiltration of lymphocytes in the portal area and around the
bile ducts. The clinical course of the recipient is summarized in Fig. 1. One year after the LDLT, the lymphocytotoxic crossmatch remained
negative and the patient has been well with good graft function.Fig. 1The clinical profile of the present patient. ACR acute cellular
rejection, ALT alanine aminotransferase, MMF mycophenolate mofetil, MP methylprednisolone, PE plasma exchange, TB total bilirubin, POD
postoperative day The clinical profile of the present patient. ACR acute cellular rejection, ALT alanine aminotransferase, MMF mycophenolate
mofetil, MP methylprednisolone, PE plasma exchange, TB total bilirubin, POD postoperative day The impact of a lymphocytotoxic crossmatch-
positive liver graft on acute cellular rejection and graft survival remains controversial, both in deceased donor liver transplantation [3,
4] and in LDLT . Some institutions have reported significantly unfavorable outcomes in LDLT recipients with a positive lymphocytotoxic
crossmatch [6, 7]. In contrast, our previous results showed that if the titer is low (no more than 32×), a positive lymphocytotoxic
crossmatch does not adversely affect the graft or survival in patients without desensitization. Although the significance of a quantitative
assessment of the lymphocytotoxic crossmatch has not been reported, the high titer in our present patient led to the need for perioperative
desensitization to prevent early graft loss due to antibody-mediated rejection. After considering the results in the present patient, we
have settled the indication criteria for preoperative desensitization therapy at the titer of 1,000× (T lymphocyte crossmatch). In this
patient, the anti-donor antibodies were assumed to have arisen through pregnancy. Therefore, we applied preoperative desensitization using
rituximab and plasmapheresis to reduce the high titer of preformed antibodies and B lymphocytes. As a result, the lymphocytotoxic crossmatch
was negative after the 3rd plasmapheresis, and negativity was sustained thereafter. Preoperative desensitization using rituximab was
introduced in ABO-incompatible LDLT in 2003 and has dramatically improved the outcomes of ABO-incompatible LDLT. The appropriate dosage of
rituximab is still controversial, but many previous studies have reported the administration of 375 mg/m2 of rituximab 1–3 weeks before the
transplant. Following these successful cases, we planned the administration of 375 mg/m2 (500 mg/body) of rituximab 2 weeks before the
operation [8, 9]. In addition, we performed splenectomy during the LDLT. Splenectomy is also considered to be effective to reduce antibody
production, as the spleen is the site of antibody production. After the operation, the suppression of T-cell function to prevent the
initiation of T-cell-mediated antibody production was regarded as indispensable. We have routinely used tacrolimus and steroid as an
immunosuppressive regimen, and in this particular patient, we added basiliximab (postoperative days 1 and 4) and MMF. Mild acute cellular
rejection occurred about 3 weeks after the LDLT, but response to the steroid recycle therapy was prompt, and the lymphocytotoxic crossmatch
was negative during this episode. In summary, we report a successful LDLT using a lymphocytotoxic crossmatch highly positive graft.
Perioperative desensitization using plasmapheresis and rituximab may provide significant benefits for reducing anti-HLA antibodies. The
authors thank Professor Kyung-Suk Suh, Department of Surgery, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Korea, for his critical advice
regarding the perioperative treatment protocol. The authors also thank Ms. Mika Matsuhashi for conducting the lymphocytotoxic crossmatch
tests. This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, and Science of
Japan. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are
credited. Human leukocyte antigen Living donor liver transplantation Mycophenolate mofetil
