In Korea, many people enjoy eating raw or underkooked freshwater crayfish and crabs which unfortunately may cause paragonimiasis. Here, we
describe a case of pulmonary and abdominal paragonimiasis in a 9-year-old girl, who presented with a 1-month history of abdominal pain,
especially in the right flank and the right inguinal area, with anorexia. A chest radiograph revealed pleural effusion in both lungs, and
her abdominal sonography indicated an inflammatory lesion in the right psoas muscle. Peripheral blood analysis of the patient showed
hypereosinophilia (66.0%) and an elevated total serum IgE level (>2,500 IU/ml). The pleural effusion tested by ELISA were also positive for
antibodies against paragonimiasis. Her dietary history stated that she had ingested raw freshwater crab, 4 months previously. The diagnosis
was pulmonary paragonimiasis accompanied by abdominal muscle involvement. She was improved after 5 cycles of praziquantel treatment and 2
times of pleural effusion drainage. In conclusion, herein, we report a case of pulmonary and abdominal paragonimiasis in a girl who
presented with abdominal pain and tenderness in the inguinal area. Paragonimiasis is a parasitic disease caused by Paragonimus trematodes,
commonly known as the lung fluke. More than 8 species of Paragonimus are known to infect humans worldwide. The most common species,
Paragonimus westermani, is distributed mainly in South Korea, Japan, India, and other Southeast Asian countries. Human paragonimiasis is
caused by ingestion of raw or incompletely cooked freshwater crabs or crayfish infected with metacercariae of the lung fluke . Although the
rate of infection and incidence are low in many countries; however, in Korea, patients still commonly present with paragonimiasis. Koreans,
in general, enjoy eating raw freshwater crabs or crayfish, especially as a part of the traditional Korean dish, called 'Kejang', prepared by
soaking freshwater crabs in soybean sauce, which may lead to paragonimiasis . Patients with paragonimiasis are usually adults, presenting
with signs and symptoms in their lower respiratory tract. The overriding symptoms are cough, hemoptysis, or dyspnea, some of which overlap
with tuberculosis and other pulmonary disorders. While only a few pediatric cases have been described in the literature , we report a rare
case of combined pulmonary and abdominal paragonimiasis in a 9-year-old Korean girl who suffered from abdominal pain and tenderness in the
right inguinal area for 1 month. A 9-year-old girl who lived in Inchon city, Korea, presented at a local hospital with a 2-day history of
mild fever and a 1-month history of abdominal pain, in particular, pain in the right flank and right inguinal area. During this month, she
experienced 2 kg weight loss with anorexia. The physician treating her at the local hospital suspected acute appendicitis, and, therefore,
advised abdominal CT, in order to identify the cause of the abdominal pain. However, the results showed both pleural effusion and small
amount of ascites in the abdominal and pelvic cavities. Therefore, she was referred to our hospital for further evaluation. She had
previously been treated for allergic rhinitis and atopic dermatitis, and she visited a Sumjin River area and consumed 'Kejang', which was
prepared using crabs from the Sumjin River, 4 months before. Other members of her family did not consume this traditional dish. On
admission, her vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 37.8â„ƒ; heart rate, 90/min; respiratory rate, 24/min; and blood pressure,
100/70 mmHg. On examination, she looked very ill and her breathing sounds were decreased on both sides of the lower chest. Moderate
tenderness was detected in the right flank and the right inguinal area. A chest radiograph indicated pleural effusion (Fig. 1), and
abdominal sonography revealed an inflammatory lesion in the right psoas muscle (Fig. 2). Her total white blood cell (WBC) count was 26,900
cells/mm3, hemoglobin level was 10.7 g/dl, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 75 mm/hr, and C-reactive protein concentration was 71
mg/dl. The patient also presented with hypereosinophilia (66%), and the total serum IgE value higher than 2,500 IU/ml. Because her dietary
history and laboratory findings were indicative of a parasitic infection, we performed a serum antibody test using ELISA and examined her
stool, sputum, and pleural fluid specimens . No evidence of parasite eggs in the stool or sputum specimen was obtained, but ELISA was
positive for P. westermani in the serum, with an optical density (OD) of 0.619 (cut-off OD: 0.255). The pleural fluid obtained by
thoracentesis revealed the following findings: WBC, 26,200 cells/mm3 (neutrophils, 25%; lymphocytes, 72%); pH, 7.129; proteins, 8.2 g/dl;
albumin, 2.1 g/dl; glucose, 5 mg/dl; and turbid appearance. Gram staining, culture studies, and tuberculosis- PCR (TB-PCR) in the pleural
fluid, however, were negative. Praziquantel therapy was initiated at a dose of 25 mg/kg, 3 times a day for 2 days. Two days after admission,
fever subsided, the pleural effusion decreased, the abdominal pain improved, and the follow-up chest radiograph showed improvement. On the
6th day of hospitalization, she was discharged. However, at the next follow-up visit, her peripheral blood was still positive for
hypereosinophilia (74.9%); therefore, an additional cycle of praziquantel therapy was recommended. One month after the first admission, the
eosinophil count in the peripheral blood and the total serum IgE value were still high (eosinophils, 37.4%; IgE, 1,094 IU/ml). The follow-up
chest radiograph showed improvements of the left pleural effusion, but persistence of the right pleural effusion (Fig. 3A). She was,
therefore, readmitted to the hospital, and the pleural fluid was drained using a pigtail catheter. Analysis of the drained pleural fluid
showed the following results: WBC, 250 cells/mm3 (neutrophils, 8%; lymphocytes, 49%); pH, 7.164; protein, 9.8 g/dl; albumin, 2.7 g/dl;
glucose, 4 mg/dl; and amber colored appearance. Gram staining and culture studies of the pleural fluid were negative, but P. westermani-
specific IgG antibody was strongly positive in the pleural fluid, with an OD of 1.576 (cut-off OD: 0.002). Abdominal sonography revealed a
smaller, albeit still existing, inflammatory lesion in the right psoas muscle (Fig. 3B). The patient was treated again with a third cycle of
praziquantel therapy. After 4 days, the catheter for draining pleural fluid was removed, and she was discharged. On the follow-up clinical
visit, she received the fourth and fifth cycles of praziquantel therapy. Six months after the first admission, complete blood cell (CBC)
revealed WBC count of 10,900 cells/mm3 and eosinophil proportion of 10.0%. A follow-up abdominal sonogram showed no abnormal lesions in the
peritoneal cavity as well as an improvement in the omental lesion in the right lower quadrant (RLQ) of the abdomen. No other family members
were ill, and their serum and stool samples tested negative for the infection. Following the fifth cycle of praziquantel therapy and pleural
effusion drainage, all symptoms, including abdominal pain and tenderness in the right inguinal area, resolved, and the abnormal psoas muscle
lesion also disappeared. After the 1970s, the rate of infection and incidence of paragonimiasis decreased in many endemic countries. In
South Korea, however, paragonimiasis persisted, and the major source of infection has been presumed to be soybean-sauced freshwater crabs
(='Kejang'). In 1990, 11.8% of crabs purchased at markets in Seoul were positive with a mean of 2.1 metacercariae per positive crab . In a
recent study, the rate of infected crabs showed low frequency, but, only the crayfish collected at Haenam, Jeollanam-do, were positive for
P. westermani metacercariae . However, 'Kejang' is sold more in large cities than in rural areas, clinicians should include paragonimiasis
as a possible diagnosis when the patient's chest radiograph shows pulmonary infiltration and peripheral blood eosinophilia even in
metropolitan cities . The major symptoms of paragonimiasis are cough, hemoptysis, and dyspnea; some of these overlap with symptoms of
tuberculosis and other pulmonary disorders. Pulmonary infiltrates, effusion, nodules, or lesions are also very common [14, 15], and ectopic
locations of flukes include the pleura, abdominal wall, viscera, and brain. In our case, the patient complained of abdominal pain,
especially in the right flank and right inguinal area but had no cough, dyspnea, or chest pain. The chest radiograph revealed pleural
effusion, and abdominal sonography showed a low-echoic lesion with inflammation of the surrounding fat in the psoas mucle. This lesion is
presumed to be due to adult flukes, which are present in loosely formed cysts in the psoas muscle. Diagnosis of paragonimiasis is
established by detection of the characteristic eggs in the stool, tissues, sputum, or pleural fluid. In our case, Paragonimus eggs were not
found in the stool, sputum, or pleural fluid. Instead, P. westermani-specific IgG antibody was detected in the serum by ELISA. It is well
established that serologic testing for anti-Paragonimus IgG by ELISA has a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 91%-100% . The
recommended treatment for paragonimiasis is 25 mg/kg of praziquantel 3 times a day for 2 consecutive days . Most papers have mentioned cure
rates of around 90-100% using this regimen. However, recent studies have reported treatment failure after an initial cycle of praziquantel
medication . Radiographic abnormalities are shown to gradually improve over months; most resolving completely after 1 year . Small pleural
effusions generally clear with therapy, whereas larger effusions may require either thoracentesis or surgical decortications to prevent
long-term pleural complications . The degree of peripheral blood eosinophilia decreases when the disease shifts to its chronic phase. This
chronicity of the disease could be a reason for the requirement of additional doses of praziquantel . In the present case, the patient's CBC
showed persistence of hypereosinophilia, and the chest radiograph revealed pleural effusion even after the first cycle of praziquantel. The
patient improved after 5 cycles of praziquantel therapy and pleural fluid drainage. Last eosinophils (%) was 10.0%, which was still high;
however, we surmised that this hypereosinophilia was due to allergic rhinitis and atopic dermatitis. Paragonimiasis can be prevented easily.
Public health education programs should warn people not to consume uncooked crabs or crayfish. The present case involved a girl who, after
eating uncooked freshwater crabs, became infected with Paragonimus, but did not develop any respiratory symptoms. We, therefore, suggest
that all patients presenting with eosinophilia, high levels of IgE antibody, and with a history of ingestion of uncooked crabs or crayfish,
even without respiratory symptoms, should be evaluated for infection with Paragonimus sp. Chest radiograph on first admission. Pleural
effusion is visible in both the lower lungs. Abdominal sonogram on first admission. (A) A low-echoic lesion measuring 2 cm with inflammation
of the surrounding fat in the medial right psoas lesion (arrow). (B) Swelling of the right inguinal area with enlarged lymph nodes (arrow).
Chest radiograph and abdominal sonogram on the second admission. (A) Right pleural effusion is still present. (B) A slightly smaller lesion
is visible in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen.
