Gerbode defect is a rare type of left ventricle to right atrium shunt. It is usually congenital in origin, but acquired cases are also
described, mainly following infective endocarditis, valve replacement, trauma or acute myocardial infarction. We report a case of a 50-year-
old man who suffered an extensive and complex infective endocarditis involving a bicuspid aortic valve, the mitral-aortic intervalvular
fibrosa and the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve. After dual valve replacement and annular reconstruction, a shunt between the left
ventricle and the right atrium - Gerbode defect, and a severe leak of the mitral prosthesis were detected. Reintervention was performed with
successful shunt closure with an autologous pericardial patch and paravalvular leak correction. No major complications occurred denying the
immediate post-surgery period and the follow-up at the first year was uneventful. The uncommon intercavitary shunt between the left
ventricle (LV) to right atrium (RA), known as Gerbode defect (GD) has been mainly described as congenital in origin, representing less than
1% of all congenital heart defects. However there are also few cases reported as acquired, namely after complicated infective endocarditis
(IE) . Its clinical spectrum depends on the underlying etiology and the size of the defect. In small ones, it may be well tolerated without
symptoms or clinical signs, except for an associated murmur. Larger communications lead to volume overload, chamber enlargement and
eventually heart failure. Despite being a rare intercavitary shunt, its nature, with an abnormal flow towards an anterior cardiac chamber,
shall be revealed by a comprehensive detailed transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), obviating the need for other imaging modalities. We
report an unusual acquired GD developing in the clinical workup of a complicated case of aortic valve IE. TTE was sufficient both to
establish the diagnosis and to decide its management. We describe a clinical case of a 50-year-old man admitted to the emergency department
due to recurrent fever, tiredness and poliarthralgia with one month of evolution. He was previously followed at our institution for a
bicuspid aortic valve with moderate aortic regurgitation, mild LV dilatation and preserved LV ejection fraction. Physical examination was
positive for fever (38.4Â°C), high pulse pressure, a 3/6 holosystolic murmur over the precordium and bilateral pulmonary rales. Laboratorial
profile showed a normocytic normochromic anaemia (Hb: 10.8 g/L) and increased inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein: 15.2 mg/dl,
sedimentation velocity: 69 mm/h, leucocytes: 11500/L). The 12-lead electrocardiogram revealed a first-degree atrioventricular block,
prolonged at 260 ms, not previously known. For the clinical suspicion of an infective IE a TTE was performed, revealing an echogenic,
pediculated and mobile mass attached to the atrial surface of the anterior mitral valve leaflet. Both severe aortic and mitral regurgitation
were present (Figure 1 and Additional files: clip S1 and Clip S2). In fact, two mitral valve regurgitation jets were visualized, one of them
leading to the suspicion of leaflet perforation (Additional file 3: Clip S3). Transthoracic echocardiogram - parasternal long-axis view with
evidence of a nodular image attached to the atrial side of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve (A, arrow) and a holodiastolic flow
reversal in the descending thoracic aorta recorded from a suprasternal notch window with terminal velocity > 20 cm/s (B) supporting severe
aortic regurgitation. In order to confirm the diagnosis, assess aortic valve involvement and exclude local complications, a transoesophageal
echocardiogram (TEE) was done. It confirmed anterior mitral leaflet perforation, also revealing a long vegetation involving the origin of
the anterior cusp of the aortic valve, the aortic ring, the mitro-aortic intervalvular fibrosa and the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve
(Figure 2 and Additional file 4: Clip S4). Figure 2 and Clip S4 Transoesophageal long-axis view of the aortic valve. Visualization of a long
vegetation (A) (larger axis: 26 mm) on the atrial side of the mitral valve, with insertion on the aortic ring (B) and reduced. It was still
possible to visualize the morphological distortion of the aortic cusps, its eccentric closure (bicuspid) as well as a filamentar image in
the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) (C), probably in concordance with other vegetation (C). There was a large aortic regurgitation
jet, anteriorly directed to the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve. In relation with mitral valve involvement by the vegetation, but
equally as possible injury of the aortic jet, there was a perforation of the anterior leaflet with an important regurgitation jet. ECG
recording was notable for a large atrio-ventricular conduction delay. Blood cultures were positive for Streptoccocus anginosous and previous
empirical antibiotherapy was changed accordingly. Although clinical evolution was favorable, at the nineth day of admission the patient was
submitted to mitral and aortic valve replacement due to: heart failure at admission with severe mitral and aortic regurgitation; > 15 mm
vegetation length; local complications with mitro-aortic fibrosa involvement and anterior mitral leaflet perforation. Two mechanical valves,
St Jude 29 and St Jude 23, were implanted at mitral and aortic position, respectively. Both aortic valve annulus and membranous septum
reconstruction with an autologous pericardium patch were performed - Manouguian surgery. Immediate postoperative period was uneventful
albeit new pathological findings at the TTE performed ten days after surgery. This exam revealed an abnormal systolic jet between the LV and
the RA at parasternal short axis view, even without changing colour baseline or scale, above the tricuspid valve, without hemodynamic
compromise (Additional files: Clip S5 and S6). There was also an abnormally high gradient of the mitral prosthesis and high pulmonary artery
systolic pressure (Figure 3). The TEE study made afterwards confirmed the presence of an abnormal systolic jet entering the RA and revealed
an anterior moderate-to-severe peri-prosthetic mitral leak (Additional files: Clip S7 and S8). Surgical correction was achieved with closure
of the intercavitary defect with an autologous pericardial patch and prosthetic leak suture. Postoperative transthoracic ecocardiogram
showing an abnormally high gradient of the mitral prosthesis (maximal 18 mmHg and mean 10 mmHg), with a deceleration time (< 130 ms),
possibly correlated with an increased flow across the prothesis (left panel). High pulmonary artery systolic pressure was assessed (51 mmHg)
(right panel). The patient was dismissed without major complications and with normal prosthesis evaluation. At the first year after
discharge, clinical follow-up was uneventful and echocardiographic assessment did not show any additional abnormal finding (Additional file
9: Clip S9). GD was described for the first time as a very rare congenital defect in 1958. Acquired cases were subsequently reported, mainly
in association with IE but also after valvular surgery, thoracic trauma, repaired atrioventricular septal defect and mechanical
complications of ischemic heart disease . The mechanism explaining acquired GD is not clearly known. Following IE, bacterial infection of
the subannular region with involvement of the high membranous interventricular septum has been suggested as a possible cause for the
acquired shunt . Staphylococcus aureus infection is more frequently involved, possibly due to its pathogenic aggressiveness and capability
to cause local complications. Early after valve replacement GD can be related both with the extension of the valvular debridement and the
erosion of the membranous septum by the rigid prosthetic ring. GD is anatomically possible because the normal tricuspid valve is more
apically displaced than the mitral valve. Two presentations of GD were described by Riemenschneider and Moss in 1967, according to the
insertion of the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve, which divides the membranous septum into two portions - interventricular, below the
valve, and atrioventricular, above the valve. This anatomical substract differentiates congenital from acquired forms of GD. In the first
case, the shunt is usually found below the insertion of the tricuspid valve, with a communication between LV and RA through the septal
leaflet. These congenital shunts often coexist with tricuspid valve abnormalities. In the acquired form, the communication is above the
insertion point of the tricuspid valve leaflet . Preoperative diagnosis is often difficult. One of the hallmarks of GD is the high Doppler
gradient between LV and RA on echocardiogram. However, it can be mistakenly interpreted as a tricuspid regurgitation jet and in this case
color Doppler can be useful for delineating the origin and direction of the different jets . Furthermore modified parasternal short-axis and
sub-costal views allowing simultaneous RA and LV outflow tract visualization have to be tried when a GD is suspected, eventually with color
settings adjustments for the detection of lower velocity shunts. Despite having lower spatial resolution than TEE, TTE may be more sensitive
for its diagnosis as these jets are anteriorly directed, towards the RA . In the setting of an extensive and destructive IE with an
agressive and modified surgical approach involving patches and enlarged tissue debridement, a comprehensive follow-up TTE has to be
performed. Particular detailed evaluation upon atrioventricular level, LV outflow tract and intervalvular fibrosa should be attempted. In
small defects, direct closure is possible, but larger ones require a patch of pericardium. As an alternative to surgery, there are reported
cases of percutaneous closure with septal occluders, while not in the context of prosthetic valve implantation . Atrioventricular block as a
possible complication of the correction should be taken into account as it occurs in approximately 4% of the patients . In our case, the
suspicion of GD was raised through clinical and echocardiographic data correlation. Extensive complex surgical intervention involving not
only aortic annulus but also the fibrous skeleton of the heart in the setting of a complicated IE should raise the suspicion and may easily
explain unusual anatomic findings. Moreover the specific lesion diagnosis could be made by TTE, even considering that in this patient TEE
was also very important for the confirmation of a more common complication after IE surgery: prosthetic leakage. We found this case peculiar
for being a rare situation of an acquired GD in a patient with bicuspid aortic valve IE. To our knowledge this is the second reported case ,
in which a focused and detailed TTE played a central role in both diagnosis and management. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests (there are not disclosures of any relationship with industry). All other authors were directly involved in patient management and
written report. HD is a cardiology resident at the Cardiology Department of Hospital de Santa Cruz, Carnaxide - Portugal (the corresponding
author of the manuscript), being particularly involved in the clinical assessment and follow-up of the patient presented in the reported
case. He is also responsible for the main written case report. JA and RR were responsible for the first echocardiographic evaluation and
diagnosis. JPN was the cardiothoracic surgeon being the director in chief of the Cardiothoracic Surgery Department. MM is the head director
of the Cardiology Department. All authors read and approved the manuscript. The present report has not been previously published. Clip S1.
Parasternal long axis view revealing an echogenic, pediculated and mobile mass attached to the atrial side of the anterior leaflet of the
mitral valve. Click here for file Clip S2. Color Doppler imaging by suprasternal view depicting diastolic flow reversal at the descending
thoracic aorta. Click here for file Clip S3. Transthoracic apical view showing two mitral valve regurgitation jets, one of them in possible
correlation with an anterior leaflet perforation. Click here for file Figure 2and Clip S4. Transoesophageal long-axis view of the aortic
valve. Visualization of a long vegetation (A) (larger axis: 26 mm) on the atrial side of the mitral valve, with insertion on the aortic ring
(B) and reduced. It was still possible to visualize the morphological distortion of the aortic cusps, its eccentric closure (bicuspid) as
well as a filamentar image in the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) (C), probably in concordance with other vegetation (C). There was a
large aortic regurgitation jet, anteriorly directed to the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve. In relation with mitral valve involvement
by the vegetation, but equally as possible injury of the aortic jet, there was a perforation of the anterior leaflet with an important
regurgitation jet. ECG recording was notable for a large atrio-ventricular conduction delay. Click here for file Clip S5 and Clip S6.
Abnormal systolic jet between the left ventricle and the right atrium above the tricuspid valve (parasternal short axis view - Clip S5 and
subcostal four chambers view - Clip S6). Click here for file Clip S5 and Clip S6. Abnormal systolic jet between the left ventricle and the
right atrium above the tricuspid valve (parasternal short axis view - Clip S5 and subcostal four chambers view - Clip S6). Click here for
file Clip S7 and Clip S8. An abnormal systolic jet entering the right atrium was seen at a high esophageal view (Clip S7). A moderate-to-
severe peri-prosthetic leak was also evident (Clip S8). Click here for file Clip S7 and Clip S8. An abnormal systolic jet entering the right
atrium was seen at a high esophageal view (Clip S7). A moderate-to-severe peri-prosthetic leak was also evident (Clip S8). Click here for
file Clip S9. Transthoracic echocardiogram - parasternal short axis view performed during the follow-up showing the absence of the shunt
between the left ventricle and the right atrium. Click here for file
