A 52-yr-old male with alcoholic liver cirrhosis was hospitalized for hematochezia. He had undergone small-bowel resection due to trauma 15
yr previously. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed grade 1 esophageal varices without bleeding. No bleeding lesion was seen on colonoscopy,
but capsule endoscopy showed suspicious bleeding from angiodysplasia in the small bowel. After 2 weeks of conservative treatment, the
hematochezia stopped. However, 1 week later, the patient was re-admitted with hematochezia and a hemoglobin level of 5.5 g/dL. Capsule
endoscopy was performed again and showed active bleeding in the mid-jejunum. Abdominal computed tomography revealed a varix in the jejunal
branch of the superior mesenteric vein. A direct portogram performed via the transhepatic route showed portosystemic collaterals at the
distal jejunum. The patient underwent coil embolization of the superior mesenteric vein just above the portosystemic collaterals and was
subsequently discharged without re-bleeding. At 8 months after discharge, his condition has remained stable, without further bleeding
episodes. Jejunal varices are an uncommon manifestation of portal hypertension and are rarely symptomatic (1). Acute bleeding has been
reported in 5.5% of patients with portal hypertension and small bowel varices (2). Jejunal varices are associated with portal hypertension,
which may be due to cirrhosis or extrahepatic portal venous obstruction, chronic alcoholism, portal vein thrombosis, or intrahepatic
arterioportal fistulas (3). Ectopic varices tend to develop at sites of tissue adhesion in patients who have previously undergone abdominal
surgery (4) and may occur in combination with jejunal variceal bleeding. Esophagogastric varices, in contrast, are caused primarily by
portal hypertension. Traditionally, jejunal variceal bleeding has been treated surgically (5, 6). Non-surgical treatment options include
porto-caval shunt (7, 8), endoscopic sclerotherapy (9), embolization (8, 10-12), and balloon dilatation and stent placement in the portal
vein for extrahepatic portal venous obstruction (4, 13). Here, we report a case of ectopic jejunal variceal bleeding that was treated
successfully by percutaneous coil embolization via the superior mesenteric vein. A 52-yr-old male was admitted for hematochezia on 5
February 2009. Fifteen years previously, he had undergone a laparotomy for the repair of a small bowel perforation due to blunt trauma.
Seven years ago, he was diagnosed with alcoholic liver cirrhosis. Balloon-occluded retrograde transvenous occlusion (BRTO) was performed for
gastric variceal bleeding 3 months prior to admission. Upon admission to our hospital, he underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), which
showed a grade 1 esophageal varix without bleeding. Colonoscopy revealed no lesion that explained the hematochezia. Capsule endoscopy showed
angiodysplasia in the small bowel, suspected of causing the hematochezia. The patient was treated conservatively for 2 weeks. His melena
ceased and he was discharged 5 weeks after admission. However, 1 week after discharge, he was re-admitted for hematochezia, which reportedly
occurred 3-4 times a day. He had not consumed any alcohol after the discharge. His blood pressure was 106/37 mmHg and his heart rate was 91
beats/min. He had a hemoglobin count of 5.5 g/dL, a platelet count of 149,000/ÂµL, a prothrombin time of 15.8 s (international normalized
ratio: 1.36), and an albumin concentration of 3.0 g/dL. There was no encephalopathy but he had mild ascites and a Child-Pugh score of 7.
Serologic viral markers showed HBsAg/Ab (-/+), anti-HCV Ab (-). Emergency EGD showed non-bleeding, grade 1 esophageal varices. Hematochezia
at the sigmoid colon and rectum was noted on colonoscopy, but there was no active bleeding lesion. Intestinal segments above the sigmoid
colon could not be examined because of poor visualization due to the presence of a blood clot. Capsule endoscopy showed active bleeding at
the mid-jejunum and bloody staining of the bowel wall below the mid-jejunal level (Fig. 1). Abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT)
showed liver cirrhosis, splenomegaly with mild ascites, varices of the jejunal branch of the superior mesenteric vein, and edematous change
at the ascending colon and gall bladder (Fig. 2). Based on these findings, jejunal variceal bleeding was suspected. A direct portogram
performed via the transhepatic route showed hepatofugal flow into the superior mesenteric vein and multiple dilated portosystemic shunts
from the superior mesenteric vein to both internal iliac veins (Fig. 3A-D). There was no evidence of active bleeding. Coil embolization was
performed at the superior mesenteric vein just above the portosystemic collaterals to decompress the variceal pressure (Fig. 3E). The
patient was discharged without re-bleeding after the procedure. Eight months after discharge he remains in stable condition, with no further
bleeding. Jejunal variceal bleeding, although rare, can be life threatening without treatment. The three clinical features of small-bowel
varices are portal hypertension, a history of abdominal surgery, and hematochezia without hematemesis (5, 14). The case described here shows
that jejunal variceal bleeding can be treated successfully with percutaneous coil embolization via the superior mesenteric vein. Portal
hypertension due to baseline alcoholic liver cirrhosis, a history of abdominal surgery, and recent BRTO likely explained our patient's
jejunal varices. Baseline alcoholic liver cirrhosis is known to induce portal hypertension and, frequently, esophageal and jejunal varices.
Moreover, the severity of hepatic failure is a risk factor for gastroesophageal varix (15, 16). In contrast, in patients with portal
hypertension, there is less association between other factors, such as age, gender, presence of cirrhosis, gastroesophageal varices, and
Child-Pugh class C, and varices occurring in the small bowel (2). A history of abdominal surgery is also a known predisposing factor for
jejunal variceal bleeding (5). Previous abdominal surgery can lead to the development of ectopic varices at the abdominal surgical site or
they may be a consequence of postsurgical stricture in the small bowel (4). Small-bowel varices due to prior abdominal surgery may result
from the mesenteric hypertension caused by mesenteric vein stenosis or from portal hypertension. Thus, in a patient with obscure
gastrointestinal bleeding, a history of abdominal surgery, and portal hypertension, small-bowel varices at the anastomotic site or the
postoperative stricture site should be considered. BRTO procedures for the treatment of gastric varices may induce a significant elevation
in the portal systemic pressure gradient (17). In our patient, recent BRTO might have aggravated the portal systemic pressure gradient,
thereby inducing jejunal variceal bleeding. While the patient may have had jejunal varices at first admission, there was no evidence for
their presence on a capsule endoscopy image and it was assumed that the cause of hematochezia was angiodysplasia of the small bowel. Jejunal
variceal bleeding is difficult to diagnose and is best confirmed using abdominal enhanced CT, capsule endoscopy, abdominal angiography, or
99mTc-labeled red blood cell scanning (14). In some cases, push enteroscopy and ileoscopy may be useful diagnostically (18). Capsule
endoscopy is highly sensitive for the detection of fresh blood in the small bowel. However, it is of limited usefulness for the diagnosis of
small-bowel varices because the mucosal layer covering the varices can exhibit a mosaic pattern, a shining pattern, or normal features.
Blood clots can cover the varices. Therefore, clinical suspicion is key to diagnosis (19). The treatment of jejunal varices includes surgery
(5, 6), transjugular intrahepatic porto-systemic shunt (TIPS) (7, 8), enteroscopic sclerotherapy (9), percutaneous embolization (8, 10-12),
and dilatation of a stenosed portal vein followed by stent placement (4, 13). Treatment for segmental varices in which there is superior
mesenteric vein stricture without portal hypertension involves surgical resection. In the presence of systemic portal hypertension, a TIPS
or a decompressive shunting procedure is recommended (18). For small-bowel varices with extrahepatic portal vein obstruction, surgery and
TIPS are not only invasive but are relatively difficult to perform. Additionally, inflammation, trauma, and/or severe abdominal adhesion are
common postoperatively (10). Superior mesenteric vein embolization and portal vein angioplasty with stent insertion are options in patients
in whom surgery is not possible due to portal hypertension and extrahepatic obstruction (10, 13). These procedures can also be performed
successfully in patients with jejunal variceal bleeding related to extrahepatic portal vein obstruction but without portal hypertension
(20). The Child-Pugh score of our patient at admission was 7, and he had no evidence of hepatic failure. Possible causes of jejunal variceal
bleeding were portal hypertension due to stricture at the anastomotic site, intra-abdominal adhesion, and extrahepatic portal venous
obstruction from previous small-bowel surgery, rather than aggravation of alcoholic liver cirrhosis. He had no portal vein obstruction.
Intervention angiography was selected as a first-line therapy rather than TIPs, due to the presence of mild ascites and grade 1 esophageal
varices, and the risk of hepatic encephalopathy. Coil embolization as a first-line treatment resulted in a successful outcome for our
cirrhotic patient. In summary, we report the case of a patient with jejunal variceal bleeding who was treated successfully by percutaneous
coil embolization. Further studies are needed to confirm the use of embolization as an interventional first-line therapy for small-bowel
variceal bleeding. Capsule endoscopic findings show blood-stained mucosa below the mid-jejunum, with suspected active bleeding (arrow) of a
jejunal varix. Jejunal varices and main portal vein in multidetector CT; Axial scan and multiplanar reformation in multidetector CT show
multiple and dilated jejunal varices (arrow). Note the main portal vein (small arrows) in the multiplanar reformation. Serial direct
portogram and coil embolization; Serial direct portogram shows hepatofugal flow into the superior mesenteric vein and multiple dilated
portosystemic shunts from the superior mesenteric vein to both internal iliac veins (A-D). Coil embolization of the superior mesenteric vein
was performed just above the portosystemic shunts (E).
