B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with features intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and Burkitt lymphoma (BL)
(intermediate DLBCL/BL), is a heterogeneous group with some features resembling DLBCL and others resembling BL. Here, we report a case of
intermediate DLBCL/BL in a Korean child. A 2-yr-old male was admitted for evaluation and management of left hip pain. Immunohistochemistry
of a biopsy of the femur neck revealed tumor cells positive for CD20, CD10, BCL2, BCL6, and Ki67. A bone marrow (BM) aspirate smear revealed
that 49.3% of all nucleated cells were abnormal lymphoid cells, composed of large- and medium-sized cells. Immunophenotyping of the
neoplastic cells revealed positivity for CD19, CD10, CD20, and sIg lambda and negativity for CD34, Tdt, and myeloperoxidase (MPO).
Cytogenetic and FISH analyses showed a complex karyotype, including t(8;14)(q24.1;q32) and IGH-MYC fusion. Intensive chemotherapy was
initiated, including prednisone, vincristine, L-asparaginase, daunorubicin, and central nervous system prophylaxis with intrathecal
methotrexate (MTX) and cytarabine. One month after the initial diagnosis, BM examination revealed the persistent of abnormal lymphoid cells;
cerebrospinal fluid cytology, including cytospin, showed atypical lymphoid cells. The patient was treated again with cyclophosphamide,
vincristine, prednisone, adriamycin, MTX, and intrathecal MTX and cytarabine. The patient died of sepsis 5 months after the second round of
chemotherapy. In most cases, a better understanding of the molecular pathogenesis underlying lymphoid malignancies has allowed for a
pathogenesis-based approach to lymphoma classification [1, 2]. Improved immunophenotyping and genetic studies have increased the recognition
of lymphoma cases that lie on a biologic continuum between 2 entities . Specifically, these borderline categories, known as "gray zone
lymphoma," "atypical Burkitt lymphoma (BL)," or "Burkitt-like lymphoma (BLL)," have overlapping clinical, morphological, and/or
immunophenotypic features belonging to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and BL. The 2008 WHO classification includes provisional
borderline categories for cases that are not clearly DLBCL or BL. This new category is called as B-cell lymphoma, unclassifiable, with
features intermediate between DLBCL and BL (intermediate DLBCL/BL) . Many cases of intermediate DLBCL/BL that morphologically resemble BL
occur in adults and are rare in patients under the age of 18 . In general, these cases have a poor prognosis, with the exception of
children. In children, intermediate DLBCL/BL does not have an adverse prognosis, based on gene expression profiling (GEP), although the
number of patients studied is low. The prognosis for young adults is still unclear . Herein, we report a case of intermediate DLBCL/BL in a
Korean child and review the relevant literature. A 2-yr-old male was admitted for evaluation and management of left hip pain. On admission,
physical examination was significant for several palpable lymph nodes in the left inguinal area and an ill-defined heterogeneous mass-like
lesion in the left anteromedial muscle. Abdominopelvic computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging of both hips were performed on
suspicion of myositis. Radiologic studies suggested osteomyelitis of the left proximal femur with subperiosteal abscess, myositis, and a
small-cell tumor, such as lymphoma, leukemia, or Ewing's sarcoma. Bone biopsy of the femur neck, bone marrow (BM) aspiration, and biopsy of
both posterior superior iliac crests were performed. Immunohistochemistry on the biopsy specimen of the femur neck revealed tumor cells
positive for CD20, CD10, BCL2, BCL6, CD99, and Ki67 (-90%) and negative for myeloperoxidase (MPO), Tdt, CD3, and cyclin D1 (Fig. 1). In situ
hybridization for Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNAs (EBER) was negative in the tumor cells. The final diagnosis from the bone biopsy was high-
grade B-cell lymphoma, suggestive of B lymphoblastic lymphoma. Peripheral blood examination revealed the following: hemoglobin, 9.6 g/dL;
white blood cell count, 6.83×109/L; platelet count, 182×109/L, and 5 atypical lymphocytes per 100 white blood cells. Based on the laboratory
findings and bone biopsy results, we suspected lymphoma or lymphoblastic leukemia; therefore, we performed BM examination, cytogenetic
analysis, and immunophenotyping. The BM biopsy was insufficient for evaluating cellularity; 49.3% of all nucleated cells were abnormal
lymphoid cells, consisting of large- and medium-sized cells. Large neoplastic cells had irregular nuclei with 1-2 distinct nucleoli and
abundant deeply basophilic cytoplasm. Medium-sized cells had round nuclei with 1-4 prominent nucleoli and scantly to moderately basophilic
cytoplasm with some vacuoles (Fig. 2). Immunophenotyping of the neoplastic cells revealed positivity for CD45 (99.0%), CD19 (94.84%), CD10
(27.64%), CD20 (94.24%), HLA-DR (95.70%), sIg lambda (96.45%), CD13 (22.46%), and CD117 (22.22%) and negativity for CD34 (0.01%), Tdt
(0.64%), MPO (0.01%), CD33 (1.58%), CD14 (1.18%), CD41 (3.08%), CD2 (3.00%), sCD3 (7.78%), CD5 (1.42%), CD7 (1.34%), and CD56 (5.82%).
Cytogenetic analysis of the cells in the BM aspirates revealed that the cells had the following karyotypes: 46,XY,
t(8;14)(q24.1;q32),del(11)(q13),dup(11)(q22q13),der(17)del(17)(p12)t(1;17)(q21;q25) (Fig. 3). FISH analysis of BM aspirate cells was
performed using Vysis LSI IGH/MYC, CEP 8 tri-color, dual fusion translocation probes (Abbott Molecular, Des Plaines, IL, USA). We detected
an IGH-MYC rearrangement in 81.2% of the nuclei examined with typical 2 fusions, 1 orange, 1 green, and 2 aqua signals, which was described
as nuc ish (D8Z2×2,MYC×3,IGH×3)(MYC con IGH×2) (Fig. 4). Neither BCL2 nor BCL6 rearrangements were observed by FISH analysis on BM aspirates
cells using Vysis LSI BCL2 and BCL6 dual color, break apart rearrangement probes (Abbott Molecular). The patient was diagnosed with
intermediate DLBCL/BL. Intensive chemotherapy with prednisone, vincristine, L-asparaginase, daunorubicin, and central nervous system
prophylaxis with intrathecal methotrexate (MTX) and cytarabine were initiated. One month after the initial diagnosis, follow-up BM
examination demonstrated persistence of abnormal lymphoid cells. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was performed after induction of
chemotherapy; CSF cytology, including cytospin, showed atypical lymphoid cells consistent with malignant lymphoma. The patient was treated
again with cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone, adriamycin, MTX, and intrathecal MTX and cytarabine. The patient died of sepsis 5
months after initiation of the second round of chemotherapy. Gray zone B-cell lymphoma, such as intermediate DLBCL/BL, cannot be classified
into a single distinct disease entity. This new category of lymphoma has morphologic, immunophenotypic, and genetic features that include
aspects of both DLBCL and BL, but differ with respect to one or more findings . The 2008 WHO classification affirms that the following
lymphoma cases should not be diagnosed as intermediate DLBCL/BL: those with a typical DLBCL morphology and a very high proliferation index,
typical DLBCL with a MYC translocation, typical BL without a MYC rearrangement, and those with IG-MYC rearrangement as the only abnormality
. Intermediate DLBCL/BL most often occurs in adults, some with a history of follicular lymphoma; it is extremely rare in pediatric patients.
The majority of patients present with generalized lymphadenopathy or mass lesions in extranodal sites and frequent involvement of the BM.
Some patients have a leukemic presentation [5, 8]. Liang et al. reported the clinicopathologic features of 2 pediatric patients with gray
zone lymphoma, who presented with common features, such as male gender, older than 10 yr of age at the time of diagnosis, and presentation
with a mediastinal mass. In children, high cure rates are achieved with treatment strategies similar or identical to those for BL and DLBCL
. The gray zone between BL and DLBCL currently does not impact therapy decision or outcome in childhood lymphomas . Morphologic feature are
useful in the differential diagnosis of intermediate DLBCL/BL. Such morphologic features include variable cellular forms, such as those
smaller than typical DLBCL, those resembling BL cells, those larger than typical BL, and those resembling DLBCL cells. The immunophenotype
is similar to BL, showing positivity for CD19, CD20, CD22, CD79a, and germinal center-associated molecules, CD10 and BCL6. BCL2 expression
may be absent, weak, or strong, and the Ki67 labeling index shows varying positivity . Genetically, 35-50% of cases of intermediate DLBCL/BL
show 8q24/MYC translocations but often with atypical features, including one or more of the following: (1) rearrangement with a non-IG
partner, (2) part of a complex karyotype, and (3) concurrent rearrangements of the BCL2 and/or BCL6 genes, suggesting a "double-hit" or
"triple-hit" lymphoma. Double-hit lymphomas are characterized by a second translocation in addition to t(8;14), t(8;22), or t(2;8). In the
majority of the double-hit cases, an 18q21/BCL2 breakpoint can be found, mostly as a t(8;14) plus t(14;18) karyotype . Double-hit lymphomas
are almost always absent in children, consistent with the almost complete lack of t(14;18) found among lymphomas in those younger than 18 yr
. More recently, GEP analysis using microarrays can establish molecular categories within the gray zone between DLBCL and BL . The
bioinformatic core group extension method applied by the Molecular Mechanisms in Malignant Lymphomas group identified a set of 53 mature
aggressive B-cell lymphomas with a molecular BL (mBL) index between that of mBL (mBL index >0.95) and that of non-mBL (mBL index <0.05).
These lymphomas could not be classified as mBL or as non-mBL and were called "molecular intermediate lymphomas" [1, 5, 6]. Molecular
intermediate DLBCL/BL in children has a significantly higher Burkitt index by GEP than in adult patients, frequent IG-MYC positivity, and a
good outcome. Interestingly, significant numbers (31%) of morphologic DLBCL in children show mBL by GEP, with more than half of them having
IG-MYC. These findings suggest that, in children, biologic BL might be hidden among DLBCL . Salaverria et al. suggested that GEP should be
considered a single diagnostic criterion, like MYC status or CD10 positivity. In the present case, the patient was diagnosed with
intermediate DLBCL/BL based on the intermediate morphological features of both BL and DLBCL, the expression of CD10, BCL6, BCL2, and Ki67
labeling index, and a complex karyotype with 8q34/MYC. Based on existing literature and the findings of this case, evaluation for
intermediate DLBCL/BL should include an immunophenotypic panel with CD10, BCL6, BCL2, and Ki67. In addition, evaluation should include
conventional cytogenetic analysis for detection of simple or complex karyotypic abnormalities and molecular cytogenetic evaluation (FISH)
with MYC-IgH fusion probe for t(8;14), BCL2-IgH fusion probe for t(14;18), BCL2 break-apart probe, BCL6 break-apart probe, MYC break-apart
probe, IGH break-apart probe, and IGL break-apart probe for t(2;8) and t(8;22) . However, several questions remain unanswered. A major
concern is that cases of intermediate DLBCL/BL only slightly differ from BL and DLBCL. Therefore, it is important that the diagnostic border
of DLBCL and BL is clearly defined in order to identify the specific morphology, immunophenotyping, genetics, and molecular lesions based on
a gene expression. Another issue is that the current treatment of intermediate DLBCL/BL may compromise the validity of clinical trials
evaluating the efficacy and safety of therapies on well-established diagnostic entities and may obscure the pathologic predictors of their
outcome and treatment response. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Immunohistochemistry shows
positivity for BCL2 (A), BCL6 (B), CD10 (C), and Ki67 (D) of tumor cells (Femur neck, immunohistochemical stains, 400× magnification). Bone
marrow smear (A, Wright-Giemsa stain, 1,000× magnification) and biopsy (B, H&E stain, 1,000× magnification) reveal abnormal lymphoid cells
composed of large and medium sized cells. Large neoplastic cells showed irregular nuclei with 1-2 distinct nucleoli and abundant deeply
basophilic cytoplasm. Medium-sized cells showed round nuclei with 1-4 prominent nucleoli and had scantly to moderately basophilic cytoplasm
with some vacuoles. Giemsa-trypsin banding showed the following karyotypes:
46,XY,t(8;14)(q24.1;q32),del(11)(q13),dup(11)(q22q13),der(17)del(17)(p12)t(1;17)(q21;q25). FISH analysis using Vysis LSI IGH/MYC, CEP 8 tri-
color, dual fusion translocation probe reveals IGH-MYC rearrangement with 2 fusions (IGH-MYC fusions on der(8)t(8;14) and der(14)t(8;14)), 1
orange (native MYC), 1 green (native IGH), and 2 aqua (D8Z2) signals.
