We report the first case of Kytococcus schroeteri implant-related septic arthritis and osteomyelitis, identified by phenotypic tests and 16S
rRNA sequencing, which responded to implant removal and doxycycline. 16S rRNA sequencing was useful for the accurate and rapid
identification of the organism as it exhibited three different colonial morphologies in vitro. The genus Kytococcus, literally meaning “a
coccus from skin”, was separated from Micrococcus spp. in 1995 based on phylogenetic and chemotaxonomic properties . Kytococci are Gram-
positive, pigmented, non-encapsulated, non-motile, aerobic, catalase-positive cocci in pairs or tetrads. The genus now consists of three
species: K. sedentarius, K. schroeteri, and K. aerolatus. Sporadic cases of prosthetic valve endocarditis and pneumonia in immunocompromised
patients due to K. schroeteri have been described, but to the best of our knowledge, we report here the first case of chronic implant-
related septic arthritis with contiguous osteomyelitis caused by a strain of K. schroeteri which exhibited three different colonial
morphologies in vitro. A 45-year-old Chinese man who suffered from left shoulder dislocation requiring tendon reconstruction with a silicone
graft 15 years previously presented with recurrent flare-ups of chronic left shoulder infection manifesting as increasing pain and
discharge. He first experienced left shoulder pain and discharge 6 years earlier, at which time a firm subcutaneous mass at the left
acromioclavicular joint and a discharging sinus at the coracoid process of the left scapula were detected on physical examination. The
roentgenogram showed an old fracture with callus formation at the distal left clavicle. Ultrasonography of the left shoulder showed an
inflammatory mass measuring 46 × 9 × 20 mm in the subcutaneous tissues overlying the acromioclavicular joint. This mass communicated with a
second mass overlying the coracoid process, the lateral aspect of the pectoralis muscle, and extended to the glenohumeral joint. A sinogram
detected a sinus tract, approximately 7 cm in length, which extended superomedially, with its cephalic end located just below the coracoid
process of the left scapula. Culture of the debrided wound tissue yielded methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus, and the patient was
treated with a 2-week course of cloxacillin. However, his symptoms recurred 1 year later. Computerized tomography scan of the left shoulder
showed diffuse bony sclerosis and pus in the sinus tract extending from the skin surface to the old fracture site at the distal left
clavicle and left acromioclavicular joint. Repeated debridement was performed, and culture of the debrided tissue yielded “Micrococcus spp.”
Despite initial response, the patient’s condition worsened again after another 2 years. Magnetic resonance imaging showed both an enhancing
lesion in the left distal clavicle extending into the overlying subcutaneous fat and a non-enhancing mass, suspected to be surgical
material, within the lesion. In view of the recurrent symptoms despite repeated wound debridement and cloxacillin, a more extensive
operation consisting of ostectomy, joint lavage, wound debridement, and removal of the implanted silicone graft, was performed. Aerobic
culture of the debrided bone yielded tiny non-hemolytic colonies of Gram-positive cocci in tetrads and clusters on 5% sheep blood agar after
24 h of incubation in 5% CO2 at 37°C. After 48–72 h of incubation, colonies with three different types of morphologies became apparent on
macroscopic observation (Fig. 1). Morphotype 1 was muddy yellow, dry, rough, and volcano-like, had irregular edges, and measured about
2.5 mm in diameter. Morphotype 2 had a lighter yellow color and smooth edges, was pleomorphic, and measured about 0.5–1.5 mm in diameter.
Morphotype 3 had a chalky yellow color, was tiny, and measured about 0.5–1 mm in diameter. All three morphotypes tested positive for
catalase, arginine dihydrolase, alkaline phosphatase, and pyrazinamidase, and negative for oxidase, lecithinase, β-galactosidase, and
urease. They hydrolyzed gelatin and Tween 80, but not esculin. The API Rapid ID 32 Strep (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France) and the BD
Phoenix automated microbiology (Becton–Dickinson Diagnostics, Sparks, MD) systems identified all three morphotypes to be “Micrococcus spp.”
with 99% confidence levels. Scanning electron microscopy, performed as described in our previous publications [2, 3], showed spherical cells
measuring around 1.0 μm in tetrads or clusters.Fig. 1Appearances of Kytococcus schroeteri morphotypes 1, 2, and 3 in 5% sheep blood agar
after 72 h of incubation in 5% CO2 at 37°C. a, b Morphotype 1, c, d morphotype 2, e, f morphotype 3 Appearances of Kytococcus schroeteri
morphotypes 1, 2, and 3 in 5% sheep blood agar after 72 h of incubation in 5% CO2 at 37°C. a, b Morphotype 1, c, d morphotype 2, e, f
morphotype 3 In view of their phenotypic differences from micrococci, namely, resistance to penicillin and oxacillin, and positive arginine
dihydrolase activity, 16S rRNA gene sequencing was performed, as described in our previous publications for other Gram-positive cocci ,
using LPW1282 5′-GCGTGCTTAACACATGCAAG-3′ and LPW58 5′-AGGCCCGGGAACGTATTCAC-3′ (Sigma-Proligo, Singapore) as the PCR and sequencing primers.
The sequences of the PCR products were compared with sequences of closely related species in the GenBank by multiple sequence alignment
using ClustalX 1.83 , and phylogenetic relationships were determined using the neighbor-joining method. Sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene of
the morphotypes showed that the 16S rRNA gene sequences of the three morphotypes were identical. There was no base difference between the
16S rRNA gene sequence of the three morphotypes and that of K. schroeteri (GenBank Accession No. GU180084.1), 12 (1.3%) base differences
between the 16S rRNA gene sequence of the morphotypes and that of K. aerolatus (GenBank Accession No. FM992368.1), and 15 (1.6%) base
differences between the 16S rRNA gene sequence of the morphotypes and that of K. sedentarius (GenBank Accession No. EU379289.1), confirming
that all three morphotypes were K. schroeteri (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Phylogenetic tree showing the relationships of the three morphotypes to closely
related species. The tree was inferred from 16S rRNA gene sequence data by the neighbor-joining method and rooted using the 16S rRNA gene
sequence of Dermacoccus profundi (AY894329.1). Bootstrap values were calculated from 1,000 trees. The scale bar indicates the estimated
number of substitutions per 200 bases. Names and accession numbers are given as cited in the GenBank database Phylogenetic tree showing the
relationships of the three morphotypes to closely related species. The tree was inferred from 16S rRNA gene sequence data by the neighbor-
joining method and rooted using the 16S rRNA gene sequence of Dermacoccus profundi (AY894329.1). Bootstrap values were calculated from 1,000
trees. The scale bar indicates the estimated number of substitutions per 200 bases. Names and accession numbers are given as cited in the
GenBank database Antimicrobial susceptibility tests were performed by the disk diffusion method (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) on Mueller–Hinton
agar. The results were expressed as susceptible, intermediate, or resistant according to the criteria of the Clinical and Laboratory
Standards Institute (CLSI) for staphylococci . All three morphotypes were resistant to penicillin, oxacillin, cefuroxime, clindamycin, and
fusidic acid and were susceptible to amoxicillin/clavulanate, minocycline, rifampicin, and vancomycin. Postoperatively, the patient was
treated with a 6-week course of oral doxycycline 100 mg every 12 h. He had good clinical response, and the symptoms and raised inflammatory
markers resolved after 1 week. He had remained well at the follow-up 3 years after the operation. Traditionally, the different colonial
appearances among the three Kytococcus spp. is considered to be a direct and helpful property by which to differentiate them. Whilst K.
sedentarius is classically described as having a “deep buttercup yellow” or “cream-white” color , K. schroeteri is known for its “muddy
yellow” pigmentation . K. aerolatus, which has yet to be implicated in human infection, has a beige pigmentation . Our case describes a
novel and important laboratory observation of K. schroeteri: the existence of different colonial morphologies within the same organism. As
shown in Fig. 1, colonies with three different macroscopic morphologies were isolated from our patient. In this situation, the macroscopic
appearance of the colonies was not reliable tool to differentiate the organisms from other pigmented Kytococcus spp. Although various
physiological properties and fatty acid compositions may be useful to separate the three species of Kytococcus, the results are often
inconclusive and the analyses time-consuming. In contrast, the application of 16S rRNA gene sequencing allows rapid and accurate
identification of the organisms. Using this technique, we identified all three morphotypes from our patient as K. schroeteri. Taking into
account their similar scanning electron microscopic appearances, biochemical properties, and identical 16S rRNA gene sequences, we concluded
that all three morphotypes belonged to the same strain of K. schroeteri and that this strain possessed different colonial morphologies. In
addition to generating new observations on the organism’s microbiological characteristics, our case also carries significant clinical impact
in being the first case of K. schroeteri chronic implant-related septic arthritis with contiguous osteomyelitis. After its first isolation
from the blood of a patient with prosthetic valve endocarditis in 2002 [9, 11], the clinical significance of K. schroeteri has been
increasingly recognized in the past decade. Including our case, a total of 14 cases of K. schroeteri-related infections have been reported
in the literature (Table 1), namely, six (43%) cases of prosthetic valve endocarditis [9, 11–16], five (36%) cases of pneumonia , one (7%)
case of ventriculoperitoneal shunt infection , one case (7%) of folliculitis , one case (7%) of infective spondylodiscitis , and our case of
chronic implant-related septic arthritis with contiguous osteomyelitis. The most common site of isolation of the organism was the blood
(9/14; 64%), followed by respiratory tract secretions (5/14; 36%), bone (2/14; 14%), prosthetic heart valve (1/14; 7%), and cerebrospinal
fluid (1/14; 7%). Among the patients who did not have an infection of a prosthesis, the majority (5/6; 83%) had an immunocompromised state
(use of prednisolone or acute myeloid leukemia). The other patient with lumbar spondylodiscitis developed the infection after an operation
which compromised the local immunity . Thus, similar to coagulase-negative staphylococci and micrococci, K. schroeteri is regarded as an
opportunistic pathogen which is capable of causing prosthesis-related infections, skin infection, osteomyelitis, and fatal pneumonia in
immunocompromised hosts. The prognosis of patients with K. schroeteri-related infections mainly depend on the clinical presentation and
immune status of the patient. All five patients with pneumonia were immunocompromised, and the majority of them (4/5; 80%) died within
1 month despite supportive treatment. The nine patients with other forms of clinical manifestations (infection of prostheses or lumbar
spondylodiscitis) recovered with antibiotics and surgical removal of prostheses. Unlike coagulase-negative staphylococci and micrococci,
however, the natural habitat of K. schroeteri has not been confirmed to be the human skin and mucous membranes. Szczerba and Krzeminski
isolated K. sedentarius, but not K. schroeteri, from human skin and mucous membranes. Le Brun and colleagues were also unable to recover K.
schroeteri from the skin and mucous membranes of their patient. However, at the time of Szczerba and Krzeminski’s study, K. schroeteri was
probably unrecognized. Thus, further sampling should be performed to assess whether K. schroeteri, like K. sedentarius, is part of the skin
and mucous membranes flora.Table 1Characteristics of patients with infections due to Kytococcus schroeteriReferenceSex/age and predisposing
factor(s)Clinical syndrome (presentation)Site of isolationTreatmentOutcomeBecker et al. [9, 11]F/34Aortic dissection with implantation of
aortic arch conduit and reimplantation of the supraaortic arteries 10 weeks previouslyProsthetic valve endocarditis (fever, TOE showed
paravalvular abscess and vegetation, septic emoblic stroke with right-sided hemiparesis)BloodAntibiotics (IV vancomycin, gentamicin and
rifampicin for 3 weeks) followed by aortic arch prosthesis replacementDischarged after admissionLe Brun et al. M/73 yearsAVR 3 years
previouslyProsthetic valve endocarditis (fever, exertional dyspnea, TOE showed small vegetations on the aortic bioprosthesis and
perivalvular abscess)Blood, vegetation, perivalvular abscess, and prosthetic valveAVR and antibiotics (IV vancomycin and then teicoplanin
for 6 weeks, gentamicin and rifampicin for the initial 3 weeks)Discharged after clinical remissionMohammedi et al. F/71 yearsAsthma on
prednisone 20 mg dailyHypertensionBacteremic community-acquired pneumonia (fever, respiratory distress with right lower lobar
pneumonia)Blood and BAL fluidSupportive treatment (bronchodilators, steroid, magnesium sulfate and antibiotics including IV ceftriaxone and
ofloxacin)Died 4 days after admission to ICU due to refractory septic shock and multiorgan failureMnif et al. F/49 yearsMVR 10 years
previouslyProsthetic valve endocarditis (fever, TOE showed prosthesis disinsertion and vegetations on the mitral valve prosthesis)BloodMVR
and antibiotics (IV pristinamycin, vancomycin and gentamicin for 6 weeks then oral rifampicin and pristinamycin for 3 weeks)Discharged after
clinical remission (6 weeks after admission)Renvoise et al. M/70AVRProsthetic valve endocarditis (fever, TOE showed vegetation on the
prosthetic aortic valve and intertrigonal abscess, septic embolic stroke and bilateral renal emboli)BloodAntibiotics (IV amoxicillin for
6 weeks and gentamicin for the initial 2 weeks) followed by AVR 3 months afterwardsDischarged after clinical remissionAepinus et al. F/38AVR
twiceVentricular septal defect with surgical closureDiabetes mellitusProsthetic valve endocarditis (fever, TOE showed vegetation on the
prosthetic aortic valve)BloodAntibiotics (IV vancomycin and rifampicin for 6 weeks, gentamicin for the initial 2 weeks; followed by oral
levofloxacin and rifampicin for 2 months)Discharged after clinical remissionJourdain et al. M/13 monthsCyanotic congenital heart
diseaseHydrocephalus with VP shunt 5 months previouslyVP shunt infection (fever, acute otitis media, abnormal CSF findings)CSFRemoval of
shunt and antibiotics (IV vancomycin and rifampicin for 27 days)Discharged after clinical remissionPoyet et al. M/72AVR for aortic
regurgitationTriple bypass for ischemic heart diseaseProsthetic valve endocarditis(fever, septic embolic stroke, TTE showed vegetation on
the prosthetic aortic valve)BloodAntibiotics (IV vancomycin and rifampicin for 6 weeks, gentamicin for the initial 2 weeks)Discharged after
clinical remissionJacquier et al. F/50L3/4 discectomy for sciatica 8 months previously Diabetes mellitusPostoperative lumbar
spondylodiscitis (fever and suprapubic pain for 1 day)Biopsied boneAntibiotics (IV ofloxacin and rifampicin for 2 weeks followed by oral
therapy for 4 weeks)Discharged after clinical remissionHodiamont et al. M/40Acute myeloid leukemiaNeutropenic fever with nosocomial
pneumonia (neutropenic fever and right upper lobar pneumonia on day 19 after induction chemotherapy)Blood, sputum and BAL fluidSupportive
treatment and antibiotics (IV ceftazidime, vancomycin, gentamicin and rifampicin)Died on day 26 of admission due to multiorgan
failureM/52Acute myeloid leukemiaNeutropenic fever with nosocomial pneumonia (neutropenic fever and multilobar pneumonia on day 16 after
induction chemotherapy)Blood and BAL fluidSupportive treatment and antibiotics (IV ceftazidime, vancomycin and rifampicin)Died on day 27 of
admission due to multiorgan failureNagler et al. M/68Acute myeloid leukemiaNeutropenic fever with folliculitis and nosocomial pneumonia
(neutropenic fever, scattered crusted papules in the groin and pneumonia on day 12–13 after induction chemotherapy)Skin biopsy and BAL
fluidAntibiotics (IV cefepime and vancomycin)Died on day 22 after induction chemotherapyBlennow et al. F/43Acute myeloid leukemiaNeutropenic
fever with bacteremic pneumonia (neutropenic fever, right upper and middle lobar pneumonia 10 days after chemotherapy)Blood and BAL
fluidAntibiotics (IV piperacillin/tazobactam, vancomycin, linezolid and co-trimoxazole)Discharged after clinical remissionPresent
caseM/45Left shoulder dislocation with tendon reconstructionImplant-related septic arthritis and chronic osteomyelitis (recurrent left
shoulder wound discharge for 5 years)Debrided bone and wound tissueSurgical debridement, removal of prosthesis, and antibiotics (oral
doxycycline for 6 weeks)Discharged after clinical remissionF Female, M male, MVR mitral valve replacement, AVR aortic valve replacement,TOE
transoesophageal echocardiogram, VP ventriculoperitoneal, TTE transthoracic echocardiogram, CSF cerebrospinal fluid, BAL bronchoalveolar
lavage, IV intravenous, ICU intensive care unit Characteristics of patients with infections due to Kytococcus schroeteri F Female, M male,
MVR mitral valve replacement, AVR aortic valve replacement,TOE transoesophageal echocardiogram, VP ventriculoperitoneal, TTE transthoracic
echocardiogram, CSF cerebrospinal fluid, BAL bronchoalveolar lavage, IV intravenous, ICU intensive care unit In terms of antibiotic
susceptibilities, K. schroeteri is frequently resistant to penicillin G (unlike micrococci) and oxacillin , a property which is considered
to be specific for the genus Kytococcus. This is of clinical importance as these antibiotics are often used as first-line agents in cases of
musculoskeletal infections caused by coagulase-negative staphylococci and micrococci. In such cases, empirical antibiotics consisting of
ampicillin and cloxacillin are often used. The exact antibiotic susceptibility patterns are frequently omitted unless there is suboptimal
clinical response to empirical treatment. As an illustration of this, the chronicity and the extent of disease involvement in our patient
would probably have been less if further identification and antibiotic susceptibility tests had been performed on the initially isolated
“Micrococcus spp.” to optimize the choice of antibiotics, rather than at the time when the patient suffered from progressive disease despite
treatment with cloxacillin. Due to the scarcity of cases, there is no standardized guideline for the optimal choice of antibiotics in K.
schroeteri-related infections. Because of the frequent occurrence of prosthesis-related infections in the reported case series,
glycopeptides, namely, vancomycin and teicoplanin, in combination with aminoglycosides and rifampicin, were often required in the initial
parenteral phase. Oral antibiotics, including fluoroquinolones and tetracyclines, with or without the addition of rifampicin, were used as
oral maintenance depending on the individual strains’ susceptibilities, clinical severity, and the presence or absence of prostheses. In
summary, in our case report we describe two important novel findings of K. schroeteri: the existence of variable colonial morphologies and
its capability to cause chronic implant-related joint and bone infection. Other clinical entities commonly associated with K. schroeteri
include prosthetic valve endocarditis and fatal pneumonia in immunocompromised patients. Therefore, in patients who have prosthesis or are
immunocompromised, further analysis to identify this potentially pathogenic organism using 16S rRNA gene sequencing should be performed
after initial isolation of coagulase-negative staphylococci or micrococci in the laboratory. Treatment consisting of appropriate antibiotics
and removal of infected prostheses is often necessary to prevent significant morbidities and mortalities. The 16S rRNA gene sequences of the
morphotypes have been lodged within the GenBank sequence database under Accession Numbers JF514888-JF514890. This work is partly supported
by the University Development Fund and the Committee for Research and Conference Grant, The University of Hong Kong. None. This article is
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
