To the Editor, Stress-induced cardiomyopathy (SIC) (also known as ampulla cardiomyopathy, tako-tsubo syndrome, and broken heart syndrome)
mimicking an acute myocardial infarction is a unique acute cardiac syndrome that appears under physically or emotionally stressful
circumstances. It was first described in Japan and is typically characterized by chest pain, elevated ST-segment on electrocardiography
(ECG), mildly elevated cardiac enzymes, and reversible left-ventricular dysfunction . Two-dimensional echocardiography (2D-Echo) reveals a
typical regional wall motion abnormality; however, coronary angiography (CAG) usually shows no significant atherosclerotic stenosis. A left
ventriculogram typically reveals akinesis of the mid-ventricle and apex and hyperkinesis of the base of the heart . However, the mechanism
or pathophysiology remains incompletely understood. In a study in Japan, approximately 9% of 88 patients were diagnosed with SIC associated
with ventricular tachycardia (VT) or ventricular fibrillation (VF) during the clinical course , whereas in Korea, only one of 18 patients
and three of 155 patients had VT or VF-associated SIC . We report a case of SIC presenting as VT as an initial manifestation after extreme
emotional stress. A 74-year-old woman with no risk factors of atherosclerosis presented to the emergency room with chest discomfort and
general weakness that had begun 30 minutes prior to arrival. Chest discomfort developed when she experienced intense emotional stress after
a severe quarrel with her sister-in-law; it was said that she did not have a good relationship with this individual. Her clinical signs were
blood pressure (BP), 90/50 mmHg; heart rate (HR), 62 beats/min (bpm); respiratory rate, 20/min; and body temperature, 36â„ƒ. Nausea, chills,
and generalized rigidity suddenly developed while her medical history was being taken. Her 12-lead ECG then showed VT, and HR was 217 bpm
(Fig. 1A). VT was refractory to 200 J and 300 J of direct current (DC) cardioversion with an intravenous infusion of lidocaine and
amiodarone. Her BP was sustained at 90/60 mmHg, and her mental status was alert. A few minutes later, ECG showed sinus arrhythmia (HR, 60 to
70 bpm), ST-segment depression, and T-wave inversion in leads II, III, avF, and V2-V6 (Fig. 1B). Chest X-ray findings were cardiomegaly (CT
ratio, 0.65) and pulmonary congestion. The levels of serum creatinine kinase-MB (3.0 ng/mL) and troponin-I (0.16 ng/mL) were within normal
limits. However, levels of serum myoglobin (220.2 ng/mL), high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (2.330 mg/L), and plasma N-terminal pro-brain
natriuretic peptide (2,140 pg/mL) were elevated. 2D-Echo revealed an ejection fraction of 56%, with akinesis of the left ventricular apex
and apical ballooning (Fig. 2A). On the second day of admission, CAG showed no significant stenosis, and left ventriculogram revealed apical
ballooning and akinesis of the left ventricular apex (Fig. 3). The patient was treated with aspirin, amiodarone, and ramipril. A follow-up
ECG on the second day showed a normal sinus rhythm (HR, 65 bpm) and normalized ST-segment and T-wave. After discharge, a follow-up 2D-Echo
was performed every month. Akinesis of the left ventricular apex had recovered 5 months later (Fig. 2B). SIC was first described in Japan in
1990 and is characterized by akinesis and ballooning of the left ventricular apex, similar to a Japanese octopus trap (tako-tsubo). Indeed,
this is how this disease got its name, tako-tsubo cardiomyopathy, or ampulla cardiomyopathy. Also, Tsuchihashi et al. referred to this
disease as transient left ventricular apical ballooning. Recently, in Korea, Lee et al. and Kim et al. reported SIC presenting as transient
akinesis of the mid-ventricle. They referred to this as acute regional cardiomyopathy rather than apical ballooning . The pathophysiology of
SIC is not clearly understood. Previous studies suggested that a surge of catecholamines in response to extreme physical or emotional
stress, coronary spasm, elevated sympathetic tone, and pheochromocytoma are all related to SIC. Additional studies using contrast
echocardiography or myocardial single photon emission computed tomography (M-SPECT) suggest that coronary microvascular dysfunction is
related to SIC. Among 18 Korean patients with SIC , one showed akinesis of the mid-ventricle rather than the apex. Another patient (5.5%)
suffered VT and VF during the clinical course and recovered after DC cardioversion. In a retrospective, multicenter study by Jo et al. ,
three of 155 patients had VT associated with SIC. In Japan, a retrospective, multicenter study involving 88 Japanese patients with SIC
reported that 9% of them experienced VT or VF. In our case, VT was the initial manifestation of SIC triggered by extreme emotional stress,
and it recovered after intravenous injection of lidocaine and amiodarone. Wall-motion abnormality in SIC patients usually improves within 4
weeks. However, in our case, wall-motion abnormality improved 5 months later. Jo et al. reported that predictors of the recovery of wall-
motion index were an absence of arrhythmic events and elevated initial LV end-systolic diameter. However, generalization is limited, as the
number of VT patients in that study was too small. In hibernating myocardium, delayed recovery would be expected if the morphologic changes
were severe . In our patient, we suggest that chronic and repeated emotional stress provoked morphologic changes in the myocardium, such as
hibernating myocardium, that resulted in delayed recovery. Accordingly, recovery of wall-motion abnormality might be delayed. Further
prospective trials should be undertaken to determine the mechanism and pathophysiology of SIC. No potential conflict of interest relevant to
this article was reported. (A) Electrocardiography reveals ventricular tachycardia. (B) After infusion of intravenous lidocaine and
amiodarone, electrocardiography reveals sinus arrhythmia and mild ST depression and T-wave inversion in lead II, III, aVF and V2-6. (A) Two
dimensional echocardiography at admission shows apical akinesis and ballooning. (B) Follow-up two dimensional echocardiography after 5
months shows improvement of apical wall motion. Ventriculogram. (A) End-diastole. (B) End-systole. Left ventriculogram reveals apical
akinesis and ballooning.
