Non-necrotizing epithelioid granulomas have been described in association with many primary tumors. In such cases, they are designated as
sarcoid-like reaction. Although it is more seen in carcinomas than in sarcomas, it is very rarely reported in renal carcinoma. Here, we
describe a rare association of prominent peritumoral sarcoid-like reaction without intratumoral granulomas and conventional clear cell renal
carcinoma in a 62-year-old-male, without clinical or laboratory finding of sarcoidosis. At 30 months follow-up, he had no recurrence. The
virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/4054525336657922 Non-necrotizing
granulomas have been described in association with several primary cancers. Histologically, this sarcoid-like reaction is undistinguishable
from granulomas found in systemic sarcoidosis. It is composed of a focal accumulation of epitheloid cells and multinucleated giant cells .
Few cases of association of sarcoid-like reaction with renal cell carcinoma have been described , and some in patients with a known or
suspected systemic sarcoidosis . Here, we describe a renal cell carcinoma associated with a peritumoral granulomatous reaction in a patient
without systemic sarcoidosis. A 62-year-old caucasian male known for dyslipidemia and scalp psoriasis was admitted to the emergency room for
right renal colic. The patients had no history of constitutional symptoms, gross hematuria or abdominal pain. Laboratory findings were
unremarkable. A computerized tomography (CT) was performed, which showed a 3.3 cm heterogeneous enhancing lesion in the upper pole of the
right kidney consistent with a renal carcinoma (Figure 1). Patient was then scheduled for a laparoscopic partial nephrectomy. The per- and
post-operative periods were uneventful. Lymph nodes were explored during surgery and none were found. Nothing in the patient's clinical
history or in the thoracic and abdominal CT scan performed suggested sarcoid granulomas involvement. No lymph node nor metastasis were
present at the time of the surgery and at 30 months follow-up. CT of the abdomen. Heterogeneous enhancing lesion in the upper pole of the
right kidney without invasion to surrounding tissues. Macroscopically, the tumor lesion revealed a 3.5 cm encapsulated yellowish mass with
bosselated surface with small foci of hemorrhage and necrosis. Histological examination showed a conventional clear cell type renal
carcinoma of Fuhrman nuclear grade III, without sarcomatoid features (Figure 2A). There was no perinephric, renal sinus fat, or renal vessel
involvement. Surgical margins were negative. Neoplastic proliferation was delineated from normal renal parenchyma by a fibrous pseudocapsule
where multiple non-necrotizing granulomas with multinucleated giant cells were found (Figure 2B, C, D). No granuloma was seen within the
tumor. These granulomas did not contain centrally located malignant cells. These granulomas were associated with mild mononuclear,
lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate. No granuloma was seen in the adjacent renal parenchyma (Figure 3). Ziehl-Neelsen and Grocott stains did
not detect the presence of mycobacteria or fungi. Partial right upper pole nephrectomy. A, Conventional clear cell type renal carcinoma of
Fuhrman nuclear grade III, without sarcomatoid features (HE;×100 original magnification). B, Epithelioid cell granulomas with Langhans-type
giant cells (Sarcoid-like reaction) in the peritumoral fibrous pseudocapsule (×40 original magnification). C, Sarcoid-like reaction with
some peritumoral inflammatory reaction, without any contact with tumor cells (×100 original magnification). D, Renal cell carcinoma with
sarcoid-like reaction (×200 original magnification) No granuloma was observed in the adjacent normal renal parenchyma (x40 original
magnification). The frequency of sarcoid like reactions in certain tumor types and in different locations varies from 4% in carcinoma, to
20% in lymphoma . Non-caseating granulomas can be caused by chemical exposure, infections, foreign bodies, granulomatous diseases and tumors
. Therefore, before claiming an association between renal cell cancer and sarcoid-like reaction, the other causes must be excluded by a
careful clinical history, diagnostic tests and pathologic examination . Antigens expressed by the neoplastic cell or soluble tumor antigens
trigger an immune response which leads to the formation of non-caseating granulomas. Such reaction, locally mediated by T-cell, can be found
in involved or uninvolved remote site, in regional lymph nodes and less frequently in tumoral areas . A certain number of cases in the
literature reports sarcoid-like reaction associated with renal cell carcinoma in patient with sarcoidosis . Renal involvement in sarcoidosis
displays a wide range of clinical manifestations. Renal histopathology shows granulomatous interstitial nephritis. Alexandrescu et al
reported one case of renal cancer with non-cutaneous sarcoidosis. Lucci et al described the 6th case of clear cell renal cell carcinoma
associated with sarcoidosis, this association is very rare. Few cases reported sarcoid-like reaction associated with renal cell carcinoma in
patients without sarcoidoisis . We presented the sixth case of this reaction in conventional clear cell type renal carcinoma, in patients
without sarcoidosis (Table 1). The prognostic factor of this association is still unclear. Kamiyoshihara et al found no difference regarding
lung cancer prognosis. However, Pavic et al suggested that sarcoid-like reaction could play a role in preventing metastatic dissemination
and may be associated with a better prognosis in Hodgkin's disease and gastric adenocarcinomas. Piscioli et al reported a case of a renal
cell carcinoma with sarcomatoid and sarcoid-like reaction. The patient died from metastatic dissemination 6 months after the nephrectomy.
The authors suggested that his poor prognostic was not influenced by the sarcoid-like reaction but rather the sarcomatoid features. However
two other cases reported longer recurrence free survival of 15 and 48 months, respectively. In our case, the sarcoid like reaction was seen
peritumoral, without sarcomatoid features, with a recurrence free survival at 30 months follow-up. Sarcoidosis and sarcoid-like granulomas
have been associated with psoriasis treatments . However, in our case the patient never had any treatment for his scalp psoriasis.
Clinicopathological features of reported cases of sarcoid-like reaction associated with conventional clear cell type renal carcinoma in
patients without sarcoidosis Interestingly, in our case we did not find granulomatous reaction within the tumor as described in some
carcinoma, including breast , renal and hepatocellular carcinomas . We presented the sixth case of this reaction in conventional clear cell
type renal carcinoma, in patients without sarcoidosis. However, it is, to our knowledge the first case of conventional clear cell type renal
carcinoma to show peritumoral sarcoid-like reaction without intratumoral involvement. We report a rare association between conventional
clear cell type renal carcinoma and peritumoral sarcoid-like granulomatous reaction in a patient without clinical, radiologic or laboratory
finding of sarcoidosis. Due to the low number of published cases, prognostic value of peritumoral non-necrotizing epithelioid granulomas has
yet to be determined. Further cases are needed to provide information on the mechanism and prognostic value of peritumoral granuloma
reaction in renal cell carcinoma. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any
accompanying images. A copy of written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. SO drafted the manuscript and provided clinical information. RA carried out the histological evaluation and
helped drafted this manuscript. RS was the surgeon, supervised and helped drafted this manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. We would like to thank Tania Fayad, Ph D for the critical reading of this article.
