A 47-year-old Korean woman with right middle lobe lung adenocarcinoma, malignant pleural effusion, and multiple lymph node and bone
metastases, after three months of lung cancer diagnosis, presented with a palpable right breast mass. Images of the right breast
demonstrated architectural distortion that strongly suggested primary breast cancer. Breast biopsy revealed metastatic lung cancer with a
negative result for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and mammaglobin, and a positive result for thyroid transcription
factor-1 (TTF-1). We present a case of breast metastasis from a case of lung cancer with an extensive micropapillary component, which was
initially misinterpreted as a primary breast cancer due to unusual image findings with architectural distortion. Common image findings of
breast metastases from extra-mammary malignancy are single or multiple, round, usually circumscribed mass(es) variable in size (1). This is
known to be due to a nonductal pattern of metastatic spread and lack of desmoplastic reaction in breast metastasis. If architectural
distortion is seen on mammography, the possibility of metastasis from extra-mammary malignancy is very low and primary breast lesion
including primary cancer is rather favored. Here, we present a case of breast metastasis from lung cancer with extensive micropapillary
component which was initially favored to be the primary breast cancer rather than metastasis because the breast lesion was associated with
an architectural distortion on mammography. A 47-year-old woman initially presented with chest pain and dyspnea for the last three months
and with 3 kg in weight loss over the last six months. Her past medical history includes a right thyroid lobectomy for a large benign
thyroid nodule and cyst about two years ago. A chest computed tomography (CT) from the outside hospital showed a 2.3 × 1.8 cm sized mass in
the right middle lobe with pleural effusion (Fig. 1A). On a positron emission tomography (PET) image, hot uptakes were noted at multiple
sites including the main lung mass, multiple mediastinal and right cardiophrenic lymph nodes, and bones (ribs and right femoral head).
Clinically, lung cancer with distant metastasis (clinical stage IV) was suspected and the patient was transferred to our hospital. A lung
biopsy was performed and a primary lung adenocarcinoma with predominantly micropapillary carcinoma component was diagnosed (Fig. 1B). The
patient was treated with chemotherapy consisting of Cisplatin followed by Irinotecan. Three months after the initiation of chemotherapy, she
complained of a palpable mass in her right breast. For evaluation of the right breast lesion, she underwent mammography and spot
magnification with metallic marker attachment (Fig. 1C). On the right lower inner quadrant, focal architectural distortion was detected
without evidence of microcalcifications or mass on images. A follow-up chest CT shows an irregular enhancing lesion of the right breast in
the lower inner quadrant (Fig. 1D). A breast ultrasound (US) was performed to localize the lesion and for a biopsy. The breast US showed an
about 1 cm sized ill-defined irregular-shaped isoechoic lesion in the right lower inner quadrant, about 4 cm from the right nipple (Fig.
1E). Color Doppler US demonstrated no vascularity. In order to confirm the image finding of primary breast cancer and to exclude the
possibility of metastatic lung cancer, an US-guided core needle biopsy (14 gauge automated gun, Acecut®, TSK Laboratory, Tochigi, Japan) was
performed and 4 core tissue samples were obtained. The breast biopsy showed an adenocarcinoma with a micropapillary component as well as a
desmoplastic reaction and lymphovascular invasion, which was morphologically similar to that seen in the primary lung cancer (Fig. 1F). The
surrounding breast ducts and lobules were unremarkable with no atypical changes. To further support the metastatic carcinoma from the lung
and to exclude the primary breast cancer, immunohistochemistry was recommended. Immunohistochemical markers for breast including ER, PR, and
mammaglobin, were negative and lung cancer marker of TTF-1 was strongly positive, which further supported the lung adenocarcinoma with
metastasis to the breast. After 4 cycles of cisplatin followed by Irinotecan, the chemotherapeutic agent was changed to Erlotinib. Five
months after performing an US-guided core biopsy of the right breast, the volume of the main lung mass and pleural effusion was minimally
decreased and the patient's dyspneic symptoms were relieved. She did not undergo any follow-up examination for the breast lesion. She is
currently alive with disease eight months after initial diagnosis of lung cancer. In contrast to primary breast cancer being the most common
malignancy of adult females worldwide, metastatic involvement of the breast is rare with a reported frequency of 0.4-1.3% in clinical series
(2, 3). Despite its rarity, metastatic disease to the breast is an important diagnostic clinical problem, because its treatment differs
greatly from that of primary breast cancer. Carcinomas with micropapillary components have been reported at several anatomical sites,
including the breast, urinary bladder, ovary, major salivary glands, and recently the lungs (4). The micropapillary component is being
increasingly recognized as a prognostic predictor for aggressive behavior with a tendency to metastasize to the lymph nodes and other organs
(5, 6). Maounis et al. (7) reported a case of metastasis to the breast from lung adenocarcinoma with an extensive micropapillary component,
focused on the pathologic and immunohistochemical differentiation of the primary lung versus breast. To the best of our knowledge, our case
is the second case of lung adenocarcinoma with a micropapillary component metastatic to the breast. Our case and Maounis et al.'s case
shared some similarities in that they were more compatible with primary breast cancer than the metastasis on initial image findings. Based
on the rare reported cases, it is difficult to document whether lung cancer with a micropapillary component has a unique pattern of breast
metastasis or not on image findings. However, it is worthwhile to accumulate more cases to support our findings. The distinction between
metastasis from lung adenocarcinoma, particularly with extensive micropapillary patterns, and primary mammary micropapillary adenocarcinoma
may cause a significant diagnostic dilemma. The immunohistochemistry could contribute to a differential diagnosis. TTF-1 is expressed in
68-80% of lung adenocarcinoma cases, and has never been reported to stain positive in breast adenocarcinoma cases (8). ER expression in lung
adenocarcinoma cases using monoclonal antibodies, is very low (9). Finally, mammaglobin is expressed in 48-72% of mammary adenocarcinoma
cases, but stains negative in pulmonary adenocarcinoma (8, 10). Consequently, a panel of markers must be used, as no single antibody is 100%
sensitive and false negative results do occur. The panel for distinguishing lung adenocarcinoma from breast carcinoma includes ER, PR and
mammaglobin for the breast and TTF-1 for the lung. Our case demonstrated a typical immunohistochemical finding of lung cancer with ER, PR
and mammaglobin negative, and TTF-1 positive. Imaging findings of primary invasive micropapillary carcinoma of the breast are highly
suggestive of malignancy. The lesion is known to be a high-density irregular mass with indistinct margins associated and microcalcifications
on mammograms; a solid irregular hypoechoic mass with indistinct margins and frequent axillary nodal involvement on sonograms (11). In our
case, microcalcifications were not seen on mammogram. The most common radiologic appearance of blood-borne metastasis to the breast is one
or more round, discrete nodules in the breast (12). From a purely radiologic view, these nodules cannot be differentiated from small benign
nodules such as cysts or fibroadenomas. To differentiate radiologically metastatic carcinoma to the breast from the primary breast cancer,
several points should be kept in mind. A discrete nodule in the mammography of patients known to have extra-mammary cancer should alert one
to the possibility of blood-borne metastasis, particularly if other soft tissue metastases are also present. Likewise, an unusual or
eccentric location of a discrete nodule in subcutaneous fat rather than glandular tissue should suggest the possibility of blood-borne
metastasis. In addition, the rapid growth of breast nodules between two mammogram intervals may also be an important clue favoring
metastasis (12). Another type of metastasis to the breast from extra-mammary malignancy is cross lymphatic, with the earliest radiologic
finding of this type is skin thickening (12). In our case, the images did not indicate any mass or skin thickening. An architectural
distortion was the main image finding. Therefore, the first impression was a primary breast malignancy even though the patient has a known
history of lung adenocarcinoma. The histology of metastases to the breast usually reflects the primary tumor well enough that the pathologic
diagnosis is obvious. The metastatic tumor in the breast in the current case revealed an adenocarcinoma with micropapillary component with
severe desmoplastic reaction and lymphovascular invasion, which could be a possible explanation of the architectural distortion on images.
This was a unique finding, different from that of another case report described as diffuse asymmetric density on mammography (13). We
present a rare case of metastasis to the breast from lung adenocarcinoma with an extensive micropapillary component, which on mammography
due to architectural distortion, a primary breast carcinoma was favored even though the patient had a history of known primary lung cancer
and this pattern has never been described before as a metastasis. Therefore, in cases with architectural distortion on mammogram with known
lung cancer history, before making the diagnosis of primary breast cancer, the possibility of metastasis from the known lung cancer should
be carefully excluded, in addition to considering the presence of a micropapillary component. Images and pathologic findings in 47-year-old
woman with primary lung cancer. A. Outside chest CT shows round mass with internal necrosis in right middle lobe (arrow), with right pleural
effusion. B. Primary lung cancer shows adenocarcinoma with papillary and micropapillary carcinoma (arrow; Hematoxylin and Eosin staining, ×
100). TTF-1 stain reveals nuclear positivity (inset, TTF-1 immunostaining, × 200). C. Spot compression view of right breast shows focal
architectural distortion (arrow) in right lower inner quadrant without evidence of microcalcifications or discrete mass. Metallic marker is
attached to area of palpable site. D. Follow-up chest CT shows irregular enhancing lesion of right breast in lower inner quadrant (arrow).
E. Breast US demonstrates 1 cm sized ill-defined irregular shaped isoechoic lesion (arrows) with focal infiltration at 4 o'clock position in
right breast. F. Breast biopsy shows micropapillary carcinoma with small tumor cell nests in empty lacunar spaces and desmoplastic reaction
in stroma (Hematoxylin and Eosin staining, × 100). TTF-1 stain reveals nuclear positivity, supporting metastasis from lung (TTF-1
immunostaining, × 100).
