To the Editor: We report the case of a 27-year-old male Swiss tourist who spent 3.5 weeks (July 6–30, 2011) vacationing in the vicinity of
Tarapoto, a small city located in the rainforests of the Amazon Basin in northern Peru. An acute febrile illness developed in the man during
the second week of his stay. Signs and symptoms of illness were chills, malaise, frontal headache, generalized myalgia, a self-limiting
painful cervical and inguinal lymphadenopathy (lasting ≈1 week), slowly progressive and pronounced polyarthralgic pains of the peripheral
joints, and a transient nonpruritic maculopapular rash (starting at the forearms ≈1 week after onset of fever and spreading to the trunk and
later to the neck and face before fading after 3 days). The traveler sought care at the local hospital, where physicians diagnosed suspected
dengue fever on the basis of the clinical signs and symptoms, and received symptomatic treatment with paracetamol. The fever and other signs
subsided within 1 week, except the arthralgia, which did not improve. The polyarthritis initially was accompanied by swelling of the
affected joints and showed a symmetric pattern, mainly affecting the small joints of the hands and feet as well as the wrists, ankles, and
knees. After returning home to Switzerland, the patient consulted his general practitioner (August 1, 2011) because of persisting,
incapacitating joint pains. The patient reported stiffness of the affected joints, mainly in the morning and after immobility. Physical
examination of the affected joints did not reveal visible clinical signs of inflammation (swelling, redness, effusion). Laboratory tests
were performed for complete blood count, liver and kidney function, C-reactive protein, and serologic testing for dengue virus, chikungunya
virus, Borrelia burgdorferi, Chlamydia trachomatis, Epstein-Barr virus, parvovirus B19, Salmonella Typhi, and S. Paratyphi, but none
revealed a cause for the symptoms. Over almost 2 more months, the joint pains did not improve; thus, the patient was referred to a
rheumatologic clinic and subsequently to the Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland, for evaluation of a putative
travel-related cause of the polyarthralgia. Because of the patient’s travel history, the course of the illness and clinical signs and
symptoms experienced during the journey, and the evolution and characteristics of the persisting joint pains, we suspected an underlying
Mayaro virus (MAYV) infection. Serologic testing (indirect immunofluorescence and virus neutralization assays) for several alphaviruses were
performed as described (1), and the results (Table) confirmed our presumptive diagnosis. *SF, Semliki Forest; ND, not done; BF, Barmah
Forest; VEE, Venezuelan equine encephalitis; WEE, Western equine encephalitis; EEE, Eastern equine encephalitis. †Sample obtained August 29,
2011. ‡Sample obtained September 12, 2011. Several viral infections (e.g., dengue, rubella, parvovirus B19, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, HIV,
and human T-lymphotropic virus type 1) can be accompanied by arthralgia. However, the most prominent and long-lasting polyarthritic symptoms
occur in patients infected by alphaviruses (family Togaviridae). Alphaviruses are arthropod-borne viruses (arboviruses) that circulate among
a wide variety of wild animals in relative mosquito vector–specific and host-specific enzootic cycles; infection in humans (dead-end hosts)
is almost exclusively incidental. Clinical cases and virus isolation have been reported only from northern South America, where MAYV
circulates in an enzootic sylvatic cycle (similar to that for yellow fever) involving forest-dwelling Haemagogus spp. mosquitoes as vectors
and nonhuman primates as natural hosts (2). Infections in humans mostly occur sporadically, are strongly associated with occupational or
recreational exposure in rainforest environments, and are assumed to represent spillover from the enzootic cycle (2). MAYV was first
isolated in Trinidad in 1954; since then, sporadic cases, clusters, outbreaks, and small epidemics of Mayaro fever have been reported from
Brazil, Bolivia, Columbia, French Guiana, Guyana, Peru, Venezuela, and Surinam (3). In addition to the clinical cases and virus isolates
reported from northern South America, serologic survey findings suggest the presence of MAYV in Costa Rica, Guatemala, and Panama (4)
(Figure A1). Clinical signs of this acute, dengue-like, febrile illness last 3–7 days and typically include chills, headache, retro-orbital
and epigastric pain, myalgia, arthralgia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and a maculopapular rash (sometimes followed by desquamation) (7).
However, as with other alphavirus infections (i.e., chikungunya [Africa, Asia], o’nyong-nyong , Ross River [Australia, Oceania], Barmah
Forest , and Sindbis [Africa, Europe, Asia, Australia]), the hallmark of MAYV infection is the highly debilitating arthralgia. Permanent
damage of the affected joints has not been reported. Hemorrhagic manifestations of MAYV infections are rare but have been described (3).
Concerns over the potential emergence of urban transmission of MAYV were raised after a laboratory study showed vector competence of Aedes
aegypti mosquitoes (8). International travelers are rarely given a diagnosis of MAYV infection (9,10). This might be attributed to the
overall low frequency of the infection; the dengue-like signs and symptoms, which may lead to a misdiagnosis; and the fact that the disease
is not well known outside MAYV-endemic regions. Physicians treating patients with signs and symptoms of a dengue-like illness and a recent
history of travel to MAYV-endemic areas should consider MAYV infection in the differential diagnosis, especially if arthralgia is prominent
and prolonged and dominates the clinical picture. Suggestion citation for this article: Neumayr A, Gabriel M, Fritz J, Günther S, Hatz C,
Schmidt-Chanasit J, et al. Mayaro virus infection in traveler returning from Amazon Basin, northern Peru . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the
Internet]. 2012 Apr [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1804.111717 These authors contributed equally to this article. Distribution
of Mayaro virus (MAYV) in the Central and South America (3,5–7).
