To the Editor: Rickettsia conorii, the etiologic agent of Mediterrenean spotted fever (MSF), is transmitted to humans by the brown dog tick
(Rhipicephalus sanguineus). MSF is endemic to Italy; incidence is highest in the south and on the islands of Sardinia and Sicily (1).
Recently, the use of molecular methods has enabled identification of other rickettsiae of the spotted fever group (SFG) from Ixodes ricinus
ticks in northeastern Italy and in other areas of Europe (2–6). R. monacensis was identified as an etiologic agent of MSF-like illness in
Spain (7). We report a case of MSF-like illness in a 28-year-old man from Sassari in northwestern Sardinia who was admitted to the
Infectious Disease Unit of the University of Sassari Hospital in April 2011. At admission, he reported fever (38.2°C) and headache of 2
days’ duration. At physical examination, he had a crusty skin lesion surrounded by edema and erythema, which was compatible with inoculation
eschar, on the left calf. He had no rash. Laboratory results showed a slight leukocyte increase, hypocromic and microcytic anemia
(hemoglobin 10.6 g/dL [reference range 13.1–17.1 g/dL], mean corpuscular volume 67.7 fL [reference range 81–88 fL], mean corpuscular
hemoglobin concentration 29.6 g/dL [reference range 33–35 g/dL]), hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin 1.36 mg/dL [reference range 0.2–1.3
mg/dL], direct bilirubin 0.49 mg/dL [reference range 0.0–0.6 mg/dL]), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 37 mm/h (reference range 0–25
mm/h). The remaining parameters were within reference ranges. A small skin sample taken from the inoculation eschar and whole blood were
stored at –30°C. The patient immediately started taking doxycycline 100 mg every 12 hours. Serologic tests were negative for R. conorii IgM
and IgG (ELISA) and positive for SFG Rickettsia spp. IgG on indirect immunofluorescence with a titer of 128. After 24 hours of antimicrobial
drug therapy, he was afebrile; he was discharged on day 3. He completed a 7-day course of doxycycline at home and recovered completely. The
skin biopsy sample, collected in phosphate-buffered saline, and whole blood were obtained before antimicrobial therapy began and were
subjected to DNA extraction. Bacterial detection and identification were conducted by using molecular methods based on real-time PCR,
classical PCR, and nucleotide sequencing (Table). *gltA, citrate synthase; ompA, outer membrane protein A. A set of primers for gltA gene
that encodes the citrate synthase enzyme (8) was used to determine that the organism belonged to the genus Rickettsia, which includes the
SFG and typhus group. Each real-time PCR reaction was performed by QuantiTect SYBR Green PCR kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) by using 20 ng of
purified DNA. R. conorii and R. typhii were used as positive controls for SFG and typhus group, and Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Bartonella
henselae, Ehrlichia chaffeensis, and Coxiella burnetii (Bartonellaceae and Coxiellaceae members) served as negative controls. Results were
checked for the specific molecular length by electrophoresis on a 3% (wt/vol) agarose gel. The skin biopsy specimen of the inoculation
eschar was positive for Rickettsia spp. The whole blood sample was negative for Rickettsia spp. These results were confirmed by
amplification of the ompA gene by using the ompA–F and ompA–R primers (9) and by the sequencing of the PCR amplicon. The nucleotide sequence
analyzed by using the BLAST search tool (www.ncbi.n/m.nib.gov/blast) showed 100% identity with the R. monacensis isolate N72 (GenBank
accession no. FJ919650.1). We identified R. monacensis as cause of MSF-like illness in the patient reported here. Our results have several
clinical and microbiological implications. Although MSF-like illness is highly endemic to Sardinia, to our knowledge no pathogens other than
R. conorii had ever been identified. Antibodies against R. monacensis were not detected by the R. conorii ELISA commonly used in hospital
laboratories. In contrast, indirect immunofluorescence, which cannot distinguish between rickettsial species because of cross-reactivity,
was positive. Therefore, the cocirculation of R. monacensis and, possibly, of other SFG rickettsiae, could lead to misdiagnosis and
therapeutic delay. Furthermore, in consideration of the negative result in whole blood, a small skin sample from the eschar might improve
the diagnostic sensitivity of PCR. We did not perform entomologic studies. However, I. ricinus ticks, which are considered vectors of R.
monacensis, are widely distributed in Italy and have been found in Sardinia, although less often than other tick species (10). Moreover, it
is not excluded that other ticks might act as vectors for R. monacensis in Sardinia, where ticks of the genus Rhipicephalus are prominent.
Molecular investigations of ticks could better clarify the extent of circulation of SFG rickettsiae in Sardinia. Identification of R.
monacensis as a cause of MSF-like illness in Sardinia expands the list of pathogenic rickettsiae circulating in Italy. It also highlights
the need for further investigation in humans and vectors to understand infection dynamics and improve diagnosis and treatment of this
potentially life-threatening disease. Suggested citation for this article: Madeddu G, Mancini F, Caddeo A, Ciervo A, Babudieri S, Maida I,
et al. Rickettsia monacensis as cause of Mediterranean spotted fever–like illness, Italy . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2012
Apr [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1804.111583 This study was supported by a Centro Nazionale per il Controllo e la Prevenzione
delle Malattie Project of the Italian Health Ministry.
