We report four patients with pneumothorax as a complication of ERCP with sphincterotomy. With conservative treatment all patients recovered.
Previously, 16 comparable cases have been reported in the literature. The main risk factor for this rare complication seems (pre-cut)
sphincterotomy. Pneumothorax is usually right-sided or bilateral and accompanied by pneumomediastinum, pneumoretroperitoneum and
subcutaneous emphysema. The prognosis seems favourable with a non-surgical approach including intravenous antibiotics, fasting and when
indicated chest tube drainage. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is a complex, technically demanding procedure with a
considerable potential for serious complications. The rate of specific complications—including pancreatitis, bleeding, sepsis and
perforation—reportedly ranges from 5 to 6.9 %, with a mortality rate of 0.33 % [1, 2]. One of the most feared complications is perforation.
The most frequent type is retroperitoneal perforation. This usually occurs after sphincterotomy, with a reported incidence of 0.1–1 % . A
dramatic complication of retroperitoneal perforation is the development of pneumothorax. As this is a rare, unexpected, frightening and
potentially life-threatening event, all those involved in the care of patients undergoing ERCP should be aware of this potential
complication and have knowledge of the aetiology, therapeutic principles and prognosis. We here report four patients with post-
sphincterotomy pneumothorax who were observed over a 16-year period in a university hospital. In addition, a short review of previously
reported cases is presented. A 76-year-old woman underwent elective endoscopic resection of a papillary adenoma. During this procedure,
which included biliary sphincterotomy for removal of common bile duct stones, no particular problems were encountered. Immediately after the
procedure the patient developed severe dyspnoea and massive subcutaneous emphysema of the thorax, neck, face and lower extremities. Chest
X-ray and CT revealed left-sided pneumothorax, right-sided tension pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, pneumoperitoneum and
pneumoretroperitoneum (Figs. 1 and 2). CT with oral contrast showed a minimal amount of contrast leakage in the second part of the duodenum
(Fig. 3). The patient was treated with oxygen, bilateral chest tube placement, antibiotics, and a nil per mouth regime. After 1 day she was
transferred from the intensive care unit to the normal ward. She gradually improved and was discharged from the hospital 10 days after the
procedure.Fig. 1Case 1 Thoracic CT showing right-sided tension pneumothorax with mediastinal shift to the left side. There is a smaller
right-sided pneumothorax and also presence of mediastinal, soft-tissue and subcutaneous airFig. 2Case 1 Abdominal CT-scan showing intra- and
retroperitoneal free airFig. 3Case 1 Abdominal CT-scan with oral contrast administration. At the site of the papilla of Vater there is
minimal extravasation of contrast indicating perforation (solid arrow). Dotted arrow biliary endoprosthesis in duodenum, A intra- and
retroperitoneal air, C renal cortical cysts, D duodenum Case 1 Thoracic CT showing right-sided tension pneumothorax with mediastinal shift
to the left side. There is a smaller right-sided pneumothorax and also presence of mediastinal, soft-tissue and subcutaneous air Case 1
Abdominal CT-scan showing intra- and retroperitoneal free air Case 1 Abdominal CT-scan with oral contrast administration. At the site of the
papilla of Vater there is minimal extravasation of contrast indicating perforation (solid arrow). Dotted arrow biliary endoprosthesis in
duodenum, A intra- and retroperitoneal air, C renal cortical cysts, D duodenum A 77-year-old man was admitted with obstructive jaundice.
Imaging studies suggested a pancreatic head tumour. Endoscopic cholangiography showed a severe stenosis of the distal common bile duct. For
selective cannulation pre-cut sphincterotomy was performed followed by placement of a plastic endoprosthesis. During this procedure
retroperitoneal air was noticed. The patient became hypotensive and developed extensive subcutaneous air of the neck and head. Further
imaging showed mediastinal air and bilateral pneumothorax. Conservative treatment was started, including antibiotic treatment for 5 days,
intravenous fluids, nil per mouth and gastric drainage. The clinical course was uneventful and the patient made a rapid recovery within
1 week. An 88-year-old woman with complaints of intermittent abdominal pain was scheduled for ERCP for removal of biliary stones. The
papilla was situated in a large duodenal diverticulum. Following guidewire-assisted sphincterotomy there was immediate suspicion of an
abnormal route with retroperitoneal leakage. Furthermore, there was active bleeding at the site of the sphincterotomy. Haemostasis was
achieved with adrenalin injections. The patient developed gradually progressive subcutaneous emphysema, chest pain and dyspnoea. Additional
imaging showed pneumomediastinum and right-sided pneumothorax. Initial treatment included insertion of a nasobiliary drain and
administration of oxygen. She was transported to the intensive care unit where a chest tube was inserted and antibiotic treatment was
started. The following day there was marked clinical improvement and she could return to the normal ward. The further clinical course was
uneventful. A 58-year-old woman underwent ERCP for further evaluation and treatment of jaundice and biliary pain. Biliary cannulation was
unsuccessful and pre-cut sphincterotomy was performed. After successful cannulation, cholangiography failed to show clear biliary
abnormalities. At this stage the presence of retroperitoneal and mediastinal air was noted, accompanied by right-sided pneumothorax.
Conservative treatment was initiated and consisted of nil per mouth, nasobiliary drainage and antibiotics. The further clinical course was
uncomplicated and the patient fully recovered. A literature research revealed 16 additional, previously published cases of pneumothorax
complicating ERCP (Table 1). It should be noted that cases with instrumental wall perforations or perforation of pre-existing duodenal
ulcers were excluded. The mean age of the total reported 20 patients was 66 (range 24–89) years; 16 were female. In four cases the presence
of juxtapapillary diverticula was reported and in two-thirds of cases sphincterotomy or pre-cut sphincterotomy preceded the development of
pneumothorax. In 8/20 (40 %) cases pneumothorax was bilateral while in no more than one case it was only left-sided. In 2 of the 20 patients
surgery was undertaken. Chest tube drainage, either uni- of bilateral, was performed in 15 (75 %) patients. In 19/20 cases the outcome was
favourable, with full recovery of the patient. A fatal outcome was reported for one patient, a 78-year-old woman who presented 3 days after
ERCP with sphincterotomy and failed stone extraction, and died from peritonitis and sepsis .Table 1 Cases of pneumothorax complicating
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)AuthorAge (years)GenderIndication for ERCPERCP procedureLocation and type of
pneumothoraxOther findingsaManagementOutcomeGya et al. 63FCBD stoneSphincterotomyRight-sidedA, C, DChest tube, laparotomySurvivedScarlet et
al. 59FBiliary painPre-cut sphincterotomyRight-sidedB, CChest tube, conservativeSurvivedDoerr et al. 81FCBD stoneFailed attempt to remove
CBD stoneRight-sidedA, B, DChest tube, conservativeSurvivedHui et al. 89FCholangitis, CBD stonesFailed attempt to reach papilla, B-II
gastrectomyRight-sided–Chest tube, conservativeSurvivedLagoudianakis et al. 55MCholelithiasis, jaundiceFailed attempt of catheterization
papilla, sphincterotomyRight-sidedC, DConservativeSurvivedMarkogiannakis et al. 56FCholangitisSphincterotomy, stone removalBilateralA, B, C,
DBilateral chest tube, conservativeSurvivedKocaman et al. 24MProgressive jaundiceBrushing, endoprosthesisBilateralA, B, C, DBilateral chest
tube, laparotomySurvivedFerrara et al. 82MCholangitis, CBD stonesSphincterotomy, stone removalLeft-sidedA, B, C, DChest tube,
conservativeSurvivedIyilikci et al. 24FCBD stoneSphincterotomy, partial stone removalBilateralDChest tube, laparotomySurvivedSang-Yun Song
et al. 78FCBD stoneSphincterotomyRight-sided tensionA, C, DConservativeDiedSchiavon et al. 79FCBD stonesSphincterotomy, Stone removalRight-
sidedA, DConservativeSurvivedBrueck et al. 39FCBD stonesSphincterotomy with lithotripsy, stone removalBilateralA, B, C, DChest tube,
conservativeSurvivedFuji et al. 73FBiliary anastomotic strictureBalloon dilatation, endoprothesis placementBilateralA, B, C, DBilateral
chest tube, conservativeSurvivedOzgonul et al. 62FObstructive jaundiceKlatskin tumour, stentingBilateralA, B, C, DBilateral chest tube,
laporatomySurvivedSampaziotis et al. 68FCBD stonesExtension sphincterotomy, Stone removalBilateralA, B, C, DBilateral chest
tubeSurvivedSeymann et al. 78FCBD stoneStone removalBilateralA, C, DBilateral chest tubeSurvivedPresent case 177FResection papilla
adenomaSphincterotomy, resection papilla adenomaBilateral, right-sided tensionA, B, C, DChest tube, conservativeSurvivedPresent case
277MObstructive jaundicePrecut sphincterotomyBilateralA, C, DConservativeSurvivedPresent case 388FCBD stonesSphincterotomy, bleedingRight-
sided tensionA, C, DChest tube, conservativeSurvivedPresent case 458FJaundice and biliary painPrecut sphincterotomyRight-sided?A,
CConservativeSurvivedaOther findings: A mediastinal air, B intraperitoneal air, C retroperitoneal air, D subcutaneous emphysemaCBD common
bile duct, F female, M male Cases of pneumothorax complicating endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) aOther findings: A
mediastinal air, B intraperitoneal air, C retroperitoneal air, D subcutaneous emphysema CBD common bile duct, F female, M male The
cumulative reported experience with pneumothorax complicating ERCP suggests that this is an exceptional complication that can occur at any
age, is usually right-sided or bilateral and is typically associated with the presence of retroperitoneal, mediastinal and subcutaneous air,
frequently also with intraperitoneal air. The main risk factors are (pre-cut) sphincterotomy and possibly the presence of juxtapapillary
diverticula. With conservative treatment, including chest tube insertion, administration of antibiotics and a temporary nil by mouth
regimen, the prognosis seems good. A notably complicated or fatal course seems uncommon. We are aware of several unpublished cases of
pneumothorax following sphincterotomy. Publishing serious complications may not be appealing, particularly when the outcome is unfavourable
or fatal. This may be a significant factor contributing to underreporting of serious complications such as ERCP related pneumothorax.
Although the incidence of this complication is without doubt low, we speculate that the true occurrence may be higher, and the course more
often complicated than is suggested by currently available data. Several pathophysiological mechanisms underlying ERCP related pneumothorax
have been proposed. The most likely route is that air enters the retroperitoneal space after interruption of the duodenal barrier. The most
frequent cause is (pre-cut) sphincterotomy with false direction or an incision that is too large or deep. In many cases altered or variant
anatomy, secondary to tumours, diverticula or other causes, is likely to be of importance. Insufflation of air may contribute to relatively
fast accumulation of air in the retroperitoneum. Subsequently air can spread to the mediastinum, the subcutaneous tissues and also to the
peritoneal cavity. Finally, mediastinal air can gain access to the pleural cavity, possibly due to rupture of the parietal pleura. Depending
on the amount of air this can give rise to pneumothorax of variable severity. It has been suggested that a continuum of fascial planes
connects cervical soft tissues with the mediastinum and retroperitoneum . This particular spatial anatomy could facilitate rapid movement of
air from one compartment to another. Several observations indicate that a complete transmural defect is not a prerequisite for developing
pneumoretroperitoneum and its sequelae . Thus local weakening of the duodenal-retroperitoneal barrier, for instance after sphincterotomy or
balloon dilatation, or secondary to tumour or inflammation, may occasionally allow air to enter the retroperitoneum. This is supported by
several reported cases with pneumoretroperitoneum and pneumothorax unrelated with (pre-cut) sphincterotomy (Table 1). An alternative pathway
is that pores in the diaphragm, formed either congenitally or acquired, may allow air to move between the abdominal and thoracic cavity.
Porous diaphragm syndromes are characterized by the passages of fluids, gases, tissues, secretions and intestinal content through
diaphragmatic pores from the peritoneal cavity into the ipsilateral hemithoracic space . This is also the pathophysiological mechanism
underlying hydrothorax associated with peritoneal dialysis and ascites. The fact that intraperitoneal air is certainly not an uniform
finding in patients with ERCP associated pneumothorax does not support this as a central mechanism. It has also been hypothesized that
alveolar rupture may occur due to increased intrathoracic pressure, particularly in patients poorly tolerating endoscopic procedures . The
Vasalva manoeuvre has been strongly associated with development of subcutaneous emphysema, pneumomediastinum, and more rarely pneumothorax .
Studies employing standard CT after sphincterotomy indicate that air in the retroperitoneal space, indicative for duodenal perforation, can
be found in up to 29 % of cases, suggesting that in the large majority of cases this is a sub-clinical problem not requiring specific
therapy [28, 29]. Juxtapapillary diverticula are a possible risk factor for retroperitoneal perforation [30, 31] and were described in 20 %
of cases in this review. However, the importance of diverticula as an independent risk factor is uncertain as the prevalence in populations
undergoing ERCP may be as high as 20–27 % [32, 33]. Depending on the amount of leakage, retroperitoneal perforation and pneumothorax may
become manifest either during (3 of our 4 cases) or after ERCP. This can be as fluoroscopically or radiologically visible accumulation of
retroperitoneal, mediastinal or intrapleural air or by symptoms such as unrest, tachycardia, dyspnoea, subcutaneous emphysema or hypoxemia.
Also, contrast can be visible in the retroperitoneal space. Retroperitoneal perforation is usually not visible endoscopically. Changes in
vital signs, dyspnoea and decreasing oxygen saturation, especially following (pre-cut) sphincterotomy, should lead to considering possible
retroperitoneal perforation or pneumothorax. Imaging other than a chest and a plain abdominal X-ray is probably not necessary in the
majority of cases with retroperitoneal air and pneumothorax. When this is not evident and a patient after ERCP deteriorates clinically, with
symptoms and signs suggesting a possible serious complication, abdominal and/or chest CT is indicated . In many of the reported cases of
pneumothorax after ERCP, even extensive radiographic imaging studies failed to show the site of perforation [6, 7, 12–14, 16–18, 21].
Laparotomy may fail to show perforation [13, 15] even when this was radiologically shown . More important, however, is the clear absence of
therapeutic implications of documenting actual intestinal leakage or the exact site of perforation. Therefore diagnostic studies aimed at
documenting leakage seem usually not indicated or useful. Obviously the situation is different when there is evidence to suggest that
instrumental trauma may have caused bowel wall perforation. This may be a particular consideration in the presence of strictures, external
tumour or inflammatory compression and altered anatomy of the upper gastrointestinal tract, such as after gastric surgery, especially when
problems were encountered during the endoscopy. Obviously, there are no large series or controlled studies with respect to the optimal
treatment of this complication. Comparable with the usual management of retroperitoneal duodenal perforation , the experience here reported
with ERCP related pneumothorax indicates that a non-surgical approach can be followed. The conservative treatment regimen employed by most
authors included the administration of oxygen and of intravenous antibiotics, a variable period of fasting (nil by mouth) and if indicated,
with respect to the severity of pneumothorax and hypoxemia, uni- or bilateral pleural drainage. Patients should be carefully observed and
any concern about the clinical evolution should lead to consider additional imaging and surgical consultation. When the initial conservative
treatment strategy of retroperitoneal perforation is not successful surgical closure of the leak has been found feasible and effective .
Duodenal perforation secondary to sphincterotomy has been treated with endoscopic clips [39, 40]. In two of our patients in whom
pneumothoraces were detected during ERCP, nasobiliary drains were placed in order to divert bile away from the site of perforation. Given
the reported favourable outcome in many cases not treated with clips or biliary drainage, it is uncertain whether these procedures can be
considered an important part of management. The same may apply to the necessity of gastric drainage. Pneumothorax is a rare but frightening
complication of ERCP. The most common pathophysiology is retroperitoneal perforation due to (pre-cut) sphincterotomy, followed by
development of pneumomediastinum and pneumothorax. With conservative treatment, including pleural drainage when indicated, rapid and
complete recovery can be expected. The authors have nothing to disclose. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are
credited. Computed tomography Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography The authors contributed equally to data acquisition, literature
search and writing of the manuscript.
