We present here an intriguing case of sporadic renal haemangioblastoma occurring in a 61-year-old male. The tumor consisted of nests of
polygonal cells and abundant capillary networks. The neoplastic cells generally showed abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and prominent
eccentric nuclei, resembling the rhabdoid cells. Pronounced intranuclear cytoplasmic pseudoinclusions were another significant feature seen.
NSE, a-inhibin and S100 were positive in tumor cells and particularly, focal CD10 expressions were observed. This is possibly the first
reported case of a haemangioblastoma showing a rhabdoid phenotype and CD10 immunopositivity. Malignant rhabdoid tumor and renal cell
carcinoma with rhabdoid features were probably the most challenging mimics need to be differentiated. The result of focal CD10 staining in
our case may further lead to confusion with renal cell carcinoma. To avoid misdiagnosis, more considerations should be attached to the rare
neoplasm. The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1068858553657049
Haemangioblastoma is a slowly growing, highly vascular benign tumor, corresponding to WHO grade I. It typically arises within the central
nervous system (CNS), but may occasionally originate in unusual sites such as peripheral nerve, bone, soft tissue, skin, liver, lung and
pancreas , and maybe associated with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease. The kidney is another rare site for the development of sporadic
haemangioblastoma growth, and only four cases have been reported in the English-language literature so far . The accurate diagnosis is often
challenging when the tumor develops in this region. We described herein the fifth case of this rare tumor, which notably demonstrated a
rhabdoid phenotype as well as unexpected CD10 staining. In addition, the shared characteristics of renal haemangioblastomas (RHB) and their
differential considerations were also discussed in detail. A 61-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for a solid mass found in the
right kidney during a routine checkup. Computed tomography showed that the mass was located in the superior pole. No remarkable symptoms
such as flank pain or urinary irritation were reported by the patient. He also had no familial history or clinical evidences of VHL disease.
Radical nephrectomy was carried out, showing a 5.3 × 5.0 × 5.0 cm mass. It was grey to yellowish in color and well-demarcated from the
surrounding renal parenchyma. The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery and was well at 12 months follow-up. Microscopically, the
specimen consisted of nests of polygonal tumor cells and a prominent capillary network. Focal areas of necrosis were present. The stroma
showed extensive fibrosis and hyalinization, which amounted to approximately one third of the lesion (Figure 1A, B). Histopathological
findings of the renal hemangioblastoma. (A) Stromal hyalinization was prominent among the neoplasm and foci of necrosis were observed inside
the tumor (left field) (H&E staining, with original magnification ×40). (B) The tumor cells were arranged in nests and traversed by a
vascular network (H&E staining, with original magnification ×100). (C) Lipid vesicles were abundant in some tumor cells (H&E staining, with
original magnification ×400). (D) The tumor cells had enlarged eosinophilic cytoplasm and eccentrically-displaced nuclei, exhibiting a
rhabdoid phenotype (H&E staining, with original magnification ×200). (E) Pseudo-nuclear invaginations were another distinctive feature of
tumor cells (H&E staining, with original magnification ×400). (F) The sclerotic stroma dispersed tumor cells into isolated small nests (H&E
staining, with original magnification ×100). The vessels in between were usually dilated and some of them resembled the changes of papillary
endothelial hyperplasia (inserted panel, H&E staining, with original magnification ×400). The majority of the neoplastic cells were enlarged
with marked eosinophilic cytoplasm that sometimes contained sharply delineated lipid vacuoles. A few cells showed highly vacuolated and
clear cytoplasm. The nuclei were generally eccentric, mildly to moderately pleomorphic with coarse granular chromatin, resembling the
rhabdoid cells (Figure 1C, D). The nucleoli were inconspicuous. However, there were many prominent intranuclear cytoplasmic pseudoinclusions
(Figure 1E). Mitotic figures were detectable but were exceedingly rare. The tumor cells displayed an alternation of cellular and reticular
growth patterns. In the former, zellballen-like cellular clusters of neoplastic cells enclosed discrete and sparse vessels. In the latter,
trabeculae of neoplastic cells were traversed by abundant slit-like sinusoids. In regions with extensive stromal fibrosis, the tumor cells
were dispersed and progressively replaced by hyalinized collagen. The coupled vessels were remained and were frequently dilated (Figure 1F).
Reticular fibers enclosed both tumor cells and vasculature in the areas of reticular growth pattern, but barely surrounded the vessel walls
in the regions of cellular growth pattern (Figure 2). PAS staining for glycogen was negative in tumor cells. Reticulins were found around
individual tumor cells as well as the vascular channels (reticulin growth pattern, right field). Alternatively, only the vascular channels
were delineated (cellular growth pattern, left field) (Reticular staining, with original magnification ×200). The neoplastic cells displayed
diffuse immunoreactivity for a-inhibin, NSE, S100, vimentin and EGFR. Focal membranous staining was noted for CD10 and EMA. The Ki-67 index
was approximately 1%. CD34 outlined the vascular structures (Figure 3). There was no positive staining for AE1/AE3, CK8/18, CK19, gp200,
calretinin, HMB-45, Melan-A, chromogranin, Desmin, Actin, Myoglobin and CD68 (Table 1). Immunoprofiles of the renal hemangioblastoma. The
neoplastic cells showed diffuse positive staining for S100 (A), NSE (B) and a-inhibin (C) (with original magnification ×400). Some tumor
cells were immunoreactive with CD10 (with original magnification ×200) and bright membrance staining were observed (inserted panel, with
original magnification ×400) (D). CD34 underlined the rich vascular channels (E) (with original magnification ×200). The Ki-67 index was
around 1% (F) (with original magnification ×100). Panel of immunohistochemical stains Renal haemangioblastoma (RHB) is extremely uncommon
since only four cases were definitely reported previously (Table 2). Our case was specifically in line with the diagnostic clues of RHB
suggested by Ip et al and Verine et al . Those characteristics included circumscribed borders, paucity of mitotic figures, fine vacuoles in
some tumor cells indicating presence of intracytoplasmic lipids, and a rich capillary network. The immunoprofiles (S100 +, NSE+, a-inhibin +
and AE1/AE3-) also conformed to those of haemangioblastomas. However, the majority of the tumor cells in our case showed rhabdoid features,
which may be easily mistaken for other rhabdoid tumors that are known to occur in the kidney. Clinicopathological characteristics of the
reported sporadic hemangioblastomas in the kidney NP, nephrectomy; pNP, partial nephrectomy; AW, alive and well In our opinion, the first
differential consideration is the malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRTs). Although most of MRTs afflict young children, there still are sporadic
cases affecting adults . Several features seen in our case do not support the diagnosis of MRTs: (i) MRTs generally show vesicular
chromatin, prominent nucleoli and hyaline intracytoplasmic inclusion . The neoplastic cells in our case demonstrated dark-stained and coarse
granular chromatin, and lack the discernable nucleoli as well as cytoplasmic inclusions. (ii) MRTs are devoid of the cytoplasmic lipid
droplets and arborizing stromal vasculature, characterized by haemangioblastomas. (iii) Immunohistochemically, MRTs occasionally are focally
positive for S100 and NSE , but a-inhibin staining was not shown. The features are different from the extensive expression of S100, NSE and
a-inhibin seen in RHB. (IV) MRTs are a highly invasive and lethal neoplasm with a proliferation index of Ki-67 around 95% . In contrast, the
extremely low Ki-67 index and rare mitosis indicate an indolent behavior of our case. Another necessary differential consideration is renal
cell carcinomas with rhabdoid features (RCCR), which have been previously described . RCCR are predominantly composed of large polygonal
cells with eccentric nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm. Of the 23 cases analyzed by Gökden et al. , RCCR showed a diffuse NSE staining (79%
of cases) and focal positive staining for EMA (47% of cases) and S-100 (37% of cases), whereas cytokeratin expression was decreased (56% of
cases). Obviously, there are many morphologic and immunophenotypic features that markedly overlap with our present case. Nevertheless,
compared with RCCR, the tumor cells of our case did not display the vesicular nuclei and prominent nucleoli. Furthermore, RHB is
characterized by abundant vascular networks, which are strikingly reduced in RCCR . In addition, RHB demonstrates negative PAS staining for
glycogen, whereas this staining is positive in RCCR . The low Ki-67 index in our case is also not compatible with the high proliferative
index in RCCR . Other neoplasms with rhabdoid features possibly that need to be considered before making the diagnosis of RHB include
epithelioid angiomyolipoma (HMB-45+ and Melan-A+), malignant melanoma with rhabdoid features (HMB-45+ and Melan-A+) , paraganglioma
(synaptophysin+, chromogranin+ and a-inhibin-), epithelioid leiomyosarcoma with rhabdoid features (SMA+, desmin+ and S100-) , and
epithelioid malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (a-inhibin-) . Interestingly, focal CD10 positivity was observed in some tumor cells of
our present case. In the normal kidney, CD10 stains glomerular cells and proximal convoluted tubules, and participates in the regulation of
water and sodium metabolism . Thus, CD10 expression in RHB seemingly substantiates the earlier hypothesis that haemangioblastomas are
derived from pluripotent mesenchymal cells, and partially acquire some site-specific markers of their parental organs during pathogenesis .
Many studies have suggested CD10 is a powerful marker in the differentiation between renal cell carcinoma and haemangioblastoma since it
usually demonstrates positive staining in renal cell carcinoma while is steadily negative in haemangioblastoma . Our result indicates that
caution should be taken on evaluating the differential efficacy of this reagent. Noticeably, Verine et al. reported a negative result of
CD10 staining in their case of RHB. The reasons for the discrepancy remain unknown, and probably either reflect the intrinsic disparities of
expressional profiles between the two specimens, or may be just caused by different antibodies used. Some investigators have suggested that
RHB would not be as rare if it had got wider recognition as a primary renal tumor . So it is undoubtedly necessary to be aware of the
clinicopathologic characteristics of RHB. From the available data, RHB commonly occurs in the elderly people (range 55 to 71 years) and
there is no sex predilection. The right kidney seems more prone to be affected and the superior pole is likely the preferential site of mass
development. Grossly, these tumors displayed a solid cut surface, though cystic changes were occasionally observed. Architecturally, the
lesions were consistently composed of cellular and paucicellular regions. In the cellular areas, the tumor could be subclassified as
reticular and cellular variants analogous to cerebellar haemangioblastoma . In the paucicellular zones, stromal fibrosis was prominent.
Cytologically, the neoplastic cells in RHB generally contained mild to remarkably eosinophilic cytoplasm and frequently outnumbered the
clear cells with rich lipid droplets. The nuclei were often enlarged and hyperchromatic, and frequently displayed some pleomorphism. In
addition to the positivity for S100, a-inhibin and NSE, focal expression of EMA, SMA, MSA and calponin were also noted . Nevertheless,
Cytokeratins, HMB-45, Melan-A, chromogranin, calretinin, and Myoglobin were characteristically negative. Compared with cerebellar
haemangioblastoma (CHB), RHB manifest with some different features. For instance, RHB incidence peaks in the sixth decade compared to the
fourth decade of CHB . RHB usually presents as a solid mass, whereas 65 percent of CHB manifest as a cystic mass . The acidophilic cytoplasm
and pleomorphic nuclei that are frequently present in renal tumors are usually not seen in CHB. Stromal hyalinization in RHB is also more
prominent than that in CHB. However, the immunophenotype and benign behaviors of RHB reflect the essential consistency with CHB. We have
presented another case of RHB, which demonstrates distinctive rhabdoid features and focal CD10 expression. The tumor cells of RHB generally
show abundant acidophilic cytoplasm and pleomorphic nuclei, whereas the characteristic stromal cells with finely-vacuolated lipid droplets
are not usually prominent. Diffuse expression of S100, a-inhibin and NSE are very helpful to narrow down the differential diagnoses. The
unexpected positive staining of CD10 in RHB should be particularly concerned. RHB have excellent prognosis, and tumor necrosis and nuclear
pleomorphism do not seem to affect the prognosis. Most importantly, RHB should be included in the differential diagnosis of primary renal
tumors. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. W-HY designed the study, performed the histological and
immunohistochemical evaluation, literature review and drafted the manuscript. JL participated in histological diagnosis and
immunohistochemical evaluation, literature review and revised the manuscript. JKCC participated in histological diagnosis. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in Chief of this Journal. The authors express their
sincere appreciation of the language editing assistance given by Keiyan Sy, MD, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology,
University of Toronto, Canada and Laibao Sun, MD, Department of Anatomic Pathology, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, Canada.
