Melorheostosis is a rare benign non-hereditary sclerosing dysplasia involving the bone, often in a sclerotomal distribution. we report the
case of a 27 years old lady with painful swelling of the left hand and forearm lasting for almost 15 years. The patient experienced
aggravation of symptoms and limitation of motion during the past two months. Radiographic assessment revealed hyperostosis involving the
left 3rd and 4th metacarpal bones and corresponding digits as well as the left ulna and distal humerus, with no soft tissue ossification.
Angiographic and blood pool images of bone scintigraphy showed increased activity of mid-metacarpal region, corresponding to the sclerotom
C-8. Delayed static views showed increased radiotracer uptake of the left 4th metacarpal bone and the corresponding digit as well as the
left ulna and humerus, but no abnormal osteoblastic activity of the 3rd left metacarpal and digit. Histopathologic assessment confirmed the
diagnosis of Melorheostosis. The case confirms that even in the same sclerotomal distribution, the multiple foci of involvement can present
in different metabolic stages. In fact, the disease does not progress uniformly and different lesions can be seen in dissimilar stages of
activity. Hence, metabolic imaging can be important to unmask which of the radiographically detected bony lesions are metabolically active
and have the potential to be the source of current patient's symptoms and which of them are old, metabolically inactive and silent lesions,
which are not clinically relevant to the patient's complaints. Melorheostosis is a rare benign non-hereditary sclerosing dysplasia involving
the bone, often in a sclerotomal distribution . The disease is evident by age of 20 in almost half of the cases and affects both sexes
equally . Although genetic predisposition , anomalies of blood vessels or lymph vessels , and metabolic abnormalities have been proposed as
possible underlying pathophysiologic causes, the exact etiology of Melorheostosis is yet to be determined. The role of clinical imaging
modalities, including magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography in revealing the spectrum of the disease manifestation and
differentiation from other possible diagnoses and excluding malignancy has been emphasized . Bone scintigraphy is one of the most useful
imaging modalities to assess the metabolic activity of the skeletal lesions . In this regard, the application of bone scintigraphy in
patients suspicious for Melorheostosis has been reported . Our case was a 27 year old lady with painful swelling of the left hand and
forearm lasting for almost 15 years. The patient experienced aggravation of symptoms and limitation of motion during the past two months.
Radiographic assessment revealed hyperostosis involving the left 3rd and 4th metacarpal bones and corresponding digits as well as the left
ulna and distal humerus, with no soft tissue ossification (Figure 1). Early angiographic and blood pool images of bone scintigraphy with
20mCi (740MBq) 99mTc-MDP showed increased activity of mid-metacarpal region, corresponding to the sclerotom C-8 (Figure 2). Delayed static
views showed increased radiotracer uptake of the left 4th metacarpal bone and the corresponding digit as well as the left ulna and humerus,
but no abnormal osteoblastic activity of the 3rd left metacarpal and digit (Figure 3). Subsequently, histopathologic assessment confirmed
the diagnosis of Melorheostosis. Plane radiographic images showing hyperostosis of the 3rd and 4th metacarpal and digits as well as ulna and
distal humerus Angiographic (A) and blood pool (B) images using 99mTc-MDP, showed hyperemia involving mid-metacarpal region Static delayed
views of 99mTc-MDP bone scintigraphy [whole body (A), and hand posterior spot view (B)], showing bone involvement in different stages of
metabolic activity Two main features can be found with our case. The first one is the involvement of multiple bony structures in the upper
extremity, which is not a common feature of the disease. The primary sites of involvement are long bones of the lower limbs and just few
cases of the disease affecting the upper extremities have been reported . More importantly, the case confirms that even in the same
sclerotomal distribution, the multiple foci of involvement can present in different metabolic stages. In fact, the disease does not progress
uniformly and different lesions can be seen in dissimilar stages of activity. Hence, metabolic imaging can be important to unmask which of
the radiographically detected bony lesions are metabolically active and have the potential to be the source of current patient's symptoms
and which of them are old, metabolically inactive and silent lesions, which are not clinically relevant to the patient's complaints. Whole
body scan using bone seeking radiopharmaceuticals is a valuable tool for the assessment of patients with developmental and metabolic bone
disorders. All authors declare that no financial or other potential conflicts of interest exist. SI was involved in collecting information
regarding the case, getting informed consent from the patient and supervision of image acquisition. SI and AG both were involved in image
interpretation and follow-up of the patient and clinical decision making. AG was involved in review of literature and drafting the
manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.
