Corresponding Author: Ayako Mitsuma, MD, PhD Department of Clinical Oncology and Chemotherapy, Nagoya University Hospital, 65 Tsurumai-cho,
Showa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi 466-8560, Japan Phone/Fax: +81-52-744-1903, E-mail: ayakom@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp A massive extravasation of pegylated-
liposomal doxorubicin (Doxil®) accidentally occurred, affecting the right forearm of a 54-year-old woman with metastatic ovarian cancer who
was receiving an intravenous infusion of the drug. In accordance with the institutional guidelines for vesicant drugs, a corticosteroid
preparation was immediately injected subcutaneously into the surrounding tissues. Clobetasol propionate and an ice pack were then topically
applied to the affected region. There were no serious complications at the extravasation site, such as tissue necrosis or severe pain, and
only a transient erythema of the skin and desquamation remained after 2 months. Extravasation refers to the unintended leakage of a liquid
formulation of a drug from blood vessels into surrounding tissues. Extravasation of anticancer drugs administered by intravenous infusion
constitutes a serious adverse event associated with chemotherapy. In particular, the extravasation of drugs with vesicants, such as
anthracyclines, can cause necrosis of the surrounding tissues, often requiring surgical procedures. In addition to careful observation
during treatment, a better understanding of the risks of tissue damage triggered by extravasation is essential to ensure the safety of
patients who receive cancer chemotherapy. The package insert of Doxil® (pegylated-liposomal doxorubicin) cautions that this preparation is
an irritant. However, medical procedures for the management of extravasation reactions and their actual outcomes have not been well
documented.1-4) We describe here a patient in whom extravasation of a large volume of Doxil® was successfully treated by an immediate
subcutaneous corticosteroid injection. A massive extravasation of a Doxil® Injection (Janssen Pharmaceutical, Tokyo, Japan) accidently
occurred during an intravenous infusion of the drug in a 54-year-old woman with heavily treated metastatic ovarian cancer. She had
previously received four courses of the same regimen without any extravasation. The patient was scheduled to receive an intravenous infusion
of 75 mg of Doxil® in a 250 ml 0.9% NaCl solution, delivered via a 24-gauge cannula (SurFlo® I. V. Catheters, Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) placed
in the right forearm. Before and at the beginning of the infusion, oncology nurses in the outpatient chemotherapy unit confirmed good
patency of the vein by checking the blood backflow; a free flow of the infusion solution was also confirmed. Extravasation occurred after
about 35 mg of pegylated-liposomal doxorubicin had been infused. The patient reported a swelling (10 x 20 cm) with mild erythema gradually
spreading around the infusion cannula placed in the right forearm (Fig. 1). She experienced no pain, but did feel numbness. In accordance
with the institutional guidelines for the management of the extravasation of vesicant drugs, the infusion was terminated immediately, and
less than 0.1 ml of the infusion solution and a small amount of blood were slowly aspirated back through the original cannula with the use
of a disposable syringe. After removal of the original cannula, 200 mg of corticosteroid (Solu-Cortef®, Pfizer, Tokyo, Japan) and 50 mg of
lidocaine (1% Xylocaine®, AstraZeneca, Tokyo, Japan) diluted with 0.9% NaCl solution to a total volume of 20 ml were injected subcutaneously
via a 27-gauge needle into the extravasation site and surrounding tissues. The affected site was then topically applied with clobetasol
propionate (Dermovate Ointment®, GlaxoSmithKline, Tokyo, Japan) and cooled with an icepack for 30 minutes. Immediately after the
extravasation of Doxil®. The extravasation site was remarkable, and the skin was partially red. Three days after extravasation the swelling
decreased, and erythema of the extravasation site became faint. The color was most likely caused by the extravasated doxorubicin (Fig. 2).
Four weeks after extravasation, the erythema had faded, and a mild epithelial desquamation remained around the extravasation site (Fig. 3).
By two months after extravasation the erythema had resolved, and the wound had healed with no apparent sequela. There were no serious
complications such as tissue necrosis or ulceration. Three days after extravasation. The swelling had decreased, and erythema of the
extravasation site had become faint. Four weeks after extravasation. The erythema had faded, with mild epithelial desquamation remaining
around the extravasation site. This case report provides valuable information on the characteristics and successful management of
extravasation reactions caused by Doxil®, an intravenous anticancer drug used to treat refractory ovarian cancer. This preparation contains
doxorubicin encapsulated in pegylated-liposomes (STEALTH® liposomes). In contrast to conventional liposomes, the introduction of this novel
delivery system allows pegylated-liposomal doxorubicin to evade detection and destruction by the body’s immune system. The drug thus remains
in the systemic circulation for a prolonged period, with an elimination half-life of approximately 55 hours. Though doxorubicin is thought
to be preferentially released from the pegylated-liposomes into tumor tissues, the exact mechanism involved is not fully understood. Owing
to a modification of the formulation, extravasated Doxil® is categorized as an irritant, even though doxorubicin per se is a well-known
vesicant. Although the package insert states that Doxil® is an irritant, we took all necessary precautions and administered all the
treatments currently available in Japan because the extravasation was massive, and doxorubicin per se is classified as a vesicant. Other
antidotes, such as dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), hyaluronidase, or dexrazoxane, have been used to treat extravasation reactions, but they are
not currently approved in Japan.5,6) Although the mechanism by which corticosteroids ameliorate extravasation reactions remains unclear,
these drugs have been used to manage extravasation injury caused by various drugs. In our patient, an immediate subcutaneous corticosteroid
injection apparently contributed to preventing tissue necrosis and other potentially serious complications. We have no conflicts of interest
to declare.
