Hepatic lymphangioma is a rare benign neoplasm characterized by cystic dilatation of the lymphatic vessels in the hepatic parenchyma. In
most cases, the hepatic lesion is a part of multi-organ involvement including the liver, spleen, kidneys, skeleton, gastrointestinal tract,
mesentery, lungs, and somatic soft tissue.1,2 The typical imaging feature of hepatic lymphangioma is a cystic or multicystic hepatic mass
with internal septations.3 In this report, we describe the imaging features of a pathologically proven case of hepatic lymphangioma with
microscopic cystic component, and we demonstrate the advantage of using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the diagnosis of lesions
composed of multiple aggregated microcysts. A 75-year-old woman with no significant medical history presented with abdominal pain for one
week. She was tender in the left costovertebral angle and had frequent voiding symptoms without gastrointestinal problems. Routine urinary
analysis showed many red blood cells and 20-29 white blood cells per high power field of microscopy indicating renal stone disease. Other
laboratory tests were unremarkable. Chest computed tomography (CT) was performed for evaluation of a nodular lesion in the right lower lung
field that was detected on routine chest radiography leading to the incidental discovery of a low-density lesion in the left hepatic lobe.
While she was admitted to the hospital for treatment of left renal stone disease, further evaluation of the incidental low-density lesion in
the left hepatic lobe was performed. Ultrasonography (US) of the upper abdomen demonstrated a 3.1 cm-sized mixed-echoic nodular lesion in
segment IV with a hyperechoic rim (Fig. 1A). The right portion of the lesion was anechoic (solid arrow) while the left was hyperechoic. An
abdominal CT scan revealed a lobulated mass with a cystic component in the right portion of the mass and delayed enhancement in the left
which was thought indicate solid component (Fig. 1B). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the liver was performed for further evaluation of
the mass. The right side of the mass was seen as low signal intensity while the left side was enhanced on gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted
image (Fig. 2A), thus matching to the CT features. However, T2-weighted images showed bright high signal intensity throughout the whole
lesion (Fig. 2B, C) suggesting that the lesion was composed of aggregated cysts rather than solid tissue. For confirmative diagnosis, the
patient underwent gun biopsy using US-guidance, the results of which demonstrated microscopic findings of a sponge-like lesion composed of
microscopic cysts lined by attenuated cells resembling those in normal lymphatic ducts (Fig. 3A). In addition, the lining cells showed
staining for the endothelium marker, CD34 (Fig. 3B). The final histopathologic diagnosis for the specimen was hepatic lymphangioma. Hepatic
lymphangioma is a rare benign neoplasm that may be solitary2 or associated with multiple liver lesions, and is characterized by cystic
dilatation of lymphatic vessels in the hepatic parenchyma. Lymphangioma solely involving the liver is extremely rare,1 and in most cases,
the hepatic lesion is a part of multi-organ involvement including the liver, spleen, kidneys, skeleton, gastrointestinal tract, mesentery,
lungs, and somatic soft tissue.3,4 The etiology of hepatic lymphangioma is poorly understood. It is generally believed to be a developmental
abnormality associated with failure of the developing lymphatic tissues to establish normal communication with regional lymphatic drainage,
resulting in the dilatation of abnormal channels.5 On US, CT, and MRI, hepatic lymphangioma may appear as a simple or multiloculated cystic
mass with internal septations, but it is difficult to differentiate hepatic lymphangioma from other cystic disease. Because most
lymphangiomas are multicystic lobulated lesions, they may be confused with other lesions including septated bile duct cyst, biliary
cystadenoma and cystadenocarcinoma, cystic metastasis, or echinococcal cysts.3,6 In particular, biliary cystadenoma and cystadenocarcinoma
usually occurs in middle-aged women and demonstrates features such as mural nodules, fibrous capsule, and calcifications. Cystic hepatic
metastasis may be seen with mucinous adenocarcinoma of stomach, colorectum or ovary, and CT mostly shows a cystic mass with peripheral solid
lesion.7 In the case of an echinococcal cyst, the presence of daughter cysts and a postural dependency of internal vesicles within the
mother cyst are the typical imaging features. However, because this disease is extremely rare in Northeast Asia, a positive serologic test
and history of travel to an endemic area are necessary for its diagnosis.8,9 MRI of lymphangioma usually shows a multiloculated
heterogeneous mass with low signal intensity on T1-weighted images, and high signal intensity on T2-wei ghted images because of its
content.10 However, the microcystic component of lymphangioma be mistaken for a solid lesion due to its enhancement after intravenous
injection of contrast. MRI is very helpful for determining such characteristic features of the lesion because T2-weighted and heavily
T2-weighted imaging are sensitive to the presence of water. Solid serous cystadenoma of the pancreas is another example where MRI can be
very useful.11 Microscopically, this solid variant is composed of multiple microcysts containing serous fluid. Thus, MRI, especially MR
cholangiopancreatography is useful in differentiating lymphangioma from a true solid neoplasm. Our case also consisted of numerous
microcysts, and MRI enabled a correct diagnosis. In conclusion, we present a case of solitary hepatic lymphangioma that could have been
confused with a partially solid neoplasm. MRI facilitated the correct diagnosis of hepatic lymphangioma with multiple aggregated cysts. A
case of primary hepatic lymphangioma with a microcystic component was incidentally found in a 75-year-old woman. Although ultrasonography
(US) and computed tomography (CT) showed a mixed lesion including cystic and solid components, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated
the morphologic characteristics of the lesion better than other modalities. computed tomographya magnetic resonance imaging ultrasonography
A mixed echoic hepatic nodule in the segment IV is seen on ultrasonography. The right side of the lesion is anechoic (solid arrow), and the
left is hyperechoic (open arrow) (A). On the post enhanced CT scan shows the right side of the lesions is a relatively well-circumscribed
low attenuated portion (solid arrow), but the other side is enhanced heterogeneously (open arrow). This feature is matched with
ultrasonographic findings (B). MR scan shows that its features on the 3D-spoiled gradient echo T1-weighted MR scan after gadolinium contrast
injection are very similar to the that of CT scan (A), and fat-suppressed T2-weighted MR scan shows a bright high signal intensity in the
whole mass (solid and open arrows), differentiated from the US and CT features. This finding suggests that this hepatic mass may be composed
of a fluid-filled structure, cyst (B). Coronal T2-weighted MR scan demonstrates the aggregated cystic component on the left side of the mass
well (open arrow) (C). Pathologically, the sponge-like lesion is composed of microscopic cysts lined by attenuated endothelium, resembling
that in normal lymphatics (H-E stain, ×20) (A). Immunohistochemical staining with CD34 antibody, reveals the lining endothelium is well
demonstrated on the microscopy (CD34 stain, ×400) (B).
