We report a case of unexpected heterogeneous uptake of gadoxetic acid into a hepatic metastasis in a patient with T-cell lymphoblastic
lymphoma that also lacked hypermetabolic characteristics on positron emission (PET)/computed tomography (CT) with fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG).
Therefore, in cases of heterogeneous uptake of gadoxetic acid, infiltrative lesions must be considered. Detection of extranodal lymphoma
continues to be a diagnostic challenge as metastatic disease can occur in nearly any organ system and have a widely variable appearance.
There may be overlap in the imaging characteristics of benign and other neoplastic entities, thus sometimes resulting in a diagnostic
conundrum. Gadoxetic acid (gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid; gadolinium-EOB-DTPA, gadoxetate disodium; Eovist®,
Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals Inc., USA) is a new hepatocyte-specific magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agent. This contrast
agent is actively transported from the extracellular space into hepatocytes by the same mechanism responsible for bilirubin transport, with
subsequent excretion into the biliary system. In a patient with normal liver function, hepatocyte uptake is usually reached within 20 min,
which is called the hepatocyte or heptobiliary phase. The reported value of the pharamcodynamics of gadoxetic acid is to assist in both the
detection and characterization of focal hepatic lesions. Ideally during the hepatobiliary phase, this agent demonstrates increased uptake in
lesions that contain functional hepatocytes, such as focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH), and does not show uptake in lesions that have few
functioning hepatocytes (e.g. hepatocellular carcinoma) or are not of hepatocellular origin, such as cholangiocarcinoma or metastases. By
increasing the contrast between the enhanced normal hepatic parenchyma and hypoenhancing masses, this contrast agent is ideal for the
detection of small metastatic lesions. Recent studies have demonstrated uptake of gadoxetic acid into some well-differentiated
hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) and hepatic adenomas due to functioning hepatocytes and biliary transporters. However, there are no reports
of uptake in metastatic lesions in the literature to our knowledge. We present a case of unexpected gadoxetic acid uptake into a metastatic
hepatic lesion from T-cell lymphoma. A 23-year-old male was transferred to our facility after experiencing 2 months of sharp upper back
pain. He developed an acute increase in pain with radiation of the pain to the upper anterior chest which eventually led to a computed
tomography (CT) scan of the chest. A large lobulated anterior mediastinal mass measuring 6.6×9.8 cm without associated lymphadenoapthy was
detected. Initial laboratory values for aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), total bilirubin, alkaline
phosphatase, and alpha fetoprotein were normal. After transfer to our facility, additional evaluation with contrast-enhanced positron
emission tomography (PET)/CT (Biograph 2, Siemens Medical Solutions USA, Hoffman Estates, IL, USA) utilizing 633 MBq of FDG demonstrated
increased metabolic activity in the mediastinal mass with a standardized uptake value (SUV)max of 12.5 (Fig. 1), suggestive of lymphoma or
teratoma. An additional heterogeneous, lobulated 4.5×5.5 cm mass in the right lobe of the liver was also detected but did not demonstrate
FDG avidity above normal hepatic background suggestive of benign etiology (Fig. 2). The spleen was normal size and without evidence of
splenic involvement. Figure 1Images from PET/CT through the mid thorax. (a) CT image demonstrating a large lobulated anterior mediastinal
mass measuring 6.6×9.8 cm. There is no associated lymphadenoapthy. (b) Corresponding PET images demonstrating hypermetabolic activity in the
tumor. Figure 2Images from PET/CT at the level of the liver. (a) CT image demonstrating a heterogeneous, lobulated 4.5×5.5 cm mass (black
arrow) in the right lobe of the liver. (b) Corresponding PET image shows no significant FDG uptake (white arrow) within the right hepatic
mass. Images from PET/CT through the mid thorax. (a) CT image demonstrating a large lobulated anterior mediastinal mass measuring
6.6×9.8 cm. There is no associated lymphadenoapthy. (b) Corresponding PET images demonstrating hypermetabolic activity in the tumor. Images
from PET/CT at the level of the liver. (a) CT image demonstrating a heterogeneous, lobulated 4.5×5.5 cm mass (black arrow) in the right lobe
of the liver. (b) Corresponding PET image shows no significant FDG uptake (white arrow) within the right hepatic mass. MRI (Magnetom Verio
3T, Siemens Medical Solutions, USA, Hoffman Estates, IL, USA) with gadoxetic acid (0.025 mmol/kg) was performed to further characterize this
hepatic lesion (Fig. 3). The liver was non-cirrhotic in morphology. The right hepatic lesion was mildly hypointense on T1-weighted sequences
and mildly hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences, compared with surrounding hepatic parenchyma. After the administration of intravenous
gadoxetic acid, the lesion demonstrated heterogeneous mild arterial enhancement, did not wash out on delayed images, and was heterogeneously
iso- to hyperintense with scattered areas of hypointensity on hepatobiliary phase imaging. Considering these MRI findings, possible causes
included atypical FNH, HCC, and hepatic adenoma; metastasis was considered but felt to be less likely. Figure 3MRI of the liver. The right
hepatic lesion is mildly hypointense on axial T1-weighted images with fat saturation without intravenous contrast (white arrow, a), and
mildly hyperintense on corresponding axial T2 weighted images with fat saturation (white arrow, b). Axial dynamic post-contrast T1-weighted
images with fat saturation utilizing gadoxetic acid for intravenous contrast demonstrate mild heterogeneous arterial enhancement within the
right hepatic lesion after 20 s (white arrow, c). The liver lesion does not wash out at 1 min (white arrow, d). During hepatobiliary phase
imaging (white arrow, e), the right hepatic lesion is heterogeneously iso- to hyperintense with respect to hepatic parenchyma and contains
scattered areas of hypointensity. MRI of the liver. The right hepatic lesion is mildly hypointense on axial T1-weighted images with fat
saturation without intravenous contrast (white arrow, a), and mildly hyperintense on corresponding axial T2 weighted images with fat
saturation (white arrow, b). Axial dynamic post-contrast T1-weighted images with fat saturation utilizing gadoxetic acid for intravenous
contrast demonstrate mild heterogeneous arterial enhancement within the right hepatic lesion after 20 s (white arrow, c). The liver lesion
does not wash out at 1 min (white arrow, d). During hepatobiliary phase imaging (white arrow, e), the right hepatic lesion is
heterogeneously iso- to hyperintense with respect to hepatic parenchyma and contains scattered areas of hypointensity. Ultrasound-guided
biopsy of the hepatic lesion was performed which yielded a diagnosis of T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma which corresponded to the histologic
and immunohistochemical findings from the mediastinal mass. The liver biopsy specimen showed architecturally normal liver surrounded by
neoplastic T-cells within sinusoids (Fig. 4). Figure 4Hematoxylin and eosin stain (magnification ×40) from ultrasound-guided core biopsy of
the liver lesion shows benign hepatocytes (white arrow) with diffuse infiltration of the sinusoids by neoplastic T cells (black arrows),
which demonstrated histomorphology and an immunohistochemical staining profile consistent with T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma. Hematoxylin
and eosin stain (magnification ×40) from ultrasound-guided core biopsy of the liver lesion shows benign hepatocytes (white arrow) with
diffuse infiltration of the sinusoids by neoplastic T cells (black arrows), which demonstrated histomorphology and an immunohistochemical
staining profile consistent with T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma. Lymphoblastic lymphoma accounts for about 2% of all lymphomas, usually
affecting males in their teens to twenties. It is a rapidly growing neoplasm that develops from immature lymphocytes, which in turn can
differentiate into either T-cell or B-cell lineage, more commonly T-cell lineage. Patients with T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma usually
present with mediastinal mass and bone marrow involvement, with abdominal disease unusual. Secondary lymphomatous hepatic involvement can
present variably from discrete nodules and masses to diffuse infiltration. When infiltrative, there can be confusion in the imaging
diagnosis as the secondary tumor can be masked by the invaded organ. Differentiation of benign and malignant causes is often a diagnostic
challenge as distinguishing imaging features can overlap. As noted in this case, the FDG uptake by the metastatic hepatic lesion was
different from the anterior mediastinal mass. The hepatic lesion demonstrated FDG avidity equal to the level of surrounding liver
parenchyma, decreasing its conspicuity. As a newer MRI contrast agent, the value of gadoxetic acid exists in its ability to differentiate
various benign and malignant hepatic lesions. As mentioned earlier, metastases have been described as uniformly hypoenhancing, and FNHs
typically as homogeneously isointense to hyperintense compared with hepatic parenchyma during hepatobiliary phase imaging. However, up to
26% of FNHs demonstrate atypical heterogeneous uptake with gadobenate dimeglumine, another hepatocyte-specific agent. This heterogeneous
uptake can overlap with some HCCs and hepatic adenomas. The liver lesion in this case report demonstrated heterogeneous iso- to
hyperenhancement on gadoxetic acid-enhanced MRI consistent with functioning hepatocytes. The apparent uptake of gadoxetic acid by this
metastatic hepatic lesion in this case is likely accounted for by the preserved enhancing hepatic parenchyma intermixed with the relatively
hypoenhancing infiltrative lymphoblastic lymphoma. We assert that the normal hepatic parenchyma enhanced during the hepatobiliary phase and
not the interspersed diffuse or mottled tumor foci. Radiologists should be aware that tumors with known infiltrative properties may have
atypical or confusing appearances to include uptake on hepatobiliary phase gadoxetic acid or differing PET avidity between primary and
metastatic lesions. *The opinions and assertions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be construed as official or as
representing the opinions of the Department of the Army or the Department of Defense. This paper is available online at
http://www.cancerimaging.org. In the event of a change in the URL address, please use the DOI provided to locate the paper.
