Background: Essential tremor (ET), a progressive, age-associated disease, is one of the most common neurological disorders. Yet until
recently, there had been few postmortem examinations so that the full range of pathological changes associated with this disease has not
been catalogued. Objectives: We report a patient with ET who had a pattern of pathological change which to our knowledge has not previously
been reported in ET or another neurological disease. Methods: Clinical-pathological case report. Results: The patient had adult-onset, non-
familial, kinetic arm tremor that gradually worsened. Voice and head tremors were also present. The clinical diagnosis was ET. She died at
age 102. On postmortem examination, there was severe segmental loss of Purkinje cells, Bergmann gliosis and numerous torpedoes in the
cerebellum. The other outstanding change was the presence of neurons in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus that contained an ubiquitinated,
nuclear inclusion. These inclusions were not detected in Luxol fast blue/hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections. Conclusions: This ET
patient had a pattern of pathological change that has not been reported previously. This case further reinforces the view that ET is likely
to be a heterogeneous family of degenerative diseases whose underlying pathological anatomy involves the cerebellum. Essential tremor (ET),
a progressive, age-associated disease, is one of the most prevalent neurological disorders [1, 2, 3]. Individuals in all age groups,
including children , may develop ET, although the incidence rises with age and especially with advanced age where the prevalence may exceed
20% . The hallmark feature of ET is a kinetic tremor of the arms, yet patients may also exhibit a range of other tremors (e.g., intention,
rest), other motor features (e.g., mild gait ataxia), and a range of cognitive deficits including dementia . The tremor itself is often
progressive, producing disabilities in basic daily activities such as eating, writing, and body care . First-line medications, of which
there are only two, are ineffective in 50% of patients , leaving a sizable population of patients untreated and disabled. More recently,
physicians have turned to deep-brain stimulation surgery to provide partial relief for severe, pharmacologically-intractable cases . A
better understanding of the underlying disease mechanisms is a critical starting point for the development of more effective treatments.
Although ET shares a number of important clinical features with neurodegenerative diseases , until recently, there had been almost no
postmortem examinations and the localization of the anatomic pathology was unknown . With intensive efforts to perform detailed postmortems,
an understanding of the basic anatomic pathology is just now emerging [11, 12]. In most ET brains studied so far, degenerative changes,
including Purkinje cell loss , have been observed in the cerebellum; a smaller number of brains have Lewy bodies in the brainstem with
relatively normal cerebella [11, 12]. One other case had ubiquitinated intranuclear inclusions in the Purkinje cells . It is becoming
apparent that the degenerative changes in ET are heterogeneous, suggesting that ET is not a single disease . The number of published
postmortem examinations is still limited (n = 100) and the full spectrum of pathological changes associated with this disease has not been
fully catalogued. We report a clinically well-characterized ET patient who had a pattern of pathological change that has not been reported
previously in ET or, to our knowledge, in another brain disorder. Thus, the case is instructive, providing potentially useful insights as to
the underlying mechanisms of this common neurological disease. At death, the patient was a 102-year-old, right-handed Caucasian woman with a
high school education. Tremor began at age 90 years; she had first noticed it when she used her hands for certain tasks (e.g., pouring
water, eating soup with a spoon, putting on make-up). Her tremor worsened over the ensuing 4 years, and at age 94 she was first seen by a
neurologist specializing in movement disorders (P.M.) at the Center for Parkinson’s Disease (CPD) and other Movement Disorders at Columbia
University Medical Center. She reported that, because of tremor, she was no longer able to eat soup unless she lowered her mouth to the bowl
and she could not put on her earrings. Her past medical history was notable for a transient ischemic attack manifested by brief left arm and
leg weakness (age 92), atrial fibrillation, hypertension, congestive heart failure, bilateral cataract surgeries, hypothyroidism, arthritis
and impaired hearing for which she used a hearing aid. Her thyroid function tests were checked regularly and were normal. There had been no
exposure to diphenylhydantoin, cyclosporine or other medications with cerebellar toxicity. She consumed no more than 3 glasses of wine in a
typical week. There was no family history of tremor. On examination, there was no postural tremor but kinetic tremor was observed in both
arms. The tremor was of moderate amplitude during a variety of tasks (pouring, drinking, drawing spirals) and it resulted in spillage when
she used a spoon to drink water. There was no tremor at rest and no features of parkinsonism or dystonia. The remainder of the neurological
examination was normal, except for mild difficulty with tandem gait. There was no dysarthria, intention tremor, dysdiadochokinesia, or frank
ataxia. A clinical diagnosis of ET was assigned. Low-dose primidone was initiated (25 mg b.i.d.), resulting in excellent tremor control over
the ensuing weeks. Between the ages of 94 and 100, she was seen 8 times at the CPD by the same neurologist (P.M.). She continued to report
that her hand usually trembled when she held a pen to write and that her tremor often embarrassed her. At age 95, she was enrolled in a
clinical epidemiological study of ET at Columbia University and as a potential brain donor into the Essential Tremor Centralized Brain
Repository . A brief cognitive screen, the Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status was administered; the score, 35 of 41, was above the
range considered to be indicative of dementia (< 31). On a Folstein Mini-Mental Status Examination , she similarly scored 29 out of 30. A
videotaped tremor examination at that time revealed no rest tremor, minimal postural tremor of the left arm only, tremor while pouring
(mild-to-moderate on the right and moderate on the left), tremor while using a spoon (moderate bilaterally), tremor while drinking from a
cup (moderate on the right and mild on the left), tremor during the finger-nose-finger maneuver (mild-to-moderate on the right and moderate
on the left), and tremor while drawing spirals (mild on the right and moderate on the left). There was a mild and intermittent side-side
(“no-no”) head tremor but no voice tremor. The finger-nose-finger tremor had a mild intentional component (left greater than right); an
intention tremor of the head was also noted when she drank water from a cup. Rapid alternating movements, facial expression and speech were
normal and there was no dystonia. Based on these data, a senior movement disorders neurologist (E.D.L.) diagnosed ET using standardized,
published clinical research criteria (moderate or greater amplitude kinetic tremor observed during 3 or more activities or a head tremor, in
the absence of Parkinson’s disease) . At age 98, during her visit to the CPD, she reported an increase in hand tremor such that she could no
longer hold a tea cup; primidone was increased to 50 mg b.i.d., with some resultant tremor reduction. At age 100, a voice tremor was first
noted on examination; tremor in her hands had also increased and there was now an intentional component, in addition to kinetic tremor, on
the finger-nose-finger maneuver. At the time of her final visit (age 100), she used walker due to declining confidence in her gait; her
advanced age, bilateral hip replacements, and a possible hair-line fracture adjacent to the hip replacement were the major contributors to
her tentative gait. There were no cognitive complaints and she continued to live independently and swam daily for exercise. She died at home
at age 102 of cardiopulmonary arrest. The brain, which weighed 1,054.3 g, was placed on ice 2.5 h after death. At the New York Brain Bank,
Columbia University, external examination (J.P.G.V.) revealed mild (1+) frontal atrophy; in addition, the amygdala was mildly atrophic.
Otherwise, the brain was grossly unremarkable. As described [12, 19], blocks were taken from standardized brain regions and embedded in
paraffin; 7 mm-thick sections were stained with Luxol fast blue counterstained with hematoxylin-eosin (LH&E). Additional sections from
selected blocks were stained with modified Bielschowsky silver stain, and others, with antibodies directed against α-synuclein (1 : 40,
Leica, Buffalo Grove, IL, USA) (including cerebral cortex, hippocampal formation, globus pallidum, putamen, amygdala, midbrain with
substantia nigra, pons with the locus ceruleus, medulla with the dorsal vagal nucleus, and olfactory bulbs), β-amyloid (1 : 400, Biocare
Medical, Concord, CA, USA), hyperphosphorylated τ (AT8) (1 : 200, Thermoscientific, Rockford, IL, USA), and glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP) (Ventana, Tucson, AZ, USA) proteins. The hippocampal formation and the cingulate gyrus were stained with antibodies directed against
Tar-DNA binding protein-43 (TDP-43) (1 : 2,000, Protein Tech Group, Chicago, IL, USA), Fused in Sarcoma (FUS) (1 : 500, Millipore,
Billerica, MA, USA) and p62 (1 : 500, Millipore). The following selected blocks were stained with antibodies directed against ubiquitinated
proteins (1 : 300, Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA): superior frontal cortex; posterior frontal cortex; parietal cortex; calcarine cortex;
hippocampal formation with lateral geniculate body and tail of caudate nucleus; caudate, putamen, and nucleus accumbens; globus pallidus and
putamen with claustrum; cerebellum; subthalamic nucleus with anterior thalamus; anterior hippocampal formation; and pituitary gland. Using
ubiquitin-stained sections of several brain regions, we quantified the number of inclusions: in five 630× fields, we counted the number of
inclusions per neuron with visible nucleolus. This was expressed as a percentage. A 3 × 20 × 25 mm standard parasagittal cerebellar cortical
block was immersion-fixed in 10% buffered formalin. Torpedoes in the entire LH&E section and another entire Bielschowsky-stained section
were counted . Purkinje cells in 15 randomly-selected 100× LH&E stained fields of the standard cerebellar section were counted. The average
of these 15 counts was reported as the mean number of Purkinje cells per 100× field. Bergmann cells were assessed using a GFAP-immunostained
section. A semiquantitative rating of the appearance of the basket cell plexus surrounding Purkinje cell bodies throughout the Bielschowsky
preparation was applied using the following scale: 0 (few or no discernible processes); 1 (sparse number of processes); 2 (moderate number
of processes); and 3 (dense tangle of processes), as described . The neuronal density was normal throughout the cerebral cortex. The
outstanding change consisted of the presence of scattered neurons that contained an ubiquitinated, nuclear inclusion (Figure 1, Figure 2).
These neurons, which tended to form groups (Figure 3) and predominated within the deep cortical layers, were found throughout the cerebral
cortex. In addition, occasional ubiquitinated dystrophic neurites were seen especially in the vicinity of the neurons including nuclear
inclusions (Figure 4). These inclusions were not detected in LH&E-stained sections, or in sections subjected to AT8 antibodies directed
against phosphorylated t, or to antibodies directed against α-synuclein aggregates, or against amyloid deposits. Although rare, neurons with
an ubiquitinated nuclear inclusion were also found within the CA4, CA2-3, and CA1 regions of the hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus.
Neither the neo- nor the paleostriatum showed ubiquitinated neuronal nuclear inclusions. These inclusions were not observed in astrocytes or
oligodendrocytes. Hippocampal and cingulate sections, which were subjected to TDP-43 antibodies, did not reveal any nucleo-cytoplasmic
translocation of labeling or neuropil skeins; the same sections, subject to FUS did not reveal any significant abnormality. The sections
from the same regions subject to p62 antibodies confirmed the presence of ubiquitinated neuronal nuclear inclusions and that of scattered
dystrophic neurites. Notably a few ubiquitinated neuronal nuclear inclusions were found within the CA4, CA2-3, CA1 and parahippocampal
gyrus, and within the cingulate gyrus. Using ubiquitin-stained sections of several brain regions, we quantified the number of inclusions by
counting, in five 630× fields, the number of inclusions per neuron with visible nucleolus. This was expressed as a percentage. The results
were as follows: superior frontal cortex (24.3%), posterior frontal cortex (11.8%), superior parietal cortex (18.5%), primary visual cortex
(3.2%), hippocampus (CA4) (7.4%), hippocampus (CA2-3) (27.5%), hippocampus (CA1) (2.9%), and parahippocampal gyrus (12.5%). By comparison,
we used the same method to quantify the number of inclusions in 20 normal control brains (mean age = 85.2 y, range = 74 – 104 y). Inclusions
were quantified in the superior frontal cortex, and CA1, 2-3 and 4 regions of the hippocampus; we did not find any (0% in each brain
region). The frontal, parietal, and occipital neocortex was without argyrophilic neuronal tangles, without AT8-labeled neurons, and without
visible amyloid deposits. Rare argyrophilic neuronal tangles involved the upper layers of the entorhinal cortex, parahippocampal, and
occipitotemporalis gyri, where they were outnumbered by AT8-labeled neurons that were intermingled with neuropil threads. The temporal pole
exhibited scattered AT8-labeled neurons and threads. Rare neuropil threads were seen within the prefrontal or parietal region. The Braak &
Braak Alzheimer’s disease (AD) stage was IV. The sections subjected to α-synuclein antibodies did not reveal any abnormal aggregates. In the
cerebellum, there was an excess of torpedoes, noted especially on Bielschowsky stained sections. There were 5 torpedoes in the entire LH&E
stained cerebellar cortical section (published value from elderly control brains = 1.7 ± 1.4, and value from ET brains with cerebellar
changes = 12.6 ± 7.9) and 17 torpedoes in the entire Bielschowsky stained cerebellar cortical section (Figure 5) (published value from
normal elderly brains = 3.3 ± 7.3, and value from ET brains with cerebellar change 19.6 ± 14.5) . Abnormal swellings of the Purkinje cell
dendritic arbor were also evident (Figure 6). The segmental loss of Purkinje cells was severe in many regions (Figure 7A, B). The mean
number of Purkinje cells per 100× field was 4.3 (respective published value from elderly normal brains = 9.6 ± 3.4, and from ET brains with
cerebellar changes = 6.6 ± 2.4) . The Bergmann gliosis was segmental, the severity of which varied from marked to mild with interposed parts
that were apparently free of gliosis. The semiquantitative rating of the appearance of the basket cell plexus surrounding Purkinje cells = 2
(published mean value from elderly control brains = 1.39, and mean value from ET brains with cerebellar changes = 1.84) , indicating the
likely presence of reactive structural reorganization of basket cell processes in response to Purkinje cell loss (Figure 8). The dentate
nucleus was normal. Ubiquitinated, nuclear inclusions were not found in the cerebellum. Postmortem testing of frozen brain tissue was
negative for Fragile X Tremor Ataxia Syndrome (FXTAS) (both 29 repeats; normal < 55 repeats), Spinocerebellar Ataxia (SCA) 1 (both 29
repeats; normal < 45 repeats), SCA 2 (22 and 26 repeats; normal < 32 repeats), SCA 3 (both 23 repeats; normal < 45 repeats), SCA 6 (both 11
repeats; normal < 19 repeats), and SCA 7: (10 and 12 repeats; normal < 36 repeats). The patient we report had a 12-year history of ET and,
on postmortem examination of the brain, had ubiquitinated, neuronal nuclear inclusions throughout the cerebral cortex and hippocampus as
well as severe segmental loss of Purkinje cells, Bergmann gliosis, and numerous torpedoes in the cerebellum. Neuronal intranuclear inclusion
disease is a rare neurodegenerative disorder with a heterogeneous clinical picture that can include parkinsonism, cerebellar signs,
pyramidal tract signs, and dementia accompanied by the diffuse presence of ubiquitin positive inclusions in the brain [22, 23, 24]. In
addition, neuronal loss is often present, though not in the brain regions in which inclusions are present. In marked contrast to published
cases, the ubiquitinated inclusions in our case were not detected in LH&E or H&E-stained sections [22, 23, 24]. Hence, this patient had a
pattern of pathological change that has apparently not been reported previously in the literature. Furthermore, we are unaware of any
reports of patients with diffuse neuronal intranuclear inclusions and a clinical picture of ET. The observation of ubiquitinated-protein
inclusions is one of the hallmarks of neurodegeneration. Ubiquitinated-intranuclear inclusions are found in a variety of neurodegenerative
diseases including FXTAS, SCAs, and Huntington’s disease; however, in these disorders inclusions are accompanied by marked additional
changes on postmortem . The mechanism of accumulation of these protein inclusions is not clear but it may be tied with the attempted
clearance and detoxification of damaged proteins. In published cases of neuronal intranuclear inclusion disease, the inclusions were often
observed in morphologically well-preserved neurons, and quantitative studies have demonstrated this inverse correlation; thus, inclusions
seem to be numerous in brain regions without obvious neuronal loss and infrequent in brain regions in which neuronal depletion is severe .
Similarly, in polyglutamine repeat diseases, this discrepancy between inclusion formation and neuronal death has also been reported, leading
some investigators to suggest that the inclusions might be neuroprotective [24, 26, 27, 28]. The same pattern was observed in the present
case, with inclusions detected in brain regions with no obvious neuronal depletion (cerebral cortex) and the absence of inclusions in the
cerebellum, where Purkinje cell loss was marked. The role in this case that the inclusions played in producing the clinical symptoms and
signs is not entirely clear, as they involved several cerebral cortical regions as well as the hippocampus. However, they seemed to be more
abundant in the primary sensorimotor cortex, which seems to be involved in the propagation of tremor in ET , than they were in the primary
visual cortex, which plays no role in tremor generation or propagation in ET. However, clinical-pathological correlations should in general
be regarded with caution. In FXTAS, a disorder for which ubiquitinated-intranuclear inclusions are a clear pathological hallmark, the
regional distribution of inclusions often does not correlate with the presence or progression of clinical features . Similarly, in HD
Like-2, another disorder for which ubiquitinated-intranuclear inclusions occur, the regional distribution of inclusions within the brain
does not necessarily correlate with the clinical symptomatology . Our patient had a clinical diagnosis of ET, independently assigned by two
neurologists specializing in movement disorders using both clinical criteria as well as stringent research criteria for ET. Clinical
features that were consistent with ET were (1) the presence in both upper limbs of kinetic tremor of moderate amplitude on multiple tasks,
in the absence of parkinsonism or dystonia, (2) a mild intentional component to arm tremor, (3) the greater amplitude of kinetic than
postural tremor, (4) the gradual yet progressive worsening of limb tremor with time, (5) the later development of tremor in cranial
structures (“no-no” head tremor and voice tremor), (6) absence of dysarthria, dysdiadochokinesia, or marked ataxia, and (7) clinical
response to primidone. There was no family history and a relatively old age of onset, but both sporadic ET and onset of ET in advanced age
are well-known to occur . Hence, there was nothing clinically atypical about this case. Our patient did not have FXTAS as the genetic
testing was negative. Furthermore, an ET-like phenotype is very rare in that disorder . Against a diagnosis of SCA is the clinical
presentation (absence of dysarthria, dysdiadochokinesia, or marked ataxia), negative genetic test results, and postmortem findings (e.g.,
absence of: pontine atrophy, neuronal loss in inferior olivary nucleus or more complete loss of Purkinje cells). The study of the
pathological anatomy of ET is in its infancy. Postmortem studies over the past several years have indicated that a variety of different
types of degenerative changes occur in the ET brain, indicating that ET is likely to be a family of diseases with an overlapping clinical
phenotype rather than a single clinical-pathological entity [11, 12]. In most ET brains, degenerative changes, including Purkinje cell loss
, have been observed in the cerebellum. A smaller number of brains have Lewy bodies in the brainstem (esp. locus ceruleus) with relatively
normal cerebella, although given the direct synaptic connections between neurons of locus ceruleus and Purkinje cells, it has been suggested
that cerebellar dysfunction may be occurring in these cases as well [11, 12]. One reported ET case also had ubiquitinated intranuclear
inclusions in the Purkinje cells . We now report an ET patient who had both cortical nuclear inclusions as well as degenerative changes in
the cerebellum. Aside from the unique pathological features, the case is of additional import because it (1) further reinforces the view
that ET is likely to be a heterogeneous family of diseases rather than a single clinical-pathological entity, (2) reinforces the notion that
ET is disease characterized by neurodegenerative changes (i.e., cell loss, neuronal inclusions), and (3) provides additional evidence that
the underlying pathological anatomy in ET involves the cerebellum. R01 NS42859 from the National Institutes of Health (Bethesda, MD); the
Parkinson’s Disease Foundation (New York, NY, USA).
