Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma is one of the most common subtypes of peripheral T-cell lymphoma (15-20% of all cases), accounting for
approximately 1-2% of all non-Hodgkin lymphomas. It often presents autoimmune phenomena including hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia,
glomerulonephrities and circulating immune complexes. Polyarteritis nodosa is an autoimmune disease characterized by necrotizing vasculitis
of medium vessels, which rarely develops in association with hematological malignant disorders. Herein we report the case of a 40-year-old
man who underwent lymph node biopsy in the suspicious of sarcoidosis. On the basis of histological and immunohistochemical findings, the
diagnosis of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma was performed. The patient was successfully treated with cytarabine-based regimen for 6
cycles. Three months after the initial diagnosis of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma, a whole body computed tomography showed a lesion in
the lower pole of the left kidney. Renal cell carcinoma was suspected, thus a nephrectomy was carried out. The histological findings were
compatible with polyarteritis nodosa. To the best of our knowledge, the association between polyarteritis nodosa and angioimmunoblastic
T-cell lymphoma has been described only once. This relation may be secondary to the induction of an autoimmune phenomenon by the lymphoma
with the formation of circulating immune complexes, leading to vessels walls injury. A careful evaluation is needed in the management of
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma patients with signs of renal failure in order to avoid delay of treatment and organ damage. The World
Health Organization (WHO) classification of tumors of hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues defines the Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma
(AITL) as one of the more common specific subtypes of peripheral T-cell neoplasms, accounting for approximately 15-20% of all cases, or 1-2%
of all non-Hodgkin lymphomas . It occurs in middle age and elderly, with an equal incidence in males and females and has an aggressive
clinical behavior, often with fever, skin rash, generalized lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly and autoimmune phenomena including hemolytic
anemia, thrombocytopenia, glomerulonephrities and circulating immune complexes (CIC). Histologically, it is characterized by polymorphous
infiltrate involving lymph nodes, and prominent proliferation of high endothelial venules and follicular dendritic cells. During the
clinical course of a lymphoma, many lesions (not only direct invasion by neoplastic cells) may affect the kidney as broad phenomenon
disorders . This finding is more common in Hodgkin’s disease rather than non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. During the clinical course of AITL,
proliferative glomerulonephritis , minimal-change disease , A-type amyloidosis , acute renal failure , immunoglobulin (Ig)M-λ glomerular
thrombi, and membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis-like lesions , myeloma-like kidney , direct invasion by lymphoma cells , interstitial
nephritis , vasculitis , nephrocalcinosis , Fanconi syndrome and nephrotic syndrome due to membranous nephropathy (MN) may be rarely
observed.To the best of our knowledge, there is only one previous case of AITL associated with polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) . Herein, we
report a very unusual complication in AITL, a renal necrotic lesion due to vasculitis with the appearance of PAN, clinically misdiagnosed as
renal carcinoma, highlighting the possible pathogenic mechanism. A 40 year-old-male patient presented to his general practitioner with a
3-weeks history of myalgia, arthralgia, fever (37.5°C) and cough which persisted despite a broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. For this, he
underwent a chest X-ray examination which showed bilateral lung nodules and enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes, with a clinical picture
consistent with sarcoidosis. The patient was admitted to the Pneumologic Unit of Siena University Hospital. On admission, physical
examination showed generalized lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly and skin rash. The laboratory data are summarized in Table 1. The blood count,
liver and renal function, as well as angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), were within the reference range. Eosinophilia and
hypergammaglobulinemia were not found whereas C-reactive protein, lactate dehydrogenase, β2-microglobulin and serum immunoglobulins were
increased. Since the clinical picture was doubtful, the patient underwent biopsy of the axillary lymph node, the maximum diameter of which
was 3 cm. On the basis of clinical presentation and histological findings, the diagnosis of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma stage IVB was
made according to the criteria of WHO classification . The patient received a combination chemotherapy with pegylated liposomal doxorubicin
(30 mg/m2, day 1), cytarabine (2 g/m2 day 2–3) and dexamethasone (40 mg day 1–4) every 21 days. After two cycles, the patient presented a
marked improvement of the systemic symptoms and no superficial lymphadenopathies were observed. After 3 months a re-stage whole body
computed tomography (CT)-scan was performed which showed the disappearance of all previous pathologic findings, but evidenced a lesion of
45 mm in the lower pole of the left kidney (Figure 1). Such finding was later confirmed by an ultrasound scan, that showed, at the color
Doppler exam, a vascular pattern consistent with renal cell carcinoma. The patient was readmitted to the Hospital in order to perform a
nephrectomy. The final diagnosis was renal infarction due to PAN, according to Carlson . The patient had negative rheumatoid factor,
HLA-B27, streptolysin O, anti-nuclear, anti-cardiolipin, anti-DNA, anti-smith, anti-RNP, anti-SSA, anti-SSB, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic and
anti-lupus anticoagulant antibodies. Serologies and PCR for both HBV and HCV were negative. The histological diagnosis of PAN was also
confirmed by clinicians according to American College of Rheumatology (ACR) criteria . After six days, the patient was discharged from
hospital without complications. He completed the chemotherapy induction program (4 cycles) and underwent consolidation with high-dose
chemotherapy and autologous stem cells transplantation. He is well five years after surgery. Summary of laboratory data Hb Haemoglobin, RBC
red blood cells count, WBC white blood cells count, MCV mean corpuscular volume, MCHC mean cell haemoglobin concentration, AST serum
aspartate aminotransferase, ALT alanine aminotransferase, LDH lactate dehydrogenase, ACE angiotensin converting enzyme. TC scan findings. A
lesion of 45 mm in the upper pole of the left kidney is shown. Serial sections of both axillary lymph node and left kidney were performed,
routinely processed, stained with haematoxylin and eosin and examined by light microscopy. Histologically, the lymph node architecture was
partially effaced by polymorphic cellular infiltration, burnt-out follicles (Figure 2A) and proliferation of numerous arborizing high-
endothelial venules (Figure 2B). An expansion of paracortex was observed, which was diffusely infiltrated by a polymorphous population of
small to medium-sized lymphocytes, with distinct cell membranes, clear to pale cytoplasm, and mild irregular nuclei (Figure 2C). The
neoplastic population was admixed with small reactive lymphocytes, eosinophils, plasma cells, histiocytes and numerous follicular dendritic
cells. Few large immunoblast-like lymphoid cells with large distinct nuclei and clear cytoplasm were observed intermingled with lymphocytes.
In addition, scattered Reed-Sternberg (RS)-like cells with irregular multilobated nuclei and large eosinophilic nucleoli were present in the
node. Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic T-cells were positive for CD45Ro, CD3, CD10, LANA-1 and LMP and expressed mostly the CD4 antigen
(Figure 2D), although numerous reactive CD8 positive T-cells were present. CD20, CD79a, PAX-5, CD56, MUM-1 and CD30 were negative. The large
immunoblast-like cells and the scattered RS-like cells showed immunoreactivity to CD20, CD79a and CD30. The proliferation of follicular
dendritic cells highlighted by CD21 and CD23 was prominent throughout the node, and entrapped high-endothelial venules. By means of in situ
hybridization RNAs (EBERs), EBER-positive signals were observed in scattered large B immunoblasts and RS-like cells (Figure 2D, inset).
Molecular studies showed monoclonal rearrangement of T-cell receptor genes and polyclonal rearrangement of immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH)
receptor. Macroscopic examination of the left kidney specimen showed a large pale area at the lower pole, approximately 4 cm in maximum
diameter with a triangular morphology, centered on the renal cortex and consistent with an infarcted area (Figure 3A). Coagulative necrosis
of renal parenchyma (Figure 3B) and multiple segmentary inflammatory lesions of small and middle renal arteries were observed on
histological examination. Masson and Giemsa stains showed rupture of internal elastic lamina with aneurysmal collapse of the arterial wall
(Figure 3C). Some vascular lumina were obliterated by fibrous stroma and sometimes recanalized by thin vascular channels (Figure 3D). There
was no infiltration by neoplastic T-cells. Axillary lymph node morphology. Effacement of lymph node architecture with burnt-out follicles
(A) and marked vascular proliferation (B) was observed. The neoplastic cells show clear-to-pale cytoplasm, distinct cell membrane and
minimal atypia (C); they mainly express CD4 (D). EBV-positive B cells are present (inset, D). [A-C: Haematoxylin–Eosin (H&E); Original
Magnification (O.M.): 40x; D: CD4 stain, O.M.: 40x; D, inset: EBER in situ hybridization, O.M.: 40x. Renal infarction. Gross morphology
shows a large pale lesion of the lower pole (A). Histological examination shows coagulative necrosis of renal parenchyma (B), aneurysmal
distension of the arterial wall (C) and rupture of the internal elastic lamina (C, inset, arrow). Some vascular lumina are obliterated by
fibrous stroma and recanalized by thin vascular channels (D). (B-D: Masson stain; O.M.: 40x; 20x; 40x). AITL is a disease of the middle-aged
and elderly people but it rarely occurs in the fourth decade, as it has happened in our patient . No standard of care has been established
and the prognosis is poor, with a median survival of less than three years . Responder patients seem to benefit from high dose chemotherapy
and autologous stem cell transplantation. AITL was previously considered an atypical reactive process, named angioimmunoblastic
lymphadenopathy ; currently, overwhelming evidence deriving from molecular and cytogenetic studies suggests that AITL rises de novo as a
peripheral T-cell lymphoma . The nearly constant association with EBV has suggested a possible role for the virus in the etiology, possibly
through an antigen-driven process. However, the neoplastic T cells are EBV negative. They express most pan T-cell antigens such as CD3, CD2
and CD5 and, in vast majority of the cases, CD4, although numerous reactive CD8 positive T-cells are often present. In 60-100% of the cases,
the tumour cells express CD10, CXCL13 and PD-1. In our case, not only histological examination of lymph node demonstrated morphological
features of AITL, but also the presence of T-cell lineage with aberrant CD4 and CD10 expression strongly supported the diagnosis . Moreover,
TCR genes showed clonal rearrangement. Immunoblast-like cells and RS-like cells showed polyclonal IgH rearrangement, thus a concomitant
large B cell lymphoma (a well-known complication in AITL) was excluded. A review of the literature has demonstrated that a wide spectrum of
renal lesions (not only direct infiltration by neoplastic cells) in glomeruli, tubule-interstitium and vessels can develop in patients with
AITL and angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy . Clinico-pathological features of the patients are listed in Table 2. To the best of our
knowledge, only one case of AITL associated with PAN , has been previously described. It concerned an elderly (71 years) man, who developed
an intraperitoneal hemorrhage two months after the diagnosis of AITL. PAN is an autoimmune necrotizing systemic vasculitis that
preferentially involves small and medium-sized arteries, with signs and symptoms resulting from infarction and scarring of the affected
organ. It often starts with non specific symptoms and laboratory features . Any age group may be affected, but it is commonly seen in people
between the ages of 40 and 60, as in our case. The most frequent visceral manifestations involve kidney (93.4%), heart (72%), and
gastrointestinal tract (57.4%) ; moreover, several reports indicate that the disease may affect also testis and prostate . Currently, the
most widely used vasculitis classification system is that of the ACR which is based predominantly on clinical findings. Histological
diagnosis of vasculitis is performed according to the Chapel Hill Consensus Conference criteria and to the more recent scheme suggested by
Carlson . The possible mechanism that may explain the relation between AITL and PAN is represented by the induction of an autoimmune
phenomenon by the lymphoma. It is well known that AITL cells produce cytokines such as interleukin 6 and TNF-α , stimulating polyclonal
B-cells and plasma cells to secrete antibodies forming circulating immune complexes (CIC). CIC complete the complement cascade, releasing
vasoactive substances and chemotactic factors that cause accumulations of inflammatory cells and release of lysosomal enzymes by
neutrophils, leading to injury of vessels walls and thrombosis . In the patient here presented, only serum IgG value and C-reactive protein
were elevated whereas platelet count and CIC were normal. Throughout the course of the disease, platelet count decrease and CIC increment
was documented. The main diagnostic difficulty was represented by the absence of signs and symptoms of vasculitis; moreover, echo-color-
doppler and CT scan findings led to a misdiagnosis of renal carcinoma. Only histological examination of the kidney which showed necrosis of
parenchyma and multiple segmentary vasculitis involving small and middle renal arteries allowed the correct diagnosis of PAN which was later
confirmed by clinicians. Clinicopathological features of patients with AITL developing renal involvement CR complete remission; n.a. not
available, CHOP Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisolone. A careful evaluation is needed in the management of AITL patients
which may exhibit immunodeficiency and autoimmunity secondary to the neoplastic process . Herein we report the first case of PAN presenting
at onset with renal involvement, sequential to AITL, in a 40 year-old man. PAN has rarely been reported in association with AITL but,
although infrequent, clinicians should keep in mind the possibility of an autoimmune disorder involving kidney, in case signs of renal
failure develop. Renal biopsy and angiography are necessary in order to avoid delay of treatment and organ damage. Written informed consent
was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any all accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. AITL, Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma; CT, Computed tomography; PAN,
Polyarteritis nodosa; WHO, World Health Organization; CIC, Circulating immune complexes; Ig, Immunoglobulins; ACE, Angiotensin converting
enzyme; ACR, American College of Rheumatology; RS, Reed-Sternberg; EBER, EBV-encoded RNA; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; AILD, Angioimmunoblastic
lymphadenopathy with dysproteinemia. The Authors declare that they have no competing interests. MRA wrote the paper; BJR performed analysis
of the histological sections; AG and MO carried out the immunoassays; AF and MC made contributions to acquisition of clinical data; SL
contributed his expertise in the field and fruitful discussion; SAT coordinated the work and gave final approval of the version to be
published. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
