A 35-year-old male patient presented with a right upper eyelid mass with mechanical ptosis. The patient gave no history of trauma or
surgery. On examination, there was a huge cystic mass fixed to the tarsal plate. Excisional biopsy with tarsectomy was done. Histopathology
sections demonstrated a keratin-filled cyst arising from the tarsus. A thorough Pubmed search did not reveal an epidermal cyst of the tarsal
plate of this size which was successfully managed. The incision was made in such a way that postoperative ptosis would be avoided. Excess
skin was removed during the surgery. Most cysts of the eyelid are diagnosed as epidermal inclusion cysts, dermoid cysts, pilar/sebaceous
cysts or as a chalazion. The diagnosis of epidermal cyst of the tarsal plate is not made very often. This differential should be kept in
mind while operating on a cyst of the upper eyelid. A definitive diagnosis depends upon a histopathologic examination, and an en bloc
excision with tarsectomy, including the base of the cyst, is the definitive treatment. A 35-year-old male patient presented with a swelling
of the right upper eyelid of 10 years’ duration. The swelling which was initially the size of a peanut started increasing in size since the
last 1 year, causing drooping of the upper eyelid. There was no associated pain or redness. There was no history of ocular trauma, previous
surgery or any systemic illness. On examination, there was a mechanical ptosis with zero vertical interpalpebral fissure height and zero
levator function. The lid showed a large round swelling of 2 cm in diameter [Fig. 1]. On palpation, the tumor was well defined, cystic but
firm, and free from skin and bony margins. There were no signs of inflammation and the overlying skin appeared normal. On retraction of the
upper eyelid, only 2 mm of the lower cornea was seen which appeared normal [Fig. 2]. The left eye examination was normal. Computed
tomography (CT) scan of the right orbit did not reveal any bony attachments on bone and soft tissue window. There were no cysts elsewhere
like on face, neck and trunk, and rest of the systemic examination was also normal. The patient was posted for excisional biopsy. A
horizontal skin incision was made, inferior to the lid crease. Subcutaneous tissue was separated from the center toward periphery. Careful
superior and inferior separation of the cyst from subcutaneous tissue was done [Fig. 3]. Inferiorly, the cyst had reached the lid margin as
the hair follicles were visible during dissection. As the dissection proceeded posteriorly, the cyst was found to be attached to the tarsal
plate. Hence, a 3–4 mm tarsectomy was done to remove the cyst in toto [Fig. 4]. The tarsoconjunctival suturing was done with 8-0 Vicryl.
Excess skin was excised and skin was sutured with interrupted sutures using Proline. The patient was started on oral antibiotics and anti-
inflammatory drugs. There was lid edema on the 1st postoperative day. He was started on topical antibiotics. By the 10th postoperative day,
the edema had totally subsided, the levator function had returned to normal and there was no ptosis [Fig. 5]. The patient has shown no
recurrence in the follow-up period of 5 months and has a best corrected vision of 20/30 post surgery. Histopathology reports showed, on
gross appearance, a round to oval 2.5 × 2 × 2 cm cystic, grayish-brown mass. Microscopy revealed a cyst lined by stratified squamous
epithelium devoid of keratohyaline granules. The cyst lumen contained string-like keratin [Figs. 6 and 7]. The cyst wall was composed of
bland collagenous tissue devoid of inflammation. Part of the tarsal plate and the underlying conjunctiva was attached to the cyst wall. The
histopathologic features were consistent with epidermal cyst of the tarsal plate. Preoperative photograph showing a huge mass (2 cm
diameter) of the upper eyelid, causing mechanical ptosis Photograph showing the under surface of the mass which appears round, well defined
and without any signs of inflammation; rest of the ocular structures could not be examined Intraoperative photograph showing a cystic mass
free from the skin and subcutaneous tissue Cyst removed in toto 10th postoperative day showing normal levator function Histopathology
demonstrated a cyst lined by squamous epithelium and containing keratin (H and E, ×400) Photomicrograph showing epidermal cyst wall with
keratin in the lumen (H and E, ×100) Cysts of the epidermis are the second most common type of benign periocular cutaneous lesions,
accounting for approximately 18% of excised benign lesions. Most of these are epidermal inclusion cysts which are slow growing, elevated,
round and smooth, and filled with keratin. Very few cases of epidermal cysts of the tarsal plate have been reported. Vagefi et al. in 2008
discussed various theories of development of epidermoid cysts. Since there is no history of trauma or surgery in our patient, the most
likely theory is the sequestration of epidermal rests during the embryonic development of the eyelid, as was the case in Vagefi's report.
Lucarelli et al. reported cases of intratarsal epidermal inclusion cysts which were initially diagnosed as chalazions and for which incision
and curettage was done. They were ultimately diagnosed as having originated from the tarsus and protruding into the skin. Finally, the base
of the cyst with the tarsus had to be excised to prevent recurrence. Hence, incision and curettage or superficial shave biopsies may not
give the exact diagnosis in all cases of lid tumors. A full thickness biopsy of the tarsal plate is diagnostic. Jakobiec et al. presented
cases of intratarsal cyst of meibomian gland. The average age of patients was 62.5 years. The authors did an immunohistochemical study with
the help of which they distinguished it from the epidermal cysts. To avoid lid retraction, 20–24 mm of skin should be left between the brows
and the lid margin. The upper eyelid also requires 4 mm of tarsus along the eyelid margin to ensure stability. This allows us to recruit any
excess superior tarsus beyond 4 mm into a defect. In more extensive defects of the tarsus, procedures like eyelid sharing procedure,
contralateral upper eyelid tarsoconjunctival grafting or tarsoconjunctival substitutes like hard palate mucoperiosteum could be used. In our
patient, the tumor size was 2 cm in diameter and the amount of tarsus that was sacrificed along with the conjunctiva was about 3–4 mm. Five
millimeter skin excision was done and no skin graft was required. The layers of the upper eyelid from anterior to posterior, between the lid
margin and the lid crease consist of skin, orbicularis muscle, levator aponuerosis, tarsus and conjunctiva. These layers are held tightly
together by fibers of the levator aponuerosis that cross the orbicularis and insert into the dermis. The upper eyelid crease is formed by
the most superior of these attachments. Since the incision given was inferior to the attachment of the levator palpebrae superioris to the
skin, the lid crease was not compromised and ptosis was nil. Jakobeic et al. have documented the first eyelid epidermoid cyst displaying
malignant transformation in a 72-year-old woman. Hence, no matter how benign any eyelid cyst may appear, they all should be sent for
histopathologic examination.
