Biliary parasitosis is one of the important causes of biliary obstruction in endemic areas, however due to migration and travel the disease
is known to occur in non endemic zones as well. The spectrum of biliary fascioliasis ranges from recurrent biliary colics to acute
cholangitis. The long term complications are gall stones, sclerosing cholangitis and biliary cirrhosis. We describe fascioliasis as a cause
of recurrent biliary colics in a young male necessitating multiple hospitalizations over a period of four years. Investigative profile had
been non-contributory every time he was hospitalized for his abdominal pain prior to the current presentation. He never had cholangitis due
to the worm in the common bile duct. It was only at endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) biliary fascioliasis was
discovered to be the cause of his recurrent biliary colics. After removal of the live Fasciola hepatica from the common bile duct he became
symptom free and is attending our clinic for last 11 months now. Clinical spectrum of biliary fascioliasis is discussed in this report. In
endemischen Gebieten ist der Parasitenbefall von Gallengängen eine häufige Ursache für Gallenkoliken. Aufgrund von Migration und
Reisetätigkeiten kommen derartige Erkrankungen auch außerhalb endemischer Gebiete vor. Das Spektrum der Symptome bei Gallengangsfasciolose
erstreckt sich von wiederholten Gallenkoliken bis zur akuten Cholangitis. Als Langzeitkomplikationen werden Gallensteine, sklerosierende
Cholangitis und biliäre Zirrhose beschrieben. Wir berichten über eine Fasciolose als Ursache für Gallenkoliken bei einem jungen Mann, der
über vier Jahre mehrfach wegen Gallenkoliken stationär behandelt wurde. Das Untersuchungsprofil brachte bisher jedes Mal keinen Erfolg, wenn
er stationär wegen Bauchschmerzen aufgenommen wurde. Er hatte vorher niemals eine Cholangitis auf der Basis eines Befalls mit dem Leberegel.
Nur durch endoskopisch retrograde Cholangiopankreatikographie (ERCP) wurde die biliäre Fasciolose als Ursache für die wiederholten
Gallenkoliken entdeckt. Nach Entfernen der lebenden Fasciola hepatica aus dem Gallengang wurde der Patient, nunmehr seit 11 Monaten,
symptomfrei. Das klinische Spektrum der biliären Fasciolose wird in diesem Bericht diskutiert. Fascioliasis is endemic in sheep raising and
cattle breeding countries but reports from non-endemic areas have been described in the literature. In a recent meta analysis by Thomas
Furst et al. it has been estimated that more than 2.6 million people are infected by the Fasciola hepatica globally with highest
infestations being in Latin America, Andean, followed by North Africa, middle east, Asia and Europe. In the same meta analysis authors
reported an increase of 11% for fascioliasis over the last decade. These estimates are 35% higher than previous World Health Organization
(WHO) figures . The life cycle of Fasciola hepatica is complex and human beings are the accidental hosts. Humans get infected by eating raw
vegetables especially watercress grown in sheep raising areas. Other fresh water plants like lettuce, mint, alfalfa are known to transmit
the infection. Occasionally drinking unboiled water contaminated by metacercariae may cause the infection . The eggs hatch into larvae and
penetrate the gut lumen, finally migrate to the liver where they lodge into the biliary system. Adult worm is large, flat, brownish and
leaf-shaped. Its size is about 2.5 × 1 cm. It is estimated to live for 9–13 years in the human biliary system . There are three phases in
the life cycle of the parasite in human beings. First phase is the hepatic phase which reflects an acute phase of infection. Second phase is
the biliary phase reflecting the chronic phase and the third is the pharyngeal phase which is considered to be an ectopic phase in its life
cycle. Damage to the liver is proportional to the parasitic load during hepatic phase. Endoscopic ultrasound has emerged as an important
investigational tool in the biliary phase of the parasite but endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) has the advantage of
therapeutic potential in the management of fascioliasis. Biliary phase requires ERCP for management as the drugs are effective only in the
hepatic phase of the parasite. Reports of cholangitis, hemobilia even death caused by fascioliasis have been described in the literature . A
27-year-old Egyptian male with no significant comorbidities presented with history of episodic, recurrent abdominal pain of 4 years duration
to our clinic at King Abdul Aziz specialist hospital Taif, a tertiary care centre in the western region of Saudi Arabia. Patient described
pain as colicky, remaining for 1–2 hours necessitating intravenous analgesics predominantly in the upper abdomen. His abdominal pain had no
reference or radiation and there was no jaundice associated with it. Patient had been admitted four times in various hospitals during this
period and every time basic laboratory evaluation including liver function tests and serum amylase were within normal limits. His ultrasound
examination had been within normal limits on each occasion he was hospitalized for his abdominal pain. Patient denied any high risk behavior
or drug abuse. Over this period he had stable appetite and constant weight. On examination he was conscious oriented and he had stable
vitals. There was no icterus, or lymphadenopathy. His systemic examination was unremarkable. Laboratory data revealed normal hemogram,
normal liver function tests and his abdominal ultrasound was also within normal limits. There were no eggs or ova in his stool examination.
Keeping in view recurrent biliary colics magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) was done which showed a doubtful filling defect
in the common bile duct but intra-hepatic biliary radicals were not dilated. There were no gall stones and the rest of the viscera were
within normal limits. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was undertaken which revealed normal papilla. Selective common
bile duct (CBD) canulation was done and cholangiogram revealed a filling defect in the lower end of common bile duct. There was mild
dilatation of the common bile duct (Figure 1 (Fig. 1)) however, biliary radicals were not dilated. Sphincterotmy was done and CBD was
sweeped with biliary balloon and a live Fasciola hepatica was seen coming out of the common bile duct (Figure 2 (Fig. 2), Figure 3 (Fig.
3)). Later using biopsy forceps the worm was taken out of duodenum and confirmation of the species, Fasciola hepatica, was made by the
microbiology department of the hospital. Patient was given two tablets of triclabendazole 250 mg (manufactured by Novartis) after the
procedure. Following therapeutic ERCP patient became symptom free and is attending our clinic for last 11 months now. The index case had
recurrent biliary colics without having cholangitis due to Fasciola hepatica. Although hailing from an endemic area (Egypt) he has been
living in non-endemic zone (Saudi Arabia) for the last 8 years now implying that even brief exposure to an endemic zone can lead to
infestation of the parasite. Various cases of biliary fascioliasis described in the literature , have demonstrated obstructive jaundice to
be the commonest presentation, however, the index case had no jaundice or cholangitis during four years of his intermittent illness. It is
possible that there was a low worm load in the biliary system of the index case which allowed free flow of bile. There has to be high degree
of suspicion to diagnose biliary fascioliasis as a cause of recurrent biliary colics especially in non-endemic areas. Although painful
cholestasis associated with eosionphilia should make high suspicion of parasitosis as a case of biliary obstruction, the index case had no
eosinophilia. Eosionphilia is striking in the hepatic phase and may not be observed in the biliary phase of the life cycle of the parasite
as in the index case. During the first 3–4 months of acute infection, immunologic techniques play an important role in the diagnosis of
fascioliasis. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) has a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 97.8% , . During the early larval
stage of infection, eggs are not found in the stool. The diagnosis can be made by finding characteristic ova in feces, duodenal aspirates,
or bile specimens in the biliary phase of the parasite. Eggs are non-embryonated, ovoid, and large (130–150 × 60–90 µm), with a small
operculum. Eggs being released sporadically it may be necessary to examine number of concentrated stool specimens to reach the diagnosis.
The stool analysis in the index case was negative for ova and parasites, possibly we didn’t repeat the analysis multiple times. We had low
presumption of fascioliasis before ERCP and no serology was done in the index case. In the biliary phase of the parasite CT scan may
demonstrate hypodense nodules or tortuous tracks resulting from migration of the parasite, in addition to dilatation of biliary radicals .
Endoscopic ultrasound and ERCP may demonstrate irregular thickening of the common bile duct and ERCP having therapeutic potential has been
preferred by most of the workers in the management of biliary fascioliasis , , . The radiological picture of fascioliasis may even mimic
other biliary disorders. For example Mohammad et al. reported a 34-year-old male with obstructive jaundice having features of
cholangiocarcinoma on magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP). Their patient proved to have fascioliasis on ERCP. The adult
parasite mainly inhabits the biliary system and causes biliary complication but there are reports of pancreatitis caused by Fasciola
hepatica , . Maryo et al. postulated that the eggs laid by the adult parasite cause obstruction at the papilla leading to pancreatitis and
hence risk of pancreatitis is proportional to the worm load in a given case. Biliary phase of the parasite mimicking sphincter of Oddi
dysfunction was reported by Keshishian et al. . Thus biliary phase of the parasite has a complex clinical spectrum. It may present as
biliary colics, cholangitis or pancreatitis and requires ERCP for removal of the parasite. In contrast the hepatic phase usually presents as
abdominal pain, fever and jaundice. The hepatic phase is treated with triclabendazole which can be given as a single oral dose of 10 mg/kg
or, in cases of severe infection, in two doses (10 mg/kg) given 12 h apart. Tablet triclabendazole 250 mg (manufactured by Novartis) is
related to the benzimidazole–2–carbamate anthelmintics and has been approved for human biliary fascioliasis. This drug is shown to penetrate
liver flukes by transtegumentary absorption followed by inhibition of the parasite’s motility by causing the destruction of the microtubular
structure, resulting in the death of the parasite . Fascioliasis is one of the unusual causes of recurrent biliary colics and it warrants a
high degree of clinical suspicion especially in non-endemic areas. The current report emphasizes that ERCP may be considered for management
of recurrent biliary colics even though classical features of biliary obstruction may not be present. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. The authors thank Mr. Mohammad Alkotob Zohairy of the Department of Radiology, King Abdul Aziz Specialist Hospital
Taif, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, for his contribution to the preparation of this manuscript.
