The most common recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities in T-lymphoblastic leukemia (T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia ) involve T-cell receptor
(TCR) loci and a variety of partner genes, including HOX11, HOX11L2, MYC, and TAL1. In this report, we present a rare case involving
simultaneous translocation of the TCR α/δ loci with different partner loci (Xq22 and 12p13); this resulted in a poor prognosis. Chromosomal
analysis showed 46,Y,t(X;14)(q22;q11.2),t(12;14)(p13;q11.2) and FISH analysis by using a T-cell receptor alpha delta DNA probe, Split Signal
(DakoCytomation, Denmark), showed translocations at the same TCR α/δ locus on both chromosomes. FISH with 2 bacterial artificial chromosome
clones showed break apart signal, which suggests involvement of the IRS4 gene. To our knowledge, this is the first report of T-ALL in which
both TCR α/δ loci were translocated with different partner loci, and 1 of the partner loci, Xq22, was a rare translocation partner locus
that included IRS4 gene. T-lymphoblastic leukemia (T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia ), a highly malignant cancer derived from T-cell
progenitors, comprises 15% of acute lymphoblastic leukemia cases [1, 2]. T-ALL is a genetically heterogeneous disease with translocations
that usually involve recombination between T-cell receptor (TCR) loci and several different partner genes . Most of these translocations
result in deregulation of the partner genes that are located near TCR regulatory elements . The most common partner genes are HOX11,
HOX11L2, MYC, and TAL1. Consequently, these partner genes, rather than the TCR, may play important roles in T-cell leukemogenesis.
Translocations involving TCR loci are found in about 35% of T-ALL cases, and unidentified partner genes are involved in 5-10% of cases .
This report presents a case of T-ALL in which the leukemic cells showed the simultaneous chromosomal abnormalities t(X;14)(q22;q11.2) and
t(12;14)(p13;q11.2). To our knowledge, this simultaneous translocation has not been previously reported, and Xq22 has been reported as a
partner locus only once in childhood T-ALL . A 27-yr-old man was admitted to our hospital complaining of headache, dizziness, nausea, and
vomiting, which began 3 days before admission. No palpable lymph-node enlargement or hepatosplenomegaly was detected on physical
examination. Laboratory findings were as follows: white blood cell (WBC) count, 49.5×109/L; hemoglobin level, 161 g/L; and platelet count,
36×109/L. A peripheral blood smear showed that 95% of WBCs were blasts (Fig. 1A). The serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was markedly
elevated to 13,022 IU/L. The patient's bone marrow was nearly packed with small-to-medium sized leukemic cells with a high
nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, which was calculated as 93.2% (Fig. 1B, C). A biopsy showed hypercellularity with diffuse infiltration of
immature blast cells (Fig. 1D). Flow cytometry revealed that the leukemic blasts with intermediate CD45 expression and low side scatter
(SSC) were positive for CD2, CD7, CD5, and CD3, and negative for TdT, CD34, CD13, CD33, CD10, CD19, CD20, and CD22. Therefore, the patient
was diagnosed with T-ALL. The patient's karyotype was 46,Y,t(X;14)(q22;q11.2),t(12;14)(p13;q11.2) (Fig. 2). FISH analysis was performed to
determine the breakpoints using a T-cell receptor alpha delta (TCRAD) DNA Probe, Split Signal (DakoCytomation, Glostrup, Denmark), and it
revealed 2 red and 2 green abnormal signal patterns in 89% of the cells, suggesting TCR α/δ rearrangements in both chromosomes. To map the
Xq22 breakpoint, 2 bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones, RP11-815E21 and RP11-105F23 (Empire Genomics, Buffalo, NY, USA), were used
, and break-apart signal patterns were obtained, suggesting insulin receptor substrate (IRS)4 gene translocation (Fig. 3). Additional FISH
analyses by using the LSI BCR/ABL Dual Color, Dual Fusion Translocation Probe (Vysis/Abbott Molecular, Des Plaines, IL, USA), the TEL/AML1
ES Dual Color Translocation Probe (Vysis/Abbott Molecular), the LSI p16(9p21)/CEP 9 Dual Color Probe (Vysis/Abbott Molecular), the LSI MLL
Dual Color, Break Apart Rearrangement Probe (Vysis/Abbott Molecular), and the LSI MYC Dual Color, Break Apart Rearrangement Probe
(Vysis/Abbott Molecular) showed no abnormal signals. The patient was treated with hyper-CVAD (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, adriamycin, and
dexamethasone) as the first course of induction chemotherapy. Complete remission was achieved after 1 month and was confirmed by normal
TCRAD FISH signals. At that time, the patient's karyotype was 46,XY . Next, the patient was treated with high-dose methotrexate/cytarabine
(HD MTx/Ara-C) as the first course of consolidation therapy, hyper-CVAD as the second consolidation therapy, and then allogeneic peripheral
blood stem cell transplantation (allo-PBSCT) was performed. However, a central nervous system (CNS) relapse was diagnosed 1 yr later, and
the patient died of sepsis while receiving induction chemotherapy 1 month after relapse. T-ALL is a malignant proliferation of T-lymphoid
blasts, and 50-70% of cases have abnormal karyotypes [2, 6]. The chromosomal rearrangements in T-ALL typically involve breakpoints in bands
where TCR genes are located, including 14q11 (TCR-α and TCR-δ), 7q32-36 (TCR-β), and 7p15 (TCR-γ) [2, 7]. During V(D)J recombination in
T-cell development, several genes transcribed at an early stage of thymocyte development are in an "open" chromatin configuration and are
vulnerable to the action of recombinases. Consequently, illegitimate recombination may place target partner genes next to TCR regulatory
sequences. This may lead to their aberrant expression in developing thymocytes, thus leading to T-ALL, with differentiation blocked at
various stages of maturation . Commonly involved partner genes of TCR loci include the transcription factors HOX11 (TLX1) (10q24), HOX11L2
(TLX3) (5q35), MYC (8q24.1), TAL1 (1p32), TAL2 (9q32), LYL1 (19p13), LMO1 (11p15), and LMO2 (11p13), and the cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase LCK
(1p34.3-35) [6, 8-10]. Simultaneous rearrangements targeting TCR-β and -α loci are observed in 4% of patients with T-ALL, possibly
reflecting a higher susceptibility to errors in V(D)J recombination . In this study, we described a case of T-ALL with simultaneous
translocation of both TCR α/δ loci (14q11) to different partner loci (Xq22 and 12p13). From a molecular perspective, Xq22 and 12p13 were
juxtaposed with the TCR α/δ loci (14q11). Breakpoints within the TCR α/δ locus occur in more than 20% of T-ALL cases with abnormal
karyotypes, and the mechanism underlying these translocations most likely involves illegitimate V(D)J recombination [4, 12, 13]. In several
T-ALL cases, t(12;14)(p13;q11) has been observed in association with the CCND2 gene, which is thought to stimulate cellular proliferation
via cell cycle activation [1, 4]. The Xq22 locus is a rare partner gene, and to our knowledge, has been reported only once by Karrman et al.
in a pediatric case of T-ALL in which Xq22 was translocated to 7q34 (TCR-β). There is no report of adult T-ALL involving the translocation
of Xq22 and TCR α/δ. The molecular genetic characterization of t(X:7) revealed the IRS4 gene [3, 14]. Although an additional study was not
available in our case, FISH using the RP11-815E21 and RP11-105F23 BAC probes (Empire Genomics) at Xq22.3 showed a break-apart signal
pattern, suggesting IRS4 gene translocation. The exact role of IRS4 remains unclear; however, IRS proteins mediate signaling from insulin
and insulin-like growth factor 1 receptors, and have important effects on cell growth and survival . In rarely observed cytogenetic
abnormalities, it is difficult to uncover any relationship with prognosis. In a UK-US collaborative group study of 356 adult T-ALL cases,
the remission rate was over 90%, and the 5-yr survival rate was approximately 50% . However, considering that in the case reported by
Karrman et al. the patient relapsed and died about 2 yr after diagnosis, and the outcome in our case, where the patient relapsed and died
about 1 yr after the initial diagnosis, IRS4 gene involvement may be related to a poor prognosis. In conclusion, this is the first case
report of T-ALL in which both TCR α/δ loci (14q11) were translocated simultaneously to different partner loci. One of these partner loci,
Xq22, was rare and was found to involve IRS4, which may have an important effect on cell growth and survival, and to be associated with a
poor prognosis. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. T-lymphoblastic leukemia. Peripheral blood smear
containing leukemic cells (Wright's stain, ×200) (A). Bone marrow aspirate smear showing leukemic cells that are small-to-medium sized, with
a high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio (Wright-Giemsa stain, ×200 (B) and ×1,000 (C)). Biopsy section showing hypercellularity with heavy
infiltration of immature cells (H&E, ×100) (D). Karyotype at diagnosis showing 46,Y,t(X;14)(q22;q11.2),t(12;14)(p13;q11.2). Arrows indicate
the rearranged chromosomes. FISH at initial diagnosis using the TCRAD DNA Probe, Split Signal (DakoCytomation, Glostrup, Denmark), which
showed 2 red and 2 green abnormal signals in metaphase (A) and interphase (B). A schematic diagram of the positions of RP11-815E21 and
RP11-105F23 at Xq22.3 (C). Start and end positions were acquired from NCBI36/hg18 assembly. FISH using RP11-815E21 and RP11-105F23 showing 1
red and 1 green break-apart signal (D). Abbreviation: TCRAD, T-cell receptor alpha delta.
