Rationale: About 95% of prostate cancers are adenocarcinoamas. Depending on the detection method used, neuroendocrine cells are found in 10%
to 100% of prostate cancer specimens. Objective: A 64-year-old patient was diagnosed in 2006 with adenocarcinoma of the prostate, PSA 4.1
ng/ml, Gleason 6, T3b, positive PSA immunohistochemistry. Methods and results: The patient was started on hormone therapy: orchidectomy
followed by flutamide 750 mg/day for three years, and underwent radiotherapy 6400 R. The patient was asymptomatic for three years. In 2009,
the patient complained of perineal and rectal pain, but the PSA remained normal. In 2010, the patient underwent TUR of the prostate for
acute urinary retention. Pathological exam revealed Gleason 8 adenocarcinoma of the prostate (different pathologist suggested Gleason 9) and
foci of neuroendocrine cells. Immunohistochemistry detected 15-20% positivity for Cromogranin A and 10% for synaptophysin. The patient
developed multiple liver metastases in October 2010 and underwent five cycles of etoposide, carboplatin. The patient died of liver failure
in March 2011. Discussion: Regarding prevalence, neuroendocrine differentiation is the second phenotype after prostate adenocarcinoma, but
still remains undiagnosed. It is resistant to radiation therapy and chemotherapy. Detection of the neuroendocrine differentiation is
recommended during the clinical, biochemical, histopathological and immunohistochemical follow up of prostate cancer patients treated by
EBRT and / or androgen deprivation. Abbreviations CT computerized tomography; MRI magnetic rezonance imaging; NE neuroendocrine; NSAID
nonsteroidal anti-inflamatory drug; PSA prostatic specific antigen; EAU European Association of Urology; PET Positron Emission Tomography;
EBRT external beam radioyherapy Prostate cancer is one of the most common neoplasic diseases in male population. According to the National
Cancer Institute, regarding prostate cancer, 217,730 new cases were diagnosed and 32,050 deaths were registered due to prostate cancer in
2010, in the United States. In 2008, there were approximately 338,000 cases in the European Union. In Romania, the incidence was of 32.2
(cases per 100,000 inhabitants) in the year 2006, compared to the United States, where the incidence was of 95.9 for Caucasian and 127.6 for
Afro-American population (mortality was of 3.14/100.000). A 64-year-old male patient, with a single left kidney (history of right
nephrectomy for benign condition), admitted in our Department, for episodes of hematuria, in August 2006, when, based on the clinical
examination (rectal examination outlining a prostate of 4/4 cm with an endured left lobe), PSA of 4.1 ng/ml and transurethral prostate
biopsy was diagnosed with prostate cancer - well-differentiated papillary tubulointerstitial adenocarcinoma, Gleason score was of 6 (3 +3).
Fig. 1 MRI evaluation of the prostate revealed a prostate tumor with left seminal vesicle invasion (T3b) and small pelvic lymph-nodes.
Patientâ€™s choice was surgical orchidectomy and antiandrogen hormonal therapy (flutamide 3x250 mg / day). It was locally irradiated with 6400
Rad. Immunohistochemical examination from 16.10.2006 revealed an intensely positive PSA, tubulo-papillary and cribriform adenocarcinoma of
the prostate (Gleason 6). The patient underwent the follow-up protocol according to the EAU guidelines until 2009, being asymptomatic, with
a PSA level of 0,003 ng/ml, and with no postvoid residual. Prostate adenocarcinoma, Gleason score 6 (3+3), August 2006 From February 2009
the patient accused extremely intense pain in the perineum and rectum. PSA was of 0.003 ng/ml. Abdominal and pelvic CT and bone scan were
within normal limits. He completely emptied the bladder. Under the usual treatment with analgesics and NSAIDs, the pain was controlled,
until February 2010. Digital rectal examination revealed local minimal changes of the prostate. Pelvic MRI showed a 4,5 cm tumor prostate
with left extracapsular invasion, the infiltration of the mezorectal fascia, of the left levator ani muscle and a 26 mm lesion in the left
femoral head. The patient underwent a PET scan, which showed a metabolically active prostate tumor and the left femoral lesion. In May 2010,
the patient developed urinary retention managed by TURP: pathological exam revealed adenocarcinoma of the prostate Gleason score was 8 (3
+5), Fig. 2 The patient asked for a second opinion in an urology clinic in Turkey. Repeated MRI confirmed the extracapsular invasion.
Ultrasound: bladder capacity of 175 ml, prostate 55cc, postvoid residual 45 ml. Paraffin blocks sent for a second opinion: prostate
adenocarcinoma, Gleason score 3 +5 (Fig. 2), neuroendocrine differentiation, with positivity for Cromogranin (Fig. 3) and synaptophysin
(Fig. 4). Adenocarcinoma of the prostate Gleason 9 (4+5) 2010 CROMOGRANIN 4x(2010) SYNAPTOPHYSIN 10x(2010) The serum Cromogranin was of 199
micrograms / ml (normal up to 98) and serotonin 5-hydroxy-indolacetic acid was normal. The treatment with Carboplatin and Etoposide was
initiated. Painful symptoms were remitted. The patient underwent five cycles of chemotherapy, but developed severe neutropenia. In October
2010, the MRI revealed multiple masses in the liver parenchyma, varying between 10 and 20 mm. (Fig. 5). MRI revealed multiple formations in
the liver parenchyma (October 2010) Since November 2010 he was treated with 20 mg of Sandostatin LAR per month, then with Farmarubicine. In
February 2011, he developed an upper urinary tract dilatation with acute renal failure (serum creatinine reached 6 mg/dL and oliguria).
Percutaneous left nephrostomy was inserted. The diuresis resumed and the values of creatinine reached normal levels. In March 2011, he died
from liver failure. Cellular elements of the prostate, are found on a base membrane of ductal and acinar secreting cells, basal cells, among
which are the stem cells and the neuroendocrine cells belonging to the APUD system (amino precursor uptake decarboxylation), which can be
opened to the gland lumen and in contact with neural dendrites, or it may be closed (no communication with the lumen). Prostate cancers are
95% adenocarcinomas. Depending on the technique used to detect neuroendocrine cells (NE) they are from 10% to 100% present in prostate
cancers. Histopathological forms are: - Small cell carcinomas, - Carcinoids - Foci of neuroendocrine neoplasic cells in prostatic
adenocarcinoma. This is of major importance because prostate cancers with neuroendocrine differentiation have a poor prognosis (35% survival
at 2 years) compared with cases where there are no NE cells (97% survival at 2 years). One of the most important things to note, is that the
differentiation process of these neuroendocrine cells can appear over time. The hormone dependency of the prostate adenocarcinoma is known
since 1941. With androgen deprivation therapy, a regression for a period of time is achieved, after that the phenomenon of hormone-
resistance or hormone independence appears. It seems that the NE cells are the most in this period, these cells displaying apoptotic
activity of only 0.16%, in other words they are an immortal cell population in patients with prostate cancer. They produce substances such
as somatostatin, bombesin and serotonin, involved in cell growth and metastasis. Among the characteristic tissue and serum markers, are the
cromogranin A, serotonin and the synaptophysin. Neuroendocrine-like cells in prostate cancer: neuroendocrine transdifferentiation of
prostate adenocarcinoma cells. This patient was diagnosed with adenocarcinoma of the prostate in 2006, PSA 4.1 ng / ml, Gleason 6, T3b and
positive PSA immunohistochemistry. The patient was irradiated up to 6400 Rad! Ablative hormone therapy (orchidectomy) and antiandrogen
(flutamide 750 mg / day) was established. For 3 years he was asymptomatic. In 2009, he accused perineal and rectal pain but without PSA
rise. In 2010, the prostate was re-resected and prostate adenocarcinoma Gleason score 8 and foci of neuroendocrine cells were diagnosed.
Serum Cromogranin A was of 199 micrograms/L (compared with 98- maximum admitted value), serotonin was 85.9 micrograms/L (compared to 117-190
mg/L), 5-hydroxy-indolacetic acid 5.6 mg/24 hours (N=2-9). Immunohistochemistry showed 15-20% positivity for Cromogranin A and 10% for
synaptophysin. In October 2010, the patient developed multiple liver metastases. He underwent five courses of Carboplatin with etoposide,
but, because of the severe adverse events (febrile neutropenia) the chemotherapy was suspended and monthly treatment with 20 mg of
Sandostatin was instituted. He died due to liver failure in March 2011. Neuroendocrine differentiation characterizes the second phenotype by
prevalence in comparison with the prostate adenocarcinoma, but remains under diagnosed. NE tumor cells are androgen-insensitive and have a
mitogenic effect on adjacent tumor cells (exocrine). They are resistant to irradiation and chemotherapy. The monitoring and diagnosis of NE
differentiation is recommended in clinical, laboratory, histopathological and immunohistochemical monitoring of the patients with prostate
cancer treated by irradiation and/or androgen deprivation therapy.
