We describe a 14-month-old girl who initially presented with 8 days of fever, conjunctival injection, rash, and irritability, admitted with
a presumptive diagnosis of Kawasaki disease. Further history revealed intermittent urticarial-like rash since 3 months of age and
pathological evaluation showed a perivascular infiltrate of neutrophils and lymphocytes. Here, we discuss the key points surrounding her
diagnostic workup and our therapeutic approach. Persistent urticaria and fever in a previously healthy child. Our patient is a 14-month old
girl, product of a full-term, fraternal twin gestation, who was initially hospitalized for 8 days with fever and rash with a presumptive
diagnosis of Kawasaki disease. Evaluation revealed significantly elevated levels of acute-phase reactants and serum inflammatory markers
without evidence of underlying infection. She received i.v. immunoglobulin (IVIG; 2 g/kg) initially, followed by a second dose of IVIG and
subsequently infliximab (5 mg/kg), with only temporary resolution of fever, conjunctival injection, and rash. The allergy and immunology
service was consulted for evaluation of persistent urticaria and fever. Review of our patient's history revealed that she had experienced an
intermittent rash since 3 months of age, which was initially treated as dermatographism. Two months before her presentation, her parents
noted recurrence of the rash with associated conjunctivitis. The rash was associated with fever and was unique in that it appeared to worsen
during the day and have near complete resolution overnight. It was described as nonpruritic and nondistressing to the patient and was
accentuated in exposed areas of skin with some sparing of areas covered by clothing (Fig. 1, A and B). Antibiotics and antihistamines had no
impact on either the fever or the dermatologic symptoms. Urticarial-like rash. (A and B) Photographs were taken at the peak of rash
development, before initiation of any therapies. (C and D) Histological examination of skin with perivascular inflammatory infiltrate. There
was no history of significant infections or prolonged illness. She met her developmental milestones appropriately but was generally noted to
be smaller in size than her fraternal twin. She tolerated routine vaccinations without incident. There is no family history of urticaria,
immunodeficiency, autoimmune disease, or recurrent fevers. Her parents, as well as her fraternal twin, are healthy. She initially presented
as an irritable child, with weight at the 43rd percentile for age and height at 70th percentile for age. At our initial evaluation, her
temperature was 40.1°C (104.1°F), and she was tachycardic. Physical exam was notable for cervical and inguinal lymphadenopathy, mild
hepatosplenomegaly and multiple erythematous, blanchable macules, and patches of an urticarial nature, mostly coalescing on the upper and
lower extremities, face, and torso, with minimal involvement of the palms and soles (Fig. 1, A and B). There was no evidence of skin
excoriation, oral findings, or skin peeling of the fingers. Laboratory evaluation revealed elevated levels of acute-phase reactants and
serum inflammatory markers, including C-reactive protein at 22 mg/L (reference range, 0–3 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 43
mm/hour (reference range, 0–20 mm/hour), and platelets of 697,000/μL (reference range, 140–440 × 103/μL). Cultures and diagnostic tests were
negative for an infectious etiology (Table 1). Multiple echocardiograms documented normal coronary artery internal dimensions. Laboratory
evaluation ANA = antinuclear antibody; CRP = C-reactive protein; ELISA = enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; ESR = erythrocyte sedimentation
rate; IVIG = i.v. immunoglobulin; LDH = lactate dehydrogenase; WBC = white blood cell. The differential diagnosis for fever and urticaria in
a child is extensive, and includes infectious causes, medication reactions (especially antibiotics), autoimmune diseases, vasculitides, and
autoinflammatory disorders including the cyropyrin-associated periodic syndromes (CAPS).1,2 The length of fever (>5 days), history of
conjunctivitis, and presence of cervical lymphadenopathy is also concerning for Kawasaki disease, as initially diagnosed in this patient,
although she did not meet the other criteria. For a diagnosis of classic Kawasaki disease, she would require at least two additional
symptoms such as oral mucosal changes, polymorphous rather than urticarial rash, erythema/edema of palms/soles, or desquamation of
fingertips/toes.3 Table 2 summarizes a more complete list of differential diagnoses. Differential diagnosis of fever and urticaria CAPS =
cryopyrin-associated periodic syndromes; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus; HLH = hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; SCLE = subacute
cutaneous lupus; SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus; URI = upper respiratory infection. Complex urticaria, as suggested by lack of
responsiveness to antihistamines, association with fever, or other indications of a systemic process, should be biopsied. Evaluation of the
inflammatory infiltrate may identify rare but serious syndromes marked by urticaria, including the vasculitides and CAPS.
Immunohistochemical identification of specific cell types, such as regulatory T cells (observed in cases of chronic urticaria), can guide
diagnosis and management decisions.4 Additional histological studies such as immunofluorescent antibody staining of the tissue may provide
further information regarding antibody deposition as seen in subacute cutaneous lupus.5 Treatment with IVIG at 2 g/kg led to only a
temporary improvement in the fevers and inflammatory markers, but minimal impact on her rash. Subsequent treatment with infliximab at 5
mg/kg as well as a second course of IVIG (2 g/kg), gave similar results. Given the failure of sustained improvement in her inflammatory
symptoms and persistence of the urticarial rash, a skin biopsy of affected skin was performed, which showed a perivascular inflammatory
infiltrate comprised of lymphocytes, neutrophils, and rare eosinophils without evidence of leukocytoclastic vasculitis. Some of the mixed
inflammatory infiltrate also surrounded a few adnexal structures, suggestive of CAPS6,7 (Fig. 1, C and D). A therapeutic trial with
subcutaneous anakinra (2 mg/kg per day) resulted in partial resolution of symptoms, and increasing the dose to 4 mg/kg per day led to
complete resolution of her physical symptoms as well as normalization of inflammatory markers (Fig. 2). There was no evidence of
papilledema, such as blurred optic margins or hemorrhage near the optic disk on ophthalmologic exam, and laboratory studies have
consistently indicated normal renal function. Additional workup revealed normal bone studies, but minimal leptomeningeal enhancement on MRI
as observed in neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disorder.8 Her dose requirement and clinical findings characterize her as a more
severe phenotype on the spectrum of CAPS. Sequencing of all NLRP3 coding exons failed to show a mutation. Select laboratory markers and
response to therapy. (A) Total white blood cell count. (B) Absolute neutrophil count. (C) C-reactive protein (CRP). IVIG, i.v.
immunoglobulin. She continues to be asymptomatic on anakinra at 4 mg/kg per day, with serum inflammatory markers at the lower limits of
detection: C-reactive protein at 0.02 mg/L (reference range, 0–3 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate at 1 mm/hour (reference range,
0–20 mm/hour). Attempts at reducing her dose to every other day administration have resulted in return of clinical symptoms. She has met
developmental milestones appropriately, and her growth has improved with height and weight now surpassing those of her fraternal twin
sister. Therapy with anakinra has been well tolerated and she has not experienced any injection site reactions or serious infections. The
pattern of symptoms and clinical findings, as well as response to anakinra, was consistent with a diagnosis of CAPS. CAPS are a spectrum of
autosomal dominant disorders, characterized by intermittent or continuous symptoms of fever, rash, conjunctivitis, and musculoskeletal
pain.9,10 The mildest form, familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome, uniquely displays episodes of inflammation after mild generalized cold
exposure.11 Muckle-Wells syndrome is similarly characterized by inflammatory episodes, which occur more frequently but without a defined
inciting factor. Chronic inflammation in Muckle-Wells syndrome leads to the development of progressive sensorineural hearing loss and
systemic amyloidosis in a subset of patients.12 In the most severe phenotype, neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disorder, patients
present early with chronic inflammation including an urticarial rash and fever. Later, they develop signs of central nervous system
inflammation (increased intracranial pressure, chronic aseptic meningitis, seizures, and uveitis) as well as sensorineural hearing loss and
progressive arthropathy.8 Although classified as distinct disorders, many patients display overlapping symptoms, as we observed in our
patient. The majority of CAPS patients present within the first few weeks to months of life, consistent with the inherited nature of this
systemic innate immune inflammatory disorder. However, there are several cases in which significant symptoms are not observed until after
the neonatal period as was seen in our patient. This is also true for several of the other hereditary fever disorders, suggesting a role for
an environmental trigger, such as microbial exposure. These autoinflammatory disorders are characterized by dysregulation of innate immunity
or aberrant pattern recognition sensing, with a predominance of activated neutrophils and monocytes, rather than the antigen-specific T
cells and high-titer autoantibodies observed in autoimmune diseases. Most but not all CAPS patients have a mutation in NLRP3 which encodes
cryopyrin.13 The identification of mutation-negative patients with a classic CAPS phenotype suggests the involvement of additional genes in
the same or related pathways. Additionally, considerable evidence now exists for the presence of somatic mosaicism in NLRP3 in many CAPS
patients initially thought to be mutant negative,14,15 but this still has not been evaluated in our patient. Cryopyrin associates with
apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase recruitment domain and procaspase-1 to form the NLPR3 inflammasome driving
IL-1β and IL-18 production. Persistent activation of the inflammasome in CAPS leads to up-regulation of IL-1β and the symptoms observed in
CAPS (Fig. 3).16 NLRP3 Inflammasome. Cyropyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS)–associated mutations in NLRP3 lead to inflammasome
hyperactivity, independent of known clinically relevant sterile inflammatory stimuli. Inflammasome activation results in pro–caspase-1
cleavage, caspase-1 activation, and IL-1β production leading to inflammation. Therapies for CAPS primarily target IL-1 and include anakinra
(recombinant IL-1 receptor antagonist),17,18 rilonacept (fusion protein of IL-1 receptor and IL-1 receptor accessory protein),19,20 and
canakinumab (humanized monoclonal antibody to IL-1β).21 Studies with IL-1 blockers have consistently shown reduction of symptomatic periods
and inflammatory markers in patients with CAPS, similar to the results observed in our patient. Additionally, anti–IL-1 therapy has often
shown substantial improvement of progressive and long-term complications of CAPS, including hearing loss and renal disease due to
amyloidosis, as well as improvement in quality-of-life measurements.22–24 The success of IL-1–targeted therapy in CAPS and other
neutrophilic skin disorders such as Sweet syndrome25 and Schnitzler syndrome26 suggest that it may have a role in the therapy of chronic
urticaria with neutrophilic pathology. Currently, rilonacept and canakinumab are Food and Drug Administration approved for CAPS, whereas
anakinra is only approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. All three drugs are injectable and have established life-changing
results for these patients but primarily differ in their recommended frequency of administration. IL-1–targeted therapy may be associated
with increased risk of nonopportunistic infection, and patients should be monitored appropriately and treated accordingly. Final diagnosis
was cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome. This patient with mutation-negative CAPS emphasizes the broad differential diagnosis of fever
and rash in a young child and the variable clinical presentation of the CAPS spectrum. This case also illustrates the usefulness of biopsy
for urticarial-like lesions that are minimally responsive to conventional therapy. It also suggests that there is a role for a therapeutic
trial of anakinra in the diagnostic workup of CAPS as well as long-term maintenance therapy. Presented initially as an abstract at the
meeting of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology (ACAAI), Boston, MA, November 5, 2011 L Broderick is funded by NIH
Training Grant T32 AI 07469 during her fellowship training and has received grant support from the Thrasher Research Foundation and The
Hartwell Foundation. This work is supported in part by grants from The Hartwell Foundation and The Harold Amos Medical Faculty Development
Program from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation awarded to AH Tremoulet. HM Hoffman is a consultant for Sobi Biovitrum, Novartis and
Regeneron. The remaining author has no conflicts of interest to declare pertaining to this article This study was approved by the University
of California–San Diego Institutional Review Board. The authors acknowledge the clinical advice of Raphaela Goldbach-Mansky, M.D., (NIH),
Shireen Guide, M.D. (Rady Children's Hospital–San Diego), and Sheila F. Friedlander, M.D. (Rady Children's Hospital–San Diego).
