Gastric tube after esophagectomy can be the site of local recurrence or the development of second primary tumor which implies poor
prognosis. The study presents an extremely rare case of a patient after Ivor-Lewis esophagectomy for squamous cell carcinoma, in whom there
was detected local recurrence in the anastomosis associated with metachronous primary tumor in gastric tube. Esophageal reresection with the
upper part of the stomach was performed. Left colonic segment supplied by middle colic vessels transposed through retrosternal route was
used as new esophageal substitute. Esophagectomy with lymph node dissections combined with adjuvant therapy remains the basic method of
esophageal cancer surgical treatment. The stomach is the most commonly used esophageal substitute after esophagectomy. Owing to the
availability of new, more precise diagnostic techniques and to the improvement of the late outcomes of esophageal cancer treatment, there
increases the detectability of the cases of second primary malignancies in the stomach . The coexistence of squamous cell carcinoma with
malignant and benign cancers of other organs (such as the head, neck, upper respiratory tract, and of the remaining part of the
gastrointestinal tract) is known and concerns nearly 10% to 21% of patients . This phenomenon even has meaningful term: ‘field
cancerization’ . The coexistence of primary gastric and esophageal cancer has been estimated to reach 3% to 7% . The incidence of primary
cancer within the gastric graft after esophagectomy has been estimated to be related to <2.1% of patients . The surgical treatment of a
cancer diagnosed in the gastric tube after esophagectomy is a difficult and rarely undertaken surgical challenge associated with the risk
for severe complications and high mortality. A female patient, MZ, aged 61 years, referred primarily for surgical treatment due to
esophageal cancer detected in the epicardial region. Endoscopic examination revealed a primary tumor located 30 cm from the incisors.
Endoscopic evaluation of the stomach lumen was impossible due to esophageal stricture at the tumor level. Histopathological examination of
tumor specimens led to the diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma. Preoperative thoracic computed tomography (CT) detected neither tumor
infiltration on the surrounding tissues nor the enlargement of the regional lymph nodes in the thorax and abdominal cavity. Based on the
results of diagnostic investigations which confirmed the possibility of local excision of the tumor, the patient was qualified for surgical
treatment. Partial Ivor-Lewis esophago-gastrectomy was performed with conventional two-field en block lymphadenectomy using a gastric tube
as an esophageal substitute. The esophagogastroplasty was performed in the right pleural cavity. The postoperative histopathological
examination showed squamous cell carcinoma keratodes G-2 invading the adventitia without lymph node metastasis (pT3N0M0, Stage II A).
Microscopically esophageal and gastric rings were free from neoplastic cells. The proximal resection margin was 4 cm. Eighteen lymph nodes
of the following groups were removed: upper thoracic paraesophageal lymph nodes (2), right thoracic paratracheal lymph nodes (1),
bifurcation lymph nodes (2), middle thoracic paraesophageal lymph nodes (2), right pulmonary hilar lymph nodes (1), lower thoracic
paraesophageal lymph nodes (2), diaphragmatic lymph nodes (1), posterior mediastinal lymph nodes (2), lesser curvature lymph nodes (3), left
gastric artery lymph nodes (1), and common hepatic artery lymph nodes (1). All lymph nodes were free of cancer cells. The patient’s
postoperative course was uncomplicated and she was discharged from hospital after 17 days. After surgery, the patient did not report for
further treatment at an oncological center. The follow-up endoscopy performed 6 months after esophagectomy showed: (A) mucosa at the site of
anastomosis: uneven, congested with superficial lesions covered with fibrin, unchanged esophageal mucous membrane proximal to anastomosis.
About 3 cm below the anastomosis was a stocky polyp of 10 to 12 mm in diameter (B) surrounded by normal gastric mucosa. Congested mucosa
without lesions were in the gastric tube distal segment. The results of histopathological examinations revealed: (A) gastric mucosa segment
with the features of foveolar hyperplasia, (B) polyp from the gastric tube - squamous cell carcinoma keratodes (suspicion of local
recurrence). The result of CT after esophagectomy was (Figure 1): anastomosis between the stomach and the esophagus constructed above
tracheal bifurcation. No recurrence of radiological traits of the growth process were found at the anastomosis site. There was visible
segmental gastric wall thickening (7 mm) about 3 to 4 cm below the anastomosis without infiltration to the surrounding structures. There
were enlarged single paratracheal and subcalcarine lymph nodes. No focal lesions were observed in the lungs. Computed tomography (scan A,
B): gastroesophageal anastomosis at the level of tracheal bifurcation, below visible thickening of gastric mucosa. The patient was qualified
for reoperation with the possibility using a colon as esophageal substitute. Earlier performed diagnostic endoscopy revealed no pathological
lesions nor vascular anomalies in angio CT of abdominal vasculature. Operation was started with right rethoracotomy to release carefully the
gastric tube from adhesions with the right lung and thoracic wall. The esophageal wall thickened circumferentially about 1 to 2 cm above the
anastomosis, characteristic of recurrence, was detected by intraoperative palpation (not shown on endoscopy and CT). En bloc dissection of
residual esophagus was performed to the level of the apex of the chest and then the esophageal stump was cut 8 cm above the anastomosis
(Figure 2). After separation of anastomoses between the gastric tube and the lung numerous air leaks from its surface were observed. Single
lymph nodes were removed in the site after conduit. Gastric tube was returned back to the peritoneal cavity together with the distal part of
esophageal stump. The resection of two-thirds of the proximal part of the stomach with the esophageal stump was performed through
laparotomy.A new conduit was prepared from left colonic segment supplied by the middle colic artery (Figure 3). The esophageal stump was
dissected from a left neck incision and limited lymphadenectomy was performed (paraesophageal and deep cervical lymph nodes). The right
colon was mobilized and then pulled through the cervical incision through the retrosternal route. Hand-sewn anastomosis was made in the neck
between the esophageal stump and antiperistaltic colonic loop. The distal end of conduit was anastomosed to the posterior gastric wall.
Initially, jejunostomy feeding was introduced and after 5 days it was replaced with oral feeding. The total period of hospitalization was
15 days. The range of gastric tube and esophageal stump resection. Vascularization of the long segment of transverse colon and left part of
the colon on the middle colic artery. The results of postoperative histopathological examination were (a) distal esophageal stump with
anastomosis: recurrence of squamous cell carcinoma keratodes G-2, tumor emboli in lymphatic vessels, proximal esophageal stump free of tumor
infiltration; (b) tumor located in gastric tube, squamous cell carcinoma pT2N0Mx (primary focus), the tumor sounded by normal gastric
mucosa; and (c) lymph nodes from the thoracic area (7) and neck (4) without tumor cells. Eight weeks after surgery, in the course of the
second cycle of chemotherapy, dysphagia developed. Endoscopy revealed no anastomotic stenosis. Within a 3-week period an effective
endoscopy-guided dilatation with a balloon was performed twice. Six months after reoperation no recurrence of the neoplastic process was
observed in follow-up diagnostic tests. The use of the stomach as an esophageal substitute after esophagectomy is commonly accepted by the
majority of surgeons . The stomach is by choice the first organ owing to such characteristics as: availability and length, plasticity, and
rich submucosal vascular network . However, part of patients can manifest the second primary tumor. The second primary carcinoma was defined
according to the criteria described by Warrren and Gates : (1) the tumours had to be evidently malignant on histological examination; (2)
they had to be separated by normal mucosa; and (3) the possibility of a second tumor representing a metastasis had to be excluded. In the
case described by us, besides the local recurrence in the anastomosis we dealt with the second primary tumor in the gastric tube which
fulfilled histopathological criteria of metachronous tumour. Esophageal stenosis often makes endoscopic evaluation of the stomach
impossible. In the observation of Koide as much as 89.3% of gastric tumors coexisting with esophageal carcinoma were located at the upper or
middle third of the stomach and nearly one-third of them were not detected before surgical treatment. We cannot exclude that due to
esophageal stenosis, the secondary gastric tumor was not detected in our patient in the first endoscopy. Gastric metachronous carcinomas
which are diagnosed on the basis of clinical symptoms have poor prognosis, whereas those detected early in the course of endoscopic
screening have much better prognosis, particularly if they are related only to the mucosa . Synchronous primary gastric cancers in patients
with esophageal carcinoma diagnosed before esophagectomy should be treated in the same way as primary cancer . If they are limited to
mucosa, they can be resected during pre- or intraoperative endoscopy . Other locally operative tumors can be resected during esophagectomy
by performing mucosal resection using gastrotomy or adequately extending the range of gastric resection. In the case of metachronous tumors
located in the gastric tube the therapeutic management depends on the depth of tumor infiltration to the gastric wall . In the case of
second locally inoperable tumors and local recurrence the therapy is limited to chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or a combination of these
modalities . After esophagectomy, endoscopic mucosal resection is the therapy of choice for early gastric cancer . In the selected cases of
metachronous tumors limited to gastric substitute wall reconstructed retrosternally, the tumor can be resected using minimally invasive
videothoracoscopic technique . The surgical treatment of advanced secondary cancers in the gastric tube is a difficult and rarely undertaken
challenge due to complicated local conditions, the risk of severe complications, and high mortality. Table 1 demonstrates the literature
data summing up the results of the treatment of metachronous neoplastic lesions in the gastric conduit. Akiyama and Nakayama reported that
in surgeries due to a cancer in the gastric tube the mortality rate could reach 50% of cases (14 of 28) . In low grade tumors located in the
upper third of the stomach it is suggested to perform proximal gastrectomy with the dissection of regional lymph nodes. In high grade but
operative second cancers of the stomach total gastrectomy combined with esophagectomy is recommended . The surgery allows removal of both
tumors and complete dissection of the regional lymph nodes. According to Oki et al. the prognosis of patients who underwent resection was
better than that of the other patients . Table summarizing published cases of metachronous neoplastic lesions in the gastric conduit EC,
oesophageal cancer; GC, gastric cancer; ; m, months; NR, not reported; RLN, regional lymph node metastases. Gastric tube resection requires
reconstruction of gastrointestinal tract with the useof colonic or small intestine conduit. In such situations colon graft is preferred
owing to its proper length, reliable blood supply, and fewer complications . In the case described by us we decided to use retrosternal
route for colon graft transposition for four reasons: the need for more extensive resection of the esophagus; the risk of locoregional
recurrence; planned radiotherapy of the area of posterior mediastinum; and intensive air leak from the lung surface. Similar management was
recommended by Yoon et al.. The non-complicated postoperative course confirmed the rightness of this choice. We think that more frequent use
of a colon graft as the first choice esophageal substitute is worth considering owing to lower risk of the development of second primary
tumor or local recurrence at the site of esophagus removal. Gastric tube resection with the creation of a new esophageal substitute from the
colon is a difficult but possible treatment option in selected cases of recurrence or second primary cancer of the stomach detected in
postoperative follow-up. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this report and any accompanying images.
The authors declare that they have no competing interests in this paper. SJ composed the case report, prepared and edited this manuscript,
contributed it conception, collected the data and conducted a literature search. ŁP and MW participated in the data collection and gave
final approval for this version of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
