Although pilomatrixomas are frequently encountered by dermatologists and pathologists in the differential diagnosis of head and neck
lesions, this is not usually the case among head and neck surgeons. A pilomatrixoma (calcifying epithelioma of Malherbe) is a benign tumour
of the hair matrix cells. Histologically it is characterised by the presence of ghost cells, basophilic cells and foreign body cells. It may
sometimes be difficult to histologically distinguish it from its malignant counterpart, the pilomatrix carcinoma. We report an interesting
case of an ulcerated pilomatrixoma of the pinna in a middle-aged Caucasian female. A 46-year-old Caucasian female presented with a one-month
history of tender brownish lump on the pinna. Initially it was thought to represent a pyogenic granuloma. The lesion was treated by wide
circular excision. Histopathological evaluation reported a benign calcifying epithelioma of Malherbe. A search of the world’s literature has
led us to believe that this is a rare case of a calcifying epithelioma of Malherbe of the pinna. The rapid growth and ulcerative nature of
this tumour makes this case even more unique. PUBLISHER'S NOTE: Based on the information available to BioMed Central, this article was
apparently handled by Waseem Jerjes, an author of the article and Editor-in-Chief of the journal at that time. The manuscript was reviewed
by one recent co-author of some of the authors and accepted without revision. Calcifying Epithelioma of Malherbe (CEM) or Pilomatrixoma was
first described in 1880 by Malherbe and Chenantais as a benign tumour that occurs most commonly in children . In 1949, Lever and Griesember
suggested that it originates from the hair matrix cells . It usually presents as a slow-growing lesion, but it can also grow rapidly and can
be locally aggressive . Its malignant counterpart, pilomatrix carcinoma or calcifying epitheliocarcinoma of Malherbe, is rare and was first
described by Lopanski and Mihm in 1980 . A calcifying epithelioma of Malherbe occurs most commonly in head and neck areas, especially
cervical, frontal and temporal regions, eyelids and preauricular regions ; although the upper extremities, trunk and lower extremities can
be affected, in decreasing order of frequency . The peak incidence of pilomatrixoma is found between 8 and 13 years of age . There is a
slight female preponderance with a female to male ratio of 1.75:1 . Clinically, it presents as a firm, irregular, reddish-blue, slow-
growing, dermal or subcutaneous nodule that measures 0.5-5.0 cm in diameter . It may be associated with a number of different conditions
such as Gardner’s syndrome, myotonic muscular dystrophy, Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, Turner’s syndrome, xeroderma pigmentosum and basal cell
naevus syndrome . A 46-year-old Caucasian female presented with a one-month history of tender brownish lump on the pinna. The patient
reported that the lump was rapidly increasing in size and its surface was ulcerating. The patient’s medical history was unremarkable.
Examination revealed a 1.4 by 1.0 cm tender, firm, non-fluctuant, ulcerated lesion; initially it was thought to represent a pyogenic
granuloma (Figure 1). There was no palpable lymphadenopathy. Clinical photograph of the pinna showing an ulcerated lesion. The lesion was
treated by wide circular excision with a 4-6 mm margin followed by reconstruction of the defect with a split skin graft. Histopathological
evaluation of the resected tissue reported a benign calcifying epithelioma of Malherbe (Figures 2, 3 and 4). The patient remains well after
five years. H&E stained section taken with low-power objective. This view shows the lobular architecture of the tumour and demonstrates the
typical biphasic population of darkly staining basaloid cells (left) and the larger more eosinophilic ghost keratinocytes (right) H& E
stained section taken with a medium power objective. Squamous epithelium is shown on the right side adjacent to eosinophilic keratinous
debris with visible ghost outline of tumour cells and calcification towards the centre. The granular layer is not in evidence and there is
abrupt keratinisation in keeping with the predominantly pilar keratinisation seen in pilomatricoma. H&E stained section taken with a medium
power objective. This shows maturation in pilomatricoma. The basaloid cells shown in the bottom right of the picture gradually become
enlarged and more eosinophilic, the nuclei become pyknotic and eventually form the ghost cells characteristic of this tumour. There is
foreign body reaction top left which is often seen in association with pilomatricoma Calcifying epithelioma of Malherbe (pilomatrixoma) is a
rare benign neoplasm of hair matrix cell origin . It is one of the most common cutaneous tumours of skin appendages in patients less than
20 years . To our knowledge, other cases have been described . Other reported cases of a clinical variant called perforating pilomatrixoma,
in which ulceration is typical . The differential diagnosis for a head and neck pilomatrixoma includes a sebaceous cyst, ossifying
haematoma, chondroma, degenerating fibroxanthoma, giant cell tumour, foreign body reaction, dermoid cyst, osteoma cutis, squamous cell
carcinoma, basal cell carcinoma, amelanotic malignant melanoma and metastatic bone formation . The typical histopathological features are
the presence of mature, keratinised, karyolitic cells called ghost cells, basophilic cells, bony metaplasia, foreign body giant cell
reaction and less commonly pigmentation, transepidermal elimination and an infiltrative growth pattern . The infiltrative growth pattern,
the high mitotic rate and the presence of excessive basaloid cell proliferation characterize the aggressive type of pilomatrixoma, which may
be histologically difficult to differentiate from basal cell carcinoma, proliferating pilar cyst and pilomatrix carcinoma . It has the
ability to locally invade adjacent structures and has the capacity to recur . The malignant counterpart of pilomatrixoma is known as
malignant pilomatrixoma, pilomatrix carcinoma or calcifying epitheliocarcinoma of Malherbe . It is a rare finding, usually occurs in middle-
aged patients and has a male to female ratio of 4:1 . It has the tendency to recur locally . Just above 50 cases have been described in the
world’s literature. Of those cases, only five developed metastatic disease in the lungs, bones and viscera . Pilomatrix carcinoma appears to
be resistant to both primary chemotherapy and radiotherapy and therefore, radical surgery followed by postoperative radiotherapy has been
advocated to ensure local control . A search of the world’s literature has led us to believe that this is a rare case of a calcifying
epithelioma of Malherbe of the pinna. The ulcerative nature of this tumour makes this case even more unique, with only a few cases of
‘perforating pilomatrixoma’ reported so far of the pinna. The case was also of interest because of its rapid evolution with ulceration. It
should therefore be included in the differential diagnosis of any cutaneous lesion of the pinna, especially when considering lesions such as
keratoacantomas, squamous cell carcinomas, basal cell carcinomas and amelanotic malignant melanomas, where treatment involves extensive
resection followed by local or distant reconstructive techniques, and not just a simple excision. Written informed consent was obtained from
the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. TU, WJ, FS, AS, PK, MA, HR contributed to
conception and design, carried out the literature research, manuscript preparation and manuscript review. All authors have read and approved
the final version of the manuscript.
