Z.G. and T.K. contributed equally to this work. Mutations of the KCNJ11 gene are a common cause of permanent neonatal diabetes (PNDM) (1,2)
and sometimes result in other diabetic phenotypes (2). Sulfonylureas (SUs) are effective and safe in most diabetic KCNJ11 mutation carriers
(3). However, their application risk is sometimes uncertain. We have previously described glibenclamide use in a pregnant woman with
KCNJ11-related PNDM (4); for the first time, we report two cases treated with SU throughout the entire pregnancy. The first case was a
Hungarian woman with the E229 K KCNJ11 mutation resulting in relapsing neonatal diabetes. The patient experienced remission between the ages
of 3 and 10 years, at which point insulin was restarted. At the age of 13, after genetic testing, the patient was switched to gliclazide 60
mg/day. The woman became pregnant at the age of 16 years. When she was referred to the clinic in the 11th week of pregnancy, HbA1c was 8.2%.
Because diabetes was brittle during the insulin treatment on which she had been earlier, it was decided to continue gliclazide; the
Bioethical Committee was informed. She was normoglycemic (HbA1c 5.8, 5.2, and 5.2%) on a stable SU dose. Cesarean delivery was performed in
the 38th week. The Apgar score of the baby girl (birth weight 3,010 g) was 10 at the first minute; the neonatal period was uneventful.
Genetic testing from the umbilical cord blood showed the E229 K mutation. So far, the baby, currently 18 months old, has not been diagnosed
with diabetes and is developing normally. The second case, a previously reported R201H KCNJ11 mutation carrier with multiple diabetes
complications from Poland (4,5) became pregnant again at the age of 39 years when she was on glibenclamide 45 mg/day. Informed about the
risks, she ruled out switching to insulin and decided to continue SU. HbA1c at the 5th month of pregnancy was 5.8%. The amniocentesis in the
16th week showed the fetal DNA without chromosomal abnormalities or the R201H mutation. The woman delivered prematurely in the 33rd week via
Cesarean section; the indication was the motherâ€™s status: edema, proteinuria, and renal function impairment. The latter was probably
responsible for the need for glibenclamide dose reduction (10 mg/day). The Apgar score of the newborn (birth weight 2,720 g, >90 percentile)
was 7 at the first minute. The baby girl presented with decreased muscle tension and cyanosis. She was also diagnosed with hypoglycemia
requiring intravenous glucose, hyperbilirubinemia (treated with phototherapy), and respiratory acidosis. The latter was initially treated
with continuous positive airway pressure and then, for 2 days, noninvasive mechanical ventilation. The recovery was uneventful. No birth
defects were recorded. The child's development at the 18th month was normal. In summary, we provide evidence that SUs constitute an
alternative to insulin in pregnant women with Kir6.2-related diabetes, particularly in those refusing standard treatment or not adherent to
this approach. The use of SUs did not result in developmental abnormalities. As in the first pregnancy (4), transient complications occurred
in the baby of the mother with the R201H mutation receiving glibenclamide. Nevertheless, one should be careful with attributing them to the
specific drug because they are common in prematurity. This study was supported by the EU Framework 7 CEED3 Grant (HEALTH-F2-2008-223211), by
funds from the Jagiellonian University Medical College (to M.T.M.), and by the TAMOP 4.2.1./B-091/1/KONV-2010-0007 project (to I.B.). No
potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. Z.G. and M.T.M. interpreted data, critically revised the manuscript
for important intellectual content, and approved the final version to be submitted. T.K. researched data and contributed to writing the
manuscript. I.K.,W.M., L.A., J.T., I.B., and K.C. researched data. M.T.M. is the guarantor of this work and, as such, had full access to all
the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. The authors thank the
subjects who participated in the study. The authors also acknowledge the editorial assistance of Aleksandra Malecka, Warsaw University,
Warsaw, Poland.
