A 21-year-old female presented with progressive bilateral visual loss for the past 8 years. The patient had no history of systemic disease,
surgery or medications. Complete ophthalmologic examination and topography were performed. On ophthalmic examination, uncorrected visual
acuity was counting fingers at 2.5 m (20/50 with pinhole) in the right and left eyes. Both corneas appeared hazy on gross examination. On
slit-lamp biomicroscopy, focal grayish-white opacities with indistinct borders were noted in the superficial and deep corneal stroma of both
eyes. Both corneas were thin and bulging. Corneal topography showed a pattern consistent with keratoconus. The patient underwent penetrating
keratoplasty (PKP). Histopathologic studies after PKP confirmed the diagnosis of macular corneal dystrophy and keratoconus in the same eye.
The patient was clinically diagnosed as a case of concurrent macular dystrophy and keratoconus, which is a very rare presentation.
Keratoconus (KCN) is a progressive, non-inflammatory corneal stromal thinning disorder which leads to corneal ectasia, with irregular myopic
astigmatism and visual impairment as early as in the second decade of life. Although the hereditary pattern is unpredictable, positive
family history can be detected in 6–8% of patients.1 However, it is most often an isolated sporadic condition, despite multiple single
reports of an association with other systemic or ocular disorders.12 Although, keratoconus and corneal dystrophies are rare in the general
population, there are reported cases of both occurring in the same eye.3 It is important to report the association of other conditions with
keratoconus since many of these combinations could be manifestations of a common pathogenetic mechanism or may represent adjacent genetic
defects.13 In this report, we present a case with concurrent keratoconus and macular corneal dystrophy (MCD). A 21-year-old female presented
with progressive bilateral visual loss for the past 8 years. The patient denied any history of systemic disease, surgery, or medications.
There was no consanguinity between her parents. There was no history of a similar disease in her family or pedigree. General physical
examination was unremarkable. At the first visit, uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) was counting fingers at 2.5 m (20/50 with pinhole) in the
right and left eyes. Best spectacle visual acuity (BSCVA) and manifest refraction was 20/100 with a correction of -2.00 D in the right eye
and 20/70 with a correction of -1.00 D in the left eye. Pupillary reactions and ocular motility were normal. The corneas were hazy
bilaterally. On slit-lamp biomicroscopy, focal grayish-white opacities with indistinct borders were noted in the superficial and deep
corneal stroma bilaterally. There was diffuse haziness which was more pronounced in the peripheral cornea with greater severity in the left
eye. Both eyes were thin and bulging. Incomplete Fleischer's rings were visible at the base of the lesions, and vogt striae were not present
[Figure 1]. Intraocular pressures were 8 and 10 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Objective refraction was not possible and a
scissors reflex was present on retinoscopy bilaterally. Despite the hazy media, funduscopy was normal. The patient was clinically diagnosed
with macular dystrophy and probable keratoconus (KCN). Corneal topography (EyeSys Vision Inc., Houston, Texas, USA) showed a characteristic
pattern of KCN [Figures 2a–d]. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy showing focal grayish-white opacities with indistinct borders in the superficial and
deep corneal stroma. Diffuse haziness especially in the peripheral cornea is notable (a-d) Corneal topographies showing inferior steepening
consistent with keratoconus in both eyes Due to the progressive visual loss, the patient underwent penetrating keratoplasty (PKP) in the
right eye on January 2009 and three months later in the left eye. The postoperative course was uneventful and there have been no episodes of
rejection to date. Histopathologic examination of the corneal buttons indicated a markedly thin cornea with irregular attenuated epithelium
and focal Bowman's layer breaks and destruction [Figures 3a and b]. There were diffuse subepithelial and stromal inter-lamellar irregular
deposits, which were Periodic Acid-Schiff-reactive [Figure 3c] and intensely blue on alcian blue staining [Figure 3d] which is typical of
macular dystrophy. The deposits were also present between endothelial cells that appeared normal. Six months after PKP in the left eye, the
UCVA was 20/25 in both eyes. The BCVA with correction of -1.75 -3.00 × 90° was 20/25 in the right eye. Postoperatively the corneas appeared
clear bilaterally. To date, there has been no evidence of recurrence of the dystrophy in the grafts. H and E staining of excised corneal
buttons showing attenuated and folded Bowman's layer (a) and focal breaks and destruction of Bowman's layer (b), Note the diffuse
subepithelial and irregular stromal interlamellar deposits, which are reactive to periodic acid-Schiff (c), Alcian blue staining showing
intense blue-colored intrastromal deposits (d) Macular corneal dystrophy is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by corneal
opacities due to intracellular and extracellular deposits within the corneal stroma. Macular dystrophy (MCD) is among the three classic
corneal stromal dystrophies but is less common than granular dystrophy or lattice dystrophy. However, there have been reports of higher
prevalence of MCD in some regions.4 MCD is characterized by a cloudy, dense stroma with gray-white spots. The macular spots have indistinct
edges and the intervening stroma becomes unclear. In MCD the early lesions are central and superficial, with involvement of the peripheral
cornea and deep stroma over time. Central corneal thinning confirmed by pachymetry has been previously documented.5 MCD deposits stain
easily with alcian blue and colloidal iron and weakly with Periodic Acid-Schiff (PAS). Histochemically, these deposits consist of
glycosaminoglycans and resemble keratan sulfate.6 Keratoconus is a non-inflammatory, corneal ectasia. The etiology remains unclear but is
likely multifactorial, and the pathogenesis is characterized by an area of protrusion associated with loss of stromal substance.
Histopathologic changes include fragmentation of Bowman's layer, stromal and epithelial thinning, folding or rupture of Descemet's membrane
and a variable amount of scarring, especially in the anterior stroma; with normal endothelium.34 Keratoconus can occur in association with a
variety of ocular and systemic diseases. Systemic associations include atopy,2 Down syndrome,7 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome,8 mitral valve
prolapse,9 Marfan syndrome,10 osteogenesis imperfecta type I11 and other disorders of connective tissue. Several studies have reported the
association of keratoconus with atopic characteristics, vernal conjunctivitis, asthma, hay fever and atopic dermatitis.2 Keratoconus can
occur in the presence of isolated ocular pathologies such as retinitis pigmentosa, Leber's congenital amaurosis, vernal
keratoconjunctivitis, and corneal dystrophies.3 Associations with corneal dystrophies include granular, posterior polymorphous, fleck, Fuchs
and lattice dystrophies.3 The association between macular dystrophy and keratoconus has been described previously in 2 case reports.412 The
causes of this association remains unknown but may include a poorly understood molecular mechanism, or genetic linkage. Some have postulated
abnormal synthetic activity of keratocytes and degeneration of defective basal epithelial cells in both granular corneal dystrophy and
keratoconus.13 Javadi et al.,4 noted the interesting biochemical similarities between these two entities such as decreased levels of keratan
sulfate and an increased ratio of dermatan to keratan sulfate. They4 hypothesized that a biochemical alteration in collagen fibril size or
packing induced by the abnormal deposits in macular dystrophy may predispose to thinning and ectasia. Alternately, this association may be
caused by a single genetic alteration. Based on genetic studies, distinct mutations on chromosome 16q22 can cause both types of corneal
dystrophies.14 This locus contains a carbohydrate sulfotransferase gene (CHST6) which encodes an enzyme called corneal N-acetylglucosamine
6-sulfotransferase (C-GlcNAc 6ST).15 Based on genetic studies it is apparent that some distinct clinicopathologic corneal dystrophies are
caused by different mutations on the same locus.14 Future molecular and genetic studies may elucidate this association. Using confocal
microscopy, Balestrazzi et al.,12 found highly reflective scar tissue that extended from the basal membrane to the underlying stroma. They12
suggested this observation was a focal rupture of Bowman's membrane that is visible in both keratoconus and macular dystrophy. In fact, the
main histopathologic alteration of macular dystrophy is represented by focal ruptures of Bowman's membrane that may be irregular, thinned or
absent in some areas.12 Macular dystrophy is a stromal dystrophy that is histopathologically characterized by an accumulation of
glycosaminoglycans between the stromal lamellae, hence, the deposits may be a large extracellular accumulation of abnormal material.12 The
incidence of combined keratoconus and other dystrophies may be higher than suggested by the relative paucity of reports because mild
keratoconus can be overlooked on a routine examination. Clinically, these cases demonstrate the importance of excluding corneal dystrophy as
a cause of visual complaints in keratoconic patients and excluding keratoconus as an unrecognized cause of visual loss in patients with
corneal dystrophies. Corneal topography, confocal microscopy and thorough slit-lamp examination are helpful in determining the coexistence
and severity of both disorders. The correct diagnosis of both disorders leads to the most appropriate treatment.3 Although it is not
possible to completely rule out a coincidental association between both diseases, considering our observations to earlier case reports
strengthens the possibility of an association between these two diseases. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
