Dear Editor(s), In 1999, deep brain stimulation (DBS) was introduced as a new therapeutic approach for intractable Tourette syndrome (TS) .
Currently, it is still considered to be an experimental option with limited controlled data to support its effect [2, 3]. Both single and
multiple brain areas have been targeted to deal with tics as well as comorbid symptoms of TS, including attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) and behaviour (OCb), self-injurious behaviour (SIB), depression and anxiety. These
associated comorbidities are present in up to 90 % of clinically referred TS patients and have a significant impact on quality of life . So
far, guidelines to select patients [4, 5] for DBS were mainly focused on tics. Also in the recently revised clinical guidelines by the
European Society for the Study of Tourette Syndrome , the issue comorbidity in patient selection is relatively underaddressed. In 2010, we
have completed a double-blind trial stimulating the centromedian nucleus–substantia periventricularis nucleus–ventro-oralis internus
(Cm–Spv–Voi) cross-point of the thalamus . Here, we report on the outcome of DBS in an institutionalized patient with intractable TS and
severe comorbidity. Although she was younger than 25 years, she was included in the trial and underwent surgery for clinical urgency.
Postoperatively, she could not be randomised within the period of follow-up because of unexplained complications. In this letter, we discuss
the nature of the complications and the implications for patient selection. The 20-year-old female patient was born with a mild spastic
diplegia due to complications during pregnancy. The diagnosis of TS was made at the age of 10 years. Motor and vocal tics included eye
blinking, licking, cheek biting, tapping with her right foot, coughing, barking, uttering sounds and coprolalia. Associated comorbidities
included depression, pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS) and compulsions (e.g., forced touching of furniture
and a specific form of trichotillomania). In 2005, she developed severe SIB, including repetitive hitting her head and arm (she had to wear
a helmet and a body protector), poking sharp objects into her body and scratching until bleeding. Numerous pharmacological treatments had
been administrated and discontinued, due to the side effects or lack of response. Behavioural therapy and electroconvulsive therapy were
even leading to new tics. In November 2006, she underwent surgery for thalamic DBS. See Ackermans and colleagues for the surgical details.
Three weeks after surgery, while adjusting the parameters, the patient showed an abrupt onset of severe hypertonia in her left leg. In the
following days, this extended to the right leg and both arms, followed by involuntary movements of the left arm, and on one occasion
rotating movements of both arms above the head. The symptoms did not disappear when switching off the stimulator. Either with or without
stimulation, the hypertonia was present but inconsistent over time and could not be classified within the phenomenology of organic movement
disorders such as myoclonus, dystonia or spasticity. During the first month after surgery, she was bedridden and developed an opisthotonus.
Rehabilitation with a cognitive behavioural approach was not successful. In May 2007 she developed unexplained disturbances of
consciousness, followed by periods of mutism. To exclude a side-effect of stimulation, double-blind stimulation was performed at 19 months
after surgery according to the procedure of the trial . Unblinding the conditions showed an increase in tics (see Table 1), but a relief of
hypertonia while the stimulator was switched on, and visa versa. For the patient, the results were completely unexpected and she decided to
have the stimulator switched off. From that time on she showed alternating hypertonia in legs and arms, but relatively few motor and vocal
tics. Later, she developed complaints of impaired swallowing, nausea and she could not bear food anymore. Diagnostics (e.g., gastroscopy)
did not result in an organic explanation and psychiatric consultation did not reveal a depressive state. Hypodermoclysis could not prevent
dehydration and she refrained from admission to a hospital for intravenous infusion. In November 2009, she passed away in a nursing home.
For personal reasons no autopsy was performed.Table 1Pre- and post-operative assessment of tics and comorbiditiesBefore surgeryaStimulation
offbStimulation oncTic severity (YGTSS total)421239Vocal tics (YGTSS vocal)17014Motor tics (YGTSS motor)251225OCD (Y-BOCS)2087SIB
(VAS)5.708.9ADHD (CAARS)584245Autism (PDD-SQ)136127124Depression (BDI-II)122015Anxiety (BAI)324144YGTSS Yale Global Tic Severity Scale, OCD
obsessive compulsive disorder, Y-BOCS Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale, SIB self injurious behaviour, VAS Visual Analogue Scale, ADHD
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, CAARS Conners Adult ADHD Rating Scale, PDD-SQ Pervasive Developmental Disorder-Self Questionnaire,
BDI-II Beck Depression Inventory (2nd edn.), BAI Beck Anxiety InventoryaPre-operative medication included duloxetin (30 mg/day), alprazolam
(0.50 mg 4 times a day), baclofen (20 mg thrice a day) and pergolide (0.05 mg/day)b22 months after surgery, at the end of the first
randomization period of 3 months with stimulation ‘off’c23 months after surgery, at the end of the second randomization period of only
6 weeks with stimulation ‘on’ and the following stimulation parameters: 5 mV, 60 μs and 110 Hz (contact 1−/2+, 5−/6+) bilaterally Pre- and
post-operative assessment of tics and comorbidities YGTSS Yale Global Tic Severity Scale, OCD obsessive compulsive disorder, Y-BOCS Yale-
Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale, SIB self injurious behaviour, VAS Visual Analogue Scale, ADHD attention deficit hyperactivity disorder,
CAARS Conners Adult ADHD Rating Scale, PDD-SQ Pervasive Developmental Disorder-Self Questionnaire, BDI-II Beck Depression Inventory (2nd
edn.), BAI Beck Anxiety Inventory aPre-operative medication included duloxetin (30 mg/day), alprazolam (0.50 mg 4 times a day), baclofen
(20 mg thrice a day) and pergolide (0.05 mg/day) b22 months after surgery, at the end of the first randomization period of 3 months with
stimulation ‘off’ c23 months after surgery, at the end of the second randomization period of only 6 weeks with stimulation ‘on’ and the
following stimulation parameters: 5 mV, 60 μs and 110 Hz (contact 1−/2+, 5−/6+) bilaterally Considering the criteria of Fahn and Williams ,
the abrupt onset of the hypertonia, its inconsistency and incongruency with organic disorders, the bizarre movements and the concomitant
somatizations (loss of consciousness, mutism and later swallowing disturbances) suggest a psychogenic movement disorder. The surgical
procedure or stimulation may have caused a dysbalance in the limbic and associative cortico-basal ganglia-thalamocortical loops , leading to
psychiatric symptoms. Perhaps, the symptoms could be seen as disinhibition or progression of a preoperatively unidentified somatoform
disorder. Reviewing the patient’s medical history, it is noteworthy that she frequently suffered from abdominal distress, headaches and
unexplained urine retention (related to decreased relaxation of pelvic muscles). Finally, the decrease in tic severity, which possibly
served as a coping mechanism to daily demands prior to surgery, might have interfered with the results of DBS. Although it is difficult to
draw final conclusions, we believe that the course of this case illustrates the potential contra-indication for DBS in TS patients with
severe comorbidity. While TS is a heterogeneous entity , the combination of associated comorbidities with prominent and severe SIB may raise
questions about the diagnosis. Whereas the diagnosis of TS had been approved by several experts in TS prior to surgery, our patient might
also have suffered from an additional somatoform disorder. A somatoform disorder can be treatment-resistent as well, but contrary to TS, DBS
is not indicated and might even worsen the clinical picture. Apart from the psychiatric comorbidity, our patient also suffered from a pre-
existent neurological disorder, spastic diplegia, which in itself may constitute a risk for DBS. In conclusion, before deciding upon DBS, we
would like to emphasize that experts in TS should confirm the diagnosis and that patients should be thoroughly screened for somatoform
disorder, including psychogenic movement disorder. Patients should be excluded from DBS in the presence of symptoms. Overall, clinicians
should be alert on comorbid psychiatric symptoms beyond the well-known associated comorbidities such as OCD and ADHD. Serious preoperative
attempts to treat psychiatric comorbidities are warranted even in case of apparent clinical urgency to perform surgery. The authors wish to
thank the patient’s family and both Prof. K. Hoogduin and Dr. M. Tijssen for their expertise. The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
