This report describes the case of a 6-month-old girl with a large cardiac fibroma in the right ventricle. Ventricular tachycardia associated
with the fibroma was successfully treated with amiodarone. At the age of 3 years, surgical resection was indicated because of right
ventricular outflow tract obstruction caused by progression of the tumor. The fibroma was successfully resected, and further follow-up
evaluation was uneventful. Primary cardiac tumors in children are rare. The incidence is reported to be 0.03–0.32%, with fibroma accounting
for approximately 25 % . Fibromas, usually single and large, are most commonly found in the left ventricular free wall or septum and less
commonly involve the right ventricle (RV) or atria. We report a case of a young girl with a large cardiac fibroma in an atypical location.
In a 6-month-old girl, a large cardiac tumor in the RV was discovered during evaluation for a soft systolic murmur. Except for the soft
systolic heart murmur, the overall pediatric examination was normal. Echocardiography showed a large (4.0 × 4.5 × 4.0 cm) homogeneous mass
appended to the RV free wall (Fig. 1). There was neither significant RV outflow tract obstruction nor stenosis of the tricuspid valve.
Cardiac computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the presence of a large intraventricular solid mass
developed at the expense of the RV lateral wall (Fig. 2). Short-term follow-up assessment was complicated by an episode of symptomatic
ventricular tachycardia, which was successfully treated with electric cardioversion and amiodarone. Oral therapy with amiodarone was
continued under close echocardiographic and rhythmic monitoring with uneventful follow-up evaluation for 2 years.Fig. 1Transthoracic
echocardiography showing a large homogeneous mass originating from the right ventricular free wallFig. 2The presence of a solid tumor
confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging Transthoracic echocardiography showing a large homogeneous mass originating from the right
ventricular free wall The presence of a solid tumor confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging At the age of 3 years, surgery was clinically
indicated because tumor progression had resulted in obstruction of the RV outflow tract. The tumor was completely resected, and the
resection margins were plicated (Fig. 3). Histologic examination of an intraoperative tumor biopsy showed abundant proliferation of
fibroblasts with collagen deposition, which confirmed the diagnosis of cardiac fibroma.Fig. 3Macroscopy of the encapsulated tumor during the
different stages of surgical resection and at its total resection (lower right panel) Macroscopy of the encapsulated tumor during the
different stages of surgical resection and at its total resection (lower right panel) The girl’s postoperative course was uneventful.
Because arrhythmia did not occur during a 6-month follow-up period, the amiodarone treatment was discontinued. Long-term follow-up
evaluation was without complications and showed normal cardiac function without recurrence of the tumor. Although fibromas are
histologically benign, they can induce serious cardiovascular complications, including intracavitary obstruction and rhythm disturbances, as
illustrated by the reported case and described in the literature . Although treatment of symptomatic fibromas consists of complete excision
, the management of asymptomatic fibromas remains controversial. Surgery may be complicated by tumor location and size but is reported to
result in extended symptom-free survival with acceptable low operative morbidity and mortality, even for patients with large fibromas .
Fibromas are not likely to decrease , and because they often are associated with clinically significant and potentially life-threatening
arrhythmias , we think patients should be considered for early surgical treatment when cardiac tumors, probably fibromas, are diagnosed.
However, a more pragmatic strategy may be preferred in cases of uncertainty concerning the nature of the tumor or its cleavage plane, when
excision of the tumor might affect the integrity of the ventricle, or when individual contraindications for surgery exist. In the reported
case, surgery was postponed by treatment of ventricular tachycardia and careful monitoring. For small children, the latter strategy may
increase the chances for successful and uncomplicated surgery. Irene E. van Geldorp is financially supported by the Dutch Heart Foundation
(Grant NHS-2010T078). This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
