Factor X deficiency is the most common coagulation factor deficiency amongst patients with AL amyloidosis. It presumably occurs due to
adsorption of factor X to amyloid fibrils. The deficiency of this factor, in conjunction with other hemostatic defects, can cause bleeding
complications. A case of acquired factor X deficiency due to AL amyloidosis is reported, where abnormal coagulation parameters were the only
presenting feature. AL amyloidosis can be associated with several hemostatic defects, including deficiency of one or more coagulation
factors. These hemostatic defects can cause bleeding complications and are often the presenting manifestation of the disease. A case of AL
amyloidosis is presented, where abnormal coagulation parameters were the only presenting sign of the disease. A 74-year-old male presented
with a fracture of the right femoral head and shaft after an accidental fall. Routine blood work in the emergency room revealed abnormal
coagulation parameters. The patient was admitted to the medicine service for further evaluation and management of the coagulopathy in
anticipation of hip surgery. On admission, the patient only complained of right hip pain. He denied bleeding symptoms, fever, chills, night
sweats, or weight loss. The patient had undergone hemorrhoidectomy 15 years back without bleeding complications. He denied alcohol, tobacco,
or drug use. There was no family history of abnormal bleeding. He was not taking anti-platelet or anticoagulant medications. At
presentation, his vital signs were normal. Examination of the oral cavity did not show any petechiae or gingival anomalies. Cardiovascular
and pulmonary examinations were unremarkable. There was no abdominal organomegaly. Musculoskeletal examination showed limited range of
motion of the right hip but no hematoma formation. Skin examination showed bruises on the right arm. Neurological examination was non-focal.
There was no lymphadenopathy. Laboratory evaluation revealed hemoglobin of 10.8 g/dL (normal range 12.9–16.1 g/dL) and hematocrit of 31.8%
(normal 37.7%–46.5%). Serum electrolytes and liver enzymes were normal. Total protein levels were in the normal range. Urinalysis was
unremarkable. His prothrombin time (PT) was 32.7 s (normal 10.8–13.1 s), partial thromboplastin time (PTT) was 67.7 s (normal 25.0–39.0 s),
and international normalized ratio was 2.48 (normal 0.9–1.2). D-dimer level was elevated, but fibrinogen level was not decreased, ruling out
disseminated intravascular coagulation. Thrombin time was within normal limits. PT and PTT mixing studies were done, and they did not
correct to normal. The lupus-sensitive PTT was prolonged and confirmed by a positive phospholipid neutralization procedure, suggesting
presence of lupus anticoagulant activity. However, the dilute Russell's viper venom time was within normal limits. In addition, the ELISAs
for anti-beta2-glycoprotein 1 and anti-cardiolipin antibodies were within normal limits. Coagulation factor levels were checked, and all
except factor X levels were within normal limits. Factor X level was extremely low at 5%. The factor X deficiency was considered to be
acquired given the lack of personal or family history of bleeding. Infusions of fresh frozen plasma did not correct the factor X levels,
raising suspicion of amyloidosis. Work-up for a gammopathy was undertaken. Neither serum protein electrophoresis nor urine protein
electrophoresis revealed paraproteins. Immunoglobulin G, M, and A levels were within normal limits. However, free lambda levels were
elevated at 39.10 mg/L (normal 5.71–26.30 mg/L). Free kappa levels were normal. Beta2 microglobulin was mildly elevated at 3.79 mg/L (normal
0.70–3.40 mg/L). The patient received two transfusions of factor eight inhibitor bypass activity (FEIBA) anti-inhibitor coagulation complex
and subsequently underwent a right hemiarthroplasty without any bleeding complications. A touch preparation of the femoral neck showed
increased plasma cells comprising approximately 15%–20% of the nucleated cells. A Congo red stain demonstrated Congophilic material that
displayed apple-green birefringence on polarization. Flow cytometric immunophenotyping of the femur demonstrated the presence of a clonal
population of cells which were consistent with plasma cells. The cells were CD38+/CD45- and exhibited lambda light chain restriction. The
patient underwent further evaluation for amyloidosis including an abdominal fat pad biopsy and a cardiac MRI. The fat pad biopsy was Congo
red stain-negative, but the cardiac MRI showed mild left ventricular hypertrophy and delayed enhancement pattern consistent with cardiac
amyloidosis. The patient was diagnosed with acquired factor X deficiency secondary to AL amyloidosis and discharged to follow up with
hematology. The patient was treated with a combination of melphalan and dexamethasone. However, he failed to respond after six cycles, with
no significant improvement in his factor X levels. He continues to receive chemotherapy with a regimen consisting of melphalan,
dexamethasone, and bortezomib. Factor X deficiency is the most common coagulation factor deficiency in patients with AL amyloidosis (1). It
has been reported to occur in 8.7% to 14% of patients (1,2). The half-life of factor X is shortened due to its adsorption to amyloid
fibrils, explaining the deficiency (3). Hepatic synthetic defect or urinary protein losses due to nephrotic syndrome are not causes of the
factor X deficiency (1). Although factor X deficiency is the most common factor deficiency in AL amyloidosis, it is uncommon for it to be
the presenting feature of the disease. In the study by Mumford et al., only 3 of the 337 (0.9%) enrolled patients presented after incidental
discovery of abnormal coagulation parameters (2). In fact, the authors of another large series of 368 patients suggest that patients with AL
amyloidosis be screened for factor X deficiency (1). Factor X is a coagulation factor involved in both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways,
explaining the prolongation of PT and PTT in these patients. However, factor X levels do not correlate with the magnitude of prolongation of
these coagulation parameters (1,2). Additionally, in factor X deficiency due to AL amyloidosis, the factor levels may not be the major
determinant of bleeding complications or their severity, since these patients may have other hemostatic defects (2,4). These include small-
vessel fragility due to amyloid infiltration, deficiencies of other coagulation factors, abnormal fibrin polymerization, vitamin K
deficiency, thrombocytopenia, and dysfunctional platelets (2,4-7). Treatment of factor X deficiency associated with AL amyloidosis is
difficult. Evidence is sparse to guide management of bleeding episodes, and most of the information available is in the form of case
reports. Replacement with prothrombin complexes and plasma may not be yielding as the factor X in these products would get adsorbed onto the
amyloid and, thus, be removed from the circulation quickly (8). Recombinant factor VIIa and plasma exchange have been reported to be
successful (8,9). By removing a considerable burden of amyloid, splenectomy has been shown to improve the coagulopathy (10). Finally,
treating the underlying disease with chemotherapy and stem cell transplantation can lead to improvement in factor X levels (1). Declaration
of interest: The author reports no conflicts of interest. The author alone is responsible for the content and writing of the paper.
