Maciel AT provided care to the patient, collected and analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript. Park M provided care to the patient and
collected the data. Acute kidney injury (AKI) is common among critically ill patients. Because it is associated with high rates of morbidity
and mortality, efforts are being made to identify AKI early to increase the likelihood of successful intervention. Serum creatinine, the
primary parameter used to diagnose AKI, is universally considered a late marker. One of the major problems associated with AKI is acid-base
disturbance. The physicochemical approach proposed by Stewart (1) is increasingly recognized as useful in managing complex acid-base
disturbances. In this case, we demonstrate that, during the development of AKI, evolutive alterations in physicochemical serum and urinary
variables are easily measured and may reliably precede increases in creatinine. These parameters may thus aid in the early diagnosis of AKI.
A 45-year-old male was admitted to our intensive care unit (ICU) from the ward, where he was concluding antibiotic treatment for a urinary
tract infection and being treated with oral anticoagulants for antiphospholipid syndrome. On the day of ICU admission (day 0), the patient
was found unconscious on the floor of the ward. A cranial CT scan revealed an acute subdural hematoma. The patient was immediately
transferred to the ICU and intubated. The anticoagulant was reversed with vitamin K and plasma. Soon after, the patient was transferred to
the operating room, where the hematoma was drained and an intracranial pressure (ICP) monitoring device was installed. After the surgery,
the patient returned to the ICU. Because of his elevated ICP, the patient was kept sedated with thiopental. Norepinephrine was infused to
maintain an adequate cerebral-perfusion pressure. Initial exams after surgery (day 1) revealed normal blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and
creatinine levels and increased levels of serum Na+ and Cl- (Table 1). Blood gas analysis revealed a mild non-anion gap metabolic acidosis.
A simultaneous spot sample of urine also revealed high levels of Na+ (NaU) and Cl- (ClU) as well as a high urinary strong ion difference
(SIDu = ). By day 2, BUN and creatinine levels had decreased slightly. Urine output over the previous 24 h had been normal. Serum and urine
levels of Na+ and Cl- remained elevated, and the SIDu remained high, but the blood gas analysis was normal. The ICP was controlled;
thiopental was replaced by dexmedetomidine, and the dose of norepinephrine was reduced. By day 3, BUN and creatinine levels had increased
only minimally. Urine output had decreased over the previous 24 h but did not fall below the normal range (Table 1). Serum Na+ and Cl-
levels were evolutively similar, while NaU and ClU levels remained high. A significant increase in SIDu was observed, which resulted from
increases in NaU and K+ (KU) levels and decreases in ClU levels (Figure 1). Sedation was stopped, but norepinephrine was still necessary to
maintain the patient's mean blood pressure above 65 mmHg. C-reactive protein levels and the degree of leukocytosis increased daily, and
cultures were collected. On day 4, the patient developed tachycardia, and urinary flow continued to decrease, while norepinephrine levels
increased to maintain the mean blood pressure. There was no fever. Treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics was initiated empirically.
During this time, creatinine levels had not increased, but the BUN level increased slowly each day to levels that did not exceed the normal
range. Serum phosphate and unmeasured anions (Table 1) also increased daily. Serum Na+ and Cl- were still high, but NaU and ClU levels
decreased; KU levels increased daily from day 2 onward. On day 5, the patient developed clear oliguria, although the creatinine measurements
performed at the beginning of the day were normal. The BUN level continued to increase. An abrupt decrease in NaU and ClU levels occurred in
parallel with the increases in KU levels. The SIDu decreased but remained very high. On day 6, the patient developed fever, severe metabolic
acidosis, and refractory shock with overt multiple-organ failure. NaU and ClU levels fell further, but the KU and SIDu levels remained high.
The patient's creatinine levels increased abruptly, and the nephrology team indicated the need for continuous renal-replacement therapy;
however, the patient died before therapy could be initiated. None of the cultures collected revealed the presence of an infectious agent.
The case described above is a common example of AKI (possibly septic in origin), and it demonstrates that creatinine is a late diagnostic
marker. In this case, increases in creatinine occurred simultaneously with overt multiple-organ failure, which limited the likelihood of
effective intervention. Using the Acute Kidney Injury Network criteria (2), AKI diagnosis in this patient was possible on day 4 by
considering urine output (AKIN stage 1 – data not shown). A delayed diagnosis of AKI stage 2 was possible only on day 6 using the creatinine
criteria, and AKI stage 3 could be diagnosed using urine-output criteria on day 5. Interestingly, other variables exhibited daily trends
that suggested that AKI was developing before the major changes in creatinine levels occurred. First, relative decreases in urinary flow
should be taken into account; in this case, daily decreases in urine output might have suggested AKI as early as day 2, although the levels
remained within a “normal” range (>0.5 ml/kg/h). Daily simultaneous increases in BUN, unmeasured anions, and phosphate levels, even within
the normal range, could also be useful in the diagnosis of a progressive impairment in renal function. It has been previously demonstrated
that hyperphosphatemia and an increased concentration of unmeasured anions account for metabolic acidosis in AKI (3). Furthermore, a
persistently high SIDu (well above plasmatic SID; Table 1 would not be expected in hyperchloremic acidosis, which is usually present after
major crystalloid infusion, as occurred during surgery. It has also been previously suggested that high levels of SIDu are associated with
renal failure in metabolic acidosis (4). Finally, abrupt decreases in NaU, ClU, and their respective fractional excretions, occurring in
parallel with increases in KU and its fractional excretion between days 4 and 6, might also signal severe renal hemodynamic compromise with
exacerbated activity of the sympathetic and angiotensin system (a “pre-renal” pattern of AKI). These changes were probably part of a
systemic inflammatory response, with microcirculatory impairment that, if left untreated, would lead to multiple-organ failure and death.
This “pre-renal” pattern of AKI has been previously shown in experimental hyperdynamic sepsis (5). Cardiac output was not measured in this
patient, but successive positive fluid balances argue against hypovolemia as the main cause of the urinary findings. In conclusion, the
daily evaluation of changes in simple parameters such as consistent increases in serum phosphate levels, unmeasured anions, and KU, with
decreases in NaU and ClU and a persistently high SIDu, could facilitate the early diagnosis of renal impairment before major decreases in
urine output or increases in creatinine are observed. Even small alterations in these parameters might be a warning sign of ongoing renal
and perhaps systemic hemodynamic impairment. No potential conflict of interest was reported. Daily changes in electrolyte levels in spot
urine samples. Traditional renal and physicochemical parameters in the evolution of AKI. AKI: acute kidney injury; BUN: blood urea nitrogen;
SIDa: apparent strong ion difference; SIDu: urinary strong ion difference; SIG: strong ion gap (unmeasured anions); FeNa, FeCl, and FeK:
fractional excretion of sodium, chloride and potassium, respectively. Ωmeasured in blood. SIDa and SIG were calculated as previously
reported (see (reference 3). # SIDu was calculated as follows: urinary + – .
