The association of cryptorchidism, functional Sertoli cell tumors, and spermatic cord torsion has been rarely reported in the literature.
Two dogs were admitted for bilateral skin alopecia and weight loss. Both animals were cryptorchid and displayed a pendulous preputial
sheath, prostate hypertrophy, and increased levels of circulating oestrogen. Transabdominal palpation and ultrasonography revealed the
presence of neoplastic retained gonads. During surgery, spermatic cord torsion was also detected in the enlarged neoplastic testes of both
dogs. Histologic examination confirmed the presence of Sertoli cell tumors that were primarily responsible for the feminizing syndrome.
Complete remission of all symptoms occurred within 3 months after orchiectomy. Cryptorchidism is a testicular developmental disorder that is
quite common in dogs and mainly associated with genetic causes . In retained testes, there is an increased risk of neoplasms, such as
Sertoli cell tumors and seminoma, which can exhibit more aggressive behavior than those in scrotal testes . Approximately 70% of Sertoli
cell tumors arising in abdominal testes are functional and associated with a feminizing paraneoplastic syndrome characterized by non-
pruritic, bilateral symmetrical alopecia, hyperpigmentation, gynecomastia, edematous and pendulous penile sheath, prostatic dysfunctions,
attraction to other males, and standing in a female posture to urinate . Estrogen myelotoxicosis has been reported in 15% of these dogs and
is characterized by bone marrow hypoplasia and non-regenerative anemia . Retained testes are more susceptible than scrotal testes to
spermatic cord torsion, and the risk of this condition is increased even more with progressive enlargement of the neoplastic organ .
Although closely linked to one another, concomitant association of cryptorchidism, Sertoli cell tumors, feminizing syndrome, and spermatic
cord torsion has been rarely reported in the literature . Here, we present two cases of cryptorchidism accompanied by spermatic cord torsion
and feminization in dogs. Case history 1: A 7-year-old male mixed breed dog weighing 27 kg was brought for our examination due to widespread
alopecia with hyperkeratosis, progressive weight loss, feminine behavior during urination, and the absence of both testes from the scrotum.
Non-pruritic alopecia had originated in the genital and perineal regions, and spread symmetrically into the ventral abdomen, flanks, thorax,
and neck (Fig. 1A). Physical examination suggested the development of bilateral abdominal cryptorchidism. The prepuce was pendulous and the
prostate was uniformly enlarged. Palpation of the left caudal abdomen identified a large, firm, and painful mass. Ultrasound examination
showed a 'complex mass' structure enclosed by a hyperechoic capsule. In the other quadrant, another isoechoic formation of smaller
dimensions that resembled testicular parenchyma was also observed. The prostate had increased in volume (4.7 × 4.8 × 7.8 cm), and contained
a non-homogeneous parenchyma that included small anechoic areas likely to be cysts. Abdominal radiographs confirmed these findings and,
together with the thoracic findings, did not reveal metastases. Hematological analysis indicated moderate anemia and leukocytosis
(hematocrit: 25.7%, hemoglobin: 11.90 g/dL, RBC: 4.37 × 106/µL, WBC: 21.60 × 103/µL). Endocrine evaluation showed alterations in sexual
steroid levels with increases in estrogen [progesterone (P4) = 0.39 ng/mL, 17 beta-estradiol (E2) = 17.90 pg/mL, testosterone (T) = 0.66
ng/mL]. Suspecting a Sertoli cell tumor in the retained testis, an exploratory midline laparotomy was carried out to locate and remove both
testes. The left testis, greatly increased in size, presented multiple spermatic cord torsions (Fig. 1B). The right testis, moderately
increased in size, was also neoplastic. Grossly, the left testis (10.5 × 6.5 × 5.5 cm) had a significant profile alteration and multilobular
appearance; cross-sectionally, it appeared to be completely replaced by spongy neoplastic tissue. The right testis (5 × 4 × 2.5 cm) had a
pyramidal shape and was almost completely replaced by lobular compact neoplastic tissue that was yellowish in color. Histopathological
sections confirmed the presence of a Sertoli cell tumor with tubular and pseudofollicular patterns in both gonads. Post-operative treatment
was administered including anti-inflammatory drugs for 3 days and antibiotics for 7 days. After 1 month, the clinical symptoms significantly
improved. Specifically, the prostate size was greatly reduced, hematological values appeared to recover, and sexual hormones returned to
baseline levels (E2 and T were not detected. P4 = 0.14 ng/mL). Total remission of skin symptoms was observed 3 months after surgery. Case
history 2: An 8-year-old male Rottweiler dog weighing 35 kg was admitted for severe hematuria, weight loss, and progressive apathy that had
developed during the preceding 5 months. Clinical signs included non-pruritic bilateral symmetrical alopecia in the flanks and thighs. The
prepuce was edematous and pendulous, and moderate gynecomastia was also evident. The abdomen was extremely sensitive to palpation and a
nodular mass was detected in the caudal quadrant. The left testis had decreased in size and consistency, and was noticeably close to the
external inguinal ring. The prostate appeared enlarged and painful upon digital palpation. Ultrasound examination of the caudal right
abdominal quadrant revealed a 'complex mass' structure. The prostate measured 6.9 × 6.8 × 10.5 cm, and had a non-homogeneous echogenicity
with cystic formations up to 2.2 cm in diameter. Hematological analysis revealed anemia and leukocytosis (hematocrit: 24.0%, hemoglobin:
8.10 g/dL, RBC: 3.36 × 106/µL, WBC: 33.30 × 103/µL). Endocrine evaluation showed alterations in sexual steroids with increased estrogen
levels (P4 = 1.32 ng/mL, E2 = 23.05 pg/mL, T = 0.20 ng/mL). Blood transfusion was necessary to lower anesthetic risk before surgery. After
removing the left testicle, a midline laparotomy identified the right neoplastic testis, associated with double torsion of the spermatic
cord, in the abdomen. Following this procedure, the prostatic cyst content was aspirated and the abdomen was closed. Grossly, the right
testis (2.5 × 1.5 × 1 cm) was atrophic while the left (4.5 × 3.5 × 2.7 cm) was round in shape and appeared to be completely replaced by
neoplastic tissue with a spongy appearance and yellowish-gray in color (Fig. 2). Histological sections confirmed the diagnosis of a Sertoli
cell tumor with a pseudotubular pattern characterized by highly vacuolized elements and modest nuclear atypia. Cytological examination of
the prostatic cyst content revealed epithelial cells with signs of squamous metaplasia (Fig. 3). Postoperative treatment included
administration of anti-inflammatory drugs for 3 days and antibiotics for 7 days. Four weeks after surgery, the dog gained 4 kg of body
weight, hematological parameters improved, and the endocrine profile returned to normal. After 3 months, complete remission of skin symptoms
was evident and the prostate volume was markedly reduced (3.9 × 4.1 × 6 cm). The two cases described above are comparable in terms of
consequentiality of the disorders. In both dogs, non-descent of one or both testes favored the development of a functional Sertoli cell
tumor similar to cases reported in the literature . The associated feminizing syndrome is quite characteristic and often the only external
clinical sign of this neoplastic change. Prostatic dysfunctions may be diagnosed during the development of this syndrome. These include
benign hyperplasia, squamous metaplasia, and prostatic cysts with related symptoms . A sexual hormone assay detected increased levels of
estrogen, probably responsible for the blood anomalies. These levels returned to normal a few months after surgical removal of the
neoplastic testes. Retained neoplastic testes are considered to be more predisposed to testicular torsion that can aggravate the clinical
signs and result in an inauspicious prognosis . In the cases reported above, spermatic cord torsion did not provoke congestive or necrotic
changes although it certainly contributed to abdominal pain. This study emphasizes the importance of monitoring cryptorchid dogs, especially
given the possible complications which may occur over time, in order to correctly evaluate the risks and benefits of surgical gonad removal.
Case 1. (A) A dog presenting characteristic bilateral symmetrical alopecia with hyperkeratosis involving the ventral abdomen, flanks,
thorax, and neck. (B) The left testis at surgery was greatly increased in size and had multiple spermatic cord torsions (arrow). Case 2.
Gross appearance of a totally neoplastic testis compared to the contralateral atrophic one. Case 2. Epithelial cells with signs of squamous
metaplasia collected from a prostatic cyst. May-Grünwald-Giemsa stain, ×250.
