Patients suffering from an H1N1 infection mainly suffer from respiratory symptoms but may also develop symptoms in other organ systems, such
as the kidneys. A 4 ½ year-old boy was admitted with relatively mild respiratory symptoms of H1N1 infection, but developed severe
generalized proximal tubular dysfunction with sterile leucocyturia and a reversible rise in serum creatinine. He made a full recovery with
supportive therapy. Influenza H1N1 may be associated with acute tubulointerstitial nephritis. An H1N1 (influenza A) pandemic emerged in 2009
resulting in a significant burden of illness. These patients suffered mainly from respiratory symptoms, but some also developed symptoms in
other organ systems. Acute kidney injury appeared common in critically ill adult patients with H1N1 infection. A recent study revealed an
incidence of 34 % of acute kidney injury among 628 ICU patients with H1N1 infection . The data available for pediatric patients mostly
relates to patients with underlying kidney disease and describes a wide range in incidence . There are two case reports on children with
H1N1 infection who developed acute glomerulonephritis [3, 4]. Here, we present the case of a child with tubulointerstitial nephritis during
H1N1 infection. A 4½ year-old boy with arthrogryposis multiplex congenita of unknown origin developed fever, cough and vomiting during
3 days before presenting at the emergency room. Besides paracetamol (60 mg/kg/day), he had not taken any medication. Physical examination
revealed a heart rate of 90 beats per minute, mild signs of dehydration with a weight loss of 1 kg in the preceding days, while urine output
was maintained. The lungs were clear on auscultation, a chest X-ray showed no significant abnormalities. He was admitted under the diagnosis
of a viral infection and received supplemental oxygen. Polymerase Chain Reaction in a nasal swab was positive for influenza H1N1.
Oseltamivir was withheld because symptoms had started more than 48 hours before presentation. Paracetamol was continued during admission.
Laboratory results on admission showed a severe hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia in combination with mild hyponatremia due to increased
renal losses. In addition, he had ketoacidosis, plasma lactate was normal. Serum creatinine had risen from a baseline of 11 μmol/l at a
recent outpatient visit to 19 μmol/l, corresponding to acute kidney injury pRIFLE - “R” . Urine analysis was remarkable for sterile
leucocyturia and low molecular weight proteinuria. Renal ultrasound was normal. He was started on enteral feeding via a nasogastric tube and
received enteral and parenteral supplementation of sodium, potassium, magnesium and phosphate. During the following days the patient
developed an incomplete renal Fanconi syndrome (Table 1) with low molecular weight proteinuria and loss of sodium, potassium, phosphate,
magnesium and uric acid and a de novo generalized hyperaminoaciduria. Renal (ie normal anion-gap) acidosis and glucosuria were absent.Table
1Laboratory findings during the course of the diseaseLaboratory resultsDay 1Day 13Day 45ReferenceConversion factor to metric
unitsBlood Creatinine (μmol/l)191112n.a.mg/dl × 0.011 Urea (mmol/l)5.54.73.63.0-7.5mg/dl × 6.006 Uric acid
(μmol/l)55265225200–450mg/dl × 0.017 Na (mmol/l)135142139136–146mg/dl × 2,298 K (mmol/l)1.64.44.23.6-4.8mg/dl × 3.910 Cl
(mmol/l)9210610498–108mg/dl × 3.545 Mg (mmol/l)0.610.860.840.70-1.00mg/dl × 2.431 Ca (mmol/l)1.922.322.512.20-2.60mg/dl × 4.008 P
(mmol/l)0.401.691.820.70-1.40mg/dl × 3.097 pH7.337.407.407.35-7.45n.a. pCO2 (mmHg)24363735–45n.a. HCO3
(mmol/l)12.121.822.322–26n.a.Urine Ketostix3+n.d.n.d. Fractional Excretion urea (%)18.0n.d.n.d. Fractional Excretion uric acid
(%)11.957.411.2 Fractional Excretion Na (%)2.581.871.01 Fractional Excretion K (%)11223.68.96 Fractional Excretion Mg (%)11.412.15.64Tubular
maximum Phosphate reabsorption /Glomerular Filtation Rate-0.821.201.64 α-1 microglobuline (mg/l)11.8n.d.< 4.0 β-2 microglobuline
(μg/l)633011848 Albumine/Creatinine ratio (mg/mmol)3259 α-1 microglobuline/Creat (mg/mmol)10.2n.d.< 2 β-2 microglobuline/Creat
(μg/mmol)546659.826.0 Aminoaciduria3+, gen1+, gen1+, selectLegend:gen, generalized; select, selective; n.a., not applicable; n.d., not done
Laboratory findings during the course of the disease Legend: gen, generalized; select, selective; n.a., not applicable; n.d., not done Serum
creatinine, as well as tubular function, improved within one week and had normalized after six weeks and have been normal since. Extensive
metabolic testing during evaluation for arthrogryposis multiplex as well as during the current illness revealed no signs of an underlying
metabolic defect. Here we present a patient with acute tubulointerstitial nephritis concomitant with an influenza H1N1 infection. The
diagnosis is based on the combination of an incomplete renal Fanconi syndrome, non-oliguric renal failure and the presence of sterile
leucocyturia. In view of the rapid improvement of renal dysfunction and the respiratory symptoms we refrained from performing a kidney
biopsy to confirm our clinical diagnosis. The differential diagnosis of acute proximal tubular dysfunction in our patient includes the
manifestation of an underlying mitochondrial disease, which might also have caused the arthrogryposis. Yet, extensive metabolic testing in
blood and urine yielded no signs of mitochondriopathy. History revealed the use of paracetamol, which has been associated with acute
tubulointerstital nephritis in two patients with a concomitant alcohol intoxication [6, 7]. Rapid reversibility and the absence of any
systemic signs of autoimmunity render an underlying immune disorder (eg systemic lupus erythematosus, sarcoidosis) unlikely. Since many
viruses have been linked with tubulointerstitial nephritis, we postulate a causal relationship between the proven influenza H1N1 infection.
Still, we did not rule out other infections known to cause acute tubulointerstitial nephritis such as Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus,
Hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus, mycoplasma, or Hanta virus. Several pathological studies have demonstrated that H1N1 virus
is not restricted to the lungs. In one study H1N1 virus was found in the cytoplasm of glomerular macrophages . Nin et al demonstrated the
virus in epithelial cells in the capsule of Bowman and in distal tubular cells . Most patients with H1N1-related renal injury suffer from
acute tubular necrosis during intensive care therapy. Nin et al distinguish early versus late kidney injury during H1N1 infection. The
former is reversible reflecting hemodynamic instability, whereas in the latter persistent injury and/or co-morbidity might play a role .
Therefore, this group bears a worse prognosis and these patients often need renal replacement therapy. To the best of our knowledge,
tubulointerstitial nephritis has not been reported previously in patients with influenza H1N1 infection. This may reflect under-reporting as
the signs of tubulointerstial nephritis can be relatively mild, and therefore the diagnosis be missed unless blood and urine are tested. In
conclusion, we describe a 4½ year-old boy with acute tubulointerstitial nephritis during an influenza H1N1 infection, with full recovery of
renal function after supportive treatment. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which
permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
