A 55-year-old woman with widely metastatic breast cancer was admitted to your intensive care unit (ICU) because of a decreased level of
consciousness and respiratory failure. She had documented cerebral and meningeal metastases that were progressing despite chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. The admitting physician met with her family and suggested a palliative approach, making them very upset. The family insisted
that the team 'do everything' and now they refuse to discuss any change in the plan of treatment. They maintain a constant presence at the
bedside, taking notes and questioning everyone who enters the room. They have threatened legal action toward several of the nursing staff,
and hospital security has been called twice because of shouting matches between family and staff members. As the physician taking over care
for the ICU, you would like to resolve this conflict. Conflict is a common occurrence in intensive care units (ICUs) . ICU workers and
family members must interpret large amounts of information to make difficult decisions for incapable patients with life-threatening
illnesses. Experts recommend a model of 'shared decision-making', which aims to achieve a consensus among the patient, family, and health-
care team about goals of care . But consensus is not always achieved; a physician may adopt a paternalistic model of decision-making, and
some family members may not value the opinions of the physician . Disagreements are common and can easily escalate , as they have in this
case. Conflicts may occur within the health-care team or with family members , resulting in potentially severe consequences for patients,
family members, and health-care workers alike . Few clinicians have any formal training in mediation or conflict resolution. Conflict is not
unique to the ICU environment, and other professions have developed approaches to resolving disagreements that have escalated into conflict.
In this article, we will review key principles of mediation and explain how they can be applied in the ICU setting. A line in the sand has
been drawn, and there is an angry standoff. How did we get here? Two people may not agree on a particular decision, but that does not
necessarily lead to a conflict. Conflicts are usually a product of an additional element - something that people think or feel but do not
say directly. Any individuals who work or live together can experience thoughts or feelings of hurt, loss, betrayal, guilt, or anger toward
one another at some point. The very nature of conflict is described as 'subjective, unstable, reactive, complicated and incomplete' , but
disagreement or tension between people does not always lead to conflict. Conflicts generally develop by a process of naming, blaming, and
claiming. Naming occurs when an individual perceives a situation as injurious. Blaming transpires when the individual identifies other
parties in the injurious event. Finally, claiming occurs when the individual seeks out the party or organization responsible for remedy or
restitution . The scholarly field and professional practice of conflict resolution emerged after World War II . The conflict continuum
includes negotiation, mediation, arbitration, and litigation as a spectrum of third-party dispute resolution practices. Mediation is a
popular conflict resolution process used widely across professional organizations. Mediation is described by legal scholars as a facilitated
process designed to resolve conflict between two parties in a voluntary and mutually acceptable way through neutral third-party assistance
as an alternative to proceedings that are more coercive (for example, arbitration and litigation). Whereas some disagreements can be
resolved by the disputants themselves, other situations benefit from third-party intervention. Third-party mediation may be required when
conflicts feature intense emotion, poor communication, misperceptions, repetitive negative behaviors, disagreement over data, prioritization
of multiple issues, and perceived or real incompatible interests between the disputants . The mediator is a key figure in the role of
compassionate, authentic, and responsible transmitter between and advocate for two or more parties. The mediator role also includes the
following : participating in constructing the problem, reframing and relabeling the problem, reordering the sequence of the plot elements,
and remaking history by altering stories and creating the future by building new stories. Stephen Littlejohn, conflict management
consultant, writes: 'Instead of settling a dispute, we need to think of ways to transform it. Instead of encapsulating a conflict, we need
to think of ways to redefine it' . Mediation is a forum for parties to create a new and shared under-standing of their positions and
interests. Positions are best described as the entrenched ideas that one party holds about the relationship, process, or substance of a
conflict (what I want). Interests are the reasons behind the positions being held (why I want what I want). The mediator focuses on helping
the parties explore their underlying interests rather than focus on their positions, to talk less about what they want and more about why
they want it. For example, in a common conflict between a parent and child, a mediator might elicit the following positions and interests:
Parental position: 'I want my 13-year-old child in the house at 9 p.m.' Parental interest: 'I want to be sure that my child is safe'. Child
position: 'I do not want to come home at 9 p.m'. Child interest: 'I believe I am old enough to decide when to come home'. Emotion is a
central feature of any conflict, and conflicts are often seen as irrational on the basis of the emotional sense of indignation or outrage of
each party. People tend to think in terms of reason and logic versus emotion. They isolate reason from emotion in their analysis of conflict
and decision-making, when in fact the two are more deeply connected. Anger is the cardinal emotion attached to conflict. Anger is frequently
seen as a barrier to our ability to reason and think objectively. However, emotion is fundamentally connected to our reasoning skills and
cognition and can be an important source of feedback. Antonio Damasio, a neuroscientist, writes: 'When emotion is entirely left out of the
reasoning picture... reason turns out to be even more flawed than when emotion plays bad tricks on our decisions' . Emotion can be a direct
source of strength and energy. For example, anger can mobilize individuals or groups as a productive force toward change (for example, the
civil rights and women's rights movements). However, the expression of emotion can be counterproductive or destructive, wounding others.
Emotions are contagious. In the presence of anger, it is important to discern a signal for change or a struggle for power. How we express
emotion has implications for mediation and conflict resolution processes and outcomes. Our ability to acknowledge our emotion in the midst
of conflict increases our capacity for "reflection-in-action" - the ability to combine cognitive and emotional information in the moment .
This ability can be harnessed to produce alliances around a common issue. The mediation process aims to achieve a mutually acceptable
solution respecting the self-determination of all parties. Thus, skilled mediators emphasize problem solving, impartiality, fairness,
ethical awareness, analytical skills, empathy, and a strong sense of self . For those interested in pursing mediation, these skills and
abilities are an important addition to the professional toolbox. The role of the mediator involves the following: introducing mediation as a
voluntary process, establishing ground rules for the conversation, ensuring confidentiality for all parties, encouraging all parties to
fully tell their story from their perspective, allowing parties to gain a shared perspective through listening and retelling and
clarification, brainstorming options in order to generate a mutually agreed-upon resolution, and facilitating the parties' co-creation and
consensus of a mutual agreement or contract (legal to non-binding) as a blueprint for future action. Within the process, mediator skills and
techniques include helping the parties to do the following: stay focused on the issues, set aside the desire to 'win', focus on joint
problem solving, suspend blame and judgment, strive for neutrality, clarify assumptions, find common ground, use straightforward language,
and apologize if appropriate. Successful outcomes are shaped by the skills and abilities of experienced mediators. Macfarlane suggests that
active listening may be the most important skill for any mediator or third-party intervener. Active listening skills include acknowledging,
paraphrasing, reflecting, clarifying, questioning, and summarizing as well as using non- verbal communication skills (Table 1). These are
effective skills to consider in daily practice with friends, family, and coworkers . Active listening skills and techniques for conflict
resolution The complex m√©lange of competencies required of the skilled mediator implies a high degree of personal and professional self-
awareness and investment in promoting effective interaction with others. Can medical professionals learn to equip themselves with these
critical inter-personal skills in order to independently manage their own conflicts or potential third-party interventions? What would be
the consequence of integrating the tenets, skills, and techniques of mediation into daily personal and professional practice? As linguist
Deborah Tannen writes: 'The terms in which we talk about something shape the way we think about it - and even what we see' . Whether happy,
frustrated, conflicted, or misunderstood, we are simultaneously constructing and constructed by what we say and how we say it. Every
conflict requires a unique solution because of the unique characteristics of each participant, but we can hone our mediation skills with
practice. Whether we are participating as a mediator in a triad or as a member of a dyad with colleagues, friends, clients, or family
members, we need to build a capacity and trust in our own mediation skills. The principles of mediation and effective communication may not
only foster individual resilience in approaching and addressing personal and professional conflict issues but also build confidence and
competence in productive interactions and have important implications for stronger communities of practice. In short, ICU clinicians could
benefit from learning and employing basic mediation skills in the ICU environment to further therapeutic and collegial relationships
regardless of whether conflict exists. The present case is a typical but extreme example of a conflict between family members and the
health-care team. When approaching this conflict, you may try to become involved as a neutral third-party mediator, but this role would be
difficult to fulfill as a member of a health-care team. You could attempt a resolution yourself in a dyadic model (as is usually the case in
the ICU), or you may engage a third-party mediator because of the emotions or perceived incompatibility of the interests of the parties (or
other considerations mentioned above). In some jurisdictions, a third-party mediator is mandated by law or policy in any case involving
withdrawal or withholding of life-sustaining treatment . Of course, formal third-party mediation can be costly and time-consuming, which
would limit its widespread use. The choice of mediator is important. The medical team may opt for a mediator who is experienced in medical
matters, but the patient/family may not feel that this person is truly neutral. A hospital bioethicist is sometimes called upon to mediate
disputes, but this person has a potential conflict of interest as a hospital employee. In Ontario, Canada, a neutral panel known as the
Consent and Capacity Board is often convened to mediate disputes about patient care . This panel can be convened in a matter of days at no
cost to the participants. Similar panels exist in other jurisdictions. The Consent and Capacity Board is rarely convened for ICU cases but,
in our experience, has served as an effective third-party mediator in cases in which the family and the health-care team had fallen into a
pattern of repetitive negative behaviors or in cases in which there was a perceived incompatibility of interests. The board consists of
three members, two of whom are non-physicians. The head of the board, a lawyer with training in mediation, has resolved cases simply by
clarifying the role of a surrogate decision-maker or by clarifying the interests of the two parties (rather than the positions) and
demonstrating that they were not incompatible. Anecdotally, this core mediation skill has been particularly effective for resolving ICU
cases. In other situations, even the full process of a board hearing was not sufficient to create agreement between the parties, and a more
coercive process was required (for example, applications to the courts). However, members of the health-care team and the family often take
comfort from the process, as it leads to an improved understanding about the interests and motivations of the other party . To proceed with
mediation, you will need to ensure that the family is willing to participate in the process. If they are not willing, mediation will not be
successful, and you may need to pursue proceedings that are more coercive in order to resolve the conflict. If the family members agree to
mediation in a dyadic model, you will need to internalize the role of the mediator and attempt to determine their positions and interests
while recognizing and expressing your own. Work toward reframing the conflict in a way that achieves a new understanding for both parties. A
patient or family request for 'everything' is a position - you need to find the interests behind that position. Quill and colleagues have
suggested some potential interests and useful approaches for exploring them. Start by exploring the conflict from the family's perspective
(in particular, why they were so upset by the suggestion of palliative care and why they do not want to discuss any change in the plan of
treatment). Possible 'interests' and questions for this family might include the following: ‚Ä¢ A need to complete specific life goals or see
family members ('What things did she want to achieve before she became ill?') ‚Ä¢ A need to be certain that all legitimate treatment options
have been exhausted ('What have others told you about the status and prognosis of her disease?') ‚Ä¢ A need to help the patient's children and
spouse come to terms with her anticipated death ('What do her children understand about her illness?') ‚Ä¢ A need to respect God‚Äôs role in
deciding matters of life and death ('How would we know when it is her time to pass on?') There are likely to be issues of misperception and
lack of trust. These questions are intended as starting points for a discussion, but ongoing use of active listening skills will be key to
achieving a better understanding of the family's interests. Next, you will need to help the family explore not only the interests of the
health-care team in suggesting palliative care but also any other incident that may have upset the family. Pantilat has suggested useful and
compassionate phrases that can help in such interactions. Typically, the health-care team suggests a transition to palliative care out of a
desire to avoid therapies that they feel are non-beneficial and potentially uncomfortable. This is often communicated (or heard) as
'stopping everything' or 'withdrawing care', which is inaccurate and upsetting. Getting family members to ask exploratory questions may be
difficult and require prompting. It may be helpful to start by explaining this interest explicitly from your perspective (similar to how the
family has explained their interest) and discuss how you feel that the present (or proposed) management plan does not achieve that interest.
The family must feel empowered to ask questions and seek a greater understanding of the health-care team's perspective. This is a critical
element in the process of achieving a new and shared perspective between both parties. During the process of exploration and understanding,
you will also need to address the anger that has characterized this dispute. As explained above, anger and emotion are not the enemies of
rational thought and conflict resolution. They are common responses in the ICU and indicate the high degree of importance that all parties
attach to decisions that are made here. It may be helpful to start with a validation of the emotions displayed (for example, 'I can
certainly see how much you care about your loved one and the treatments she receives') but try to agree on some ground rules to prevent any
eruptions during the mediation process (for example, no interrupting, no raised voices, and no personal attacks). Participants should be
encouraged to express their concerns in a non-confrontational way by using 'I feel' statements (for example, 'I feel that I am not helping
your wife' rather than 'You are torturing your wife'). All parties need to recognize that emotions are valid but must be expressed in an
appropriate way. During the process of mediation, it is easy to fall back into the familiar behaviors that led to the conflict in the first
place. As a mediator, you must recognize certain cardinal symptoms of conflict (for example, escalation, repetition, and focusing on
disputed data). When you observe these symptoms, you should reframe the discussion, focus on areas of common ground, and help the parties
generate potential solutions to perceived problems. Often, the interests of the family may be served by non-medical interventions (for
example, spiritual care, second opinions, and bereavement counseling), and physicians should recognize that end-of-life care in the ICU is
not uniform . It may be possible to acknowledge the interests of the family and the health-care team and move beyond the positions of both
parties. Ultimately, you may require multiple sessions to achieve a mediated solution to this conflict, or in some cases you may not achieve
a solution at all. But if you are able to participate in a dialogue that leads to a better mutual understanding and joint problem solving,
the conflict will certainly de-escalate and a resolution will be easier to achieve. Disagreements are common in the ICU and can easily
escalate into conflicts that have serious consequences for patients, family members, and health-care workers. Conflict resolution skills are
therefore an important competency for any ICU professional. By using active listening skills and understanding interests rather than
positions, ICU workers can help to achieve a shared understanding among parties in conflict. ICU: intensive care unit. The authors declare
that they have no competing interests.
