Inferior vena cava (IVC) filters are indicated in patients with venous thromboembolic disease in whom standard anticoagulation therapy is
contraindicated or ineffective. A 32-year-old female presented to our hospital with chest pain 5 years after IVC filter placement. Imaging
revealed sequential fracturing and embolization of two of the IVC filter arms to the pulmonary arteries. IVC filter fracture and subsequent
migration to the lung is a rare complication. Systematic long-term follow-up in patients with IVC filters and, if possible, filter removal
should be considered to prevent possible complications. Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE) are frequent and potentially
fatal conditions. The mortality rate of untreated PE is reported to be as high as 30 percent . Venous thromboembolism (VTE) often starts as
a thrombus within the large veins of the lower extremity or pelvis. A portion of this thrombus has the potential to break away and migrate
to the pulmonary arteries, giving rise to a pulmonary embolism. Certain factors are believed to contribute to the formation of thrombus,
including advanced age, obesity, trauma, surgery, major medical illness, and previous VTE; in addition, there may also be genetic risk
factors for VTE . Anticoagulant therapy is the mainstay of treatment for VTE . The use of inferior vena cava (IVC) filters have gained
acceptance for patients in whom standard anticoagulant therapy is contraindicated or ineffective . IVC filters are designed to trap possible
thromboemboli, while preserving normal blood flow in the IVC. The Mobin-Uddin umbrella filter (1967) was the first filter designed for this
purpose, followed by the Kimray-Greenfield stainless steel IVC filter in 1973 . Over the last decades, several IVC filters have been
developed, featuring various materials, designs and delivery systems. The Recovery filter (G1; Bard Peripheral Vascular, Tempe, AZ),
commercially available from June 2003 to August 2005, is an IVC filter that can be retrieved after placement . This filter is composed of
six filter leg wires with anchoring hooks in a standard radial symmetric configuration and an additional six outward-directed centering arm
wires at the top of the filter . IVC filters are considered safe to deploy and effective in most patients. However, there have been several
reports of short- and long-term complications. We report a case of repeated filter fracture and pulmonary migration. A 32-year-old female
with a medical history of five caesarean sections and chronic pelvic pain presented to our hospital for diagnostic laparoscopy.
Postoperatively, the patient developed chest pain and shortness of breath. A ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scan demonstrated large segmental
mismatched defects in both lungs, resulting in high probability for a pulmonary embolus. The patient was anticoagulated and discharged to
home on oral warfarin therapy. Two years later, the patient underwent exploratory laparotomy, total abdominal hysterectomy, salpingo-
oophorectomy, and lysis of adhesions. Considering the history of pulmonary embolism and noncompliance with the oral anticoagulation therapy,
the decision was made to place an IVC filter during the same admission. A Recovery filter was successfully deployed in an infrarenal
position via a right femoral approach. A caval venogram after filter placement showed no extravasation of contrast and good filter
alignment. Six months after filter placement, the patient was prompted to return for consultation. However, at this time, the patient was
not receptive and refused filter removal. During the following 5 years, the patient presented to the hospital several times with chest pain
and shortness of breath. The workup for PE remained negative. Five years after placement of the IVC filter, a plain chest radiograph showed
two linear filter struts projecting over the right hemithorax (Figure 1). An abdominal CT study showed the absence of two of the short
“alignment” arms of the Recovery filter. Retrospective review of prior abdominal CT scans showed sequential flexion of these arms, followed
by their fracture and migration (Figures 2 and 3). Furthermore, the fractures’ fragments within the pulmonary arteries could not be easily
identified on the prior pulmonary CTA scans (Figure 4). We describe a case of sequential flexion, fracture, and pulmonary migration of the
wires of a retrievable IVC filter. Anticoagulation has been accepted as an effective treatment for venous thrombosis and PE. IVC filters
have been used for the prevention of PE in patients with contraindications to anticoagulation and in patients with progressive venous
thromboembolic disease despite anticoagulation . IVC filters have been shown to be relatively safe. The most common complications after IVC
filter placement are recurrent PE, thrombosis of the IVC, and local access site complications . Migration of the filter is a relatively rare
complication . Filter fractures are extremely rare and have been reported in 1 to 2 percent of cases . There is limited data published on
the long-term outcomes with the Bard Recovery filter. This filter, described in our case, was commercially available until August 2005, when
it was voluntarily withdrawn from the market and replaced by the Bard G2 filter . The modified G2 filter was designed to decrease risk of
perforation, migration, and fracture. The risk of these long-term complications of indwelling filters increases with time; therefore,
retrievable filters are considered beneficial to avoid possible late complications . Despite the advantages of retrieval, only a small
number of patients return for filter removal . Grande et al. reported a less than 15 percent retrieval rate in all Recovery filters placed
with the intention of future retrieval . An overestimation of the number of patients who need only temporary IVC filtration combined with
high rates of loss to follow-up probably contribute to this low retrieval rate. The filter in our case was placed with the intent of
removal, however, due to poor patient compliance, was never retrieved. Nicholson et al. reported a 25 percent (seven of 28) prevalence of
device fragmentation and embolization in patients with the Bard Recovery filter. All the fractured fragments embolized to an end organ .
Another study showed filter leg fractures with migration into the right ventricle, the pulmonary artery, and the retroperitoneum in 21
percent of the patients (three of 14) . A MAUDE database search performed by Desjardins et al. demonstrated 329 reported cases of
significant malfunction of the Recovery filter within a 6-year period, including 69 cases of filter migration, 149 cases of filter
fragmentation, and 88 cases of filter fragment migration . The migrated fragments were reported to be lodged within the heart and lungs. The
unique feature in our case is the fact that two of the filter arms underwent consecutive fracture and pulmonary migration. This highlights
the increased risk for a subsequent filter fragment migration after the first event. The mechanism of fracture may be related to tilting of
the filter, continuous strain on the engaged strut resulting in repetitive flexion, and eventual fracture caused by metal fatigue. In our
case, both leg fractures were preceded by leg flexion. To detect malposition, leg flexion or fracture, a plain radiograph of the abdomen is
the initial screening test that will allow detection of gross changes in filter position, location, and orientation. Additionally, abdominal
CT scanning can be useful in detecting filter angulation, caval perforation, and leg flexion and fracture. The fractured and migrated IVC
filter struts within pulmonary arteries are difficult to distinguish from surrounding enhancing vessels on pulmonary CTA. Therefore, careful
review of the plain chest X-ray film should be performed. Based on our experiences, we advocate for systematic long-term follow-up in
patients with IVC filters, particularly retrievable IVC filters. Plain radiography and unenhanced CT imaging can be used to screen for arm
flexion, fracture, or migration. The occurrence of filter strut flexion might precede filter strut fracture. Additionally, there might be an
increased risk for repeat filter strut flexion, fracture, and migration. In patients with any of these findings, removal of a retrievable
filter should be considered to prevent possible further complications. Furthermore, removal of these types of filters should be considered
earlier if they are no longer needed. inferior vena cava deep vein thrombosis pulmonary embolism venous thromboembolism
ventilation/perfusion A. Frontal chest X-ray 2 years after filter placement showing a single linear opacity in the right lower lung field
(blue). B. Frontal chest X-ray 5 years after filter placement showing an additional linear metallic foreign body within the right lung
(red). A. Axial CT image demonstrating the Recovery filter within the inferior vena cava, in close relationship to the spine and right
kidney. The six upper arms of the Recovery filter (numbered 1 to 6) and the six legs (not numbered) are intact. B. Axial CT image obtained 3
years later demonstrating a missing filter arm. C and D. Axial CT images obtained 4 years and 5 years later, respectively, demonstrating two
missing filter arms. A. Coronal reformatted CT image demonstrating flexion of one of the upper arms of the Recovery filter 3 years after
initial filter placement. B. Coronal reformatted CT image obtained 1 year later demonstrating the previously flexed filter arm now to be
missing. C. Coronal reformatted CT image obtained 6 months later showed another filter arm flexed upward. Axial CT image of the chest
demonstrating the fractured and migrated IVC filter strut as a bright radiolucent structure within a right pulmonary artery branch (arrow).
The surrounding enhancing pulmonary branches appear bright as well, due to administration of contrast, and are difficult to distinguish from
the IVC filter strut.
