Tangier disease (TD) is a phenotypic expression of rare familial syndrome with mutations in the ABCA1 transporter. The risk of coronary
artery disease in patients with TD is variable. On the other hand the pivotal role of Platelet-Activating Factor (PAF) mediator in
atheromatosis was found. Plasma lipoproteins are transporters of the PAF acetylhydrolase (PAF-AH) in cells and known as lipoprotein-
phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2) in plasma and regulators of PAF levels in blood. In addition, PAF can be biosynthesized from the remodeling and
the de novo pathways in which Lyso-platelet activating factor-acetyltransferase (Lyso-PAF-AT) and platelet activating factor-
cholinephosphotransferase (PAF-CPT) are the regulatory enzymes. The aim of this study is to investigate in a TD patient with a unique
mutation (C2033A), the concentration of PAF in blood, the Equivalent Concentration for 50% aggregation (EC50) values of platelet rich plasma
(PRP) toward PAF, adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and thrombin, and the activities of PAF metabolic enzymes Lp-PLA2, PAF-AH, Lyso-PAF-AT and
PAF-CPT. The EC50 value of PRP was measured by an aggregometer. The determination of the specific activity of PAF-CPT and Lyso-PAF-AT was
made after in vitro enzymatic assay, chromatographic separation and measurement of the produced PAF in a biological assay with washed rabbit
platelets. The determination of PAF-AH and Lp-PLA2 was made after an in vitro enzymatic assay from the decay of radioactive PAF. The TD
patient had lower bound-PAF values in blood, decreased specific activity of PAF-CPT and Lyso-PAF-AT, increased specific activity of PAF-AH
in platelets and leukocytes and Lp-PLA2 activity in plasma compared to healthy women. The EC50 of PAF and Thrombin were higher compared to
healthy women. The increased Lp-PLA2 activity, as well as, the decreased activities of PAF-CPT and Lyso-PAF-AT, explain the decreased bound-
PAF level in TD patient and the EC50 of PAF. However, total PAF is in a normal range and this probably can explain one of the reasons this
TD patient has no CAD. Tangier disease (TD) is a rare genetic disorder that was first described by Fredrickson et al. and it is
characterized by nearly absence of high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol in patients’ plasma. Only recently, in 1999, has been reported
that mutations in the ATP binding cassette A1 transporter (ABCA1) is responsible for TD . ABCA1 is a member of the ABCA subfamily with high
expression levels in hepatocytes, adrenal glands, liver, lung and several other tissues . In vivo models with ABCA1 inactivation
demonstrated cholesterol deposition in macrophages and other cells , suggesting a pivotal role of this transporter in the trafficking of
lipids, HDL biogenesis, and overall cholesterol homeostasis. Approximately, 1/3 of TD patients may develop coronary artery disease (CAD) .
The mechanism of CAD in TD patients is still not very clear. Several mechanisms, beside lipid metabolism, may be involved in the development
of CAD. Inflammation is the one of these mechanisms. The inflammation is initiated by leukocytes and lipoproteins infiltration into the
arterial wall (1), where the lipoproteins undergo oxidation (2) and the monocyte-derived macrophages after digestion of modified lipoprotein
particles form foam cells . Macrophages, after their activation, synthesize proinflammatory and prothrombotic factors such as platelet-
activating factor (PAF) which is a powerful mediator of inflammation and a key factor for atherosclerosis . A pathological regulation of PAF
metabolism results in increased PAF-levels and triggers local inflammatory response of vascular endothelium . PAF biosynthesis is regulated
by two different enzymatic pathways: the de novo pathway in which the key enzyme is specific dithiothreitol-insensitive CDP-choline:
1-alkyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycerolcholinephosphotransferase (PAF- cholinephosphotransferase, PAF-CPT, EC 2.7.8.16) that converts
1-O-alkyl-2-acetyl-glycerol to PAF; and the remodeling one in which the key enzyme is Lyso-PAF:acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase (Lyso-PAF-
acetyltransferase, Lyso-PAF-AT, EC 2.3.1.67) which acetylates Lyso-PAF. It is believed that the de novo reaction sequence appears to be
responsible for its constitutive synthesis maintaining resting PAF levels in various tissues and blood whereas the remodeling route plays a
crucial role in inflammatory/hypersensitivity responses of PAF. PAF is catabolized by PAF-acetylhydrolase (PAF-AH, EC 3.1.1.47). PAF-AH has
an isoform in plasma, also known as lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2) . PAF-AH action is to cleave short chain acyl chains
at the sn-2 position of phospholipids such as oxidized phospholipids and PAF . Since PAF-AH cleaves PAF (which is an atherogenic factor) it
can be characterized as an anti-atherogenic enzyme . In the present study, we determined in a TD patient the specific activities of PAF
anabolic enzymes (PAF-CPT and Lyso-PAF-AT) in platelets and leukocytes as well as the specific activity of the catabolic enzyme PAF-AH in
the same set of cells and erythrocytes along with the activity of Lp-PLA2 in plasma. We measured PAF levels (free, bound and total) in blood
and we studied the EC50 values of PAF, thrombin and adenosine diphosphate (ADP) in Platelet-Rich Plasma (PRP). We studied a 43 years old
Greek women with TD, previously described by Kolovou et al. . The patient had no CAD documented angiographically and had no signs of carotid
artery atherosclerosis as evaluated by echocardiography. At the present time she was an ex-smoker. She is the child of two second-degree
cousins and a mother of three girls. Clinical examination revealed mild hepatosplenomegaly. Blood samples were performed in the 21st day of
her menstrual cycle and the lipid measurements were made in the same day. No enlarged tonsils, pathological lymph nodes, peripheral
neuropathy or atherosclerosis were present. Her lipid profile was typical of TD phenotype. DNA analysis has revealed a new mutation (C2033A)
in both alleles, causing a premature stop codon at the amino acid residue 573, which resulted in truncation of the ABCA1 protein . The
control group consisted of 12 women aged 64 ± 10 years old who were self-reported as healthy. The Department of Chemistry of National and
Kapodistrian University of Athens and Onassis Cardiac Surgery Center ethics committee approved the protocol of this study. All subjects
signed an informed consent form. Human blood, collected from an antecubital vein, was distributed into 2 polyethylene tubes containing
anticoagulant (0.1 M buffered dextrose citrate, ACD) in the ratio of blood/anticoagulant: 9/1 (v/v) to a final volume of 10 mL. The
isolation of PRP was performed as previously described . Briefly, the PRP was obtained by centrifugation (1st) of blood specimens at 194 × g
for 10 min. PRP was then transferred to polypropylene tubes at room temperature for the biological assay, whereas PPP was obtained by
further centrifuging (2nd) the specimens at 1465 × g for 20 min. PRP was adjusted to 500000 platelets/μL using the respective PPP. All
procedures took place at 24 °C (room temperature). The isolation was performed as previously described . Briefly, human blood, collected
from an antecubital vein was distributed into 1 polyethylene tube containing anticoagulant in the ratio of blood/anticoagulant: 9/1, so as
the total volume in each tube to be 10 mL. The procedure is the same as above but after the 2nd centrifugation (1465 × g, 20 min) the
supernatant (plasma) was collected, aliquoted and stored at -80°C. In the pellet from the 2nd centrifugation 1 mL of a buffer containing
50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.4) was added and was sonicated 4× 15 s in an ice bath, the sample was then centrifuged (3rd) at 500 × g for 10 min at
4°C. The supernatant was the platelets homogenate which was aliquoted and stored at -80°C. In the pellet of the 1st centrifugation saline to
a final volume of 10 mL was added. After mildly redissolving, 3.4 mL of dextran solution was added (3% dextran in NaCl 0.15 M) to induce
erythrocyte sedimentation. The mixture was kept for 1 hour at room temperature and the leukocyte-rich supernatant (LRP) was then centrifuged
(4th) at 500 × g for 10 min at room temperature. The remaining erythrocytes in the sediment were lysed with the addition of 5 mL of a lyses
solution consisted of 155 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM KHCO3, and 0.1 mM EDTA, and after 5 min removed by centrifugation (5th) at 300 × g for 10 min at
room temperature. The pelleted cells (leukocytes) were resuspended in 1 mL of a buffer containing 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.4) and then sonicated
into ice for 4 × 15 s. After a centrifugation (6th) at 500 × g for 10 min at 4°C the supernantant of washed human leukocytes (WHLs)
homogenate was aliquoted and stored at -80°C. From the sediment of erythrocytes a volume of 500 μL was added in 2.5 mL of saline and then
centrifuged (7th) at 200 × g for 10 min at room temperature. The pellet was resuspended in 2 mL of a buffer containing 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH
7.4) and centrifuged at 500 × g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was aliquoted and stored at -80°C. Human PRP was obtained as previously
described. Aliquots of PAF solution in chloroform/methanol (1:1 v/v) were evaporated under a stream of nitrogen and were redissolved in BSA
(1.25% in saline) to obtain PAF solutions with final concentrations into cuvette ranging from 1.0 10–8 to 1.0 10–5 mol/L. ADP and Thrombin
were dissolved in saline to obtain solutions with final concentrations into cuvette ranging from 10-10 to 10-9 M of ADP and 90 to 370 U/L of
Thrombin, respectively. The maximum reversible or the minimum irreversible PAF-induced platelet aggregation was determined as the 100%
aggregation, and then various PAF concentrations were added, so as to achieve aggregations between 20% and 80%. These PAF-induced
aggregations were of linear response to the respective PAF concentration; therefore, the EC50 value was calculated. EC50 (Equivalent
Concentration for 50% aggregation) accounts for the aggregating agent concentration inducing 50% aggregation and results are expressed as M
or Units (final concentration in the cuvette). The isolation and purification of PAF was according to the method of Demopoulos et al. .
Briefly, 10 mL of blood were collected from each human subject and poured immediately (after collection) into 40 mL of absolute ethanol. The
mixture was stirred and centrifuged at 300 × g for 10 min. The supernatant and the pellet were extracted separately according to the Bligh
and Dyer method and the chloroform phase in each case was stored. The supernatant chloroform extract contains plasma PAF, named as free PAF,
while the pellet extract contains cell–PAF, named as bound PAF. The above extracts were purified on silicic acid column chromatography that
was eluted with 45 mL of methanol/water (1:1.5, v/v), followed by 50 mL of methanol/water (2:1, v/v). The initial 45 mL (containing the bulk
of proteinaceous and other non-lipid impurities) were discarded while the PAF containing eluents were further purified by HPLC on a cation-
exchange column. The solvent system consisted of an isocratic elution of acetonitrile/methanol/water (61:31:8, v/v/v) slightly modified from
the one described in . The eluted substances were detected using UV detection at 208 nm. Washed rabbit platelets were prepared as previously
described . PAF and the all examined samples were dissolved in BSA 1.25% in saline. The PAF concentration of the samples was estimated
against an 8 point regression curve of standard PAF. The study was performed using a Chronolog aggregometer (model 400) (Havertown, Pa, USA)
at 37°C with constant stirring at 1200 rpm, coupled to a Chronolog recorder. The PAF-AH enzymatic assay was performed as previously
described . Briefly, Tris–HCl 50 mM pH 7.4 buffer was mixed with 4 nmol of 3 H]-PAF (20 Bq per nmol)/PAF solution in BSA (1% in saline). The
whole mixture was incubated at 37°C for 5 min and the reaction was initiated by adding homogenates (0.25 mg/mL for leukocytes, 0.5 mg/mL for
platelets and 2.5 mg/mL for erythrocytes at final volume of 200μL). The reaction took place at 37°C for 30 min and was stopped by the
addition of BSA solution (final concentration 0.75 mg/mL) and followed by precipitation with trichloroacetic acid (TCA; final concentration
9.6% v/v). The mixture stayed in ice bath for 30 min and then was centrifuged at 16000 × g for 5 min at 4°C. The 3 H]-acetate released from
the reaction was measured on the liquid scintillation counter by placing 0.1 mL of the suspension liquid into 5.0 mL of scintillation
liquid. The enzyme activity was expressed as pmol of PAF degraded per minute per mg total protein except of the fraction of plasma where the
enzyme activity was expressed as pmol of PAF degraded per min per μL of plasma. All experiments were conducted in triplicates. Assay was
performed at 37°C for 20 min in a final volume of 200 mL containing 0.05 mg/mL protein, 100 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8.0), 15 mM DTT, 0.5 mM
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 20 mM MgCl2, 1 mg/mL BSA, 100 μM Cytidinediphosphocholine (CDP-Choline), and 100 μM AAG. The
reaction was stopped by adding 500 μL of methanol. The assay procedure, extraction, purification, and determination of produced PAF
concentration were performed as previously described . The enzyme activity was expressed as pmol of synthesized PAF per minute per mg of
total protein. All experiments were conducted in triplicates. Assay was performed as previously described . Briefly, the reaction was
carried out at 37°C for 30 minutes in a final volume of 200 μL containing 0.125 mg/mL protein, 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.4), 0.25 mg/mL BSA,
20 μmol/L Lyso-PAF, and 200 μmol/L acetyl-CoA. The reaction was stopped by adding 500 μL of methanol and the extraction, purification, and
determination of PAF was carried out as mentioned in the PAF-CPT assay . The enzyme activity was expressed as pmol of synthesized PAF per
min per mg of total protein. All experiments were conducted in triplicates. The Wilcoxon non parametric statistic analysis for one sample
was performed to compare the sample of TD patient with 12 healthy women. The statistic significance was established at 5% (p < 0.05) and the
variables of control group are shown as median and percentiles (25% – 75%). The patient’s lipid profile was typical for TD (Table 1). Lipid
profile and the biochemical measurements of the TD patient HDL-cholesterol: High density lipoprotein-cholesterol. LDL-cholesterol: Low
density lipoprotein cholesterol. Patient’s “free” PAF was 4.74 fmol/mL and “bound” PAF was 1.32 fmol/mL giving a total PAF of 6.06 fmol/mL.
In the control group “free” PAF was 3.16 fmol/mL (1.89-12.86) and “bound” PAF was 2.92 fmol/mL (2.27-3.99), so the total PAF was 6.40
fmol/mL (3.92-16.31) (Figure 1). Levels of Free-PAF, Bound-PAF and total PAF in blood of the control group and TD patient. The box plots
indicate the data from the control group while the single bar indicates the mean (and also median) value of TD patient. (†: statistically
significant difference compared to control group, p < 0.05). Many studies expressed the PAF levels in pg/mL and for this reason we converted
our results from fmol/mL to pg/mL. After conversion with a theoretical molecular weight of PAF at 548 pg/mol, “free” PAF was 2.60 pg/mL and
1.73 pg/mL, “bound” PAF was 0.72 pg/mL and 1.60 pg/mL, and total PAF was 3.32 pg/mL and 3.50 pg/mL, in TD patient and control group,
respectively. The Lp-PLA2 activity was 37.12 pmol/min/μL in the TD patient, while in the control group was 22.25 pmol/min/μL (17.40-25.01)
(p < 0.05) (Figure 2). The specific activity of PAF-AH in the TD patient’s leukocytes, erythrocytes and platelets was 77.56, 9.01 and 821.41
in pmol/min/mg of protein, respectively while in healthy women the corresponding activities were 6.60 (2.14-15.48), 17.26 (13.08-19.91), and
14.19 (11.74-17.92) (p < 0.05) (Figure 3). The activity of Lyso-PAF-AT in leukocytes and platelets was 5.52 and 0.37 pmol/min/mg of protein
respectively, in the TD patient. In the control women the Lyso-PAF-AT specific activity in leukocytes was 20.31 (4.05-44.15) and in
platelets was 9.18 (3.61-11.41) pmol/min/mg (p < 0.05) (Figure 4). PAF-CPT specific activity in leukocytes and platelets was 45.29 and 5.61
pmol/min/mg of protein, respectively, while in the control women’s leukocytes was 43.54 (33.88-121.14) and in platelets was 252.93
(212.36-282.48) pmol/min/mg (p < 0.05) (Figure 5). The activity of Lipoprotein-phospholipase A2(Lp-PLA2) in plasma in TD patient and in
control group. The box plots indicate the data from the control group while the single bar indicates the mean (and also median) value of TD
patient. (†: statistically significant difference compared to control group, p < 0.05). The specific activity of PAF-acetylhydrolase (PAF-
AH) in cells in TD patient and in control group. The box plots indicate the data from the control group while the single bar indicates the
mean (and also median) value of TD patient. (†: statistically significant difference compared to control group, p < 0.05). The specific
activity of Lyso-PAF-acelyltransferase (Lyso-PAF-AT) in cells, in TD patient and in control group. The box plots indicate the data from the
control group while the single bar indicates the mean (and also median) value of TD patient. (†: statistically significant difference
compared to control group, p < 0.05). The specific activity of PAF-cholinephosphotransferase (PAF-CPT) in cells, in TD patient and in
control group. The box plots indicate the data from the control group while the single bar indicates the mean (and also median) value of TD
patient. (†: statistically significant difference compared to control group, p < 0.05). The patient’s EC50 value of the aggregation in PRP
of PAF was 36.5·10-7 M, of ADP was 20.15·10-10 M and of Thrombin was 183·U/L (final concentration in the cuvette). In control group the EC50
of PAF was 9.5·10-7 (5-17) M, of ADP 126·10-10 (111-165) M and of thrombin 17 (12-20) U/L (Figures 6, 7 and 8). The EC50of PAF in platelet
rich plasma (PRP) in TD patient and in control group. The box plots indicate the data from the control group while the single bar indicates
the mean (and also median) value of TD patient. (†: statistically significant difference compared to control group, p < 0.05). The EC50of
ADP in platelet rich plasma (PRP) in TD patient and in control group. The box plots indicate the data from the control group while the
single bar indicates the mean (and also median) value of TD patient. (†: statistically significant difference compared to control group,
p < 0.05). The EC50of Thrombin in platelet rich plasma (PRP) in TD patient and in control group. The box plots indicate the data from the
control group while the single bar indicates the mean (and also median) value of TD patient. (†: statistically significant difference
compared to control group, p < 0.05). This is the first time that PAF levels were measured in blood sample of TD patient. Although, the
bound PAF values of TD patient were lower in comparison with the control group, the total PAF values were in the normal range. Chen et al.
evaluated the PAF in nonsmoking patients with periodontits and/or CAD and found different values compared to our study. Also, different PAF
values were found in few other studies evaluated patients with periodontal disease , asthma , anaphylaxis , heart failure and liver
cirrhosis . In all of these studies the PAF values were higher compared to controls. The discrepancy found between our study and others
investigators can be explained that we performed measurements with different method and the disease was different. This is the first study
which evaluated the specific activities of PAF-AH, Lyso-PAF-AT, PAF-CPT and the activity of Lp-PLA2, in a TD patient. However, Pritchard et
al. and Stafforini et al. have evaluated solely the Lp-PLA2 activity in patient with TD. Both studies found that the activity of Lp-PLA2 was
higher in patients than controls. The values of the activities of Lp-PLA2, similar to PAF, differ among studies. This happens because the
evaluated variables are measured in different samples (plasma or blood cells). Furthermore, in several pathological situations, such as
acute coronary syndrome and unstable angina , polycystic ovary syndrome , heart failure , human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) , CAD patients after positive exercise test and hypertension , the Lp-PLA2 activity was increased
compared with controls. A number of studies evaluating the activity of Lp-PLA2 in various pathological situations found lower values
compared with control group. Vadas et al. measured the activity of Lp-PLA2 in patients with anaphylaxis and found lower specific activity
than in control group and PAF values of 805 ± 595 pg/mL in patients and 127 ± 104 pg/mL in controls. Similar results were reported by Rufail
et al. in patients with generalized aggressive periodontitis and Lösche et al. who studied patents with periodontitis before and after
treatment. In addition, Serebruany et al. measured plasma levels of PAF-AH and found that in patients with acute myocardial infarction were
significantly lower comared with controls. In our study the patient’s specific activities of PAF-AH in platelets and leukocytes and the
activity of Lp-PLA2 in plasma, were increased compared to healthy women (p < 0.05). The patient’s specific activities of PAF-CPT in
platelets and Lyso-PAF-AT in platelets and leukocytes, were decreased compared to healthy women (p < 0.05). The decreased specific
activities of PAF-CPT and Lyso-PAF-AT also indicate the lack of a chronic or an acute inflammation. It is the first time that EC50 of the
aggregation in TD patient’s PRP of PAF, ADP and thrombin are measured. Stathopoulou et al. found in 69 healthy individuals that the PAF EC50
values ranged 0.13-24.37 10-7 M. In addition, Goudevenos et al. studied platelet response to the aggregatory effect of PAF in 44 patients
with CAD who performed exercise tests. The PAF EC50 values in 21 patients with positive exercise test were found to be significantly
decreased at rest compared with 21 subjects with negative exercise test. In our study the patient’s EC50 of PAF was increased compared to
healthy women (p < 0.05), which can be explained by the increased activity of Lp-PLA2. The patient’s EC50 values for ADP was lower and EC50
of Thrombin was higher, compared to healthy women (p < 0.05). Tselepis et al. studied platelet aggregation in the PRP of 32 patients with
unstable angina before and after treatment with abciximab. The PAF EC50 values were significantly lower on the day of admission, whereas the
maximal percentage of aggregation was significantly higher compared to controls. Similar behavior of the platelets was observed in the
aggregatory effect of ADP. Also, Demopoulos et al. found that ADP (5 μM) caused decreased or normal platelet aggregation in the homozygous
beta-thalassaemic patients, approximately normal in the heterozygous subjects and increased in the splenectomized patients. Harmon et al.
found that thrombin binding was elevated in TD patients but with lower responsiveness at lower thrombin concentrations and they suggested
that platelets were less responsive to thrombin than in normal control subjects. We found higher value of EC50 of thrombin in TD patient
compared with controls and we can assume that some co-enzymes could be in lower concentrations or less active in PRP of TD patient. The
reason why our TD patient has not developed foam cells and CAD is unknown and was extensively discussed by Kolovou et al. . Furthermore, it
may be partially explained by PAF metabolism. Since, PAF play an important role in atherosclerosis the development of CAD may depend on PAF
levels in blood, as well as, biosynthesis and catabolism of PAF in cells. In conclusion, the biosynthetic enzymes (PAF-CPT and Lyso-PAF-AT)
of TD patient have lower specific activity than of the control group, which can be explained by the decreased levels of PAF. The catabolic
enzyme PAF-AH specific activity in leukocytes, in platelets and Lp-PLA2 activity in plasma is higher in TD patient than in controls.
Opposite, the PAF-AH in erythrocytes was lower than in control group. Thus, this may partially explain why bound PAF levels are lower in TD
patient compared with normal subjects. The measurements of total PAF levels which were close to the normal range, may be the reason for not
developing CAD in TD patients. It is hard to establish whether the features observed with this TD patient are similar in other TD patients,
since TD is a rare genetic disease with approximately 50 indentified cases all over the world. In addition, this is the first time that PAF
metabolism, as well as, PAF levels and aggregability, were measured in a TD patient. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. VK participated in the experiments procedures and drafting of the manuscript. VP, GS, SV and MX participated in the experiments
procedures and review the manuscript. GK evaluated the patient and review the manuscript. CD participated in the study design, its
coordination and review the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
