Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumors (DNETs) arise mostly in the supratentorial cerebral cortex. A very rare case of intraventricular
DNET with diffuse ependymal involvement, which causes spinal drop metastasis, is presented. A dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor (DNET)
is a benign, mixed neuronal-glial neoplasm associated with a medically intractable seizure in children and young adults (1). DNETs are
typically located in the supratentorial cortex, mostly in the temporal lobe. There have been few reports regarding extracortical locations
of DNET, such as the cerebellum, brainstem, pericallosal region, septum pellucidum, caudate nucleus, and intraventricular region (2-5).
Intraventricular DNET is extremely rare and manifested as a well circumscribed focal mass with no contrast enhancement (2, 6-9). Herein, we
present a case of DNET that had widespread, diffuse ventricular ependymal involvement, which has not previously been described in the
literature. A 29-year-old female patient presented with a 2-month history of decreased visual acuity and hand tremors. In the 4 days prior
to presentation, she had gait disturbance. Neurological examination at the presentation revealed a drowsy mental status, diplopia, and gait
disturbance. MR imaging demonstrated diffuse, thick nodular ependymal masses throughout the entire ventricles. The lesion was hypointense on
T1-weighted images and markedly hyperintense on T2-weighted images (Fig. 1A, B). Fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images showed a
well defined hyperintense thin rim surrounding the tumor (Fig. 1C). In addition, peripheral rim like enhancing portions within the mass in
the right lateral ventricle were noted on postcontrast T1-weighted imaging (Fig. 1D). Obstructive hydrocephalus was also noted. There was no
diffusion restriction on the diffusion-weighted images (Fig. 1E). The preoperative diagnosis was intraventricular astrocytoma.
Neuronavigation-assisted excisional biopsy was performed on the mass in the temporal horn of right lateral ventricle. Pathological
evaluation revealed oligodendrocyte-like tumor cells with uniformly round and hyperchromatic nuclei and a perinuclear halo in a myxoid
background (Fig. 1F); immunohistochemical staining showed floating neurons with a positive synaptophysin reaction (Fig. 1G). The
histopathologic diagnosis was determined to be a dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor. The patient underwent a ventriculoperitoneal shunt
for treatment of hydrocephalus and was managed conservatively. 29 months after her initial presentation, she developed lumbar pain and motor
weakness in both legs. Lumbar spine MR imaging demonstrated multiple well defined enhancing lesions surrounding cauda equina and S1 nerve
roots, which is suggestive of leptomeningeal drop metastases (Fig. 1H, I). The patient consequently underwent radiation therapy to the
lumbosacral region. DNET is a benign tumor of neuroepithelial origin that occurs in children and young adults and is usually located in the
cerebral cortex. These tumors frequently cause medically intractable partial seizures. The histopathological hallmark of DNETs is the
glioneuronal element, which contains oligodendrocyte-like cells attached to bundles of axons and neurons floating in a myxoid interstitial
fluid (10). DNETs are typically an intracortically located supratentorial tumor. The temporal lobe is the most common site, followed by the
frontal lobe, parietal lobe, and occipital lobe (10). Only a few intraventricular DNET cases have been reported in the literature to date
(2, 6-9). It has been suggested that a intraventricular DNET derives from the subependymal secondary germinal layer (5). Intraventricular
DNET has been described as a well circumscribed, localized mass located in the lateral ventricle or third ventricle with associated
obstructive hydrocephalus in the literature. In contrast to previous reports, our case has a unique morphological feature; widespread,
diffuse nodular masses along walls of entire ventricles. To the best of our knowledge, this "diffuse ependymal involvement type" of DNET has
not been previously reported. The MRI signal characteristics of intraventricular DNETs are similar to those of ordinary DNETs located in the
cortical region. At MR imaging, DNETs are hypointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images without mass effect or
surrounding vasogenic edema, regardless of their location. Calcifications and hemorrhage are rare (10). The other signal characteristics
included a relatively low incidence of contrast enhancement and pseudocystic appearance because of abundant myxoid interstitial matrix of
the tumor. Around 20% of DNETs show a nodular, ring-like, or heterogeneous contrast enhancement (10, 11). Recently, Parmar et al. (12)
reported that the finding of hyperintense rim surrounding the tumor on FLAIR images is sensitive and specific for DNETs. They speculated
that the hyperintense rim on FLAIR images may represent loose glioneuronal elements at the periphery of the tumors. Our case also
demonstrated uniform, thin hyperintense rim between nodular tumors and underlying normal-appearing white matter on FLAIR images, which has
not been described in previously reported cases of intraventricular DNETs. Our patient developed multiple intradural masses of the cauda
equina and sacral nerve roots 2.4 years after initial presentation, which is suggestive of spinal drop metastasis due to leptomeningeal
seeding of the tumor. We found only one case report of intraventricular DNET with spinal leptomeningeal seeding in the literature. Bilginer
et al. (9) reported a case of 9-year-old boy with a localized DNET in the third ventricle and leptomeningeal dissemination. Leptomeningeal
dissemination of low grade glioma has been reported with a frequency of 5-10% (9). As shown in our case and previous case reports, there is
a likelihood of spinal dissemination in cases of intraventricular DNETs. Thus, we recommend that the patients with intraventricular DNETs
should be routinely screened and followed up with spine MR imaging. In conclusion, we present the first case of intraventricular DNET with
widespread, diffuse ependymal involvement that caused spinal drop metastases. Intraventricular DNETs may also show the hyperintense rim sign
on FLAIR images similar to those with cortical location. In addition, routine spine MR imaging should be recommended for the early diagnosis
of spinal drop metastasis in patients with intraventricular DNETs. Diffuse ependymal dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor with spinal drop
metastasis in 29-year-old female patient. A. Axial T1-weighted image shows diffuse and nodular low signal intensity lesions along ependymal
surface of lateral ventricles and third ventricle. B. Lesions show bright signal intensity on axial T2-weighted image. C. Axial fluid
attenuated inversion recovery image shows hyperintense rim (arrows) along wall of ventricles between mass lesions and underlying
periventricular white matter. D. Coronal, contrast-enhanced T1-weighted image shows peripheral rim like or nodular enhancement along surface
of mass lesions. E. Axial diffusion-weighted image shows no diffusion restriction within tumor. F. Photomicrograph shows oligodendrocyte-
like cells in mucinous matrix (H&E, × 400). G. Immunohistochemical staining shows that synaptophysin is expressed in larger tumor cells,
which are supposed to be neuronal component (IHC, × 400). H. Axial, T2-weighted lumbar spine magnetic resonance (MR) image obtained 29
months after initial presentation shows well defined, multiple intradural masses with high signal intensity surrounding cauda equina
(arrows). I. Axial, contrast enhanced T1-weighted lumbar spine MR image shows extensive enhancement in intradural masses and bilateral S1
nerve roots (arrows).
