Wide en bloc excision of proximal ulna sections is used to treat traumatic and pathological fractures of the ulna, though poor
standardization of clinical treatment often results in long-term failure of such reconstructed biomechanical structures. In order to provide
insight into effective ulnar reconstructive treatments, the case of an 80-year-old Chinese Han male presenting with pathological fracture
caused by a proximal ulnar metastatic tumor concurrent with metastatic renal cancer complicated by occurrence in the brain and lungs is
reported and contrasted with alternative treatment techniques. Wide resectioning of the proximal ulna and reconstruction with local radius
neck-to-humerus trochlea transposition resulted in preservation of functionality, sensitivity, and biomechanical integrity after
postsurgical immobilization, 6 weeks of passive- and active-assisted flexion, and extension with a hinged brace. The resultant
Musculoskeletal Tumor Society rating score was 25 of 30 (83 %). Full sensitivity and mobility of the left hand and elbow (10° to 90° with
minimally impaired supination and pronation) was restored with minimal discomfort. No evidence of local recurrence or other pathological
complications were observed within a 1-year follow-up period. Efficient reconstruction of osseous and capsuloligamentous structures in the
elbow is often accomplished by allografts, prosthesis, and soft tissue reconstruction, though wide variations in risk and prognosis
associated with these techniques has resulted in disagreements regarding the most effective standards for clinical treatment. Current
findings suggest that radius neck-to-humerus trochlea transposition offers a superior range of elbow movement and fewer complications than
similar allograft and prosthetic techniques for patients with multiple metastatic cancers. Reconstruction processes addressing the defects
produced by wide excision of portions of the proximal ulna are difficult to treat because of the complex biomechanical interactions
surrounding the hinge joint of the elbow. The function of the elbow relies on a complex combination of restraints achieved by the dynamic
muscles of the elbow and the static bony and capsuloligamentous structures to which they are attached. Under normal conditions, valgus
stress ranges from 31 % in extension to 33 % in 90° flexion, with the radial head acting as a secondary stabilizer, minimizing valgus
instability . Removal of significant portions of the ulna can reduce the stabilization provided by the radial head, resulting in
symptomatically impaired mechanical function of the elbow. Subsequent to reconstructive surgery, improper healing may also represent
significant impairments that are not immediately evident, but instead manifest as symptomatic sensitivity or mobility limitations months or
years after the surgical procedure. In order to successfully reconstruct the biomechanical interactions between osseous and
capsuloligamentous structures required for normal elbow function, structural vascularized bone grafts with internal fixation, elbow
arthrodesis, and custom or modular prosthetic elbow arthroplasty are often conducted in clinical settings . Bone grafts induce restoration
of natural osteoconduction, osteoinduction, and osteogenic cells, particularly when composite grafting is applied . Arthrodesis, while
commonly selected for the treatment of traumatic elbow damage, often results in improper healing, necessitating extensive rehabilitation
before mobility is restored . Prosthetic total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) often depends highly on the varus-valgus interplay between the
humeral and ulnar components, and is rarely used to treat cases where the ulnar head is impaired . The appropriate treatment choice varies
highly among different cases, often related to the patient’s condition, pathology, previous mobility, pain level, and unique mobility
requirements. Each of these techniques represents a unique set of risks for the development of complications, such as infection, prosthetic
loosening, or fracture. Furthermore, these complications exhibit the tendency to occur immediately after the surgical procedure or much
later in the patient’s life, suggesting that appropriate treatment choice may also vary by the patient’s projected lifespan, normal stress
or activity levels, and overall mobility requirements. While many previous studies have examined the immediate benefits of these surgical
techniques, long-term assessment of reconstructive surgeries is rarely reported despite the critical role of long-term outcomes in
determination of appropriate treatment methodology. In order to assess the 1-year effectiveness of radius neck-to-humerus trochlea
transposition, the rare case of an 80-year-old Chinese Han male undergoing the procedure after wide excision of an advanced metastatic ulnar
tumor is examined in detail, providing a powerful precedent for the potential long-term success of this procedure in stabilizing the elbow
with minimal impact on the sensitivity and minimal mobility impairment. Few cases have reviewed both the immediate postsurgical and long-
term outcomes of this technique , suggesting the need for formal evaluation of such cases in order to improve clinical treatments choices
and overall patient outcomes. An 80-year-old Chinese Han male with a history of recurrent renal cancer originating approximately 10 years
prior was admitted to the present facility presenting a self-reported severe left forearm pain present for approximately 2 weeks. The
patient reported treatment for recurrent renal cancer within the past 1–3 years, resulting in no apparent impairment to mobility or joint
function. Metastasis of cancer tissue had previously been extensively observed in the patient, including brain metastasis treated with Gamma
Knife procedures three times over the previous 7 years, as well as lung metastasis (Figure 1) first observed 5 years prior to the appearance
of the currently described ulnar metastasis. Additionally, the patient had been previously advised to initiate chemotherapeutic treatment
for lung and brain metastasis, but refused treatment based on the impact on his quality of life and independent living status. The patient
was thus able to remain in independent living conditions with no in-home support or care prior to admission. Preoperative radiographic and
computer tomographic (CT) images clearly indicate previously diagnosed and current lung metastatic tissues. Following admission, the patient
exhibited no abnormal vital signs. Specifically, no indication was found of hypertension, fever, dyspnea, or other abnormalities.
Radiographic imaging revealed a fracture in the left proximal ulna. Coupled with the patient’s previous history of metastatic movement,
these findings suggested an initial diagnosis of metastatic bone tumor and resultant pathologic fracture, a diagnosis that was confirmed
prior to the procedure by routine biopsy of the affected area. Informed consent was obtained from the patient and the patient’s family for
all procedures included in the current case study. Amputation of the affected limb was initially considered because of the extent and size
of the lesion, generally considered indicative of poor reconstruction procedure outcomes resulting in limited mobility (Figures 2, 3). The
patient was advised that limb-sparing treatment was likely to increase the risk of recurrent metastasis and would likely achieve poor
reconstruction outcomes resulting in only partial restoration of mobility. Upon advisement, the patient expressed an explicit preference for
a limb-sparing option, resulting in a treatment designed to provide localized disease control without amputation, offering maximum
preservation of the forearm and elbow functionality. This treatment, however, is not generally recommended for limiting the risk of
metastasis in recurrent patients with or without a history of metastatic growths. Preoperative radiograph of the left proximal ulna and
pathologic fracture of the olecranon. Preoperative CT scan of the left elbow revealing signs of metastatic tumor along with destruction and
pathologic fracture of the olecranon. The initial preoperative reconstruction plan recommended full elbow replacement with a custom
prosthesis coupled with radius neck-to-humerus trochlea transposition. The patient and patient’s family opted to reject the prosthesis but
expressed a desire to move forward with radius neck-to-humerus trochlea transposition. Due to the extremely wide tissue deficit expected
after full removal of metastatic osseous tissues and surrounding materials, soft tissue coverage with a myocutaneous free flap was added to
the surgical plan in lieu of a prosthetic graft. To ensure optimal visibility during the operative procedure, a posterior approach was
applied. The initial incision was drawn along the ulnar shaft, inclusive of the biopsy site. Identification of ulnar nerve was conducted
visually, and the structure was subsequently exposed within the olecranon groove. The nervous tissue was carefully protected from surgical
damage in order to maintain sensitivity in the forearm. Furthermore, the adjacent portions of the median and radial nerves were identified
and similarly conserved in order to prevent postsurgical sensory damage. During surgical removal of the tumor, wide en bloc excision was
necessary for full removal of tumor tissues, resulting in the sacrifice of significant portions of the muscular elements attached to the
tumor process. Specifically, large sections of the extensor muscle, supinator, and flexor pronator group adjacent to tumor tissues were
excised, and the entire proximal half of the ulna was involved in the procedure. The margin of resection was 2 cm distal to the distal
border of the tumor, as observed by T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging, resulting in a relatively large resected area. Visual
observation was used as the primary tool for resectioning of osseous and soft tissue regions, with negative margins determined according to
the extent of observed malignancy. The procedure was completed in accordance with the guidelines previously provided by Enneking , wherein
complete removal of malignant tissues were ensured by the application of margins a minimum of 5 cm distal to primary malignant bone tumors
and 2 cm distal to metastatic tumors. Over the course of the operation, samples were collected from marginal tissues for frozen-section
examination, resulting in definitive determination that margins were negative for metastatic tissue. A total length of 10 cm of the proximal
ulna and surrounding soft tissue were resected. The proximal radius was circumferentially mobilized, the radial-humeral joint was
disarticulated, and the radial neck was then sufficiently mobilized to allow articulation with the humeral trochlea (Figure 4). The
stability of the construct is considered to be highly dependent on the biceps tendon at its insertion point for normal movement, providing a
mechanical purpose for soft restriction to posterior translation of the radius relative to the humeral trochlea. The triceps tendon was
severed and reattached to the proximal radial head by soft tissue-to-bone repair, and the bond was further strengthened using a bone anchor.
(a) Posterior incision including the biopsy site. (b) Exposure and preservation of the ulnar nerve. (c) Wide excision of the tumor segment.
(d) Radius neck-to-humerus trochlear reconstruction; triceps tendon reconstructed to radius head using bone anchor and pins. (e, f)
Postoperative radiograph showing cast and pins at 3 weeks. Resultant tissue margins were examined as frozen sections, confirming the
negative status for metastatic tissue. Notably, in cases where a small amount of the proximal olecranon can be spared in continuity with the
tendon insertion, bone-to-bone repair is often successful. Reconstruction of the tendon insertion allows for subsequent extension against
gravity and provides a restraint to translation of the radial neck as it articulates with the humeral trochlea. Additionally, the long-term
stability of the reconstructed limb is highly dependent on the level of postoperative scar formation, which is often exacerbated by
overstimulation in the weeks subsequent to surgery. In order to protect the reconstructed elbow joint, 3 weeks of full immobilization with a
Kirschner pin and cast at 90° of flexion were ordered after surgery, followed by an additional 6 weeks of passive- and active-assisted
flexion and extension in the sagittal plane with the added protection of a hinged brace. Good upper extremity function was observed after
rehabilitation (Figure 5), though some tolerable discomfort was reported upon resuming normal daily activities. Postoperative results for
left elbow showing: (a) postoperative radiograph at 6-month follow-up, (b) extension and flexion, and (c) pronation and supination. The
Musculoskeletal Tumor Society rating score for the patient after rehabilitation was 25 of 30 (83 %). The patient exhibited full sensitivity
and use of the left hand, allowing the patient to successfully return to most normal activities of daily living with only moderate
discomfort. Additionally, the range of the elbow movement was observed to be 10° to 90°, though supination and pronation were slightly
restricted. No evidence of local recurrence or other pathological complications was observed after 1 year of follow-up. Due to the presence
of stable renal cancer and concurrent lung and brain metastases, the patient remains at elevated risk for future metastatic occurrences. The
procedure of radial neck articulation with the trochlea was first described by Enneking in 1983 , although Dr. Cable Young was the first to
perform the procedure in severe trauma cases. Bone tumors located at the proximal ulna are relatively rare, although reports of primary
giant cell tumor, osteochondroma, and Ewing’s sarcoma of the proximal end of the ulna have appeared. Most osseous cancers, including those
of the ulna, originate from the metastatic movement tumors localized in other tissues. A total of 2.5 % of all cases of ulnar tumor
resulting in pathological fracture or symptomatic pain result from solitary metastasis of malignant cells from highly vascular renal cell
carcinomas. Similar to the current case study, a single study reported application of a similar procedure for reconstruction after the wide
resection of the proximal ulna to treat chondrosarcoma , resulting in highly positive outcomes in which the patient achieved a 35-135° range
of motion at the elbow several weeks after the surgery and no chronic pain. Flexion and extension forces, however, were approximated at half
of the normal strength observed in the contralateral limb. Both the previous case findings and the outcomes of the current case suggest that
successful implementation of radius neck-to-humerus trochlea transposition for the reconstruction of the proximal ulna may improve prognosis
compared with alternative techniques. Alternatively, treatment with artificial elbow arthroplasty (AEA) has been widely reported, though
numerous other techniques have also been employed for treatment of traumatic or pathological removal of large sections of osseous ulnar
tissue . Guo et al. reported 19 cases of peri-elbow tumor resection and reconstruction using total elbow replacement (TER) prostheses.
Evaluation by the Mayo Elbow Performance Score revealed that pain scores decreased from 3.6 to 2.0, and the mean arc of the elbow improved
from 30° to 80°. An excellent or good result occurred in 14/19 of patients (77.8 %), and a poor result occurred in 4/19 patients (22.2 %).
Common complications of total elbow replacement include infection, stem loosening, and peri-prosthesis fracture. Unfortunately, many of
these effects may occur during the immediate postsurgical period or many months or years after the surgery, making the true long-term
effectiveness of this technique difficult to evaluate. Revision is often necessary when these complications occur, which may result in
additional scarring and the application of successive reconstructive techniques, often further impairing mobility and sensitivity.
Specifically, elbow allografts offer additional control over scarring and reduced chances of rejection . Because of the immediate benefits
of reduced scaring, the potential for long-term failure and pathological complications is often overlooked in the choice to treat patients
using arthroplastic techniques. Vascularized fibular grafting is another viable technique used for reconstruction after excision of large
areas of osseous tissues. Gianoutsos reported this treatment following the removal of a hard bloc of cancerous adamantinoma bone tissue
located in the proximal ulna, with good outcomes. Furthermore, Kimura et al. reported a case of Ewing’s sarcoma of the proximal ulna treated
with hemiarthroplasty coupled with a vascularized fibula graft, resulting in no local recurrence and excellent function achieved by the
4-year follow-up. Though outcomes of this treatment are generally positive, fracture, infection, and gradual degeneration remain prominent
issue with its widespread implementation. In order to provide a contrast of the current results and results of previous studies, treatment
outcomes and complications have been assessed in Table 1. The table clearly indicates that treatment with radius neck-to-humerus trochlea
transposition is associated with greater restoration of range of elbow movement and improved resistance to future fracture, deterioration,
and infection compared with the use of prostheses or grafting techniques. Though these results indicate an initial benefit for choosing
radius neck-to-humerus trochlea transposition treatment, further studies conducted using much larger cohorts will be required to verify
these findings before concrete clinical recommendations can be produced. Treatment techniques and postoperative outcomes for wide en bloc
excision of portions of the proximal ulna For each technique short-term outcomes are often reported as excellent or good without adequate
follow-up. Due to the consistent mechanical stressors associated with daily activities of the elbow joint, long-term outcomes that are most
critical to the determination of proper treatment methodology often remain poorly documented. In many cases where other reconstructive
options are contraindicated, radius neck-to-humerus trochlea transposition can be considered a viable alternative for reconstruction
following wide resectioning of the proximal ulna or severe elbow trauma. Not only does this method offer superior elbow mobility after
rehabilitation, as indicated by the present case study and several of its predecessors, this limb-sparing operation may likely provide
superior long-term stability and result in less interference with limb sensitivity. Additionally, the purpose of surgical therapy in the
current case was primarily palliation and improvement in the quality of life remaining for the patient, not prevention of metastasis. It is
important to note that the current patient’s previous metastases may complicate long-term follow-up, requiring additional studies to assess
the effectiveness of this treatment for elbow reconstruction in patients that will resume periods of sustained or intensive elbow use.
Although published data regarding neck-to-trochlea transposition are severely limited, resulting in a lack of clinical standards for
treatment, the results of the current case study suggest that this option for reconstruction after wide excision of the proximal ulna
results in the maximum restoration of elbow motion in the sagittal plane while avoiding many common complications associated with prosthetic
or allograft reconstruction. Neck-to-trochlea transposition provides a viable clinical alternative that may be suitable for use in many
clinical cases, suggesting that the technique should be carefully considered in cases of wide en bloc reconstructive surgery of the proximal
ulna. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient(s) for publication of this manuscript and accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent has been made available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Xia Jun and FeiYan Chen designed the surgical procedure. Xia Jun, YiBing Wei, and FeiYan Chen performed the operation. SiQun
Wang, JianGu Wuo, and GangYong Huang participated the postoperative care and follow-up work. Jie Chen and JingSheng Shi performed the
literature research and manuscript preparation. All authors contributed to the completion and approval of the final manuscript.
