Highly active antiretroviral therapy for AIDS sometimes engenders inflammatory manifestations resulting from an inappropriate and unbalanced
immune-system restoration, called Immune Reconstitution inflammatory Syndrome, which, in turn, can unmask a subclinical infection/pathology.
Despite our patient’s evident syndrome, the atypical clinical, microbiologic and radiologic feature of Pneumocystis pneumonia made its
diagnosis difficult. Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PJP) is a frequent opportunistic infection occurring in moderately-severely
immunodeficient HIV-infected patients before starting Highly Active Antiviral Therapy (HAART). Classical clinical and radiological
manifestations include insidious general and respiratory symptoms, associated with multicystic alveolar–interstitial pneumonia. Since the
advent of HAART, inappropriate and, probably, unbalanced restoration of immune system functions has resulted in exaggerated inflammatory
clinical manifestations characterizing the immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS). Two main IRIS types are described : clinical
deterioration of a known and treated condition (opportunistic infection, neoplasia) define paradoxical IRIS ; whereas the appearance of new
symptoms leading to detection of a subclinical infection is an unmasking-IRIS . This latter diagnosis may be particularly difficult to make
because clinical symptoms differ from the classical infection-associated manifestations. The present report describes an unmasking-
IRIS–associated PJP with unusual and misleading clinical manifestations. A 34-year-old HIV-1-infected woman was admitted for dyspnea and
acute bilateral pneumonia. HIV-1 infection had been diagnosed 8 years earlier during pregnancy, when she received only mother-to-child
antiviral infection prevention. When her virus load (VL) reached 100000 copies/ml and CD4-cell count fell to 270/mm3 HAART with efavirenz,
tenofovir and emcitrabine was started on 16 July 2008. Eight days later, she complained of fever and a persistent cough. Because no clinical
improvement was obtained after 5 days of self-administered amoxicillin–clavulanate and ofloxacin, she was admitted; her chest X-ray showed
bilateral interstitial pneumonia. Her diagnostic work-up found polypnea, cough and fever at 41°C, and a biologically severe inflammatory
syndrome (C-reactive protein: 190 g/dL) without eosinophilia. Arterial blood-gas determination showed severe hypoxemia PO2 45.6 mm Hg. The
thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan revealed multifocal areas of branched centrilobular nodules and patchy ground-glass opacities with
few lobular reticulates (Fi), without cavitation, pleural involvement or mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cytology
showed 950,000 cells/ml: 33% macrophages, 16% neutrophils, 8% eosinophils, no mast cells and 43% lymphocytes, with a CD4/CD8 ratio of 0.6.
Direct BAL microscopy was negative for Pneumocystis jiroveci cysts, Mycobacterium species, Candida and viral inclusions. Histological
examination of bronchial biopsies showed aspecific chronic inflammatory infiltrates. At this time, her HIV-1 VL was 5,322 copies/ml and CD4
T-lymphocyte count had reached 510/mm3 (25%). Volumetric reconstruction of the Thoracic computed tomography-scan at admission, showing
multifocal areas of branched centrilobular nodules and patchy ground-glass opacities with few lobular reticulates (left). At right a single
5-mm thick slice of the upper right lobe. Because of the worsening of the pulmonary function, the patient was transferred to the ICU and
improved rapidly, when HAART was interrupted, under cotrimoxazole and steroids (1mg/kg/day) initiated for suspected IRIS, unmasking of PJP,
which was subsequently confirmed, after the elimination of other possible diagnoses, by both BAL positive Pneumocystis-DNA polymerase chain
reaction amplification and careful microscopic reanalysis showing a few parasitic cysts. IRIS pathogenesis is reportedly linked to an acute
and uncontrolled recovery of antigen-specific immune responses and is associated with a broad nonspecific inflammatory syndrome. These
immunologic and inflammatory pathogenetic pathways can explain why IRIS-associated clinical symptoms may differ from usual infection-related
manifestations. Paradoxical IRIS associated with already diagnosed opportunistic infections is a well-described entity frequently arising in
patients receiving effective HAART mostly reported during Mycobacterium tuberculosis and cryptococcal infections. PJP-associated paradoxical
IRIS is characterized by an acute worsening of fever, with severe respiratory failure and diffuse alveolar opacities. These well-described
events have become rare because steroids are often prescribed and HAART delayed once PJP is diagnosed . Unmasking-IRIS, recently separated
from the former , is more difficult to diagnose and requires more urgent adaptation of therapy, because the underlying pathogen is not yet
known or treated. To our knowledge, only a few cases of PJP-associated unmasking-IRIS, has been reported . Our patient’s underlying PJP was
especially difficult to discern because of several atypical clinical features. However, the rapid response obtained after stopping of HAART
and starting specific antimicrobial therapy and high-dose steroids achieved a favorable clinical outcome. PJP-associated unmasking-IRIS was
diagnosed in 2-steps. In light of the symptom kinetics soon after HAART initiation and concomitant with its good virologic and immunologic
efficacy, the IRIS diagnosis was easily made, it was the search for and identification of the underlying opportunistic infection that posed
the problem. Indeed, this patient had several atypical clinical and radiologic characteristics. The patient’s CD4 T-cell count was higher
than usual in the presence of this opportunistic infection and could be explained by a qualitative rather than quantitative immunodeficiency
. Secondly, BAL fluid findings were atypical: in classical HIV-associated PJP, BAL usually contains numerous parasitic cysts which make the
diagnosis possible on direct sputum examination . In the PJP-associated paradoxical-IRIS cases described in the literature, BAL were mostly
negative for Pneumocystis jiroveci cysts and diagnosis required recourse to molecular biology or thoracic biopsy. That situation is
consistent with IRIS at the time of an already treated PJP. In unmasking-IRIS, like our patient’s, the absence of cysts cannot be explained
by anti-parasitic drug efficacy. The small number of cysts and the appearance of mixed alveolitis, which is an atypical inflammatory
response of the affected tissue, might suggest that the respiratory symptoms are secondary to an inappropriate immune-system reaction,
rather than to the infection itself . A more careful reexamination of the BAL provided a retrospective confirmation of our patient’s
diagnosis. From a radiologic perspective, 9 out of 10 times, in PJP, and PJP-associated paradoxical IRIS, thoracic CT scans revealed
exudative alveolitis resembling bilateral ground-glass attenuation . The presence of multiple branched micronodules, as in our patient’s
case, is not typical of PJP and usually suggests the presence of airway involvement, like that seen in infectious bronchiolitis or
mycobacterial infection. Nodules have been described in PJP but are usually not the predominant sign . Only Chen et al. reported such
unusual PJP-associated unmasking-IRIS with granulomatous histologic lesions but their patient had PJP and Mycobacterium avium co-infections
. Thus, the radiologic appearance of PJP-associated unmasking-IRIS could differ from classic PJP or the generally described PJP-associated
paradoxical-IRIS images, which may reflect to a specific pathogenetic process. Because infection-associated IRIS symptoms coincide with the
burst of the acute reconstitution of anti-infectious immunity , clinical symptoms might be more attributable to the inflammatory immune
responses to some exogenous antigens, than to the virulence of the infectious agent. In our opinion, atypical clinical symptoms arising
after HAART introduction should evoke unmasking-IRIS and require concentrated efforts to identify the underlying pathogen, independently of
the classical epidemiologic, clinical, radiologic or microbiologic descriptions. Acknowledgements: Special acknowledgment to Mrs. Janet
Jacobson for her editing of the manuscript. No conflicts of interest
