Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndromes (MDSs) are autosomal recessive diseases characterized by a severe decrease in mitochondrial DNA
content leading to dysfunction of the affected organ. Autosomal recessive mutations in MPV17 have been identified in the hepatocerebral form
of MDS. We describe the clinical features, biochemical and molecular results of a Saudi infant with a new mutation of MPV17 and compared the
features to those of previously reported cases. We stress the importance of such rare cases particularly in countries with high
consanguineous marriage rate. Profound reduction of the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number is the molecular hallmark of the mtDNA
depletion syndromes (MDSs), a heterogeneous group of severe mitochondrial disorders of infancy and childhood. These syndromes are inherited
as autosomal recessive traits, while no mutations were identified in the mtDNA molecule, which suggests that MDS results from defects in
nucleus-encoded factors, involved in mtDNA maintenance. Clinically, MDS are usually classified as 1 of 3 forms: a myopathic form associated
with mutations in the thymidine kinase 2 (TK2) gene or the p53-induced ribonucleotide reductase B subunit (RRM2B) gene, an
encephalomyopathic form associated with mutations in the ATP-dependent succinyl CoA synthase gene (SUCLA2) or the GTP-dependent succinyl CoA
synthase gene (SUCLG1), and a hepatocerebral form associated with mutations in either the Twinkle (PEO1) gene, the polymerase-gammaA (POLG1)
gene, the deoxyguanosine kinase (DGUOK) gene, or, more recently, with mutations in the MPV17 gene. MPV17 gene encodes a small hydrophobic
protein of unknown function, located in the mitochondrial inner membrane. One hypothesis is that MPV17 could play a role in the structural
preservation of the inner mitochondrial membrane, which could in turn control mtDNA maintenance and stability. Mutations in the MPV17 gene
were initially identified in 3 families with infantile hepatic mtDNA depletion. The phenotype in these patients was characterized by
recurrent episodes of severe hypoglycemia, associated with signs of hepatopathy evolving towards liver failure and cirrhosis, and growth
retardation, during the first year of life. Frequent, corn-starch-based meals were proven to be effective in preventing severe hypoglycemic
crisis in some of these patients, with a trend towards the stabilization of the hepatic insufficiency. However, surviving patients do
develop neurologic abnormalities, including both sensory–motor peripheral neuropathy and lesions of the central nervous system, particularly
in the cerebellum and cerebral cortex. A founder MPV17 mutation associated with a longer-surviving, predominantly neurologic, was later
identified in patients with Navajo neurohepatopathy (NNH; MIM 256810), an autosomal recessive disorder prevalent in the Navajo population of
the southwestern United States. The MPV17 gene maps to chromosome 2p23.3 and contains 8 exons. To date, 20 different mutations in 29
patients have been reported. These include 9 mis-sense mutations, 2 nonsense mutations, 3 in-frame deletions, 2 splicing site mutations, 2
insertion mutations, 1 frame-shift deletion, and 1 large deletion encompassing the entire gene. We describe here the clinical features, and
the biochemical and molecular results of an infant with a new mutation of MPV17 and compared his features with those of previously reported
cases. We report the case of a Saudi boy, the first and only offspring of healthy Saudi parents who happened to be first cousins. He was the
product of a fullterm pregnancy, born by spontaneous vaginal delivery after an uncomplicated pregnancy. However, he was admitted on the
second day of life for 22 days because of poor feeding and repeated vomiting, and was seen to have episodes of unexplained hypoglycemia. He
continued to have poor feeding and occasional episodes of vomiting. He presented with failure to thrive and dehydration at the age of 12
months. The infant was also showing delay in attaining motor development milestones. The family history was insignificant for neurologic
disease, liver disease, or premature deaths in infancy or childhood. At the age of 12 months, the infant had no dysmorphic features, and was
alert and appropriately attentive to different stimuli though slightly irritable. All his growth parameters were more than 3 SD below the
mean for age and sex, his weight was more than –7 SD below the mean. Liver was only mildly enlarged but with sharp border and firm
consistency. There was generalized muscle wasting but with no fasciculations or abnormal movements. He was markedly hypotonic; nevertheless,
he could move his limbs freely and at least against gravity. Deep tendon reflexes could not be elicited. Hair was brittle and sparse and
skin was scaly, pruritic; showing eczematous changes and reticular pigmentation. [Figures 1 a–b]. (a-b) Image of the patient showing brittle
and sparse hair; scaly and pruritic skin with eczematoid changes and lichenification A panel of investigations was carried out under the
hypothesis of a neurometabolic disorder. The following values were all normal: arterial blood gases, urea, creatinine, electrolytes, blood
sugar, ammonia, creatine kinase, serum amylase, thyroid stimulating hormone, free T4, glucose, cortisol and adrenocorticotropic hormone.
Transaminases were mildly elevated [alanine aminotransferase 119 U/L (normal range 30–65 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase 214 U/L (normal
range 15–37 U/L)], alkaline phosphatase level was 270 U/L (normal range 50–136 U/L)], plasma albumin 25 g/L (N 34–40); the APTT the
Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (APTT) was prolonged to 49.17 s (N, 26–4) and the international normalized ratio (INR) 1.57. Total
bilirubin was 51.9 μmol/L (direct 44.0 μmol/L). Quantitative plasma amino acids showed moderately elevated plasma tyrosine (309 μmol), while
there was generalized increase in all aminoacids in urine. Succinylacetone was not increased in urine and results of very long chain fatty
acids were unremarkable but serum lactate repeatedly showed moderate elevation, ranging between 2.9 and 9.7 mmol/L (N, 1.1–2.2).
Pelviabdominal renal ultrasound showed left kidney multiple stones and hydronephrotic changes. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed
increased signal intensity in T2-weighted images involving the cortical and subcortical white matter and extending to the subcortical U
fibers with fair hyperintensity involving the cerebellar white matter and hili of the dentate nuclei, a picture suggestive of leukodystrophy
with centripetal progression [Figures 2 a–b]. (a-b) MRI brain of the patient (axial FLAIR) showing increased signal intensity in T2 weighted
images- involving the cortical and subcortical white matter Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction carried out on DNA extracted
from muscle and liver of the patient revealed normal mtDNA amount in the former and less than 10% in the latter tissue, compared with age-
matched control tissues. For MPV17 sequence analysis, the 7 coding exons and the exon-intron boundaries of the gene were amplified from
muscle DNA and sequenced directly as previously described. A homozygous transversion G to T at position +1 (IVS3+1G>T) was found in intron
3. The mutation destroys the donor splice site of exon 2, therefore producing an aberrant mRNA and protein. The boy continued to have
vomiting and poor weight gain and had another episode of hypoglycemia that a gastrostomy tube was placed. However, 1 month after admission,
he developed marked ascites but with no further increase in the transaminases. Doppler ultrasound scan showed normal flow of both hepatic
and portal veins. Echocardiogram examination was normal. The patient's condition deteriorated further and he died in a matter of few weeks
due to complications of liver failure. Liver complications are typically considered a late feature of multisystem mitochondrial disorder in
which neuromuscular disease is prominent. By contrast, in MPV17-associated hepatocerebral MDS, liver involvement appears early in the course
of the disease and is seen in nearly all reported cases. Similar to ours, in many other reported cases liver dysfunction progressed to liver
failure, leading the patient to death in infancy or early childhood, if liver transplantation was not performed. However, MPV17 mutations
that are compatible with longer survival have been reported. For instance compound heterozygosities p.G94R and p.P98L, or p.S170F and
c.451insC were found in patients surviving for as long as 30 and 47 months, respectively, without liver transplantation. The longest
survival has been associated with the p.R50Q mutation, associated with NNH and identified in an Italian family, with cases surviving to
their late teens. Expectedly, failure to thrive is a common manifestation and it was the main cause of parental concern when our patient
first presented to our hospital. Only 3 cases in the literature were reported to have a normal growth pattern. Common neurologic
manifestations of the MPV17-associated MDS include microcephaly, developmental delay, muscle weakness, and hypotonia, all seen in our case.
Other neurologic manifestations reported in the literature include seizures, cerebrovascular infarct, and dystonia. By contrast, no
neurologic manifestations were reported in only 2 cases. Unfortunately, electrophysiologic studies were not done to our patient so we cannot
comment on peripheral neuropathy reported in several cases, whereas leukoencephalopathic lesions similar to those in our patient have also
been detected by brain MRI in previous cases. Lactic acidosis and hypoglycemia are possibly the most frequent signs at onset, and our
patient was no exception. Prominent vomiting as seen in our patient in a 4-month-old infant, and gastroesophageal reflux in another 2
patients were reported by El-Hattab et al. The generalized aminoaciduria may be due to proximal tubulopathy as reported in other
mitochondrial diseases. Only 1 patient, an Iraqi girl with a homozygous nonsense mutation p.W120X was reported to develop nephrolithiasis as
the present case. The underlying etiology is not clear; it is possible that frequent episodes of severe dehydration and metabolic acidosis
may play a role in its development. Hair abnormalities and skin changes described in our patient are among the broad spectrum of presenting
symptoms of mitochondrial diseases. These are often reported to be puzzling and unexpected manifestations of mitochondrial disease, which we
are describing in this patient, although we have no clear explanation. The treatment of acute liver failure and progressive liver disease in
mitochondrial hepatopathies remains unsatisfactory. Present treatments involve the use of various vitamins, cofactors, and respiratory
substrates, none of which have proven effective. Supportive treatments may include infusion of sodium bicarbonate for acute metabolic
acidosis, and intravenous administration of glucose. Frequent feeding every 3h may help slow down the disease progression and may be
lifesaving in case of potentially fatal hypoglycemia. Liver transplantation is a treatment option for end-stage liver disease associated
with MDS, but the role of liver transplantation in mitochondrial hepatopathy is controversial. In some patients neurologic involvement can
be non-recognizable or ensue later than the initial presentation of liver failure. Therefore, the absence of extrahepatic features of
mitochondrial disease at the time of liver transplantation does not warrant a good outcome. When one is faced with a mitochondrial disorder,
clinical deterioration due to the stress of transplantation, infections, and bleeding should also be emphasized and anticipated if
transplantation is considered. In conclusion, the prevalence of MDS disorders is probably underestimated due to lack of awareness of such
rare diseases, their clinical heterogeneity, and the difficulties in establishing the diagnosis. MDS cases are rarely reported from the
Middle East. We aim to alert the clinicians, especially in areas with a high rate of consanguineous marriage as is the case in our region,
to such rare medical disorders. The identification of the genetic defect makes prenatal diagnosis possible in at-risk families and is
particularly more important in cases with seizures where administration of valproate may have a deleterious effect. We express our
appreciation to Dr. Ali Alasmari, MD, pediatric metabolic consultant at KFMC, for referring the case to pediatric neurology service. This
work was supported by Telethon grants GGP07019 and GPP10005 to Massimo Zeviani. Source of Support: This work was supported by Telethon
grants GGP07019 and GPP10005 to Massimo Zeviani Conflict of Interest: None declared.
