Spontaneous globe luxation is a rarely reported condition which can lead to complications like optic neuropathy. Common causes are thyroid
eye disease, shallow orbit and floppy eyelid syndrome. We report a case of spontaneous globe luxation with the onset and severity associated
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). To our knowledge, this is the first case of spontaneous globe luxation associated with
COPD. Globe luxation occurs when the globe is displaced anteriorly beyond the orbital rim with retraction of the eyelids behind the globe
and tethering of the optic nerve. The resultant acutely occurring extreme proptosis can cause severe anxiety, pain, corneal exposure,
retinal venous congestion and optic neuropathy. Globe luxation can be spontaneous, traumatic or voluntary. We report a case of spontaneous
globe luxation associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). To our knowledge this is the first case report of such an
association. A 46-year-old male had been admitted in the intensive care unit (ICU) for severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD;
bronchial asthma). Patient developed acute proptosis of both eyes after admission. Based on the clinical picture of acute bilateral
proptosis with retracted lids [Fig. 1] and patient's history of similar episode in the past, a diagnosis of globe luxation was made and the
globe was reduced by pressing on the superior sclera down and back while pinching the upper lid [Figs. 2 and 3]. History from the patient
and his wife revealed that he had previous such episodes over past 4â€“5 years. The episodes initiated after he started developing wheezing
episodes and most of the globe luxation episodes occurred along with exacerbations of COPD. Ocular examination revealed bilateral
pseudophakia with normal pupil and fundus. Axial length in both eyes was 23.8 mm. Computed tomography (CT) scan of orbit revealed no orbital
mass [Fig. 4]. CT scan showed a proptosed eye with a stretched optic nerve because patient developed luxation while CT was being performed.
Orbit volume and globe volume appeared normal. Prominent luxation of both globes Left globe has been reduced. Right eye still luxated Both
globes have been reduced CT scan showing bilateral prominent globe luxation with stretched optic nerve During his stay in ICU, the patient
had repeated episodes of globe luxation (almost every 2 hours) which was reduced each time. Bilateral temporary tarsorrhaphy was done after
five to six episodes of repeated globe luxation to prevent the repeated proptosis. Unfortunately, the patient developed complications such
as respiratory paralysis and septicemia and expired on the third day of admission. Spontaneous globe luxation is a rare event. Kunesh et al.
reviewed and found 26 reported cases of spontaneous globe luxation till 2001. After that, another four case reports regarding spontaneous
globe luxation could be identified in literature review till 2010. Spontaneous globe luxation occurs in patients with thyroid eye disease,
proptosis, floppy eyelid syndrome and shallow orbit. Rare causes like histiocytosis X and Engelmann's disease have also been reported.
Luxation can be precipitated by lid manipulation, Valsalva maneuver, trauma, general anesthesia and even by contact lens insertion.
Structural anomalies resulting in laxity of orbital ligaments and extraocular muscles can predispose to globe luxation. Once the luxation
starts, the orbicularis muscle goes into spasm to maintain the state of luxation. The case reported here had a history of globe luxation
whose onset correlated with increased severity of COPD. He also had recurrent luxation after admission for severe COPD. The raised
intrathoracic pressure with resultant increased intraorbital pressure must have caused the luxation. Preexistent weaknesses of extraocular
muscles and ligaments could have predisposed the patient for globe luxation. Floppy eyelid was not demonstrated in this patient. CT scan
ruled out a shallow orbit or orbital mass as cause. Review of literature did not reveal any such case of luxation being precipitated and
aggravated by COPD. Management consists of simple reducing maneuvers like asking the patient to look down, pinching the upper lid and
pressing on the superior sclera down and back. This simple technique can be taught to the patient also and can help to avoid severe anxiety
when the patient develops such an episode where help may not be available. Surgical treatment consists of lateral tarsorrhaphy, pentagonal
wedge eyelid resection and advancement of orbital wall. But lateral tarsorrhaphy has also been reported to increase the risk of luxation by
producing a tighter orbit and increased intraorbital pressure, and once luxation occurs, the smaller remaining palpebral aperture can hinder
the reduction of the globe.
