To the Editor: Paracoccidioidomycosis, a systemic mycosis caused by Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, is endemic to rural areas of Latin
America (1). Persons are infected early in life by inhaling the fungus propagules, which reach the lower airway and cause primary complex
(2). The most common clinical manifestation of paracoccidioidomycosis, which occurs with the chronic multifocal form, is characterized by
pulmonary and extrapulmonary (e.g., skin, central nervous system, osteoarticular system) involvement, which occurs after a prolonged latency
period (2). Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is seldom associated with pyogenic agents (3), Mycobacterium tuberculosis (4), or fungal agents
(5). Few reports have described paracoccidioidomycosis in immunosuppressed patients (6). We report a rare case of flexor tenosynovitis and
severe CTS in the context of reactivated, chronic paracoccidioidomycosis infection. A 63-year-old white male agricultural worker from São
Paulo, Brazil, reported insidious and progressive pain, numbness, and tingling in his right hand and fingers, which began in April 2009. His
medical history included symmetric polyarthritis of hands, ankles, and knees, which had been diagnosed elsewhere as seronegative rheumatoid
arthritis in 2006. At that point, he also had chronic cough; a computed tomographic (CT) scan of the chest showed small nodules and mild
interstitial fibrosis, and sputum specimens were negative for fungi or mycobacteria by microscopy. For treatment, he received prednisone,
leflunomide, meloxicam, and methotrexate. Hydroxychloroquine was added in March 2010 because of worsening polyarthritis. Pain in the right
hand also increased, and infiltrations of the right carpal tunnel with methylprednisolone and lidocaine were performed in September and
October 2010, with poor response. After that, physical examination showed mild edema and warmth of the flexor surface of the hand and
reduced wrist motion. Phalen test and Tinel signs were positive. In February 2011, an outpatient electrophysiologic evaluation showed a
severe right focal demyelination of the median nerve at the wrist and mild acute denervation in the abductor pollicis brevis muscle,
consistent with CTS. In August 2011, the patient was admitted to the hospital of the University of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil, with poor
general health, fever, cutaneous nodules on the trunk and limbs, and dyspnea. Purulent material drained from 2 fistulous nodules in the
right thumb and forearm (Figure, panel A). A new CT scan of the chest indicated cystic bronchiectasis, bronchial wall thickening, and
adjacent areas of consolidation. Microscopic examination of thumb secretion and sputum samples by using 10% potassium hydroxide revealed the
characteristic pilot’s wheel appearance of Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, showing multiple-budding yeast cells with well-defined refringent
double walls (7) (Figure, panel C). Grocott-Gomori stain of a skin biopsy specimen demonstrated yeast with the same microscopic features
(7). Serologic tests for Paracoccidioides spp. were negative. Blood and thumb secretion cultures were negative for Mycobacterium spp. and
fungi. Magnetic resonance imaging of the right wrist and forearm showed diffuse inflammatory infiltrates with signs of tenosynovitis and
fluid collection involving the flexor compartment and extending to areas corresponding to fistulous skin lesions (Technical Appendix). A)
Edema and erythema of the flexor surface of the hand of patient with paracoccidioidomycosis, carpal tunnel syndrome, and flexor
tenosynovitis, Brazil. Note a fistulous pustulous nodule in the right thumb and forearm (arrows) and flexor contracture of the fourth
finger. B) Flexor surface of the hand and forearm after surgery. C) Paracoccidioides brasiliensis was directly identified on the thumb
secretion, sputum, and flexor tenosynovectomy specimen by using a 10% potassium hydroxide preparation. This image was obtained from the
thumb secretion. Note the characteristic multiple-budding yeast cells (pilot's wheel) with the well-defined refringent double wall.
Intravenous co-trimoxazole was prescribed, followed by oral itraconazole. Immunosuppressant drugs were withdrawn. After the patient’s
general health stabilized, he underwent open carpal tunnel release, flexor tenosynovectomy, and collection of the purulent drainage. When
evaluated 5 months after hospital discharge, his right hand symptoms and polyarthritis had almost completely resolved (Figure, panel B). A
neurophysiologic examination demonstrated a mild improvement in distal median neuropathy. Results of serologic assessment for rheumatoid
factor and antibodies against cyclic-citrullinated peptide were negative. Also, no signs of bone erosions or subcortical cysts were shown on
radiograph of wrist and hand joints, which does not support the diagnosis of seronegative rheumatoid arthritis. Although a direct search for
fungi and mycobacterial agents was initially negative, paracoccidioidomycosis should still have been included in the differential diagnosis
for this patient, who exhibited arthritis and pulmonary symptoms and had the risk factors of heavy smoking and living in a
paracoccidioidomycosis-endemic region. The initial chest CT scan did not rule out paracoccidioidomycosis (7). However, seronegative
rheumatoid arthritis was diagnosed and treated. When the patient arrived in our hospital, systemic manifestations, severe pulmonary
compromise, and CTS of the right hand were the main features of his condition, and P. brasiliensis was detected on direct microscopic
observation of sputum and thumb secretions. The central nervous system is a frequent extrapulmonary site of damage by paracoccidioidomycosis
(2,8,9), but for paracoccidioidomycosis to cause CTS is unusual. The patient received immunosuppressive drugs during a 5-year period. The
immunosuppressive treatment could contribute to reactivation of pulmonary quiescent infection foci and hematogenous fungal spread.
Infiltrations of the wrist with corticosteroids could facilitate and enhance local fungal proliferation after hematogenous dissemination.
Factors such as inoculum size, pathogenicity and strain virulence, and patient’s immune status could explain the development and severity of
disease (2). Immunocompromised patients, particularly those with cell-mediated immune impairment, are at greatest risk for severe
disseminated paracoccidioidomycosis (6), as occurred in this patient. Identifying antibodies against Paracoccidioides spp. in patient’s
serum would have helped monitor the host response to treatment (2), but he was seronegative, probably because of his immunosuppressed state.
Paracoccidioidomycosis serologic testing would be useful early in the disease to help distinguish between seronegative rheumatoid arthritis
and reactive arthritis. Paracoccidioidomycosis should always be suspected in P. brasiliensis–endemic areas. Magnetic resonance image of the
right wrist and forearm of patient with paracoccidioidomycosis, Brazil. Suggested citation for this article: von Glehn F, Damasceno A,
Miotto N, Naseri EP, Costalla LTL, França MC Jr, et al. Carpal tunnel syndrome with paracoccidioidomycosis . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the
Internet]. 2012 Aug [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1808.120153 We express our sincere thanks to Luzia Lyra for her technical
assistance with the P. brasiliensis documentation. F.V.G., A.D., N.M., A.N., and M.C.R. designed the case report. F.V.G., A.D., N.M.,
E.P.N., L.T.L.C., M.C.F.J., A.N., and M.C.R. helped write the article. All authors have read and approved the final version of the
manuscript.
