To the Editor: The increased severity of Clostridium difficile infection is primarily attributed to the appearance of an epidemic strain
characterized as PCR ribotype 027 (1). The only report that identified epidemic C. difficile ribotype 027 in an American country outside of
North America comes from Costa Rica, raising the possibility that strains 027 might also be present in other countries of Latin America (2).
Several studies between 2001 and 2009 have been conducted in South American countries to detect the incidence of C. difficile infection in
hospitalized patients, but they did not identify which C. difficile strains were causing these infections (3). During an epidemiologic
screening of patients with C. difficile infection in a university hospital in Chile, we analyzed all stool samples of patients with
suspected C. difficile infection during a 5-month period (June–November 2011). Two cases of C. difficile infection were associated with
ribotype 027. C. difficile was isolated from stool samples according to published protocols (4). Briefly, stool samples were spread onto
taurocholate-cefoxitin-cycloserine fructose (Merck, Rahway, NJ, USA) agar plates and incubated for 96 hours at 37°C in a Bactron III-2
anaerobic workstation (SHEL LAB, Cornelius, OR, USA.). Plates were examined for the characteristic p-cresol odor unique to C. difficile
culture (5). The aminopeptidase test (6) was also used to differentiate C. difficile strains. Suspected colonies were further analyzed by
PCR to amplify tcdA, and tcdB genes (7). The presence of binary toxin gene (cdtB) and deletion in the negative regulator of the
pathogenecity locus, tcdC, were determined by using Cepheid GeneXpert PCR (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). We used C. difficile ribotype 027
strain R20291 as a reference strain for comparative purposes. PCR ribotyping was performed as described (8). The specific ribotype 027 of
each of the clinical isolates was determined by visual analysis and with the GelCompar II v6.5 software (Applied Maths, St-Martens-Latem,
Belgium). Case-patient 1 was a 60-year-old man with a history of coronary disease who required a coronary artery bypass graft because of
3-vessel coronary disease. Forty-eight hours after receiving 3 doses of cefazoline to prevent surgical wound infection, he exhibited severe
and diffuse abdominal pain with frequent loose stools (8 bowel movements/day), fever (up to 39°C), and hemodynamic compromise, which
required high doses of vasopressors. Stool samples were positive for C. difficile by ELISA, and the patient received intravenous
metronidazole and oral vancomycin. However, because of the severity of the course of the disease, he underwent an urgent total colectomy
with terminal ileostomy. The patient showed progressive improvement, and he was discharged 11 days after surgery. No relapse of C. difficile
infection was reported in this patient in the next 5 months. Isolation of toxigenic culture and PCR demonstrated that the bacterial pathogen
causing the diarrhea was C. difficile ribotype 027 (i.e., strain PUC51) (Figure). Results of PCR ribotyping of Clostridium difficile 027
strains from Chile. M indicates the 100-bp DNA ladder; lane 2, R20291; lane 2, PUC47; lane 3, PUC51. A) PCR ribotyping of C. difficile
isolates. PCR results show that that the band pattern of the ribosomal intergenic regions of strains PUC47 and PUC51 are similar to those of
the reference (epidemic) strain R20291. B) Cluster analysis of strains PUC47, PUC51, and the epidemic strain 027 R20291 shows >99%
similarity and that they belong to the same epidemic clade. Scale bar indicates percent identity. Case-patient 2 was a 46-year-old man with
a history of ischemic stroke with hemiparesis of the left side who had experienced a urinary tract infection that had been treated with
ciprofloxacin 2 months earlier. Four weeks before admission, he had frequent loose stools with no fever and diffuse abdominal pain after
meals. On admission, a computed tomographic scan and angiograph of the abdomen showed pancolitis with colonic wall thickening and scant
ascites, suggestive of an inflammatory or infectious cause, without vascular compromise. However, ELISA of stool samples was negative for C.
difficile toxin. Treatment with ceftriaxone reduced his symptoms, and he was discharged. Seven days after discharge, he had intense diffuse
abdominal pain, with frequent loose stools and fever up to 38.9°C, and was again admitted to the hospital. A new computed tomographic scan
of the abdomen showed no change; however, an ELISA of a new stool sample for C. difficile toxin was positive, and the patient was given oral
vancomycin. No relapse of C. difficile infection was observed within 3 months of observation. Toxigenic culture from stool samples and PCR
identified the C. difficile isolate as ribotype 027 (i.e., strain PUC47) (Figure). Molecular typing analysis showed that both case-patients
had a monoclonal infection caused by C. difficile ribotype 027. Both isolates had tcdA, tcdB, and cdtB and had a deletion in tcdC (data not
shown). In summary, the described severe cases of C. difficile infection in Chile were caused by epidemic C. difficile ribotype 027. One of
these case-patients required urgent colectomy. These results demonstrate that epidemic C. difficile 027 strains are present in South
America, highlighting the need for enhanced screening for this ribotype in other regions of the continent. Suggested citation for this
article: Hernández-Rocha C, Barra-Carrasco J, Pizarro-Guajardo M, Ibáñez P, Bueno SM, Sarker M, et al. Epidemic Clostridium difficile
ribotype 027 in Chili . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2012 Aug [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1808.120211 We thank
Nigel Minton (University of Nottingham) for kindly providing C. difficile strain R20291. This work was supported by grants from the Comisión
Nacional de Investigación en Ciencia y Tecnologia (FONDECYT REGULAR 1100971) to M.A.-L. and S.B. and by grants from MECESUP UAB0802,
Comisión Nacional de Investigación en Ciencia y Tecnologia (FONDECYT REGULAR 1110569) and from the Research Office of Universidad Andres
Bello (DI-35-11/R) (to D.P.-S); and from the Medical Research Center, Facultad de Medicina of the Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile,
Resident Research Project (PG-20/11) to C. H.-R. These authors contributed equally to this article.
