You don’t have to be a contestant on Fear Factor to eat unusual things. An investigation of 9 new cases of lung fluke infection in Missouri
found that in all cases, patients had eaten raw crayfish while on rafting or camping trips and most had been drinking alcohol. Although all
patients recovered after treatment, a few whose diagnosis was delayed had unnecessary procedures and serious illness. Physicians should
consider lung fluke infection in patients with nonspecific cough and fever, especially patients who have recently returned from a
recreational river trip. Crayfish in Missouri rivers often carry lung flukes and should not be eaten raw. Medscape, LLC is pleased to
provide online continuing medical education (CME) for this journal article, allowing clinicians the opportunity to earn CME credit. This
activity has been planned and implemented in accordance with the Essential Areas and policies of the Accreditation Council for Continuing
Medical Education through the joint sponsorship of Medscape, LLC and Emerging Infectious Diseases. Medscape, LLC is accredited by the ACCME
to provide continuing medical education for physicians. Medscape, LLC designates this Journal-based CME activity for a maximum of 1 AMA PRA
Category 1 Credit(s)TM. Physicians should claim only the credit commensurate with the extent of their participation in the activity. All
other clinicians completing this activity will be issued a certificate of participation. To participate in this journal CME activity: (1)
review the learning objectives and author disclosures; (2) study the education content; (3) take the post-test with a 70% minimum passing
score and complete the evaluation at www.medscape.org/journal/eid; (4) view/print certificate. Release date: July 20, 2012; Expiration date:
July 20, 2013 Upon completion of this activity, participants will be able to: Analyze the epidemiology and microbiology of paragonimiasis
Assess the clinical presentation of paragonimiasis Evaluate patterns of management of paragonimiasis Distinguish abnormal ancillary studies
among patients with paragonimiasis Thomas J. Gryczan, MS, Technical Writer/Editor, Emerging Infectious Diseases. Disclosure: Thomas J.
Gryczan, MS, has disclosed no relevant financial relationships. Charles P. Vega, MD, Health Sciences Clinical Professor; Residency Director,
Department of Family Medicine, University of California, Irvine. Disclosure: Charles P. Vega, MD, has disclosed no relevant financial
relationships. Disclosures: Michael A. Lane, MD, MSc; Luis A. Marcos, MD; Nur F. Onen, MBChB, MRCP; Lee M. Demertzis, MD; Samuel Z. Davila,
MD; Diana R. Nurutdinova, MD; Thomas C. Bailey, MD; and Gary J. Weil, MD, have disclosed no relevant financial relationships. Erika V.
Hayes, MD, has disclosed the following relevant financial relationships: received grants for clinical research from: Gilead Sciences: grant
funding for ED Adolescent Rapid HIV testing project, which is now complete. Suggested citation for this article: Lane MA, Marcos LA, Onen
NF, Demertzis LM, Hayes EV, Davila SZ, et al. Paragonimus kellicotti flukes in Missouri, USA. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet].
2012 Aug [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1808.120335 Paragonimiasis is an infection caused by lung flukes of the genus
Paragonimus. In Asia, P. westermani infections are relatively common because of dietary practices. However, in North America, cases of
paragonimiasis, which are caused by P. kellicotti flukes, are rare. Only 7 autochthonous cases of paragonimiasis were reported during
1968–2008. In 2009, we reported 3 new case-patients with paragonimiasis who had been seen at our medical center over an 18-month period. Six
additional case-patients were identified in St. Louis, Missouri, USA, and treated at Washington University–affiliated health centers in
2009–2010. We report detailed descriptions of these case-patients, which includes unusual clinical manifestations. We also describe public
health interventions that were undertaken to inform the general public and physicians about the disease and its mode of transmission.
Paragonimiasis is an infection caused by lung flukes of the genus Paragonimus. As many as 9 species of Paragonimus are responsible for human
infections worldwide (1). Human paragonimiasis is common in Asia, where diets often include raw, cured, pickled, or salted crustaceans
(2,3). In contrast, consumption of uncooked crustaceans is uncommon in North America. In North America, paragonimiasis is caused by
Paragonimus kellicotti flukes (4). Paragonimus spp. lung flukes have a complex life cycle, requiring snail and crustacean intermediate
hosts. Definitive hosts excrete eggs in feces or sputum, which hatch in water to become ciliated miracidia. The miracidia invade soft tissue
of snails where they reproduce asexually. Cercariae released from snails invade the secondary intermediate host, a crustacean. Secondary
intermediate hosts for P. kellicotti flukes are crayfish in the genera Cambarus and Orconectes. Mammals acquire the infection when they
ingest raw or undercooked crustaceans (5). P. kellicotti fluke infections have been found in cats, dogs, bobcats (6), raccoons (7), foxes
(8,9), skunks (9), minks (9,10), and coyotes (9). Human infections are uncommon; only 7 cases were reported during 1968–2008 (2,11–18) In
2009, we reported a cluster of 3 patients who had probable or proven paragonimiasis caused by P. kellicotti flukes and who were seen at a
single tertiary-care center over an 18-month period (19). We report an additional 6 patients seen at Washington University Medical Center,
St. Louis, Missouri, and at an affiliated Veterans Administration hospital over 14 months (September 2009–October 2010). The purpose of this
report is to emphasize that P. kellicotti flukes are an emerging pathogen in Missouri, to highlight unusual clinical features observed in
these patients, to educate the public in hopes of preventing new cases, and to increase awareness among the medical community to promote
early diagnosis and treatment. Patients with proven or probable P. kellicotti fluke infection seen at Washington University School of
Medicine and an affiliated Veterans Administration Hospital during September 2009–October 2010 were identified at time of clinical
encounter. Patient characteristics, case histories, and laboratory values were obtained from medical records by infectious disease
physicians. Immunoblot tests were performed at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Atlanta, GA, USA), commercial laboratories,
or Washington University School of Medicine as described in the Technical Appendix. Patient characteristics for the combined series of 9
patients are summarized in Table 1 and Table 2, and detailed case descriptions for the 6 new patients are provided in the Technical
Appendix. The patients included in this series were predominantly male (88.9%), and all but 1 were adults. Patients consumed raw crayfish
while on float (recreational river) trips (7/9, 77.8%), camping (1/9, 11.1%), or as a demonstration of wilderness survival skills (1/9,
11.1%). Alcohol consumption at the time of crayfish consumption was common (7/9, 77.8%). Although there were differences in timing of
seeking care and signs and symptoms, patients in this series frequently had cough (100%), fever (88.9%), and eosinophilia (100%). *Patients
4–9 were not previously reported. NA, not applicable. *Values are no. (%) unless otherwise indicated. †n = 7. Paragonimiasis can be
difficult to diagnose in its early stages because of the nonspecific nature of initial symptoms. In some regions, paragonimiasis may be
mistakenly diagnosed as tuberculosis. In this series of patients, initial diagnoses included pneumonia, bronchitis, influenza,
gastroenteritis, acute cholecystitis, and pulmonary embolism. The median time between crayfish ingestion and the onset of clinical signs and
symptoms was 4 weeks (range 2–12 weeks). The median interval between the onset of symptoms and the initial visit to health care facilities
was 2 weeks (range 2–8 weeks). However, the median time from symptom onset to the correct diagnosis was 12 weeks (range 3–83 weeks). Before
diagnosis of paragonimiasis, patients received multiple unnecessary medications and treatments, and these were sometimes associated with
serious illness. All patients were treated with antimicrobial drugs. Clostridium difficile infection developed in 1 patient after multiple
courses of antimicrobial drug therapy. Six (67%) patients were treated with ≥l course of corticosteroids. One patient also underwent
multiple thoracentesis procedures, and 1 of these procedures resulted in pneumothorax that required chest tube replacement. This patient
also underwent decortication because of recurrent pleural effusions. One patient underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy after having right
upper quadrant pain. This finding may have been related to parasite migration across the diaphragm because the gallbladder did not show any
pathologic changes. Patients with paragonimiasis often have abnormal laboratory test results that are useful for making a diagnosis.
Eosinophilia has been reported in 62%–66% of patients with infection caused by P. westermani flukes (20,21) and in 75% of patients with
paragonimiasis in North America (19). All patients in this series had eosinophilia at initial examination (absolute eosinophil count range
600 cells/mm3–2,300 cells/mm3, % range 5.6%–21%). Pleural fluid analysis showed eosinophilia in 3 patients. Chest radiographic findings were
abnormal for all patients with paragonimiasis in North America (19). Pleural effusions were present in 37% of paragonimiasis patients in
Asia and in 60% of previously described patients in North America (19,22). All patients in this series had pleural effusions. Other chest
radiographic findings included nodules, opacities, and infiltrates. Chest computed tomography scans showed pleural thickening, pericardial
thickening, pericardial effusions, and worm nodules (23). Four of 6 patients in the current series had pericardial effusions documented by
either computed tomography or echocardiography. Although most pericardial effusions were small and did not cause hemodynamic compromise, 1
patient had cardiac tamponade that required emergency pericardiocentesis and drain placement. Analysis of pericardial fluid showed marked
eosinophilia. Eosinophilic pericardial effusions were documented in 3 children with paragonimiasis caused by P. mexicanus flukes in Costa
Rica (24,25). Pericardial effusion has also been reported for 1 patient with paragonimiasis in Asia (26). Pericardial effusions have not
been reported for patients with P. kellicotti flukes infection, although various Paragonimus spp. flukes have been reported to invade soft
tissue (19,20,27,28) and the central nervous system (19,29). Serologic analysis can be useful for confirming a diagnosis of paragonimiasis.
However, available serologic tests have limitations. An immunoblot for P. westermani flukes performed at the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (Atlanta, GA, USA) has been reported to be highly sensitive (96%) and specific (99%) (30). However, this assay has not been
validated for P. kellicotti flukes. In our series, 2 patients had negative immunoblot results at the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention for samples that had been positive by Western blot with P. kellicotti fluke antigen at Washington University (G.J. Weil, et al.,
unpub. data). These patients had symptoms and abnormal laboratory test results suggestive of paragonimiasis after ingestion of raw crayfish,
and their symptoms resolved after therapy with praziquantel. Diagnosis by identification of ova in sputum specimens is specific, but has low
sensitivity (30%–40%) (1). Ova were present in sputum from only 1 patient in our series (5). Examination of stool for ova has low
sensitivity (11%–15%) (31,32). Praziquantel (75 mg/kg in 3 divided doses for 2 days) is the treatment of choice for paragonimiasis in the
United States (33). Cure rates of 71%–75%, 86%–100%, and 100% have been reported with 1-, 2-, and 3-day courses, respectively (1,34). All
patients in this series were treated with praziquantel for 2–3 days, and 7 (77.8%) experienced rapid clinical improvement or cure after
treatment. One patient had some residual dyspnea and chest tightness 4 weeks after treatment. These findings may have been related to the
protracted time between onset of his symptoms and initiation of appropriate therapy. He was asymptomatic at the 6-month follow-up visit. One
atypical patient with chronic paragonimiasis who also had preexisting chronic obstructive pulmonary disease did not notice much improvement
in his chronic dyspnea after praziquantel treatment, but defervescence and a weight gain of 30 pounds represented a clear clinical response
to therapy. Control of this organism in the wild is not feasible because of the wide geographic distribution of crayfish and mammalian
intermediate hosts that eat crayfish and serve as definitive hosts for the parasite. P. kellicotti flukes are highly prevalent among
crayfish in rivers that are used for recreation in Missouri (5). Effective prevention strategies should focus on physician education to
improve awareness of this disease and education targeted at the general population. We worked with public health officials to help improve
awareness of this disease in physicians and in the general public. For example, we assisted the Missouri Department of Health and Senior
Services in creating a health advisory (www.health.mo.gov/emergencies/ert/alertsadvisories/pdf/HAd4-30-10.pdf) for physicians in Missouri
with the goal of educating physicians on the risk factors, clinical signs and symptoms, and treatment for this infection. In September 2009,
we collaborated with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services and the Missouri Department of Natural Resources to create a
warning poster (www.health.mo.gov/living/environment/fishadvisory/pdf/crayfish.pdf) that was posted at canoe rental facilities and
campgrounds along rivers in Missouri. This poster warned the general public about the risk for consuming raw crayfish. In addition, during
the spring of 2010, four of the authors (M.A.L., L.M.D., T.C.B., G.J.W.) provided information to local and national print, radio, and
television media to increase awareness of this infection. Three cases were identified after this media campaign. One patient sought care at
our medical facility after his mother, a nurse, saw an article about paragonimiasis in her local newspaper. One patient was referred to our
clinic by a friend who had seen a report on paragonimiasis on a local television station. Another patient had atypical features, but
increased physician awareness helped to establish the diagnosis in this patient. Although only a small number of cases of human
paragonimiasis have been described in the medical literature since 1984, we have seen 9 patients with this disease in St. Louis since 2006.
Five other patients with this disease in Missouri have been reported to the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services since 2009 (P.
Lo, pers. comm.). P. kellicotti flukes are believed to be widely distributed throughout the North America. In addition, outdoor activities
such as camping and float trips when combined with alcohol consumption are not uniquely confined to Missouri. It is likely that there are
case-patients in other regions who have not been given a diagnosis or treated. Although most patients reported to date have been adults,
this series shows that children are also at risk for infection if they ingest uncooked crayfish. As this patient series demonstrates,
delayed diagnosis can lead to unnecessary medical treatments and procedures that can cause serious illness. Clinicians should consider the
diagnosis of paragonimiasis in all patients with cough, fever, and pleural effusion with peripheral eosinophilia. We are developing a new
antibody assay that may help clinicians identify and treat patients with this infection. Additional efforts to raise awareness of this
parasite among physicians will potentially help appropriately identify and treat currently infected persons. These efforts should also
target the general public to warn them of the dangers of consuming raw crayfish. Detailed case descriptions for 6 new patients infected with
Paragonimus kellicotti flukes, Missouri, USA, September 2009–2013;October 2010. Suggested citation for this article: Lane MA, Marcos LA,
Onen NF, Demertzis LM, Hayes EV, Davila SZ, et al. Paragonimus kellicotti flukes in Missouri, USA. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the
Internet]. 2012 Aug [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1808.120335 Dr Lane is an assistant professor of medicine at Washington
University School of Medicine in St. Louis. His research interests are clinical outcomes, patient safety, and quality improvement. To obtain
credit, you should first read the journal article. After reading the article, you should be able to answer the following, related, multiple-
choice questions. To complete the questions (with a minimum 70% passing score) and earn continuing medical education (CME) credit, please go
to www.medscape.org/journal/eid. Credit cannot be obtained for tests completed on paper, although you may use the worksheet below to keep a
record of your answers. You must be a registered user on Medscape.org. If you are not registered on Medscape.org, please click on the New
Users: Free Registration link on the left hand side of the website to register. Only one answer is correct for each question. Once you
successfully answer all post-test questions you will be able to view and/or print your certificate. For questions regarding the content of
this activity, contact the accredited provider, CME@medscape.net. For technical assistance, contact CME@webmd.net. American Medical
Association’s Physician’s Recognition Award (AMA PRA) credits are accepted in the US as evidence of participation in CME activities. For
further information on this award, please refer to http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/category/2922.html. The AMA has determined that
physicians not licensed in the US who participate in this CME activity are eligible for AMA PRA Category 1 Credits™. Through agreements that
the AMA has made with agencies in some countries, AMA PRA credit may be acceptable as evidence of participation in CME activities. If you
are not licensed in the US, please complete the questions online, print the certificate and present it to your national medical association
for review. 1. You are seeing a 24-year-old man with a 4-week history of cough, fever, and malaise. He was seen in an urgent care center 10
days ago and prescribed a course of macrolide antibiotics, which did not improve his symptoms. On questioning, the symptoms began after a
camping trip in which the patient and his friends experimented with eating raw meat and seafood. You are concerned regarding the possibility
of paragonimiasis in this patient. What should you consider regarding the epidemiology and microbiology of paragonimiasis? A. Most cases are
reported in North America B. P. kellicotti requires snail and crustacean intermediate hosts C. Humans usually are infected after eating
escargot D. P. kellicotti infects only humans 2. What should you consider regarding the clinical presentation of paragonimiasis in the
current case series as you evaluate this patient? A. All patients were female B. Cough and fever were the most common clinical symptoms C.
Vomiting and malaise were the most common clinical symptoms D. The onset of symptoms occurred within 48 hours of ingesting food contaminated
with P. kellicotti 3. What should you consider regarding the management of paragonimiasis in the current case series as you evaluate this
patient? A. The median time from symptom onset to the correct diagnosis was 12 weeks B. Only half of patients had received antibiotic
therapy C. No patients had received corticosteroids D. Most patients failed to respond even to appropriate antiparasitic therapy 4. Which of
the following tests is most likely to be abnormal if this patient has paragonimiasis? A. Serum neutrophil counts B. Serum eosinophil counts
C. Serum sodium levels D. Electrocardiogram Suggested citation for this article: Lane MA, Marcos LA, Onen NF, Demertzis LM, Hayes EV, Davila
SZ, et al. Paragonimus kellicotti flukes in Missouri, USA. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2012 Aug [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1808.120335
