This report suggests that laparoscopic single-site pyeloplasty of uteropelvic junction obstruction associated with horseshoe kidney is
feasible, safe, and effective in select patients. Pyeloplasty in horseshoe kidneys can be challenging due to aberrant vasculature, renal
malrotation, and ectopic location. Fewer than 20 cases of minimally invasive (MIS) pyeloplasty in horseshoe kidneys have been reported in
the literature to date. We herein report the first 2 cases of laparoendoscopic single-site (LESS) pyeloplasty for UPJ obstruction in
horseshoe kidneys. Two patients with symptomatic ureteropelvic junction obstruction in horseshoe kidneys were treated with an Anderson-Hynes
LESS pyeloplasty. This was performed using three 5-mm trocars through a single umbilical incision, plus an accessory 3-mm port at the
anterior axillary line to facilitate suturing and subsequent drain placement. Both patients had BMI <23. The operative times were 204
minutes and 171 minutes. Blood loss was negligible, and no intraoperative complications occurred. To date, 9-month renography for patient 1
demonstrates stable renal function and unobstructed drainage. After stent removal, patient 2 was asymptomatic. In experienced hands, LESS
reconstructive techniques are applicable to complex renal anomalies. LESS pyeloplasty for UPJ obstruction associated with horseshoe kidneys
is feasible, safe, and effective in select patients. Since first being introduced in 1993, minimally invasive pyeloplasty has become a well-
established treatment for ureteropelvic junction obstruction (UPJO).1 However, to date, only a limited number of reports have been published
on the application of laparoscopic pyeloplasty for the treatment of UPJO associated with horseshoe kidneys. The first dismembered
laparoscopic pyeloplasty in a horseshoe kidney was reported in 1996.2 Since then, fewer than 20 cases have been reported in the literature.
Explanations for these low numbers might include the relative rarity of horseshoe UPJO, but also a perceived increase in surgical difficulty
due to unfamiliar and variable anatomy. This renal fusion anomaly is characterized by renal malrotation, variable blood supply, and high
insertion of the ureters with an incidence of ureteropelvic junction obstruction in up to one-third of cases.3,4 Despite these anatomic
challenges, the principles of surgery remain the same regardless of the approach. The new evolution in MIS pyeloplasty is the LESS technique
with over 90 cases reported to date.5â€“12 With appropriate preoperative imaging to delineate the anatomy, LESS techniques have been applied
successfully to urologic reconstructive techniques.8 To our knowledge, these are the first 2 reported cases demonstrating the feasibility of
LESS pyeloplasty in horseshoe kidneys. A 44-year-old Caucasian female was referred for episodes of severe intermittent right flank pain and
lower abdominal pain that would last several hours. There was no history of complicating stones or infections. She had no prior abdominal
surgery and her BMI was 19.1. A CT scan (Figure 1) and IVP (Figure 2) demonstrated an extrarenal dilated pelvis with delayed excretion. On a
MAG-3 renogram the differential function of the affected side was preserved (52%), but drainage t1/2 was 45 minutes, consistent with
obstruction. Surgical options were discussed, and the patient elected single-incision laparoscopic pyeloplasty. CT scan of horseshoe kidney
and right ureteropelvic junction obstruction (Case 1). IVP of right ureteropelvic junction obstruction in horseshoe kidney. No contrast
excretion is visualized beyond the right UPJ (Case 1). A 24-year-old Hispanic female with a BMI of 22.5 presented with a 1-year history of
intermittent left flank pain. A CT scan demonstrated left pelviectasis, but a renogram was not diagnostic of obstruction with a differential
function of 60% for the left side. Nevertheless, persistent debilitating pain prompted placement of a nephrostomy tube which resulted in
immediate symptom resolution. A subsequent nephrostogram demonstrated minimal drainage, and the patient was offered surgical treatment. The
patient is positioned in a modified flank fashion, and a 2.5-cm incision is made within the umbilical dimple to conceal the scar. After
insufflation of the abdomen, three 5-mm trocars are placed through the anterior abdominal fascia in a triangular configuration. A 5-mm
45-degree laparoscope is used along with articulating laparoscopic instruments. The laparoscope is placed through the most medial trocar and
positioned anteriorly in the abdomen so that the camera looks down onto the surgical field. The working instruments are placed through the 2
lateral trocars (Figure 3). LESS port configuration at the umbilicus for horseshoe pyeloplasty. With the patient in lateral decubitus, the
30 degree angled 5 mm camera is placed through the most medial port and looks down onto the surgical field. The REAL articulating LESS
working instruments are placed through the two laterally placed ports. The working instruments cross each other within the abdomen and below
the camera to maximize the working space. The colon is reflected medially and Gerota's fascia opened longitudinally to expose the renal
pelvis and ureter in the usual fashion. In Case 1, the gonadal vessels were clearly seen crossing anterior to the ureter at the site of
obstruction. A high insertion of the ureter was also noted. In Case 2, an anterior crossing vessel compressed the ureter against the
isthmus. In both cases, the renal pelvis, UPJ, and ureter were fully mobilized posterior to the crossing vessels, care being taken not to
grasp the crossing vessels directly. After excision of the UPJO segment and spatulation of the ureter and renal pelvis, a PTFE-coated wire
is passed down the ureter through an umbilical trocar under direct vision and exchanged for a superstiff wire via a 5-Fr angiographic
catheter. A 6-Fr JJ ureteral stent is passed antegrade over the wire. The running anastamosis is completed with 3-0 vicryl by using rigid
needle drivers, one through the umbilical site, and a second through a 3-mm trocar at the mid axillary line. Since a retroperitoneal 10-Fr
closed-suction drain is placed at the conclusion of the case, the required stab incision is utilized at this stage to facilitate suturing
with the trocar later exchanged for the drain. In Case 1, a 3-mm subxyphoid instrument was required for retraction and exposure of the renal
pelvis. The suture line is reinforced with fibrin glue. The 10-Fr closed-suction drain is positioned next to the anastomosis and
externalized through the lateral trocar. The ureteral stent is removed after 4 weeks, and a follow-up renogram is obtained 3 months
postoperatively. Both patients underwent uncomplicated horseshoe LESS pyeloplasty with operative times of 171 and 204 minutes, respectively.
During each case, a crossing vessel was identified necessitating ureteral transposition. The umbilical port-site skin incisions were each
2.5cm in length. There was minimal blood loss, and both patients were discharged home on postoperative days 3 and 4, respectively, after
uneventful hospitalizations. After 9 months of follow-up, Patient 1 remained asymptomatic, and renography showed a t1/2 of 11 minutes
compared to a preoperative t1/2 of 45 minutes. Patient 2 was asymptomatic after stent removal but moved shortly thereafter and was lost to
follow-up. LESS has been reported for a variety of procedures including pyeloplasty in heterotypic kidneys, nephrectomy, and adrenalectomy.9
As reflected in the cases presented, optimal candidates for LESS pyeloplasty include those with a low BMI, no prior abdominal surgery,
primary UPJ etiology, large extrarenal pelvis, and finally, a desire for superior cosmesis. Although there is a learning curve between
standard laparoscopic and LESS pyeloplasty,5 we would expect surgeons with LESS pyeloplasty experience to be equipped to operate on
horseshoe kidneys. In fact, the lower anatomical position of horseshoe kidneys brings the pelvis closer to the umbilical port site and helps
facilitate LESS pyeloplasty. On the other hand, unfamiliar and variable anatomy can be intimidating. In one postmortem study of 6 horseshoe
kidneys, the authors differentiated 3 groups of arteries. Besides the main renal vessels and accessory vessels entering the hilum, aberrant
vessels entering directly into the poles of the kidney and isthmus were noted.13 This latter group of vessels is of particular relevance to
pyeloplasty cases in horseshoe kidneys. To avoid unnecessary bleeding and renal compromise, preoperative CT scan or MRI is essential for
proper delineation of the renal vasculature. The few cohort studies available comparing standard laparoscopic to LESS pyeloplasty have
demonstrated similar perioperative outcomes including operative time, blood loss, perioperative complications, length of stay, and analgesic
requirements.9 Success rates, both clinical and radiologic, also appear to be equivalent in experienced hands.9,14 The primary advantage of
LESS pyeloplasty is thus aesthetic, which we have found to be most important to younger females like the 2 patients presented here. Given
the finite benefits of LESS pyeloplasty, it is imperative to avoid complications such as urine leak or excessive bleeding. In case 1, an
accessory 3-mm xiphoid port was placed to facilitate renal pelvis retraction during suturing. Although usually not required, it was helpful
in this case due to a large floppy pelvis that impaired visualization of the suture line. We believe that under no circumstances should
patient outcomes be compromised to avoid a small accessory incision. Robotic-LESS pyeloplasty is proving to be a valuable technique and will
likely supplant conventional-LESS in the future due to a reduced learning curve for both dissection and suturing. Furthermore, robotic
articulation negates the need of an accessory lateral port, because suturing can be accomplished with relative ease through the single
incision.15 These first reported cases of LESS pyeloplasty in horseshoe kidneys demonstrate that the procedure is both safe and efficacious,
though it should only be undertaken by highly experienced surgeons. A 3-mm accessory port facilitates suturing with rigid drivers.
Advancements in robotic single-incision techniques may present an additional opportunity for treatment of horseshoe UPJO via advanced
minimally invasive approaches.
