Large cystic ovarian masses can be removed laparoscopically with intentional trocar puncture of the mass to facilitate removal without
leakage of cyst fluid. Large cystic ovarian masses pose technical challenges to the laparoscopic surgeon. Removing large, potentially
malignant specimens must be done with care to avoid the leakage of cyst fluid into the abdominal cavity. We present the case of a large
ovarian cystic mass treated laparoscopically with intentional trocar puncture of the mass to drain and remove the mass. Large cystic ovarian
masses can be removed laparoscopically with intentional trocar puncture of the mass to facilitate removal without leakage of cyst fluid.
Laparoscopic surgery provides numerous benefits to patients, including improved cosmetic results, reduced infection risk, less pain, and
quicker recovery from surgery.1,2 However, challenges arise with the laparoscopic approach when large cystic ovarian masses are addressed.
Removal of the mass intact is usually not possible, and care must be taken to avoid the leakage of malignant cells from the cyst in cases of
malignancy.3,4 Also, chemical peritonitis may result from the leakage of benign cyst fluid into the peritoneal cavity.5,6 Several approaches
to removing large cystic ovarian masses have been described. Drainage of the cyst either by ultrasound-guided paracentesis7 or by drainage
during laparoscopy8 followed by oophorectomy or extracorporeal cystectomy9 are common surgical approaches. A 37-year-old, para 4, patient
presented for evaluation of increasing abdominal girth and abdominal pain. A computed tomography scan showed a very large simple cystic
right adnexal mass filling the entire abdomen, measuring 27cm by 18cm by 22cm (Figure 1). The CA-125 level was 37 (normal range, 0 to 35
units/mL). Physical examination confirmed the finding of a large cystic abdominal mass that was freely mobile and separate from the uterine
body. A benign serous cystadenoma was suspected from the clinical examination, CA-125 level, and imaging results. Computed tomography scan
image of the large cystic ovarian mass. The patient was taken to the operating room for surgical management. Laparoscopic access was
obtained at the left upper quadrant. The mass filled the entire abdomen. The surface of the mass was smooth and regular and without
excrescences (Figure 2). Direct laparoscopic visualization of the mass supported the clinical suspicion that the mass was benign. A second
port site was placed just inferior to the umbilicus. A Step bladeless trocar system (Covidien. Mansfield, MA) access needle and sleeve were
guided through a small skin incision and intentionally directed into the cystic mass under laparoscopic visualization. The access needle was
removed from the sleeve, and the 5-mm dilating cannula was placed through the sleeve (Figure 3). Laparoscopic view of the mass looking
toward the upper abdomen. Laparoscopic view of the trocar puncture of the mass. The suction irrigator was then advanced through the cannula
to decompress and drain the cyst of approximately 5 liters of fluid without any spillage of the cyst fluid. The cannula was left in place
throughout the salpingo-oophorectomy procedure to prevent any spillage of residual cyst fluid and was also utilized to manipulate the mass
(Figure 4). Two additional ports were placed, one in the right upper quadrant and one in the right lower quadrant to complete the procedure.
Laparoscopic view of the decompressed cyst with the trocar in place being used for intraoperative traction. The ovarian vessels were sealed
and divided, and the salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. The specimen was placed into a specimen retrieval bag, and the cannula was removed
from the cyst upon closure of the bag. The specimen was removed intact without leakage of any cyst fluid into the peritoneal cavity. The
patient was discharged home the same day. The final pathology report showed a benign serous cystadenoma. Large ovarian masses pose a
surgical challenge when addressed laparoscopically. Care must be taken to avoid cyst rupture to prevent the spread of malignant cells
throughout the peritoneal cavity and to reduce the risk of chemical peritonitis. The Step bladeless trocar system consists of an access
needle inserted through a braided expandable sleeve. A dilating cannula is then placed through the sleeve after removal of the access
needle. The braided contour of the expandable sleeve makes this trocar system ideal for the drainage of a large ovarian cyst. Once directed
into the cyst, the small puncture site is dilated by the cannula with the braided sleeve in its expanded configuration. This gives a
watertight seal and prevents the cannula from slipping out of the cyst. This technique is an effective variation of the previously described
methods for the removal of large ovarian cysts. The intentional insertion of a dilating trocar directly into a large ovarian cystic mass
should be considered as a method of laparoscopic removal to prevent leakage of fluid from the cyst.
