Dear Editor, A 68-year-old man presented with cervical lymphadenopathy and bilateral tonsillar enlargement and ulcerations. Computed
tomography (CT) showed an infiltrative disease (Fig. 1a, arrow). A blood count showed haemoglobin, 13.1 g/dL; leucocytes, 41.9 × 109/L (89 %
blasts); and platelets, 48 × 109/L. Bone marrow examination confirmed acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) without maturation (Fig. 1b).
Cytogenetic analysis showed 46,XY,t(7;14)(p13;q32), the significance of which was unknown. NPM1 and FLT3 genes were wild type. Unexpectedly,
a biopsy of the tonsillar mass showed infiltration by medium-sized atypical cells with indistinct cytoplasmic borders (Fig. 1c) and
irregular and grooved nuclei (insert). These atypical cells were positive for CD1a (Fig. 1d) and S100 (Fig. 1e). Myeloblasts were not
evident. Pathological features were consistent with Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH). Marrow trephine biopsy showed myeloblasts
intermixed with numerous atypical cells (Fig. 1f), which were also S100 positive (Fig. 1g). The overall diagnosis was therefore consistent
with concomitant disseminated LCH and AML. As leukaemia treatment was more urgent, a standard AML regimen of daunorubicin
(60 mg/m2/day × 3 days) and cytarabine (100 mg/m2/day × 7 days) was administered. Interestingly, the tonsillar masses and cervical
lymphadenopathy subsided, and a day-22 marrow examination showed complete remission of AML and LCH. A positron emission tomography/CT
(PET/CT) also confirmed complete response of the LCH. Two consolidation courses of high-dose cytarabine have since been given, with the
patient remaining in CR 6 months after diagnosis.Fig. 1Concomitant disseminated Langerhans cell histiocytosis and acute myeloid leukaemia. a
Computed tomography showing bilaterally enlarged tonsils, more prominent on the left side (arrow). b Marrow aspirate showing predominance of
myeloblasts. c Tonsillar biopsy, showing infiltration by a population of atypical cells with indistinct cytoplasmic borders. High-power view
(insert) showed atypical cells with nuclei containing linear grooves. d The tonsillar atypical cells were positive for CD1a
(immunoperoxidase). e The tonsillar atypical cells were positive for S100. f Trephine biopsy of the marrow, showing admixture of myeloblasts
and atypical cells with elongated and grooved nuclei. g Atypical cells in the marrow were positive for S100 Concomitant disseminated
Langerhans cell histiocytosis and acute myeloid leukaemia. a Computed tomography showing bilaterally enlarged tonsils, more prominent on the
left side (arrow). b Marrow aspirate showing predominance of myeloblasts. c Tonsillar biopsy, showing infiltration by a population of
atypical cells with indistinct cytoplasmic borders. High-power view (insert) showed atypical cells with nuclei containing linear grooves. d
The tonsillar atypical cells were positive for CD1a (immunoperoxidase). e The tonsillar atypical cells were positive for S100. f Trephine
biopsy of the marrow, showing admixture of myeloblasts and atypical cells with elongated and grooved nuclei. g Atypical cells in the marrow
were positive for S100 LCH in association with leukaemia occurs mainly in two clinical patterns: LCH preceded by acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia (pathogenesis undefined) and LCH treated by etoposide/vinblastine followed by therapy-related AML . Concomitant LCH and AML have
very rarely been reported . Two explanations for this extraordinary phenomenon have been proposed: LCH and AML deriving from the same
neoplastic precursors or LCH being reactive to the AML . In our patient, the LCH was infiltrative with marrow metastasis, supporting that it
was neoplastic. In addition to its diagnostic interest, this case had therapeutic implication. The optimal treatment of disseminated LCH
remains undefined. The use of vinblastine, etoposide, 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine, cyclophosphamide and cytarabine has been described .
Anthracyclines have apparently not been studied before. Our case showed fortuitously that a standard daunorubicin/cytarabine regimen was
highly effective in inducing a remission for disseminated LCH, an observation that requires further validation. The authors declare that
they have no conflict of interest. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
