Pulmonary cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection causes fatal CMV pneumonia (CMVp) in Immunocompromised patients; however, the mechanisms
underlying CMV-Infection-Induced pulmonary lesion development remain largely unknown. We examined the relationship between CMVp patterns and
Intrapulmonary viral tropism, Including expression of Inflammatory cytokines and related molecules. Double Immunohistochemistry of CMV
antigen and cellular markers showed that epithelial tropism was associated with a diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) pattern (CMVp-DAD) while
stromal tropism was associated with a predominantly interstitial inflammation/fibrosis (IIF) (CMVp-IIF) or a combination of DAD and IIF
(CMVp-complex). Transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 expression was relevant to CMV-induced tissue injury, and its expression was higher in
CMVp-complex and CMVp-IIF than in CMVp-DAD. Expression of integrin β6 (ITGB6), an adhesion molecule and important activator of TGF-β1 in
interstitial pneumonia, was lost in CMV-infected pneumocytes, especially CMVp-DAD, whereas CMV-negative pneumocytes in CMVp-complex and
CMVp-IIF showed overexpression. Diffuse interleukin (IL)-8 up-regulation and strong expression were present in both CMV-infected pneumocytes
and stromal cells only in CMVp-IIF cases with marked interstitial neutrophilic infiltration. On the basis of viral tropism and the
expression of TGF-β1, ITGB6, and IL-8, we conclude that CMV-Infected pulmonary cells play an Important role in the development of diverse
CMVp patterns. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a major pathogenic microbe in immunocompromised individuals, and CMV pneumonia (CMVp) is a critical
complication because of the high fatality.1,2 The clinical findings of CMVp have been well documented;3,4 however, how CMV infection causes
pulmonary lesions is not yet well understood. Cytomegalovirus pneumonia, a secondary interstitial pneumonia (IP), exhibits various
histopathological characteristics, i.e., focal or diffuse interstitial lesions with/without hemorrhage, hyaline membrane, and
necrobiosis.5–7 It has been reported that CMV infects a wide variety of cell types, including pneumocytes, fibroblasts, macrophages, and
endothelial cells in the lung.8 Although cytomegalic cells are a well-known hallmark of CMV-infected cells, only a few reports have
immunohistochemically confirmed these cell types.8–10 Moreover, to our knowledge, the proportions of CMV-infected cell types among the
diverse patterns of CMVp have not been described in previous reports. Many growth factors and cytokines have been identified as pathogenetic
factors for the initiation or progression of both idiopathic and secondary IP.11,12 Transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 has been implicated
as a pivotal molecule in the development of acute and chronic IP13,14 and CMVp.15 CMV infection was reported to induce production of
TGF-β1,16 and this protein also enhanced viral replication in some CMV-infected cells.17 Inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis
factor-α, interleukin (IL)-6, and IL-8, were highly expressed in IP,18–20 and were up-regulated by CMV infection.21,22 Furthermore, high
expression of IL-8 and its receptor in CMV-infected human lung fibroblasts enhanced its function in an autocrine manner and promoted CMV
replication in vitro.23 Therefore, CMV-infected cells may play an important role in the formation of IP lesions in CMVp. However, these
findings may not be sufficient to account for the diverse histology of CMVp. Very few reports have analyzed CMVp pathogenesis from a
histopathological point of view.8,24 In this study, we focus on the types of CMV-infected cells and the expression of inflammatory cytokines
and related molecules in the various histological types of CMVp. From the autopsy files of the Department of Pathology, Hamamatsu University
School of Medicine, 12 cases of severe CMVp, with an average of at least 100 CMV antigen-positive cells in each immunohistochemistry (IHC)
section, were selected (Table 1) to examine the characteristic CMV-induced changes. Cases of mild CMVp with fewer CMV-positive cells, as
well as cases concomitant with other opportunistic infections such as pneumocystis, fungi, severe bronchopneumonia, or intrapulmonary
neoplasms were excluded. Two cases of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) (case nos. 9 and 12) were included; however, the remarkably CMV-
infected lesions were carefully compared with the non-CMV-infected areas. Clinical data and histopathological findings of 12 autopsy cases
Post-immunosuppressive therapy. Post-adjuvant chemotherapy. Post-operation. Post-transplantation. CMV-induced lesions with a sign of
inequality or equality, according to those predominances, and primary or complicated lesions, shown in parentheses. The period after
deterioration or the appearance of respiratory symptoms to death. Adr, adrenal gland; BP, bronchopneumonia; CRF, chronic renal failure; DAD,
diffuse alveolar damage; Gbl, gallbladder; Hrt, heart; IIF, interstitial inflammation/fibrosis; Kdn, kidney; LGI, lower gastrointestinal
tract, including small intestine and colon; Liv, liver; MI, myocardial infarction; N.D., not determined; NSIP, non-specific interstitial
pneumonia; OP, organizing pneumonia; Ovr, ovary; PE, pulmonary edema; PH, pulmonary hemorrhage; Pnc, pancreas; Prs, prostate; Skn, skin;
Spl, spleen; Thy, thyroid gland; Ubl, urinary bladder; UGI, upper gastrointestinal tract, including esophagus, stomach and duodenum; UIP,
usual interstitial pneumonia; Utr, uterus; wk, weeks; yr, years. All 12 patients had underlying primary diseases causing immunosuppression
during medical treatment. Systemic CMV infection in multiple organs was observed in all cases except case no. 10. Case no. 12 had regional
lung necropsy, although CMV infection in the visceral organs was not determined. Case nos. 1 and 2 had systemic lupus erythematosus with no
apparent pulmonary involvement. The pulmonary lesion in case no. 7 was clinically diagnosed as non-specific IP, but was diagnosed as CMVp at
autopsy. After deterioration or the appearance of respiratory disease, all patients died of respiratory failure or hypoxia-induced
cardiovascular collapse within 1 to 8 weeks, except case nos. 4, 5, 7, and 12 (the durations to death were not reported in the autopsy
records) (Table 1). All autopsied lung materials were fixed in 10% formalin for more than 7 days. At least one tissue block was prepared
from the gross lesions in each lobe, and the tissue blocks were embedded in paraffin. In every case, 1 or 2 paraffin-embedded blocks
containing the most CMV-infected cells, as shown by CMV IHC, were selected. Additional blocks without CMV-infected cells were prepared in
case nos. 9 and 12. A set of 4 µm thick sections was cut for histopathological analyses, including hematoxylin and eosin (HE) and aniline
blue staining. Primary antibodies to cytokeratin (CK) (clone AE1/AE3; Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), CK7 (clone OV-TL 12/30; Dako), surfactant
apoprotein A (SP-A) (clone PE10; Dako), vimentin (clone V9; Dako), α-smooth muscle actin (SMA) (clone 1A4; Dako), CD45 (LCA) (clone 2B11 +
PD7/26; Dako), CD68 (clone PG-M1; Dako), CMV (clone CCH2 + DDG9; Dako), TGF-β1 (clone TB21; Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA) and integrin β6
(ITGB6) (clone 442.5C4; Calbiochem, Darmstadt, Germany) were used in this study. Double IHC was performed by combining antibodies for CMV
with those for cell type markers or cytokines, using peroxidase (POD)-conjugated universal immuno-enzyme polymer (UIP), anti-mouse solution
(Nichirei Biosciences, Tokyo, Japan) and alkaline-phosphatase (ALP)-conjugated UIP, anti-mouse solution. Dewaxed sections were initially
incubated in 3% hydrogen peroxide solution at room temperature for 20 min. Antigen retrieval was done according to the manufacturer's
instructions. Each antibody reaction was done at 37°C for 1 h. The first round of immunostaining was colored bluish purple with fast blue BB
salt (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA).25 To block cross-reactivity in sequential rounds of immunostaining, the microwave oven heating (MW) method
was performed.26 The second round of immunostaining was colored red with 3-amino-9-ethyl carbazole (AEC) + substrate-chromogen
(DakoCytomation, Carpinteria, CA, USA). The specificity and sensitivity of each marker was verified by single IHC prior to double IHC using
POD-conjugated UIP and colored brown with a liquid 3,3′-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB) substrate chromogen system
(DakoCytomation), then counter-stained with hematoxylin. A DNA probe for CISH-CMV, which was derived from a bacterial artificial chromosome
(BAC) and encoded 230 kb of the whole genome of human CMV Towne strain (a gift from Dr Fenyong Liu, University of California, Berkeley,
USA), was labeled with digoxigenin (DIG)-11-dUTP (Roche Diagnostics, Penzberg, Germany) using a nick translation kit (Roche Diagnostics).
The hybridization and washing procedures have been described previously.27 Sections were subsequently incubated with POD-conjugated anti-DIG
Fab fragments (1:100, Roche Diagnostics) and colored red with AEC+, followed by hematoxylin counter staining. Combined ITGB6 IHC and CISH-
CMV were also performed. The former was preceded with POD-conjugated UIP, and then colored brown with DAB substrate. After MW, CISH was done
and colored red with AEC+, and then counterstained with hematoxylin. Ten slices of 10 µm thick paraffin-embedded tissue sections, which were
cut from the same samples used for histology and IHC, were placed into a 1.5 mL tube. Total RNA was extracted using ISOGEN (Nippon gene,
Tokyo, Japan), according to the manufacturer's protocol. Following treatment with RNase-free DNase I (Roche Diagnostics) for 15 min at 37°C,
RNA was reverse transcribed using the SuperScript II First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Isolated reverse
transcribed product (0.5 µg) was used as the RT-PCR template. The primer pairs for RT-PCR were as follows:
5′-AAGATATCGAATTCTCCGAGAAGCGGTAC-3′ and 5′-CGCGGATCCTCCGGTGACATCAAAAGATA-3′ for TGF-β1; 5′-GAAGGTGAAGGTCGGAGTC-3′ and
5′-GAAGATGGTGATGGGATTTC-3′ for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH); and 5′-ATGAAGTGTATTGGGCTAACTATGC-3′ and
5′-TTCTCCTAAGTTCATCCTTTTTAGC-3′ for CMV. An initial denaturation step at 95°C for 10 min was followed by 40 cycles of denaturation at 95°C
for 30 s, and annealing at 56°C, 58°C, and 60°C for 30 s for TGF-β1, GAPDH, and CMV, respectively. The final elongation step was at 72°C for
10 min. Amplified aliquots were separated on a 2% agarose gel and visualized by ethidium bromide staining. To detect in situ expression of
IL-8 mRNA, a fragment of IL-8 complementary DNA, corresponding to nucleotides 1134–1245 (GenBank Accession No. NM_000584), was cloned into
the pGEM-T vector (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Antisense and sense IL-8 riboprobes were prepared with a DIG RNA labeling kit (Roche
Diagnostics) using pGEM-T/IL-81134–1245 as the template. Hybridization and washing procedures have been previously described.28 For signal
detection, POD-conjugated anti-DIG Fab fragments were applied, and then colored red with AEC+. The specificity of ISH was demonstrated by
parallel hybridization of the sections with sense riboprobes. For double staining by IL-8 ISH and CMV IHC, completion of the former was
followed by MW. CMV IHC was performed using ALP-conjugated UIP and colored bluish purple with fast blue BB salt. The number of cells
positive for CMV as well as the number of cells double positive for CMV and cellular markers were counted in more than three non-overlapping
5 × 5 mm2 fields. The ratio of double positive cells to CMV-positive cells was calculated. Since endothelial cell markers, such as CD31 and
factor VIII, tend to lose their immunoreactivity in CMV-infected endothelial cells,29,30 CMV-infected endothelial cells were morphologically
identified in double vimentin- and CMV-stained sections and were counted. The average number of CMV-positive cells and the frequency of CMV
infection, calculated by the average number of CMV-positive cells per counted area (mm2), were also examined. Aniline blue stains collagen-
deposition areas dark blue compared to the light blue-stained reticulin fibers or basement membrane.31 Images of several non-overlapping
regions, excluding those with large vessels or bronchi, were taken with a digital camera system (DP70; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). Each dark
blue-stained area was extracted as a two-tone image and the ratio of the stained area to whole image was determined using Adobe Photoshop
7.0 (Adobe Systems Inc., San Jose, CA, USA). The mean aniline blue-positive ratio in each case was used as an indicator of interstitial
fibrosis. Pulmonary lesions are shown in Table 1. CMV-induced pulmonary lesions exhibited diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) and/or interstitial
inflammation and fibrosis (IIF). In DAD lesions, hyaline membranes, detached swollen pneumocytes, intra-alveolar exudation, and alveolar
wall edema were commonly observed. Cytomegalic cells were frequently seen on the alveolar surface or in the alveolar spaces (Fig. 1a,
arrows). In contrast, CMV-induced IIF lesions presented various degrees of interstitial inflammatory infiltrates and fibrous thickening as
well as reactive alveolar epithelial proliferation. Cytomegalic cells were observed not only on the alveolar surface, but also in the stroma
(Fig. 1b,c, arrows). Three major histological patterns of cytomegalovirus (CMV) pneumonia (CMVp). (a) Diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) pattern
of CMVp (CMVp-DAD) (case no. 1, x20), (b) intermixed pattern of DAD and interstitial inflammation/fibrosis (IIF) (CMVp-complex) (case no. 7,
x10), and (c) predominantly IIF pattern (CMVp-IIF) (case no. 12, x20). Cytomegalic cells (arrows) are observed on the alveolar surface, in
the alveolar space, and in the alveolar wall. Three cases (case nos. 1–3) had DAD with negligible IIF (CMVp-DAD) (Fig. 1a) and six cases
(case nos. 4–9) had DAD and IIF with variable severity in a complex pattern (CMVp-complex) (Fig. 1b). In the remaining three cases (case
nos. 10–12), IIF was predominant (CMVp-IIF) (Fig. 1c), although minor DAD patterns were also seen in case nos. 11 and 12. All DAD lesions
had acute stage characteristics with hyaline membrane formation, except case no. 3, in which foci of intra-alveolar fibrosis, regarded as an
organizing stage of DAD, were also observed. Numerous CMV antigen-positive cells, many more than the number of cytomegalic cells, were found
by IHC. These CMV-positive cells were doubly labeled with epithelial, mesenchymal, or leukocyte markers by IHC without cross-reactivity
(Fig. 2), except for endothelial cell markers CD31 and factor VIII, which only stained the CMV-negative endothelial cells well (data not
shown). Double immunohistochemistry (IHC) of cytomegalovirus (CMV, red) and each cellular marker (blue) in representative cases of CMV
pneumonia (CMVp)-diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) (case no. 2), CMVp-complex (case no. 4), and CMVp- interstitial inflammation/fibrosis (IIF)
(case no. 12). The results of intrapulmonary CMV tropism by double IHC are shown in Fig. 3a. Although the proportion of CMV-infected cells
was generally very small in specific stromal cell types, such as smooth muscle cells, myofibroblasts, leukocytes, macrophages, and
endothelial cells, the proportion in vimentin-positive whole stromal cells, including fibroblasts, and cytokeratin-positive epithelial
cells, including pneumocytes, was larger and varied among the cases. The major histological patterns of CMVp depended on the proportion of
CMV-infected pneumocytes and total stromal cells. In cases with CMVp-DAD, CMV infection was more frequent in pneumocytes than in stromal
cells, whereas in CMVp-complex or CMVp-IIF cases, CMV infection was more prevalent in stromal cells, except in case no. 5. Collagen
deposition, quantified by aniline blue staining, was less than 3% in CMVp-DAD cases and as high as 14% in CMVp-IIF cases (Fig. 3b); however,
the percentage of staining was not strictly proportional to the duration of respiratory symptoms (Table 1) or the ratio of CMV-infected
stromal cells (Fig. 3a). Cytomegalovirus (CMV) tropism and severity of fibrosis among cases. (a) The ratio of doubly positive number for CMV
and cellular marker to CMV-positive number in every section with the average number of CMV-positive cells and the frequency of CMV infection
shown in parentheses; (b) representative aniline blue stained images and extracted two-tone images with the value of the positive ratio
(left panels), and the aniline blue-positive ratio in all cases (right panel). The cases of CMVp-diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) (case nos.
1–3), CMVp-complex (case nos. 4–9), and CMVp-interstitial inflammation/fibrosis (IIF) (case nos. 10–12) are indicated by pink, yellow, and
green, respectively. Transforming growth factor-β1 immunoreactivity was observed in various cell types, such as fibroblasts, endothelial
cells, reactive pneumocytes, and intra-alveolar mononuclear cells (Fig. 4a). Not all CMV-infected cells were positive for TGF-β1. The
percentage of TGF-β1 expressing, CMV-infected cells ranged from 5 to 40% (Fig. 3a), and had no apparent relationship to CMVp pattern. The
TGF-β1 staining intensity and distribution also varied among the cases (Fig. 4a). In CMVp-DAD cases, weak to moderate TGF-β1 staining was
restricted to swollen pneumocytes and intra-alveolar mononuclear cells (Fig. 4a, left panel). In CMVp-complex and CMVp-IIF cases, TGF-β1
immunoreactivity increased in intensity and was found in both pneumocytes and stromal cells, and stromal cells exhibited heterogeneous and
collective staining patterns (Fig. 4a, middle and right panels). Strong TGF-β1 expression was noted in areas of active tissue injury
accompanied by CMV infection and inflammatory infiltration. Transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 expression in immunohistochemistry (IHC) and
semi-quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). (a) Representative cases of TGF-β1 IHC of cytomegalovirus
pneumonia (CMVp)-diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) (case no. 2) (left panel), CMVp-complex (case no. 5) (middle panel), and CMVp-interstitial
inflammation/fibrosis (IIF) (case no. 11) (right panel), the positive findings in the reactive pneumocytes (solid arrowheads), intra-
alveolar mononuclear cells (open arrowheads), fibroblasts (arrows), and vascular endothelial cells (asterisks); (b) the findings of semi-
quantitative RT-PCR for TGF-β1, CMV, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) in representative cases of CMVp-DAD (case nos. 2
and 3), CMVp-complex (case nos. 5, 6, and 7), and CMVp-IIF (case nos. 11 and 12) with the frequency of CMV infection (CMV freq.) as
described in Figure 3a. The expression of TGF-β1 mRNA, determined by semi-quantitative RT-PCR, was low in representative cases of CMVp-DAD,
while expression was relatively high in many CMVp-complex and CMVp-IIF cases (Fig. 4b), which was similar to the TGF-β1 protein expression
intensities shown by IHC (Fig. 4a). Expression in CMVp-complex and CMVp-IIF cases was correlated with the CMV infection frequency, except in
case no. 6. Immunohistochemical staining for TGF-β1 and for both ITGB6 and CMV in the serial sections from CMVp-complex or CMVp-IIF cases
showed CMV antigens in regions with TGF-β1 expression (Fig. 5a,b, circles), and overexpression of ITGB6 in CMV-negative pneumocytes, but not
in CMV-positive pneumocytes (Fig. 5a). In cases of CMVp-DAD, ITGB6 expression was rare, while co-localization of TGF-β1 and CMV was observed
in pneumocytes (data not shown). The relationship between cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection/replication and functional expression of
transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1, associated with integrin β6 (ITGB6) overexpression. (a) Double immunohistochemistry (IHC) of CMV (red)
and ITGB6 (blue) and (b) single IHC of TGF-β1 (brown), examined at the same region of the serial sections (case no. 5). Up-regulation of
ITGB6 in the pneumocytes accompanied by TGF-β1 expression (solid arrowheads) as well as colocalization of TGF-β1 expression and CMV antigens
(circles) in both CMV pneumonia (CMVp)-complex and CMVp-interstitial inflammation/fibrosis (IIF) cases. (c and d) In double staining of
chromogenic in situ hybridization for whole CMV genome (CISH-CMV) (red) and ITGB6 IHC (brown) (case no. 12), ITGB6 overexpression area is
surrounded by remarkable IIF with increased CISH-positive stromal cells (c, x10). CISH-positive pneumocytes are lacking ITGB6 expression (d,
arrows, x40). With CISH-CMV, positive signals were seen, not only in the cytomegalic cells, but also in various types of infected cells with
indistinct cytomegaly, since the sensitivity of CISH-CMV is much higher than that of conventional CMV ISH. A large number of CISH-positive
cells were often associated with severe DAD and/or IIF lesions. Overexpression of ITGB6 was observed in pneumocytes and accompanied by
remarkable proliferative inflammation in the stroma where the number of CISH-positive cells was increased (Fig. 5c). However, as
demonstrated by double staining, CISH-CMV-positive pneumocytes significantly lost ITGB6 expression (Fig. 5d, arrows). Expression of IL-8
mRNA by ISH was barely detected in CMVp-DAD cases (Fig. 6a), while focal expression was observed in several cases with CMVp-complex (Fig.
6b). Interestingly, all CMVp-IIF cases showed diffuse IL-8 up-regulation, and case no. 12 exhibited strong IL-8 expression (Fig. 6c).
Expression of IL-8 was observed both in pneumocytes and stromal cells, including fibroblastic cells and endothelial cells. Double staining
for IL-8 ISH and CMV IHC suggested that some CMV-infected pneumocytes and stromal cells induced IL-8 expression (Fig. 6, arrows),
particularly in CMVp-IIF, which exhibited remarkable interstitial neutrophilic infiltration. Double staining of interleukin (IL)-8 ISH (red)
and cytomegalovirus (CMV) IHC (blue) in representative cases of CMVp-DAD (a, case no. 1), CMVp-complex (b, case no. 8), and CMVp-
interstitial inflammation/fibrosis (IIF) (c, case no. 12); arrows, IL-8 overexpression in CMV infected cells; al, alveolar space; cap,
capillary endothelial cells. Here we demonstrated a possible relationship between major CMVp histology and pulmonary viral tropism, namely,
CMVp-DAD with epithelial tropism and CMVp-complex or CMVp-IIF with stromal tropism. The desquamative reactions in CMVp-DAD might be caused
by CMV-induced alveolar epithelial injury. Previous reports suggested that CMV-infected pneumocytes tended to lose expression of their
functional molecules.8–10 Compared with the rates of CK- (AE1/AE3) or CK7-positive CMV-infected cells, the rates of SP-A-positive CMV-
infected cells were lower in almost all cases (Fig. 3a). Cell–cell or cell–matrix adhesion molecules, including ITGB6, were also reported to
be down-regulated by CMV infection in some permissively infective cells.32,33 Our IHC and CISH analyses confirmed that ITGB6 expression was
significantly lost in CMV-infected pneumocytes (Fig. 5d). The decreased adhesion between penumocytes and the basement membrane might result
in frequent epithelial detachment, which could be a subsequent source of CMV propagation to other pneumocytes. Finally, plasma exudation,
which forms a hyaline membrane on the alveolar surface, causes DAD lesions (Fig. 7). A schema for pathogenesis of cytomegalovirus (CMV)
pneumonia (CMVp), focused on the intrapulmonary CMV tropism and expression of transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1, integrin β6 (ITGB6), and
interleukin (IL)-8. Epithelial trophic CMV infection causes cellular dysfunction without expression of ITGB6, inhibiting TGF-β1 activation
as well as leading to desquamative reaction, which forms diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) lesions (top row). Functional TGF-β1 expression,
mediated by up-regulated ITGB6, may promote interstitial chronic proliferative inflammation, according to the CMV infection frequency, that
progresses the formation of interstitial inflammation/fibrosis (IIF), especially in the presence of IL-8 overexpression (bottom row).
Transitional CMV propagation between pneumocytes and stromal cells causes reciprocal tissue injury of epithelia and stroma, resulted in the
complex patterns of DAD and IIF with variable severity (middle row). , pneumocyte; , injured pneumocyte; , stromal cell; , CMV-infected
cell; , CMV; , macrophage; , lymphocyte; , neutrophil; , capillary vessel; , integrin; , integrin up-regulated pneumocyte; , TGF-β1, latent
form; , TGF-β1, activated form; , IL-8; , IL-8 overexpressing cell. In addition to its function as an adhesion molecule, ITGB6 has been
shown to play an important role in the development of TGF-β1-mediated IP lesions in combination with integrin αv (as a heterodimer).34
Transforming growth factor-β1, the majority of which is produced in a latent form,35 requires proteolytic enzyme reactions or a
conformational change mediated by membrane-bound integrins for activation.36 In the absence of ITGB6 expression in CMV-positive pneumocytes,
TGF-β1 signal transduction may be insufficient for the development of interstitial lesions, thereby resulting solely in a CMVp-DAD
histological pattern, even if increased TGF-β1 expression is present. In case no. 3, which had 4 weeks of symptoms of respiratory disease,
the organizing stage of DAD with intra-alveolar fibrous reaction was observed, while IIF lesions were underdeveloped. Conversely, in CMVp-
complex and CMVp-IIF cases, ITGB6 was overexpressed in CMV-negative pneumocytes along with TGF-β1 overexpression (Fig. 5a,b). CISH-CMV
revealed a number of CMV-positive cells in the stroma of such ITGB6-overexpressing alveoli (Fig. 5c). Therefore, stromal trophic CMV
propagation might promote functional TGF-β1 expression, primarily according to the frequency of CMV infection intensity, and cause
persistent interstitial injury, leading to prolonged wound healing and exacerbation of IIF (Fig. 7). The variation in DAD and IIF severity
in CMVp-complex may reflect, not a series of DAD lesions, but the reciprocal tissue injury induced by transitional CMV propagation between
pneumocytes and stromal cells (Fig. 7). It is essential to consider host immune status to understand CMV pathology and viral
propagation.37,38 Marked systemic CMV involvement in CMVp-DAD cases (Table 1) suggests a profound loss of the immune response against CMV
infection. The severe immune-refractoriness may bring about CMV reactivation and rapid propagation in the lung with epithelial tropism, thus
leading to CMVp-DAD with slight inflammatory infiltrates despite the alveolar injury. In contrast, chronic, excessive inflammation,
accompanied by IL-8 overexpression, was noted in cases of heavily infected CMVp-IIF. The CMV genome harbors several functional homologs of
cytokine, chemokine, and chemokine receptors.39 A transcript of UL146, an open reading frame in the CMV genome, is known to act as an IL-8
receptor agonist,40 promoting transendothelial migration of the neutrophils and viral transmission through migratory cell–cell microfusion
events.41 Furthermore, CMV-infected neutrophils are protected from apoptosis and remain in the tissue with enhanced function,42 especially
in the presence of IL-8.43 Hence, CMV can propagate and modulate various host cellular immune functions,44,45 leading to regulatory failure
of the host immune system. In the underlying pathology of IPF in case nos. 9 and 12, IL-8 overexpression may be a factor that exacerbates
CMV-induced IIF (Fig. 3b); however, the mechanism underlying induction of in vivo IL-8 overexpression remains controversial. Stromal
components, such as vascular endothelial cells and myofibroblasts, have been proposed to play a critical role in regulating IPF46,47 and
CMVp.24 Endothelial cells infected with CMV were found in the present CMVp cases, as in the previous reports;6,48 however, the ratio of
positive cells was typically lower (Fig. 3a), and are not likely to be a major regulator of local CMVp lesion formation. Infection with CMV
in SMA-positive cells was mostly not found in myofibroblasts, but was observed in pre-existing peribronchiolar or perivascular smooth muscle
cells (Fig. 2). As to the concept of epithelial mesenchymal transition, i.e., TGF-β1-mediated cellular transformation from epithelial cells
to myofibroblasts,49 further evidence is required to elucidate its significance in IIF pathogenesis. In conclusion, the present
histopathological and pathogenetic analysis of severe CMVp suggested that CMV tropism between pneumocytes and stromal cells, CMV-induced
cytokine expressions, and host immune conditions were crucial in the formation of a variety of CMVp types. The authors thank Dr. Fenyong
Liu, University of California, for sending a BAC clone of CMV Towne strain; Dr. Tadaaki Eimoto, Emeritus Professor, Nagoya City University,
Graduate School of Medical Sciences and Medial School, for giving advice on writing the manuscript and correcting the text; and Mr. Masaaki
Kaneta, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, for his excellent technical assistance.
