MCAD-deficiency is the most common inborn error of fatty acid oxidation now included in many newborn screening programms using MS/MS. During
prolonged catabolic episodes, patients may suffer from metabolic decompensation with dysfunction of liver, skeletal- and heart muscle as
well as brain. In anabolism, neither clinical symptoms nor biochemical signs of organ dysfunction occur. We report a female patient with
MCAD-deficiency in whom at the age of 11 years isolated AST-elevation was found without any clinical or biochemical signs of organ
dysfunction. We showed by polyethylene glycol precipitation that macro-AST formation was responsible for this biochemical finding. AST was
probably complexed with immunoglobulins possibly related to an allergic disposition. Macro-AST formation is not a special feature of MCAD-
deficiency but rather a non-specific, coincidental finding which also occurs in healthy individuals. The general practitioner consulted by
the patient before coming to our outpatient clinic for inborn errors of metabolism was worried that isolated AST-elevation indicated cell
damage in MCAD-deficiency. He ordered further diagnostic tests like ultrasound, ECG and echocardiography without any pathology. In isolated
AST-elevation, macro-AST has to be considered in order to avoid unnecessary, costly and invasive evaluation. This is not only true for
healthy persons but for patients with chronic diseases like MCAD as well. Medium chain acyl CoA-dehydrogenase (MCAD)-deficiency (OMIM
#201450) is the most common inborn error of mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation. It is inherited as an autosomal-recessive trait and leads to
compromised breakdown of C4-C12 acyl-CoAs. The incidence in Northern Europe is 1:9,000 to 1:11,000 ( and own data). Catabolism (immediately
after birth or during common infections) may trigger acute metabolic decompensation. As fatty acids are the main energy fuel for skeletal
and heart muscle as well as liver, dysfunction of these organs may occur during metabolic decompensation in MCAD-deficient patients though
other mechanisms may play an additional role. Encephalopathy is presumably caused by the accumulation of toxic lipophilic compounds proximal
to the enzyme defect as well as hypoketotic hypoglycaemia. Hypoketonaemia is based on compromised hepatic ketogenesis resulting from reduced
fatty acid oxidation and leads to energy deprivation of the brain during prolonged catabolism/fasting. MCAD-deficiency is a target disease
of many newborn screening programs using the MS/MS technique which resulted in a significant reduction of metabolic decompensations and
death by simply avoiding catabolism. The same goes for MCAD-patients diagnosed after an initial metabolic decompensation by selective
screening. There is no chronic toxicity known in MCAD-deficiency though prospective long-term studies are lacking. In childhood,
decompensation typically occurs during febrile illness or emesis. However, there are different challenges during adolescence/adulthood which
may hamper anabolism in the absence of parental care . Catabolism may be triggered by alcohol ingestion, fasting for weight reduction and
competitive sports without adequate intake of food, in females, pregnancy and delivery may be an issue. We report a female patient with
MCAD-deficiency who developed isolated AST-elevation at the age of 11 years which was supposed to be a sign of chronic toxicity but later
turned out to be due to macro-AST. Macro-AST is known for many years as a cause of isolated AST-elevation, however, it is often not
considered during the work-up of patients with AST-elevation. The girl was born before the era of newborn screening for MCAD-deficiency by
tandem MS/MS. After an uneventful pregnancy and delivery at term she presented with 3 generalized tonic seizures associated with
hypoglycaemia at the age of 3 days. Selective screening led to the diagnosis of MCAD-deficiency, homozygosity for the mutation p.K329E was
found. Parents were advised to avoid catabolism, she did not have any further metabolic decompensation and showed normal psychomotor
development. In the first years of life, she was regularly seen by a metabolic specialist, later –after the family moved out of town- she
was seen by a general practitioner who sporadically took blood to assess organ functions. The girl developed allergic rhinitis and asthma,
birch-specific IgE was elevated. At the age of 11 years, isolated AST-elevation (700 U/l, normal < 31 U/l) was first noticed. AST-levels
remained elevated ever since (500–700 U/l) without any other laboratory abnormalities. Ultrasound of the abdomen, ECG and echocardiography
were repeatedly normal, infection with hepatotropic viruses and autoimmune processes were excluded. The general practitioner concluded that
isolated AST-elevation was related to MCAD-deficiency and indicates some organ dysfunction though the organ affected could not be specified
yet. The girl first presented at our outpatient clinic for inborn errors of metabolism at the age of 15 years. Psychomotor development was
normal, physical examination was unrevealing. In line with MCAD-deficiency, the acylcarnitine profile in a dried blood spot showed
elevations of C6, C8, C10 and C10:1 acylcarnitines, free carnitine concentration was normal. Analyses of amino acids in plasma and organic
acids in urine were unrevealing. Concentrations of creatine kinase, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, gamma-glutamyltransferase, lipase and lactate
dehydrogenase were not elevated there were no signs of hemolysis. Blood count was normal except for eosinophilia indicating an allergic
disposition. AST was elevated (598 U/l, normal: < 31 U/l). In the absence of clinical and biochemical organ dysfunction, we considered
macro-AST. More than 95% of AST-activity could be precipitated by polyethylene glycol indeed, thus confirming the presence of macro-AST.
Macro-AST is supposed to result from complex formation with immunoglobulins which prompted us to determine immunoglobulin concentrations in
blood. IgE-levels were above normal (412 IU/ml, reference range 1–100 IU/ml), probably related to birch allergy already diagnosed during
childhood, while all other immunoglobulins were not elevated. Informed consent for publishing this case was obtained from the parents and
the patient. MCAD-deficiency can lead to organ damage (especially skeletal- and heart muscle, liver, brain) as a result of cellular energy
deficiency and/or accumulation of endogenous toxic intermediates. Hypoketotic hypoglycaemia based (amongst other factors) on compromised
hepatic ketogenesis from fatty acids is another pathophysiological mechanism leading to encephalopathy during prolonged fasting or
intercurrent illness. Organ dysfunction is triggered by longer episodes of catabolism (febrile infection/prolonged fasting) and can usually
be prevented by administering carbohydrates. Cell damage leads to spill-over of intracellular enzymes like AST, ALT, creatine kinase, lactic
dehydrogenase into the blood circulation. Usually, this does not occur when the patient is well nor does it lead to isolated leakage of
intracellular AST. However, metabolites accumulating in MCAD-deficiency are known to be toxic and may lead to organ dysfunction in the long
run. There are no large prospective studies describing the outcome of patients diagnosed by neonatal mass screening in adulthood. Therefore,
the assumption by the general practitioner that sustained, isolated AST-elevation indicated organ damage in our patient was reasonable. We
could show that isolated AST-elevation in this MCAD-patient was caused by macro-AST. This was not a congenital condition as AST-levels were
normal initially. Macro-AST has been described in the literature as a benign condition due to binding of AST to macromolecules like
immunoglobulins (e.g. ). These complexes cannot be excreted via the kidneys, therefore their half-life is extended. In our patient, we found
elevated immunoglobulin E resulting from an allergic disposition while all other immunoglobulins were normal. In most cases described so
far, AST was complexed with immunoglobulins A, M and G . Macro-AST has not only been described in healthy persons but also in patients with
hepatic diseases like hepatitis C or malignancies and chronic liver disease . Macro-AST or isolated AST-elevation is not a common feature in
MCAD-deficiency. As Macro-AST is fairly common in the general population macro-AST in our MCAD-patient is coincidental. In summary, we
describe a girl with MCAD-deficiency developing isolated AST-elevation without any clinical or biochemical signs for organ dysfunction. We
could detect macro-AST as the cause of AST-elevation. Macro-AST has to be considered in any healthy individual or patient with a chronic
disease displaying an isolated AST-elevation. This goes for patients with chronic metabolic diseases like MCAD-deficiency as well. Thus,
unnecessary costly and invasive evaluation can be avoided. In our opinion, MCAD-patients should be regularly followed. Apart from dealing
with acute health problems this will allow us to study the long-term biochemical and clinical outcome in patients with this rare disease
diagnosed by neonatal mass screening. ALT: Alanine aminotransferase; AST: Aspartate aminotransferase; ECG: Electrocardiogram; MCAD: Medium
chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase; MS/MS: Tandem-mass spectrometry. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. AMD treated the
patient in the metabolic outpatient clinic, drafted and approved the manuscript. NJ and SD performed the analysis for macro-AST and advised
regarding interpretation of results. NJ assisted in drafting the manuscript. AF performed ultrasound, ECG, echocardiography and various
blood tests in the patient. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed
here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-230X/12/119/prepub
