To the Editor: Rickettsia raoultii is an obligate intracellular gram-negative bacterium belonging to the spotted fever group (SFG) of the
genus Rickettsia. Genotypes RpA4, DnS14, and DnS28, originally isolated from ticks from Russia in 1999 (1), were designated as Rickettsia
raoultii sp. nov. on the basis of phylogenetic analysis (2). R. raoultii has been found mainly in Dermacentor spp. ticks in several
countries in Europe (3). It was detected in a Dermacentor marginatus tick from the scalp of a patient with tick-borne lymphadenitis in
France (2), which suggests that it might be a zoonotic pathogen. We determined the prevalence of R. raoultii–like bacteria in Dermacentor
spp. in highland regions in Tibet. Ticks from sheep (Ovis aries) near Namuco Lake (a popular tourist destination 4,718 m above sea level)
were collected and identified morphologically as D. everestianus and D. niveus ticks (4). Genomic DNA was extracted from individual
specimens by using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). All DNA samples were amplified by using PCRs specific for the citrate
synthase (gltA, 770 bp) gene (5) and the outer membrane protein A (ompA, 629 bp) gene (6). Some samples were amplified by using a PCR
specific for the ompB (2,479 bp) gene (7). Randomly selected amplicons for gltA (n = 27), ompA (n = 31), and ompB (n = 7) were cloned into
the pGEM-T Easy vector (Promega, Shanghai, China) and subjected to bidirectional sequencing (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China). Sequences
obtained were deposited in GenBank under accession nos. JQ792101–JQ792105, JQ792107, and JQ792108–JQ792166. Phylogenetic analysis was
conducted for sequences we identified and sequences of recognized SFG rickettsial species available in Genbank by using the MegAlign program
(DNASTAR, Inc., Madison, WI, USA) and MEGA 4.0 (8). Of 874 tick specimens, 86 were D. everestianus ticks (13 male and 73 female), and 788
were D. niveus ticks (133 male and 655 female). Samples positive for gltA and ompA were considered SFG rickettsial species. Using this
criterion, we found that 739 tick specimens (84.6%) were positive for Rickettsia spp. Of 86 D. everestianus ticks, 85 (98.8%) were positive
for Rickettsia spp. and of 788 D. niveus ticks, 654 (83.0%) were positive. Infection rates for male and female D. niveus ticks were 87.9%
and 82.1%, respectively. We found an overall prevalence of 84.6% for R. raoultii–like bacteria in Dermacentor spp. in the highland regions
in Tibet. Nucleotide sequence identities ranged from 99.2% to 100% (except for isolate WYG55, which had an identity of 98.6%) for the ompA
gene and from 99.2% to 99.9% (except for isolate XG86, which had an identity of 98.5%) for the ompB gene. These results indicated that
homology levels of most isolates were within species thresholds (ompA ≥98.8% and ompB ≥99.2%) (9). Isolate WYG55 showed the lowest identity
(98.2%) among gltA gene sequences and the lowest identity (98.6%) among ompA gene sequences. Isolate XG86 showed lowest identity (98.5%)
among ompB gene sequences. These results suggest that other Rickettsia spp. were among the investigated samples. A BLASTn search
(www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) for the obtained sequences was conducted. The best matches (highest identities) detected were with sequences of R.
raoultii. However, comparison of our sequences with corresponding sequences of R. raoultii in GenBank showed identity ranging from 98.0% to
99.0% for ompA and from 98.1% to 99.0% for ompB, which did not meet the threshold (9) for R. raoultii. We compared the new sequences with
corresponding reference sequences of universally recognized SFG group Rickettsia spp. in Genbank and constructed 2 phylogenetic trees
(Figure). The new sequences were placed into separate branches, which were closely related to R. raoultii branches. Unrooted phylogenetic
trees inferred from comparison of A) outer membrane protein A (ompA) and B) ompB gene sequences of rickettsial species by using the
neighbor-joining method. Sequences in boldface were obtained during this study. Numbers at nodes are the proportion of 100 bootstrap
resamplings that support the topology shown. Prevalence of R. slovaca and R. raoultii was 6.5% and 4.5% in D. silvarum ticks in Xinjiang
Uygur Autonomous Region of China (10). In contrast, we found that the overall prevalence of R. raoultii–like bacteria might be ≤84.6% in D.
everestianus and D. niveus ticks in Dangxiong County in Tibet. Our findings suggest that D. everestianus and D. niveus ticks are potential
vectors of R. raoultii–like bacteria and indicate that spread of R. raoultii-like bacteria encompasses a large area in China. In the study
sites, yak and Tibetan sheep are the major domestic animals, and rodents are the major wild animals. Rodents are also the major hosts of
Dermacentor spp. ticks, which can transmit R. raoultii transstadially and transovarially (2). Animals bitten by infected ticks can acquire
the pathogen and serve as natural reservoirs. On the basis of phylogenetic analysis, we found that the Rickettsia spp. in ticks investigated
represents a novel species, which can be designated Candidatus Rickettsia tibetani. However, additional phylogenetic studies are needed to
obtain more information on the molecular biology of these bacteria. Suggested citation for this article: Wang Y, Liu Z, Yang J, Chen Z, Liu
J, Li Y, et al. Rickettsia raoultii–like bacteria in Dermacentor spp. ticks, Tibet, China . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2012
Sep [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1809.120644 We thank Robin B. Gasser for providing comments and revising the manuscript. This
study was supported by the 973 Program (2010CB530206), the Key Project of Gansu Province (1002NKDA035 and 0801NKDA033), the National Science
Foundation of China ( 30800820, 30972182, 31072130, and 31001061), the 948 Program (2012-S04), the National Beef Cattle Industrial
Technology System, Ministry of Agriculture (CARS-38), the Network for Excellence for Epizootic Disease Diagnosis and Control (FOOD-
CT-2006-016236), and the Improvement of Current and Development of New Vaccines for Theileriosis and Babesiosis of Small Ruminants (PIROVAC)
Project (KBBE-3-245145) of the European Commission, Brussels, Belgium.
