During January 2010, a husband and wife returned from Laos to France with probable parasitic disease. Increased antibodies against an
Acanthamoeba polyphaga mimivirus virophage indicated seroconversion. While in Laos, they had eaten raw fish, a potential source of the
virophage. This virophage, associated with giant viruses suspected to cause pneumonia, could be an emerging pathogen. An ameba-associated
giant virus, Acanthamoeba polyphaga mimivirus (APM), was first described in 2003 after its discovery in water collected from a cooling tower
in the United Kingdom (1). In 2008, a new APM strain (mamavirus), along with an APM virophage, was discovered in water from a cooling tower
in France (2). The APM virophage is a virus that infects giant viruses. The pathogenicity of giant viruses is still a matter of debate (3).
We describe seroconversion to antibodies against the APM virophage in 2 humans. The patients were a 29-year-old woman and her 36-year-old
husband, each born in Laos, who had immigrated to France in 2008 and 2000, respectively. During December, 20, 2009, through January 22,
2010, they traveled to Laos with their 4-month-old baby to visit friends and relatives. This was their first return to Laos since
immigration. While in Laos, they ate local food, including raw fish. Five days after their return to France, they experienced asthenia, low-
grade fever, myalgia, and nausea. They had no other history of travel, and their baby showed no clinical signs. Blood test results indicated
hypereosinophilia, hepatic cytolysis, and cholestasis (Table). At 7 days after the onset of symptoms, the patients were hospitalized;
physical examination of the man detected no abnormalities, and examination of the woman detected tachycardia. Echocardiography of the woman
showed a thin pericardial effusion, but chest radiographs showed no abnormalities. Serum from the woman contained antibodies against
toxocara, trichinellae, and Fasciolia trematodes; and serum from the man contained antibodies against Fasciolia trematodes. No parasites
were recovered from stool samples from either patient. The patients received antiparasitic treatment (praziquantel for 3 days and
albendazole for 15 days), after which they recovered completely and their eosinophil counts returned to reference levels. *Patients returned
from Laos on January 17, 2010. Treatment with praziquantel and albendazole started on February 2, 2010. Numbers in parentheses are cutoff
values (i.e., values higher than cutoff values are positive). Ref, reference; APM, Acanthamoeba polyphaga mimivirus; NT, not tested; NA, not
available; neg, negative; pos, positive. †APM virophage conventional PCR primers targeting the capsid-encoding gene included Spk_capsid_1F
(5′-GTATATTGGACAGATCAAACTGGTG-3′) and Spk_capsid_30R (5′-CTCTCACCATAACCTACATT-3′). APM virophage real-time PCR primers and probe targeting
the open reading frame–3 encoding gene included Sp3P (5′-TTTTTCCCTTTGAATTTCCCTCCAGCT-3′), Sp3F (5′-TGGAACAAACTTTCCTTCTGG-3′), and Sp3R
(5′-AAAGATAGTAAACCGTTTGCAAAAAT-3′). ‡Giant virus real-time PCR primers and probe targeting heat shock protein 70–like protein encoding gene
included MimiMama01 P (5′-CGGAATATTGCAAGTAACTGCACACGA-3′), MimiMama01 F (5′-ATCGGGATTTGAAAAAGGTC-3′), and MimiMama01 R
(5′-CTTCCTTTTGCTCCCCATGT-3′). We routinely test all serum samples for antibodies against intracellular microorganisms discovered at the
World Health Organization Collaborative Center for Rickettsioses and Arthropod Borne Bacterial Diseases. For the patients reported here, we
conducted microimmunofluorescence assays by using APM virophage and mamavirus APM strain antigens, obtained after amebal coculture with
Acanthamoeba castellanii. From the first positive serum sample from each patient (acute-phase samples), we detected elevated IgG and IgM
against the APM virophage (Table). For the woman, serum obtained when she had been pregnant, 5 months before disease onset, was negative.
The APM antibody titer in the 3 samples was either negative or lower than the significant cutoff point (Table). To determine specificity of
the APM virophage antibodies, we tested 2 positive serum samples (1 from each patient) and the negative serum sample from the woman by
Western blotting and 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis with purified APM virophage, mamavirus antigens, and A. castellanii antigens. Protein
spots were excised from the silver-stained gels (Figure). All spots were excised for the APM virophage, and only immunoreactive spots were
excised for mamavirus and A. castellanii. Peptide digestion and mass spectrum analyses were performed by using a matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization spectrometer (MALDI-TOF/TOF Bruker Ultraflex II; Bruker Daltonics, Wissembourg, France) (2). The negative serum showed
no immune reaction against virophage proteins, whereas the positive serum showed high-intensity immune reactions for 2 groups of spots,
identified as open reading frames (ORFs) 21 and 14 (Figure). Two-dimensional (2-D) gel electrophoresis with silver stain results (on left)
and Western blot results (on right) for 3 serum samples from patients who had visited Laos. The proteins were resolved by using 10% sodium
dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Protean II xi chamber; Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). After migration, the gels were
processed either by a silver-staining method compatible with mass spectrometry (4) or by transfer onto nitrocellulose membranes in a semidry
blotting apparatus (Semi-Phor unit; Hoefer Scientific Instruments, San Francisco, CA, USA). The membranes were probed with horseradish
peroxidase–conjugated goat anti-human secondary antibodies (Southern Biotech, Birmingham, AL, USA), and detection was achieved by enhanced
chemiluminescence (ECL; GE Healthcare, Vélizy, France). APM, Acanthamoeba polyphaga mimivirus; ORF, open reading frame; A. castellani,
Acanthamoeba castellani. After protein spots were excised, we obtained a reference proteome map for APM virophages with only 2 identified
ORFs (21 and 14), although several isoforms of these proteins were recovered from different parts of the gel (Figure). For the 2 patients,
the immunoreactive spots corresponded to specific antibodies against virophage proteins. For mamavirus and A. castellanii, we observed
immunoreactive spots of only slight intensity that were strictly identical in the 3 samples. Mass spectrometry was performed for these
spots, but their identity was not verified. Whether these spots were artifacts or represented low antibody titers remains unknown. Various
body fluids recovered during patient follow-up were screened with molecular testing (PCR and reverse transcription PCR with in-house primers
and probes) and amebal coculture to seek APM virophages and/or APM. Results of molecular testing (Table) and amebal coculture (2,5) were
negative. Human exposure to virophages is unknown. We searched for environmental occurrences of APM virophage–like sequences in
environmental metagenomic datasets (6). A BLASTP (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PAGE=Protens) search of APM virophage-translated
ORFs was performed against all metagenomic ORF peptides from Sanger reads (5,634,288,892 nt). These included translated peptide sequences of
ORFs identified on all metagenomic sequence reads and excluded reads generated from Roche 454 GS-20 FLX and Titanium pyrosequencer (Roche
Applied Science, Mannheim, Germany). With no minimal e-value and an alignment of 25 reads per query, we obtained 347 hits from the different
metagenomic datasets. When an increased stringency (e-value<10−4) was used, 112 reads were still recovered. Most hits (29 reads and 7 ORFs)
were returned from the environment of Lake Gatun, a large artificial freshwater lake in the Republic of Panama. Numerous mimivirus-related
sequences were also found in the Lake Gatun metagenome (561 reads with an e-value of <10−4 among 228 different ORFs), suggesting that the
virophage and its host are common in this environment. Each patient was probably infected with a yet-unidentified parasite, although they
each had positive test results for >1 foodborne helminthiases endemic to Southeast Asia. Nonetheless, the broad-spectrum antiparasitic
treatment was effective (7). For each patient, antibodies against the APM virophage were elevated. We cannot rule out serologic cross-
reaction between APM virophage proteins and proteins of other origin, as described for the major capsid protein of A. polyphaga mimivirus
that was recognized in serum of patients infected by Francisella tularensis (8). However, our method indicates that only human antibodies
specific to APM virophage proteins were produced. The negative results of our molecular testing might have been caused by polymorphisms in
the sequences chosen for amplification (9). Cross-reactivity with proteins of other virophages, such as Mavirus-infecting Cafeteria
roenbergensis virus or Organic Lake virophage–infecting phycodnaviridae, is, however, the most plausible explanation because these
virophages have some protein homology similar to that for capsid (10,11). Our environmental analysis indicated recovery of the APM virophage
and viral host sequences from the environment, particularly a freshwater lake. Along with raw fish-borne parasites, aquatic environments
could be a source of human exposure to the APM virophage, as they are for other ameba-associated microorganisms emerging as causal agents of
pneumonia (12,13). It is noteworthy that specific antibodies against the APM virophage but not APM were detected. Because the APM virophage
is associated with a host giant virus, human exposure to APM virophages and to giant viruses should be concomitant. However, for the
patients reported here, APM virophages might have been associated with an undescribed giant virus that cannot be detected with current
laboratory techniques (9,14). Indeed, we have found that APM virophages infect distinct but related giant viruses of the family Mimiviridae
(B. La Scola, unpub. data). Patients might have been directly exposed to free virophages that are apparently present in high numbers in
fresh as well as saline water. For example, during the natural cycle involving virophages, phycodnaviruses, and algae, populations of each
evolve over time (10). This potential direct exposure could explain why antibodies against giant viruses were not detected in the patients
reported here. Virophages could also be associated with viruses that infect various protozoa or parasites (15). We cannot exclude the
possibility that each patient seroconverted while still in France, during the 5 months before their trip. It seems, however, more probable
that they seroconverted while in Laos. Each patient ate raw fish, a potential source of the APM virophage. Human seroconversion against the
APM virophage suggests that virophages could potentially be listed as emerging human pathogens. Suggested citation for this article: Parola
P, Renvoisé A, Botelho-Nevers E, La Scola B, Desnues C, Raoult D. Acanthamoeba polyphaga mimivirus virophage seroconversion in travelers
returning from Laos. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2012 Sep [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1809.120099 These
authors contributed equally to this article. We are grateful to Said Azza for his help with the proteomic experiments and to Lina Barrassi
for technical assistance. This work was supported by the French Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. Dr Parola is professor of
infectious diseases and tropical medicine at the Faculty of Medicine of Marseille and Director of the World Health Organization
Collaborative Center for Rickettsioses and Arthropod Borne Bacterial Diseases. His research interest includes rickettsiology and travel-
related infectious diseases.
