Pelegrino KO performed the aCGH experiments, the qPCR assays and the data analysis and interpretation and participated in the preparation
and revision of the manuscript. Sugayama S was responsible for the patient examination and clinical description and participated in the
preparation of the manuscript. Lezirovitz K performed the DNA extraction and participated in the aCGH experiments. Catelani AL performed the
karyotype analysis. Kok F participated in the writing of the discussion section and in the revision of the manuscript. Chauffaille ML
coordinated the study, designed the project, was responsible for fund obtaining, contributed to the data interpretation, manuscript writing
and review. Craniosynostosis is a disorder characterized by the premature fusion of the calvarial sutures, causing an abnormal skull shape.
Because this disorder occurs with a relatively high frequency, estimated at 1 in 2500 individuals, craniosynostosis represents a relevant
medical problem (1). More than 100 syndromes have been shown to be associated with this disorder. It is believed that at least 20% of cases
are due to single gene mutations or chromosome abnormalities (2). Although most cases can be considered both clinically and genetically
heterogeneous, there is evidence that six genes are involved in many cases: MSX2, FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3, FBN1, and TWISTY (1). The Msh
homeobox 2 (Msx2) gene encodes a homeodomain transcription factor protein and is expressed in migrating cranial neural crest cells during
development (3). Msx2 has central roles in craniofacial development (4) and limb and tissue formation (6). Furthermore, Msx2 overexpression
was demonstrated to be associated with craniosynostosis in mice (5,7), indicating that normal craniofacial formation is dependent on the
Msx2 dosage. Corroborating these findings, increases in the copy number in the MSX2 region have been reported in craniosynostosis patients
(8-11). In the present study, we describe the findings from a whole-genome array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) analysis of a
four-year-old patient exhibiting craniosynostosis, microcephaly, psychomotor development delay, short stature, and cognitive impairment,
among other abnormalities. We found a gain in a region of chromosome 5q35.2 that contains MSX2 and has been shown to be associated with
craniosynostosis. Quantitative PCR confirmed the increase in the MSX2 copy number. This study was approved by the Hospital das Clínicas
Institutional Ethics Committee, and written informed consent was obtained from the family. The propositus (a girl) was the first live born
child of a healthy and non-consanguineous couple (the mother was 38 years old and the father was 40 years old at the time of conception).
The mother is of Japanese descent, and the father is of African descent. The mother had experienced two previous miscarriages due to
incontinence of the endocervical isthmus. The pregnancy was uneventful except for mild vaginal bleeding during the first trimester. The
patient was born preterm (31 weeks) after vaginal delivery, with Apgar scores of 8 and 9, a weight of 1550 g, a length of 38.5 cm, and an
OFC of 28.0 cm. At birth, the patient exhibited respiratory distress and underwent orotracheal intubation (3 days). The patient was
hypotonic, had poor suction, and exhibited neonatal jaundice and metabolic disturbances (hyponatremia and hypocalcemia). She was discharged
at 2 months of age at a weight of 1910 g. The patient also exhibited failure to thrive, recurrent otitis and global developmental delay. She
was able to sit without support at 15 months and able to walk with no support and say simple words at 24 months. Physical examination at 19
months showed a weight of 6500 g, a length of 68.5 cm, and an OFC of 42.5 cm. The patient's face was peculiar, with a narrowing of the
frontal diameter, upslanting palpebral fissures, an enlarged nasal root, low and posteriorly rotated ears, bilateral convergent strabismus,
a high arched palate and mild retrognathia. Neuroimaging studies (CT) revealed coronary craniosynostosis. No heart defects were observed.
Abdominal ultrasonography showed a mild abnormality of the renal parenchyma, but the patient's kidney function is normal. Phytohemagglutinin
(PHA)-stimulated lymphocytes were subjected to G-banding karyotyping (500 bands) of the propositus and progenitors. The results were
described according to the recommendations of the ISCN (2008). G-banding karyotype analysis of the patient showed a normal 46,XX pattern
with no structural or numeric variations. The same was observed for both progenitors. For the aCGH experiments, DNA from the patient and
progenitors was extracted from blood samples using a QIAamp DNA Blood Midi kit (Qiagen, Germany). Labeling and hybridization reactions were
performed as recommended by the manufacturer (Perkin Elmer, Norwalk). aCGH was performed with Constitutional Chip 4.0 (Perkin Elmer,
Norwalk), which includes 5000 BAC clones spotted in duplicate with a resolution of at least 650 kb and human DNA segments of 100∼300 kb
distributed through the whole genome. The slides were scanned with InnoScan 710 (Innopsys, Carbonne, France), and MAPIX 4.5 software was
used to generate GPR files. Data analysis was conducted with SpectralWare® v2.3.3 aCGH Analysis System software (12) from Perkin Elmer. The
computational parameters used were pin linear normalization, a threshold between 0.7 and 1.3, a Loess alpha of 0.1 for normalization and a
confidence level of 95%. Median values were used for the interpretation of the results. The Database of Genomics Variants was consulted to
determine the size of chromosome regions and to identify CNVs (13). These analyses revealed gains in two neighboring BAC clones on 5q32.2
and losses in 4q22.1, 8q24.3 and 9q34.2-34.3 (Table 1). A spectral image of chromosome 5 from the patient demonstrating the gain in 5q35.2
is presented in Figure 1. The patients revised karyotype was 46,XX.arr 4q22.1(88,282,368-88,336,595)x1,
5q35.2(173,984,926-174,145,340)(174,718,444-174,907,513)x5, 8q24.3(142,215,092-142,412,727)x1, 9q34.2q34.3(136,982,786-137,166,802)x1. DNA
samples from the patient and progenitors were used for MSX2 gene copy number assessment. A TaqMan copy number assay (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA) consisting of an MGB probe labeled with FAM and unlabeled PCR primers for MSX2 (assay Hs01821094_cn) was employed.
Unlabeled primers and a VIC dye-labeled TAMRA probe for RNase P gene, which is known to be present in two copies in human diploid genome,
were used for normalization. Reactions were performed as recommended by the manufacturer in triplicate. Duplex real-time polymerase chain
reactions were conducted in a 7500 Real-Time PCR System, and the data were analyzed with CopyCaller™ Software v1.0, both from Applied
Biosystems. Cycle thresholds (CT) were calculated using the relative quantification method (Applied Biosystems). Copy numbers were
calculated by determining the difference in the CT between the target and control probes (ΔCT). Cycle thresholds greater than 32 were
excluded from analyses. A quantitative PCR assay to detect MSX2 CNVs revealed two copies for both progenitors and five copies for the
patient (Figure 2). Phenotypically normal subjects unrelated to the studied family also had two copies. The mean delta Ct, calculated as the
FAM Ct divided by the VIC Ct, and the standard deviation of the delta Ct were 0.2192±0.13 for Subject 1, 0.5772±0.29 for Subject 2,
0.5807±0.1 for the patient's mother, -0.8858±0.12 for the patient, 0.3630±0.16 for Subject 3 and 0.7518±0.12 for the patient's father. A
search for similar abnormalities in DECIPHER (Database of Chromosomal Imbalance and Phenotype in Humans Using Ensembl Resources) (14)
returned three cases with chromosome 4 alterations related to that observed in the present study (cases 753, 994, and 249573). The
phenotypes in these cases included mental retardation/developmental delay, short stature, atrial septum defects, hypotonia and eyelid
defects, among other abnormalities. However, it is important to stress that no correlation between a loss in the 4q22.1 region and
craniosynostosis has been described. In addition, no patient with case data reported in DECIPHER who had alterations in 8q24.3 or
9q34.2-34.3 similar to those in our patient exhibited craniosynostosis. In a detailed study that investigated common CNVs in Asian
population, it was found that the KLHL8 (4q22.1), VAV2 (9q34.2) and OLFM1 (9q34.3) genes exhibited copy number variations in phenotypically
normal subjects (15), indicating that copy number losses in these genes most likely do not contribute to the craniosynostosis phenotype.
Corroborating these findings, a search of the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database (16) returned no correlations between the
genes KLHL8, VAV2, DRD1, SFXN1, DENND3, SLC45A4 and OLFM1 and clinical phenotypes. The SARDH gene, located in the 9q34.2 region, was shown
to be associated with sarcosinemia, which is generally considered a benign condition unrelated to neurologic symptoms or significant
clinical problems (17). Among the CNVs found in the present work, the gain in the 5q35.2 chromosome region where the MSX2 gene is located
has already been reported to be associated with craniosynostosis (8); however, the MSX2 gain was confirmed using molecular techniques in
only four cases (8-11). MSX2 is a member of the homeobox MSX family and is related to Drosophila muscle segment homeobox (msh). MSX2 has
important roles in tissue and organ development (3) and is also expressed in several regions of the developing skull. In mice, Msx2 is
strongly expressed in osteogenic cells from calvarial sutures, and Msx2 activation is thought to initiate the release of factors from the
dura mater that affect osteoblastic suture cells (18,19). Consistent with this role of Msx2, transgenic mice that over expressed this gene
exhibited premature suture closure and craniofacial abnormalities (5), whereas other evidence suggests that MSX2 haploinsufficiency leads to
a delayed or incomplete closure of the opening between the frontal and parietal bones. MSX2 haploinsufficiency has been demonstrated to be
responsible for the majority of foramina parietalia permagna (FPP) cases (20-22). There are 39 reported cases of 5q distal trisomy, but
craniosynostosis was observed in only ten of these cases. Because most craniosynostosis patients exhibit a distal 5q duplication, it is
hypothesized that in patients with larger duplications, MSX2 expression may be inhibited due to extra copies of other genes (8). Additional
cases may help to elucidate the validity of this hypothesis. In conclusion, our analysis indicates that an increase in MSX2 copy number is
correlated with this disorder, corroborating previous findings that subjects with gains in 5q35.2 in the MSX2 gene region exhibit
craniosynostosis. In addition, the aCGH technique was shown to be useful for the detection of CNVs throughout the whole genome. Further
studies should now be undertaken to determine which of these CNVs are normal individual variations and which are of clinical relevance,
e.g., associated with specific syndromes. We would like to thank the patient and her parents for their participation in our research. This
study used data generated by the DECIPHER Consortium. A full list of the centers that contributed to the generation of the data is available
from http://decipher.sanger.ac.uk and via e-mail from: decipher@sanger.ac.uk. We would specifically like to thank Dr. J. M. Friedman and Dr.
McGillivray from the University of British Columbia for additional data on Decipher patient 994, Dr. Anne Philippe from Université René
Descartes for data on Decipher patient 753 and Dr. Koen Devriendt for data on patient 249573. This study was supported by Fleury Group. A
spectral image of chromosome 5 from the patient revealing a gain in 5q35.2, which was detected by aCGH. Assessment of MSX2 copy number
variation. The estimated copy number variations for the patient, the progenitors, and three unrelated subjects are presented. The bars
represent the variation in the calculated copy number. The values were ±0.41 for Subject 1, ±0.63 for Subject 2, ±0.23 for the patient's
mother, ±0.79 for the patient, ±0.45 for Subject 3 and ±0.30 for the patient's father. Clones that exhibited copy number variation detected
through aCGH screening of the patient's genome.
