Patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2A develop medullary thyroid cancer, which is associated with poor prognosis in its
metastatic stage. Hyperparathyroidism is a common finding in both MEN 1 and 2. We report a 68-year-old patient diagnosed clinically with MEN
1 based on the presence of hyperparathyroidism and pituitary Cushing’s disease with no supporting genetic evidence. The hyperparathyroidism
was later found to be part of MEN 2A with underlying metastatic medullary thyroid cancer. We highlight the importance of genetic
confirmation before a diagnosis of MEN 1 is made as other more serious pathologies might be overlooked. Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN)
syndromes are rare endocrine tumour syndromes. MEN 1 syndrome involves primarily tumours of the parathyroid, pancreas and anterior pituitary
gland. Primary hyperparathyroidism, the earliest and most frequent feature of MEN 1 syndrome, is also present in 20–30% of patients with MEN
2A, in addition to medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) and phaeochromocytomas.1,2 Patients in the general population frequently have
abnormalities involving parathyroid hyperplasia and pituitary adenoma. However, endocrinologists should be careful diagnosing an MEN 1
phenotype based on these findings. A 68-year-old man was referred with a diagnosis of MEN 1 phenotype (negative mutation) to treat
associated hyperparathyroidism. Both magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and sestamibi scintigraphy were concordant in localising a left
inferior parathyroid adenoma and the patient was listed for a parathyroidectomy. The patient’s past medical history included diabetes and
Cushing’s syndrome diagnosed in 1990. An adrenal origin to the Cushing’s syndrome was excluded due to elevated adrenocorticotropic hormone
responding to a corticotropin releasing hormone test. Computed tomography (CT) showed the presence of bilateral adrenal nodules and MRI of
the pituitary gland showed no evidence of a pituitary adenoma but this was confirmed with inferior petrosal sinus sampling. The patient had
transphenoidal surgery to treat his Cushing’s disease both in 1992 and 2006 but this was unsuccessful. The pathology report showed an
atypical appearance of a pituitary adenoma (Fig 1). Radiotherapy was considered but this was withheld until after the parathyroid surgery.
He had chronic severe diarrhoea, investigated with CT of the colon and colonoscopy, which proved to be normal. Figure 1Histological sections
of the pituitary gland. Unequivocal classical Cushing's adenoma is not present. The edge of one fragment is suspicious of the presence of
phenotypically distinct corticotropes (A). This population of cells is positive for adrenocorticotropic hormone (B) and negative for CAM 5.2
(C). Histological sections of the pituitary gland. Unequivocal classical Cushing's adenoma is not present. The edge of one fragment is
suspicious of the presence of phenotypically distinct corticotropes (A). This population of cells is positive for adrenocorticotropic
hormone (B) and negative for CAM 5.2 (C). The nodules of the adrenal glands remained stable on serial MRI and CT with negative plasma
metanephrines and urinary catecholamines. Iobenguane and octreotide scans were performed to investigate the adrenal glands. The octreotide
scan showed avid uptake in both adrenal glands while the iobenguane scan showed uptake in the adrenal glands with intense uptake in a left-
sided thyroid nodule. Clinical examination revealed a palpable lymph node in the supraclavicular fossa. Needle cytology of the thyroid
showed evidence of neuroendocrine proliferation, suggesting the possibility of MTC. Blood tests showed calcitonin levels of 27,000ng/l and
carcinoembryonic antigen levels of 415μg/l. Repeated 24-hour urinary tests showed elevated catecholamines and metanephrines. Positron
emission tomography showed uptake in the left thyroid lobe and cervical lymph nodes with left vocal cord palsy, in addition to uptake in
both adrenal glands, the liver and spine (Fig 2). Figure 2Computed tomography showed bilateral nodules (A) with the left adrenal gland
showing avid uptake on the iobenguane scan in addition to liver deposits (B). Positron emission tomography showed uptake in the left lobe of
the thyroid gland and cervical lymph nodes (C), segment V/VI of the liver (D) and a small deposit in the body of L3 (E). Computed tomography
showed bilateral nodules (A) with the left adrenal gland showing avid uptake on the iobenguane scan in addition to liver deposits (B).
Positron emission tomography showed uptake in the left lobe of the thyroid gland and cervical lymph nodes (C), segment V/VI of the liver (D)
and a small deposit in the body of L3 (E). RET genetic analysis showed positive mutation of codon 634. The patient was started on
phenoxybenzamine and propranolol, and listed for a bilateral adrenalectomy. However, he developed airway difficulty and a decision to
perform an urgent thyroidectomy was made. A total thyroidectomy with a left neck dissection was performed. Histology of the thyroid showed
MTC (Fig 3). As the patient was not symptomatic with his phaeochromocytomas, the decision was taken not to operate on the adrenal glands.
Figure 3Histological sections of medullary thyroid cancer. Sections from the thyroid gland show a tumour composed of nests of cells with
neuroendocrine nuclear features associated with foci of amyloid deposition (A), chromogranin (B) and calcitonin (C) positivity. Histological
sections of medullary thyroid cancer. Sections from the thyroid gland show a tumour composed of nests of cells with neuroendocrine nuclear
features associated with foci of amyloid deposition (A), chromogranin (B) and calcitonin (C) positivity. We report a rare case scenario of
an MEN 2A syndrome overlooked by a diagnosis of MEN 1 based on phenotype with no supporting genetic abnormality. A phenotype diagnosis of
MEN 1 based on parathyroid hyperplasia and pituitary adenoma alone might have serious consequences on diagnosis and management. The failure
to follow the natural history of the disease might produce confusing results. This is in addition to the burden on the family members, who
would require genetic testing.3 Our patient had incurable MTC by the time a proper diagnosis was made, with distant metastasis and locally
advanced disease compromising the airway. Unexplained chronic persistent diarrhoea in the presence of hyperparathyroidism with suggestive
evidence of MEN should prompt a calcitonin measurement and exclusion of MTC. More confusion was added by the asymptomatic phaeochromocytoma,
which is not infrequent in 30–50% of patients with MEN 2A.4 In our patient, the decision to proceed with thyroid surgery despite untreated
phaeochromocytomas was due to the rapid progression of the MTC with metastatic lymph node disease in the central compartment compromising
the airway. The importance of this diagnosis lies not only in managing the patient himself but in screening and treating other family
members. When the patient’s son was genetically screened, he was found to carry the same genetic mutation. A prophylactic thyroidectomy was
then performed showing evidence of MTC on histological examination; however, with no metastatic disease and hence associated with a more
favourable prognosis. This case report highlights the importance of genetic testing in diagnosis of MEN syndromes as solely clinical
diagnosis might lead to devastating consequences. Thyroid surgery for MTC in the presence of phaeochromocytoma might be attempted under
certain circumstances to maintain a patent airway. Nevertheless, this needs to be performed under close monitoring with both alpha and beta
receptor blockade.
