In this case report we describe a successful interdisciplinary approach (including flow redirection and endovascular occlusion) applied to a
patient with a continuously growing extracranial giant aneurysm of the right internal carotid artery (ICA) due to known Ehlers–Danlos
syndrome. A 42-year-old man with a continuously growing extracranial giant aneurysm of the right ICA sought treatment after failed surgery
of a similar lesion of the left ICA. A multidisciplinary consultation was held at the end of 2008. The treatment strategy consisted of flow
redirection in order to secure sufficient cerebral perfusion prior to surgical trapping of the carotid aneurysm. Flow redirection was
achieved by placement of a double-barrel extracranial–intracranial bypass. Subsequent surgical trapping failed due to the extreme size of
the aneurysm, making certain identification of surrounding structures impossible. The aneurysm was then successfully occluded by
neuroradiological intervention. In a further procedure, a large intra-aneurysmal hematoma was surgically removed to reduce the remaining
bulging aneurysm sac. This case report describes a successful interdisciplinary approach for the treatment of a rare giant extracranial ICA
aneurysm in a patient with Ehlers–Danlos syndrome. Treatment options for this type are few and carry high risks. Flow redirection via
extracranial–intracranial bypass followed by endovascular occlusion appears to be a good treatment approach. Ehlers–Danlos syndrome (EDS) is
a group of inherited connective tissue disorders caused by a defect in collagen synthesis. The clinical presentation varies widely based on
the type of EDS.1 Joints, skin and blood vessels are typically affected, the latter being the problem in the case presented in this paper.
Some types of EDS lead to fragile blood vessels resulting in cystic medial necrosis with a high tendency to aneurysms at any location of the
vascular system.2 We report an interdisciplinary treatment approach in a middle-aged man with a continuously growing giant extracranial
aneurysm of the right internal carotid artery (ICA) caused by type IV EDS. A 42-year-old man with EDS type IV was admitted to our department
with a rapidly progressive cervical pulsatile and painful swelling on the right side (figure 1). Apart from the swelling, a neurological
examination also showed right-sided palsy of the hypoglossal nerve. The patient's history indicated that, in 1999, direct revascularization
using a vessel graft to treat an extracranial giant aneurysm of the left ICA had failed due to technical problems in performing an adequate
anastomosis causing left hemispheric ischemia. Neurological impairment such as right-sided hemiparesis or aphasia was not seen at the
current presentation. (A) Frontal and (B) lateral views showing a large pulsatile swelling on the right side of the neck in a patient with
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome with a giant extracranial internal carotid artery aneurysm. Cerebral digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed a
giant aneurysm of the right ICA (C1 segment) measuring 10×7×7 cm, extending from the carotid bifurcation to the base of the skull (figure
2). A largely dilated basal artery and left posterior communicating branch indicating compensatory supply to the left hemisphere was also
demonstrated. A Doppler-controlled balloon occlusion test of the right ICA revealed a moderate insufficiency of the middle cerebral artery
(MCA) territory and additional collateralization of the right hemisphere via the ophthalmic branches. MRI demonstrated ischemic lesions of
the left hemisphere as a result of the previous occlusion of the left ICA. Angiographic study prior to treatment showing the contrast in the
giant extracranial internal carotid artery aneurysm measuring 10×7×7 cm. The radiological findings were then thoroughly discussed in an
interdisciplinary conference including neuroradiological, neurological and neurosurgical colleagues in order to achieve a low-risk and
adequate treatment of the growing aneurysm of the right ICA. The agreed strategy consisted of securing right cerebral perfusion via flow
redirection through a double-barrel extracranial–intracranial bypass followed by surgical trapping of the aneurysm. The double-barrel bypass
was successfully placed from the superficial temporal artery to two M4 cortical branches of the right MCA (figure 3). Both branches showed
sufficient flow in postoperative angiographic studies. Prior to definite occlusion, a temporary ICA occlusion test was conducted using an
eclipse balloon in order to confirm sufficient contrast perfusion of the right hemisphere through the previously placed tandem bypass
(figure 4). The occlusion test showed good flow through the bypass and additional ophthalmic collateral filling, so we were able to proceed
with the permanent elimination of the aneurysm from the circulation. Surgical trapping of the aneurysm failed due to the risk of sacrificing
the external carotid artery. A decision was therefore made to occlude the aneurysm by means of endovascular coiling. Two separate sessions
were needed to occlude both the distal and proximal segments of the giant aneurysm. The distal segment was successfully occluded with
platinum spiral coils (figure 5). A stent was then placed in the right external carotid artery to secure its patency and, from there, stent-
supported coiling was performed to occlude the proximal segment (figure 6). Secure proximal placement of the coils was not possible in a
single-catheter technique owing to the high flow turbulence within the aneurysm sac. By using a double-catheter method, two coils could be
placed simultaneously directly outside the stent wall facing the proximal segment of the extracranial ICA. Immediately after the procedure
the patient had a transient ischemic attack with latent left-sided hemiparesis which regressed within 48 h. Ischemic lesions were excluded
in post-procedural non-enhancement CT scans. Minor surgery was later performed to drain the residual hematoma in the aneurysm sac. The
bulging skin collapsed instantly, reducing the large visible swelling on the patient's neck. The patient recovered rapidly from the
individual procedures without any additional impairment and was discharged in an unaltered clinical/neurological condition. Angiographic
study demonstrating patent superficial temporal artery–middle cerebral artery bypass with sufficient contrast (lateral view). (A) Internal
carotid artery (ICA) occlusion test during cerebral angiography. (B) Anteroposterior view of patent contrast via extracranial–intracranial
bypass during temporary ICA occlusion. Angiographic study showing coiling of the distal segment of the right internal carotid artery
(lateral view). Angiographic study showing stent-assisted proximal occlusion of the right internal carotid artery. Follow-up at 2 months
revealed a good clinical result without any deficits with slight recurrence of the swelling on the right side of the neck. CT and CT
angiography showed a hypodense non-enhancing filling of the remaining aneurysm sac. Density measurements indicated the filling to be serous
fluid which was safely drained via CT-assisted puncture. Again the swelling collapsed immediately, leaving the patient with a good cosmetic
result (figure 7). The patient died a year later due to a ruptured aneurysm of the splenic artery. Photograph showing reduction of the
swelling on the right side of the neck after drainage of the residual hematoma at clinical follow-up. Extracranial giant ICA aneurysms are
rare lesions and treatment is often accompanied by a high risk of morbidity and mortality.3 4 Surgical resection with reconstruction is
considered to be the best therapeutic option for these extracranial vascular pathologies.4 5 In the case presented here, surgical treatment
had been attempted for a similar lesion of the left EICA but failed due to the dimensions of the lesion and led to ischemic stroke. An
alternative treatment method for the abovementioned lesion of the right EICA in this patient was therefore sought. A well-accepted approach
for giant and complex intracranial ICA aneurysms is the combination of flow redirection followed by definite exclusion of the aneurysm from
the circulation.6–8 A transcranial Doppler-controlled balloon occlusion test performed during the initial diagnostic angiography revealed
moderate insufficiency of the right MCA territory, so a STA–MCA bypass was seen as adequate in this case. After interdisciplinary
consultation, we decided to apply this combined approach to this extracranial ICA aneurysm in order to prevent further ischemic events.
Exclusion from the circulation can be achieved either through surgical trapping or by endovascular occlusion.6 9 10 Both methods are
reported to be equally acceptable. Extracranial–intracranial bypass and aneurysm exclusion can be carried out as a single-stage or two-stage
procedure.11 If aneurysm exclusion is performed as surgical trapping, the single-stage procedure under a single anesthesia is the more
common protocol.11 To avoid the increased risk of postoperative bleeding, a two-stage procedure with anticoagulation after the endovascular
occlusion of the aneurysm should be considered. Given the fact that the patient had already had an ischemic stroke of the left hemisphere
due to ICA ligation after failed surgery, we decided to apply the aforementioned standard methods for intracranial ICA aneurysms to this
giant aneurysm of the right EICA. At first we chose a single-stage strategy in which we planned to place an extracranial–intracranial bypass
with subsequent open surgical trapping in one procedure. Trapping failed again due to the extreme dimensions of the aneurysm at the
bifurcation, making it impossible to trap the aneurysm and not the external ICA. As mentioned above, endovascular occlusion is a well-
accepted treatment method in combination with bypass for intracranial aneurysms which has not previously been used in a patient with EDS
with an extracranial ICA aneurysm. This combined surgical and endovascular approach presented a valid alternative. Occlusion was
successfully performed in two separate endovascular procedures (distal coiling followed by proximal stent-assisted coiling). There are few
reports of the use of this method for the treatment of extracranial ICA aneurysms in the literature, and this is the first report of its use
in a patient with type IV EDS. A combination of flow redirection using cerebral bypass surgery and endovascular occlusion is a rational
treatment method for intracranial aneurysms and also seems to be a valid option for high-risk extracranial giant ICA aneurysms, even in a
patient with EDS. Contributors: JMP performed the analyses on all samples, interpreted the data, wrote the manuscript and acted as
corresponding author. BT contributed to planning of the article and critical evaluation. HJS and DH supervised development of the work,
helped with data interpretation and manuscript evaluation. All authors approved the final version of the manuscript. Competing interests:
None. Patient consent: Obtained. Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
