The Hyper-immunoglobulin M syndromes (HIGM) are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders resulting in defects of immunoglobulin class
switch recombination. Affected patients show humoral immunodeficiency and high susceptibility to opportunistic infections. Elevated serum
IgM levels are the hallmark of the disease, even though in few rare cases they may be in the normal range. Hyper IgM is associated with low
to undetectable levels of serum IgG, IgA, and IgE. In some cases, alterations in different genes may be identified. Mutations in five genes
have so far been associated to the disease, which can be inherited with an X-linked (CD40 ligand, and nuclear factor-kB essential modulator
defects) or an autosomal recessive (CD40, activation-induced cytidine deaminase, and uracil-DNA glycosylase mutation) pattern. The patient
herein described presented with recurrent upper and lower respiratory infections and evidence of suppurative lung disease at the
conventional chest imaging. The presence of low serum IgG and IgA levels, elevated IgM levels, and a marked reduction of in vivo switched
memory B cells led to a clinical and functional diagnosis of HIGM although the genetic cause was not identified. Chronic suppurative lung
disease (CSLD) describes a clinical syndrome characterized by chronic endobronchial suppuration with or without high resolution computed
tomography (HRCT) evidence of bronchiectasis . The presenting symptoms are identical to bronchiectasis, and include recurrent chest
infections with prolonged moist or productive cough, exertional dyspnoea, features of reactive airway disease, and in some cases growth
failure. Digital clubbing, chest wall deformity, adventitious sounds, and/or hyperinflation are the main physical signs. Haemoptysis is rare
in children. Once excluded cystic fibrosis (CF), patients should be investigated for other disorders, such as primary immunodeficiencies,
aspiration pneumonia, and primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) . Hyper-immunoglobulin M syndrome (HIGM) is a rare (incidence, 1 in 100,000
births) primary immunodeficiency , in which defective B cell isotype switching leads to a phenotype characterized by elevated or normal
levels of serum IgM, and low levels of serum IgG, IgA and IgE . Mutations in five different genes, encoding for CD40 ligand, CD40, nuclear
factor-kB essential modulator (NEMO), activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), and uracil-DNA glycosylase (UNG), have so far been
associated to the disease . Like in other humoral immunodeficiencies, recurrent respiratory tract infections, potentially leading to
bronchiectasis, sinus infections, and ear infections are commonly found in affected patients. Immunoglobulin replacement therapy prevents
the progression of the clinical manifestations. In around 40% of cases opportunistic infections by Pneumocystis carinii is the presenting
feature of the syndrome . However, despite the high susceptibility to airway infections, lung involvement is not commonly characterized by
CSLD. We herein describe the case of a 7-year old girl presenting with symptoms and signs of CSLD, in whom a functional and clinical
diagnosis of HIGM was achieved. A 7-year old girl complaining of recurrent upper and lower respiratory infections and chronic productive
cough was referred to our Department for further diagnostic work-up. She was born to non-consanguineous parents after an uneventful 37 weeks
pregnancy and had been healthy until the age of three years, when recurrent upper respiratory tract infections started. No other problems
were experienced by the patient until the age of 6 years, when she developed an acute pneumonia during a measles infection. Since then,
recurrent lower airway infections requiring repeated antibiotic courses and several hospital admissions occurred. At admission to our
Department, the patient appeared in good clinical conditions and physical respiratory examination disclosed any remarkable sign except for
mild rhinorrhea and productive cough. Lung auscultation revealed diffuse mild crackles and rhonchi. No symptoms and signs of heart disease
were observed. Lung function tests showed no relevant impairment, with forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and forced vital capacity
(FVC) of 106% and 104% predicted, respectively. Bronchiectasis in the left and right lower lobes and a consolidation area in the middle lobe
were evident at chest HRCT (Figure 1). Tuberculosis, CF, PCD, gastroesophageal reflux disease, alpha-1 anti-trypsin deficiency and atopy
were ruled out on the basis of normal or negative results of purified protein derivative test, sweat test, cilia motility and ultrastructure
assessment at nasal brushing, prolonged pH-metry, serum alpha-1 anti-trypsin level, and skin prick test and serum IgE levels to the most
common food and inhalant allergens. General blood test results were unremarkable, but raised levels of serum IgM (5.63 g/l; normal range,
0.56-2.61) associated with low serum concentration of IgG and IgA (6.06 g/l; normal age-matched range, 6.33-10.16; and 0.33 g/l; normal
range, 0.41-3.15, respectively) suggested the diagnosis of HIGM, supported by a marked reduction of in vivo switched memory B cells. Chest
HRCT: bronchiectasis in the left and right lower lobes (A) and a consolidation area in the middle lobe (B) may be observed. The lymphocyte
immunophenotyping was assessed by flow cytometry. For flow cytometry analysis, the samples were incubated at 4°C for 20 minutes with the
appropriate amount of monoclonal antibodies, following the manufacturer’s instructions. The mixtures were lysed with ammonium chloride
(NH4Cl) lysing solution, then incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes, and finally washed with phosphate buffered saline. Samples were
then acquired on a FACSCanto II flow cytometer and analysed with FACSDiva software (BD Bioscience). Fluorescein isothiocyanate-,
phycoerythrin-, and peridin chlorophyll protein-coupled antibodies to the following cell-surface proteins were used for flow cytometry:
CD19, CD45RA, CD27 (BD Pharmingen or Beckman Coulter) . Results revealed an increase in CD19+ cells (44%), with complete lack of switched
CD27+ B cells. Naïve T cells (CD45RA+) were normally found, but CD40-L expression on T lymphocytes after proper stimulation was low (0.2%),
indicating a functional alteration of the machinery required for immunoglobulin class switch recombination (CSR). To rule out a non-random
X-inactivation, responsible for a CD40-L defect in a female, a methylation assay was performed as previously described , and was found
normal. Sequence analysis of NEMO and TACI (transmembrane activator and calcium-modulating cyclophilin ligand interactor) revealed no
alterations. The mutational analysis of NEMO and TACI was carried out using the polymerase chain reaction test as described by Bardaro et
al.. Amplification was performed using specific primers for NEMO (forward-GAGGACCAATACCGAGCATC and JF3R reverse primers) and TACI (forward-
GTGGTCACTTATTCTAAAGG and reverse-GCAGGATCTTGCCTGCGTC primers). Amplified products were automatically sequenced. ABI Prism dye terminator
cycle sequencing kit and an ABI 377 Automated DNA Sequencer were used. Treatment including daily physiotherapy with nebulized saline was
started. Prolonged oral and/or intravenous antibiotics decided on the basis of sputum culture results were prescribed when required. During
the follow-up, predominantly Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae were isolated at sputum cultures performed on a three-
monthly basis. Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection was diagnosed at the age of 11 years. Overall, after the first pneumonia occurred during
measles, she had 7 more episodes of chest X-ray documented pneumonia. At the age of 12 years she developed a skin lesion on the neck and the
histological examination led to a diagnosis of cutaneous B-cells lymphoma successfully treated with at the Oncologic Department. Over the
follow-up, the patient was visited about every 3 months, and serum IgM concentration, evaluated every 3-to-6 months, remained persistently
elevated, while the low IgG levels progressively decreased over time eventually requiring, at the age of 12 years, the start of intravenous
immunoglobulin replacement therapy because of serum IgG levels of 2.93 g/l (normal range, 6.40-19.09) (Figure 2). At present, the patient is
16-year old. Her clinical conditions are stable and daily physiotherapy with nebulised saline is still ongoing. Intravenous immunoglobulin
replacement therapy is performed approximately every 3 months. Immunoglobulin levels through the long-term follow-up: serum IgG and IgA
progressively decreased to 2.93 g/l and 0.02 g/l, respectively, thus requiring intravenous immunoglobulin replacement therapy. Hyper IgM
syndrome is a heterogeneous group of immune defects characterized by normal or increased production of IgM contrasting with a marked
decrease or an absence of other isotypes (i.e., IgG, IgA, and IgE). The humoral immunodeficiency results in susceptibility to bacterial
infections particularly affecting the respiratory tract. Patients with HIGM often present infections by opportunistic intracellular
pathogens, such as Pneumocystis carinii, Cryptosporidium species , Toxoplasma gondii, and Mycobacteria species . A common complication of
both clinical and subclinical infections is represented by cholangiopathy, which may lead to the development of liver function tests
alterations, sclerosing cholangitis, and cirrhosis that may eventually result in cholangiocarcinoma . Chronic intestinal cryptosporidiosis
may lead to weight loss, persistent diarrhea, and failure to thrive. Significant neurologic complications, such as cerebral toxoplasmosis
and cryptococcosis , are seen in 10-to-15% of affected males. Disseminated cytomegalovirus infection may be observed as presenting sign .
Moreover, neutropenia may often complicate CD40-ligand deficiency, while autoimmune complications are relatively common in patients with
defects of CD40 signalling. Malignancies may also occur in patients with HIGM and usually affect the biliary tree and the gastrointestinal
tract in the form of neuroendocrine tumours . As in other immunodeficiencies, patients also have an increased risk for lymphomas,
particularly Hodgkin's disease associated with Epstein-Barr virus infection . Indeed, AID deficiency causes the most frequent autosomal
recessive alteration of CSR. Marked lymphoid hypertrophy represent a clinical feature of AID deficiency, even though malignant
lymphoproliferation has not been ever described. Nevertheless, knock out mice for the UNG gene are prone to B cell lymphomas . Furthermore,
lymphomas are common in forms of HIGM due to DNA repair defects such as Ataxia-telangiectasia and Nijmegen Breakage syndrome. Allogeneic
hematopoietic cell transplantation can be curative and feasible for the X-linked forms of HIGM without severe cryptosporidial infection and
its related complications. If available, transplantation from either an HLA-matched sibling or an HLA-matched unrelated donor can be
performed safely . Mutations in five different genes involved in CSR have so far been associated with HIGM. X-linked forms are due to
alterations of CD40-ligand and NEMO genes, while autosomal recessive forms are associated with mutations in CD40, AID, and UNG genes. The
first recognized and most frequent form of HIGM, accounting for at least 70% of patients with CSR, is CD40-ligand deficiency . Up to now,
alterations of NEMO have been excluded in our patient, while mutations in AID and UNG genes have not. However, we are planning to search for
these genetic alterations in the near future. Specialist referral to diagnose CSLD/bronchiectasis is recommended for children who have
either two or more episodes of chronic wet cough per year, or chest radiographic abnormalities persisting for at least 6 weeks after
appropriate therapy . In previous large series, the majority of cases of CSLD appeared associated to extrinsic factors, especially childhood
respiratory infections (severe pneumonia, pertussis, complicated measles and tuberculosis) that caused chronic endobronchial suppuration
with or without bronchiectasis. Singleton et al. reviewed the case histories of 46 Alaskan native children with bronchiectasis born in the
1970s, and concluded that recurrent pneumonia was the major preceding medical condition leading to bronchial damage . In a study by Eastham
et al., previous pneumonia was the most common cause found in 93 cases of non-CF bronchiectasis . Likewise, nearly 50% of children were
found to have developed bronchiectasis after tuberculosis or severe pneumonia in a review study by Karakoc et al. . Nowadays, with early
immunization and the widespread use of antibiotics in childhood, post-infectious damage is likely to be less relevant than in non-vaccinated
children . Nonetheless, detailed investigations must be carried out to determine the underlying cause of the condition . In CSLD, type,
extent and severity of lung changes is evaluated by chest imaging techniques, including HRCT or magnetic resonance imaging . Our case report
highlights the importance to search for noninfectious extrinsic insults or intrinsic defects that predispose to bronchial inflammation or
infection resulting in CSLD. These must include aspiration of irritants and congenital disorders, as immunodeficiencies and ciliary defects
. The identification of the underlying disorder is mandatory in that a delayed diagnosis is associated with more severe disease . Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. HIGM: Hyper-immunoglobulin M syndromes; CSR: Class switch
recombination; CSLD: Chronic suppurative lung disease; HRCT: High resolution computed tomography; CF: Cystic fibrosis; PCD: Primary ciliary
dyskinesia; NEMO: Nuclear factor (NF)-kB essential modulator; FEV1: Forced expiratory volume in 1 second; FVC: Forced vital capacity. The
author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. SM has made substantial contributions to conception and design, has been involved
in drafting the manuscript, and has given final approval of the version to be published. MM has made substantial contributions to conception
and design, has been involved in drafting the manuscript, and has given final approval of the version to be published. GG has made
substantial contributions to acquisition of data, has been involved in drafting the manuscript, and has given final approval of the version
to be published. ADG has made substantial contributions to acquisition of data, has been involved in revising the manuscript critically for
important intellectual content, and has given final approval of the version to be published. LP has made substantial contributions to
conception and design, has been involved in revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content, and has given final
approval of the version to be published. VM has made substantial contributions to acquisition of data, has been involved in revising the
manuscript critically for important intellectual content, and have given final approval of the version to be published. MVU has made
substantial contributions to acquisition of data, has been involved in revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual
content, and have given final approval of the version to be published. MS has made substantial contributions to analysis and interpretation
of data, has been involved in revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content, and has given final approval of the
version to be published. CP has made substantial contributions to conception and design and analysis and interpretation of data, has been
involved in revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content, and has given final approval of the version to be
published. FS has made substantial contributions to conception and design and analysis and interpretation of data, has been involved in
drafting the manuscript and revising it critically for important intellectual content, and has given final approval of the version to be
published. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
