To the Editor, Bowel endometriosis is defined as the presence of endometrial glands and stroma infiltrating the bowel wall reaching at least
the subserous fat or adjacent to the neurovascular branches (subserous plexus) . In general, colonoscopy offers little assistance in the
diagnosis of bowel endometriosis because the lesions are typically submucosal and usually not visible during this examination . A 48-year-
old woman was referred to our hospital for further evaluation of an incidental submucosal tumor detected during colonoscopy for a health
checkup. Recently, she had been suffering from cyclic, intractable pelvic pain, which was not associated with altered bowel habit or rectal
bleeding. The physical examination revealed no specific findings, such as abdominal tenderness or palpable masses in the abdomen. The
laboratory examination showed an elevated cancer antigen (CA) 125 level at 110 IU/mL, while other values were within the normal limits. The
gynecologic examination revealed a normal vagina, uterus, and uterine cervix. Transvaginal ultrasonography revealed multiple myomas in the
uterine wall, but no abnormalities in either ovary. Abdominopelvic computed tomography showed no specific findings. Colonoscopy showed
subepithelial compression with a smooth mucosal surface in the sigmoid colon 25 cm from the anal verge (Fig. 1). An endoscopic
ultrasonography (EUS) miniprobe (UM-2R, Olympus Japan, Tokyo, Japan) was used to evaluate the subepithelial mass at a frequency of 12 MHz.
This demonstrated a homogenous, hypoechoic, indistinctly shaped lesion located in the fourth layer (muscularis propria) (Fig. 2). Based on
the EUS miniprobe findings, the possibility of a myogenic tumor, such as a leiomyoma or gastrointestinal stromal tumor, was considered in
the differential diagnosis, but the presence of bowel endometriosis, although though to be less probable, could not be excluded with
certainty. Bowel endometriosis had to be ruled out because the patient had cyclic, intractable pelvic pain; the CA-125 level was elevated at
110 IU/mL; and the location was the sigmoid colon. The patient underwent laparoscopy-assisted sigmoidectomy to confirm the diagnosis.
Normal-appearing peritoneum was found at laparoscopy. The gross examination of the resected sigmoid colon revealed a 1.3-cm ill-defined hard
mass in the wall, indenting the overlying serosal surface (Fig. 3A). No remarkable findings were noted in the mucosal surface. The mass
consisted of an irregularly thickened proper muscle layer. Histologically, the mass consisted of irregularly arranged, proliferated smooth
muscle cells of the proper muscle layer with embedded endometrial glands and stromal cells, consistent with bowel endometriosis (Fig. 3B).
On EUS, bowel endometriosis consists of heterogeneous or hypoechoic crescent-shaped lesions, involving the serosal, muscularis propria, and
occasionally submucosal layers and sparing the mucosal layers . Bowel endometriosis shows thickening of the muscularis propria and fibrotic
adhesions and convergence of the serosa. This appears to be responsible for the typical EUS pattern. The heterogeneous echo finding is
caused by the presence of the so-called chocolate cysts that result from hemorrhage within the implants induced by the hormonal cycle .
Bowel endometriosis often extends outside the rectal wall into the rectovaginal septum or into the posterior lower uterine wall; this
infiltrative quality of the implants can be mistaken for a malignant process . EUS is even less accurate for endometriotic nodules located
away from the EUS probe, such as endometriosis in the uterosacral ligaments and ovaries. The accuracy for detection of nodules in the
uterosacral ligaments or ovaries is 56% and 53%, respectively . In our case, the normal-appearing peritoneum on laparoscopy was thought to
explain the isolated bowel endometriosis, rather than missing perirectosigmoid endometriosis. In summary, this case report demonstrates that
bowel endometriosis should be added to the shortlist of diseases that cause hypoechoic lesions located on the muscularis layer on EUS
examination, of which the characteristic lesion is a myogenic tumor. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article is reported.
Colonoscopy revealed subepithelial compression with normal overlying mucosa. Endoscopic ultrasonography using a miniprobe showed an
indistinctly shaped hypoechoic lesion arising from the muscularis propria layer. Pathology findings. (A) Macroscopically, the cut section of
sigmoid colon showed an irregularly thickened proper muscle layer and an indented serosal surface with retracted pericolic soft tissue. (B)
Microscopically, endometrial glands and stromal cells were embedded in the thickened proper muscle layer (H&E, × 40; inset, × 200).
