Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds Collection Devic’s
disease, also known as neuromyelinitis optica (NMO), is a severe, rare demyelinating disorder, previously considered to be a form of
multiple sclerosis (MS). The aim of this study was to present the case report of 21-year-old woman with a very early diagnosis of Devic’s
disease, established following electrophysiological testing. A 21-year-old woman was referred to Warsaw Medical University, Department of
Ophthalmology, with subjective visual impairment. The patient underwent a full clinical examination, colour vision and Goldmann visual field
testing, fluorescein angiography, OCT, multifocal ERG, and visual evoked potentials (VEPs). Visual evoked potentials are a very useful
diagnostic tool in optic nerve neuropathies. In our patient, the electrophysiological testing allowed us to establish a proper diagnosis
very early, before typical clinical signs of Devic’s disease. Devic’s disease, or neuromyelitis optica (NMO), is an uncommon demyelinating
syndrome of the central nervous system, characterized by bilateral optic neuritis and transverse acute myelitis, with no other neurological
involvement. The first description of the disease was provided by Eugene Devic at the end of the 19th century in Lyon, France. NMO was
previously considered to be a subtype of multiple sclerosis . Devic’s disease is now considered as an auto-immune channelopathy . Most NMO
patients produce auto-antibodies against aquaporin-4 (AQP-4), also known as NMO-IgG. AQP-4 is a water channel expressed on astrocytes and in
brain blood vessels . In 2006, Wingerchuk proposed revised diagnostic criteria for NMO: 2 major criteria – optic neuritis and transverse
myelitis, and at least 2 of 3 supportive criteria – MRI lesions extending over 3 vertebral segments, onset brain MRI not meeting diagnostic
criteria for multiple sclerosis, and NMO-IgG seropositive status . Devic’s disease most frequently affects non-Caucasian women who are older
than those with multiple sclerosis. In comparison to MS, Devic’s disease also leads to more severe neurological impairment . A 21-year-old
woman presented with non-specific ocular phenomena, referred as a subjective visual impairment and “blurry” vision for 3 weeks. No other
complaints were reported, and the family history concerning general and ocular diseases was negative. The patient had previously been
examined in 2 other ophthalmic departments and no abnormalities were found, so the patient was classified as having psychosomatic
disturbances and a psychological consultation was recommended. The patient’s best corrected visual acuity was 6/6 in both eyes on Snellen
charts. Colour vision testing using the Ishihara tables was normal. Examinations of pupillary reflexes, anterior segment, the eye fundus and
the visual field (full field 120, Humphrey) were normal. A fluorescein angiography and macular OCT (Cirrus, Zeiss) were also non-
contributory. These symptoms were still unclear, so the patient underwent electrophysiological testing by using the RetiScan RetiPort system
(Roland Consult). A multifocal ERG was performed to assess retinal function. The mfERG results were normal. Pattern visual evoked responses
(PVER) were performed according to ISCEV standards and compared with normal values. The latencies of P100 wave was 132 ms and 127 ms in
right and left eye, respectively, so they were prolonged over 20% in both eyes in comparison to normal values. The morphology of the waves
was also abnormal (Figure 1). On the basis of PVER, the suspicion of a demyelinating process was established. The brain MRI with contrast
revealed 3 lesions not meeting diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis. The orbital MRI with contrast revealed no lesions. A spinal cord
MRI showed 1 lesion on the C3/C4 level. The patient was referred to the neurology ward and a suspicion of Devic’s disease was established.
Within 6 weeks after first symptoms (three weeks after ophthalmic examination) the patient presented a weakening of the lower limbs and
developed clinical transverse myelitis. The patient was treated by IV steroids. The spinal cord MRI revealed lesions extending over 3
vertebral segments. The diagnosis of Devic’s syndrome was established, which was later confirmed by NMO-IgG seropositive status. In 4 years’
observation, the visual function remains quite good (6/9 in both eyes), but urinary incontinence and walking disorders significantly worsen
the 25-year-old patient’s quality of life. Devic’s disease is considered to be an acute and devastating disease. It was reported that 55.8%
of NMO patients need support to walk within 5 years from diagnosis, mortality rate ranges from 2.9% to 25%, and about 50% of patients have
severe visual deficits within 5 years from diagnosis . Although it is very rare disease, its early diagnosis may allow administering proper
treatment (IV steroids, plasmapheresis, Imuran, rituximab), thus preventing mortality. Most papers describe full clinical manifestation of
Devic’s disease. Our paper presents a case report of very early NMO diagnosis. In our patient, non-specific ocular phenomena preceded the
neurological manifestations. Although the ophthalmologic examination and tests were normal, visual evoked potentials pointed to a
demyelinating process. Further diagnostic procedures (brain and spinal cord MRI, neurological consultation) allowed establishing a proper
diagnosis. We would like to emphasize that non-specific ocular symptoms or subjective visual impairment in young patients in their 20s or
30s, with full visual acuity, normal ophthalmic and accessory investigation results, should be examined by visual evoked potentials testing
to exclude demyelination. In these cases, it is essential to exclude a neuromyelitis optica, a disease with a worse prognosis than multiple
sclerosis. Statement The authors had no financial or proprietary interest in any product, material or method mentioned. Source of support:
Departmental sources Pattern visual evoked potentials of the right (A) and left (B) eye in comparison to normal responses (C).
