Dear Editor, Arsenic trioxide (As2O3) is a standard medication for relapsed acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). However, high blood arsenic
levels lead to potentially fatal arrhythmias. As2O3 is renal-excreted and considered contraindicated in renal failure. A 42-year-old man was
referred for treatment of APL in first relapse, presenting with pancytopenia, impaired renal function, and septicemia. He was treated with
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA, 45 mg/m2/day) and oral As2O3 (10 mg/day) . Progressive renal function derangement developed, necessitating
reduction of oral As2O3 to 5 mg/day. On the third day, the leukocyte count increased to 8.9 × 109/L, associated with bilateral pulmonary
infiltrates. Features were consistent with the APL differentiation syndrome, which with the underlying septicemia led to anuric acute renal
failure. ATRA was stopped. Idarubicin (6 mg/m2/day × 5), dexamethasone (12 mg/day × 7), and alternate daily hemodialysis were administered.
Oral As2O3 at 5 mg was given after each hemodialysis and was stopped after 9 days. At 4 weeks, marrow examination confirmed complete
remission. He remained anuric, and hemodialysis was continued. Oral As2O3 was re-commenced at 2 mg after each hemodialysis. Two months
later, continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) was started. A maintenance regimen for APL, comprising oral As2O3 (5 mg/day) and
ATRA (20 mg twice daily) [2, 3], given 2 weeks every 2 months, was administered. At 6-month follow-up, he remained in remission and was
negative for the PML-RARA fusion gene characteristic of APL. No cardiac arrhythmias were observed at any time. Serum elemental arsenic
levels were assayed by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry [3, 4], on blood samples sent for creatinine measurement. At 4 days,
there was a sudden increase of arsenic levels, as the cellular and third-space compartments became saturated and anuria prevented arsenic
excretion (Fig. 1a). The arsenic level peaked at 4,240 nmol/L, outside the therapeutic range of 500–2,000 nmol/L typical of oral As2O3. The
commencement of hemodialysis and cessation of oral As2O3 resulted in a fall of arsenic levels parallel to those of creatinine. After oral
As2O3 was re-commenced, arsenic levels gradually increased to the therapeutic range (Fig. 1b). As arsenic clearance in oral As2O3 therapy
during CAPD had been documented previously , arsenic assays were not performed after peritoneal dialysis was started.Fig. 1a Blood arsenic
levels during the first 3 weeks of hemodialysis. A rapid surge of arsenic levels occurred on day 5, in parallel with a rise in creatinine
and further renal function deterioration. Oral arsenic trioxide was stopped on day 9, resulting in a gradual fall of arsenic levels after
hemodialysis was commenced. Days (sample number): 3 (1–4), 4 (5–7), 5 (8), 6 (9), 7 (10–13), 8 (14–16), 9 (17–19), 10 (20–21), 11 (22), 12
(23), 13 (24), 14 (24–26), 15 (28–30), 16 (31–32), 17 (33–34), 18 (35–36), 19 (37–38), 20 (39), 21 (40), 22 (41), 23 (42), and 24 (43). b
Blood arsenic levels during the second month of hemodialysis. With the re-commencement of oral arsenic trioxide on day 42, there was a
gradual increase of arsenic levels back to the therapeutic range. Arsenic levels also varied in parallel with creatinine levels during
hemodialysis and had remained within the therapeutic range a Blood arsenic levels during the first 3 weeks of hemodialysis. A rapid surge of
arsenic levels occurred on day 5, in parallel with a rise in creatinine and further renal function deterioration. Oral arsenic trioxide was
stopped on day 9, resulting in a gradual fall of arsenic levels after hemodialysis was commenced. Days (sample number): 3 (1–4), 4 (5–7), 5
(8), 6 (9), 7 (10–13), 8 (14–16), 9 (17–19), 10 (20–21), 11 (22), 12 (23), 13 (24), 14 (24–26), 15 (28–30), 16 (31–32), 17 (33–34), 18
(35–36), 19 (37–38), 20 (39), 21 (40), 22 (41), 23 (42), and 24 (43). b Blood arsenic levels during the second month of hemodialysis. With
the re-commencement of oral arsenic trioxide on day 42, there was a gradual increase of arsenic levels back to the therapeutic range.
Arsenic levels also varied in parallel with creatinine levels during hemodialysis and had remained within the therapeutic range As2O3 is a
key medication for patients with relapsed APL. Intravenous (i.v.) As2O3, used in most reports, may lead to lethal arrhythmias due to QT
prolongation, which is directly proportional to blood arsenic levels . Because i.v. As2O3 leads to a rapid surge of blood arsenic levels,
arrhythmia related to QT prolongation is an important adverse effect. Oral As2O3 is slowly absorbed and results in lower blood arsenic
levels. Its bioavailability, estimated by area-under-the-curve pharmacokinetically, is comparable to that of i.v. As2O3 . Hence, oral As2O3
has the same efficacy, but little risk of arrhythmia . In one previous report, blood arsenic levels after i.v. As2O3 were measured in an APL
patient on hemodialysis . The peak level was 6,450 nmol/L, a toxic level that led to termination of i.v. As2O3 therapy. It was concluded
that i.v. As2O3 was contraindicated in renal failure . In our case, the sudden increase in blood arsenic levels was related to an
unanticipated acute renal failure. Timely cessation of oral As2O3 and institution of hemodialysis prevented further increases in arsenic
levels. Subsequently, with careful dose adjustment and meticulous monitoring, oral As2O3 was safely administered during hemodialysis. The
blood arsenic levels were also kept within the therapeutic range. We have also previously demonstrated the safety of oral As2O3 during CAPD.
Therefore, patients on renal replacement therapy are still eligible for oral As2O3 treatment. The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
