An 81-year-old woman with a raised pigmented nodule over her left cornea for 7 months duration was examined. Dark conjunctival pigmentation
was observed in the upper bulbar fornix conjunctiva. She had previously undergone primary surgical excision of a malignant conjunctival
melanoma four years earlier. The tumor separated easily from the corneal surface, but remained slightly attached to the corneoscleral
surface. A corneoscleral lamellar dissection of 3 mm in width and 2 mm in depth as well as a corneoscleral lamellar keratoplasty for the
reconstruction of the corneoscleral defect were performed. The wide upper bulbar and fornix conjunctiva were excised, and an amniotic
membrane transplantation was performed. Biopsy revealed an invasive melanoma with a depth of 1 mm. Left, right, and inferior tumor margins
of the corneoscleral lesion and the pigmentary lesion in the conjunctiva were free of the tumor. After surgery, 0.04% mitomycin was
administered topically 4 times daily for 4 weeks. There was no recurrence 2 years after surgery, and systemic evaluation revealed no
metastasis. Conjunctival melanomas are a rare unilateral disease comprising 2% of all ocular melanomas . Malignant melanomas grow on the
cornea without evidence of invasive conjunctival tumors . The incidence of a corneal displaced conjunctival melanoma remains unknown.
Previous studies have reported that more than 50% of patients have local tumor recurrence after ocular treatment . In the past, conjunctival
malignant melanomas were treated by primary orbital exenteration . This radical treatment has been more recently found to be less effective
than previously described. More recently local resection has generally been performed . Cryotherapy has been developed for an adjuvant
treatment after local excision . Topical chemotherapy with mitomycin C (MMC), adjuvant radiotherapy, and topical and subconjunctival
injection of Interferon alfa-2b have also been performed as adjuvant treatments after local excision . In the past, when the size of the
conjunctival defect is too large for primary closure after local excision, autografts of conjunctiva from the fellow eye or oral mucosa have
been performed . More recently, reconstruction with a preserved amniotic membrane to close large conjunctival defects after excision of wide
tumors has been reported . In an invasive corneal displaced melanoma, lamellar dissection of the cornea, and reconstruction with
corneoscleral tissue is required after removal of the invasive tumor. However, there have been no reports on lamellar dissection of the
cornea and reconstruction with corneoscleral tissue. We report, to the best of our knowledge, the first case of surgical excision of a
corneal displaced recurrent conjunctival melanoma and reconstruction with a corneoscleral lamellar keratoplasty and amniotic membrane
transplantation (AMT). An 81-year-old woman was examined for a raised pigmented nodule over her left cornea for 7 months duration, which
disturbed vision and blinking. She had previously undergone primary surgical excision of a malignant conjunctival melanoma four years
earlier (Fig. 1). Visual acuity was 8 / 20, and the right eye was normal. A pale, lightly pigmented, vascularized tumor was present
superiorly in her left eye, parallel to the the adjacent limbus. Dark conjunctival pigmentation was observed in the upper bulbar conjunctiva
and fornix area. The tumor separated easily from the corneal surface, but remained slightly attached to the corneoscleral surface.
Corneoscleral lamellar dissection on the melanoma mass that measured 3 mm in width and 2 mm in depth and corneoscleral lamellar keratoplasty
for reconstruction of the corneoscleral defect were performed. The wide upper bulbar and fornix conjunctiva were excised for evaluation of
tumor invasion, and an AMT was performed for reconstruction of the large conjunctival defects (Fig. 2). Biopsy revealed an invasive
conjunctival melanoma with 1 mm depth of invasion under the conjunctival epithelium (Fig. 3). The total thickness of the specimen was 3 mm.
There was also slight invasion in the corneal stroma. However, the remaining tumor margins in the corneoscleral lesion were free of tumor
cells. The pigmentary lesion in the upper bulbar and fornix conjunctiva revealed a pigmentary macrophage in the subconjunctiva, but no
melanoma cells. After surgery, 0.04% mitomycin was administered topically four times daily for 4 weeks. No tumor recurrence had appeared in
the superior cornea and conjunctiva 2 years after surgery. Systemic evaluation revealed no metastases. This case demonstrates the successful
use of a corneoscleral lamellar keratoplasty and an AMT for the reconstruction of ocular surface defects following surgical excision of a
corneal displaced recurrent conjunctival melanoma. The advantages of an AMT for surgery of a conjunctival melanoma include: 1) cosmetic
appearance following surgery, 2) the absence of donor site morbidity complicating the harvest of mucosal autografts, and 3) the ability to
clinically monitor local recurrence of tumors underneath the transparent amniotic membrane graft . In this case, dark conjunctival
pigmentation was observed in the upper bulbar conjunctiva and fornix area. We excised the wide upper bulbar and fornix conjunctiva for
evaluation of tumor invasion. AMT was necessary for the reconstruction of the wide conjunctival defects in the whole upper bulbar and fornix
area. In addition to local recurrence and metastasis, limbal melanomas may rarely show intraocular extension . A case study of a
conjunctival melanoma with intraocular extension was attributed a previous surgery in which Bowman's membrane was penetrated and removing
its effect as a barrier . In conventional local resection of an invasive corneoscleral melanoma with adjunctive therapy, there is a risk of
intraocular extension of the invasive melanoma because of a defect in Bowman's membrane . In this case, we felt the conjunctival melanoma
was slightly attached to the corneoscleral surface during surgery. Therefore, we performed a lamellar dissection of the corneoscleral area
to evaluate local tumor invasion. The corneoscleral surface was elevated due to the conjunctival melanoma. A corneoscleral lamellar
dissection with a depth of 2 mm including the thickness of the melanoma was necessary. We performed a corneoscleral lamellar keratoplasty
for the reconstruction of Bowman's membrane in the corneoscleral area. In conventional surgery, deep excision is difficult because
corneoscleral thinning may result after surgery, increasing the risk of an intraocular extension of the invasive melanoma due to a defect in
Bowman's membrane. In comparison with conventional surgery, corneoscleral lamellar keratoplasty may be useful in preventing intraocular
extension of a recurrent melanoma if there is a danger of damaging Bowman's membrane during surgery. An AMT was also helpful for the
reconstruction of the wide conjunctival defects in the upper bulbar and fornix area. Topical mitomycin, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), and
Interferon alfa-2b have been used alone or as adjunctive treatments for conjunctival primary acquired melanosis (PAM) with atypia and
conjunctival melanoma . MMC is an alkylating agent that binds to DNA during all phases of the cell cycle, leading to irreversible cross-
linking, and inhibition of nucleotide synthesis . Chalasani et al. reported that the overall recurrence rate in patients receiving MMC as an
adjuvant therapy was 43%, while Shields et al. reported that the recurrence rate was 0%. The major side-effect of MMC was transient
keratoconjunctivitis that resolved following cessation. MMC is the most widely used agent for PAM with atypia and conjunctival melanoma.
5-FU is also an antimetabolite used to treat many epithelial cancers because of its action on rapidly proliferating cells . Midena et al.
reported that the recurrence rate was 12.5% after treatment with topical 1% 5-FU in conjunctival squamous cell carcinoma, and recurrence
cases were successfully retreated with a second 4-week course of topical 5-FU. The exact mechanism of Interferon alfa-2b is not completely
understood, but it seems to play an indirect immunoregulatory role rather than having a direct antitumor mechanism . Finger et al. reported
that for primary or recurrent malignant melanoma, the lesions regressed without side effects two months after topical Interferon alfa-2b
treatment. We used topical 0.04% mitomycin for adjuvant therapy after surgery, and no tumor recurrence or complications were observed 2
years after surgery. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case of the surgical excision of corneal displaced recurrent
conjunctival melanoma and reconstruction with corneoscleral lamellar keratoplasty and AMT. We hypothesize that if there is a risk of a
conjunctival melanoma attaching to the corneoscleral surface, a corneoscleral lamellar keratoplasty may be useful to prevent intraocular
extension. An AMT may be necessary for the reconstruction of conjunctival defects after wide resection of the conjunctival melanoma.
Adjuvant topical 0.04% mitomycin may be efficient in preventing local tumor recurrence. This work was supported by National Research
Foundation of Korea Grant founded by the Korean Government (2012038648). No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was
reported. (A) Pigmented lesion on the bulbar conjunctiva and cornea of the left eye. (B) Epithelioid melanoma cells infiltrations were
observed by hematoxylin & eosin stain (Ã—400). This patient had an epithelioid conjunctival melanoma with corneal displacement. The pictures
were taken 4 years previously. Surgical excision of a corneal-displaced recurrent conjunctival melanoma, and reconstruction with
corneoscleral lamellar keratoplasty and amniotic membrane transplantation. (A) Preoperative finding. (B) Corneoscleral lamellar dissection
with a width of 3 mm and a depth of 2 mm was performed. (C) Donor corneoscleral lamellar tissue was prepared. (D) Corneoscleral lamellar
keratoplasty was performed. (E) Pigmentary lesion of the wide upper bulbar and fornix conjunctival was excised. (F) Amniotic membrane
transplantation was performed. (A) Preoperative corneal displaced recurrent conjunctival melanoma. (B) Postoperative ocular findings showing
a well-removed pigmented mass and well-attached corneoscleral lamellar keratoplasty. (C) Epithelioid melanoma cells can be observed by
hematoxylin & eosin stain (Ã—400). (D) Positive staining for HMB 45 in melanoma cells (Ã—200).
