Dear Editor, Approximately 2 % of multiple myeloma (MM) patients present with hemorrhage at diagnosis. However, hemorrhage due to
abnormalities in the coagulation system is a rare complication [1, 2]. Although lupus anticoagulant (LA), which is infrequently reported to
be in association with MM, is commonly a risk factor for arterial or venous thrombosis, bleeding tendencies in patients with LA are strongly
related to a low prothrombin activity . Acquired hypoprothrombinemia with LA, also called LA hypoprothrombinemia syndrome (LAHPS), is a rare
disease which appears mostly in young females with systemic lupus erythematosus or in healthy children after viral infection and is usually
associated with the presence of antiprothrombin antibodies . We herein report the case of an 86-year-old male with Bence-Jones protein (BJP)
κ-type MM who presented with hypoprothrombinemia and LA associated with antibodies directed to the phosphatidylserine–prothrombin complex
(or phosphatidylserine-dependent antiprothrombin antibodies, aPS/PT). The patient was admitted with anemia and had no past history of
bleeding disorders or thrombotic events. A urinalysis showed massive proteinuria (5.3 g/day), which was determined to be κ-type BJP using
immunoelectrophoresis. Bone marrow aspiration showed proliferation of abnormal plasma cells. Computerized tomography showed hematomas in the
bilateral gluteus maximus muscle and the supraclavicular area. Initial coagulation tests showed prolonged prothrombin time and activated
partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) (Table 1). Reduced clotting activity of factors II (FII), VIII (FVIII), and IX (FIX) was noted in a
pattern typical of that observed in previously reported cases of LAHPS [8, 9]. FVIII and FIX inhibitors were not detected. The prolonged
aPTT with LA-sensitive aPTT reagent (PTT-LA Roche Diagnostics, Tokyo, Japan), which could not be corrected by mixing with normal plasma,
suggested the presence of LA. The results were confirmed using the Staclot LA® assay, and the dilute Russell viper venom time test was used
to confirm the presence of LA with the phospholipid-neutralizing LA test (Gradipore, Frenchs Forest, Australia). IgG/M anticardiolipin
antibodies and IgG aPS/PT were negative, while strong positive IgM aPS/PT was detected, which was measured with ELISA using the
phosphatidylserine–prothrombin complex as antigen immobilized on ELISA plates in the presence of CaCl2 . Based on these findings, the
patient was diagnosed as MM with LAHPS associated with aPS/PT and treated with melphalan and prednisolone (MP) therapy. The FII levels were
observed to normalize after one cycle of MP therapy and the patient has remained in remission without any hemorrhage for 10 months.Table
1Laboratory findingsMP therapyNormal valuesBeforeAfter3 courses6 coursesPT (%)26566470–130aPTT (s)65.349.044.625–38Fibrinogen
(mg/dl)284200–400Factor II (%)49939474–149Factor V (%)12970–152Factor VII (%)6963–143Factor VIII (%)43334362–145Factor IX (%)97974–149Factor
X (%)7471–128Factor XIII (%)100>70LA test PTT-LA (s)158.7<48.2 Staclot LA (s)58.058.1<8.0 dRVVT ratio3.02.67<1.3Anti-b2GPI
(U) IgM0<29.8 IgG6.3<10.4aPS/PT (U) IgM>10020.8<13.0 IgG00<2.0BJPPositiveNegativeNegativeNegativePlasma cell (%)54.22.02.8<3.5PT prothrombin
time, dRVVT dilute Russel’s viper venom time Laboratory findings PT prothrombin time, dRVVT dilute Russel’s viper venom time In our case,
aPTT continued to be prolonged with reduced levels of FVIII and FIX in spite of normalizing the FII level after therapy. LA and IgM aPS/PT
remained positive, although these values were improved, suggesting that the presence of LA might have an influence on coagulation tests
after treatment. There are very rare reports showing the presence of aPS/PT in patients with LAHPS . These reports describe the patients as
having bleeding tendencies with mildly reduced FII levels, similar to that observed in our patient. However, in previously reported child
cases of LAHPS, severe hemorrhage usually occurs when the FII levels are very low (under 10∼15 %). It is possible that other coagulation
factors associated with aPS/PT in LAHPS might be present. A diagnosis of LAHPS should always be considered in MM patients with bleeding
tendencies associated with LA, and aPS/PT detection should be performed in conjunction with LA tests. The authors declare that they have no
conflict of interest. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
