Sub-phenotypes of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)—Crohn disease, ulcerative colitis and some cases of irritable bowel syndrome—are
generally considered a consequence of gastrointestinal inflammation of unknown etiology. Conventional therapy and more recently biologic
agents, all with varying degrees of drawbacks, have resulted in improved control of these diseases. However, as the incidence and prevalence
continue to rise, needs for prevention, permanent remission and cures remain unmet, plus there still remain needs for improved control of
symptoms, such as pain and diarrhea. The case report herein describes a serendipitous, novel means for curtailing these symptoms associated
with a bovine gastrointestinal disease that may have applicability for patients with diseases characterized by abdominal-visceral pain and
diarrhea. The case report herein describes a serendipitous, novel means of curtailing pain and diarrhea associated with a bovine
gastrointestinal disease (Johne disease) that may potentially be beneficial for relieving abdominal-visceral pain and diarrhea in patients
with gastrointestinal diseases. Johne disease—a world-wide disease primarily in ruminants, most prevalent in cattle, sheep and goats, but
even in wildlife—has many manifestations in common with the human IBD, Crohn disease (CD),1-4 including pain and debilitating diarrhea (in
cattle). As with CD, there are no preventive/curative therapies for Johne disease outside a probiotic Dietzia therapy.5-7 The etiologic
agent of Johne disease is Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis (MAP). Natural exposure of cattle to MAP, which usually results in
clinical disease at > 2 y of age, occurs primarily in utero and/or by oral ingestion of MAP by neonates.8 For disease to be manifested,
infection with MAP is followed by intestinal inflammation. Interestingly, humans are also systemically infected with MAP. However, the
incidence of infection in the “normal” population is lower than in those with Crohn disease,9-13 ulcerative colitis13 and irritable bowel
syndrome,13 three diseases characterized in whole or part by gastrointestinal pain and diarrhea. Unfortunately, the consequences—cause,
perpetuate, bystander—of such associations are highly controversial and remain to be unequivocally clarified. The initial investigations on
alteration of cellular processes by 2-Me originated in this laboratory when various murine immunological reactivities in vitro were found to
be dramatically enhanced by, or dependent upon, sulfhydryl compounds—of those studied, the most potent was 2-Me.14-17 Subsequently, a number
of in situ processes/diseases were found to also be altered by 2-Me. For example, 2-Me (1) reversed the loss of immune functions associated
with aging,18,19 (2) increased longevity and quality of life,19-22 (3) prevented high-fat-diet obesity,21 (4) altered systemic lupus
erythematosus,22 (5) completely prevented development of mammary tumors of unknown etiology23 and (6) slowed progression of spontaneous or
cigarette-smoke-induced liver cancers,19,20 virally caused mammary tumors23 and leukemia (Click RE, in preparation). Some of these diseases
have also been found to be altered by organosulfur compounds/derivatives derived from Allium and Brassica foods; the most extensively
investigated are processes associated with tumorigenesis—anticarcinogenic and apoptosis induction.24-26 Of all the processes altered by
2-Me, the finding that 2-Me altered leukemia progression in AKR/Cum mice—a strain that naturally harbors murine leukemia virus (MuLV) and at
least four ecotropic, endogenous MuLV proviral DNA sequences27—was instrumental in why the protocol reported herein was tested in cattle. An
adult, four-year-old multiparous dairy cow (#16) was found positive (sero-specific ELISA OD of 3.85 determined by the Univ Minn Vet
Diagnostic Lab) for bovine leukemia virus (BLV). Cattle infected with this virus may develop lymphomas/leukemia;28 however, the incidence of
disease is quite low relative to the number of positive animals in any given herd, likely because dairy cows in general are not productive
much beyond 5–6 y of age. Twenty-two months after #16 tested BLV positive, clinical symptoms indicative of lymphoma developed (lack of
appetite, weight loss and enlarged fore-udder lymph nodes). In addition, although not having pipestream diarrhea, her feces were a bit
loose, a symptom not typical of BLV infection. It should be pointed out that these symptoms are in general characteristic signs of early,
clinical Johne disease. However, a diagnosis of Johne disease was considered unlikely because she had tested MAP negative29 multiple times
over the prior two years. Based on the presumptuous diagnosis of BLV-induced leukosis and since there was/are no effective treatments for
BLV disease in cattle, she was considered an ideal, non-rodent candidate to assess the safety and efficacy of the murine, 2-Me-leukemia
protocol. Therefore, she was started on a once daily, feed additive regimen of 1.38 mg/kg body weight 2-Me, a dose slightly lower than the
lowest effective dose for mice.21 After treatment was initiated, both fecal consistency and appetite returned to normal (reduced GI pain?)
and both remained normal up until the day she succumbed. During this “beneficial” four-month interval, she unexpectedly continued to lose
weight, which is not characteristic for BLV-caused leukosis, nor for the Dietzia probiotic reversal of Johne disease symptoms. This, plus
the earlier pretreatment, atypical fecal consistency, indicated that retesting for MAP should once again be done. Surprisingly, this time
she tested serologically positive by ELISA (an OD value of 2.4), but was serologically negative for AGID (a serological test that defines a
more advanced disease than an ELISA29) and negative for fecal MAP shedding, all determined by Allied Monitor, Inc.29 Three weeks after serum
and feces were submitted for testing, she succumbed with Johne disease; anticipated because of the continued weight loss, but still not
understood since treatment curtailed diarrhea and reduced GI pain sufficiently to return appetite to normal. This is striking because
neither of these symptoms ever reversed in over 60 end-stage, non-treated or unsuccessfully treated animals that succumbed from Johne
disease.6,7 The results do suggest that 2-Me “normalized” the gastrointestinal tract in some manner, a result that may have value for IBD
patients. Interestingly, a similar phenomenon—decreased macroscopic and microscopic colonic damage—was found for experimentally-induced
colitis in rats by dietary methylsulfonylmethane,30 an organosulfur molecule with a chemical structure such that it likely functions via a
mechanism similar to that postulated for 2-Me; i.e., generation of sulphane sulfur.31 In conclusion, treatment of a cow with early signs of
clinical Johne disease (plus two cows with BLV-induced leucosis that were negative for Johne disease; manuscript in preparation) with 2-Me
was safe, just as found in rodents, and it had ameliorative effects for symptoms of a bovine intestinal bowel disease. The findings raise
two intriguing questions: By what mechanism does intestinal “well-being” occur and would IBD patients, if treated with either food or
xenobiotic organosulfurs, have a similar health-related quality of life benefit? A special thanks to Dr Craig Van Kampen for editorial
review. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (R01AI019643) prior to retirement from the University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN. NIH and Dr Van Kampen had no involvement in the study design, collection, analysis and interpretation of data, conclusions
derived and decision to submit the manuscript for publication. Previously published online:
www.landesbioscience.com/journals/virulence/article/22090
