A 67-year-old Japanese female was followed up due to prolonged idiopathic thrombocytopenia with non-response to steroid therapy for 4 years,
but recent progressive pancytopenia, hypo-albuminemia, and hypo-γ-globulinemia were presented. An abdominal CT scan revealed heterogeneously
enhanced splenomegaly without any nodular lesions. A splenectomy was performed, and gross examination showed markedly hyperemic red pulp,
weighing 760 g, accompanied by multiple foci of peripheral anemic infarction. Surprisingly, microscopic findings exhibited a diffuse
proliferation of medium-sized to large tumor cells having pleomorphic nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm,
predominantly within the sinuses and cords of the red pulp, which occasionally displayed conspicuous hemophagocytosis and vascular
permeation. In immunohistochemistry, these atypical cells were specifically positive for CD68 (KP-1), CD163, and lysozyme, which was
consistent with histiocytic sarcoma (HS) of the spleen. Subsequently, section from the aspiration of bone marrow showed infiltration of the
neoplastic cells associated with erythrophagocytosis 2 months after the operation, but never before it. Therefore, primary splenic HS
presenting with secondary bone marrow involvement was conclusively diagnosed. Since early diagnosis and treatment are necessary for the HS
patients with poor outcomes, splenic HS should be considered as a differential diagnosis in cases with chronic thrombocytopenia and
splenomegaly. The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1009474924812827 By
definition, histiocytic sarcoma (HS), a rare hematopoietic neoplasm, but a known entity, representing as less than 0.5% of all non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma, is malignant proliferation of cells presenting morphologic and immunophenotypic characteristics of mature tissue histiocytes . HS
is known to often present as localized disease confined to the intestinal tract, skin, lymph node, or soft tissues , however, primary HS of
the spleen has been an exceedingly rare. Mathé G et al. first proposed the term ‘HS’ tentatively in 1970 . In contrast, since its
description was strictly based on the histologic similarities of the tumor cells to macrophages, this diagnostic challenge is further
complicated as it is critical to clearly distinguish HS from other histiocytic processes, from benign to malignant, such as hemophagocytic
syndrome, malignant histiocytosis, and acute monocytic leukemia . Despite that, the detailed evaluation of HS depends especially on the
verification of histiocytic lineage and the exclusion of other malignancies, including anaplastic large cell lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma, poorly differentiated carcinoma, malignant melanoma, follicular dendritic cell sarcoma, or interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma,
by way of thorough immunohistochemical examination . In this context, it is very difficult to interpret HS papers published more than
25 years ago, i.e., before the development and widespread use of immunohistochemical techniques and the availability of molecular genetic
tools . Actually, until now, the number of ‘true’ cases reported as primary splenic HS in the English literatures is only few, up to 7, and
most recent references are from 2008 within our investigation , summarized in Table 1, and its clinicopathological features have not been
well described. Based on this Table 1, HS of the spleen can be potentially lethal condition that might remain asymptomatic or closely
related with chronic thrombocytopenia for a long time . Even while diagnostic imaging findings have not been also characterized
satisfactorily, primary splenic HS cases often show multi-nodular or nodular lesions in the enlarged tissues of spleen . The patients of
splenic HS have a poor prognosis due to aggressive behavior with liver or bone marrow infiltration, even though a splenectomy might induce
temporary remission . Therefore, early accurate diagnosis and treatment before disseminated proliferation of the HS tumor cells should
improve their survival rates. Comparison of the main clinical features among the reported cases with primary splenic HS, including ours CC
chief complaint, S surgery (splenectomy), R radiation, C chemotherapy, Y year, M month, BM bone marrow, LN lymph node. Indeed, this is not
the first case reported. Despite that, we reported a very rare and unique surgical case of primary splenic HS complicated with prolonged
idiopathic thrombocytopenia, progressive pancytopenia, hypo-albuminemia, hypo-γ-globulinemia, and secondary bone marrow involvement, which
grossly presented as splenomegaly with multiple peripheral infarction but without any nodular foci. The patient was a 67-year-old Japanese
female. The specimen after fixation in 10% neutral buffered formalin was embedded in paraffin for histological or immunohistochemical
examinations. All immunohistochemical stainings were carried out using Dako Envision kit (Dako Cytomation Co., Glostrup, Denmark) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions, and using commercially available prediluted monoclonal antibodies against the following antigens: CD1a
(Immuno Tech. Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan, diluted 1:2), CD3 (Dako, diluted 1:1), CD4 (Dako, diluted 1:1), CD5 (NOVOCASTRA laboratories Ltd.,
Newcastle, United Kingdom, diluted 1:25), CD8 (Nichirei Biosciences Inc., Tokyo, Japan, diluted 1:1), CD10 (NOVOCASTRA, diluted 1:20), CD20
(Dako, diluted 1:200), CD21 (Dako, diluted 1:10), CD23 (Nichirei, diluted 1:1), CD30 (Dako, diluted 1:40), CD45 (Dako, diluted 1:400),
CD45RO (UCHL-1; Dako, diluted 1:200), CD68 (KP-1; Dako, diluted 1:100), CD79a (Dako, diluted 1:50), CD163 (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar,
Germany, diluted 1:200), lysozyme (Dako, diluted 1:600), S-100 protein (Dako, diluted 1:900), fascin (Dako, diluted 1:50), bcl-2 (Dako,
diluted 1:30), myeloperoxidase (MPO; Dako, dilutede 1:500), EMA (Dako, diluted 1:100), Cam5.2 (Becton Dickinson Immunocytometry Systems, San
Jose, CA, diluted 1:1), and HMB45 (Enzo Life Sciences Ltd., New York, diluted 1:100). Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection status was analyzed
by in situ hybridization for EBV-encoded RNAs using an Epstein-Barr Early RNA Probe Reagent (EBER; Roche Applied Science, Lewes, UK).
However, no chromosome studies have been performed. This patient had 4-year-history of idiopathic thrombocytopenia with non-response to
steroid therapy and progressive pancytopenia half year before a splenectomy (Figure 1A). There was no history of immunosuppressive
disorders, use of immunosuppressive medications, or unusual infections. The abdominal CT scanning showed heterogeneously enhanced and
growing splenomegaly without evidence of mass or nodular lesions, measured approximately 130 × 80 mm in diameter (Figure 1B).
Retrospectively, the clinical imaging examination also demonstrated mild splenomegaly, measured 48 × 39 mm or 95 × 34 mm in diameter 3 or
2 years before surgery, respectively (Figure 1A). In laboratory data on admission, blood cell counts revealed pancytopenia; white blood cell
count (WBC) was 1,300/mm3; hemoglobin (Hb) was 5.7 g/dL; and platelet count (Plt) was 8,000/mm3 (Figure 1A). Biochemistry showed almost
within normal limits, except for low levels of total protein (TP; 4.9 g/dL), albumin (Alb; 1.6 g/dL), and γ-globulin (γ-gl 0.6 g/dL)
(Figure 1A), whereas high level of C-reactive protein (CRP; 4.07 mg/dL). Serum interleukin 2 receptor (sIL-2R) level as a tumor marker was
only increased up (1306.0 U/mL). Physical examination on admission demonstrated no remarkable change, except for mild weakness. Since the
clinician highly suspected hypersplenism, a splenectomy was performed. The patient was dead due to secondary bone marrow involvement of the
HS tumor cells, as described more in detail below. Autopsy could not be examined because of the family’s objection. The clinical findings
including laboratory examination and therapy for 4 years are summarized in Figure 1A until his death 6 months after the surgery. Summary of
various clinical data before and after splenectomy, and the finding of an abdominal CT scan at surgery. (A) This patient showed prolonged
idiopathic thrombocytopenia presenting with increased splenomegaly and non-response to steroid therapy. In addition, progressive
pancytopenia, hypo-albuminemia, and hypo-γ-globulinemia coexisted. (B) The abdominal CT scanning revealed heterogeneously enhanced, severe
splenomegaly without evidence of mass or nodular lesions. Before the operation, the clinician and we pathologists had performed and examined
bone marrow aspiration 5 times for 2 and half years (September in 2009, September and December in 2010, December in 2011, and January in
2012), histologically showing the tissues of normo- to hyper-cellular marrow (cellularity: 50-70%) composed of 3 series of hematopoietic
cells with a mildly increasing number of bland-looking megakaryocytes (4-8/1HPF). There was no evidence of monotonous proliferation of
atypical or blastoid cells in the bone marrow specimens (not shown). On gross examination of the surgical specimen, the spleen was markedly
enlarged, measuring 145 × 120 × 80 mm and weighing 760 g. The cut surface revealed multiple foci of peripheral infarction but not mass or
nodular lesions, which predominantly looked dark-red in colour associated with congestive red pulp and depleted white pulp (Figure 2). A
scanning magnification of it showed markedly hyperemic red pulp, coexisted with peripheral anemic infarcts and hemorrhage, but not
encapsulated tumor-like lesions (not shown). Gross examination of splenic HS from the resected specimen. On gross examination of the
splenomegaly, the cut surface showed multiple foci of peripheral anemic infarction, but not any mass or nodular lesions, which predominantly
looked dark-red in colour associated with congestive red pulp and depleted white pulp. Bar = 10 mm. Microscopically, the spleen
predominantly displayed a diffuse proliferation of medium-sized to large tumor cells having mildly hyperchromatic and pleomorphic nuclei,
prominent nucleoli, and abundant eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm, mainly within the sinuses and cords of the red pulp, highlighted by silver
impregnation (Figure 3A). However, neither nodular lesions nor fibrous encapsulation were evident with Masson’s trichrome staining (data not
shown). On high-power view, these large cells occasionally showed apparent hemophagocytosis of red blood cells or mononuclear lymphocytes
(Figure 3B). Hemosiderin pigments in the hemophagocytic tumor cells confirmed erythrophagocytosis with Berlin-blue staining (Figure 3B). On
the other hand, vascular invasion of the tumor cells was sometimes noted in the trabecular artery, making a clear contrast by elastica van
Gieson (EVG) staining (Figure 3C). It was suggested that vascular permeation could induce multiple foci of peripheral anemic infarction
associated with hemorrhage. Additionally, adjacent to these infarcts, a very small amount of the existing splenic tissue was remarkably
compressed. In immunohistochemistry, these large cells were specifically positive for CD68 (KP-1) (Figure 4A), CD163 (Figure 4B), lysozyme
(Figure 4C), S-100 protein, and CD45, and many reactive histiocytes were also positive for CD163 and S-100 protein. Whereas, the tumor cells
were negative for CD1a, CD3, CD4, CD5, CD8, CD10, CD20, CD21, CD23, CD30, CD45RO (UCHL-1), CD79a, fascin, bcl-2, myeloperoxidase (MPO), EMA,
Cam5.2, and HMB45. All immunohistochemical profile of the tumor cells is summarized in Table 2. By contrast, CD8 staining confirmed that
proliferating tumor cells were existed within the sinuses and cords of the red pulp, accompanied focally by the destruction of the sinuses
(data not shown). On the other hand, in situ hybridization for EBV-encoded RNAs was negative. Based on all these features, we made a
diagnosis of histiocytic sarcoma (HS) of the spleen. Histological examination of splenic HS. (A) The spleen predominantly showed a diffuse
proliferation of medium-sized to large tumor cells having mildly hyperchromatic and pleomorphic nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and abundant
eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm, mainly within the sinuses and cords of the red pulp, highlighted by silver impregnation (inset) (H&E
stains, Original magnification × 200). (B) On high-power view, these large tumor cells exhibited apparent hemophagocytosis of red blood
cells or mononuclear lymphocytes (H&E stains, Original magnification × 400). Hemosiderin pigments within the large cells confirmed
erythrophagocytosis by Berlin-blue staining (inset). (C) Vascular invasion of these tumor cells was noted in the trabecular artery, very
likely inducing multiple foci of peripheral anemic infarction (H&E stains, Original magnification × 40). This could make a clear contrast by
elastica van Gieson (EVG) staining (inset). Immunohistochemical examination for the tumor cells of splenic HS. (A)(B)(C) These large tumor
cells were specifically positive for CD68 (KP-1) (A), CD163 (B), and lysozyme (C), and many reactive histiocytes were also positive for
CD163 (Original magnification × 400). Immunohistochemical profile of the tumor cells in our splenic HS case Furthermore, 2 months after the
splenectomy, the HS cells partially infiltrated the bone marrow (Figure 5A), coexisting with a substantial amount of 3 series of
normocellular marrow including a significantly increasing number of megakaryocytes. Immunohistochemical CD68 (Figure 5B) and S-100 protein
stainings could make it much easier to understand the microscopic findings of HS involvement in the bone marrow. The above clinical and
pathological findings indicated that this case was really primary splenic HS presenting with secondary bone marrow involvement. Histological
and immunohistochemical examination of secondary bone marrow involvement of primary splenic HS. 2 months after the splenectomy, the tumor
cells infiltrated the bone marrow tissue (H&E stains, Original magnification × 200). Immunohistochemical CD68 staining (inset) could make it
much easier to understand the microscopic findings of HS involvement in the bone marrow. It is possible that the current case report might
be pathologically remarkable for two reasons at least: first, neither nodular formation nor fibrous encapsulation was evident in the tissue
of spleen appearing as splenomegaly. According to the several case reports of primary HS of the spleen as summarized in Table 1, all tumors
have macroscopically exhibited nodular or multi-nodular lesions with or without fibrous encapsulation, composed of a diffuse proliferation
of HS cells predominantly in a sinusoidal pattern within the red pulp , very similar to our case. However, this case showed that the
existing splenic tissue was significantly small and compressed, inducing these characteristic imaging and gross features (Figures 1 and 2),
possibly compared to the other splenic HS cases . Although we cannot provide the direct evidence that the present splenic HS shows only
splenomegaly, future studies will be further required to determine how its mechanism has a role in the tumor growth after collecting and
examining a larger number of splenic HS cases. Second, multiple foci of peripheral anemic infarction coexisted. It is well known that
vascular invasion is a common finding in high grade malignancies, frequently associated with thrombosis and ischemia, i.e., ischemic
necrosis (infarction). In spite of that, merely one splenic HS case has demonstrated relatively large necrosis due to an infarction of the
splenic artery , as likely shown in Figure 3. As described here (Table 1), splenic HS has an extensively aggressive behavior with vessel
permeation and a poor prognosis, regardless of the localized site of tumor origin. Actually, another autopsy case of HS (but entitled
‘malignant histiocytosis’ in the published paper) with unknown primary site demonstrated that the mechanical pressure elicited by severe
infiltration of HS cells in the spleen should lead to capsular weakening and splenic rupture . Some confusion still exists even in the
recent literature with regard to the terminology of this entity, i.e., histiocytic lymphoma, malignant histiocytosis, or HS. Despite that,
the term HS includes whole spectrum of localized and disseminated forms from true histiocytic lymphoma to malignant histiocytosis by
definition . In this context, it is very challenging that we pathologists strictly make a final disgnosis as primary splenic HS, since many
HS cases have exhibited extensive involvement of other organs at first decision, representing as dissemination of tumor cells, such as the
above splenic rupture case . Indeed, so-called ‘malignant histiocytosis’ has considered to be apparently characterized by general symptoms
including high fever, wasting, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and progressive pancytopenia, resulting in a rapidly fatal clinical
outcome, rather than localized form of HS . Moreover, it is likely that well-defined nodular lesions are very rare in most of the ‘malignant
histiocytosis’ cases , as in the present splenic HS. In this context, the present case seems to be categorized into classical ‘malignant
histiocytosis’, rather than so-called true ‘histiocytic lymphoma’. Nevertheless, splenic HS must be a unique clinical entity, particularly
associated with hypo-albuminemia, hypo-γ-globulinemia, and thrombocytopenia . Ezdinli EZ et al. proposed that, as to those mechanisms, the
neoplastic histiocytes could phagocytose albumin and immunoglobulin as well as blood cells, pathologically manifesting as hemophagocytic
syndrome, as shown in Figure 3B. On the other hand, HS is very likely an uncertain neoplasm from the aspects of molecular pathogenesis.
Although no cytogenetic studies have been performed here, some recent papers demonstrated a clonal immunoglobulin heavy chain gene
rearrangement , a clonal cytogenetic abnormality including t(14;18) , and a 57–80 hyperdiploid /46, XY karyotype, including 3 to 4 copies of
various chromosomes . Further studies are needed. It also remains to be elucidated whether splenectomy with or without following aggressive
chemotherapy is beneficial for patients with splenic HS or not, since it has been reported that so-called ‘malignant histiocytosis’ has no
or little response to splenectomy . In fact, based on the current Table 1, HS of the spleen must be potentially lethal condition with short
survival even after the splenectomy combined with chemotherapy and irradiation. Pathological differential diagnoses of this splenic HS case
include interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma, follicular dendritic cell sarcoma, Langerhans cell sarcoma, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma,
peripheral T-cell lymphoma, anaplastic large cell lymphoma, metastatic carcinoma, and malignant melanoma. Morphologically, tumor cells in
interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma, follicular dendritic cell sarcoma, and Langerhans cell sarcoma often have grooved, indented, folded,
lobulated, or oval- to spindle-shaped nuclei, arranged in a nodular, fascicular, or storiform growth pattern, that should be absent in HS .
The conclusive diagnosis of HS is based on not only histological but immunohistochemical examination of histiocytic differentiation and
exclusion of other immunophenotypes including lymphoid, epithelial, or melanocytic differentiation, as also described here (Table 2). The
tumor cells in the present case apparently revealed positive expression of specific histiocytic markers, such as CD68 (KP-1), and lysozyme
(Figure 4). But these HS cells also diffusely expressed the hemoglobin scavenger marker, CD163, regarded as a peculiar marker for HS as well
. We herein reported a unique surgical case of primary splenic HS strongly associated with pathological findings of aggressive infiltration
of tumor cells in the red pulp and splenic artery, in the background of splenomegaly with multiple foci of anemic infarction, but without
any nodular lesions. Although splenic HS is very uncommon, not only clinicians but we pathologists should be aware that its patients undergo
a fatal condition with poor prognosis, and must consider it as a differential diagnosis in cases with prolonged thrombocytopenia with
splenomegaly that is non-responsive to therapy. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report
and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. SY and TT participated in conception of the idea and writing of the manuscript. SY, TT, NS,
NA, SK, HN, KY, MT and YS performed the histological interpretation of the tumor tissue. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript.
