Pulmonary embolectomy is a treatment option in selected patients with high-risk pulmonary embolism (PE). Efficiency of thrombus degradation
in PE largely depends on the architecture of its fibrin network, however little is known about its determinants. We present the case of a
56-year-old woman with high-risk PE and proximal deep-vein thrombosis, whose thrombotic material removed during embolectomy from the right
atrium and pulmonary (lobar and segmental) arteries has been studied using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). SEM images showed that
distally located thrombi are richer in densely-packed fibrin fibers and contain more white cells and less erythrocytes than the proximal
ones and the atrial thrombus. Fibrin fibers alignment along the flow vector was observed in the thrombi removed from high-velocity flow
pulmonary arteries, and not in the atrial thrombus. The content of denser fibrin network and platelet aggregates was increased in segmental
thromboemboli. Our findings describe the relation between thrombus architecture and location, and might help to elucidate thrombus
resistance to anticoagulant therapy in some PE patients. Pulmonary embolism (PE) is associated with a substantial morbidity and mortality .
Right heart thrombi are usually found in hemodynamically compromised patients with acute PE and indicate worse prognosis . In patients with
high-risk PE and right heart dysfunction pulmonary embolectomy is a treatment option . An autopsy-based study on pulmonary thromboembolus
morphology suggested its structure to be layered, with layers of fibrin and platelets alternating with layers of erythrocytes . Fibrin
network, that represents a major component of venous thrombi, is lysed at a rate dependent on its architecture, with impaired lysis in case
of dense clots . Fibrin clots obtained from subjects with chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension have been reported to be resistant
to lysis . In vitro experiments indicate that velocity of flow markedly affects fibrin clot structure . With the increase of flow, more
fibrin fibers are aligned along the flow vector, and less are randomly oriented . Recently, we have shown that the structure of the
pulmonary thrombus obtained during embolectomy is organized, fibrin-rich, and not layered . To our knowledge, there is no ex vivo data on
the architecture of right heart thrombi and pulmonary thromboemboli. Here we present the case of a 56-year-old woman with high-risk PE whose
thrombotic material removed from right atrium and lobar and segmental pulmonary arteries has been studied using scanning electron microscopy
(SEM). A 56-year-old woman (body mass index, 29.8 kg/m2), a former smoker, with a history of chronic venous insufficiency who suffered from
recent-onset schizophrenia was admitted to our institution for PE after a 48 h treatment with unfractionated heparin in a regional hospital.
Two months prior to admission she was hospitalized in a psychiatric ward and received no thromboprophylaxis. On admission, the patient
presented with progressing dyspnea, cyanosis and chest discomfort with elevated D-dimer (>16,000 μg/l). Contrast-enhanced computed
tomography revealed large emboli at the right pulmonary artery (PA) trifurcation and in the left PA (Fig. 1a). Extensive proximal DVT in
both legs was observed. Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated right ventricular (RV) overload with RV systolic pressure exceeding
50 mmHg, and a right atrial mass originating in the inferior vena cava. Within 2 h she developed cardiogenic shock requiring inotropic
support. Due to rapid clinical deterioration despite anticoagulant therapy, she underwent urgent embolectomy with extracorporeal circulation
in deep hypothermia. Pulmonary trunk was opened, and fresh and organized thrombi were removed from right and left lobar and segmental
branches. After opening of the right atrium, a 7 cm long fresh thrombus coming from the inferior vena cava was removed. The patient required
prolonged ventilatory support and management of pulmonary hypertension during the post-operative period. Three-month follow-up was
uneventful. She was treated with warfarin. Thrombophilia screening and family history of thrombosis were negative. Cancer as a cause of
thrombosis was excluded.Fig. 1Computed tomography and scanning electron microscopic (SEM) images. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography
showing a thrombus at the trifurcation of right pulmonary artery (a). Representative SEM images of the removed parts of the thrombus from
the right atrium (b and e), lobar pulmonary artery (c and f) and segmental artery (d and g). b–d magnification, ×1,000; e–g magnification,
×3,500. Scale bar 5 μm Computed tomography and scanning electron microscopic (SEM) images. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showing a
thrombus at the trifurcation of right pulmonary artery (a). Representative SEM images of the removed parts of the thrombus from the right
atrium (b and e), lobar pulmonary artery (c and f) and segmental artery (d and g). b–d magnification, ×1,000; e–g magnification, ×3,500.
Scale bar 5 μm The thromboemboli were evaluated using SEM, as previously described . After washing, the thrombus was fixed with 2.5 %
glutaraldehyde phosphate buffered saline solution. Specimens were dehydrated, gold coated, and photographed digitally with a JEOL JSM 5410
(JEOL, Tokyo, Japan). The microscopic analysis revealed that the atrial thrombus was mainly composed of erythrocytes with few platelet
aggregates, and some white cells (Fig. 1b, e). The fibrin network of the atrial thrombus was rather randomly arranged. In the thrombi
removed from lobar (Fig. 1c, f) and segmental pulmonary arteries (Fig. 1d, g), a stepwise increase in relatively dense fibrin and platelet
aggregates was observed. There was a noticeable decrease in the count of erythrocytes and increase in the count of white cells in the
thrombotic material removed from lobar and segmental arteries, as compared with the atrial thrombus (Fig. 1). Thrombi removed from lobar and
segmental arteries were characterized by fibrin fibers alignment along the longitudinal axis of the respective vessel, which was absent in
the atrial thrombus. To our knowledge, this study is the first to demonstrate the composition of right atrial and pulmonary thrombi removed
during embolectomy in the PE patient. We observed that the fibrin content in pulmonary thrombus increases when the diameter of pulmonary
arteries reduces, which is in contrast to the major impact of the time since symptom onset (“the clot’s ageing”), but not the vessel
caliber, reported in acute myocardial infarction . Moreover, the thrombus location appears to affect the architecture of fibrin network,
since more tightly packed fibrin fibers resembling a solid mass were observed in thrombi from pulmonary arteries where the flow velocity is
higher than in the right atrium. It is likely that the structural differences among the various thrombi, observed by us, result in part from
hemodynamic conditions in the right atrium versus pulmonary arteries. Higher flow velocity in the pulmonary arteries might also contribute
to lower number of erythrocytes, accompanied by increased fibrin content in the thrombi from those vessels. The increasing number of white
cells within distal pulmonary thrombi indicates their early active role in their modulation and/or degradation in vivo. Interestingly,
fibrin fiber alignment in distal pulmonary thrombi shown in this report confirms the recent in vitro findings, clearly indicating a potent
modulatory effect of flow on fibrin structure in vivo. It should also be highlighted that in pulmonary thrombi, platelets and fibrin are co-
localized, and the presence of platelets determines the local formation of denser fibrin network via multiple mechanisms, including
unfavorable impact of polyphosphate and platelet factor 4 on clot structure, reported in vitro . Such architecture of the pulmonary thrombus
might impede its dissolution despite administration of anticoagulants. This report provides an important in vivo evidence of the importance
of platelet-related factors affecting fibrin clot architecture. Mechanisms underlying such fibrin phenotype in pulmonary thromboemboli
obtained from our PE patient remain to be elucidated. Most likely, transient factors, including those linked to hemodynamic abnormalities
and massive thrombosis, determine thrombus properties to a greater extent than genetic factors in our case . We cannot exclude that abnormal
fibrin clot phenotype measurable prior to PE might contribute to unfavorable clinical course in this case and contribute to failure of
heparin therapy. It might be speculated that unfavorable fibrin network characteristics with formation of compact fibrin structures in some
patients with acute PE might explain, at least in part, heparin treatment failure. The study was funded by the grant of Jgiellonian
University Medical College (No. K/ZDS/002936, to AU). None. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
