This report presents a rare case of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (IHCC) arising 28 years after excision of a type IV-A congenital
choledochal cyst. The patient underwent excision of a congenital choledochal cyst (Todani’s type IV-A) at 12 years of age, with Roux-en-Y
hepaticojejunostomy reconstruction. She received a pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) using the modified Child method for an infection of a
residual congenital choledochal cyst in the pancreatic head at the age of 18. She was referred to this department with a liver tumor
22 years later. Left hemihepatectomy with left-side caudate lobectomy was performed and the tumor was pathologically diagnosed to be IHCC.
The cause of the current carcinogenesis was presumed to be reflux of pancreatic juice into the residual intrahepatic bile duct during
surgery. This case suggests that a careful long-term follow-up is important for patients with congenital choledochal cysts, even if a
separation-operation was performed at a young age, and especially after PD. Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (IHCC) is the second most common
primary liver cancer, and the incidence is increasing . There is a significant association between the presence of congenital choledochal
cysts and the development of hepatobiliary malignancies, including IHCC. The cause of carcinogenesis in these cases is presumed to be the
reflux of pancreatic juice into the bile duct and the accumulation of mixed bile in the biliary system caused by an anomalous junction of
the pancreaticobiliary duct. The recommended standard surgical treatment is the excision of the dilated extrahepatic bile duct, with a
hepaticoenterostomy to stop the reflux of pancreatic juice. This is called a “separation-operation.” However, some patients develop biliary
cancer long after a separation-operation. The development of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma after pancreaticoduodenectomy has not
previously been reported in patients with congenital biliary dilation, however, this report presents a case of intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma arising 28 years after the initial separation-operation for a Todani’s type IV-A congenital choledochal cyst, and
22 years after pancreaticoduodenectomy for infection of a residual congenital choledochal cyst in the pancreatic head. A 40-year-old female
was referred to this department for further examination of a liver tumor. She had undergone excision of a congenital choledochal cyst
(Todani’s type IV-A) at 12 years of age, with Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy reconstruction (Fig. 1a). She underwent a
pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) at the age of 18, using the modified Child method to treat an infection of a residual congenital choledochal
cyst in the pancreatic head (Fig. 1b). The patient had been well with no symptoms since her last operation, so she had not undergone regular
follow-up during the 18 years since her second operation.Fig. 1Schematic illustration of the reconstruction. a Excision of the extrahepatic
dilated bile duct with Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy reconstruction separated the bile from the pancreatic juice flow. Arrow with the broken
line shows the flow of the pancreatic juice. b Pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) using a modified Child method was performed for infection of
residual congenital choledochal cyst in pancreatic head. Arrow with the broken line shows the flow of pancreatic juice that could enter the
intrahepatic bile duct. c Pancreaticogastrostomy after PD. Arrow with the broken line shows the flow of pancreatic juice, which is less
likely to move backward to the bile duct Schematic illustration of the reconstruction. a Excision of the extrahepatic dilated bile duct with
Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy reconstruction separated the bile from the pancreatic juice flow. Arrow with the broken line shows the flow of
the pancreatic juice. b Pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) using a modified Child method was performed for infection of residual congenital
choledochal cyst in pancreatic head. Arrow with the broken line shows the flow of pancreatic juice that could enter the intrahepatic bile
duct. c Pancreaticogastrostomy after PD. Arrow with the broken line shows the flow of pancreatic juice, which is less likely to move
backward to the bile duct She was diagnosed with a chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection during a medical checkup at the age of 37, and
was referred to our hospital for treatment. She had received interferon and ribavirin therapy and finally obtained a sustained viral
response, after which she underwent regular follow-up. Follow-up-dynamic abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a low-density tumor o
the left medial section (Fig. 2a) at the age of 40. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and DUPAN-2 levels were elevated to 6.3 ng/ml and
360 U/ml, respectively. Positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) revealed the maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of the liver tumor
to be 9.3, with no signs of lymph node metastasis, intraperitoneal dissemination, or hepatic metastasis. 3D-drip infusion cholangiography-CT
(3D-DIC-CT) revealed dilation of the right and left hepatic ducts of up to 20 mm and tumor invasion of the B2 + 3 bile duct; the
hepaticojejunostomy was not affected by the tumor (Fig. 2b). The tumor was diagnosed to be IHCC.Fig. 2Enhanced abdominal computed tomography
and three dimensional-drip infusion cholangiography-computed tomography. a Arrows show a low-density tumor, 32 mm in diameter, in the
lateral section of the liver. Arrow heads shows a dilated intrahepatic bile duct. b 3D-DIC-CT revealed dilation of the right and left
hepatic ducts to 20 mm, and tumor invasion of the B2 + 3 bile duct but not the hepaticojejunostomy Enhanced abdominal computed tomography
and three dimensional-drip infusion cholangiography-computed tomography. a Arrows show a low-density tumor, 32 mm in diameter, in the
lateral section of the liver. Arrow heads shows a dilated intrahepatic bile duct. b 3D-DIC-CT revealed dilation of the right and left
hepatic ducts to 20 mm, and tumor invasion of the B2 + 3 bile duct but not the hepaticojejunostomy She underwent a left hemihepatectomy with
left-sided caudate lobectomy, preserving the hepaticojejunostomy that had been established in the previous operation. Intraoperative frozen
sections of the cut end of the left hepatic duct and lymph node of the hilar lesion revealed no metastasis. Amylase levels in the bile juice
of the left hepatic duct were 7621 U/L, and bile juice culture detected the presence of Enterococcus faecalis. The cut surface of the tumor
was 32 mm in diameter, hard and whitish; the margin was somewhat lobulated and the tumor had invaded the bile duct of the lateral segment
(Fig. 3a). The tumor contained atypical cells with nuclei with enriched chromatin and showed morphological variety. The atypical cells had a
poorly glandular arrangement (Fig. 3b).Fig. 3Gross findings of the excised specimen and histopathological findings. a Arrow shows the tumor
and the arrow head shows the dilated intrahepatic bile duct. The cut surface of the tumor was 32 mm in diameter, hard and whitish; the
margin was somewhat lobulated and the tumor had invaded the B2 + 3 bile duct. b The tumor was composed of solid cell nests with occasional
glandular spaces. Tumor nuclei were vesicular with coarse chromatin, small nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm Gross findings of the excised
specimen and histopathological findings. a Arrow shows the tumor and the arrow head shows the dilated intrahepatic bile duct. The cut
surface of the tumor was 32 mm in diameter, hard and whitish; the margin was somewhat lobulated and the tumor had invaded the B2 + 3 bile
duct. b The tumor was composed of solid cell nests with occasional glandular spaces. Tumor nuclei were vesicular with coarse chromatin,
small nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm The patient received postoperative adjuvant systemic chemotherapy with gemcitabine. There was no
recurrence 10 months after surgery. The development of biliary cancer is a major complication in patients with congenital choledochal cysts,
with an incidence of hepatobiliary malignancies associated with congenital choledochal cysts ranging from 2.5 to 28 % . Although the
mechanism of carcinogenesis has not been fully elucidated, it is reported that the carcinogenetic process is caused by repeated damage and
restoration of the biliary epithelium by a mutual countercurrent of pancreatic and bile juice. The regenerated epithelium gradually produces
a variant accompanied by cellular atypical changes, as well as mutations of the K-ras and p53 genes . These processes may lead to mucosal
metaplasia and biliary tract malignancy. Excision of the entire extrahepatic bile duct and hepaticoenterostomy are recommended to prevent
the development of biliary carcinoma, because it separates bile from pancreatic juice flow. However, some patients develop intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma long after the separation-operation. Kobayashi et al. . reported biliary tract cancer before and after separation-
operations for patients with congenital biliary dilation, and concluded that the relative risk in the post-surgery group was still higher
than in the general population, although it was decreased by approximately 50 % after the separation-operation. This suggests that the
epithelium of the remnant bile duct wall may have already progressed to a precancerous stage by the time of surgery, and that genetic
changes may have taken place or continued during the postoperative period. Furthermore, all patients in this previous study that developed
bile duct carcinoma after surgery had a Todani’s type IV-A dilation, characterized by narrowing of the peripheral bile duct and a dilated
pathologic bile duct. A complete resection of a dilated pathologic intrahepatic bile duct is not a straightforward procedure, and thus the
risk of developing cancer remains high. This was also true in the current case, in which the patient was diagnosed with Todani’s type IV-A
dilation and the residual dilated intrahepatic duct was detected by 3D-DIC-CT. Patients who undergo biliary-enteric anastomosis are thought
to be at risk for developing IHCC after surgery for benign disease, as the reflux of activated pancreatic juice and bacterial contamination
can cause chronic inflammation and carcinogenic processes. Tocchi et al. reported that the incidence of cholangiocarcinomas after
choledochoduodenostomy or hepaticojejunostomy for benign disease is 7.6 and 1.9 %, respectively, and this significant difference occurs
because the activated pancreatic juice can more easily flow back to the biliary tract in a choledochoduodenostomy. Therefore, the reflux of
activated pancreatic juice might be the strongest carcinogenic factor. Re-exposure to pancreatic juice may have been one of the causes of
cancer in the current case. The residual dilated intrahepatic bile duct appeared to have been stimulated by a mutual countercurrent of
pancreatic and bile juice and by intestinal bacteria, because E. faecalis was detected in a culture of the bile juice and amylase levels
were 7621 U/L in the bile juice of the left hepatic duct. Therefore, pancreaticogastrostomy is recommended for patients with congenital
choledochal cysts after PD, because it is more difficult for pancreatic juice to flow backward to the bile duct during this procedure
(Fig. 1 c). Re-anastomosis of the hepaticojejunostomy using another Roux-en-Y to prevent pancreatic juice from flowing backward to residual
dilated right hepatic duct during resection of the IHCC was planned in the current case, because the patient was relatively young. However,
the adhesion of the hepatic hilum and jejunum was strong and there was a risk of damage to the right hepatic artery. Therefore, only a left
hemihepatectomy with left-sided caudate lobectomy was performed, preserving the hepaticojejunostomy that had been established in the
previous operation. Infection with hepatitis B virus or HCV is suggested to be involved in the pathogenesis of IHCC. A large cohort study
revealed that HCV infection conferred a more than two fold elevated risk of developing IHCC, while Yamamoto et al. reported that nodular
IHCC appears to be related to hepatitis viral infection and could be detected at an early stage by following up cases of chronic hepatitis
and cirrhosis. The current patient had not undergone regular follow-up for 18 years after her second operation. However, she underwent
periodic medical check-ups after being diagnosed with chronic HCV infection that allowed IHCC to be detected early and a potentially
curative operation to be performed. An extensive literature search revealed ten reports describing IHCC arising after surgery for a
congenital choledochal cyst (Table 1). The 11 patients, including the current case, included five males, five females and one case of
unknown gender, ranging in age from 16 to 66 years. The mean period between the primary operation and the development of cancer was
15.3 years (2–34 years) and the type of dilation was Todani’s type IV-A in eight patients and type I in one patient. The IHCC was resected
successfully in only four of these patients, three had an unresectable advanced tumor and one had a resectable tumor that was inoperable due
to poor liver function. A periodic medical check-up is important for detecting the tumor at an early stage; since cholangiocarcinoma is not
characterized by distinct clinical symptoms until its advanced late stages.Table 1Published cases of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma arising
several years after surgery for a congenital choledochal cystCaseSexAge (years)Todani tumor typeYears after surgerySite of
carcinomaResectabilityFirst author1F58IV-A7LtUnresectedGallagher 2F38IV-A17–UnresectedChandhuri 3M3320RtUnresectedCohen
4––IV-A2RtResectedScudamore 5M29IV-A3BilUnresectedJoseph 6F18IV-A2.4LtUnresectedKobayashi 7F52I10AResectedGoto 8M46IV-A26MUnresectedSuzuki
9M44IV-A34LtResectedShimamura 10M66–20RtUnresectedMatsuura 11F40IV-A28MResectedPresent case Published cases of intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma arising several years after surgery for a congenital choledochal cyst This report presented a case of intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma arising 28 years after the initial operation of excision of a Todani’s type IV-A congenital choledochal cyst with
reconstruction by Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy. The patient had multiple possible risk factors for developing IHCC, including remaining
IV-A congenital biliary dilation, subsequent modified Child PD that induced re-exposure of pancreatic juice, and chronic HCV infection.
Careful long-term follow-up is therefore recommended for high risk patients even after separation-operation. The authors have no conflict of
interest. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
