Sudden death in a 66-year-old woman with squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity and exclusive metastatic involvement of the right
stellate ganglion and right nerve vagus is reported. The patient also suffered from paroxysmal atrial fibrillation treated with quinidine.
An autopsy showed exclusive metastases to the right stellate ganglion and vagus nerve, along with decreased nerve fibre density in the
ventricular myocardium suggesting that Wallerian axon degeneration of cardiac fibres was responsible for sudden death. Descriviamo un caso
di morte improvvisa in una donna di 66 anni, affetta da carcinoma spinocellulare del cavo orale e con metastasi a livello del ganglio
stellato di destra con coinvolgimento del nervo vago. La paziente era affetta inoltre da fibrillazione atriale parossistica (PAF) in terapia
con quinidine. L'autopsia ha confermato le metastasi a livello del ganglio stellato di destra e del nervo vago omolaterale con contestuale
riduzione della densità delle fibre cardiache del miocardio ventricolare, come osservato nella degenerazione Walleriana, causa della morte
improvvisa. The importance of the peripheral nervous system on cardiovascular activity is well established. Cardiac sympathetic fibres
originate in the upper 1 or 2 thoracic and lower 5 or 7 cervical segments, show synapses between pre- and postganglionic fibers mainly in
the stellate or caudal cervical ganglion and have norepinephrine (NE) as a neurosecretory effector mediator. Eventually, these fibres reach
the senoatrial (SA) node, the atrio-ventricular (AV) node and the ventricular myocardial wall. In contrast, the parasympathetic system
exerts opposite effects on heart activity via acetylcholine (ACh) mediation upon SA and AV node inactivation. Intramyocardial nervous fibre
degeneration has been reported in different degenerative disorders such as Parkinson's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (SLA) 1.
Herein, we describe selective Wallerian axonal degeneration due to metastasis of carcinoma. In 2000, a 66-year-old-woman was hospitalized
for a SCC of the gum involving the mandibular bone and concomitant paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (PAF). After chemotherapy with a ViFUP
scheme (5-FU-Cisplatin-vinorelbine) and RT fractionated (72 Gy), the tumour recurred in the same site the following year. She then underwent
right hemimandibulectomy with cervical lymphadenectomy for yrpT4, ypN0 squamous cell carcinoma. PAF was successfully treated with quinidine
(Class 1A drug, slow release, 250 mg twice a day). In 2002, the surgical scar was removed. Despite the absence of any signs of PAF or other
documented ECG abnormalities, the patient suddenly died on the second day after surgery. An autopsy was performed. The autopsy showed signs
of previous surgical procedures. A single hard white nodule measuring 1 cm in maximum diameter was detected in the soft tissues surrounding
the first right rib. Histological evaluation demonstrated that this was the right stellate ganglion (RSG). Another nodule with these
characteristics, with a diameter of 2 cm, was found adjacent to the right carotid artery. The heart did not show any macroscopic
alterations, and the coronary arteries and cardiac valvular system were free of atherosclerotic lesions. The central nervous system and
other organs showed no macroscopic alterations. Samples of the midbrain, pons, bulbus, heart, right carotid and RSG were histologically
examined. All specimens were fixed in 4% phosphatebuffered formaldehyde for 12 hours, embedded in paraffin, cut in 4 μm sections and stained
with haematoxylin and eosin. Immunohistochemistry was performed with antibodies against S-100 protein (polyclonal, dilution 1:2000, Dako)
and neurofilament (NF) (2F11, dilution 1:100, Dako) by using an automated immunostainer (DakoAutostainer, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), and then
incubated with a high sensitivity detection kit (Dako EnVision Plus-HRP, Dako) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Peroxidase
activity was developed with 3-3'-diaminobenzidine- copper sulphate (Sigma Chemical Co, St Louis, MO, USA) to obtain a brown-black end
product. The prevalence of nerve density in the ventricular wall was evaluated by counting all nerve fibres in 1 mm2 at 400×, highlighted by
the S-100 and NF antibodies on transversal sections of myocardium. The nerve density evaluated by this technique in four heart samples
obtained from subjects who died of non-cardiac-related diseases were used as positive controls. Histologically, squamous cell carcinoma was
seen to permeate the perinevrium of the VN where degeneration of schwann cells and axonal bodies were observed, as well as the body of RSG
where ganglion cells showed loss of Nissl's body, vacuolated cytoplasms, nuclear fragmentation and atrophy (Fig. 1). The heart showed
fragmentation of myocardium cells, without any degenerative changes of cells or band contractile degeneration. Immunostaining for S-100
protein and NF showed an lower density nervous fibres in the ventricular wall (Fig. 2a-b). View of metastasis in the RSG. Neoplastic (thin
arrow) and gaglion degenerate cells (thick arrow) are visible. Nerve density evaluated by NF staining. Pathological heart fibres (a)
compared with a normal heart (b). Diminished nerve density in (a) evaluated by NF staining is apparent. The S-100- and NF-positive mean
myocardial nerve density was 340 and 2.75/mm2 in the present case, respectively, and 652 and 4.6/mm2 in controls, respectively. The central
nervous system, as well as other organs, did not show any macroscopic or histological alterations. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first report documenting a reduction of density in nervous fibres in the myocardial wall associated with metastatic involvement of RSG and
VN by SCC of the oral cavity, leading to sudden death. The role of the peripheral nervous system on cardiovascular activity is well
established 2. Cardiac sympathetic fibres show pre- and postganglionic synapses, mainly in the stellate or caudal cervical ganglion, and
have NE as neurosecretory effectors. These fibres reach the seno-atrial (SA) node, the atrio-ventricular (AV) node and the ventricular
myocardial wall. In contrast, the parasympathic system exerts opposite effects on heart activity via acetylcholine mediation upon SA and AV
node inactivation. A reduction in myocardial nervous fibres has been reported in patients affected by degenerative diseases of the cardio-
regulatory centre of the brain stream and spinal cord 3. The causative mechanism responsible for disease is likely due to Wallerian axon
degeneration of the RSG 4, which results in progressive increases in QTc and eventual ventricular fibrillation with cardiac arrest (torsades
de pointes), as documented in experimentally denervated dog hearts, chronic pain syndromes, RSG block or after neck surgery. In all these
situations, the block of RSG activity is usually preceded by bradycardia and an increase in the P-P and the QTc intervals. As no specific
alterations in the QTc or P-P intervals were observed in the present case, we speculate that the disappearance of nerve fibres in the
cardiac wall could evoke a Bezold- Jarish-like reflex (BJR), which leads to sudden bradycardia, ventricular fibrillation and hypotension
without previous ECG alterations 5. The BJR is a cardiac reflex due to rapid enlargement of the cardiac cavity due to blood overload.
Because the reflex arc is altered, it occurs incorrectly, leading to bradycardia and lowering of blood pressure, which in a heart with PAF
could give rise to syncope and ventricular fibrillation. A delayed or incomplete response of the signal can be the cause of subsequent
ventricular fibrillation and sudden death even without ECG alterations, as previously demonstrated 5. The effects of the nervous system upon
control of heart beat are very important, and the terminal alteration of heart nerve density should always be evaluated whenever the cause
of death is uncertain, and in particular, in patients without clinical or instrumental signs of disease.
