We report a case of malignant melanoma of Eustachian tube with extension to the middle ear cavity and nasopharynx in a 51-year-old woman who
presented with right ear fullness. Computed tomography showed a soft tissue mass in the middle ear cavity and causedthe widening and eroding
of the bony eustachian tube. Magnetic resonance imaging showed well enhancing mass in eustachian tube extending nasopharynx to middle ear
cavity. A biopsy of the middle ear cavity mass revealed a malignant amelanotic melanoma. Malignant melanoma usually affects the skin, but
may also arise from the mucosa. Mucosal melanoma accounts for 1% of all melanoma of the head and neck, with most cases in the nasal and oral
cavity. A malignant melanoma in the Eustachian tube is so rare that only 6 cases have been reported until recently (1-5). To the best of our
knowledge, there was no report of the computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings of a malignant melanoma in
Eustachian tube, which extended to nasopharynx and middle ear cavity simultaneously. Here, we present the magnetic resonance (MR) imaging
findings of a primary amelanotic melanoma of the Eustachian tube with unusual extension. A 51-year-old woman with no significant medical
history presented at a local otolaryngologist with right ear fullness. Only chronic otitis media and mastoiditis were diagnosed. On a
follow-up examination after treatment, her symptom did not improve and an otorhinolaryngologic examination revealed a dark colored mass
behind the tympanic membrane. CT showed a soft tissue mass in the middle ear cavity, which was widening and eroding the bony Eustachian tube
(Fig. 1A). MRI revealed an elliptical shaped well-defined mass, located in the Eustachian tube and extending to the orifice in the
nasopharynx to the middle ear cavity. The mass showed iso-signal intensity to muscle on T1-weighted image (Fig. 1B, C) and high signal
intensity on T2-weighted image with moderate homogeneous enhancement following the administration of contrast material (Fig. 1D, E). Neither
an enlarged retropharyngeal node, evidence of head and neck melanoma, or systemic abnormalities was found. A biopsy specimen of the dark
colored middle ear cavity revealed a malignant melanoma. Although, a hematoxylin-esosin stain did not reveal tumor cells containing melanin
(Fig. 1F), tumor cells were strongly positive for melanoma antibody HMB45 (Fig. 1G), Melan (Fig. 1H), and S-100 on immunohistochemical
stainings. Of the results of the histopathologic study suggest an amelanotic melanoma as the final diagnosis. During her work up, no other
primary melanoma was found. Melanoma is composed of a proliferation of melanocytes, which derive from the neural crest and subsequently
migrate into the nasal mucosal surface with an ectodermal origin. Mucosal melanomas of the head and neck mostly occur between the fifth and
seventh decades of life, with a slight male predominance, equally involving the sinonasal or oral mucosa (6). Unusually, the malignant
melanoma can be found in the nasopharyngeal opening of the Eustachian tube (1, 2, 5), restricted to Eustachian tube (4), and extending from
the middle ear cavity to the nasopharynx (3). The etiology of mucosal melanoma is still unknown at present (7). Radiological studies are
mandatory for the evaluation of the middle ear cavity mass. CT is useful to determine the bone change, but it is difficult to make a
differential diagnosis by CT alone because bone destruction is negligible and the ossicles are intact in malignant melanoma of the middle
ear cavity (8). Moreover, the inferior soft-tissue resolution of CT make the diagnosis more difficult (5). MR imaging is more useful for
evaluation of the melanoma in the extension of the tumor and the components of the mass. Even though a physical examination revealed only a
middle ear cavity mass, the tumor could extend from the Eustachian tube to the nasopharynx. The signal intensity of the lesion largely
depends on the concentration and distribution of melanin in the tumor (9). Characteristic MR imaging findings of high signal intensity on
T1-weighted image and low signal intensity on T2-weighted image are due to higher content of melanin in the tumor (10). Conversely, in cases
of an amelanotic melanoma, the signal intensity of the mass can demonstrate low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal
intensity on T2-weighted images (8, 11). In the presenting case, we found the erosion of the bony Eustachian tube on CT and a well
demarcated tumor extension on MRI. However, the signal intensity of the tumor did not show the characteristic signal intensity of melanoma,
and hence, we can hardly consider the malignant melanoma on MR imaging. In considering the differential diagnoses of the lesion along the
Eustachian tube extending from the middle ear cavity and nasopharynx, one should include squamous cell carcinoma, glomus tumor, and
lymphoma. Squamous cell carcinoma usually originates from the Rosenmuller fossa and is limited by its cartilaginous portion and
pharyngobasilar fascia. It is difficult to find squamous cell carcinoma in the Eustachian tube. A glomus tumor has a unique salt-and-pepper
pattern and serpentine flow void with intense enhancement. Lastly, lymphoma may involve the Eustachian tube, but it often shows bulky mass
and lymphadenopathy (5, 11, 12). This case demonstrates an unusual manifestation of a malignant melanoma. One should have to consider the
malignant melanoma as a differential diagnosis, if we found the following characteristics: (1) a soft tissue mass in the Eustachian tube
extending from the middle ear cavity to the nasopharynx, even if it does not shows typical high signal intensity on T1 weighted image; (2)
an erosion of the bony Eustachian tube. 51-year-old woman with malignant melanoma of Eustachian tube. A. Computed tomography of amelanotic
melanoma. Soft tissue mass in middle ear cavity is widening and eroding bony Eustachian tube. B-E. Magnetic resonance imaging of amelanotic
melanoma, which is characterized as elliptical-shaped well defined mass located in Eustachian tube and extending from orifice in nasopharynx
(arrows) to middle ear cavity (arrowheads). Mass shows iso-signal intensity to muscle on T1-weighted images (B, C), with moderate
homogeneous enhancement following administration of contrast material (D, E). F-H. Histopathological study of amelanotic melanoma. Most
cells do not contain melanin (F, Hematoxylin-Eosin, original magnification Ã— 10). On immunohistochemical stainings, tumor cells are strongly
positive for melanoma antibody HMB45 (G) and Melan-A (H).
