Laryngeal chondrosarcomas are a very rare malignancy with less than 150 cases reported in the literature. Of these, the epiglottis is the
most unusual primary neoplastic subsite. Uncertainties arise owing to the extremely rare nature of the condition with regard to treatment
and investigation for metastases in overtly low grade cases. We present the case of a 62-year-old woman with a low grade chondrosarcoma,
arising from the tip of the epiglottis, presenting with dysphagia but no other symptoms. Only 150 cases of laryngeal chondrosarcoma exist in
the world literature. The epiglottis is the least common primary site of tumour with four cases reported worldwide. Over 95% of all
chondrosarcomas are low grade and are treated by surgical excision, including conservative surgical laryngectomy options.1–4 Diagnostic
uncertainties arise due to the extremely rare nature of laryngeal chondrosarcomas. Treatment dilemmas exist regarding the metastatic
potential of epiglottic chondrosarcomas compared with chondrosarcomas elsewhere in the body.2,4,5 A 62-year-old woman presented to the
otolaryngology department with a 6-month history of worsening dysphagia, having been referred by her general practitioner under the ‘2-week
wait’ initiative for suspected head and neck malignancy. This affected solids but liquids were unaffected. She had no odynophagia or reflux
symptoms and her voice was unchanged. There were no lateralising symptoms. She was well systemically and had no significant medical or
family history. She had never smoked and drank alcohol only occasionally. Mouth and oropharyngeal examinations were normal. There were no
palpable neck nodes. A flexible nasendoscopy was performed in clinic. This yielded views of a large smooth swelling on the tip of the
epiglottis. Magnetic resonance imaging of the neck, performed to delineate the lesion, showed a large, spherical, well-circumscribed mass
extending from the tip of the epiglottis, with high signal intensity in T2 weighted images. The lesion represented a mucous retention cyst
radiologically (Fig 1). There appeared to be a wide margin of normal epiglottic cartilage separating the mass from the rest of the laryngeal
cartilage skeleton. Laser excision biopsy of the lesion was carried out uneventfully. The swelling was felt to resemble a mucous retention
cyst, measured 11mm × 11mm × 6mm and was sent for histological analysis. Histologically, the cyst was smooth surfaced and firm
macroscopically. Microscopy demonstrated a polypoid, neoplastic mass covered by non-dysplastic squamous epithelium. The core contained a
lobulated proliferation of cartilaginous tissue with focal ossification and central focal degenerative change. There was little nuclear
polymorphism seen (Figs 2–4). Figure 1T2 weighted sagittal magnetic resonance imaging showing a smooth, well defined mass arising from the
tip of the epiglottis Figure 2Scanning power photomicrograph showing a focally ossifying cartilaginous tumour underneath the epiglottic
squamous epithelium Figure 3Medium power photomicrograph showing a lobular and patchily hypercellular proliferation of atypical chondrocytes
Figure 4High power photomicrograph showing atypical binucleate chondrocytes in a single lacuna T2 weighted sagittal magnetic resonance
imaging showing a smooth, well defined mass arising from the tip of the epiglottis Scanning power photomicrograph showing a focally
ossifying cartilaginous tumour underneath the epiglottic squamous epithelium Medium power photomicrograph showing a lobular and patchily
hypercellular proliferation of atypical chondrocytes High power photomicrograph showing atypical binucleate chondrocytes in a single lacuna
There was diagnostic uncertainty as to whether the mass represented a benign or malignant lesion. Consequently, a tissue block and
haematoxylin and eosin stain were sent for a second opinion. The provisional diagnosis of chondrosarcoma was supported: ‘Although a benign
chondroma has been considered, given the areas of increased cellularity and focal binucleated chondrocytes, this is best regarded as a low
grade chondrosarcoma.’ Although the tumour closely approached the base of the specimen, it was separated from the margin by a thin rim of
connective tissue and appeared to have been excised completely. Although the neoplasm appeared low grade, further partial excision of the
epiglottis was performed to confirm a clear margin of excision. Excision margins were confirmed as clear. There has been no recurrence at 18
months post-excision and follow-up is planned for 5 years. There was clinical uncertainty as to the appropriate follow-up duration due to
the lack of evidence base. Following the second excision of tissue from the epiglottis to confirm clearance, the patient reported occasional
symptoms of aspiration but these resolved after six months, with speech and language therapy advice and intervention. Laryngeal
chondrosarcomas are an extremely rare form of tumour that show a wide variability in behaviour, with high grade tumours acting in a locally
aggressive fashion as well as spreading via haematogenous and lymphatic routes to the lungs, kidney, spleen and cervical vertebrae. Low
grade chondrosarcomas behave more like benign chondromas.5 The epiglottis is the rarest subsite of this tumour, with four cases reported in
the literature. Of these, only one case went on to develop metastasis and was confirmed to be high grade at histological analysis.2 Five-
year survival and metastatic behaviour varies with grade of neoplasm. Low grade chondrosarcoma has a 90% five-year survival and 0% rate of
metastasis. High grade chondrosarcoma has a much lower five-year survival rate of 43% and a 71% metastasis rate.5 There has been some
controversy in the past regarding the need to completely excise low grade chondrosarcomas in the head and neck, given that there is a
negligible risk of metastasis. More recent opinion advocates complete excision, supplemented with radiotherapy in cases where excision might
be difficult.5 The rarity of such epiglottic lesions reinforces the need for histological investigation of excised specimens. A second
opinion should be considered readily in cases where malignancy needs to be established. Histology will form the basis for ongoing management
and follow-up. Discussion in a multidisciplinary setting is therefore advocated to ensure accurate diagnosis, appropriate management and
intervention where necessary.
