There have been no reports describing polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV) in eyes with retinitis pigmentosa (RP). A 63-year-old woman
who had been diagnosed as having RP was referred to us because of sudden onset of blurred vision in her right eye. Funduscopic examination
revealed retinal findings typical of RP in both eyes. The macular area of the right fundus showed polypoidal lesions with massive
hemorrhages. Fluorescein angiography and indocyanine green angiography showed multiple polypoidal lesions. Optical coherence tomography
showed a large hemorrhagic retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) detachment and polypoidal lesions. The PCV subsided after three applications of
anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) therapy and a single application of photodynamic therapy, but “mottled lesions” with hyper-
and hypofluorescence appeared temporal to the macula after disappearance of hemorrhage. We present a case of PCV in an eye with RP. Further
studies are necessary to clarify whether anti-VEGF therapies could affect RPE status in eyes with RP. Macular choroidal neovascularization
(CNV) is a relatively rare complication of RP . PubMed search with “CNV” and “retinitis pigmentosa (RP)” on 14 September 2012 extracted only
three articles reporting a case with classic CNV diagnosed angiographically. However, PubMed search with “polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy
(PCV)” and “retinitis pigmentosa” on the same date did not extract any articles. We present a case with development of PCV in an eye with
RP. A 63-year-old woman presented with sudden onset of blurred vision in her right eye. She had been diagnosed as having retinitis
pigmentosa (RP) without systemic complications. No members of her family had been diagnosed with RP. At initial examination, best-corrected
visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.2 in the right eye and 1.0 in the left. Visual field examination using Goldmann perimetry showed concentric
constriction of the field bilaterally and paracentral scotoma in the right eye. Funduscopic examination revealed retinal findings typical of
RP, such as bone spicule-like pigmentation, attenuated retinal vessels, and waxy pallor of optic disc in both eyes (Fig. 1). The macular
area of the right fundus showed polypoidal lesions between the optic disc and central fovea accompanied by massive hemorrhages. Fluorescein
angiography (FA) showed two points with dye leakage, and indocyanine green angiography (IA) showed multiple polypoidal lesions (Fig. 2c, d).
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed a large hemorrhagic retinal pigment epithelial detachment (PED) and polypoidal lesion
(Fig. 2b).Fig. 1Color fundus photographs of both eyes showing findings typical of retinitis pigmentosa, such as bone spicule-like
pigmentation, attenuated retinal vessels, and waxy pallor of optic discFig. 2Retinal findings before (a–d) and after (e–h) intravitreous
injection of ranibizumab (IVR) and photodynamic therapy (PDT). a Color fundus photograph of right fundus, showing the massive hemorrhage in
the macula. b Optical coherence tomography (OCT) of right fundus, showing a large hemorrhagic retinal pigment epithelial detachment (PED)
and polypoidal lesion. c Fluorescein angiography (FA) after 3 min of dye injection of right fundus, showing two points with dye leakage. d
Indocyanine green angiography (IA) after 3 min of dye injection of right fundus, showing multiple polypoidal lesions. e Right fundus after
treatment, showing the decrease of subretinal hemorrhage. f OCT after treatment, showing flat polypoidal lesions. g FA after 5 min of dye
injection, showing mottled lesions with hyper- and hypofluorescence in the temporal region of macula (arrowheads). h IA after 10 min of dye
injection of right fundus showing remnant polypoidal lesions with vascular networks Color fundus photographs of both eyes showing findings
typical of retinitis pigmentosa, such as bone spicule-like pigmentation, attenuated retinal vessels, and waxy pallor of optic disc Retinal
findings before (a–d) and after (e–h) intravitreous injection of ranibizumab (IVR) and photodynamic therapy (PDT). a Color fundus photograph
of right fundus, showing the massive hemorrhage in the macula. b Optical coherence tomography (OCT) of right fundus, showing a large
hemorrhagic retinal pigment epithelial detachment (PED) and polypoidal lesion. c Fluorescein angiography (FA) after 3 min of dye injection
of right fundus, showing two points with dye leakage. d Indocyanine green angiography (IA) after 3 min of dye injection of right fundus,
showing multiple polypoidal lesions. e Right fundus after treatment, showing the decrease of subretinal hemorrhage. f OCT after treatment,
showing flat polypoidal lesions. g FA after 5 min of dye injection, showing mottled lesions with hyper- and hypofluorescence in the temporal
region of macula (arrowheads). h IA after 10 min of dye injection of right fundus showing remnant polypoidal lesions with vascular networks
After three consecutive intravitreal injections of 0.05 ml (0.5 mg) ranibizumab (IVR), a single application of photodynamic therapy (PDT)
was performed. At 7 months after the last intravitreous ranibizumab injection and 2 months after PDT (Fig. 2e–h), the subretinal hemorrhage
was decreased and polypoidal lesions became flat on OCT (Fig. 2f), although PED remained unchanged. Mottled lesions with hyper- and
hypopigmentation appeared temporal to the macula after disappearance of hemorrhage (Fig. 2g). At the final visit, constriction of visual
field had not progressed and BCVA was maintained during follow-up. Although the pathogenesis of PCV has not been fully clarified, PCV has
been reported to occur in association with other retinal degenerative disorders such as tilted disc syndrome, high myopia, angioid streaks
[4, 5], and central serous chorioretinopathy . Martine et al. suggested the possibility that various factors such as impaired choroidal
blood flow and degeneration of retinal pigmented epithelium could cause development of PCV . In addition to RPE alterations, it has been
reported that reduction of choroidal blood flow in clinical settings as well as histomorphological changes of choroidal blood vessels occur
in eyes with RP . The PCV in our patient subsided after three injections of ranibizumab and a single application of PDT. We performed PDT to
obtain closure of polypoidal lesions. Although there have been no reports of PCV in RP, the two case reports [2, 3] describing classic CNV
in RP found that the CNV in these two patients responded well to IVB. Adverse effects of intravitreal injections of anti-vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) drugs in eyes with RP have not been reported, whether this therapy was to treat CNV [2, 3] or cystoid
macular edema [10, 11]. In our patient, mottled fluorescence with a mixture of hypo- and hyperpigmentation appeared temporal to the macula
after disappearance of hemorrhage. The RPE alterations observed in our patient appear similar to what was found to develop in four young
females with classic CNV treated by PDT , and further studies are necessary to clarify whether such RPE alterations develop in association
with RP. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
