Vernix caseosa peritonitis (VCP) is a rare and poorly recognised condition resulting from a sustained foreign body reaction to the vernix
caseosa of the baby. This case-based review aims to highlight its importance for any medical team managing patients with peritonitis who
have undergone a recent Caesarean section. A 31-year-old woman presented 5 weeks after a Caesarean section with symptoms and signs of
peritonitis. Laparotomy and peritoneal lavage is the mainstay of treatment for VCP. Knowledge of the condition may stop inadvertent
resection of normal intra-abdominal organs. Greater awareness of VCP is required to ensure earlier recognition as patients can recover well
following timely operative intervention. Vernix caseosa is a thick white paste that is present on foetal skin from the third trimester of
pregnancy until shortly after birth.1 It is unique to our species and consists predominantly of water (80%) combined with proteins and
lipids in equal portions (20%). Biologically, vernix caseosa is beneficial to the neonate and infant via production of antimicrobial
peptides2 as a moisturiser for neonatal skin and providing a waterproof barrier allowing for maturation of the neonatal stratum corneum. It
is thought to be the cause of vernix caseosa peritonitis (VCP).3 VCP is a rare condition that affects women post-Caesarean section following
spillage of amniotic fluid and vernix caseosa into the peritoneal cavity. Vernix caseosa can result in a profound systemic inflammatory
response that necessitates maternal laparotomy and may lead to erroneous resection of intra-abdominal organs. Diagnosis is often difficult
due to a lack of awareness of the condition and may only be made following histological examination. Confusion regarding diagnosis can
result in considerable anxiety for both the patient and surgeon in the ongoing management of the condition. We present a case report of VCP
in a 30-year-old woman 5 weeks after a Caesarean section. A 30-year-old primigravida woman delivered a healthy baby boy by lower segment
Caesarean section (LSCS) at 40 weeks after conversion from natural delivery due to failure to progress. She had an unremarkable antenatal
period and no significant medical history. Five weeks following the LSCS, she presented with a 48-hour history of generalised abdominal
pain, vomiting and diarrhoea, and was admitted with a provisional diagnosis of gastroenteritis under the care of the medical team. Clinical
examination revealed a systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) with a pulse rate of 150bpm, blood pressure of 97/55mmHg and
temperature of 39.1ºC. Abdominal examination demonstrated a soft abdomen with generalised tenderness. The LSCS wound looked healthy. The
C-reactive protein level was 481mg/l with a neutropaenia of 2.2 × 109/1. Intravenous fluid and antibiotics were administered. Computed
tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis on day 2 demonstrated some free fluid. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit
(ICU) and was prescribed granulocyte colony stimulating factor, which increased her neutrophil count to 41.2 × 109/l. Stool, urine and blood
cultures were all negative. The patient deteriorated further with increased pain, a distended abdomen and signs of peritonitis. Repeat CT
demonstrated an increased volume of intra-abdominal free fluid. An urgent laparotomy was performed, which revealed a multiloculated fluid
collection in the abdomen and pelvis that was not malodorous. The uterus was intact. There was widespread inflammatory change throughout the
peritoneal cavity with large volumes of fibrinous material. Appendicitis was presumed and an appendicectomy and extensive peritoneal lavage
performed. Two large drains were sited, in the right paracolic gutter and the pelvis. The patient improved post-operatively with a
concomitant decrease in inflammatory markers. Histology of the appendix revealed acute fibrinous serositis and material taken from the
abdominal cavity demonstrated degenerate anucleate squamous cells in keeping with VCP (Fig 1). Further cultures taken from the drain post-
operatively revealed no evidence of intra-abdominal infection. The patient was discharged pain free 23 days after surgery. Figure 1Histology
of appendix and intra-abdominal tissue: The pan-cytokeratin stain demonstrates a mesothelial reaction on the serosal surface of the appendix
and over the serosal exudates (A; 10x magnification). At higher power one can see both nucleated cell staining with cytokeratin (mesothelial
cells) and anucleate linear structures consistent with anucleate squamous cells (B; 200x magnification). Both nucleated mesothelial cells
and anucleate cells consistent with squamous cells are seen in the exudates from the peritoneal cavity (C; 400x magnification). Histology of
appendix and intra-abdominal tissue: The pan-cytokeratin stain demonstrates a mesothelial reaction on the serosal surface of the appendix
and over the serosal exudates (A; 10x magnification). At higher power one can see both nucleated cell staining with cytokeratin (mesothelial
cells) and anucleate linear structures consistent with anucleate squamous cells (B; 200x magnification). Both nucleated mesothelial cells
and anucleate cells consistent with squamous cells are seen in the exudates from the peritoneal cavity (C; 400x magnification). The
literature base for VCP is limited (Table 1) and, to date, only 20 cases of VCP following a Caesarean section have been published.3–15 It is
unclear whether two of the cases of VCP described by Herz et al5 had been published previously. The largest series of three patients is from
Australia.16 Most of the cases, however, were from the US.17 VCP has also been seen antenatally following spontaneous rupture of membranes.
Caesarean sections performed on two women revealed VCP at the time of delivery, presumably as a result of reflux of vernix caseosa into the
peritoneal cavity.18 Table 1Case reports of vernix caseosa peritonitis following Caesarean sectionAuthorsCasesCaesarean to acute
presentationOperation performedResected organsHistopathologyMicrobiologyOutcomeKrumerman and Pouliot, 19764128
daysLaparotomyAppendixAppendiceal serositis, giant cells surrounding anucleate squamesPeritoneal material culture -veRecoveredHerz et al,
198252a) 8 days;b) 14 daysa) Laparotomy + adhesiolysis;b) Laparotomya) None;b) Hysterectomy + BSOa) Granulomatous reaction + squames, lanugo
hair, keratin and meconium;b) Tubo-ovarian abscess + squames surrounded by giant cellsa) N/A;b) Exudate cultured B
melaninogenicusRecoveredFreedman et al, 198262a) 9 days;b) 17 daysa) Laparotomy;b) Laparotomya) Appendix;b)Hysterectomy + BSOa) Foreign body
reaction + keratin debris and hair fragments;b) Tubo-ovarian abscess + squames engulfed by foreign body giant cellsN/AN/ABoothby et al,
19857135 daysLaparotomyDescending colonColon not perforated, giant cells, macrophages with degenerating superficial squamous
cellsN/ARecoveredGeorge et al, 199582a) 8 days;b) 10 daysa) Laparotomy;b) Laparotomya) Ascending colon;b) Omentuma) Serositis, granulomatous
inflammation with anucleate squamous cells, lanugo hair;b) mixed inflammation with anucleate squamous cellsa) Peritoneal fluid culture
-ve;b) Culture -veRecoveredZellers and Balaj, 199692a) 12 days;b) 5 daysa) Laparotomy;b) Laparotomya) Appendix;b) AppendixBoth a) and b):
Periappendicitis + foreign body reaction with anucleate squamous cellsN/ARecoveredNuñez, 19961013 daysLaparotomyAscending colonNot
perforated, peritonitis, foreign body granulomas with anucleated squamesN/ARecoveredMahmoud et al, 19971113 daysLaparotomyAppendixAnucleated
squamous cellsN/ARecovered with steroid therapyTawfik et al, 19981214 daysLaparotomyNoneMixed inflammatory exudate + squames, hair shafts
and meconium pigmentBlood + aspirate cultures -veFurther abscess drainedCummings et al, 20011316 daysLaparoscopyGallbladderGranulation
tissue aggregated about anucleate squames; no acute cholecystitisGram -veRecoveredSelo-Ojeme et al, 2007317 daysLaparotomyNoneN/AScanty
growth of Gram positiveRecoveredStuart et al, 2009163a) 5 days;b) 8 days;c) 4 daysa) Laparotomy;b) Laparotomy;c) Laparoscopic to open + 2nd
laparotomya) Omental biopsy;b) None;c) Appendix at 2nd operationa) Serositis, granulomas + fetal squames;b) Chronic granulomas + fetal
squames;c) Acute inflammation surrounding fetal squames and keratin debris from 1st operationa) N/A;b) Urine culture -ve;c) Urine + blood
cultures -vea) Recurrent vernix caseosa abscesses;b) 7 months’ pain;c) Recurrent obstructionWisanto et al, 201014124
daysLaparoscopyNoneAnucleated squamous cellsN/ARecoveredMyers and Fernando, 201115121 daysFine needle aspirationNoneMixed inflammatory
response with anucleate and mature squamous cellsCulture -veRecovered with no operation-ve = negative; BSO = bilateral salpingo-
oophorectomy; N/A = not applicable Case reports of vernix caseosa peritonitis following Caesarean section -ve = negative; BSO = bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy; N/A = not applicable Our patient presented to hospital five weeks following her LSCS, which is the longest period
currently described in the literature. Diagnosis was made after seven days, multiple radiographic tests, a period on the ICU, and following
laparotomy and histological confirmation. This highlights the diagnostic dilemma with VCP. A study published in 2011 reports that VCP could
be diagnosed with image guided biopsy15 although this may not be practical in the presence of peritonitis and SIRS. Most women in this
cohort of patients, in corroboration with our case, progressed to emergency laparotomy and organ resection for presumed diagnoses of more
common causes of peritonitis (appendicitis, bowel/ureteric injury or uterine rupture). Our experience suggests such difficulty in diagnosis
can result in considerable psychological stress for the patient. Following our experience with VCP, we recommend laparotomy and peritoneal
lavage as the mainstay of treatment, with intravenous antibiotic cover and critical care support if required. We note that steroid therapy
has been used successfully in some cases.11 However, in our case we felt it was not appropriate. Prognosis appears to be good with the
majority of patients recovering following surgery. Nevertheless, some authors report recurrent vernix caseosa abscess formation
necessitating drainage or reoperation.12,16 Although the condition is not often described in medical textbooks,17 with the increasing number
of Caesarean sections performed worldwide, this diagnosis must be considered in post-Caesarean section women presenting with abdominal pain
and signs of peritonitis. This case highlights the lack of awareness in the medical community of VCP. In spite of its rarity, VCP represents
serious post-Caesarean section morbidity and may require urgent surgical management. Diagnosis requires close involvement with the
histopathologist. Management should entail rigorous peritoneal lavage and placement of intra-abdominal drains to monitor for early
recurrence. It is unknown whether VCP can present later than five weeks post-partum but consideration of VCP as a diagnosis is important in
any woman presenting with an acute abdomen following a recent Caesarean section. We would like to thank the Departments of Gynaecology and
Acute Medicine at Great Western Hospital for their help.
