Rightward cerebral lateralization has been suggested to be involved in the neuropathology of autism spectrum conditions. We investigated
functional and neuroanatomical asymmetry, in terms of handedness and corpus callosum measurements in male adolescents with autism, their
unaffected siblings and controls, and their associations with executive dysfunction and symptom severity. Adolescents with autism did not
differ from controls in functional asymmetry, but neuroanatomically showed the expected pattern of stronger rightward lateralization in the
posterior and anterior midbody based on their hand-preference. Measures of symptom severity were related to rightward asymmetry in three
subregions (splenium, posterior midbody and rostral body). We found the opposite pattern for the isthmus and rostrum with better cognitive
and less severe clinical scores associated with rightward lateralization. The neuroanatomical underpinnings of autism spectrum conditions
(ASC) are still poorly understood, but theories surrounding atypical cerebral asymmetry as one possible factor influencing the condition
have received considerable attention. Many people with ASC show a pattern of deficits in skills ascribed to the left hemisphere, such as
language, communication and symbol use, whilst appearing relatively unimpaired in right hemisphere functions such as visuospatial abilities
(Blackstock 1978; Fein et al. 1984; Prior and Bradshaw 1979). These observations have given rise to the notion that the condition might be
related to atypical cerebral organization, with the left hemisphere being most affected. Further evidence for this ‘left hemisphere
dysfunction’ theory stems from neuroimaging studies showing a reversal of asymmetry in language-related regions such as the inferior lateral
frontal cortex (De Fosse et al. 2004; Herbert et al. 2002), the parieto-occipital region near the posterior language zone (Hier et al. 1979)
and the planum temporale (Rojas et al. 2002, 2005). These alterations of typically occurring asymmetries are corroborated by findings based
on single photon emission computed tomography (Chiron et al. 1995; Ohnishi et al. 2000), and positron emission tomography (Muller et al.
1999) showing atypical or reversed cerebral blood flow in frontal language regions. Other brain regions have been implicated, too.
Computerized tomography (CT) scanning reveals increased cerebral blood flow in the right temporal and right parietal lobes (Hashimoto et al.
2000). Siegel et al. (1992) found leftward reductions in glucose metabolism in the posterior putamen. Also, the amygdala was shown to
display reduced leftward volume in individuals with autism (Rojas et al. 2004). Another source of evidence for left hemisphere dysfunction
is research into functional asymmetry. On dichotic listening tasks, children with ASC do not show the usual right ear advantage for speech
processing (Prior and Bradshaw 1979). They tend to prefer to use their left ear when listening to verbal and musical stimuli, compared to
typically developing children who prefer to use their left ear for musical and their right ear for verbal stimuli (Blackstock 1978). Studies
of handedness, as another marker of lateral preference, support these findings. It is well documented that there are elevated rates of left-
handedness in ASC (Colby and Parkison 1977; Gillberg 1983; Hauser et al. 1975; McCann 1981; McManus et al. 1992; Soper et al. 1986; Tsai
1983). However, many studies also report a high incidence of ambiguous or inconsistent lateral preference (Bryson 1990; Cornish and McManus
1996; Fein et al. 1984; Soper et al. 1986). Thus, 30–40 % of children with ASC display inconsistent hand preference, whereas 15–20 % exhibit
established left-hand preference, which is almost twofold increase compared to the general population (Leboyer et al. 1988). Mixed-handed
individuals with ASC score lower on cognitive tasks in comparison to individuals with ASC with consistent hand preference (Fein et al. 1984;
Soper et al. 1986). There is a close link between cerebral lateralization and connectivity, with more strongly lateralized brains relying on
less inter-hemispheric transfer. In particular, the corpus callosum has emerged as a target of research into cerebral connectivity owing to
its associations with functional asymmetry and other structural brain asymmetries (Aboitiz et al. 1992; Clarke and Zaidel 1994; Dorion et
al. 2000; Hopkins and Rilling 2000; Witelson and Goldsmith 1991). It is the main fibre tract mediating inter-hemispheric communication
between (mostly) homologous cortical areas, which are critical for higher cognitive functions (Tomasch 1954). The corpus callosum is
topographically organized such that different subsections project to different cortical regions (see Fig. 1). This distributional pattern of
the inter-hemispheric fibres is of essential importance as regional characteristics shed light on the organization of associated cortical
areas.Fig. 1Anatomical sub-regions of the corpus callosum and cortical regions it projects to according to Witelson (1989). Subdivisions of
the corpus callosum in seven regions after tracing and parcellating in AnalyzeDirect, Inc., KS: SP splenium (projects to occipital, inferior
temporal cortex), IS isthmus (projects to superior temporal, posterior parietal cortex), PM posterior midbody (projects to somatosensory,
posterior, parietal cortex), AM anterior midbody (projects to motor cortex), RB rostral body (projects to premotor, supplementary motor
cortex), G genu (projects to prefrontal cortex), R rostrum (projects to caudal/orbital prefrontal, inferior premotor cortex). Upper figure
shows manually traced outline, projected for illustration onto a representative brain image in coronal section. Lower figure shows 3D
rendered MNI template image in MRIcron Anatomical sub-regions of the corpus callosum and cortical regions it projects to according to
Witelson (1989). Subdivisions of the corpus callosum in seven regions after tracing and parcellating in AnalyzeDirect, Inc., KS: SP splenium
(projects to occipital, inferior temporal cortex), IS isthmus (projects to superior temporal, posterior parietal cortex), PM posterior
midbody (projects to somatosensory, posterior, parietal cortex), AM anterior midbody (projects to motor cortex), RB rostral body (projects
to premotor, supplementary motor cortex), G genu (projects to prefrontal cortex), R rostrum (projects to caudal/orbital prefrontal, inferior
premotor cortex). Upper figure shows manually traced outline, projected for illustration onto a representative brain image in coronal
section. Lower figure shows 3D rendered MNI template image in MRIcron The majority of studies have focused on volumetric differences between
the sexes and handedness groups (Allen et al. 1991; Tepest et al. 2010; Witelson 1989), or clinical subgroups (Foong et al. 2000; Hardan et
al. 2000; Hynd et al. 1991). One of the most reliable findings is that consistently right-handed men have a smaller corpus callosum than
non-consistently right-handed men (Witelson 1985, 1989). With respect to ASC, overall size reductions have been reported (Brambilla et al.
2003; Hardan et al. 2000, 2009). Considering its topography, one might assume that hemispheric lateralization might not only relate to
callosal size but also co-occur with callosal asymmetries. As there is an inverse relationship between cortical asymmetry and corpus
callosum volume (Galaburda et al. 1990), global callosal size reductions (in association with greater hemispheric and functional
lateralization) may be mediated by regional right or leftward callosal reductions, depending on which hemisphere exhibits dominance.
However, to date, only one study has tested whether there are structural asymmetries of the corpus callosum itself. Luders et al. (2006)
were the first to suggest that the distribution of callosal fibres is influenced by structural differences in homologous cortical regions.
They report stronger rightward lateralization in the anterior callosal section which projects to the motor cortices in right-handed males,
concluding that stronger leftward lateralization of motor functions in right-handers reduces left commissural connections. Despite the
obvious functional relevance of corpus callosum asymmetries, no other detailed study has been performed in either typical people or any
clinical population. Callosal size reductions in autism are in line with theories suggesting that ASC is a condition of neural under-
connectivity and deficits result from reduced synchronization between different brain regions (Just et al. 2004). Also, Courchesne and
Pierce (2005) and Belmonte et al. (2004) argue that underlying neural defects in ASC are due to reduced long distance connectivity between
the frontal cortex and other systems, and to local over-connectivity in the frontal lobe. In fact, individuals with ASC display impairments
in fronto-striatal higher-order functions in social, emotional and cognitive domains, such as social and flexible behaviour and
neuropsychological performance. Accordingly, they have impaired performance on executive function tasks such as the Wisconsin Card Sorting
test (WCST; Berg 1948), the Tower of Hanoi (Borys et al. 1982), and two subtests of the CANTAB involving frontal function—the Stockings of
Cambridge and the Intra-dimensional/Extra-dimensional Shift task (Ozonoff et al. 2004). Even though factors related to these
neuropsychological deficits remain unclear, it has been suggested that impairments in executive function might be caused by atypically
rightward lateralized fronto-striatal network systems deficient in integrating information (Rinehart et al. 2001). Both neuroanatomical and
functional connectivity alterations have thus been proposed to be core elements of the pathophysiology of ASC. The purpose of the present
study was to examine whether adolescents with ASC display both atypical functional asymmetry in handedness, and atypical neuroanatomical
asymmetry in the corpus callosum. We expected individuals with ASC to show a leftward handedness shift and more pronounced rightward
lateralization. A further aim was to explore whether atypical lateralization is related to social, cognitive and language functions, which
are impaired in ASC and have been related to aberrant connectivity (Courchesne and Pierce 2005). Cognitive functions were assessed using IQ
and neuropsychological performance on two tasks from the CANTAB (Robbins et al. 1998) measuring executive functioning. Clinical symptoms
were assessed using the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule-Generic (Lord et al. 2000) and the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (Lord
et al. 1994). Finally, as ASC is strongly genetic, with heritability being estimated around 60–90 % (Bailey et al. 1995; Folstein and Rutter
1977; Folstein and Rosen-Sheidley 2001; Ronald et al. 2006; Steffenburg et al. 1989; Sullivan et al. 2012), we compared people with ASC not
only to controls, but also to their unaffected siblings, to shed light on a potential neuroanatomical endophenotype of autism. Initial
functional MRI findings in this cohort have already been described (Spencer et al. 2011). Participants comprised 40 adolescents with high-
functioning autism (HFA) or Asperger Syndrome, 40 unaffected, full biological siblings of those in the autism/Asperger group, and 40
typically developing controls. Further recruitment details of this cohort have been described previously (Spencer et al. 2011). All
participants in the autism group were positive on both the ADOS-G (Lord et al. 2000) and ADI-R (Lord et al. 1994). All siblings and controls
scored below threshold (<15) on the Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ; Berument et al. 1999). Based on self-reports on the Kiddie
Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia (K-SADS; Puig-Antich et al. 1987) and parents’ reports on a family history questionnaire,
controls did have neither any psychiatric disorder nor any first- or second-degree family members with ASC. Subjects were excluded if they
met any of following criteria: (1) a current IQ less than 70, as assessed by the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI; Wechsler
1999); (2) any current or previous use of psychotropic medication; (3) any psychiatric diagnosis (other than an ASC in the autism group);
(4) any history of seizures, drug abuse, intracranial surgery or head injury. In view of the well-characterized sexual dimorphism in brain
structure (Giedd et al. 1997), for this study we focused only on the male sub-sample. This comprised 35 adolescents with autism (M age:
14.48 years; SD: 1.74; range: 12.01–18.53), 12 siblings (M age: 15.3 years; SD: 2.01; range: 12.1–18.95) and 20 controls (M age:
15.27 years; SD: 1.62; range: 12.29–17.62). All subjects were group-matched for age ranging between 12 and 18 years. Groups did not differ
in terms of mean age (F (2, 64) = 1.752; p = 0.182). The WASI (Wechsler 1999) was used to assess intellectual function. Participants with
autism had mean IQ of 108.4 (SD: 16.15; range: 81–146), siblings had mean IQ of 114.67 (SD: 10.78; range: 97–129) and controls had mean IQ
of 114.05 (SD: 11.39; range: 83–131). Groups did not differ in terms of mean IQ (F (2, 64) = 1.474; p = 0.237). The project received ethical
approval from the Cambridgeshire 1 Research Ethics Committee. Handedness was assessed using the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (EHI;
Oldfield 1971), a self-completed questionnaire for determining hand preference. It consists of 10 items measuring handedness for everyday
tasks such as writing, drawing, throwing, using scissors, using a toothbrush, using a knife, using a spoon, using a broom, striking a match
and opening a box. Participants are asked to indicate which activity they perform exclusively with the right hand, exclusively with the left
hand or with either hands. Scores are expressed as a laterality quotient using the formula “total number of items performed with the right
hand—total number of items performed with the left hand/total number of items performed by both hands”. Scores were treated as quantitative
variables ranging from −100 indicating strongest left-handedness to +100 indicating strongest right-handedness. In total, we received 33
questionnaires from the ASC group, 10 from the sibling group and 19 from the control group (see Table 1).Table 1Range of age, IQ, asymmetry
index values and handedness across the three groupsVariableASC (n = 35)Controls (n = 20)Siblings (n = 12)ASC versus siblingsASC versus
controlsMeanSDRangeMeanSDRangeMeanSDRangeAge (n = 67)14.481.7512.01 to 18.5315.271.6212.29 to 17.6215.302.0112.10 to 18.95IQ
(n = 67)108.4016.1581 to 146114.0511.3983 to 131114.6710.7897 to 129Asymmetry indices (AI) (n = 67)FpFp Splenium AI0.421.55−2.43 to
3.460.601.61−2.88 to 4.270.451.61−2.20 to 2.731.6710.2030.2090.65 Isthmus AI−0.934.27−10.00 to 8.650.883.96−7.54 to 10.370.783.09−4.17 to
7.880.0460.8320.5090.479 Posterior midbody AI0.083.45−12.38 to 7.38−1.013.94−9.17 to 8.96−1.252.81−5.04 to
3.790.5760.45214.3420.000 Anterior midbody AI1.012.70−6.71 to 4.27−1.093.09−8.09 to 6.40−1.252.87−7.54 to 3.580.0000.9835.3410.025 Rostral
body AI0.713.40−7.28 to 7.900.853.77−5.24 to 7.150.183.95−7.23 to 4.290.4410.5110.8640.357 Genu AI0.873.62−6.55 to 8.210.163.43−9.33 to
7.220.653.80−5.30 to 6.762.8220.1010.0150.903 Rostrum AI7.8513.24−40.9 to 21.4−5.208.69−21.69 to 12.37−6.682.00−35.11 to
15.880.0000.9970.170.898 Total volume AI0.041.50−4.30 to 3.45−0.121.60−3.49 to 3.14−0.151.24−2.49 to 2.360.860.362.540.118 Handedness
(n = 62)51.1659.81−89.5 to 10069.1944.56−70 to 10086.2014.3757.89 to 100105.50.0822590.292Handedness was assessed using the Edinburgh
Handedness Inventory. Values range from +100 (strongest right-handedness) to -100 (strongest left-handedness). Corpus callosum asymmetry
index values > 0 indicate rightward asymmetry and values < 0 indicate leftward asymmetry. Differences in sample size are due to fewer
available measures on handedness in the three groups with n = 33 for ASC, n = 19 controls and n = 10 for siblings Range of age, IQ,
asymmetry index values and handedness across the three groups Handedness was assessed using the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory. Values range
from +100 (strongest right-handedness) to -100 (strongest left-handedness). Corpus callosum asymmetry index values > 0 indicate rightward
asymmetry and values < 0 indicate leftward asymmetry. Differences in sample size are due to fewer available measures on handedness in the
three groups with n = 33 for ASC, n = 19 controls and n = 10 for siblings MRI scans were acquired using a Siemens 3T Tim Trio scanner
(Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany) at the Medical Research Council Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK, using a high-
resolution T1-weighted 3D MPRAGE (magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo) sequence with the following parameters: voxel size
1 × 1 × 1 mm, repetition time = 2,250 ms, echo time = 2.99 ms; inversion time = 900 ms; flip angle = 9°; total scan time = 4 min 16 s).
Image alignment and tracing measurements were performed using Analyze 10.0 (AnalyzeDirect, Inc., KS). Raters were blind to study group and
all other details regarding the scans. All of the images that made up the dataset were traced by the two independent raters (DF and LRC).
Before determining the corpus callosum size, all scans were spatially realigned in all three axes along the AC-PC (anterior to posterior
commissure). The two blinded raters independently defined the corpus callosum for each of the 120 scans using a graphical tablet by tracing
the corpus callosum in 13 consecutive sagittal slices, comprising the mid-sagittal slice and six adjacent para-sagittal slices on each side
(Hardan et al. 2009). Subsequently the corpus callosum tracings were divided into seven subregions by the two independent raters (Witelson
1989). The volume of the corpus callosum was defined as the sum of all 13 sagittal sections traced, and the volume for each subsection as
the mean of the volumes from the two independent raters. Inter-rater reliabilities were calculated using the intra-class correlation
coefficient (ICC). Corpus callosum asymmetry indices (AI), comparing the total volume of the six left para-sagittal slices (LS) with the
total volume of the six right parasaggital slices (RS), were calculated as: asymmetry index (AI) = (RS − LS)/(RS + LS) × 100 (see Table 1).
Neuropsychological cognitive performance in terms of executive function was measured in terms of executive function with two subtests from
the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB; Robbins et al. 1998) including the Intra-Dimensional/Extra-Dimensional
(ID/ED) Shift task and the Stockings of Cambridge (SOC). These tests assess cognitive flexibility and planning ability respectively, each of
which is reported to be impaired in ASC (Ozonoff et al. 2004). The ID/ED task specifically measures attentional set-shifting and mental
flexibility in terms of rule acquisition and reversal. Participants were asked to select a shape according to a rule. After 6 correct trials
the rule changed and participants had to shift to a new rule. The task consisted of nine stages of which two constituted critical shifts.
These occurred at stage six of the task when participants had to shift to a different stimulus within a relevant dimension (the “intra-
dimensional” shift), and stage eight when participants had to shift attention to a new dimension (the “extra-dimensional” shift). In light
of the graded nature of the task, performance is indicated by the number of stages completed, the number of trials per stage, and the number
of errors made. Errors at the extra-dimensional shift stage are comparable with the category shift in the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (Fray
et al. 1996), and are considered particularly to reflect cognitive flexibility. The number of errors made at stages eight and nine was
identified as the variable of interest for this analysis. Also, research indicates that especially these two stages involve prefrontal
function (Dias et al. 1996). In this computerized adaptation of the Tower of London task (Shallice 1982), participants were asked to move
balls in the lower display to match a pattern in the upper display. This task increased in difficulty from 1 to 5 move problems. The mean
number of moves required for completing the task measured participants’ planning and problem solving ability. Subdomains of the ADI-R (Lord
et al. 1994) and the ADOS-G (Module 4) (Lord et al. 2000) were used to determine clinical symptoms in terms of abnormal social behaviour
(ADI subdomain-A; ADOS subdomain-B), communication (ADI subdomain-B; ADOS subdomain-A) and stereotyped, restricted behaviour (ADI
subdomain-C; ADOS subdomain-D). Composite scores from ADOS-G and ADI-R were calculated as follows:Four items composed the ADOS communication
score, with a range of 0–8. Seven items composed the ADOS reciprocal social interaction score, with a range of 0–14. Four items composed the
ADOS stereotyped behaviours and restricted interests score, with a range of 0–8.15 items composed the ADI qualitative abnormalities in
reciprocal social interactions, with a range of 0–30. 13 items composed the ADI qualitative abnormalities in communication score, with a
range of 0–26. Six items composed the ADI restricted, repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behaviour score, with a range of 0–12. For
these scores the caregiver’s descriptions of the adolescents’ childhood aged 4–5 or ‘‘ever’’ behaviours were used. Four items composed the
ADOS communication score, with a range of 0–8. Seven items composed the ADOS reciprocal social interaction score, with a range of 0–14. Four
items composed the ADOS stereotyped behaviours and restricted interests score, with a range of 0–8. 15 items composed the ADI qualitative
abnormalities in reciprocal social interactions, with a range of 0–30. 13 items composed the ADI qualitative abnormalities in communication
score, with a range of 0–26. Six items composed the ADI restricted, repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behaviour score, with a range of
0–12. For these scores the caregiver’s descriptions of the adolescents’ childhood aged 4–5 or ‘‘ever’’ behaviours were used. To assess the
degree of lateralization in terms of handedness, we compared the raw Edinburgh Handedness Inventory scores of the three groups using a
Kruskal–Wallis non-parametric test, as scores were not normally distributed. We investigated corpus callosum asymmetry by a univariate
analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) for AI based on total volumes, and a multivariate analysis of covariance (MANCOVA) for all AI based on the
seven subregions. For both models, main effects of group and handedness were investigated along with the group-by-handedness interaction.
Age was included as a covariate in both models. Subsequently each sub-region was tested separately with an equivalent ANOCOVA to observe the
profile of putative differences along the corpus callosum. Due to the greater number of comparisons involved in investigating all
subregions, we sought to control for multiple comparisons by setting the p value for significant at p = 0.01. As the seven subregions are
related to one another (with correlations up to r = 0.53), we considered that full Bonferroni correction as p = 0.05/7 = 0.007 may be too
stringent in this case. To identify possible endophenotypic patterns of between-group differences, we subsequently conducted between two-
group tests (ASC vs. controls and siblings vs. controls) for any subregions for which significant group-by-handedness interactions were
found in the above step. For these follow-up calculations between the two pairs of groups, a Bonferroni correction was applied and a level
of statistical significance was set at p = 0.05/2 = 0.025. The relationship between corpus callosum asymmetry and cognitive function was
investigated in separate ANCOVAs with full scale IQ and the mean number of moves in the SOC task as the dependent variables and in a MANCOVA
with total number of errors made in stages eight and nine on the ID/ED task as the dependent variables. In all three models, main effects of
group and AI along with the group-by-AI interaction were investigated covarying for age. For these calculations, the p value was not
corrected, as the two stages on the ID/ED task are highly inter-correlated (r = 0.81, p < 0.001) and thus the tests are not independent of
each other. Similar to the analyses above, group-by-AI interaction was subsequently tested for an endophenotype using two group tests: ASC
versus controls and siblings versus controls. Bonferroni correction was applied; p = 0.05/2 = 0.025. To explore any relationship between AI
and symptoms, within-group partial correlation (controlling for age) was undertaken between corpus callosum asymmetry measures and clinical
symptom severity as measured by composite measures of the ADOS-G and ADI-R for the ASC group only. In the above analyses, significant main
effects or interactions found were further investigated using correlation analysis. There was no significant overall effect of group across
the three groups (H(2) = 3.313; p = 0.191). Also, participants with ASC did not differ significantly from their unaffected siblings
(U = 105.5; z = −1.741; p = 0.082; r = −0.27) or from controls (U = 259; z = −1.054; p = 0.292; r = −0.15) (see Fig. 2). We then applied a
quartile split in order to test whether the groups were differently distributed across the handedness spectrum, without any significant
effects (25 %: H(1) = 0.097; p = 0.755; 50 %: H(2) = 1.028; p = 0.598; 75 %/100 %: H(2) = 0.95; p = 0.622).Fig. 2Distribution of raw
handedness scores as measured by the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory ranging from +100 (strong right-handedness) to −100 (strong left-
handedness) in the 3 groups Distribution of raw handedness scores as measured by the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory ranging from +100
(strong right-handedness) to −100 (strong left-handedness) in the 3 groups As the sample size was less than 25 in the sibling and control
group, we calculated in addition the Kolmogorov–Smirnov Z. We found a trend towards a significant difference between the ASC and sibling
group (Z = 1.318; p = 0.062), with the ASC group being less consistently right-handed, but no significant difference between the ASC and
control group (Z = 0.72; p = 0.678). Inter-rater reliability was calculated for all corpus callosum volume measurements: ICC = 0.98 for the
total volume; ICC = 0.99 for the splenium; ICC = 0.97 for the isthmus; ICC = 0.96 for the posterior midbody; ICC = 0.97 for the anterior
midbody; ICC = 0.99 for the rostral body; ICC = 0.97 for the genu; ICC = 0.97 for the rostrum. In terms of asymmetry, we performed an ANCOVA
for AI derived from global volume and a MANCOVA for AI based on the seven subregions with age as a covariate exploring main effects and
group-by-handedness interaction. For AI from global volume groups did not differ significantly from each other based on handedness (F (2,
55) = 1.806; p = 0.174). For AIs from the subregions of the corpus callosum, the group-by-handedness MANCOVA interaction bordered on
significance (Wilk’s lambda = 0.637; F (14, 98) = 1.774; p = 0.053). Separate univariate ANCOVAS for each sub-region showed a significant
interaction between group and handedness for the posterior midbody (F (2, 55) = 7.572; p = 0.001). The anterior midbody (F (2, 55) = 2.601;
p = 0.083) and genu (F (2, 55) = 2.614; p = 0.082) showed a marginal trend towards significance. Two-group analyses revealed that group-by-
handedness interaction for ASC versus control was significant in the posterior midbody (F (1, 47) = 14.342; p < 0.001) with significant main
effects of both group (F (1, 47) = 11. 747; p = 0.001) and handedness (F (1, 47) = 5.271; p = 0.026) (see Fig. 3) and for the anterior
midbody (F (1, 47) = 5.341; p = 0.025) with a significant main effect of handedness (F (1, 47) = 5.019; p = 0.03) (see Fig. 3). There were
no significant group-by-handedness interactions in the siblings versus controls comparison (posterior midbody: F (1, 24) = 0.004; p = 0.953;
anterior midbody: F (1, 24) = 0.001; p = 0.972).Fig. 3Asymmetry of the posterior midbody in standardized residual units (with age regressed
out) in relation to handedness across the three groups. Values >0 indicate rightward asymmetry and values <0 indicate leftward asymmetry.
Blue line ASC, red line siblings and green line controls (Color figure online) Asymmetry of the posterior midbody in standardized residual
units (with age regressed out) in relation to handedness across the three groups. Values >0 indicate rightward asymmetry and values <0
indicate leftward asymmetry. Blue line ASC, red line siblings and green line controls (Color figure online) Asymmetry index values of the
posterior midbody were positively correlated with handedness in the control group (r = 0.561; p = 0.013), indicating that rightward
asymmetry of these subregions was associated with a rightward shift in handedness. The same association was marginally significant for the
anterior midbody (r = 0.417; p = 0.076). These correlations were not significant in the ASC group (posterior midbody: r = 0.017; p = 0.926;
anterior midbody: r = 0.02; p = 0.912) and the sibling group (posterior midbody: r = 0.113; p = 0.757; anterior midbody: r = −0.069;
p = 0.85). For IQ the ANCOVA revealed a significant main effect of rostral asymmetry with stronger rightward asymmetry being related to
higher IQ (F (1, 60) = 6.04; p = 0.017). Subsequent partial correlations with age as a covariate, conducted separately by group, revealed
that the association was only significant in the ASC group (r = 0.526; p = 0.001), but not in the siblings (r = 0.205; p = 0.546) or
controls (r = 0.243; p = 0.316). For the ID/ED, the only significant interaction occurred between group and asymmetry index values of the
isthmus for stage eight (F (2, 61) = 3.338; p = 0.042) across all three groups. Follow-up analyses revealed that this interaction was
significant between the ASC and control group for the number of errors made in stage eight (F (1, 51) = 7.481; p = 0.009) with a significant
main effect of group (F (1, 51) = 6.58; p = 0.013). The interaction was not significant across siblings and controls (stage eight: F (1,
28) = 2.497; p = 0.125). Subsequently conducted correlations (separate by group) between stage eight of the ID/ED task and asymmetry values
of the isthmus were significant in both the ASC group (r = −0.371; p = 0.028) and the control group (r = 0.633; p = 0.003), but not the
sibling group (r = −0.174; p = 0.588). For the SOC task, the interaction between group and corpus callosum asymmetry did not reveal any
significant results. Bivariate partial correlations (accounting for age) between AI and symptom severity were carried out only in the ASC
group. We found that asymmetry of the splenium was positively correlated with symptom severity scores for social interaction difficulties
(subdomain-B) (r = 0.358; p = 0.038) on the ADOS-G. Also, asymmetry of the posterior midbody was significantly positively correlated with
symptom severity scores for repetitive and stereotyped behaviours (subdomain-D) (r = 0.411; p = 0.016) on the ADOS-G. In both cases, greater
rightward asymmetry was associated with a greater severity of symptom scores. Also, rightward asymmetry of the rostral body was associated
with higher scores for abnormalities in reciprocal social interaction (subdomain-A) on the ADI-R (r = 0.390; p = 0.023). Asymmetry of the
rostrum was significantly negatively correlated with symptom severity scores for social communication (subdomain B) as measured by the ADI-R
(r = −0.406; p = 0.017), with greater leftward asymmetry being associated with greater severity of symptoms. This study tested whether ASC
was related to an atypical pattern of hemispheric lateralization, both in terms of functional and neuroanatomical asymmetry. We found
significant interactions between group and handedness for the posterior and the anterior midbody between participants with ASC and controls.
Both results implied that left-handed controls were more strongly leftward lateralized than left-handed adolescents with ASC in both
subregions. In the control group, but not the ASC group, this correlation between handedness and asymmetry was significant. Luders et al.
(2006) found similar results showing stronger rightward lateralization in the anterior callosal section which projects to the motor cortices
in right-handed males, concluding that stronger leftward lateralization of motor functions in right-handers reduces left interhemispheric
fibres. Our findings are consistent with this and reports suggesting that motor transfer is more efficient from the right to the left
hemisphere via the corpus callosum (Braun et al. 2003; Saron et al. 2003). We did not find this relationship between handedness and
asymmetry in the ASC group. As the lack of an association does not necessarily imply impairment, we can just speculate that the absence of
the normally occurring leftward lateralization in left-handed people with ASC might result in a less favourable distribution of commissural
connections. The corpus callosum has been found to play an important role in the neuropathology of autism. However, most studies have only
looked at its size and there are no existing results on asymmetry. We therefore can only compare our findings to other groups of people with
brain lesions in these callosal regions or indirectly via looking at injuries in cortical areas, which the callosal subregions carry
projections to. The anterior midbody projects to the motor cortex (Hofer and Frahm 2006), while the posterior midbody projects to the
posterior parietal cortex (PPC), which is a highly interconnected region integrating motor and sensory input from somatic and visual
modalities (Andersen and Buneo 2002). It subserves higher cognitive functions such as early planning of sensory-guided movements (such as
eye, grasp, and reach movements) and regulation of controlled behaviour in response to environmental stimuli. Studies looking at behavioural
and cognitive outcomes in patients with lesions in the middle and posterior part of the corpus callosum report deficits in complex bimanual
coordinative movements (Meyer et al. 1998) and interhemispheric transfer of tactile information (Bentin et al. 1984). Patients with PPC
lesions display difficulties in following verbal commands, performing sequences of actions and fine-tuning eye and hand movements when
grasping things (Geschwind and Damasio 1985; Goodale and Milner 1992; Perenin and Vighetto 1988). Similar problems in ASC suggests that
atypical lateralization of the posterior midbody and the anterior midbody might underpin symptoms such as clumsiness (Burgoine and Wing
1983; Ghaziuddin and Butler 1998), impaired fine motor skills (Dawson and Watling 2000), difficulties in motor planning and planned
sequencing of actions (Greenspan and Wieder 1997) and difficulties responding to spoken commands (Preis 2006). As one sub-region of the PPC
is involved in the planning of eye-movements, the question arises whether anomalous joint attention and eye contact in autism may be related
to this brain region as well. In a case study, Dimond et al. (1977) report behavioural, verbal and emotional deficits following section of
the middle third of the corpus callosum. After surgery impairments were present in linguistic ability characterized by simplified or
repetitive and stereotyped language, alongside difficulties in expressing and naming emotions, and a change in ear preference on the
dichotic listening task as well as in hand-preference in favour of the left. The similarities in symptomatology to autism are striking.
Also, reports of complete agenesis of the corpus callosum confirm that associated symptoms such as impaired social skills overlap with the
diagnostic criteria for autism (Badaruddin et al. 2007; Paul et al. 2007). We have to be careful when deriving conclusions from these
studies for our own, as we don’t know if atypical asymmetries and brain lesions are comparable on a neuroanatomical level in terms of
clinical outcome. Still, morphological alterations in the same region might lead to similar cognitive deficits. Previous studies have looked
at the relationship between handedness and the corpus callosum showing that non-consistently right-handed men have a larger corpus callosum
than consistently right-handed men (Witelson 1989). This consistently reported finding seems incompatible with the notion that individuals
with ASC are more often reported to be left-handed and to have reduced corpus callosum volume. Taking both direction (right vs. left) and
degree (consistent vs. non-consistent) of lateralization into account, the non-consistently right-handed individuals might actually
represent a group of people with greater bihemispheric cognitive representation. This would be in line with findings showing that less
strongly lateralized people, such as women, have a larger corpus callosum (Steinmetz et al. 1995). In the same way, Luders et al. (2010)
found that less lateralized left-handers had a larger corpus callosum than strongly lateralized right-handers and so did less lateralized
right-handers in comparison to strongly lateralized left-handers. Future studies should further explore how the direction and the degree of
handedness differentially relate to callosal size and asymmetry in autism in comparison to typical individuals. It has yet to be defined
whether left-handed individuals with autism compose a qualitatively different group, with possibly different degrees of lateralization.
Looking at callosal asymmetries in this context can give us even more detailed information on the location of callosal size reductions or
increases and shed also light on the degree of lateralization in related cortical areas. We did not find an overall difference in handedness
between the three groups. Participants with ASC did not differ from controls in handedness, in contrast to previous studies which have
documented greater functional right-lateralization. However, some studies have failed to establish significant differences in handedness
between people with ASC and controls (Barry and James 1978) or also found significant differences between people with ASC and their siblings
or parents (Boucher 1977; Tsai 1982). Incongruity in results might partly be due to methodological limitations. There are many discrepancies
in handedness assessment across different studies, with some only asking subjects to specify their writing hand (Vuoksimaa et al. 2010),
while others ask them to fill in different questionnaires (Annett 1970; Crovitz and Zener 1962; Oldfield 1971) or perform manual tasks (Hand
Preference Demonstration Task; Soper et al. 1986). Also, studies differ in the way handedness is classified, and where cut-off points for
categories are set, resulting in classifications such as “left- versus right-handedness”, “right- versus non-right-handedness”, and “mixed
handedness”. Many report neither IQ nor age, which is important to specify the level of cognitive functioning and to assess the possibility
of whether mixed-handedness reflects an age-related developmental lag. Due to the small number of available handedness measures in the
sibling (n = 10) and control group (n = 19), the power to detect handedness differences might have been limited. In fact, the effect sizes
for the handedness difference between the ASC and sibling group (r = −.27) and the ASC and control group (r = −0.15) both are very small.
Additionally, non-parametric tests are known to be less powerful than parametric tests. The trend in the data in the expected direction
suggests that with additional numbers the between group differences may reach significance, consistent with previous reports. In view of the
large number of consistent reports, it seems that there is a shift in the handedness distribution towards non-right-handedness in ASC. The
question remaining is what these elevated rates tells us. In contrast to neuroanatomical asymmetries, handedness appears to be a more global
marker of lateralization and due to the lack of a neurobiological substrate, it is less straightforward to interpret. In order to be able to
derive conclusions, it is important to look at it in association with other traits with known brain structural correlates such as language
or cognitive function, which can be impaired in autism. Accordingly, as we did not find a marked difference between our overall sample of
adolescents with ASC and controls, the question arises, whether there are differences in lateralization between certain subgroups within
people with ASC based on their level of functioning. DeLong (1978), for example, argues that there are different handedness subtypes in
autism comprising a “bihemispheric autistic syndrome” which is related to lower levels of functioning and mixed handedness and a “left
hemisphere autistic syndrome” which is less severe and linked to high-functioning autism. In line with this, several studies report that
lower functioning individuals may be more likely to display mixed-handedness (Fein et al. 1984; Tsai 1983). Our ASC group seemed to be less
strongly lateralized compared to the two other groups. The EHI score is not sensitive to differentiate between ambiguous and ambidextrous
handedness patterns, so that this less strongly lateralized pattern in the autism group could mean that they use different hands for
different tasks (ambidextrous) or different hands for same tasks (ambiguous). The latter would reflect that they are unable to establish a
normal pattern of lateralization, which makes them switch hands within tasks. However, as ambiguous handedness has been linked to low
functioning autism and as we only included individuals with IQ scores higher than 70, it is less likely that this applies to our
participants. Future research would benefit from using tests that distinguish between these two patterns and from comparing low-functioning
with high-functioning individuals to establish the relationship between handedness and the level of cognitive functioning. Also, Escalante-
Mead et al. (2003) consider diagnostic sub-groups separately. They reported reduced rates of established lateral preference in individuals
with autism with delayed language development compared to individuals with autism with typical early language acquisition. We did not
distinguish between different subgroups, as we did not look at Asperger Syndrome and HFA separately in our analyses. These considerations
are consistent with the idea that atypical handedness is a marker of different etiologic subgroups within ASC. Future studies should
differentiate between subtypes within ASC, and include measures such as age and IQ, alongside consistent handedness classifications, to
establish whether different patterns of lateralization manifest at different degrees of impairment. Strikingly, we found a significant
correlation between leftward asymmetry of the isthmus and worse performance on stage eight of the ID/ED task in individuals with autism.
Based on Bradshaw’s fronto-striatal model (2001), we would have expected that rightward asymmetry of regions projecting to the frontal lobe,
such as the rostral body, genu or rostrum would show an association with poorer executive function. An association with one of these regions
has been found by Just et al. (2007) showing that size reductions in the genu were associated with functional underconnectivity between
frontal and parietal areas during the Tower of London task. Still, also Keary et al. (2009) report that worse performance in participants
with autism on the Tower of Hanoi and Wisconsin card sorting test was associated with smaller isthmus size. As this region projects to the
tempo-parietal cortex, which is involved in language and complex cognitive functions, its role in executive function has yet to be
established. Since this was the only result for the ID/ED task and there were no results for the SOC task, we assume that atypical
lateralization might play a less crucial role for executive function deficits. Nonetheless, further research is needed to confirm this.
Rightward asymmetry of several callosal subregions such as the splenium, the rostral body and the posterior midbody were associated with
increased symptom severity. The splenium has projections to the occipital and inferior temporal lobe that are crucial for face and object
processing. Schultz (2005) has shown unusually greater activity in the inferior temporal gyrus and less activity in the fusiform face area
(FFA) during face processing in autism compared to controls. Difficulties with face processing in autism constitute an underlying precursor
of social interaction difficulties and might also provide a potential explanation for why alterations in the splenium region are associated
with social interaction difficulties as measured by the ADOS subdomain-B. Rightward asymmetry of the rostral body was related to more marked
abnormalities in reciprocal social interactions as measured by the ADI subdomain-A. This is in line with Bradshaw’s fronto-striatal model
(2001) stating that abnormally lateralized frontal circuits constitute the base for impairments in higher cognitive and social functions
including social behaviour. Rightward asymmetry of the posterior midbody was associated with stronger symptom severity as measured by the
ADOS subdomain-D. As described previously, the PPC integrates sensory and motor input. Autism is sometimes associated with sensory
processing abnormalities in terms of hypo- or hyper-responsiveness to sensory input and sensory processing abnormalities have been found to
be correlated with stereotyped and repetitive behaviour (Baranek et al. 1997). We found rightward asymmetry of the posterior midbody to be
associated with stronger repetitive, stereotyped behaviour, which might suggest an indirect corroboration of that association. This implies
that rightward lateralization (and possibly under-connectivity) may disturb the normal process of planned movement generation and result in
stereotyped patterns of behaviour and body mannerisms. Contrary to the other results, asymmetry of the rostrum did not show rightward
disadvantage. Rostral rightward asymmetry was instead associated with higher IQ scores and less severe communication impairment. This is
particularly striking as this region is thought to connect to prefrontal areas and it has been suggested that dysfunction of the left
fronto-striatal system relates to deficits in higher-order cognitive functions in autism (Bradshaw 2001). This raises the question of
whether not only impairments in high functioning autism, but also strengths of the condition such as high IQ or good systemizing skills,
might be related to the same atypical pattern of lateralization in the same way. Since these two domains (IQ and onset of language) set
Asperger Syndrome apart from classic autism, it would be interesting to test in future research whether there is a difference in cerebral
lateralization between the two diagnostic sub-groups. Even though it is plausible to suggest that as the rostrum is the smallest sub-region
of the corpus callosum it may be difficult to define, remarkably high inter-rater-reliability should substantiate the accuracy of our
measurement. In terms of callosal asymmetry siblings showed an intermediate position between the two other groups for the posterior and
anterior midbody in relation to hand-preference. The same pattern occurred for neuropsychological performance based on isthmus asymmetry.
However, the difference between siblings and controls was not significant for either result. Also in terms of handedness, participants with
ASC showed a more pronounced difference to their siblings than to controls. These findings lead us to assume that cerebral lateralisation
does not appear to be a marker of familial risk for the condition implicating that either environmental factors have considerable influence
on the establishment of lateralization or that individuals with autism carry genetic variants with increased vulnerability for developing
the condition that are not shared by their siblings. In accordance with these findings, a recently published study on the genetic liability
for autism showed that the relative influence of shared environment in twin pairs was higher than genetic heritability (Hallmayer et al.
2011). They raise the issue that genetic factors have been overestimated in previous reports and environmental influence should be taken
into account to a greater extent in future research. Some studies corroborate that genetic influence towards left- handedness is rather
limited. Tsai (1982) found that children with autism significantly differed from their siblings and parents displaying stronger non-right-
handedness. Also Boucher et al. (1990) reported similar findings showing that parents of children with autism had an increased incidence of
pure right-handedness compared to their children. In terms of heritability of callosal morphology, Scamvougeras et al. (2003) found corpus
callosum volume to be highly heritable in young typical men and women, with a genetic influence of 94 %. Nevertheless, other studies report
that the corpus callosum is one of the last main fibre tracts to mature in humans and its functional maturation extends into late childhood
(Rakic and Yakovlev 1968). Thus, reports on environmentally induced callosal size differences (Lee et al. 2003; Sanchez et al. 1998; Schlaug
et al. 2009, 1995) suggest that certain environmental stimuli could possibly affect corpus callosum morphology and patterns of cerebral
lateralization. Underlying mechanisms causing cerebral lateralization are still poorly understood, but as genetic studies of the
developmental origins of handedness have shown, only 25 % of its variability is explained by genetic influences (Medland et al. 2006). It is
believed to be influenced to some extent by factors such as sex (Gilbert and Wysocki 1992), age (Ellis et al. 1998), disruptive events in
pregnancy (Bakan et al. 1973) and prenatal androgen levels (Tan 1991). In particular the latter has been suggested as a potential factor in
contributing to the establishment of functional brain lateralization, as handedness originates prenatally (Hepper et al. 1998; Witelson
1987), and males are more often left-handed than females (Annett 1970; Papadatou-Pastou et al. 2008). Accordingly, exposure to high levels
of testosterone during critical periods of foetal brain development might lead to an unequal brain development enhancing the maturation of
the right hemisphere and resulting in non-right-handedness (Geschwind and Galaburda 1985a, b, c). We have previously shown that prenatal
testosterone is associated with rightward asymmetry of one region of the corpus callosum (Chura et al. 2010) and with asymmetry of specific
grey matter regions (Lombardo et al. 2012). Future research is required to explore whether prenatal testosterone is associated with cerebral
lateralization. It appears that callosal asymmetries are not necessarily negative in general. As seen in our controls and in the study of
Luders et al. (2006), rightward asymmetry of anterior regions seems to be a normal pattern in right-handed men. It would not be surprising
if other studies also found asymmetries in callosal subsections projecting to language regions such as the splenium or isthmus. In the light
of these considerations, there are several explanations that could account for cerebral asymmetries seen in autism. One is the commonly
cited left hemisphere dysfunction theory stating that atypical global rightward asymmetries result in autism-related deficits. Since there
is also normally occurring rightward lateralization in the cerebral cortex in typical people, another possible explanation is that
individuals with ASC exhibit reversed patterns of normal asymmetry, which can occur in either direction. A last possibility is that people
with ASC show the same directional asymmetries as typical people, but might differ in quantitative terms with an atypically greater amount
of asymmetry. In our study, adolescents with ASC did not differ from controls in terms of functional asymmetry (handedness), but
neuroanatomically they showed reversed patterns of the associations between the posterior midbody and anterior midbody and handedness on the
one hand, and between the isthmus and executive function on the other hand. Most neuroanatomical asymmetry measures indicated that rightward
lateralization was associated with stronger symptom severity. We could not compare these findings to the sibling or control group since they
were based on symptoms only present in autism. Thus, for this result, we cannot establish whether the underlying neuroanatomical alteration
is of qualitative or quantitative nature. As seen in the isthmus and rostrum, we could not fully support the left hemisphere dysfunction
theory, as we did not find a consistent picture of that cognitive disadvantage was restricted to rightward lateralization. An important
question for future research consequently is whether the left hemisphere dysfunction theory of autism is too broad an approach and whether
depending on the region being investigated, different patterns of lateralization might be beneficial. As siblings did not show a similar
pattern to the autism group in handedness and were not significantly different from controls in terms of callosal asymmetry (based on
handedness) and executive function (based on callosal asymmetry), we suggest that atypical asymmetry may be a marker of the condition itself
rather than of a familial risk in the broader phenotype. In this study we only had sufficient numbers of male participants and therefore
could not assess whether similar findings are present in females with ASC. We only measured the asymmetry of the corpus callosum, however
its topographic organization indirectly implicates other cortical areas as potentially contributing to the neuroanatomical basis of autism.
As it also includes heterotopic callosal connections to non-corresponding cortical areas, future work should relate asymmetry measures of
other brain regions to cognitive functions and symptom severity in autism. In this paper we have adopted the terminology ASC in preference
to “Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD)”, as we consider this terminology to be less burdensome to individuals and families affected. To avoid
confusion, however, we would point out that we are using ASC to refer to the same conditions as ASD. We are grateful to all participants and
their families for their participation in our study and to all autism support organizations that helped with recruitment. This research was
funded by an MRC Clinician Scientist Fellowship to MDS from the UK Medical Research Council (G0701919). This study was conducted in
association with NIHR CLAHRC for Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust. We are grateful to Dr. Meng- Chuan Lai for comments
and helpful advice.
