Nipple adenoma is a relatively rare benign breast neoplasm, and cases of the disease arising from the axillary accessory breast have very
seldom been reported in the English literature. We report a case of nipple adenoma arising from axillary accessory breast including clinical
and pathological findings. An 82-year-old woman presented with the complaint of a small painful mass in the right axilla. Physical
examination confirmed a well-defined eczematous crusted mass that was 8 mm in size. The diagnosis of nipple adenoma was made from an
excisional specimen on the basis of characteristic histological findings. Microscopic structural features included a compact proliferation
of small tubules lined by epithelial and myoepithelial cells, and the merging of glandular epithelial cells of the adenoma into squamous
epithelial cells in the superficial epidermal layer. Because clinically nipple adenoma may resemble Paget’s disease and pathologically can
be misinterpreted as tubular carcinoma, the correct identification of nipple adenoma is an important factor in the differential diagnosis
for axillary tumor neoplasms. The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1186821489769063 Nipple adenoma is a benign proliferative lesion of the breast that arises
from galactophorous duct of the nipple. It was first recognized as a distinctive entity in 1955 by Jones who referred to it as “florid
papillomatosis” of the nipple duct . Nipple adenoma, also known as nipple duct adenoma, papillary adenoma, erosive adenomatosis, florid
papillomatosis, papillomatosis of the nipple and subareolar duct papillomatosis, is a variant of intraductal papilloma involving the
terminal portion of the galactophorous ducts . Clinically, nipple adenoma can be mistaken for Paget’s disease and can be interpreted
pathologically as a tubular carcinoma. Although axillary tumors have many differential diagnoses ranging from benign to malignant, nipple
adenoma arising from the axillary accessory breast has rarely been described in the English literature. We describe the clinical and
pathological finding relating to a rare case of nipple adenoma arising in an axillary accessory breast. An 82-year-old Japanese woman
presented with the complaint of a painful tumor that had been localized in the right axilla. The tumor was a well-circumscribed eczematous
crusted tumor with erythema that was 8 mm in size, and exhibited erosion but no discharge (Figure 1). The tumor was separate from the
patient’s breast and the axillary lymph nodes were not palpable. It was suspected as being an inflamed epidermal cyst, furuncle or possibly
extramammary Paget’s disease. No neoplastic lesions were detected in the patient’s breast. Complete local excision was performed under local
anesthesia. Histologically, the tumor was diagnosed as nipple adenoma arising from the axillary accessory breast. The patient has had no
local recurrence at 2 years after excision of the tumor. Clinical appearance. Photograph showing a well-circumscribed eczematous crusted
tumor with erythema, 8 mm of the size, and located in the right axilla. In cross section the tumor was 8 mm in diameter, appeared non-
encapsulated and firm, and had no continuity with normal breast tissue. Loupe images revealed that the tumor was composed of a fairly well-
circumscribed but non-encapsulated mass with some ducts and atrophic mammary lobules at its bottom (Figure 2, a). Microscopically, the main
morphological feature was a clearly defined proliferation of ductules around dilated lactiferous ducts. Some ductules showed micropapillary
epithelial hyperplasia. They were proliferating two cell layered glands sprouting from and compressing the ducts resembled adenosis (Figure
2, b). The tumor exhibited central dilated lactiferous ducts and a pseudoinvasive tubular pattern with dense stroma in the peripheral
regions (Figure 2, c). The glandular cells had fairly regular, uniform, round to oval nuclei. There was no hyperchromasia, pleomorphism or
mitotic activity. Inflammatory cell infiltration was mild around the ductules, and fibrosis was considerable. Immunohistochemical studies
using the p63 stain clearly demonstrated a two layer structure composed of an epithelial layer and a myoepithelial layer (Figure 2, d).
Paget’s cells were not identified in the epidermis. Loupe images showing cross-sections of the tumor. a At the top of the section the
epidermis of the accessory nipple can be seen. At the bottom of the section some ducts and atrophic lobules are visible. b A low-power view
showing the architecture with a complex proliferation of ductules around dilated lactiferous ducts. The lesion is relatively well-
circumscribed but has no capsules . c A higher magnification view demonstrating ductules with internal micropapillary proliferations . d
Immunohistochemical staining for p63 to assist the recognition of the two cell layers and demonstrate the participation of myoepithelial
cells . Accessory breast tissue generally develops along the embryonic mammary ridge that extends from the axilla to the groin and is most
common in the axilla. Accessory axillary breast tissue has a relatively common occurrence with an incidence of 0.4-6% ; it is one of the
factors used in the differential diagnosis of axillary tumors. A number of different neoplasms, both benign and malignant, have been found
in axillary breast tissue. The most common of these tumors reported in the literature is a fibroadenoma, and there are scattered case
reports of other tumors including phyllodes tumor and mammary carcinoma . Nipple adenoma is one of the rare benign breast tumor types which
develop within or in the superficial portion of the nipple. On physical examination, the most common findings are an eroded, ulcerated,
crusted nipple and a palpable nodule ; and nipple adenoma can be mistaken clinically for Paget’s disease . In the present case, the tumor
arose from the axillary accessory breast and not the nipple, and extramammary Paget’s disease was hard to diagnose preoperatively. The tumor
was small, eczematous and crusted, and was initially suspected as being an inflammatory disease such as an inflamed epidermal cyst. The
present case is only the 3rd case of nipple adenoma arising from axillary accessory breast to be reported in the English literature, having
been reported by Doctor and Shinn . Microscopically, nipple adenoma is composed of a proliferation of small tubular structures displaying
double layers . Nipple adenoma is a complex benign mammary proliferation that has a variety of histologic appearances. Rosen and Caicco
classified nipple adenoma into four morphological patterns: 1) sclerosing papillomatosis; 2) papillomatosis; 3) adenosis; and 4) mixtures of
these proliferative patterns . In our case, the tubular structure formed a complex branching pattern with some micropapillary epithelial
hyperplasia and was classified as having a mixed pattern. The galactophorous ducts had a squamous cell metaplasia close to the skin. This
feature is also a valuable criterion for the identification of nipple adenoma . An adenosis and pseudoinfiltrative pattern were also
prominent in the present case, and resembled invasive tubular carcinoma or adenosquamous carcinoma. However, demonstration of the two layer
structure consisting of a myoepithelial layer surrounding the epithelial tubules, and the relative uniformity and coherence of the cells,
indicated the benign nature of the tumor . Immunohistochemical staining for p63 was particularly helpful in confirming the two layered
structure (Figure 2, d). Syringomatous adenoma can be excluded as a diagnosis by the absence of irregular, compressed or comma-shaped nest
infiltration into smooth muscle bundles, showing sweat gland differentiation . Standard treatment for nipple adenoma is local excision .
Although nipple adenoma has basically been suggested as being a benign tumor, the relationship between nipple adenoma and carcinoma has not
been elucidated entirely . This is necessary to confirm the requirement for complete resection of the tumor and pathological retrieval.
Recognition of this disease by both the clinician and the pathologist, and close communication between them is important in avoiding
misdiagnosis of malignancy and unnecessarily extensive surgery. A case of nipple adenoma arising from axillary accessory breast was reported
here. The correct identification of nipple adenoma is an important factor in the differential diagnosis for axillary tumors. Recognition of
this rare benign condition is important in preventing misdiagnosis of malignancy. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. YS and SK treated this patient clinically. S-iN, and MK contributed
to pathological diagnosis. YS and MK participated in the sequence alignment and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
