Pyodermatitis-pyostomatitis vegetans is a rare mucocutaneous dermatosis characterized by pustular and vegetating lesions of the skin and
oral mucosa. It is considered a highly specific marker for inflammatory bowel diseases. The authors describe a case of pyodermatitis-
pyostomatitis vegetans in a pediatric patient who presented marked clinical improvement after beginning treatment with oral corticosteroids,
azathioprine, and dapsone. Bowel surveillance is mandatory, since the dermatosis is associated with inflammatory bowel diseases in more than
70% of patients, especially ulcerative colitis. A piodermatite-pioestomatite vegetante é uma dermatose mucocutânea rara, caracterizada por
lesões pustulosas e vegetantes na pele e mucosa oral. É considerada um marcador altamente específico para doenças intestinais inflamatórias.
Os autores descrevem um caso de piodermatite-pioestomatite vegetante em paciente pediátrico, o qual apresentou boa resposta a corticoterapia
oral associada à azatioprina e à dapsona. A vigilância intestinal é mandatória, uma vez que a dermatose está associada a doenças intestinais
inflamatórias em mais de 70% dos casos, especialmente a colite ulcerativa. We describe the case of a twelve-year old patient presented with
a four-month history of painful coalescent ulcerations in the oral cavity and lips, including the tongue and palate, with edema, erythema,
and crusts. Three months later, he presented erythematous vegetating ulcers on the basis of the penis and in the perianal region (Figure 1).
He had no other complaints. A. Lips: ulcerated crusted lesions in the lip mucosa; B. Basis of the penis: erythematous crusted plaques; C.
Perianal region: vegetating erythematous plaque Laboratory tests resulted in normal complete blood count, complement, and immunoglobulins.
Serology for viral hepatitis, syphilis, and HIV were negative. Tests showed high inflammatory activity. The ASCA test (ASCA IgG: 46,13U;
IgA: 50,89U) was positive; the p-ANCA and c-ANCA tests were negative. Colonoscopy was normal. Histopathology of the lower lip and of the
lesions on the basis of the penis showed suprabasal acantholytic cleft and a mixed inflammatory process, with eosinophils. Skin fragments
from the perianal region revealed epidermal hyperplasia, neutrophil abscesses, intraepithelial eosinophils, and a moderate mixed
inflammatory process, with eosinophils on the dermis (Figure 2). Direct Immunofluorescence (DIF) was negative for immunoglobulin and
complement deposits in the oral mucosa. A. Lower lip mucosa: suprabasal clefts and acantholytic cells, mixed inflammatory process with
eosinophils. (H&E X 20). B. Skin of the basis of the penis: epidermal hyperplasia and suprabasal multifocal acantholysis formed by clefts
where there are eosinophils and neutrophils; on the dermis, moderate mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate, with eosinophils and neutrophils.
(H&E X 10). C. Perianal plaque skin: epidermal hyperplasia and intraepithelial voluminous abscesses. (H&E X 10). D. Detail of the abscess:
neutrophilic infiltrate with numerous eosinophils and dissociated keratinocytes. (H&E X 40) Based on the clinical presentation and
histopathological findings, the main diagnoses considered were pemphigus vegetans (a variant of pemphigus vulgaris) and pyodermatitis-
pyostomatitis vegetans (PD-PSV). The differentiation between them could only be made by immunofluorescence, since clinical presentation and
histopathological findings are very similar in both diseases. Direct and indirect immunofluorescence (DIF and IIF) are negative or weakly
positive in PD-PSV, whereas they are positive and reveal strong intercellular deposits of IgG and C3 in pemphigus vegetans.1-3 Considering
that our patient's DIF test was negative, we made the definite diagnosis of PD-PSV. PD-PSV is a rare inflammatory disease characterized by
pustular and vegetating plaques that affect the skin and mucous membranes. The etiology of PD-PSV is unknown, and its pathogenesis is poorly
understood.1,4,5 It is associated with gastrointestinal disease and has been described as a highly specific marker for inflammatory bowel
diseases (IBD).6,7 Diagnostic differentiation between PD-PSV and pemphigus vegetans is essential, even though immunosuppressant regimen
would be similar. The association of PD-PSV with IBD is well known, and IBD precedes the onset of oral lesions by months or years in most
cases. Ulcerative colitis occurs in 70-78%, and Crohn's disease is seen in 11% of patients. In about 15% of cases, skin lesions precede
gastrointestinal symptoms. Therefore, patients with PD-PSV must be monitored to detect the onset of IBD. There is not a single treatment
protocol, and none of the treatment regimens presented solid scientific evidence of having superior efficacy.2,3,8,9 The patient was treated
with prednisone 1mg/Kg/day and azathioprine 1mg/Kg/day. Corticosteroid doses were gradually tapered and stopped at the end of six months.
After normal dosing of glucose-6-phosphatedehydrogenase, dapsone 100mg/day was introduced as a corticoid-sparing agent, and azathioprine was
discontinued one month later. The patient showed improvement of the lesions, which was slower for the perianal plaques (Figure 3). The
patient was followed up as an outpatient for nine months. After that, dapsone was discontinued. He took part in periodic screening protocols
(clinical and laboratorial) for early detection of IBD. Eighteen weeks after beginning treatment. Marked improvement of ulcerated lesions of
the lip mucosa (A) and of the erythematous crusted plaque on the basis of the penis (B). There has been slow improvement of the perianal
lesion (C) Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None * Work conducted at the Hospital University of Brasilia (Hospital
Universitário de Brasília) - University of Brasilia (Universidade de Brasília - HUB-UnB) - Brasilia (DF), Brazil.
