These authors made an equal contribution. Five to 10% of cases of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis are familial, with the most common genetic
causes being mutations in the C9ORF72, SOD1, TARDBP and FUS genes. Mutations in the angiogenin gene, ANG, have been identified in both
familial and sporadic patients in several populations within Europe and North America. The aim of this study was to establish the incidence
of ANG mutations in a large cohort of 517 patients from Northern England and establish the neuropathology associated with these cases. The
single exon ANG gene was amplified, sequenced and analysed for mutations. Pathological examination of brain, spinal cord and skeletal muscle
included conventional histology and immunohistochemistry. Mutation screening identified a single sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis case
with a p.K54E mutation, which is absent from 278 neurologically normal control samples. The clinical presentation was of limb onset
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, with rapid disease progression and no evidence of cognitive impairment. Neuropathological examination
established the presence of characteristic ubiquitinated and TDP-43-positive neuronal and glial inclusions, but no abnormality in the
distribution of angiogenin protein. There is only one previous report describing the neuropathology in a single case with a p.K17I ANG
mutation which highlighted the presence of eosinophilic neuronal intranuclear inclusions in the hippocampus. The absence of this feature in
the present case indicates that patients with ANG mutations do not always have pathological changes distinguishable from those of sporadic
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an adult onset neurodegenerative disease characterized by degeneration
of motor neurones in the cerebral cortex, brainstem and spinal cord. It results in progressive muscular weakness, wasting and paralysis that
typically causes death within 3–5 years of onset 1. Five to 10% of ALS cases are familial and causative mutations have been identified in
several genes, the most common being C9ORF72, SOD1, TARDBP and FUS 2–7. An association between the angiogenin gene (ANG), located on
chromosome 14q11.2, and ALS was originally demonstrated by Greenway and colleagues. They identified that the G allele of the synonymous
rs11701 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) was overrepresented in Scottish and Irish ALS cases compared with controls 8. Subsequent
screening of the coding region of the ANG gene in 1629 ALS cases identified seven missense mutations in 15 ALS patients, including four
familial and 11 sporadic cases 9. Mutations in ANG have subsequently been associated with ALS in nine different populations 10–18. To date
20 different mutations have been identified in ALS patients (Table 1), with ANG mutations accounting for 1.2–2.6% of familial ALS (FALS)
cases and 0.35–0.8% of sporadic ALS (SALS) cases. ANG mutations reported in ALS cases to date Amino acid changes also found in controls.
ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; SALS, sporadic ALS; FALS, familial ALS. Mature ANG is a 14 kDa, 123 amino acid, secreted protein
predominantly produced by the liver. It is a member of the pancreatic ribonuclease superfamily and was originally identified as a potent
factor stimulating new blood vessel growth secreted by tumour cells 19. Exogenous ANG binds to a 170 kDa receptor on the surface of
endothelial cells and is transported into the cell by receptor-mediated endocytosis. Once inside the cell ANG is rapidly translocated to the
nucleus where it accumulates inside the nucleolus. There it binds to ribosomal DNA and stimulates ribosomal RNA synthesis, a rate-limiting
step in ribosome biogenesis which is required for active cell proliferation 20. Both the ribonuclease activity of ANG and its translocation
to the nucleus are essential for its angiogenic and cell proliferative activity. ANG also has a role in the cytoplasm where it has been
shown to cleave transfer RNAs in response to cellular oxidative stress resulting in an important alternative, eIF2α-independent pathway of
translational inhibition 21. ANG is widely expressed throughout the adult human nervous system, is present inside motor neurones and has
been shown to be directly neuroprotective 10,22. The aim of this investigation was to screen the coding region of ANG for mutations in a
large cohort of patients from Northern England. We have identified a single SALS case with a p.K54E mutation; both the clinical and
neuropathological findings of the individual are presented. DNA samples were obtained from blood taken from patients attending the Motor
Neurone Disorders Clinic at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital in Sheffield, England, and from the Sheffield Brain Tissue Bank, which contains
post mortem tissue donated by ALS patients between 1989 and 2012. In total, 517 cases were screened, and these comprised the following
groups of patients: 433 ALS (30 FALS), 36 progressive muscular atrophy, 11 progressive bulbar palsy, nine primary lateral sclerosis, 10 ALS
plus dementia and 18 atypical ALS. None of these cases were positive for SOD1, TARDBP or FUS mutations; however, subsequent screening of
this cohort identified 13 FALS and 16 SALS with expansions in the C9ORF72 gene. Control DNA samples from 278 healthy age- and sex-matched
individuals were obtained from blood samples donated by unrelated partners and carers of ALS patients, and from volunteers donating blood
for transfusion at National Blood Service sessions in Sheffield. All cases and controls were of White Caucasian ethnicity. Approval for the
use of DNA samples was obtained from the local research ethics committee and donor consent was obtained. Genomic DNA was extracted from
whole blood and fresh frozen central nervous system tissue using the Nucleon BACC Genomic Extraction Kit and Soft Tissue DNA Extraction Kit,
respectively (Tepnel, UK). The ANG gene was amplified from genomic DNA by PCR using standard methods and published primer sequences 9. PCR
products were sequenced using BigDye Terminator v3.1 (Life Technologies, Paisley, UK) according to manufacturer's instructions. Sequencing
products were read on a 3730 DNA Analyser (Life Technologies) and chromatographs were aligned to the available reference sequence
(NM_001145). Residues were numbered in accordance with the nomenclature recommended by the Human Genome Variation Society
(http://www.hgvs.org). Controls were screened for the c.232A>G substitution by performing restriction digests of the ANG PCR products with
TaqαI using standard methods. Mutant sequences yield two products at 287 bp and 263 bp, whereas the wild-type sequence remains uncut (550
bp). An autopsy was performed with the consent of the next of kin. Representative blocks of brain, spinal cord and skeletal muscle were
taken and fixed in formalin. They were then embedded in paraffin wax, sectioned and stained for haematoxylin and eosin and luxol fast blue.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for FUS, TDP-43, p62, CD68, ANG, α-actinin-2 and α-smooth muscle actin was performed on 5 μm sections (Table 2).
This study used the same antibody for ANG (MANG-1) as was employed in the existing neuropathologically characterized case report 23.
Antibodies used in immunohistochemical studies Screening of the entire ANG coding region in the 516 cases identified a single heterozygous
c.232A>G change in one patient with SALS (Figure 1). This change results in the substitution of lysine for glutamate at residue 54, p.K54E.
This substitution was not detected in 278 neurologically normal controls, screened using the TaqαI digest (Figure 1). In silico analysis
using SIFT 24 predicted that this mutation adversely affects the protein function, while I-Mutant 2.0
(http://folding.uib.es/i-mutant/i-mutant2.0.html) predicted decreased stability of the encoded protein. The amino acid change is located
within the second helix of the mature ANG protein (Figure 2). This patient was negative for SOD1, TARDBP and FUS mutations, as well as
negative for the C9ORF72 expansion. The p.K54E mutation identified in ANG. The non-synonymous A>G nucleotide substitution at position c.232
gives rise to the amino acid substitution, p.K54E. Chromatograms are shown for wild-type sequence (a), and the heterozygous c.232A>G case
(b). Screening for this change in control samples was conducted by digestion of the ANG PCR product with TaqαI. Presence of the G allele
introduces a TaqαI digest site, resulting in the production of 287 bp and 263 bp fragments from the 550 bp PCR product (c). Schematic
diagram of the ANG protein and location of the p.K54E mutation. The protein domains and secondary structure are derived from information
provided on the ANG protein (P03950) found on the UniProt database. The individual in whom the p.K54E mutation was identified was a
Caucasian male who presented at the age of 49 years with a 2-month history of lower limb weakness. He had initially noticed his right leg
giving way and unsteadiness of gait. This had progressed over a few weeks to include right-sided foot drop. He had no significant prior
medical history and no family history of neurological disease. Initial neurological examination revealed no abnormalities in the cranial
nerve territory. Widespread fasciculations were evident in the muscles of all four limbs. In the upper limbs tone and power were normal
bilaterally and the reflexes were pathologically brisk. In the lower limbs, muscle tone was normal. Wasting of the right quadriceps muscle
was observed and power was reduced bilaterally in hip flexion and ankle dorsiflexion. Knee jerks were brisk, ankle jerks were depressed and
the plantar responses were flexor. No abnormalities of sensation were detected. Routine laboratory investigations revealed only a slightly
elevated creatine kinase level of 557 IU/l (reference range 25–190 IU/l). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein and cytology were normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and spine was normal apart from multiple wedge fractures of thoracic and lumbar vertebrae
without cord compression. Dual energy X-ray absorbance (DXA) scanning showed only vertebral osteopenia. A computerized tomography (CT) body
scan performed did not identify any malignancy but did identify extensive bilateral pulmonary emboli for which the patient was prescribed
warfarin. Respiratory function testing was normal at presentation. Neurophysiological examination revealed normal motor and sensory nerve
conduction. Sensory nerve action potentials (SNAP) from both sural nerves were reduced. Motor studies in the tibial and peroneal nerves
demonstrated reduced compound muscle action potentials (CMAP). Electromyography (EMG) in multiple upper and lower limb muscles revealed
neurogenic changes compatible with anterior horn cell dysfunction. EMG of the tongue and paraspinal muscles was normal. A sural nerve biopsy
was normal. The patient's symptoms progressed rapidly resulting in severe bilateral lower limb weakness and followed by progressive weakness
in the upper limbs. Repeat neurophysiology 6 weeks after the initial studies showed worsening motor axonal loss in all four limbs. He
subsequently presented acutely to hospital with an episode of acute respiratory muscle weakness and died 6 days later from respiratory
failure, 5 months after symptom onset. At this terminal stage of the disease there was no evidence of bulbar involvement and no cognitive
impairment. The final clinical diagnosis was limb onset ALS, classified as probable ALS by the El-Escorial criteria. Autopsy examination
revealed no significant systemic pathology outside of the nervous system and the brain appeared macroscopically normal. Conventional
histology revealed a marked loss of motor neurones (MN) from the anterior horns of the spinal cord. Residual MN contained occasional Bunina
bodies (Figure 3i,j). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for p62 revealed compact and skein-like neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions in MN throughout
the spinal cord, in anterior horn and Clarke's column (Figure 3a,b) as well as in the hypoglossal nucleus of the medulla. IHC for p62
performed on the hippocampus, cerebellum as well as frontal and temporal neocortex did not show the ubiquitinated neuronal cytoplasmic
inclusions that are characteristic of MND caused by hexanucleotide repeat expansions of C9ORF72 (data not shown) 25–28. Compact neuronal
cytoplasmic inclusions were seen in the motor cortex (Figure 3d). Glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCI) were also evident (Figure 3b) in motor
regions but not in the midbrain, neocortex or hippocampus. Neuronal intranuclear inclusions (NII) were not observed with p62 or conventional
stains. IHC for TDP-43 revealed both normal nuclear labelling and neuronal and glial cytoplasmic inclusions of similar morphology and
distribution to that seen with p62 IHC (Figure 3e–g). There was concomitant loss of nuclear TDP-43 in cells which contained cytoplasmic
TDP-43 inclusions. IHC for CD68 in the spinal cord revealed a microglial reaction in the grey and white matter (Figure 3k). The dorsal
columns were spared and the corticospinal pathways (crossed and uncrossed) were most severely affected. This tract degeneration was not
apparent in conventional myelin stains. IHC for ANG revealed granular labelling of the neuronal cytoplasm as described elsewhere 23. The
histological appearances suggest that this most probably corresponds to staining of lipofuscin (Figure 3i). This pattern of ANG staining was
also seen in the spinal cord tissue from a neurologically healthy control, a case of SOD1-related ALS and a case of SALS (data not shown).
Staining was also evident in blood leucocytes and ependymal cells, providing an internal positive control. IHC for α-smooth muscle actin
labelled the smooth muscle layer of blood vessels strongly. There was no nuclear or cytoplasmic labelling of neurones or glia in the p.K54E
ANG case. IHC for FUS showed normal, predominantly nuclear labelling without any neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (Figure 3h), and βA4
amyloid was negative throughout motor system, midbrain and hippocampus. IHC for α-actinin-2 in skeletal muscle showed normal labelling of
Z-discs (figure 3l). Immunohistochemistry of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (SALS) case with p.K54E ANG mutation. Images show p62
(a–d), TDP-43 (e–g), FUS (h), angiogenin (i), H&E (j), CD68 (k) and α2 actinin (l) showing: neuronal (a, b, d, e and g) and glial (c and f)
cytoplasmic inclusions in the spinal cord; neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions in the motor cortex (d and g); normal, predominantly nuclear
labelling of FUS in the spinal cord (h), granular cytoplasmic staining in a motor neurone with the appearance of lipofuscin (i); Bunina
bodies (arrowheads; j); a microglial reaction that is most marked in the lateral descending tract of the spinal cord and least marked in the
dorsal columns (k); normal labelling of Z-disc in skeletal muscle by α2 actinin (l). Scale: a–i and l, bar = 20 μm; j, bar = 20 μm; k, bar =
1 mm. Mutation screening of the ANG gene in a large cohort of ALS patients from Northern England identified a single mutation in a SALS
case: c.232A>G that results in p.K54E amino acid change. This mutation was not detected in 278 controls from Northern England. A previous
report identified this mutation in a German SALS patient, while it was absent from 616 controls 16. Taking into account all the previous
reports, as summarized by van Es, the p.K54E mutation is absent from a total of 7946 controls 9,11,12,13,18. The ANG K54 residue is highly
conserved in mammals and substitution of the lysine by glutamic acid is predicted to alter function and stability, by replacing the basic
residue with an acidic one. The clinical findings in our case were of a limb onset, rapidly progressive, predominantly lower motor neurone
ALS phenotype in a 49-year-old male. In addition, the patient had reduced sural nerve sensory action potentials. This compares with the
previously reported case with a p.K54E mutation which was also a male who had limb onset disease but at the much younger age of 28 years
with a longer survival of 24 months and who also had frontal lobe dysfunction. There was no evidence of cognitive impairment in the case
described in this report. Analysis of all ANG-related ALS cases where clinical details were available revealed that approximately 58% of
cases are limb onset and 42% are bulbar (http://alsod.iop.kcl.ac.uk) 29. Neuropathology findings have been reported in only one ANG-related
ALS case previously, carrying a p.K17I substitution 23,30. A highlighted feature of this case was the presence of eosinophilic neuronal
intranuclear inclusions in the pyramidal neurones of the hippocampus and frontal cortex that were immunoreactive for ubiquitin, p62 and
α-smooth muscle actin. These were not detected in the p.K54E ANG case described in this report. The characteristic ALS neuropathology of
TDP-43- and ubiquitin-positive neuronal and glial inclusions was present in both cases, while neither case showed any abnormalities of
immunostaining for ANG. The p.K17I ANG case also showed marked loss of α-actinin-2 immunoreactivity in peroneal muscle which was not
detected in our p.K54E ANG case. It also is interesting to note that in our current case p62/TDP-43-positive neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions
were identified in Clarke's column. Neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions have been demonstrated with immunohistochemistry for p62 in SALS 31,
phosphorylated neurofilament in SOD1-associated FALS 32 and FUS in FUS-associated FALS cases with basophilic inclusions 33. While the
neuropathological findings in our current case differ from the previous report, this is not surprising as findings from other ALS genes do
not indicate that each gene has a unique pathological appearance. This is further supported by the finding of the p.K17I cases'
characteristic neuronal nuclear alpha-actin inclusions neuropathology in cases which do not carry ANG mutations (Ansorge, pers. comm.). In
addition, there is some debate as to whether p.K17I is pathogenic – this substitution is one of only two ANG nucleotide changes which have
also been identified in controls from Europe 9,16,18. A recent study of 6471 ALS cases and 7668 controls concluded that these two variants,
p.K17I and p.I46V, should be considered as polymorphisms, rather than pathogenic mutations 18. The discovery of TDP-43 as the signature
disease protein in pathological inclusions in SALS and in the majority of the related condition frontotemporal lobar degeneration with
ubiquitinated inclusions (FTLD-U) has shed light on a possible common pathway leading to neurodegeneration in these conditions 34. However,
an important question remains about how the other ALS-associated genes, with their varying neuropathological appearances, but clinically
indistinguishable patterns of disease, fit into this pathway. It is known that the pathological inclusions in ALS cases associated with
mutations in SOD1 and FUS genes contain aggregated SOD1 and FUS proteins, respectively, rather than TDP-43 35,36. In the case of SOD1, this
may be consistent with the toxic gain of function exhibited by the mutant protein, such that production of misfolded, mislocalized and
inactive mutant protein exceeds the cells' protein degradation capacity resulting in formation of insoluble aggregates 37. Early cell models
of ALS-related FUS mutants also suggest a possible toxic gain of function mechanism with increased cytoplasmic localization of the mutant
protein 3. Similarly, evidence from mouse models overexpressing TDP-43 also suggests toxic cytoplasmic protein aggregation as a mechanism
leading to neurodegeneration 38. The mechanism of ANG-mediated neurodegeneration has not yet been elucidated. However, functional data from
cell models suggest a role for haploinsufficiency. ALS-associated ANG mutants have markedly decreased ribonuclease activity and are unable
to translocate to the nucleus, both of which are essential to normal ANG function 10,39. The mutant forms of ANG also have impaired
neuroprotective ability 40, and are proposed to act through impaired inhibition of apoptosis via the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein
kinase B (PI3K–AKT) signalling pathway 41, a mechanism also implicated in SOD1-related ALS 42. However, no functional link between ANG and
TDP-43 has yet been demonstrated, although both are involved in distinct aspects of RNA processing 43. Further functional studies are
required to elucidate the pathological mechanism of ANG mutations and their potential interaction with TDP-43. This study was supported by a
Wellcome Trust programme award to P. J. S., a David Peake Clinical Fellowship award to C. H. and a Medical Research Council/Motor Neurone
Disease Association Lady Edith Wolfson Clinical Fellowship to J. R. H. Additional control DNA was extracted from CNS tissue provided by the
Newcastle Brain Tissue Resource, which is funded in part by a grant from the UK Medical Research Council (G0400074). P. J. S. and J. K. are
funded by EU Framework 7 EUROMOTOR award (n°259867). E. F. G is funded by the MNDA. J. K., R. H., P. I. and P. S. designed the study. J. K.,
L. C., E. F. G. and C. H. performed the sequence analysis, R. H. and P. I. provided the CNS tissue and carried out the histopathological
analysis, and H. H., J. H., M. F., C. M. and P. S. obtained patient samples and provided clinical information. J. K., R. H., L. C., C. H.
and P. S. wrote the paper.
