Deletion and duplication of the -3.7-Mb region in 17p11.2 result in two reciprocal syndrome, Smith-Magenis syndrome and Potocki-Lupski
syndrome. Smith-Magenis syndrome is a well-known developmental disorder. Potocki-Lupski syndrome has recently been recognized as a
microduplication syndrome that is a reciprocal disease of Smith-Magenis syndrome. In this paper, we report on the clinical and cytogenetic
features of two Korean patients with Smith-Magenis syndrome and Potocki-Lupski syndrome. Patient 1 (Smith-Magenis syndrome) was a 2.9-yr-old
boy who showed mild dysmorphic features, aggressive behavioral problems, and developmental delay. Patient 2 (Potocki-Lupski syndrome), a
17-yr-old boy, had only intellectual disabilities and language developmental delay. We used array comparative genomic hybridization (array
CGH) and found a 2.6 Mb-sized deletion and a reciprocal 2.1 Mb-sized duplication involving the 17p11.2. These regions overlapped in a 2.1 Mb
size containing 11 common genes, including RAI1 and SREBF. A number of common contiguous gene syndromes arise from a nonallelic homologous
recombination mechanism. This can cause a loss or increase in the copy number of genes within the deleted or duplicated region. It can also
contribute to the copy number variation seen in some gene clusters (1). Deletion and duplication of the -3.7-Mb region in 17p11.2 result in
two reciprocal syndromes, Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS, OMIM #182290) and Potocki-Lupski syndrome (PTLS, OMIM #610883) (2, 3). SMS is caused
by a deletion or loss of genetic material on one copy of chromosome 17p11.2. This disorder is a well known and complex neurobehavioral
disorder characterized by moderate intellectual disability, distinctive facial features, sleep disturbances, and behavioral problems (4). In
contrast, PTLS, also referred to as duplication 17p11.2 syndrome, has recently been recognized as a reciprocal microduplication disease of
SMS. Patients with PTLS show infantile hypotonia, sleep apnea, structural cardiovascular anomalies, learning disabilities, attention-deficit
disorder, obsessive-compulsive behaviors, malocclusions, short stature, and failure to thrive (5). In this paper, we report the clinical and
cytogenetic features of two Korean patients with reciprocal deletion and duplication of 17p11.2. A 2.9-yr-old boy visited our clinical
geneticist with developmental language delay on February 23th, 2012. He was born at week 41 of gestation age by spontaneous vaginal delivery
after an unremarkable pregnancy as the first child of healthy non-consanguineous Korean parents. His birth weight was 2,960 g (10-25th
percentile), birth length 51 cm (50-75th percentile), and head circumference was 32 cm (3-10th percentile). The mother and father were,
respectively, 28 and 31 yr old. The family had no history of neurologic disease or developmental delay. No feeding difficulties or hypotonia
occurred during early infancy. He showed normal development until the age of 3-4 months. His mother reported that his development seemed to
be delayed since the age of 12 months. He walked independently at 18 months. He did not speak his first words until he was 12 months old. He
showed no autistic features or sleep problems. He was unable to adapt to socially acceptable behavior at kindergarten. He showed aggressive
behavior and picked on his friends. There was no history of seizure at the moment. When he visited our clinic as a 2.9-yr-old, his body
weight was 12.3 kg (-1.05, standard deviation score, SDS), height was 87.8 cm (-1.16 SDS), body mass index (BMI) was 15.96 kg/m2 (-0.62
SDS), and head circumference was 50 cm (-1.19 SDS). On examination, he was noted to have a broad forehead, brachycephaly, and downturned
upper lip but had no dysmorphic features or other significant findings (Fig. 1A). Eye examination was normal. His oral cavity and oropharynx
were unremarkable. Extremities showed shortness of the fingers (Fig.1B). He was alert and made good eye contact. The other neurologic
examination was normal. He underwent a neurodevelopmental evaluation at 3 yr of age. He exhibited inattentive and uncooperative behavior
during the tests. He revealed the cognitive function of an 18-month-old on Bayley Scales of Infant Development II. His social quotient (SQ)
was 60.6 on social maturity scale (SMS). He revealed developmental language delay determined by the sequenced language scale of infants
(SELSI); expressive language function was at the level of an 18-month-old, and receptive language function was at the 12-month-old level.
Adaptive skill was checked with the Developmental Age Referenced Breakdown Assessment Schedules (DARBAS). He showed a lower level of
adaptive behaviors; he had the activities of daily living (ADL) functional age of a 19-month-old, fine motor functional age of a 20-month-
old, and a cognitive functional age of 16.6 months. His hearing test (otoacoustic emissions test) was normal. The laboratory tests including
complete blood count, chemistry panel, lipid profile, thyroid function test, and urinalysis were all normal. Electrocardiography and chest
radiograph were normal. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was normal, without ventriculomegaly. Chromosome analysis revealed a deletion
within the short arm of chromosome 7, with breakpoints of p11.2 and p11.2 at least 550-band resolution (Fig. 2). We conducted whole genome
array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) using commercially available array-CGH slides (MACArray Karyo 1440 BAC-chip, Macrogen,
Seoul, Korea) to confirm the suspected cytogenetic findings. We found a 2.6 Mb deletion on chromosome 17p11.2 (Fig. 3). The start and stop
points of this deletion were estimated at 17,083,225 and 19,654,341 (GRCh37 February 2009 assembly) with a total of 5 probes: BAC90_H16,
BAC-249_G12, BAC41_D18, BAC132_L20, and BAC10_I20. The 2.57 Mb region contained 15 RefSeq (NCBI reference sequence) genes: MPRIP [MIM
612935], PLD6, FLCN [MIM 607273], COPS3 [MIM 604665], RAI1 [MIM 607642], SMCR5, SREBF1 [MIM 184756], MIR33B [MIM 613486], TOM1L2, TRIM16L,
FBXW10 [MIM 611679], FAM18B, ALDH3A2 [MIM 609523], SLC47A [MIM 609833], and ALDH3A1 [MIM 100660]. A 17-yr-old boy revisited the hospital for
rehabilitation and was referred to our genetic clinic for an evaluation of unexplained intellectual disability and language disability on
July 11th, 2011. He had been delivered at week 36 of gestation by vaginal delivery after an induced preterm birth due to preeclampsia and
intrauterine growth retardation. His birth weight was 1,500 g (< 3rd percentile). He spent about 25 days in the neonatal intensive care unit
(NICU) for very low birth weight. The mother and father were both 33 yr old. He had an older healthy brother. The family had no history of
neurologic disease or developmental delay. His parents reported that he was rather slow to walk (18 months). He had obvious language
development after 3 yr old. He showed no autistic features, sleep problems, hyperactivity, or oppositional behaviors. He had two provoked
seizures; his first seizure at the age of 3.5 yr was associated with hypoglycemia (serum glucose 38 mg/dL) and his second seizure occurred
at the age of 7 yr during a high fever. On physical examination at 17 yr, he showed no definite dysmorphic facial features or other
significant findings. His dominant hand was left. His heart sound was normal without murmurs. No skeletal abnormalities were noted. His
neurologic examination was normal. His first neurodevelopmental evaluation was checked at age 3.5 yr. At that time (3.5 yr old), he showed
mild intellectual disability, a low level of adaptive behaviors, and significant developmental language delay; his ADL functional age was
33.6 months, his fine motor functional age was 30.07 months, his cognitive functional age was 21.44 months on the DARBAS, his receptive
language age was 24 months, and his expressive language age was 18-24 months on the PRES. He underwent a second neurodevelopmental
evaluation at age 17 yr. His intellectual functioning was measured by the Korean Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (K-WAIS). He had a
moderate intellectual disability; FSIQ, VIQ, and PIQ were all below 45. His social maturation quotient (SQ 48.7) also showed a moderate
trainable intellectual disability. He still exhibited developmental language delay, with a receptive language age of 5 yr and an expressive
language age of around 3 yr. Laboratory tests, which included a complete blood count, chemistry panel, lipid profile, thyroid function test,
and urinalysis, were all normal. Brain MRI showed no focal lesion and a normal ventricular size (17 yr old). He underwent a chromosome
analysis at another hospital. The result of a blood lymphocyte karyotype was 46, XY. We performed whole genome array CGH (MACArray Karyo
1440 BAC-chip, Macrogen, Seoul, Korea), which revealed a duplication on chromosome 17p11.2 including the RAI1 gene region [arr 17p11.2
(17,575,978-19,654,341) Ã— 3] (Fig. 4). The size was estimated at approximately 2.1 Mb with 4 probes that contained 11 RefSeq genes: RAI1
[MIM 607642], SMCR5, SREBF1 [MIM 184756], MIR33B [MIM 613486], TOM1L2, TRIM16L, FBXW10 [MIM 611679], FAM18B, ALDH3A2 [MIM 609523], SLC47A
[MIM 609833], and ALDH3A1 [MIM 100660]. Clinically, both the SMS and the PTLS syndromes are associated with nonspecific developmental delay,
language impairment, and intellectual disability. Typically, besides intellectual disability, SMS is characterized by self-injurious
behaviors, sleep disturbance, obesity, and craniofacial/skeletal anomalies. The SMS clinical phenotype is rarely evident before late
childhood. With increasing age, the dysmorphic features become apparent (6). In contrast, PTLS presents as a milder syndrome than SMS, with
distinct characteristics including infantile hypotonia, sleep apnea, structural cardiovascular anomalies, autistic features, and failure to
thrive. In our cases, both of our patients showed developmental language delay and intellectual disability. Although patient 1 was too young
to show full expression of clinical features, he showed mildly dysmorphic features including a broad, square-shaped forehead, brachycephaly,
an outward-curving upper lip, and brachydactyly. Despite his relatively older age, patient 2 had no definite dysmorphic features. Patient 1
revealed frequent temper tantrums, aggression behavior, and difficulty paying attention. However, patient 2 showed no definite behavioral
problems. In spite of similarly sized gene dosage changes, patient 2 exhibited a milder phenotype. Chromosome 17 has the second highest gene
content among all chromosomes (7). It contains several dosage-sensitive genes such as PMP22, PAFAH1B1, YWHAE, RAI1, and NF1, which have been
implicated in a number of genomic disorders (8). Several reciprocal deletion/duplication syndromes of chromosome 17 are associated with
these dosage sensitive genes, including SMS and PTLS, which are also known as reciprocal microdeletion and microduplication of chromosome
17p11.2. Most SMS deletions and reciprocal duplications have common breakpoints, although deletions and duplications of different sizes have
been identified. Both appear to involve a common 1.3-3.7 Mb chromosome section in 17p11.2 that includes the RAI1 gene (5, 8, 9). Previous
studies (10-13) have provided evidence that the number of RAI1 copies is most likely responsible for these syndromes. Thus, RAI1 is believed
to represent the critical gene involved in these diseases. However, since no cases of RAI1 duplication alone have been identified, this
hypothesis requires further supporting evidence. Other candidate genes have been identified within the duplicated section, including SREBF1
[MIM 184756], DRG2 [MIM 602986], LLGL1 [MIM 600966], SHMT1 [MIM 182144], MFAP4 [MIM 600596], and TTC19 [MIM 613814], located within and
flanking the SMS common deletion region (13). Our cases represent two patients with similarly sized overlapping locations of deletion and
duplication; a 2.6 Mb deletion (17,083,225-19,654,341) and a reciprocal 2.1 Mb duplication (17,575,978-19,654,341) on chromosome 17p11.2
(Fig. 5). These regions contained dosage changes of common 11 RefSeq genes included the well-known dosage sensitive genes, RAI1 [MIM 607642]
and SREBF1 [MIM 184756]. This raised doubts as to whether RAI1 [MIM 607642] and SREBF1 [MIM 184756] were disease-causing genes responsible
for the phenotype of our patients. Although reciprocal duplications may occur at the same frequency as deletions, only a few reciprocal
deletion/duplication syndromes have been reported. In general, patients with duplications will exhibit a significantly milder phenotype when
compared to patients with deletions. In addition, G-banded duplications are more difficult to identify compared to deletions (2). Estimates
of the incidence of SMS are 1 in 20,000-25,000 individuals, whereas fewer than 50 persons with PTLS have been reported in the medical
literature (14, 15). In Korea, several reports of SMS have been published (16-18). However, to our knowledge, patient 2 was only the second
case report of clinical features with PTLS. Current technological advances in cytogenetics, and specifically the use of array CGH for
genetic diagnosis, now allow microdeletions and microduplications to be detected with equal efficacy. Array CGH has recently become a
popular tool in the clinical field in Korea. We anticipate that more patients with PTLS will be detected using array CGH in persons with
unexplained developmental delay, intellectual disability, and/or autism spectrum disorder. Patient 1 showed broad forehead and downturned
upper lip (A). Brachydactyly was noted (B). G-banded karyotype of patient 1 revealed 46, XY, del (17) (p11.2p11.2). Array CGH result of
patient 1. (A) Array CGH data profile in whole chromosomes. A dot represents a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clone, X-axis
represents chromosome number (1-22, X, Y) and the Y-axis represents the log2 T/R signal ratio value. The table below the graph represents
the average log2 T/R signal ratio value for each chromosome. Red dots represent a copy number loss (log2 T/R signal ratio value < -0.25) and
deletion on chromosome 17. (B) Array CGH profile from chromosome 17 showed a deletion on the short arm, internal boundaries of the deletion
in 17p11.2 (17,083,225-19,654,341), and its exact size (2.6 Mb) including RAI1 gene region. Array CGH result of patient 2. (A) Array CGH
data profile in whole chromosomes. Green dots represent a copy number gain (log2 T/R signal ratio value > 0.25) and duplication on
chromosome 17. (B) Array CGH profile from chromosome 17 showed a duplication on the short arm of, internal boundaries of the duplication in
17p11.2 (17,575,978-19,654,341), and its exact size (2.1 Mb). Schematic diagram of breakpoints for genes/regions on chromosome 17p11.2 of
patient 1 and 2.
