Sir, Enterobacteriaceae, other than Escherichia spp. and Klebsiella spp., can cause serious nosocomial infections and appear to have become
increasingly drug resistant. Citrobacter freundii, belonging to the Enterobacteriaceae family, is a prominent opportunistic pathogen
responsible for serious infections in immunocompromised individuals. C. freundii is characterized by the presence of chromosomally-encoded
AmpC β-lactamases and possesses the ability to develop resistance on exposure to broad-spectrum cephalosporins . Resistance to third-
generation cephalosporins in C. freundii has been attributed to the production of extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs), but resistance
mediated by plasmid-mediated AmpC β-lactamase (pAmpCs) has not been reported to the best of our knowledge. A specific C. freundii,
designated CF0513, was isolated from the wound drainage fluid of a 75-yr-old man who suffered from chest trauma and was admitted to a
hospital in Wuhu, China, in December 2008. During the period of hospitalization, symptoms of lower respiratory tract infection emerged. This
patient was treated with cefotaxime for 7 days, but the treatment was not found to be effective The patient was then administered imipenem-
cilastatin (500 mg intravenous, q8 hr) for a period of 7 days, and the symptoms of lower respiratory tract infection gradually disappeared
during his hospitalization. The bacterial species identification was performed using the Vitek 2 system (BioMérieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France)
and confirmed using API 20E identification kit (BioMérieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France). CF0513 was found to be resistant to all the β-lactams
(except carbapenems), and to ciprofloxacin. Further, the minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of various antimicrobial agents were
determined by the agar dilution method, and the susceptibility data were interpreted in accordance with the recommendations of the Clinical
Laboratory Standards Institute, 2012 . CF0513 showed elevated MICs for all β-lactams, except for imipenem and meropenem (<0.25 mg/L), and it
was also resistant to ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, gatifloxacin, gentamicin, and amikacin (Table 1). The presence of AmpC was determined by
a modified 3-dimensional test . Plasmid DNA was extracted using a Qiagen Plasmid Purification kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany), and ampC gene
amplification was carried out by multiplex PCR using plasmid DNA as a template . The association with mobile elements (IntI1, ISCR1, and
ISEcp1) and other resistance genes (qnr, aac(6')-Ib-cr, qepA, blaTEM, blaSHV, blaCTX-M; and 16S rRNA methylase genes such as armA, rmtA,
rmtB, rmtC, rmtD, and rmtE) was investigated by PCR amplification . The PCR assay showed that CF0513 carried blaACT-1. In addition, CF0513
coharbored blaCTX-M-14, armA, ISEcp1, and IntI1 (Table 1). DNA sequence analysis showed that blaACT-1 was associated with an ISEcp1 mobile
element downstream. Plasmid analysis revealed that CF0513 only harbored a 50 kb plasmid. Escherichia coli V517 was used as a reference
marker. To determine whether the AmpC phenotype was transferable, conjugation experiments were carried out in Luria-Bertani (LB) broth with
sodium azide-resistant Escherichia coli J53 as the recipient. Transconjugants were selected on LB agar plates supplemented with sodium azide
(100 mg/L) and cefotaxime (2 mg/L). The AmpC phenotype was successfully transferred to E. coli J53. The transconjugant plasmids showing an
AmpC phenotype were classified according to their incompatibility group, using the PCR replicon-typing scheme described by Carattoli et al.
. The plasmid profile revealed that the CF0513 transconjugate carried a blaACT-1-positive plasmid that belonged to the IncL/M
incompatibility type. The plasmid was also the same size as that of the original strain CF0513. To assess if plasmid p0513, encoding
blaACT-1, was stable, both the donors and transconjugants were serially split and regrown up to 10 times on separate LB agar plates with
cefotaxime (8 mg/L). The plasmid persisted even after the last generation, which indicates that p0513 is highly stable. A wide variety of
plasmid-mediated β-lactamases, especially ESBLs and pAmpCs, have been identified worldwide. However, other than Escherichia spp. and
Klebsiella spp., they are rarely investigated in China among Enterobacteriaceae where the resistance problem has increased dramatically. C.
freundii, which belongs to the Enterobacteriaceae family, is a prominent opportunistic pathogen and characterized by chromosomally-encoded
AmpC β-lactamases. To our knowledge, there are no reports of resistance caused by plasmid-mediated AmpC β-lactamases in C. freundii. In our
study, we describe an isolated C. freundii carrying the ACT-1 type pAmpCs. Furthermore, the blaACT-1 gene was carried by an IncL/M plasmid
and was associated with blaCTX-M-14, armA, ISEcp1, and IntI1. Due to these characteristics, C. freundii CF0513 was also resistant to
aminoglycosides, such as gentamicin and amikacin. To our knowledge, this is the first report of an isolated C. freundii producing ACT-1 AmpC
β-lactamase. In conclusion, the blaACT-1 gene associated with ISEcp1 found on a transmissible plasmid in C. freundii is cause for serious
concern, as this insertion element facilitates the mobilization and expression of ACT-1-mediated resistance. This is alarming, since
horizontal transfer played a role in the dissemination of these multidrug resistant isolates. Such strains, with acquired resistance,
further limit the therapeutic options in clinical work. Further investigation of the association between mobile elements and resistance
genes is warranted. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. Characteristics of clinical isolate
Citrobacter freundii CF0513 and the transconjugate Abbreviations: MIC, minimum inhibitory concentration; PIP, piperacillin; CTX, cefotaxime;
CAZ, ceftazidime; FEP, cefepime; FOX, cefoxitin; ATM, aztreonam; GM, gentamicin; AMK, amikacin.
