Dear Editor CML is characterized by the clonal expansion of bone marrow hematopoietic cells and is associated with the Philadelphia
chromosome . The accelerated phase of CML, which is also known as the blast crisis phase, occurs in patients as the disease progresses. It
has been reported that the appearance of an additional chromosomal abnormality is the major pathogenic factor in 63% of the CML cases [2,
3]. However, the additional appearance of a minor BCR/ABL fusion transcript with disease progression has rarely been reported in CML
patients. Moreover, the dual expression of the major and minor BCR/ABL fusion transcripts during blast crisis has been reported in only 4
cases to date [4, 5]. Here, we describe a CML patient who exhibited the dual expression of the major and minor BCR/ABL fusion transcripts
during the lymphoblastic crisis (LBC) phase and possessed a mutation in the BCR/ABL kinase domain. A 13-yr-old boy was admitted to Asan
Medical Center in June 2010 for severe leukocytosis and anemia (white blood cell count: 464.1×109/L: hemoglobin: 68 g/L), and splenomegaly.
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy findings were indicative of CML, with 5.4% of myeloblasts demonstrating granulocytic hyperplasia. His
karyotype was 46,XY,t(9;22)(q34;q11.2). FISH analysis for the detection of the BCR/ABL fusion transcript showed nuc ish (ABL1, BCR)×3 (ABL1
con BCR×2). We performed reverse-transcriptase PCR for the detection of the major and minor BCR/ABL fusion transcripts but were able to
detect only the major BCR/ABL fusion transcript (b2a2 type). Quantification analysis using the LightCycler t(9;22) Quantification Kit (Roche
Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) showed a ratio of 8.00 (normalized copy number, NCN) for the major BCR/ABL transcript. The patient was thus
diagnosed with chronic phase CML, and imatinib treatment was initiated. The patient demonstrated a partial hematologic response for 2 yr
after the treatment was started. In June 2012, the patient was readmitted because he had poor oral intake and diarrhea. A complete blood
count (CBC) revealed mild leukocytosis (WBC count: 16.1×109/L) with 47% blasts in peripheral blood and 48% lymphoblasts in bone marrow
aspirates. Immunophenotyping results indicated B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. At this time his karyotype had changed to
45,XY,-7,t(9;22)(q34;q11.2), indicating the appearance of monosomy 7. FISH analysis revealed nuc ish (ABL1×2, BCR×3)(ABL1 con BCR×1),
indicating that 84.0% of the cells showed BCR-ABL rearrangement with 5' ABL1 deletion. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed as
being in the LBC phase of CML. Real-time PCR and the BCR-ABL Mbcr IS-MMR and BCR-ABL e1a2 mbcr FusionQuant kits (Ipsogen, Marseille, France)
were used to quantify the BCR/ABL fusion transcripts. Ratios of 166.42 (converted to international scale-normalized copy number, IS-NCN) and
1.17 (NCN) were obtained for the major and minor transcripts, respectively (Fig. 1). The HemaVision kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA,
USA), which uses multiplex reverse transcriptase PCR, was used to analyze RNA samples from the chronic phase and LBC phase of CML. Only the
major BCR/ABL fusion transcript was detected in the chronic phase sample (Fig. 2A and B). Notably however, both the major and minor BCR/ABL
fusion transcripts were detected in the LBC phase sample (Fig. 2C-E). To confirm imatinib resistance, BCR/ABL kinase domain mutation
analysis was performed by carrying out reverse-transcriptase PCR and direct sequencing. The results indicated a homozygous missense mutation
at the 757th nucleotide, with a substitution of cytosine for thymidine. This mutation introduced a substitution of histidine for tyrosine at
the 253rd codon resulting in imatinib resistance. Imatinib was immediately changed to dasatinib, and the patient's follow-up BCR/ABL
evaluation revealed a dramatic decrease in the ratio of the major fusion transcript (0.24 IS-NCN) and negative conversion for the minor
transcript, on day 28 after the treatment change. The CML blast crisis phase is followed by the acquisition of additional chromosomal
abnormalities, most notably the double Philadelphia chromosome and the occurrence of trisomy 8 and 17 . A previously published study has
reported that the acquisition of the minor BCR/ABL fusion transcript may be related to disease progression and LBC . However, the additional
appearance of the minor BCR/ABL fusion transcript during the blast crisis of CML is relatively rare as compared to the other chromosomal
abnormalities mentioned above, and has been previously reported in only 4 patients so far [4, 5]. Given that a CML blast crisis more often
manifests as myeloid rather than lymphoid, the dual expression of the major and minor BCR/ABL fusion transcripts during the LBC phase in our
current case, is a rare phenomenon that is worth reporting. The HemaVision kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories) has some disadvantages, such as cross-
amplification and the generation of non-specific bands on gel electrophoresis. Hence, it is difficult to confirm the dual expression of the
fusion transcripts because it uses multiplex reverse transcriptase PCR. Confirmation studies are thus necessary to validate the dual
expression of the transcripts. In our case, the quantification of the BCR/ABL fusion transcript revealed that the levels of the minor
BCR/ABL fusion transcript were approximately 1% of that of the major BCR/ABL fusion transcript during the LBC phase. This resulted in the
formation of a faint minor BCR/ABL band, which could not be easily distinguished from the non-specific bands. In the present case, we
detected a BCR/ABL band that was much fainter than the major BCR/ABL band using the HemaVision kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Confirmation
studies like cloning and sequencing of the post-PCR products were not performed in our present case. Instead, we decided to perform a
subsequent real-time PCR in order to demonstrate the presence of both, the major and minor BCR/ABL fusion transcripts as it is believed to
be a more sensitive technique than direct sequencing for the detection of specific genetic abnormalities. In our case, we were able to
confirm the presence of the minor BCR/ABL fusion transcript primarily by using real-time PCR. This approach is valid because confirmation
studies such as cloning or sequencing were not carried out in the 4 cases mentioned in previous reports [4, 5]. Moreover, we successfully
confirmed the presence of the additional minor BCR/ABL fusion transcript by using reverse-transcriptase and real-time PCR. In conclusion, we
report the dual expression of major and minor BCR/ABL fusion transcripts in a patient in the LBC phase of CML, who possesses a mutation in
the BCR/ABL kinase domain. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. Detection of the minor BCR-ABL fusion
transcript at the lymphoblastic crisis phase by real-time PCR. The amplification curves for the minor BCR-ABL fusion transcript (A) and ABL1
gene (B) are shown. The ratio of the minor BCR-ABL fusion transcript was calculated as 1.17 normalized copy number (NCN). Analysis of RNA
samples collected from the chronic and lymphoblastic crisis phase of CML using the HemaVision screening and split-out kits (Bio-Rad
Laboratories). The screening kit produced a single band in the M6 lane (A) whereas the spilt-out kit produced a single 397-base pair band in
the M6B lane (B), indicating the presence of the major BCR/ABL fusion transcript (b2a2 type) during the chronic phase. However, during the
lymphoblastic crisis phase, the screening kit produced 2 bands in lanes M6 and M8 (C) and the spilt-out kit produced a 397-base pair band in
the M6B lane (D) and a 320-base pair band in the M8F lane (E). This indicates the simultaneous presence of both the major (M6B, b2a2 type)
and minor (M8F, e1a2 type) BCR/ABL fusion transcripts in this patient.
