Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Conceived and designed the experiments: FFC. Performed the
experiments: JZ GM JQ. Analyzed the data: FFC JZ GM JQ MA. Wrote the paper: FFC JZ. Clinical Geneticist: MG. Genetic Counselor: AZ.
Pathologist: MA. We characterized the t(7;22)(q32;q11.2) chromosomal translocation in an obese female with coarse features, short stature,
developmental delay and a hypoplastic fifth digit. While these clinical features suggest Coffin-Siris Syndrome (CSS), we excluded a CSS
diagnosis by exome sequencing based on the absence of deleterious mutations in six chromatin-remodeling genes recently shown to cause CSS.
Thus, molecular characterization of her translocation could delineate genes that underlie other syndromes resembling CSS. Comparative
genomic hybridization microarrays revealed on chromosome 7 the duplication of a 434,682 bp region that included the tail end of an
uncharacterized gene termed C7orf58 (also called CPED1) and spanned the entire WNT16 and FAM3C genes. Because the translocation breakpoint
on chromosome 22 did not disrupt any apparent gene, her disorder was deemed to result from the rearrangement on chromosome 7. Mapping of
yeast and bacterial artificial chromosome clones by fluorescent in situ hybridization on chromosome spreads from this patient showed that
the duplicated region and all three genes within it were located on both derivative chromosomes 7 and 22. Furthermore, DNA sequencing of
exons and splice junctional regions from C7orf58, WNT16 and FAM3C revealed the presence of potential splice site and promoter mutations,
thereby augmenting the detrimental effect of the duplicated genes. Hence, dysregulation and/or disruptions of C7orf58, WNT16 and FAM3C
underlie the phenotype of this patient, serve as candidate genes for other individuals with similar clinical features and could provide
insights into the physiological role of the novel gene C7orf58. The uncovering of genes that cause clinically severe genetic disorders often
reveals a critical physiological role for these genes. Recently, mutations that cause Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS) (MIM 135900) , , a rare
congenital disorder, were unveiled and occurred in chromatin remodeling genes of the SWI/SNF complex , , . Other congenital anomalies that
overlap with clinical features of CSS, such as the brachymorphism-onychodysplasia-dysphalangism syndrome , , , Cornelia de Lange syndrome ,
, Mabry syndrome, Nicolaides–Baraitser syndrome (NCBRS), DOOR syndrome (deafness, onychodystrophy, osteoodystrophy, mental retardation,
fetal alcohol syndrome, fetal hydantoin/phenytoin embryopathy and trisomy 9 , complicate the differential diagnosis of these disorders. To
help in their differential diagnosis, clinical algorithms were proposed , without however, any molecular basis. To begin the identification
of genes that share clinical features with CSS and related disorders, we characterized the translocation breakpoints in a female with a de
novo t(7;22)(q32;q11.2) chromosomal translocation , who presented with clinical features that resemble CSS . We found that a duplication
encompassing the WNT16 and FAM3C genes and the tail end of a novel gene, termed C7orf58, underlie the clinical phenotype of this patient.
The identification of mutations in these genes among similarly affected patients could provide insights into their biological roles and may
help resolve their ambiguous diagnoses. Blood samples were obtained from the index patient, following informed written consent and approval
by an institutional review board (IRB) of the UCSF Committee on Human Research (CHR). Leftover de-identified DNA specimens from Caucasian
individuals were obtained from the UCSF Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory. Such decoded biological specimens do no meet the definition of
human subject research as specified by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services regulations 45 CFR 46.101(b).4 and are therefore not
considered human subjects. Thus, IRB approval and informed consent are neither applicable nor necessary. Circulating leptin levels from the
patient were determined in duplicates from plasma using a radioimmunoassay from Linco Research (Millipore). DNA extractions were performed
by a standard proteinase K method. Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) was performed on 3 µg of peripheral blood DNA using an Illumina HiSeq
following library preparation and exome enrichment with Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon v4 51 Mb kit. Paired-end readings resulted in
50.39 million reads and 7.56 GigaBases, representing an overall average coverage of 100×. The raw sequences were aligned to the human genome
build hg19 using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) software and the resulting SAM files analyzed for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and
insertions/deletions (INDEL) with PICARD, SAMTOOLS and GATK. SNPs and INDELs were further analyzed and annotated with ANNOVAR. Array CGH
microarray was performed at Baylor College of Medicine. Briefly, normal and patient DNA samples were labeled with Cy3 and Cy5 fluorescent
dyes and hybridized to a 60-mer oligonucleotide human genome microarray platform (244K Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) at a probe density of 5–8
kb. The results were analyzed with the Agilent DNA Analytics software. Copy number variations were mapped onto the human genome database
hg18 and the variants, when applicable, identified in the Toronto Database of Genomic Variation (DGV). Yeast and bacterial artificial
chromosome clones were obtained from the Human Genome Center at the National Institutes of Health (Eric Green’s chromosome 7 library) and
from Genome Systems Inc. (St. Louis MI). Plasmid DNA was extracted by standard methods and a one-microgram aliquot labeled by nick
translation using FITC-dUTP. Metaphase cells were enriched in synchronized peripheral blood cultures according to the method of Yunis ,
fixed in 3∶1 methanol:acetic acid and dropped on glass slides. Labeled DNA probes were hybridized to chromosome spreads from this patient as
previously described . Additional FISH probes consisted of gel purified Bam HI and Hind III restriction fragments derived from BAC 146J04,
consisting of 11,085 bp, 27,092 bp and 17,923 bp respectively. At least two spreads from each hybridization were fully karyotyped and
analyzed. PCR primers (Table S1) bracketing the exon-intron boundaries of WNT16, FAM3C and C7orf58 were used to amplify genomic DNA. The
targeted regions covered all exons from these three genes, including at least 100 bp flanking the splice donor and acceptor sites of each
exon. In addition, the DNA sequence of the upstream 2745 bp from the initiation codon of C7orf58 was determined using six promoter specific
PCR amplicons. Amplification reactions were set up using a 2X master mix (Affymetrix) and processed for 35 cycles at 95°C, 55°C, 72°C for 30
seconds each. The PCR amplicons were purified from residual PCR primers and their DNA sequence determined in both orientations by Sanger
dideoxy sequencing using either PCR primer. The reaction products were then fractionated and analyzed on an ABI 3730 XL DNA sequencer. DNA
sequences generated by the amplicons were analyzed and compared to their respective reference Genbank sequences using a DNA sequence Aligner
obtained from CodonCode Corporation (Dedham, MA). Allele frequencies were determined using 20–40 anonymous DNA samples from Caucasian
individuals, who requested cystic fibrosis carrier screening at the UCSF Molecular Diagnostics Laboratory. The SNPs and number of
individuals tested were in C7orf58: rs78458119 (n = 20), rs33990520 (n = 25), rs68173311 (n = 23), INDEL GAAAA (n = 21), in WNT16:
rs75556099 (n = 40), rs3832519 (n = 32), and in FAM3C: INDEL AAAACTT (n = 20), rs3837124 (n = 20). Analysis of the transcription factor
binding sites in the putative promoter region was determined by the PROMO and TESS tools. Analysis of missense mutations was performed using
the bioinformatic tools SIFT , PolyPhen2 and Mutation Taster . Putative mutations affecting splice donor, splice acceptor and branch point
sites were analyzed with Human Splicing Finder and Spliceport . Phosphorylation sites were predicted by NetPhos . Micro RNA binding sites
were queried for 15 nucleotides on either side of the SNP against the mature miRNAs database using the miRBase search engine set at maximum
E-value of 10 and using the BLASTN search method. The clinical findings of the index female patient reported in this study were initially
reported in . She is a Caucasian girl with a 46, XX karyotype and a de novo apparently balanced chromosome translocation, 46, XX,
t(7;22)(q32.1;q11.2). Her parents had normal karyotypes. She attended a special educational resources classroom throughout her schooling. A
developmental assessment at 9 years chronological age showed a performance below 6.5-year level and a delay of about three years. Her
strengths were in verbal reasoning and her weaknesses in concentration, visual-motor pursuits, fine motor development and poor gross motor
with unsteady gait. In earlier childhood, she experienced frequent bouts of respiratory infections and otitis media, but did not require
hospitalization. At 9 years, it was noted that her hair was of normal consistency and growth pattern. She had experienced two grand mal
seizures with normal EEG and normal MRI. She had two congenital melanocytic nevi surgically excised, one from the right posterior scalp and
the other from the left clavicle. An ulcerated pyogenic granuloma was excised from the left mid thoracic spine. At 11 years of age, she was
in 4th grade with special educational resources and had exhibited considerable weight gain and a decline in gross motor abilities. At that
time, her height was 129.5 cm (5–10%), weight 57.7 Kg (>97%) head circumference 54.25 cm (75%). Her features and clinical history were not
felt to be consistent with Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) and FISH/methylation studies for PWS were normal. She had a BMI of 34.4 and her
leptin levels were 31.5 ng/ml. Endocrine evaluations found no etiology for her clinical presentation and her hearing was within normal
limits. Her vision was 20/60 with corrective glasses prescribed. While the primary concern remained her obesity, she had no self-restraint
and food intake was to be continuously monitored. She also manifested some obsessive-compulsive behaviors. Review of multiple photographs at
9, 10 and 11 years of age likely excluded a CSS diagnosis based on atypical features of facial coarseness, sparse scalp hair, excessive
amount of hair in eyebrow/eyelash, dysplasia and aplastic nails (Bryan Hall, personal communication). At 22 years old, she weighed 88.9 Kg,
measured 137.2 cm and had a BMI of 47.2. She only gained 7.6 cm in height over the past 10 years. Hyperphagia, obesity and reduced cognition
remain the predominant issues. There were no deleterious mutations such as stops or frameshift mutations in any of the chromatin remodeling
genes SMARCA2, SMARCA4, SMARCE1, SMARCB1, ARID1A and ARID1B, recently reported to be mutated in CSS , . However, synonymous and non-
synonymous single nucleotide variations were found in SMARCA2, SMARCA4, SMARCB1 and ARID1B and in other members of the SMARCA and ARID gene
families, SMARCA5, SMARCAD1, ARID3A, ARID3C and ARID4A (Table 1). All these variants had common minor allele frequencies (MAF), which
preclude them from underlying this patient’s rare phenotype. Furthermore, no deleterious mutations were found in genes known to cause morbid
obesity such as leptin, leptin receptor, melanocortin 4 receptor, POMC, adiponectin and adiponectin receptor. Bolded are the genes mutated
in Coffin- Siris Syndrome. Standard nomenclatures for cDNA and protein variations (hg19) with their dbSNP reference numbers are listed.
Genotypes variations from the reference hg19 genome sequence are indicated as 0/1 and 1/1 for heterozygous and homozygous variants,
respectively. The effect of each SNP, denoted as single nucleotide variation (SNV), is shown as either synonymous (syn) or non-synonymous
(nonsyn). Minor allele frequencies (MAF) are taken from the 1000 Genomes Project. N/A denotes non-available information. Array CGH analysis
of this patient’s DNA revealed copy number variations (CNVs) on chromosomes 1, 4, 15 and 16, shown in Figure 1 and annotated in Table 2. On
chromosome 7, a unique duplication of 434,682 bp was revealed and defined by hg18 (Human Genome Build 36.3) between coordinates
120,724,175–121,158,857 (Fig. 2A) and encompassed the WNT16, FAM3C and part of C7orf58. One boundary of the duplication was located in
intron 22 of C7orf58, while the other was approximately 44 Kb upstream of the protein tyrosine phosphatase gene (PTPRZ1). This duplication
was not previously reported and occurs at 7q31.31. The profiles shown represent the averaged combined hybridization data of patient vs.
reference DNA. Regions of gain and losses are boxed and depicted as positive or negative log2 ratios relative to the midline that denotes no
gain/no loss of DNA sequences. Shown are the CNV coordinates in hg18 (Build 36.3) for the gains and losses of DNA sequences on the listed
chromosomes (Chr.) The number of individuals or occurrence in the Watson genome are indicated in the frequency data, which are derived from
the Toronto Database of Genomic Variants (DGV). On chromosome 22, a 47,394 bp region was amplified at multiple copies (>2) around the
translocation breakpoint region on chromosome 22q11.2 (Fig. 2B) but was previously reported as variation 39,980 in the DGV database. This
CNV maps between coordinates 22,677,959 and 22,725,353 in hg18. It was also reported in the Watson genome and in 24 of 30 and 22 of 39
individuals in the HapMap study . Therefore, based on its common occurrence among normal individuals, this amplification of DNA sequences on
chromosome 22q11.2 is unlikely to contribute to the phenotype of this patient. Therefore, the duplication on chromosome 7 represents her
most significant molecular lesion. (A) Chromosome 7 and 22 plots displaying gains of DNA sequences, shown in boxes, in the 7q31.3 and 7q22
regions. (B, C) Detailed plots of oligonucleotide probes from the microarray along each region of interest denoting the genes and their
chromosomal coordinates (hg18) in the duplicated and amplified regions of chromosomes 7 and 22, respectively. Various yeast and bacterial
artificial clones from chromosome 7 were mapped by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) onto chromosome spreads from this patient. The
aim of such a mapping was to sublocalize the duplicated region by determining whether a specific DNA clone hybridizes onto her chromosomes 7
and der(7), 7 and der(22) or 7, der(7) and der(22). A representative FISH from each pattern is shown in Figure 3B–D. Towards these ends, we
derived YAC clones from a 12.9 Mb chromosomal map region extending from 7q31.2–7q32.1 and defined by the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
regulator (CFTR) and carboxypeptidase 1 (CPA1) genes. Figure 4A displays a map of three regions depicted each by a FISH hybridization
pattern. One region displayed hybridization to six YACs (857F2, yWSS4875, yWSS2618, 755A9, 915C4, 823H10) onto chromosomes 7 and der (22),
indicating that their corresponding DNA sequences from chromosome 7q were translocated to der(22). Another region characterized by its
hybridization patterns on chromosomes 7 and der (7) included 4 YACs (E146, 851C4, 910B4, 824H1) and represented DNA sequences that were
retained on der (7). A third region that lied between the two previous regions was spanned by five YACs (764A8, yWSS4883, yWSS4528,
yWSS3569, yWSS182) and displayed hybridization to chromosomes 7, der(7) and der(22), suggesting that these clones span the translocation
breakpoint on chromosome 7. (A) Schematic drawing of normal chromosomes 7 and 22 and derivative chromosomes der(7) and der(22), showing the
translocated chromosomal regions. The three panels below depict each the typical hybridization of a probe located (B) on chromosomes 7,
der(7), (C) on chromosomes 7, der(7), der(22) and (D) chromosomes 7 and der(22). To refine the FISH map within the region of interest that
showed hybridizations to chromosomes 7, der(7) and der(22), we mapped BAC clones within and around the duplicated region (Fig. 4B). Two
clones (1047E14, 769P3) located within the last intron of C7orf58 and outside of the duplicated region hybridized to chromosomes 7 and
der(7). However, all other clones located in the duplicated region hybridized to chromosomes 7, der(7) and der(22), showing that the
duplication extends to the segment of chromosome 7 that has been translocated to der(22) and was thus not tandem duplicated on der(7).
Incidentally, BAC 146J04 spans the tail end of C7orf58 and all of WNT16 and FAM3C. Therefore, we mapped restriction fragments DNA probes
from BAC 146J04 to confirm that those genes had indeed been translocated onto der(22). The map in Figure 4C shows that the 11,085 bp and
16,617 bp Bam HI fragments, the 17,923 bp, Hind III fragment and the 27,092 bp Bam HI fragment from the opposite end, all map to chromosome
7, der(7) and der(22), thus corroborating their location on der(7) and translocation to der(22). The hg19 genomic coordinates of each marker
and gene are indicated next to its designated name. The centromeric (CEN) and telomeric (TEL) directions are specified for orientation on
the chromosome. Clones are denoted by their clone names, plate coordinates or/and Genbank designations. Each clone or restriction fragment
is also denoted by its hybridization onto the patient’s chromosomes 7, der(7) and/or der(22). (A) FISH map of a 12.9 Mb region of chromosome
7 extending from the CFTR to the CPA1 genes. The denoted YAC probes represent three distinct areas of hybridization relative to the
chromosome 7 translocation breakpoint, namely distal (7, der22), at or around the breakpoint (7, der7, der22) and proximal to the breakpoint
(7, der7). (B) FISH map of BAC clones at and proximal to the 434,682 bp duplicated region, spanning the tail end of C7orf58 and the entire
WNT16 and FAM3C genes. Note that all BAC clones within the duplicated region map to 7,d7,d22. (C) Bam HI restriction map, except for two
designated Hind III (H) sites, of BAC 146J04 showing the FISH mapping of Bam HI and Hind III restriction fragments, indicating hybridization
to 7,der(7) and der(22). The sizes in bp of each restriction fragment are shown and the exons in each gene displayed with solid boxes. The
initiation (ATG) and termination (TGA, TAA) codons denote the gene boundaries except for C7orf58, which is only spanned by its last exon and
part of the adjacent intron. The three genes identified within the duplicated region of chromosome 7 are C7orf58 (also called FLJ21986 and
CPED1), WNT16 and FAM3C (also called GS3786). The closest two genes on either side of the duplicated region are ING3, 13 kb upstream of
C7orf58, and PTPRZ1, 475 kb downstream of FAM3C. Information about the expression and structure of C7orf58 WNT16, and FAM3C was derived from
NCBI gene resources (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene). The novel C7orf58 gene spans approximately 306,038 bp from the initiation to
termination codons of its longest isoform and generates at least three protein isoforms of 117.6 kD, 89.2 kD and 22.6 kD that are encoded by
exons 1–23 (excluding exon 18), 1–18 and 1–3A, respectively. Another 64.6 kD isoform, which originates from an alternate promoter is encoded
by exons 5–18. The WNT16 gene spans approximately 16 kb from the initiation to termination codons. It encodes two protein isoforms of 40.5
kD, 40.7 kD, based on an alternate initiation site of translation that encompasses exon 1A or exon 1B, The two resulting isoforms, termed
WNT16a and WNT16b differ by 30 amino acids at their amino terminus. FAM3C, a member of a gene family with sequence similarity, encodes a
ubiquitously expressed 227 amino acid secretory cytokine-like protein . It spans approximately 32.5 kb and encodes a polypeptide chain of
24.7 kD, encompassing 9 exons. All three genes are expressed in multiple tissues except for the WNT16a isoform, which is restricted to the
pancreas . We found 21 SNPs in C7orf58, 5 SNPs in WNT16 and 4 SNPs in FAM3C (Table S1). Two previously unreported SNPs, INDEL GAAAA and
INDEL AAAACTT were located in intron 13 of C7orf58 and intron 7 of FAM3C, respectively. Allelic frequencies of 8 SNPs (rs78458119,
rs3390520, rs68173311, INDEL GAAAA, rs75556099, rs3832519, INDEL AAAACTT, rs3837124) occurred at fairly common frequencies (range 0.065–0.5)
to justify their clinical significance as the sole cause of a rare disorder. However, their individual or combined effects may add to the
effect of the duplication. Table S1 also lists the potential effects of SNPs that were analyzed with various online bioinformatics tools.
Overall, among the 30 SNPs, there were 13 SNPs with no predicted effects, 6 and 2 SNPs with putative splice acceptor and splice donor
defects, 4 SNPs with potential miRNA binding sites, 1 SNP with a predicted transcription factor binding site, 2 SNPs with amino acid
substitutions (A551G, D774N), both representing a conservative change, 1 non-synonymous SNP (T253I) that would lose a putative threonine
phosphorylation site, 1 non-synonymous SNP with a deleterious amino acid change (G72R), and a protein truncating mutation (CCCA INDEL) in
the WNT16A isoform. In C7orf58, there were 11 potentially functional SNPs (pfSNPs). The most significant change was rs2110277 in the
alternate promoter region of the 64.6 kD isoform, which is predicted to differentially bind transcription factors (Fig. S1). The A allele
constitutes a potential binding site for the glucocorticoid receptor beta (GR-β), the yin-yang (YY1) activator/repressor and the CCAAT-
enhancer-binding proteins (CEBPα, CEBPβ), while the G allele eliminates these DNA binding sites and generates instead a DNA sequence
recognized by the early growth response (EGR) transcription factors 1–3. No SNP variation was found in the promoter region upstream of the
117.6 kD isoform. Cryptic acceptor splice sites were likely to be generated by rs55666906, rs798949 and rs68173311 while reduced splice
acceptor efficiencies were predicted by rs55666906 and rs111663168. One SNP (rs61128227), located just 7 nucleotides downstream of the
intron 12 splice donor site, creates a new splice donor site, which when used, would cause the insertion of three in-frame amino acids,
producing an elongated protein. Furthermore, two SNPs (rs41281692, rs10953934) that cause missense mutations (A551G, D554N) were found to
constitute conservative changes and are unlikely to be functionally significant. Two other SNPs (rs798948, rs10241888) were predicted to
bind mature miRNAs (hsa-miR-449c-5p and hsa-miR-4733-3p) even though rs798948 is a synonymous amino acid change. Previous studies have shown
that a synonymous variant could cause a significant change in miRNA binding site . In WNT16, the most deleterious effect was the homozygous
CCCA DEL allele (rs755560) at codons 6–7, which produces a truncated WNT16a polypeptide of 46 amino acids instead of the normal 361 amino
acids. Also, the missense mutation G72R (rs2908004) was found to have a deleterious effect (by SIFT and SNPeffect), whereas the T253I
(rs2707466) was a tolerant change by SIFT. On the other hand, the threonine residue anticipated to be phosphorylated by NetPhos (score
0.833) would be lost by the substitution to isoleucine and the proband is homozygous for the isoleucine allele. Of the two other SNPs
located downstream of the termination codon, the T allele of rs17143305 creates a binding site for miRNA hsa-miR-362-5p for which the
proband is heterozygous. In contrast, rs3832519 has a lower probability of binding a miRNA and may thus be insignificant. In FAM3C, the
proband is heterozygous for the INS allele of the new AAAACTT INDEL, located 13 bp downstream of the intron 7 splice donor site, which is
expected (by Spliceport) to reduce the splicing efficiency of the wild-type splice donor site. Furthermore, rs3837124 INDEL A located in a
run of 10 consecutive adenines, 82 bp downstream of the splice donor site of intron 7, was not found to result in any significant splice
site abnormalities. The patient in this study was previously reported as a possible case of CSS . However, based on atypical clinical
features, the absence of mutations in six chromatin remodeling genes, recently shown to cause CSS , , and in other chromatin remodeling
genes from the SMARCA and ARID gene families, a CSS diagnosis was excluded. Nevertheless, the characterization of her phenotype will prove
useful for the diagnosis of disorders resembling CSS such as the brachymorphism-onychodysplasia-dysphalangism syndrome , , , Cornelia de
Lange syndrome , , Mabry syndrome, Nicolaides–Baraitser syndrome (NCBRS), DOOR syndrome (deafness, onychodystrophy, osteoodystrophy, mental
retardation, fetal alcohol syndrome, fetal hydantoin/phenytoin embryopathy and trisomy 9 . The absence of any apparent gene disruptions on
chromosome 22, implicates the duplications of C7orf58, WNT16 and FAM3C as the cullprit genes involved in this particular phenotype. As a
result, three different types of molecular lesions could occur in this patient. The most noticeable deleterious effect arises from the
duplication of WNT16 and FAM3C, which could lead to an increase in gene expression, resulting in a gain of function of each encoded protein.
Indeed, overexpression of WNT16 was found to result in constitutive WNT signaling , and generally, WNT genes have been implicated in a wide
range of genetic and cancer disorders . Furthermore, a genome wide association study of height revealed a significant association of
rs7776725 in FAM3C with bone mineral density , consistent with the short height of this patient. Another deleterious effect could result
from the disruption of C7orf58 at its duplicated breakpoint in the last intron, which would truncate its longest isoform. As the
pathogenesis of C7orf58 remains unknown, it is interesting to note that a patient with mental retardation, anxiety disorder and autistic
features was reported to have a complex 7q rearrangement that also appeared to disrupt C7orf58 . While our patient did not exhibit the major
types of symptoms as the patient reported by Dauwerse et al. , it is unclear what is the phenotypic contribution of a disrupted C7orf58 gene
in the context of a large chromosomal rearrangement or a smaller duplication that encompasses multiple genes. Yet another possibility is a
translocation-mediated change in chromatin, which could impact on the expression of the nearby gene, ING3 that is located just 13 Kb
upstream of C7orf58. Most interestingly, the protein encoded by ING3 contains a PHD-finger domain, a common motif involved in chromatin
remodeling genes that are increasingly being recognized as target genes for developmental disorders, such as recently in Potocki-Shaffer-
syndrome, which is caused by disruption of a BRAF-histone deacetylase gene . While no potentially functional SNPs were found by exome
sequencing in ING3, chromatin disruption could interfere with the regulated expression of its allele near the duplicated region.
Interestingly, the association of allelic loss and reduced expression of ING3 with head and neck cancers is reminiscent of a similar
association in chromatin remodeling genes of the SWI/SNF complex in CSS , with tumorigenesis and gastric cancer , , . It is also possible
that functional SNPs could independently and further contribute to the deleterious effect of the duplication. Exonic and junctional intronic
SNPs in C7orf58, WNT16 and FAM3C suggested potentially deleterious SNPs in these three genes. Among these, the two most significant SNPs
were rs2110277 in the alternate promoter region of the 64.6 kD isoform of C7orf58, which is predicted to differentially bind transcription
factors and the DEL protein truncating mutation (rs75556099) at codon 6 of the WNT16A isoform that produces an aberrant polypeptide chain of
46 amino acids. The differential binding of transcription factors could alter the expression of C7orf58 and cause ectopic expression. As for
the truncation of the WNT16a isoform, its restricted expression to the pancreas coupled with its allelic frequency of 0.312 makes it more
likely to be associated with a frequent disorder such as obesity, rather than the rare CSS-related disorders. In this vein, the relationship
of WNT proteins to adipose tissue is exemplified by WNT10a, which suppresses adipocytes differentiation and inhibits obesity in genetically
obese mice . Hence, it is conceivable that wild-type WNT16a could play a similar role, whereas its deletion mutant allele (rs75556099) could
reverse this effect by promoting adipocytes differentiation and causing obesity. While the early onset obesity and hyperphagia of this
patient are not associated with endocrine abnormalities, mutations in leptin and leptin receptor were ruled out based on her elevated leptin
levels, which correlated with her BMI of 34.4 and with the observation that heterozygous leptin null mutations result in significantly lower
than normal leptin levels . Furthermore, exome sequencing did not reveal a deleterious mutation in any of the known obesity genes,
suggesting that, if obesity was related to this translocation/duplication, the culprit region would likely fall on any or a combination of
genes involved in the duplication. Overall, the molecular basis of disease in this patient appears to be confined to the three-gene cluster,
C7orf58, WNT16 and FAM3C. The molecular characterization of these genes in patients with a phenotype resembling CSS and overlapping with its
clinical features will vindicate their clinical associations. Eventually, to unveil the biological functions of these genes and to delineate
their contributions to the various clinical phenotypes will require their targeted disruption, singly and in combination, in animal models.
Effect of rs2110277 (A/G) on transcription factors binding sites in the C7orf58 alternative promoter. The PROMO computer prediction software
shows that the A and G alleles differ in their binding of the transcription factors early growth response 1–3 (EGR), glucocorticoid receptor
beta (GR-β), yin-yang (YY1) activator/repressor, CCAAT-enhancer-binding proteins (CEBPα, CEBPβ). (TIF) Click here for additional data file.
Amplicon sizes and DNA sequences of PCR primers used for the amplification and sequencing of exons, surrounding introns, untranslated
sequences and immediate promoter regions of the WNT16, FAM3C and C7orf58 genes. The locations of the primers within each gene are donated by
their closest exon (Ex), promoter (P) or untranslated (UTR) regions. (PDF) Click here for additional data file. We thank Drs. Arthur Beaudet
and Craig Chinault for their help in the analysis of the CGH microarray and Dr. Bryan Hall for clinical advice.
