Hepatoid adenocarcinoma is a special type of extrahepatic adenocarcinoma that morphologically mimics hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Clinical and immunohistochemical features of hepatoid adenocarcinoma are similar to those of HCC, such as elevated serum alpha-fetoprotein
(AFP) level, immunoreactivity with AFP, polyclonal carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and alpha-1 antitrypsin.1 Because of these clinical and
pathological features, it is difficult to differentiate hepatic metastasis of hepatoid adenocarcinoma from HCC. Moreover, the imaging
findings of hepatoid adenocarcinoma are not well known. Therefore, we report a case of hepatic metastases from hepatoid adenocarcinoma of
stomach mimicking HCC with image findings and a review of the literature. A 65-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for evaluation of a
huge hepatic tumor that was incidentally detected during an abdominal sonographic screening examination. He complained of mild abdominal
discomfort. He had a medical history of hypertension and a social history of alcohol for several decades. The laboratory tests at the time
of admission showed an aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level of 90 U/L, alanine aminotransferase level (ALT) of 17 U/L, total bilirubin
level of 0.9 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase level of 67 U/L. The serum level of AFP (5,714 IU/mL) and protein induced by vitamin K absence or
antagonist-II (PIVKA-II; 1,005 mAU/mL) were markedly elevated. The CEA level was within normal limits. His serum was positive for hepatitis
B surface antibody, but negative for hepatitis B surface antigen and anti-HCV. The ultrasonographic images showed a 9 cm sized hyperechoic
mass with internal anechoic portion in right hepatic lobe with adjacent small hypoechoic nodules (Fig. 1A). We then performed contrast-
enhanced multidetector-row CT. The contrast-enhanced dynamic CT images revealed a 9.5Ã—7 cm sized mass in the liver, comprised of a central
necrotic portion and a peripheral solid enhancing portion. Liver cirrhotic changes were not observed on CT or ultrasonographic images. After
contrast enhancement, the peripheral solid portion of the huge hepatic mass showed heterogeneous enhancement on arterial phase image and
washout of contrast enhancement on delayed phase image. The tumor thrombus was visualized in adjacent right portal vein and a 1.3 cm sized
mass was observed in inferior aspect of huge hepatic mass. The tumor thrombi were observed in proximal main portal vein to superior
mesenteric vein. The multiple enlarged, conglomerate lymph nodes were observed along the left gastric artery, gastroduodenal artery and
right gastroepiploic artery. The CT images also revealed irregular wall thickening of gastric antrum (Fig. 1B, 1C). For evaluation of
gastric abnormality, an endoscopic biopsy was performed. An infiltrative mass with ulceration at the gastric antrum was detected on the
endoscopic image and endoscopic specimens were obtained in the gastric lesion. The specimen was pathologically confirmed as poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma. For further evaluation of the hepatic tumors, contrast enhanced liver magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) using
gadoxetic-acid was performed. The huge hepatic mass consisted of a central necrotic portion and a peripheral solid portion. The peripheral
solid portion showed low signal intensity on T1WI and high signal intensity on T2WI. After contrast enhancement, the peripheral solid
portion of the huge hepatic mass showed heterogeneous enhancement on arterial phase image, low signal intensity on portal venous, late
dynamic and hepatobiliary phase images (Fig. 1D, 1E, 1F). Dynamic MRI revealed several small nodules that were unclear on abdominal CT.
These lesions showed typical enhancement pattern of HCC such as early enhancement on arterial phase and delayed washout on late dynamic and
hepatobiliary phases. Based on laboratory tests showing marked elevated AFP and PIVKA-II, existence of pathologic proven gastric
adenocarcinoma, and typical enhancement pattern of HCC of huge and small hepatic tumors on CT and MRI, we thought two possible diagnoses;
the one was double primary malignancy as primary advanced gastric malignancy and primary HCC in the liver. The other was AFP producing
gastric malignancy and its hepatic metastases. The ultrasonography-guided biopsy of the hepatic tumors was performed. Microscopic
examination revealed that the histology of the hepatic tumor was similar to that of specimens from the gastric cancer. The results of
immunohistochemical stains were positive for AFP, Glypican-3, Glutamine synthase, Cytokeratin, and CK8/18. But CK20, CK7, and human serum
albumin were negative. These histologic features resulted in the diagnosis of this case as a gastric hepatoid adenocarcinoma with hepatic
metastases. He had eight cycles of chemotherapy with FOLFOX and he remains alive for five months after diagnosis. Hepatoid adenocarcinoma is
an AFP producing adenocarcinoma, which has a histological similarity to HCC. It was first described by Ishikura et al.2 Since its first
description in the stomach, which is the most common location, it had been found in a variety of organs such as lung, pancreas, esophagus,
colon, urinary bladder, renal pelvis, ovaries, uterus, cervix and ampulla of Vater. Hepatoid adenocarcinoma is reported to comprise 0.38 %
of all gastric cancer. Clinically, the neoplasm is characterized by older age, a high serum AFP level, aggressive behavior and the presence
of a hepatic tumor in the absence of the risk factors of HCC. Its poor prognosis is due to a strong tendency toward liver and lymph node
metastases and venous invasion.3-5 Lee et al3 reported four cases of hepatic metastases from gastric hepatoid carcinoma. In their cases,
hepatic metastases had two patterns. One was multiple hepatic metastases of a similar size without portal venous thrombosis, and the other
was hepatic metastases that appeared as a dominant bulky mass with adjacent portal venous thrombosis. They reported that the pattern of a
dominant bulky mass was more common. In our case, hepatic metastases appeared in a pattern of a dominant bulky mass similar to previous
studies, with several small masses. The abdominal CT and liver MRI showed that the enhancement pattern of hepatic masses, especially small
hepatic masses, is similar to that of HCC. Given these imaging findings, it is hard to differentiate hepatic metastases from gastric
hepatoid adenocarcinoma and HCC only by imaging finding of the hepatic mass, without knowing of the primary malignancy. Generally, tumor
thrombus in the portal venous system originating from gastric cancer is rare.6 However, tumor thrombus in the portal venous system is more
frequently found in gastric hepatoid carcinoma than other gastric adenocarcinoma.1,3 Also, tumor thrombus by hepatoid adenocarcinoma
appeared in two patterns. One pattern is tumor thrombus around a hepatic mass, caused by invasion of metastatic cancer. The other is tumor
thrombus remote from or without a hepatic mass, caused by invasion of a primary hepatoid carcinoma.6,7 In our case, tumor thrombi were found
in both patterns. The pattern of tumor thrombi remote from the hepatic mass was helpful for differential diagnosis. In conclusion,
metastatic carcinoma from hepatoid adenocarcinoma should be included in the differential diagnosis in older patients with elevated serum AFP
level and hepatic masses with imaging features of HCC in the absence of risk factors of HCC. In that situation, concomitant primary gastric
cancer and tumor thrombus remote from the hepatic mass are helpful in differential diagnosis of metastatic carcinoma from hepatoid
adenocarcinoma and HCC. When a metastatic carcinoma from hepatoid carcinoma is highly suspected, gastroscopy should be performed even if a
primary gastric cancer is not clearly demonstrated on imaging studies. Hepatoid adenocarcinoma is a special type of extrahepatic
adenocarcinoma that mimics hepatocellular carcinoma morphologically. The stomach is one of the most common sites of hepatoid adenocarcinoma.
Hepatoid adenocarcinoma is characterized histologically by hepatoid differentiation and production of large amounts of AFP. It is not easy
to differentiate hepatic metastases from hepatoid adenocarcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma when hepatic tumor is incidentally detected.
Furthermore, imaging findings of hepatoid adenocarcinoma are rarely described. Therefore, we report a case of hepatic metastases from
hepatoid adenocarcinoma of stomach mimicking hepatocellular carcinoma with image findings and a review of the literature. The authors have
no conflicts to disclose. the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases alpha fetoprotein cholangiocarcinoma computed tomography
European Association for the Study of the Liver hepatitis B virus hepatocellular carcinoma hepatitis C virus the Korean Liver Cancer Study
Group and the National Cancer Center liver cirrhosis magnetic resonance imaging National Comprehensive Cancer Network positive predictive
value Hepatic metastases from gastric hepatoid adenocarcinoma in 65-year-old man. (A) Abdominal ultrasonography shows hyperechoic mass
(arrows) with internal anechoic portion in right hepatic lobe, without evidence of liver cirrhosis. Also abdominal ultrasonography shows
small hypoechoic mass (arrowhead) around main huge hepatic mass. (B, C) An enhanced abdomen CT image (B) shows irregular wall thickening of
gastric antrum (arrows) and tumor thrombus (arrowheads) in the main portal vein. On the lower section image (C) shows multiple conglomerate
enlarged lymph nodes (arrows) along gastroduodenal artery and right gastroepiploic artery. Also tumor thrombus (arrowheads) is shown in
superior mesenteric vein. (D-F) Gadoxetic acid-enhanced MR images show huge central necrotic hepatic mass (arrows) and small hepatic mass
(arrowhead), with heterogeneous early enhancement on arterial phase (D), low signal intensity on late dynamic phase (E) and hepatobiliary
phase (F).
