We report a case in an inoperable patient with the hilar malignant biliary obstruction treated palliatively by the use of a newly designed
Y-shaped covered stent without interfering contra-lateral bile duct. We percutaneously inserted a newly designed Y-shaped covered stent into
a biliary tree in an inoperable patient with Bismuth Type II cholangiocarcinoma. We checked tubograms, enhanced CT studies, and blood
bilirubin levels before, one week after, and at every three month after the stenting, by observing closely the signs of clinical infection
as well. The follow-up period was about 12 months. The placement of the Y-shaped covered stent was successful and resulted in adequate
biliary drainage in the immediate post-procedural tubogram and in the follow-up abdominal CT. The serum bilirubin levels did not show
elevation after the insertion of the Y-shaped covered stent. The resectable rates for the hepatic hilar malignant obstruction are variable
depending on surgeons, but generally reported to be approximately 10-20% (1-3). Therefore some patients are treated palliatively rather than
curatively. Bilateral biliary drainage with stenting for hilar malignant obstructions has been performed for palliative treatment (4, 5).
Primary patency rate with the current biliary stents in 12 months has been reported as approximately 12-40% (1, 4, 5). When the stent is
obstructed by the tumor ingrowth or sludge formation, restenting can be reasonable and an ideal option to preserve the functional volume of
liver in the course of chemotherapy or to prevent the bile-stasis cholangitis. However, the necessity of biliary drainage of both liver
lobes is still controversial in the hilar malignant obstruction, including the advanced Klastkin tumor (6). It is difficult to re-stent
bilaterally in order to drain bile, because the wires of the previously inserted stent have a potential risk of preventing the additional
stent insertion through the contra-lateral bile duct (7). For this reason, there was a need for a special stent system to improve the
patency rate and to allow re-stenting bilaterally when reobstruction happens in patients with a hepatic hilar malignancy. We introduce a new
attempt to improve the patency rate of the biliary stent in patients with inoperable cholnagiocarcinomas by the insertion of a newly
designed Y-shaped branched covered stent. It consists of two different stents: a main piece of stent and a contra-lateral limb covered stent
(Fig. 1A). A 72-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital complaining of right upper quadrant pain. Initial abdominopelvic CT showed
hepatic hilar obstruction due to cholangiocarcinoma, extending from hilum of extrahepatic bile duct to distal common bile duct. Elevated
total bilirubin level (13.0 mg/dL) and direct bilirubin level (10.8 mg/dL) were found at admission. Alkaline phosphatase level (1189 IU/L)
and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (229 mg/dL) were also elevated. Percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD) through the right
intrahepatic bile duct (Fig. 1B-a) resulted from a Bismuth type II cholangiocarcinoma. We planned on the newly designed Y-shaped covered
stent insertion on the fourth day after the initial drainage procedure, and performed another PTBD through the left intrahepatic bile duct
(S3 duct) (Fig. 1B-b). Before inserting the Y-shaped biliary covered stent, the drainage catheters were removed and 8 Fr sheaths inserted
over a 0.035-inch hydrophilic guide wire (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) bilaterally. First, we inserted and located the main piece of stent into the
common bile duct through left PTBD tract (Fig. 1C). The proximal end of the main piece stent (EGIS KEY-MB stent) (S&G Bio, Seoul, Korea) was
located in the left intrahepatic bile duct (IHD) beyond the boundary of the hilar tumor (Fig. 1C, thick arrows). The short limb covered
portion of the main piece stent was directed toward the left side of the common bile duct (Fig. 1C, thin arrows). To easily insert and
deploy the contra-lateral long limb covered stent (EGIS KEY-CL stent) (S&G Bio, Seoul, Korea) without kinking its struts, the long limb
covered stent of the main piece was not to be deployed (Fig. 1D, three thick arrows) until the contra-lateral long limb covered stent was
completely deployed in an adequate position. After successful negotiation of a guide wire into the short limb covered stent of the main
piece, a contra-lateral long limb covered stent was inserted through the right PTBD tract to connect this short limb covered stent of the
main piece under the guidance of a 0.035-inch guide wire. After the confirmation that its proximal end was located in the right IHD beyond
the boundary of the hilar tumor, we deployed the contra-lateral long limb covered (Fig. 1E). Finally, the long limb covered stent of the
main piece was completely deployed. A 7 Fr drainage catheter was placed through the left IHD with its tip located in the common bile duct.
To confirm the correct stent expansion and function, post-stenting cholangiography was performed through the drainage catheter just after
the stent insertion (Fig. 1F) and 7 days later. Cholangiography showed good bilateral communication via completely expanded stents, and the
drainage catheter was removed. On eighth day following the stent placement, total bilirubin and direct bilirubin levels decreased to 2.7
mg/dL and 2.2 mg/dL, respectively. They have not been elevated in the 12 months following the Y-shaped covered stent insertion (total
bilirubin/direct bilirubin = 0.9/0.5 mg/dL). In hilar malignant biliary obstruction, the first requirement for the ideal stent platform is
complete coverage of the tumorous bile ducts without interfering with contra-lateral or branched bile duct patency. Gwon et al. (2) reported
that percutaneous Y-configurated covered biliary stent placement for the malignant hilar obstruction gives the patent biliary flows without
interfering the contra-lateral bile flows. However, even if internal biliary drainage with the other currently available biliary stent is
optimally implanted in case of the bilateral hilar malignant obstructed lesion, it may actually impair the contra-lateral bile flow. This is
from the wires of the second stent partially left inside the first stent in the hepatic hilum, when T-configured or Y-configured current
stent is inserted. Naitoh et al. (8) cited that, in case of the biliary stent-in-stent deployment, even in T or Y configuration, there is a
risk of its preventing the bile inflow in the area of the stent overlap, leading to sludge formation. Furthermore, there is a possibility
that tumor ingrowth will easily occur if the stent mesh is expanded in the area of overlap. On the other hand, the present newly designed
Y-shaped covered biliary stent may provide a higher patency rate, as it is a covered stent system. It does not interfere with the contra-
lateral bile flow with its stent-by-stent deployment and its structural configuration (Fig. 1A). If complete coverage of the branched bile
ducts with the biliary covered stent is achieved, early reobstruction occurs, and the primary patency rate of the biliary stent will be
lower. This is from the wires of the previously inserted stent having a potential risk of preventing the additional stent insertion through
the contra-lateral bile duct, when the reobstruction happens (3, 8). This Y-shaped covered biliary stent may not prevent the additional
stent insertion, even if the biliary obstruction happens again. From the technical perspective, the methods used in this Y-configured
covered stent implantation are relatively simple, other than at one point of the procedure. Two guide wires are separately inserted into the
common bile duct portion through the bilateral tumorous bile ducts. After the adequate main piece stent system (EGIS KEY-MB stent)
deployment, the contra-lateral limb covered stent (EGIS KEY-CL stent) is inserted into the short limb covered portion of the main piece
stent system. There is one technical step which is quite different from the usual stenting procedure. During the deployment of the main
piece stent system, the operator should not deploy the long limb covered portion of the main piece system (Fig. 1E). If the operator deploys
the long limb covered portion of the main piece system completely, it may interrupt the negotiation of the guide wire or long limb covered
stent-introducer passing through the hilar tumorous obstructive lesion into the short limb covered stent of the main piece system. Stent
grafts or covered stent are usually more likely to prevent tumor ingrowth than bare stents. Gwon reported that the stent graft may prolong
the patency rate in the hilar malignant obstruction (2, 4). However, there are few limitations in the use of a stent graft or covered stent
for treating the advanced hilar bile duct malignancies. There is a risk of occlusion of branching or contra-lateral bile ducts in a covered
stent or stent graft. The other possible limitation is the potential risk of migration. Hence, the partially covered stents were made with
bare ends, which provides better anchoring and stabilization. In this Y-covered stent design, bare stent extensions on each end of the
covered stents (main trunk, ipsilateral proximal limb, and contra-lateral limbs) will limit the chances of migration (Fig. 1A). In this
case, a silicone-covered self-expandable stent system was used, because it provides a larger lumen for bile flow and does not allow as much
sludge build-up or occlusion as the polyethylene-covered stent (9). Currently there have been only a few stent trials performed for the
palliative treatment of the hepatic hilar malignant obstruction (1, 4, 5), and the image appearances of the hilar lesions have seemed to be
satisfactory. However, long-term or mid-term clinical outcome studies, including the occurrence of reobstruction after the stent insertions,
are still sparse. In fact additional therapies including the radiotherapy, photodynamic therapy, and chemotherapy can lead to longer
symptomatic survival, or to longer phases of stent patency after the conservative biliary drainage (7, 10). It is hoped that this new stent
design may give clinicians the opportunity to offer a long-term patent rate, with its covered stent inserted by the Y-shaped stent-by-stent
deployment. In conclusion, the newly designed Y-shaped covered stent placement for hilar malignancies provides the following advantages: its
ability to drain the bile ducts of both lobes of liver; and the suppression of the tumor ingrowth effectively, by using silicon covered
stents without structural occlusion of contra-lateral bile ducts. However there is a need for further clinical studies to confirm its long
term patency and the ease of the restenting technique. New stant and its use for hepatic hilar malignant obstruction treatmeant. A. Newly
designed Y-shaped Covered Biliary Stent. Y-configured stent appearance can be achieved by connecting short limb covered stent of main piece
and contra-lateral long limb covered stent. Diameter of Y-shaped branched covered stent is 10 mm at main bare trunk (T) and 7 mm at covered
limb stents (L). Insertion of Y-shaped covered biliary stent in 72-year old woman with type II cholangiocarcinoma. B-a. Initial
cholangiogram showed patient's tumor as Bismuth type II cholangiocarcinoma (Arrows indicates cancerous proximal and distal margins). B-b.
For insertion of newly designed Y-shaped covered stent, we made another percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD) tract through left
IHD and inserted drainage catheters (arrows) bilaterally. C. After bilateral PTBD, we inserted and located main piece of stent into common
bile duct through left PTBD tract, under guidance of 0.035-inch guide wire. Proximal end (thick arrows) of main piece stent (EGIS KEY-MB
stent) was located in left intrahepatic bile duct (IHD) beyond boundary of hilar tumor. Short limb covered portion of main piece stent was
directed toward left side in common bile duct (Thin arrows indicate lateral markers of short limb covered stent). D. Only short limb covered
stent (thin arrows) of main piece was deployed, and long limb covered stent (thick arrows) of main piece (EGIS KEY-MB stent) was not
deployed. E. After confirmation of its proximal end located in right IHD beyond boundary of hilar tumor and distal end located within lumen
of short limb covered stent, we deployed contra-lateral long limb covered stent (arrows) (EGIS KEY-CL stent) (S&G Bio, Seoul, Korea). F.
Post-stenting cholangiography showed good internal drainage into duodenum and bilateral IHD communication, after completely deploying long
limb covered stent of main piece. Outer diameter of Y-shaped covered stent introducer is 7 Fr.
