A 46-year-old man with untreated type 2 diabetes visited our hospital. His plasma glucose and HbA1c levels were 429 mg/dL and 11.5%,
respectively. He had no renal dysfunction. Insulin therapy (18 units aspart and 22 units biphasic insulin aspart 30/70) was initiated, and
the HbA1c level improved (5.7–6.4%). One year later, he started experiencing frequent hypoglycemic attacks, which persisted despite
significantly reducing his insulin dosage (total 9 units). Fasting plasma glucose, serum immunoreactive insulin (IRI), C-peptide, and HbA1c
levels were 75 mg/dL, 420 μU/mL (reference, 1.7–10.4), 1.2 ng/mL (reference, 0.6–1.8), and 5.4%, respectively. His anti-insulin
immunoglobulin G antibody (IA) titer (125I-insulin binding rate) was 95.5% (reference, 0–7.0); free and total IRI levels were 11.0 and >240
μU/mL, respectively. After insulin cessation, nocturnal hypoglycemia persisted (28–50 mg/dL). In addition, his serum sodium level gradually
decreased in the past 2 months (from 142 to 128 mmol/L [reference, 138–146]). Adrenal function was evaluated: plasma ACTH and cortisol
levels at 0700 and 2300 h were 21.0 pg/mL (reference, 7.4–54.7) and 2.3 μg/dL (reference, 4.0–18.3), and 11.0 pg/mL and <1.0 μg/dL,
respectively. His 24-h urinary free cortisol level was 6.5 μg (reference, 11.2–80.3). Corticotropin-releasing hormone (100 μg i.v.) test
revealed blunted responses of plasma ACTH and cortisol levels (20.0–23.0 pg/mL and 1.4–1.9 μg/dL, respectively). His basal levels of growth
hormone, gonadotropins, thyrotropin, and prolactin, and their responsiveness to growth hormone-, gonadotropin-, and thyrotropin-releasing
hormones were almost normal. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a normal pituitary gland. These observations indicated a recent-onset
isolated ACTH deficiency (IAD). Replacement with 15-mg hydrocortisone normalized the 24-h urinary free cortisol level (24.8 μg) and improved
hyponatremia. Since diurnal hyperglycemia remained, 90-mg nateglinide was initiated and increased to 270 mg. Frequency of hypoglycemia
gradually decreased. The IA titers and IRI levels were 62.7% and 57.3 μU/mL, 47.9% and 12.2 μU/mL, and 15.3% and 7.9 μU/mL after 5, 7, and
11 months, respectively. HbA1c level was 5.7–6.3% without hypoglycemia. The HLA haplotype was DRB1*090102/150201–DQB1*030302/060101. The
DRB1*0406 allele was undetectable, which is common in Japanese patients with insulin autoimmune syndrome (1). An excessive production of IAs
against exogenous insulin causes unexpected hypoglycemia (2). In this patient, a high titer of IAs and IAD occurred almost simultaneously
after 1 year of insulin treatment, resulting in recurrent hypoglycemia. An accurate diagnosis was important to initiate appropriate
treatment; glucocorticoid supplementation and nateglinide substitution for insulin reduced the IA titers. This clinical course suggests that
endogenous glucocorticoid prevented the overproduction of IAs before the onset of IAD. Although the IAD was idiopathic, an immune rebound
mechanism due to adrenal deficiency might have triggered IA production, since acute changes in cortisol levels have been reported to cause
autoimmune diseases (3,4). Pharmacological doses of glucocorticoids often decrease IA titers in insulin-treated diabetic patients (5).
Conversely, the overproduction of IAs in the absence of glucocorticoids has not been reported. This rare case suggests that an imbalance
between endogenous glucocorticoid levels and the immune system induces overproduction of IAs. M.Y., M.Mu., K.O., and H.M. were involved in
the diagnosis and treatment of the patient. M.Mu., K.O., and H.M. researched data. M.Y. interpreted data and wrote, reviewed, and edited the
manuscript. M.A., M.Mi., and Y.O. contributed to discussion. M.Y. is the guarantor of this work and, as such, had full access to all the
data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. No potential conflicts of
interest relevant to this article were reported. The authors thank Cactus Communications Inc. for help with English proofreading.
