Proton therapy can result in clinically significant radiation dermatitis. In some clinical scenarios, such as lung or breast cancer, the
risk of severe radiation dermatitis may limit beam arrangement and prescription doses. Patients undergoing proton therapy for prostate
cancer commonly develop mild radiation dermatitis. Herein, we report the outcomes of two prostate cancer patients whose radiation dermatitis
appears to have been substantially diminished by transparent film dressings (Beekley stickers). This is a descriptive report of the skin
toxicity observed in two patients undergoing proton therapy for prostate cancer at a single institution in 2011. A phantom dosimetric study
was performed to evaluate the impact of a transparent film dressing on a beam’s spread out Bragg peak (SOBP). Two patients with low risk
prostate cancer were treated with proton therapy to a total dose of 79.2Gy (RBE) in 1.8 Gy (RBE) fractions using two opposed lateral beams
daily. Both patients had small circular (2.5 cm diameter) transparent adhesive markers placed on their skin to assist with daily alignment.
Patient 1 had markers in place bilaterally for the entirety of treatment. Patient 2 had a marker in place for three weeks on one side and
six weeks on the other. Over the course of therapy, both men developed typical Grade 1 radiation dermatitis (asymptomatic erythema) on their
hips; however, in both patients, the erythema was substantially decreased beneath the markers. Patient 2 demonstrated less attenuation and
thus greater erythema in the skin covered for three weeks compared to the skin covered for six weeks. The difference in skin changes between
the covered and uncovered skin persisted for at least 1 month. A phantom study of double scattered beam SOBP with and without the marker in
the beam path showed no gross dosimetric effect. Transparent adhesive markers appear to have attenuated radiation dermatitis in these two
patients without affecting the SOBP. One patient may have exhibited a dose–response effect. The reproducibility and underlying mechanisms
are unclear. However, the potential to leverage this effect to improve proton-related radiation dermatitis in other clinical scenarios is
intriguing. Exploratory animal studies are underway. Proton therapy is an attractive radiation modality because plans can be created with
relatively low integral dose to normal tissues. However, radiation dermatitis is common because of two features unique to proton plans.
First, unlike the large integral dose spread out over a considerable surface area frequently seen with intensity modulated radiation therapy
with photons, the physical properties of proton often permit the utilization of fewer beam angles. Second, due to the narrow Bragg peak seen
with a monoenergetic beam, proton plans must utilize multiple energies in a given beam direction to create a spread out Bragg peak (SOBP) to
cover a target volume with uniform dose . As Bragg peaks of different energies are summed to create uniform dose across the target in depth,
there is an increase in entrance dose compared with a monoenergetic Bragg peak due to the summing of the entrance dose from each of the
individual peaks. Thus, the limited beam angles and multiple energies utilized to create the SOBP with minimal integral dose can lead to a
substantial increase in the entrance dose to skin. In some clinical scenarios, such as lung or breast cancer, the risk of severe radiation
dermatitis may limit proton beam arrangement options and total prescription doses. In patients undergoing proton therapy for prostate
cancer, radiation dermatitis is a consistent finding but is usually limited to asymptomatic erythema in the treatment portal. Herein, we
report the outcomes of two prostate cancer patients whose radiation dermatitis appears to have been substantially diminished by transparent
adhesive markers on the treated skin. In addition, we advance several hypotheses to explain this apparent protective effect. This is a
descriptive report of the skin toxicity observed in two patients undergoing proton therapy for prostate cancer at the University of
Pennsylvania in 2011. Both patients were consented and enrolled onto institutional review board-approved prospective protocols as part of
their treatment. Skin toxicity was measured according to the NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v.4 (CTCAE) with
asymptomatic, mild erythema representative of grade 1 radiation dermatitis . All patients undergoing proton or photon based radiation
therapy for prostate cancer at the University of Pennsylvania have tattoos placed at the time of simulation for daily localization purposes.
In a small subset of patients with difficult to identify tattoos, transparent adhesive markers are placed at the time of set-up to aid in
daily setup. If these markers detach during a patient’s 9 week therapy, they may be replaced. Beekley transparent markers are approximately
0.1 mm in thickness, 2.5 cm in width, and are made of polyurethane film and acrylate, a common semipermeable film. The film is impermeable
to water and bacteria while allowing the diffusion of air to the skin beneath. Neither the thickness nor the composition is uniquely
concerning for an interaction with a high energy proton beam. Both patients in this series were treated for localized low risk prostate
cancer with definitive proton therapy. Patient 1 was treated using a double scattering delivery, and patient 2 was treated using uniform
scanning delivery. Treatment included 44 fractions of 1.8 Gy (RBE) to a total dose of 79.2Gy (RBE) using two opposed lateral beams daily.
After an initial 5040 CGE to the prostate and proximal seminal vesicles, a boost of 2880 CGE was given to the prostate only. Both patients
were treated supine in a knee/foot lock for immobilization. Nothing was placed over the skin at the time of treatment. Skin entrance doses
ranged from 27 Gy to 29 Gy. Patient 1 had the transparent adhesive marker placed at the time of set-up. The marker was worn throughout
treatment and replaced every few weeks to ensure the sticker remained in place. He developed typical asymptomatic erythema on his hips
bilaterally; however, the erythema was substantially attenuated in the area of skin beneath the markers (Figure 1). This attenuation was
seen and noted to be less pronounced throughout his treatment. His radiation dermatitis was scored as Grade 1. Per patient report, the
difference between the erythematous and non-erythematous skin (beneath the marker) persisted for at least 4 weeks. The patient experienced
no other acute toxicity during treatment. Diminished radiation dermatitis. Patient 1 demonstrated substantially decreased erythema in the
area of the skin beneath the markers. Patient 2 had the transparent adhesive marker placed at the time of set-up. After 3 weeks, the marker
on the left hip detached and was not replaced. The marker on the right hip remained in place for 6 weeks of treatment. He also developed
typical asymptomatic erythema on his hips bilaterally. Similar to Patient 1, there was a decrease in skin erythema beneath the adhesive
markers. Moreover, the area of skin on the side that was covered for only 3 out of the 6 weeks showed a less noticeable decrease in erythema
compared to the surrounding uncovered skin than the area that was covered for 6 weeks (Figure 2). Difference between the erythematous and
non-erythematous skin (beneath the marker) persisted approximately 3 months. Dose response effect. Patient 2 demonstrated more erythema in
the skin that was covered for only 3 weeks (Left Image) compared to the skin covered for 6 weeks (Right Image), suggesting a dose response
effect. A gross dosimetric phantom study was performed to assess the effect of transparent adhesive markers, in this case Beekley stickers,
on a beam’s SOBP. Using a PPC05 ion chamber in a water tank, two depth dose curves were measured, one with and the other without the
transparent adhesive marker placed above the water, centered over the ionization chamber. Double-scattered beams with a 25 cm range and 10
cm modulation width in a 10×10 cm2 field were used. These beams are comparable to the treatment fields of the patients considered here which
had an average range of 25.4 cm, modulation width of 8.9 cm, and a field radius of 6 cm. The results of the phantom dosimetric study are
shown in Figure 3. The plot demonstrates no substantial difference in the SOBPs with or without the marker in place. Data points were
sampled every 2mm and have been normalized to the dose in the center of the SOBP. The largest difference in magnitude between data points
from the two scans was 0.4% and the nominal range was identical (to a hundredth of a centimeter) for both measurements. The double scattered
SOBP demonstrated no apparent dose variation with and without the transparent marker in the beam. This observational series is the first, to
our knowledge, to report an apparent protective effect of transparent adhesive markers on radiation dermatitis associated with proton beam
therapy. As an initial investigation step, we performed basic dosimetric calculations on a phantom water tank with adhesive markers that
demonstrated no measurable effect on the SOBP in phantom studies. Whether this observation is reproducible and the underlying mechanisms by
which it occurred are unclear; however, this phenomenon has been observed in many of our prostate cancer patients undergoing proton therapy.
We have used transparent film dressings in patients receiving photon radiation in the past, but due to the lower intrinsic skin dose and
larger number of beam angles, patients do not typically have any noticeable skin erythema with treatment. Thus, it is similarly unclear
whether this effect is unique to skin effects of proton radiation. Preclinical mechanistic and phenomenological studies are currently
underway using a porcine skin model system to test a number of potential hypotheses. These hypotheses separate roughly into two categories,
dosimetric and biological. The possible dosimetric explanations for our observed effect involve the transparent adhesive marker
quantitatively altering the physical dose to skin tissue. One such hypothesis is that the transparent adhesive marker disrupts the charged
particle equilibrium at the air-skin interface . Interface perturbations are known to occur at air-tissue interfaces and certainly
complicate proton treatment planning for lung cancers. However, it is quite unlikely that this particular 0.1 mm marker with a composition
comprised mostly of hydrogen and carbon would in any way change the typical air-skin interface. Another hypothesis is that low energy
particles are created from scatter from the beam line components upstream of the patient. If the creation of low energy scatter particles
were occurring, there is a small possibility these particles could be diminished by 1 mm of substance. Additionally, if the skin reactions
were related to creation of low energy particles in the beam line components, we would expect less skin dermatitis in the patients who are
treated on the fixed beam gantry that does not have beam line components (i.e. scatterers, MLC, or compensator). However, although we are
currently evaluating this using a combination of measurements and modeling, this also seems unlikely given the phenomenon has also been
observed with a fixed beam proton gantry. The possible biological explanations for our observed effect involve transparent adhesive marker
altering the skin response to proton radiation. One hypothesis is that the transparent adhesive marker is able to alter the diffusion of
oxygen from the external environment, leading to decreased tissue oxygenation in the first few millimeters below the adhesive. The epidermis
is known to be devoid of blood vessels and relies on diffusion from capillaries in the papillary dermis for oxygenation . Additionally, it
has been suggested that the outermost 0.25-0.4 mm of epidermis is almost entirely oxygenated by external oxygen . If this is in fact the
case, small manipulations could alter flow oxygen levels at the level of the epidermis and deep dermis, leading to diminished oxygenation.
The mechanism of radiation dermatitis has been documented to involve epidermal atrophy, upper dermal edema, capillary dilation, and
melanophage deposition and the slope of the dose response profile for these effects would be decreased if the tissue experienced a modest
decrease in oxygen levels. Another hypothesis is that the transparent adhesive marker may alter the tensile forces on the most superficial
portions of the skin. As mentioned above, with limited blood supply to the epidermis, small manipulations could alter the supply of
inflammatory components from the general circulation. The inflammatory response to radiation is well-documented to involve an influx of
inflammatory components . If the tension related to the markers could alter the local response within the most superficial millimeters
beneath the markers, it seems reasonable this could relate to the diminished response. Note that these last two mechanisms could act
simultaneously to decrease tissue oxygenation. Finally, it is possible that the adhesive could have radioprotective properties. This could
occur from direct antioxidant effects that have been observed for topically applied oils and oil derived substances or indirectly through
stimulation of mild, acute non-specific local inflammation that has been demonstrated to provide radioprotection through unclear mechanisms
. There are several implications of our observations. First, acute skin toxicity from proton beam has been shown to be dose limiting;
therefore, its reduction is an important clinical goal. In a pilot study of proton therapy for accelerated partial breast irradiation in 20
patients with limited beam arrangements, investigators at the Massachusetts General Hospital documented an unexpectedly high rate of acute
skin toxicity: moderate to severe skin color changes developed in 79% of patients at 3 to 4 weeks and moderate to severe moist desquamation
in 22% of patients at 6 to 8 weeks . In an effort to reduce skin toxicity, investigators at the MD Anderson have proposed an approach using
3–4 beams, though this comes at the expense of exposing a greater volume of non-target tissue . Within our own department, among the
patients treated on prospective trials with proton therapy for lung, sarcoma, and previously irradiated recurrent tumors, mild to moderate
(Grade II-III) radiation dermatitis is one of the most common toxicities encountered. On occasion, concern for radiation dermatitis has
prompted treatment breaks and alteration of beam arrangements. The potential to leverage the apparent skin-sparing effect described above to
improve proton-related radiation dermatitis in other clinical scenarios is intriguing. Exploratory animal studies are underway. According to
protocol, written informed consent was obtained from each patient for publication of this report and any accompanying images. They authors
declare that they have no competing interests. JW generated the initial proposal and drafted the manuscript. MK and JM performed dosimetric
studies and provided physics theory for the manuscript. KC aided in writing manuscript and providing basis for biological explanations for
the observation. JB and JC documented the findings in the patients and provided clinical background for observation. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. National Space Biomedical Research Institute (NSBRI) through NASA NCC 9–58. This research was presented by
Jonathan T. Whaley at 51st Annual Meeting of Particle Therapy Co-Operative Group, NCC, Seoul, Korea, May 17–19, 2012.
