To the Editor, The diagnosis and treatment of diarrhea can be challenging. Diabetic diarrhea is seen mainly in patients with poorly
controlled insulin-dependent diabetes who also have symptoms of diabetic peripheral and autonomic neuropathy. Typically, the diarrhea is
painless, occurs during the day and night, and may be associated with fecal incontinence . We used ramosetron, a selective 5-HT3 receptor
antagonist, to treat diabetic diarrhea with a rapid small bowel transit time. A 49-year-old man who had developed type 2 diabetes mellitus
at 42 years of age, presented with diarrhea 6 months ago. His glycemia was poorly controlled, based on a haemoglobin A1c of 17.7%. He had
hypercholesterolemia, orthostatic hypotension, diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy, peripheral neuropathy, autonomic neuropathy, and
gastroparesis. Current medications included insulin, losartan, atorvastatin, midodrine, metoclopramide, and domperidone. Diarrhea occurred
at a frequency of > 10 bowel movements per day, with fecal urgency following meals. Steatorrhea was absent and the stool examination was
unremarkable. He was prescribed conventional antidiarrheals, including a pancreatic enzyme supplement, rifaximin, probiotics, cimetropium
bromide, and loperamide, but these were ineffective. He also had iron-deficiency anemia, as evidenced by a hemoglobin of 9.1 g/dL, mean
corpuscular volume of 84.7 fL, 1.95% reticulocytes, and ferritin of 8.45 ng/mL. Capsule endoscopy (PillCam SB2, Given Imaging, Yokneam,
Israel) was performed after upper endoscopy, colonoscopy, and abdominal computed tomography failed to explain the iron-deficiency anemia. He
fasted for 12 hours before capsule ingestion. For 4 hours following ingestion of the capsule, only water was permitted, after which a liquid
diet was offered. All medications except the losartan were discontinued. Capsule endoscopy identified multiple angiodysplastic lesions in
the distal ileum. Interestingly, a markedly prolonged gastric emptying time (13 hours 33 minutes) with a rapid small bowel transit time (14
minutes) was noted (Fig. 1), suggesting gastroparesis and autonomic neuropathy, respectively. The diarrhea persisted, so ramosetron therapy
(Irribow, Astellas Pharma Korea, Seoul, Korea) was started at 5 Âµg once daily before breakfast. The diarrhea and fecal urgency disappeared
completely after 1 week of ramosetron treatment, with the bowel movement frequency reduced to two soft stools per day. On ceasing
ramosetron, the diarrhea recurred, but was relieved once more when the medication was restarted. 5-Hydroxytrytamine (5-HT) acts on 5-HT3
parasympathetic receptors to produce smooth muscle contraction and the release of acetylcholine from nerve terminals, causing intestinal
secretion to increase . The 5-HT3 receptor antagonist alosetron is useful in the treatment of diarrhea in patients with irritable bowel
syndrome, but must be avoided in more severe cases because of the risk of constipation . The efficacy of other 5-HT3 receptor antagonists
such as ondansetron and ramosetron in the treatment of diabetic diarrhea has been documented. In conclusion, given the inhibitory effects of
a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist on smooth muscle contraction and secretion, ramosetron should be considered in cases of diabetic diarrhea with
rapid small bowel transit. A larger study is needed to verify the efficacy of ramosetron in treating this condition. No potential conflict
of interest relevant to this article is reported. (A) Stomach. (B) Duodenum. (C) Colon. Capsule endoscopy revealed a markedly prolonged
gastric transit time with rapid small bowel transit (gastric emptying time, 13 hours 33 minutes; small bowel transit time, 14 minutes).
