Obsessive compulsive disorders are a complex group that can have a variety of manifestations. Many authors now describe an obsessive
compulsive spectrum disorder where many other specific diagnostic entities such as trichotillomania, tic disorders and body dysmorphic
disorder are considered to be related and linked disorders. We report a case of a twenty two year old Sri Lankan male who presented with
life threatening self starvation due to severe obsessive compulsive disorder. The diagnosis was not considered till late due to the atypical
presentation of the patient. While his symptoms bordered on a delusional psychosis, a decision was made to treat him as for obsessive
compulsive disorder with behavioural therapy which was successful in the end. In analysis of a patient with severe anorexia, the
psychological causes should not be forgotten. In fact, if the feeding pattern of the patient was observed at the beginning, unnecessary
investigating and life threatening worsening of the condition could have been avoided. Research in to obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
over the last 15 years have raised the possibility that it co-exists with many other disorders considered to have a separate organic and/or
a psychological basis . These include; delusional disorders, eating disorders, impulse control disorders, pica, pathological gambling and
Tourette syndrome. This led to a hypothesis of obsessive compulsive spectrum disorder (OCSD) . The classic description of OCD as defined in
International Classification of Diseases −10 (ICD-10) involves the presence of obsessions (recurrent, intrusive, unwanted thoughts, images
or impulses) and compulsions (repetitive behaviors either covert or overt). However, in OCSD, such behaviors may co exist and sometimes
contribute to the pathogenesis of the other disorders mentioned above. Furthermore, the characteristic description of OCD states that the
obsessions and compulsions are an agony to the patients and that he or she is aware that it is a redundant behaviour. However, considering
OCSD, some of the obsessions are so ingrained to the patients’ beliefs that they become ‘delusional’ in nature. This can lead to serious
consequences that can be life threatening in some patients. We present a case of a twenty two year Sri Lankan male who presented with severe
OCD associated with delusional thoughts that responded well to behaviour therapy rather than antipsychotics. A twenty two year old Sri
Lankan male presented to the outpatients department of the National Hospital of Sri Lanka complaining of shortness of breath. Noting that
the patient was severely emaciated, he was requested to get admitted to a medical ward for further investigations. While in ward his main
complaint was recurrent shortness of breath and a bloated feeling that was brought upon by ingestion of food. He also complained of severe
constipation and maintained that he had cut down on eating due to this. He did not have symptoms such as pyrexia, symptoms of
thyrotoxicosis, bleeding per rectum, chronic diarrhoea and lumps on palpation anywhere in the body. He had no medical history suggestive of
chronic infections such as tuberculosis, metabolic disorders such as diabetes, immunodeficiency disorders and primary gastrointestinal
disorders such as celiac disease or chronic pancreatitis. There were no inherited organic illnesses in the family, risk behaviors for Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection or a history of substance abuse. He was extremely wasted with a body mass index (BMI) of 11.1 kg/m2
(weight 27 kg, height 1.56 m). He did not have any overt signs of micronutrient and vitamin deficiencies. The cardiovascular examination was
normal and the blood pressure was 110/70mmHg. The respiratory, abdomen and nervous system examinations did not reveal any clinically
significant findings. He was investigated extensively to identify an organic pathology to explain the emaciation. The haemoglobin was 11.5
g/dl with normal white blood cell and platelet counts. The blood picture was also unremarkable apart from features of iron deficiency. The
erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 3mm in first hour and the liver function tests and renal function tests were within normal limits. The
fasting blood glucose was 3.3 mmol/l and the serum amylase was 327 U/l. The total serum protein level was 68 g/l with an albumin level of 48
g/l suggesting a more recent cause for weight loss as the protein content was not grossly reduced. The electrolyte profile was normal apart
from a hyponatremia (128 meq/l) and there were no significant findings on the chest roentgenogram or the ultrasound scan of abdomen. An
upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was arranged and revealed a normal oesophagal, gastric, duodenal and upper jejunal mucosa. Multiple
biopsies taken at different sites were within normal histological limits. The HIV screen was negative and the thyroid hormone profile was
also normal. At this point it was noted that the patient was avoiding food. He constantly complained of food causing uncomfortable abdominal
distention, epigastric pain and shortness of breath. He was then referred to the University Psychiatry Unit of the National Hospital of Sri
Lanka for further assessment for an underlying psychiatric morbidity. On the initial psychiatric interview it became clear that these recent
constellation of symptoms had started three months back after he became constipated following treatment for an infected eczematous rash. He
was heavily inconvenienced by the abdominal distension plus the difficulty in passing stools and therefore tried to avoid food to minimize
the discomfort. Later, he became preoccupied with the idea of keeping his body free of symptoms by avoiding food. He was having recurrent
intrusive fears of ingested food being retained in the body without him being able to defecate due to constipation. This led to secretive
disposal of food and resultant weight loss. However, he was not convinced that his beliefs were irrational. His idea of food being retained
in the body and accumulating causing discomfort due to the potential inability to defecate, bordered on a delusional thought. Apart from
being withdrawn and wasted with a blunt mood, the rest of the mental state examination was normal. Family members have noted that he was
withdrawn and smiling to self on occasions over the last 4–5 years. He was unemployed, spent most of his time at home but didn’t help out
with the daily family chores. He did not have any special interests, hobbies or religious interests. The differential diagnosis at this
point included; OCSD with a delusional component, a prodrome of schizophrenia or simple schizophrenia. A probable diagnosis of a type of
OCSD was supported by a history of symptoms suggestive of OCD . For the past two years he had repetitive behaviours such as hand washing due
to obsessional thoughts of uncleanliness. Rituals related to hand washing and eating led to significant obsessive slowness sometimes
exceeding two hours to complete a meal. In addition to excessive washing, he used to stare at the tap prior to washing as a part of the
ritual, sometimes up to an hour. Considering the overall picture it was decided to treat him with cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) as for
OCD instead of starting antipsychotic medication. Because of his poor physical health in ward treatment was necessary. Due to his food
refusal he had to be sedated and fed via a nasogastric tube in the first few days. To avoid refeeding syndrome his biochemical parameters
including electrolytes were regularly checked. Wernicke’s encephalopathy was anticipated and treated with thiamine. As he gradually gained
his strength CBT was started early. The behavioural therapy consisted of exposure and response prevention. The exposure consisted of graded
refeeding while being encouraged to face the anxiety associated with the obsessive fear of being unable to tolerate meals and constipation.
After the initial inpatient stay of two weeks, therapy was carried out at home with the mother being the co-therapist. He was not started on
any antipsychotic or anti depressant medications and was managed on CBT alone. At three weeks, his weight increased by 1 kg and after 3
months by 5 kg (BMI 13.1 kg/m2). The average time taken for a meal reduced from 90 minutes to 20 minutes. With less preoccupation about his
meals/bowels habits, his social interactions and involvement with other members of the family improved markedly. At six months follow up his
improvement continued with further weight gain (BMI 15.8 kg/m2). His interactions with family members and neighbours had also improved. He
remained unemployed but was fulfilling his daily household chores and was considering active employment. The excellent response to
behavioural therapy within a relatively short time span was surprising but was a vindication of the diagnosis of OCD. Recent onset rapidly
worsening emaciation of a previously ‘healthy’ young adult male raise the possibility of a sinister underlying organic pathology such as a
hormonal disorder, haematological (lymphoma/leukaemia) or solid organ malignancy (e.g. gonadal tumour), infectious diseases such as
tuberculosis or HIV, severe substance abuse with food neglect or a primary gastrointestinal disorder such as celiac disease or malabsorption
due to pancreatic disease (autoimmune pancreatitis) . However many of these diagnoses could have been excluded by simple observation of his
food habits. Many primary gastrointestinal disorders that cause a significant weight loss do so because of chronic diarrhoea. This patient
was persistently complaining of constipation. Other disorders with a predominantly psychiatric pathogenesis such as anorexia nervosa or
laxative abuse are not common among males though it should have been considered in the initial differential diagnosis. The patient was
extensively investigated including an upper GI endoscopy that excluded many likely organic illnesses. OCD have been of interest to many
researchers over the last decade. Two major debates are focused on OCD at the moment a) whether it should be classified as an anxiety
disorder and b) the existence of obsessional compulsive spectrum disorders (OCSD). The discussion of this case report is more relevant to
the latter. Many authors have pointed out the similarities in symptomatology of OCD and diagnoses such as trichotillomania, Gilles de la
Tourette syndrome, body dysmorphic disorder and pica . All these disorders are characterized by undesirable body focused behaviors that are
repetitive in nature. Regarding pathophysiology, in a review of evidence, Stein shows a number of commonalities between the classic OCD and
putative OCSDs varying from genetics (tic disorders and OCD), serotonin and dopamine neurotransmitter systems and autoimmunity (OCD and
trichotillomania, tic disorders) . In addition, these disorders and OCD share similarities in response to treatment as well . In one of the
largest studies conducted to-date, Stein and Lochner assessed 417 patients with a diagnosis of classic OCD, for co-existence of other OCSDs.
They also compared the results with patient populations with panic disorder and social anxiety disorder (based on the above mentioned
hypothesis that OCDs share common features with anxiety disorders also). It was observed that certain OCSDs like trichotillomania and self-
injury were commoner in the classic OCD group while certain other conditions such as hypochondriasis and body dysmorphic disorder were
commonly observed in the anxiety disorder groups. These facts show that the entity of OCD as defined previously may be part of a wider
spectrum. Whether this spectrum also merges in to the anxiety disorder group is still doubtful. The situation in our patient was unusual in
that it did not fit in to the characteristic OCD pattern. The thought of food being retained in the body leading continuous bloating and the
inability to defecate was bordering on a delusion or an overvalued idea. The patient was not fully convinced that his belief was senseless.
In fact, it led to a life threatening self starvation with a rapid weight loss over a period of three months. Delusional beliefs in OCD have
been reported before and some authors believe as the disease becomes severe, the patient loses the conviction that his obsessional thoughts
are senseless . This leads to severe disability. As a proportion it is estimated that 5% of OCD patients lose insight regarding the
obsessions. This group is identified as a separate subgroup in DSM-IV TR . During the past two decades cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) and
pharmacotherapy that inhibit the serotonin reuptake, have emerged as being effective in OCD. Two groups of drugs, the tricyclic
antidepressants (clomipramine) and the specific serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) have been shown to be effective in randomised trials. A
combination of CBT and serotonin reuptake inhibitors gives the best results in clinical settings . However, our problem with this patient
was unique in that he refused oral intake of food let alone medication. The first priority was gradual refeeding with a nasogastric tube and
as the malnutrition was corrected CBT was started. Both the patient as well as the parents preferred CBT to medication (probably influenced
by the stigma attached to being on ‘psychiatric drugs’). Since he responded very well to CBT there was no need to start on drugs. Our
experience highlights the importance of individualization of therapy to suit the needs and preferences of the patient. Of the many OCSDs so
far described, we believe that our patient falls in to a category of OCD associated delusional disorder. It clearly distinguishes itself
from a body dysmorphic disorder given the content of the delusional ideation. This case report highlights the importance of coming to a
correct diagnosis after carefully weighing the pros and cons for a particular differential diagnosis. Given the historical factors and
changes in pre-morbid personality, he could have been easily misdiagnosed and treated as a patient with prodromal or simple schizophrenia.
It also highlights a rare life threatening form of OCD that is best described as a part of an OCSD as it does not fall within the classic
description of OCD. Finally to the general physician, it highlights the importance of simple measures like observation of food habits in a
patient presenting with weight loss and malnutrition. It would save a lot of time and effort in narrowing down the differential diagnosis.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and his legal guardian (mother) for publication of this case report. Copies of the
consent are available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. CR wrote
the first draft and did the literature survey. RH and TH were responsible for the clinical care of the patient. All authors contributed to
and approved the final manuscript. CR (MBBS) is lecturer in Medicine in the Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Colombo. TH (MBBS, MD) is senior registrar in psychiatry, in the University Psychiatry Unit of the National Hospital of Sri Lanka. RH
(MBBS, MD, MRCPsyph) is consultant psychiatrist attached to the Department of Psychological Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Colombo.
