Lifestyle modifications including exercise are beneficial and fundamentally part of the therapy of metabolic syndrome, although in most of
the cases medical interventions are also required to reach the target values in the laboratory parameters. Statin and fibrate combination
therapy is considered to be safe and effective in dyslipidaemia and metabolic syndrome. However, increased physical activity can enhance the
statin and fibrate-associated myopathy. Myositis and the rare but life-threatening rhabdomyolysis are causing a conflict between exercise
and statin-fibrate therapy, which is yet to be resolved. We present a case of a 43-year-old Caucasian man with metabolic syndrome who had
the side-effect of exercise and drug-associated myositis. The patient had only transient moderate complaints and rhabdomyolysis could be
avoided with the one-month creatine kinase control, a test which is not recommended routinely by the new guidelines. We would like to turn
the spotlight on the possible complications of statin-fibrate therapy and exercise, when strict follow-up is recommended. In this condition
high number of patients can be affected and the responsibility of general practitioners is accentuated. Cardiovascular disease is the
leading cause of death in developed countries. In adults besides body mass index above 30 kg/m2 or elevated waist circumference, the
clustered presence of 2 or more cardiovascular risk factors from among high triglyceride and fasting blood glucose levels, low high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), raised blood pressure and the presence of treated hypertension or type 2 diabetes has been designated the
“metabolic syndrome” (MetS) . These components are the principal risk factors in the development of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular
disease. Related to this high risk status, the treatment of patients with MetS is an important task of the basic healthcare. There is
substantial evidence that regular exercise has beneficial effects in physical and mental health and contributes to the primary and secondary
prevention of cardiovascular and several chronic diseases, like breast and colon cancer or diabetes . Exercise improves a variety of lipid
and lipoprotein variables and is a fundamental part of the therapy of MetS. The alternative of the lifestyle modifications is the use of
tablets. For the correction of lipid disorders in MetS, recommendations, like the recent European guideline (European Society of Cardiology
and the European Atherosclerosis Society (ESC/EAS 2011) ) aims a certain level of serum lipids. Not only statin or fibrate treatment, but
their combination may be also required to achieve target lipid levels (cholesterol, LDL-C, triglycerides, HDL-C), which appears to confer
additional cardiovascular risk – compared with LDL-C alone . The combination therapy is especially recommended in MetS and diabetes with the
administration of fenofibrate besides the statins . Although the use of statins considered to be safe, some studies suggest that the
frequency of statin myopathy is between 9% and 20% . If muscle symptoms are accompanied by the elevation of creatine kinase (CK) levels, the
condition is known as myositis . Rhabdomyolysis is the most serious side-effect of the statin therapy, where renal insufficiency is present,
as well. However, in some studies this side effect was found to be rare (affecting 0,1% of statin users) , and moreover no cases of drug-
related rhabdomyolysis were reported in some follow-up studies . Statins combined with fibrate also increase the incidence of statin-induced
myopathies , suggested a 5.5-fold greater elevation compared with statin use alone . In addition, physical exercise can also influence the
occurrence of myopathy in patients using statins and fibrates. Muscle complaints may affect 25% of the statin users who exercise , and the
prevalence of this phenomenon is 75% among athletes who take the drug . Although the new ESC guideline on dyslipidaemias is expansively
engaged in lifestyle modifications, it does not focus on the problem of the elevated risk of myopathy during statin-fibrate therapy and
exercise . This condition is not mentioned as a recommended reason for periodic CK control . In our case report we present a patient with
MetS who took statin and fibrate therapy and started parallel exercise leading to myositis with moderate symptoms but excessive CK
elevation. On routine laboratory examination dyslipidaemia was found in a 43-year-old man without symptoms, who presented in our general
practitioner praxis in October 2011. The patient was obese (body mass index 31.7 kg/m2, waist circumference 104 cm), with the history of 25
pack-year smoking and 2 units (20 ml) of alcohol intake per week. His hypertension started 10 years ago and was controlled with 2.5 mg
nebivolol per day. He was a blue-collar worker in a storehouse, and sometimes did manual work (not every day and not exhausting). His values
were: total cholesterol 277.7 mg/dL, triglycerides 448.2 mg/dL, HDL-C 36.7 mg/dl, fasting plasma glucose level was 5.68 mmol/L. LDL-C could
not have been evaluated, because the elevated serum triglyceride level disturbed the measurement. Based on data above, the patient fulfilled
the requirements of MetS (central obesity, raised serum triglycerides, reduced HDL-C, treated hypertension and upper range of normal fasting
glucose level were present). Other parameters, like creatine kinase (CK), aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT) and gamma
glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) were in the normal range (117 U/l, 26 U/l, 23 U/l and 36 U/l, respectively). Renal function (blood urea
nitrogen: 7.6 mmol/l, serum creatinine: 97 μmol/L, glomerular filtration rate: >60 ml/min) was also normal. Past medical history included
laparoscopic cholecystectomy in his 30s. From family history hypertension, hypercholesterinaemia and obesity of both parents must be
mentioned. None of them had any side effect for drug administration (both of them took statins). After informing the patient about his
elevated cardiovascular risk, he ensured us to cooperate regarding taking the prescribed medications (except for aspirin, because of bad
family experience). About lifestyle modifications he did not see possibilities for exercise because of his exhausting job. On the other
hand, about diet he said, that he tried to decrease the calorie intake long ago, but because of his manual work he often felt hungry and
required extra meals. He promised to keep this kind of diet in the future as well, which apparently was not enough. Due to the high
triglycerides and lack of lifestyle modification possibilities, 160 mg fenofibrate per day was applied. The patient was also informed about
the possible side-effects of the lipid-lowering therapy. Because of smoking, varenicline therapy was prescribed as well, as the patient
previously failed to give up smoking with lifestyle modifications and the use of nicotine patch. The patient came for one-month control
without any symptoms, and mentioned that he had begun taking varenicline only one week earlier. Laboratory parameters revealed the efficacy
of the therapy. Serum triglycerides were reduced, but remained above the target level (349 mg/dL), CK was in the normal range (121 U/l), but
cholesterol showed further increase (310.5 mg/dL). Taking the lipid levels and the high cardiovascular risk of the patient due to MetS into
consideration, 20 mg atorvastatin per day was added to the therapy. Similarly, a control laboratory test was set one month later. The
patient was also asymptomatic at the second control. This time both the values of triglycerides and cholesterol showed improvement, 154.1
and 249.8 mg/dL, respectively. However, in the CK level a more than 150-fold elevation was observed (18979 U/l). Kept on asking the possible
symptoms, the patient told us that he had changed his mind about exercise and one week ago he bought body-building equipment. After he
worked out with all kind of dumb-bells, he had moderate pain and stiff feeling everywhere in his chest and in both arms and legs and dark
urine was observed parallel. The pain lasted for three days, than the symptoms disappeared. At the time of the control he had no muscle
complaints. He had stopped taking varenicline after 2 weeks, and had taken the three types of medicines together (statin, fibrate and
varenicline) only one week long. He did not smoke since then. The irregular moderate alcohol consumption was continued during taking the
prescribed medications, as well. The findings of the physical examinations were normal. The electrocardiography did not show any relevant
pathological abnormalities. Based on these data, the patient was sent to the emergency care unit of the territorial hospital with the
diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis. He was admitted to the Department of Cardiology. In the hospital on the day of admission in blood test results
ALT (131.5 U/l) and AST (247.7 U/l) were elevated, while GGT remained in the normal range (38 U/l). The lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level
was also increased, 463 U/l. Statin and fibrate medications were stopped, and altogether 2 litres of Salsol infusion was administered. On
the next days CK showed decreasing tendency (5134, 1823 U/l), and reduction was observed in one of the levels of liver transaminases (AST:
131.3; ALT: 95.5 U/l), and in LDH (386 U/l). Serum cholesterol level remained elevated (257.2 mg/dL), triglycerides reached the normal range
(151.5 mg/dL). Kidney function parameters did not show any abnormalities, and the thyroid function test was also normal (thyroid-stimulating
hormone 1.42 μU/ml). As the patient remained asymptomatic, and the laboratory controls indicated improvement, he was discharged following 2
days of hospitalization. Strict alcohol abstinence, 180 grams/day carbohydrate diet with low fat and salt intake were recommended at
emission, completed with fish oil capsules and dietary sources of omega-3 fatty acids. Future contraindication of statin-fibrate combination
therapy was stated, and laboratory control was advised in two days. The control showed further improvement in the levels of transaminases,
CK and LDH, but they were still moderately elevated (AST 58.8 U/l, ALT 72.1 U/l, CK 526 U/l, LDH 417 U/l). One month later the laboratory
control was repeated in our praxis: CK and transaminases were normal, dyslipidaemia was reduced (total cholesterol and triglycerides levels
were 238.3 and 216.1 mg/dL, respectively). Since that time the patient has been asymptomatic, keeps diet, exercises regularly (with no
marked CK elevation), takes 1 gram omega-3 fatty acid per day, and thanks to the varenicline therapy he does not smoke. The diagnosis of
drug-induced myositis was reported to the Hungarian National Institute of Pharmacy. According to the recommendation of ESC/EASC guideline
for the management of dyslipidaemias, it is always appropriate to advise patients to engage in regular physical exercise of moderate
intensity . Lifestyle modification is recommended as the first step treating MetS, as well . In fact, physical activity is one of the most
cost-effective ways to prevent cardiovascular diseases. However, lifestyle interventions considered being difficult to be maintained, and
drugs are frequently prescribed as it is influenced by pharmaceutical industry pressure, as well . Moreover, statin therapy has been
suggested to be a fundamental tool of the prevention of coronary artery disease . There is a growing concern that this total focus on statin
use may distract attention from simple lifestyle changes and also interfere with exercise . In our patient fibrate and later statin-fibrate
medications were initiated because of the limited lifestyle changing possibilities. However, the patient changed his mind and started
exercise which led to severe myositis but only moderate symptoms. Although the patient had been already on combination therapy when the
myositis started but the main cause of it was probably the atrovastatin as compared with gemfibrozil, fenofibrate were found to be less
prone to make complications when used together with statins . However, the pathophysiological role of fenofibrate or the exaggerating effect
in the extent of CK elevation cannot be excluded. Our case report shows the emerging problem of parallel application of exercise and statin-
fibrate therapy. Although this problem is not new but still some questions are opened. It is not clear, what kind of exercise is safe and
can be recommended besides statin-fibrate use. Especially prolonged exercise, like weight bearing and those which require eccentric muscular
contractions (for example downhill treadmill walking) seem to exacerbate muscle injury . So far no study has addressed the risk of exercise
during statin and fibrate use or the possibly recommended type of gymnastics which are safe, but still beneficial in this condition. Amongst
other possible pathophysiological factors the moderate alcohol consumption of our patient probably did not influence the exercise-induced
statin-myopathy as in low amounts (12.7-38.1 ml of ethanol per day in men) it was not found to be harmful . Another question arises whether
the statin-fibrate therapy-induced rhabdomyolysis could be connected to varenicline intake. The theoretical background of this interaction
is based on the observation of Obrach et al., who found two metabolites in human excreta of varenicline: one of them is the
N-carbamoylglucuronide, catalyzed by the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase-2B7 (UGT2B7) . Fenofibrate is also glucuronidated by this enzyme . Thus
a varenicline-fenofibrate interaction is theoretically possible. In our case, 3 weeks after starting the fibrate therapy the patient began
to take varenicline, and one week later atorvastatin. He took altogether a 2-week dose of varenicline where in the second week he took
fenofibrate and atorvastatin, as well. The symptoms started two weeks after the stop of varenicline, so it probably had no role in the side
effect. Statin-fibrate combination should be prescribed with caution to patients who also receive other drugs that are metabolized through
CYP 450. Although the aromatic hydroxylation of nebivolol takes place in CYP 2D6 , a single nucleotid polymorphism of this type of
cytochrome enzyme (the presence of CYP 2D6*4 allele) was also found to be associated with statin-induced muscle effects . Although
interaction between statins and nebivolol has not been published yet, nebivolol might have influenced the development of rhabdomyolysis in
our patient. Unfortunately we did not have the opportunity to check the presence of this CYP 2D6*4 phenotype in our patient. According to
the guidelines, although pre-treatment CK level is required to be measured, routine monitoring of the enzyme without symptoms of
myopathy/rhabdomyolysis, or risk factors is not necessary . Furthermore, recent studies have suggested, that routine examinations for side
effects are not cost-effective . However, in our patient, who had no symptoms at the regular visits, the routine laboratory CK control
indicated the severe myopathy and with the urgent intervention the development of acute renal failure and other severe complications could
be prevented. Based on our case, the control of CK should also be added to lipid function control 4–6 weeks after the initiation of statin-
fibrate combined therapy especially in those patients who do exercise parallel. Finally, we must mention some emerging critical aspects of
our medical attendance. With more impressions, the patient might have been convinced about the necessity of lifestyle modifications before
the drug administrations. Unfortunately the patients' attitude and the insufficiency of time which can be expended for each patient in the
office of a general practitioner sometimes limit our success. Secondly, fenofibrate was administered first instead of atrovastatin. This
choice also can be debated, but we have chosen fibrate because of the more, than 3-fold higher triglyceride and the moderately elevated
total cholesterol at the beginning. Third, unfortunately at the first blood test LDL-cholesterol could not have been evaluated because of
the disturbing effect of raised triglyceride. Later at the control blood tests only total cholesterol was measured. LDL-cholesterol is an
essential parameter of cardiovascular risk stratification and must be the part of the general laboratory protocol. In conclusion, although
fenofibrate and statin combination therapy is supposed to be safe, myopathy, myositis and rhabdomyolysis still can develop. Exercise, as a
part of lifestyle modifications can increase the risk of muscle side effects besides drug therapy providing a conflict between the two main
therapeutic pathways of MetS. Further studies are required to define the types of exercise which are safe together with lipid lowering
medications. The incidental interaction of nebivolol with statins or fibrates is also need to be clarified in the future. Moreover, also by
asymptomatic patients the one-month CK control is important when exercise is present besides statin-fibrate therapy. In our case this test
prevented the development of further serious complications. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of the
Case report. A copy of a written consent is available for review by the Series Editor of this journal. MetS: Metabolic syndrome; TG:
Triglyceride; HDL-C: High-density lipoprotein cholesterol; ESC/EAS: European Society of Cardiology and the European Atherosclerosis Society;
CK: Creatine kinase; AST: Aspartate transaminase; ALT: Alanine transaminases; GGT: Gamma glutamyl transpeptidase; LDH: Lactate
dehydrogenase; CYP: Cytochrome P enzyme; GFR: Glomerular filtration rate. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. AL has
collected the required data of the patient and has written the manuscript. LK revised the manuscript critically for important intellectual
content. JN treated and followed the patient and revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors
acknowledge the contribution of Lászlóné Hárshegyi, who helped in the care of the patient and in the data acquisition. No authors had any
source of funding.
