We report a British family with young-onset Parkinson’s disease (PD) and a G51D SNCA mutation that segregates with the disease. Family
history was consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance as both the father and sister of the proband developed levodopa-responsive
parkinsonism with onset in their late thirties. Clinical features show similarity to those seen in families with SNCA triplication and to
cases of A53T SNCA mutation. Post-mortem brain examination of the proband revealed atrophy affecting frontal and temporal lobes in addition
to the caudate, putamen, globus pallidus and amygdala. There was severe loss of pigmentation in the substantia nigra and pallor of the locus
coeruleus. Neuronal loss was most marked in frontal and temporal cortices, hippocampal CA2/3 subregions, substantia nigra, locus coeruleus
and dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus. The cellular pathology included widespread and frequent neuronal α-synuclein immunoreactive
inclusions of variable morphology and oligodendroglial inclusions similar to the glial cytoplasmic inclusions of multiple system atrophy
(MSA). Both inclusion types were ubiquitin and p62 positive and were labelled with phosphorylation-dependent anti-α-synuclein antibodies In
addition, TDP-43 immunoreactive inclusions were observed in limbic regions and in the striatum. Together the data show clinical and
neuropathological similarities to both the A53T SNCA mutation and multiplication cases. The cellular neuropathological features of this case
share some characteristics of both PD and MSA with additional unique striatal and neocortical pathology. Greater understanding of the
disease mechanism underlying the G51D mutation could aid in understanding of α-synuclein biology and its impact on disease phenotype. The
online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s00401-013-1096-7) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. The
term α-synucleinopathy unites a group of neurodegenerative diseases which share the pathological hallmark of fibrillary inclusions in which
α-synuclein protein is the major component. The three most common members of this group are Parkinson’s disease (PD), dementia with Lewy
bodies (DLB) and multiple system atrophy (MSA). PD and DLB have common neuropathological features including deposition of fibrillar
α-synuclein in Lewy bodies (LB) and Lewy neurites (LN). In MSA, α-synuclein is aggregated in oligodendrocytes forming the hallmark lesion,
the glial cytoplasmic inclusion (GCI), and also in neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (NCIs), cell processes and to a lesser extent in neuronal
and glial nuclei [1, 28]. Several missense mutations of the SNCA gene have been identified in families with autosomal dominant forms of PD.
No SNCA mutation has been linked with MSA, however, polymorphisms of the gene have been associated with increased risk of the disease in
Caucasian populations, although these results have not been replicated in all populations [2, 70, 71, 83]. The SNCA gene, which encodes the
140-amino acid protein α-synuclein, is located on chromosome 4q21-23. In Parkinson’s disease, the first SNCA mutation to be described was
A53T in a Greek-Italian family and this was subsequently identified in families of Asian, Swedish and Polish origin [5, 12, 42, 49, 59, 61,
66, 77]. Two further missense mutations of SNCA were identified, A30P and E46K in German and Basque families, respectively. Very recently,
we have reported the novel H50Q SNCA mutation . Missense mutations in the N-terminal region of α-synuclein are reported to have a direct
impact on α-synuclein conformation and function. The A53T and E46K mutant forms of α-synuclein exhibit faster fibrillisation kinetics than
wild-type protein , while fibrillisation of the A30P mutant protein is slower and results in fewer complex fibrils in LBs . Duplication and
triplication of SNCA have been discovered in a small number of families and sporadic cases of levodopa-responsive PD and, where described,
pathological features of PD, in addition to GCIs similar to those of MSA, are observed [10, 22, 27, 31, 32, 55, 56]. The number of SNCA
locus replicates is known to influence disease progression, such that triplication causes earlier onset and a more rapid clinical course
than SNCA duplication [31, 75]. Pathological inclusions of fibrillar α-synuclein have distinct morphologies and distribution depending on
disease type. For example, in PD, the characteristic LBs and LNs occur in brainstem nuclei and usually exhibit a hierarchical spread to
involve limbic and neocortical regions with disease progression , although not all cases conform to the proposed pattern of disease
progression . In MSA, GCIs are the most abundant form of fibrillar α-synuclein inclusion and together with neuronal cytoplasmic or nuclear
inclusions are distributed widely in the striatonigral, olivopontocerebellar and other regions [1, 4, 33, 60]. We report a family with
young-onset PD and a mutation in SNCA that segregates with the disease. We describe an α-synucleinopathy with both PD and MSA-like
neuropathological features together with involvement of the striatum and severe CA2/3 neuronal loss. The distribution of neuronal and
oligodendroglial inclusions immunoreactive for α-synuclein, ubiquitin and p62 is described. The phosphorylation state of α-synuclein within
inclusions and the relationship of α-synuclein to intracellular accumulation of tau and TDP-43 are also investigated. Together the evidence
reveals neuropathological similarities to both the A53T SNCA mutation and multiplication cases with additional unique striatal and
neocortical pathology [27, 48]. The brain was donated to the Queen Square Brain Bank for Neurological Disorders, UCL Institute of Neurology
using ethically approved protocols and stored for research under a licence issued by the Human Tissue Authority (No. 12198). Following
fixation in 10 % buffered formalin, the right half brain was sliced in the coronal plane, examined and blocks were selected for paraffin wax
embedding and histology. Paraffin-embedded sections (8 μm) were stained using haematoxylin and eosin (H&E), Luxol fast blue/cresyl violet
and Gallyas silver impregnation. Immunohistochemistry was performed as previously described using primary antibodies detailed in Online
Resource 1. Double immunofluorescence was detected using isotype specific anti-rabbit IgG or anti-mouse IgG secondary antibodies conjugated
with either Alexa 488 or 594 fluorescent dyes (1:400) (Life technologies, Paisley, UK) followed by quenching of autofluorescence with 0.1 %
Sudan Black/70 % ethanol (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK) solution for 10 min and mounting with glass coverslips using VECTAshield mounting media
with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) nuclear stain (Vector laboratories, Peterborough, UK). Images were visualised using confocal
fluorescence microscopy (Leica DM5500 B). Sanger sequencing was performed for exon 3 of SNCA on family members for whom a DNA sample was
available (affected sibling and unaffected mother). Genomic DNA was amplified through polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with the Roche Fast
start master mix kit (primer sequences available upon request). After purification, the PCR product was sequenced bi-directionally with the
BigDye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied biosystems). Purified sequencing reaction products were run on ABI 3730xl DNA analyser,
sequencing results were analysed on Sequencher version 4.1.4 and variants identified were named based on the GenBank reference sequence with
accession numbers NM_001146055.1 and NP_001139527.1. Variants identified were verified through re-sequencing a duplicate genomic DNA sample.
To exclude larger genomic rearrangements in the SNCA region, genomic DNA samples from both affected siblings were run on Illumina
Human660W-Quad BeadChip arrays and the results were analysed on Illumina Genome studio V2010.2. Amino acid sequence data for α-synuclein
from Homosapiens, Pan troglodytes, Sus scrofa, Mus musculus, Bos taurus, Xenopus laevis and Gallus gallus, along with amino acid sequence
data for human β and γ synuclein, were downloaded from NCBI. Sequence alignment was carried out using the basic local alignment search tool
(BLAST, http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Secondary structure data for α-synuclein are based upon data from Ulmer and coworkers . At age 19,
this British man presented with stiffness and tremor in his left hand. Examination revealed a classical parkinsonian rest tremor of the left
arm and leg with bradykinesia, cogwheel rigidity and reduced left arm swing on walking. Eye movements were normal. His symptoms gradually
involved his right side and he had a parkinsonian gait. At age 25, levodopa therapy was started with a good initial response, but 7 months
later, he developed levodopa-induced choreiform movements which continued to be troublesome for a decade. Since age 28, he had progressive
cognitive impairment with a mini mental state examination (MMSE) score of 24/30 at age 30 and 19/30 at age 32, neuropsychometry showed
visual and verbal memory impairments and he later developed visual hallucination. At age 33, he was incapacitated by severe dysarthria,
severe akinetic rigidity, postural hypotension with syncope and postural instability. Examination revealed limb myoclonus, spasticity and
bilateral extensor plantar response. He started to have seizures in the last 8 years of his life but these were controlled using sodium
valproate. He died at age 49 with a disease duration of 29 years. His father died of a similar illness with onset of motor symptoms at age
39 and later developed dementia and died of sepsis at age 47. His sister developed parkinsonism at age 40 and has had a good persistent
levodopa response. She is now 48 years old and has mild peak dose dyskinesia, occasional visual hallucination and has not noted any
cognitive impairment. The case history of the proband was previously published in a series on young onset Parkinson’s disease (case 2M) . In
the affected family members, an α-synuclein G > A heterozygous mutation at base 152, codon 51 causing a glycine to aspartic acid amino acid
change (Fig. 1a). This mutation segregated with the disease in the family (Fig. 1b) and was not seen in over 4,500 control individuals.
Multiplication of the α-synuclein gene had been previously excluded by SNP array analysis. The mutated amino acid is highly conserved across
species down to invertebrates and is predicted to be damaging using PolyPhen-2 and SIFT (Fig. 2).Fig. 1SNCA mutation G51D. Chromatogram (red
thymine, blue cytosine, green adenine and black guanine). Sanger sequencing of the SNCA gene identified a c.G152A mutation (upper arrows) in
exon 3 of this gene as shown. This created a glycine to aspartic acid amino acid change (lower arrows)Fig. 2α-Synuclein protein structure
and conservation as shown by amino acid sequence alignment. Amino acid sequence of human α-synuclein, showing regions of secondary structure
(alpha helices highlighted in green). The G51 residue is indicated by an arrow, and sits in the middle of helix 2 (a). Sequence alignment of
α-synuclein amino acid sequences from Homo sapiens, Pan troglodytes, Sus scrofa, Mus musculus, Bos taurus, Xenopus laevis and Gallus gallus.
The G51 residue highlighted in yellow and indicated by an arrow is conserved throughout these organisms (b). Sequence alignment of human α-,
β- and γ-synuclein amino acid sequences, with the G51 residue is highlighted in yellow and indicated by an arrow (c). This residue is
conserved in α- and β-synuclein, but is replaced by a serine residue in γ-synuclein SNCA mutation G51D. Chromatogram (red thymine, blue
cytosine, green adenine and black guanine). Sanger sequencing of the SNCA gene identified a c.G152A mutation (upper arrows) in exon 3 of
this gene as shown. This created a glycine to aspartic acid amino acid change (lower arrows) α-Synuclein protein structure and conservation
as shown by amino acid sequence alignment. Amino acid sequence of human α-synuclein, showing regions of secondary structure (alpha helices
highlighted in green). The G51 residue is indicated by an arrow, and sits in the middle of helix 2 (a). Sequence alignment of α-synuclein
amino acid sequences from Homo sapiens, Pan troglodytes, Sus scrofa, Mus musculus, Bos taurus, Xenopus laevis and Gallus gallus. The G51
residue highlighted in yellow and indicated by an arrow is conserved throughout these organisms (b). Sequence alignment of human α-, β- and
γ-synuclein amino acid sequences, with the G51 residue is highlighted in yellow and indicated by an arrow (c). This residue is conserved in
α- and β-synuclein, but is replaced by a serine residue in γ-synuclein The brain weighed 1,036 g and showed frontal and anterior temporal
lobe atrophy (Fig. 3a, b). The hippocampus, amygdala, caudate, putamen and globus pallidus were reduced in volume and showed greyish
discolouration (Fig. 3a, b). The subthalamic nucleus was of normal size with mild brown discolouration (Fig. 3b). There was severe loss of
pigmentation of the substantia nigra (Fig. 3c, arrow) and mild pallor of the locus coeruleus (Fig. 3d, arrow). The medulla and cerebellum
were macroscopically unremarkable (Fig. 3e).Fig. 3Macroscopic features. Macroscopic images of formalin fixed right hemispheric brain slices
(a, b), midbrain (c), pons (d) and cerebellum (e). There was severe atrophy of the temporal cortex with relative preservation of the
superior temporal gyrus (a, b) and severe reduction in volume of white matter with thinning of the corpus callosum (a, bwhite asterisks).
The caudate nucleus was reduced in volume (a, barrow heads). There was reduction in size and grey discolouration of both the putamen and the
globus pallidus (a, b). The amygdala was small and darkly coloured (a, black asterisk). The hippocampus was moderately reduced in volume
(b). The midbrain showed marked depigmentation of the substantia nigra (c, arrow). The pons was well preserved with severe pallor of the
locus coeruleus (d, arrow). The cerebellum was macroscopically normal and the white matter was well preserved (e). Scale bars represent
15 mm Macroscopic features. Macroscopic images of formalin fixed right hemispheric brain slices (a, b), midbrain (c), pons (d) and
cerebellum (e). There was severe atrophy of the temporal cortex with relative preservation of the superior temporal gyrus (a, b) and severe
reduction in volume of white matter with thinning of the corpus callosum (a, bwhite asterisks). The caudate nucleus was reduced in volume
(a, barrow heads). There was reduction in size and grey discolouration of both the putamen and the globus pallidus (a, b). The amygdala was
small and darkly coloured (a, black asterisk). The hippocampus was moderately reduced in volume (b). The midbrain showed marked
depigmentation of the substantia nigra (c, arrow). The pons was well preserved with severe pallor of the locus coeruleus (d, arrow). The
cerebellum was macroscopically normal and the white matter was well preserved (e). Scale bars represent 15 mm Histological findings are
summarised in Table 1 and illustrated in Figs. 4 and 5. The neocortical regions showed marked superficial vacuolation with neuronal loss and
gliosis in all regions except the occipital cortex. Cortical neuronal depletion was most severe in the anterior temporal, piriform and
insular cortices. In the hippocampal formation, neuronal loss affected all regions except the dentate fascia (DF) and this was most striking
and severe in the CA2 and CA3 subregions where there was almost complete neuronal loss with accompanying gliosis. Mild neuronal loss
accompanied by severe and uniformly distributed gliosis was observed in the caudate and putamen (Fig. 4i, j). There were virtually no
remaining pigmented neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (Fig. 4h), and there was severe loss of neurons in the locus coeruleus and
the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMV). No classical intraneuronal LBs were seen in the substantia nigra, locus coeruleus or DMV in H&E
stained sections, likely due to the very severe neuronal loss. Cerebellar Purkinje cells were moderately depleted while the dentate nucleus
was well preserved. In the rostral cervical spinal cord, the anterior horn motor neurons were preserved. Weakly basophilic NCIs with varied
morphology, including well-defined round or oval structures and perinuclear annular or crescent shapes, were widespread and were prominent
in the hippocampus, neocortex and striatum (Fig. 4a–k). Balloon neurons, best identified by αB-crystallin immunohistochemistry, were present
in the frontal and temporal cortices and were most numerous in the cingulate gyrus (Fig. 4g).Table 1Semi-quantitative assessment and
regional distribution of neuronal loss and α-synuclein pathologyNeuronal lossNeuronal α-synuclein pathologyα-Synuclein
threadsOligodendroglial α-synuclein inclusionsAnnular or crescentGlobularDiffuseNFT-
likeCortex Frontal+++++–+++ Motor+++++–++++ Temporal++++++++–+++– Parietal+++++++–+++– Occipital–+––––– Cingulate++++++++–+++– Insular++++++++–+++–Sub-
cortical white
matter FrontalN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A++ MotorN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A+++ TemporalN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A++ ParietalN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A++ OccipitalN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A+– CingulateN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A++ Internal
capsuleN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A+++ External
capsuleN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A+++ Amygdala++++++++–++++Hippocampus DF–+++++–++– CA4+++++++++++ CA3+++++––++– CA2+++––––++– CA1++++++++++– Subiculum++++++++++– Entorhinal
cortex+++++++++++– Transentorhinal cortex+++++++++– Caudate+++++++++++– Putamen++++++++++++– Globus
pallidus–+–––++ Thalamus––++–++ Subthalamic nucleus–––+–++– Red nucleus–––––++ III nerve nucleus–+++–+– Substantia nigra+++––––+++ Locus
coeruleus+++––––++– Pontine nuclei–––+–++Pontine base white matterN/A––––++++ Dorsal motor nucleus of vagus+++––––++– Twelfth nerve
nucleus–––––+– Inferior olive+––++–+– Cerebellar hemisphere Purkinje cells++–––––N/A Cerebellar hemisphere white
matterN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A++++ Dentate nucleus––––––– Cervical cord anterior horn––––––– Cervical cord white
matterN/AN/AN/AN/AN/A+–Oligodendroglial α-synuclein: cytoplasmic inclusions usually with similar morphology to GCIs of MSA, less frequently
resembling coiled bodiesN/A not applicable, NFT neurofibrillary tangleFig. 4Histological findings. Representative images from the
hippocampus (a–e), insular cortex (ins, f), cingulate gyrus (Cg, g), substantia nigra (SN, h) and putamen (put, i–k). In the hippocampus,
there was severe neuronal loss in the CA2 and CA3 (a, arrows). The CA2 showed few residual neurons (b). Neuronal inclusions (arrows) with
varying morphology are illustrated in the CA1 (c), CA3 (d) and the dentate fascia (DF, e). Superficial laminae of the neocortex showed
marked neuronal loss with microvacuolation illustrated in the insular cortex (ins, f). Ballooned neurons were most frequent in the cingulate
gyrus (Cg, g). The substantia nigra (SN) shows severe loss of pigmented neurons accompanied by gliosis (h). Abundant eosinophilic reactive
astrocytes are visualised in the putamen (put, i) and confirmed by GFAP immunohistochemistry (j). TDP-43 immunoreactive inclusions were also
detected in the putamen (k). Luxol fast blue (a), haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) (b–f, h, i), αB-crystallin (g), GFAP (j) TDP-43 (k). Scale
bar 150 μm (a), scale bars in b, e–h, k represent 50 μm (c–e are at the same magnification, as are i–k)Fig. 5Characterisation of neuronal
and glial α-synuclein inclusions. Thread-like α-synuclein immunoreactivity was observed to be widespread, shown here within the hippocampal
regions CA1, CA3 and CA4 (a–c), caudate nucleus (Cd, e), putamen (put, f) and insular cortex (ins, g, h). Neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions
immunoreactive for α-synuclein had a number of different morphological appearances globular (i), annular (j), neurofibrillary tangle-like
(k) and diffuse (l). Gallyas silver impregnation demonstrated the presence of fibrillar protein in neuronal inclusions (DF, m and CA4, n)
and also in GCI-like inclusions (pontine base, o). Scale bars in e–h, l represent 50 μm (a–n) (a–e are at the same magnification as are i–l,
m and n). Scale bar in o represents 10 μm Semi-quantitative assessment and regional distribution of neuronal loss and α-synuclein pathology
Oligodendroglial α-synuclein: cytoplasmic inclusions usually with similar morphology to GCIs of MSA, less frequently resembling coiled
bodies N/A not applicable, NFT neurofibrillary tangle Histological findings. Representative images from the hippocampus (a–e), insular
cortex (ins, f), cingulate gyrus (Cg, g), substantia nigra (SN, h) and putamen (put, i–k). In the hippocampus, there was severe neuronal
loss in the CA2 and CA3 (a, arrows). The CA2 showed few residual neurons (b). Neuronal inclusions (arrows) with varying morphology are
illustrated in the CA1 (c), CA3 (d) and the dentate fascia (DF, e). Superficial laminae of the neocortex showed marked neuronal loss with
microvacuolation illustrated in the insular cortex (ins, f). Ballooned neurons were most frequent in the cingulate gyrus (Cg, g). The
substantia nigra (SN) shows severe loss of pigmented neurons accompanied by gliosis (h). Abundant eosinophilic reactive astrocytes are
visualised in the putamen (put, i) and confirmed by GFAP immunohistochemistry (j). TDP-43 immunoreactive inclusions were also detected in
the putamen (k). Luxol fast blue (a), haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) (b–f, h, i), αB-crystallin (g), GFAP (j) TDP-43 (k). Scale bar 150 μm
(a), scale bars in b, e–h, k represent 50 μm (c–e are at the same magnification, as are i–k) Characterisation of neuronal and glial
α-synuclein inclusions. Thread-like α-synuclein immunoreactivity was observed to be widespread, shown here within the hippocampal regions
CA1, CA3 and CA4 (a–c), caudate nucleus (Cd, e), putamen (put, f) and insular cortex (ins, g, h). Neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions
immunoreactive for α-synuclein had a number of different morphological appearances globular (i), annular (j), neurofibrillary tangle-like
(k) and diffuse (l). Gallyas silver impregnation demonstrated the presence of fibrillar protein in neuronal inclusions (DF, m and CA4, n)
and also in GCI-like inclusions (pontine base, o). Scale bars in e–h, l represent 50 μm (a–n) (a–e are at the same magnification as are i–l,
m and n). Scale bar in o represents 10 μm Immunohistochemical staining for α-synuclein demonstrated widespread neuronal and glial inclusions
(Table 1; Fig. 5). Amongst the areas most severely affected by neuronal α-synuclein pathology was the hippocampus (Fig. 5a–d), in which the
DF and CA1 contained many inclusions. Inclusions were sparse in the CA2 and CA3 subregions reflecting the paucity of residual neurons in
these areas. The caudate and putamen contained a remarkable load of neuronal α-synuclein-positive inclusions affecting all regions of each
nucleus to a similar extent (Fig. 5e, f). In the neocortex, there was a distinct pattern in which the superficial and deep cortical laminae
were most severely affected (Fig. 5g, h). NCIs had variable morphology; many were clearly defined globular inclusions resembling LBs
(Fig. 5i), while others were annular or crescent shaped situated around the nucleus (Fig. 5j), less frequently they resembled
neurofibrillary tangles (Fig. 5k). Small numbers of neurons showed a diffuse finely granular pattern of α-synuclein immunoreactivity
(Fig. 5l). In most areas, neuronal inclusions were accompanied by threads of varying width, up to 10 μm, representing α-synuclein
accumulation in cell processes. In cross section, these appeared as dots and round–oval structures. The argyrophilic nature of fibrillar
α-synuclein inclusions was demonstrated using Gallyas silver impregnation (Fig. 5m–o). A significant numbers of glial, α-synuclein-positive
inclusions were observed, many of which resembled the GCIs of MSA (Fig. 6a–d) and thus are hereafter referred to as GCI-like, while others
had appearances similar to coiled bodies (CBs) as previously described in PD . The distribution of GCI-like pathology also resembled MSA as
they were most frequent in the pontine base, cerebellar white matter and in the white matter underlying the motor cortex (Table 1). They
were also immunoreactive for recognised GCI markers including αB-crystallin . Double immunofluorescence of α-synuclein with the
oligodendroglial marker olig-2 confirmed that GCI-like inclusions were in oligodendrocytes (Fig. 6a–d).Fig. 6Glial inclusions.
Representative double immunofluorescence images probed with α-synuclein (red) and the oligodendroglial marker, olig2 (green). Composite
merged images show α-synuclein immunoreactive inclusions in oligodendrocytes resembling GCIs in the white matter of the frontal cortex (a,
d), the pons (b) and the alveus of the hippocampus (c). Close proximity is observed between a subset of activated microglia, as detected by
iba-1 (green) and α-synuclein (red) inclusion containing neurons, this occasionally involved encircling of α-synuclein-containing neurons by
iba-1-positive processes (e–g). A small proportion of these microglia contained α-synuclein immunoreactivity (g, insetarrowheads). A high
level of reactive astrogliosis was detected throughout all brain regions examined, without evidence of α-synuclein expression within
astrocytes or their processes (h–j). DAPI nuclear stain (blue). Scale bar in j represents 50 μm (a–j). Scale bar in ginset represents 25 μm
Glial inclusions. Representative double immunofluorescence images probed with α-synuclein (red) and the oligodendroglial marker, olig2
(green). Composite merged images show α-synuclein immunoreactive inclusions in oligodendrocytes resembling GCIs in the white matter of the
frontal cortex (a, d), the pons (b) and the alveus of the hippocampus (c). Close proximity is observed between a subset of activated
microglia, as detected by iba-1 (green) and α-synuclein (red) inclusion containing neurons, this occasionally involved encircling of
α-synuclein-containing neurons by iba-1-positive processes (e–g). A small proportion of these microglia contained α-synuclein
immunoreactivity (g, insetarrowheads). A high level of reactive astrogliosis was detected throughout all brain regions examined, without
evidence of α-synuclein expression within astrocytes or their processes (h–j). DAPI nuclear stain (blue). Scale bar in j represents 50 μm
(a–j). Scale bar in ginset represents 25 μm The relationship between microglia and astrocytes with α-synuclein pathology was also
investigated. A subset of microglia, detected using the microglial marker iba-1, was observed in close proximity to, in some cases with
processes encircling, α-synuclein inclusion containing neurons (Fig. 6e–g). A small number of microglia investigated in both the hippocampus
and neocortex contained thread-like α-synuclein immunoreactivity (Fig. 6g inset, arrows). Marked reactive astrogliosis, detected by GFAP
immunofluorescence, was observed, however, double immunofluorescence studies showed no α-synuclein immunoreactivity in astrocytic processes
in any regions including the severely affected CA2, where there was a high density of α-synuclein-positive threads (Fig. 6h–j).
Phosphorylated tau was identified using immunohistochemical staining for AT8, recognising Ser202 and Thr205 (Fig. 7a). This demonstrated
granular pre-tangles, neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil threads in the hippocampal formation, most frequent in the CA1, CA4 and
subiculum. They were also present in moderate numbers in the entorhinal and transentorhinal cortices and DF (shown in the DF, Online
resource 2). There was no neocortical tau pathology and only rare neuropil threads were found in the midbrain and pontine tegmenta. Overall
the tau pathology conformed largely to Braak and Braak stage II Alzheimer-type pathology, although involvement of the DF at this stage would
not be expected . Further support for Alzheimer-type tau deposition was provided using the AT100 antibody, recognising tau phosphorylated at
Thr212 and Ser214 with paired helical filament conformation, which labelled a proportion of neurofibrillary tangles and by isoform specific
antibodies, which showed a mixture of 3- and 4-repeat tau isoforms (Fig. 7b–d).Fig. 7Tau expression and co-localisation with α-synuclein.
Representative images from CA1 probed using immunohistochemistry with phospho-tau antibodies: AT8 (a) and AT100 (b). Inclusions contained a
mixture of 3-repeat (c) and 4-repeat (d) tau isoforms. Double immunofluorescence images of CA2 (e–i) and DF (j–l) probed for α-synuclein
(green) and AT8 (red) show strong co-localisation in a subset of neurons. AT8 immunoreactivity is detected on the dendritic processes of DF
granule cells which express α-synuclein in the stratum lacunosum-moleculare (SLM, m–p). DAPI nuclear stain (blue). Scale bars represent
50 μm (b–d are at the same magnification as are e–g, j–o) Tau expression and co-localisation with α-synuclein. Representative images from
CA1 probed using immunohistochemistry with phospho-tau antibodies: AT8 (a) and AT100 (b). Inclusions contained a mixture of 3-repeat (c) and
4-repeat (d) tau isoforms. Double immunofluorescence images of CA2 (e–i) and DF (j–l) probed for α-synuclein (green) and AT8 (red) show
strong co-localisation in a subset of neurons. AT8 immunoreactivity is detected on the dendritic processes of DF granule cells which express
α-synuclein in the stratum lacunosum-moleculare (SLM, m–p). DAPI nuclear stain (blue). Scale bars represent 50 μm (b–d are at the same
magnification as are e–g, j–o) Double immunofluorescence microscopy was used to investigate the relationship between α-synuclein and tau.
This showed that, particularly in the CA1 and DF, α-synuclein and tau co-localised in a proportion of inclusions (Fig. 7e–l). In addition,
AT8 immunoreactivity was detected on the dendritic processes of DF neurons in the stratum lacunosum-moleculare (SLM), which also expressed
α-synuclein (Fig. 7m–p). α-Synuclein in LBs is widely reported to be extensively phosphorylated [23, 82]. Double immunofluorescence staining
for total α-synuclein and α-synuclein phospho-Ser129 (Fig. 8a–c) or phospho-Y125 (Fig. 8d–f) showed almost complete overlap of
immunoreactivity within inclusions, implying the near total phosphorylation of α-synuclein at both epitopes. Ubiquitin and p62 co-localised
with the majority of neuronal α-synuclein-positive inclusions (Fig. 8g–l) and also GCI-like inclusions (Fig. 8m–o).Fig. 8α-Synuclein is
phosphorylated and inclusions contain ubiquitin and p62. Representative images of the CA2 region of the hippocampus probed by double
immunofluorescence with total α-synuclein (red) and α-synuclein phospho-S129 (green) (a–c), or α-synuclein (green) and α-synuclein
phospho-Y125 (red) (d–f) show near complete co-localisation indicating that α-synuclein is phosphorylated at both epitopes. The majority of
α-synuclein immunoreactivity (green) within neuronal inclusions co-localised with ubiquitin (red), shown in CA1 neurons (g–i). Many
α-synuclein-positive (green) neuronal inclusions also contained P62 (red) (j–l) and a similar pattern was observed in GCI-like inclusions
illustrated in the white matter underlying the entorhinal cortex (EC, m–o). DAPI nuclear stain (blue). Scale bars represent 50 μm (a–l are
at the same magnification as are m–o) α-Synuclein is phosphorylated and inclusions contain ubiquitin and p62. Representative images of the
CA2 region of the hippocampus probed by double immunofluorescence with total α-synuclein (red) and α-synuclein phospho-S129 (green) (a–c),
or α-synuclein (green) and α-synuclein phospho-Y125 (red) (d–f) show near complete co-localisation indicating that α-synuclein is
phosphorylated at both epitopes. The majority of α-synuclein immunoreactivity (green) within neuronal inclusions co-localised with ubiquitin
(red), shown in CA1 neurons (g–i). Many α-synuclein-positive (green) neuronal inclusions also contained P62 (red) (j–l) and a similar
pattern was observed in GCI-like inclusions illustrated in the white matter underlying the entorhinal cortex (EC, m–o). DAPI nuclear stain
(blue). Scale bars represent 50 μm (a–l are at the same magnification as are m–o) TDP-43 immunohistochemistry identified moderate numbers of
NCIs in the caudate and putamen (Fig. 4k), while these were sparse in the amygdala, DF, CA4, CA1, subiculum, entorhinal cortex and
transentorhinal cortex. A single neuronal nuclear TDP-43 immunoreactive inclusion was noted in the entorhinal cortex. Aβ deposition was not
detected. We provide detailed clinical, genetic and neuropathological characterisation of an α-synucleinopathy in a patient carrying a G51D
α-synuclein mutation, clinically diagnosed with juvenile parkinsonism. Neuropathological analysis revealed a combination of the
characteristic profile of SN and LC neuronal loss together with neuronal α-synuclein immunoreactive inclusions consistent with PD as well as
severe hippocampal, cortical and striatal α-synuclein pathology. An additional feature was the presence of GCI-like oligodendroglial
inclusions with a distribution similar to that found in MSA. This case shows some similarity to reports of A53T mutation and multiplication
of SNCA (Table 2) and also to a Japanese kindred reported in an abstract as carrying a G51D SNCA mutation, but without detailed segregation
data [50, 51]. However, features including dense accumulation of α-synuclein-positive inclusions in the striatum and very severe neocortical
α-synuclein pathology affecting both superficial and deep cortical laminae distinguish this case from other reported cases with SNCA
mutations.Table 2Neuropathology of α-synuclein mutation cases where α-synuclein immunohistochemistry data are availableMutationNumber of
cases (n)Neuronal lossα-Synuclein pathologyTau Braak and Braak stageTDP-43 pathologySNLCCA1CA2/3PatternStriatumNeocortical distributionGlial
inclusionsGolbe et al. and Duda et al. A53T2SevereMild–moderateYesNoPD-likeModerate grains and threadsDeep laminaeNot describedINot
describedSpira et al. A53T2SevereSevereNoSeverePD-likeNoneDeep laminaeNone0Not describedMarkopoulou et al. A53T2SevereMildSevere (n = 1)CA2
(n = 1)PD-likeGrains and threads (n = 1)Deep laminaeSmall numbers GCIsIV (n = 1), I (n = 1)Limbic and cortical (n = 1, with CA1 neuronal
loss)Seidel et al. A30P1SevereNot describedNot describedNot describedPD-likeLBsDeep laminaeSmall numbers CB and astrocytes of PD typeIINot
describedZarranz et al. E46 K1Moderate–severeMildNot describedNot describedPD-likeNonePresent, distribution not describedNot described0Not
describedObi et al. Duplication1SevereSevereNoneModerateFeatures of PD and MSANonePresent, distribution not describedSmall numbers GCIs and
CBINot describedIkeuchi et al. Duplication1SevereNot describedNoneSeverePD-likeNot describedPresent, distribution not describedFew, type not
specifiedIIINot describedGwinn-Hardy et al. Triplication1SevereSevereNoneSevereFeatures of PD and MSALBs and neuritesPredominantly deep
laminaeSmall numbers GCIs and CB0Not describedFarrer et al. Triplication1SevereSevereNoneSeverePD-likeaNot describedPresent, distribution
not describedNot describedNot describedNot describedThis reportG51D1SevereSevereMildSevereFeatures of PD and MSAFrequent neuronal inclusions
and threadsSuperficial and deep laminaeGCIs and CBIILimbicSN substantia nigra, LC locus coeruleus, N/A not available, PD Parkinson’s
disease, CB coiled bodiesaDetailed description of α-synuclein pathology not provided Neuropathology of α-synuclein mutation cases where
α-synuclein immunohistochemistry data are available SN substantia nigra, LC locus coeruleus, N/A not available, PD Parkinson’s disease, CB
coiled bodies aDetailed description of α-synuclein pathology not provided In comparison with other reported mutations in the SNCA gene, the
age of onset in this family, clinical features and progression are most similar to the SNCA triplication and A53T mutations, which are
typically associated with young-onset PD frequently associated with cognitive impairment and hallucinations. This is similar to the family
where the proband presented early at 19 years while his father and sister presented at age 39 and 40 years, respectively. In this family, an
SNCA G > A heterozygous mutation at codon 51 causes a glycine to aspartic acid amino acid change (Fig. 1a), which segregates with the
disease (Fig. 1b) and was not found in over 4,500 control individuals. The G51D mutation is located in the N-terminal domain of the protein,
a region required for lipid affinity and membrane binding and may thus influence these functions (Fig. 2) [20, 37, 68]. As the A53T and E46K
mutations result in faster fibrillisation of α-synuclein [13, 62], we postulate that the G51D mutation might have a similar effect. The
neuropathological findings included some features of both PD and MSA. In common with PD and MSA, there was severe neuronal loss in the SN.
Neuronal α-synuclein pathology had a distribution compatible with PD in that brainstem, limbic and cortical regions were affected. Unusual
for PD, however, was the severe neuronal loss in the CA2/3 subregions of the hippocampus and the extensive accumulation of neuronal
α-synuclein in the hippocampus, including the DF, and striatum [7, 8, 38, 52]. Involvement of the DF by neuronal α-synuclein inclusions has
been described previously in the case of DLB with additional MSA-type pathology and in some cases of MSA [73, 74, 78]. The severe neuronal
loss observed in CA2/3 of this case bears similarity to that described in association with A53T SNCA mutation [48, 77] and in cases of
multiplication of SNCA, though this pattern of loss was suggested to be a unique feature of the latter (Table 2). As frequently observed in
PD and DLB, and also reported in conjunction with A53T SNCA mutation, α-synuclein-positive threads were frequent in CA2/3 [17, 18, 34, 35].
The severe neuronal loss we observed is likely to be associated with the susceptibility of these hippocampal subregions to α-synuclein
accumulation. Oligodendroglial pathology in the form of GCI-like inclusions in regions such as the posterior frontal white matter, pontine
base and cerebellar white matter was also notable and prompts comparison with MSA. In common with GCIs in MSA, these inclusions were
immunoreactive for αB-crystallin . Oligodendroglial pathology with similar morphological appearances has been described in cases with SNCA
multiplication or A53T mutation (Table 2) and, interestingly, was also reported in a sporadic DLB case . Neuronal and glial α-synuclein
pathology in the striatum is also a common feature of MSA and we noted very frequent striatal neuronal α-synuclein immunoreactive inclusions
coupled with severe gliosis. However, in notable contrast to MSA, in which the putamen has a gradient of pathology most severely affecting
the posterior and dorsal aspects of this nucleus with less severe involvement of the caudate, there was a uniform distribution of pathology
in all regions of both nuclei in this case [1, 58]. This pattern of striatal pathology appears to be unique to our case as it has not been
described in the context of other SNCA mutations (Table 2). Hippocampal sclerosis with severe neuronal loss affecting CA1 and the subiculum
is a feature of many neurodegenerative diseases and is often associated with TDP-43 immunoreactive inclusions in residual neurons in these
regions and elsewhere . TDP-43 pathology is reported to be frequent in DLB cases, but is considerably rarer in MSA and in PD [3, 24, 30,
53]. While we observed sparse TDP-43-positive inclusions in these areas, the overall pattern of neuronal loss, being most severe in CA2/3,
did not resemble typical hippocampal sclerosis. Of particular note was the abundance of TDP-43 immunoreactive NCIs in the caudate and
putamen, regions also vulnerable to TDP-43 pathology in FTLD-TDP . We did not observe TDP-43-positive inclusions in neocortex or brainstem
motor nuclei. A further neuropathological feature, which may be distinctive in the G51D α-synuclein mutation, is the distribution of
neocortical α-synuclein pathology. In PD, MSA and other SNCA mutations, α-synuclein pathology is predominantly found in the deep cortical
laminae (Table 2) [19, 26, 27, 48, 72, 77] compared with our observation of severe involvement of both the superficial and deep cortical
layers. We further investigated the nature of intracellular inclusions and Gallyas silver impregnation indicated the presence of fibrillar
protein. Phosphorylation of α-synuclein at Ser129 is a feature of LB pathology and may promote oligomerisation, while phosphorylation at
Y125 may increase protein fibrillisation of α-synuclein [11, 29, 54]. Using immunofluorescence, we showed phosphorylation of α-synuclein at
both Y125 and Ser129. Although the majority of neuronal and glial inclusions were immunoreactive for p62 and ubiquitin, a proportion
remained unstained and these possibly represented an early phase of inclusion formation [40, 41, 44]. A varying degree of tau pathology has
been reported in cases of SNCA mutation or multiplication sometimes co-localising with α-synuclein in neuronal inclusions [19, 27, 32, 48,
57, 72, 84]. We report tau pathology in the hippocampal formation and entorhinal cortex corresponding to Braak and Braak stage II, but with
additional involvement of the DF. Phosphorylated tau co-localised with a subpopulation of neuronal α-synuclein inclusions, particularly in
the CA1 and DF. A relationship between tau and both the levels and aggregation state of α-synuclein, such that greater numbers of tau-
positive inclusions may increase α-synuclein pathology, is well described [14, 15, 25, 46]. More recently, it has been shown that
α-synuclein oligomers can seed tau aggregation in vitro and this may explain the occurrence of tau in a proportion of α-synuclein-containing
inclusions . The defining neuropathological hallmark of MSA is the presence of α-synuclein-containing GCIs coupled with neurodegeneration in
the striatonigral and/or olivopontocerebellar regions . The mechanism of GCI formation is currently unknown and mature oligodendrocytes are
not thought to express α-synuclein under normal circumstances . Evidence of GCI-like pathology in cases of SNCA multiplication [27, 57],
A53T mutation and in this case of G51D mutation, provide a strong link between these mutations and the pathological mechanisms of MSA. One
of the earliest stages of MSA pathogenesis may involve the overexpression or aberrant localisation of α-synuclein in oligodendrocytes, where
it becomes fibrillar and forms GCIs . Greater understanding of the effect of the G51D and A53T mutations and SNCA multiplication may shed
further light on the pathological cascades, which result in GCI formation. The data presented indicate that G51D SNCA mutation results in a
neuropathological profile, which shares some neuropathological features of both PD and MSA and, therefore understanding the consequences of
this mutation, has the potential to provide greater insight into the role of α-synuclein mutation or dysfunction in the pathogenesis of PD
and also MSA. Understanding the biology of this G51D SNCA mutation could help us to target pathways in PD, MSA and other synucleinopathies,
which lead to neuronal and glial α-synuclein accumulation. Online resource 2. Supplementary Fig. 1 Phospho-tau immunoreactivity is detected
in granule cells of the DF. Representative images from the DF of immunohistochemical staining for phospho-tau (AT8, a), α-synuclein (b)
ubiquitin (c) and p62 (d) demonstrating that tau is present in a minority of neuronal inclusions. Scale bar in d represents 50 μm in a–d.
Supplementary material 1 (DOCX 16 kb)Supplementary material 2 (TIFF 1430 kb) Supplementary material 1 (DOCX 16 kb) Supplementary material 2
(TIFF 1430 kb) Amyloid beta Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Cornu ammonis Coiled bodies Cingulate gyrus Caudate nucleus Dentate fascia
Dementia with Lewy bodies Dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus Frontotemporal lobar degeneration Glial cytoplasmic inclusions Lewy bodies Lewy
neurites Multiple system atrophy Non-amyloid-β-component Neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions Neuronal nuclear inclusions Pale bodies Pale
neurites Parkinson’s disease Putamen Stratum lacunosum-moleculare Substantia nigra TDP-43 Wild type H. Houlden, J. L. Holton are senior
authors. JH, AL and TR are supported by Parkinson’s UK, the Multiple System Atrophy Trust, Alzheimer’s Research UK and the Progressive
Supranuclear Palsy (Europe) Association. JH is supported by the Reta Lila Weston Institute for Neurological Studies. AK is supported by the
Multiple System Atrophy Trust. YA is supported by the Government of Kuwait. HH is supported by the MRC, the DMRF and the Parkinson’s disease
foundation. The research was, in part, funded/supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Unit in
Dementia based at University College London Hospitals (UCLH), University College London (UCL). The views expressed are those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health. This work was supported in part by the Wellcome
Trust/MRC Joint Call in Neurodegeneration award (WT089698) to the UK Parkinson’s Disease Consortium (UKPDC) whose members are from the UCL
Institute of Neurology, the University of Sheffield and the MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit at the University of Dundee.
