A 74-year-old Asian female underwent a chest CT scan because of a pulmonary nodule observed on her chest radiograph (figure 1A). She
complained of mild dyspnoea on exertion for few weeks. Her past history was significant for hypertension and obesity (body mass index
39 kg/m2). Physical examination, electrocardiography (EKG), cardiac echogram and laboratory biochemistry were all unremarkable. Chest CT
scan revealed a 3.6×2.8 cm solitary nodule locating at the tip of the lingual lobe with strong vascular enhancement demonstrated during
contrast phase (figure 1B). The patient was afebrile and mildly anxious, and her blood pressure was 118/64 mm Hg. Since she was symptomatic
without surgical contraindication, video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) exploration was proceeded. Under VATS, a bright-red and well-
circumscribed cystic lesion at the tip of the lingual lobe was noted (figure 2), and a wedge resection was performed. (A) Plain chest film:
a faint, peripheral located nodule noted near left costo-phrenic angle. (B) Chest CT scan: a 3.6×2.8 cm solitary nodule with strong vascular
enhancement. Under video-assisted thoracotomy: a cystic appearance, bright red, pulsatiled lesion. What is the diagnosis? Macroscopically, a
feeding vessel was seen entering the aneurysm cavity (figure 3A), and the microscopic appearances were consistent with a true pulmonary
artery aneurysm (PAA) (figure 3B). The final diagnosis was a PAA in the left lingular lobe. The postoperative recovery was uneventful, and
the patient was discharged home on day 3. (A) Macroscopic view of specimen with two vessel lumens in arrow. (B) Microscopic view of
pulmonary artery aneurysm. The PAA is rare. In 1947, Deterling et al1 described only eight cases of PAA in a total of 109 571 autopsies. PAA
is divided into central and peripheral types, with the former more commonly encountered. The central type involves the main pulmonary trunk
or main pulmonary arteries. A congenital pathology with pulmonary hypertension or cauterisation prior to diagnosis is the usual finding in
this category. The peripheral type includes lobar and segmental branches of pulmonary arteries. Syphilis, tuberculosis and trauma are the
common aetiologies of solitary peripheral pulmonary aneurysm. In addition, the mycotic aneurysms are usually multiple, small in size and
often with bilateral distribution. In our current case, the condition of solitary peripheral PAA in a patient without any predisposing
factor is uncommon. The most serious complication of PAA is rupture. Monchic et al2 summarised that 21 patients with solitary peripheral PAA
ruptured among a total of 60 patients, with the rupture rate of 35%. Symbas et al3 reported five patients with traumatic peripheral PAA, and
two patients died of aneurysm rupture, whereas two patients were treated successfully by lobectomy. Transthoracic needle biopsy is
frequently used in diagnosis of solitary pulmonary nodule, especially when it is located peripherally. It is considered a safe procedure
with the bleeding rate between 2% and 10%.4 However, biopsy of a vascular structure could be fatal and, therefore, the CT scan should be
carefully reviewed for its vascular enhancement before the procedure. Nowadays, (multidetector CT) MDCT angiography is a very effective tool
for depicting vasculature structure.5 In our case, MDCT was not available, and needle biopsy was also declined due to strong vascular
enhancement of the lesion on CT scan. Competing interests: None. Patient consent: Obtained. Contributors: C-WH and K-TK involved in
collecting clinical information and drafting the manuscript. C-ML analysed the radiological studies, provided the macroscopic specimen and
operation findings. C-WS carried out pathological examination. K-CK and C-TH helped in preparing this manuscript. Provenance and peer
review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviews.
