Injuries in children are one of the most frequent causes of high morbidity and mortality, and they present a challenge to the treating
physician. Fortunately, spinal trauma in pediatric patient is relatively rare. Brown-Séquard syndrome is a rare form of incomplete spinal
cord injury consisting of ipsilateral upper motor neuron paralysis (hemiplegia) and loss of proprioception with contralateral pain and
temperature sensation deficits resulting from hemisection or lateral injury to the spinal cord. A 11-year-old girl was admitted to our
Pediatric Trauma Emergency Department after she had suffered a penetrating back injury. Neurological examination demonstrated left lower
extremity paresis and moderate spastic paralysis of the right lower extremity. The examination showed loss of temperature sensation
contralateral to and below the lesion. The examination of the pain sensation was difficult because the patient was in pain shock, but it was
diminished on the side opposite to the damage. Multislice spiral computed tomography (MSCT) demonstrated a triangular foreign body in spinal
canal at the level of the Th11–Th12. After a Th11–L2 laminectomy and retrieval of foreign bodies, dura repair was performed. Patient was
discharged from the hospital with partial recovery. Operative decompression of the neural elements in case of spinal canal compromise is the
treatment of choice. Indication for surgical intervention in existing cerebrospinal fluid fistula includes closure of the dura and reducing
neural elements compression and lowering the risk of infectious complications by removing bone or foreign body fragments. Patients with
Brown-Séquard syndrome have good prognosis for functional recovery. Injuries in children are one of the most frequent causes of high
morbidity and mortality, and they present a challenge to the treating physician. Fortunately, spinal trauma in pediatric patient is
relatively rare. Our knowledge about the differences between pediatric and adult spinal column and spinal cord injuries remains still
incomplete; therefore, each case provides us with valuable new information. All types of spinal cord injuries are present in children
population as in adults. Brown-Séquard syndrome, first described in 1846 by Charles-Edouard Brown-Séquard , is a rare form of incomplete
spinal cord injury consisting of ipsilateral upper motor neuron paralysis (hemiplegia) and loss of proprioception with contralateral pain
and temperature sensation deficits resulting from hemisection or lateral injury to the spinal cord. Typically, it occurs in young males aged
15–50 years old after penetrating trauma . There are very few cases of Brown-Séquard syndrome after a penetrating trauma to the spine in
children reported in literature. In this population, motor vehicle accidents or other blunt traumas are the most common causes of spinal
injury. We present a case of Brown-Séquard syndrome after a stab wound to the thoracic region from broken glass window. A 11-year-old girl,
with slight degree of mental retardation, was admitted to our Pediatric Trauma Emergency Department after she had suffered a penetrating
back injury. She was running in her house when she suddenly bumped to the glass door. She has not lost consciousness. On examination at
admission, she was in logical contact. She was 15 points in Glasgow Coma Scale. The vital signs were heart rate 84 beats/min, blood pressure
100/70 mmHg, respiratory rate 20 breaths/min and temperature 36.6 °C. Physical examination revealed a linear 1.5-cm-long stab wound in the
low left paraspinal thoracic region (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Stab wound in the left thoracic region of the back Stab wound in the left thoracic region
of the back There was no foreign body seen over the skin surface. Bleeding was minimal, but cerebrospinal fluid leakage from the wound was
observed. No other injuries were diagnosed. Neurological examination demonstrated left-side lower extremity paresis and moderate spastic
paralysis on the other lower extremity. Bilateral positive Babinski sign was observed. An exact sensory examination was not possible because
of slight mental retardation, but loss of temperature sensation contralateral to and below the lesion was noticed. The examination of the
pain was difficult because the patient was in pain shock, but it was diminished on the side opposite to the damage. Rectal sphincter muscle
tone was normal. The urogenital examination was normal. There were no abnormalities in laboratory tests. Multislice spiral computed
tomography (MSCT) demonstrated a triangular foreign body inside the spinal canal (26 mm × 11 mm × 6 mm) at the level of the Th11–Th12 and
several small fragments of the glass in the paraspinal muscles on the left side (Fig. 2). Steroids were not used, and standard perioperative
antibiotic prophylactics were administered. The patient was immediately taken to the operating theatre. The wound was explored. A Th11–L2
laminectomy was performed. Intraoperatively the 2-cm-long laceration of the dura was diagnosed, and the spinal cord was also
injured.Fig. 2CT scan Th11–Th12. A piece of glass window penetrating to the spinal canal CT scan Th11–Th12. A piece of glass window
penetrating to the spinal canal After the foreign bodies retrieval (Fig. 3), dura laceration repair was performed. There were no signs of
the cerebrospinal leakage after the dura closure. Postoperative course was uncomplicated. The girl stayed in Pediatric Surgery Department
for 16 days. The rehabilitation started in the 3rd day after the surgery.Fig. 3Removed pieces of the glass window Removed pieces of the
glass window At the discharge date, she was partially recovered. The wound healed uneventfully. Muscle strength was rated according to 0–5
Lovett score as follows:1/5: muscle flicker, but no movement2/5: movement possible, but not against gravity3/5: movement possible against
gravity, but not against resistance by the examiner4/5: movement possible against some resistance by the examiner5/5: normal muscle
strength. 1/5: muscle flicker, but no movement 2/5: movement possible, but not against gravity 3/5: movement possible against gravity, but
not against resistance by the examiner 4/5: movement possible against some resistance by the examiner 5/5: normal muscle strength. Partial
paresis in the left lower limb (3/5 in the Lovett score) and slight paresis of the right lower limb (4/5 in the Lovett score) were present.
Positive bilateral Babinski sign was still present. The girl was ambulating with assistance of the walker. She was discharged from the
Pediatric Surgery Department and referred to the Rehabilitation Ward. Brown-Séquard syndrome is a result of disruption of the descending
lateral corticospinal tracts and the ascending lateral spinothalamic tracts, which cross within one or two levels on the dorsal root
entrance . Clinically, they result in an ipsilateral to injury loss of position and vibration sensation as well as paralysis and
hyperesthesias and contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensation. Light touch sensation is typically not affected . Spinal injury is
an uncommon source of morbidity in children. The most common cause of spine injury is motor vehicle accident, falls and sports-related
accidents [5, 6]. Far less common is penetrating injury to the spine, with the stab wounds and gunshot traumas being the most common reasons
in adults. Only about 3 % of traumatic spinal cord injury ends up with Brown-Séquard syndrome; however, a pure form of this syndrome occurs
rarely and therefore the term ‘Brown-Séquard-plus’ syndrome is used when additional neurological findings are present . Several cases of
such Brown-Séquard-plus syndrome have been reported in adult literature, most of them caused by penetrating trauma and rarely by blunt
trauma . Reports concerning children population are very infrequent. Treatment for this disease should be the same as for other acute spinal
cord injuries. Indication for surgical intervention in existing cerebrospinal fluid fistula includes closure of the dura and reducing neural
elements compression and lowering the risk of infectious complications by removing bone or foreign body fragments or hematoma [9, 10].
However, severe neurological deficits remaining unchanged from the time of injury rarely improve after decompressive surgery. Randomized
prospective trials in adults (NASCIS 3) suggest that patients with motor impairment may benefit from high-dose steroids administration
within 8 h of an injury, but their role is controversial . There are no randomized, prospective trials concerning steroid use in spinal cord
injury in children population. Steroid use is even more controversial in penetrating injury due to increased risk of infections leading to
prolonged hospital stay ; nevertheless, some authors advocate treatment with methylprednisolone succinate in scheme as in adult. In many
cases of spinal cord injuries, different types of loss of motor, sensory and autonomic functions below the level of lesion are observed.
Patients with Brown-Séquard syndrome have relative good prognosis for functional recovery . The authors of this article would like to give
special thanks to Agnieszka Stewart for her invaluable editorial assistance. None of the authors of the above manuscript has declared any
conflict of interest within the last 3 years which may arise from being named as an author on the manuscript. This article is distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided
the original author(s) and the source are credited.
