Repaglinide is an insulin secretagogue with a rapid onset and short duration of action. Several studies have proposed repaglinide to be a
safe and effective treatment for patients, including elderly people with type 2 diabetes (1–3). Here we report a case subject with type 2
diabetes who showed severe thrombocytopenia due to repaglinide. A 71-year-old man was referred and admitted to our hospital due to poor
glycemic control in July 2012. His plasma glucose (350 mg/dL) and HbA1c (7.6%) levels were significantly elevated. The intensive insulin
therapy promptly ameliorated his blood glucose, which was 91–151 mg/dL, by using 6 and 8 units of insulin glulisine before lunch and dinner,
respectively. We stopped the insulin therapy and started to use repaglinide (0.75 mg/day) and miglitol, α-glycosidase inhibitor (225
mg/day), on July 25 and August 2, respectively. The counts of leukocytes and platelets were 7,800/μL and 15.1 × 104/μL, respectively, and
serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 2.52 mg/dL (normal, <0.3 mg/dL) on July 24. He showed fever, and the count of leukocytes and serum
CRP level increased to 9,000/μL and 18.88 mg/dL, respectively, and the count of platelets significantly decreased to 2.5 × 104/μL on August
6. Urinary counts of bacteria and leukocytes significantly increased, and culture of urine grew Serratia marcescens. We considered that his
thrombocytopenia was due to severe urinary tract infection. We stopped repaglinide and miglitol and started antibiotic therapy; we also
restarted the intensive insulin therapy because he was critically ill. His fever disappeared, and the count of leukocytes and serum CRP
level decreased to 3,000/μL and 0.18 mg/dL, respectively. The count of platelets increased to 15.8 × 104/μL on August 15, and we restarted
repaglinide and miglitol. The count of platelets decreased to 14.9 × 104/μL, 10.2 × 104/μL, and 7.3 × 104/μL, on August 17, 20, and 22,
respectively. We stopped the use of miglitol on August 22; however, the count of platelets continuously decreased to 6.4 × 104/μL and 4.8 ×
104/μL on August 24 and 27, respectively. After we stopped the use of repaglinide, the count of platelets promptly increased to 5.9 ×
104/μL, 7.2 × 104/μL, 8.7 × 104/μL, and 9.1 × 104/μL on August 30 and September 3, 9 and 10, respectively. Antiplatelet antibody was not
detected. In summary, we experienced a patient with type 2 diabetes who showed severe decrease of platelets due to repaglinide use and
showed prompt elevation of platelets due to discontinuation of the use of repaglinide. To our knowledge, this is the first report of
thrombocytopenia due to repaglinide. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. H.K., C.H., Y.H., and H.Y.
analyzed data, contributed to discussion, and wrote, reviewed, and edited the manuscript. H.Y. is the guarantor of this work and, as such,
had full access to all the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
