We describe an enzyme-based electroanalysis system for real-time analysis of a clinical microdialysis sampling stream during surgery. Free
flap tissue transfer is used widely in reconstructive surgery after resection of tumours or in other situations such as following major
trauma. However, there is a risk of flap failure, due to thrombosis in the flap pedicle, leading to tissue ischaemia. Conventional clinical
assessment is particularly difficult in such ‘buried’ flaps where access to the tissue is limited. Rapid sampling microdialysis (rsMD) is an
enzyme-based electrochemical detection method, which is particularly suited to monitoring metabolism. This online flow injection system
analyses a dialysate flow stream from an implanted microdialysis probe every 30 s for levels of glucose and lactate. Here, we report its
first use in the monitoring of free flap reconstructive surgery, from flap detachment to re-vascularisation and overnight in the intensive
care unit. The on-set of ischaemia by both arterial clamping and failure of venous drainage was seen as an increase in lactate and decrease
in glucose levels. Glucose levels returned to normal within 10 min of successful arterial anastomosis, whilst lactate took longer to clear.
The use of the lactate/glucose ratio provides a clear predictor of ischaemia on-set and subsequent recovery, as it is insensitive to changes
in blood flow such as those caused by topical vasodilators, like papaverine. The use of storage tubing to preserve the time course of
dialysate, when technical difficulties arise, until offline analysis can occur, is also shown. The potential use of rsMD in free flap
surgery and tissue monitoring is highly promising. Figure Free flap surgery timeline: The flap is raised and MD probe inserted. Glucose and
lactate levels were monitored at 1 minute intervals throughout flap removal and the reconstruction of the tongue. Grey lines indicate key
events as communicated by the surgeons in real time. Free flap surgery timeline: The flap is raised and MD probe inserted. Glucose and
lactate levels were monitored at 1 minute intervals throughout flap removal and the reconstruction of the tongue. Grey lines indicate key
events as communicated by the surgeons in real time. Despite the increasing sophistication of modern surgical procedures, complications such
as the development of ischaemia due to a disrupted blood supply are relatively common and difficult to detect. If such complications are
detected, further emergency surgical intervention may be required. If it goes unnoticed, there is a high associated morbidity. Microdialysis
is a minimally invasive technique ideal for the clinical monitoring of tissue, particularly in difficult to observe areas. In this
technique, a thin double-lumen catheter with a semi-permeable membrane at its end is inserted into the tissue. A physiological perfusion
fluid is pumped through the catheter using a small pump, and small molecules such as glucose and lactate, pass via the membrane into the
fluid creating a dialysate stream. In conventional microdialysis, this dialysate is collected in microvials. One of the main problems with
this technique is that, with a perfusion rate of 0.3–2 μL/min, the time taken to collect a sufficient volume for assay in a bedside analyser
can take 30 min to an hour. The sample then needs to be introduced into a bedside analyser by hand (requiring attention from busy clinical
staff) and the analysis itself usually takes another few minutes before concentrations of glucose, lactate and other metabolites are
displayed. This loses dynamic information preventing real-time detection of adverse events. An exciting new method for real-time analysis of
tissue metabolites has been developed. An online flow injection system, known as rapid sampling microdialysis (rsMD), is used to monitor
tissue levels of glucose and lactate at the bedside . rsMD has also successfully been used to monitor metabolites in animal models of
ischaemia , during human gastrointestinal and human brain surgery , as well as monitoring brain injury patients on the intensive care ward .
Free tissue transfer is the process of harvesting soft tissue (such as skin and muscle and sometimes with associated bone) together with its
blood supply. Healthy tissue is prepared at the donor site and the blood supply is clamped and cut, thus creating a free flap. Microsurgery
is then used to re-establish the blood supply at the recipient site. After re-vascularisation, there is a risk of thrombosis in the artery
or vein leading to flap ischaemia and failure. Hence, early recognition of flap compromise is essential for successful reconstruction. The
majority of free flaps that fail do so within the first 24 h and current clinical assessment includes flap colour, temperature and
turgidity. Recently, modalities including Doppler flowmetry and microdialysis for measuring metabolism have gained popularity in predicting
flap compromise [7, 8]. However, some question whether these techniques are superior to clinical assessment alone . Conventional
microdialysis has already been used to detect tissue ischaemia during free flap surgery , in the oral cavity and in buried flaps . Here, we
report for the first time the use of real-time microdialysis to monitor free flap surgery and the relocated tissue in the post-operative
period. The dialysate was analysed using rsMD by directly connecting a clinical microdialysis probe (CMA70, MDialysis, Solna Sweden) to an
enzyme-based electrochemical detection method via low-volume fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP) connection tubing (0.12 μL/cm, Thames-
Restek, Bucks). An overview of the setup is shown in Fig. 1. The analysis equipment is assembled on a clinically approved isolation trolley
(CTL Medical). This is critical as it provides (a) the necessary patient isolation, (b) as importantly acceptability by clinical staff
within the operating theatre environment and (c) a workspace for the monitoring team. Patient electrical isolation occurs at three levels:
the very high impedance of the saline-filled FEP tubing, electrically isolated power supplies for the potentiostats and overall isolation
transformer for the clinical trolley.Fig. 1The microdialysis probe is inserted into the tissue flap subcutaneously and sutured into place,
shown in the photograph in (a) before the flap has been detached from the blood vessels. The dialysate is introduced to the rsMD injection
valve via low-volume FEP connection tubing (blue dotted line). The reaction is mediated by ferrocene monocarboxylate, which is perfused at
200 μL/min using an HPLC pump. The enzyme is loaded onto membranes placed before a glassy carbon electrode which is held at 0 V (b). The
current is recorded as peaks, where amplitude is related to concentration as shown in the calibration curve in (c). Raw data of a successful
arterial anastomosis (indicated by the dotted grey line) are shown in (d). A time line indicating the calibration protocol throughout
monitoring is shown in (e) The microdialysis probe is inserted into the tissue flap subcutaneously and sutured into place, shown in the
photograph in (a) before the flap has been detached from the blood vessels. The dialysate is introduced to the rsMD injection valve via low-
volume FEP connection tubing (blue dotted line). The reaction is mediated by ferrocene monocarboxylate, which is perfused at 200 μL/min
using an HPLC pump. The enzyme is loaded onto membranes placed before a glassy carbon electrode which is held at 0 V (b). The current is
recorded as peaks, where amplitude is related to concentration as shown in the calibration curve in (c). Raw data of a successful arterial
anastomosis (indicated by the dotted grey line) are shown in (d). A time line indicating the calibration protocol throughout monitoring is
shown in (e) The analysis system consists of a custom-made six-port injection valve with two 200 nL internal sample loops made by Valco
Instruments, Switzerland, coupled to a precision HPLC pump (Rheos 2200, Flux Switzerland). Every 30 s, the valve injects microdialysate
samples into a mediator flow stream (1.5 mM ferrocene monocarboxylate, 100 mM sodium citrate, 150 mM sodium chloride, 1 mM EDTA, Kathon
(Rohn and Haas), pH 7), which passes through either a glucose or a lactate enzyme reactor. The reactors house nitrocellulose-based
nanoporous membranes (Millipore) with high enzyme loading for efficient sequential transfer of the electrons from the substrate via hydrogen
peroxide to horseradish peroxidase (HRP) which was regenerated by a synthetic mediator, ferrocene monocarboxylate (Sigma-Aldrich) . A
downstream electrode (3 mm, radial flow glassy carbon disc) operating at 0 V compared to the Ag|AgCl|Cl− (150 mM) direct reading reference
electrode reduces the ferrocene (III) species produced by HRP back to ferrocene (II) to give a current peak; this is shown schematically in
Fig. 1b. The use of a reducing potential prevents interference from electroactive species that may be present in the dialysate. Our careful
choice of buffer chloride concentration has two benefits: Firstly, our in-house low-noise potentiostats are able to operate using an
internally set potential of 0 V, dramatically reducing noise by a factor of 10 . Secondly, it matches the chloride concentration in the
microdialysis stream minimising injection artefacts. The potentiostats are connected to a 16/35 Powerlab (ADInstruments) and the data are
recorded using LabChart software (ADInstruments) which also timestamps key events during the surgery with the raw data files and allows us
to record audio/video files timelocked to the data for unambiguous identification of event timing. The current peak from each sample
injection is displayed on a computer screen in real time, with current inverted for convenience (Fig. 1c). This allows the monitoring team
to give the surgical team a commentary on glucose and lactate levels during the surgical procedure. The amplitude of the current peak is
related to the concentration of substrate in the dialysate by calibrations. The system is calibrated from 0.25 to 5 mM (four steps each with
five replicates) before surgery, after surgery and after monitoring in the ICU by injection of known standards directly into the valve using
a glass Hamilton syringe (Fig. 1c, e). This allows accurate conversion of the current signal into concentration. If required, one-off
injections of a standard can occur during monitoring to track the assay stability. Typically, the analysis method has 5-day stability and a
detection limit of 25 μM . The raw data containing injection peaks are processed using MatLab (MathWorks). Purpose-written published
algorithms are used to remove common noise artefacts such as spikes, ripples and baseline drift, typically improving the signal-to-noise
ratio by 250 % . The peaks are then detected and compared to the relevant calibration function to give values for microdialysate
concentration. As each surgery is a unique event, the data collected are of high value; hence, an alternative method of data collection has
been developed for circumstances when online analysis cannot be achieved. With use of 0.4 mm ID Portex tubing, 63 min of dialysate can be
collected per 1 m length at 2 μL/min, with retention of temporal information. This allows sections of dialysate to be analysed at a later
date. Figure 2 shows the raw data of dialysate collected as the microdialysis probe was removed from the tissue. The dialysate had been
stored at 4 °C for 10 days before analysis, yet we can see stable levels, which fade to zero in both the glucose and lactate graphs at the
correct time probe removal.Fig. 2Raw data from dialysate collected during surgery into a collection tubing. The probe was removed from the
tissue during collection. The dialysate was stored for 10 days at 4 °C and analysed using rsMD. The data shown have had no noise removal
algorithms applied. The top graph shows glucose data and the bottom graph shows lactate data Raw data from dialysate collected during
surgery into a collection tubing. The probe was removed from the tissue during collection. The dialysate was stored for 10 days at 4 °C and
analysed using rsMD. The data shown have had no noise removal algorithms applied. The top graph shows glucose data and the bottom graph
shows lactate data One of the main problems was to bridge the sterility barrier from the patient to the analysis system during the often
lengthy periods of surgery. The microdialysis probe and perfusion solution are both sterile, however, our analysis system and connection
tubing are not. To overcome this, we use a sterilised tubular polyethylene camera drape. This allows the non-sterile equipment (CMA
microdialysis pump and connection tubing) to be placed inside the drape and close to the patient without the worry of contamination.
Ablative surgery, to remove the tumour, was completed and the flap was raised concurrently. Prior to division of the blood vessels (creating
a free flap), a CMA70 microdialysis probe (MDialysis, Solna, Sweden, 10 mm membrane, 20 kDa cut-off) was inserted and secured subcutaneously
into the flap using a suture at the hard plastic union (avoiding the soft concentric tubes); a photograph can be seen in Fig. 1a. The probe
was perfused with sterile T1 solution (MDialysis) at 2 μL/min. Prior to detachment of the flap, baseline dialysate levels of glucose and
lactate were recorded. A vasodilator, papaverine, was then applied topically to the blood vessels, increasing blood flow to the tissue. The
microdialysis probe remained connected with online analysis as the flap was detached and moved to the donor site. The free flap artery was
anastomosed to the facial artery first, followed by the vein and then reconstruction of the recipient site. The patients were transferred to
the ICU and kept sedated and ventilated overnight. rsMD was continued for a 10-h period before the microdialysis probe was removed. The
glucose and lactate levels were recorded, with routine flap observations (colour, temperature and turgidity) carried out in addition. Of the
five cases monitored to date, two cases will be described in detail, highlighting key events during surgery. The glucose and lactate levels
throughout surgery of a 39-year-old male presenting a carcinoma of the tongue are shown in Fig. 3. Ten minutes after probe insertion,
baseline dialysate levels stabilised to 1.26 ± 0.03 mM glucose and 0.57 ± 0.02 mM lactate (n = 10). These values are lower than the better-
perfused bowel (2.77 ± 0.57 mM glucose, 0.77 ± 0.17 mM lactate) but much higher than the brain (glucose typically ranges from 0.3 to 0.7 mM
and lactate baseline levels range from 0.4 to 0.7 mM) where blood flow is tightly regulated.Fig. 3Analysis of data collected during free
flap surgery. The top graph (blue) shows the lactate/glucose ratio. The bottom graph shows glucose (red) and lactate (green) levels
throughout the reconstructive surgery. Time zero is the time from stable baseline (10 min after probe insertion). The dotted lines indicate
key events logged as communicated by the surgeons to the monitoring team in real time Analysis of data collected during free flap surgery.
The top graph (blue) shows the lactate/glucose ratio. The bottom graph shows glucose (red) and lactate (green) levels throughout the
reconstructive surgery. Time zero is the time from stable baseline (10 min after probe insertion). The dotted lines indicate key events
logged as communicated by the surgeons to the monitoring team in real time Before detachment of the flap from the forearm, a vasodilator,
papaverine, was applied to the blood vessels. After application, the levels of both glucose and lactate increased. Most probably, this is
due to an increase in the blood volume to the tissue that the probe is sampling from. As the changes of glucose and lactate are in the same
direction, they could be due to a transient change in the efficiency of microdialysis probe recovery . To control for this, and hence
simplify the analytical measurement, a ratio of the two metabolites has been used. The lactate/glucose ratio does not change during the
application of papaverine, indicating the same percentage increase in both lactate and glucose reflecting a change in probe recovery. When
the flap was detached, by division of the blood vessels (just after 1 h in Fig. 3), the dialysate glucose concentration fell and the lactate
concentration increased. This change in levels in opposite directions is a reliable microdialysis signature . This is reflected in the near
exponential rise in the lactate/glucose ratio seen after the artery has been clamped and severed. Upon successful arterial anastomosis
(reconnection of the arterial supply to the free flap in its transferred position in the oral cavity, at 1.8 h in Fig. 3), the arterial
clamp is released and a check is made in any leak at the anastomosis site and that blood visibly flows into the flap and flows out of the
veins. Once blood flow is reconfirmed, all the clamps are re-applied. We observed a rapid rise in dialysate glucose concentration to
1.75 ± 0.14 mM (n = 10), within 11 min. The raw data for this event are shown in Fig. 1d. The lactate level was maintained for 7 min before
returning to an elevated baseline (0.78 ± 0.01 mM, n = 10). This may represent the fact that lactate is neither being utilised nor cleared
efficiently by local blood flow. Although levels return to near baseline, signs of a second ischaemia developed within 30 min, albeit the
concentration changes of glucose and lactate were not as large. This is most clearly seen in the lactate/glucose ratio. Once the venous
anastomosis has been completed (at 2.75 h in Fig. 3), all of the clamps are removed and the second ischaemia is relieved, seen as a fall in
lactate/glucose ratio, a product of the sharp rise in glucose and delayed fall in lactate dialysate levels. Therefore, we conclude that a
ratiometric approach to monitoring tissue ischaemia gives a strong indicator of flap health compared to the evaluation of individual
metabolites. Furthermore, the excellent signal to noise of the lactate/glucose ratio makes it a robust predictor of the on-set of ischaemia
that is suitable for real-time clinical use. The patient was transferred to ICU where monitoring was continued (Fig. 4). The levels of both
glucose and lactate are higher at the beginning of this monitoring period than at the end of surgery. However, there is a clear trend of
falling lactate concentration and rising glucose levels. Over the 10 h that the flap was monitored in the ICU, the lactate/glucose ratio was
seen to steadily fall to the level it was before the flap was raised from the forearm. The tissue reconstruction was successful by normal
clinical indicators.Fig. 4Analysis of data collected during ICU monitoring. The top graph shows the lactate/glucose ratio. The bottom graph
shows the glucose (red) and lactate (green) levels Analysis of data collected during ICU monitoring. The top graph shows the lactate/glucose
ratio. The bottom graph shows the glucose (red) and lactate (green) levels Figure 5 shows two extracts of glucose and lactate levels and the
ratio of a more complicated surgery of a 47-year-old male, where muscle and bone from the leg were used to reconstruct the jaw. Baseline
levels of glucose and lactate were 2.05 ± 0.36 (n = 10) and 5.55 ± 0.60 mM (n = 10), respectively.Fig. 5Two extracts from one surgery
showing (a) a failed anastomosis and (b) a successful anastomosis in terms of lactate (green), glucose (red) and the lactate/glucose ratio
(blue). Time zero is the time of connection, conveyed by the surgeons and recorded in real time Two extracts from one surgery showing (a) a
failed anastomosis and (b) a successful anastomosis in terms of lactate (green), glucose (red) and the lactate/glucose ratio (blue). Time
zero is the time of connection, conveyed by the surgeons and recorded in real time As with case study 1, after detachment of the flap, the
tissue concentration of glucose fell and the lactate/glucose ratio increased indicating tissue ischaemia. Upon the first attempt at
anastomosis (both arterial and venous), the changes in the level of glucose were much smaller than that of case study 1. The levels of
glucose and lactate remain on their downward and upward trends, respectively, which is more clearly shown by a continuation of an upward
trend in the lactate/glucose ratio as shown in Fig. 5a. This demonstrates the unsuccessful reperfusion of blood through the free flap
tissue. Upon investigation, large blood clots were found at all anastomosis sites and later an undetected rare blood disorder was confirmed.
The patient was then thrombolysed and the anastomosis was re-attempted with success (shown in Fig. 5b). Here, the glucose concentration
dramatically increases from 0.32 ± 0.02 mM (n = 10) to 4.85 ± 0.48 mM (n = 10) whilst the lactate levels are slower to change. The
successful reperfusion is shown most clearly in the lactate/glucose ratio, which falls dramatically from 17.19 ± 0.44 (n = 10) to
0.77 ± 0.07 (n = 10). These data highlight the reliability of the monitoring system for online and real-time detection of successful
reperfusion during surgery. Once the patient was transferred to ICU, monitoring continued for 10 h. During this time, the level of glucose
dropped from 4.41 ± 0.08 mM (n = 10) to 0.21 ± 0.002 mM (n = 10) and the lactate/glucose ratio gradually increased from 1.10 ± 0.02 (n = 10)
to 11.44 ± 0.26 (n = 10). Some time after microdialysis monitoring was ceased, the flap failed, and at this later date, further surgical
intervention was required. An overview of the dialysate levels of glucose and lactate and the lactate/glucose ratio throughout these two
patient cases is shown in Fig. 6. A Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test has tested for changes from the baseline within each case (before the blood
supply to the tissue had been cut) to three clear points throughout the monitoring period, detachment of the flap, full successful
reconnection and the levels in ICU. All changes show high significance indicating that monitoring these key metabolic markers during free
flap and reconstructive surgery has potential to evaluate the ‘health’ of the tissue in real time. In both cases when the blood supply to
the flap is disconnected, the lactate/glucose ratio clearly increases. This change is much harder to see from assessment of the glucose and
lactate data taken individually, although the levels of glucose in the dialysate seem to be more responsive to, and therefore more
indicative of, tissue perfusion. When the tissue has successfully been reconnected, again it is clear to see the trends in both the
lactate/glucose ratio and the level of dialysate glucose reverse. In ICU, case 1 shows no complications, with a higher level of dialysate
glucose than the baseline and a low lactate/glucose ratio. Whilst at the end of monitoring of case 1, the flap was successful, and few days
after microdialysis monitoring ceased, the flap failed and further surgery was required. This may explain the low dialysate glucose levels
and high lactate/glucose ratio seen.Fig. 6Histograms highlighting key moments during rsMD monitoring: (i) Baseline. (ii) Flap detached.
(iii) Flap reattached. (iv) Levels at the end of monitoring in ICU. A Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test was used to assess the changes from
baseline within each case Histograms highlighting key moments during rsMD monitoring: (i) Baseline. (ii) Flap detached. (iii) Flap
reattached. (iv) Levels at the end of monitoring in ICU. A Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test was used to assess the changes from baseline within
each case We have successfully monitored the metabolic health of a free flap, in real time, during and after free flap reconstructive
surgery, using rsMD. The potential value of these measurements to reconstructive surgeons is exciting. rsMD offers a considerable advantage
over offline microdialysis because of the inherent time delays that necessarily occur with the latter technique. Using a lactate/glucose
ratiometric approach is a strong indicator of tissue health, as it is insensitive to flow and recovery artefacts, leaving a clear and easily
interpretable predictor of ischaemia. In the exemplar cases, we can clearly see ischaemia on-set following both arterial occlusion and
failure of venous drainage, the two most common causes of flap failure. Unsuccessful anastomosis during surgery is shown to be easily
distinguishable to that of successful anastomosis and tissue reperfusion. We have also demonstrated, in real time, the effects of topically
applied drugs (papaverine). The research applications for further study of the real-time metabolic changes that occur during free flap
harvest, detachment and re-vascularisation are many. From the patients monitored to date, there is considerable variability in the tissue
levels and responses between patients due to many co-variates such as age, sex, underlying health issues, etc. as well as effectiveness of
the microdialysis sampling. Full statistical analysis will require a larger cohort. From these preliminary data, the relative changes in
glucose, lactate and particularly the lactate/glucose ratio within a patient data set clearly show dynamic trends that reflect tissue
health. Future work includes monitoring a larger cohort of patients for full clinical analysis. On-going optimisation using new
technologies, such as a microfluidic manifold with incorporated electrochemical sensors , will only improve the system and the quality of
the results further still. M.L. Rogers and P.A. Brennan have contributed equally to this work. We are grateful to Mr. Paul Collinson and
Prospect Diagnostics, Derby, UK for supplying the microdialysis catheters. We thank the EPSRC, Imperial BRC, BBSRC and the Wellcome Trust
for funding.
