Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection is the most common cause of hospitalization in infants and small children. The aim was to
present a 13-months old boy diagnosed with acute airway infection, acute otitis media (AOM) and hepatitis during the RSV-infection. Serum
catalytic activities of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), aspartate aminotranspherase (AST), alanine aminotranspherase (ALT), gamma glutamyl
transpherase (GGT), lactate dehydrogenase (LD), and concentrations of bilirubin were monitored during hospitalization and at control
examination. The child had clinical signs and symptoms of respiratory failure, AOM, and laboratory findings of virus infection and liver
disease. On admission, catalytic activities of enzymes were markedly increased, especially the activity of ALP (10333 U/L, i.e. 24-fold
increase in comparison with the upper reference limit). The highest increased in AST (339 U/L, 4.5-fold), ALT (475 U/L, 10.3-fold) and LD
(545 U/L, 1.5-fold) were registered on the 3rd day, and the highest increase in GGT (68 U/L, 3.1-fold) occurred on the 11th day. Seven weeks
after discharge AST, ALT, GGT and LD decreased into reference range, and ALP remain mildly increased (478 U/L, 1.1 fold increase). RSV was
confirmed in nasal lavage fluid. Laboratory results in patient with RSV infection needs to be interpreted in the light of both, respiratory
and extrapulmonary manifestations of the infection, respectively. Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection is the most common cause of
hospitalization for pneumonia and bronchiolitis in infants and small children (1). Epidemiological study concerning Zagreb County have shown
that RSV-caused bronchiolitis has been registered in 52.7% of children who were hospitalized due to acute respiratory infection (2). The
study confirmed biennial cycle of RSV outbreaks (3). Mainly, bronchiolitis occurs in infants and small children up to two years of age.
Bronchiolitis is seasonal illness (in the winter months), as RSV is widespread in the community. It is characterized by fever, nasal
discharge, dry wheezy cough (the later because of small airway obstruction) (1). Infants and small children who are born prematurely (≤ 37
weeks) and children with cardiac disease are more susceptible to severe disease and have higher rates of hospitalization (4). Recently,
extrapulmonary manifestations (central nervous system, cardiovascular system, endocrine system and liver) of RSV-infection are described
(5). The aim of this paper was to present a 13-months-old male child with clinical signs and symptoms of airway infection and acute otitis
media (AOM), and laboratory findings of liver disease during RSV-infection. We present a case of a 13-month old boy, born at full term by
Caesarean section, admitted to daily hospital department for the management of acute respiratory infection. The disease started ten days ago
with productive cough. Febrility appeared four days before admission. On examination, the child was febrile (38.9 °C, axilary), had an
impression of acute, moderately ill child. Mucosal secretion and nasal congestion were found by rhynoscopy. Pharyngeal mucosa was moderately
hyperemic. Respiration rate was 40 breaths per minute. Bronchial breath sounds over the large airways and light wheezing were registered.
Normal results on a pulse oximetry were registered (i.e. levels above 96% oxygenated haemoglobin). Signs and symptoms of pneumonia were not
presented. Otoscopy has shown prominent and hyperemic right eardrum. Auscultatory, heart sounds were normal. Some angular lymph nodes were
enlarged (diameter up to 5 mm), elastic and movable. Liver edge was palpable just below right costal margin. Finally, diagnoses of acute
rhinopharingitis, acute rhinitis, obstructive bronchitis and right-side otitis media were confirmed. Serial determination of haematological
and biochemical parameters were performed during hospitalization. The patient was treated with salbutamol inhalations, decongestans and
antipyretics. Salbutamol (0.15 mg/kg) was administered through nebulizer, according to the GINA guidelines (GINA, Global Initiative for
Asthma) (7). Side effects of salbutamol therapy were not registered. In addition, respiratory physiotherapy and airway toilet were
performed. After 11 days, the patient was discharged with normal clinical status for home care. Control physical examination and laboratory
testing were performed on day 49 of the admission to daily hospital. The patient’s mother signed the informed consent form prior to
admission to daily hospital. Diagnostic work-up was performed according to the standardized procedure, in line with ethical principles,
Helsinki Declaration on Human Rights from 1975 and Seoul amendments from 2008. Determination of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), aspartate
aminotranspherase (AST), alanine aminotranspherase (ALT), gamma glutamyltrans pherase (GGT), lactate dehydrogenase (LD), bilirubin,
C-reactive protein (CRP) and iron in serum were performed on Beckman Coulter AU 400 analyzer with original commercial reagents (Beckman
Coulter, Munich, Germany) according to the recommended/harmonized methods (6). Erithrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was performed using the
centrifugal laboratory analyzer Vesmatic 20 (DIESSE Diagnostics, S. Martino, Italija). Sysmex 1800i automated hematology analyzer (Sysmex
Corporation, Kobe, Japan) was used for the determination of leukocyte count. Nasal wash kit has been used in the collection of nasal washing
for RSV antigen isolation and detection (direct testing for RSV antigen). Dynamic changes of laboratory findings occurred during serial
monitoring (Table 1). At admission, catalytic activity of ALP was markedly elevated (10333 U/L, i.e. 24.3-fold elevation in comparison with
the upper reference value of 425 U/L). Thereafter, it decreased to 8640 U/L (at day 3; 84% of initial value), to 3080 U/L (at day 11; 30% of
initial value), and finally to 478 U/L (at day 49; 5% of initial value). The highest increased in AST (339 U/L, 4.5-fold), ALT (475 U/L,
10.3-fold) and LD (545 U/L, 1.5-fold) were registered on the 3rd day, and the highest increase in GGT (68 U/L, 3.1-fold) occurred on the
11th day. Seven weeks after discharge AST, ALT, GGT and LD decreased into reference range, and ALP remained mildly increased (478 U/L,
1.1-fold increase). During acute illness De Ritis quotient remained < 1, and at control testing it increased at normal value, i.e. 1.09. All
the time concentrations of bilirubin remain decreased (bellow lower reference value for age, i.e. < 6 μmol/L). During hospitalization,
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, ESR, remained increased. Leukocyte count, as well as the concentration of C-reactive protein, was into
reference range. In addition, initial values of IgG (9.3 g/L) and IgA (0.47 g/L) were less than upper limit of the reference range for age,
and IgM (1.48 g/L) was moderately increased (upper limit = 1.43 g/L). RSV was confirmed in nasal lavage fluid. Transient increase in
catalytic activities of ALP, AST, ALT, GGT and LD revealed that the acute hepatitis may appear during the RSV-infection. According to our
knowledge this is the first overview of markedly (24-fold) increased ALP during RSV-infection in children. Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
is medium-sized enveloped RNA paramyxovirus (8). In community, it spreads by direct contact, and replicates in nasopharingeal epithelium. In
the next few days it spreads to respiratory epithelial cells of lower respiratory system. The transit of RSV to distant organs takes place
haematogenously (9). The most studies on RSV-infections are related to pulmonary diseases. During RSV-infection, children up to two years of
age have a high risk of concomitant acute AOM as a complication (10). In a systemic review, Eisenhut had point out to extrapulmonary
manifestations of RSV-infections, especially in patients with severe clinical presentation (5). However, our patient was moderately ill, and
extrapulmonary manifestations of viral infection were not expected. The fact that RSV-infection has shown the biennial cycle (3) enables the
prospective planning of measures to control infection. In 2009, the American Association of Pediatrics (APP) has published a modified
recommendations for the prevention of RSV-infection, using a humanized monoclonal antibody (directed against an epitope of RSV), Palivizumab
(11). It is approved for the prevention of RSV disease in children up to 24 months, who are at high-risk because of prematurity and
prematurity-associated lung diseases or congenital heart diseases. Catalytic activites of enzymes and De Ritis quotient in our patient were
typical for acute hepatitis (12). So, the present case report presents at least two issues for discussion: 1) concomitant infection with
hapatotrophic viruses, eg. Epstein-Barr virus-infection, citomegalovirus (CMV)-infection, or influenca-virus, and 2) drug-side-effect,
respectively. Hepatitis is common characteristics of viral infections, eg. Epstein-Barr virus-infection (13), CMV (14), or influenca-virus
(15). So, it may be presumed that a similar pathomechanism of “collateral damage” of the hepatocytes could cause RSV-associated hepatitis.
As the child has been febrile four days before admission, and was treated with antipyretics, transitory increase in catalytic activities of
enzymes may be explained as side-effect of antipyretic medication. In children, acetaminophen (paracetamol) is often used for antipyresis,
and it may cause transitory acute liver impairment (16). Eisenhut et al. have shown aminotranspherases to be increased in children with RSV-
infection (17). Moreover, elevation of aminotranspherases (with peak value between two and four days after admission) due to hepatitis in
these children was in correlation with the severity of respiratory disease (18), and increased ALT of nearly 3000 U/L was associated with
severe hepatitis (5). The peak values of aminotranspherases and LD in the present study were registered at the 3rd day after admission to
daily hospital. The half-life of ALP is referred to be between 5 and 25 days (12). Benign transient hyperphosphatasemia (BTH) may appear
during the season of viral infections (19–21). Our previous investigation revealed that both, bacterial and viral infections may be a direct
cause of BTH (22). In that study, children with bacterial respiratory infection had higher ALP values than children with viral infections.
However, in children with BTH there is no evidence of metabolic bone or liver disease. Increased catalytic activity of ALP is isolated and
transient laboratory finding (23), and it returns into reference interval within four months (19). In patients with BTH, ALP may have
10-fold increase. In our previous study, values of ALP were in the range 528–5622 U/L (22), and Dori et al. have shown ALP values to be in
the range 805–8619 U/L (24). Values of ALP over 10000 U/L are very rare in BTH – one case with 11900 U/L has been registered by Eyman et al.
(25). Markedly increase of ALP at the admission in the child with hepatitis in the present paper has shown significant decrease at the 3rd
day. It means that RSV-infection may cause short-time increase of ALP at the very beginning of hepatitis. As liver biopsy is too aggressive
and not ethically justified, determination of cytoxine and chemokine may be useful in assessment of the severity of RSV infection. Cepika
A-M et al. have shown that low expression of chemokine receptor CX3 CR1 and perforin in peripheral blood had been linked to a more severe
RSV-disease presentation in infants (26). In addition, cytokine polymorphisms have been associated with severity of rhinovirus or RSV
infection as well as the frequency of AOM as a complication (27). Oxidative stress contributes to the pathogenesis of lung inflammatory
diseases (28). During infection-associated oxidative stress, human cells are exposed to high concentration of reactive oxygen species, ROS
(29). In vitro and in vivo investigations have shown that RSV infection induces production of ROS (30). Moderately increased concentrations
of serum bilirubin may improve outcome of disease. Since circulating bilirubin is considered to be an endogenous anti-oxidant (31), low
serum bilirubin in our patient may reveal that oxidant - anti-oxidant balance has been impaired. Signs and symptoms of respiratory
manifestations and symptoms of AOM due to RSV infections disappear in about two weeks. However, the recovery phase of hepatitis during RSV-
infection may last for weeks. Therefore catalytic activities of liver enzymes should be monitored until they return into reference range.
The main limitation of this case study is that ALP isoenzymes have not been identified. Therefore it is not clear whether markedly increased
ALP is the consequence of the mechanism of transient hyperphosphatasemia or the mechanism of RSV-induced hepatitis. Additional serious
limitation to this work is lack of proof that the liver function impairment was caused by RSV. Laboratory results in patients with RSV
infection needs to be interpreted in the light of both, respiratory and extrapulmonary manifestations of the infection, respectively.
Potential conflict of interest None declared. Results of laboratory analyses during hospital treatment (day 1, 3 and 11) and after home
treatment (day 49). ALP - alkaline phosphatase; AST - aspartate aminotranspherase; ALT - alanine aminotranspherase; GGT - gamma
glutamyltranspherase; LD - lactate dehydrogenase; De Ritis quotient = AST/ALT ratio
