G. Dapri is a consultant for Karl Storz-Endoskope (Tuttlingen, Germany). The other authors have no conflict of interest. The authors report
that giant hepatic cysts can be removed by single-access laparoscopy and curved reusable instruments. Single-access laparoscopy has garnered
growing interest in recent years in an attempt to improve cosmesis, reduce postoperative pain, and minimize abdominal wall trauma. A female
patient suffering from a symptomatic giant biliary cyst of the liver segments 4-7-8 was admitted for transumbilical single-access
laparoscopic cyst unroofing. The procedure was performed using a standard 11-mm reusable trocar for a 10-mm, 30°- angled, rigid scope and
curved reusable instruments inserted transumbilically without trocars. Operative time was 90 minutes, and the final incision length was 14
mm. The use of minimal pain medication permitted discharge on the third postoperative day, and after 25 months, the patient remains
asymptomatic with a no visible umbilical scar. Giant biliary cysts can be removed by single-access laparoscopy. Because of this technique,
surgeons work in ergonomic positions, and the cost of the procedure remains similar to that of the multitrocar technique. The incision
length and the use of pain medication are kept minimal as well. Since the advent of laparoscopy, the removal of liver lesions using
minimally invasive techniques had been reported to be feasible and safe.1–3 Because of laparoscopy, the postoperative pain, the hospital
stay, and the abdominal trauma can be reduced, besides an improved comfort of the patient. Furthermore, the laparoscopic technique has also
the advantage of minimal scarring and fewer adhesions, thereby increasing the feasibility of repeat liver resection.4 Single-incision,
single-port, single-site, or single-access laparoscopy (SAL) has garnered growing interest in recent years, in an attempt to minimize the
abdominal wall trauma, to reduce postoperative pain, and to overall improve the cosmetic outcomes.5 Nonparasitic liver cysts are usually
asymptomatic, but abdominal pain due to their enlargement,6 physical signs such as obstructive jaundice,7 complications such as rupture8 or
intracystic hemorrhage,9 can occur during follow-up. Hence, surgical treatment may be recommended mainly to relieve symptoms or to prevent
potential complications. However, a relatively low rate of risk for recurrence has been reported.6,10–12 Preoperative consideration based on
patient age, habitus, cystic size, aspect, and liver segment location is necessary. Fenestration or unroofing nonparasitic cysts has been
first described in open surgery in 196813 and by laparoscopy in 1991.14–15 Recently, because of the growing popularity of other minimally
invasive techniques, SAL has been proposed. Cyst unroofing may be a good candidate for SAL because no sophisticated laparoscopic maneuvers,
such as Pringle maneuver or hepatic vein clamps are necessary, rendering this procedure easier to be performed. We report a SAL biliary cyst
unroofing performed completely through the umbilicus, in a patient presenting with a symptomatic giant cyst of the liver segments 4-7-8. A
53-year-old female with a body mass index of 20.8 kg/m2 was referred for a symptomatic pain in the right upper quadrant. The patient had no
history of previous surgery, and she was undergoing medical therapy for arterial hypertension. The chest X-ray showed a minimal elevation of
the right diaphragmatic dome, and the abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a simple biliary cyst 15cm x 14cm in diameter in the
apex of the liver segments 4-7-8, besides to polycystic liver and kidneys (Figure 1). Preoperative abdominal CT scan. Transumbilical single-
access laparoscopic giant biliary cyst unroofing was proposed to the patient. An incision in the umbilicus was realized, a 1-cm opening in
the fascia was created, and a 1 polydiaxone (PDS) purse-string suture was placed in the fascia. An 11-mm reusable trocar was inserted inside
the purse-string suture, and pneumoperitoneum was created. A 10-mm, 30°-angled, rigid, standard-length scope (Karl Storz-Endoskope,
Tuttlingen, Germany), and curved reusable instruments (Karl Storz-Endoskope, Tuttlingen, Germany) were used. The curved instruments were
advanced transumbilically without trocars. The curved grasping forceps III (Figure 2a), kept in the surgeon's nondominant hand, was inserted
through a separate window outside the purse-string suture at the 10 o'clock position. The other curved instruments for the surgeon's
dominant hand, such as the coagulating hook (Figure 2b), the bipolar scissors (Figure 2c), and the suction device, were inserted inside the
purse-string suture and besides the 11-mm trocar at the 3 o'clock position (Figure 3). a, 2b, and 2c. Curved reusable instruments according
to DAPRI: grasping forceps III (a), coagulating hook (b), bipolar scissors (c) (courtesy of Karl Storz-Endoskope, Tuttlingen, Germany).
Placement of curved instruments, scope, and purse-string suture through the umbilical incision. The cystic dome was identified and incised
enough to empty the cystic cavity with the suction device. Because of this maneuver, a nonconnection between the biliary cyst and the
biliary tree was evidenced. A complete excision of the cystic roof was performed using coagulating hook and bipolar scissors. Because of the
curves of the instruments, the classic working triangulation during laparoscopy was established inside the abdomen, and surgeon was able to
work in ergonomic positions during the entire procedure (Figures 4a and 4b). A custom-made plastic bag was introduced into the abdomen
through the 11-mm trocar, and the tissue specimen was placed inside and removed transumbilically. The cystic cavity was finally checked for
bleeding and was left open without an omental patch. The gallbladder was not removed, and the procedure ended with the removal of the
instruments and trocar under view. A meticulous closure of the umbilical fascia and of the separate window for the grasper was performed, to
avoid development of incisional hernia. a and 4b. Single-access cystic roof excision (a) performed under ergonomic position (b). Total
operative time (between skin incision and closure of the fascia) was 90 minutes, and laparoscopic time (between beginning of
pneumoperitoneum and removal of the instruments and trocar) was 81 minutes. Blood loss was limited to 50mL and no additional trocars needed
to be inserted. The final umbilical scar was 14mm in length. Pathological examination showed a benign, simple biliary cyst. Use of minimal
pain medication permitted the discharge of the patient on the third postoperative day. After 25 months, the patient remains asymptomatic,
without recurrence, and the umbilical scar is not visible. Laparoscopic surgery with the advent of SAL frequently bypasses one of its rules,
which is working in triangulation with the scope at the bisector of this angle.16 An option for obtaining working triangulation inside the
abdomen can be offered by the use of articulating instruments, which permit achieving this principle at the usual cost of the surgeon
crossing either hands or the instruments' tips. Alternatively, the use of curved instruments can establish the classic laparoscopic working
triangulation both internally and externally (Figure 5a, 5b, and 5c), and the surgeon maintains ergonomic positions. The concept of the
curved instruments is based on the straight classic instruments (a) of the triangulation angle, both externally (b) and inside the abdominal
cavity (c). No specific ports and only 1 conventional reusable 11-mm trocar for the optical system and a transumbilical insertion of the
instruments without trocars are used in this specific SAL technique. Thus, a technique to avoid loss of the pneumoperitoneum is adopted and
consisted in the placement of a purse-string suture in the umbilical fascia and insertion of the instrument (eg, the grasper) for the
surgeon's nondominant hand outside the suture, through a separate fascia window. The grasper is never changed during the entire procedure,
whereas the other instruments for the surgeon's dominant hand (eg, the coagulating hook, bipolar scissors, and the suction device) are
continuously changed. Hence, they are introduced inside the purse-string suture and alongside the 11-mm trocar. The purse-string suture is
sufficiently tied to avoid loss of the pneumoperitoneum and opened only to allow the instruments to be changed, or to evacuate the smoke
created during the dissection. An 11-mm trocar is used because it allows the maintenance of pneumoperitoneum during the entire procedure and
the use of a 10-mm 30°-angled scope. Another possibility is the use of a 5-mm flexible scope (EndoEye camera system, Olympus Medical
Systems, Tokyo, Japan), which simultaneously permits an increase in the space between the hands of the cameraman and the surgeon outside of
the access,17 but a remaining problematic factor is the concomitant reduction of the magnified quality of the image. In the technique
described here, the umbilical fascia opening for the 11-mm trocar and for the surgeon's dominant hand instruments allows the specimen to be
removed without enlarging the opening or necessitating replacement by a larger trocar.17 Furthermore, because of this simple approach, the
length of the umbilical scar remains similar to the incision realized for a conventional 12-mm trocar; otherwise, an increased incision
length is required for the insertion of multiple trocars through the same incision17 or through the same port-device.5,18 Another advantage
of the technique reported here is the cost of the procedure, which appears to be the same as multitrocar laparoscopy, because all of the
materials utilized are reusable. Here, we have reported a case that was feasible for transumbilical SAL, but appropriate selection based on
patient age, habitus, cystic size, aspect, and liver segment location is necessary to decrease the incidence of additional trocars'
insertion or the conversion to laparotomy. Obviously, if some perioperative complications occur, such as uncontrolled bleeding or biliary
spillage, the insertion of 1 or more additional trocars is mandatory. The use of percutaneous stitches19 or introduction of millimetric wire
are alternative options to help in the cystic dome retraction20 or operative field exposure.21 Technically, we emptied the cyst at the
beginning of the procedure, permitting a precise resection of the cystic dome margin under simple tissue retraction by the grasper. We use
to perform these types of liver resections by either coagulating hook or bipolar scissors also during multitrocar laparoscopy, hence we
adopted the same strategy in SAL. However other instruments such as harmonic shears (Ethicon Endosurgery, Cincinnati, OH)20,22 or a LigaSure
device (Covidien New Haven, CT)17 can be used. In contrast to other authors,17 we did not place a transumbilical drain at the end of the
procedure, to avoid possible umbilical incisional hernia formation during follow-up. If a drain has to be left in the cavity, better would
be to make a second incision in the abdomen, which can also be used from the beginning of the procedure for an additional instrument (eg,
needlescopic grasper). We recorded a total operative time of 90 minutes, including the time needed to create the open access of the cavity,
the placement of the purse-string suture in the fascia, and the final closure of this latter. Our operative time remains in the interval
time reported in the literature during multitrocar laparoscopic liver cyst unroofing11,23 and comparable to the 60–100 minutes reported
during SAL.5,17-18,20 Finally, we discharged the patient on the third postoperative day, which is 1 day earlier than that typically reported
with other SALs.5,18 Giant biliary cysts can be removed by SAL. Because of the use of curved reusable instruments, the classic laparoscopic
working triangulation is established inside the abdomen, and the surgeon works under external ergonomic positions. Due to this technique,
the cost of the procedure remains similar to that of multitrocar laparoscopy, and the incision length with the use of pain medication are
kept minimal as well.
