Geosmithia argillacea, an anamorph of Talaromyces eburneus, is a thermophilic filamentous fungus that has a phenotype similar to that of the
Penicillium species, except for the creamy-white colonies and cylindrical conidia. Recently, a new genus called Rasamsonia has been
proposed, which is to accommodate the Talaromyces and Geosmithia species. Here, we report the first Korean case of G. argillacea isolated
from a patient with a fungal ball. The patient was a 44-yr-old Korean man with a history of pulmonary tuberculosis and aspergilloma. The
newly developed fungal ball in his lung was removed and cultured to identify the fungus. The fungal colonies were white and slow-growing,
and the filaments resembled those of Penicillium. Molecular identification was carried out by sequencing the internal transcribed spacer
(ITS) region of the 28S rDNA and the β-tubulin genes. A comparative sequence analysis using the GenBank (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/)
database was performed with the basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) algorithm. The results revealed a 97-100% similarity with the G.
argillacea ITS sequence. This case should increase awareness among physicians about the pathogenic potential of G. argillacea in humans and
help them accurately identify this fungus, because it can be easily confused with Penicillium and Paecilomyces species owing to their
similar phenotypic and microscopic characteristics. A molecular approach should be employed to enable accurate identification of G.
argillacea. Geosmithia argillacea, an anamorph of Talaromyces eburneus, is a thermophilic filamentous fungus that was first described in
1969 as a Penicillium sp. . The genus Geosmithia was proposed by Pitt . After comparison of the D1/D2 region of the 28S rDNA, Yaguchi et al.
concluded that Geosmithia eburnea (as Talaromyces eburneus) is a teleomorph of G. argillacea. Recently, a new genus Rasamsonia was
established, which comprises both thermotolerant Talaromyces and thermophilic Geosmithia species . Although its natural habitat remains
unknown, airway colonization by G. argillacea has recently been reported in a few patients with cystic fibrosis who had previously received
treatment with itraconazole with or without voriconazole [5, 6]. Intrinsically multidrug-resistant G. argillacea isolates may emerge as a
cause of disseminated infections in chronic granulomatous disease patients receiving long-term azole therapy . Moreover, a disseminated G.
argillacea infection has also been reported in a patient with gastrointestinal graft-versus-host disease . In Korea, there has been no
previous report on G. argillacea infections. Here, we report a rare case of G. argillacea colonization as an intracavitary fungal ball in a
patient with a history of pulmonary tuberculosis. The isolate was identified by comparative sequence analysis of its internal transcribed
spacer (ITS) region and β-tubulin genes. A 44-yr-old Korean man with recurrent pulmonary infection was admitted to the hospital for elective
lung surgery. He was diagnosed with pulmonary tuberculosis at the age of 18; subsequently, he received antituberculous therapy and was
cured. However, hemoptysis occurred 4 yr later due to the development of pulmonary aspergilloma, and a right upper lobectomy was performed.
In July 2007, the hemoptysis recurred and nontuberculous Mycobacterium (NTM) species were detected in the sputum sample. The treatment for
this NTM infection lasted for 2 yr. In November 2009, on high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest, and a newly formed foreign
body, with features suggestive of an intracavitary fungal ball, was noted in his right lung. Mycobacterium tuberculosis was also detected in
the sputum sample, and he received antituberculous medication for 9 months. Several chest HRCT images taken between December 2010 and April
2011 revealed an increase in the size of the fungal ball, suggesting chronic necrotizing pulmonary aspergillosis (Fig. 1). Results of
laboratory investigations were as follows: hemoglobin, 12.4 g/dL; white blood cell count, 6.03×109/L (50% segmented neutrophils, 32%
lymphocytes, 16% monocytes, and 2% eosinophils). Serum electrolyte concentrations, liver function test results, and creatinine and glucose
levels were all within the reference ranges. The serum sample was strongly positive for antibodies to Aspergillus, as determined by an
enzyme immunoassay (>200 U/mL; positive cut-off: >12 U/mL). However, negative results were obtained for serum Aspergillus galactomannan.
After the administration of antifungal therapy (itraconazole), the lesion was surgically resected in April 2011. Wide-wedge resection of the
superior segment of the right lower lobe was performed along with the removal of the fungal ball. Simultaneously, lung tissue specimens were
obtained for culture and pathology. Pathological study of the lung tissue revealed that the fungal ball was composed of hyphae, and
therefore it was identified as an aspergilloma. Pathological evaluation revealed neither the presence of fungus in the lung parenchyma nor
any evidence of invasive mycosis. Lung tissue specimens were cultured on Sabouraud dextrose agar for 3 weeks, at a temperature of 30℃ for
the first 2 days, and at room temperature (25℃) thereafter. Species was identified according to macro- and micro-morphological criteria.
Macroscopic analysis revealed that the colonies formed were cream to beige in color, with no color on the reverse side (Fig. 2). Growth was
slow and restricted at room temperature, but was enhanced at 30℃, with colonies reaching 2-3 cm in diameter after 10 days at this
temperature. Microscopic analysis revealed the presence of hyaline, rough-walled, septate, and often-branched conidiophores (Fig. 3). These
conidiophores bore biverticillate- or triverticillate-asymmetrical penicilli and had phialides with a tapering tip that were parallel to the
axis. Conidia were smooth-walled, hyaline, and cylindrical to ellipsoidal. On the basis of these microscopic characteristics, it was assumed
that the fungal ball was composed of a species of Penicillium. However, the macroscopic features were not compatible with those of
Penicillium. Penicillium species are characterized by brush-shaped, round conidia and bluish-green colonies with a white border . On the
other hand, Paecilomyces was also excluded because the observed phialides were parallel to the axis of the conidiophores and were not bent
away from the axis. Most importantly, Penicillium and Paecilomyces grow rapidly at room temperature. Therefore, molecular identification was
performed by sequencing the ITS region and β-tubulin genes. The ITS region and the β-tubulin gene fragments were amplified and sequenced by
standard methods, according to the CLSI guidelines . This was followed by sequence comparison with the GenBank (NCBI)
(http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) database using the basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) algorithm. The BLAST search revealed that the
partial ITS sequence showed a 100% (420/420) similarity with that of the G. argillacea strain CGDGA6 (accession no. HQ246728.1, #475-56),
and a 97.1% (409/421) similarity with that of the G. argillacea type strain CBS 101.69 (accession no. JF417491.1, #497-79). Moreover, the
β-tubulin gene sequence showed a 99.8% (423/424) similarity with that of the G. argillacea DTO 49D4 strain (accession no. GU968696.1,
#1-424) and a 97.2% (424/436) similarity with that of the G. argillacea type strain CBS 101.69 (accession no. JF417491.1, #1-435). On the
basis of these results, we concluded that G. argillacea was the species that was most likely responsible for the formation of fungal ball. A
phylogenetic tree was constructed using the neighbor-joining method on the basis of the results of the comparative sequence analysis of the
ITS region (Fig. 4). Phylogenetic and molecular evolutionary analyses were conducted using the Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis
(MEGA) software version 5.0 (http://www.megasoftware.net) , and a subline related to Penicillium and Paecilomyces spp. was obtained, which
are both similar to G. argillacea in microscopic findings. Itraconazole was continued for another 2 months after surgery. Thereafter, the
patient had a favorable clinical course without recurrence of symptoms or sequelae. The first case of a G. argillacea infection was reported
in 2009 in a German shepherd dog . The pathogenic potential of G. argillacea in humans was first reported after it was detected in the
sputum of patients with cystic fibrosis in 2010 [5, 6, 13]. G. argillacea is now considered one of the many respiratory pathogens associated
with the pathophysiology of cystic fibrosis. It has been suggested that an immunocompromised state following lung transplantation might make
a patient susceptible to a severe G. argillacea infection . In 2011, various cases of invasive mycosis or disseminated diseases caused by G.
argillacea were reported in patients with chronic granulomatous disease [7, 14] and gastrointestinal graft-versus-host disease . These
findings strongly suggest that infection with this fungus could be more severe in immunocompromised patients than in immunocompetent
patients such as those with cystic fibrosis. In addition, multidrug resistant G. argillacea isolates may cause disseminated infections in
patients with chronic granulomatous disease who receive long-term azole therapy . The similarity in the phenotypic characteristics (e.g.,
thermophilicity) and microscopic morphology between G. argillacea and Penicillium species could be a barrier to the immediate and accurate
identification of this fungus. According to our fungal culture protocol, clinical specimens should be incubated at 30℃ for the first 2 days
and then at 25℃ on universal media (Sabouraud dextrose agar) for a maximum of 3 weeks. When incubated at room temperature (25℃), these
creamy-white colonies showed a reduced growth rate and no conidia development upon microscopic observation. Even after 3 weeks, this mold
could not be conclusively identified, but it was suspected to be a Penicillium species based on its microscopic morphology. When subcultured
at 30℃ for 10 days, this strain showed typical macroscopic/microscopic morphologic characteristics of G. argillacea. Therefore, changing the
culture conditions to those previously described would be helpful in accurate fungal identification, especially when the strain shows
limited growth after using the standard protocol. It has been suggested that the incidence of Geosmithia spp. isolation may be higher than
that reported because this fungus may have been incorrectly identified as Penicillium or Paecilomyces . This indicates that G. argillacea
could be a more common human pathogen than previously estimated. Some studies support the presumption and have used direct sequencing
methods to correctly implicate G. argillacea as the fungal pathogen in cases in which Paecilomyces variotii or unidentified isolates were
previously identified as the causative pathogens [15, 16]. These reports also strongly suggest that molecular methods are very useful in
fungal identification. Furthermore, antimicrobial susceptibility testing may be necessary to identify the appropriate treatment for a
disseminated infection in immunocompromised patients . However, there are still some limitations in the clinical implementation of
antimicrobial susceptibility testing. Previous studies have shown that the results of in vitro antifungal susceptibility testing are not
consistent with clinical responses . Moreover, breakpoints are yet to be recommended by CLSI or other regulatory agencies. Supplementary
studies to determine a relationship between clinical outcomes and antifungal susceptibility data are needed. Interestingly, the serum
Aspergillus antibody test was highly positive, but the serum Aspergillus galactomannan antigen test was negative. Before the fungus was
identified, the findings from the antigen and antibody tests were considered to be indicative of allergic aspergillosis without invasive
mycosis. After pulmonary aspergilloma had been ruled out, the positive Aspergillus antibody test was considered false positive due to
immunological responses . To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of isolation of G. argillacea in Korea. This case should
increase awareness among physicians about the pathogenic potential of G. argillacea in humans and will help them distinguish it from
Penicillium and/or Paecilomyces species, which have similar phenotypic and microscopic characteristics. G. argillacea can colonize to form a
fungal ball, manifesting as hemoptysis, especially in patients without underlying diseases (such as cystic fibrosis) that predispose them to
respiratory pathogens and in immunocompromised patients (such as post-transplantation). Notably, the patient had an unusual history of
recurrent pulmonary infections, including tuberculosis. An existing pulmonary cavity that was created during a previous lobectomy provided
space for the fungal ball to grow. Although there was no evidence of immuno deficiency providing vulnerability to infection, we cannot
exclude the possibility of the presence of a predisposing factor that promoted the colonization and/or infection by G. argillacea. Increased
awareness among clinicians and microbiologists is necessary for them to fully comprehend the implications of a G. argillacea infection and
understand the pathophysiology of this fungus. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. High resolution
computed tomographic image in April 2011 (arrows: a fungal ball). Colony morphology of the isolate. (A) Surface is creamy white. (B) Reverse
is off-white or brown. Microscopic morphology of Geosmithia argillacea (lactophenol cotton blue stain; left ×400, right ×1,000). Unrooted
neighbor-joining phylogenetic tree based on internal transcribed spacer region sequence of Geosmithia argillacea and morpholosically similar
organisms (The scale bar represents 5 nucleotides substitution per 1,000 nucleotides).
