We report a case of CTX-M-55-type extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing Shigella sonnei infection in a 27-year-old Korean woman who
had traveled to China. The patient was admitted to the hospital due to abdominal pain, watery diarrhea, and fever (39.3℃). S. sonnei was
isolated from her stool specimens, and the pathogen was found to be resistant to cefotaxime due to CTX-M-55-type ESBL. Insertion sequence
(IS)Ecp1 was found upstream of the blaCTX-M-55 gene. The blaCTX-M-55 gene was transferred from the S. sonnei isolate to an Escherichia coli
J53 recipient by conjugation. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis and Southern blotting revealed that the blaCTX-M-55 gene was located on a
plasmid of approximately 130 kb. Shigellosis is very rare in Korea, but people who travel to certain countries may acquire the infection.
The bacteria are excreted through feces and are transmitted by ingestion of contaminated food and water . To reduce the severity of the
clinical course of illness and the duration of fecal excretion of bacteria, the WHO recommends ciprofloxacin as the first-line treatment for
shigellosis [2, 3]. Ampicillin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole are no longer sufficiently effective due to increases in the bacterial
resistance to these drugs . Because of concerns regarding the adverse effects of ciprofloxacin in children and an increase in the resistance
to ciprofloxacin, third generation cephalosporins are frequently used as alternative treatments [2, 4]. However, Shigella species producing
CTX-M-type β-lactamase are frequently being reported in some parts of the world [1, 5-7]. CTX-M-type β-lactamase is one of the most common
extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBL), and it confers resistance to all β-lactams except cephamycins and carbapenems . The spread of CTX-M
type ESBL-producing Shigella species has become of concern worldwide because the increasing circulation of this resistant strain further
narrows the choice of effective antibiotics. In Korea, only CTX-M-14-producing Shigella sonnei have been reported . We report the isolation
of CTX-M-55-producing S. sonnei from a Korean woman who was admitted to the hospital due to abdominal pain, watery diarrhea, and fever
(39.3℃) immediately after having traveled to China. A 27-yr-old woman was admitted to the hospital with watery diarrhea, abdominal pain, and
fever (39.3℃) on the day of her return from a 4-day trip to China. Laboratory investigation showed a peripheral blood leukocyte count of
8.2×109/L with 80% polymorphonuclear cells and a C-reactive protein level of 107 mg/L. Stool samples were inoculated on MacConkey and SS
agar (BD Diagnostics Systems, Sparks, MD, USA) and incubated at 37℃ for 20 hr, and colorless medium-sized colonies developed. The bacterium
was identified as S. sonnei using the Vitek2 GN ID card (bioMérieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France); a positive slide agglutination test with a
Shigella serogroup D antiserum (Joong Kyeom Co., Anshan, Korea) confirmed the identification. The pathogen's antimicrobial susceptibility
was initially determined by the VITEK 2 AST N131 card (bioMérieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France). ESBL production was confirmed by the double disk
synergy test using cefotaxime (30 µg), ceftazidime (30 µg) and amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (20/10 µg) disks (BD Diagnostics Systems) .
Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were determined by the CLSI agar dilution method or by the Etest (AB bioMérieux, Solna, Sweden)
(Table 1). The isolate was resistant to cephalothin, aztreonam, and cefotaxime, but susceptible to cefoxitin and intermediate to
ceftazidime. The patient was treated with oral ciprofloxacin, after which her symptoms began to improve. She was discharged 4 days after
admission. To determine the genetic characteristics of the ESBL, PCR and sequencing were carried out as described previously . These
investigations identified the ESBL as being encoded by blaCTX-M-55, which is identical to blaCTX-M-57 . The blaCTX-M-55 gene and surrounding
regions were investigated by PCR and sequencing , and insertion sequence (IS)Ecp1 was found to be upstream of blaCTX-M-55. The blaCTX-M-55
gene was successfully transferred from the S. sonnei isolate to an Eecherichia coli J53 (azideR) recipient by plate mating. MacConkey agar
containing cefotaxime (2 µg/mL) and sodium azide (100 µg/mL) was used as the selective media. The β-lactam resistance patterns of the S.
sonnei isolate and the transconjugant were similar, but the MICs of ceftazidime and aztreonam for the transconjugant were increased 2-fold,
from 8 µg/mL and 24 µg/mL to 16 µg/mL and 48 µg/mL, respectively (Table 1). To estimate the size of the plasmid harboring blaCTX-M-55,
genomic DNA from S. sonnei isolate and its transconjugant were digested with S1 nuclease and separated by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis .
Southern blotting was performed on the agarose gels by in-gel hybridization with a blaCTX-M-55 probe labeled with digoxigenin (Roche
Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN, USA) . This experiment showed that blaCTX-M-55 was located on a plasmid of approximately 130 kb in each of
the strains (Fig. 1). Replicon typing of the plasmid by PCR was unsuccessful . CTX-M β-lactamases are plasmid-mediated ESBLs that are
typically found to have high hydrolytic activity against cefotaxime . During the last 2 decades, CTX-M β-lactamases have rapidly spread
though the world and 133 different CTX-M β-lactamases are now recognized . CTX-M-55 was first reported in ESBL-producing E. coli and
Klebsiella pneumoniae in Thailand during 2004 and 2005. That study reported 7 CTX-M-55-producing isolates (6 E. coli and 1 K. pneumoniae) .
Thereafter, CTX-M-55-producing Enterobacteriaceae isolates have been reported in both humans and animals in several countries [1, 19-23].
Interestingly, most of these studies have been conducted in China, which suggests that CTX-M-55-producing Enterobacteriaceae, including S.
sonnei, are widely disseminated throughout China . CTX-M-55 differs from CTX-M-15 only by a single amino acid substitution (valine for
alanine) at position 80 (Ala80Val). Therefore, CTX-M-55 is expected to have similar hydrolytic activity as CTX-M-15 and to exhibit increased
catalytic efficiency against ceftazidime as well as cefotaxime . Previous studies have reported that CTX-M-55-producing isolates generally
show high resistance to ceftazidime (MIC range from 32 to > 256 µg/mL) [13, 18, 25, 26]. However, 2 of 3 CTX-M-55-producing S. sonnei
isolates from China were susceptible to ceftazidime . Our isolate also had a relatively low MIC for ceftazidime (8 µg/mL), which was
classified as intermediate sensitivity according to the CLSI breakpoints . The blaCTX-M genes can be transferred to other bacteria more
readily than other plasmid-mediated bla genes because ISEcp1, which is frequently found upstream of the blaCTX-M genes, has an important
role in the mobilization and expression of blaCTX-M genes [23, 28]. In our isolate, the blaCTX-M-55 gene was flanked by ISEcp1 and both were
located on the plasmid. Tängdén et al. reported that 24 of the 100 travelers, who had been studied, had recently been infected with ESBL-
producing E. coli after a trip to a foreign country. Five of the 21 patients who completed a 6-month follow-up were found to be infected
with ESBL-producing strains. A study analyzing the duration of colonization with ESBL-producing E. coli in patients with travelers' diarrhea
found that 10 of the 41 patients carried ESBL-producing E. coli at the first follow-up (3-8 months), and 4 patients still carried ESBL-
producing E. coli after 3 yr . The results from these studies indicate that travel to a foreign country plays an important role in the
acquisition of and infection with ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae. Furthermore, these ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae can disseminate
through the population. Specifically, the dissemination of new antimicrobial resistance genes may lead to major healthcare issues. In order
to prevent the inflow of ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae, it is important to monitor suspected carriers of ESBL-producing organisms. In
summary, we report a case of CTX-M-55-producing S. sonnei from a Korean patient who had just returned from China, suggesting that the
infection was acquired during the travel. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. Pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis of the S1 nuclease-digested genomic DNA (A) and Southern blot hybridization with the blaCTX-M-55 probe (B). The arrow
indicates plasmids in the Shigella sonnei isolate (lane 1) and the transconjugant (lane 2). Antimicrobial susceptibility of the clinical
isolate, transconjugant, and Escherichia coli J53 recipient determined by the Etest or the agar dilution method *MIC was determined by the
agar dilution method. Abbreviation: MIC, minimum inhibitory concentration.
