Hyperacute rejection is a rare but potentially catastrophic complication after cardiac transplantation. We describe an unusual case of
hyperacute rejection due to preformed anti-donor antibodies despite a negative preoperative panel-reactive antibody (PRA) screen. An
excellent outcome was achieved in this case and our strategy involving the use of CentriMag ventricular assist devices (VADs) for
biventricular support during treatment with rituximab, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), and plasmapheresis is illustrated. Hyperacute
rejection (HAR) is a rare but dreaded complication following orthotopic heart transplantation with an approximate mortality rate of 70% . It
is mediated by preformed anti-donor antibodies and is characterized by complement deposition with widespread hemorrhage and thrombosis
within the allograft . In the modern era, HAR has largely been avoided by ensuring ABO compatibility between donor and recipient, and is
restricted to cases in which preformed anti-HLA antibodies initiate antibody-mediated rejection . To avoid this complication, panel-reactive
antibody (PRA) screening is used to determine the presence of circulating antibodies to a random panel of donor lymphocytes. Along a
continuum, a higher PRA is associated with worse rejection rates and poorer overall survival . However, in spite of the recent advancements
in PRA screening techniques, HAR can be occasionally encountered in the setting of a negative preoperative PRA. Fortunately, the incidence
of such events is low, because the management of HAR after cardiac transplantation can be extremely challenging. In instances of primary
graft failure associated with HAR, temporary circulatory support with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and intra-aortic balloon pump
placement has been previously employed . Further, immunologic strategies for eliminating circulating alloantibodies implicated in HAR
include intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), monoclonal anti-CD20 antibody (rituximab), and plasmapheresis . Here, we describe an unusual case
of antibody-mediated HAR in a patient with a negative preoperative PRA. We also describe a successful strategy for allograft rescue
utilizing biventricular CentriMag VAD support during targeted immunotherapy that resulted in an excellent outcome. A twenty-four year-old
African American patient with non-ischemic cardiomyopathy underwent Heartmate II left ventricular assist device (LVAD) placement and
tricuspid valve repair. No blood products were transfused at the time of LVAD placement. Approximately one year later, the patient developed
a driveline infection and was listed for transplantation. Two months prior to transplantation, the patient required a blood transfusion. PRA
screen was negative (0%) nine days after transfusion. Subsequent PRA seventeen days after transfusion was also negative (0%). A donor heart
of a compatible blood type (ABO class B) became available. The patient underwent redo-sternotomy, LVAD explantation, and bicaval orthotopic
heart transplant using standard techniques with an ischemic time of 217 minutes. The heart failed to develop a spontaneous rhythm and severe
biventricular failure developed. After two hours of reperfusion, cardiac function deteriorated further despite pharmacologic inotropic
support and IABP placement. The heart was discolored and edematous with multiple petechiae. A CentriMag VAD was used to support the left
heart with cannulation via the left atrium, left ventricle, and aorta. Another CentriMag VAD was used to support the right ventricle with
cannulation via the right atrium and pulmonary artery (Figure 1A). All cannulas were brought out of the chest through intercostal or
subcostal incisions, allowing closure of the sternotomy (Figure 1B). (A) CentriMag VAD cannulation strategy. A CentriMag VAD was used to
support the left heart with cannulation via the left atrium, left ventricle, and aorta. Another CentriMag VAD was used to support the right
ventricle with cannulation via the right atrium and pulmonary artery. This strategy allowed for excellent flows from both devices and
complete decompression of the heart. (B) CentriMag VAD access strategy. All cannulas were brought out of the chest through intercostal or
subcostal incisions, allowing closure of the sternotomy. A postoperative retrospective crossmatch was positive. Treatment with rituximab,
IVIG, and plasmapheresis was initiated in addition to a traditional regimen consisting of steroids, mycophenolate mofetil, and tacrolimus.
Serial echocardiograms revealed improvement in ventricular function, ultimately demonstrating complete functional recovery (Figure 2). On
post-operative day (POD) six, the patient was noted to have an acute increase in chest tube output and was taken back to the operating room
for bleeding. However, at re-exploration, there was no evidence of ongoing bleeding. The graft demonstrated excellent biventricular function
by both TEE and visual inspection. The patient was resuscitated overnight and the VADs were removed on POD seven. The immunotherapy regimen
continued until POD twenty-four. Subsequent antibody screens demonstrated reduced reactivity to anti-donor antigen. Complete recovery of
ventricular function was achieved and the patient was ultimately discharged to home forty-three days after transplantation. Change in
allograft function with post-operative immunomodulatory therapy. Left ventricular ejection fraction is plotted as a function of time. The
timing of administration of immunomodulatory agents is noted with arrows as indicated. Risk factors for HAR in cardiac transplantation
include high PRA, positive pre- or post-transplant crossmatch, induction therapy with OKT3, malignancy, and preceding infection .
Additionally, there is emerging evidence that VAD implantation can contribute to HLA sensitization by inducing secondary T-cell activation
and B-cell reactivity, thereby increasing the risk for antibody-mediated rejection . However, even VAD-bridged patients who are
preoperatively identified as being highly sensitized may be candidates for cardiac transplantation. Lick et al. recently demonstrated that
cardiac transplantation of LVAD patients with high PRA without preoperative crossmatch using on-bypass plasmapheresis and alemtuzumab
resulted in equivalent midterm survival compared with non-sensitized patients . PRA screening practices, crossmatch determinations, and
management of sensitized patients vary considerably among institutions. Moreover, all PRA screening modalities are not created equal.
Traditional techniques that are more commonly used at most institutions include cell-based complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC) and anti-
human globulin-augmented lymphocytotoxicity assays . However, newer modalities such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent (ELISA) and flow
cytometric (FCM) assays appear to be more sensitive in their ability to detect class II antigens than the older techniques. Furthermore,
FCM-detectable pre-transplant antibodies better differentiated sensitized versus non-sensitized patients, and predicted allograft rejection
more reliably than the CDC method . Our institution employs Luminex single antigen bead assays for HLA antibody screening. Once antibody-
mediated rejection has been identified, options for treatment include plasmapheresis, immunoadsorption, IVIG, cyclophosphamide
administration, increasing doses of immunosuppression, and rituximab . Rituximab is a chimeric humanized monoclonal antibody against the
pan-B cell surface molecule CD20 that has showed promise in treating antibody-mediated rejection in cardiac transplantation as well as
inadvertent ABO-incompatible lung transplantation . Although rituximab induces a rapid depletion of CD20-expressing B cells in peripheral
blood, it has little or no effect on circulating antibodies. Therefore, several reports have advocated for complementing the use of
rituximab with modalities that deplete circulating antibodies such as plasmapheresis, IVIG, or immunoadsorption. Other treatment options
reported in the literature include cyclophosphamide, OKT3, and anti-thymocyte globulin . In our patient, the use of IVIG and plasmapheresis
as an adjunct to rituximab resulted in an excellent outcome. In addition to the use of appropriate immunotherapy targeting antibody-mediated
rejection, the employment of biventricular CentriMag VAD support was critical in achieving complete functional recovery in this case. The
cannulation strategy employed here allowed optimal decompression of both left and right sides of the heart during recovery. In particular,
cannulating the left side of the heart through both the LV apex and the right superior pulmonary vein ensured complete decompression of the
left ventricle. Excellent flows were achieved allowing ongoing support of organ function. Since heparin was not used in the early post-
operative period, early bleeding complications were avoided. Since the sternum was able to be closed, infection and sternal wound
complications were also avoided in this heavily immunosuppressed patient. Avoidance of early bleeding, preventing complications of an open
sternum, and successful ongoing support of allograft function while the heart was being rescued allowed for a successful outcome. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CDC: Cell-based complement-dependent cytotoxicity; ELISA: Enzyme-
linked immunosorbent and FCM flow cytometric; HAR: Hyperacute rejection; IVIG: Intravenous immunoglobulin; PRA: Panel-reactive antibody;
POD: Post-operative day; VADs: Ventricular assist devices The authors have no competing interests to declare. DJK: intra-operative and post-
operative care of the patient, manuscript drafting and editing. JD: post-operative care of the patient, manuscript drafting. MK: post-
operative immunologic evaluation and monitoring, manuscript drafting. DLD: pre-/post-operative care of the patient, manuscript drafting.
YJW: intra-operative and pre-/post-operative care of the patient, manuscript drafting and editing. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
