Exome sequencing identified compound heterozygous mutations in the recently discovered mitochondrial methionyl-tRNA formyltransferase
(MTFMT) gene in two sisters with mild Leigh syndrome and combined respiratory chain deficiency. The mutations lead to undetectable levels of
the MTFMT protein. Blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis showed decreased complexes I and IV, and additional products stained with
complex V antibodies, however the overall steady state level of mt-tRNAMet was normal. Our data illustrate that exome sequencing is an
excellent diagnostic tool, and its value in clinical medicine is enormous, however it can only be optimally exploited if combined with
detailed phenotyping and functional studies. • MTFMT mutations lead to mild Leigh syndrome and combined respiratory chain defect. • Blue
native PAGE showed decreased complex I and IV but normal mt-tRNAMet. • Next generation sequencing (NGS) is a very powerful tool in
mitochondrial disease. • It can be optimally exploited if combined with phenotyping and functional studies. MTFMT mutations lead to mild
Leigh syndrome and combined respiratory chain defect. Blue native PAGE showed decreased complex I and IV but normal mt-tRNAMet. Next
generation sequencing (NGS) is a very powerful tool in mitochondrial disease. It can be optimally exploited if combined with phenotyping and
functional studies. Mitochondrial protein synthesis is very complex, and the pathway requires ribosomal proteins, ribosomal assembly
proteins, aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, tRNA modifying enzymes, tRNA methylating enzymes and several initiation, elongation and termination
factors of translation (Rötig, 2011; Smits et al., 2010). About 150 different proteins are involved in the translation of the 13
mitochondrial-encoded proteins, illustrating the importance of mitochondrial translation in human mitochondrial disease (Chrzanowska-
Lightowlers et al., 2011; Rötig, 2011). Most of these gene defects result in cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficient or ragged red fibres and
biochemical multiple respiratory chain (RC) defect in affected organs. The clinical phenotypes are very variable, however most presentations
are early-onset, severe, and often fatal, implying the importance of mitochondrial translation from birth (Kemp et al., 2011). Some of these
conditions affect multiple tissues, however tissue specific manifestations have been reported for several mt-tRNA aminoacyl synthetase or
mt-tRNA modifying genes (Chrzanowska-Lightowlers et al., 2011; Rötig, 2011). Due to the rapid increase in the number of nuclear genes and
the widely varying phenotypes associated with combined RC deficiency, it is extremely difficult to select specific candidate genes for
diagnostic screening. As a consequence, sequencing the known nuclear genes affecting mitochondrial protein synthesis has not been efficient
in an earlier study (Kemp et al., 2011). However, next generation sequencing (NGS) has proven to be a very powerful tool in identifying
nuclear disease genes in combined RC deficiency (Calvo et al., 2010). Either analysing ~ 1000 genes predicted to encode mitochondrial
proteins (MitoExome) (Calvo et al., 2010; Tucker et al., 2011) or studying the whole exome has successfully detected the causative mutations
in several families with RC deficiency (Ghezzi et al., 2012; Haack et al., 2012; Shamseldin et al., 2012). Most of these papers report a low
number of patients with a single gene defect however some genes appear across different cohorts, indicating the existence of some more
frequent genetic defects (Hennekam and Biesecker, 2012). Although characteristic clinical presentations may facilitate the recognition of
the phenotype in larger patient cohorts (Steenweg et al., 2012), this is not usually the case. Mutations in the mitochondrial methionyl-tRNA
formyltransferase (MTFMT) gene were first identified using targeted sequencing of the mitochondrial and nuclear encoded mitochondrial
proteome (MitoExome) in two unrelated patients with Leigh syndrome and combined complex I deficiency and complex IV deficiency (Tucker et
al., 2011). Exome sequencing in a cohort of patients with complex I deficiency identified two further patients with MTFMT deficiency,
suggesting that this gene defect may account for a relevant number of patients with combined (I and IV) or isolated (complex I) deficiency
(Table 1). Here we report clinical, biochemical, genetic and in vitro studies in two sisters carrying compound heterozygous mutations in
MTFMT. Patient 1 was included in a cohort of 52 patients with genetically undefined combined respiratory chain deficiency (patient 12 in
Kemp et al., 2011). She is currently 16 years old, the first child of healthy non-consanguineous German parents. She has a similarly
affected younger sister and a brother, who has normal neurological status, but has behavioural problems. Birth and early motor development
were normal (walking by 18 months of age), however speech development was delayed, leading to the first clinical investigations at 3 years
of age (normal chromosome analysis and EEG). She slowly developed coordination problems over the following 3 years. On clinical examination
at 6 years of age her weight and height were < 3rd percentile. There was no ptosis or ophthalmoparesis. She had mild facial hypotonia, but
normal vision and hearing. She had a slight dysarthria and speech was limited to short sentences. She had no muscle weakness, however muscle
tone was generally reduced; deep tendon reflexes were normal and symmetric. There was a mild ataxia, causing difficulties in tandem gait,
and her fine finger movements were clumsy. She could walk and run without help, could not jump, but learned to ride a tricycle. Her
cognitive function was slightly impaired. Cardiac and respiratory functions were normal. Laboratory tests were normal, except for mildly
increased CSF lactate (3.3 mmol/L, normal < 2.2; serum lactate 1.5 mmol/L, normal < 2.0). Brain MRI showed mild signal abnormalities in the
dorsal periventricular white matter and increased signal intensities bilaterally on T2-weighted sequences in the nucleus caudatus and
putamen, although brainstem and cerebellum were normal. On examination at 14 years of age, she had short stature (height < 3rd percentile;
weight < 3rd percentile). She had a slightly ataxic gait. Cognitive development was impaired — she could not read but was able to count up
to 10. The younger sister of patient 1 had normal birth, and her motor development was slightly delayed (crawling at 9 months of age,
walking at 22 months of age). There was a moderate delay in her speech development (2 word sentences at 3 years of age) with mild cognitive
dysfunction. Diagnostic work-up took place at 5 years of age. Her weight was < 10th percentile, and height < 3rd percentile. Cranial nerves
were normal; she had no ptosis or ophthalmoparesis, had normal vision and hearing, but mild facial hypotonia. She had generalised muscular
hypotonia but muscle strength and deep tendon reflexes were normal. There was no ataxia or dysmetria, however she had some intention tremor.
She could walk and run, but could not ride a tricycle. Her speech was limited to short sentences and she had mild cognitive dysfunction. She
had asthma, mildly increased TSH with normal thyroid function, and heart, liver and gastrointestinal tract were normal. Because of her short
stature, growth hormone therapy was considered. Laboratory investigations showed normal results including metabolic workup, except for a
moderately increased serum lactate (3.2 mmol/L, normal < 2.2). Brain MRI and MR spectroscopy at 4 years of age were normal. Histological and
biochemical analyses of skeletal muscle were performed at 6 years of age as previously described (Gempel et al., 2007). Mitochondrial DNA
deletions, depletion and point mutations were excluded in muscle DNA. Direct sequencing of POLG, EFG1, EFTu, EFTs, MRPS16 and TRMU in blood-
DNA of patient 1 was normal (Kemp et al., 2011). Exome sequencing was performed in genomic DNA of patient 1 by AROS Applied Biotechnology AS
(Aarhus, Denmark) using Illumina's TruSeq DNA Sample Prep Kit and Exome Enrichment Kit, with 100 bp paired-end reads. Samples were processed
on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform (Horvath et al., 2012). Sequence was aligned to the human reference genome (UCSC hg19) using BWA and
reformatted using SAMtools. Single base variants were identified using VarScan (v2.2) and Indels were identified using Dindel (v1.01). The
raw lists of variants were filtered using in-house Perl scripts to identify on-target variants that were rare with a minor allele frequency
of less than 0.01 or not present in 1000 Genomes (Feb 2012 download), dbSNP135 or in the exome sequences of 91 unrelated and unaffected
individuals. Putative ‘disease causing’ mutations were identified using MutationTaster (http://www.mutationtaster.org/). Primer sequences
used to sequence MTFMT genomic DNA and cDNA are listed in the Supplementary materials. Cultured myoblasts of patient 1 and controls were
grown in skeletal muscle cell growth medium and supplement mix (PromoCell) plus 10% FBS (Gibco), 1% 200 mM l-glutamine (GIBCO) and
gentamicin 50 μL/mL. Myoblasts of patient 1 and a control cell line were immortalised by transduction with a retroviral vector expressing
the catalytic component of human telomerase (htert) (Lochmüller et al., 1999). SDS PAGE was performed on immortalised control and patient
myoblasts. Aliquots of total protein (5–20 μg) were loaded on 14% sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gels then transferred to
polyvinylidene fluoride membranes. Membranes were subsequently probed with the following monoclonal antibodies: β actin, 0.1 μg/mL (SIGMA);
complex IV subunit II, 1 μg/mL; complex II 70 kDA subunit, 0.1 μg/mL; and complex I NDUFB8 subunit, 0.5 μg/mL (MitoSciences). Following
incubation with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (Dako, Denmark A/S) detected proteins were visualised by ECL-plus (GE
Healthcare). Immunoblotting for MTFMT was performed on control and patient myoblasts. Aliquots of total protein (50–100 μg) were loaded on
14% sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gels then transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride membranes. Membranes were subsequently probed
with monoclonal antibodies for anti-MTFMT 2 μg/mL (Abcam) and complex II 70 kDA subunit, 0.1 μg/mL (Abcam), incubated with horseradish
peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (Dako, Denmark A/S) and detected proteins were visualised by ECL-plus (GE Healthcare). BN-PAGE
was performed on myoblasts of patient 1 and control myoblasts as previously described (Leary and Sasarman, 2009). After electrophoresis
activities, “in gel” assays were carried out as previously described (Diaz et al., 2009). A Coomassie blue staining was done in parallel to
the activities as a loading control. Total RNA from 1 to 2 × 106 cultured myoblast lines was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Life
Technologies, Paisley, UK) according to the manufacturer's instructions. High resolution Northern blot analysis of total RNA (1 μg) was
performed as previously described (Taylor et al., 2003). The human mt-tRNAMet probe was generated using the forward primer H4404 (positions
4404–4426) 5′-TAAGGTCAGCTAAATAAGCTATC-3′ and reverse primer L4466 (positions 4466–4446) 5′-TACGGGAAGGGTATAACCAAC-3′. The human mt-tRNAGlu
probe was generated using the forward primer L14635 (positions14810–14791) 5′-TACTAAACCCACACTCAACAG-3′ and reverse primer H14810
(positions14810–14791) 5′-GGAGGTCGATGAATGAGTGG-3′. The radioactive signal for the mt-tRNAMet probe was normalised to that of the 5S RNA
probe for each sample. Muscle biopsy of patient 1 at 6 years of age detected mild lipid accumulation in type I fibres. There was a
subsarcolemmal accumulation of mitochondria in type I fibres, but no typical ragged red fibres (RRF) on Gomori-trichrome staining, however
oxidative enzyme staining for NADH NADH-CoQ-Oxidoreductase (NADH), succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) and COX showed more prominent mitochondrial
networks. Biochemical analysis of the RC enzymes in skeletal muscle of patient 1 showed a reduction of complex I (NADH-CoQ-Oxidoreductase
(0.10 U/U citrate synthase (CS), normal range: 0.17–0.56 U/UCS) and COX (0.7 U/UCS, normal range: 0.9–4.7 U/UCS)). The activities of complex
II, complex III and the pyruvate dehydrogenase were normal (CS was 100 U/gNCP, normal 45–100 U/gNCP). COX activity in fibroblasts of patient
1 was normal (0.91 U/UCS, normal 0.4–2.1 U/gNCP). Exome sequencing identified 462 rare variants (Fig. 1A), which were not listed on dbSNP135
and were not found to be shared in the 1000 genome project or in a panel of 91 in-house disease control subjects (Horvath et al., 2012).
Twenty-two of these variants were predicted to be disease-causing (MutationTaster), but only one gene, MTFMT contained two likely pathogenic
variants (Fig. 1B). Only variants in MTFMT, a recently described human disease gene encoding a mitochondrial protein (Tucker et al., 2011)
were confirmed on Sanger sequencing. Patient 1 was heterozygous for both a missense mutation, c.452C>T, p.P151L, and a nonsense mutation,
c.994C>T, p.R332X in MTFMT. The mutations were not present in 91 in-house exomes, 128 Caucasian controls, or data from the 1000 genome
project. The unaffected mother was heterozygous for the c.994C>T, pR332X variant and the affected sibling was compound heterozygous for both
variants (Fig. 1B). DNA was not available from the father. Sequencing of MTFMT cDNA in patient 1 showed both changes to be present at
transcript level (Fig. 1B), suggesting that the stop mutation in the last exon does not result in nonsense mediated decay. Direct sequencing
of the MTFMT gene in 30 patients with combined RC deficiency detected no pathogenic mutations. High resolution Northern blotting showed
normal steady state level of mt-tRNAMet (Fig. 1C). Immunoblotting for MTFMT detected no band in myoblasts of patient 1, confirming a severe
decrease of the protein (Fig. 1D). COXII and NDUFB8 were also decreased in patient 1, suggesting a deficiency in complexes I and IV
respectively (Fig. 1E). This was confirmed by BN-PAGE which showed an absence of complex I and severe decrease in complex IV, but also
detected a number of extra bands with the complex V antibody suggesting an unstable ATP synthase (Fig. 1F). Complex III was normal. In-gel
activities were corresponding to the BN-PAGE result (Fig. 1G). Pathogenic mutations in the MTFMT gene have been reported in 2 independent
patients with combined RC defect (Tucker et al., 2011) and 2 with isolated complex I deficiency to date (Haack et al., 2012) (Table 1). All
reported patients had Leigh syndrome, however the clinical presentation was relatively late-onset in 3 patients, 2 of them being ambulatory
in adult age. The disease progression was subtle through the second decade, although acute metabolic crisis and respiratory arrest lead to
death in one patient after short anaesthesia for MRI (Tucker et al., 2011). The very brief description of 2 further patients (Haack et al.,
2012) did not allow us to make assumption on the clinical severity. Here we describe 2 sisters with compound heterozygous mutations in the
MTFMT gene leading to combined RC deficiency. Similarly to the patients reported by Tucker et al., both sisters had normal development in
their early years, the first clinical investigations took place at 9 and 5 years of age. The first symptoms were an impaired speech and mild
cognitive delay, while motor symptoms and ataxia were subtle and became obvious in a later stage of the disease. Brain MRI detected signs
typical for Leigh syndrome in patient 1, but was normal in patient 2 at 4 years of age, suggesting that MRI may not be positive in the early
phase of the disease. One of the mutations identified in our patients, the nonsense mutation c.994C>T, p.R332X has been previously reported
in compound heterozygous state with another nonsense mutation (c.626C>T/p.Arg181SerfsX5) (Haack et al., 2012). The second mutation c.452C>T,
p.Pro151Leu is novel, leads to the exchange of a well conserved amino acid and is predicted to be disease causing (MutationTaster). It has
not been detected in the international SNP databases and in the 1000 genome database, and was absent in 256 ethnically matched normal
Caucasian control chromosomes. The clinical presentation co-segregated with the compound heterozygous mutations within the family. The
pathogenicity was verified by the lack of detectable MTFMT protein on immunoblotting (myoblasts of patient 1). Mitochondrial proteins showed
decreased steady state levels in myoblasts of patient 1 on immunoblotting and BN-PAGE detected a severely abnormal pattern with decreased
complexes I and IV and several abnormal smaller bands stained with complex V antibodies. These findings were keeping with the combined RC
defect in skeletal muscle. High resolution Northern blotting showed normal steady state of mt-tRNAMet, suggesting that the defect in
formylation does not affect mt-RNAMet stability. How can we explain the combined RC defect in MTFMT deficiency? In metazoan mitochondria,
after aminoacylation of tRNAMet has occurred, Met-tRNAMet is used for both translation initiation and elongation. This is unlike its
bacterial counterpart whose translational machinery contains individual tRNAMet molecules for each role (Tucker et al., 2011). In order to
initiate translation in humans, a proportion of Met-tRNAMet is formylated by mitochondrial methionyl-tRNA formyltransferase (MTFMT)
producing fMet-tRNAMet. The translation initiation factor (IF-2mt) has a high affinity for fMet-tRNAMet and promotes its binding to the
mitochondrial ribosome (Spencer and Spremulli, 2004). However, if Met-tRNAMet binds to EFTu before it is formylated, it acts as an elongator
tRNA. This partitioning mechanism requires that IF-2mt strongly discriminates against Met-tRNAMet and that EF-Tumt preferentially binds Met-
tRNAMet (Spencer and Spremulli, 2004). Based on this hypothesis a defect in Met-tRNAMet formylation would affect mitochondrial translation,
although 35S methionine labelling in our patient showed only mild abnormalities (patient 12 in Kemp et al., 2011). This result is in
contrast with the severe impairment on BN-PAGE, suggesting that there is still more to discover about the disease mechanism. Mutations in
MTFMT should be screened in patients with Leigh syndrome and combined respiratory chain deficiency. Exome sequencing is a very powerful
diagnostic tool, and its value in clinical medicine is enormous, however it can only be optimally exploited if combined with detailed
phenotyping. The selection of primary disease causing changes can be facilitated by functional studies. Supplementary material Supplementary
material We thank Prof. Eric A Shoubridge for immortalisation of the cells and for helping with the methods. RH was supported by the Medical
Research Council (UK) (G1000848). PFC is a Wellcome Trust Senior Fellow in Clinical Science and an NIHR Senior Investigator who also
receives funding from the Medical Research Council (UK), the UK Parkinson's Disease Society, and the UK NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for
Ageing and Age-related Disease award to the Newcastle upon Tyne Foundation Hospitals NHS Trust. We are grateful to the Medical Research
Council (MRC) Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases Biobank, Newcastle for supporting this project and for providing primary human cells
(myoblasts and fibroblasts). A) Variant numbers following analysis pipeline of BWA (Sequence Aligner); VarScan (single base variant — SBV
calling); Dindel v1.01 (Indel calling). (*) SBV — VarScan parameters min. total coverage ≥ 5-fold, min. variant coverage ≥ 3-fold, min.
Quality > 10; Indel — Dindel output filter min. variant coverage ≥ 4. (a) Variants with position within targets (Illumina TruSeq 62 Mb)
+/− 500 bp, seen on both (forward & reverse) strands and (SBVs only) variant allele frequency > 24%; (b) variants that match 1000 genomes
(Feb 2012) and/or dbSNP135 with minor allele frequency (MAF) > 0.01; (c) rare/novel variants (MAF < 0.01) with exclusion of common variants
found to be shared in an in-house panel of 91 ʻnon-respiratory complexʼ individuals; (e) MutationTaster predictions. B) Identification of
pathogenic compound heterozygous mutations in MTFMT. Electropherogram of MTFMT DNA and cDNA sequence of patient 1 and a control. C) High
resolution Northern blotting detected normal mt-tRNAMet steady state levels in myoblasts of patient 1. For comparison we show also mt-
tRNAGlu and 5S rRNA. D) SDS-PAGE immunoblotting analysis in myoblasts of patient 1 showed no detectable MTFMT protein. Complex II 70 kDa
subunit antibody was used as a loading control. E) Immunoblotting in myoblasts of patient 1 showed decreased steady state levels for COX II
and NDUFB8. Blotting with antibodies against the complex II 70 kDa subunit and β actin showed equal loading. F) BN-PAGE in myoblasts of
patient 1 showed severely decreased complexes I and IV and 3 additional bands with complex V antibodies, however complex III was normal. G)
In-gel activities of complexes I and IV were decreased in myoblasts of patient 1, and complex V was slightly reduced, but showed an extra
band. Summary of all previously reported patients compared to our patients with MTFMT mutations. Abbreviations: +: present, n.d.: not
determined; LS: Leigh syndrome, RC: respiratory chain.
