This study aimed to review available published reports concerning sudden unexpected postnatal collapse (SUPC) of apparently healthy infants
within the first days of postnatal life, establish a structured presentation and delineate recommendations for preventive measures. All
published reports of SUPC cases were retrospectively analyzed, and three not previously published SUPC cases at Karolinska University
Hospital were detailed to exemplify the varying presentations and outcomes of SUPC. We found 398 published cases of SUPC occurring during
first postnatal week. Estimated incidence of the SUPC of a presumably healthy infant after birth differs widely, ranging from 2.6 cases to
133 cases/100,000. However, definition, inclusion, and exclusion criteria vary substantially between reports. Our summary indicates that
reported SUPC occurs more frequently than expected from recent surveys. About half of the infants die, and of the remaining survivors, half
have neurological sequela. Of the 233 cases of sudden unexpected death described, no etiology was found in 153 cases. When a defined time
for the SUPC event is described, approximately one third of reported events occur during the first 2 h, between 2 and 24 h and between 1 and
7 days after birth, respectively. Adequate education of caregivers and appropriate surveillance during the first days of newborns should
enable us to save hundreds of lives. Sudden unexpected postnatal collapse (SUPC) of apparently healthy term or near-term infants within the
first days of life is rare but can have catastrophic consequences. About 5 % of unexpected infant deaths during the first year of life occur
during the first postnatal week . SUPC includes both severe apparent life-threatening event (ALTE) and sudden unexpected death in infancy
(SUDI) occurring within the first postnatal week. Sudden unexpected early neonatal death (SUEND) in the first week of life shares features
with SUDI but is not included as SUDI, which is limited to postperinatal deaths (1 week–1 year). As SUPC is unexpected, infants with well-
known risk factors, e.g., prematurity (<35 week gestation), perinatal asphyxia, or congenital malformations are not included in published
reports as they are classified as “expected” neonatal deaths or ALTE events . Even if considered rare, consequences are serious with death
in half of the cases and remaining disability in a majority of the cases reported . Polberger and Svenningsen described, in a regional and a
population-based study, sudden cardiovascular collapse, occurring between 6 and 100 h after birth, in infants considered healthy at birth.
Here, the incidence of early neonatal sudden unexpected death and severe early-ALTE was established as 12 and 35 cases per 100,000 live
births, respectively . Recent national surveys from the UK and Germany have used different criteria for inclusion; SUPC is defined as
occurring within the first 24 postnatal hours and excluding (Germany) respectively including (UK) identified and possibly preventable causes
[3, 6]. Both these national surveys report an incidence of about 3 cases/100,000 infants. However, recently published guidelines for
investigations of SUPC include infants with sudden unexpected collapse during the first week of life . These “Guidelines for the
investigations of newborn infants who suffer a sudden and unexpected postnatal collapse in the first week of life” mentions 14 published
reports concerning SUPC . However, not all publications concerning SUPC are included; neither have a summary of existing SUPC reports and
their respective definition of and inclusion criteria for SUPC been done or published. Thus, we performed an exhaustive literature review of
SUPC cases to do a structured presentation of definitions, inclusions, gestational age, and postnatal time of occurrence in published cases.
We also describe new cases of SUPC to illustrate and highlight some varying presentations and outcomes. Finally, in view of all the
presented data, we summarize preventive measures that might save hundreds of lives. Scopus, Web of Science, and Medline databases were
searched to retrieve and analyze published SUPC cases and reports concerning early SUDI, early neonatal sudden unexpected death, SUEND, and
early ALTE occurring during the first postnatal days in presumably healthy term and near term newborns. The selection criteria of the
published articles were derived from the general guidelines for systematic reviews [8, 9]. All the terms comprised in “SUPC,” “SUDI,”
“SUEND,” “ALTE,” and the terms “newborn infant” or “neonate” were used as MesH terms for the research process. All references of retrieved
articles were cross-searched. We used the recent definition of a SUPC event established in “The guidelines for the investigation of newborn
infants who suffer a sudden and unexpected postnatal collapse” . We thus included infants born >35 weeks gestational age, with 10 min Apgar
of >7, considered healthy who collapsed suddenly and unexpectedly within the first postnatal week [7, 10, 11]. We excluded cases that
occurred after the first week of life and only retained articles in which minimal neonatal data were available. All articles with an English
language title were analyzed. Non-English articles in French or Spanish were analyzed with the help of native language scientist in the
research group (Drs. Kuhn and Perez, respectively). Unpublished studies were excluded. We then determined which type of study (case report,
site, regional study, or population survey) and which inclusion and exclusion criteria (gestational age, postnatal age, underlying
conditions, outcome, as well as risk and associated factors) were reported. All cases including those where a possible etiology to the SUPC
event was found during autopsy or after clinical investigations in survivors were eligible. Inquiries regarding inclusion and exclusion
criteria were addressed to Drs. Christian and Anette Poets regarding the two German national inquiries [3, 12]. In order to illustrate the
varying presentations and outcomes of this condition, an examination of three cases of SUPC occurring in presumably healthy newborns at the
Karolinska University Hospital-Solna, Stockholm, Sweden, not previously reported, was performed. Characteristics of mothers and infants
perinatal, postpartum, events and subsequent investigations, and outcome data at discharge and at 1 year of age follow-up were recorded and
analyzed. The study was performed in accordance with European Community guidelines and approved by the regional hospital research ethics
committee. We found 400 published cases of SUPC occurring during first postnatal week. Two cases were excluded due to insufficient neonatal
data available. These 2 cases were described in two articles investigating possible pathologies of SUDI. One article refers only to one case
of a female newborn where SUPC occurred at 2 days of life, in a cohort of infants in whom an anomaly of the pulmonary artery was found . The
other excluded article retrospectively reviews autopsies of neonatal SUDI cases occurring before 28 days of life, to look for brain lesions,
and reports only one case of death that occurred in the first week of life, when “the infant was still in the neonatal ward,” but with no
other perinatal information described . Tables 1 and 2 give an overview of the remaining 398 cases of SUPC reported in 26 different studies.
Table 1 lists reports that have early neonatal sudden unexpected deaths as inclusion criteria, and Table 2 lists SUPC studies where both
SUDI/SUEND and ALTE during initial hours to days of life are included.Table 1Sudden unexpected neonatal death (SUEND) during the first week
of postnatal lifeReference SUENDStudyNNumber of birthsEstimated incidenceIncluded GAIncluded PNAPlausible etiologyOut come death (%)Outcome
pathologicOutcome full recoveryYearPrimiparaPositionPolberger and Svenningsen Populat-
based16133,11012/100,000≥w386–100 h6/16a100NANA1977–1979NANRDehan et al. Hospital based31NR36/100,000≥w36≤7 days25/31d100NANA1985–1991Obonai
et al. Case report9aNANA≥w36≤10 daysa7/9e100NANANRNRNREspagne et al. Case report2NANA≥w37<2 h1/2f100NANA2003?NA2/2 ProneInwald et al. Case
report3bNANA≥w36<7 days3/3g100NANA2001–2003NRNAWeber et al. Case report55NANA≥w35<7 days32/55h100NANA1996–2005NR13/19 cobedLeow and Platt
Regional study308286483.5/100,000≥w35<7 days5/28i100NANA1983–20078/88/30 die at breastcobed co-bedding with parents, NA not applicable, NR
not reported, GA gestational age, PNA post natal ageaOne of 10 cases reported occurred at 10 days postnatal age and is excluded herebSeven
cases of enterovirus myocarditis presenting with sudden unexpected collapse, three within the first postnatal weekcGBS infection (n = 4),
anemia (n = 2)dPerinatal anoxia, generally associated with massive amniotic inhalation (16 cases) and maternal-fetal infection (9
cases)eMild gliosis in medulla oblongata cardiorespiratory control regions (n = 7)fPossible Candida albicans septicemia, no autopsy
performedgEnterovirus myocarditishCongenital heart malformations (n = 11), infection (n = 9), pulmonary hypertension (n = 6) and metabolic
disorder (n = 3)iMetabolic defects (n = 5)Table 2Sudden unexpected postnatal collapse (SUPC) during the first week of postnatal
lifeReference SUPCStudyNNumber of birthsEstimated incidenceIncluded GAIncluded PNAPlausible etiologyOutcome death (%)Outcome
pathologicOutcome full recoveryYearPrimiparaPositionPolberger and Svenningsen Regional study1320,12350/100,000≥w386–100 h6/13,b 46 %7/13,
54 %4/13, 31 %2/13, 15 %1977–1984NRNRBurchfield and Rawlings Single center10NANA≥w3715–86 h05/10, 50 %4/5, 40 %1/10, 10 %NRNRNRRodriguez-
Alarcon et al. Single center29107,26327/100,000≥w37<72 h020/29, 69 %NA9/29, 31 %1975–1991NR29/29 proneGrylack and Williams Single
center20~15,000133/100,000≥w37<72 h8/20,c 40 %0NR20/20?1993–1995NRNRKuhn et al. Case report2NANA>w37<2 h01/2, 50 %1/2, 50 %019992/2,
100 %2/2 proneGatti et al. Case report6NANA≥w36≤2 h05/6,d83 %5/6, 83 %1/6, 16 %1996–20036/6, 100 %6/6 proneToker-Maimon et al. Case
report2NANA≥w37<2 h001/2, 50 %1/2, 50 %2005?2/2, 100 %2/2 proneHays et al. Case report11NANA≥w38<2 h04/11, 36 %1/11, 9 %6/11,
55 %2000–20057/8, 88 %11/11 proneAboudiab et al. Case report2~3,000NA≥w37<2 h0002/22006NR2/2 proneBranger et al. Case
report11~28,60003.9/100,000≥w37<7 days07/11, 64 %04/11, 36 %2001–20065/10, 50 %2/4 prone; 5/8 StSForan et al. Case
report12NANA≥w36<72 h4/12,d 33 %7/12, 58 %0 at 2 years5/12, 42 %1993–20069/12, 75 %6/12 breast + 2 cobedNakamura and Sano Case
report1NANA≥w3870 min0001/1NRNR1/1 prone at breastDageville et al. Regional study262,9683.2/100,000≥w36<2 h00/2, 0 %1/2, 50 %1/2,
50 %2006–20071/2, 50 %2/2 pronePeters et al. Single center512,36240/100,000≥w36<12 h04/5,h 80 %1/5, 20 %02004–20065/5, 100 %2 prone +2
cobedSchrewe et al. Single center1NANA>w3720 min0001/120091/11 proneRodriguez-Alarcon et al. Regional
study590,7805.5/100,000≥w36<2 h0NRNRNR1992–2008NRNRRodriguez-Alarcon et al. Regional study810,80474/100,000≥w36<2 h01/8, 12 %1/8, 12 %6/8,
75 %2008–20106/8, 75 %8/8 proneAndres et al. Case report6~180,0003.4/100,000>w36<2 h03/6, 50 %03/6, 50 %2004–20074/6, 67 %6/6 prone and
StSPoets et al. National survey17665,1262.6/100,000≥w37<24 hNA7/17, 41 %6/17, 35 %4/17, 24 %200913/17, 76 %12/17 prone/sidePoets et al.
National survey17aNRNR≥w35<24 h3/14,e 18 %NRNRNR201012/14, 86 %12/14 proneBecher et al. Nationa survey45858,4665/100,000≥w37<12 h15/45,f
33 %12/45, 27 %8/45, 18 %25/45, 56 %2008–200933/45, 77 %24/30 breast/StSTsao et al. Regional study17~90,00019/100,000≥w37<7 days6/17,g
35%7/17, 41 %7/17, 41 %3/17, 18 %2001–200512/17, 71 %5/13 side/cobedcobed cobedding with parents, StS skin-to-skin, NA not applicable, NR
not reported, GA gestational age, PNA post natal ageaInclusion only of the cases not published in Poets et al. bInfection (n = 4), anemia
(n = 2)cAirway obstruction (n = 2), patent foramen ovale and/or patent ductus arteriosus (n = 3), neurological abnormalities (n = 3; PVL,
IVH, and structural abnormality with seizures)dPPHN persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (n = 3), respiratory distress syndrome
(n = 1)ePPHN (n = 1), infection (n = 2)fBacterial pneumonia (n = 5), cardiac malformation (n = 2), metabolic disorder (n = 2), meconium
aspiration syndrome (n = 2), anemia (n = 1), congenital diaphragmatic hernia (n = 1)gInfection (n = 2), hypocalcemia (n = 2), cardiomyopathy
(n = 1), urea-cycle disorder (n = 1), the cases with associated possible dehydration (n = 7; >5 % bodyweight loss < 48 h) are not
includedhDeath within 3 weeks (11 day, 20 day, 21 h, 47 h) and one infant died at 80 months age Sudden unexpected neonatal death (SUEND)
during the first week of postnatal life cobed co-bedding with parents, NA not applicable, NR not reported, GA gestational age, PNA post
natal age aOne of 10 cases reported occurred at 10 days postnatal age and is excluded here bSeven cases of enterovirus myocarditis
presenting with sudden unexpected collapse, three within the first postnatal week cGBS infection (n = 4), anemia (n = 2) dPerinatal anoxia,
generally associated with massive amniotic inhalation (16 cases) and maternal-fetal infection (9 cases) eMild gliosis in medulla oblongata
cardiorespiratory control regions (n = 7) fPossible Candida albicans septicemia, no autopsy performed gEnterovirus myocarditis hCongenital
heart malformations (n = 11), infection (n = 9), pulmonary hypertension (n = 6) and metabolic disorder (n = 3) iMetabolic defects (n = 5)
Sudden unexpected postnatal collapse (SUPC) during the first week of postnatal life cobed cobedding with parents, StS skin-to-skin, NA not
applicable, NR not reported, GA gestational age, PNA post natal age aInclusion only of the cases not published in Poets et al. bInfection
(n = 4), anemia (n = 2) cAirway obstruction (n = 2), patent foramen ovale and/or patent ductus arteriosus (n = 3), neurological
abnormalities (n = 3; PVL, IVH, and structural abnormality with seizures) dPPHN persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (n = 3),
respiratory distress syndrome (n = 1) ePPHN (n = 1), infection (n = 2) fBacterial pneumonia (n = 5), cardiac malformation (n = 2), metabolic
disorder (n = 2), meconium aspiration syndrome (n = 2), anemia (n = 1), congenital diaphragmatic hernia (n = 1) gInfection (n = 2),
hypocalcemia (n = 2), cardiomyopathy (n = 1), urea-cycle disorder (n = 1), the cases with associated possible dehydration (n = 7; >5 %
bodyweight loss < 48 h) are not included hDeath within 3 weeks (11 day, 20 day, 21 h, 47 h) and one infant died at 80 months age Most
publications are case reports, but regional cohorts as well as national surveys exist. Estimated incidence of SUPC vary between 1.6 to
133/100,000 live born infants, excluding congenital malformations and preterm infants born before gestational week 35 (<38). However,
interpretations must be made with caution as the inclusion criteria differ widely. Some studies only include SIDS, unexplained deaths
occurring <2 h , while other reports include early-unexpected ALTE events during first week of life also when a plausible etiology is found
after postevent investigations [18, 19]. We have summarized in Table 3 the reports where time of SUPC event is described. A third of
reported cases occur during the first two hours of life (n = 106, 33 %). This summary is biased, as different postnatal age exclusion
criteria have been used. For example, only 8 out of 26 studies included cases occurring between the third and seventh postnatal day.
Nonetheless, Table 3 gives a systematic overview of the different cases, studies, and postnatal age exclusion criteria used. Notably, among
the 11 studies that include SUPC occurring within 72 h of postnatal age, about half of SUPC cases occur <24 h and between 24–72 h postnatal
age respectively [84 and 73 cases out of 157 SUPC reported, in these studies (54 and 46 %)].Table 3Reported postnatal age of sudden
unexpected postnatal collapse (SUPC)ReferenceNumber of infantsIncluded PN age<2 h2–24 h24–72 h4–7 daysPolberger and Svenningsen
13b6–100 hNA193Burchfield and Rawlings 1015–86 hNA461Dehan et al. 31≤7 days114115Rodriguez-Alarcon et al. 29≤72 h9812NAGrylack and Williams
20≤72 h01010NAObonai et al. 9c≤10 days0351Kuhn et al. 2≤2 h2NANANAGatti et al. 6≤2 h60NANAEspagne et al. 2≤2 h2NANANAInwald et al.
3≤7 days0003Toker-Maimon et al. 2≤2 h2NANANAAboudiab et al. 2≤2 h2NANANABranger et al. 11≤7 days4411Foran et al. 12≤3 days741N ADageville et
al. 2≤2 h2NANANANakamura and Sano 1≤2 h1NANANAPeters et al. 5≤12 h32NANASchrewe et al. 1≤2 h1NANANARodriguez-Alarcon et al.
5≤2 h5NANANARodriguez-Alarcon et al. 8≤2 h8NANANAAndres et al. 6≤2 h6NANANAPoets et al. 17≤24 h98NANALeow and Platt 30≤7 days341013Becher et
al. 45≤12 h2916NANATsao et al. 17≤7 days1781Poets et al.a 17≤24 h17NANATotal3060–7 days103,85,73,28,Percentage of reported
cases36 %29 %24 %9 %Note that only 11 and 8 out of 26 studies provide data for events beyond 24 and 72 h, respectively. The 11 studies that
include SUPC events <72 h report 73 cases out of 157 cases that occur between 24 and 72 hPN postnatal, NA not applicableaInclusion only of
the cases not published in Poets et al. bonly partial data coming from one substudy where postnatal age at event were described.cExcluding 1
SUDI case at 10 days. Reported postnatal age of sudden unexpected postnatal collapse (SUPC) Note that only 11 and 8 out of 26 studies
provide data for events beyond 24 and 72 h, respectively. The 11 studies that include SUPC events <72 h report 73 cases out of 157 cases
that occur between 24 and 72 h PN postnatal, NA not applicable aInclusion only of the cases not published in Poets et al. bonly partial data
coming from one substudy where postnatal age at event were described. cExcluding 1 SUDI case at 10 days. Three different cases of SUPC are
described with varying presentations and outcomes. All three events occurred during skin-to-skin contact in prone position. A boy born at
gestational age 41 weeks, 3,683 g, cardiotocogram variable decelerations and thin meconium present during last minutes of, an otherwise
uneventful, vaginal delivery. He was hypotonic at 1 min age, Apgar score 7, but rapidly recovered with rosy color good responsiveness and
breathing movements with Apgar score 9 at 5 min and 10 at 10 min. Due to umbilical cord artery pH 7.0, base excess (BE)-15 (mmol/L), and
metabolic acidosis, he received a bolus dose of Tribonate® 15 mL and 10 % glucose 5 mL and supplemental oxygen during initial 15 min. At
20 min, he was alert, responsive with good saturation, also without supplemental oxygen. He was presumed to be healthy and placed prone on
the mother’s chest for skin-to-skin contact. He was seen, still in prone position, and considered healthy by midwife as well as pediatrician
at 80 min postnatal age, 2130 hours in the evening. At 100 min (2150 hours), he was discovered cyanotic, hypotonic, without breathing
movements or pulse by midwife. Immediate and extensive resuscitation commenced including cardiac compression and intubation. Blood gas
minutes after event revealed pH 6.71, pCO2 of 15, pO2 of 11, and BE of −21 (mmol/L). Adrenaline injection and Tribonate® boluses were given,
and after 7 min, he had >100 heartbeats/minute and subsequently normalized oxygen saturation and blood gases. He was placed on mechanical
ventilation after 30 min of resuscitation due to absence of spontaneous breathing movements. Generalized seizures begun at 180 min postnatal
age and were stabilized with phenobarbital. Brain cerebral function monitoring exhibited burst suppression pattern. Lumbar puncture
performed 18 h after collapse revealed clear cerebrospinal fluid. Due to isoelectric EEG and hypoxic–ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) grade
III, he was detached from mechanical ventilation after parental consent and subsequently died at 23 h of age. Extended investigations
including autopsy did not reveal any malformations, infections, or sign of prenatal events that could explain the sudden collapse and early
death of this infant, an early SIDS. A girl born at gestational age 40 weeks and 5 days, 3,455 g by normal primiparous vaginal delivery. Her
Apgar scores were 9, 10, and 10 at 1, 5, and 10 min of age, with normal adequate postnatal examinations and behavior. She started
breastfeeding under midwife supervision. She was hungry, and supplemental milk was given with two normal blood glucose controls <23 h
postnatal age. At 24 h postnatal age, 1330 hours in the afternoon, while in prone breastfeeding position, the mother discovered her daughter
motionless, cyanotic without breathing movements. Immediate resuscitation with vigorous stimulation led to rapid, within minute, recovery of
spontaneous breathing and normal color and tonus and responsiveness after some two to three additional minutes. A full investigation for
possible sepsis was performed, including blood, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cultures. All results were negative including brain
ultrasound. After 24 h extra surveillance at the neonatal intensive care unit and four-dose antibiotic treatment, until blood and CSF
cultures were negative, the girl was considered healthy. Follow-up and outcome were normal. A boy, first twin, born at gestational age
week 36 and 3 days. He was delivered after a planned cesarean section that was performed due to a risk for preeclampsia development in a
primiparous mother and because both twins were in breech position. A proportional healthy boy, 2.48 kg and 49 cm length was delivered with
Apgar 9, 10, and 10 at 1, 5, and 10 min of age and umbilical cord artery pH 7.3, and BE of −2 (mmol/L). He exhibited good sucking reflexes
and started breastfeeding immediately and had normal blood-glucose levels and normal postnatal weight loss during first day. Due to
tachypnea (60–72 breaths/min) and saturation levels between 80 and 90 %, he received supplementary O2 (30 %) via continuous positive airway
pressure (CPAP). Several pediatric checkups were made during the first 24 h with normal CRP level (< mg/L) and clinical status except a
breathing frequency around 60–70/min. Due to tachypnea, infectious workup and lung X-ray were performed, and he was diagnosed as having a
mild transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN). At 35 h postnatal age, (2330 hours at night), the midwife saw him breastfeeding in prone
position. The midwife then noted that he suddenly became pale, hypotonic, and apneic. Bag and mask resuscitation were initiated, and cardiac
compression commenced as no pulse could be detected. After 2 min, he remained apneic, pale and unresponsive, and had bradycardia (about 100
beats/min). Blood-gas showed pH 6.98 and BE of −15 (mmol/L), and he received NaCl -bolus (10 mL/kg), Tribonate® 8 mL, and supplementary
oxygen. Some minutes later, gasping began. Subsequently, he commenced breathing with normal saturation under supplementary oxygen, but had
an elevated lactate (10 mmol/L). As he was still pale with decreased peripheral circulation, blood culture, infection samples were taken
before intravenous antibiotics with ongoing surveillance at the neonatal intensive care unit. Infectious and metabolic investigations were
all normal. Echocardiography revealed an atrial–septal defect (7 mm) and a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA, 3 mm) at 48 h postnatal age. PDA
remained until day 4 before spontaneously closing during the subsequent days. He received CPAP with air until 60 h postnatal age,
discontinued with adequate blood saturation levels. He was irritable, and brain ultrasound at days 2 and 3 revealed an HIE grade 1. No
seizures and normal electroencephalogram. The persistent foramen ovale (PFO) diminished from 7 to 3–4 mm during a week and was not present
at 5-month follow-up. During cardiovascular recordings and tilt test , he exhibited an immature but not pathological cardiovascular
response. His twin brother also had a similar, but less pronounced, immature cardiovascular response. This immature response remained at
examination at 3 and 7 months but was normal at 12-month follow-up. Normal neuromotor development and no sequela were detected at 12-month
follow-up. Cases 1 and 2 occurred 2001 and case 3 in 2010. These cases illustrate the varying outcome and presentation of SUPC that occurs
in the delivery wards and in the available literature. However, a systematic review of all the SUPC events reported during 2001 until 2010
at the Karolinska University hospitals has not yet been performed. Based on our exhaustive review of previous published case reports,
regional studies, and national surveys of SUPC, several questions emerge and can be addressed. When discussing them, we will use data coming
from our three described cases that illustrate the broad spectrum of SUPC: case 1, SUDI-early SIDS <2 h postnatal age; case 2, ALTE at 24 h
postnatal age, with good outcome and no etiology found; and finally, case 3, an ALTE event during second postnatal day with possible
etiologies, TTN, persistent foramen ovale, and immature cardiorespiratory control. All occurred unexpectedly during skin-to-skin contact in
prone position. Reports have used varying inclusion and exclusion criteria for SUPC requiring caution when comparing estimations of
incidence. The definitions of when (gestational age > week 35 or > week 38) and onset of (<2, <12, <24, <72 h or within 7 days after birth)
unexpected collapses of apparent healthy infants occur differ between published reports, i.e. [2, 3, 6, 12, 21, 22] (Table 1). Single center
reports an incidence of 27–40 SUPC cases per 100,000 births, but inclusion have been <12 and <72 h postnatal age, respectively [4, 21].
Several case reports from French maternity wards exist, and two estimate incidence to be 3.2–3.6/100,000 [2, 17]. Reports from Spain
describe an incidence between 5.5 and 74/100,000 [21, 23]. However, these French and Spanish studies have only included cases occurring
within 2 h after birth [2, 16, 17, 23, 24]. Recent national surveys from the UK and Germany have used yet another time criteria for
inclusion; SUPC is defined as occurring within the first 24 postnatal hours [3, 6]. Both these national surveys report an incidence of about
3 cases/100,000 infants (2.6 and 3.5/100,000, respectively). Notably, the German study excluded SUPC where an explanation could be found,
while the English study included these, possibly preventable, SUPC cases in its report [3, 6]. However, recent guidelines for investigations
of SUPC include infants with sudden unexpected collapse during the first postnatal week . Moreover, in the reports that include also infants
of postnatal age <3 or <7 days, roughly half of SUPC cases that are reported occur after 24 h (Table 3). Thus, excluding SUPC cases that
occur after 24 h in reports will underestimate the incidence of sudden unexpected postnatal collapses in presumably healthy babies. In
addition, several clusters of cases have been described [4, 21, 23]. Most publications and authors indicate that the number of reported SUPC
cases is lower than what occurs in the wards and only reflects the most critical events . Events with rapid and favorable outcome could
easily be missed in large surveys . One recent retrospective study indicates that the prevalence of early SUDI has not changed in northwest
England during 35 years and is considered rare (3.5 SUDI/100,000) . In contrast to the UK survey and report, Rodriguez-Alarcon et al. , in
their regional study, show a significant increase in SUPC (ALTE as well as SUDI) since December 2008. They associate the increased SUPC
incidence with altered routines in maternity wards and encouragement of early skin-to-skin contact but without adequate surveillance. We
have, in a separate report, investigated the prevalence of SUPC in three Stockholm University Hospitals examining some 68,000 births during
2.5 years, between January 2010 and July 2012. In this regional cohort study, the SUPC incidence is about half of the recent Spanish report
but, nonetheless, nearly tenfold higher than in the UK and German national surveys (Pejovic and Herlenius, unpublished results). SUPC were
vigorous stimulation enabled recovery are included in reports by Andres et al. (2 of 6 infants) and Grylack et al. (20 infants) , but these
cases are only mentioned in other studies and not included in some calculations of SUPC incidence, i.e., Poets et al. . A consensus for
coding unexpected postnatal collapse in ICD 10 has not yet been established. We think that also the early apparent life-threatening events
occurring in newborn where vigorous stimulation, with or without positive pressure ventilation, should be included in the SUPC definition ,
as our cases 2 and 3 illustrate. If these, and other, unexpected collapses leading to sudden cyanotic infants had been discovered later, the
consequences could have been more serious. These infants often need additional surveillance after resuscitation. Moreover, surviving cases
outside of the hospital would have been classified as ALTE, and all SUPC cases should undergo structured investigations for possible
preventable causes of the collapse . In our case 3, a combination of underlying, possible causative factors, associated to the SUPC event,
were found (PFO, PDA, TTN, and immature cardiorespiratory control). This allowed adequate therapeutic interventions, surveillance, and
follow-up with good outcome. Our summary of published reports indicates that even if still rare and with varying reported incidences, SUPC
might occur more frequently than indicated in recent surveys. Even the lowest incidence numbers, if extrapolated on the 5 million annual
births in the European Union, would result in some 500 SUPC cases and 150 newborn unexpected deaths yearly. Most of them are likely
preventable. Weber et al., in their review of autopsies performed over a 10-year period, revealed an underlying cause of the SUPC leading to
early SUDI in 58 % of the 55 infants examined. All were born after gestational week 35 and died unexpectedly during the first postnatal
week. Congenital heart malformations (n = 11) and infections (n = 9) were the leading causes of events, leading to sudden unexpected deaths,
both potentially preventable with an early discovery (Tables 1 and 4). Sudden and unexpected death can occur in newborns with metabolic
fatty organic acid (FAO) disorders . A significant proportion of patients with an FAO disorder experience hypoglycemia within the first 72 h
after birth and exhibit warning signals before a potential collapse . Nonetheless, some of the SUDI described (n = 10) were due to metabolic
disorders (Tables 1, 2, and 4) . Most of the known disorders that are involved in the explained SUPC cases induce signs and warning signals
in the infants before the collapse (Table 4). These collapses could be prevented with adequate surveillance and therapeutic support.Table
4Potentially preventable SUPC etiologiesEtiology to SUPC eventNReferenceInfection26[5, 6, 10, 12, 15, 19, 45]Cardiac disorder18[5, 6, 10,
19]PPHN respiratory disorder14[6, 10, 12, 22]Metabolic defects10[1, 6, 11, 19]Anemia3[5, 6] Potentially preventable SUPC etiologies Even if
several of the unexpected deaths can be explained after autopsy , 153 described SUPC cases leading to death remain unexplained (Tables 1 and
2) and have been classified as early SIDS. The present case 1 had a metabolic acidosis at birth, but recovered rapidly, and was presumed to
be healthy before unexpectedly collapsing without an etiology was found in spite of extensive, clinical laboratory, and autopsy
investigations. A mild gliosis in brainstem areas involved in cardiorespiratory control was found in seven of nine cases reexamined by
Obonai et al. . They suggest that impaired cardiorespiratory control due to hypoxic ischemic insults occurring several days before death
could contribute to these SUPC cases. A white matter gliosis was also found in 10 out of 16 unexplained SUDI cases, occurring mostly between
days 8 and 28 of life . However, these authors hypothesized that these lesions suggest that these infants could have experienced a previous
prenatal or early postnatal central nervous system insult, thus making them vulnerable for known SIDS risk factors such as bed sharing. Our
case 3 had an immature cardiorespiratory control and persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. A planned cesarean section, before
onset of spontaneous delivery, will lack the catecholamine surge induced by normal delivery and increase respiratory morbidity (odds ratios
2–4) . The immature cardiorespiratory control, exemplified in our case 3, is in accordance with this as well as previous report where about
half of the early ALTE cases examined had apneas >15 s and desaturations <85 % with four infants exhibiting bradycardias (heart rate <80
beats/min for more than 5 s) implying immature cardiorespiratory control . We speculate that dysfunctional or immature brainstem
cardiorespiratory control is involved in some of the unexplained SUPC cases. The transition from fetal to extra-uterine life could make the
newborn more vulnerable during the first hours of life. Before birth, the fetal brain microenvironment contains high levels of the
neuromodulators adenosine and prostaglandin that both exert inhibition of the fetal movements, decrease metabolic rate, energy turnover, and
thus protect the brain when oxygen and energy resources might be scarce, i.e., during birth. In fact, birth is a “hypoxic” and stressful
event . The healthy newborn baby is aroused and awake the first hour after birth and starts continuous breathing movements after the first
gasps of air. Factors like squeezing and squashing of the fetus, increased sensory input, and cooling are important. There is also a
noradrenaline surge in the human brain, and high level of plasma catecholamines is detected after birth . Moreover, a rapid decrease in the
inhibitory neuromodulator adenosine in the brain occurs, as partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood rapidly increases after birth, and
contributes to the increased activity in the newborn infant compared with the fetus . The initial arousal of the newborn is followed by a
period of diminished responsiveness to external stimuli and increased vagal tone . At birth, high levels of PGE2 are present in human term
infants and neonates . This is especially true during third stage of labor . Hypoxia, per se, rapidly induces an increase in microsomal
prostaglandin E synthase-1 activity and a subsequent brainstem-specific release of PGE2 with a depression of brainstem respiratory centers,
e.g., see Fig. 1b in Hofstetter et al. . This is consistent with evidence that anoxia induces PGE2 production in mice cortex and
prostaglandin H synthase-2 messenger RNA expression in the piglet brain . PGE2 is thus involved in the acute hypoxic response, also recently
shown by us [35, 37]. Actually, PGE levels in plasma are 20-fold higher in newborns than in 5–8-week-old infants and declines rapidly during
the first postnatal week . Moreover, elevated levels of prostaglandin in the cerebrospinal fluid are present during the first 24 h after
birth especially after birth asphyxia (Björk, Leifsdottir, Saha, and Herlenius, unpublished results). Presently, we can only speculate if
these elevated levels of prostaglandin contribute to the postnatal irresponsiveness that begins some hour after birth and contribute to the
SUPC occurring within the first hours after birth. This is a testable hypothesis, and we are currently examining the role of eicosanoids in
autonomic control and SUPC during the first days of postnatal life . A majority of events occur within 2 h of birth, often at the time of
the first breastfeeding attempt [6, 12] (Table 3). Moreover, most of cases reported, where information is available, occur in prone
position, i.e., [21, 23, 38], during skin-to-skin contact with their mothers (Table 1). In fact, SUPC is associated with prone
position/skin-to-skin/cobedding in 74 % (152 out of 207 cases; Tables 1 and 2). This in agreement with Poets et al. who, based on their 31
cases and 93 “controls,” estimated an odds ratio of 6.4 for SUPC to occur in prone or “potentially asphyxiating position” when an identified
cause could not be identified . Moreover, SUDI occurring in the first month of life is associated with bed sharing . All the present three
cases occurred in newborns to primiparous mothers during skin-to-skin contact, which is consistent with previous reports. Prone position,
first breastfeeding attempt, cobedding, mother in episiotomy position, a primiparous mother, and parents left alone with baby during first
hours after birth have been identified as risk factors for SUPC or early SIDS in several recent publications [2, 4, 12, 17, 24, 39, 40]. The
current concept of SIDS is based on the “triple-risk” hypothesis of an underlying genetic or developmental predisposition in combination
with an external trigger acting synergistically at a vulnerable developmental period . Nevertheless, despite recognition of possible generic
mechanisms and epidemiological risk factors, the exact mechanism(s) of death is still unclear. The occurrence of an alveolar septal collapse
in the neonatal lung has been shown to induce severe hypoxemia and to be involved in some early SUDI cases . This possible biomechanical
mechanism has been hypothesized to explain the association of the known risk factors for SUDI such as cosleeping, prematurity, prone
sleeping position, overwrapping, overheating, and maternal smoking and possibly also be involved in some SUPC events. Although deaths in the
first week of life are often not included in SIDS datasets, the current and other summaries of SUPC cases and risk factors [1, 12] suggest
that similar processes to SIDS may account for about half of all sudden unexpected deaths of apparently previously healthy infants in the
first week of life . In ALTE, the role of central respiratory control immaturity is established, and the same risk factors as for SIDS are
apparent, at least during the first 24 h of life . Recommendations that all newborn infants should be placed in supine position within the
first few hours after birth are emphasized in the reports of SUPC and in the guidelines to reduce the risk of SIDS . Different preventive
measures and organizations of care have been strongly recommended by the majority of authors. Regardless of SUPC’s etiology, the most
important point underlined by most authors as well as in the current report is to maintain unobtrusively, but continuously, a secure
surveillance of the newborn during his first hours and days of life. Barriers to this during night/weekend times or periods of overwork in
busy units should not be disregarded and should be taken into account using quality process audit in each center. The three targets on which
perinatal healthcare teams could focus to protect otherwise healthy newborns, are (1) safe early skin-to-skin care (SSC) in the delivery
room, (2) safe breastfeeding establishment in the first days of life, and (3) secure positioning of the infant during sleep. Some tools to
reach them are summarized in Box 1. The impact of the implementation of these recommendations should be evaluated, and they could also help
prevent further cases occurring in otherwise healthy infants. Moreover, the early recognition of an underlying disease could allow
therapeutic intervention and improvement of long-term outcome. Even if SUPC is a rare entity, an adequate surveillance of the infants,
during their first hours (and days) of life, should enable us to save hundreds of newborn lives annually. Sudden unexpected postnatal
collapse Early sudden infant death syndrome Apparent life threatening event Sudden unexpected death in infancy Sudden unexpected early
neonatal death Base excess Electroencephalography Continuous positive airway pressure Hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy Transient tachypnea of
the newborn Patent foramen ovale International Classification of Disease Patent ductus arteriosus Prostaglandin E2 Microsomal prostaglandin
E synthase-1 Safe early skin-to-skin care Sudden unexpected postnatal collapse (SUPC) of healthy infants within the first days after birth
is a rare event but consequences are often catastrophic. Sudden apparent life-threatening events and deaths may occur during the first
postnatal week and happens more frequently than indicated in recent national surveys limited to events within the first 24 h. Three new SUPC
cases are described to illustrate the varying presentation, outcome as well as possible etiologies and testable hypothesizes. Healthy
newborns, especially during skin-to-skin contact in prone position, should be supervised during the first hours of postnatal life without
interfering with the mother–child bonding to prevent SUPC. The Swedish Research Council, the Stockholm County Council, and Karolinska
Institutet, supported this work as well as a mobility grant from the “Association de Néonatologie de Port Royal” (Paris, France) to Pierre
Kuhn. We thank the physicians and midwives that reported these cases. We are indebted to Drs. Nicolas Pejovic, Hugo Lagercrantz, Giovanna
Marchini, Veronica Siljehav, Monica Perez, and Gary Cohen for valuable discussions, helpful suggestions, and native language assistance. The
authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
