To the Editor, The global epidemiology of Staphylococcus aureus has changed over the past decade, and this has been characterized by the
emergence of community-associated methicillin-resistant S. aureus (CA-MRSA), which has spread to hospitals. Several CA-MRSA clones have
emerged in various geographic locations, some of which have become widespread worldwide through intercontinental transmission. The most
successful pandemic CA-MRSA clone is the Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL)-positive sequence type (ST) 8-MRSA-SCCmec IV (USA300), which
originated in the USA. At present, USA300 or closely related variants have been reported in many countries across five continents . In
Korea, a distinct CA-MRSA clone, ST72-MRSA-IV, emerged and has been spreading in both communities and hospitals . Nevertheless, in Korea,
only two reported infections caused by the pandemic clone USA300 have occurred to date . Here, we report the third confirmed infection
caused by the USA300 CA-MRSA strain in Korea. An 82-year-old female patient, who had no history of international travel, presented with a
palpable tender lesion in the suprapubic area on October 17, 2009. She had hypertension for 30 years. Four months earlier, she underwent
percutaneous coronary intervention for unstable angina. She developed a painful ulcer in the suprapubic area 2 months earlier, which
worsened and was complicated by erythema and purulent discharge beginning 20 days earlier. On admission, she was hypothermic (35.6℃), and
had a pulse rate of 77 beats/min, blood pressure of 149/74 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min. The erythema in her suprapubic area
was 10 cm in diameter and had a crust with purulent discharge at the center. Laboratory tests showed 19,260 leukocytes/µL, hemoglobin 12.5
g/dL, platelets 262,000/µL, aspartate transaminase 29 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 27 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase 535 IU/L, blood urea
nitrogen 29 mg/dL, and creatinine 1.07 mg/dL. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging suggested an immature subcutaneous abscess in the suprapubic
area with surrounding inflammation (Fig. 1). Cefazolin was administered empirically after requesting cultures of the purulent discharge.
These grew MRSA, which was susceptible to ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, clindamycin, rifampicin, cotrimoxazole, and tetracycline. The
antibiotic regimen was changed to vancomycin, and surgical drainage with debridement of necrotic tissues was performed. All of the symptoms
and signs of the subcutaneous abscess subsided after vancomycin injection for 7 days and subsequent use of oral cotrimoxazole for 12 days.
The molecular characteristics of the isolated MRSA strain were compared with those of reference strains. Multilocus sequence typing, SCCmec
typing, and staphylococcal protein A (spa) typing were performed, as described previously . The presence of the lukF-PV and lukS-PV genes
encoding the components of the PVL toxin was screened, as described previously. The isolate was determined to be PVL-positive ST8-MRSA-IV
and belonged to spa type t008. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) was performed, as described previously. The PFGE patterns were
analyzed using the GelCompar II software (Applied Maths, Sint-Martens-Latem, Belgium) and compared to two reference strains: the SMC
USA300-1 strain, a clinical isolate reported twice in Korea , and the USA300 reference strain (NRS384), which was obtained from the Network
on Antimicrobial Resistance in Staphylococcus aureus supported under National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases/National
Institutes of Health contract #HHSN2722 0070 0055C. The PFGE patterns of the isolate (SMC USA300-2) showed 81.0% similarity to the USA300
reference strain and 93.3% similarity to the SMC USA300-1 strain, indicating that they are closely related (Fig. 2). This is the third
confirmed infection in Korea caused by the USA300 clone. While the first Korean case of USA300 reported in 2008 was in a patient who had
traveled to Hawaii , the second and current cases had no overseas travel history, which suggests the autochthonous acquisition of the USA300
clone in Korea. Autochthonous acquisition of the USA300 clone has also been documented in some European countries, Canada, and Japan .
Interestingly, the PFGE pattern of the MRSA strain from this case was more similar to that of the second Korean strain than to the USA300
reference strain, which also supports the possibility of autochthonous acquisition of the USA300 clone in Korea. It also implies that our
case and the second case were caused by autochthonous acquisition of the USA300 clone. In summary, we report the third confirmed infection
caused by the USA300 clone in a Korean resident, possibly acquired autochthonously. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this
article is reported. A contrast-enhanced T2-weighted magnetic resonance image with fat saturation shows an enhancing lesion in the
subcutaneous layer of the suprapubic area. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) patterns of the methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus isolate from the patient and control stains. The analysis of the PFGE patterns showed that this isolate (SMC USA300-2) was the same
pulsotype as the USA300 strain. The PFGE pattern of the isolate showed 81.0% similarity to the USA300 reference strain and 93.3% similarity
to the SMC USA300-1 strain, which was reported for the second time in Korea. Top lane, the strain in the second case (SMC USA300-1); middle
lane, the strain infecting our patient (SMC USA300-2); bottom, the reference USA300 strain (NRS384) obtained from the Network on
Antimicrobial Resistance in Staphylococcus aureus.
