The authors review the role of selenium and highlight possible low selenium levels in soil that may result in deficient states in Saudi
Arabia. The authors report a case of selenium-responsive cardiomyopathy in a 15-month old Saudi Arabian boy. This case of selenium
deficiency causing dilated cardiomyopathy is presented with failure to thrive, prolonged fever and respiratory distress. The investigations
revealed selenium deficiency. Selenium supplementation along with anti-failure therapy [Furosimide, Captopril] was administered for 6
months. Following therapy the cardiac function, hair, skin and the general health of the patient improved significantly. The patient with
dilated cardiomyopathy of unknown etiology, not responding to usual medication may be deficient in selenium. Serum selenium measurements
should be included in the diagnostic work-up to ensure early detection and treatment of the disease. The selenium level in the Saudi
population needs be determined. Vulnerable populations have to undergo regular selenium measurements and supplementation if indicated.
Dependence on processed foods suggests that the Saudi population fortify themselves with nutrient and micronutrient supplements in
accordance to the RDA. Selenium is an essential trace element in humans and animals. It is known for its potent antioxidant activity.
Selenium is vital for good health . Al-Saleh and coworkers measured selenium in 300 umbilical cord blood samples collected from healthy
pregnant women in Al-Kharj area in Saudi Arabia which showed serum selenium levels of 40.847 ± 8.969 μg/L in 300 newborns. Of interest, the
cord serum selenium level was significantly lower in preterm infants than full-term infants (32 ± 8.029 μg/L versus 41.323 ± 8.784 μg/L).
They also noted a significant positive correlation between selenium levels and birth weight. Their findings suggest that low selenium levels
in newborns reflect an inadequate maternal dietary intake. Another study performed on Saudi Arabian patients suffering from dilated
cardiomyopathy showed that while no link could be established between plasma selenium levels and the disease, the level of selenium in the
supposedly healthy controls was at the lower end of the normal range and the test group only marginally lower than the control group . In
two other studies performed in the AlKharj area of Saudi Arabia by Al-Saleh et al. noted that 41% of 737 adults and 53.4% of 513 children
had toenail selenium levels lower than 0.56 μg/g that are considered low but not deficient (< 0.46 μg/g). Much earlier, studies performed by
the same authors on selenium levels in wheat grown in various parts of Saudi Arabia and, the soil, alfalfa and water in farms in AlKharj
area of Saudi Arabia showed selenium levels to be insufficient in wheat grains of 7 of 8 regions in Saudi Arabia and very low in soil
specimens. Importantly, the very low levels of selenium were found in the soil in the Keshan region of China, where selenium deficiency was
thought to be the etiologic factor responsible for endemic dilated cardiomyopathy or Keshan disease prevalent in that region. Indeed
selenium deficiency is now well recognized as the causative factor implicated in the etiology of Keshan disease in China. This suggests that
the Saudi population in the AlKharj region and possibly in the rest of Saudi Arabia could be at risk of selenium deficiency. The toenail
selenium levels seen in Saudi Arabia were reflective of low but not deficient levels probably because unlike the Chinese of Keshan province
the Saudis consume imported foodstuff, practice different lifestyles and their higher socioeconomic conditions probably help maintain their
selenium levels within the normal range albeit at its lower end. This plus the findings of insufficient selenium observed in wheat grains
grown in 7 of 8 regions of Saudi Arabia suggest that marginal selenium deficiency could be endemic in Saudi Arabia and that the deficient
state could manifest in some isolated segments of the Saudi society. Selenium therefore deserves to be investigated in greater detail and
such knowledge could assist in the diagnosis and resolution of disease conditions peculiar to selenium deficiency. Selenium is perhaps a
hitherto neglected entity but possibly a crucial factor affecting the Saudi population. It is known to be essential for a vast number of
normal physiologic activities and for the maintenance of good health. Therefore, its deficiency is implicated in an array of disease states
which are discussed in this brief review. Major dietary sources of selenium are plant foods (provided the soil is not deficient in
selenium), animal kidneys, seafood, egg yolk and Brazil nuts . Besides, the soil selenium level is reflected in the concentrations seen in
plants . Parenteral and enteral nutrition are iatrogenic causes of selenium deficiency. Selenium malabsorption, cystic fibrosis, rheumatoid
arthritis, neoplasia, and other varied clinical disorders exhibit low plasma levels of selenium. Highest concentrations of selenium are
found in Brazil nuts that provide 8 and 83 g Selenium/g . Consumption of one and up to a maximum of two Brazil nuts per day (estimated to
contain ~100 g of selenium) may help to meet daily requirements. However, consumption of more than two Brazil nuts per day may contribute to
selenium toxicity due to accumulation of selenium. In particular, high selenium exposure may be associated with defective glucose and lipid
metabolism and could lead to diabetes and hyperlipidemia. Since the early 1900s selenium has been regarded as possessing anticancer
properties . It has been found to inhibit DNA damage in vitro, and reduce pulmonary metastasis and radiation-induced carcinogenesis in vivo.
There appears to be an association between selenium levels and risk of lung cancer . Besides anticancer properties, selenium has a number of
functions in the normal cardiovascular , reproductive , gastroenterological , hepatic and immune systems . In addition, new roles of
selenium are being discovered . Selenium in the form of various selenoproteins is involved in the human antioxidant systems . The numbers of
selenoproteins known to be operating in the human include at least 25 and up to 30 selenoproteins, including glutathione peroxidase,
thioredoxin reductase, iodothyronine deiodinase, and selenoproteins P, W, and R . It is now well documented that these enzymes protect
against free radical damage. They also regulate DNA transcription and cell proliferation. Selenium exerts its chemopreventive effect through
the glutathione and thioredoxin systems , while some investigations suggest protective effects against allergies , and asthma , the other
studies could not find a correlation between selenium and asthma . In addition, recent studies suggest growth inhibitory and proapoptotic
activity for selenometabolites in premalignant cells . It is fairly well recognized that selenium is also involved in thyroid function,
T-cell immunity, and spermatogenesis . It is also known to be a competitive antagonist of heavy metals such as arsenic and cadmium that are
potentially carcinogenic. Besides, selenium deficiency could predispose the affected individual to a number of diseases . Selenium
deficiency could predispose to viral infections or cause a depletion of selenium or both as a consequence of which certain disease states
could manifest such as cardiomyopathy (Coxsackie virus) or immunosuppression as in HIV-induced AIDS . In particular, selenium deficiency in
patients with HIV infection may be due to the trapping of selenium by a selenoprotein encoded by the proviral genome . Numerous reports have
implicated selenium deficiency in cardiovascular diseases, including studies from Saudi Arabia , but other studies including one study from
Saudi Arabia have been inconclusive. Congestive cardiomyopathy or skeletal- muscle disorders may also develop in patients with selenium
deficiency . Here the authors highlight the possible presence of low levels and possibly deficient states of selenium in the Saudi
population. The authors report a case in point of selenium-responsive cardiomyopathy in a 15-month old Saudi Arabian boy. It is crucial to
bear in mind that selenium deficiency could be the underlying cause when confronted with cardiomyopathy. This is due to the fact that
selenium levels in the Saudi soil and therefore in its produce could be low. Indeed the level of selenium intake and its level in the tested
segments of the Saudi population appear to be low as reviewed in this report. The early identification of selenium deficiency in dilated
cardiomyopathy is imperative for the prevention and reversal of its deleterious effects on the myocardium . A 15 months old Saudi boy from
the Al Qassem area of Saudi Arabia was presented with prolonged fever (6 months) and shortness of breath for two weeks. He had a history of
chronic diarrhea and had lost 2 kg of weight in the previous 8 months. The patient presented with signs of congestive heart failure; labored
breathing, tachypnea, poor appetite, weight loss, hepatomegaly and required anti-failure medications (Captopril and Furosemide). While these
two medications helped to relieve the patient of his symptoms, they did not treat the underlying cause of the condition. Echocardiography
(Figure 1) revealed dilated cardiomyopathy. He was born full term following normal spontaneous vaginal delivery. His birth weight was 3.4
kg. He was the 5th sibling of non-consanguineous parents. His antenatal and post natal life periods were uneventful. There was no family
history of any known chronic illnesses or unexplained death. He received breast-feeding exclusively for one year. He started sitting at 6
months of age and his development, weight and length were appropriate until six months prior to his presentation. Soon after six months of
age he stopped to thrive due to ongoing illness. He had asthma which was controlled by ventolin and flixotide. Echocardiography of a
15-month male infant with dilated myocardiopathy. Investigations undertaken were his metabolic profile (serum ammonia, lactate, newborn
screening, urine orgnic acid, tendem mass spectrophotometry (MS), serum carnitine level, organic acid gas chromatography-mass
spectrophotometry (GC-MS), immunological profile [immunoglobulin level, oxidative burst test, lymphocytes markers], thyroid function tests,
sweat chloride test, stool alpha 1 antitrypsin, celiac profile, bone profile, liver function test, coagulation profile, complete blood
count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), lipid profile, serum albumin, small intestinal biopsy, Magnetic Resonance imaging (MRI) brain.
All were within normal limits, however his serum selenium level was very low [9.1 μg/l (measured by inductively coupled mass
spectrophotometry); normal range: 55–103 g/l]. Interaction of selenium with other micronutrients was not investigated because thyroid
function tests were normal and clinically there appeared to be no concern of iodine or vitamin E deficiency including that of other micro
nutrients. Selenium supplement (by the standard 2 μg/kg/day which is well documented) was commenced per os and was administered for about 6
months. His diarrhea, infections, failure to thrive, cardiomyopathy was managed in collaboration with the pediatric cardiology,
gastroenterology, metabolic, neurology and nutritional units of the hospital. He was followed up in out-patient department. Improvement was
observed following these interventions. He gained weight. Positive changes were noted for his skin, hair and general health as evidenced by
signs and symptoms and echo images. Repeat echocardiography was apparently normal following selenium treatment (Figure 2). He also
demonstrated improved appetite, neurological and cardiac functions (ejection fraction was from 40 to 80%). The patient responded to selenium
supplementation within 3–4 months. His selenium levels were repeatedly measured at 3 and 6 months following selenium supplementation that
revealed normalized selenium levels (94/L). Apparently normal echocardiography after selenium therapy in a 15-month male infant. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. The prevalence of selenium deficiency and low levels of selenium in
the Saudi population is not known. The available literature shows that highly plausible diseases associated with selenium deficiency appear
to be a distinct possibility due to the low levels of selenium found in the soil, alfalfa grass, and water, and as reflected in the toenails
in the area tested . Although the soil selenium levels could vary from place to place, the very fact that low soil selenium exists in a
given sector of Saudi Arabia suggests that it could likewise exist in other parts of the country. However the fact that the Saudi population
depends almost entirely on imported processed foods suggests that the selenium deficiency could well be due to imported processed foods
rather than from soil but this remains to be elucidated. Likewise it is probable that the dependence of the Saudi population on imported
processed foods could also lead to deficiency in other nutrients and micronutrients. Clinicians must consider selenium deficiency if the
symptoms and clinical presentations are reminiscent of diseases associated with selenium deficiency. The present case report is a case in
point. Although, the first cases were reported in 1937 during an epidemic in a rural area of China called Keshan, hence the term Keshan
Disease , it was not until 1971 that a correlation between selenium deficiency and this disease was established. The mechanism of its
pathogenesis is thought to be due to viral infection of selenium deficientcy–induced weakened cardiomyocytes . It is well documented that
selenium is an essential co-factor of the enzyme glutathione peroxidase (GPX). There are 8 isoforms of GPX selenoenzymes in humans, but only
six (GPX1-6) contain selenium. A decrease in the activity of glutathione peroxidase enzyme secondary to selenium deficiency may lead to an
increase in the oxidative stress in the myocardial cells, and this can make the cell more susceptible to Coxsackie virus or infection by
other viruses. This mechanism was demonstrated in mice models by injecting viral genome in mice deficient in selenium as opposed to mice fed
diet containing sufficient selenium. The incidence of myocarditis in the former was much higher . Furthermore, selenium deficiency appears
to increase the virulence of otherwise benign virus. Myocardial necrosis, dyspnea, early fatigue and even early or sudden death are
associated with selenium deficiency. The time course for the development of congestive cardiac failure in affected individuals varies in the
presence of viral infection between several hours in patients with Keshan disease to several years in patients on total parenteral nutrition
. Selenium deficiency is confirmed by measuring serum or plasma concentrations of selenium. Values lower than 70 ng/mL or 0.8 μmol/L suggest
that synthesis of selenium-associated proteins is not optimal and selenium supplies are limited . Hovewer, selenium deficiency on its own
does not usually cause illness. It makes the body more vulnerable to diseases . Selenium and or glutathione peroxidase level(s) may be
indicated if there is no other possible reason, cause or explanation for dilated cardiomyopathy in children. Selenium supplementation is
indicated when it is below the normal range but should be discontinued when selenium levels are normalized. It may be worthwhile to
determine the levels of selenium and other nutrients and micronutrients in the Saudi population due to the observation in a select Saudi
community that selenium levels are on the border-line in the supposedly normal population (7). Moreover, it is recommended that regular
selenium measurements are performed followed by supplementation if levels are below the normal range in selected vulnerable populations. The
dependence on imported processed foods in Saudi Arabia suggests that it may also be worthwhile to determine the levels of other nutrients
including micronutrients in the Saudi population and common foods, since possible deficiencies of other nutrients and micronutrients could
coexist with selenium deficiency. Until sufficient data is available to prove otherwise, the Saudi population should fortify themselves with
nutrients and micronutrient supplements in keeping with the Recommended of Dietary Allowances (RDA) because processed foods may be deficient
in nutrients and micronutrients. In view of possible prevalence of low or deficient levels of selenium in the Saudi population it is
imperative that selenium deficiency is considered when symptoms presentation is reminiscent of diseases associated with selenium deficiency.
It is important the selenium level in the Saudi population is determined. Vulnerable populations have to be carefully monitored with regular
selenium measurements and supplementation if indicated. Dependence on processed foods suggests that the Saudi population fortifies
themselves with nutrient and micronutrient supplements in accordance to the RDA. ESR: Erythrocyte sedimentation rate; GC-MS: Gas
Chromatography - Mass Spectrophotometry; GPX: Glutathione peroxidase; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging; MS: Mass spectrophotometry; RDA:
Recommended of Dietary Allowances. The authors have no conflicts of interest whatsoever with regard to funding, commercial interests, etc.
Authors declare no competing interests. No funding was sought for this work. No funding was received from any source other than routine
operational budget that was not handled by the authors. ARM contributed to the conceptualization, conduct of the study and wrote the first
draft of the case report MH provided the clinical aspects of the study while JA reviewed the subject and re-wrote the manuscript . All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2431/13/39/prepub The authors express gratitude to Dr. Ali Alasmari Pediatric Metabolist and Dr.Omar
Galal, Pediatric Cardiologist, for their assistance in this case study.
