Mycobacterium fortuitum is a non-tuberculous fast-growing mycobacterium which is frequently acquired from environmental sources such as soil
and water. Since it is an opportunist pathogen, it is associated with trauma, surgery or immunodeficiency. The current report describes a
case of Mycobacterium fortuitum-caused disseminated lesions on the skin of an immunocompetent patient. Mycobacterium fortuitum é uma
micobactéria não tuberculosa de rápido crescimento, freqüentemente adquirida em fontes ambientais como solo e água. E um patógeno
oportunista que está geralmente associado a trauma, procedimentos cirúrgicos, ou imunodeficiência. Este relato descreve um caso de lesões
disseminadas na pele causada por Mycobacterium fortuitum em paciente sem imunocomprometimento. There are currently over 140 species of
nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) and that number has been increasing every year. NTM is a widely diverse group of organisms with a broad
spectrum of virulence and potential to cause human disease.1 Diseases caused by NTM, which have been grouped as mycobacterioses, show a wide
broad spectrum of clinical manifestations and are not usually transmitted from man to man.2 Cutaneous mycobacterioses are not common;
clinical, histopathological and bacteriological findings are not very distinct, making the diagnosis difficult.3 Mycobacterium fortuitum is
a rapidly growing NTM, often acquired from environmental sources such as soil and water. It is considered an opportunistic pathogen often
associated with trauma, surgical procedures, or immunodeficiency.4,5 There are few reports of infections in healthy hosts, which include
cutaneous and soft tissue after intramuscular injections, breast augmentation and other forms of surgery, soft tissue infection following
acupunture and also outbreaks of M. fortuitum as agents of furunculosis on the legs after pedicure procedures.5,6,7 The pathogenicity of M.
fortuitum is unclear but it is known that local trauma is the most important entry point for infections of the skin and soft tissues,
followed by nosocomial acquisition.8 NTM infection should be considered in the differential diagnosis of chronic infection, fever of unknown
origin and localized disease (abscesses, ulcers, nodules, infiltration, etc.) that do not respond to antibiotics commonly used in skin
infections.6 This report describes a case of disseminated skin lesions caused by M. fortuitum in an young woman without clinical signs of
immunosuppression. A 32-year-old woman who worked as a nurse in hospitals in Maringá, Parana, Brazil, suffered from erythema nodule-type
lesions with some cold abscesses. The lesions had diameters ranging from 5 to 30 mm, on the trunk and on the upper and lower members, with
an evolution of approximately 60 days (Figure 1). At first, the patient was treated with cephalexin 500 mg four times daily, for
furunculosis, and later, with ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally twice daily for 14 days, with no improvement. Puncture and drainage of certain
lesions were undertaken and specimens submitted to culture. Results were negative for aerobic bacteria and facultative anaerobic ones. The
patient was then treated with rifampicin 600 mg orally twice daily and tetracycline 500 mg, four times daily, for 30 days, without any
clinical improvement. The patient underwent biopsy for pathological test and culture for Acid-Fast Bacilli (AFB), fungi and pyogenic
bacteria. Complementary tests, such as hemoculture, Hemogram, Aspartate Aminotranspherase (AST), Alanine-aminotranspherase (ALT), Urea,
Createnin, Hemosedimentation speed, Antinuclear Antibodies (ANA), serology for HIV, Hepatitis C and B (HBs Ag, Anti-HBc, Anti-HBs), acid
Alpha 1-glycoprotein, Immunoglobulins (IgE, IgA, IgG, IgM), Rheumatoid factor, Reactive Protein "C", Complement C3 and C4, CD4/CD8, were
performed. The pathological test indicated deep perforating and suppurating folliculitis surrounded by a granulomatous and suppurating
inflammatory process typifying a foreign body, coupled to a superficial and perivascular limphohistoplasmocytarian infiltrate and to a deep
periadnexal infiltrate. Direct research for fungi and AFB showed negative results. Culture for AFB was positive in less than seven days at
30ºC and 35ºC. No growth of other bacteria occurred. Identification of AFB isolate was undertaken by Restriction Fragment Length
Polymorphism Analysis (PCR-PRA) as Mycobacterium fortuitum complex.9 No complementary test produced any changes that would justify
involvement of other infectious pathogens. The patient underwent treatment using intravenous amikacin 1 g, three times weekly,
clarithromycin 500 mg orally twice daily, during 12 weeks. Afterward monotherapy was maintained with clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily for
12 months. The elapsed time from first medical appointment until the beginning of therapy that achieved regression of lesions was
approximately two months. By the end of treatment the patient experienced total regression of skin lesions with no recurring factor up to
the present. A. Erythematous nodular lesions on the trunk; B,C,D erythematous nodular lesions on lower members of the body The current
report describes a case of M. fortuitum-caused disseminated skin lesions in patient without clinical signs of immunosuppression. This is
different from cases with localized lesions currently described in the literature.10 Since the patient did not have either a surgical
history or any other type of skin trauma, the source of M. fortuitum infection remained unknown. M. fortuitum is frequently sensitive in
vitro to several oral antimicrobial agents, including last generation quinolone, macrolides, doxycyclines, minocyclines, amikacin and
sulfonamide.11 With the therapy initially employed, the patient demonstrated bacterial resistance to ciprofloxacin. However, when the
infectious agent was identified as belonging to the genus Mycobacterium spp. and therapy with amikacin and clarithromycin started, the
patient showed complete resolution of lesions. In spite of the fact that 80% of isolates are sensitive to clarithromycin, experts do not
recommend monotherapy and justify the association with amikacin.8 Recent studies have shown that a significant amount of M. fortuitum are
resistant to macrolides and that, as a rule, antimicrobial resistance in M. fortuitum may not be detected by routine sensitivity tests.8 For
a high cure probability, a minimum therapy period of four months is recommended in bone, serious cutaneous and soft tissues infections using
at least two active agents.8 Current report highlights the need to include M. fortuitum in the differential diagnosis of cutaneous
infections that fail to respond to antimicrobial therapy against pyogenic bacteria. This is due to the fact that non-tuberculous
mycobacteria have been isolated with greater frequency. The issue requiring an answer in situations described above is whether such increase
occurred through the improvement of diagnosis techniques or through an increase in mycobacterial virulence. Financial support: none.
Conflict of interests: none. * Study carried out at the Clinical Bacteriology Laboratory-LEPAC of the Department of Clinical Analyses and
Biomedicine, (Universidade Estadual de Maringá-UEM) - Maringá (PR), Brazil.
