It may be clinically difficult to differentiate early-stage melanoma from benign tumors, specially pigmented seborrheic keratosis.
Dermoscopy can help; however, the findings are not always conclusive. Therefore, histopathology may be necessary for a correct diagnosis. We
describe a melanocytic lesion with dubious clinic and dermoscopic findings. An incisional biopsy of a suspicious area, guided by dermoscopy,
was performed to clarify the findings. A diferença clínica entre melanoma inicial e tumores benignos pode ser difícil em algumas ocasiões,
especialmente na ceratose seborreica pigmentada. A dermatoscopia pode ajudar; porém, os achados nem sempre são conclusivos, de modo que a
histopatologia pode ser necessária para o diagnóstico correto. Descrevemos uma lesão melanocítica com aspectos clínicos e dermatoscópicos
duvidosos. Nesse caso, a biópsia incisional de área suspeita, guiada pela dermatoscopia, estabeleceu o diagnóstico. Dermoscopy or
epiluminescence microscopy, noninvasive and practical, is nowadays an important tool for the diagnosis of pigmented lesions, helping to
differentiate non-melanocytic lesions from melanocytic ones, as well as to distinguish between benign and malignant melanocytic lesions. In
some situations, however, there are difficulties in the interpretation of dermoscopic signs, because of mixed characteristics and the
subjective analysis of the method. If melanoma persists as a diagnostic possibility, an incisional biopsy should be performed in the
dermoscopically suspicious area.1,2,3 A 50-year-old white male physician, born and raised in Rio de Janeiro, was referred to our Dermatology
Department for skin cancer screening. On physical examination, we observed a 3 cm blackened macula with an irregular border and more than
one color on the right calf (Figure 1). The patient told us that the lesion had appeared 10 years ago, showing progressive growth in recent
months. He had a positive family history of melanoma. Dermoscopic examination showed a peripheral atypical pigmented network structure (more
marked on the right of the lesion), brownish streaks in the central area and in the right periphery, a peripheral area with a black blotch
and some globular structures, an amorphous area with a pseudofollicular opening and pseudocysts on the left of the lesion, beyond the veil
in the center of the lesion (Figures 2 e 3). Multi-colored blackened macula on the right calf with an irregular border Peripheral atypical
pigmented network structure (more marked on the right of the lesion), brownish streaks in the central area and right periphery, a peripheral
area with a black blotch and some globular structures, an amorphous area with a pseudofollicular opening and pseudocysts on the left of the
lesion, beyond the veil in the center of the lesion Details of the suspicious area biopsied As the lesion had some clinical aspects of
seborrheic keratosis and the more suspicious dermoscopic findings were restricted to only a part of the lesion, we chose to perform an
incisional biopsy (punch 4) in this area (with streaks). Histological examination showed confluent atypical melanocytes, occupying part of
the epidermis and extending into the superficial dermis, several mitotic figures, and an inflammatory reaction in the dermis. A diagnosis of
superficial spreading melanoma was rendered (Breslow thickness = 0.37 mm) (Figure 4). Dermoscopy-guided incisional biopsy revealing a 0.37
mm-thick melanoma (panoramic view, x40, hematoxylin-eosin) The lesion was then removed with a 1 cm margin, and the wound was left to heal by
secondary intention. The histological examination of this surgical specimen just showed a residual inflammatory reaction. There were no
other melanoma features. The area of the blotch seen on the dermoscopy was histologically related to acanthosis, papilomatosis, and
extensive deposition of melanin pigment in the dermis (consistent with partial regression phenomenon) (Figure 5). Thus, we found that the
portion of the malignant lesion had been excised with incisional biopsy guided by dermoscopy. Excisional biopsy; the area of the blotch seen
on dermoscopy was histologically related to acanthosis, papilomatosis, and extensive deposition of melanin pigment in the dermis (consistent
with partial regression phenomenon) Melanoma with seborrheic keratosis (SK)-like features is a potential diagnostic pitfall, since it may
present with classic dermoscopic features of SK, including multiple comedo-like openings and milia-like cysts, which may prove to be
misleading.1,2 SK usually presents an easy clinical diagnosis that does not require dermoscopic evaluation. However, if the clinician feels
inclined to use dermoscopy to assess a SK-like lesion, it probably deserves careful and meticulous scrutiny to rule out features of
melanoma.3,4,5 This is what occurred in the case reported, in which dermoscopy was fundamental in selecting the biopsy site. Most
retrospective and prospective studies do not show an influence on patient outcome after incisional biopsies in melanoma lesions. Although
complete excisional biopsies are generally the recommended standard for melanoma surgery, incisional biopsies are currently recommended for
histopathologic diagnosis of the most clinically or dermoscopically atypical portion of the lesion in certain circumstances, such as facial
or acral location, low clinical suspicion or uncertainty of diagnosis, or very large lesions.6,7,8 Our patient's lesion showed suspicious
dermoscopic aspects in a restricted area, so we opted for an incisional biopsy of that area, which proved diagnostic. An excisional biopsy
showed that the melanoma had been removed with the incisional biopsy of the suspicious area, since the remainder of the skin sample showed
fibrosis only, representing perhaps the amorphous area and veil seen on dermoscopy. Another important point to note in this case is that,
even though the patient was a medical doctor and had a positive family history of melanoma, he was unable to recognize his leg lesion as
worrisome. This case illustrates that the judicious use of dermoscopy is very helpful in doubtful clinical cases of melanocytic/pigmented
lesions. It also stresses the need for more effective instruction of the general medical population in recognizing the "warning signs" of
these cutaneous lesions in themselves and in their patients. Financial support: none. Conflict of interests: none. * Work conducted at Pedro
Ernesto University Hospital (Hospital Universitário Pedro Ernesto) - Rio de Janeiro State University (Universidade do Estado do Rio de
Janeiro - HUPE-UERJ) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
