There are only nine primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) cases that have arisen in lung parenchyma without pleural or chest wall
involvement in the literature. Here, we present a long–term survival case of pulmonary PNET. A pulmonary mass was detected in a 19-year-old
man on a chest radiograph and computed tomography image. At the three-year follow-up, the mass had enlarged in diameter by two-fold. The
lesion was resected via lower left lobectomy. Histologically, the tumor was composed of uniform cells with round nuclei and scanty cytoplasm
arranged in lobules with rosettes and pseudorosettes formation. Immunohistochemically, the tumor was positive for CD99, vimentin, neuron
specific enolase and chromogranin A, and negative for cytokeratins, CD3, desmin, and leukocyte common antigen. Pancreatic metastasis
occurred sixteen months after the first surgery, which was managed by pancreatectomy. The patient has survived seven years after the mass
was initially detected, and four years after the first lobectomy. The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1500847644913244 Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs), first described by Hart and Earle
in 1973 , belong to the group of highly malignant neoplasms and have a tendency toward early metastasis. This rare neoplasm is more
prevalent in children and adolescents than in adults, as well as in the central than the peripheral nervous system. Peripheral PNETs
(pPNETs) usually involve bone or soft tissues but have also been discovered in a variety of other organs, such as the kidney, urinary
bladder, and heart . Reports of pPNETs that arise in the lung parenchyma without pleural or chest wall involvement are extremely rare.
Herein, we report an additional case of primary PNET in the lung, which then metastasized to the pancreas. In October 2005, a mass in the
left lower lung lobe of a 19-year-old male was detected on a chest radiograph and a computed tomography (CT) image during a routine health
examination (Figure 1a, b). Because the patient was young and asymptomatic, and since the CT image indicated a benign tumor, a lung biopsy
was not performed at the time. Physicians then recommended the patient for semi-annual follow-up. Chest radiographs and CT scans of lung and
pancreas. a) Chest radiograph showing a mass in the left lung (October 2005). b) Chest CT showing a well-defined solid mass in the lower
lobe of the left lung (October 2005). c) Chest radiograph showing an enlarged mass in the left lung (September 2008). d) Chest CT showing an
enlarged mass in the lower lobe of the left lung (September 2008). e) Contrast-enhanced CT showing a huge solid mass with cystic areas
originating from the pancreas. At the follow-up two-and-a-half years later, an imaging study showed the invariable lung tumor. At the year 3
follow-up, the mass was found to have enlarged remarkably. The patient was admitted to our hospital in September 2008 for further evaluation
of the lung mass. A chest radiograph and CT scan showed a well-circumscribed tumor with a diameter of 5.0 cm in the lateral basal segment of
the left lung (Figure 1c, d), but did not detect any bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy. A bronchoscopy showed no abnormal results. Standard
staging procedures, including brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), abdominal ultrasonography, and bone scintigraphy, did not detect
distant metastasis. A lobectomy of the lower left lung combined with a lymph node dissection was ordered. During the operation, the surgeon
discovered a well-defined 5.5 cm × 5.0 cm solid mass in the parenchyma of the lower lobe of the left lung, without pleural or chest wall
involvement. Microscopic analysis of the resected tissue revealed that the tumor was composed of small, round cells with inconspicuous
cytoplasm and arranged in diffuse or compact sheets or lobules (Figure 2a). Immunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor cells were
strongly positive for vimentin and CD99 (Figure 2b), focally positive for neuron specific enolase (NSE) and chromogranin A (CgA), and
negative for cytokeratins, CD3, desmin, and leukocyte common antigen (LCA). Immunophenotype analysis ruled out lymphoma, desmoplastic small
round cell tumor, neuroblastoma, small-cell carcinoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and monophasic synovial sarcoma. Therefore, the postoperative
pathologic diagnosis was PNET of the lung. Histologic features of the tumor in the lung and pancreas. a) The pulmonary tumor cells had round
or oval nuclei, a fine chromatin pattern, and indistinct cytoplasm and nucleoli. Mitotic activity was very high (HE, 400×). b) The pulmonary
tumor cells showed a consistent and strong membranous expression of CD99 (SP, 400×). c) Diffusely infiltrative tumor cells were present in
the pancreas parenchyma (HE, 200×). The subsequent pathology indicated clear surgical margins and pleura and lymph nodes free of tumor
cells. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient refused adjunct radiation or chemotherapy after the initial surgery, but
participated in regular follow-up examinations. After a 16-month disease-free period, the patient complained of several episodes of a dull
ache in the upper right quadrant of the abdomen. The patient was admitted to our hospital for further evaluation in February 2010. An
ultrasonography and contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen revealed a 3.5 cm × 4.0 cm mass in the pancreatic head (Figure 1e). The mass
had solid and cystic characteristics and was difficult to distinguish from the surrounding pancreas parenchyma. Laparotomy showed a
3.0 cm × 4.0 cm solid and cystic mass on the surface of the uncinate process of the pancreas. The boundary between the mass and pancreas
parenchyma was obscure and the mass appeared unencapsulated. An en bloc resection of the mass was accomplished through the standard Whipple
procedure . Diffuse infiltrative tumor cells were present in the surrounding tissue (Figure 2c). Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor
cells confirmed strong membranous expression of CD99 and focal expressions of vimentin and synaptophysin. The immunophenotyping results and
patient history of pulmonary PNET indicated a postoperative pathologic diagnosis of metastatic pancreatic PNET. Again, the patient refused
adjunct radiation and chemotherapy. To date, no evidence of tumor recurrence or metastasis has been found. The patient has survived seven
years after the mass was initially detected, and four years after the first radical resection. pPNETs belong to the family of “small round
cell tumors” that show varying degrees of neuroectodermal differentiation and are derived from cells originating from the neural crest and
are characterized by a specific chromosomal translocation, t(11;22)(q24;q12), in most cases. Among the reported cases of PNET, tumors
involving the thoracopulmonary region were first reported as “malignant small cell tumors of the thoracopulmonary region in childhood” by
Askin et al. in 1979, which led to these tumors being referred to as Askin’s tumors . Conventional light microscopy analysis of PNETs shows
undifferentiated small, round cells with uniform, unconspicuous nuclei and scanty cytoplasm arranged in lobules with rosettes and
pseudorosettes formation; in addition, there is little or no stroma. Immunohistochemically, PNETs are positive for CD99 antigen, but CD99
immunostaining is not specific and the results must be interpreted in combination with other findings. T lymphoblastic lymphoma, poorly
differentiated synovial sarcomas, stromal tumors, and rare rhabdomyosarcoma may show CD99 positivity. Vimentin stains most tumor cells and
neural markers, such as NSE, and is frequently expressed by tumor cells . Cytokeratin-positive staining has also been reported in some cases
of primitive neuroectodermal tumors . To diagnose a tumor as PNET, it should display small round cells forming rosette and pseudorosettes,
and should be positive for at least two of the neural markers. Ultrastructural analysis usually shows PNET cells to have complex cytoplasmic
processes, microtubules, and few neurosecretory granules. The following chromosomal translocations have been associated with PNET specimens:
t(21;22)(q22;q12), t(11;22)(q24;q12), t(7;22)(p22;q12), and t(7;22)(q22;q12) . Thus, the diagnosis of PNET necessitates histopathological,
immunohistochemical, ultrastructural, and, if possible, genetic analyses. The differential diagnosis of PNETs includes neuroblastoma,
lymphoma, small-cell carcinoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, monophasic synovial sarcoma, and desmoplastic small round cell tumor, all of which are
indistinguishable by conventional light microscopy . However, due to the different prognostic characteristics and therapeutic schedules for
each of these tumor types, differential diagnoses are essential. Immunohistochemical positivity for CD99, NSE, synaptophysine, and
chromogranine A are very useful in differential diagnosis. Furthermore, the presence of Homer-Wright rosettes are typical for
neuroblastomas, which are also positive for NSE, synaptophysine, and chromogranine A, but negative for CD99. LCA positivity supports the
diagnosis of lymphoma, but T cell lymphoblastic lymphoma may be negative for LCA and positive for CD99 and CD3. Small-cell carcinoma is
almost always positive for cytokeratin, while rhabdomyosarcoma is positive for desmin, actin, myoglobulin, and monophasic synovial sarcoma
is positive for CD99, cytokeratin , EMA. The desmoplastic small round cell tumor is characterized by sharply circumscribed nests or clusters
of small, undifferentiated cells surrounded by a desmoplastic stroma, and show positivity for cytokeratin and desmin, but negativity for
CD99. Therefore, the phenotypes observed in our case, i.e., positive expression of CD99, vimentin, NSE, and synaptophysin, and negative
expression of cytokeratins, CD3, desmin, and LCA, are highly suggestive of a pulmonary PNET . Despite the patient’s history of pulmonary
PNET and imaging findings that were consistent with primary pancreatic cancer, we initially suspected primary serous cystic pancreatic
neoplasm because metastasis of a PNET to the pancreas had never been previously reported. However, the patient’s histological findings
indicated no transition had occurred from the pancreas to the neoplastic tissue. In addition, there were no clinical signs of chronic
pancreatitis in the surrounding parenchyma. Considering the expression of CD99, NSE, and synaptophysine, as well as the primary pulmonary
PNET, we believed the findings strongly supported a diagnosis of metastatic pancreatic PNET. According to the literature, there have only
been nine reported cases of PNET originating from the lung without pleural or chest wall involvement . Ages of the reported patients have
ranged between 8 to 67 years, with a mean age of 33 years. There is a slight male predominance, with the male:female ratio being 5:4. Five
of the cases originated from the left lung and four from the right. Despite treatment with various combinations of surgery, chemotherapy,
and radiation therapy, the survival rate in the previous reports was poor; typically, the two-year survival rate after operation is 33.3%.
Of the nine reported cases, seven were followed-up; four were alive without disease at eight months, 16 months, 22 months and two years
after surgery, and three had died at three months, two years, and two years after operation due to local recurrence or widespread metastatic
disease. Furthermore, the predominating metastatic sites are the lungs, adrenal glands, and ovaries. In our case, no adjunct radiation or
chemotherapy was given after the initial surgery, due to patient refusal. However, recurrence was detected at sixteen months after the first
resection and appeared as a metastasis to the pancreas. The patient underwent the second radical surgical resection of the metastatic tumor.
Adjunct radiation or chemotherapy again refused by the patient after the second surgery. To date, no evidence of tumor recurrence or
metastasis has emerged. The patient has survived 32 months after the second surgery. The long-term survival of the patient may have been a
result of the two radical surgeries alone, but we believe that his prognosis would have been better if the lung biopsy was performed
promptly in October 2005. We speculate that close follow-up with immediate surgical intervention when required may have helped to prolong
the survival of our case . We reported a rare case in which a primary pulmonary primitive neuroectodermal tumor metastasized to the
pancreas. The primary and metastatic tumors were resected respectively, and no adjunct radiation or chemotherapy was given before or after
the two surgical procedures. This newly described PNET patient has the longest survival (seven years) and the longest post-operational
follow-up period (four years) of all the cases reported in the literature to date. We speculate that close follow-up with immediate surgical
intervention when required may have helped to prolong the survival of our case. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. SL gave the final histopathological diagnosis, performed the
literature review, acquired photomicrographs, and drafted the manuscript. GZL participated in patient management and edited and revised the
manuscript. WXL participated in patient management and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This
study was supported by a grant from the 2010 Technology Fund of the Inner Mongolia Science and Technology Department (No. 20100501).
