Extra-adrenal paraganglioma of the retroperitoneum with metastasis to the vertebra is very rare. To our knowledge this is the first report
of this kind of disease in the literature. Here, we present an oroginal case of paraganglioma of the retroperitoneum with metastasis to the
abdominal vertebra in a 42-year-old female patient who was successfully treated by complete removal of the tumor and its metastasis. The
patient was followed up for four years and remained disease-free. Our case demonstrated the need to consider paraganglioma of the
retroperitoneum in the differential diagnosis of retroperitoneal mass, metastatic tumors to the vertebra, and the importance of radical
surgery for a successful management of the disease. The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1956611954880197 Paragangliomas, also known as extra-adrenal pheochromocytomas, are rare
neuroendocrine neoplasms that are derived from the paraganglia, a diffuse neuroendocrine system dispersed from the skull base to the pelvic
floor. They are found in many tissues such as the adrenal medulla, the carotid bodies, the organs of Zuckerkandl, and the paraganglia of the
sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons . Paragangliomas usually occur in the head and neck region but rare in the retroperitoneum. It has
been estimated that as much as 10% paragangliomas of the retroperitoneum arise outside of the adrenal gland. In addition, few cases
regarding paragangliomas of the retroperitoneum with metastases have been reported . Here, a rare case of paraganglioma of the
retroperitoneum with metastasis to the abdominal vertebra was reported in a 42-year-old female patient. The patient had an increasing degree
of pain in left lower back for over a month with a blood pressure of 106/60 mmHg. An immobile, hard but smooth mass below the left costal
margin was diagnosed by physical examination. This solidmass was palpated in the first lumbar vertebra without a distinct boundary. Computed
Tomography (CT) scan of the mass showed an inhomogeneous density (10.5×6.7 cm2) in the left adrenal region with cystic changes. The
scattered spots indicated the calcification foci. No lymph node swelling and distant metastasis were detected except for the lesion in the
first lumble vertebra. Osteolytic bone destruction and punctiform dead bone was detected in the first lumbar vertebra, which affect the
posterior margin of the vertebra, bilateral arch and plate, superior and inferior articular processus, processus spinosus and left processus
transverses (Figure 1A and 1B). Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the first lumbar vertebra showed a well-defined mass. The mass was
isointense on T1 and hypointense on T2 (Figure 1C). Furthermore, Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) detected that
Technetium-99m methylene diophosphate (Tc-99m-MDP) highly accumulated in the tenth of thoracic vertebra and the first and second lumbar
vertebra (Figure 1D1). Moreover, ultrasonography displayed an irregular, boundary-less and uneven internal echo mass between left kidney and
spleen (Figure 1E). Vanillyl mandelic acid (VMA) and catecholamine in the urine and blood of the patient was in the normal range. The
preoperative diagnosis was an adrenal tumor with metastasis to the abdominal vertebra. CT scan (A) and contrast enhanced CT scan (B) showed
an inhomogeneous density of mass (10.5×6.7 cm2) in the left adrenal region, with cystic changes, scattered calcified foci (arrow) and
inhomogeneous enhancement (arrow). The mass is ventral to the left kidney and the abdominal aorta. (C) MRI showed a well-defined mass and
showed a mass in the back of vertebra (arrow). (D1) SPECT showed Tc-99m-MDP highly accumulated in the tenth of thoracic vertebra and the
first and second lumbar (arrow). (D2) SPECT showed that the whole body bone scintigraphy is clear, with no abnormal structure detected. On
the left half of the ninth thoracic a radionuclide uptake dot is visible. Left renal agenesis is seen (arrow). (E) Ultrasonographic study
further demonstrates the mass has an uneven internal echo (arrow). The mass is irregular in shape and without a distinct boundary, between
the left kidney and spleen. The primary lesion was resected through a thoracoabdominal incision in December 2006. Intraoperative examination
showed that the stomach, transverse colon, pancreas and spleen were displaced by the mass, but without significant adhesion to the ventral
surface of the tumor. The left kidney tightly adhered to the tumor and was difficult to separate from it. The volume of the solid tumor is
about 10×9×7 cm3 with integrated surface and full of vascular network. The left kidney and the tumor were resected and the weight of the
tumor is 670 grams. Intraoperative blood loss is 300 ml. The intersection of the tumor is red-brown, full of blood vessels, fibrous septa
and bone-like substance with some schistic hemorrhage and necrosis in the middle. Macroscopically, no invasion of the tumor into the kidney
can be observed. Histologically, the tumor was alveolar-like with many well-vascularized septa (Figure 2A and 2B). The tumor cells contained
fine eosinophilic granules, mitotic figures and some nuclear atypia (Figure 2C1, Figure 2C2). Immunohistochemical examination of the tumor
was as follows: cytokeratin- (Figure 3A1, 3A2), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA)- (Figure 3B1, 3B2), vimentin+ (Figure 3C1, 3C2), S-100
sported+ (Figure 3D1, 3D2), synaptophysin+ (Figure 4A1, 4A2), chromograninA+ (Figure 4B1, 4B2),The Ki-67 labeling index was less than
1%.(Figure 4C1, 4C2),These findings led to a histological diagnosis of non-chromaffin paraganglioma of the retroperitoneum. Gross appearance
of the resected tumor and the left kidney. The tumor is about 10×9×7cm3, appeared solid, and is well vascularized. Macroscopically, no
apparent tumor invasion into the kidney was observeded (A, B). The resected tumor was stained with H&E method. The tumor cells contained
fine eosinophilic granules, mitotic figures and some nuclear atypia. C1 (× 100). C2 (× 400). Resection of the lumbar tumor and treated by
posterior fixation with Moss Miami system (D, E, F). Neither cell type was positive for cytokeratin or EMA (A1, × 100; A2, × 400; B1, ×100;
B2, × 400). Cell Cytoplasm showed positive reactivity for vimentin and ChromograninA (C1, × 100; C2,× 400; D1, × 100; D2, × 400). Cell
cytoplasm showed positive reactivity for synaptophysin (A1, ×100; A2, × 400). Individual support cells showed positive reactivity for S-100
protein (B1, × 100; B2, × 400). Ki-67 labeling index was less than 1% (C1, × 100; C2, × 400). After two weeks, the patient was transferred
to the Department of Spine Surgery for resection of the lumbar tumor and treated by posterior fixation with Moss Miami system (Figure 2D,
2E, 2F). Intraoperative blood loss is 3000 ml. Pathological examination showed metastasis of the paraganglioma to the vertebra. The patient
has been followed up for four years and does not show any sign of recurrence (Figure 1D2). The clinical, pathologic and radiological
features of retroperitoneal paragangliomas have been previously described . Paraganglioma can be diagnosed in early stage if it is a
functional tumor secreting excessive amounts of catecholamine. For those patients with a nonfunctional paraganglioma, VMA and catecholamine
are normal in her urine and blood. Diagnosis of retroperitoneal paraganglioma could be delayed as it usually relies on the growth of the
tumor mass. It is hard to make a correct preoperative diagnosis due to absence of typical clinical symptoms in the patient. CT, MRI or
ultrasonographic studies are sensitive in detecting a retroperitoneal mass and could delineate its location, outline, internal structure as
well as its relationship with the surrounding organs. However, specific diagnosis for the retroperitoneal mass still relies on postoperative
histopathological diagnosis. In addition, histopathological diagnosis is required to define the paraganglioma as benign or malignant tumours
exhibit similar clinical diagnosis and imaging findings . Chromogranin A and synaptophysin are the most common neuropeptides synthesized in
endocrine cells and can be used for immunohistochemical analysis of paragangliomas along with other protein markers such as neuron specific
enolase and vimentin. They can aid the correct diagnosis of this rare disease. Our immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the tumor was
positive for Chromogranin A, vimentin, S-100, synaptophysin, thus providing a histopathological basis for a correct diagnosis of
nonchromaffin paraganglioma of the retroperitoneum in the patient. Zhao et al. described a case of pigmented paraganglioma showing weak
expression of chromogranin A, but the tumor cells were negative for vimentin and devoid of the S-100 protein positive cells . Okubo et al.
report a case of duodenal gangliocytic paraganglioma tumor cells showing positive response for synaptophysin . In these studies , the Ki-67
labeling index was less than 1%, which is similar to our results. Most paragangliomas are benign in nature and the malignancy rate is about
10%to 15% . The presence of metastatic lesions is considered to be the only acceptable fact for malignant paraganglioma and is used to
discriminate between malignant and benign paraganglioma. The combination of a large size, heterogeneous density, and irregular margins has
been suggested to have an increased likelihood of malignancy . In addition, an extra-adrenal tumor location and high tumor weight (more than
80 grams) were also considered to have an increased chance of malignant paraganglioma . Metastasis of paraganglioma of the retroperitoneum
is usually to lungs, lymph nodes, liver, bones, or the spleen., The presence of paraganglia tissue in these organs strongly indicates a
metastasis. We are aware of one reported case regarding paraganglioma of the retroperitoneum with direct invasion of the spinal canal which
lead a cross section syndrome of the cauda equine . It has been no previous report of metastasis to the lumbar vertebra on paraganglioma of
the retroperitoneum. Our case suggests that metastatic paraganglioma of the retroperitoneum should be considered as a rare case of
metastases in the differential diagnosis of vertebral masses. Management paragangliomas of the retroperitoneum with metastases remains a
very challenging task as complete surgical removal of the tumor as well as the metastasis offer the only chance for cure and no other
therapeutic methods have been shown to provide long-term survival. Meticulous and complete surgical removal of the original tumor and its
metastasis has been reported to associate with long-term survival . Most paragangliomas have an intact capsule with abundant blood vessels
both on its surface and inside. Therefore, most paragangliomas can be removed without much difficulty if the tumor is meticulously resected.
A thoraco-abdominal incision is indicated if an adrenal tumor is large , which provides an adequate exposure of the tumor mass in the
peritoneal cavity and greater maneuverability for operation. The patient does not have any sign of tumor recurrence after four years of
surgery, suggesting the surgery is successful and effective. Our results demonstrate the need to consider paraganglioma of the
retroperitoneum in the differential diagnosis of retroperitoneal mass and in the differential diagnosis of metastatic tumors to the
vertebra. They also illustrate the importance of radical surgery for a successful management of paraganglioma of the retroperitoneum with
metastasis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy
of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. JH and X-JW carried out pathological examination and wrote the manuscript as major contributors. WZ participated in pathological
investigations. Y-WZ carried out the immunohistochemical staining and collected the patient’s clinical information. JH gave final approval
to the manuscript as a corresponding author. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported by the Natural
science foundation of Hunan Province (No.:10JJ5042). The authors thank Dr. Yi Min Zhu for all his support and encouragement. The authors
thank Jiang Yong and Zhi Feng Yin for their technical support and pathological advice.
