We report the case of a 61-year-old man with supratentorial extraventricular anaplastic ependymoma who presented with repeated intratumoral
hemorrhage. The patient was admitted with headache. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging showed an enhancing mass with
intratumoral hemorrhage in the right temporal lobe. Gross total resection was performed. The tumor was well demarcated from the brain
tissue, and showed no continuity with the ventricular system. Histopathological examination revealed the features of anaplastic ependymoma.
Therefore, additional radiation therapy and adjuvant chemotherapy were administered. Ten months later, the tumor recurred with hemorrhage in
the spinal canal. This case showed rapid malignant progression and repeated intratumoral hemorrhage within a short period of time, both of
which are characteristics of anaplastic ependymomas. Close observation of the central nervous system and adjuvant radiotherapy are
mandatory, even if the ependymoma presents with repeated intratumoral hemorrhage. Ependymomas are primary neoplasms of the central nervous
system (CNS) that account for about 3–5 % of all adult intracranial gliomas [1, 2]. Ependymomas usually arise from the cells lining the
ventricular system and central canal in the spinal cord . In a minority of cases, ependymomas arise from the supratentorial parenchyma and
show no continuity with the ventricular system. These ependymoma variants are called ectopic, cortical, lobar, or extraventricular
ependymomas. Only a few such cases have been reported in the literature . In most of these cases, the tumors were difficult to diagnose
before surgery. We present a patient with a supratentorial extraventricular anaplastic ependymoma who presented with repeated intratumoral
hemorrhage in the brain and spine. A 61-year-old man presented with severe headache on November 30, 2008. A more detailed history revealed
that he had been suffering from severe headache of acute onset from 3 days beforehand. Head computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a high-
density lesion in the right temporal lobe (Fig. 1a) with a mean diameter of 40 mm. On the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed on
December 9, 2008, the lesion was visualized as mixed intensity on T1- and T2-weighted images, and showed strong enhancement following
intravenous administration of gadolinium diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (Fig. 1b–d). The lesion was surrounded by perifocal cerebral
edema. Based on these findings, hemorrhage in the brain tumor was suspected. Cerebral angiography showed that the tumor was supplied by both
the internal and external carotid arteries (Fig. 2a, b). Neurological examination did not reveal any neurological deficit during this
admission. We planned the operation for January 9, 2009, and the patient was discharged from the hospital.Fig. 1Preoperative imaging
studies. a Axial-plane CT scan showing a high-density lesion in the right temporal lobe. b Axial T1-weighted MR image demonstrating the
tumor with heterogeneous intensity located intraaxially and in the extraventricular space. c Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image
demonstrating a strongly enhancing mass. d Coronal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image demonstrating a strongly enhancing mass. The tumor
occupies the right temporal lobeFig. 2Lateral view of the right internal carotid artery cerebral angiogram (a) and lateral view of the right
external carotid cerebral angiogram (b) performed on December 9, 2008. Early venous filling and tumor staining are observed Preoperative
imaging studies. a Axial-plane CT scan showing a high-density lesion in the right temporal lobe. b Axial T1-weighted MR image demonstrating
the tumor with heterogeneous intensity located intraaxially and in the extraventricular space. c Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR
image demonstrating a strongly enhancing mass. d Coronal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image demonstrating a strongly enhancing mass. The
tumor occupies the right temporal lobe Lateral view of the right internal carotid artery cerebral angiogram (a) and lateral view of the
right external carotid cerebral angiogram (b) performed on December 9, 2008. Early venous filling and tumor staining are observed The
patient presented to the hospital again with severe headache on December 26, 2008. Repeat CT revealed another high-density area within the
tumor and more extensive peripheral edema, the findings suggestive of recurrence of the intratumoral hemorrhage (Fig. 3a). The patient was
treated conservatively until the operation. During the preoperative period, the patient developed consciousness disturbance. Follow-up CT
scans obtained after admission demonstrated another recurrence of the intratumoral hemorrhage (Fig. 3b–d). On January 7, 2009, the patient
fell into a coma, and emergent right temporal craniotomy was performed. Intraoperative findings confirmed that the tumor was attached to the
dural membrane of the middle fossa, showing no attachment to the ventricular system. The tumor was clearly demarcated from the surrounding
brain tissue and gross total resection was performed.Fig. 3Computed tomography scans obtained on December 26, 2008 (a), December 31, 2008
(b), January 3, 2009 (c), and January 7, 2009 (d). A high-density area can be seen in the tumor that gradually expands (arrow head). This
indicates repeated intratumoral hemorrhage. The perilesional brain edema and displacement of the midline structures deteriorated Computed
tomography scans obtained on December 26, 2008 (a), December 31, 2008 (b), January 3, 2009 (c), and January 7, 2009 (d). A high-density area
can be seen in the tumor that gradually expands (arrow head). This indicates repeated intratumoral hemorrhage. The perilesional brain edema
and displacement of the midline structures deteriorated Histological examination revealed that the lesion was very cellular and well
vascularized. Many blood vessels, hemorrhages, and vascular proliferation were seen, but pseudopalisading necrosis was not seen in the
specimen (Fig. 4a, b). The nuclei were polymorphic; there were some mitotic figures and numerous perivascular pseudo-rosette formations
(Fig. 4c). Immunohistochemical study revealed positive staining of the tumor cells for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) (Fig. 4d),
epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) (Fig. 4e), S-100 protein, and vimentin. However, the tumor showed negative staining for CD34 and bcl2. The
MIB-1 labeling index was 10–30 %. The pathological diagnosis was anaplastic ependymoma.Fig. 4Pathologic micrographs from the surgical
specimen. H&E-stained section of the resected tumor (a ×40, b ×100, c ×400). a Pathologic micrograph showing the highly cellular tumor. Many
hemorrhages were seen. b This micrograph shows the highly cellular and well-vascularized tumor. c The hyperchromatic nuclei show mild
polymorphism. There were numerous perivascular pseudo-rosette formations. Positive immunohistochemical staining for glial fibrillary acidic
protein GFAP (d) and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) (e) (d ×200, e ×400). d Immunostaining for GFAP showed numerous positive clear cells
and positive perivascular tumor cells. e Dot-like EMA positivity was seen in the tumor cytoplasm or pericellular area Pathologic micrographs
from the surgical specimen. H&E-stained section of the resected tumor (a ×40, b ×100, c ×400). a Pathologic micrograph showing the highly
cellular tumor. Many hemorrhages were seen. b This micrograph shows the highly cellular and well-vascularized tumor. c The hyperchromatic
nuclei show mild polymorphism. There were numerous perivascular pseudo-rosette formations. Positive immunohistochemical staining for glial
fibrillary acidic protein GFAP (d) and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) (e) (d ×200, e ×400). d Immunostaining for GFAP showed numerous
positive clear cells and positive perivascular tumor cells. e Dot-like EMA positivity was seen in the tumor cytoplasm or pericellular area
Postoperative MRI demonstrated gross total resection (data not shown). After surgery, focal radiation therapy (60 Gy) and chemotherapy
(temozolomide) were administered. The patient showed no neurological deficit after the treatment, and was discharged. The patient was
admitted again with back pain and gait disturbance on November 8, 2009. MRI of the thoracic spine demonstrated a tumor with hematoma in the
spinal canal (Fig. 5). A second operation was performed, and histopathological examination revealed recurrence and dissemination of the
anaplastic ependymoma.Fig. 5MRI of the thoracic spine. Sagittal T1-weighted MR image (a), T2-weighted MR image (b), and T1-weighted MR image
with contrast enhancement (c). a Fluid–fluid level was seen in the dorsal side of the spinal cord as a slightly high intensity signal
(arrows). b Fluid–fluid level was seen in the dorsal side of the spinal cord as a low-intensity signal (arrows). c An intradural
extramedullary enhancing mass was seen after intravenous administration of gadolinium diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (arrow heads). This
indicated drop metastases (arrow heads) with hemorrhage (arrows) MRI of the thoracic spine. Sagittal T1-weighted MR image (a), T2-weighted
MR image (b), and T1-weighted MR image with contrast enhancement (c). a Fluid–fluid level was seen in the dorsal side of the spinal cord as
a slightly high intensity signal (arrows). b Fluid–fluid level was seen in the dorsal side of the spinal cord as a low-intensity signal
(arrows). c An intradural extramedullary enhancing mass was seen after intravenous administration of gadolinium
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (arrow heads). This indicated drop metastases (arrow heads) with hemorrhage (arrows) Ependymomas usually
arise from the cells lining the ventricular system and central canal of the spinal cord . The clinical courses of patients with intracranial
ependymomas can be quite variable . Supratentorial ependymomas in adults are rare CNS tumors that continue to generate considerable
controversy with regard to their clinical management . Several negative prognostic parameters have been identified, such as young age,
incomplete tumor resection, histological anaplasia, and supratentorial localization [9, 18, 19]. To the best of our knowledge, only 9 case
reports of supratentorial extraventricular anaplastic ependymoma, including our present case, have been reported in the literature
(Table 1). The mean age of the 9 patients was 40 years, and the male-to-female ratio was 5:4. The tumor was located in the frontal lobe in 3
cases, the parietal lobe in 1 case, the temporal lobe in 2 cases, the temporoparietal lobe in 2 cases, and the parietooccipital lobe in 1
case. In 6 cases, the tumors were contiguous with the brain surface as cortical ependymoma. In 5 of these cases, intratumoral hemorrhage was
observed. Hemorrhage was observed in 4 cases of cortical ependymoma.Table 1Summary of 9 cases of supratentorial extraventricular anaplastic
ependymomaCase no.Author (year)Age/sexLocation of ependymomaHemorrhageStaining on angiographyRecurrence1Takeshima (2002)70/FFrontal+No
study–2Kojima (2003)56/FTemporoparietal+No studyResidual lesion3Moritani (2003)50/FTemporal–HypovascularInitial location4Miyazawa
(2007)32/MParietal++Initial location5Toba (2009)36/FFrontal–No study–6Toba (2009)18/MTemporoparietal+No studyInitial location, spine7Eika
(2010)15/MParietooccipital–No study–8Flavio (2012)23/MFrontal–No study–9Present case61/MTemporal++Spine Summary of 9 cases of supratentorial
extraventricular anaplastic ependymoma The case we have reported here presented with at least 5 episodes of intratumoral hemorrhage over a
period of 40 days. Only one previously reported case of supratentorial extraventricular ependymoma presented with repeated intratumoral
hemorrhage . In that case, 3 episodes of hemorrhage occurred over a period of 2 years. To the best of our knowledge, none of the previously
reported cases had repeated intratumoral hemorrhage that occurred within a period as short as that seen in our patient. Intratumoral
hemorrhage in supratentorial ependymomas is usually considered a rare event [20, 21], although Romero et al. mentioned that intratumoral
hemorrhage is not rare in this tumor. The pathological finding in all of these cases was anaplastic ependymoma. Hemorrhage caused by
intracranial neoplasm is usually associated with high-grade malignancy and extensive, abnormal vascularization . Kojima et al. reported that
the hemorrhage in the tumor reflects the malignancy grade of the tumor. Ernestus et al. also mentioned that the factor that predisposes the
most for bleeding seems to be extensive and abnormal vascularity, and endothelial proliferation or dilated thin-walled vessels were common
findings in ependymal tumors with spontaneous hemorrhages. In our case, the histological findings were compatible. In our present case, the
tumor recurred in the spine between the lower thoracic and upper lumbar spinal cord, showing both intratumoral and extratumoral hemorrhage.
According to the previous literature, anaplastic ependymomas are characterized by a higher proliferative rate and a greater tendency to
disseminate into the cerebrospinal fluid, causing drop metastases. Saito et al. mentioned that anaplastic ependymoma disseminated within the
central nervous system without local failure. Our case showed a similar course. Cerebrospinal fluid dissemination of anaplastic ependymoma
has been reported to be one of the factors that determine end-of-life prognosis [19, 26, 27]. In conclusion, meticulous MRI follow-up of the
CNS is mandatory in adult patients with intracranial anaplastic ependymomas, even after gross total removal of the tumor. Thus, our
experience of this case indicates that supratentorial extraventricular ependymoma with repeated intratumoral hemorrhage should lead to a
suspicion of an anaplastic tumor histology. Neurosurgeons should not hesitate to perform a radical initial surgery in such cases. Even after
gross total removal of the tumor, adjuvant radiotherapy and close MRI follow-up of the central nervous system are mandatory. We are grateful
to Dr Shinichi Tsuchiya, Division of Diagnostic Pathology, Nippon Medical School Hospital, Tokyo, for providing several comments on the
histological diagnosis of this case.
