Invited Editor Mathew Weitzmann, University of Pennsylvania Editor Herbert Virgin, Washington University School of Medicine For DNA viruses,
genetic recombination, addition, and deletion represent important evolutionary mechanisms. Since these genetic alterations can lead to new,
possibly severe pathogens, we applied a systems biology approach to study the pathogenicity of a novel human adenovirus with a naturally
occurring deletion of the canonical penton base Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) loop, thought to be critical to cellular entry by adenoviruses.
Bioinformatic analysis revealed a new highly recombinant species D human adenovirus (HAdV-D60). A synthesis of in silico and laboratory
approaches revealed a potential ocular tropism for the new virus. In vivo, inflammation induced by the virus was dramatically greater than
that by adenovirus type 37, a major eye pathogen, possibly due to a novel alternate ligand, Tyr-Gly-Asp (YGD), on the penton base protein.
The combination of bioinformatics and laboratory simulation may have important applications in the prediction of tissue tropism for newly
discovered and emerging viruses. The ongoing dance between a virus and its host distinctly shapes how the virus evolves. While human
adenoviruses typically cause mild infections, recent reports have described newly characterized adenoviruses that cause severe, sometimes
fatal human infections. Here, we report a systems biology approach to show how evolution has affected the disease potential of a recently
identified novel human adenovirus. A comprehensive understanding of viral evolution and pathogenicity is essential to our capacity to
foretell the potential impact on human disease for new and emerging viruses. Infection entails complex and functionally integrated
relationships between pathogen and host (1, 2). The synthesis of genomic, bioinformatic, cellular, and molecular methodologies permits a
systems biology approach to predict the emergence of new and severe infectious agents. Human adenoviruses (HAdV) are ubiquitous, cause
infections in the respiratory, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and ocular mucosas, can be opportunistic in the immune-compromised host, and
have been associated with obesity (3–8). Adenoviruses also are common choices for gene therapy vectors (9, 10). Thus, while adenoviruses
continue to cause significant morbidity and mortality in the human population, their existence also provides a potential benefit for the
treatment of patients with an even broader range of ailments. Since the first adenovirus was characterized in 1953 (11, 12), over 60 human
adenoviruses have been recognized as unique types. Analysis of whole-genome sequence data for existing and new HAdVs confirmed a critical
role for homologous recombination in adenovirus evolution, leading to new and sometimes serious human infections (13–18). The emergence of
new HAdV types, with several associated with severe eye infection (13, 16, 18), prompted us to apply a systems biology approach to try to
predict the ocular tropism of a previously uncharacterized and highly novel HAdV, isolated by nasopharyngeal swab from a 4-month-old boy
with severe bronchiolitis. A combined genomic, bioinformatic, and biological analysis identified a unique deletion in a key protein of the
viral capsid and further suggested the potential of this virus to cause significant ocular infection. These results point toward a possible
approach for predicting pathogenicity for newly identified and recently emergent human pathogens. Viral cultures were obtained by
nasopharyngeal swab from a male child with bronchiolitis. Initial testing suggested a mixed infection with adenovirus and human
metapneumovirus. Limited genomic sequencing of the adenovirus suggested a unique adenovirus type. Subsequent whole-genome sequencing,
phylogenetic analysis, and viral neutralization assays for the adenovirus in the specimen revealed the novel adenovirus to be a recombinant
of several human adenoviruses, with sequence contributions from HAdV-D20 (hexon gene) and HAdV-D37 (penton base gene) but with a unique
fiber gene (Fig. 1A; see also Fig. S1 to S3 in the supplemental material). Thus, this new human adenovirus species D type (HAdV-D) was
designated HAdV-D60, based on current typing criteria (19). Unexpectedly, sequence analysis revealed deletion of the Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) loop
(amino acids 294 to 319) in the predicted penton base protein (Fig. 1B and D), which is normally highly conserved and thought to mediate an
interaction with host cell integrins critical to viral entry, e.g., αvβ3 (20). HAdV-D60 is the first virus within the species HAdV-D that
was found to lack an RGD loop or similar motif. Despite the deleted RGD loop, SimPlot analysis of the entire penton base gene confirmed
extensive identity between HAdV-D60 and HAdV-D37 (Fig. 1C; Fig. S1 and S3A), the latter a major cause of epidemic keratoconjunctivitis.
Genomic analysis of HAdV-D60. (A) Whole-genome phylogenetic analysis of HAdV-D60. (B) Multisequence alignment of the penton base protein
from a representative type from each HAdV species. The highly conserved RGD sequence is bolded and boxed in red. (C) SimPlot analysis of the
HAdV-D60 penton base gene queried against all completely sequenced HAdV-D penton base genes. The location, in relation to the nucleotide
sequence, of the two major hypervariable loop (HVL1 and RGD) domains of the protein are presented above the graph. HAdV-D37 sequence
similarity is presented in red. (D) Predicted protein model of the HAdV-D60 penton base based on homology modeling of the crystal structure
of HAdV-C2. The absence of the RGD loop in HAdV-D60 is shown in red (arrow). The RGD loop for HAdV-C2 was not resolved in crystal structure
and was modeled and added (arrow and in red). We recently demonstrated that entry of a human adenovirus into human corneal epithelial cells
in vitro can differentiate a corneal pathogen (21). The absence of the RGD loop in the penton base protein in HAdV-D60, with otherwise high
similarity to HAdV-D37 throughout the rest of the gene, led us to test whether HAdV-D60 would infect ocular surface epithelial cells. By
confocal microscopy with Cy3-labeled virus, HAdV-D60 enters both corneal (THE) and conjunctival (Chang) epithelial cells by 1 h
postinfection. This was compared to the 30-minute entry seen with HAdV-D37 (Fig. 2A; see also Fig. S4 and S5 in the supplemental material).
Viral replication (Fig. 2B) and E1A transcription (Fig. 2C; Fig. S6) for HAdV-D60 also occurred but were delayed compared to those for
HAdV-D37. Together, these data demonstrate that HAdV-D60 infects and replicates in ocular surface epithelial cells, albeit more slowly than
HAdV-D37. Entry, replication, and inflammation of HAdV-D60. (A) Entry of Cy3-labeled HAdV-D60 in human lung (A549), conjunctival (Chang),
and corneal (THE) epithelial cells. (B) Growth of HAdV-D37 (black) and HAdV-D60 (red) in A549 (squares), Chang (circles), and THE (triangle)
cells in vitro. (C) Viral gene expression of HAdV-D37 and HAdV-D60 E1A 13S in Chang cells. (D) In vivo infection of HAdV-D37 and HAdV-D60 at
various titers. Clinical pictures represent inflammation at 4 days postinfection. (E) Flow cytometry analysis of CD45+ events following in
vivo infection of HAdV-D37 (black) and HAdV-D60 (red). (F) ELISA analysis of the cytokines IL-6, CXCL1, and CXCL10 16 h after in vivo
infections of HAdV-D37 (black) and HAdV-D60 (red). Error bars represent standard deviations. n = 3 for all experiments. *, P < 0.05 (two-way
ANOVA). Since in vitro infection of ocular surface epithelial cells was consistent with corneal tropism, we examined the capacity of
HAdV-D60 to induce corneal inflammation in vivo by testing various titers of the virus in an adenovirus keratitis mouse model (22, 23).
Surprisingly, HAdV-D60 induced threshold clinical inflammation at an infectious dose considerably (~100-fold) lower than that for HAdV-D37
(Fig. 2D; see also Fig. S7A in the supplemental material). By flow cytometry, roughly 4-fold more infiltrating CD45+ cells infiltrated the
HAdV-D60-infected cornea than infiltrated corneas with similar titers of HAdV-D37 (Fig. 2E). Consistent with increased infiltration by
leukocytes, cytokine levels of interleukin 6 (IL-6), CXCL1, CXCL10, alpha interferon (IFN-α), and IFN-β in the corneas of HAdV-D60-injected
mice were significantly elevated compared to those in mice with control HAdV-D37 infection (Fig. 2F; Fig. S7B). These results show that
HAdV-D60 capably induces keratitis in the mouse. We previously showed that administration of an RGD 15-mer identical to the RGD loop in
HAdV-D37, when coinjected with HAdV-D37, reduced resultant inflammation compared to a KGE-containing control 15-mer otherwise identical to
the RGD peptide (23). Because HAdV-D60 lacks the penton base protein RGD motif thought essential for viral internalization via binding to
and aggregation of host cellular integrins, we predicted that a similar experiment performed with HAdV-D60 would show no suppression of
corneal inflammation by either the RGD 15-mer or its KGE control. Surprisingly, administration of the RGD 15-mer identical to the RGD loop
in HAdV-D37, when coinjected with HAdV-D60, reduced resultant inflammation compared to the KGE-containing control (Fig. 3A), suggesting that
integrin binding remained an important element in the pathogenesis of infection or, less likely, suggesting a direct effect of the RGD
ligand on the immune response (24). Protein modeling of the HAdV-D60 penton base illustrated the RGD loop deletion, but also identified a
Tyr-Gly-Asp (YGD) motif (Fig. 3B), on the outer upper region of the modeled penton base protein. This motif was found to be conserved in all
known HAdV-D penton base genes, suggesting novel and redundant strategies for penton-mediated integrin binding and aggregation (25).
Notably, a YGD 15-mer identical to the amino acid sequence surrounding YGD in the HAdV-D60 penton base protein prevented binding of HAdV-D60
to cultured human corneal fibroblasts (Fig. 3C). Previous work demonstrated a key role for downstream expression of CXCL8 in human
adenovirus keratitis (26). Treatment of human corneal fibroblasts with the YGD 15-mer also reduced CXCL8 expression in HAdV-D60 infection
(Fig. 3D) and abrogated clinical and histological keratitis in the HAdV-D60-infected mouse cornea compared to those in the KGE control
(Fig. 3E), suggesting a possible role for the YGD motif on the penton base. No other potential integrin ligand was found on the HAdV-D60
penton base protein. HAdV-D60 interaction with host cellular integrins. (A) In vivo infection of HAdV-D60 in the presence of either a 15mer
peptide containing Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) motif or a control 15mer peptide containing Lys-Gly-Glu (KGE). Clinical pictures represent inflammation
at 4 days postinfection. (B) Homology modeling of the pentameric structure of the HAdV-D60 penton base. The location of a Tyr-Gly-Asp (YGD)
motif on the putative structure is identified in red. (C) In vitro entry of HAdV-D60 into human corneal fibroblasts in the presence of a
15mer peptide containing YGD or KGE. (D) CXCL8 expression in human corneal fibroblasts at 4 h after infection in vitro with HAdV-D60 in the
presence of peptide containing either RGD, YGD, or KGE. (E) In vivo infection of HAdV-D60 in the presence of peptide containing either YGD
or KGE. Clinical pictures (top) and hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained tissue sections (bottom) show inflammation at 4 days postinfection.
Error bars represent standard deviations. n = 3 for all experiments. *, P < 0.05 (ANOVA with preplanned contrasts). Here, we report the
identification of a novel human adenovirus and possible bronchial pathogen, HAdV-D60, which is partially recombinant with HAdV-D37, a known
eye pathogen, and we describe an approach to test its potential to cause severe eye infections. Whole-genome sequencing revealed a
recombinant genome with a recombined and RGD loop-deleted HAdV-D37 penton base. This was surprising, as the RGD or similar motif is thought
to enable viral entry via host cellular integrins for all human adenoviruses (20, 27). HAdV-D60 represents the first reported HAdV within
species D lacking the specific RGD motif, and this is the first report of any HAdV missing the RGD loop in its entirety. Notably among
previously known HAdVs, HAdV-F40 and HAdV-F41 express an external penton base loop with a modified integrin binding motif (28, 29); the loop
on HAdV-F40 penton base protein expresses RGAD, while HAdV-F41’s penton base loop has IGDD. The capacity of HAdV-D60, with a penton base
protein similar to that of HAdV-D37, to infect the ocular surface epithelium and induce keratitis despite the absence of an RGD loop
suggests that other components of the penton base protein may play a role in tissue tropism. It is known that the fiber protein (see
Fig. S3B in the supplemental material), in particular, the fiber knob, is an important determinant of tropism for the ocular surface
epithelium. A single amino acid change in the knob domain of the fiber protein was implicated in conjunctival tropism (30). The fiber of
HAdV-D60 was most similar to that of HAdV-D20, a virus not known to infect the ocular surface. Therefore, we predict effects on viral
tropism also by other viral components beyond the fiber and penton base. Interestingly, in the absence of the RGD-containing penton base
loop, HAdV-D60 infection of conjunctival and corneal cells in vitro appeared to be slowed relative to that with HAdV-D37 and viral gene
expression was considerably delayed. Thus, the RGD loop appears to be important but dispensable for viral entry, possibly due to a surrogate
YGD integrin binding motif on the virus. It is intriguing that HAdV-F40 and -F41, which are relatively fastidious enteric viruses (28, 31),
also lack the penton base protein RGD motif and express the penton base YGD motif (28, 29). It is unknown at present whether the YGD on the
adenovirus penton base protein is exposed sufficiently to interact with cellular integrins during virus attachment and entry.
Crystallization of the HAdV-D60 penton base protein is in progress and may help resolve this question. Alternatively, free or altered penton
base capsomer due to partial virus uncoating at the cell surface may aggregate cellular integrins and assist in viral entry after fiber knob
binding (32, 33). Future work is needed to identify whether YGD represents a novel and redundant motif for adenovirus internalization. If
inflammation is initiated by virus binding to its cellular receptor(s), then perhaps delayed internalization by HAdV-D60 is, in part,
responsible for its substantially greater inflammatory capacity in the cornea in vivo. Our data suggest that HAdV-D60 may cause ocular
infection, but our synthesis can only predict, not foretell with certainty. Further, it is unclear to what degree HAdV-D60 is currently or
might in the future become prevalent in the community. At present, the population distribution of HAdV-D60 is unknown, but another virus
identical to HAdV-D60 with the exception of a recombined E3 transcription unit was recently isolated from the gastrointestinal tract of an
HIV-infected patient in England (GenBank accession number JN162672) (34), suggesting that genome variants of HAdV-D60 may be in circulation
outside Canada. Whole-genome sequencing recently identified 10 new or previously unidentified HAdV types, and surprisingly, three of these
were isolated from patients with epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (13, 16, 18). Until or unless HAdV-D60 is identified in an outbreak of ocular
infection, the true ocular pathogenicity of HAdV-D60 will remain unknown. The synthesis of in silico, in vitro, and in vivo experimental
approaches, here applied to a novel virus in a hypothesized ocular infection, represents one potential means to predict tropism and
pathogenicity for new or emerging infectious agents before they cause serious outbreaks of disease. HAdV-D60 (GenBank accession number
HQ007053) was cultured from a 4-month-old male infant with bronchiolitis in Edmonton, Canada. Respiratory virus testing was performed at the
Provincial Laboratory for Public Health, Calgary, Canada. Nasopharyngeal swab test results for influenza A virus, influenza B virus,
parainfluenza (types 1, 2, 3, and 4), and respiratory syncytial virus A and B were negative, but testing results for adenovirus and human
metapneumovirus were positive. Blood and urine cultures were negative. HAdV-D60 was cultured directly from a nasopharyngeal swab using A549
cell culture and identified as a potentially novel virus on the basis of limited Sanger sequencing of the virus capsid hexon gene.
Subsequent whole-genome sequencing led to typing of the virus as HAdV-D60, the next available type number in GenBank, on the basis of its
unique genome and phylogenetic analysis, as approved by the Human Adenovirus Working Group (http://hadvwg.gmu.edu/) (19), a collaboration
between the adenovirology community and the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI, Bethesda, MD). HAdV-D37 (GenBank accession
number DQ900900) was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). For use in these studies, HAdV-D37 and
HAdV-D60 stocks were grown in A549 cells and purified by a cesium chloride gradient. Human lung carcinoma cell line A549 (CCL-185), a human
alveolar epithelial cell line that was previously shown to support HAdV virion production (35), was obtained from ATCC. Telomerase-
immortalized human corneal epithelial (THE) cells were the kind gift of Jerry Shay (University of Texas—Southwestern Medical Center) and
were cultured in defined keratinocyte serum-free medium with supplements (Gibco, Grand Island, NY). Human conjunctival epithelial (Chang)
cells were obtained from the ATCC. Primary human corneal fibroblasts (HCF) were isolated from human donor corneas as previously described
(26). Cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum. Eight- to 12-week-old
wild-type female C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME). The research described in this study conformed to
the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. The virus studied was cultured from a human patient as part of routine clinical care, deemed
necessary by the clinical provider. The virus isolate would otherwise have been discarded and was deidentified for analysis and was
therefore determined to be exempt from review by the Human Studies Committee at the Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, a Harvard Medical
School affiliate. All animals used in this study were treated humanely and in full agreement with the Association for Research in Vision and
Ophthalmology resolution on usage and treatment of animals in research. Approval for the use of animals in this study was obtained from the
Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary Animal Care Committee. Purified HAdV-D60 DNA was sequenced on a Roche 454 DNA sequencer (Branford, CT)
by Eurofins MWG Operon (Huntsville, AL). Gaps, ambiguous sequences, and the inverted terminal repeats were sequenced using an ABI 3130xl
(Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA) via PCR amplification. Quality control included sequence annotation and comparison with HAdV genome
landmarks. Data were assembled using CLC Genomics software (CLC bio; Cambridge, MA), with an N50 average of 5,260. Minimal sequence
coverages were 8-fold (Sanger chemistry) and 17- to 20-fold (Next Gen), with the Next Gen data noted by Operon at an accuracy of greater
than 99% (Q20 or better). The software programs mVISTA Limited Area Global Alignment of Nucleotides (LAGAN;
http://genome.lbl.gov/vista/lagan/submit.shtml) and Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis (MEGA) version 4.0.2
(http://www.megasoftware.net) were used for global pairwise sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis as previously described (14, 15,
18, 36–41). For phylogenetic trees, branches with bootstrap values below 70 (indicative of low confidence) were collapsed. DNA sequence
recombination analysis was performed with SimPlot 3.5.1 software (http://sray.med.som.jhmi.edu/SCRoftware/simplot/), including the options
of Bootscan and SimPlot analysis, to identify possible recombination sites (42). Default settings were used, and HAdV-D60 was used as the
reference sequence for analysis. Multisequence amino acid alignment was performed using CLC sequence viewer 6
(http://www.clcbio.com/index.php?id=28). A model of the HAdV-D60 penton base was constructed using Swiss-Model
(http://swissmodel.expasy.org/) for homology modeling (43, 44). The crystal structure of HAdV-C2 (45) (Protein Data Bank no. 1X9T) was used
as a template for the model. The identity between the HAdV-C2 penton base and the HAdV-D60 penton base was 77%. The model generated by
Swiss-Model was evaluated by PROCHECK (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/software/PROCHECK/) and a Ramachandran plot, which identified 82.7%
of residues in most-favored regions and 14.9% in additional allowed regions. To model the missing RGD loop from the crystal structure of the
HAdV-C2 penton base, the RGD loop consisting of 78 amino acids was modeled using the Robetta Server (http://robetta.bakerlab.org/). Robetta
provides both ab initio and comparative models of protein domains and uses the Rosetta fragment insertion method. Five PDB files were
generated for the structure of the hypervariable RGD loop of HAdV-C2. One model was chosen and fit by DeepView software (http://spdbv.vital-
it.ch/) on the crystal structure of HAdV-C2 to get the full penton protein. UCSF Chimera software (http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera) (46) was
used for visualization and analysis. Cells grown to 80 to 90% confluence were infected in triplicate with virus at a multiplicity of
infection (MOI) of 5 or mock infected with virus-free dialysis buffer, and virus-infected cells and/or supernatants were harvested at
indicated time points and assayed, as described below. For some infections, HAdV-37 and HAdV-D60 were conjugated with Cy3 dye (GE
Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) according to the methods of Leopold et al. (47). One milligram of Cy3 dye was reconstituted in 1 ml of 0.1 M
sodium bicarbonate (pH 9.3). Labeling was performed by conjugating Cy3 dye to virus at a concentration approximately equal to 1012 AdV
particles/ml, where reconstituted Cy3 dye was 20% of the final solution. The mixture was allowed to incubate for 30 min in the dark with
gentle mixing every 10 min, followed by overnight dialysis to remove the excess Cy3 dye. Mice were anesthetized by intramuscular injection
of ketamine (85 mg/kg of body weight) and xylazine (14 mg/kg). Anesthetic drops (0.5% proparacaine hydrochloride; Alcon, Fort Worth, TX)
were applied topically to each eye before injections. One microliter of virus (103 to 105 tissue culture infective dose ) or virus-free
dialysis buffer was injected into the central corneal stroma with a glass micropipette needle fitted with a gas-powered microinjection
system (MDI, South Plainfield, NJ) under an ophthalmic surgical microscope (Carl Zeiss Meditec, Inc., Thornwood, NY). At indicated time
points, mouse corneas were photographed and mice were euthanized using CO2 inhalation prior to removal of corneas for histology and other
studies. A549, Chang, and THE cells were grown in 6-well plates and infected in triplicate with virus at a MOI of 1. Following a 1-h
incubation period to allow viral absorption, cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) to remove unbound virus and fresh
medium was added. Cells and supernatants were collected together at 1, 2, 3, and 7 days postinfection and freeze thawed. Supernatants were
collected after centrifugation (5,000 rpm for 5 min), and titers of samples were determined on A549 cells. A549, Chang, and THE cells were
infected with virus at an MOI of 5. Following a 1-h incubation, cells were washed twice with PBS and fresh medium was added. Total RNA was
isolated with Trizol (Invitrogen, Eugene, OR) according to the manufacturer’s instructions at indicated time points. To eliminate any
contamination by genomic DNA, RNA samples were treated with Turbo DNase (Ambion, Austin, TX). RNA samples were analyzed on a Bio-Rad
SmartSpec Plus (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) spectrophotometer for concentration and purity. Elimination of DNA was confirmed by absence of
visible bands for DNase-treated RNA used as a template (no reverse transcriptase [*Cm5: Zehava Robbins: Is “RT” correctly defined as
“reverse transcriptase,” implying that “RT-PCR” is “reverse transcriptase PCR”? Or should it be “reverse transcription-PCR”?RT] control).
RT-PCR was preformed on the samples as described previously (48). For confocal microscopy, A549, THE, and Chang cells were grown on slide
chambers (Nunc, Rochester, NY) and infected with Cy3-labeled virus for 30 min and 1 h. HCF were pretreated with RGD, YGD, or their control
15-mers (see below) for 30 min prior to infection with Cy3-labeled virus. Cells were then partially fixed in 0.05% paraformaldehyde for
10 min, washed in PBS containing 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS), and permeabilized in solution containing 0.1% Triton X-100 in 2% bovine serum
albumin (BSA) for 10 min. After 30 min blocking in 2% BSA-PBS, the cells were incubated in 5 µg/ml of 488-conjugated phalloidin (Invitrogen,
Eugene, OR) for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were then washed, fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde for 10 min at 25°C, and coverslipped using
mounting medium containing DAPI (4`,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; Vectashield; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). Samples were scanned with
a confocal laser scanning microscope (TCS SP5; Leica, Heidelberg, Germany). Synthetic 15-mer peptides were obtained from GenScript
Corporation (Piscataway, NJ). The sequence of the HAdV-D37 wild-type penton base peptide including the RGD loop was DAVPRGDNYASAAEA, and the
negative-control peptide, with KGE in place of RGD, was DAVPKGENYASAAEA. The sequence of the HAdV-D60 wild-type penton base peptide
including YGD was LSYTYGDPEKGVQSW, and the negative-control peptide with KGE instead of YGD was LSYTKGEPEKGVQSW. The peptides were dissolved
in water and diluted in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), used at 1 mM to pretreat human cell lines for 30 min prior to in vitro infection.
In experimental mouse infections, 0.5 µl of peptide (2 mM) was mixed with 0.5 µl virus (2 × 105 TCID) or virus-free dialysis buffer and
injected into the corneal stroma of wild-type mice as described above. Mouse corneas were photographed at 4 days postinfection and removed
for histology. Both the RGD- and YGD-containing 15-mers—but not their KGD-containing controls—had reduced adhesion when mixed with
epithelial cells and fibroblasts on plastic tissue culture plates; adhesion was also restricted by EDTA. Human cells were infected in
triplicate with either HAdV-D60, HAdV-D37, or virus-free dialysis buffer and supernatants harvested for an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) at 4 h postinfection for protein detection. Mouse corneas were removed at 16 h postinfection (n = 3/time point/group) and flash
frozen in liquid nitrogen. Corneas were then homogenized in 400 µl of PBS with 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 1 µg/ml aprotinin,
and 10 µg/ml leupeptin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). The lysates were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C, and the supernatants
were used for analysis. ELISAs for human CXCL-8 and mouse CXCL1, IL-6, CXCL10, IFN-α, and IFN-β (all from R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) were
performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Each sample and standard was analyzed in duplicate. The plates were read on a
microplate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) and analyzed (SoftMax software; Molecular Devices). Corneas were dissected from mouse
eyes at 4 days postinfection and cut into small (1- to 2-mm-diameter) fragments for subsequent digestion with 1 mg/ml collagenase type I and
0.5 mg/ml DNase (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) (13, 23). Single-cell suspensions were washed twice (300 × g, 5 min/wash) in PBS and
then incubated on ice for 15 min with 2 µl anti-mouse Fc block (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA) in a total volume of 100 µl PBS-1% BSA.
Following incubation, cells were centrifuged (300 × g, 5 min) and resuspended in 5% normal rat serum (Jackson ImmunoResearch Inc., West
Grove, PA) for an additional 15 min on ice. Cells were then labeled with 4 µl anti-mouse fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated anti-
CD45 (clone 30-F11; BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA) and incubated in the dark on ice for 30 min. Following incubation, the cells were washed 3
times with PBS-1% BSA (300 × g, 5 min/wash) and resuspended in PBS containing 1% paraformaldehyde. After overnight fixation at 4°C in the
dark, cells were pelleted and resuspended in PBS-1% BSA and flow cytometry was performed using a Cytomics FC500 (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA)
for CD45+ events, representing the numbers of leukocytes present in infected and control corneas. ELISAs and flow cytometry experiments were
each performed at least three times. Means of observations were compared by analysis of variance (ANOVA) or Student’s t test, as indicated
in each figure legend, using statistical analysis software (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). Statistical significance was set at a P value of
≤0.05. The full genomic sequence of HAdV-D60 is archived at GenBank (accession no. HQ007053). Global pairwise sequence alignment of HAdV-D60
with 18 other HAdV-D types. Percent sequence conservation is reflected in the height of each data point along the y axis. Deletion of the
RGD loop is reflected in the drop in sequence conservation in the HAdV-D37 penton base (designated by an asterisk). Download Figure S1, TIF
file, 1.4 MB Serological and phylogenetic analysis of HAdV-D60. (A) Viral neutralization test of HAdV-D60 compared to human sera collected
for every HAdV-D serotype. (B) Phylogenetic analysis of the complete hexon gene (arrow, HAdV-D60). Cladogram branches with bootstrap values
below 70 (indicative of low confidence) were collapsed. (C) Phylogenetic analysis of the combined hypervariable loop 1 and 2 regions of the
hexon gene where serum neutralization occurs (arrow, HAdV-D60). (D) SimPlot analysis of the HAdV-D60 hexon gene compared to all HAdV hexon
genes deposited in GenBank. Download Figure S2, TIF file, 1.9 MB Phylogenetic analysis of the complete penton base (A) and fiber (B) genes
(arrow, HAdV-D60). Cladogram branches with bootstrap values below 70 (indicative of low confidence) were collapsed. Download Figure S3, TIF
file, 0.5 MB Cy3-labeled HAdV-D60 viral entry. Lung (A549), corneal (THE), or conjunctival (Chang) epithelial cells were grown on glass
chamber slides, infected with HAdV-D60, and analyzed at 30 min and 1 h postinfection. Original magnification, ×63. Download Figure S4, TIF
file, 2.7 MB Cy3-labeled HAdV-D37 viral entry. Lung (A549), corneal (THE), or conjunctival (Chang) epithelial cells were grown on glass
chamber slides, infected with HAdV-D37, and analyzed at 30 min and 1 h postinfection. Original magnification, ×63. Download Figure S5, TIF
file, 3 MB Comparative expression of E1A 13S transcripts in corneal epithelial (THE) cells over time for HAdV-D37 and HAdV-D60. Total RNA
was collected at indicated time points, and viral E1A gene expression was determined. GAPDH (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase) was
used as a positive control. Download Figure S6, TIF file, 0.2 MB In vivo inflammation from HAdV-D60. (A) Histological analysis of various
titers of HAdV-D60 injected into the mouse cornea. (B) ELISA analysis of IFN-α and IFN-β 16 h postinfection with either HAdV-D37 (black) or
HAdV-D60 (red). Error bars represent standard deviations. n = 3 for all experiments. *, P < 0.05 (Student’s t test). Download Figure S7, TIF
file, 2.3 MB Citation Robinson CM, Zhou X, Rajaiya J, Yousuf MA, Singh G, DeSerres JJ, Walsh MP, Wong S, Seto D, Dyer DW, Chodosh J, Jones
MS. 2013. Predicting the next eye pathogen: analysis of a novel adenovirus. mBio 4(2):e00595-12. doi:10.1128/mBio.00595-12. This study was
supported by NIH grants EY013124, EY021558, and EY014104, a Research to Prevent Blindness Senior Scientific Investigator Award (to J.C.),
the Falk Foundation, and the Massachusetts Lions Eye Research Fund.
