X-linked juvenile retinoschisis is a rare hereditary retinal disease characterized by a tangential splitting of the neurosensory retina
which may cause early-onset visual impairment. Existence of the retinal neurosensory layer splitting on cross-sectional images of optical
coherance tomography (OCT) and the absence of leakage on fluorescein angiography (FA) help confirming the diagnosis. Such diagnostic tests
are also helpful in determining the management of the disease. However, most of the retinoschisis cavities remain stable and rarely extend
to the posterior pole, many authors suggest laser prophylaxis to avoid the potential risk of retinal detachment due to holes in the outer
retinal layer. Herein, we report a case with bilateral foveal retinoschisis accompanying unilateral peripheral retinoschisis who was
evaluated with detailed ophthalmologic examination. Visual acuity, fundoscopy, OCT, and FA remained stable in the second year of follow-up
after prophylactic argon laser treatment. Visual deterioration that progresses during the first to second decades of life is the most common
symptom of retinoschisis, while amblyopia, strabismus, and nystagmus related with retinal detachment and vitreous hemorrhage may also be
seen. The main clinical feature is foveal schisis with cystoid spaces and fine radial striae located in the macula. Peripheral retinoschisis
occurs in approximately 50% of affected male patients. Vitreous hemorrhage, retinal detachment, and neovascular glaucoma may also be seen.
Although there is no proven theuropeutic approach for this disease, laser photocoagulation, cryotherapy, scleral buckle, and pars plana
vitrectomy are considered as the main treatment options for retinoschisis especially complicated with vitreous hemorrhage or retinal
detachment. A 11-year-old boy was referred with complaints of bilateral blurred vision. The best corrected visual acuities were 10/20 in the
right eye and 20/200 in the fellow eye. Anterior segment examination with slit lamp biomicroscopy was unremarkable. Fundoscopic examination
via indirect ophthalmoscopy revealed minimal macular edema in the right eye and diffuse pigmentary changes as well as peripheral
retinoschisis in the fellow eye [Fig. 1]. Cartwheel-like configurated radial striates as well as fine cystoid changes in macula were seen in
fluorescein angiography (FA) of the right eye and diffuse punctate filling defects were revealed in FA of the left eye [Fig. 2]. Bilateral
foveal retinoschisis was evident on optical coherance tomography (OCT) [Fig. 3]. Bilateral subnormal rod responses in scotopic
electroretinogram (ERG) and subnormal flicker responses were present; however, they were more pronounced in the left eye. Bilateral negative
maximum responses in scotopic ERG were also detected. Besides, a selective decrease in b-wave amplitude on photopic cone responses which is
characteristic for retinoschisis was evident for the subject. Clinical photographs of right (a) and left (b) fundus. Peripheral
retinoschisis in the left eye (c); laser spots around the peripheral retinoschisis lesion (d) Radial striates and fine cystoid changes of
the right eye (a) and diffuse punctate filling defects of the fellow eye (b) in fluorescein angiography Foveal retinoschisis in the OCT
images of right (a) and left (b) fundus; OCT images of right (c) and left (d) fundus at the second year of follow-up In order to avoid the
potential risk of retinal detachment, argon laser photocoagulation was performed around the peripheral retinoschisis lesion in the left eye
[Fig. 1]. After the second year of follow-up visual acuity remained stable, also FA [Fig. 3] and OCT [Fig. 4] revealed no progression in
time. Fluorescein angiography of right (a) and left (b) fundus at the second year of follow-up. Peripheral retinoschisis lesion at the
second year of follow-up (c) The constant diagnostic feature of XLRS is bilateral foveal retinoschisis, whereas peripheral retinoschisis may
be present approximately half of the affected male patients. Tangential splitting of the neurosensory retina caused by the defect of
cellular adhesion and cellâ€“cell interactions within the inner nuclear layer is main histopatological appereance. However, disease is
commonly presented with reading difficulties due to the foveoschisis in school-age children, it can be diagnosed with nystagmus or
strabismus in infancy. Prognosis is poor because of the progressive maculopathy, moreover sudden visual loss due to retinal detachment or
intravitreal hemorrhage may be seen in cases with peripheral retinoschisis. Clinical photographs of retina and cross-sectional images of OCT
help confirming the diagnosis and determining the management of the disease. Existence of mild window defects and absence of fluorescein
leakage on FA as well as presence of a selective decrease in b-wave amplitude on both scotopic and photopic testing of ERG are also
characteristic findings for differential diagnosis. Confirming RS1 gene mutations on genetic molecular testing is an emerging diagnostic
parameter for the affected patients without a family history. However most of the retinoschisis cavities remain stable and rarely extend to
the posterior pole, many authors suggest laser prophylaxis. Malagola et al. reported the success of prophylactic argon laser
photocoagulation in the asymptomatic stage of bullous retinoschisis with outer layer breaks. Gopal et al. also reported the beneficial
effect of prophylactic photocoagulation in collapsing the schisis cavities. Successful treatment with laser photocoagulation in one of three
cases of posteriorly situated retinoschisis-retinal detachment was reported by Ambler et al. Jo et al. published the data of the first case
of spontaneous regression of retinoschisis as observed by OCT in the literature. On the other hand, some authors do not recommend
prophylactic treatment of retinoschisis in the absence of combined retinal detachment; moreover, they stated the increased risk of retinal
tears and iatrogenic retinal detachments after the heavy photocoagulation burns. In the present case, we performed prophylactic argon laser
photocoagulation to the posterior margin of retinoschisis cavity. At the end of the second year of follow-up, both fundoscopic examination
and visual assessment remained stable. Although there is no proven guideline for both the laser prophylaxis and the treatment of
retinoschisis, laser photocoagulation, cryotherapy, scleral buckle, and parsplana vitrectomy are considered as the main treatment options
especially in cases with vitreous hemorrhage or retinal detachment. The present study was conducted at the Ophthalmology Department in Dokuz
Eylul University School of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
