In this study, we have presented the case report of a 20 year old boy who suffered an electric injury shock, following which he showed
peripapillary retinal opacification and increased retinal thickening that subsequently progressed to retinal atrophy. The fluorescein
angiogram revealed normal retinal circulation, thus indicating thermal damage to retina without any compromise to retinal circulation.
Electrical injury from high-tension wires can result in a significant ocular morbidity. Tissue damage can occur through the transmission of
electrical current directly through the tissues, and conversion of electrical energy to thermal energy, which gets subsequently absorbed by
tissues, thus causing end-organ ischemia either by generalized vascular constriction or by cardiac arrhythmia. The extent of damage to the
tissues depends on the intensity of the current, duration of tissue exposure, and the tissue's resistance to the current. The optic nerve
and retina have a low resistance and are thought to be primarily affected by ischemia resulting from coagulation and necrosis of the
vascular tissues that feed them. The sequence of events following such an injury to retinal tissues is not known. We report a case which
illustrates that the initial acute response following electric shock injury is the retinal opacification with increased retinal thickness
that subsequently progresses to retinal atrophy. A 20 year old boy presented to our department with decreased vision, redness and watering
of both eyes following electrocution with overhead transmission wires six days ago. The electricity transmission wires were carrying a high
voltage of approximately 20,000V. He had multiple eschars on the back, scalp and arms along with facial erythema [Fig. 1]. His best-
corrected visual acuity was light perception in the right eye and counting fingers in the left eye with normal intraocular pressures. There
was a lid scaling and charring of the eyelashes. Anterior segment examination showed bilateral circumcorneal congestion, sluggish pupillary
reactions, superficial punctate keratitis and cataract in the left eye. Fundoscopy revealed an area of peripapillary retinal opacification
and a dull foveal reflex in both eyes [Figs. 2 and 3]. Fundus fluorescein angiogram showed a normal retinal circulation with late
hyperfluorescence corresponding to the area of opacification. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed retinal thickening with few cystoid
spaces in the right eye [Fig. 4]. Similar changes were seen the left eye (not shown). Patient was started on oral corticosteroids
(prednisolone 30 mg/day) and acetazolamide (750 mg/day in three divided doses). Steroids were given to control inflammation arising from the
injury, if any, and oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitor were added to reduce cystic fluid collection by possible stimulation of the retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE) pump. Acetazolamide was withdrawn after 1 month and oral steroids were discontinued after another month by gradual
tapering. One month later, his best corrected visual acuity was counting fingers 1 meter in the both eyes with posterior subcapsular
cataract and peripapillary retinal atrophy in both the eyes [Fig. 5]. OCT of both the eyes showed retinal atrophy with disorganization of
all retinal layers and the RPE [Fig. 6]. Patient underwent cataract surgery after 6 months from the time of injury in both the eyes with no
improvement in the visual acuity. Photograph of the face of the patient in the study following electrical burn showing eschars, erythema and
facial erythem Fundus photograph of the right eye of the patient in the study at presentation showing areas of peripapillary retinal
opacification with a dull foveal reflex Fundus photograph of the left eye of the patient in the study at presentation showing areas of
peripapillary retinal opacification with a dull foveal reflex Optical Coherence Tomography of right eye of the patient in the study at
presentation showing presence of retinal thickening and few cystic spaces. The retinal thickening is predominantly nasal with disruption of
the inner segment /outer segment (IS/OS) junction and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). Localized areas of posterior vitreous detachment can
be observed Fundus photograph of both eyesof the patient in the study taken at 1 month following injury showing almost complete resolution
of retinal opacification with appearance of retinal atrophy in both eyes. The area of retinochoroidal atrophy can be seen as patches of
pigmented and depigmented retina. Right eye shows pallor of the optic disc and attenuation of inferior peripapillary retinal vessels is
noted Optical Coherence Tomography of right eye of the patient in the study at one month following injury showing retinal atrophy with
disorganization of retinal layers and clumps of photoreceptor cells (left eye not shown) Optic nerve is very good conductor of electricity,
with the nerve tissue conducting electricity as any metal rod. The retina usually suffers thethermal effects of injuries in the form of
immediate coagulation of proteins and cells, â€“ and thus the initial whitening/opacification of the retina can be explained. The absorption
of energy by the RPE results in retinal damage which was evident in the peripapillary and macular area in our patient. A normal fluorescein
angiogram indicates that the retinal opacification was not as a result of ischemia, but was due to the thermal coagulation of the retinal
tissue. According to a recently published report, peripapillary meridional changes in the eye have been noted in a patient suffering from
electric injury. However, OCT changes underlying the pathology have not been studied in that study. Our case illustrates that initial acute
response following electric shock injury is the retinal opacification with increased retinal thickness, that subsequently progresses to
retinal atrophy. Source of Support: Nil, Conflict of Interest: None declared.
