Nodular fasciitis (NF) is a benign proliferation of fibroblasts and myofibroblasts that rarely occurs in the periorbital region. We report
what we believe to be the first case of periorbital NF associated with pregnancy. A case of intravascular fasciitis, a NF variant, has been
reported during pregnancy, but it was not located in the periorbital region. A weak presence of estrogen receptors has been reported in NF.
This may make it more susceptible to the hormone-related changes during pregnancy and contribute to the development of the lesion by
stimulating fibroblasts and smooth muscle cell types. Although rare, NF should be considered in the differential diagnosis of periorbital
soft-tissue masses arising during pregnancy. Nodular fasciitis (NF) is a benign proliferation of fibroblasts and myofibroblasts that is
characterized by a solitary, firm, rapidly growing nodule. It occurs predominately in the upper extremities and trunk, but it has also been
identified in the head and neck region in 13–20% of reported cases. Periorbital involvement is even less common although involvement of the
eyebrow, eyelids, and ocular surface have been described. Lesions are typically self-limited but can be mistaken for a sarcoma due to its
rapid growth. NF can occur at any age but young adults are most commonly involved, affecting males and females equally. NF does not appear
to be associated with any systemic manifestations, although a case of intravascular fasciitis, a variant of NF, was reported in a pregnant
woman. A literature review could find no reports of any other cases of NF in pregnancy. We report what we believe to be the first case of
periorbital NF associated with pregnancy. A healthy 25-year-old Caucasian female presented 2 months postpartum complaining of a mass above
her right eye. She first noticed it when she was 6 months pregnant and it had progressively enlarged. The patient reported mild tenderness
to palpation. The forehead and scalp had normal sensation to touch. It was the patient's first pregnancy and she was breastfeeding. The
patient denied a history of trauma. Examination revealed a freely mobile 1 × 1 cm firm, solitary nodule above the superomedial aspect of the
right orbital rim. The surrounding tissue was not adherent and the overlying skin was unremarkable. There were no other lesions or
lymphadenopathy. A computed tomography (CT) scan examination of the orbits showed a rounded, soft-tissue mass in the subcutaneous soft
tissue at the right supraorbital notch [Fig. 1]. There was no associated osseous defect and no intraorbital, sinus or other extension
identified. A rounded subcutaneous soft-tissue mass at the right supraorbital notch. There is no associated osseous defect or extension
identified The nodule was completely excised and the surgical site closed primarily. Histopathological examination revealed a slightly
irregular unencapsulated mass with monomorphic spindle-shaped cells. They were arranged in interlacing fascicles with occasional storiform
pattern in a myxoid stroma [Fig. 2]. Mitoses were infrequent and scattered throughout the lesion with no atypical mitoses. There were
numerous fine capillaries with scattered collections of extravasated lymphocytes and red blood cells present. The tumor cells stained
positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and vimentin. They stained negative for S100 and estrogen and progesterone receptors. Bland plump
spindled cells in a loose myxoid background with extravasated red blood cells and scattered chronic inflammation, (H and E, ×200)
Periorbital NF is a relatively rare lesion. The etiology remains unknown although trauma and inflammatory reactions have been blamed even
though limited evidence substantiates this. Periorbital NF can be very concerning since its rapid onset and growth may simulate a malignant
process. Although periorbital lesions have similar histological features when compared to NF identified at other anatomic sites, the lesions
tend to be smaller presumably due to the lack of abundant subcutaneous fat and earlier patient presentation. Local marginal excision is the
preferred treatment although partial resection may be adequate. Recurrence of the excised lesion has been documented, but it is so uncommon
that it has been suggested that recurrence of a lesion initially diagnosed as NF should lead to a careful reevaluation of the original
diagnosis. Ophthalmologists are unlikely to consider NF in their differential of lesions in the periorbital region. Clinically, the
differential diagnosis may include fibroma, solitary fibrous tumor, dermatofibroma, fibrosarcoma, neuroma, neurofibroma, lipoma, granuloma,
dermoid, and epidermal inclusion cyst. The clinical and imaging features of NF are not pathognomonic and this can lead to potential
diagnostic confusion. NF is a benign lesion that does not metastasize. Histopathologic examination and immunohistochemistry are usually
required for the precise diagnosis. Despite the absence of cellular atypia, NF can be confused with a spindle cell sarcoma because of its
infiltrative quality, rich cellularity, and variable mitotic figures. These include fibrosarcoma, neurofibrosarcoma, myofibroblastic
sarcoma, and osteosarcoma. As a spindle cell tumor, NF stains positive for vimentin and variably for SMA. Similar to our case, NF in the
head and neck region more commonly stains diffusely for SMA than lesions of the trunk and extremities, suggesting stronger expression by
myofibroblasts. NF does not stain positive for desmin, keratin, or S-100 protein. A weak presence of estrogen receptors was reported in a
series with three out of four cases of back and upper extremity NF, demonstrating focal cytoplasmic positivity for estrogen receptors. A
case of intravascular fasciitis, a NF variant, was discovered during pregnancy and the authors hypothesized that the hormone-related changes
during pregnancy may have contributed to the development of the lesion. They reasoned that estrogen is known to stimulate fibroblasts and
smooth muscle cell types and has been implicated in other fibroproliferative disorders such as carpal tunnel syndrome. They did not report
staining their specimen for estrogen receptor antibodies. Since our patient developed NF during pregnancy without a history of trauma, we
also reasoned that hormone-related changes may have contributed to the development of the lesion by inducing smooth muscle and fibroblast
proliferation. The lesion stained negative for estrogen and progesterone receptors, but this can sometimes be due to poor fixation and
embedding procedures. Although rare, NF should be considered in the differential diagnosis of periorbital soft-tissue masses arising during
pregnancy. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
