A 29-year-old male diagnosed with brucellosis a week earlier was referred to the ophthalmology clinic with visual complaints. On
examination, visual acuity was 20/25, he had conjunctival injection on slit lamp examination. There was also bilateral optic disk swelling
plus retinal hyperemia (optic disc hyperemia and vascular tortuosity) and intraretinal hemorrhage on funduscopy. The patient was admitted
and treated with cotrimoxazole, rifampin, doxycycline and prednisolone for 2 months. Ocular manifestations subsided gradually within 6
months after treatment. Brucellosis can affect the eye and lead to serious ocular complications. Early diagnosis and prompt treatment should
be considered in endemic areas. Brucellosis (Malta fever) is an infectious disease with a wide range of manifestations. This zoonotic
disease is caused by the Gram-negative coccobacillus, Brucella. There are four types of Brucella, B. melitensis, B. abortus, B. canis and B.
suis. Hosts are usually cows, camels, sheep and goats. Bacteria are transmitted to humans via the injection of non-pasteurized dairy
products, uncooked raw meat or by contact through skin, blood, conjunctiva, gastrointestinal or respiratory tracts.12 Although the incidence
of brucellosis has declined, it is still remains an important health problem in endemic areas such as the Middle East, the Mediterranean and
Asia. Iran is considered an endemic country as are Peru, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Turkey.34 According to the report of the diseases
prevention and Fight Department of Iran’s Health Center, Published in 2009, the incidence of brucellosis was 25 in 100,000 people. In
Hamadan, a western province in Iran, the incidence was 44 in 100,000 people. Studies show that B. melitensis is the most common and virulent
species with a high prevalence in Latin America, Mediterranean and developing countries. B. abortus is reported mostly in Europe and North
America. Despite the decrease in total prevalence of the disease, brucellosis remains a serious threat worldwide.5–7 A 29-year-old male was
referred to Infectious Disease Clinic of Hamadan Sina Hospital in summer 2008 with acute onset of fever, headache, malaise, sweating and low
back pain. On examination, the patient was conscious and his temperature was 39°C. There were no obvious systemic findings such as
organomegaly on physical examination. Laboratory test findings were: white blood cell (WBC) count of 13350 (Neutrophil: 85%), erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR) 48m/h, CRP+, RF–, ANA–, Wright’s agglutination titer of 1/1280. Results of serologic testing for syphilis,
hepatitis, tuberculosis and AIDS were negative. Outcomes of a lumbar puncture were normal. Blood levels, for sugar, sodium and potassium
were normal. Blood cultures were negative and electrocardiogram and chest-X-ray (CXR) were normal. The patient was diagnosed with
brucellosis, and treated with rifampin 600 mg/day and doxycycline 100 mg/twice daily. After a week, the patient was referred for an
Ophthalmology consult with complaints of ocular pain and redness and visual complaints. On ophthalmic examination, visual acuity in both
eyes was 20/25. There was diffuse conjunctival injection bilaterally which was more prominent in the right eye. The conjunctional injection
was a mixture of ciliary injection, episcleritis and conjunctivitis but more severe in the ciliary area. Neither eye had signs of
intraocular inflammation. Pupillary light reflexes were sluggish bilaterally but no afferent pupillary defect was present. The patient was
orthophoric without any muscle involvement and there was no diplopia. On funduscopy, there was bilateral optic disc swelling along with
retinal hyperemia (optic disc hyperemia and vascular tortuosity) and diffuse intraretinal hemorrhage [Figure 1]. Intraocular pressure (IOP)
was 26 mmHg in the right eye and 24 mmHg in the left eye. The patient was hospitalized with a probable diagnosis of ocular brucellosis and
was treated with co-trimoxazole adult two tablets, three times a day (tid), rifampin 600 mg/day doxycycline 100 mg/BID and prednisolone 1
mg/kg for 2 months. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging studies of the brain and optic nerve were requested. Both studies
were unremarkable. A brief visual field limitation was reported on perimetry. Fever and headache diminished within 48 hours of the treatment
however, ophthalmic complaints lingered. One week after treatment, visual acuity improved to 20/20. Conjunctival hyperemia had decreased but
previous funduscopic findings remained unchanged. IOP was 19 mmHg OD and 16 mmHg OS using timolol. Four weeks after treatment, there were no
visual complaints. Optic disc swelling and hyperemia had decreased and IOP bilaterally was within normal limits. Thirteen months after
treatment, the funduscopic examination was normal [Figure 2]. Bilateral optic disc swelling with retinal hyperemia (optic disc hyperemia and
vascular tortuosity) and diffuse intraretinal hemorrhage Fundoscopic findings 13 months after treatment for brucellosis Brucellosis presents
with a spectrum of clinical manifestations and diagnosis of this disease is based on clinical signs, positive bacteriological and
serological tests. Ocular involvement caused by Brucella remains poorly recognized. Some ocular manifestations including dacryoadenitis,
episcleritis, chronic iridoscleritis, nummular keratitis, cataract, glaucoma, multifocal choroiditis, exudative retinal detachment,
maculopathy, and optic neuritis.8–14 Rolando et al.14 showed that the most frequent ocular manifestation is uveitis predominantly posterior
uveitis. It seems that optic nerve involvement is secondary to meningeal inflammation and flow change of the optic nerve due to axonal
degeneration.14 Visual improvement of the patient following corticosteroid administration is proof of ischemic or vasculitic
involvement.1410 Ophthalmic manifestations of brucellosis are not common and acceptable outcomes following treatment with antibiotics and
steroids are low.91015–17 Cavallarro et al.18 reported a patient with papilledema due to brucellosis that was treated with sole anti-
brucellosis treatment without steroid administration. Abd-Elrazak19 reported a case of bilateral optic neuritis caused by brucellosis that
resolved following anti-brucellosis and steroid administration. Lashay et al.20 from Iran reported a case of bilateral optic nerve head
swelling following brucellosis, which led to bilateral optic nerve atrophy and visual loss. In our case, antibiotic and steroid
administration led to complete visual recovery and in 13 months follow-up after treatment, ophthalmologic examinations were normal. The
outcome in our case is likely due to early diagnosis and treatment, lack of a drug resistant strain and better prognosis in males compared
to females.1421–23 In the current case, imaging studies were normal. However, such lesions may be missed on routine imaging studies if
magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is not performed. Considering the rapid response to the therapeutic interventions, the MRA was not
performed for patient. Likewise, other possible causes of conjunctival injection associated with increased venous pressure such as cavernous
sinus thrombosis or orbital apex syndromes were ruled out due to this quick and appropriate response to treatment. The prevalence of
brucellosis has decreased in many developed countries and ophthalmic complications are rare in these regions, but it is suggested that in
endemic areas, routine ophthalmic examination for brucellosis be considered, as it seems that early diagnosis and prompt treatment of the
disease could decrease vision-threatening complications.23 Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
