We report a case of a 57-year-old male who presented with an inoperable chest wall sarcoma due to numerous pulmonary metastases and was
treated with chemotherapy and radiation therapy. The patient subsequently developed refractory bleeding from the chest wall tumor requiring
palliative chest wall resection and reconstruction. The patient made an uneventful recovery however died from metastatic disease 8 months
later. This case represents a very rare indication for palliative chest wall resection. Soft tissue sarcomas represent less than 1% of
malignancies occurring in the adult population and those arising from the chest wall comprise between 10% and 20% of these cases .
Management of chest wall sarcomas typically involves a multimodality approach including wide surgical resection with reconstruction . In
most cases, treatment is intended for curative purposes however occasionally palliative resection in the face of metastatic disease is
needed. Local complications as a result of radiation therapy can occasionally occur such as skin ulceration, pain syndromes, and extensive
tumor necrosis for which palliative surgery can improve the remaining quality of life . We report a case of refractory bleeding from tumor
necrosis after chemotherapy and radiation therapy that required operative intervention for palliation. A 57-year-old Caucasian male with a
60-pack-year smoking history and no other co-morbidities or medical conditions initially presented to an outside hospital with a large left-
sided chest wall neoplasm. (Figure 1A) Biopsy revealed a high-grade pleomorphic sarcoma. At the time of presentation, there were numerous
pulmonary metastases and therefore he was not felt to be a surgical candidate. He received 3 cycles of doxorubicin and ifosfamide
chemotherapy resulting in a modest radiographic response in the pulmonary metastases. There was no appreciable change in the primary
neoplasm and he subsequently received radiation therapy to the chest wall with a total of 5,000 cGy over 25 treatments. Six weeks after
receiving radiation, he developed significant skin and tumor ulceration resulting in diffuse bleeding refractory to multiple local
hemostatic measures including cauterization and application of numerous topical agents. He required constant blood transfusions, a total of
8 units over a 12-week interval. Hematologic studies revealed no evidence of an underlying bleeding disorder. Attempts at percutaneous
transarterial coil embolization of several chest wall arteries were subsequently performed however they were unsuccessful and the bleeding
and skin ulceration worsened. (Figure 1B) As the patient’s metastatic disease was felt to be controlled, he was referred to our institution
for urgent chest wall resection. Pretreatment chest CT scan (A) showing left chest wall sarcoma and preoperative chest x-ray (B) with
evidence of tumor and multiple embolization coils (dark arrows). At the time of surgery, wide chest wall excision was performed with an
approximately 3 cm circumferential gross tumor free margin. Ultimately, ribs 4 through 8 were excised anteriorly from the costal cartilages
to the anterior axillary line posteriorly. The resultant chest wall defect measured approximately 15 cm by 20 cm (Figure 2B). Chest wall
reconstruction was accomplished with a double layer of prolene mesh covered by transverse rectus abdominus myocutaneous (TRAM) flap
(Figure 2C). Pathologic analysis demonstrated an undifferentiated high-grade pleomorphic sarcoma with microscopic tumor free margins. The
patient’s post-operative course was uncomplicated and he was discharged after eight days in improved condition. He did well for 6 months
however developed metastatic disease to the bone and brain and died 8 months following surgery. Bleeding necrotic chest wall sarcoma (A)
with chest wall defect before (B) and after reconstruction (C). While surgical resection remains the standard of care for primary chest wall
sarcomas, the role of a multimodality therapy approach appears promising. There is growing evidence to suggest chemotherapy may reduce
systemic recurrence and improve survival . Pulmonary metastatectomy can also be considered for curative purposes in select cases. For
inoperable patients with chest wall sarcomas, a combination of chemotherapy and local radiation is typically offered to control distant and
local disease. Complications of radiation therapy may occur and include skin ulceration, pain syndromes, and primary tumor necrosis with or
without superimposed infections . While such complications are usually mild, on occasion, combined chest wall resection with reconstruction
is indicated for palliation of severe complications with the goal of improving the remaining quality of life . Significant and refractory
bleeding from soft tissue sarcomas following radiation therapy appears however to be a rare event. A review of the literature (a PubMed
search from 1990 to 2012 with index words: chest wall sarcoma, resection, bleeding) failed to identify any reports of chest wall resections
performed for refractory bleeding. The decision to pursue palliative resection is certainly challenging for both patients and caregivers.
When multiple efforts including arterial embolization failed to stop hemorrhage in our patient, chest wall resection and reconstruction
clearly became necessary. Although the optimal timing of surgery is unknown in these situations, we speculate that earlier referral for
resection could have been considered in this case. In summary, we encountered a rare case of significant and refractory bleeding from a
chest wall sarcoma following radiation therapy. The high-grade and large size of the primary neoplasm may have contributed to this unusual
complication. Bleeding refractory to conservative measures, along with other significant complications typically following radiation
therapy, can be indications for palliative chest wall resection and reconstruction. Although seemingly radical in the face of incurable
disease, surgery can allow an extended or improved quality of life. Telephone informed consent was obtained from the patient’s family for
publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. Each author contributed to the design and drafting of this
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We would like to thank our radiology and histology departments for their
assistance in procuring images and records.
