Background: periodic paralysis related to hypokalemia is seldom reported in thyrotoxicosis, and it usually occurs in Asian males. Patients
and methods: Two Romanian (Caucasian) young patients presented with hypokalemic paralysis. TSH, FT4, TT3 was measured by
immunochemiluminescence. Case report 1. Patient O.R, aged 19, presented marked asthenia and lower limbs paralysis, following high
carbohydrate meal. He declared 10 kg weight loss on hypocaloric diet and mild sweating. Biochemical data revealed moderate hypokalemia
(K+=2.6 mmol/L) and thyrotoxicosis (TSH<0.03 mIU/L, FT4=30 pmol/L, TT3=315 ng/dL). Case report 2. Patient T.A., aged 18, presented 2
episodes of weakness and flaccid paralysis, with hypokalemia, precipitated by effort, without any sign of thyrotoxicosis. Biochemical data
revealed severe hypokalemia (K+=1.8 mmol/L) and thyrotoxicosis (TSH<0.03 mIU/L, FT4=24 pmol/L, TT3=190 ng/dL). Treatment with intravenous
potassium, thereafter methimazole and propranolol were administered in both cases, with the maintenance of normal kalemia and
thyrotoxicosis’ control. Conclusion: these 2 cases of hypokalemic periodic paralysis occurring in young Caucasian teenagers with mild
thyrotoxicosis underlined the importance of thyroid screening in patients with symptomatic hypokalemia, even in the absence of symptoms and
signs of thyrotoxicosis. Abbreviations: THPP=Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, BMI=body mass index, TRAb=TSH receptor antibody,
ECG=electrocardiogram. Hypokalemia with acute paralysis is a medical emergency. Up to 43.3% of the patients with hypokalemic paralysis had a
secondary cause, 16.6-32% showing thyrotoxic paralysis . Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis (THPP) is an unusual complication of thyrotoxicosis,
that manifests as acute episodes of muscle weakness associated with hypokalemia . The disease primarily affects people of Asian descent, but
also other ethnic groups such as Europeans , Hispanics , native Americans . THPP predominantly affects males . THPP was reported more
frequently in Graves disease , but also in toxic multinodular goiter , toxic thyroid adenoma , TSH secreting pituitary adenomas , painless
thyroiditis , in patients with Jodbasedow thyrotoxicosis and in patients taking levothyroxine . Two young, non-consanguineous Caucasian
patients (18 and 19 years) initially presented with periodic hypokalemic paralysis. They did not have Asian ancestors, or a familial history
of periodic paralysis, or personal history of distal renal tubular acidosis, primary hyperaldosteronism or Bartter-like syndrome. Both
patients denied diarrhea, diuretics, licorice or alcohol use. TSH, FT4, TT4, TT3 were measured by immunochemiluminescence, upright
aldosterone by ELISA, plasma 8 a.m. cortisol and direct rennin by immunochemiluminescence. Case 1, O.R., male, aged 19, overweight (BMI=27.8
kg/m2), presented with marked asthenia and lower limbs paralysis. The symptoms had abrupt onset in the morning, after a rich carbohydrate
meal. The patient declared 10 kg weight loss on hypocaloric diet and mild sweating. Neurological exam showed symmetrical, lower limbs
flaccid paresis. Biochemical assessment revealed hyperglycemia (126 mg/dL) and moderate hypokalemia (2.6 mmol/L). Intravenous potassium
supplements were administered with normalization of serum potassium levels. In the endocrine department, the physical exam revealed mild
tachycardia, small diffuse goiter and tremor, without exophthalmia. Hormonal assessment revealed thyrotoxicosis (TSH<0.03 mIU/L, FT4=30.6
pmol/L, TT3=315 ng/dL); TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb) were positive (Table 1). Oral glucose tolerance test was normal. After restoration of
normal serum potassium levels, potassium excretion was normal (31.6 mmoL/24 hours). Case 2, T. A., male, aged 18, presented with marked
asthenia and quadriplegia with abrupt onset after an intensive physical effort. Neurological exam showed flaccid limbs paralysis. Severe
hypokalemia (1.8 mmol/L) was present. Intravenous potassium supplements were administered with normalization of serum potassium levels. In
the endocrine department, physical exam revealed small diffuse goiter without tachycardia, tremor or exophthalmia. Hormonal assessment
revealed mild thyrotoxicosis (TSH<0.03 mIU/L, FT4=24 pmol/L, TT3=190 ng/dL) (Table 1). After the restoration of normal serum potassium
levels, renal potassium excretion was normal (51.8 mmoL/24 hours). In both patients, thyroid ultrasound revealed hypoechoic, diffuse goiter;
there were no signs of hypercortisolism and adrenal assessment was normal (Table 1). Clinical and biochemical features at the onset of
hypokalemic paralysis Antithyroid drugs (Methimazole 30 > 20 > 10 > 5 mg/day) and non-selective β blockers (Propranolol 120 > 60 > 40 > 30
mg/day) treatment were administered in both patients, with long-term maintenance of normal serum potassium levels and progressive
normalization of TSH and FT4 levels (Table 2). Antithyroid drugs’ treatment duration was of 18 months. No recurrence of the paralysis has
been noted during follow-up. Biochemical data after 3 months treatment with antithyroid drugs and non-selective β blockers To our knowledge,
these cases are the first Romanian published cases of hypokalemic thyrotoxic paralysis so far. Both our patients are males. THPP had a
higher predilection for men than for women . The disease occurred especially in young adults . In our patients, THPP occurred at night and
early after awakening, respectively. Early morning paralysis was reported as the first manifestation of hyperthyroidism both in Asian men
and in Caucasians . Precipitating factors included sleep at night, hot weather, upper respiratory tract infections, excessive physical
activities , excessive alcohol intake , high carbohydrate intake . Both our patients showed mild thyrotoxicosis. Many affected patients do
not have obvious symptoms and signs of thyrotoxicosis . Both patients showed sinus tachycardia, U waves, without ventricular arrhythmia on
electrocardiogram (ECG). ECG manifestations in THPP were slightly different as compared with non-thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, at similar
low K+ levels: heart rate, PR interval, and QRS voltage were significantly higher . Young patients with THPP complicated by acute
hypercapnic respiratory failure and ventricular tachycardia or with thyroid storm, psychosis and episodic acute respiratory failure were
reported. The underlying mechanism of THPP is an acute extra to intracellular shift of potassium, mainly into the muscles, due to the
stimulation of the activity of the Na-K-ATP-ase pump by thyroid hormones, via beta-adrenergic stimulation . Genetic predisposition plays a
role in the pathogenesis of thyrotoxic hypokalemic periodic paralysis; polymorphisms of the calcium channel alpha1-subunit gene , mutations
in SCN4A or CACNA1S were reported. Up to 33% of THPP patients showed a mutation in Kir2.6 gene, regulated by thyroid hormones . Single
nucleotide polymorphisms of gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor alpha3 subunit were associated with THPP . Treatment of THPP implies two steps:
the hypokalemia correction and the euthyroidism restoring . Both our patients initially received intravenous potassium chloride
supplementation; correction of hypokalemia by potassium supplementation, in order to avoid fatal cardiac arrhythmias and to reverse muscle
weakness is mandatory . However, the patients do not have a total body deficiency of potassium, so aggressive potassium supplementation
should be avoided, because it can result in rebound hypokalemia . Potassium supplementation should be given as small as possible (<10
mmol/hr) . Intravenous glucose solution should be avoided, because it could aggravate hypokalemia, leading to death . The second step is the
treatment with antithyroid drugs and beta-blockers. Nonselective beta-adrenergic blockers can ameliorate and prevent recurrence of the
paralytic attacks. Both our cases received propranolol 120 mg/day and antithyroid drugs. In both presented cases, no recurrence of the
paralysis has been noted within the first 3 years after diagnosis. However, before achieving the euthyroid status, the rate of recurrent
attacks could be up to 62.2% . This episodic paralysis will remit with definitive control of hyperthyroidism . Both our patients refused
definitive surgical treatment of thyrotoxicosis and underwent regular thyroid follow-up. Thyrotoxic hypokalemic periodic paralysis, although
rare in Caucasian men, should be considered in the differential diagnosis of hypokalemic paralysis. Thyroid screening is mandatory in
patients with muscular paralysis associated with hypokalemia.
