While esophagogastric varices are common manifestations of portal hypertension, variceal bleeding from the jejunum is a rare complication of
liver cirrhosis. In addition, ectopic variceal bleeding occurs in the duodenum and at sites of previous bowel surgery in most cases,
including of stomas. We report a case of obscure overt gastrointestinal bleeding from jejunal varices in a 55-year-old woman who had not
previously undergone abdominal surgery, who had liver cirrhosis induced by the hepatitis C virus. Emergency endoscopy revealed the presence
of esophageal varices without stigmata of recent bleeding, and no bleeding focus was found at colonoscopy. She continued to produce
recurrent melena with hematochezia and received up to 21 units of packed red blood cells. CT angiography revealed the presence of jejunal
varices, but no active bleeding was found. Capsule endoscopy revealed fresh blood in the jejunum. The patient submitted to embolization of
the jejunal varices via the portal vein, after which she had a stable hemoglobin level and no recurrence of the melena. This is a case of
variceal bleeding from the jejunum in a liver cirrhosis patient without a prior history of abdominal surgery. Varices commonly occur in the
gastro-esophageal region and bleeding from gastro-esophageal varices is one of the most serious complications of portal hypertension.
However, ectopic varices can arise anywhere in the abdomen except in the cardio-esophageal region and can represent an unusual cause of
hemorrhage, accounting for up to 5% of all variceal bleeding.1 Although ectopic varices bleed less commonly than gastro-esophageal varices,
they can be far more difficult to diagnose and treat. Ectopic varices can occur at several sites; bleeding ectopic varices are most commonly
found in the duodenum and at sites of previous bowel surgery including stomas.1,2 However, variceal bleeding from the jejunum in a cirrhotic
patient without a prior history of abdominal surgery is rare. We report a case of intrahepatic portal hypertension-related variceal bleeding
from the jejunum with obscure overt gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding who has not previously undergone abdominal surgery and review the
literature pertaining to this condition. A 55-year-old woman with liver cirrhosis induced by the hepatitis C virus was admitted to Eul-ji
University Hospital with a 20 day history of melena. Upon admission, her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, heart
rate of 70/min, respiratory rate of 18/min and body temperature of 36.8â„ƒ. Head and neck examinations were unremarkable except for anemic
conjunctiva. Her abdomen was distended with shifting dullness and the spleen was palpable. Initial laboratory data were as follows: WBC
1,400/mm3, Hb 5.1 g/dL, platelet 63,000/mm3, BUN 19 mg/dL, creatinine 0.48 mg/dL, albumin 3.0 g/dL, AST 26 IU/L, ALT 20 IU/L, ALP 47 IU/L,
total bilirubin 0.73 mg/dL, INR 1.45, CRP 0.08 mg/dL, AFP 2.4 ng/dL. The hepatitis B marker was negative and the anti HCV antibody was
positive. A hepatitis C viral load was undetectable. Initial diagnosis was Child's B liver cirrhosis with possible variceal bleeding. The
patient was treated with intravenous (IV) pantoprazole, IV terlipressin and IV ciprofloxacin and was transfused with fresh frozen plasma and
packed red blood cells. Emergency esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed the presence of grade 2 esophageal varices without stigmata of recent
bleeding. No bleeding focus was found at colonoscopy up to the terminal ileum. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed liver cirrhosis
with massive ascites, splenomegaly and esophagogastric varices with portosystemic collaterals. In addition, CT angiography revealed the
presence of jejunal varices but no active bleeding was found (Fig. 1). Because she continued experiencing recurrent melena, a capsule
endoscopy was performed on day five of hospitalization. It demonstrated fresh blood adjacent to varices in the jejunum (Fig. 2). On day six
of hospitalization, a decision was made to perform the embolization of varices via the portal vein. The guidewire was manipulated into the
superior mesenteric vein and the catheter tip was then positioned into tortuous, wide jejunal varices drained to the inferior vena cava.
Five steel coils were placed into this vein. After that, injection of contrast under pressure did not demonstrate any retrograde flow,
indicating that it was occluded (Fig. 3). She received up to 21 units of packed red blood cells before the coiling embolization of the
jejunal varices. Since that point in time, she has had a stable hemoglobin level and no recurrence of the melena has been recognized. She
has been treated with a non-selective beta-blocker. A CT scan of the abdomen obtained 5 month after the embolization showed contrast-
enhancing steel coils deposits within the varices. No further GI bleeding occurred during the 5 month follow-up. Obscure GI bleeding could
be categorized as obscure overt and obscure occult bleeding on the presence or absence of clinically evident bleeding.3 It has been
estimated that approximately 5% of GI bleeding occurs in the small intestine.4 Lesions caused by portal hypertension are also important
causes of obscure bleeding. Varices, either in the small bowel or in other unusual locations, should be considered in all obscure bleeders
who have liver disease and/or portal hypertension.4 Ectopic varices are defined as large portosystemic venous collaterals occurring anywhere
in the abdomen except in the cardio-esophageal region. In patients with portal hypertension caused by an obstruction of the portal or
splenic veins, duodenal varices are more prevalent than in patients with intrahepatic portal hypertension.1 A history of abdominal surgery
appears to predispose the development of ectopic varices in adhesions.2 A triad of portal hypertension, history of abdominal surgery and
hematochezia without hematemesis characterizes small intestinal varices.2 Duodenal varices occur in about 0.4% of all patients with portal
hypertension and account for one-third of bleeding episodes from ectopic varices. Variceal bleeding from the jejunum is more rare than
variceal bleeding from the duodenum because of inaccessibility and anatomic difference.5 Recently, smallbowel varices secondary to portal
hypertension, diagnosed by capsule endoscopy, are reported and small bowel varices and mucosal changes are considered the definite or
probable source of bleeding.6 Investigations of the small intestine, including radiographic contrast studies, nuclear scans, angiography,
capsule endoscopy and push enteroscopy have been used to diagnose jejunal varices.7 In this case, CT angiography was negative and a capsule
endoscopy was performed as the next step. Capsule endoscopy, which is relatively non-invasive, was a suitable investigation for this
patient. Capsule endoscopy is being used increasingly to investigate GI bleeding of obscure origin and disorders of the small bowel. Tang SJ
et al. found smallbowel varices in four out of 46 patients (8.7%) who underwent capsule endoscopy for obscure GI bleeding.8 They reported
that capsule endoscopy is invaluable and highly sensitive for the detection of small-bowel variceal bleeding. Triester SL et al. reported
that capsule endoscopy was shown to be superior to push enteroscopy in a meta-analysis, although it has limitations in its inability to
therapy.9 The initial management of bleeding from jejunal varices involves hemodynamic stabilization with correction of anemia and
coagulopathy. The patient was treated with IV terlipressin, which has been beneficial in the management of bleeding esophageal varices. The
role of terlipressin in the control of bleeding from jejunal varices has not been estimated, but the use of terlipressin to reduce
splanchnic blood flow and variceal pressure may be beneficial in patients with intrahepatic portal hypertension-related variceal bleeding.1
Outside the reach of standard endoscopy, available therapy for jejunal variceal bleeding is limited to surgery, transjugular intrahepatic
porto-systemic shunt (TIPS), enteroscopy and percutaneous emolization. Surgery has been the main treatment option of bleeding jejunal
varices.10-12 The embolization of coil was attempted in this case because she had coagulopathy with high risk associated with surgery.
Radiological techniques with embolization have been used successfully in the active bleeding of jejunal varices.13 There is a case report of
enteroscopic sclerotherapy being successfully carried out using cyanoacrylate to treat hemorrhage from jejunal and gallbladder varices.14
The selection of possible therapeutic options for cirrhotic patients was made considering the risks and benefits in the situation and the
health of the patients. In conclusion, bleeding from ectopic varices must be considered for patients with portal hypertension and obscure
overt GI bleeding, and we described a case of variceal bleeding from the jejunum in a patient with liver cirrhosis who had not previously
undergone abdominal surgery. Combination of CT angiography and capsule endoscopy could lead towards diagnosis, and embolization of coil was
attempted in this case because of high risk of surgery. The authors have no conflicts to disclose. gastrointestinal intravenous transjugular
intrahepatic porto-systemic shunt CT angiography showing jejunal varices with no bleeding. Capsule endoscopy revealed "red markings" on and
adjacent to varices with serpiginous folds and a shiny surface in the jejunum. (A) Portal venography showing huge varices in the jejunum.
(B) Angiography demonstrating coil embolization of the varices in the jejunum.
