To the Editor We present the rare occurrence of a concurrent pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor (pNET) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC) in a patient with multiple endocrine neoplasia 1 (MEN1) syndrome. It is important for clinicians to consider the possibility of PDAC
in patients with MEN1 because aggressive early surgical intervention provides the only chance of cure. Multiple endocrine neoplasia 1 is
characterized by parathyroid adenomas, pNETs, and anterior pituitary tumors.1 Multiple endocrine neoplasia 1–associated pNETs are usually
slowly progressive and associated with low malignant potential. In the context of MEN1, pancreatic NET size correlates with prognosis and
the presence of metastases,2 and lesions of more than 2 cm are associated with greater genetic instability and malignant behaviour.3 The
European Neuroendocrine Tumour Society recommendations for management of pancreatic lesions in a patient with MEN1 state that early
diagnosis and surgical excision of MEN1-related pNET improve survival, preventing or delaying the development of distant metastases.4 It is
mandatory to operate on MEN1-related nonfunctioning pancreatic tumors with metastases, size of more than 2 cm, or yearly increased size of
more than 0.5 cm. Management of pNETs of less than 2 cm is controversial, current recommendation being intensive surveillance to avoid
repeated intervention where lesions are typically multiple and behave in an indolent fashion. A 46-year-old man was under surveillance in a
tertiary referral neuroendocrine tumor unit for a diagnosis of MEN1 syndrome. Medical history included Zollinger-Ellison syndrome with
resection of primary gastrinoma from the tail of the pancreas, primary hyperparathyroidism, and chronic hypercalcemia. Fifteen years
following his diagnosis of MEN1, he presented with anorexia, nausea, and jaundice and was treated for biliary sepsis. Computed tomography
(CT) scan and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) showed intrahepatic and pancreatic duct dilation. Endoscopic stent
placement was performed, and the patient improved. Three months later, his symptoms recurred, and he underwent a further ERCP at which point
a blocked stent was replaced with symptomatic improvement. Biochemical testing showed an extremely high carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA-19-9)
tumor marker of 4520 U/mL (46 U/mL 2 months previously). Cross-sectional imaging showed a 2.8 × 2.2-cm mass in the head/uncinate process of
the pancreas with associated duct obstruction. Cytological brushings from the ERCP demonstrated synaptophysin immunopositivity, indicating
the presence of neuroendocrine tumor; however, gallium 68 DOTA octreotate positron emission tomography (Ga-68 PET) scanning did not show any
uptake in the pancreas. Endoscopic ultrasound demonstrated the double duct sign and confirmed a mass in the head of the pancreas. In view of
these findings, in association with a raised CA-19-9, a Whipple pancreatoduodenectomy was performed. Histology demonstrated a 30-mm
moderately differentiated ductal adenocarcinoma of the head of the pancreas, invading to the mucosal surface of the duodenum and
peripancreatic adipose tissue, pT3 N0 M0 (stage IIA). Also present was a concurrent 9-mm well-differentiated grade 1 pNET, with 5 of 19
lymph nodes positive for metastatic neuroendocrine tumor (pT1 N1). Immunohistochemistry of the pNET was positive for chromogranin and
synaptophysin, and Ki-67 was less than 1%. Figure 1 illustrates histopathologic features of both tumors. A, Hematoxylin-eosin–stained
section, original magnification ×4: head of the pancreas with a moderately differentiated pancreatic ductal-type adenocarcinoma (upper half
of the picture) closely juxtaposed to a well-differentiated neuroendocrine neoplasm of low grade (lower half of the picture). B,
Immunohistochemistry for Ki-67, X4: the proliferative rate with Ki-67 is low in the well-differentiated neuroendocrine neoplasm compared
with the high proliferative rate seen in the pancreatic adenocarcinoma. C, Immunohistochemistry for synaptophysin, X4: a diffuse and strong
positivity is seen in the well-differentiated neuroendocrine neoplasm, and complete negativity is seen in the adenocarcinoma. In this case,
the use of serum tumor markers (a significantly raised CA-19-9) and negative functional imaging (Ga-68 PET) of the pancreatic mass raised
the suspicion of an alternative diagnosis to the expected pNET. CA-19-9 is the most frequently utilized biochemical marker for pancreatic
adenocarcinoma, with median sensitivity for diagnosis of 79% (70%–90%) and specificity of 82% (68%–91%).5 Specificity falls in jaundice.
Recommendations for evaluation of suspected pancreatic adenocarcinoma involve endoscopic ultrasound and CT assessment, and note that CA-19-9
is of limited diagnostic value but of use to guide treatment and follow-up.6 The use of functional and somatostatin receptor imaging is
important in the evaluation of suspected neuroendocrine tumors; however, all modalities are limited by reduced sensitivity for lesions of
less than 1 cm. Gallium 68 PET scan is more sensitive than other modalities; however, its role in the assessment of patients with MEN1 has
not yet been determined.7 In our case, lack of uptake in the pancreas on Ga-68 PET despite a 3-cm lesion being visualized on CT raised the
suspicion of nonneuroendocrine malignancy. The small (9 mm) neuroendocrine tumor was below the resolution threshold of the Ga-68 PET and
therefore was not visualized. We have presented a rare concurrence of PDAC with pNET in a patient with MEN1 syndrome. This case highlights
the importance of relevant imaging and biochemical biomarkers and questions the current practice of surveillance for small pancreatic masses
in patients with MEN1 syndrome. No specific funding was provided for this work. Two of the authors (A.K. and C.Th.) are funded by Cancer
Research UK and the Raymond and Beverley Sackler Foundation. The authors declare no conflict of interest. No specific funding was provided
for this work. Two of the authors (A.K. and C.Th.) are funded by Cancer Research UK and the Raymond and Beverley Sackler Foundation. The
authors declare no conflict of interest.
