Sepsis is now the leading direct cause of maternal death in the United Kingdom, and Streptococcus pyogenes is the leading pathogen. We
combined conventional and genomic analyses to define the duration and scale of a lethal outbreak. Two postpartum deaths caused by S.
pyogenes occurred within 24 h; one was characterized by bacteremia and shock and the other by hemorrhagic pneumonia. The women gave birth
within minutes of each other in the same maternity unit 2 days earlier. Seven additional infections in health care and household contacts
were subsequently detected and treated. All cluster-associated S. pyogenes isolates were genotype emm1 and were initially indistinguishable
from other United Kingdom emm1 isolates. Sequencing of the virulence gene sic revealed that all outbreak isolates had the same unique sic
type. Genome sequencing confirmed that the cluster was caused by a unique S. pyogenes clone. Transmission between patients occurred on a
single day and was associated with casual contact only. A single isolate from one patient demonstrated a sequence change in sic consistent
with longer infection duration. Transmission to health care workers was traced to single clinical contacts with index cases. The last case
was detected 18 days after the first case. Following enhanced surveillance, the outbreak isolate was not detected again. Mutations in
bacterial regulatory genes played no detectable role in this outbreak, illustrating the intrinsic ability of emm1 S. pyogenes to spread
while retaining virulence. This fast-moving outbreak highlights the potential of S. pyogenes to cause a range of diseases in the puerperium
with rapid transmission, underlining the importance of immediate recognition and response by clinical infection and occupational health
teams. Cases of postpartum maternal Streptococcus pyogenes sepsis occur sporadically; paired cases and deaths are rare in the developed
world (1, 2). We describe two postpartum deaths due to S. pyogenes (group A Streptococcus ) that occurred within 24 h in the same maternity
unit; one case was characterized by septic shock and the other by hemorrhagic pneumonia. Both cases were associated with seven additional
infections detected in health care and family contacts. We combined genotypic and phenotypic analyses with whole-genome sequencing to
confirm that the isolates were unique and distinct from other emm1 GAS isolates circulating in the United Kingdom, enabling us to determine
the time limits and scale of this outbreak. A 39-year-old teacher (gravida 3, para 2) presented at term with irregular contractions and was
monitored for 5 h in the maternity unit prior to discharge. She was readmitted 5 h later and delivered a live female infant. Other than a
small second-degree tear, there were no complications and the mother was discharged 13 h after delivery. Approximately 30 h following
delivery she awoke with lower abdominal pain necessitating hospital readmission, inhaled nitrous oxide, and opiates, although physiological
measurements were initially normal. She collapsed, 6 h later, with hypotension and was transferred to the intensive care unit. She rapidly
developed multiorgan failure and responded poorly to inotropic and ventilatory support in addition to broad-spectrum antibiotics. The
following day, blood cultures indicated a streptococcal infection, and high-dose intravenous pooled human immunoglobulin G (IVIG) was
administered. The patient deteriorated and died 2.5 days after delivery of her third child. GAS was isolated from blood cultures and genital
tract swabs obtained antemortem and also from uterine cervix tissue obtained postmortem. A 29-year-old primigravid teacher was admitted
while in labor to the same unit on the same day as case 1. She had experienced spontaneous rupture of membranes 48 h earlier and had
commenced prophylactic amoxicillin. During the day she had had a transient temperature of 37.7Â°C which settled, though other physiological
measurements were normal. An oxytocin infusion was commenced; 12 h later, a live male infant was delivered by emergency cesarean section,
and a final antibiotic dose was administered intraoperatively. The time of cesarean delivery was 2 min before the delivery of the baby of
case 1, although the delivery occurred in a separate section of the maternity unit and was undertaken by different staff. She was discharged
approximately 66 h after cesarean section. Approximately 76 h after delivery, she developed a cough and chest pain associated with blood-
stained sputum. A community midwife arranged hospital readmission. While packing, the patient collapsed in respiratory arrest associated
with hemoptysis. Resuscitation was attempted by a paramedical team on site and in the hospital emergency unit but the patient died on 24
December, 3.5 days after cesarean section. GAS was isolated from throat, hemorrhagic lung, and uterine cervix samples postmortem but not
from the cesarean wound or lower genital tract. GAS isolates from both cases were subsequently identified as emm type 1. A hospital outbreak
control team managed the incident, surveillance, and epidemiology. Household and health care worker (HCW) contacts of each patient were
screened, including antenatal, during-labor, and postnatal contacts (Fig. 1). Environmental screening was conducted once in the immediate
aftermath of the outbreak by swabbing of baths, showers, basins, and bed space surfaces, and the samples obtained by swabbing were cultured
on blood agar. Identification of group A streptococcus (GAS) cases. Cumulative number of individuals carrying or infected with the outbreak
strain by date (upper axis, blue-shaded bars). Individuals with the outbreak strain included maternity patients (solid shading), household
contacts (diagonal crosshatching), and health care workers (HCWs) (horizontal crosshatching). Individuals found to be carrying or infected
with other GAS isolates during the period of surveillance are shown on the lower axis (gray-shaded bars). Period of overlapping hospital
admissions for three maternity patients denoted by gray shaded area. During the period of intense surveillance, which started on December 24
and lasted for 2 months, two HCWs were identified to be carrying emm12 GAS (gray-shaded horizontally hatched bars) and two nonmaternity
patients had community-acquired invasive infections caused by GAS strains emm89 (gray-shaded bar, January 3) and emm75 (white bar, January
23). Enhanced surveillance continued for a further 4 months, during which time no further GAS was isolated from any maternity patient. As
part of a 2-month period of intensive surveillance, all mothers who had been on the unit concurrently with the two cases were contacted and
advised to seek medical attention and screening if symptomatic. All women in labor were screened during this period within a day of
admission. Throat and skin swabs (if skin lesions were reported) were used for screening for GAS, plus lower genital tract swabs for all
women in labor. During the intensive surveillance period, enhanced twice daily chlorine-based cleaning in the maternity unit was undertaken
(previously once daily detergent-based cleaning). Four household contacts of case 1 were screened, of whom 2 were positive for GAS. Two
household contacts of case 2 were screened, of whom 1 was positive for GAS. The baby of case 1 was admitted to the neonatal unit with a
raised level of C-reactive protein (CRP) and received ceftriaxone for suspected sepsis; nose and ear swabs obtained 2 days after delivery
yielded GAS emm1, although blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cultures were negative. The baby of case 2 was not colonized or infected with
GAS. Throat swabs from the partners of case 1 and case 2 yielded GAS emm1, and both of these individuals received antibiotics. One partner
reported pharyngitis at the time of screening (i.e., after the death of case 1), while the other developed a lower respiratory tract
infection necessitating hospital admission 4 days after the death of case 2. Of 69 HCW contacts screened, 3/69 (4.3%) had throat swabs that
yielded GAS emm1, and each received antibiotic treatment. The three HCWs reported single episodes of postnatal clinical contact with the
patients and included an obstetrician who examined case 1, an intensive care unit (ICU) nurse present at the intubation of case 1, and a
community midwife attending case 2 at home. Two of the HCWs developed significant symptoms 7 to 10 days after the deaths; one had
tonsillitis and cervical lymphadenopathy, while the other had pharyngitis. HCWs who tested positive for GAS were offered 10 days of
treatment with oral amoxicillin, removed from work for this period, and screened again at the end of treatment. The partner of a symptomatic
HCW was treated for GAS pharyngitis, though the isolate was not available for study. One hundred ninety-three HCWs from the same
institution, who were not contacts of the two cases, were also screened. Two of the 193 (1%) had throat swabs that yielded GAS and received
antibiotics; however, these isolates were emm12. In the immediate aftermath of the outbreak, 42 maternity patients were screened, including
women who reported symptoms compatible with GAS and had been on the unit at the same time as the two fatal cases, along with those admitted
up to 2 weeks later. One of the 42 had a throat swab that yielded GAS, typed as emm1. This patient reported pharyngitis and sinusitis that
developed 1 week postpartum and also recalled meeting and talking with case 1 on the day of her original admission (Fig. 1). This patient
was treated with antibiotics in the community. Two further cases of invasive GAS infection (necrotizing fasciitis and pneumonia) were
admitted from the community during the month following the maternal fatalities; however, the GAS isolates in these cases were emm75 and
emm89 (Fig. 1). GAS was not isolated from any environmental samples. A further 4-month period of enhanced clinical surveillance was
instituted within the obstetric and neonatal units, in which HCW were particularly alert for all GAS infections and swabbed throats and skin
of patients or HCW if there was any history or indication of inflammation. No further GAS carriage or infection was detected. All 15 emm1
GAS isolates from the cluster were compared with 14 other emm1 GAS isolates submitted to the national reference laboratory from elsewhere in
England in the 3 months preceding and 1 month following the outbreak, including, where available, isolates from the same region (see Table
S1 in the supplemental material). GAS phenotypic comparison, emm typing, superantigen genotyping, and covR/S and sic loci sequencing are
described in Supplementary Methods in the supplemental material. Illumina sequencing was performed on 24 strains, including all 15 strains
from the outbreak, and mapped against the complete genome sequence of the U.S. emm1 strain MGAS5005 (3). In excess of 50-fold sequence
coverage was achieved for all isolates (see Supplementary Methods in the supplemental material). As a surrogate for immunity among women of
child-bearing age in the United Kingdom, anonymized serum samples from antenatal screening were obtained from the Imperial College
Healthcare Trust and used in accordance with approval from the West London Research Ethics Committee. Reactivity of antenatal sera to
recombinant SIC proteins was tested using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)-based method. Diluted antenatal sera were applied to
SIC protein-coated wells, and bound IgG was detected with goat anti-human IgG-horseradish peroxidase (HRP). In order to quantify SIC-
reactive IgG in each serum sample relative to the human blood product intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) (Zenalb 4.5), which has high
antistreptococcal activity, the activity of IVIG against SIC protein was also measured using a series of fixed concentrations of IVIG to
generate a standard curve of IVIG-equivalent anti-SIC IgG on each plate. A similar protocol was used to detect IgG reactivity of antenatal
sera to whole emm1 S. pyogenes cells, but the wells were coated with heat-killed emm1 S. pyogenes. Details are provided in the supplemental
methods in the supplemental material. Assays were performed using 80 (of 199) representative heat-inactivated antenatal patient sera. emm1
GAS (strain H584) isolates were stained with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) (Invitrogen) and opsonized with test serum before being added
to 2 Ã 106 fresh human neutrophils and 10% complement (rabbit serum; Merck Chemicals, United Kingdom). Neutrophils with internalized FITC-
labeled bacteria were measured by flow cytometry. To exclude the external adherent, FITC-labeled S. pyogenes, samples were quenched with
trypan blue. Antenatal serum-opsonized GAS isolates were compared with IVIG (2.5 mg/ml)-opsonized GAS isolates, as this has been shown to
provide optimum opsonophagocytosis. Nonopsonized GAS isolates were used as negative controls. To determine whether the 15 emm1 GAS isolates
from the maternity unit exhibited excessive virulence, they were compared phenotypically with 14 other emm1 strains from the United Kingdom
using a wide panel of in vitro analyses that included investigations of growth in whole blood, superantigenicity, and the expression of
capsule, Streptococcus pyogenes cell envelope protease (SpyCEP), and cysteine protease SPEB (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material).
There were no phenotypic differences detected between the outbreak cluster and other emm1 strains circulating in the United Kingdom.
Isolates were penicillin sensitive, and the MIC did not differ from other emm1 isolates (0.03 mg/liter). Although 5 to 10 different
superantigen genotypes have been described in European emm1 strains (4), all 29 outbreak and nonoutbreak strains had the same superantigen
genotype (speA, speG, speJ, and smeZ). Sequencing of the streptococcal inhibitor of complement (SIC), encoded by sic, identified 13
different sic alleles among all 29 emm1 isolates studied, the most common allele identified being sic1.02 (see Table S1 in the supplemental
material). Of the 15 emm1 isolates from the maternity unit, 14 had the same sic gene, which had a unique gene sequence and was designated
sic1.300. One genital tract isolate from case 1 demonstrated another unique sic allele, designated sic1.301. As sic1.301 differed from
sic1.300 by an 87-bp deletion (see Fig. S2 in the supplemental material), we surmised that sic1.301 had arisen from sic1.300 during mucosal
carriage indicating possible longer duration of infection (5, 6). Despite distinctive sequences, there were no differences in the abilities
of the recombinant variant SIC proteins to inhibit complement-mediated erythrocyte lysis (SIC1.300, SIC1.301, and the common United Kingdom
type SIC1.02) (see Fig. S2 in the supplemental material), a finding that is consistent with those reported in published structure-function
data (5, 7). To determine if any features in addition to those revealed by the sic genotyping distinguished the isolates, we performed
whole-genome sequencing of the 15 emm1 isolates from the maternity unit and 9 of the 14 unrelated emm1 isolates from elsewhere in England.
Genome sequencing confirmed that the 15 strains from the maternity unit were unique and differed from the nearest GAS relative by eight core
genome single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs); six of these SNPs were unique to the outbreak cluster (Fig. 2). Of the six unique SNPs, one
was nonsynonymous and occurred in the sic gene (consistent with the previously noted unique sic gene sequence). Additionally, outside the
core genome, the outbreak cluster had a unique nonsynonymous SNP that mapped to a gene of unknown function in phage 5005.2. Phylogenetic
analysis results demonstrating that the core genomes of the maternity unit isolates were identical to each other but different from
contemporaneous emm1 isolates submitted to the reference laboratory. The genomes of all 15 isolates from the maternity unit and 9 emm1
isolates from around England were sequenced and mapped to the complete genome sequence of MGAS5005, a contemporary U.S. strain (3). A
maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree was generated from core genome single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 24 emm1 isolates. The
maternity unit isolates clustered in a single clade that differed from the nearest relative by eight SNPs. The sic allele for each isolate
is indicated. The unique sic allele (sic1.301) that arose within the outbreak cluster is highlighted in red. The scale bar represents
substitutions per SNP site. Details of all SNPs are provided in Table S2 in the supplemental material. HCW, health care worker; URT, upper
respiratory tract; LRT, lower respiratory tract; GT, genital tract. Comparing all 24 sequenced emm1 strains with the genome of MGAS5005, the
most recently sequenced U.S. emm1 strain (3), we identified a total of 250 SNP loci within the core genome (excluding phage-related
sequences), of which 138 (â¼55%) were nonsynonymous substitutions, 80 (â¼32%) were synonymous substitutions, and 32 (â¼13%) were within
intergenic regions (see Tables S2, S3, and S4 in the supplemental material). Mutations in GAS regulatory genes, reported to be associated
with strain hyperinvasiveness, were not seen in any of the 15 isolates from the maternity unit. Unique mutations in covR/S and rgg were seen
in only 2/7 and 1/7 invasive emm1 strains from elsewhere in England, respectively, and these were associated with predicted phenotypic
changes that included increased SpyCEP and capsule expression but reduced SPEB expression (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material). During
the short outbreak course, no new SNPs arose in the 15 isolates from the maternity unit. However, in addition to the sic deletion mutation
already detected in a genital tract isolate from case 1, a truncation deletion mutation in the capsule biosynthesis gene, hasB, was
identified in a pharyngeal isolate cultured from the maternity patient contact with an 11-day history of pharyngitis. This mutation had no
measurable impact on capsule production in vitro (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material). To investigate antenatal population immunity to
emm1 GAS, 199 sera were tested for reactivity to each SIC allele (sic being specific to emm1) and to emm1 GAS surface proteins. Of the 199
sera, 7% showed no recognition of SIC, while a majority showed low reactivity and a small proportion (8%) showed strong reactivity similar
to IVIG. SIC allele-specific responses were seen only in a minority (see Fig. S3 in the supplemental material). Only 16% of the 199
antenatal sera had any detectable antibody to GAS surface proteins (see Fig. S4). The ability of antenatal sera to opsonize FITC-labeled
emm1 GAS was determined by coincubation with fresh human neutrophils and measurement of subsequent phagocytosis; 5% of samples demonstrated
no ability to facilitate opsonophagocytosis of emm1 GAS, while only 4% showed activity equivalent to that seen when we tested human IVIG
(Fig. 3). Immunity to emm1 GAS among healthy pregnant women. The ability of antenatal sera to opsonize FITC-labeled M1 GAS is shown for 80
representative sera (out of 199). The percentage of neutrophils associated with serum-opsonized FITC-labeled bacteria was measured by flow
cytometry and expressed relative to the percentage of neutrophils associated with FITC-labeled bacteria when IVIG (2.5 mg/ml) was used as
the opsonin. Negative, below the level of the âno serumâ (complement alone) control (â¤10% of IVIG-equivalent opsonophagocytosis). This
lethal outbreak of emm1 S. pyogenes in a maternity unit was explosive, commencing with a likely community source. Transmission events
occurred on a single day with apparently transient contacts. Whole-genome sequencing confirmed cases to be clonal, although events were so
rapid that a chronological sequence of transmission could be determined only by changes in a virulence gene, sic, rather than conventional
analysis of whole-genome data. The rapid and lethal nature of this outbreak highlights a number of learning points. First, GAS infection
remains a deadly threat in the puerperium. The transmission risk within the maternity setting is high, not only to HCWs who attend infected
patients, but also between social and family contacts and to the newborn infant. Oropharyngeal carriage may be important, and single
episodes of contact are sufficient for productive transmission to occur (including both social and health care contact). Recognized risk
factors for postpartum sepsis may not always be present, and signs of severe sepsis may be masked or present atypically. Invasive GAS
infection in the postpartum period is not limited to classical genital tract (puerperal) sepsis and may present to physicians other than
obstetricians, progressing rapidly to irreversible multiorgan failure. Remarkably, sepsis is now the leading cause of âdirectâ maternal
deaths in the United Kingdom. GAS accounted for 13 of 25 sepsis-related maternal deaths reported in 2006â2008 by the United Kingdom Centre
for Maternal and Child Enquiries (CMACE), although the reasons for the increases are unclear (8, 9). Although pairs of GAS infection caused
by the same emm type have been previously reported in maternity units, such events are rare and may be related to HCW carriage (1, 10, 11).
The outbreak we describe was caused by emm1 GAS, the major lineage associated with invasive disease in Europe and the United States.
Although GAS puerperal sepsis is most frequently associated with emm28, the mortality of GAS puerperal infection is disproportionately
attributable to emm1 and emm3 S. pyogenes isolates (12). Environmental factors that influence GAS outbreaks have been well documented
(seasonal variation, sharing rooms, hygiene, etc.) (13â16), but the host and the pathogen factors affecting transmission of S. pyogenes in
this setting are unknown. The affected women were admitted while in labor to the same unit on the same day. It is not possible to
definitively determine whether infection was acquired outside the hospital and then transmitted sequentially through person-to-person
contact within the unit or whether the maternity patients acquired their infection from a common source. However, one isolate (out of four)
from case 1 had undergone allelic change in sic at an unknown time point, indicative of longer mucosal colonization. Changes in sic within
individual patients carrying GAS mucosally have been reported previously, as have changes during epidemics within a population (5, 17), but
these events may require prolonged carriage (>2 weeks). Indeed, experimental mucosal infection of mice failed to induce allelic change in
sic over a 9-day period (data not shown), a result consistent with those of other studies (5, 6). Due to the high numbers of repeat regions
within the sic gene, the mapping software used to analyze whole-genome sequencing cannot identify such changes, necessitating conventional
sequencing. Although both women delivered within minutes of one another, symptomatic infection in case 2 arose 2 days later than in case 1.
We speculate that the administration of prophylactic beta lactam antibiotics for ruptured membranes in case 2 may have delayed the onset of
disease, although these antibiotics were insufficient to prevent GAS acquisition or colonization. The routes of GAS transmission in the
puerperium are hard to investigate, since samples are seldom obtained from women antenatally or from contacts, except where an outbreak
occurs. GAS is rarely present in the genital tract antenatally (18â21); hence, screening or clearance regimens, antenatally or intrapartum,
are unlikely to have an impact on postpartum GAS infection. The importance of the respiratory tract as a source of infection in recently
pregnant women was established in the 1930s, and reiterated in the CMACE report (8, 18). GAS throat carriage among healthy adults in England
is low, around 0.5 to 2% (22), consistent with the 1% carriage rate (of nonoutbreak strains) we detected in HCWs who were not direct
contacts of the cases. In contrast, 4.3% of the HCWs identified as contacts were found to be carriers or infected with the outbreak strain,
suggesting that it may be especially suited to spreading in this setting. Transmission of the outbreak strain to HCWs was, however, limited
to those reporting close but single clinical contacts, and this raises the question as to whether mask wearing is advisable for HCWs
treating GAS patients. Screening of HCWs was performed using throat or skin swabs and thus excluded those carrying GAS rectally or
vaginally. Previous outbreaks have been associated with HCWs asymptomatically carrying GAS at all mucosal sites (11); therefore, we cannot
fully exclude an unknown HCW source of GAS. HCW compliance is essential during outbreak investigation (13, 23), and newly issued United
Kingdom guidance (14) recommends that nasal, rectal, and vaginal swabs should be obtained, if other swabs are negative, in situations where
an HCW is implicated in transmission. Contact with children in either the home or the workplace has been reported in association with
maternal invasive GAS infection (8); coincidentally, both women who died were teachers, although they taught at separate schools. While it
is possible that children represented a reservoir for the outbreak strain, the strain was not detected in any of 193 HCWs that were not
contacts of the patients, nor was it identified among 100 GAS throat isolates submitted from the affected region in the 1 year following the
outbreak. We therefore concluded that the outbreak strain was not circulating in the wider community. Women after delivery are 20 times more
susceptible to hemolytic streptococcal bacteremia than nonpregnant women; this risk increases to 100-fold if all invasive GAS infections are
included (24, 25). There is a pressing need to establish a robust assay for GAS immunity that can be applied to large populations. To
determine immunity in a similar but unrelated antenatal population, we used an assay that solely measured serum opsonic function that could
result in phagocytosis. Five percent of antenatal sera showed no opsonic activity against emm1 GAS, highlighting an underlying
susceptibility to GAS infection in a significant proportion of the antenatal population. Whether immunity to GAS alters during the course of
pregnancy is entirely unknown and is a subject of ongoing research. To our knowledge, the emm1 GAS isolates in this study are the first to
be sequenced outside the United States. For comparison and SNP identification, we chose to align our sequences against the emm1 genome
strain MGAS5005 (rather than SF370), as the MGAS5005 strain is more representative of the globally disseminated emm1 clone (3). Mutations in
regulatory genes are reportedly characteristic of emm1 hyperinvasiveness (26â28) but may result in fitness cost, reducing colonization
potential (29). These mutations were not observed in any of the outbreak strains and were observed in fewer than half of the invasive emm1
strains from elsewhere in England. Preservation of GAS regulatory gene function may have underpinned the rapid transmissibility and
adaptability essential for this explosive but short-lived outbreak. This outbreak illustrates the devastating rapidity and intensity with
which GAS can spread within a susceptible population and draws attention to the need for urgent infection control intervention, including
immediate staff screening in a suspected outbreak to prevent consequent additional transmission events. Staff screening should occur prior
to the availability of the results of molecular typing and ideally before staff members return to duty, although this may necessitate a
flexible approach to the screening process rather than the conventional use of occupational health units. The emm1 GAS organism is equipped
with a range of virulence factors that allow it to cause the spectrum of disease observed in this outbreak (30), from asymptomatic
colonization through to tonsillitis, hemorrhagic pneumonia, and bacteremia toxic shock. Recent guidelines regarding outbreak prevention (14)
and management of severe sepsis in the obstetric patient are timely (31). When reviewing maternity patients presenting after childbirth,
vigilance is needed with regard to suspicion of sepsis, which may develop in the community, as occurred in both cases reported here.
Published ahead of print 24 April 2013 Supplemental material for this article may be found at http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JCM.00679-13. This
work was supported by the United Kingdom Clinical Research Collaboration, which funds the National Centre for Infection Prevention and
Management at Imperial College London. The work was also supported by The Wellcome Trust (C.E.T., R.A.L., S.D.B., and M.T.G.H.). S.S. is
grateful for support from the United Kingdom NIHR Biomedical Research Centre funding scheme. We thank the core sequencing and informatics
teams at the Sanger Institute for their assistance, Alison Holmes and Theresa Lamagni for helpful comments regarding the manuscript, and the
ICHT Department of Virology for access to screened sera.
