This paper reports a case of endometriosis of the lung in a 29-year-old woman with long-term periodic catamenial hemoptysis. A chest
computed tomography image obtained during menstruation revealed a radiographic opaque lesion in the lingular segment of the left superior
lobe. During bronchoscopy, bleeding in the mucosa of the distal bronchus of the lingular segment of the left superior lobe was observed.
Histopathology subsequent to an exploratory thoracotomy confirmed the diagnosis of endometriosis of the left lung. The 2-year follow-up
after lingular lobectomy of the left superior lobe showed no recurrence or complications. Endometriosis is the presence of functional
endometrial tissue outside the uterus, most commonly in the ovaries, uterosacral ligaments, and peritoneum. It was first described in 1860 .
A very common disease in women worldwide, it affects 5% to 15% of them during their reproductive years . Although usually confined to the
pelvis, endometriosis is also known to occur in extra-pelvic organs or tissues; ectopic endometrium has been found in the umbilicus,
abdominal scars, breasts, the extremities, pleural cavity and lung . Although the symptomatology of extra-pelvic endometriosis is always
coordinated to the menstrual cycle, this is not directly apparent in all patients and diagnosis is notoriously difficult. Efforts to
estimate the prevalence of extra-pelvic endometriosis are hampered by the great variety of symptoms, signs, locations, and ambiguous
diagnosis . Endometriosis of the lung is associated with catamenial hemoptysis and chest pain. It is rare, chronic, and estrogen dependent.
Confirmation requires a combination of clinical symptoms and postoperative histopathological assessment . Clinical examination often reveals
only occult symptoms and signs, but severe cases can result in extensive decidual adhesions and distortion of tissue in the proximity of the
decidua. It is these that lead to catamenial pain and hemoptysis, and the disease can be suspected in women with these symptoms . The
pathologist’s role is made additionally difficult by the disease’s many histologic features, from typical endometrial glands to an abundance
of fibrous tissue. For women with lung endometriosis, surgery is able to provide radical relief. Because of the high rate of recrudescence,
surgical salvage may be expected . Medical therapies have historically included administration of contraceptive progestogens, gonadotropin-
releasing hormone agonists, androgens, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Treatments to lower circulating estradiol concentrations
may be useful for only a limited time due to unacceptable side effects, and changes or additional medications are commonly needed .
Important recent advances in the understanding of endometriosis hold promise for the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic
approaches that could limit symptoms and improve fertility . Such new conceptual understandings depend on the study of retrieved endometrial
tissue and recognition of the immune response associated with endometriosis. A 29-year-old woman complained of repetitive and consecutive
catamenial hemoptysis (coughing up of blood during menstruation) of one year’s duration, approximately 5 mL to 10 mL each cycle with blood
clots, which gradually had aggravated. Intriguingly, the hemoptysis generally started on the first or second day of each menstruation and
thereafter continued for about 6 days, identical with the menstruation interval. The volume of the hemoptysis increased with the
menstruation. More importantly, the end of hemoptysis coincided with that of menstruation. Prior to being seen at our clinic, the patient
had taken prescribed antitubercular drugs for 4 months after being misdiagnosed as suffering from pulmonary tuberculosis at the community
hospital. Her treatment was ended because hemoptysis had begun again. Hemostasis and fluid administration had been administered during the
past 8 months. Hemoptysis had become worse 10 days before, with a hemoptysis volume of 10 mL to 20 mL during each episode accompanied by
dyspnea, coincident with the start of menstruation. The patient had no history of weight loss or other serious illness. She had achieved
conception five times, ending in one normal delivery, one Caesarean section, and three abortions. A physical examination revealed coarse
rasps in the left-inferior lobe of the lung with moist rales. A chest radiograph showed irregular nodular opacity in the middle-exterior
field of the left lung with a symmetric thorax and plain lung markings. Laboratory findings on admission were as follows: white blood cell
(WBC) count was 6,000/μL, creatinine was 1.4 mg/dL, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 10/h, procalcitonin (PCT) 0.2 ng/mL,
C-reactive protein 0.2 mg/dL, AST 38 IU/L, ALT 33 IU/L, LDH 80 IU/L and Hb 8.1 g/dL. A chest computed tomography (CT) image taken during the
menstrual cycle and just after a hemoptysis event revealed pneumonia in the left-superior lobe of the lung (Figure 1A). Bronchoscopy
(Olympus electric bronchoscope BF-P240 with Number 2800560, Olympus CLV-U40 as the host computer and Olympus CV-240 as the image acquisition
system) on the fourth day of the menstrual cycle was performed and showed active bleeding in the distal bronchus of the superior segment of
the left lingular lobe (Figure 1B). Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid under the light microscope was negative for acid-fast bacillus. A fibroid
space-occupying lesion, 2.2 cm × 1.4 cm, with a clearly defined margin was detectable via pelvic ultrasonography in the anterior wall of the
uterus, although gynecological examination showed no signs of abnormalities except for grade-2 erosion of the cervix. Blood cell count and
serologic assays did not corroborate the symptoms and signs. Although lung endometriosis was greatly suspected in this patient, she rejected
medical treatment for fear of adverse hormonal side effects. Subsequently, this patient suffered a poorer quality of life during one year of
catamenial hemoptysis. Clinical findings. (A) CT scan on the third day of menstruation. There was a nearly round opaque nodule (arrow) in
the distal part of the left-superior lobe of the lung. (B) Bronchographic image on the fourth day of menstruation. There was bleeding in the
distal bronchus of the superior segment of the left lingular lobe. (C) Exploration of the lingular lobe of the left lung showed the pleural
lamina visceralis was hyperemic and phlyctenular (arrow). (D) Making an incision in the left lingular lobe. There was a lesion that
constituted the foci of an old hemorrhage (thin arrow) in the pulmonary parenchyma under the pleura. The visceral pleura surrounding the
lesion was hyperemic and yellow-staining (thick arrows). A decision to proceed to biopsy was made based on symptoms, signs, and the results
of the respiration function test. From the biopsied sample the pathology report confirmed the suspected diagnosis, and a radical resection
was subsequently performed. During the exploratory thoracotomy, a phlyctenular apophysis, 2 cm × 2 cm, was detected on the surface of the
lingular segment of the left superior lobe with no further macroscopic signs of external endometriosis (Figure 1C). Albuterol 0.83% 5 mL was
administered by nebulization twice a day before the surgical procedure. No further hemoptysis was observed at the end of her period after
she was admitted. Finally, after the procedure the patient received 5 days of fluid therapy with antibiotic levofloxacin 0.5 (erase 0.5 and
add 500 mg) intravenous once a day, as well as sputum therapy with mucosolvan® 90 mg intravenous once a day. The patient was discharged to
home on the ninth day in a good condition. The pleura at the site of the lesions’ surfaces was impaired. The specimen comprised the upper
lobe of the left superior lobe, 16.0 cm × 9.0 cm × 4.0 cm. It contained an irregular dark-red lesion, 5 cm × 4 cm × 4 cm, with an obscure
boundary 4 cm from the bronchus. The stiffness of the lesion was moderate to mild (Figure 1D). Under low-power microscopy, the atypical
tubular-gland structures of the lesions were visible in the alveoli and were arrayed as columnar and cubical epithelia, surrounded by a
large number of lymphocytes (Figure 2A). In the alveolar space, a large number of red blood cells and phagocytic cells were intermingled.
The alveolar walls were infiltrated by plasma cells and lymphocytes (Figure 2B). Immunohistochemical reactions revealed the presence of
CD68+ (Figure 2C) and CK7+ (Figure 2D). The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 11 days after surgery. She
has been asymptomatic for 2 years without any recurrence of hemoptysis. Staining of pulmonary parenchyma. H&E: (A) Atypical tubular-gland
structures of decidual lesions were detected in the alveolar space (thin arrow). Structure of alveolar wall (thick arrow); 100×. (B) The
alveolar spaces were filled with many red blood cells and phagocytic cells with hemosiderin (thick arrow). The alveolar walls were
infiltrated by plasma cells (triangular arrow) and lymphocytes (thin arrow); 200×. Immunohistochemical staining: (C) Phagocytic cells in the
alveolar space, CD68+ (heavy arrow). Plasma cells and lymphocytes in the alveolar walls, CD68– (thin arrow), H&E 200×. (D) Gland epithelium
in an alveolus, CK7+ (thick arrow). Infiltrating plasma cells and lymphocytes in the alveolar wall, CK7– (thin arrow), H&E 200×. H&E:
hematoxylin and eosin (correct). Endometriosis is characterized mainly by the presence of ectopic endometrial glands outside the uterine
cavity. It was first reported by Carl von Rokitansky in 1860 , who named the condition ‘adenomyoma’. The pathogenesis of endometriosis is
ascribed to one (or more) of three mechanisms: the retrograde regurgitation of endometrium through the oviducts during menstruation,
Müllerian metaplasia of coelomic epithelium, or lymphatic and venous dissemination of endometrial tissue to distant sites with implantation
. Extra-pelvic (that is, non-gynecologic) endometriosis has received special attention primarily because of the diversity of affected sites
and its unusual symptomatology. Extra-pelvic endometriosis may occur in any of four anatomical regions: the lungs, bowel-omentum, urinary
tract, and all other sites inclusive . Explanations for the spread of endometrial tissues to distant sites rest on hypotheses of venous or
lymphatic circulation, or analogies to the metastatic spread of neoplasms . Therefore, the hypothesis is that endometriosis does not result
solely from retrograde bleeding, but also from endometrial cells that are shed in the pelvic cavity and which have a tendency to implant and
proliferate . New insights into the etiology and pathogenesis of this disease serve as a background for new treatments for disease-
associated pain and infertility. Possible causal and supportive factors include genetic susceptibility, environmental factors, the immune
system, intrinsic endometrial abnormalities, and the secreted products of endometriotic lesions . Importantly, affected women are at higher
risk than the general female population of developing ovarian cancer, and may also be at increased risk of breast and other cancers, as well
as autoimmune and atopic disorders. However, there may soon be a new repertoire of approaches for treatment and perhaps cure of this
enigmatic disorder in the near future. Endometriosis of the lung is a clinically serious form of the disease, which requires careful
differential diagnosis, as in the present case. Our patient complained of hemoptysis, a clinical symptom of thoracic endometriosis, as is
hematothorax and pneumothorax. Menstruation-related hemoptysis is not obviously present in all patients, and accurate diagnosis of thoracic
endometriosis is always difficult to make. Fortunately, our patient presented with catamenial hemoptysis. Due to our interest in this case,
we also reviewed 74 cases of catamenial hemoptysis that have been reported since 1956 in which ectopic endometriosis was identified: 37
cases (59.6%) (please correct to 0.5) were in the right lung, 19 (30.6%) in the left, and 6 (9.7%) were bilateral. In 61 of 70 patients
(87.1%) who underwent gynecological examinations, no evidence of pelvic endometriosis was found . Additionally, 58 of 73 cases (80.6%)
(please correct to 74 and additionally correct the percentage)showed a history of gynecological disorders. These observations support the
embolization theory as the underlying cause of ectopic endometriosis in the respiratory tract. While in our case there was no proven pelvic
endometriosis or gynecological disease, our patient has previously undergone induced abortions, and there were two cases in the literature
review in which induced abortion may have caused endometriosis in the respiratory system. The CT findings for pulmonary endometriosis may
include well-defined opacities, nodular lesions, thin-wall cavities, or bullous formations, but most cases involving hemoptysis have
transient radiologic densities in the affected part of the lung . In our patient, the CT images taken during her menstrual period showed a
radiographic opacity at the distal end of the left superior lobe. Of note, there was also active bleeding in the distal bronchus of the
superior segment of the left lingular lobe detected by bronchoscopy on the fourth day of the menstrual cycle, which further strengthened the
clinical diagnosis in the view of the CT finding. Ultimately, histopathological confirmation of ectopic endometriosis was obtained after
exploratory thoracotomy. In general, the initially important diagnostic criterion for this disease is presentation of periodic hemoptysis
that is synchronous with menstruation. Most previously reported cases were diagnosed based on the clinical history of the patient; a
histological confirmation of ectopic endometriosis is not always done. Fortunately, in the patient reported here, ectopic endometrium was
found in the pulmonary parenchyma, and infiltration of hemosiderin-laden macrophages was observed that were the result of repeated bleeding
episodes. Patients with lung endometriosis usually undergo either surgery or hormonal treatments. However, no large-scale randomized trial
has been conducted and the optimal treatment regimen remains controversial. Recently, video-assisted thoracic surgery for catamenial
hemoptysis was reported, which was found to be safer and less invasive than lobectomy . When the bleeding site is confirmed by bronchoscopy
and it is determined to be distributed within one lobe, the surgical approach is considered appropriate for the disease, especially when the
patient desires a pregnancy in the future or if they are worried about possible complications related to hormonal treatments. In addition,
the treatment of catamenial hemoptysis by endoscopic laser ablation has also been reported, and this treatment modality should be considered
if the lesion can be clearly detected by bronchoscopy . In the current case, a lobectomy provided a favorable outcome for this benign
lesion, and endometriosis was confirmed via postoperative histopathology. Because of the history of hemoptysis synchronous with the
menstrual cycle, an immunohistochemistry test was performed to ensure the preoperative diagnosis. Although we performed a lobectomy rather
than the more minimally invasive video-assisted thoracic surgery (because the patient could not afford it), endometriosis-associated events
were not present during the postoperative 2-year follow-up. Lobectomy was appropriate for the treatment of lung endometriosis in the present
case, and its success lends support for the efficacy and safety of lobectomy for this disorder. Further studies and a more extensive
literature search are required to determine the best course of treatment for patients presenting with this rare disease. Systems biological
approaches with patients and morphology-based mathematical modeling could be valuable for studying aspects of pathophysiology and for
comparing variants of therapeutic modalities in depth. For the majority of women with endometriosis, the disease imposes a substantial toll
in terms of well-being, personal relationships, time away from work, and the need for surgery and expensive therapies . Furthermore, the
increased risk of ovarian cancer and possible increased risks of autoimmune diseases and breast and skin cancers further support a need for
multidisciplinary care and long-term follow-up of women with this disorder . For women in whom lung endometriosis is suspected, a current
history of catamenial hemoptysis, active bleeding observed by bronchoscopy, and evidence from CT scans justify the preliminary diagnosis.
The endometriosis patient’s history, environmental exposures, family history, and physical examination are considered just as important for
assessment and care. Surgical removal remains the accepted treatment for the disease, and is supported by the outcome of our case.
Appropriately designed clinical trials are essential for determining which therapies are safe and effective. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and the accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the editor-in-chief of this journal CT: computed tomography; H&E: hematoxylin and eosin (correct). The authors report no conflicts
of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of the paper. HH and CL made equal contributions to this paper.
The two authors diagnosed the patient, treated the patient, and wrote a major part of the manuscript. PZ, NM, NK and KZ were involved in the
editing of the manuscript. KD and WH-S assisted as experts in the field. MS and EC revised the manuscript and corrected the final version.
LY and TZ treated the patient with HH and CL. QL provided useful insights as an expert. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
