Dysphagia is a known complication in Pompe Disease (PD), a severe metabolic myopathy due to alpha-glucosidase deficiency. Enzyme replacement
therapy (ERT) with alglucosidase alfa is the only approved therapy for PD. Presently no data are available on the effects of ERT on
dysphagia in PD patients. The aim of this work is to evaluate the course of this complication in a 6 years old boy affected by PD after
treatment with ERT. Dysphagia was assessed by Videofluoroscopic Swallowing Study (VFSS) at baseline, before the start of ERT and after
36 months of therapy. We used the Dysphagia Severity Rating Scale (DSS) to define the severity grade of dysphagia. VFSS performed at
baseline revealed complete incoordination of oral stage swallowing which was classified as a grade 1 dysphagia according to DSS. After
36 months of treatment VFSS revealed normal swallowing, classified as grade 0 by DSS. Our results suggest that ERT is effective in improving
dysphagia. VFSS may be a useful tool to investigate and monitor swallowing disorders in patients affected by PD. Pompe Disease (PD) (OMIM
232300, glycogen storage disease type II, acid maltase deficiency) is a rare metabolic myopathy, due to the deficiency of the lysosomal
acid-α-glucosidase (GAA) (E.C. 3.2.1.20) . The overall incidence of PD is estimated 1 in 40,000 live births . The deficiency of GAA leads to
generalized glycogen accumulation, that is most relevant for the clinical manifestations in heart and skeletal muscles. The phenotype of the
disease encompasses a continuum that ranges from severe, early-onset forms to attenuated, late-onset phenotypes. The severe end of this
spectrum is traditionally referred to as the “classic infantile” form, which presents within the first months of life with severe and
progressive hypotonia, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, macroglossia, feeding difficulties, recurrent respiratory infections, and failure to
thrive. If untreated, classic infantile patients generally die in the first year of life . Non-classic infantile-onset forms share a similar
clinical picture, but with milder or absent heart involvement, which may be limited to ECG abnormalities . In the late-onset forms symptoms
may present at any age from childhood to late adulthood, cardiac involvement is generally absent and the clinical manifestations are mostly
related to skeletal muscle involvement, with progressive motor impairment, respiratory failure, and premature death. Typical biochemical
markers of PD are the elevated levels of transaminases and creatine kinase (CK) in blood, but these values vary considerably among different
patients, and show broad fluctuations in time . The definitive diagnosis of PD relies on the demonstration of reduced or absent GAA activity
in lymphocytes, cultured fibroblasts, or muscle biopsies , and on the identification of mutations of the GAA gene. At present, the only
approved therapy for PD is Enzyme Replacement Therapy (ERT) with recombinant human alglucosidase alfa (Myozyme®, Genzyme Corporation,
Cambridge, MA, USA). This therapy is based on periodic infusions of the recombinant enzyme, that is delivered to tissues where it replaces
the defective GAA. Several clinical trials in classic infantile PD demonstrated remarkable success of this approach in correcting cardiac
pathology and function and in extending patients’ survival, whereas the response of skeletal muscle was less striking . ERT seemed to be
more effective when started earlier . Long-term administration of ERT has modified the natural course of PD, and different complications,
previously unrecognized, have become evident , including conductive and neurosensorial hearing impairment , intracranial artery
abnormalities , osteopenia and osteoporosis . Recently new strategies for the treatment of PD are emerging . Although feeding difficulties
have been frequently reported and are commonly considered as part of the typical PD phenotype, only recently particular attention has been
paid to the characterization of dysphagia and swallowing disorders . These complications may substantially impact on the quality of life of
patients and may lead to malnutrition, dehydration, weight loss and failure to thrive. In addition, airway invasion and aspiration may
occur, increasing the risk of potentially lethal respiratory infections. Ineffective cough, due to the involvement of respiratory muscles,
contributes to the risk of aspiration pneumonias. Due to the severe consequences of dysphagia, its identification is relevant for the
appropriate management of PD patients. Although at present there are no published studies on the effects of ERT on dysphagia, accurate and
serial evaluations of swallowing may also be useful as markers to assess the efficacy of therapy in PD. Dysphagia can be investigated with
Videofluoroscopy Swallowing Study (VFSS) or with fibreoptic endoscopy. VFSS may be preferable as it is less invasive and easily tolerated,
in infants and children. In addition, by VFSS it is possible to examine the bolus progression, to characterize the involvement of different
stages of swallowing (oral, pharyngeal and esophageal), and to detect aspiration of contrast medium into the airways . Here for the first
time we present the data obtained in a patient with infantile-onset PD that was studied by VFSS before the start of ERT and after 36 months
of therapy. CF, a 6-year-old boy, is affected by the nonclassic infantile form PD, and has received ERT with alglucosidase alfa (Myozyme®)
since the age of 2.3 years. He was born from healthy, non-consanguineous parents. Pregnancy was characterized by reduced fetal movements.
Breast feeding difficulties and feeble cry were reported, since the first days of life. At 2 years of age he was referred to medical
attention because of severe hypotonia, recurrent respiratory tract infections, macroglossia, open drooping, tent shaped mouth and failure to
thrive. At that time he was able to sit, but was unable to stand. Chewing and swallowing problems were also reported, that caused feeding
difficulties and insufficient caloric intake. Blood biochemistry showed increased serum levels of aspartate aminotransferase (approximately
7-fold the upper normal value), alanine aminotransferase (2.5-fold the upper normal range) and creatine kinase (3.7-fold the upper normal
range). Electrocardiography showed short PR interval (80 msec). A diagnosis of PD was suspected when he was 2.3 years old, and confirmed by
GAA enzymatic assay in lymphocytes and fibroblasts. The molecular analysis of the GAA gene showed the mutations [c.-32-13 T > G] and [c.1856
G > A] on one allele and [c.1655 T > C] on the other allele. Due to the reported chewing and swallowing difficulties, a VFSS was performed
before the start of ERT, by administering oral boluses of 5 ml liquid barium according to standard (published) procedures . VFSS showed
complete incoordination of the oral stage swallowing with anterior positioning of bolus, weakness of labial and oral cavity muscles and
delayed bolus transit. Weak and incoordinated tongue motion was ineffective for swallowing with spilling of barium boluses from the mouth.
Epiglottis deflection was normal and pharyngeal and esophageal stages of swallowing were regular. No airway invasion was evident. According
to a dysphagia severity scale (DSS) (adapted by Gates et al. ), dysphagia was limited to oral stage and classified as grade 1 severity
(Table 1). A supportive speech therapy was started. Dysphagia Severity Rating Scale (adapted by Gates et al.) ERT with alglucosidase alfa
was started at the age of 2.3 years at a dose of 20 mg/kg/14 days. The patient was periodically monitored. At the age of 6.3 years, after
36 months of ERT, no progression of clinical manifestations related to muscle involvement was observed and the general clinical picture
seemed stable. Physical examination still showed generalized hypotonia and weak tendon reflexes. The increase of serum transaminases and
creatine phosphokinase persisted. Recurrent pneumonias were reported, but the patient never required invasive ventilation. Facial-muscle
weakness with open drooping mouth, expressionless face, absence of horizontal forehead lines, ptosis of the eyelid persisted. Hearing loss,
impaired speech with articulatory disorders and hypernasal resonance were also evident. The feeding difficulties were improved and no
additional problems in drinking or eating food of any consistence were reported. Swallowing ability was again assessed by VFSS at the age of
6.3 years. Substantial improvement of swallowing mechanisms was observed, that correlated with the reported absence of feeding difficulties.
Barium boluses were regularly inserted without spillage. The oral stage was regular and oral acceptance was coordinated. Tongue thrusts were
coordinated and effective to push the food. Epiglottis deflection was regular. The transit of barium contrast medium was normal pharyngeal
and esophageal phases. In summary, VFSS revealed the absence of dysphagia, that classified as grade 0 by the DSS score (Table 1). This is
the first case of a single PD infantile patient with a documented improvement of dysphagia after three years of ERT. The improvement of
dysphagia was assessed by VFSS, performed before the start of ERT and after 36 months of treatment, and by a DSS scoring scale. Dysphagia
has already been reported in PD patients. A study of 13 untreated children with classic infantile PD, showed that VFSS abnormalities were
detectable in all patients, including a 15-day-old infant . In this study the severity of dysphagia was rated on the basis of clinical
information, and of the need for special dietary recommendations (normal foods, modified foods, or non-oral nutrition). In this group of
patients a second assessment of VFSS was not performed after the start of ERT. Van Gelder’s et al. examined the course of dysphagia in four
patients on ERT, by fibreoptic endoscopy. By this approach, dysphagia apparently remained stable during treatment in three patients and
worsened in one. ERT seemed to reduce feeding difficulties in some patients, who could discontinue nasogastric tube feeding, but there was
no complete normalization of swallowing, even in patients who were orally fed. In this study no data before the start of ERT were available.
In our patient, at diagnosis, VFSS showed a weak and incoordinated swallowing during the oral phase, a finding already reported in PD
patients . After 36 months of therapy VFSS showed coordinated swallowing mechanisms, with effective deglutition. The DSS improved from 1 to
0. Although this was a subtle change, it may be clinically relevant in a progressive disease like PD in which symptoms worsen over time
without treatment. These results suggest that ERT (possibly in combination with supportive speech therapy) may be useful to improve
swallowing in PD patients, although this observation in a single child should be confirmed in larger numbers of patients and in formal
clinical studies. It is known that PD manifestations have a broad severity spectrum and respond variably to therapy. The identification of
reliable measures to follow disease progression and ERT efficacy has been so far a challenging task. Biochemical markers of disease severity
are unreliable, and administration of functional tests can be difficult in young patient, or may be influenced by the operator. VFSS is a
safe and non invasive method to investigate dysphagia, which can be performed in children by skilled radiologists . VFSS is also useful to
get a quantitative severity score of dysphagia with appropriate scales, and to identify airways invasion or risk for aspiration. If further
studies in larger populations will confirm our data, one could hypothesize that an accurate evaluation of dysphagia may represent an
additional marker to monitor ERT efficacy. The pathophysiology of dysphagia in PD patients is not completely defined. It is possible to
speculate that different mechanisms may concur in causing abnormal swallowing. These include the dysfunction of bulbar muscles and the
weakness of respiratory muscles and diaphragm that can lead to impaired coordination of swallowing and breathing. In addition, recent
studies pointed to a possible role of the involvement of lower motor neurons . In principle, all these mechanisms may coexist in our
patient. However, an effect on the motor neurons can be excluded, as it is known that ERT cannot cross the blood–brain-barrier and reach
therapeutic levels in the central nervous system. Therefore, it would be reasonable to think that the improvement of dysphagia during ERT
reflects an improvement of bulbar muscle and diaphragm function. In conclusion, we suggest that VFSS and the VFSS-based score scale are
useful tools in the management of PD patients, to document the presence of dysphagia and to reduce the risk of life-threatening
complications. In our patient only two observations were available, before the start of ERT and 36 months later. It would be desirable for
the management of PD patients to include serial, periodical VFSS evaluations, in order to monitor the evolution of dysphagia during
treatment and to start early appropriate supportive measures. Speech therapy, may be considered, as an adjunctive therapy, in a
multidisciplinary approach for the treatment of PD patients . Further studies in larger groups of patients are needed to confirm the
possible role of ERT to improve dysphagia. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and
any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. PD: Pompe disease;
ERT: Enzyme replacement therapy; VFSS: Videofluoroscopic swallowing study; DSS: Dysphagia severity rating scale; GAA: Acid-α-glucosidase;
CK: Creatine kinase Giancarlo Parenti has received travel support from Genzyme, Generoso Andria has received unrestricted research grants,
honoraria and travel support from Amicus, Genzyme, Shire, Biomarin and Actelion. Simona Fecarotta has received travel support from Genzyme
and Actelion. SF has made substantial contributions to conception and design, analysis and interpretation of data, has been involved in
drafting the manuscript and has given final approval of the version to be published. SA has made substantial contributions in the
acquisition of data, has been involved in drafting the manuscript, and has given final approval of the version to be published. GM has made
substantial contributions to acquisition of data has been involved in drafting the manuscript, and has given final approval of the version
to be published. RDC has made substantial contributions to acquisition of data, has been involved in revising the manuscript critically for
important intellectual content, and has given final approval of the version to be published. PV has made substantial contributions to
conception and design, has been involved in revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content, and has given final
approval of the version to be published. AR has made substantial contributions to analysis and interpretation of data, has been involved in
revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content, and has given final approval of the version to be published. EDG has
made substantial contributions to analysis and interpretation of data, has been involved in revising the manuscript critically for important
intellectual content, and has given final approval of the version to be published. GA has made substantial contributions to conception and
design and analysis and interpretation of data, has been involved in revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content,
and has given final approval of the version to be published. GP has made substantial contributions to conception and design and analysis and
interpretation of data, has been involved in drafting the manuscript and revising it critically for important intellectual content, and has
given final approval of the version to be published. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank Dr. Mirella Filocamo,
Laboratorio Diagnosi Pre e Postnatale Malattie Metaboliche, IRCCS Giannina Gaslini, Genova, for the molecular characterization of the
patient.
