With an increasing number of off-pump coronary artery surgery procedures in high-risk patients with coagulopathy, including renal failure,
hepatic failure and anticoagulant drug-using patients, the frequency of related complications such as repeated exploration for bleeding is
also increasing. The associated co-morbidity and repeated use of electrocautery in postoperative bleeding leaves patients susceptible to
electrocautery ulcers. In this case series, rare cases of cautery burn with unique causative mechanisms are described. Electrocautery ulcer
is a very rare intra-operative accident, with an overall incidence of one patient in 1,000 cardiac surgeries. Despite the rarity of this
complication, the causative mechanism is interesting, instructive and unique. This article presents these rare case series of electrocautery
burn along with literature reviews for conducting a thorough electrocautery burn study. The electrocautery devices unit is frequently
concerned about intra-operative skin sores. In many cases, the injury may be caused by a fault in the electrosurgical unit or its connection
or a malfunction of that device.1,2,3 The causes of skin burns in the operation room (OR) include: 1- Radio frequency in electro surgery, 2-
Thermal injuries as result of direct contact with heating pads, diathermy, electrocautery, flash-sterilized surgical instruments, heated
probes, radiant warmers, exam and operating lights, fiberoptic light cables, lasers, Povidone-iodine prep solutions and Ethylene oxide by
improper aeration of Ethylene oxide-sterilized devices.4,5,6 Among the above-mentioned factors, burns that occurred in the cardiac OR were
limited to some special factors, most of which related to staff and surgeon ignorance. Depending on the time of the occurrences and location
of the burn, the equipment, devices, and solutions that may have to be inspected include: the electrocautery device and its components
including the hand piece electrodes, grounding electrodes, cables, and conductive gel, hypo/hyperthermia units with associated blankets and
patient rectal or nasopharyngeal temperature probes, heating pads, heat lamps, radiant warmers; diathermy units; transcutaneous oxygen and
carbon dioxide electrodes; pulse oximeter probes; bispectral index electrodes; intra-aortic balloon pumps and their accessories. These
accessories include electrodes, cables, tubes, tourniquets, monitors such as electrocardiogram (ECG), electroencephalogram (EEG), and
temperature with associated cables, electrodes, and probes, cardiopulmonary bypass equipment; operating room tables; anesthesia masks and
tubing; prepping and antiseptic agents; ointments; and linens and allergic reaction to adhesives, electrode gel, ointment, and skin prep
solution likes povidone iodine and deconex. But the most important device that predisposes the patient to intraoperative burn is the
electrocautery unit.6,7,8 Operation technique Saphenous vein grafts and left internal mammary artery (Lima) were always anastomosed to the
left anterior descending artery. Intra-operative monitoring of patients undergoing off-pump coronary artery bypass graft(CABG) surgery
typically includes a combination of the following: arterial pressure monitoring, electrocardiographic monitoring and sometimes
transesophageal echocardiography to detect wall motion abnormality or valve incompetence. Anesthesia management includes use of short-acting
anesthetic drugs, pain control, one-lung ventilation to improve access and reduce lung movement by inflation and deflation of the left lung.
Sometimes, for this goal, we have a fixed pericardial edge to left sternal border. Conventional immobilization techniques such as deep
pericardial sutures were used to provide better access to lateral and posterior target vessels. Sometimes two or four sponges were placed
under the heart. Others immobilization techniques include use of intraoperative Esmolol to induce bradycardia and help reduce the technical
difficulty of performing surgery on a beating heart. Whenever indicated, the patient position was changed to a slight right lateral
decubitus and 20-30 degree Trendelenburg. A bypass circuit was not settled but a perfusionist was available in the OR. Heparin 100 mg/kg was
administered to keep the activated clotting time (ACT) between 200-400 seconds. During the operation, an auto transfusion device was not
used for blood recovery. The two stabilization techniques involved use of either a suction or compression device: suction stabilization
lifts the epicardium and pulls the tissue target to the immobilized target area. Compression stabilizers push downwards to compress the
myocardium or restrict its motion. Before anastomosis, the target coronary artery is temporarily occluded proximally and distally by fine
bulldog clamps or looped 5/ 0 Vilene suture. If the systolic bland pressure was reduced to 70 mmHg or less an inter-luminal shunt was used.
Phenylephrine (1-2 mg) was administered intravenously to the patients whose hemodynamic status was unable to keep the blood pressure between
70-90 mmHg The patient was a 56-year-old man with a medical history notable for coronary artery disease, diabetes, and a past medical
history of spinal cord fracture repaired by external fixators. Of note, several titanium plates remained in his spinal columns following
traumatic spinal cord fracture treated by plate and screw application five years ago. He had off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting.
Accordingly, he underwent re-exploration for excessive postoperative bleeding, and he was placed in the supine position with his head
resting on a well-padded gelatin horseshoe. One grounding pad was applied on the left arm. His surgery proceeded without incident. Total
operating time was 2.5 hours for CABG and one hour for re-exploration for bleeding. When he was turned over at the conclusion of the second
surgery for ICU transferring, full skin erythema was noted on all of his back and sacrum. A swollen 3 Ã— 3 cm round area of brown and black
dermis with visibly coagulated veins was noted above his T6 and T7 spinal column. (Figure 1). Two zones, the inner black and outer brown,
extended concentrically from this area of burns and corresponded to the exact location of his indwelling plate and screw hardware as seen on
radiography. The burn was treated with zinc oxide gel. Follow-up at two months revealed complete healing of the burn site (Figure 2). A male
patient underwent an uncomplicated off-pump CABG that took approximately two hours to complete. A ground-referenced electrosurgical unit was
used for the procedure. An ECG monitor was connected to the patient. The electrocautery unit was set up by the circulating nurse, and the
device was initially set at 3 in the cut and coagulated mode. The device setting was increased from 3 to 4 after the surgeon noticed
inadequate surgical effect and requested more. Before the request for the increased dial setting, an anesthesiologist tripped on the
grounding electrode cable. The grounding electrode was applied to the middle left arm after supine position for the procedure. The electrode
was not checked for proper contact with the patient following repositioning. After the procedure, when the drapes were removed from the
patient, it was noticed that the conductive portion of the paddle electrode was not completely in contact with the patient. There was no
injury beneath the dispersive electrode. However, postoperative skin check in ICU revealed an area of skin injury behind the patient's
sacrum, which had been in contact with a wet operating room cover. The injured area was a light cream color, was hard to the touch, and had
a red rim. It measured approximately 1.5 x 3 cm. When the operating room staff member tripped on the cable, the dispersive electrode was
pulled off the patient. Because the electrical cautery grounding pad for electrosurgical currents was weakly connected to the patient, the
electrosurgical currents found an alternate pathway through the patient/wet table cover. The dial setting was increased to overcome the
resistance offered by the patient's skin in contact with a small part of table via the wet cover. Current flow through this small area of
patient contact caused tissue damage at this site. After the patient has been established in the desired position, every repositioning or
request from the surgeon for an increase to the dial setting or ineffective cautery in coagulation mode or any interfering of device with
ECG monitoring or Intra aortic balloon pump machine should be accompanied by a warning about electrocautery malfunction. The circulating
nurse should not automatically increase the dial setting after a request from the surgeon. Before doing so, the nurse should check all
cables and connection of electrical cautery grounding pad. And after checking the cables and devices, the nurse should increase the dial
setting as little as possible. A 55-year-old patient with a history of coronary artery disease underwent CABG. The surgery lasted three
hours. An electrical cautery grounding pad and a monitoring device with cables and accessories were used throughout the procedure. The
cautery dial was initially set at 3 in the coagulated mode and 3 in the cutting mode. The coagulation dial setting was increased from 3 to 5
at the surgeon's request during sternum closure. The dispersive electrode was applied to the patient's left arm and was found intact at the
end of the procedure. Because this was emergency surgery, the surgical prepping solution had been poured on the patient, and it had pooled
underneath him on the operating table. Eighteen hours after surgery, blistering skin lesions were found on the patient's sacral area and
adjoining upper buttock area. This lesion area measured approximately 7 x 10 cm, was red across its entire surface with blisters beginning
to form, and felt warm and firm in and around the involved area. Further immobility during recovery also contributed to the development of
the lesions, as did the wetness from the pooled prep solutions. The use of cautery dates back to ancient times. Egyptian papyrus scrolls
reveal the use of heated stone for traumatic injury treatment.9 In the West, many credit William Bovie as the father of electrosurgery
devices. However some believe that scientific and workable advancement of cautery had been known for hundred years before Bovie was
active.10 Bovieâ€™s preliminary electrosurgical device causes tissue to heat rapidly to high temperature that in turn causes blood coagulation
and control of bleeding at the cost of burning some surrounding tissue. Electrocautery burns are often the result of exposure of the
patient's skin to a high-frequency electrical circuit. With modern electrosurgical equipment that is able to selectively cauterize tissues
by scattering current density as it leaves the patient's body, this is very rare. Modern cautery is accomplished by a paddle electrode or
indifferent or grounding electrode that completes the looped circuit between the patient and electrocautery device. Since the application of
the first successful unipolar electrocautery by Bovie in 1928, and the bipolar electrocautery by Gendron in 1939,11 Goldwyne et al.12 and
Zinder et al. have reported a number of thermal complications in skin, bone and other organs. The electrocautery unit generates two types of
electrical current, depending on the desired mode. A cutting current is produced by a vacuum tube oscillator producing a sinusoidal wave
form and this is used in skin incision. The most frequently used mode is coagulating current that is produced by a spark-gap circuit
resulting in a damped oscillating wave at an average frequency of 1 600 000 cycles per second (Hz), several hundred volts being applied to
the spark gap. The average out-put to the hand piece electrode is 400 watts, but may exceed 800 watts if the tip of the hand piece has
debris. Debris and coagulated and necrotic tissues cause unusual impedance to active electrode current flow. The spark-gap mechanism
generates an electromagnetic wave which can be picked up as a parasite by electronic monitors and mobiles, computers and even radio
receivers in proximity to the OR. Potentially deleterious effects on the heart are obviated by the very high frequency of the current. The
power output of the electrocautery unit is purposely concentrated in the active electrode. The body skin usually has a high resistance; an
average of 4000 ohms to a usual current flow of 400 or 600 watts.13,14,15,16 Basically, a monopolar electrosurgical current in a monopolar
circuit functions in the following manner: an electrosurgical current is produced in a generator, and this is led to the electrode through
cables. This hand piece or active electrode transmits the device energy as an electrical current to the tissue, and the current will leave
the patient through an electrical cautery grounding pad and then will return to the generator. Since an appropriate connection of the
electrical cautery grounding pad to the skin has a much greater surface area than the small tip of the active electrode, the current is
dispersed over a large area, thereby minimizing the heating of the tissue underneath the electrical cautery grounding pad. However, Fickling
et al.17 have shown that if the surgeon uses the active electrode or hand piece for a prolonged time period, with increasing current, the
temperature of the paddle that is in connection with the patient will also increase because the electrical cautery grounding pad cannot
disperse the current on a larger surface. According to the experimental work of Fickling et al, if the temperature of the electrical cautery
grounding pad, as the result of prolonged cautery use, exceeds 44ÂºC, burns may occur.17 Makama et al.18 stated that multiple factors
contribute towards such burns. Firstly, an interruption or prolonged activation of active electrode or hand piece, especially at high
voltages, would heat up the electrical cautery grounding pad excessively. Secondly, if the contact area under the grounding pad were to
decrease, this would result in concentrating the current only at the remaining contact points and thus the current would not disperse across
the whole area of the grounding pad. Improper dispersing of current could occur for the following reasons. The grounding pad may have been
placed on: an area with little muscle such as a bonny prominence (elbow joint, lower forearm,); areas with a lot of body hair (hairy
forearm, unshaved thigh); areas with little soft tissue (lower legs). The use of oily cream instead of conductive cream, on areas with
previous scars19,20,21,22,23,24 can also lead to improper dispersing. We believe that the most important factor predicting postoperative
burn is the use of high currents for long periods of time without interruption. This is done in order to reduce postoperative bleeding,
during exploration for postoperative excessive bleeding in a valvular or CABG operation. The other complications of electrocautery are
interference with the monitoring of ECG and pulse oximeter and bispectral index, malfunction of pacemaker, implanted implantable
cardioverter defibrillator (ICD, burn injury, intra organ fire, and inhalation of diathermy smoke and gene mutation. Burn injuries in the
operation room occur from cautery, warming devices and airway fires.22,23,25,26,27 Cautery fires constitute up to 20% of burn claims. This
study aims to evaluate electrocautery burn and compare it with the pressure sore that occurs after coronary artery bypass grafting with off-
pump method. Intraoperative electrocautery burns can occur following these technical and equipment faults: direct osculation; high voltage
use; continuous or interrupted operator use of the electrocautery; high resistance of active electrode tip by coagulated or necrotic tissue;
improper attachment or placement of paddle; burns resulting from electrode heating of pooled solutions such as patients sweating, iodine
solutions, intraoperative irrigation; iatrogenic injection of solution in the joint in orthopedic surgery and burns occurring as a result of
circuits generated between the active electrocautery tip and a subsidiary grounding source.24,25,28,29,30,31,32,33 A subsidiary
intraoperative circuit utilized previously placed external fixator in the patient's spinal column as the grounding electrode, resulting in a
small full-thickness skin necrosis overlying the site of plate implantation and heating of the pooled solution caused second degree burns to
the patientâ€™s back. We recommend the reduction of this type of electrocautery burn by avoiding paddle placement on the hairy forearm, on
bonny prominence, and on a place with little soft tissue, although further investigation is needed to determine optimal grounding electrode
placement with respect to known indwelling hardware such hardware in legs, arms spinal cord, thigh, skull and pelvis. In contrast to
electrocautery burn, over one hundred risk factors for pressure ulcer development are reported in the literature. Kemp et al,34 measured
seven variables and the risk factors from the Braden scale. They showed in their study that age, time on operating room and cardiopulmonary
bypass (CPB) usage are significant risk factors for pressure ulcer development. The Braden scale was not a significant predictor of pressure
ulcer development. In Papantonio et alâ€™s35 prospective study, 136 adult cardiac surgery patients were evaluated for development of pressure
ulcer. Intra aortic balloon pumps (IABP) were used in all of them and all patients were lying on low-air loss beds. In this study,13
variables were examined as possible risk factors for Pressure Ulcer (PU) development. Factors predicting development of PU were included
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), aging, diabetes reduced hematocrit, hypoalbuminemia ecchymosis and prolonged operating time.
Jesurum et alâ€™s36 study included patients underwent open-heart surgery with IABP lying on low-air-bed. Variables were examined as risk
factor for the development of PU. Factors predicting development of PU on first post-operative day were: age, stroke, renal failure and high
APACHE. Results of this study revealed that pressure sore is a patient-dependent complication and in contrast to electrocautery sore which
is related to technical or device faults and to experience and care of OR staff. Complete evaluation of a skin injury includes consideration
of all possible device faults or body-preparation solution interactions. It must also consider the possibility that the injury may be a
pressure sore, electrocautery ulcer, thermal injury or reaction to drugs or antiseptic solution. Some investigators assumed that an
electrocautery unit or solution caused the injury simply because it was used. It seems that most of these assumptions are often incorrect
and preclude considerations of other possibilities, and may bias the studies. When evaluating a sore in operating room, the medical engineer
and surgical staff team must make sure that all possibilities and probabilities are considered and that surgeon and staff involved in the
incident are questioned. Only then will it be possible to develop effective preventive measures. Funding:None Competing interests: None
declared. Ethical approval: Not required.
