Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutation is the most common cause of genetic-related parkinsonism and is usually associated with Lewy
body pathology; however, tau, α-synuclein, and ubiquitin pathologies have also been reported. We report the case of a patient carrying the
LRRK2 G2019S mutation and a novel heterozygous variant c.370C>G, p.Q124E in exon 4 of the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT). The
patient developed parkinsonism with good levodopa response in her 70s. Neuropathological analysis revealed nigral degeneration and
Alzheimer-type tau pathology without Lewy bodies. Immunohistochemical staining using phospho-TDP-43 antibodies identified occasional TDP-43
pathology in the hippocampus, temporal neocortex, striatum, and substantia nigra. However, TDP-43 pathology was not identified in another 4
archival LRRK2 G2019S cases with Lewy body pathology available in the Queen Square Brain Bank. Among other published cases of patients
carrying LRRK2 G2019S mutation, only 3 were reportedly evaluated for TDP-43 pathology, and the results were negative. The role of the MAPT
variant in the clinical and pathological manifestation in LRRK2 cases remains to be determined. Among the 5 identified pathogenic leucine-
rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutations, G2019S is the most common, and accounts for 1% of sporadic Parkinson's disease and 4% of hereditary
parkinsonism worldwide (Healy et al., 2008). Clinical presentation of LRRK2 mutation resembles idiopathic Parkinson's disease but may be
associated with a more benign disease course (Healy et al., 2008). Most patients with LRRK2 mutation exhibit neuropathological features
consistent with typical Lewy body Parkinson's disease (Gilks et al., 2005; Khan et al., 2005; Zimprich et al., 2004); however, “pure” nigral
degeneration, tau, α-synuclein, or ubiquitin pathologies resembling progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), multiple system atrophy, and
frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive inclusions (FTLD-U) have also been reported (Dachsel et al., 2007; Gaig et al.,
2008; Giasson et al., 2006; Hasegawa et al., 2009; Rajput et al., 2006; Zimprich et al., 2004). Ubiquitinated TAR DNA-binding protein–43
(TDP-43) is a major disease protein in FTLD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and can occasionally be observed in Lewy body disorders
and tauopathies (Mackenzie et al., 2010; Neumann et al., 2006; Sreedharan et al., 2008). Recently, TDP-43–related pathology was reported in
3 patients carrying LRRK2 mutations (p.R1441C, p.R793M and L1165P) (Covy et al., 2009; Wider et al., 2010). Here, we report a patient with a
clinical diagnosis of Parkinson's disease, who in post-mortem was found to have nigral degeneration without Lewy body pathology, and
was also shown to carry the LRRK2 G2019S mutation and a novel heterozygous variant c.370C>G, p.Q124E in exon 4 of the microtubule-associated
protein tau (MAPT). Genomic DNA was extracted from frozen brain tissue of these cases, and Sanger sequencing was performed according to
standard procedures as previously described (Kara et al., 2012). As part of an ongoing clinicopathological study to evaluate archival cases
with post-encephalitic parkinsonism (PEP) and unclassifiable tauopathy at the Queen Square Brain Bank for Neurological Disorders (QSBB), we
sequenced LRRK2 (exons 24, 25, 27, 29, 35, 36, 41, and 48), PARK2 and MAPT genes in 13 cases. PARK2 was chosen because it can cause
levodopa-responsive parkinsonism with absence of Lewy bodies (Doherty et al., 2013), whereas LRRK2 mutations are more commonly associated
with Lewy body pathology (Wider et al., 2010). MAPT gene was sequenced because of the presence of tau pathology in these cases. From this
cohort, we recently published our findings of the rare MAPT p.A152T variant as a risk factor for the development of tauopathies (Kara
et al., 2012). MRC-Holland (Amsterdam, the Netherlands) multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) kits (P051, P052) were used
for copy-number analysis of the following genes: PARK2 6q25.2, SNCA 4q21, Pink1, Park7 1p36, UCHL1 4p14, GCH1 14q22.1, and LRRK2 12q12.
Mutations and variants identified in MAPT, LRRK2, and PARK2 were named based on transcripts with accession numbers NM_005910.5/NP_005901.2,
NM_198578.3/NP_940980.3, and NM_004562.2/NP_004553.2, respectively. MAPT haplotypes were determined by the genotype of the H1/H2-tagging SNP
rs1052553 (Hayesmoore et al., 2009). The TDP-43 gene was sequenced in the present case with TDP-43 pathology. In 4 other cases with proven
LRRK2 G2019S mutations and Lewy body pathology available in the QSBB (Gilks et al., 2005), sequencing of the MAPT gene was performed.
Subjects in this report had provided written consent to perform neuropathological and genetic studies. All protocols of brain donation had
been approved by a London Research Ethics Committee, and tissue is stored for research at the QSBB with a license from the Human Tissue
Authority. This research was approved by the Tissue Request Committee of the QSBB. Following the QSBB protocols, the brains were divided
mid-sagittally post mortem. One-half of the brain was immediately frozen and stored at −80 °C, and the other half was immersed and fixed in
10% neutral formalin for 3 weeks. After slicing and sampling the brain, tissue blocks were processed using standard protocols. We performed
hematoxylin and eosin, Luxol fast blue/cresyl violet, and Congo red staining on 7-μm-thick sections, and also used the modified Bielschowsky
and Gallyas silver impregnation methods. Immunohistochemistry with antibodies to phospho-tau (AT8 clone recognizing Ser202/Thr205;
BioScience Life Sciences; 1:600), 3-repeat (3R) and 4-repeat (4R) tau isoforms (Upstate/Millipore; 3R tau: RD3; 1:2000; 4R tau: RD4; 1:200)
(de Silva et al., 2003), Aβ (Dako; 6F/3D; 1:100), ubiquitin, p62, TDP, p-TDP, α-synuclein (Vector Laboratories; KM51; 1:50) and phospho-α-
synuclein (recognizing Ser 129; Abcam-ab59264; rabbit polyclonal) was carried out using a standard avidin–biotin method. In 4 other cases
with proven LRRK2 G2019S mutations and Lewy body pathology available in the QSBB (Gilks et al., 2005), immunohistochemistry staining using
antibody to phospho-TDP-43 (p-TDP) was carried out in the hippocampus, amygdala, and upper midbrain blocks. To assess whether the neuronal
loss in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) identified in the LRRK2 case was related to the genetic mutation or to its Alzheimer's
related pathology, we performed semi-quantitative assessment of nigral cell loss in 12 randomly selected cases with confirmed pathological
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Of the 13 cases with PEP and unclassifiable tauopathy we identified 1 case with both LRRK2 G2019S
mutation and a heterozygous variant in MAPT exon 4 (c.370C>G, p.Q124E) (Fig. 1). The MAPT p.Q124E variant is absent in all control subjects
in the public databases (N = 6568, of which 3913 are caucasians), which include, Ensemble (http://useast.ensembl.org/index.html) and Exome
Variant Server (Exome Variant Server, NHLBI GO Exome Sequencing Project (ESP), Seattle, WA (URL: http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/)
[(1,2013) accessed]) (see Supplementary Table 1); this variant is also absent in the 4 LRRK2 cases with Lewy body pathology. The MAPT
haplotype of this patient was H1/H2. PARK2 and TDP-43 sequencings in this case were negative. A dosage study using MLPA was negative for all
analyzed genes including PARK2 and LRRK2. The British white woman who carried the LRRK2 G2019S mutation and the heterozygous p.Q124E MAPT
variant, developed right-hand tremor at age 73 years. She had mild bradykinesia and rigidity and was diagnosed with idiopathic Parkinson's
disease. She was initially started on an anticholinergic medication; 5 years later, levodopa therapy was administered and titrated to 1000
mg/day, with a good response. She had no cognitive impairment. Her motor symptoms gradually deteriorated. She reported wearing-off symptoms
but never had any dyskinesia. In the last year of life, she had balance difficulty, multiple falls and required a rollator to mobilize. She
died at age 85. There was no family history of any movement or neurological disorders. Neuropathological analysis confirmed an overall
moderate degree of neuronal loss in the SNpc except in the ventrolateral tier, where severe neuronal loss was found (Fig. 2). There were no
Lewy bodies on α-synuclein or phospho-α-synuclein immunohistochemistry. There were sparse tau-positive neuropil threads (NTs) in the frontal
and parietal cortices; sparse NTs, neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), and pre-tangles (PreTs) in the CA1 and CA4 hippocampal subregions; mild
PreTs, moderate numbers of NPs, NFTs and NTs in the subiculum; severe NFTs, NTs, and PreTs in the entorhinal cortex and very sparse NTs in
the striatum (Fig. 2). All tau inclusions were both 3R- and 4R-tau positive. The subthalamic nucleus was preserved, and no tau pathology was
noted. Aβ immunohistochemistry demonstrated parenchymal deposition in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and striatum corresponding to Thal
phase score of 3 (Thal et al., 2002), whereas the distribution of tau pathology corresponded to Braak and Braak stage III (Braak et al.,
2006). Using the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's disease (CERAD) criteria (Mirra et al., 1991), the NP score was “sparse”
in the temporal cortex, “moderate” in the frontal cortex, and “sparse” in the parietal cortex. These results gave a “low” likelihood of AD,
according to the National Institute on Ageing (NIA)/Reagan Institute of the Alzheimer Association Consensus Recommendations for the
Postmortem Diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease, 1997 (NIA-Reagan criteria) (Hyman and Trojanowski, 1997), and “intermediate” level of AD
pathologic change (A2, C2, B2) according to the 2012 guideline (Hyman et al., 2012). TDP-43 and p-TDP-43 immunohistochemistry showed
numerous fine thread-like processes and few coarser neurites in the CA1 hippocampal subregion and subiculum. In the amygdala and the
temporal and frontal cortices, there were occasional NCIs and few threads. There were occasional NCIs, threads, and NIIs in the subiculum,
striatum, and SN, and skein-like NCIs in the SN (Fig. 2). There was no hippocampal sclerosis. No α-synuclein immunoreactive inclusions,
argyrophilic grains, cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), or vascular pathology was observed. No P62-positve “star-shaped” inclusion in the
hippocampus or small “dot-like” structures in the cerebellar granule cells were observed. In 4 other cases available in the QSBB with proven
LRRK2 G2019S mutation, no TDP-43–related pathology was observed in the hippocampus or amygdala. Sequencing of the MAPT gene did not reveal
any abnormal finding. In the 12 randomly selected cases with confirmed pathological diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (NIA/Reagan “high”
likelihood of AD), nigral cell loss was, at most, mild, as evidenced by regional pigment incontinence in the SNpc. LRRK2 G2019S mutation is
commonly associated with Lewy body pathology. Of the 22 published post-mortem cases with this mutation, only 4 cases had an absence of Lewy
bodies. Rajput et al reported a case with slow, progressive, non–levodopa-responsive parkinsonism and tau-positive NFTs resembling the
neuropathology of PSP (Rajput et al., 2006), Giasson et al and Gaig et al each reported a case with classical tremor-dominant parkinsonism
and pure nigral degeneration (Gaig et al., 2008; Giasson et al., 2006), and, Dachsel et al reported a case with dementia and tremor and
pathology consisted of FTLD with ubiquitinated neuronal inclusions (FTLD-U) (Dachsel et al., 2007). On the other hand, pleomorphic
pathologies including α-synuclein, tau, and ubiquitin seem to be more commonly associated with other pathogenic LRRK2 mutations (Hasegawa
and Kowa, 1997; Hasegawa et al., 2009; Santpere and Ferrer, 2009; Wszolek et al., 1997, 2004; Zimprich et al., 2004). We report a case with
LRRK2 G2019S mutation clinically diagnosed as Parkinson's disease, with good levodopa response, in which neuropathological analysis revealed
nigral degeneration with an absence of Lewy bodies, Alzheimer-type tau, and TDP-43 pathologies. Interestingly, this patient was also found
to carry a novel p.Q124E MAPT variant. Prompted by the TDP-43 pathology, we screened this case for TDP-43 mutations, which were negative. We
then surveyed for TDP-43 pathology in another 4 archival QSBB cases with LRRK2 G2019S mutation and Lewy body pathology, and the findings
were negative. These 4 LRRK2 G2019S cases were also negative for pathogenic mutations or novel variants in MAPT. To date, only 3 cases
with LRRK2 mutation have been reported to have TDP-43–related pathology (p.R1441C, p.R793M, and L1165P) (Covy et al., 2009; Zimprich et al.,
2004), none of which had the G2019S mutation. Only 3 other published cases carrying the LRRK2 G2019S mutation were evaluated for TDP-43
pathology (Giasson et al., 2006) but no TDP-43–positive inclusions were observed (Covy et al., 2009). The discovery of TDP-43 in 2006 as a
major disease protein in FTLD and ALS led to the introduction of TDP-43 immunohistochemistry into the routine diagnostic protocols of brain
banks in the last few years. It is therefore likely that other reported LRRK2 cases with ubiquitin pathology may also have TDP-43 inclusions
and will warrant comprehensive assessment (Dachsel et al., 2007; Wszolek et al., 1997, 2004; Zimprich et al., 2004). In addition to FTLD-TDP
and ALS, TDP-43 inclusions can sometimes be detected in other neurodegenerative diseases including AD, Lewy body disorders, and primary
tauopathies including corticobasal degeneration, PSP, parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam, and dementia pugilistica (Arai et al., 2009;
Hasegawa et al., 2007; King et al., 2010; Mackenzie et al., 2010; McKee et al., 2013; Uryu et al., 2008; Yokota et al., 2010). The cause and
mechanism of TDP-43 in tauopathies are not known, but it has been postulated that tau aggregates may promote aggregation of TDP-43 through
cross-seeding (Morales et al., 2009; Uryu et al., 2008). TDP-43 immunoreactivity may modify clinical features in AD and other types of
dementia (Josephs et al., 2008; Lashley et al., 2011), and is also closely associated with hippocampal sclerosis (Amador-Ortiz et al., 2007;
Josephs et al., 2008). It remains to be determined whether TDP-43 protein plays a role in influencing the clinical features in LRRK2 cases.
As in Lewy-body Parkinson's disease, nigral degeneration is a typical finding in LRRK2 mutation and is considered to be the pathological
substrate of clinical parkinsonism in these patients (Wider et al., 2010). Although previous studies have shown a correlation between nigral
pathology and extrapyramidal symptoms in AD (Burns et al., 2005), our screening of 12 randomly selected AD cases did not reveal significant
nigral cell loss, in contrast to the present LRRK2 case. It is therefore unlikely that the modest Alzheimer-type tau pathology in this case
would explain the extent of the nigral cell loss. The pleomorphic pathologies in LRRK2 mutation supports the notion that LRRK2 acts upstream
from the pathway of other proteins implicated in neuronal death; and it is likely that genetic and environmental factors then influence the
type of proteinopathy that eventually develops in the individual, whether it is α-synuclein, tau, or ubiquitin pathology (Wider et al.,
2010). The novel MAPT variant identified in our case is located in a region of the protein far from microtubule-binding domains and does not
have an obvious role in the molecule's function. A similar variant was also recently reported in exon 7 of the MAPT gene (Coppola et al.,
2012; Cruchaga et al., 2012; Jin et al., 2012; Kara et al., 2012), and a rare variant p.A239T in exon 8 (NM_005910.5) was found in a carrier
of a C9orf72 repeat expansion (King et al., 2013) (Fig. 1). Interestingly, these 3 rare variants all localize in an uncharacterized region
of the MAPT protein in cases with unexpected tau pathology, which supports the speculation that these variants may have a disease-modifying
role and may predispose the individual to tau pathology (Coppola et al., 2012; Devine and Lewis, 2008; Gan-Or et al., 2012; Kara et al.,
2012). However, the precise mechanism of this relation is far from clear, and our genetic findings in this case serve as an interesting
observation rather than yielding a definitive conclusion. It is noteworthy that, in LRRK2 cases with atypical clinical presentation and/or
unusual pathologies, one should also consider the possibility of a coincidental neurodegenerative process with a non-penetrant LRRK2
mutation (Goldwurm et al., 2011; Sierra et al., 2011; Xiromerisiou et al., 2012). None of the authors have potential or actual conflicts of
interest, and all the authors have seen the manuscript before submission. The work was funded by the Reta Lila Weston Foundation and the PSP
Brain Bank. The funding source had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript. There is no animal work in this study, and the human work on blood and pathology materials has been carried out in compliance
with UK regulations. Supplementary table 1 Supplementary table 1 H.L. is supported by the PSP (Europe) Association Research Fellowship Grant
. The authors thank Mark Gaskin and Jamie Toombs for sample organization and preparation of human tissue, Linda Parsons for extracting
tissue samples, Robert Courtney for immunohistochemistry staining, Tammaryn Lashley for providing control cases, and Aoife Kiely for
provision of the phospho-α-synuclein antibody. The authors also thank the NHLBI GO Exome Sequencing Project and its ongoing studies which
produced and provided exome variant calls for comparison: the Lung GO Sequencing Project (HL-102923), the WHI Sequencing Project
(HL-102924), the Broad GO Sequencing Project (HL-102925), the Seattle GO Sequencing Project (HL-102926), and the Heart GO Sequencing Project
(HL-103010). The authors thank the NIEHS Environmental Genome Project for providing support for this project under contract
no.HHSN273200800010C. This work was supported in part by the Wellcome Trust/MRC Joint Call in Neurodegeneration award (WT089698) to the UK
Parkinson's Disease Consortium (UKPDC), whose members are from the UCL Institute of Neurology, the University of Sheffield and the MRC
Protein Phosphorylation Unit at the University of Dundee. The research was partly supported by the National Institute for Health Research
(NIHR) Biomedical Research Unit in Dementia based at University College London Hospitals (UCLH), University College London (UCL). The views
expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR, or the Department of Health. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited. Supplementary data associated with this article can be
found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.04.011. Diagram of the MAPT gene depicting the location of
the 3 rare variants reported to date to be associated with tau pathology. The novel variant c.370C>G is indicated with a black arrow on the
chromatogram above the p.Q124E variant. Key neuropathological findings in the present case. Severe loss of neuromelanin-containing neurons
in the ventrolateral tier of the substantia nigra (arrows), as well as gliosis and free pigment (arrowheads) (A); Abundant tau-positive
neurofibrillary tangles, neuropil threads, and pre-tangles in the entorhinal cortex (B); phospho-TDP-43 (p-TDP) immunoreactive neuronal
cytoplasmic inclusions (NCIs), neurites, and a skein-like structure (inset) in the substantia nigra (C); and numerous p-TDP–positive fine
thread-like processes, few coarser neurites, round, dot-like structures, and a “cat's-eye” neuronal intranuclear inclusion (NII) (inset) in
the subiculum (D). A, hematoxylin and eosin staining; B, AT8; and C and D, phospho-TDP-43 immunostaining.
