The first two authors contributed equally to this work To report a case series of patients with novel forkhead box CI (FOXC1) mutations in a
Korean family with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS). Four members of the same family underwent complete ophthalmologic and systemic
examinations and genetic analysis. Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes, and all coding exons with flanking intronic
regions of the FOXC1 and pituitary homeobox 2 genes were amplified using PCR, and sequenced. The patients were 40, 12, 11, and 10 years old
(father, son, and two sisters, respectively). All four had uncontrolled intraocular pressure, glaucomatous visual field defect, retinal
nerve fiber layer defect, iridocorneal adhesion on gonioscopy, hypoplasia and marked atrophy of the iris, flattening of the midface, and
broad flat noses. A diagnosis of ARS was made based on characteristic ocular and systemic traits. A novel FOXC mutation, c.317delA, was
identified in all affected members of the family with ARS. We found a novel c.317delA mutation in FOXC1 in a Korean family with ARS. We
suggest that this FOXC1 mutation causes typical ARS, and that our results may be useful for better understanding of the spectrum of FOXC1
mutations and the role of FOXC1 in the development and progression of ARS. Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) is characterized by anomalies of
the anterior segment of the eye and systemic signs, and is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern . The anterior segment anomalies
include iris strands connecting the iridocorneal angle to the trabecular meshwork and a prominent, anteriorly displaced Schwalbe’s line
(posterior embryotoxon), iris hypoplasia, abnormal situation of pupil (corectopia), more than one pupil in an eye (polycoria), and glaucoma
. The systemic signs include abnormality of the cardiovascular outflow tract, midface hypoplasia, a broad flat nasal root, maxillary and
occasionally mandibular hypoplasia, hypertelorism (excessive distance between two eyes) and telecanthus (abnormally increased distance
between the medial canthi of the eyelids), microdontia (abnormally small teeth), hypodontia (having fewer teeth than normal), skeletal
anomalies, and hearing loss. The phenotype of this syndrome varies considerably among cases and even in the two eyes of the same individual
. ARS is genetically heterogenous, and two major genes, forkhead box C1 (FOXC1) on chromosome 6p25 and pituitary homeobox 2 (PITX2) on
chromosome 4q25, have been demonstrated to cause the disease . The FOXC1 mutation is more likely to be associated with glaucoma, while the
risk of systemic abnormalities is greatest with the PITX2 mutation. Other implicated loci include those at 13q14 and 16q24, but no
definitively causative mutations have been identified in any one gene. A recent, single autosomal recessive case of a child with
characteristic anterior chamber anomalies and umbilical hernia was identified as a compound heterozygote for mutations in CYP1B1 . The FOXC1
gene is a member of the forkhead family of transcription factors, which play important roles in embryogenesis, tissue-specific gene
expression, and tumor development. FOXC1 recognizes and binds to specific DNA sequences through the conserved 110-amino-acid forkhead domain
(FH), and thus activates the target genes . The most common FOXC1 defects leading to ARS are point mutations. More than 40 documented
deletions, either interstitial or telomeric, involve 6p25, and patients frequently present with ocular, craniofacial, skeletal, and cardiac
malformations and hearing loss. The phenotypic variation seen in these patients is largely due to the size of the deletions and the genes
involved . To the best of our knowledge, intragenic mutations, including deletions, of FOXC1 have been described in 46 patients, but
c.317delA has not been detected in any patients with ARS, including those with ocular and systemic abnormalities . Here, we describe the
c.317delA genetic aberration in a Korean family and the clinical phenotypes of ARS in these patients. The purpose of the study and the
procedures were explained to all patients, and informed consent was obtained. The procedures used conformed to the tenets of the Declaration
of Helsinki. This study was approved by the Gyeongsang National University Institutional Review Board. The proband (Figure 1A) in this
Korean family was a 12-year-old boy who presented with decreased visual acuity and intraocular pressure (IOP) uncontrolled by antiglaucoma
medications in the right eye. His best-corrected vision was 20/200 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. The IOP measured with
Goldmann applanation tonometry was 36 mmHg in the right eye and 24 mmHg in the left. Ocular examination revealed normal corneal diameter,
Haab’s striae (horizontal break in Descemet’s membrane), and iris atrophy in both eyes. In addition, gonioscopy showed open angles in both
eyes with anterior insertion of the iris into the trabecular meshwork with prominent iris processes. He had apparent hypertelorism,
telecanthus, a flat face, and a flat, broad nasal bridge. Because of these findings, he was diagnosed with bilateral ARS. Pedigree and
sequence analysis of the forkhead box CI (FOXC1) gene in a family with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome. A: The proband (II:1) is indicated with an
arrow. The filled symbols represent affected individuals. B: Direct sequencing analysis of the FOXC1 gene showed overlapping peaks at
nucleotide position 317 due to a heterozygous 1-bp deletion of alanine (c.317delA) in the proband (II:1), his father (I:1), and two younger
sisters (II:2 and II:3). C: The FOXC1 domain structure and predicted protein due to a novel mutation (c.317delA; p.Gln106Argfs*75)
identified in this study are illustrated. The black rectangle represents the forkhead domain, and the slashed box indicates those areas of
the mutant protein that are translated differently from the normal FOXC1 protein. This family had four affected members: the proband, his
father, and his two younger sisters (Figure 1A). Table 1 summarizes the clinical characteristics of the ocular and systemic examination of
the four patients in this family. BCVA, Best corrected visual acuity; LP, light perception; FC, finger count; ECC, endothelial cell count;
N, nasal side, T, temporal side; +, present; -, not present; C/D, cup disc ratio. All four patients underwent comprehensive ophthalmologic
examinations, including best-corrected visual acuity measurement and slit lamp biomicroscopy, followed by ophthalmoscopy after pupillary
dilation. Additional examinations included anterior segment photography, gonioscopic photography, optical coherence tomography (Carl Zeiss
Meditec, Dublin, CA), visual field testing (Carl Zeiss Meditec), dental panoramic radiography, trans-thoracic echocardiography, auditory
function testing, and computed tomography of the head. In addition, we obtained information about the patients’ systemic abnormalities
through the clinical interview. Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes using the Wizard Genomic DNA Purification Kit
(Promega, Madison, WI). All coding exons, with flanking intronic regions, of the FOXC1 and PITX2 genes were amplified using PCR with primers
designed by the authors (available upon request) and a thermal cycler (Model 9700; Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Sequencing was
performed with the ABI Prism 3100×l Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) using the BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit
(Applied Biosystems). The obtained sequences were analyzed using Sequencher software (version 4.10.1, Gene Codes, Ann Arbor, MI) and
compared with the reference sequence for FOXC1 (NM_001453.2) and PITX2 (NM_000325.5). We followed the Human Genome Variation Society
guidelines to describe sequence variations: “A” of the ATG translation start site was numbered +1 for the DNA sequence, and the first
methionine was numbered +1 for the protein sequence. The proband presented with complex bilateral anterior segment developmental anomalies
including the presence of Haab’s striae (see “Patient Details”; Figure 2). The father and sisters of the proband showed a typical ARS
phenotype, but the proband’s mother appeared normal, with no sign of the disease. We screened the four members of the family for coding
mutations in the FOXC1 and PITX2 genes. The proband was heterozygous for a 1-bp deletion in the FOXC1 gene (c.317delA) that is expected to
result in ARS through haploinsufficiency either due to nonsense-mediated decay of mutant mRNA or mutant FOXC1 protein produced with 181
amino acids rather than full-length 553 amino acids missing the forkhead domain, the most important function part of the protein
(p.Gln106Argfs*75, Figure 1B,C). Analysis of the parents revealed that this mutation was inherited from the proband’s father, since the
mother had a wild-type sequence. The two affected sisters of the proband had the same variant as their father and brother. When we tested
104 unaffected ethnically matched controls, none had the mutation. In addition, no sequence variant was found in the PITX2 gene. Ocular
characteristics and systemic anomalies of patient II:1. Slit lamp photographs showed Haab’s striae and iris hypoplasia in both eyes (A, B).
Gonioscopy showed open angles in both eyes with anterior insertion of the iris into the trabecular meshwork, prominent iris processes, and
broad-based synechiae at places in both eyes (C, D). Physical examination revealed hypertelorism, telecanthus, a flat face, and flat broad
nasal bridge (E, F). Clinical evaluation of the four patients showed typical clinical phenotypes of ARS, including uncontrolled intraocular
pressure, glaucomatous visual field defect, iridocorneal adhesion on gonioscopy, hypoplasia and marked atrophy of the iris, flattening of
the midface, and broad, flat noses. Interestingly, in these four patients, who had glaucoma in both eyes, the eye with more extensive areas
of anterior insertion of the iris into the trabecular meshwork with prominent iris processes presented with higher IOP and was more
resistant to medical treatment, to the point that two of the patients needed surgical management. In addition, of both eyes affected by ARS,
the eye with higher IOP presented a thicker central cornea with broad Haab’s striae and lower endothelial cell counts. These asymmetric
ocular manifestations were identified in the early stages and the later stages of the disease in this family. None of the four patients had
any abnormalities on dental panoramic radiograph, auditory function test, trans-thoracic echocardiography, or computed tomography of the
head. A 40-year-old man was referred to our clinic because of uncontrolled IOP in the right eye. He was a known patient with glaucoma and
had been treated by topical antiglaucoma medications in both eyes. However, he had been completely blinded in his left eye because of
glaucoma 10 years earlier. He was referred to our center for IOP uncontrolled by topical medications in the right eye for 1 year. IOP
measured with Goldmann tonometry was 26 mmHg in the right eye and 36 mmHg in the left. His best-corrected vision was 20/80 in the right eye
with mild myopia. His left eye was deviated outward. Slit lamp examination revealed slight corneal edema, Haab’s striae, iridocorneal
adhesions, and atrophy of the iris with corectopia in both eyes. Further physical examination revealed a flat midface, hypertelorism, and
telecanthus. Other detailed ocular and systemic findings for this patient are shown in Table 1 and Figure 3. He had normal intelligence.
Based on these findings, he was diagnosed with ARS. The IOP in the right eye was not adequately controlled with medication alone, so we
performed trabeculectomy with mitomycin C in this eye. Postoperatively, at the third month, the IOP was well controlled in the right eye.
Ocular characteristics and systemic anomalies of patient I:1. Slit lamp photographs showed slight corneal edema, Haab’s striae, iridocorneal
adhesions, and atrophy of the iris with corectopia in both eyes (A, B). Gonioscopy showed open angles in both eyes with anterior insertion
of the iris into trabecular meshwork, prominent iris processes, and broad-based synechiae at places in both eyes (C, D). Physical
examination revealed exotropia in the left eye, a flat midface, hypertelorism, and telecanthus (E, F). A 12-year-old boy was referred to our
clinic because of uncontrolled IOP in the right eye. He was born at 38 weeks' gestation with a birthweight of 2,500 g. The pregnancy and
delivery were uneventful. The corneal diameter was 12 mm in both eyes. His best-corrected vision was 20/200 in the right eye and 20/20 in
the left eye. IOP measured with Goldmann tonometry was 36 mmHg in the right eye and 24 mmHg in the left. Haab’s striae and iris hypoplasia
were seen in the anterior segment. Gonioscopy showed open angles in both eyes with anterior insertion of the iris into the trabecular
meshwork, prominent iris processes, and broad-based synechiae in places. Optic disc examination revealed a cup-to-disc ratio (CDR) of 0.9 in
the right eye and 0.6 in the left. Humphrey visual fields revealed severe glaucomatous defects in the right eye, but the left eye was
normal. The patient had apparent hypertelorism, telecanthus, a flat face, and a flat, broad nasal bridge. Other detailed ocular and systemic
findings for this patient are shown in Table 1 and Figure 2. Because of these findings, he was diagnosed with bilateral ARS. He was treated
with topical antiglaucoma medications in both eyes. The IOP in both eyes was well controlled on medication alone. An 11-year-old girl was
referred to our clinic because of uncontrolled IOP in the right eye. She was born at 37 weeks' gestation with a birthweight of 2,800 g. The
pregnancy and delivery were uneventful. The corneal diameter was 11.8 mm in both eyes. Her best-corrected vision was 20/200 in the right eye
and 20/20 in the left eye. IOP as measured with Goldmann tonometry was 32 mmHg in the right eye and 24 mmHg in the left. Iris hypoplasia and
posterior embryotoxon were seen in both eyes, but Haab's striae were present only in the right eye. Gonioscopy showed open angles in both
eyes, with anterior insertion of the iris into the trabecular meshwork, prominent iris processes, and broad-based synechiae in places. Optic
disc examination revealed a CDR of 0.5 in the right eye and 0.3 in the left. Humphrey visual fields revealed severe glaucomatous defects in
the right eye, but the left eye was normal. She had apparent hypertelorism, telecanthus, a flat face, and a flat, broad nasal bridge. Her
other detailed ocular and systemic findings are shown in Table 1 and Figure 4. Because of these findings, she was diagnosed as having
bilateral ARS. The IOP was not adequately controlled with medication alone in the right eye, so we performed trabeculectomy with mitomycin C
in this eye. Postoperatively, at the fourth month, the IOP was well controlled in the right eye. Ocular characteristics and systemic
anomalies of patient II:2. Slit lamp photographs showed iris hypoplasia and posterior embryotoxon (black arrows) in both eyes, but Haab’s
striae were observed only in the right eye (A, B). Gonioscopy showed open angles in both eyes with anterior insertion of the iris into the
trabecular meshwork, prominent iris processes, and broad-based synechiae at places in both eyes (C, D). Physical examination revealed
hypertelorism, telecanthus, a flat face, and a flat broad nasal bridge (E, F). A 10-year-old girl was referred to our clinic because of
uncontrolled IOP in the left eye. She was born at 38 weeks' gestation with a birthweight of 3,100 g. The pregnancy and delivery were
uneventful. The corneal diameter was 11.5 mm in both eyes. Her best-corrected vision was 20/20 in both eyes. IOP, as measured with Goldmann
tonometry, was 24 mmHg in the right eye and 30 mmHg in the left. Iris hypoplasia and posterior embryotoxon were seen in both eyes, but
Haab's striae were seen only in the left eye. Gonioscopy showed open angles in both eyes with anterior insertion of the iris into the
trabecular meshwork, prominent iris processes, and broad-based synechiae. Fundus examination revealed a CDR of 0.5 in the right eye and 0.5
in the left. Humphrey visual fields revealed paracentral scotoma in the left eye and a normal visual field in the right eye. She had
apparent hypertelorism, telecanthus, a flat face, and a flat, broad nasal bridge. Other detailed ocular and systemic findings for this
patient are shown in Table 1 and Figure 5. Because of these findings, she was diagnosed as having bilateral ARS. She was treated with
topical medication in both eyes, and the IOP in both eyes was well controlled on medication alone. Ocular characteristics and systemic
anomalies of patient II:3. Slit lamp photographs showed hypoplasia and iris posterior embryotoxon (black arrows) in both eyes, but Haab’s
striae were observed only in the left eye. A, B: Gonioscopy showed open angles in both eyes with anterior insertion of the iris into the
trabecular meshwork, prominent iris processes, and broad-based synechiae at places in both eyes (C, D). Physical examination revealed
hypertelorism, telecanthus, a flat face, and a flat broad nasal bridge (E, F). In this study, we described a novel FOXC1 gene mutation
(c.317delA) that is expected to result in ARS through haploinsufficiency due to nonsense-mediated decay of mutant mRNA or the mutant FOXC1
protein produced (Figure 1B,C). Unidentified until now, the mutation was found in a Korean family affected by autosomal dominant ARS. To the
best of our knowledge, deletions of FOXC1 have been described in 13 patients, but neither the c.317delA mutation nor the ocular and systemic
abnormalities seen in the family comprising the present case series had yet been seen in patients with ARS . These four patients
demonstrated characteristic clinical phenotypes. The conditions that comprise ARS are all inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern with
high penetration. ARS is genetically heterogenous, and mutations in different genes lead to similar clinical phenotypes. ARS has been
associated with mutations in two genes: PITX2 at 4q25 and FOXC1 at 6p25 . A third locus was suggested by deletions in 13q14, supported by
linkage analysis, but a disease-causing gene has not yet been identified . In two isolated cases, deletion in the 16q23–q24 region and
deletion of the PAX6 gene at 11p13, respectively, were related to ARS, but these findings were not supported by other studies . In more than
60% of patients, the genetic defect underlying ARS is not known . Genetically, point mutations in the FOXC1 gene cause ARS, and patients
with the 6p25 deletion syndrome probably exhibit ARS because FOXC1 is located on chromosome 6p25 . The FOXC1 gene is a member of the
forkhead/winged helix family of transcription factors, which are characterized by an evolutionarily conserved DNA-binding domain and are
essential for embryonic development . The gene is expressed in human tissues, with the highest concentration in skeletal muscle, kidney,
liver, and heart as well as the eyes . In addition to the FOXC1 gene, defects in other genes in the deleted region may also result in the
ocular and non-ocular phenotypes of patients with the 6p25 deletion syndrome . Gould et al. summarized the phenotypes of patients with 6p25
deletions, showing that these patients exhibited a recognizable pattern of malformations. These malformations include hypertelorism,
downslanting palpebral fissures, ARS, hearing loss, anomalies in the central nervous system, and developmental delay . Manifestations of the
four patients described in this case series were consistent with those of the 6p25 deletion syndrome. To our knowledge, intragenic mutations
of FOXC1 have been described in 46 patients, and these include missense (n=23) and nonsense (n=6) mutations, as well as
deletions/insertions/duplications (n=17) . These mutations in human FOXC1 have been associated with anterior segment dysgenesis, iris
anomalies, and developmental glaucoma. Interestingly, the same FOXC1 mutation may lead to different clinical manifestations. For example,
the Leu86Phe mutation led to ocular changes in one patient, but the same mutation in another patient led to several systemic abnormalities,
including obesity, short stature, myocardial infarction, and dental abnormality . Functional studies of FOXC1 missense mutations do not
imply a strong correlation between the protein function and the phenotype. Strungaru et al. suggested that patients with FOXC1 duplication
have a more severe prognosis for glaucoma development compared with patients with intragenic FOXC1 mutations . Although FOXC1 clearly plays
an important role in eye development, the complexities of this association are made evident by the lack of any conclusive genotype-phenotype
correlations . A better understanding of the relationship between these genetic lesions and clinical manifestations in patients with ARS
would lead to better clinical management and genetic evaluation, but this relationship is complex and difficult. Individuals with FOXC1
mutations or deletions demonstrate a spectrum of phenotypic consequences, including the same mutated allele seen in affected and unaffected
members of the same family . It has therefore been suggested that either environmental factors and/or modifier genes interact with FOXC1 in
producing a disease phenotype, and this has been seen with other ocular developmental genes . This report is especially worthy of notice in
that it showed different stages of ARS in a family. The major clinical concern in ARS is the risk of developing sight-threatening glaucoma,
which is estimated to occur in 50% of patients with ARS . Further, only 18% of patients with glaucoma and either FOXC1 or PITX2 genetic
defects respond to medical or surgical treatment . Although physical occlusion of the angle structure is not a prerequisite for elevated IOP
and glaucoma in ARS, the severity of glaucoma correlates with the level of iris insertion into the angle . In the four patients of this
series, who had glaucoma in both eyes, the eye with more extensive areas of angle closure presented with higher IOP and was more resistant
to medical treatment. In addition, as shown in Figure 1, Figure 2, Figure 3, and Figure 4, the eye with higher IOP presented a thicker
central cornea with broad Haab’s striae. Further functional studies may clarify whether the novel mutation of FOXC1 found in our patients is
associated with an increase in the thickness of the cornea or the formation of Haab’s striae. In summary, this study described a novel
mutation (c.317delA) in the FOXC1 gene of four members of a Korean family who were affected by autosomal dominant ARS. All four patients
with this until-now unidentified mutation demonstrated typical clinical phenotypes of ARS, including uncontrolled intraocular pressure,
glaucomatous visual field defects, iridocorneal adhesion on gonioscopy, hypoplasia and marked atrophy of the iris, flattening of the
midface, and broad, flat noses. Additionally, of both eyes affected by ARS, the eye with higher IOP presented more extensive areas of areas
of anterior insertion of the iris into the trabecular meshwork with prominent iris processes and a thicker central cornea with broad Haab’s
striae. We therefore suggest that the c.317delA mutation in FOXC1 is a cause of typical ARS. Our results may be useful for a better
understanding of the spectrum of FOXC1 mutations and the role of FOXC1 in the development and progression of ARS. In addition, identifying
the genetic causes underlying ARS cases allows for more precise genetic counseling and better prognosis. In addition, in the future, gene-
specific or mutation-specific therapies may become available.
