We report a case of mucinous cystic neoplasm of pancreas with sarcomatous stroma metastasizing to the liver. The tumor occurred in a male
patient aged 46 years. Symptoms included persistent epigastric and right upper quadrant pain. Radiographically, the pancreas contained four
large cystic masses located in the neck, body, and tail. Histologically, the cysts were lined with benign, mucinous epithelium with
underlying bland, storiform, ovarian-like stroma. An undifferentiated focally hyalinized, sarcomatous stroma composed of bland spindle cells
showing short fascicular growth pattern and focal nuclear palisading was associated with the epithelial component in one of the cysts. These
cells showed strong immunoreactivity with vimentin and inhibin (weak), they were negative for CD34, estrogen receptor, progesterone
receptor, androgen, calretinin, S-100, CD117, melan A, chromogranin, and synaptophysin. A morphologically and immunohistochemically
identical metastatic sarcomatous focus was identified in the liver without any glandular component. This case is unique in its clinically
malignant behaviour and metastatic nature despite its morphologically benign epithelial and stromal components. Mucinous cystic neoplasms
(MCNs) represent one of the major cystic neoplasms of the pancreas. They have distinct clinicopathological features. They are seen in women
in the fifth or sixth decades of life; only rarely are examples documented in men. The tumor is usually located in the tail of the pancreas.
Macroscopically, the cysts are multilocular and they do not communicate with the pancreatic ductal system. Histologically, the lining
epithelium consists of tall, columnar cells with abundant apical mucin, although cuboidal cells that lack obvious mucin may also be present.
The epithelium may be bland in appearance or might range from mild to severe atypia resembling ovarian counterparts and include mucinous
cystadenomas, borderline mucinous cystic tumors, and mucinous cystadenocarcinomas. Another distinct histologic feature is the presence of
subepithelial hypercellular, ovarian-like spindle cell stroma, and its presence has become a requirement for the diagnosis of this entity .
Here we report a case of mucinous cystic neoplasm of the pancreas with sarcomatous stroma metastasized to liver. A 46-year-old man presented
with persistent epigastric and right upper quadrant pain. Endoscopic ultrasound studies revealed multiple cysts in the pancreas
(Figures 1A,B). Computed tomography (Figure 1C) of the abdomen showed a large mass in the neck and body of the pancreas measuring 6.8 × 5.7
cm in cross-section, consistent with a cystic mass with internal hemorrhage. In addition, a 1.2 cm cystic mass in the pancreatic body and
three adjacent cystic masses in the pancreatic tail measuring 2.3, 1.7, and 1.4 cm were identified. No pancreatic ductal dilatation was
seen. Endoscopic ultrasonography and computed tomography. A-B) Endoscopic ulrasonography showing cysts in neck, body and tail of Pancreas.
C) Computed tomography of pancreas showing cystic mass with hemorrhage. A partial pancreatectomy removed four cysts ranging in size from 1.5
× 1.5 × 0.8 cm to 7.0 × 5.0 × 3.5 cm, located in the neck, body, and tail of the pancreas. All the cysts had a green-tan to red, smooth,
glistening lining. The parenchyma separating the cysts was tan-yellow and focally indurated (Figure 2A). Pictures of pancreatic cysts, cyst
lined by benign mucinous epithelium, sarcomatous stroma in pancreas, and sarcomatoid metastatic foci in liver. (A) Gross picture of
pancreatic cysts occupying neck, body and tail. (B) Cyst lined by benign mucinous epithelium with underlying ovarian-like, storiform stroma
(H & E, 10×) (C) Sarcomatous stroma in pancreas. Spindle stromal cells with fascicular growth pattern and nuclear palisading. Focal areas of
dense, acellular, hyalinized tissue are evident (H & E, 20×) (D) Sarcomatoid metastatic foci in liver. Morphology is identical to lesion in
pancreas (H & E, 20×). Histologically, the cysts were lined with columnar cells with mucinous laden cytoplasm and basally located, bland
nucleus. Beneath the epithelial lining, a hypercellular ovarian-like stroma composed of spindle-shaped cells in a storiform growth pattern
was observed (Figure 2B). In some areas, the spindle cells had a fascicular growth pattern and focally nuclear palisading was evident. In
these areas, the cells had mild atypia; however, no increase in mitotic figures was detected. The focal areas of the stroma were composed of
dense, acellular, hyalinized tissue (Figure 2C). A liver segment resected at the same time revealed a metastatic stromal lesion composed
entirely of spindle-shaped cells identical to those seen in the pancreas but without the glandular component (Figure 2D). The uninvolved
pancreas showed fibrosis and atrophy. All of the 11 lymph nodes were free of metastasis. The epithelial component of the cysts was positive
for CAM 5.2 antibody (Figure 3A). The stromal component in both pancreas and liver was strongly positive for vimentin (Figure 3B) and weakly
positive for inhibin (Figure 3C). However, the spindle cells were negative for CD34, estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, androgen,
calretinin, S-100, CD117, melan A, chromogranin, and synaptophysin. The Ki67 index of stroma was low, 1% to 3% (Figure 3D).
Immunohistochemical studies. (A) Epithelial component of the lesion is CAM5.2 positive. Sarcomatous stroma shows strong vimentin (B) and
weak inhibin (C) immunoreactivity. (D) Sarcomatous component has a low Ki67 index (1% to 3%). Sarcomatous neoplastic lesions arising from
the stroma of MCNs of the pancreas have been described in the literature (Table 1). The stromal component may be composed of bland, spindle
cells with mild atypia and a small number of mitotic figures. These types of lesion have been described as ‘mucinous cyst adenoma with
mesenchymal overgrowth or mural nodules’ . In these tumors, the sarcoma-like foci are benign and do not affect the prognosis adversely.
Other reported examples of MCNs include an associated malignant spindle cell stroma with characteristic features of malignant fibrous
histiosarcoma , leiomyosarcoma , and undifferentiated pleomorphic high-grade sarcoma . In some of these cases, the epithelial component was
also malignant, so a diagnosis of carcinosarcoma was made. Summary of reported cases of mucinous cystic neoplasm of pancreas with
sarcomatous component ER, estrogen receptor; MCN, mucinous cystic neoplasm; MFH, malignant fibrous histiocytoma; MSA, muscle-specific actin;
PR, progesterone receptor; SMA, smooth muscle actin. In three cases reported by Wenig et al. , stromal cells showed moderate to high-grade
atypia, pleomorphism and increased numbers of mitotic figures. The sarcomatous component was angioinvasive. Two patients had metastatic
lesions composed of sarcomatous lesion only. The epithelial component of one of these lesions showed features of invasive adenocarcinoma.
Our case differs from the previously reported literature by distant metastasis of only the stromal component, despite its morphologically
benign features with bland spindle cells showing mild atypia, a low number of mitotic counts and a low Ki67 index. Both the sarcomatous
stroma in the pancreas and the metastatic foci in the liver were strongly positive for vimentin and variably positive for inhibin. Estrogen
receptor and progesterone receptor expression was not detected; this is not unlikely in MCN of pancreas arising in men. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first clinically MCN of the pancreas reported with distant metastasis of sarcomatous stromal component despite the
relatively benign histologic features of the lesion. Although both epithelial and stromal components of the lesion are morphologically
benign, the presence of a metastatic stromal focus in the liver renews the discussion that all pancreatic MCNs should be regarded as
potentially malignant and that histology alone is not a definitive prospective indicator of behaviour . According to most of the reported
literature, the MCN with sarcomatous tumor behaves more aggressively; therefore, it is most likely that the sarcomatous component appears to
be responsible for the malignant behaviour of these tumors and supersedes the epithelial component in terms of defining the aggressiveness
of these tumors. The patient has given his consent for this case report to be published. H & E: Hematoxylin and eosin; MCN: Mucinous cystic
neoplasm; MFH: Malignant fibrous histiocytoma. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. M W performed the surgery and
completed the final paper. D G and V G are pathologists who evaluated the specimen. G A-gastroenterologist who diagnosed the tumor and
helped in article writing. B A article writing and literature review. All author read and approved the final manuscript.
