High altitude retinopathy is a condition often seen among mountain climbers or among persons who reach high altitudes rapidly. In this
report, we describe a case of a 57 year old healthy gentleman who presented with diminution of vision in both the eyes associated with
retinal hemorrhages and the spontaneous resolution of the same. High Altitude Retinopathy is a well described clinical entity characterized
by vascular dilatation and scattered superficial hemorrhages. Although a benign condition, its accurate diagnosis may alert the attending
physician in preventing the other more fatal conditions of the spectrum of Altitude Illness namely pulmonary and cerebral edema. Also, the
diagnosis of high altitude retinopathy does not immediately come to mind when one sees a patient at sea level and the patient may be
investigated for myriad other etiologies. We are also emphasizing the benign course of the condition associated with spontaneous recovery. A
57-year healthy avid mountain climber came with 20 days history of sudden onset painless diminution of vision in the left eye. Patient was
on his first Everest expedition when he noticed a central field defect. His medical history was unremarkable. Best corrected visual acuity
(BCVA) was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/50 in the left eye. Anterior segment examination of both eyes was unremarkable. Fundus examination
of both eyes [Figs. 1 and 2] revealed multiple flame shaped superficial hemorrhages located in all the four quadrants up to the mid
periphery. In addition, the left eye also had a dark blotchy intra retinal hemorrhage at the fovea measuring approximately 0.5 DD. OD color
fundus montage at presentation showing multiple superficial hemorrhages OS colour fundus montage at presentation showing multiple scattered
superficial hemorrhages and a blotchy hemorrhage at fovea The patient underwent a complete hemogram, basic coagulation profile and
peripheral blood smear, which revealed no abnormality. He underwent a general physical check up and imaging to rule out cardiac or
neurological abnormalities, which turned out to be normal. A diagnosis of High Altitude Retinopathy was made. At four weeks follow up, a
near total resolution of hemorrhages with BCVA 20/20, N6 in both eyes was noted, which confirmed our diagnosis. Figs. 3 and 4 shows
reduction in hemorrhages at 2 weeks and Figs. 5 and 6 show almost total resolution at 4 weeks. OD colour fundus montage at two weeks follow
up showing relative reduction in the hemorrhages OS color fundus montage at two weeks follow up showing relative reduction in the
hemorrhages OD color fundus montage at one month follow up showing near total resolution of hemorrhages OS color fundus montage at one month
follow up with near total resolution of hemorrhages and a dilated STQ vein High-altitude retinal hemorrhages (HARH) were first described
more than four decades ago by Singh, et al. High altitude retinopathy was classified by Weidman. He graded it according to the number and
area of distribution of hemorrhages. Various theories, have been described in the pathogenesis of HAR. Autoregulation in response to
hypoxia, increase in venous pressure secondary to raised intra cranial pressure and variations in hematocrit levels have been described.
However, the autoregulation theory is most widely accepted. Hypoxia, due to deficient oxygen at a high altitude, induces various
compensatory mechanism in the retinal vasculature, which leads to retinal hemorrhages. Choroidal circulation does not exhibit
autoregulation; hence, the occurrence of hemorrhages is more in the superficial retina than at a deeper level. This is a usually a self-
limiting condition which does not require any active intervention. Source of Support: None. Conflict of Interest: No.
