Localized emphysema is difficult to detect on normal thoracoscopy. Indocyanine green (ICG) was used to precisely delineate an emphysematous
lesion using an infrared camera system in a 75-year-old woman with a large emphysematous lesion in the right lower lobe. Due to repeated
infections of the emphysematous lesion, right basal segmentectomy for localized lung emphysema was performed. During surgery, ICG
(0.5 mg/kg) was injected intravenously, and the emphysematous lesion was detected as a fluorescence defect. This method could be used for
precise resection of large emphysematous lesions because it permits clear detection with a small amount of ICG. In some cases of localized
emphysema, it is difficult to detect the line between normal lung and the emphysematous lesion. In particular, in infected lesions, accurate
detection of the line is very important to remove the entire lesion to completely eradicate infection. An infrared camera was used to
precisely delineate an emphysematous lesion using an appropriate amount of indocyanine green (ICG). This method has already been used in
hepatectomy by injection of ICG to identify the border of a liver segment and a lung segment . The case of a patient who underwent
segmentectomy for a large emphysematous lesion using ICG detected by an infrared camera system (Photodynamic Eye: PDE-neo™, Hamamatsu
Photonics KK, Shizuoka, Japan) is reported. A 75-year-old woman was referred to our department with a diagnosis of pneumonia with a high
fever. She had no significant medical history except for diabetes mellitus, and no abnormality on screening chest X-ray had ever been
detected. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed fluid collection in a large emphysematous lesion. At first, pulmonary sequestration of the
right lower lobe was suspected, but it was eventually diagnosed as pulmonary bullous emphysema because there was no aberrant artery from the
aorta on enhanced computed tomography. The patient was treated with antibiotics for infected bullous emphysema. There was no clear
communication between the bronchus and the bulla on bronchoscopy, but the presence of infection suggested the possibility of a
communication. After the infection was cured, the localized emphysema had not decreased in size, and she continued to have repeated
infection in the bulla. Therefore, it was decided that surgery to completely remove the bullous emphysematous lesion was needed. The large
bullous lesion was located by CT scan from segment 9 to segment 10 in the right lower lobe, and it extended longitudinally to the border
between segments 6 and 10 (Figure 1). Chest computed tomographic images show bullous emphysema in the right lower lobe. There is no aberrant
artery and no communication with the bronchus. Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) was performed, and the bullous lesion was seen
both by the scope and directly by the naked eye. However, the border of the bullous lesion was not clear in the deflated lung. ICG
(0.5 mg/kg) was injected into a right arm vein, and the lung was observed using the PDE imaging system through the 8-cm thoracotomy site.
About 8 seconds after injection, ICG entered the lung, and the bullous lesion was detected as a defect of fluorescence contrasting with the
normal lung fluorescence. The contrast remained for 30 seconds, and the ICG reached the bullous area, which was visualized as white (Figure
2). While the contrast was present, the border between normal lung and the bullous lesion was marked by electric cautery. During the
marking, a scope from a 10-mm port assisted in visualizing the lung because the PDE system shows a black and white view without normal light
support. It appeared that the bullous emphysematous lesion could be resected completely by basal segmentectomy, and this was performed.
There were no complications postoperatively, and the patient was discharged 10 days postoperatively. At follow-up 12 months after surgery,
the patient had no infections and no bullous lesions in the lung. The patient was provided informed consent to use ICG and the Ethics Review
Board on Clinical Research of Japanese Red Cross Nagasaki Genbaku Hospital approved the study protocol (#175). Intraoperative images. Images
under normal light (A) and infrared light with indocyanine green injection (B). Bullous emphysema is black, whereas the normal lung tissue
is white (B). The arrows indicate the emphysematous lesion. A localized pulmonary bulla is sometimes difficult to detect clearly on
thoracoscopy, especially in a deflated lung. VATS has already been accepted for wedge resection of lung bullae or emphysema and partially
for lobectomy or segmentectomy of lung cancer or infectious diseases of the lung . Under VATS, inflation of the lung makes the operation
difficult because a large part of the chest cavity is occupied. To address this issue, Gotoh et al. used ICG to detect bullae of
pneumothorax by infrared thoracoscopy . Their infrared camera was very useful because it was a two-color infrared camera that showed the
tissue with ICG as blue and that without ICG as white. However, they used ICG 3.0 mg/kg, which is much more than the volume of ICG used for
liver function testing . According to toxicity studies, a 5.0 mg/kg ICG intravenous injection is safe and tolerable , and another report
described it as safe enough, as there were only three (0.15%) mild adverse reactions, four (0.2%) moderate reactions, and one (0.05%) severe
reaction in 1226 consecutive patients . However, some reports noted that ICG dye has a dose-dependent toxic effect on the retina , and in
our experience, prolonged vomiting or fever has occurred postoperatively in some cases. It is clear that a smaller volume of ICG than they
used is much better. The PDE imaging system contains a charge-coupled device camera that filters out light with a wavelength of less than
820 nm, as well as 36 light-emitting diodes with a wavelength of 760 nm. It shows clearly that the tissue with ICG is white and that without
ICG is black . The advantage of the PDE system is high sensitivity for ICG, which allows a lower dose of ICG (0.5 mg/kg) to be used. Since
even ICG at 0.5 mg/kg can show the contrast clearly, it may be possible to reduce the ICG dose further. Another advantage of this approach
includes the ability to see the border clearly as a black and white line and to be able to use normal thoracoscopy from another 10-mm port
to see the normal color lung at the same time. This means that it is possible to use electrocautery to mark the border using normal
thoracoscopy and the PDE system concurrently. The black and white contrast lasted for about 30 seconds, and then gradually the bullous
lesion turned white; this is not long, but it is enough to see the border and mark it by electric cautery. Furthermore, because the color is
lost about 15 minutes after injection, the segment line can be used one more time during cutting. On the other hand, a disadvantage is the
large size of the system, having a diameter of 8 cm, which requires a large incision to be used. However, in our experience, it is possible
to use at least a 4-cm incision because the part of the charged-coupled device (CCD) camera except for the infrared light-emitting diode
(LED) is 3.2 cm in diameter. In conclusion, the procedure using the PDE system with ICG injection to perform surgery for pulmonary bullous
emphysema is safe and can be quickly completed, with minimal drug-related side effects. This approach is cost-effective because the PDE
system can be used in other operations, and ICG is inexpensive. ICG fluorescence for lung operations promises to be useful. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CCD: Charged-coupled device; CT: Computed tomography; ICG: Indocyanine green;
LED: Light-emitting diode; PDE: Photodynamic Eye; VATS: Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. KM wrote the manuscript, and TN supervised the patient’s entire treatment. IS and HT participated in the surgical
operation and treatment. NY, TT, TM, and KT collected the data and gave the PDE information. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. The authors gratefully appreciate the support of Hamamatsu Photonics K.K., Hamamatsu, Japan for the PDE system. There was no
financial support for this study.
