Hydatid cyst of the breast is endemic in some areas like sheep-raising countries. The location of the disease is mostly in the liver and
lungs. We presents a case of 66-year-old female with hydatid cyst of the breast diagnosed pre-operatively by core needle biopsy. Complete
radiology workup are also provided which includes mammography, ultrasound, and computed tomography images. Hydatid cyst of the breast is
extremely rare even in endemic areas, its only accounts for 0.27% of all cases. Only few reports are published in the literatures about
breast hydatid cyst and majority of cases have been diagnosed post-operatively with no complete radiology workup. Hydatid disease is endemic
in some areas like sheep-raising countries. Echinococcus granulosus is the most common cause of hydatid disease in humans. The location is
mostly in the liver (75%) and lungs (15%), with only 10% occurring in other parts of the body. Hydatid disease of the breast is extremely
rare even in endemic areas, its only accounts for 0.27% of all cases. Patients usually presents to the hospital with a palpable and painless
lump in the breast. It's challenging to differentiate it from other tumors. Only few reports are published and majority of the reported
cases have been diagnosed postoperatively. We report a case of hydated cyst of the breast diagnosed preoperatively by core needle biopsy
with no complication. Full radiology workup is also provided which includes mammography, ultrasound, and computed tomography (CT) images. A
66-year-old female patient known case of hypertension and diabetic mellitus presented to our institute with palpable mass in the left breast
associated with pain of long duration. There was no nipple discharge, or fever. No history of breast trauma, hormone replacement therapy, or
family history of breast cancer. On physical examination, large palpable mass is identified within the left breast with regular borders. The
nipple, areola, and skin are unremarkable. There was no palpable lymph node in the left axilla. The right breast and axilla were normal and
systemic examination did not show any abnormality. Investigations showed normal complete blood count, and chemistry apart from raised serum
glucose level. Liver function test is within normal limits. Chest x-ray is grossly unremarkable. On her mammograms, large oval and dense
mass is identified within upper outer quadrant of the left breast (Figure 1, Figure 2). The mass is multilobulated and well circumscribed in
its contours. It measures about 9.2x7.5 cm. There were no associated microcalcifications. The nipple-areola and skin complex are grossly
unremarkable. No significant enlarged axillary lymph nodes are seen. The right breast is within normal limits. Our impression based on the
mammograms is unusual large dense mass of the left breast coded as BIRAD 4A taking into consideration the patient age for further evaluation
by target ultrasound. The differential diagnosis would include phyllodes tumor, PASH (Pseudoangiomatous stromal hyperplasia), and well
circumscribed carcinoma. Crainocaudal mammogram image of the left breast shows a large dense mass in the left upper outer quadrant
Mediolateral oblique mammogram image of the left breast shows a large dense mass in the upper outer quadrant Ultrasound was performed in
same sitting for further characterization using Philips IU22 ultrasound machine. The ultrasound revealed a large heterogeneous and lobulated
mass seen in the left breast upper outer quadrant corresponding to the mammographic density. Few internal anechoic cysts are seen at the
peripheral aspect of the lesion. Doppler interrogated images were also obtained which revealed no internal vascularity within the mass
(Figure 3, Figure 4, and Figure 5). There were no associated enlarged axillary lymph nodes. Plan was made for histological confirmation by
biopsy. The procedure risks and benefits were completely explained to the patient. Procedure consent form was obtained from the patient.
Ultrasound guided core needle biopsy was performed. The specimen was sent to the pathology department for analysis. The procedure was
uneventful. No complications were reported. Target ultrasound image of the left breast upper outer quadrant shows a large mass with multiple
internal anechoic cysts Doppler integrated image shows no internal flow within the mass Panoramic ultrasound image of the left breast mass
CT scan was performed for further assessment which showed a large oval hypodense mass in the left breast. Very tiny and thin internal
septations were also evident. Peripheral enhancement was seen. No internal enhancement within the mass was identified. The mass measured
about 6.8x6.2x9 cm in maximum dimensions (Figure 6, Figure 7). No axillary lymph nodes were noted. The rest of intra thoracic and abdominal
structures were within normal limits. The pathology report revealed scanty material formed of fragmented eosinophilic membranes with
laminated appearance in keeping with hydatid cyst. The final diagnosis was made to be hydatid cyst of the breast. The patient was referred
to the surgery department for surgical resection. Axial CT image shows left breast mass with internal septations and peripheral enhancement
Coronal CT image shows the left breast mass with internal hypo dense cystic component Hydatid disease is parasite infection caused by
several species of Cestode Echinococcus but mostly by larva tapworm Echinococcus granulosus. Hydatid disease of the breast is extremely rare
even in endemic areas; it can be the only primary site or part of disseminated hydatidosis . 60% of hydatid cysts are found in the liver,
30% in the lungs, 2.5% in the kidneys, 2.5% in the heart, 2% in the bone, 1.5% in spleen, 1% in the muscle, and 0.5% in brain . However, in
the breast its only accounts for 0.27% of all cases . Typically the patients present with painless breast lump which increase in size over
time. It generally affects women between age of 30 and 50 years old; although ages from 20 to 74 years have been reported . When secondary
infection occurs, hydatid cyst canâ€²t be distinguish from breast abscess, clinically or by mammography . The screening modalities for
diagnosis of breast hydatid disease are mammography, ultrasound, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). However, for classification of the
cysts ultrasound considered the best choice. Mammography shows a non-specific, homogeneous, smooth, circumscribed lesion. The differential
diagnosis based on mammography would includes cyst, fibroadenoma, phylloides tumour and, rarely, circumscribed carcinoma. The characteristic
ring shaped structure inside a mass in over penetrated view strongly suggests hydatid cyst. Vega et all noted that the presence of ring
shaped structures and interseptal bands in the slowly developing breast mass should suggest a hydatid cyst . The ultrasound findings vary
according to the degree of maturation and the complications. Separation of the ruptured endocyst layer from the ectocyst leads to a free
floating membrane which produces the so called water lily sign. Hydatid sand composed of hooklets, membrances, and debris give internal
echo, and the level of fluid can be seen. The presence of a thicker and more laminated wall, relative to a simple cyst, and a thin
calcification layer within the lesion on ultrasonography favors hydatid cyst. In addition, the presence of a cyst in another organs together
with a multilocular cystic lesion showing a fluid level in the breast suggests a hydatid cyst . Gharbi et al. have described five types of
ultrasound findings for hydatid cysts, including pure fluid collection (type I), fluid collection with a split wall (type II), fluid
collection with septa (type III), heterogeneous echo patterns (type IV) and reflecting thick walls (type V). MRI findings can be helpful but
not specific. The findings of cystic lesion with capsular enhancement are suggestive of hydatid cyst. The capsular enhancement is more
typical with secondary infection. Hydatid cyst can presents with no capsular enhancement. Diagnosis is frequently delayed due to no specific
signs are found at the time of examination, and they instead mimic other pathologies. A hydatid cyst is usually not included in the
differential diagnosis of breast lumps due to its rarity, even in endemic areas. Due to the rarity of this condition, the above-mentioned
mammographic and sonographic appearances of breast hydatid disease are frequently missed until an operative diagnosis has been made .
Rarely, a preoperative diagnosis can be made using a combination of clinical, imaging and fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) findings.
Serologic tests may be used to confirm the diagnosis and in follow up. A positive serum reaction may occur even in absence of liver and lung
involvement . Scoleces, hooklets, and laminated membranes can be identified in FNAC. No urticarial or anaphylactic reactions have been
reported as a complication of this procedure. Therefore, FNAC can provide a safe, fast, inexpensive preoperative diagnosis and allow the
planning of a cystectomy, minimizing the risk of intraoperative rupture . A hydatid cyst is treated with total excision without any spillage
and its recurrence is very rare. Albendazole treatment has been shown to reduce the incidence of recurrence [5, 8]. Hydatid disease of the
breast is extremely rare disease, but it should be considered as a differential diagnosis of breast lumps for individuals residing in
endemic areas. Breast mass of long duration without internal flow by ultrasound Doppler images can suggest hydatid cyst. The diagnosis
usually made postoperatively. However, ultrasound guided core needle biopsy is safe and good preoperative diagnostic tool. The authors
declare no competing interests. Ali Alamer performed paper writing. Asim Aldhilan and Alamer reviewed the literatures. Alamer and Dorothy
Makanjuola review the radiological images. And Abdulmohsen Alkushi reported the pathology slides. All authors have read and approved the
final manuscript.
