To the Editor: Bovine leukemia virus (BLV), a deltaretrovirus in the family Retroviridae, is the causative agent of enzootic bovine leukosis
(EBL). Although EBL is still endemic to the Americas and eastern Europe, most countries in western Europe are EBL free in accordance with
European Union legislation; for example, Great Britain has held EBL-free status since 1999. EBL is notifiable to the World Organisation for
Animal Health (1), with disease incursion affecting international trade. Infection with BLV is life-long and persistent; the presence of
antibodies or integrated proviral DNA are indicators of virus exposure. Two tests prescribed for international trade are the agar gel
immunodiffusion test (AGIDT) and ELISA (1); these tests are used widely for diagnosis (2). We report 5 cases that occurred in the United
Kingdom during 2009, in which calves became seropositive for BLV after consuming colostrum replacer. In Dumfriesshire, Scotland, routine
serologic screening for BLV detected seropositivity in 2 calves, which were artificial insemination bull candidates. In Newport, Wales, a
BLV-seropositive calf was identified during pre-export testing. And in Yorkshire, England, 2 more BLV-seropositive calves, also artificial
insemination bull candidates, were identified. All calves were home bred, and there was no evidence (as documented by serologic testing) or
history of EBL within the herd. The farms were considered to have low risk for disease incursion because the introduction of new animals was
limited. Further inquiry revealed that the calves had each been exclusively fed a colostrum replacer from North America, where BLV is
endemic. Antibodies to BLV might have been present in the colostrum replacer and thus passively acquired by the calves, resulting in
seropositivity. The hypothesis was tested by monthly blood sampling and ELISA analysis for antibodies against BLV (Institute Pourquier,
Montpellier, France). Although the batch of colostrum replacer that had been fed to the calves from Dumfriesshire was not available for
investigation, another colostrum sample was obtained from the same manufacturer for analysis. The reconstituted colostrum replacer was
tested by AGIDT (IDEXX, Bern, Switzerland) at the following dilutions: neat (manufacturer’s guidelines), 1:2, 1:4, and 1:8. In addition, 2
commercial ELISA tests (Institute Pourquier and IDEXX) were used over a series of dilutions to 1:125. All serologic tests were conducted
according to manufacturer’s recommendations. To examine the samples for proviral DNA, we conducted PCRs to amplify a 385-bp fragment of the
envelope gene (3). At the various dilutions of colostrum replacer, all serologic tests gave clearly positive reactions. Proviral PCR of the
colostrum replacer also returned positive results, which were confirmed by sequencing. The resultant envelope sequence (GenBank accession
no. HF545344) was aligned with 23 other sequences obtained from GenBank, which encompassed all known BLV genotypes. Phylogenetic analysis
was conducted as described (4) and revealed clustering within genotype 1, which is consistent with BLV of North American origin (4). The
hypothesis that colostrum intake had caused the seropositivity was supported by the declining antibody titers found in serial blood sampling
of all 5 calves (Table). *Tested by ELISA (Institute Pourquier, Montpellier, France). +++, strong positive, sample to positive (S/P) ratio
>200; ++, positive, S/P ratio >100; +: weak positive, S/P ratio 60–99; –, negative, S/P ratio <60; IC, inconclusive, S/P ratio 60–70; NS,
not sampled. The same brand of colostrum replacer was used on all 3 farms. For the farms in Wales and England, it was possible to sample the
batch of colostrum powder being used; aliquots from each farm were BLV positive by AGIDT and ELISA. Reactions to passively acquired
antibodies would be expected to decrease and become undetectable. After exposure to virus and subsequent infection, antibody titers would
not wane to undetectable levels. Our results (Table) provide evidence that the serologic reactions reported here resulted from ingestion of
the colostrum replacer rather than BLV infection. The policy and international trade implications of such cases for Great Britain have been
discussed (5). To maintain the disease-free status of the country, it was necessary to follow up with these cases, which inconvenienced
farmers because of movement restrictions and, consequently, financial loss. The cases described were all linked by the brand of colostrum
used; however, our additional investigations found that other brands also tested BLV positive by AGIDT and thus could cause an effect
similar to that described here. These data would therefore be useful to any organization involved in BLV serologic surveillance. As a result
of this investigation, in March 2010 the European Union banned the import of calf colostrum from herds that are not EBL free. Although PCR
confirmed the presence of BLV proviral DNA in the colostrum, detection of such does not mean that the colostrum contained viable virus.
Retroviruses, including BLV, are heat labile; thus, it is unlikely that viable BLV would survive the spray-drying production process.
Whether other agents can survive warrants further investigation. Suggested citation for this article: Choudhury B, Finnegan C, Frossard J-P,
Venables C, Steinbach F. Colostrum replacer and bovine leukemia virus seropositivity in calves . Emerg Infect Dis . 2013 Jun [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1906.121523 We thank our colleagues at the Department of Virology, Laboratory Services Department, Information
Technology and the Reagent Production Unit at the Animal Health and Veterinary Laboratories Agency, Weybridge, UK, for their technical
assistance; and the Animal Health and Veterinary Laboratories Agency regional veterinary officers for providing case histories. This work
was funded by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs: Maintaining the Enzootic Bovine Leukosis Disease-Free Status in Great
Britain.
