Cytotoxic lymphomas comprise a spectrum of peripheral T-cell lymphomas that can have a initial or late cutaneous presentation. We describe a
46-year-old man from Cape Verde, with a dermatosis involving his face and trunk, consisting of monomorphic papules with a smooth surface and
both motor and sensory polyneuropathy.The hypothesis of leprosy was supported by the clinical and initial hystopathological findings and the
patient was referred to our hospital with suspected Hansen's disease. In the new skin and lymph node biopsies a lymphocyte population was
identified whose immunohystochemistry study allowed the diagnosis of T-cell lymphoma with expression of cytotoxic markers. The patient was
started on chemotherapy with initial remission of the skin lesions but, subsequently, progression of systemic disease. Os linfomas
citotóxicos compreendem um espectro de linfomas de células T periféricos e linfomas Natural Killer que podem ter expressão cutânea primária
ou secundária. Descrevemos o caso de um homem com 46 anos de idade, natural de Cabo Verde,com dermatose envolvendo a face e tronco
constituída por pápulas monomorfas superfície lisa e polineuropatia sensitivo motora.A hipótese de Hanseníase foi colocada suportada por
achados histopatológicos sugestivos sendo o doente referenciado à consulta de Doença de Hansen do nosso hospital. Em biopsia de pele e de
gânglio identificou-se proliferação linfocitária cujo estudo imunohistoquímico permitiu o diagnóstico de linfoma T com expressão de
marcadores citotóxicos. Iniciou quimioterapia verificando-se inicialmente remissão parcial das lesões cutâneas mas posteriormente a
progressão da doença sistémica. Cytotoxic cutaneous lymphomas are a group of lymphoproliferative disorders characterized by expression of
cytotoxic proteins (TIA-1, granzyme A or B or perforin). 1,2 The diagnosis of these conditions can sometimes be clinically and
histopathologically challenging. We describe a 46-year-old, black male patient, born in Cape Verde. He first noted, months prior to
presentation, a dermatosis that almost exclusively involved his face and trunk consisting of multiple small monomorphic papules with an
erythematous smooth surface. 1,2 The patient reported dysesthesia at the distal ends of both feet and paroxistical difficulty in mobilizing
both feet. These symptoms suggested the existence of a sensory motor polyneuropathy.A cutaneous biopsy was performed motivated by these
findings. The histopathological evaluation revealed perivascular and periadnexal inflammatory infiltration of nerve bundles with lymphocytic
permeation which, with simultaneous findings of cutaneous involvement and sensory motor polyneuropathy, could be consistent with the
diagnosis of leprosy. The patient was therefore referred for a consultation at the hospital regarding the possibility of Hansen's disease.
The physical examination revealed a dermatosis involving the face and the upper torso that consisted of multiple infracentimetric
monomorphic papules and plaques with a smooth erythematous surface (Figures 1 and 2). There was no hypoesthesia in relation to skin lesions.
Examination of ganglionic chains revealed several adenopathies below the chin and in axillary chains. The adenopathies that were found were
over one centimeter in diameter, with a hard consistency. Palpation of the abdomen revealed no masses or organomegaly. Clinical
presentation. Multiple small monomorphic papules on the face Clinical presentation (left sideof the face). Multiple small monomorphic
papules and plaques slightly infiltrateds The neurological examination did not reveal thickening or pain upon palpation of the nerve roots.
There was slight hypoesthesia at the distal end of both feet, with diminished thermal, tactile and pain sensitivity. The patient also
reported weight loss of 12 kg(>10%) during the past year which had never been taken into consideration. The patient denied any other
constitutional symptoms, including fever, anorexia and malaise. The supplementary study revealed: normocytic normochromic anemia(10.4 g/dL),
white blood cell count with lymphocytosis(3500) and thrombocytopenia (94000),VS 71mm in 1st hour, β2-microglobulin(8.0 mg/dL) and LDH(689
U/L) and negative results for HIV, HTLV, EBV. PCR applied to a biopsy performed from the synovial tissue proved negative for M. leprae. Body
axial tomography showed severe ganglion involvement of the axillary and inguinal lymph nodes and mild splenomegaly with multiple small
parenchymal nodules. The skin biopsy revealed diffuse lymphoid infiltration in the dermis composed of CD3, CD4 positive T-cells, some of
which had CD8 positivity (Figures 3,4 and 5). The axillary lymph node biopsy identified a lymphocytic proliferation composed of small cells
with CD2, CD3 positive cells and CD7, CD8, CD20 negative cells, and TIA expression allowing the diagnosis of T-cell lymphoma with cytotoxic
expression (Figure 6). The study of T-cell receptors rearrangement by PCR confirmed the monoclonality of the cell population based on the
analysis of gamma genes.The absence of typical clinical lesions and the typical histological markers of Hansen's disease, the successively
negative nasal smears and skin swabs, together with the PCR detection technique for M. leprae, allowed for the exclusion of a Hansen's
disease diagnosis. The evaluation by a neurologist allowed a correlation between lymphoma and demyelinating neuropathy to be characterized
as a rare paraneoplastic syndrome. Hystopatology (H&E). Dermal intense and difuse infiltration of lymph cells Immunochemistry study (CD3).
Lymph cell infiltrate showing CD3 positivity Immunochemistry (CD4). Lymph cells infiltrate showing CD4 positivity Immunochemistry study
(TiA). The immunochemistry study showing a difuse infiltrate of lymph cells with cytotoxic expression (TiA+) The patient was started on
chemotherapy with CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisolone), which led to partial remission of the cutaneous
lesions (Figure 6) but with subsequent loss of response. Second line therapeutic management with ESHAP (etoposide, methylprednisolone,
cytarabine and cisplatin ) was then initiated with no noticeable clinical response. The patient was then started on a CMOPP chemotherapy
regimen (cyclophosphamide, mechlorethamine, vincristine, procarbazine and prednisolone), but at 12 months follow-up there was invariable
progression of the systemic disease, resulting in the patient´s death. The heterogeneous cutaneous clinical presentation of T-cell
lymphomas, together with the frequent occurrence of nonspecific histological findings in cutaneous biopsies, creates significant diagnostic
difficulties. The cutaneous lymphoma classification is also a challenge, in addition to the problem that until a few years ago there was no
consensus between the WHO and the EORTC (European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer). 1,3 The new classification allows for
more uniformity regarding both the diagnosis and therapeutic approach to these lymphomas.4 In the case of our patient, there was already
systemic involvement at the date of diagnosis, and in these circumstances this lymphoma could not be classified as primary cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma. These lymphomas are characterized by a transient partial response to chemotherapy and by its association with a poor prognosis.
The demyelinating neuropathy has been otherwise described since lymphomas have been reported to occasionally involve the peripheral nervous
system. This damage is more often caused by non-Hodgkin T-cell lymphomas, the cells of which can infiltrate the nerve sheath and cause
axonal damage, or by an autoimmune process where antineuronal antibodies are directed against intracellular antigens. 5,6 Furthermore our
patient's lymphoma exhibited cytotoxic behavior characterized by the expression of molecules such as TIA, perforin and granzyme B. The
expression of these molecules is of great diagnostic use and helps the dermatologist to classify lymphoma; however, the use of these markers
lacks clinical and phenotypic specificity. 7 The surface markers expressed in malignant T-cells: CD2, CD3, CD4, CD25 and CD52 were the first
therapeutic targets to be identified. However, the presence of these receptors, even in normal T-cells, implies that therapy with monoclonal
antibodies or immunotoxins inevitably results in different degrees of immunosuppression. New classes of therapeutic agents have emerged,
particularly those that act by inhibiting histone deacetylase(HDAC).8,9 These molecules are intended to induce apoptosis in malignant
T-cells. Immuno modulators such as interferon and toll-like receptor agonists (TLR), also have a particularly important role in the
treatment of primary cutaneous lymphomas (CTCL).9 While most classical cytotoxic drugs have limited effectiveness in the treatment of
lymphomas, agents that inhibit the metabolism of purine and pyrimidine (nucleoside analogues) seem to have some additional efficacy in cases
of T-cell lymphoma.9,10 Clinical trials currently underway will better define therapeutic strategies for these lymphomas. We stress the
importance of this case due to the uncommon clinical presentation, in particular the simultaneous neurological and skin involvement that
required a thorough investigation of multiple differential diagnoses. This may ultimately result in a later diagnosis of Non-Hodgkin's
peripheral T-cytotoxic lymphoma. * Study conducted at the Curry Cabral Hospital - Central Lisbon Hospital Center EPE (HCC- CHLN) - Lisbon,
Portugal. Financial Support: none Conflict of Interests: none
