The authors discuss laparoscopic removal of an abdominal cerclage in a female patient who presented at 19 weeks with ruptured membranes. We
discuss laparoscopic removal of an abdominal cerclage in a 39-year-old woman, gravida 4, para 0, abortus 3, who presented at 19 weeks'
gestation with ruptured membranes. This patient had a failed previous vaginal cerclage. An abdominal cerclage was performed at the time of
abdominal myomectomy. A subsequent pregnancy was diagnosed, with ruptured membranes at 19 weeks' gestation, and the patient opted for
pregnancy termination. After laparoscopic removal of the cerclage, cervical laminaria were placed, and the patient underwent an
uncomplicated dilation and curettage procedure the following day. Abdominal cerclage was originally described by Benson and Durfee1 in 1965.
Most patients who have had recurrent second trimester pregnancy loss as a result of an incompetent cervix, now termed cervical
insufficiency, can be treated successfully with a transvaginal cerclage. A select group of patients who have recurrent pregnancy loss
despite a transvaginal cerclage or who have an anatomically physically disabled cervix, making vaginal cerclage placement impossible, may
benefit from the transabdominal approach.2–4 In the past, the major disadvantage of the transabdominal approach has been the necessity of 2
laparotomies: one associated with placement of the cerclage and the other with cesarean delivery.5 We recently reported our series of
successful abdominal cerclage procedures performed laparoscopically.6 Some disorders of pregnancy in the second trimester, before fetal
viability, warrant delivery. Previously, these women required either a laparotomy to remove the cerclage to allow vaginal delivery or a
hysterotomy for delivery while leaving the cerclage in situ. We describe a successful laparoscopic removal of an abdominal cerclage in a
patient with ruptured membranes at 19 weeks' gestation. To date, removing a cerclage suture laparoscopically at this gestational age has
been accomplished only one previous time.7 The patient was a 39-year-old woman, gravida 4, para 0, abortus 3, who presented at 19 weeks'
gestation with spontaneous ruptured membranes. She had a poor pregnancy history, including a spontaneous miscarriage at 8 weeks with her
first pregnancy and a loss at 16 weeks in her second pregnancy that was attributed to cervical insufficiency. In her third pregnancy,
despite a prophylactic McDonald cerclage that was placed early in pregnancy, she had another loss at 16 weeks. The decision was made to
place an abdominal cerclage before another pregnancy. The patient was noted to have multiple uterine fibroids, including one 3 × 3–cm
fibroid at the cervical isthmus. At the time of laparotomy, a myomectomy was performed to remove the 2 fibroids, and the abdominal cerclage
was placed using a 5-mm Mersilene band. The patient conceived within 3 months of her cerclage placement and had an uneventful early
pregnancy. Obstetric ultrasonongraphy at 17 weeks revealed a cervical length of 47 mm and no funneling. At 19 weeks, spontaneous ruptured
membranes were confirmed. She was counseled about the options of pregnancy termination versus expectant management. She elected pregnancy
termination and preferred dilatation and curettage over induction of labor. To achieve adequate cervical dilation, removal of the abdominal
cerclage was necessary. We scheduled the patient for a laparoscopic removal of the cerclage to be followed by placement of a cervical
laminaria and a dilation and curettage procedure the following day after sufficient time had elapsed for the laminaria to affect cervical
dilation. While under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a lithotomy position. The patient's uterus was 1 cm below the umbilicus.
A 10-mm incision was made vertically in the navel, and a Hasson trocar was placed through the umbilicus under direct visualization. We
placed two 5-mm trocars bilaterally, slightly above the level of the umbilical incision, and a single accessory port was placed
suprapubically. Initial survey of the abdomen revealed moderate adhesions, which were lysed (Figure 1). A 5-mm, 3-blade laparoscopic fan was
instrumental for retraction and manipulation of both the bowel and the uterus because this uterus was soft as would be expected in a 19-week
gravid uterus. The entire pelvis was filled with the gravid uterus, and we needed all of the ports. The port positions were instrumental in
finding the proper angle to dissect and locate the previously placed abdominal cerclage. Dense adhesions in deep pelvis. After displacement
of the uterus to the right and somewhat posteriorly and advancing the laparoscope anterior to the uterine fundus, we identified the
vesicouterine reflection at the level of the internal cervical os. It required careful dissection with laparoscopic scissors and Maryland
forceps along the left lateral vesicouterine reflection, undermining and lifting the bladder off of this portion of the lower uterine
segment. Proceeding posteriorly was not an option because of the size of the uterus. This dissection uncovered the Mersilene knot that was
positioned just anterolateral to the left uterine artery. We mention this to emphasize that at this gestation age, the lower uterine segment
is soft and difficult to manage without incising into either the bladder or the uterine artery laterally. The knot was then grasped with a
blunt grasper to elevate the suture. Laparoscopic scissors were gently placed under the single strand of the suture and the suture was
transected. We removed the suture and knot. Blood loss was minimal and we ended her surgery. We then placed 10 laminaria in her cervix in
preparation for her dilation and curettage procedure that was scheduled for the following day. We have previously published a case report11
of a successful laparoscopic removal of an abdominal cerclage in a 17-week-gestation pregnancy. We reconfirm in this case report that in an
even larger uterus at 19 weeks, an operative laparoscopy is a viable alternative for removing a cerclage previously placed by laparotomy. An
important technical aspect of the case was placement of the trocars.10,11 We placed the lateral trocars at least as high as the navel
incision (Figures 2, 3, and 4). This allowed us to achieve the proper angle to address the depth and width of the larger uterus, which can
block the visualization of the camera and trocars when they are placed through an infraumbilical port. In this case, we were able to
displace the uterus posteriorly and lateral enough to develop a bladder flap, accessing the space of Retzius to ensure we had palpated and
located the area of the suture and the knot. We were able to grasp the knot and elevate and transect the suture while firmly holding the
knot. We then removed the entire knot and suture with good hemostasis. The lateral ports had been placed at a level slightly higher than the
umbilicus under direct visualization to gain access to the cervical isthmus and bladder flap. In an earlier article,12 in a pregnancy at 17
weeks, a posterior approach was discussed. In this case, at 19 weeks' gestation, the uterus was too large to displace anteriorly or
laterally enough to gain access to the posterior area between the uterosacral ligaments. We mention this because at the time of this surgery
(10/27/2010), we were reporting the second case of removal of an abdominal cerclage as far as 19 weeks' gestation.7 This dissection was
difficult to perform, and we would not recommend the posterior approach at 19 weeks' gestation. Uterus at 19+ weeks (our patient). Example
of uterus at 16 weeks. Example of uterus at 20 weeks. An abdominal cerclage can be removed laparoscopically in the second trimester of
pregnancy. At 19 weeks' gestation, this surgery requires a clear operative strategy and superior laparoscopic skills.
