Primary lung cancer is extremely rare in children, while secondary malignancies reportedly develop in 2% to 3% of pediatric osteosarcoma
survivors. A 14-year-old girl was found to have two pulmonary lesions on computed tomography. These tumors had developed 1 year after
osteosarcoma surgery. Segmentectomy of right segment 1 and wedge resection of right segment 9 were performed. Both lesions were completely
resected and postoperative histopathological examination revealed metastasis of osteosarcoma and bronchioloalveolar carcinoma, respectively.
Bronchioloalveolar carcinoma may present as a solitary pulmonary lesion indistinguishable from a metastatic lesion and should be included in
the differential diagnosis of pulmonary lesions in survivors of pediatric cancer. Thus, pulmonary lesions identified in these patients
should be biopsied or resected to establish a histological diagnosis. Osteosarcoma accounts for approximately 3% of all pediatric
malignancies. With current multi-modal approaches, 70% of patients can achieve long-term survival . The lungs are a common site of
recurrence, and close follow-up with imaging studies is mandatory . The differential diagnosis of new lung lesions in survivors of
osteosarcoma usually includes disease recurrence versus inflammatory lesions, such as granulomatous disease , but the possibility of a
second malignancy is seldom considered. Herein, we present a surgical case of bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC) found simultaneously with
pulmonary metastasis of osteosarcoma. The patient was a 14-year-old girl. A 14-year-old girl was found to have an abnormal shadow on a chest
X-ray during postoperative follow-up for osteosarcoma of the upper end of the left tibia (Figure 1A), and was referred to our department in
June 2011. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a 35-mm tumor in right segment 1 (S1) and a 3-mm ground glass opacity (GGO) in right
segment 9 (S9) (Figures 1B, 2B). Positron emission tomography (PET) showed fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake with a maximum standardized
uptake value of 7.8 only in the right S1 tumor without evidence of metastatic foci elsewhere in the body (Figure 1C). Blood chemistry data
were unremarkable, and the carcinoembryonic antigen and squamous cell carcinoma-related antigen were within normal limits. She was otherwise
in good health. Her family history was unremarkable and negative for cancer. Radiological findings of pulmonary metastasis of osteosarcoma.
(A) Chest X-ray shows an abnormal shadow in the right upper lung field. (B) Chest CT reveals a 35-mm tumor with a relatively smooth surface
in right S1. (C) PET shows FDG uptake by the tumor. As to the past history of this patient, from January 2010 to June 2010, under a
diagnosis of osteosarcoma of the left tibia, she had received chemotherapy, including cisplatin + pirarubicin, high dose methotrexate, and
high dose ifosfamide. Then, wide resection of the upper end of the left tibia was performed in July 2010. Although chest CT at that time
showed no tumor in the right S1, a tiny and extremely faint shadow was observed in the right S9 (Figure 2A). Radiological findings of
bronchioloalveolar carcinoma. (A) Chest CT just before the left tibia surgery showed an extremely faint, small shadow in right S9. (B) When
the patient was referred to our department 1 year later, chest CT revealed a 3-mm GGO at the same site. The right S1 tumor had a relatively
smooth surface and showed rapid growth. PET showed FDG uptake, and pulmonary metastasis of osteosarcoma was suspected. On the other hand,
the right S9 GGO lesion showed little tendency to grow (Figure 2), and there was no FDG uptake on PET. Given also the morphology of the
lesion and the patient’s age, we considered the GGO to likely be an inflammatory lesion. At surgery, right S1 segmentectomy and wedge
resection of right S9 were performed. The right S1 tumor was firm, with a diameter of 3.7 cm, and the cut surface was white and glistening
(Figure 3A). Many cavities containing mucus were observed inside the tumor. Postoperative histopathological examination revealed spindle-
shaped cells arranged densely in fascicles (Figure 4A). These cells exhibited abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and marked nuclear
pleomorphism. The tumor tissues were in part admixed with eosinophilic osteoid stroma (Figure 4A). The histology of the tumor was similar to
that of the osteosarcoma resected previously. On the other hand, the right S9 lesion was an aerated whitish tumor, 3 mm in diameter with
macroscopically ill-defined margins (Figure 3B). Histopathological examination revealed the alveolar walls to be densely covered with
atypical cuboidal cells with enlarged nuclei, forming a bronchioloalveolar pattern (Figure 4B,C). There was no interstitial infiltration of
the tumor cells. Cytologically, the cells were characterized by finely granular chromatin and conspicuous nucleoli, with atypia. Thus, the
lesion was diagnosed as non-mucinous and localized BAC without foci of collapse or invasive growth. The tumor cells were positive for
thyroid transcription factor-1, pan-cytokeratin, and epithelial membrane antigen. The MIB-1 labeling index was low at approximately 1%. The
resected margins of both the right S1 and the right S9 tumor were free of malignant cells. Gross examination of the resected specimens. (A)
Right S1 tumor. (B) Right S9 lesion. Arrow indicates the S9 lesion. Histopathological findings. (A) Microscopic examination of the right S1
tumor confirmed a sarcoma composed of fascicular proliferation of spindle-shaped cells. (B, C) In the right S9 lesion, atypical cuboidal
cells grew densely along alveolar walls, forming a bronchioloalveolar pattern. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course, and was
discharged on the 7th postoperative day. Chemotherapy with high-dose ifosfamide has been performed at the Department of Orthopedics of our
hospital. At present, 16 months after lung surgery, she remains recurrence free. The incidence of primary pediatric lung cancers is
extremely low . Histologically, bronchial adenoma (40%), bronchogenic carcinoma (17%), and pleuropulmonary blastoma (16%) are the common
types . BAC is one such rare form of pediatric pulmonary malignancy, but no clear association between BAC and environmental exposure has
been established . One identified association is a link between BAC and congenital adenomatoid cystic malformation Type I, particularly with
mucinous metaplasia . Sporadic cases of BAC developing as a secondary malignancy have been reported among survivors of pediatric
malignancies, including Ewing sarcoma, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, hepatoblastoma, and testicular teratocarcinoma . As in this case, the occurrence
of BAC in a child with another primary malignant tumor treated with chemotherapy or radiation therapy raises the possibility that BAC is
linked to therapeutic or immunosuppressive factor, in addition to a genetic predisposition. Although the overall incidence of second
malignant neoplasms in survivors of pediatric osteosarcomas is relatively low, it is higher compared with the expected incidence of
malignant neoplasm in the general population . Institutional reviews have found the rate of second malignant neoplasms in survivors of
pediatric osteosarcomas to be between 2% and 3% (Table 1) . Pratt et al. reviewed 334 patients with osteosarcoma and found that second
malignant neoplasms had developed in nine (2.6%) . Anug et al. reviewed 509 patients with osteosarcoma and documented second malignant
neoplasms in 14 (2.7%) . No cases with primary lung neoplasms were found in either of these reviews . In a review of 1,205 patients with
osteosarcoma of the extremities, Bacci et al. described 26 (2.2%) who had developed a second malignant neoplasm . Two of these 26 patients
developed lung cancers, one adenocarcinoma and one squamous cell carcinoma at 4 and 9 years, respectively, after the osteosarcoma diagnosis.
Several studies have demonstrated that female gender and being at least 10 years of age, as in our case, proved to be independent risk
factors for the development of a second malignant neoplasm . Studies on second malignant neoplasms in childhood osteosarcoma survivors SMN,
second malignant neoplasms. Case reports on primary lung cancer arising in survivors of pediatric osteosarcoma are shown in Table 2. Six
cases have been reported to date. In all six, the diagnosis was confirmed by surgical resection of the pulmonary tumor. The majority of
these patients were at least 10 years old. There were three boys and three girls. The histological type was adenocarcinoma in all cases
(including BAC in three cases). Case reports on primary lung cancer in childhood osteosarcoma survivors Icard et al. reported the 5-year
survival rate for stage I pulmonary lung cancer in young patients to be 70% which is not quite different from that for lung cancer in
elderly patients, and that the survival rate depends on disease stage rather than age . Thus, surgical resection is the treatment of choice
for pediatric BAC, as for adult BAC. In our case, additional resection was not performed after wedge resection based on the pathological
examination results. Given that BAC or pulmonary metastasis of osteosarcoma may occur metachronously in the future, meticulous outpatient
follow-up is planned. In conclusion, we have described a very rare BAC in a 14-year-old girl with recurrent osteosarcoma. It is interesting
that most of these rare pediatric BAC have occurred in children who had another malignant tumor, raising the possibility of a link between
these entities. Additionally, our present patient illustrates the importance of establishing a histopathological diagnosis for suspected
pulmonary metastases in children with known primary malignant tumors. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the
publication of this case presentation and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief
of this journal. BAC: Bronchioloalveolar carcinoma; CT: Computed tomography; FDG: Fluorodeoxyglucose; GGO: Ground glass opacity; PET:
Positron emission tomography; S1: Segment 1; S9: Segment 9. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. MO and TG wrote the
manuscript. MO and TG performed surgery. YH carried out the pathological examination. RN and MK were involved in the final editing. All
authors approved the final manuscript.
