Cardiac myxomas are the most common type of benign cardiac tumors and most of them occur in the left atrium but the biatrial myxoma is
uncommon. We present a rare case of giant biatrial myxoma nearly obstructing the orifice of the inferior vena cava. A 58-year old woman
presented with exertional dyspnea and intermittent chest discomfort. The non-pedunculated tumor involved most of the interatrial septum and
extended from the orifice of the inferior vena cava to the displaced mitral annulus and the lower left pulmonary vein. The resected specimen
weighed 76 gram and measured 80 × 40 × 30 mm. She did not complain of dyspnea or show any sign of recurrence by echocardiography during the
2-year follow-up period. Cardiac myxoma is the most common type of primary cardiac neoplasm and accounts for 30% to 50% of all primary
tumors of the heart with an annual incidence of 0.5 per million populations . Over 70% of all cardiac myxomas originate from the left and
18% from the right atrium. Biatrial myxomas account for less than 2.5% of all cardiac myxomas . We present biatrial myxoma, which occupies
both atria without pedunculating mass. A 58-year old woman presented with exertional dyspnea and intermittent chest discomfort. She had no
past medical or familial history, and physical and neurological examinations, chest radiography, and electrocardiography findings were
normal, although ESR was high at 54 mm/hr. However, echocardiography revealed a huge, immobile mass without pedunculation occupying both
atria (Figure 1A). Due to its atypical characteristics and position, we performed a magnetic resonance imaging scan. Images showed a well-
defined mass within the inferior portions of both atria with high signal intensity on T2 weighted images, slightly high signal intensity on
T1 weighted images, no fat suppression on fat saturated images, and strong peripheral enhancement on gadolinium enhanced images. In
addition, multiple calcified lesions of low intensity were noted within the tumor and the coronary sinus was inferiorly displaced by the
mass (Figure 1B,C). Surgery was performed via conventional median sternotomy. During cardiopulmonary bypass, IVC cannulation was performed
through the left femoral vein instead of the lower right atrium because the inferior vena cava was almost totally obstructed and the distal
embolization should be prevented. The tumor was resected and the interatrial septal defect was closed with pericardium. The non-pedunculated
tumor involved most of the interatrial septum and extended from the orifice of the inferior vena cava to the displaced mitral annulus and
the lower left pulmonary vein. The resected specimen weighed 76 gram and measured 80 × 40 × 30 mm and was not gelatinous but solid. The one
third of the right side of the specimen protruded into the right atrium, covered with endothelium but the two third of the left side of the
specimen was attached to the base of the left atrium. The cut surface showed the multi-focal calcification and hemorrhage. Histologic
examination confirmed myxoma without any other malignancy (Figure 2A,B,C). The patient was discharged without any complications, and during
the 2-year follow-up period, she did not complain of dyspnea or show any sign of recurrence by echocardiography. The large tumor, occupying
both atria, was shown in the transthoracic echocardiography (A) and the magnetic resonance scan (B,C). The myxoma was not gelatinous but
solid (A) and showed the multi-focal calcification and hemorrhage (B,C). Cardiac myxoma is usually polypoid and pedunculated lesions,
arising from endocardium . In contrast, other cardiac tumors, such as, lipoma and rhabdomyoma are typically not pedunculated. The majority
of cardiac myxomas manifest as a gelatinous, smooth, round mass with a glistening surface . Imperio et al. reported that biatrial myxomas
had two stalks arising from the same area of the interatrial septum and growing in opposite directions toward the right and left atria .
Irani et al. reported that there was no evidence of extension across the interatrial septum, thereby favoring contemporaneous origin of two
separate tumors , whereas Ha et al. described two distinct types of myxoma, that is, a round type, characterized by a solid texture and
round shape with a non-mobile surface (52%); and a polypoid type, characterized by a soft texture and an irregular shape with a mobile
surface (48%) . Right-sided myxomas are rare, but typically attach on a broad base and are more likely to be calcified than left-sided
lesions . In our case, the biatrial myxoma was not pedunculated, was attached on a broad base, and its surface was hard and solid with
calcifications. We speculated that the myxoma grew to nearly obstruct the orifice of the IVC and that its root grow predominantly toward the
left-side. This speculation proved consistent with surgical findings, as two thirds of the left-side of the specimen was attached to the
base of the left atrium. The symptom of right side heart failure might have been erroneous because the IVC was not entirely occluded. Budd-
Chiari syndrome can rarely develop by hepatic inferior vena cava and portal vein thrombosis, caused by a large myxoma of the right atrium .
The incidence of biatrial myxoma is rare but cardiopulmonary problems and neurologic complications can be prevented by surgical resection.
Although the rate of recurrence is less than 5% after complete resection, patients should be monitored routinely by cardiac
echocardiography. The Biatrial myxoma is uncommon and could be considered in the differential diagnosis of other cardiac tumors with several
imaging modalities. Prognosis is excellent after surgical resection. Written and informed consent obtained for publication of this case
report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by editor-in- chief of this journal. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. CP and CC collected the data and wrote the manuscript. JK, YJ, JL, and KP participated in the
design of the manuscript and they revised and critically reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
