A persistent primitive olfactory artery (PPOA) is an extremely rare variation of the proximal anterior cerebral artery (ACA). The PPOA is
connected to the distal ACA, ethmoidal artery, or both. I describe one patient with a PPOA connected to the middle cerebral artery (MCA). I
analyzed the radiological characteristics of this anomalous vessel in this patient, who presented with headache. Computed
tomography–angiography revealed an abnormal vessel in the patient, which originated from the distal ACA and ran anteromedially along the
olfactory tract; it then made an abrupt turn and became the MCA. A PPOA connected to the MCA has been described in only two patients,
including my own, in the English-language literature. Persistent primitive olfactory artery (PPOA) is extremely rare. The PPOA variant 1
originates at the terminal portion of the internal carotid artery (ICA) and runs anteriorly along the olfactory tract toward the crista
galli. The distal portion of the PPOA makes an acute angle to the distal anterior cerebral artery (ACA) and supplies the normal ACA
territory . Whereas PPOA variant 1 involves the ACA, variant 2 passes through the cribriform plate to supply the nasal cavity as the
ethmoidal artery. The PPOA variant 2 does not involve the ACA. The PPOA is classified into these two variant forms according to its vascular
territory . Horie’s group reported another variant of PPOA that constitutes a transitional type between variants 1 and 2 that partially
involves the ACA. I experienced a patient with a PPOA connected to the distal middle cerebral artery (MCA). This type of PPOA has been
reported in only one other patient . Here, I describe the computed tomography (CT)–angiographic findings for this type of PPOA. A 78-year-
old woman presented with headache. CT–angiography revealed a right PPOA. The vessel originated from the right distal A1, ran along the right
olfactory tract toward the olfactory bulb, and made an abrupt posterior turn, ultimately becoming the distal MCA. In this patient, I
identified the normal A1 and a short anterior communicating artery (Fig. 1). Her headache was relieved with medication.Fig. 1Computed
tomography–angiography reveals a right persistent primitive olfactory artery. This vessel is originated from the right distal anterior
cerebral artery (ACA), runs in an anterior direction along the olfactory tract, and makes an abrupt posterior turn. It then becomes the
distal middle cerebral artery. I identify a short anterior communicating artery and a normal right proximal ACA (a). The anomalous vessel
contacts the anterior cranial fossa (b). 1 Right middle cerebral artery, 2 right A1, 3 right A2, 4 left A2, 5 left A1, 6 persistent
primitive olfactory artery Computed tomography–angiography reveals a right persistent primitive olfactory artery. This vessel is originated
from the right distal anterior cerebral artery (ACA), runs in an anterior direction along the olfactory tract, and makes an abrupt posterior
turn. It then becomes the distal middle cerebral artery. I identify a short anterior communicating artery and a normal right proximal ACA
(a). The anomalous vessel contacts the anterior cranial fossa (b). 1 Right middle cerebral artery, 2 right A1, 3 right A2, 4 left A2, 5 left
A1, 6 persistent primitive olfactory artery PPOA is extremely rare. Nozaki’s group classified these arteries into two variants and provided
an explanation of the embryological development of PPOA. Horie’s group reported PPOA variant 3, which is a transitional type between
variants 1 and 2. I encountered yet another variant of PPOA, so I reviewed the literature and analyzed the radiological characteristics of
PPOA. In PPOA variant 1, the anomalous artery arises from the ICA, runs along the olfactory tract, and makes a hairpin turn to supply the
distal ACA territory. The normal A1 is absent. A long or absent anterior communicating artery is observed because of the large distance
between the contralateral A1 and the PPOA. However, one patient reported to have PPOA variant 1 had a normal A1 and a normal anterior
communicating artery . In PPOA variant 2, the artery arises from the normal A1 and passes through the cribriform plate to supply the nasal
cavity as the ethmoidal artery. Three cases of PPOA variant 2 have been reported, in all of whom a normal A1 was present [1, 5, 7]. Horie’s
group reported PPOA variant 3, which is a transitional type between variants 1 and 2. The anomalous artery of PPOA variant 3 has two
branches: the superior branch forming the callosomarginal branch of the ACA, and the anterior branch extending toward the cribriform plate,
with an anastomosis with the ethmoidal artery. The type of PPOA observed in my patient had some interesting characteristics. The patient had
a normal A1, from which the PPOA originated before running along the olfactory tract. The distal portion of the PPOA then made an abrupt
acute angle and ran into the Sylvian fissure. This PPOA supplied the distal MCA territory. This variant is very similar to case 5 in
Uchino’s group who described 14 cases of PPOA after a retrospective review of 3,626 magnetic resonance angiographies. Embryologically, the
primitive olfactory artery (POA) is the rostral division of the primitive ICA . The POA terminates in the nasal fossa and the secondary
artery constitutes the medial olfactory artery, which supplies the olfactory bulb. The medial olfactory artery becomes the ACA proper,
whereas the terminal portion of the POA usually regresses. Lateral olfactory branches of the POA include the recurrent artery of the
Heubner, anterior choroidal artery, lateral striate artery, and later MCA. Recurrent artery of Heubner is not the remnant of the POA. When
the POA maintains its embryological course along the olfactory tract, it is called a ‘PPOA’. The most important point in the definition of
PPOA is the embryological course of the anomalous artery along the olfactory tract . The PPOA vessel can be divided into four variants,
according to the distal vascular territories it serves. Variant 1 supplies the distal ACA territory, variant 2 forms an anastomosis with the
ethmoidal artery, and variant 3 connects with the callosomarginal and ethmoidal arteries. The new variant seen in my patient supplies the
MCA territory, as an accessory MCA (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Drawings of the four variants of persistent primitive olfactory artery (PPOA). PPOA
variant 1 connects with the distal anterior cerebral artery (a); variant 2 makes an anastomosis with the ethmoidal artery (b); variant 3
supplies the callosomarginal and ethmoidal arteries (c); and the new variant observed in my patient connects to the accessory middle
cerebral artery (MCA) (d). AchoA anterior choroidal artery, PcomA posterior communicating artery, ICA internal carotid artery, ACA anterior
cerebral artery, OphA ophthalmic artery. Reproduced with permission from Drawings of the four variants of persistent primitive olfactory
artery (PPOA). PPOA variant 1 connects with the distal anterior cerebral artery (a); variant 2 makes an anastomosis with the ethmoidal
artery (b); variant 3 supplies the callosomarginal and ethmoidal arteries (c); and the new variant observed in my patient connects to the
accessory middle cerebral artery (MCA) (d). AchoA anterior choroidal artery, PcomA posterior communicating artery, ICA internal carotid
artery, ACA anterior cerebral artery, OphA ophthalmic artery. Reproduced with permission from Aneurysm is rarely seen at the hairpin turn of
the PPOA, probably because of hemodynamic stress . A follow-up study is required in patients with PPOA to determine the risk of an aneurysm
at the hairpin turn of the PPOA, especially in young patients. This work was supported by research grant from an Inje University College of
Medicine. The author declares no conflict of interest.
