Extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma(NKTCL), nasal type, occurring primarily in the prostate gland, is extremely rare. We present a case of
primarily prostatic NKTCL in a 59-year-old man suffering from dysuria. Histological examinations revealed that diffused, large-sized,
pleomorphic lymphocytes were arranged in an angiocentric distribution with large areas of geographic necroses. Additionally, the prostatic
glands were diffusely infiltrated by heteromorphous lymphocytes forming lymphoepithelial lesions. The tumor cells were strongly expressed
CD3ϵ, CD56, TIA-1, granzyme B and EBV-encoded RNAs. And interestingly, the lymphoid cells were also strongly immunoreactive with CD30. A
rearrangement study showed T-cell receptor γ-chain gene rearrangement with monoclonal appearance. Though postoperative combination of
chemotherapy was given, the patient died four months later. Our observation and other literatures indicate that extremely rare NKTCLs
unusually express CD30. TCR gene rearrangement existed in some NKTCL, suggesting that a subset of NKTCL may be a mixed NK/T-cell
differentiation. The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/9671878568932824.
Extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma, nasal type (NKTCL) is well known as an aggressive tumor that is characterized by vascular damage and
destruction, prominent geographic necrosis, and associated with Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV). The most common sites involve the upper
aerodigestive tract, with the nasal cavity being the prototypic site. The extranasal sites that NKTCL favors include skin, gastrointestinal
tract, and soft tissues . The NKTCL involving prostate is very rare . Primary NKTCL has been not reported. Here, we report a case of primary
prostate NKTCL in a 59-year-old man with CD30 positive expression and T-cell receptor γ-chain gene rearrangement. A 59-year-old man suffered
from low fever for one month, increased frequency of urination and dysuria for approximately a week. A computed tomography (CT) scan
revealed benign hyperplasia in the prostrate. Therefore, a routine procedure of transurethral resection of prostate was conducted. After the
diagnosis of NKTCL, since there was a great possibility of dissemination of other sites’ NKTCL, the patient was referred to a whole body
positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) study to search for a potential primary tumor, but no other abnormality was found.
The lesion was proved primarily occurred in prostate and just in stageI. However, despite three courses of chemotherapy were given, the
patient died after four months with wide dissemination of the tumor and rapidly deteriorated clinical symptoms. Tissues were routinely fixed
in 10% neutral buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. Three micrometer-thick sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin.
Immunohistochemical analyses were performed using the ChemMate Envision/HRP Kit (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark). Antibodies used in this study
were CK, PSA, PSAP, P504S, Vimentin, LCA, CD2, CD3ϵ, CD7, CD4, CD8, CD56, CD30, ALK, TIA-1, granzyme-B, CD20, CD79a, CD138, CD68, TdT, and
ki-67. The antibodies were obtained from Dako Cytomation (Carpinteria, CA) and Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). Slides were
dewaxed and rehydrated routinely and then were treated with 10 mmol citrate buffer (pH 6.0) in a microwave for antigen retrieval. After
incubation with diluted primary antibodies, slides were treated with the ChemMate Envision/HRP Kit for 30 minutes at room temperature
followed by development with diaminobenzidine (DAB) for visualization. In situ hybridization(ISH) was performed to detect the Epstein-Barr
virus encoded RNAs(EBERs) (DIG-AP, A300 K.9901; PanPath, Netherlands). Detection process was conducted according to manufacturer’s
instructions. For cytogenetic analysis, the paraffin tissue DNA was prepared with a tissue DNA extraction and purification kit (Dneasy TM
Tissue Kit, Qiagene, CA). T-cell receptor rearrangement studies were performed. Two sets of primers (tube A, 145–255 bp; tube B, 80-220bp)
were used to amplify the rearranged T-cell receptor (TCR)-γ gene. A T cell lymphoma case with a known monoclonal rearrangement was used as a
positive control, a non-lymphoid and hematopoietic tumor was used as a negative control, and a reaction without template DNA was
simultaneously run as a blank control. β-actin was amplified as an internal control. The detection process was conducted by methods
described previously . The microscopic findings of the prostate revealed the lesion was mainly infiltrated by intermediate- to large-sized
tumor cells with angiocentric and angiodestructive growth pattern. The prostate gland damage was also noted in the lesion. The tumor cells
had irregular or oval, hyperchromatic nuclei with one to several prominent nucleoli, accompanying notable pathological mitosis and apoptosis
(Figure 1a-f). The tumor cells expressed LCA, CD3ϵ, CD2, CD7, CD30, and CD56, perforin, TIA-1, rather than CK, PSA, PSAP, P504S, Vimentin,
CD79a, CD20, CD4, CD8, and ALK (Figure 2). Ki67 was expressed in nearly 90% of the tumor cells. EBERs signals were detected diffusely in
nuclei of the tumor cells (Figure 3). Based on these results, the diagnosis of NKTCL with CD30 expression was made. The rearrangement study
showed TCRG gene rearrangement with monoclonal appearance (Figure 4). Histological examination. (a) Under low magnification, the tumor
diffuses with the large areas of necrosis (H&E staining, original magnification × 2). (b) The normal areas of prostate near the tumor (H&E
staining, original magnification × 4). (c) Tumor cells invade vessel wall seriously (H&E staining. original magnification × 20). (d) Glands
are destroyed by tumor cells (H&E staining. Original magnification × 20). (e, f) The tumor cells were large with one to several prominent
nucleoli, accompanying notable pathological mitosis and apoptosis (H&E staining. Original magnification × 40). Immunohistochemical results.
(a) Remnant gland epithelial cells were positive for CK (SP, original magnification × 40). (b) LCA positive expression for tumor cells (SP,
original magnification × 40). (c-e) Tumor cells were positive for CD3, CD2 and CD56, respectively (SP, original magnification × 40). (f)
Tumor cells were positive for CD30 (SP, original magnification × 40). EBERs positive expression in tumor cells (→) (ISH, original
magnification × 40). Multiplex PCR for T-cell receptor c-chain gene using 6% polypropylene gel electrophoresis.Lane 1, DNA Marker. Lane 2
monoclonal(positive) control of tube A. Lane 3 polyclonal(negative) control of tube A. Lane 4 blank control of tube A. Lane 5 monoclonal
T-cell receptor c-chain gene rearrangement in reproducible duplicate of tube A. Lane 6 monoclonal(positive) control of tube B. Lane 7
polyclonal(negative) control of tube B. Lane 8 blank control of tube B. Lane 9 monoclonal T-cell receptor c-chain gene rearrangement in
reproducible duplicate of tube B. Lane 10 β-actin. Besides of prostatic adenocarcinoma, there are a few other types of neoplasms occurring
in prostate which are difficult to determine their primary origins, such as prostatic squamous carcinoma . Lymphomas of prostate, either
primary or secondary, are very rare. The types are mainly consisted of B-cell lymphomas , including diffuse large B-cell non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma (DLBL) , mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma , and mantle cell lymphomas . Only three cases of T-cell lymphomas
involving the prostate have been reported, but none of them was primary . According to the criteria of Bostwick , primary prostatic lymphoma
could be diagnosed subject to the fulfillment of the following conditions: primary symptoms are attributed to prostatic enlargement; the
disease is almost localized to the prostate; and, NKTCL diagnosis does not include lymph nodes, liver, spleen and other organs in 1-month.
The symptoms of the present case were only associated with prostatic hyperplasia, and no tumor was detected in other organs through the
systemic PET-CT detection. In this manner, the primary lymphoma of prostate was confirmed. The tumor showed typical angiocentric and
angiodestructive growth patten, a typical immunophenotype expressing CD56, CD3ϵand EBERs positive detection with ISH. Collectively, the
lesion was best recognized as NKTCL. Cell morphology of NKTCL is comprehensive. Most cases comprise middle cells mixed a few small- and
large-sized cells, and usually do not have nucleoli. The present case is mainly composed of large or anaplastic cells containing several
nucleoli. This tissue change may indicate a poor prognosis . Expression of CD30, an important marker for anaplastic large-cell lymphomas, in
NKTCL is rare. One case of CD30+ NKTCL occurring on skin was reported in 2008 . In that case, Strong CD30, CD3ϵand CD56 immunoreactivities
were noted in large atypical mononuclear cells. That patient died within 8 months after the onset of skin lesions. In another report, fine-
needle aspiration of an large adrenal mass and CSF cytology showed that large atypical cells were positive for CD30, CD43, and CD56. The
patient also died a few days after the final diagnosis was achieved though with high dose intravenous dexamethasone . The case in the
present study also revealed diffusely CD30 expression in large tumor cells. According to these cases, it is speculated that NKTCL with large
cells can express CD30 and indicate a worse prognosis. But more cases are necessary to prove it. In 2013, 17/40 cases CD30-positive were
found in a report of 73 cases at MD Anderson cancer center, but had no further discussion about clinical threatment and prognosis . The
rearrangement TCR genes is an important supplement to the diagnosis of T-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma. TCR genes are clonally rearranged in
most cases of PTCL, NOS , while only a small proportion of NKTCLs show clonal rearrangement . However, some studies identified monoclonal
TCRG gene rearrangement in a significantly higher proportion of NKTCLs, suggesting a mixed NK/T-cell differentiation in a subset of these
tumors . The present case maybe belong in this subset. Though with characteristic microscopic finds and Immunohistochemical expression,
differential diagnosis is requisite before making a definite NKTCL, since prostatic NKTCL is so rare. Poorly differentiated carcinoma with
diffuse tumor cells might represent some histological similarity with NKTCL, but it usually dose not display angiocentric distribution with
large geographic necroses and lymphoepithelial lesions, and it often can be found some heteromorphic glands. Immunohistochemical results
show expression of epithelial markers such as CK, CK8/18 and PSA et al., rather than lymphocyte ones. Another rare tumor, prostatic stromal
sarcoma, is often showed pervasive small and medium-sized round cells around the residual glands too . It is suspiciously derived from
mesenchymal pluripotent stem cells in the prostatic stroma and usually express CD10, CD34 and PR. The case reported the possibility of NK/T
cell lymphoma primarily occurring in prostate. Compared with that of other organs, the prognosis of the prostate disease is also poor. The
prognoses of those tumors mainly comprised of big cells with CD30 positive expression are quite unclear because of rare cases. The
rearrangement of TCR genes in NKTCL suggests a mixed NK/T-cell differentiation in a subset of these tumors. It is well known the prognosis
of prostatic adenocarcinoma depend on its Gleason score, positive surgical margin(PSM), perineural invasion (PNI), and abnormal expression
of some genes . Nevertheless, these items are not fit with other less happened neoplasms in prostate, such as lymphoma. Though the primarily
prostatic NKTCL is very rare, its accurate diagnosis is medically significant because it is highly aggressive and its clinical prognosis is
as poor as ones in other sites. Its treatment is supposed to take chemical therapy as done as NKTCL of other organs, instead of traditional
androgen deprivation therapy for prostatic carcinomas. Usually, diagnosis procedure for a primarily prostatic CD30 positive NKTCL includes
the following steps: 1. H&E staining reveals diffuse infiltrated large-sized or anaplastic tumor cells with remarkable apoptosis and
angiocentric necrosis; 2. Immunohistochemical results present the expression of LCA, CD2, CD3ϵ and CD56, perforin, TIA-1, and CD30; 3. EBERs
are detected in tumor cells. 4. No tumor was detected in other organs. To publish this case report and accompanying images, written informed
consent was obtained from the patient’s family. NKTCL: Natural killer/T cell lymphoma. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. QP J drafted the manuscript and participated in the final diagnosis. ZT X conducted the gross examination and final diagnosis. SY
L conducted the immunohistochemical study. YX Y participated in the immunohistochemical study. J P and HZ X participated in the final
diagnosis. XC G revised manuscript critically for important intellectual content and had given final approval of the version to be
published. The final manuscript was read and approved by all authors.
