Ocular dirofilariasis is a zoonotic filariasis caused by nematode worm,Dirofilaria. We present a case of dirofilariasis affecting the upper
eyelid in a 2-year-old child presenting as an acutely inflammed cyst, from southern Indian state of Kerala. Live adult worm was surgically
removed and confirmed to be Dirofilaria repens. Live worm showing continuous movement was seen on the pre-operative high-resolution
ultrasound. Ultrasound can be helpful in pre-operative identification of live worm. Imaging findings reported in literature are very few. We
describe the clinical, ultrasound, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings. Ocular dirofilariasisis a zoonotic filariasis caused by
nematode worm, Dilofilaria, transmitted to humans by the bite of Aedes, Culex,or Anopheles mosquitoes. Eye involvement may be periocular,
sub-conjunctival, sub-tenon, or intraocular. The species Dirofilaria repens is endemic in southern-middle Europe and in some parts of Asia
and Africa. There are very few reports of imaging findings in literature. We describe the clinical, ultrasound, and Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) features. A 2-year-old female child presented with acute onset of periorbital edema in right eye. She was initially diagnosed
as preseptal cellulitis and treated with systemic antibiotics. There was mild resolution of edema, but a cystic swelling was apparent in the
right upper eyelid. Ultrasound was performed with high-resolution probe (8MHz) and showed a well-defined cyst approximately 2.5Ã—1.5 cm in
the lateral part of right upper eyelid. The cyst showed within it a coiled structure with parallel echogenic walls [Fig. 1]. It showed
continuous movement which represents the live worm. MRI was done to know any deep intraorbital extension and exclude other intraorbital
abnormalities. MRI of orbits showed a cyst in the lateral part of upper eyelid which showed hyperintense signal on coronal short-tau
inversion recovery image [Fig. 2a], hypointense signal on coronal T1 image [Fig. 2b] and revealed rim enhancement on post-contrast
T1-weighted fat saturated images [Fig. 2c (coronal) and d (sagittal)]. The cyst was confined to the upper lid. Ill-defined intermediate
signal intensity was seen on STIR images [Fig. 2a] within the cyst which may represent the worm. Axial high resolution ultrasound (8MHZ)
images showing a cystic lesion in the upper lid. A coiled structure with parallel echogenic wall is seen within it (white arrow), which
represents the worm Coronal short-tau inversion recovery magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of orbits shows lesion in lateral part of right
upper lid with hyperintense signal (white arrow) Coronal T1-weighted image of orbit shows the lesion (white arrow) with hypointense signal
Post-contrast fat saturation T1 coronal shows rim enhancing lesion (whitearrow) in right upper orbit Post-contrast fat saturation T1
sagittal image shows rim enhancing lesion (solid arrow) in right upper orbit Surgical excision of the parasitic cyst was done through an
upper lid crease incision. The cyst was adherent to the levator palpebrae superioris muscle. It contained a live motile worm measuring about
9 cm in length [Fig. 3]. Histopathological examination [Fig. 4] showed a worm with thick cuticle, muscle coat, longitudinal and transverse
striations and double uterus. Based on histopathological appearance, the worm was identified as D.repens. Photograph showing the long worm
and the excised inflamed cyst Histopathological photograph (longitudinal section) of worm showing thick cuticle and transverse striations
Post-operatively, the child was asymptomatic except for a mild residual ptosis which was improving. Ocular dirofilariasisis is a zoonotic
filariasis caused by nematode worm, Dilofilaria. It is transmitted to humans by the bite of Aedes, Culex, or Anopheles mosquitoes. Dogs are
main source of infection and humans are accidental hosts. Human infection is caused by Dirofilaria immitis, Dirofilaria tenius, Dirofilaria
ursi, and D.repens. The condition associated with D.repens is the most frequent and the most widely distributed in the world, of the
dirofilariases of medical relevance. The species D.repens is endemic in southern-middle Europe and in some parts of Asia and Africa. In
India, dirofilariasisis is predominantly reported in published literature in southern India with reports from Kerala, Karnataka, and Tamil
Nadu. Cases of Dirofilariasis have also been reported from Assam, Northern India, and Western India. Clinically, ocular involvement may be
periorbital, sub-conjuctival, sub-tenon, and intraocular. Apart from ocular involvement, subcutaneous and pulmonary manifestations can also
occur. Imaging findings have not been well described in literature. Few reports have described the imaging findings. In one report, the live
worm was shown on ultrasonography as an actively motile, folded tubular structure with parallel echogenic walls. A soft tissue with
enhancing periphery was seen on the contrast computed tomography. MRI findings have been described in a single case and include the
visualization of an enhancing thick-walled, semiliquid structure with a discrete, tubular, central signal, representing the worm on
T1-weighted images. In our case, high-resolution ultrasound (8MHz) showed a well-defined cyst in upper eye lid with a coiled structure
showing parallel echogenic walls. It showed continuous movement. MRI was also done in our case to look for any deep extension and assess
other intraorbital structures. MRI showed a well-defined cyst in lateral part of upper eyelid. Rim enhancement was seen on post-contrast
T1-weighted fat saturated images, which represents surrounding inflamed tissue. The cyst was within upper eye lid and rest of the orbit was
normal. Ill-defined intermediate signal intensities were seen on STIR images which may represent the worm. The definitive visualization of
worm was, however, done on ultrasound. MRI mainly showed the inflamed cyst. It excluded deep extension and other conditions such as
inflammatory pseudo tumor and lacrimal gland tumor. This is a report of a case of periorbital type of ocular dirofilariasis. Ultrasound can
be used as a non-invasive diagnostic tool to identify live adult worm and may help in pre-operative diagnosis. Source of Support: Nil,
Conflict of Interest: None declared.
