Postpartum vaginal cystic lesions constitute a common situation that is caused either by inflammation or by accumulation of lymph. We report
a case of a 33-year-old woman who had bilateral duplication of the pelvicalyceal system and ureter, and after the labor of her second child,
she had one ureter prolapse into the vagina after initially appearing as a cystic lesion. Ureteral duplication is the most common renal
abnormality, occurring in approximately 1% of the population and in 10% of children who are diagnosed with urinary tract infections. In our
case we consider possible that this clinical situation was a result of a combination of postpartum pelvic floor trauma and prolapse of the
ureter. There are only several of these cases in the literature where ureter prolapse is associated and complicated by pelvic floor trauma
caused during or after labor. The clinical approach of the cystic lesions located in the vagina during the postpartum period should include
a meticulous examination of the urinary system before any other medical practice. Cystic lesions in the vagina after a natural birth are
common incidences. The algorithm of the differential diagnosis comprises the inflammation and the formation of a lymphocyst . We report a
case of a 33-year-old woman who had bilateral duplication of the pelvicalyceal system and ureter, and she had one ureter prolapse, which
appeared as a cystic lesion, into the vagina after the labor of her second child. A 33-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to the
outpatient department of our hospital reporting mild pain and discomfort in her vagina after sex. The patient’s obstetrics history included
two natural child births - one six months before and the other one two years before. The patient’s physical examination revealed the
presence of a bulky, cystic structure located in the left anterior vaginal wall. The patient`s laboratory findings upon admission were white
blood count (WBC): 6,900/μl, hematocrit (HCT): 40%, hemoglobin (HGB): 13.2 mg/dL, platelets (PLT): 227,000/μL, glucose: 89 mg/dL, urea: 37
mg/dL, creatinine: 0.7 mg/dL, serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT): 16 IU/L, serum glutamic pyruvate transaminase (SGPT): 15 IU/L,
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GT): 11 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP): 44 IU/L, Na: 144 mmol/L, K: 4.2 mmol/L, and international
normalized ratio (INR): 1.03. The first therapeutic attempt was conservative, using antibiotics, with no improvement of the symptoms. Taking
under consideration the fact that the patient did not improve after the medical therapy, paracentesis of the cyst was conducted and the
sample was sent for cytological examination, which was negative for the presence of cells. The cystic structure seemed to shrink after each
paracentisis followed by an improvement in the patient’s symptoms, but it relapsed after twenty days and the patient experienced the same
symptoms accompanied by the presence of fluids in her vagina. The patient’s work-up included a computed tomography of the lower abdomen
which revealed a well-defined, oval shaped cystic lesion on the left of the uterus body (Figures 1 and 2). After that, a surgical excision
of the lesion was scheduled. During the operation rupture of the cystic structure occurred, followed by its partial excision and injection
of methylene blue in the bladder in order to clarify if this lesion communicated with it. The methylene blue test was negative, but there
was outflow of serous fluid from the lesion, and there was also a small orifice on its top. A small Nelaton catheter was inserted through
the orifice and contrast agent was injected followed by an X-ray, which showed that the anatomy of lesion was compatible with that of a
ureter. The surgical specimen was sent for histological examination, which confirmed its ureteral origin. Additionally, a pouch between the
cystic structure and the vagina was created, which led to the outflow of urine from the vagina. During the surgery the patient underwent to
a pyeloureterography via insertion of Nelaton catheter through the small opening of the intravaginal cystic ‘mass’ and according to these
findings, underwent a computed tomography (CT) urography and a CT of the upper and lower abdomen on the same day (Figure 2), which were
repeated 20 days after that (Figure 3). Imaging tests revealed that the patient had a bilaterally duplicated ureter. A 99mTechnetium-
dimercapto-succinic-acid (99mTc-DMSA) was performed in order to clarify the renal function of the patient. Renal scintigraphy (anterior,
posterior, right anterior oblique (RAO) and left anterior oblique (LAO) images) with a gamma camera (Millenium MPR; General Electric,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin) was performed 4 hours after the intravenous injection of 4 mCi (148 MBq) technetium-99 dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA).
The patient’s renal scintigraphy (99mTc-DMSA) showed a hydronephrotic lesion, which presented as a wide foto-deficient area, located on the
upper pole of the left kidney (Figure 3). The woman underwent nephrostomy, and two months later the vagina wall was sutured. The patient`s
laboratory findings upon discharge were as follows: WBC: 8,600/μl, HCT: 34.8%, HGB: 11.4 mg/dL, PLT: 219000/μL, glucose: 81 mg/dl, urea: 33
mg/dL, creatinine: 0.6, Na: 139 mmol/L, K: 4.2 mmol/L, INR: 1.05, SGOT: 18 IU/L, SGPT: 14 IU/L, γ-GT: 11 IU/L, and ALP: 44 IU/L. Computed
tomography findings. Axial contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) images of the pelvis show a well-defined oval-shaped cystic lesion at
the left of the uterus body (A) that extends to the anterior wall of the vagina (B). Coronal (C) and sequential sagittal (D, E) contrast-
enhanced CT images of the pelvis reveal the tubular morphology of the well-defined cystic lesion at the left of the uterus body (C) that
extends caudal to the anterior wall of the vagina (D) and has a configuration that resembles a ureter. Intraoperative retrograde
pyeloureterography via insertion of Nelaton catheter through the small opening of the intravaginal cystic ‘mass’. The upper half of a
dilated ureter is opacified as well as a dilated pelvicalyceal system at the upper pole of the left kidney (A). Excretion urography at 60
minutes post-injection (B) and volume rendered computed tomography (CT) urography (C) bilateral duplication of pelvicalyceal systems and
ureters. The upper pole of the left kidney drained by the ectopic ureter has a grossly dilated pelvicalyceal system (C). The ectopic left
ureter is no longer dilated. Computed tomography and V/Q scan after treatment. Coronal (A) and sagittal contrast-enhanced computed
tomography (CT) images (B) reveal the cystic degeneration of the upper pole of the kidney drained by the chronically obstructed ectopic left
ureter, 99mTechnetium- dimercapto-succinic-acid (99mTc-DMSA) renal scintigraphy (C) reveals foto-deficient area, located on the upper pole
of the left kidney. The congenital abnormalities of the ureters constitute a complex and wide field of urology. In the past the detection of
these anomalies was hampered by the lack of appropriate imaging techniques available for the manifestation of these abnormalities. The
duplication of the ureter is the most common renal abnormality. It affects approximately 1% of the population and 10% of children who suffer
from urinary tract infections . The ureter duplication can be either complete or incomplete. Complete ureteral duplication is the situation
in which two ureters enter the bladder and increase the possibilities of vesicoureteral reflux into the lower pole and obstruction to the
upper pole of the kidney . On the other hand, incomplete ureteral duplication is a clinical situation in which one common ureter enters the
bladder and this situation is rarely clinically significant . Additionally, the upper pole ureter may be ectopic in its insertion into the
bladder or it may end in the formation of a ureterocele. These two conditions are more common in duplicated collecting systems than in
single systems. In order to understand this situation it is crucial to refer to the ureteral embryology. Ureteral development begins at the
fourth week of gestation. More specifically, the ureteral bud branches off of the mesonephric (or Wolffian) duct and eventually extends into
the nephrogenic blastema. Embryologically, the ureteral bud is responsible for the formation of the renal collecting system, beginning at
the ureteral orifice and ending at the collecting ducts of the kidney. The mesonephric duct is incorporated into the bladder at the locum of
the distal aspect of the ureteral bud, the mesonephric duct, which is accompanied by the location of the ureteral orifice superolaterally,
taking its normal position on the trigone, whereas the more distal segment of the mesonephric duct is carried inferomedially and is
incorporated into the bladder neck. In females, the distal segment of the mesonephric duct forms the Gartner duct, which is located between
the vagina and urethra . In cases of ureteral duplication, where the ureteral bud is formed twice, the ureter of the lower part integrates
with the bladder earlier than expected and, as a result, is carried into a more superolateral position; this results in the distal ureter
being poorly supported by the trigone and having a shorter intramural tunnel. These situations increase the likelihood of vesicoureteral
reflux . Thus, the upper pole ureter integrates with the bladder later than usual and is inferomedially carried, thereby increasing the
possibility of the presence of a ureteral orifice that is either located in a lower position on the trigone or is ectopically found at the
bladder neck or ejaculatory duct. In females, the ureter may end in a Gartner duct, resulting occasionally in the erosion of the nearby
vagina or the urethra, inferiorly to the urinary sphincter. This is considered to be the cause of continuous urinary incontinence in females
. In our case we consider the possibility that this clinical situation was a result of a combination of postpartum pelvic floor trauma and
prolapse of the ureter. There are several cases in the literature referring to pelvic floor trauma caused during or after the labor . More
specifically, there have been studies in which parity has been identified as a risk factor for pelvic organ prolapsed . Females with one
vaginal child birth had 4 times and women with two child births an 8.4 times greater possibility of subsequently requiring admission to the
hospital for prolapsed pelvic organs . Avulsion of the puborectalis and the levator muscle is considered to be responsible for a prolapsed
pelvic organ after delivery . However, apart from avulsion or macrotrauma, other forms of pelvic floor injury may play a role in the
pathogenesis of pelvic organ prolapse. The levator hiatus, is the anatomical area that is found between the arms of the V. It contains the
urethra anteriorly, the vagina in the center and the anorectum posteriorly. This area varies from 6 to 36 cm2 according to the Valsalva
maneuver in young nulliparous women . Taking under consideration the fact that the space needed for the average fetal head in the plane of
minimal diameters is 70 to 100 cm2 (after the equation to a head circumference of approximately 300 to 350 mm), the distension and
deformation of the levator complex is inevitable . A study of Shek et al. on primiparous women pre- and postpartum has proven an increase in
hiatal area during Valsalva maneuver by 6% without any evidence of gross levator trauma. These results suggest that traumatic overdistension
or ‘microtrauma’ could be an alternative type of levator injury. Although there is limited research on levator overdistension, significant
correlations have been found as far as the area of the levator hiatus and pelvic organ descent are concerned, both in symptomatic and
asymptomatic women . All these changes that occur in the pelvis floor and the vagina after labor can explain the presence of the ureter in
the vagina. In fact we consider possible that the prolapse of the left upper pole ureter into the vagina in the case presented is caused by
the trauma of the muscles that either support or form the vagina. The management of the ectopic ureter consists of surgical reconstruction.
The approach depends on whether the system is duplex or single, and the extent of function of the involved kidney moiety. Because most cases
of ectopic ureter in a duplex system are associated with a dysplastic upper pole renal segment, the excision of this segment along with the
proximal ureter is usually curative. In cases where the upper pole has good function, the ectopic ureter is re-implanted into the bladder or
anastomosed outside the bladder to the normal pole ureter (ureteroureterostomy) . The therapeutic approach in patients with a single system
in which the kidney is usually dysfunctional and the base of the bladder (hemitrigone) is poorly developed treatment usually consists of
nephrourecterectomy. If the kidney is functional, the treatment is resection of the distal ectopic ureter and re-implantation into the
bladder . In conclusion, it is crucial for the obstetricians-gynecologists to be aware of the various congenital abnormalities of the
urinary tract that may alter the anatomy of the pelvis. The clinical approach of the cystic lesions located in the vagina during the
postpartum period should comprise an assiduous examination of the urinary system before any other medical practice. As a consequence of the
clinical approach mentioned above, we suggest the inclusion of the specific imaging analysis of the anatomy and function of the urinary
tract (CT-urography, intravenous pyelography) in the algorithm that is used for the differential diagnosis and management of postpartum
vaginal cystic lesions. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. ALP: Alkaline phosphatase; CT:
Computed tomography; DMSA: Dimercaptosuccinic acid scan; HCT: Hematocrit; Hgb: Hemoglobin; INR: International normalized ratio; LAO: Left
anterior oblique; PLT: Platelets; RAO: Right anterior oblique; SGOT: Serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase; SGPT: Serum glutamic pyruvate
transaminase; WBC: White blood count; γ-GT: Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase. The authors report no conflicts of interest. The authors alone
are responsible for the content and writing of the paper. NM and IT made the same contributions to this paper. These authors collected the
data of the patient and contributed in the writing of the manuscript. AK, RT and PP diagnosed and treated the patient. AO evaluated the
radiologic findings. AZ performed and evaluated the DMSA exam and results. PZ, NM and WH-S performed the editing and coordinated the
collaboration between different centers for external evaluation. CM is the director of the department, treated the patient and provided
useful insights. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
