A 2 Year old boy presented with painful ballooning of both eyes with the 2 days history of trauma to the head while playing. His vaccination
was complete. On examination he was afebrile. The Eyes were ballooned with blackish crust over both lids. On local examination, eye swelling
was tense with severe tenderness. The diagnosis of Preseptal cellulitis was made .We did an Emergency drainage and pus was sent for culture
that came out to be positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Proteus mirabilis with multiple drug resistance. The coverage was given by
Imipenem + cilastatin and child had wonderful recovery. A 2 Year old boy presented with painful ballooning of both eyes with the 2 days
history of trauma to the head while playing. His complete history reveals unremarkable antenatal, natal and postnatal history. He was
afebrile on presentation. His vaccination was complete according to EPI schedule. The past history was significant for sinusitis for which
he got the treatment (undocumented). On examination the patient was afebrile with dry cough and vitally stable. The Eyes were ballooned with
blackish crust over both lids (Figure 1). On local examination, eye swelling was tense with severe tenderness. His blood work up was normal
except raised leukocyte count with left shift (might be due to infection). The diagnosis of pre-septal cellulitis was made after excluding
other possible causes clinically and radiologically and antibiotic was empirically started (amoxicillin + clavulinic acid) after both eyes
were drained and pus was sent for culture and sensitivity, the culture report came out to be positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Proteus
mirabilis with multiple drug resistance (Table 1). As indicated in the antibiogram, the coverage was given by Imipenem + cilastatin
(15/15 mg/kg/dose every 6 hours) because it was the only drug to which both bacteria were sensitive. The child had wonderful recovery after
the treatment. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents for the publication of this report and any accompanying
images. Photograph showing the patient’s eyes with preseptal cellulitis. Resistance antibiogram R = Resistant. S = sensitive. Preseptal
cellulitis is characterized by hyperemic skin and eyelid distension without the obvious signs of orbital congestion . Preseptal cellulitis
can occur as a result of exogenous as well as endogenous extension . In this particular case the rare combine infection by two bacteria with
multi drug resistance made this case interesting and difficult to manage. This infection can progress to involve the post-septal space and
result in orbital cellulitis with life threatening complications. Majority of the cases are caused by Streptococci or Staphylococci . While
making diagnosis, this condition should be differentiated from other causes of Eye swelling ranging from simple inflammation to life
threatening Retinoblastoma . Once this diagnosis is suspected it should be related with lab investigations like complete blood count, blood
culture and culture of aspirate so that therapy should be targeted . Computed Tomography is recommended investigation to delineate the
extension of the cellulitis ; however, is not necessary. Nasal decongestants are recommended if sinusitis is suspected and antibiotics
should be continued from three to ten days depending on severity of the infection. Vision is the most wonderful sense gifted by nature and
restoration of vision after such sinister infection was the source of joy both for family and doctors. The authors state that they have no
competing interest. MN and NAR: literature search and conception. IM and NAR: Initial draft preparation. KM and MN: Finalization of the
draft. Picture and Informed Consent taken: MN. Informed Written consent was taken for the publication of the picture. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
