The use of human umbilical cord blood-derived mesenchymal stem cells for cell transplantation therapy holds great promise for repairing
spinal cord injury. Here we report the first clinical trial transplantation of human umbilical cord (hUCB)-derived mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) into the spinal cord of a dog suspected to have fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy (FCEM) and that experienced a loss of deep pain
sensation. Locomotor functions improved following transplantation in a dog. Based on our findings, we suggest that transplantation of hUCB-
derived MSCs will have beneficial therapeutic effects on FCEM patients lacking deep pain sensation. Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy
(FCEM) is a common cause of ischemic myelopathy in dogs and is a syndrome of acute spinal cord infarction due to embolization of
fibrocarctilageous materials identified as the nucleus pulposus of intervertebral discs . The pathogenesis of FCEM is still unclear . A
definitive diagnosis of this disease is confirmed by histopathological evaluation; therefore, antemortem diagnosis of FCEM is based on
patient history, clinical examination, Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis, Computed tomography (CT) data, and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) findings . MRI is especially helpful for making an antemoterm diagnosis of ischemic myelopathy and eliminating other causes of
myelopathy including degenerative disc disease. This technique can also be used to visualize signal intensity changes indicative of ischemic
myelopathy . The prognosis of FCEM depends on ischemia severity and extent of the affected area . Previous reports described negative
prognostic factors of FCEM including a loss of deep pain sensation, CSF changes, spinal cord swelling, and lack of improvement within the
first two weeks of disease onset . The absence of deep pain sensation after any spinal cord injury is indicative of a poor prognosis and
significantly associated with bilateral damage to the gray and white matter . Therefore, FCEM patients lacking deep pain sensation were
given a guarded prognosis in previous reports . Furthermore, methods for treating cases of FCEM without deep pain sensation have not been
reported. In a previous study using rat models of SCI, treatment with human umbilical cord blood-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hUCB-MSCs)
led to significant improvement of locomotor function . hUCB-MSCs were also found to be capable of differentiating into neural cells in vivo
. In fact, our previous studies have demonstrated that hUCB-MSCs promote regenerative potential in cases of SCI . We encountered a dog
(7-year-old female cocker spaniel) that was referred to the Konkuk University Veterinary Teaching Hospital (Korea) with an acute onset of
hindlimb paralysis in the absence of any history of trauma. Neurological examination revealed that the dog suffered from hindlimb paralysis.
No postural reaction was seen in the bilateral hindlimb including a lack of paw positioning, hopping, and extensor postural thrust.
Additionally, no voluntary urination was observed. Spinal reflexes were normal. Deep pain sensation in the dog was absented at the first
neurological examination. Methylprednisolone succinate (Koreamypharm, Korea) was administered intravenously (30 mg/kg) to reduce secondary
spinal cord damage. MRI (0.3T; Esaote, Italy) was performed 24 h after clinical onset of symptoms (Fig. 1). There was no evidence of disc
extrusion. An intramedullary lesion involving the gray matter alone, appearing as an area of hypointensity from L2 and L3 in the transverse
image, was found on the T2-weighted image. CSF analysis was performed as well and did not produce any remarkable findings. We tentatively
diagnosed the dog with FCEM based on the clinical symptoms, MRI findings, and CSF analysis according to previous studies . Dorsal
laminectomy was performed on the dog from L1 to L3 to promote decompression. The spinal cord was significantly swollen. However, no evidence
of disc material extrusion or hemorrhage was found during surgery. Deep pain sensation and motor function did not improve until 1 week after
surgery. We notified the owners of the dog about the possibility of an adverse prognosis given the absence of deep pain sensation and
significant spinal cord swelling. Participation of the dog in this clinical trial involving hUCB-derived MSC transplantation was offered and
owner gave consent. Before transplantation, sensory evoked potential (SEP) analysis was performed (Sierra Wave, 2006; Cadwell Laboratories,
USA). Based on the results, we confirmed that the dog did not show SEPs. Transplantation of hUCB-derived MSCs was performed 7 days after
decompression surgery. The hUCB-derived MSCs were provided for pure research purposes by the Seoul Cord Bank (Histostem, Korea). For the
transplantation procedure, 1 Ã— 106 hUCB-derived MSCs in a total 0.3 mL volume of saline was injected directly into three separate spinal
cord segments (L1~L2, L2~L3, and L3~L4) using a spinal needle. Immunosuppressants were not administered to the dog. A modified Tarlove scale
was used to evaluate locomotor function. This scale grades hindlimb movement on a scale of 0 (no movement) to 5 (normal gait). Deep pain
sensation was assessed using a hemostat to pinch the digit. The owner of the dog reported that manual bladder expression was not needed 3
weeks after transplantation and the dog voluntarily urinated at a given location at 4 weeks during follow-up. The dog exhibited gradual
improvements in hindlimb locomotor functions starting at 4 weeks post-transplantation. Modified Tarlov scores increased from 0 to 4 by 10
weeks post-transplantation. One year after transplantation, modified Tarlov scores were maintained. However, gait performance further
improved although deep pain sensation was not restored after transplantation. MRI (3T; Oxford Medinus, Korea) studies were performed 3
months (Fig. 2) after transplantation. Hyperintense signals were still observed in the dorsal portion of the spinal cord even 3 months after
the initial MRI examination. The presence of FCEM is confirmed by neurohistopathologic examination showing occlusion of the spinal
vasculature to nucleus pulposus that causes ischemic necrosis of dependent regions in the spinal cord parenchyma . However,
neurohistopathological examination could not be performed in the present study because the dog was still alive. Therefore, we diagnosed FCEM
according to clinical symptoms, MRI results based on previous studies , and observations made during surgery. The criteria of MRI findings
for diagnosing FCEM include the presence of a focal, relatively sharply demarcated, and often asymmetric intramedullary lesion (edematous
infracted tissue) involving gray matter with hyperintense signals on T2-weighted images and isohypointense signals on T1-weighted images .
hUCBs secrete neurotrophic factors that have been described in vitro as brain-derived neurotrophic factor, nerve growth factors, and
neurotrophin-3 . Many transplanted hUCBs can differentiate into oligodendrocytes . We previously reported that hUCB-derived MSCs migrate and
survive in dogs with SCI for 4 weeks . Spinal cord swelling is associated with a relatively poor prognosis . Corticosteroid administration
was found to be helpful for reducing spinal cord swelling and minimizing secondary spinal cord injury . However, no significant difference
was observed with or without corticosteroid treatment in another investigation . Since the dog had severe cord swelling between L1 and L3
according to the MRI findings, we performed a laminectomy to minimize secondary injury due to edematous compression. We believe, however,
that while laminectomy might help minimize additional secondary damage, it is not sufficient for functional recovery. The mechanism
underlying the regenerative properties of hUCB-derived MSCs remains unclear. Nevertheless, we suggest that hUCB-derived MSCs exert potential
therapeutic effects on cases of FCEM given the following findings. First, motor function of the dog improved despite the presence of poor
prognostic factors including spinal cord swelling, symmetrical clinical signs, and an absence of deep pain sensation. Secondly, the recovery
of motor function started at 6 weeks after onset of symptom (4 weeks after transplantation). Previous studies determined that most dogs with
FCEM recover within 2 weeks after the onset of clinical symptoms while a lack of improvement within 2 weeks after disease onset is
indicative of a poor prognosis . This recovery pattern is similar to that reported in our previous study in which the transplantation of
hUCB-derived MSCs in dogs with spinal cord injuries led to improved motor function 3 or 4 weeks post-transplantation . Immunological
rejection was a consideration in the present case. This is because a xenograft (human cells injected into a canine) was used without
administration of immunosuppressive drugs. Nevertheless, clinical evidence of immunological rejection such as lymphocytosis, cavitation, or
malasic changes on MRI was not detected. In conclusion, our results suggest that hUCB-derived MSCs can help treat patients with FCEM who
lack deep pain sensation. hUCB-derived MSCs may be a potential cell source for novel therapeutic modalities for treating different types of
spinal cord infarction such as FCEM in dogs and humans. This paper was supported by Konkuk University in 2013. T1-weighted (TR 530, TE 26)
and T2-weighted (TR 3500, TE 90) MRI images of the dog 12 h (A~D) after the onset of clinical signs. The transverse T1-weighted image showed
isointensity in the parenchyma of L2 (A) and L3 (C). Arrows: transverse T2-weighted image showing hyperintensity in the parenchyma of L2 (B)
and L3 (D). T1-weighted (TR 550.0, TE 12.6) and T2-weighted (TR 4400, TE 96) MRI images of the dog 12 weeks after transplantation. The
transverse T1-weighted image showed isointensity in the parenchyma of L3 (A). In the transverse T2-weighted image of L3, an area of
hyperintensity was visible in the dorsal aspect of the spinal cord (B).
