Academic Editor: Anton M. Jetten Purpose. Thyroid-related orbitopathy (TRO) is associated with inflammation, expansion of orbital fat,
enlargement of extraocular muscles, and optic neuropathy (ON). We examined the effects of orbital decompression on the inflammatory and
congestive signs of TRO in patients who underwent emergent orbital decompression. Methods. This retrospective, consecutive study included
patients with ON from TRO who underwent orbital decompression. Pre- and postoperative orbital inflammatory signs in the operated and
nonoperated, contralateral eyes were graded with the 10-item clinical activity score (CAS). Results. Thirty-one orbits were included.
Postoperatively, 22 patients and 29 orbits had resolution of ON while the remaining 2 patients had improvement in visual acuity. Mean
preoperative CAS was 9.5 ± 0.4. At 12 months, postoperative CAS was 2.1 ± 0.6 (P < 0.01) in the operated eye and 3.2 ± 0.5 (P < 0.05) in the
nonoperated, contralateral eye. Conclusion. In our series, 94% of orbits had resolution of ON. There was also a statistically significant
postoperative reduction in the CAS in both the operated and nonoperated, contralateral eyes. This phenomenon may be due to lowered venous
congestion, decreased intraorbital pressure, and diminution in inflammatory factors. Thyroid-related orbitopathy (TRO) affects approximately
fifty percent of patients with thyroid dysfunction . Current understanding of the pathophysiology of TRO suggests that dysregulation of
orbital fibroblasts leads to the cellular changes that are responsible for enlargement of extraocular muscles and expansion of orbital fat .
However, the exact pathophysiology of TRO has not been clearly elucidated. The active phase of the disease, which usually lasts from six to
twelve months, is characterized by discomfort, eyelid retraction, proptosis, eyelid and conjunctival edema, exposure keratopathy,
restrictive strabismus, and, rarely, optic neuropathy (ON) . Humoral and cell-mediated immune processes are likely involved and result from
cross-reactivity against shared antigens in both thyroid and orbital tissues, causing immune-mediated inflammation . Based on this
understanding, immunomodulatory therapy aimed at reducing the active inflammatory phase of the disease has been advocated. Corticosteroids
and external beam orbital radiation (XRT) are commonly used agents for TRO, with newer modalities, such as rituximab (RTX), being
investigated [9, 10]. Presently, there is inadequate evidence to ascertain whether medical treatment reliably shortens the active phase of
TRO, and there is no agreement on the standard therapeutic protocol for the treatment of TRO [11, 12]. For symptomatic patients without
sight-threatening disease, orbital decompression is indicated after the active inflammatory phase has passed, and the patient's disease has
stabilized . In three to five percent of cases, compressive ON and vision-threatening corneal exposure can be seen, requiring prompt
treatment [14, 15]. It is thought that optic nerve compression at the orbital apex from enlarged extraocular muscles, increased
inflammation, and orbital fat hypertrophy are responsible for ON . Some have suggested that ON persisting after medical and surgical
therapies may be due to optic nerve ischemia or optic neuritis [17, 18]. We previously described ON after botulinum toxin administration for
restrictive myopathy which was reversed after corticosteroid therapy followed by prompt orbital decompression . Although corticosteroids,
XRT, and orbital decompression have all been shown to be beneficial, there is no universal agreement in the sequence or efficacy of
treatment for ON from TRO . Numerous studies have examined the visual outcome after orbital decompression in patients with ON . Several
studies have noted CAS and inflammatory indices following surgical and medical treatment for ON, but they were not the studied in depth [35,
36]. We present a series of patients who underwent expeditious orbital decompression for ON. The goal of this study was to compare the
effects of surgery on not only visual recovery, but also disease activity status. We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of all
patients who underwent orbital decompression surgery for ON from TRO, between 2000 and 2010, at the University of California, San Diego,
Shiley Eye Center. The UCSD Human Research Institutional Review Board approval was obtained. We analyzed these patients' records and
extracted information regarding demographic characteristics, thyroid status, and previous medical treatments, as well as relevant ophthalmic
findings including pre- and postoperative diplopia and the type of orbital decompression performed. Exclusion criteria included previous
eyelid or orbital surgery, any history of previous unrelated optic nerve disease, and decreased visual acuity from other causes. ON was
diagnosed on evidence of decreased visual acuity along with color vision abnormality on Ishihara (Ishihara Medical Supplies) or Hardy-Rand-
Rittler (Richmond Products, Albuquerque, NM, USA) color plates, a visual field defect not related to other ophthalmic diseases, or a
relative afferent pupillary defect in unilateral or asymmetric cases. All cases had orbital apex crowding on imaging studies, confirming
that the optic neuropathy was related to their TRO. Preoperatively, patients were examined for proptosis, lid retraction, restrictive
strabismus, conjunctival injection, chemosis, periocular erythema, pain, and edema. They were then graded with the 10-item CAS. At three,
six, and twelve months of followup, postoperative CAS in both the operated and nonoperated contralateral eyes was again assessed. All
patients underwent maximal decompression ± removal of the bony lateral rim as previously described (DOK and BSK) . Orbital fat decompression
was performed as well. Two milliliters of peribulbar steroid (1 : 1 mixture of triamcinolone acetonide 40 mg/mL and methylprednisolone
sodium succinate 125 mg/mL) was administered at the time of surgery. Improvement of optic neuropathy was determined by improvement in visual
acuity by 2 or more lines, resolution of color vision abnormality, resolution of visual field defects, and resolution of relative afferent
pupillary defect. Pre- and postoperative CAS were compared. Statistical analysis was carried out using SPSS 14.0 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL,
USA). Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05. Twenty-four patients underwent orbital decompression for ON. Seven patients had
bilateral ON. Average age was 55.1 ± 14.3 years. The cohort included 7 men and 17 women. All 24 patients had decreased visual acuity
compared to their previous baseline examination, 15 patients had a relative afferent pupillary defect, and 13 patients had color deficiency.
All 24 patients had worsening visual field deficits, when compared to baseline testing, and optic nerve edema on dilated funduscopic
examination. All 24 patients underwent orbital decompression within 7 days of presentation. Each orbit in the bilateral cases was considered
separately. In all, 31 orbits were included in the study. Ten patients were treated elsewhere with either intravenous or oral
corticosteroids and were taking corticosteroids when they presented to the Thyroid Eye Center. They were treated with corticosteroids for an
average of 8.4 weeks prior to orbital decompression. The other 14 patients began treatment with oral corticosteroids after their initial
visit at the Thyroid Eye Center for ON. These patients were treated for an average of 4.6 days prior to orbital decompression. Following
orbital decompression, oral corticosteroids were tapered within 7 days in all 24 patients. None of the patients had reactivation of their
TRO after surgery. 23 patients had pre-operative diplopia. Two patients had resolution of their diplopia after decompression. One patient
had no diplopia before and after surgery. At 12 months, 29 orbits (94%) in 22 patients (92%) had resolution of ON. The remaining 2 patients
(8%), who had unilateral ON, had greater than 2 lines of improvement in visual acuity, but had residual color vision and visual field
deficits. Average reduction in exophthalmos after surgery was 6.2 ± 1.7 mm. Preoperative CAS was 9.5 ± 0.4. At 6 months, postoperative CAS
in the operated eye was 2.9 ± 0.4 (P < 0.01), and at 12 months, postoperative CAS in the operated eye was 2.1 ± 0.6 (P < 0.01) (Figure 1).
In the nonoperated, contralateral eye, preoperative CAS was 7.4 ± 0.3. At 6 months, postoperative CAS in the non-operated, contralateral eye
was 3.5 ± 0.1 (P < 0.05), and at 12 months, postoperative CAS in the non-operated, contralateral eye was 3.2 ± 0.5 (P < 0.05) (Figure 1).
Ten patients had been treated with corticosteroids for an average of 8.4 weeks when they presented to the Thyroid Eye Center. Their
preoperative CAS of 8.3 ± 0.6 and their post-operative CAS was 2.0 ± 0.3 (P < 0.01). This was not statistically different from the other 14
patients, who were treated with corticosteroids for 4.6 days prior to orbital decompression. Case 1A 50-year-old male presented with
bilateral optic neuropathy. His visual acuity was 20/60 in both eyes with impaired color vision (Figure 2(a)). His pre-operative CAS was 9
in both eyes. Six months after bilateral orbital decompression, his visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes with full color vision (Figure
2(b)). His post-operative CAS was 2 in both eyes at 6 months of followup. A 50-year-old male presented with bilateral optic neuropathy. His
visual acuity was 20/60 in both eyes with impaired color vision (Figure 2(a)). His pre-operative CAS was 9 in both eyes. Six months after
bilateral orbital decompression, his visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes with full color vision (Figure 2(b)). His post-operative CAS was 2
in both eyes at 6 months of followup. Case 2A 49-year-old female had been previously treated elsewhere with intravenous pulsed
corticosteroids six months prior to presentation and was taking oral corticosteroids when she was first examined at the Thyroid Eye Center.
Her visual acuity was 20/80 in the right eye and 20/70 in the left eye with impaired color vision in both eyes (Figure 3(a)). Computed
tomography of her orbits showed enlarged extraocular muscles and orbital apex crowding (Figure 3(b)). Her pre-operative CAS was 9 in the
right eye and 10 in the left eye. After bilateral orbital decompression, her vision was 20/20 in both eyes with resolution of color vision
defects (Figure 3(c)). Postoperative CAS was 2 in both eyes at 12 weeks after surgery. A 49-year-old female had been previously treated
elsewhere with intravenous pulsed corticosteroids six months prior to presentation and was taking oral corticosteroids when she was first
examined at the Thyroid Eye Center. Her visual acuity was 20/80 in the right eye and 20/70 in the left eye with impaired color vision in
both eyes (Figure 3(a)). Computed tomography of her orbits showed enlarged extraocular muscles and orbital apex crowding (Figure 3(b)). Her
pre-operative CAS was 9 in the right eye and 10 in the left eye. After bilateral orbital decompression, her vision was 20/20 in both eyes
with resolution of color vision defects (Figure 3(c)). Postoperative CAS was 2 in both eyes at 12 weeks after surgery. Case 3A 47-year-old
female presented with optic neuropathy in the right eye. Her visual acuity was 20/60 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye. She also
had impaired color vision in the right eye (Figure 4(a)). Her pre-operative CAS was 10 in the right eye and 9 in the left eye. After right
orbital decompression, her visual acuity was 20/25 in the right eye with resolution of optic neuropathy (Figure 4(b)). Her post-operative
CAS was 3 in the right eye and 4 in the left eye at 8 weeks of followup. She later had left orbital decompression for disfiguring proptosis,
with symmetric exophthalmometry measurements (Figure 4(c)). A 47-year-old female presented with optic neuropathy in the right eye. Her
visual acuity was 20/60 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye. She also had impaired color vision in the right eye (Figure 4(a)). Her
pre-operative CAS was 10 in the right eye and 9 in the left eye. After right orbital decompression, her visual acuity was 20/25 in the right
eye with resolution of optic neuropathy (Figure 4(b)). Her post-operative CAS was 3 in the right eye and 4 in the left eye at 8 weeks of
followup. She later had left orbital decompression for disfiguring proptosis, with symmetric exophthalmometry measurements (Figure 4(c)).
Our cohort included 24 patients who had urgent surgical orbital decompression for ON. Ninety-four percent had reversal of ON. Among these
patients, the average CAS at presentation was 9.5 ± 0.4. Postoperatively, the average CAS was 2.1 ± 0.6, P < 0.01. Patients who had been
treated with corticosteroids prior to their presentation to the Thyroid Eye Center for an average of 8.4 weeks prior to their surgical
decompression had preoperative CAS of 8.3 ± 0.6. This group also had a statistically significant decrease in CAS after surgery (2.0 ± 0.3).
To the authors' best knowledge, this is the first report of a reduction in inflammatory signs and symptoms after urgent surgical
decompression for optic neuropathy (keywords: orbital decompression, clinical activity score, inflammation, congestion, Graves' disease,
orbitopathy, and optic neuropathy). After orbital decompression, there was a statistically significant reduction in orbital congestion such
as chemosis, pain, and eyelid edema . At 12 months, average CAS decreased from 9.5 to 2.1 (P < 0.01) (Figure 1). Ten patients had been
treated with chronic corticosteroids prior to their decompression (8.4 weeks). These patients had similar CAS scores pre- and
postoperatively, when compared to those who were started on oral corticosteroids for a short period prior to their decompression (4.6 days).
We hypothesize that resolution of congestive symptoms brought on by expansion of orbital fat and extraocular muscle hypertrophy may be
partially explained by relief of venous stasis. By expanding orbital volume, there is improved venous outflow with subsequent relief of
congestion. It may be impossible to distinguish with certainty if the reduction in CAS is from decreased inflammation, reduction in venous
congestion or both. Some reduction in inflammatory signs such as conjunctival injection and erythema of the eyelids, however, cannot be
entirely explained by changes in hydrostatic pressure and intraorbital volume. When the CAS was examined in the nonoperated, contralateral
eye, we noted a statistically significant reduction from 7.4 to 3.2 (P < 0.05) (Figure 1). Orbital fibroblasts and orbital stem cells have
been postulated as targets for immunoglobulins in TRO [2, 41]. All patients underwent orbital fat removal during surgery, and perhaps it is
this reduction in inciting factors in the operated eye that leads to a decrease in overall inflammatory cascade, with a reduction of
inflammation in the contralateral eye. The mechanism may be similar to sympathetic ophthalmia, where there is improvement in the
contralateral eye after enucleation of the inciting eye . Another possibility is spontaneous improvement from disease modulation as time
progresses (Rundle's curve). Pre- and postoperative inflammatory indices such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate or C-reactive protein were
not obtained in our study group. Ultimately, histopathologic studies evaluating the molecular and cellular changes in the orbital contents
before and after orbital decompression are necessary to fully elucidate this phenomenon. Lastly, the effect from perioperative oral and
intraoperative periorbital steroid effects cannot be ignored. Surgical decompression of the bony orbit is traditionally advocated for
disfiguring proptosis after the inflammatory phase of TRO has stabilized, unless there is optic neuropathy or vision threatening corneal
exposure [13, 15]. The deep lateral wall, medial wall, and the orbital floor may all be decompressed, with exquisite attention paid towards
maximal apical expansion [19, 43]. Some studies have shown efficacy of performing medial wall decompression for compressive ON . In the
current series, all patients underwent maximal orbital decompression of all three walls, as it is our opinion that a maximally decompressed
apex gives the best visual outcome and relief of optic nerve crowding, as well as the best chance to reduce orbital congestion. Some have
advocated a “balanced orbital decompression” where the medial and lateral walls are removed with retention of the floor to decrease the risk
of new onset of diplopia . In our cohort one patient did not have preoperative diplopia and remained free of diplopia postoperatively.
Interestingly, two patients had resolution of their diplopia following surgery. The remaining patients had diplopia before and after orbital
decompression. TRO activity normally follows Rundle's curve where there is an initial deterioration of the symptoms followed by a period of
stability and then improvement . From start to finish, this time course is approximately 1 year. Traditionally, definitive intervention is
initiated after the disease has stabilized. In this study, we treated ON with maximal decompression prior to disease stabilization and noted
stability at one year. The results of our study raise the question whether early intervention for optic neuropathy improves clinical outcome
. This study is limited by several factors. First, it is retrospective in nature. A randomized, controlled study comparing medical and
surgical therapy for ON in patients with bilateral disease would be ideal, but would be difficult to conduct. Second, histologic examination
of orbital tissue before and after orbital decompression may reveal changing inflammatory markers, but may not be feasible as tissue
sampling may not be possible. Third, some patients in the cohort were treated with corticosteroids for 8.4 weeks while others were treated
for a much shorter duration, prior to orbital decompression. Although they all had similar preoperative CAS and similar statistically
significant reduction in CAS after surgery, this represents a confounding variable that cannot be ignored. Fourth, our mean postoperative
follow-up period is 12 months. Ideally, a longer follow-up period could be studied to rule out late reactivation of disease. Fifth, although
the CAS objectively measures active disease status, it is difficult to differentiate inflammatory from congestive signs. Finally, there were
a limited number of patients. A multicenter study with large numbers would be needed to strengthen the findings of the study. In summary, we
describe the resolution of inflammatory and congestive symptoms in patients treated for ON with orbital decompression. Future studies are
directed towards longer-term studies both on a prospective basis and aimed towards defining a cellular and molecular basis to explain these
findings. None of the authors has conflict of interests with the submission of this paper. This study was presented at the ASOPRS 41st
Annual Fall Scientific Symposium, October 13-14, 2010, Chicago, IL, USA. Generously supported by Steve and Kathleen Flynn, the Bell
Charitable Foundation, and an unrestricted grant from Research to Prevent Blindness (RPB), New York, NY. None of the authors have any
financial interest to disclose. Preoperative and postoperative clinical activity scores (CAS) on the operated eye and nonoperated,
contralateral eye at 12 months following orbital decompression. (a) A 50-year-old male with bilateral optic neuropathy with CAS 9 in both
eyes. (b) Six months after bilateral orbital decompression with resolution of optic neuropathy and CAS 2 in both eyes. (a) A 49-year-old
female who failed intravenous and oral corticosteroids with bilateral optic neuropathy and CAS 9 in the right eye and 10 in the left eye.
(b) Computed tomography of her orbits showed enlarged extraocular muscles and orbital apex crowding. (c) 12 weeks after bilateral orbital
decompression with resolution of optic neuropathy and CAS 2 in both eyes. (a) A 47-year-old female with right optic neuropathy. Her
preoperative CAS was 10 in the right eye and 9 in the left eye. (b) 8 weeks after unilateral, right orbital decompression, she had
resolution of her right optic neuropathy. Her postoperative CAS was 3 in the right eye and 4 in the left eye. (c) 6 weeks after left orbital
decompression for disfiguring proptosis, with symmetric exophthalmometry measurements.
