A 49-year-old woman underwent right lung transplantation due to pulmonary emphysema, with favorable evolution in the early postoperative
period. A year later she was readmitted to our department with productive cough. During that admission, the patient was treated for
cytomegalovirus pneumonia and received broad-spectrum antibacterial therapy. At outpatient follow-up, cavities appeared in the native lung,
which gradually increased in size. Ten months later, she was admitted for the resection of a hyperinflated cavity. Chest X-rays showed an
increase in the cavity in the left upper lobe with herniation of the lung and compression of the transplanted lung. Chest HRCT at various
positions showed a round mass with soft tissue density within a lung cavity that moved when the patient changed position, thus strengthening
the hypothesis of a fungus ball (Figure 1). Bullectomy was performed, and the histopathologic examination showed fungal colonization by
Aspergillus fumigatus in emphysematous bullae and bronchiectasis. She was treated with itraconazole and had a satisfactory response. Figure
1Axial HRCT scans. In A, cavitary lung lesion in the left upper lobe filled with an opacity resembling a fungus ball (arrow). In B, a scan
after moving the patient from the supine position to the prone position, demonstrating the motility of the mass (arrow). Lung
transplantation has become an acceptable treatment option for many end-stage lung diseases and could be single or double.( 1 , 2 ) However,
Aspergillus sp. infections continue to be an important cause of morbidity and mortality in these patients. Aspergillus sp. is an ubiquitous
fungus that can cause clinical entities of varying severity, such as asymptomatic colonization, aspergilloma, tracheobronchitis, active
parenchymal disease, and angioinvasive aspergillosis.( 1 - 6 ) Airway colonization is a common occurrence in such patients because of the
exposure of the transplanted lung to the environment and impaired local host defenses, including mucociliary clearance. In addition,
colonization of the native lung, which commonly occurs in end-stage lung disease, is an important source of post-transplantation
aspergillosis in single lung transplantation recipients. Aspergillus sp. colonization has also been related to cytomegalovirus infection and
chronic rejection.( 1 - 4 ) Patients who undergo unilateral transplantation are often older and have a higher prevalence of COPD as an
underlying disease, a condition that might predispose to airway colonization by Aspergillus sp.( 1 - 3 ) The most accurate way to perform
the diagnosis is the demonstration of characteristic, acute branching, broad, septate hyphae showing zones of growth in
biopsy/surgical/autopsy specimens and positive cultures for Aspergillus sp.( 3 , 5 , 6 ) Our patient presented with Aspergillus fumigatus
fungal ball (aspergilloma) in emphysematous bullae and bronchiectasis in the native lung 26 months after transplantation, with a
satisfactory response to medical and surgical treatment. She also had a history of cytomegalovirus infection one year after transplantation
as another risk factor. The diagnosis was made through imaging and evaluation of surgical specimens. In fact, aspergilloma affecting the
native lung in single lung transplantation recipients has been reported only rarely in retrospective studies.( 3 , 4 ) Aspergilloma is
characterized by Aspergillus sp. infection without tissue invasion. It leads to the conglomeration of intertwined fungal hyphae mixed with
mucus and cellular debris within a pre-existing pulmonary cavity, bulla, or ectatic bronchus. The most common underlying causes are
tuberculosis and sarcoidosis. Although patients might remain asymptomatic, the most common clinical manifestation is hemoptysis.( 5 , 6 )
Risk factors for a poor prognosis of aspergilloma include the severity of the underlying lung disease, increase in size or in the number of
lesions on chest X-rays, immunosuppression (including transplantation), increasing Aspergillus-specific IgG titles, recurrent large volume
hemoptysis, and sarcoidosis. This highlights the importance of radiological findings, cultures, reviews of the level of immunosuppression,
and environmental factors for the early diagnosis and prevention of further complications, such as angioinvasive disease. Treatment should
be considered only when patients become symptomatic, usually with hemoptysis. There is no consensus on the best treatment approach; however,
surgical resection of the cavity and removal of the fungus ball are usually indicated in patients with recurrent hemoptysis if their
pulmonary function is sufficient to allow surgery.( 4 - 6 ) On CT scans and X-rays, aspergillomas are characterized by the presence of a
round or oval mass with soft tissue density within a lung cavity. The mass can be separated from the wall of the cavity by an air space of
variable size, resulting in the "air crescent" sign. The aspergilloma usually moves when the patient changes position, as was seen in our
case. Another finding of aspergillomas is the thickening of the cavity wall and adjacent pleura, which might be the earliest radiological
sign.( 5 , 6 ) In summary, the susceptibility of the native lung to Aspergillus sp. infections might be an additional factor to be
considered in choosing the ideal transplantation procedure. In cases of single lung transplantation, radiological and clinical attention is
especially directed to the transplanted organ. However, the native lung, structurally damaged, can be a nidus for Aspergillus sp. and
provide a source of infection.
