Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Conceived and designed the experiments: SAA EFB APF JDD
MGN TSP ACS. Analyzed the data: SAA EFB APF JDD VJAG AH MGN TSP ACS JV AW. Wrote the paper: SAA EFB APF JDD VJAG AH MJN TSP ACS JV AW.
Patient History-Taking, Interview and/or Physical Exam: EFB APF JDD ACS. Genomic Analysis: AH MGN TSP JV. Critical revision of the
manuscript for important intellectual content: SAA EFB APF JDD VJAG AH MGN TSP ACS JV AW. A 44-year-old man is presented here with 14 years
of chronic purulent sinusitis, a chronic fungal rash of the scrotum, and chronic pelvic pain. Treatment with antifungal therapy resulted in
symptom improvement, however he was unable to establish an effective long-term treatment regimen, resulting in debilitating symptoms. He had
undergone extensive work-up without identifying a clear underlying etiology, although Candida species were cultured from the prostatic
fluid. 100 genes involved in the cellular immune response were sequenced and a missense mutation was identified in the Ras-binding domain of
PI3Kγ. PI3Kγ is a crucial signaling element in leukotaxis and other leukocyte functions. We hypothesize that his mutation led to his chronic
infections and pelvic pain. A 44 year-old male presented with 14 years of chronic infections and pelvic pain. Although subject to frequent
respiratory and gastrointestinal infections since childhood, his pelvic pain began at age 30. Following initiation of antibiotic and
corticosteroid treatment for acute sinusitis, he developed a painful erythematous scrotal rash. His core symptoms are presented in Table S1.
He initially attempted treatment with antifungals with mild improvement, but his rash gradually worsened over time. After another course of
antibiotics for acute sinusitis, his rash spread to the glans penis and he subsequently developed severe urethral, testicular, and pelvic
pain. He also began having chronic purulent sinusitis, and since that time he has struggled to control his upper respiratory symptoms,
pelvic pain, and scrotal rash. The dynamics of his symptoms over time is presented in Figure 1. Rash and sinusitis symptom severity
presented on a scale of 0 to 10, with 10 being worst. NIH-CPSI scores presented on the respective scales: NIH-CPSI Pain Domain: 0–21, NIH-
CPSI Voiding Domain: 0–10, NIH-CPSI Quality of Life Impact Domain: 0–12 and Total NIH-CPSI Score: 0–43 (from Litwin MS, McNaughton-Collins
M, Fowler FJ Jr, Nickel JC, Calhoun EA, et. al. (1999) The National Institutes of Health chronic prostatitis symptom index: development and
validation of a new outcome measure. Chronic Prostatitis Collaborative Research Network. J Urol 162∶369-75. He has undergone treatment with
numerous immunologic and antifungal therapies including G-CSF, IFN-gamma, GM-CSF, IVIG, IL-2, fluconazole, amphotericin B, micafungin,
itraconazole, caspofungin, voriconazole, with varying levels of success (Figures 2–8). He experienced substantial improvement of his pelvic
pain and skin lesions and mild improvement of his upper respiratory symptoms with micafungin but had to forego therapy for financial reasons
(Figure 1 and Figure 5). Other regimens including GM-CSF (Figure 3) with fluconazole and amphotericin (Figure 2) with caspofungin (Figure 4)
have also helped control symptoms, but to a lesser degree. He has consistently noted worsening of his pelvic pain, rash, and upper
respiratory symptoms with antibiotic treatments. Unfortunately, medication costs and side effects have prohibited the establishment of a
successful long-term regimen. His pelvic pain and the fatigue associated with his symptoms have significantly impacted his quality of life.
His pelvic pain limits his ability to sit for long periods of time, and his sinusitis is associated with pharyngitis, headaches, fatigue,
and malaise. These symptoms have limited his ability to work, exercise, maintain a social life, and enjoy dating or sexual activity. He has
undergone extensive work-up, which has failed to identify a unifying underlying diagnosis (Tables 1, 2, and 3 and Tables S2, S3, S4).
Prostatic fluid and ejaculate cultures, however, have grown multiple Candida species (Table 4), and immunologic testing has demonstrated
anergy to Candida antigen (Table S3). We hypothesized that defects in the cellular immune response may underlie his clinical condition, as
we have demonstrated previously in other chronic fungal infections. , The current study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of
Children’s Hospital Boston, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston and Radboud University in Nijmegen, the Netherlands. The
individual in this manuscript has given written informed consent to publish these case details, as outlined in the PLoS consent form
available at: http://www.plosone.org/static/plos_consent_form.pdf.” A panel of 100 genes known to induce or modulate the immune response was
sequenced, revealing a heterozygous mutation in the gene PIK3CG, corresponding to a Val282Ala amino acid substitution in the
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase gamma (PI3Kγ) protein (Tables 5 and 6, Figures 9 and 10). The brother and the father of the patient tested
negative for this mutation in PIK3CG, suggestive of a de novo mutation. Unfortunately, this could not be definitively confirmed by the DNA
analysis of the patient’s mother, as she was deceased (Table 7). The mutation is not a known polymorphism, based on its absence in 100 in-
house exome datasets from individuals of European ancestry, and from 179 individuals sequenced as part of the 1000 genomes project. Based on
a Grantham score of 64, this mutation is predicted to be poorly tolerated for maintaining protein conformation. On target: mapping to bases
included in the array design Near target: In 500 basepair (approximate fragment length) proximity of array targets Off target: Mapping to
other genomic positions in the genome We present a patient with chronic infections and pelvic pain, found to have a novel missense mutation
in PI3Kγ: a signaling molecule involved in a wide variety of cellular functions, including leukotaxis. There are currently no descriptions
of PIK3GC germline mutations in humans with associated clinical phenotypes. We hypothesize that the patient’s mutation is responsible both
for his predisposition to chronic infections and his chronic pelvic pain. Chronic pelvic pain syndrome (CPPS) is defined as greater than
three months of pelvic pain over a six month period with no established etiology based on routine testing. Pain symptoms can occur in the
perineum, lower abdomen, testicles, penis, and with ejaculation, and patients can also experience voiding dysfunction. CPPS has been
estimated to account for nearly two million annual physician visits, and its impact on quality of life is similar to or greater than angina,
congestive heart failure, Crohn’s disease, and diabetes mellitus. While the etiology and pathophysiology are not well understood, many
experts favor a model of CPPS as a heterogeneous condition, with multiple potentially overlapping etiologies existing along a spectrum. This
patient’s history may suggest a chronic fungal infection, or potentially an autoimmune process precipitated by an inciting fungal infection,
as the cause of his CPPS. While infectious and autoimmune mechanisms have been proposed in CPPS, they have never been proven responsible in
specific cases. Furthermore, while multiple levels of evidence support a genetic underpinning in CPPS, a specific mutation has never been
proven responsible. Recent evidence from the Northwestern University Prostatitis Research group implicates mast cells in the pathogenesis of
CPPS. , Activation may result in the release of vasoactive and inflammatory molecules in response to unknown triggers. This activation is
known to be significantly dependent on PI3K-γ. . Despite a wide range of roles in cells throughout the body, PI3Kγ has largely been studied
for its importance within the immune system, where it participates in leukotaxis and other elements of the immune response. Class I PI3Ks
are heterodimers consisting of a catalytic and a regulatory subunit that is further grouped into Class IA and IB, each with respective
isoforms. Class IA PI3Ks are activated by receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), whereas class IB is activated through G protein coupled
receptors (GPCR). , PI3Kγ consists of a catalytic subunit, p110γ, and regulatory subunits, p101 or p84/p87. Upon binding of chemokines or
other ligands to GPCRs, PI3Kγ is activated through binding to the βγ subunit of a heterotrimeric G-protein. PI3Kγ activation is also
enhanced by binding of the GTPase Ras to the Ras-binding domain of p110γ, which lies directly adjacent to the catalytic domain. This
initiates the signaling cascade that results in chemotaxis in multiple leukocyte lineages, both within the adaptive and innate immune
responses. In addition, it activates other leukocyte functions, including the oxidative burst in neutrophils. In vivo models have
demonstrated decreased inflammation and susceptibility to infections when PI3Kγ function is abrogated, making it an attractive target in the
treatment of inflammatory, allergic and autoimmune diseases. , . Beer-Hammer and colleagues demonstrated that p110γ contributes to T and B
cell development, and is variably expressed throughout the hematopoietic process. The γ catalytic subunit plays a very different role from
other IB class members, directly interacting with the G-protein βγ dimers and Ras proteins. Several studies have looked at p110γ/p110δ
mutants p110γ-deficient animals, homozygous for a KD p110δ mutant, show profound T cell lymphopenia accompanied by multiple organ
inflammation,, while mutations only in p110γ primarily causes defects in neutrophil and mast cell function. These mutations have shown
specificity in affecting TCR-induced T cell activation. PI3Kγ has been implicated in leukocyte migration, regulation of T-cell proliferation
and cytokine release, 10 and most recently mast cell activation. 20 Overexpression of p110γ was shown to induce oncogenic transformation of
chicken embryo fibroblasts, if Ras binding occurred. 21 P110γ overexpression has also been documented in chronic myeloid leukemia, 22
presenting it as an potential oncogene through the recent literature. The Val282Ala mutation occurs within the Ras-binding domain of the
p110γ subunit of PI3Kγ. Functional studies will be necessary to determine the specific effect of the Val282Ala mutation on the activity of
PI3Kγ, but one can hypothesize that decreased activity could suppress the immune response by inhibiting leukocyte migration and function.
This could explain the patient’s history of frequent and chronic infections. Additionally, it could potentially explain his chronic pelvic
pain, through several different mechanisms. The history suggests that the patient’s cutaneous fungal infection likely spread to the urinary
tract after extending to the glans penis, and may have subsequently involved the urethra, epididymis, testicles, prostate, or other areas
within the genitourinary system. With failure to completely eradicate the infection due to impaired leukocyte activity, chronic infection
alone may have caused his pain symptoms. Another possibility is that the initial infection within the genitourinary system may have been
effectively treated by antifungal therapy but subsequently incited an autoimmune process, which can result from infection via multiple
mechanisms. Alternatively, a mutation in PI3KCG that resulted in over-activation could cause inflammation through an autoimmune mechanism,
resulting in chronic pelvic pain. Further studies will be necessary to determine the activity of the mutant protein and elucidate the exact
mechanisms of injury. Core Symptoms. (DOCX) Click here for additional data file. Immunoglobulin and IgG Subclass Profile. (DOCX) Click here
for additional data file. Lymphocyte Antigen and Mitogen Proliferation Assays. (DOCX) Click here for additional data file. Toll-Like
Receptor Function Assays. (DOCX) Click here for additional data file.
