Malakoplakia is a rare granulomatous disease that occurs commonly in the urinary tract and secondarily in the gastrointestinal tract. Most
reported cases of malakoplakia are associated with immunosuppressive diseases or chronic prolonged illness. Here, we report a rare case of
malakoplakia in a young healthy adolescent without any underlying disease. A 19-year-old female was referred to our hospital following the
discovery of multiple rectal polyps with sigmoidoscopy. She had no specific past medical history but complained of recurrent abdominal pain
and diarrhea for 3 months. A colonoscopy revealed diverse mucosal lesions including plaques, polyps, nodules, and mass-like lesions.
Histological examination revealed a sheet of histiocytes with pathognomonic Michaelis-Gutmann bodies. We treated the patient with
ciprofloxacin, the cholinergic agonist bethanechol, and a multivitamin for 6 months. A follow-up colonoscopy revealed that her condition was
resolved with this course of treatment. Malakoplakia is a rare, chronic, granulomatous inflammatory disease that was first described by
Michaelis and Gutmann in 1902. The name "malakoplakia" was derived from the Greek "malakos" (soft) and "plakos" (plaque) in 1903 by Von
Hansemann. Malakoplakia is most commonly found in the urinary tract, but has been reported in the gastrointestinal tract, lung, brain, lymph
node, adrenal, tonsil, conjunctiva, skin, bone, abdominal wall, pancreas, retroperitoneum, and female genital tract . Malakoplakia is
associated with many coexisitng conditions, such as organ transplantation, tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, allergic conditions, cytotoxic
chemotherapy, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, malignancies, steroid use, alcohol abuse, poorly controlled diabetes, ulcerative colitis,
and malnutrition . It is very rare in young people without underlying disease. Here, we report a case of malakoplakia in an otherwise
healthy 19-year-old female with a review of the literature. A 19-year-old female was referred to our hospital following the discovery of
multiple polyps in the rectum with sigmoidoscopy. Her clinical symptoms were recurrent low abdominal pain and loose stool with blood and
foul odor 4 to 5 times a day for 3 months. She complained of a squeezing type abdominal pain relieved after defecation. When the patient was
admitted, she was in relatively good condition with no specific past medical history and did not complain of fever, chill, anorexia, weight
loss, or cold sweating. On physical examination, there were no definite abnormal findings except for mild epigastric tenderness and slightly
increased bowel sounds. Blood pressure was 110/76 mmHg, pulse rate 106 beats per minute, body temperature 36.3℃. Laboratory tests revealed
hemoglobin at 9.0 g/dL, white blood cell (WBC) count at 9,050/µL with 26.6% neutrophils, 27.2% lymphocytes, 15.2% monocytes, and 0.8%
eosinophils. A peripheral blood smear showed normocytic normochromic anemia, Fe of 18 µg/dL, total iron binding capacity of 286 µg/dL, 0.8%
reticulocytes, and stool occult blood over 1,000 ng/mL. Inflammatory markers such as C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation
rate (ESR) were mildly elevated to 3.03 mg/dL and 42 mm/hr, respectively. Urine analysis with microscopic exam showed no abnormality. Stool
acid-fast bacillus and tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction were negative, and gram stain showed WBC 10 to 25 and a number of gram-
positive cocci and gram-negative bacilli. In the stool culture, Salmonella or Shigella was not isolated and blood cultures were negative.
Rheumatic factor was normal, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody was negative. Serum IgG, IgE, and hemolytic complement 50 (CH50)
complement levels were slightly elevated to 1,800 mg/dL, 236 IU, and 54.2 U/mL, respectively. IgA, IgM, complement 3, and complement 4 were
within normal range. Colonoscopy revealed very diverse circular or flat elevated mucosal lesions up to 10 cm in size from the cecum to the
descending colon, small nodules, mass-like lesions, and erosive small polypoid lesions throughout the colon, particularly in the sigmoid
colon (Fig. 1). Biopsies were taken in eight different places. After colonoscopy, we initially suspected atypical lymphoma or malignancy.
However, lactate dehydrogenase and tumor markers such as carcinoembryonic antigen, CA 125, CA 19-9, and α-fetoprotein were within normal
range and an abdominopelvic computed tomography scan revealed no other abnormal findings, except for localized multiple small reactive lymph
node enlargements along the mesentery. Histological examination of colon lesion biopsies revealed dense histiocyte infiltration with round
inclusions of varying sizes in the cytoplasm. Many of these inclusions had round laminated structures with a central dark area and
peripheral pale halo. These structures were stained with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), Alcian blue, Prussian blue, and Gomori methenamine
silver stains to confirm the presence of Michaelis-Gutmann bodies with pathognomonic features of malakoplakia (Fig. 2). These diagnostic
tests confirmed the diagnosis of malakoplakia. During antibiotic treatment, diarrhea and abdominal pain improved so she was discharged with
instructions to take 500 mg ciprofloxacin twice a day, 25 mg bethanecol three times a day, and 60 mg ascorbic acid once a day by mouth.
After the treatment started, the symptoms of abdominal pain and diarrhea disappeared in a week. After 2 months, CRP, ESR, and hemoglobin
were nearly normal with values of 0.32 mg/dL, 2 mm/hr, and 12.5 g/dL, respectively. The patient remained on this regimen for 6 months.
During the treatment period, no drug side effects were observed. Previous abnormal colonoscopy findings were remarkably improved after 6
months of follow-up, and returned to normal after the end of 12 months (Fig. 3). Outpatient follow-up visits have confirmed that she is
currently healthy. The gastrointestinal tract is the second most common site of involvement by malakoplakia, and most of these cases involve
the rectum and colon. Clinical manifestation of colonic malakoplakia is very diverse, from asymptomatic to diarrhea, abdominal pain, rectal
bleeding, intestinal obstruction, vomiting, malaise, fever, and constipation . However, clinically characteristic symptoms or signs
diagnosing malakoplakia do not exist. Colonic malakoplakia may involve segmentally or diffusely. Endoscopically, malakoplakia commonly
presents in the early stages as soft yellow to tan mucosal plaques or in the late stages as raised, grey to tan lesions in various sizes
with peripheral hyperemia and a central depressed area . Malakoplakia can be diagnosed by histology with the presence of the mineralized
basophilic structures and Michaelis-Gutmann bodies . The etiology and pathogenesis of malakoplakia is still not fully understood, but
multiple possible mechanisms have been suggested. The involvement of microorganisms is supported by reports of patients with malakoplakia
who have chronic infections with various organisms such as Escherichia coli, Proteus, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Staphylococcus aureus.
Infections induced by the microorganisms mentioned above are much more common than malakoplakia; therefore, other factors must contribute.
Malakoplakia may also be caused by a defect in lysosomal processing of microorganisms undergoing phagocytosis by macrophages or monocytes.
Therefore, incompletely digested microorganisms accumulate in lysosomes and lead to mineralization of calcium and iron salts on residual
microorganism glycolipids. These Michaelis-Gutmann bodies can be intracellular or extracellular when stained with PAS, Prussian blue for
iron, and von Kossa for calcium. Microtubules are essential to bacterial phagocytosis and lysosomal fusion. The assembly of microtubules is
stimulated by cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) and inhibited by cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). β-Glucuronidase located in the
lysosome is essential to efficient lysosomal bactericidal activity. Both low cGMP level and reduced β-glucuronidase activity have been
reported in patients with malakoplakia . In this patient, we initially suspected atypical lymphoma, familial adenomatous polyposis, or other
uncommon cancers because of a wide variety of mucosal lesions throughout the colon. We performed multiple random colonic biopsies to verify
the diagnosis and, in all biopsies, Michaelis-Gutmann bodies characteristic of malakoplakia were observed. ESR and CRP were mildly elevated,
but blood and stool cultures were negative. No definite infectious signs were checked, as the patient did not have any specific infectious
disease such as pneumonia or otitis media in her childhood. We could not measure polymorphonuclear leukocyte function through stimulation by
cGMP and inhibition by cAMP. There may also be a corrlation between immunosuppression or chronic prolonged iellness and malakoplakia because
immunodeficient individuals and patients receiving chemotherapy or immmunosuppressive therapy for transplantation constitute a considerable
portion of malakoplakia cases . Furthermore, malakoplakia seems to be correlated with malignant neoplasms and systemic diseases, such as
systemic lupus erythematosis, mycotic infections, liver diseases, sarcoidosis, ulcerative colitis, cachexia, and drug addiction . Some
authors hypothesized that the coincidence of malakoplakia with colonic and rectal adenocarcinoma might begin with local alteration of gut
flora and advised physicians to carefully search for a colorectal neoplasm when malakoplakia appears histologically . However, the patient
in this study was not immunocompromised and did not have any suspicious findings of autoimmune disease. Generally, malakoplakia should be
differentiated from Crohn's disease, military tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, Whipple disease, Chediak-Higashi syndrome, and malignancies such as
colon cancer and lymphoma. To rule out a particularly serious malignant disease and evaluate the response to treatment, follow-up
colonoscopies with random biopsies were performed four times at 3, 6, and 12 months, and at 6 months after the end of treatment for a total
follow-up period of 18 months. No other malignancies were found and mucosal lesions improved gradually upon sequential endoscopic
examinations. Medical treatment of malakoplakia is based on the eradication of microorganisms. The first strategy is to increase the
intracellular cGMP to cAMP ratio using cholinergic agonists such as bethanechol and ascorbic acid to improve lysosomal function. The second
therapeutic strategy is to treat the presumed microorganism infection within the colon by antibiotics. The antibiotics
trimethoprim/sulphamethoxazol, rifampicin, and particularly ciprofloxacin have all been used in the treatment of malakoplakia, because these
are able to enter macrophages and contribute to intracellular microorganism death . The duration of treatment is not fixed, but long-term
treatment is advised, although its efficacy still remains debated. According to the report, 6 months to 3 years, there was one case of
antibiotic treatment. An underlying condition is the most crucial factor affecting malakoplakia mortality, and significant morbidity is
related to the chronic underlying condition, which can resist local and systemic therapy. In this case, the patient's symptoms improved very
quickly after antibiotic treatment. Since her symptoms and clinical results improved without aggravation after medical treatment, we
speculated that she suffered from malakoplakia without coexisting disease and that immune maturation with aging might play a role. The
etiology of colonic malakoplakia in this patient was unclear since there were no microorganisms in the stool and blood culture. The patient
had no specific past medical history and was not immunodeficient, did not have a malignancy or any chronic illness, and was not in the most
frequently affected age group. In Korea, three cases of malakoplakia have been reported . One case involved the ascending colon and the
others involved the rectum. One of these cases was treated surgically , another treated by endoscopic polypectomy , and the last one treated
medically . This is the first case of malakoplakia with very diverse mucosal lesions throughout the entire colon in a healthy young female
with no associated disease. Our case illustrates that when very diverse and atypical mucosal lesions are detected on colonoscopy, physicians
should consider malakoplakia. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article is reported. Initial colonoscopy findings. (A)
Proximal colon mucosa shows circular, flat elevated lesions and (B) a very long flat elevated lesion. (C) A mass lesion is seen with (D) a
large polypoid lesion resembling Cap polyposis, and (E) a large multigranular mass-like lesion throughout the whole colon. (F) The sigmoid
colon and rectum mucosa shows multiple small polypoid lesions resembling familial adenomatous polyposis. Histological findings. Specific
histological stains show concentrically layered basophilic inclusions and Michaelis-Gutmann bodies with pathognomonic features of
malakoplakia (arrows) (A, H&E stain, × 400; B, Alcian blue, × 400; C, Prussian blue, × 400; D, periodic acid-Schiff, × 400). Follow-up
colonoscopy findings 12 months after the end of treatment showing normal mucosa throughout (A, B, C, D, and E) the colon and (F) sigmoid
colon.
