Acinetobacter baumannii (AB) is a common pathogen found in patients with hospital-acquired pneumonia all over the world. Community-acquired
AB pneumonia, however, is very rare and has seldom been reported in Asia-Pacific countries. Community-acquired AB pneumonia has a fulminant
course and is associated with a higher mortality than hospital-acquired AB pneumonia. In Korea, no case of fatal community-acquired AB
pneumonia has been reported to date. Here, we describe the first fatal case of fulminant community-acquired AB pneumonia in Korea.
Acinetobacter baumannii (AB) is an aerobic gram-negative coccobacillus commonly found in soil and fresh water. It is a major pathogen
associated with hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) . In rare cases, AB can cause community-acquired pneumonia (CAP), reported to occur
primarily during the humid seasons in Asia-Pacific countries . Clinically, community-acquired Acinetobacter baumannii pneumonia (CAP-AB)
progresses more rapidly than its HAP counterpart, with a higher mortality rate due to frequent antibiotic tolerance . A putative case of
CAP-AB was reported in Korea, wherein the bacterial strain isolated was sensitive to most antibiotics and the patient had a good prognosis .
Here, we report the first case of a patient in Korea with rapidly progressing and fatal CAP-AB who succumbed within 36 hours of hospital
admission. A 53-year-old male patient visited the emergency room for worsening symptoms of productive cough, fever, and chills that
developed the day before. The patient, with no specific occupation, had a 30-pack/year history of cigarette smoking and consumed alcohol in
moderation. He was successfully treated for CAP in another hospital 2 years prior and had experienced no other problems. Upon admission, the
patient appeared acutely ill. His blood pressure was 82/46 mmHg, respiratory rate was 22 breaths per minute, pulse rate was 120 beats per
minute, and body temperature was 40â„ƒ. A regular heart rhythm was observed and there were coarse breathing sounds with crackles on the right
lower lung field. The laboratory chemistry values were as follows: white blood cell count of 11,500/mm3 with 86.1% neutrophils, 11.5%
lymphocytes, 1.9% monocytes, 0.2% eosinophils; hemoglobin 14.4 g/dL; platelet count 188,000/mm3; C-reactive protein 1.28 mg/dL. The arterial
blood gas analysis at room air was pH of 7.47, pCO2 of 22.4 mmHg, pO2 of 52.5 mmHg, HCO3- of 16 mmol/L, and O2 saturation of 89%. Blood
chemistries showed a blood urea nitrogen (BUN)/creatinine (Cr) level of 9/2.05 mg/dL and the serum sodium, potassium, and chloride were 139,
4.1, and 105 mmol/L, respectively. The urine sodium was 19 mmol/L, urine Cr was 222.31 mg/dL, and the calculated fractional excretion of
sodium was 0.1%. A simple chest radiograph showed moderate patchy consolidation in the right lower lobe (Fig. 1). We made a presumptive
diagnosis of sepsis caused by CAP. Septic shock was suspected due to low blood pressure. A central line catheter was promptly inserted,
along with fluid resuscitation, and oxygen was administered via nasal cannula. Cultures of blood, sputum, and urine samples were also
completed. Empiric piperacillin/tazobactam with ciprofloxacin injections were administered simultaneously. The patient was admitted into the
intensive care unit for directed therapy of septic shock. The initial APACHE II score was 25. Low blood pressure persisted after vigorous
fluid therapy; thus, the vasoactive agent norepinephrine was administered. Vasopressin was later added when the mean arterial pressure did
not normalize. Sixteen hours after admission, respiratory distress worsened, resulting in acute respiratory failure with arterial blood gas
analysis showing a pH of 7.085, pCO2 of 61.4 mmHg, and HCO3- of 19 mmol/L. The patient was immediately intubated with mechanical ventilation
at FiO2 of 1.0 and positive end expiratory pressure at 14 cmH2O; however, hypoxia persisted and respiratory and metabolic acidosis continued
to deteriorate. Twenty-four hours after admission, follow-up arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.096, pCO2 of 63.7 mmHg, pO2 of
77.6 mmHg, HCO3- of 20 mmol/L, and O2 saturation of 89%. The follow-up chest radiograph showed more exacerbated consolidation in the right
lung field with the beginning of patchy opacities in the left lower lobe (Fig. 2). The antibiotics were then switched to meropenem with
teicoplanin. Twenty-eight hours after admission, oliguria ensued along with deteriorating acute kidney injury with BUN/Cr at 26/3.66 mg/dL.
Continuous renal replacement therapy was promptly initiated. After 36 hours of intensive treatment, septic shock and acute respiratory
failure did not improve and the patient went into cardiac arrest. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed for 30 minutes but the patient
did not recover. After the patient expired, AB was identified in both the culture of sputum and two pairs of blood samples taken during the
emergency room visit. Bacterial sensitivity to antibiotics was measured using isolates from both sputum and blood cultures. The bacterial
isolate was susceptible to piperacillin/tazobactam, ceftazidime, cefepime, imipenem, meropenem, gentamicin, and tobramycin; tolerant to
ampicillin, amoxacillin/clavulanic acid, cafalotin, cefoxitin, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole; and moderately tolerant to cefotaxime and
levofloxacin (Table 1). A VITEK device (VITEK 2, Biomerieux, Marcy I'Etolile, France) was used for culturing, and the sensitivity test was
conducted in accordance to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. This is the first case of fatal CAP-AB reported in Korea. It
illustrates the speed of infection; the patient was in shock from the time of admission and his clinical condition rapidly progressed until
the patient expired 36 hours later. AB was confirmed from both the sputum and two pairs of blood cultures with the same antibiotic
susceptibility profile. In Asia-Pacific countries including Korea, AB is a known pathogen causing a high incidence of HAP (16% to 38%), as
compared to Western countries . Patients with HAP-AB tend to do poorly and have a relatively higher mortality rate, as compared to those
with HAP caused by other pathogens. CAP-AB is also more frequent in Asia-Pacific countries than its Western counterparts and the
relationship between CAP and AB has rarely been reported in Asia-Pacific countries. Based on data from reported cases in these countries, it
appears that CAP has a worse prognosis than HAP . Reports have suggested that mortality in CAP-AB can reach 58% to 64% . A review of CAP-AB
cases in Southeast Asia showed that six out of eight patients die as a result. The patients usually present with poor clinical prognosis and
succumb to the disease from 13 hours to 6 days after presentation, primarily in the early stages of hospitalization . Epidemiologic studies
of CAP-AB have shown that this pathogen occurs in subtropical regions with high humidity. Less than 10% of all CAP outbreaks in Australia
and Taiwan are due to AB . A presumed CAP-AB had been previously reported in Korea by Han et al. . However, this case showed different
clinical characteristics and the bacterial isolate had a different antibiotic susceptibility profile, as compared to cases from other Asia-
Pacific countries. The present case of CAP-AB occurred in Korea's Jeju island, which has a climate similar to other Asia-Pacific countries.
Its clinical progress was also similar to the severe pneumonia cases reported in other Asia-Pacific countries, where the patient expired
within a very short time (36 hours) after the admission. The average age of patients with CAP-AB is between 56 to 73 years , and the known
risk factors are smoking history, chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases, alcoholism, diabetes mellitus, renal diseases, and malignancies .
Affected patients usually experience sudden fever and chills accompanied by sudden cough with purulent sputum, chest pain, and respiratory
distress . In many cases, bacteremia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, or shock has already occurred at presentation , and the chest
radiograph typically shows lobar consolidation . The patient in this report was 53 years old with a 30-pack/year history of cigarette
smoking and consumed alcohol moderately. His clinical presentation began with an acute fever and he had bacteremia and was in shock at the
time of admission, with the chest radiograph showing lobar consolidation in the right lower lobe. This patient had been hospitalized for
pneumonia 2 years before but a past history of pneumonia has not been reported to correlate with CAP-AB. Empirical antibiotics such as
ceftazidime with aminoglycoside, ticarcillin/clavulanate, and imipenem are recommended for CAP-AB. Studies have shown that CAP-AB shows good
response to antipseudomonal penicillins, imipenem, aminoglycoside, ampicillin/sulbactam, and ciprofloxacin . In contrast, a study conducted
in Hong Kong revealed that, compared to other pathogens causing HAP-AB, CAP-AB showed resistance to ciprofloxacin, cotrimoxazole and
tobramycin . The AB isolated in this case was susceptible to antipseudomonal penicillin (piperacillin/tazobactam), ceftazidime, cefepime,
meropenem, and tobramycin; was tolerant to amoxacillin/clavulanic acid, cefoxitin, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole; and was moderately
resistant to cafotaxime and levofloxacin. It was resistant to ciprofloxacin and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. The antibiotic sensitivity
test result was similar to that of the study in Hong Kong . Studies have reported that differences in the pathogens account for the higher
mortality in CAP-AB, as compared to HAP-AB. One study suggested that the AB isolated from CAP-AB has different antibiotic sensitivity
patterns, as compared to those from HAP-AB . Another study showed that the pathogens of CAP-AB have different genetic features to those of
HAP-AB . Pulse-field gel electrophoresis of strains obtained from patients with CAP-AB suggested that community-acquired strains of AB were
composed of a large variety of unrelated strains and were distinct from the more closely related strains found in hospitals . Therefore,
community-acquired AB may be more problematic due to the different genetic make-up of the pathogen and more research is needed to sort
through these challenges. This case report describes the first Korean case of fatal CAP-AB. The infection rapidly progressed and resulted in
the patient succumbing to the illness shortly after admission. We believe that, as in other Asia-Pacific countries, an outbreak of fatal
CAP-AB is possible in Korea. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article is reported. A simple chest radiograph obtained in
the emergency room shows moderate patchy consolidation in the right lower lung field. After 24 hours, right lung field consolidation
worsened and new mild patchy opacities developed in the left lower lung field. The antibiotic sensitivity test MIC, minimum inhibitory
concentration; R, resistant; S, sensitive; I, intermediate.
