Collecting duct carcinoma (CDC) with a mass of coagulative necrosis is very rare. We report here a case of CDC with extensive geographic
coagulative necrosis mimicking anemic infarct with tumor cells embedded around the necrotic foci in a 73-years-old man. Histopathological
examination showed that tumor nests near the necrotic foci were arranged as angulated tubules, tubulopapillary and glandular structures.
Neoplastic cells had moderate to abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and large hyperchromatic nuclei with prominent nucleoli as Fuhrman nuclear
grade 3 or 4. The tumor cells were positive for pan-Cytokeratin, Vimentin, E-cadherin, CD10, and CK7, confirming the diagnosis as CDC. The
patient is still alive 6 months later from nephrectomy, a long time following up is needed to learn the prognosis. Conclusively, morphology
from different portions of the lesion, immunohistochemical stain and the combination analysis of the radiological features is essential to
make a precise pathological diagnosis of CDC. And CDC should also be distinguished from clear cell renal cell carcinoma, renal medullary
carcinoma, urothelial carcinoma with glandular differentiation, renal neuroendocrine tumor, renal epithelioid angiomyolipoma, renal
pigmented paraganglioma and renal mesenchymal chondrosarcoma etc. The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1264270525975030 Adult renal tumors comprise a range of distinct clinicopathologic subtypes
with differing clinical and/or syndrome associations, gross, microscopic, immunohistochemical characteristics. Collecting duct carcinoma
(CDC) of the kidney is an unusual variant of renal cell carcinoma. It originates from the epithelium of the collecting tubule and accounts
for less than 1% of the incidence of renal epithelial neoplasms . CDC was firstly reported by Foot and Papanicolaou in 1949 . And it was
formally recognized as an unique clinicopathologic subtype of RCC following the report and description of 6 new cases by Fleming and Lewi in
1986 . Unlike the majority of renal cell carcinomas, CDC is characterized by distinct clinicopathological features, aggressiveness and poor
prognosis . A male to female ratio of approximately 2:1 with a mean age of occurrence in the sixth decade . Grossly, the tumor is often
centrally located in or near the region of the renal pelvis and appears gray or white without extensive hemorrhage . The tumor often has
irregular infiltrative borders and no extensive hemorrhage and necrosis . The most common architectural patterns of CDC include angulated
tubules or tubulopapillary structures and glandular structures . High-grade nuclear features with pleomorphism and prominent eosinophilic
nucleoli as Fuhrman nuclear grade 3 or 4 are common . Occasionally, focal necrosis were noted in the foci . In contrast to previously cases,
we present here a CDC case with extensive necrosis and cystic formation in an old male patient, which were seldom observed in this type
tumor of kidney. The clinicopathological features of this case and the differential diagnosis was also been discussed. A 73-year-old man was
hospitalized because of right flank pain. There was no history of cigarette smoking and no family history of malignancy. No history of
occupational exposure to carcinogens and chronic diseases and chronic medications was obtained. On admission the patient appeared to have
good general condition without fever, weight loss and dyspnoea. Physical and neurological examinations showed no abnormality. The laboratory
results including blood count and classification, liver and renal function, and tumor markers were within the normal range. Computed
tomography showed a 2.5×3.4 cm complex solid/cystic mass in the upper right kidney invading renal sinus and peri-renal tissue, which was an
ill-defined, heterogeneous mass with central cystic formation (Figure 1, Arrow showed). Chest and abdominal x-ray were normal for lung and
other abdominal organs. A preoperative presumed diagnosis was renal coagulative necrosis or tumor and a radical right nephrectomy was
performed. CT images. (A) Axial contrast-enhanced nephrographic-phase CT image obtained at level of renal hilum shows an ill-defined,
heterogeneous mass with central cystic change involving the parenchyma of the right kidney, with extension into the renal pelvis and right
vein. (B) Reconstructed coronal contrast-enhanced CT image obtained during the excretory phase shows the compression and distortion of the
renal pelvis. The specimen was fixed in a 10% neutral formalin solution and embedded in paraffin. Four micrometer-thick sections were
prepared and stained with hematoxylin-eosin. An Envision two-step assay was used for the immunohistochemistry staining. Commercially
available monoclonal antibodies were employed: Pan Cytokeratin (Mouse mAb (AE1/AE3); 1:200), Vimentin (Mouse mAb (V9);1:1000), CD10 (Mouse
mAb (56C6); 1:200), E-Cadherin (Mouse mAb(NCH-38);1:200), CK7(Mouse mAb(OV7L12/30);1:200), CK20 (Mouse mAb(Ks20.8);1:200), CD31(Mouse
mAb(JC70A);1:200), CD34 (Mouse mAb(QBEnd10); 1:200), Actin (MousemAb(1A4); 1:200), CD56 (Mouse mAb(123C3); 1:200), CgA (Rabbit pAb; 1:200),
MelanA (Mouse mAb(A103); 1: 200), HMB45 (Mouse mAb(HMB45); 1: 200), Ki-67 (Mouse mAb(MIB-1);1:200). All the primary antibodies and HRP-
conjugated secondary antibodies were obtained from DAKO Inc., Denmark. Gross examination of the kidney revealed a kidney measuring
10.0 × 7.5 × 5.5 cm. On cut section of the specimen, a 2.5 × 2.5 × 2.0 cm pale mass was mainly found in the upper part of kidney and near
hilus renalis. The mass appeared as a firm grayish yellowish, solid and cystic nodule with irregular borders and extensive geographic
coagulative necrosis, infiltrating renal sinus and peri-renal fat (Figure 2A). Morphology of this renal tumor. (A) Macroscopic appearance of
the tumor. A global firm grayish yellowish tumor in the upper part of kidney and near hilus renalis, involving the renal medulla and the
cortex. (B) Histological feature of the tumor showed large areas of geographic coagulative necrosis of kidney (H&E × 100). (C) Tubules or
angulated glands irregularly infiltrating the renal parenchyma with a prominent interstitial growth pattern (H&E × 200). (D) Tumor cells
with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and large hyperchromatic nuclei with prominent nucleoli (H&E × 400). (E) Hobnail nuclei were noted in
the fibrous background (H&E × 400). (F) Microabscess like necrosis was occasionally seen with scattered atypical cells (H&E × 400).
Histological examination revealed extensive geographic coagulative necrosis with the contour of the necrotic tissues and a large amount of
debris of the dead cells. This image was firstly considered as kidney anemic infarct by some pathologists. A few atypical cell nests
embedded in the edge of the necrotic foci and the wall of the cyst were carefully found, which caused the caution as a tumor (Figure 2B).
More 10 samples taken from the whole rest mass had been analyzed, and there were much more tubules or angulated glands irregularly
infiltrating the renal parenchyma with a prominent interstitial growth pattern, which were interweaved with the normal kidney tubules around
the necrotic foci (Figure 2C). It was confirmed to be a malignant tumor that many cells in the irregular glands showed moderate to abundant
eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm and large hyperchromatic nuclei with prominent nucleoli, which were of Fuhrman nuclear grade 3 or 4.
(Figure 2D). On rare occasions, Hobnail nuclei were noted in the fibrous background (Figure 2E). Microabscess like necrosis was occasionally
seen with scatted atypical cells (Figure 2F). The desmoplasia was accompanied by a predominantly lymphocytic or occasionally mixed
inflammatory infiltrate including neutrophils and eosinophils. Immunohistochemical staining showed atypical cell nests were positive for
both CK (Figure 3A) and Vimentin (Figure 3B), partly positive for E-cadherin (Figure 3C), and weakly positive for CD10 (Figure 3D) and CK7
(not shown). They were also negative for CD31, CD34, CD56, CgA, Actin, Melan-A, HMB-45, and CK20. MIB was up to 20% in the tumor cells.
Immunohistochemical staining helped to find the involvement of the glomeruli and the vascellum by malignant tumor cells. Based on these
histological and immunohistological findings, this lesion was coincident with the diagnosis as collecting duct carcinoma (CDC) of Bellini of
the kidney, not anemic infarct. Immunohistochemistry staining for the invasive tumor. (A) pan-CK, (B) Vimentin, (C) E-Cadherin and (D) CD10
staining (IHC × 200). Collecting duct carcinoma (CDC) of the kidney is a rare renal cell carcinoma. Occasionally, focal necrosis were noted
in the foci , while CDC with extensive coagulative necrosis is very rare. In this case, because of the extensive geographic coagulative
necrosis, it was easily to be misdiagnosed as renal anemic infarct at the first sight. As known, kidney anemic infarcts tend to be wedge-
shaped foci with the occluded vessel at the apex and the periphery of the kidney forming the base, and there are no cellular atypia in the
surrounding normal tissue . In this case, with sufficient resections from different portions, the atypical tumor cells were seen to
infiltrate the upper and middle renal calyxes, and involve the glomeruli and the vascellum. The coagulative necrosis foci was also different
from infarct either in shape or the characteristics. The difference between CDC and kidney anemic infarct was shown in Table 1.
Immunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor cells were positive for CK, Vimentin, partly positive for E-cadherin, weakly positive for
CD10 and CK7, which was basically consistent with the literature . After the exclusion of the other tumors of kidney, we made the final
diagnosis as kidney collecting duct carcinoma. Comparison of the morphological difference between kidney CDC in this case and anemic infarct
of kidney The diagnostic criteria of CDC have not yet been fully established, it is often difficult and, to some extent, is one of exclusion
(See Table 2 in detail). CDC is an aggressive tumor, sometime with extensive multi-organ metastasis including the lung, liver, spleen, bone
marrow, adrenal gland, para-aortic lymph node, proximal ureter, and meninges, resulting in complex presentation . Therefore the prognosis of
CDC is poor, with approximately 70% of patients dying of disease progression within 2 years after diagnosis . In this case, the patient is
still alive 6 months later from nephrectomy, so that a long time following up is needed to judge the exact prognosis. Comparison of the
immunohistochemical features of kidney CDC and other differential diagnosis Because there were tumor areas composed with clear cells, clear
cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC) should be eliminated too. CCRCC is a typically globular tumor which commonly protrude from the renal
cortex as a round mass, tending to be well-circumscribed expansile lesions invariably with a pseudocapsule. It is in contradistinction to
the infiltrative nature of collecting duct carcinoma . Immunohistochemical staining was distinguishable to show that tumor cells of CCRCC
diffusely positive for CD10, vimentin and negative for E-cadherin, CK7, CK20, while that of CDC are positive for E-cadherin, CK7, vimentin,
partially CD10, and negative for CK20 . Renal medullary carcinoma is another distinctive tumor needed to be distinguished with CDC. Renal
medullary carcinoma occurs in younger cohort mainly in the third decade of life, with a strong male predominance (10:1) individuals of
African ancestry, and all the patients had hemoglobin abnormalities and much shorter median survival . There is marked overlap on clinical
features, histology, immuno-phenotype, patterns of metastases, and uniformly aggressive outcome between collecting duct carcinoma and renal
medullary carcinoma, suggesting a close interrelationship between them. By some views, renal medullary carcinoma is considered as a
distinctive clinicopathologic subtype within the aggressive category of carcinoma of collecting ducts of Bellini . Urothelial carcinoma of
the renal pelvis with glandular differentiation or urothelial adenocarcinoma invading the renal parenchyma may elicit desmoplastic response,
thus resembling collecting duct carcinoma. In this case, the tumor cells were positive for both CK and vimentin, and weakly positive for
CD10. Because urothelial carcinoma cells are positive for CK, not for vimentin and CD10, it was not so difficult to make proper diagnosis
with immunohistochemical markers . Renal primary neuroendocrine tumor (NET) also have trabecular nests or solid nests. The tumor cells were
largely polygonal with clear cytoplasm and indistinguishable cytoplasmic boundaries . Sometime the large polygonal tumor cells of CDC may be
indistinguishable from them. But the nuclei of NET are round to oval and uniform in size, the mitotic figures are rare. The positive
staining of pan-CK and neuroendocrine marker as CgA and Syn are helpful to make the right diagnosis. The tumor cells of epithelioid
angiomyolipoma (AML) are round to polygonal with abundant granular cytoplasm and enlarged vasicular nuclei often with prominent nucleoli,
which may be initially misdiagnosed as a high grade carcinoma as CDC. Although almost all the epithelioid angiomyolipoma lack classical tri-
phasic AML areas, it can be distinguished from CDC by immunohistochemical positive staining for Melan-A and HMB-45, and partly Actin .
Another non-epithelial tumors as renal pigmented paraganglioma and renal mesenchymal chondrosarcoma should be ruled out from the
differential diagnosis. Renal pigmented paraganglioma has the typical features of paraganglioma. The tumor cells were characteristically
arranged in nests (“Zellballen”) or trabecular patterns bound by a delicate fibrovascular stroma. They are also large round or polygonal
with round, oval, hyperchromatic nuclei. Approximately two-thirds of the tumor cells showed some degree of pigmentation. Prussian blue
staining is useful to show the abundant iron in cytoplasmic. The tumor cells are positive for CD56 and CgA, which is helpful to distinguish
from the CDC tumor cells. Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma of kidney is a very rare tumor of kidney , which is consisted of undifferentiated
spindle to oval shaped cells, with hyperchromatic nuclei and scanty cytoplasm mainly arranged in Ewing’s sarcoma-like, lamellar or
hemangiopericytomalike patterns. This pattern might be confused with CDC. Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma has also other areas demonstrated well
defined islands of cartilage, which is totally different from CDC. Herein, sufficient resection from the sample is essential. The lack of
immunoreactivity for epithelial markers as cytokeratin AE1/E3, EMA and E-cadherin is the important marker for the differential diagnosis.
Collecting duct carcinoma of Bellini of kidney is a rare but highly aggressive renal neoplasm arising from the distal portion of the
nephron. The tumor cells of CDC may invade the vascular, leading to large area coagulative necrosis, which might be misdiagnosed as kidney
infarct. On the other hand, the diagnosis of CDC should not be made before the exclusion the other kidney lesions. Written informed consent
was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available
for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CDC: Collecting duct carcinoma; CCRCC: Clear cell renal cell carcinoma; NET:
Neuroendocrine tumor; AML: Epithelioid angiomyolipoma; CT: Computed tomography. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
QX carried out pathological examination, drafted the manuscript and performed the literature review; QC performed the literature review and
collected the patient’s clinical information; NL carried out the immunohistochemical staining; ZF provided the radiological datas; ZY
participated in pathological investigations and helped to draft the manuscript .TP gave and reviewed the final histopathological diagnosis,
and revised the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Dr. Zhaohui Zhang for the
radiological support and Dr. Zhi Li for the suggestion and revision for the manuscript.
