Syphilis has been referred to as “the great imitator” due to its ability to imitate other diseases. Untreated syphilis becomes a systemic
infection that can involve almost every organ systems. Treponema pallidum has a high affinity for bone tissue, but osteitis has mainly been
described in late stages of the disease. Vertebral involvement is rare, and this is to our knowledge the first case describing syphilitic
spondylitis in early acquired syphilis. We here describe destructive osteitis in the vertebral column as the initial manifestation of early
acquired syphilis in a 24-year-old caucasian homosexual male with HIV infection. The diagnosis was reached by universal bacterial PCR and
DNA sequencing of the DNA product. It was confirmed by PCR specific for Treponema pallidum, immunohistochemistry and detection of increasing
antibody titer. As syphilis has re-emerged in Western countries and remains a worldwide common disease it is important to have in mind as a
causative agent of skeletal symptoms, especially among HIV-infected individuals or men who have sex with men (MSM). Syphilis is a sexually
transmitted disease caused by the spirochete Treponema pallidum. The presentation of the disease includes a variety of clinical symptoms as
the spirochetes can be spread through the bloodstream to all organ systems. The disease is divided into early and late syphilis. Early
syphilis includes a primary stage with a painless ulcer (chancre) and usually non-tender regional lymphadenopathy, and a secondary stage
with multiorgan involvement due to bacteremia. Secondary syphilis occurs 4–8 weeks after inoculation where T. pallidum becomes a systemic
infection. Bone involvement is a common finding in congenital and tertiary syphilis, but is seldom encountered in the early stage of
syphilis. Syphilitic bone disease begins with seeding of the deeper vascular areas of periosteum by the spirochetes with resulting
perivascular inflammatory infiltrates and subsequent formation of highly cellular granulation tissue. At this stage the pathologic process
may regress or proceed to osteolytic or osteoblastic changes in the bones . It is mainly the superficial bones that are involved (skull,
sternum, tibia and clavicle). Though treponemes have a pronounced affinity for bone tissue, osteitis is a rare manifestation of secondary
syphilis . The incidence of syphilis has had a dramatically increase during the last decade especially among men who have sex with men (MSM)
and HIV-infected individuals . With this resurgence it is important to have in mind that syphilis may present with unusual symptoms and
clinical findings. To our knowledge this is the first case describing vertebral involvement in early syphilis. A 24-year-old HIV positive
homosexual Danish male with no other chronic diseases was admitted to the hospital with four days of febrile episodes and thoracic pain with
intermittent stabbing pain in both arms. He had also had bilateral leg pain worst at night time. He denied having had any kind of rash or
genital ulcers. There had been no traumas in connection to the onset of pain. Two weeks before admission, the patient contacted the
Department of Infectious Diseases due to a sore throat. At this point physical examination was normal including a normal examination of the
oral cavity. A throat culture was negative, and the patient did not have fever. The patient had been tested positive for HIV in 2002, and
antiretroviral treatment with tenofovir/emtricitabine , atazanavir and ritonavir was initiated seven months prior to admission. Prior to
treatment initiation the CD4 nadir was 330 cells/μl, and the HIV-1 RNA was 44549 copies/ml. Syphilis testing was performed at treatment
initiation and 7 months before admission to the hospital, both serology tests were found negative. On the admission day physical examination
disclosed nothing abnormal except from severe tenderness of the processus spinosus of the second thoracic vertebrae (T2). The overlying skin
was without any signs of infection and no rash or genital ulcers were found. Laboratory test demonstrated a normal white blood cell count
4.8 × 109/l and C-reactive protein level of 109 mg/l. The CD4 count was 360 cells/μl, and HIV-1 RNA was 158 copies/ml. A QuantiFERON-TB gold
test was negative. Eight blood cultures were done, all negative for bacterial and fungal growth. Osteitis was suspected and a bone
scintigraphy was performed which revealed bilateral tibial activity as well as abnormal activity in the right side of the cranium but no
spine activity was observed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine revealed destructive lesions in C2 (the dens of axis) and T2
consistent with osteitis (Figure 1). MRI images (T1 sequences) of the affected cervical vertebra (white arrows) before (A) and after (B)
contrast enhancement. A surgical biopsy from T2 was performed, and culture from the biopsy was negative for bacterial growth. Acid-fast and
Gram stain did not reveal any microorganisms. The biopsy was then analyzed for bacterial DNA. PCR for part of the 16S rRNA gene resulted in
a 528 basepair fragment which by DNA sequencing and subsequent comparison to sequences deposited in the NCBI database showed sequence
homology with Treponema pallidum (505 out of 507 identical bases). The bacterial identification was confirmed by PCR specific for the
organism . The pathological examination revealed an inflammatory infiltrate dominated by lymphocytes and plasmacells. Immunohistochemical
analysis using polyclonal antibody against T. pallidum demonstrated several spirochetes (Figure 2). Furthermore, a reactive quantitative
rapid plasma reagin (RPR) syphilis serology was found to be positive with a 1:128 titer. As soon as the biopsy was obtained treatment was
initiated with cefuroxime 1.5 g × 3 daily. Following the diagnosis of syphilitic osteitis, treatment was changed to Ceftriaxone 2 g × 1
daily for five weeks according to the local guidelines. The thoracic pain disappeared within the first week of treatment. A follow-up MRI of
the spine performed after two weeks of treatment revealed unaltered lesions. Immunohistochemical analysis using polyclonal antibody against
T. pallidum demonstrating several spirochetes. In the case presented T. pallidum was identified as the unexpected cause of a vertebral
osteitis. Clinically significant osteitis and osteomyelitis are rare complications of secondary syphilis unlike bone involvement in
congenital and tertiary syphilis. The syphilitic bone lesions usually have origin in the periostitis but can spread to the subjacent bone.
The most frequently affected bones are tibia and the skull. In our case, an HIV positive male with early stage of syphilis, as he had a
negative syphilis serology 7 months prior to admission had osteitis. There was no recognized chancre unless the throat pain represented an
undiagnosed chancre. The nocturnal shin pain our patient described is a typical symptom of syphilitic periostitis and often accompanied by
swelling and erythema. Thus, the findings on the scintigraphy with tibial and cranial activity are compatible with periostitis. As the
osseous lesions can be hard to encounter the prevalence of bone involvement in syphilis is unknown. In one study two patients out of 851
(0.2%) had periostitis . In another x-ray study survey of the skulls of 80 patients with secondary syphilis, 7 patients (9%) had cranial
lesions . The by far largest study performed by Reynolds and Wasserman in 1942 found that only 15 patients out of 10.000 (0.15%) with
syphilis had destructive bony changes . During the last decades a number of cases of bone involvement in early syphilis have been reported .
In these cases the diagnosis has primarily been reached by radiological findings (bone scintigraphy, MRI, x-ray). Only one case of
syphilitic osteitis where the diagnosis is obtained by PCR technique has been formerly reported . In very few cases spirochetes have been
isolated from bone biopsy . Recently, increasing incidence of syphilis, especially among MSM, has been reported across Europe . In Denmark,
the number of reported cases has tripled from 2008 to 2009 and the increase continues within 2010 . In California there was a >700% increase
in primary and secondary syphilis cases reported between 1999 and 2005, and 80% of these cases involved MSM. Furthermore 60% of MSM with
syphilis were co-infected with HIV . The increasing incidence of STD may indicate a decrease in the safe sex practice that may be due to the
decreased awareness of HIV transmission after well established antiretroviral treatment. With this in mind syphilitic osteitis should be
considered for at-risk patients with bone symptoms or with lytic bone lesions. In conclusion we describe an atypical presentation of
syphilis in a young HIV infected male with osteitis in vertebrae including the dens of axis caused by T pallidum. MRI changes lead to bone
biopsy and subsequently the diagnosis of syphilis obtained by specific PCR technique. The rare location of a syphilitic osteitis and the
diagnostic approach make this case unique. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and
accompanying images. HIV: Human immunodeficiency virus; PCR: Polymerase chain reaction; MSM: Men who have sex with men; HAART: Highly Active
retrovirale treatment; STD: Sexual transmitted diseases; cART: Combination antiretroviral treatment; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. TF and SDN were clinical responsible. CE responsible for CT–scan and description. CW
Responsible forpathological examinations. MK responsible for 16S PCR and syphilis specific PCR. All authors have read the manuscript and
accepted its final version. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/13/347/prepub
