Esthesioneuroblatoma (Olfactory neuroblastoma) is a rare malignant neoplasm arising from the olfactory epithelium with bimodal age
distribution between with first peak in second decades and second peak in sixth decade. Proptosis due to esthesioneuroblastoma is one of the
rare causes. They have a long natural history characterized by frequent local or regional recurrence. Computed tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging are the imaging modalities for diagnosing these tumors. A multidisciplinary approach with surgery and radiation therapy is
an excellent treatment options for these tumors with chemotherapy being used to treat advanced or recurrent disease. Esthesioneuroblastoma
(olfactory neuroblastoma) is a rare neuroectodermal malignant neoplasm that originates from the olfactory sensory epithelium . It accounts
for upto 5.0% of malignant tumors of the nasal cavity. Berger et al. in 1924 was first to describe this disease. The incidence curve for
this disease has a bimodal shape with the first peak in the 2nd decade and 2nd peak in 6th decade with roughly equal sex distribution .
Patients present with nonspecific symptoms of nasal obstruction, epistaxis, headache, pain, visual disturbances, anosmia. Owing to the
nonspecific nature of the presenting symptoms, patients often have a long history prior to diagnosis . Tumors involving the orbital area
generally present with epiphora, decreased visual acuity and proptosis . We report a case of esthesioneuroblastoma in 60 years old male who
presented with proptosis and nasal obstruction, diagnosed on computed tomography. A 60 years old male presented to with complaints of nasal
obstruction, nasal bleeding and bulging of left eye with decreased vision for 1.5 years. He also noticed a rapidly increasing swelling over
nasal bridge for 4 months and associated headache and neck pain. There was insignificant past history and family history. On systemic
examination, there was loss of smell sensation. Local examination revealed a diffuse, firm, nontender swelling with ill-defined margins over
the nasal bridge, glabella and over left maxillary region. There was no rise in local temperature. Pinkish mass was visible in both nostrils
with purulent nasal discharge. There was proptosis of left eye and mild lateral deviation with limited eyeball movement; however visual
acuity was normal. There is no evidence of lymphadenopathy. Blood profile demonstrates normal limits of complete blood count, renal function
test and liver function test. Computed tomography (CT) scan of paranasal sinuses including orbit was performed in axial section with coronal
and sagittal reconstructions. CT revealed large, ill-defined, heterogeneously enhancing soft tissue density mass in both nasal cavities and
ethmoid sinuses with destroyed nasal septum (Figure 1A, 1B). There was destruction of medial wall of left maxillary sinus and left lateral
nasal wall with extension into left maxillary antrum. Laterally, the mass extended into the left infratemporal region with destruction of
the postero-lateral wall of left maxillary sinus (Figure 1C, 1D, 2A). There was also destruction of medial wall of left orbit with
intraorbital extension causing antero-latero-inferior displacement of the eyeball resulting in proptosis (Figure 1A, 2B). The mass extended
superiorly involving frontal sinuses; however cribriform plate was normal. There was no intracranial extension. Inferiorly, there was
destruction of hard palate with intraoral extension (Figure 1C, 1D). Posteriorly, it was extending into nasopharynx through choana and
destruction of anterior sphenoid sinus wall extending into sinus (Figure 2A, 2B). CT images in soft tissue window showing mass in ethmoid
sinus and nasal cavity extending into the left orbit. A &B: Axial section CT image showing heterogeneously enhancing soft tissue density
mass in bilateral ethmoid sinuses and both nasal cavities with bony destruction and extension into left orbit causing proptosis. C &D: Axial
and coronal section CT images showing lateral extension of the mass into left infratemporal region with destruction of the postero-lateral
wall of left maxillary sinus. CT images in bone window showing bony destruction. A &B: Axial section CT images (bone window) showing
destruction of medial and postero-lateral wall of left maxillary sinus, left lateral wall of nasal cavity, nasal septum, ethmoid sinus and
medial wall of left orbit by the mass. Histopathology revealed monomorphic malignant round cell tumour with rossette formation, consistent
with esthesioneuroblastoma. Patient was advised for chemotherapy/radiotherapy and was referred to oncology institute. Esthesioneuroblastoma
has been reported to originate from sphenopalatine ganglion, vomeronasal organ of Jacobson, neuroepithelial cells of the olfactory membrane,
the ectopic olfactory epithelium in the nasal mucosa and the amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation cells . It is a locally infiltrating
malignant neoplasm; frequently invades the skull base, orbit and adjacent soft tissue from the typical “cribriform” site. In our patient,
the neoplasm has infiltrated the left orbit through destruction of medial orbital wall resulting in proptosis. Distant and regional
metastases are seen in about 14–38% of cases at the time of diagnosis; cervical lymph nodes, lung and bone being the frequently involved
sites . Esthesioneuroblastoma should be differentiated from other malignant tumors in anterior skull base. CT and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) are helpful to identify the margin and spread approaches of the tumor. Fine-cut CT scan (3 mm slice thickness) with direct coronal
imaging is the initial radiological study of choice . On CT scan, the tumor usually present with a heterogeneous mass, sometimes with focal
necrosis or calcification. The paranasal sinuses and anterior skull base are often destroyed, while the clivus is intact. It appears as
isointense on T1-weighted and hyperintense on T2-weighted MR images with heterogeneous enhancement on gadolinium contrast study. MRI help to
differentiate tumour from obstructed secretions in paranasal sinuses, determining meningeal and extradural spread and to detect perineural
spread . Angiography demonstrates tumour blush in majority of cases . There are several staging systems described for olfactory
neuroblastoma; Kadish system has been the frequently used staging system with good prognostic correlation. It has divided the tumors in
three stages: Stage A- tumors restricted to the nasal cavity; Stage B- tumors involving the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses and Stage C-
tumors extending to beyond the paranasal sinuses (orbit, skull base or metastasis). Differential diagnosis of esthesioneuroblastoma includes
inverting papilloma, squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, sinonasal undifferentiated carcinoma, hemangioma and metastasis. In addition
to imaging, histopathological correlation is must in making diagnosis . Esthesioneuroblastomas are histologically similar to adrenal or
sympathetic ganglionic neuroblastomas and retinoblastomas . On histopathology, the presence of fibrillary intercellular background along
with Homer-Wright rosettes is considered to be diagnostic of esthesioneuroblastoma . Open craniofacial resection or endonasal endoscopic
resection is done for stage A and B tumors. Chemotherapy is usually implemented in patients with locally advanced, metastatic or recurrent
disease . The commonly used chemotherapy combinations are cyclophosphamide plus vincristine and cisplatin-based regimens . The combination
of surgery and radiotherapy is the most frequent treatment approach with highest cure rates, however definitive radiotherapy as a
conservative management is also used. Despite definitive local therapy, local recurrence and distant metastases have been reported with the
metastasis being 25.0-50.0% of cases. In patients with recurrent or metastatic olfactory neuroblastoma, chemotherapy is therefore often
implemented. Radiotherapy is usually adopted as an adjuvant following surgery, especially for cases with neck metastasis or as a neoadjuvant
before surgery . Compared with other sinonasal malignancies, the prognosis of esthesioneuroblastoma is much better, with a disease-free
survival at 5 years of more than 80.0% . In conclusion, clinicians should be aware of this malignant disease and proptosis should be
considered as one of the differential diagnosis of esthesioneuroblastoma. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging are the
modalities of choice in diagnosing, looking for extent and staging of tumor in esthesioneuroblastoma. A multidisciplinary approach with
surgery and radiation therapy is the treatment options for these tumors with chemotherapy being used to treat advanced or recurrent disease.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. CT: Computed tomography; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging. Authors
declare no conflict of interest. SA has done substantial contributions to conception and design, acquisition of data, Analysis and
interpretation of data, drafting the article, revising it critically for important intellectual content and final approval of the version to
be published. KA has done analysis and interpretation of data, revising it critically for important intellectual content, final approval of
the version to be published. KD has done substantial contributions to conception and design, revising it critically for important
intellectual content and final approval of the version to be published. MKG has done substantial contributions to conception and design,
revising it critically for important intellectual content and final approval of the version to be published. MFA has done drafting the
article, revising it critically for important intellectual content and final approval of the version to be published. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. The corresponding author is the guarantor of submission.
