This report is of a 32 year old man who presented with complains of pain, swelling and deformity of right wrist of four weeks duration. He
gave history of road traffic accident four weeks back leading to injury to right wrist; Preoperative radiographs and C.T. scan images were
suggestive of trans-scaphoid dislocation of the proximal row of wrist. A volar and dorsal approach were used to reduce this complex
dislocation but was not successful. Wrist arthodesis was performed after doing proximal row carpectomy. One year follow-up of the patient
showed fair result with grip strength of 85% to contralateral side and modified Mayo wrist score of 65 at one year. Dislocation of wrist is
severe injury resulting from extreme position of the wrist. Trans-scaphoid perilunate dislocation is the most common dislocation pattern.
Isolated dislocation of carpal bone has been described of which lunate dislocation is the most common isolated carpal bone dislocation. Rare
patterns involve the dislocation of the scaphoid pisiform triquetrum trapezium trapezoid capitate hammate and scapholunate as a unit.
Dislocation of the proximal row is not described in English literature. The closest injury pattern described is transverse fractures of the
scaphoid, triquetrum, lunate, and pisiform with volar dislocation to the mid-forearm . A thirty two year old right hand dominated male
patient presented with complaints of swelling, pain on movements, limited movements, and loss of grip strength of right wrist of four weekâ€˜s
duration. The patient had a road traffic accident four weeks back leading to high velocity injury and fall on the outstretched hand with
wrist in dorsiflexion and radial deviation. The patient consulted a local practioner who treated him in a plaster of Paris slab for two
weeks. The slab was removed after two weeks, the patient noticed a decrease in the swelling but continued to have pain, limited movements
and loss of grip strength for which he was referred to our hospital which is the Apex centre of the country. The consulted four weeks after
the injury for which x rays (Figure 1) were done. The x-rays, done four weeks after the injury, were suggestive of fracture scaphoid and
dislocation of the proximal row of carpals. C.T. scan (Figure 2) was done after reviewing the X-rays which confirmed the diagnosis. The
patient was advised proximal row carpectomy or wrist arthodesis if reduction of carpals failed since the injury was old. The patient was
taken for surgery under guarded prognosis with consent for wrist arthrodesis if open reduction fails. Volar and dorsal approaches were used
to open the wrist joint. The proximal pole of scaphoid, lunate, triquetrum and pisiform were found to be dislocated as a unit (Figure 3).
Decompression of the carpal tunnel was done and reduction of the proximal row was attempted but failed. Dislocated proximal row was excised
(Figure 4) and wrist arthodesis was performed with the wrist in neutral position. The excised carpal bones were crushed and used as bone
graft. The patient was mobilised two weeks after the surgery and was followed for one year. The follow-up x-rays showed sound union (Figure
5). The patient showed fair result with grip strength of 85% to contralateral side and modified Mayo wrist score of 65 at one year.
Radiographs showing (a) dislocated proximal pole of scaphoid (Sp), lunate(L), triquetrum(T) and pisiform(P) in PA view, (b) showing volar
subluxation of the lunate in lateral view (a),(b),(c): Computed tomography 3D images showing dislocated proximal row scaphoid (Sp),
lunate(L), triquetrum(T) and pisiform(P) pushing the capitulam(C) Intraoperative photograph showing dislocated Proximal pole scaphoid (Sp)
and lunate(L) Surgically removed proximal fragment of scaphoid (Sp), lunate (L) and triquetrum (T) AP (a) and Lateral (b) radiographs
showing sound union at one year follow up The wrist is relatively a rare joint to dislocate due to strong volar and dorsal ligaments and the
tough attachment of the capsule. Most of the variations of wrist dislocation occur around the lunate as lunate being the most tightly bound
carpal to the radius. In 1980, Mayfield staged a series of experiments; the results of these experiments led him to develop a new
classification system of perilunate dislocations . The present case will be among the Mayfield stage four of perilunate dislocations in
which the lunate subluxates volarly. The major difference between this case and previously reported cases is that the proximal pole of
scaphoid, lunate, triquetrum and pisiform dislocated volarly as a unit. The most common pattern among the perilunar dislocations is the
stage one or the disruption of scapholunate ligament which was surprisingly intact in this case as the scaphoid fractured at its waist.
Despite the early diagnosis and treatment results still remain dependent upon the time of intervention. About 25% of the cases of most
common dislocation pattern are missed. The rare patterns of injuries are definitely more prone to be missed due to lack of careful evalution
of the roentograms. Any dislocation pattern of carpal bones is an emergency and should be reduced after providing adequate analgesia by
haematoma block or general anaesthesia. Delay in treatment affects the outcome of treatment. Our case presented after four weeks of injury
so it was expected that the reduction would be difficult, hence he was given an option of wrist arthodesis or proximal row carpectomy. The
patient was a manual worker and hence he opted for wrist arthodesis. One year after the surgery he has fared well. We conclude that the rare
dislocation pattern as this case was, presents as a challenge to orthopaedic surgeon and diagnosis should not be missed, as later
presentation leads to difficulty in reduction. Salvage procedures such as wrist arthodesis and proximal row carpectomy are the good
alternative procedures with fair results. The authors declare no competing interest. Mohammed Tahir Ansari: Assisted surgery and writer of
the manuscript; P.P. Kotwal: Chief surgeon of the case and guide for formulating the case; Laxman Rijal: Modification in the language and
taking up the photographs. All the authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript.
