Ankyloblepharon is defined by partial or complete adhesion of the ciliary edges of superior and inferior eyelids. It is usually a sporadic
isolated malformation in which the upper and lower lids are joined by tags. Although it is an uncommon and benign condition, its presence
should alert the clinician to the possibility of other important disorders. We report a case of a new born who had a sporadic
ankyloblepharon, treated one day after birth. Ankyloblepharon describes direct fusion of the lids. It is a rare congenital abnormality, in
which single or multiple strands of fine connective tissue join the upper and lower lids anywhere along the lid but never at the lateral or
medial canthus . These strands are extensible, and by forcibly opening the lids their length can be almost doubled. The tissue invariably
arises from the grey line, anterior to the meibomian gland orifices and posterior the cilia. A female neonate was referred for assessment of
his right eyelids. She was born at term, to a primigravid mother, weighing 3400 g. Pregnancy and delivery were unremarkable. There was no
family history of congenital anomalies or consanguinity. The baby was noted to have fused right eyelids at birth; apart from this, she was
perfectly healthy. A detailed pediatric assessment failed to reveal any other congenital abnormalities. Ocular examination showed partial
fusion of his right upper and lower eyelids by a central narrow band of tissue, arising from the grey lines (Figure 1). Full eyelid opening
was impaired and interpalpebral aperture was limited to 3.5 mm. Right eye examination was normal. The band of tissue was excised with Vannas
scissors at the level of each eyelid margin (Figure 2). The procedure was performed under sedation. There was a limited bleeding. Subsequent
right eye examination did not reveal any other pathology. At her follow up appointment 5 months later, no abnormality was noted. Photograph
of the neonate with ankyloblepharon filiforme adnatum showing partial fusion of the right upper and lower eyelids by a band of tissue Right
eye immediately after adhesion separation Ankyloblepharon filiforme adnatum (AFA) is a rare benign congenital anomaly, first described by
Von Hasner in 1881. Fusion of the eyelid margins is a normal stage in human development, but an abnormal occurrence at birth. The developing
eyelid margins remain fused until the fifth gestational month, but may not be completely separated until the seventh month. Ankyloblepharon
is characterized by full thickness fusion of the lid margins. AFA describes single or multiple bands of tissue joining the upper and lower
eyelids either unilaterally or bilaterally. The histology of these connecting strands has been shown to consist of vascularised central core
surrounded by stratifed squamous epithelium . It may present as an isolated congenital defect such as in our patient. However, it is always
important to actively look for coexisting pathology. The ophthalmic association of AFA is iridogoniodysgenesis with juvenile glaucoma . It
has been reported in the context of trisomy 18 (Edwardsâ€² syndrome) , Hay-Wells syndrome (a variant of the ectodactyly-ectodermal dysplasia-
cleft lip palate syndrome) [4, 5], the popliteal pterygium syndrome (characterized by intercrural webbing of the lower limbs), and CHANDS
(curly hair-ankyloblepharon-nail dysplasia syndrome). Other associations may include hydrocephalus, meningocele, an imperforate anus,
bilateral syndactyly, infantile glaucoma and cardiac problems such as patent ductus arteriosus and ventricular septal defects . Detailed
systemic assessment by an experienced pediatrician is therefore imperative in the management of AFA. Rosenman et al [7, 8] divide AFA into
four subgroups (Table 1) and indicated that groups I and II were sporadic and groups III and IV were autosomal dominant with variable
expressivity. Bacal et al suggested a fifth group: AFA in association with chromosomal abnormalities. Classification of ankyloblepharon
filiforme adnatum The aetiology of this abnormality is unknown and a number of theories have been proposed. The currently accepted theory is
that this condition is due to an interplay of temporary epithelial arrest and rapid mesenchymal proliferation, allowing union of lids at
abnormal positions . This case report demonstrates the simplicity in treating AFA. Surgical correction should be performed promptly to
minimize any risk of amblyopia, and enable full examination of the eye. It also highlights that its presence should alert the clinician to
the possibility of an underlying congenital disorder. Ankyloblepharon filiforme adnatum is a rare but potentially amblyogenic congenital
abnormality of the eyelids. Treatment should be performed to minimize the risk of amblyopia. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. All the authors contributed in the case management, BA made the case report. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
