Metastases to intramammary nodes have been shown to be an independent predictor of poor outcome in patients with breast cancer, such as
axillary lymph node metastases. The detection and accurate characterization of these nodes preoperatively is thus crucial for the staging
and planning of treatment for breast carcinoma, particularly in cases with axillary lymph node negative disease as it upgrades the disease
staging. We herein report the first case where we detected an intra-mammary node on specimen MRI after the primary pathological gross
specimen evaluation failed to detect the node. Intramammary nodes are frequently diagnosed preoperatively on various imaging modalities in
patients with breast carcinoma. We herein discuss a case where an intramammary node in a case of axillary node negative carcinoma breast was
localized using post-mastectomy specimen MRI and was proven to be malignant; hence, it upstaged the disease and even altered the management.
We intend to highlight the importance of these often neglected nodes and to emphasize the need of scrupulous radiological and pathological
examinations in detecting these nodes, and thereby improve the management of patients suffering from breast carcinoma. A 61-year-old female
was presented to the breast clinic with complaints of a lump in the right breast since the past 3 months. On examination, a lump was
palpated in the right upper-outer quadrant without any palpable axillary nodes. The contralateral breast and axilla were clear. Mammography
showed a high density lesion in the upper outer quadrant of the right breast with perilesional architectural distortion and spiculations
(Fig. 1A). The MRI showed a soft tissue mass showing irregular spiculated margins in the upper outer quadrant of the right breast which was
hypointense on T1W images and hyperintense on Short Tau (t) (inversion time) Inversion Recovery (STIR) images; further, it showed areas of
restricted diffusion at the periphery. Another similar appearing nodular lesion was noted at the right 12 o'clock position measuring
approximately 5 mm (Fig. 1B-E). It showed a homogeneous contrast enhancement with rapid increase in signal intensity on the postcontrast
scan, followed by a washout-type II signal intensity curve favoring a malignant lesion. A second-look ultrasound examination was performed,
presenting a tiny hypoechoic nodule (Fig. 1F). With the lesion being small, an ultrasound-guided FNAC was attempted in the same sitting,
which was negative for malignancy. The lesion was classified as indeterminate and the patient underwent modified right radical mastectomy
with axillary node sampling. Sentinel lymph node biopsy and lymphoscintigraphy are not routinely performed at out institution. The final
histopathology was reported as infiltrating ductal carcinoma; grade II without nodal involvement as the axillary nodes were negative. The
smaller lesion was not evaluated in pathological grossing owing to its size. As the lesion was highly suspicious for malignancy, the
resected pathology specimen was subjected to an MRI examination .The specimen MRI confirmed the STIR hyperintense lesion observed previously
(Fig. 1G). The lesion was then localized under MR guidance and methylene blue was injected at the site (Fig. 1H). The specimen was sent back
for regrossing and pathology examination. Additional sections were taken from the marked region, which showed intramammary node with
metastasis from ductal carcinoma without perinodal extension (Fig. 1I). Thus, the disease was then labeled as follows: carcinoma with
axillary node-negative but metastatic intramammary node, which upgraded the disease to stage II. The patient was placed on adjuvant systemic
therapy and close follow-up, as the presence of intramammary node correlates with poorer overall prognosis. Development of distant
metastases is the major cause of mortality and morbidity in patients with breast cancer. Axillary node metastases have proven to be the most
important prognostic indicator, and are significantly associated with decreased disease free survival and overall survival (1). Intramammary
nodes have been detected on pre-operative imaging modalities, such as mammography and USG, during surgery and post-operatively in the
dissected specimens. However, the clinical significance of a metastatic intramammary node is not well established. Intramammary lymph nodes
(IMLN) have been reported in approximately 5% of patients undergoing mammography (2). Although they can be seen in any quadrant, they are
most commonly located in the upper outer quadrant (3). Intramammary lymph node should be completely surrounded by breast parenchyma, a
criteria which helps to distinguish them from inferior axillary nodes which also overlie the pectoral muscles region on mammography (4).
Intramammary lymph nodes are considered normal if they have the following characteristics: well-defined, round to oval moderate density,
contain a radiolucent fatty hilum and measure less than 1 cm (5). On ultrasound, benign intramammary node appears as a ovoid, isoechoic or
slightly hypoechoic nodule with an echogenic fatty hilum (5, 6). The sensitivity of our current imaging method in the detection of
intramammary node metastases is low (7). The reported incidence of IMLNs varies widely from less than 1% to almost 50%. This wide
variability depends on the method of identification, (radiographic, surgical or pathological reporting) and how meticulously the pathology
specimens were scrutinized (8). For example, in the technique used by McSweeney and Egan (9), the breast specimens were sliced into 5 mm-
thick sections and IMLN were identified in 29% of breasts with carcinoma and in 47% of benign breasts. It has been shown that scrupulous
pathological analysis is superior to imaging studies, lymphoscintigraphy or retrospective database reviews at identifying IMLNs (8). In our
case, however, the node was detected on imaging and was missed on pathology examination. The therapeutic significance of positive IMLNs is
not yet well-established. These are the potential sites for regional spread from breast cancer; moreover, metastases to these sites have
been reported up to 9.8% of operable breast cancer (1, 9, 10). IMLN does not find a separate mention in the current AJCC staging manual for
breast cancer and a metastatic IMLN is considered equivalent to an axillary node and thus, labels the disease as N1 (11). The presence of
metastatic IMLN correlated with poorer prognosis in patients with stage I disease, whereas it had no effect on the prognosis of patients
with stage II disease (9). Various studies have established that intramammary lymph node metastases are an independent predictor of poor
outcome (poor disease-free survival, disease-specific survival and overall survival) in patients with breast carcinoma compared with
intramammary negative patients (1, 7, 12). The issue which needs attention is the case wherein there are isolated metastases to the IMLN
with negative axillary metastases. Guth et al. (10) in their study have reiterated the finding that patients with positive IMLNs have more
aggressive cancer, with higher grade and stage, higher rates of lymphovascular invasion and axillary nodal disease and more frequent
multifocal disease; hence, their presence mandates axillary dissection and influences adjuvant therapy. Further, Hogan et al. (1) report a
case wherein a patient had a benign axillary sentinel lymph node with metastatic intramammary lymph node; hence, axillary dissection was
deferred. However the patient developed a recurrence in the axilla later. In addition, intramammary lymph node metastases are a greater
predictor of additional nodal disease than a metastatic axillary sentinel lymph biopsy (1). Thus, the presence of IMLNs has important
clinical implications. It is essential to detect these on pre-operative imaging and to evaluate them by histopathological examination. Post-
operatively, the excised breast specimens should be carefully examined in order to detect the presence of metastatic intramammary nodes. The
radiologist should communicate the imaging findings to the pathologist so that these smaller nodes are also accurately characterized. Post-
operative specimen USG or MRI can be a useful aid to guide the pathologist in cases where there is a high index of suspicion and the routine
specimen examination has failed to detect these nodes. The detection and accurate characterization of IMLNs nodes preoperatively is crucial
for the staging and planning of treatment for breast carcinoma, particularly in cases with axillary lymph node negative disease as it
upgrades the disease and warrants further axillary dissection; hence, such patients then become candidates for aggressive adjuvant systemic
therapy. It is important not only for clinicians but also for radiologists and pathologists to be aware of the prognostic implications
associated with these nodes in order to ensure prompt diagnosis. A good collaboration between the three can ensure higher detection of these
often neglected nodes and ultimately improve patient care. Digital mammography (A), magnetic resonance imaging of the breast (B-E),
targetted USG (F), post opearative specimen MRI (G), photograph of resected specimen (H), and photomicrograph from obtained after
localisation (I). A. Mammogram of right breast shows mixed fibrofatty and glandular parenchyma with high density mass in upper outer
quadrant of right breast with perilesional architectural distortion and spiculations measuring approximately 1.3 Ã— 1.1 cm. Centimeter sized
axillary node is also noted. Other than these, no other suspicious lesion is noted. Left breast was normal. B-E. Precontrast axial T1W
depicting tiny hypointense nodule noted at 12 o'clock position in right breast (B) which appears hyperintense on precontrast (C).
Postcontrast T1W axial (D) and sagittal images (E) of breast showing nodule in right breast. STIR = Short Tau Inversion Recovery, T1W = T1
weighted F. Ultrasonography of right breast showing tiny hypoechoic nodule with rim of hyperechoic tissue in 12 o'clock position. FNAC was
performed in same setting, which was negative for malignancy. G. STIR MRI sequence of resected breast specimen shows hyperintense nodule in
specimen. H. Photograph of resected specimen with methylene blue injected at suspicious site, which was localized using STIR MRI sequence.
I. Photomicrograph obtained from site after localization of lesion using methylene blue shows metastatic ductal carcinoma cells along
sinuses (HFE: 100). STIR = Short Tau Inversion Recovery,
