Mediastinal inflammatory pseudotumor is a rare benign disease with its capability for local invasion and rapid growth. We present a case of
middle-mediastinal inflammatory pseudotumor and report its contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography, 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography/computed tomography and pathologic findings. Inflammatory pseudotumor is an uncommon benign disease mimicking
malignancy. It has been reported to occur mostly in young people and to be found in nearly every site of the body, most commonly involving
the lungs and orbit (1). The radiographic features are quite nonspecific and various, and the definitive diagnosis is based on the
histological evaluation of tissue specimens composed of fibrosis, necrosis, granulomatous reaction and various cell types including
histiocytes, myofibroblasts, plasma cells, and lymphocytes (1). Inflammatory pseudotumor arising purely in the mediastinum is very rare,
with only few reported cases in the literature (2, 3). Furthermore, there is only one case presenting the disease with
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) (2). We report a case of middle-mediastinal
inflammatory pseudotumor of a patient with a history of acute lymphoblastic leukemia, which showed moderate and heterogeneous 18F-FDG
accumulation on PET/CT. A 25-year-old male had a chest X-ray taken as part of a routine health examination; the results showed a large mass
in the right paratracheal space (Fig. 1A). He had had acute lymphoblastic leukemia 11 years earlier but was in complete remission. He was
asymptomatic, had no pain, cough, or dyspnea. His physical examination was normal, and all laboratory tests were within normal limits except
mild leukocytosis (12.1 × 103/µL, normal range 3.9-9.7). Contrast-enhanced chest CT and 18F-FDG PET/CT were performed to rule out malignant
lymphadenopathy (Fig. 1B-D). The mass showed mild homogeneous enhancement with a longitudinal dimension of approximately 8.0 cm in the right
paratracheal space in the transaxial view on contrast-enhanced chest CT (Brilliance CT 16-slice, Philips Medical Systems, Cleveland, OH,
USA). No abnormality was observed in the lung parenchyma (Fig. 1B). The patient underwent 18F-FDG PET/CT (Discovery STe scanner, GE
Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI, USA) after fasting for at least 6 hours. Unenhanced CT was performed by a continuous spiral technique using a
16-slice helical CT (120 KeV, 80-200 mAs with AutomA mode, a section width of 3.75 mm) 60 minutes after injection of 370 MBq 18F-FDG. After
CT scan, an emission scan was obtained from the thigh to the head for 3 minutes per frame in the 3-dimensional (3D) mode. Attenuation-
corrected PET images using CT data were reconstructed by a 3D ordered-subsets expectation maximization algorithm (20 subsets, 2 iterations).
A huge mass with lobulated borders was found in the right paratracheal space; the mean Hounsfield unit of the mass was 36 on unenhanced CT
of 18F-FDG PET/CT. On PET images, the mass showed heterogeneous 18F-FDG uptake, with the maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 5.0
(Fig. 1C, D). No 18F-FDG uptake suggesting metastases was observed on PET/CT. These clinical and radiological findings suggested malignant
lymphadenopathy associated with recurrent leukemia. The patient underwent mediastinoscopic biopsy. Histopathology suggested an inflammatory
pseudotumor. The mass was removed via thoracotomy. The tumor was a multinodular mass, measuring about 8 × 6 × 5 cm. On the cut section, the
mass was lobulated by intervening fibrous tissue, showing a yellow-brown or yellow-white color with a myxoid character. Histopathologically,
the tumor contained multifocal patchy infiltration of B and T lymphoid cells, plasma cells, histiocytes, and fibroblastic cells in a
fibrocollagenous stroma (Fig. 1E, F). The final diagnosis was an inflammatory pseudotumor, fibrohistiocytic type. Inflammatory pseudotumor
is an uncommon benign disease of unknown etiology, mimicking malignancy both clinically and radiologically. Trauma, surgical inflammation,
immune-autoimmune condition, infection or other malignancies were supposed to be associated with inflammatory pseudotumor (1, 4).
Histologically, inflammatory pseudotumor is composed of fibrosis, necrosis, granulomatous reaction and various inflammatory cells including
histiocytes, myofibroblasts, plasma cells, and lymphocytes (1). This histologic complexity have caused inflammatory pseudotumor to be
described by various names, such as plasma cell granuloma, inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, histiocytoma, xanthoma, fibroxanthoma,
xanthogranuloma, and plasma cell-histiocytoma complex (4). They are most common in the lungs and orbit, but have been reported in nearly
every part of the body. They occur most frequently in children and adolescents, but can occur in older persons (1). Patients present with
diverse symptoms depending on the site of the lesion, including fever, weight loss, malaise, growth retardation, and symptoms related to
mass effect (1). Radiographic findings are nonspecific and various, possibly due to varying degrees of fibrosis, cellular infiltration and
dynamic change during the inflammatory process (5). Inflammatory pseudotumor has low, equal, or high attenuation compared with the
surrounding tissue on CT. Contrast-enhanced CT may show a homogeneous or heterogeneous lesion. The characteristics of the imaging findings
depend on the site of origin of the lesion (1). Several cases of inflammatory pseudotumor in the lung, liver, kidney, colon and spleen have
been reported with 18F-FDG PET/CT images. They showed diverse features, i.e., moderate to intense, and focal to heterogeneous 18F-FDG uptake
(1). 18F-FDG PET/CT is highly sensitive, but not specific for the primary diagnosis of inflammatory pseudotumor. However, it could be useful
for monitoring treatment response in patients with non-surgical treatment (2, 6). An inflammatory pseudotumor arising solely in the
mediastinum is very rare, and few cases have been reported (2, 3). Among the reported, only one case included 18F-FDG PET/CT images (2). In
the report, a subcarinal mass with well-defined borders showed similar attenuation to mediastinal great vessels on unenhanced CT. The PET
image demonstrated intense and homogeneous 18F-FDG uptake, but SUVmax was not measured. In our case, 18F-FDG PET/CT demonstrated a huge
right paratracheal mass with a similar attenuation value as that of the aortic arch. The 18F-FDG uptake of the mass was moderate and
heterogeneous. The 18F-FDG uptake of inflammatory pseudotumor may be high, but its activity and uptake pattern can be varied depending on
the amount of fibrosis and cellular components within the mass. In the present case, the contrast-enhanced chest CT revealed mild
homogeneous enhancement in the mass. This feature may reflect mildly increased vascularity of the mass, possibly due to inflammation.
However, 18F-FDG uptake was moderate and heterogeneous on the PET images. Increased 18F-FDG uptake may reflect the activity of inflammatory
cells. Multifocal and patchy infiltration of inflammatory cells in the lobulated mass by intervening fibrous tissue may result in
heterogeneous 18F-FDG uptake of the mass. Such varying degrees and distribution of inflammatory activity may be the reason for the diverse
features of 18F-FDG accumulation of inflammatory pseudotumor. Since the patient had a history of complete remission of acute lymphoblastic
leukemia, malignant lymphadenopathy associated with recurrent leukemia was suggested. However, some malignancies such as small cell lung
carcinoma, lymphoma and primary malignant fibrous histiocytoma can be presented with a hypermetabolic solitary middle-mediastinal mass on
18F-FDG PET/CT. Thymoma, schwannoma, teratoma, hibernoma, hemangioma and sarcoidosis developing in the middle mediastinum can show 18F-FDG
accumulation and are benign (7-10). However, non-FDG-avid tumors such as bronchogenic cysts and pericardial cysts can be excluded from the
differential diagnosis of middle-mediastinal inflammatory pseudotumor (10). Therefore, it may be challenging to differentiate an
inflammatory pseudotumor from other middle-mediastinal neoplasms based on the pattern of 18F-FDG uptake. Imaging and histopathologic
findings of mediastinal inflammatory pseudotumor. A. Chest X-ray showed large mass in right upper mediastinum. B. Contrast-enhanced chest CT
demonstrated bulky mass in right paratracheal space with mild homogeneous enhancement. C, D. 18F-FDG PET/CT (C. maximum intensity
projection, D. fusion transaxial image) showed heterogeneous FDG accumulation in huge right paratracheal mass (SUVmax = 5.0). SUVmax =
maximum standardized uptake value, 18F-FDG = 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose. On histopathologic examination, tumor was composed of lymphoid cells,
plasma cells, histiocytes and fibroblastic cells in fibrocollagenous stroma (E. hematoxylin-eosin stain, × 400). Immunohistochemical
analysis revealed that CD163 was positive to histiocytes but negative to fibroblastic spindle cells (F. × 400).
