The therapeutic potential of human multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells, especially human adipose tissue-derived stem cells (hASC), is
promising. However, there are concerns about the safety of infusion of hASC in human. Recently, we have experienced pulmonary embolism and
infarct among family members who have taken multiple infusions of intravenous autologous hASC therapy. A 41-year-old man presented with
chest pain for one month. Chest CT showed multiple pulmonary artery embolism and infarct at right lung. Serum D-dimer was 0.8 µg/mL (normal;
0-0.5 µg/mL). He had received intravenous autologous adipose tissue-derived stem cell therapy for cervical herniated intervertebral disc
three times (one, two, and three months prior to the visit). His parents also received the same therapy five times and their chest CT also
showed multiple pulmonary embolism. These cases represent artificial pulmonary embolisms and infarct after IV injection of hASC. Follow-up
chest CT showed spontaneous resolution of lesions in all three patients. The most common application of stem cell therapy in medicine is to
replace cell lines that have been lost or destroyed.1 Adult human adipose tissue originates from the embryonic mesoderm, and represents an
abundant and less invasive source of mesenchymal stem cells than bone marrow.2 Human adipose tissue-derived stem cells (hASC) are an
attractive cell source for generating other cells because these cells can secrete multiple growth factors and cytokines that exert
beneficial effects on organ or injured tissue.3 hASC can be easily isolated from routine liposuction and reconstructive surgery waste
materials. The accessibility, abundance, and immunosuppressive properties of hASC have attracted attention for uses in regenerative
medicine.4 Despite this potential, however, hASC therapy in general is in its infancy. Problems, including heterogeneity of stem cells,
uncertainty of correct differentiation into target tissue, and the risk of tumor formation, still remain to be addressed before application
is justified in clinical settings.5 In addition to these difficulties, stem cell therapy can produce unexpected outcomes depending on the
route of administration. Recently, we have observed pulmonary embolism and infarct among family members (index patient and his parents) who
have taken multiple infusions of intravenous autologous adipose tissue-derived stem cells. A forty-one year old man visited our hospital
because of chest pain starting one month earlier. During the diagnostic work-up, chest CT revealed wedge-shaped consolidation at the
subpleural area of the right upper lobe (Fig. 1A). In addition, multiple emboli were found in small pulmonary artery branches of both lungs
with right pleural effusion (Fig. 1B). There was mild elevation of D-dimer (0.8 µg/mL, normal; 0-0.5 µg/mL) which suggested the diagnosis of
pulmonary embolism and infarct. Full diagnostic work-up for hypercoagulability was done. Antinuclear antibody, anti-dsDNA and lupus
anticoagulant were all negative. Levels of anti-cardiolipin antibody, homocysteine and anti-thrombin III and activity of protein C and S
were within normal range. Factor V Leiden gene mutation was not detected. There was no evidence of deep vein thrombosis in his lower
extremities by Doppler ultrasound. He was a non-smoker and did not have chronic illnesses. He did not take a medicine and had not recently
taken airplane for a long period. We were puzzled about the cause of the multiple embolism and infarct. We checked his medical history more
closely and he confessed to having taken autologous adipose tissue-derived stem cell therapy for cervical herniated intervertebral disc
three times intravenously. The each stem cell therapy was at intervals of one month and the last treatment was finished one month before his
visit. We considered the possibility of pulmonary embolism by intravenous infusion of hASC. The suspicion of IV stem cell therapy as the
cause of pulmonary embolism became more solidified when we came to know that his parents had taken the same therapy for treatment of knee
osteoarthritis five times. We invited them for diagnostic work up. They had no specific respiratory symptoms. His father was a current
smoker (40 pack years) and his mother was a non smoker. Except for old age, they did not have risk factors for thromboembolism. His father's
chest CT showed similar findings: there were multiple emboli at both pulmonary artery branches with right pleural effusion (Fig. 2A). In
addition, pulmonary infarct was noted at the periphery of right lower lobe. Serum D-dimer was also elevated (1.0 µg/mL). As for his mother,
we also confirmed multiple emboli in the pulmonary artery branches in both lungs (Fig. 2B) with mild elevation of serum D-dimer (1.1 µg/mL).
They had no abnormal findings in the tests for hypercoagulability either. The index patient was first treated with enoxafarin, and then
overlapped and switched to warfarin. Anti-coagulant therapy was stopped after a month because of the development of hematuria. His parents
were observed without anti-coagulation therapy. Follow-up chest CT taken three month later showed disappearance of pleural effusion in index
patient (Fig. 1C) and in his father. Pulmonary emboli were not detected in any of them. Recent studies have shown that hASC can be induced
to express the cartilage-like gene and to synthesize cartilage matrix molecule.6,7 In animal studies, injection of ASC improved symptoms of
osteoarthritis and decreased functional disability.8,9 However, as far as we are aware of, it is illegal in South Korea to inject stem cells
into human body without special Institutional Review Board permission whether it is autologous or not. The local Korean bioengineering
company responsible for this therapy which specializes in adult stem cells tried to avoid the legal issue by administering stem cells in
foreign countries (China and Japan).10 The sampling, purification and collection of hASC are performed in Korean territory. The strategy may
allow them to avoid the legal jurisdiction of Korean authorities. However, they cannot escape from ethical issue in that they tried stem
cell therapy for the treatment of cervical herniated intervertebral disc for the index patient and knee osteoarthritis of his parents, which
are totally unacceptable indications. It is not only unreasonable but also quite dangerous to inject stem cells intravenously. It has
already been reported that IV infusion of stem cells can result in pulmonary embolism and even death in animal study.11,12 Takahashi, et
al.11 tried intralesional, intrathecal or intravenous stem cell therapy for spinal cord injury in mice. In the IV group, no grafted cells
were detected in the injury site. All of the mice showed pulmonary embolism and one-third of them died immediately after IV injection of
stem cells. In other study, when hASC was injected into abdominal aorta, the blood microcirculation was interrupted and 25-40% of animals
died of pulmonary embolism.12 It has been shown that tissue factor is highly expressed and localized on the cell surface of cultured ASC,
and that tissue factor is a triggering factor in the coagulation pathway activated by infused ASC.13 It is, therefore, highly likely that
injected hASC provoked coagulation pathway and resulted in multiple pulmonary embolism in our three cases. To our best knowledge, this is
the first case report of pulmonary embolism after IV stem cell therapy which occurred in all three recipients who are all family members.
Intravenous injection of autologous hASC therapy can result in pulmonary embolism (and infarction too). However promising it may be,
therefore, unauthorized administration of stem cells via intravenous route cannot be justified until scientifically proven otherwise. This
Research was supported by the Chung-Ang University Research Grants in 2013. The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. Chest CT of
patient. (A) Chest CT demonstrates wedge-shaped, peripheral consolidation at upper lobe of right lung (black arrow), which is consistent
with pulmonary infarct. (B) Chest CT shows multiple filling defects (white arrows) at segmental pulmonary artery branches of right lung
along with right pleural effusion (black arrow head). (C) Follow-up chest CT taken three month later showed disappearance of pleural
effusion and pulmonary emboli. Chest CT of his father (A) revealed multiple emboli at segmental pulmonary artery branch (white arrow head)
and right pleural effusion (white arrow). Chest CT of his mother (B) showed linear emboli (white arrow) along the lumen of pulmonary artery
branch of right lung.
