Hepatic resection is the gold-standard treatment for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In East Asia, however, only 20 % of patients with HCC
are eligible for hepatectomy . In a small subset of patients, surgical resection using conventional techniques is extremely challenging. In
these marginal cases, the tumor size, extension of the lesion, and proximity of the tumor to critical structures are important factors
determining how to proceed. For tumors considered unresectable by conventional means, extracorporeal hepatic resection with
autotransplantation (ECHRA) has been proposed to be an alternative . ECHRA has been used to treat hepatic pathologies including giant
hemangioma , liver metastases , and sarcomas . However, few studies have reported on its application as a treatment for HCC . Herein we
report a case series involving three consecutive patients with HCC who were successfully treated with ECHRA as curative therapy for
otherwise unresectable HCCs. In 2011, ECHRA was performed in three patients with liver tumors at anatomically critical locations that were
deemed technically impossible to resect (Fig. 1). Patient characteristics and indications for this technique are outlined in Table 1. To
ensure sufficient liver function after liver resection, we estimated pre- and post-operative liver volumes using 3-D computed tomography
volumetry. Indocyanine green (ICG) test was performed in selected patients. None of the patients showed evidence of portal
hypertension.Fig. 1CT images of case series. a Large liver tumor with compression of the IVC (arrow), left hepatic vein and right hepatic
vein. The middle hepatic vein has been obscured. The resection line (white line) follows the left hepatic vein. b Both the portal vein (navy
blue) and IVC (dark blue) are compressed by the tumor. The resection line in this view follows the left portal vein. c Coronal illustration
of the resection line (white line)Table 1Patient characteristicsPatient characteristicsPatient 1Patient 2Patient 3Age677160SexMMMECOG000Pre-
operative data Hepatitis historyNon-B/C, alcoholismHepatitis BHepatitis C AFP (ng/ml)357.59>270,00024.25 Platelet count (/μl)227 × 103
335 × 103 380 × 103 INR1.221.280.93 Evidence of PHNoNoNoTumor characteristics Maximum diameter (cm)18 × 1218 × 135.8 × 6.8 Tumor locationS
1, 4, 5, 7, 8S 2, 3, 4, 5, 8S 4, 5, 8;Satellite S7Indication for ECHRA (vascular involvement/tumor location)At confluence of LHV, MHV, IVCAt
confluence of V7/RHV into IVCCentrally located, involve RHV, PVRemnant liver volume (%)a 44.2634.4651.00 ECOG Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group performance status, PH portal hypertension, S liver segment, LHV left hepatic vein, MHV middle hepatic vein, IVC inferior vena cava,
V7 hepatic vein to segment 7, RHV right hepatic vein, PV portal vein aRatio of remnant liver volume and standard liver volume CT images of
case series. a Large liver tumor with compression of the IVC (arrow), left hepatic vein and right hepatic vein. The middle hepatic vein has
been obscured. The resection line (white line) follows the left hepatic vein. b Both the portal vein (navy blue) and IVC (dark blue) are
compressed by the tumor. The resection line in this view follows the left portal vein. c Coronal illustration of the resection line (white
line) Patient characteristics ECOG Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status, PH portal hypertension, S liver segment, LHV left
hepatic vein, MHV middle hepatic vein, IVC inferior vena cava, V7 hepatic vein to segment 7, RHV right hepatic vein, PV portal vein aRatio
of remnant liver volume and standard liver volume ECHRA was performed as described previously with minor modifications . Unlike previous
reports, we employed temporary portocaval shunt during the anhepatic period (Fig. 2). In patients with tumor-invaded major vasculature, the
vessel wall was pared and reconstruction with a venous patch harvested from the explanted liver (Fig. 3). Details of the surgery are given
in Table 2. The affected segments of liver were resected after total hepatectomy and the autograft was re-implanted orthotopically.
Pathology evaluation confirmed all three tumors to be HCC.Fig. 2 a Temporary portocaval shunt used during the anhepatic period. b Tumor
thrombus found in the confluence of the hepatic veins. c Re-implantation of the graftFig. 3 a Large HCC compressing the juncture of left
hepatic vein and IVC. b Part of the IVC wall was excised and repaired with a venous patch (arrow). c Unification of V7 and right hepatic
vein, which was later widened with a venous patchTable 2Operation characteristicsOperation (OP) detailsPatient 1Patient 2Patient 3Replanted
graft segmentsS 2, 3, and partial S 4S 5–8S 2, 3, and S 6, 7Graft weight (g)440696961Blood loss (ml)1,5005,3007,000Cold ischemic time
(min)120202162Warm ischemic time (min)401443 a Temporary portocaval shunt used during the anhepatic period. b Tumor thrombus found in the
confluence of the hepatic veins. c Re-implantation of the graft a Large HCC compressing the juncture of left hepatic vein and IVC. b Part of
the IVC wall was excised and repaired with a venous patch (arrow). c Unification of V7 and right hepatic vein, which was later widened with
a venous patch Operation characteristics The outcomes are outlined in Table 3. Patient 3 had major complications included postoperative
biliary leakage and intra-abdominal abscess, which were treated with endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and surgical drainage of
the abscess, respectively. There was no hospital mortality.Table 3Postoperative dataPost-op dataPatient 1Patient 2Patient 3ICU days
(days)878Length of stay (days)302239Ishak score334Metavir fibrosis scoreF2F2F3Post-op complication1. Sepsis2. Transient hepatic
insufficiency1. Sepsis2. Transient hepatic insufficiency1. Sepsis2. Transient hepatic insufficiency3. Biliary leakage4. Intra-abdominal
abscess InterventionNoneNoneERCP for biliary leakage ReoperationNoneNoneLaparotomy for drainage of abscessLong-term follow-
up RecurrenceNoneIn post-op 8 monthIn post-op 8 month Management for recurrenceNoneRFATACE Current statusAlive (28 months)Alive
(26 months)Alive (23 months)a RFA radiofrequency ablation, TACE transarterial chemoembolization aAlive until May, 2013 Postoperative data
RFA radiofrequency ablation, TACE transarterial chemoembolization aAlive until May, 2013 Two of the three patients experienced tumor
recurrence 8 months after the operation. Patient 2 was treated with radiofrequency ablation while the other was treated by transarterial
chemoembolization. All patients are currently alive with stable disease at the most recent follow-up. To date, the only large series
involving ECHRA was reported by Oldhafer et al. . The difficulty of the surgical technique and the high perioperative and postoperative
morbidity impede surgeons from using this procedure. We are the first institution to use preoperative liver volumetry to prevent
postoperative hepatic failure, the most serious complication. The preoperative evidence of preserved liver function and without liver
cirrhosis or portal hypertension were other determinants for a good outcome. The three patients did well after the operation. In the
literature reporting patients with HCC receiving ECRHA, our first patient had the longest survival [5, 7]. Unlike other studies, we used a
temporary portocaval shunt instead of venovenous bypass to facilitate hemodynamic stability during the anhepatic period. Temporary
portocaval shunts have been shown to improve hemodynamic status, reduce requirement of intraoperative blood transfusion, and preserve renal
function during orthotopic liver transplantation ; however, it has not been reported to be used in ECHRA. We believed that the relatively
short cold ischemic time and preservation of the inferior vena cava enhanced the functionality of the temporary portocaval shunt during the
anhepatic period. ECHRA represents an additional surgical option in the treatment of unresectable hepatic tumors, including HCC. In
addition, the use of a temporary portocaval shunt is a feasible alternative to venovenous bypass during the anhepatic period.
