Letter to the Editor. Sir, â€“ Primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL) is a malignant lymphoma that arises within the parenchyma of
the brain or spinal cord. The incidence of PCNSL has been rising over the last few decades, particularly in immunologically compromised
patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [1, 2, 3, 4]. It is a rare diagnosis in the immunocompetent patient [5, 6, 7]. Most PCNSLs
are diffuse, large B-cell lymphomas with a different biological behavior, management and prognosis than systemic diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas . The majority of these lesions are located in the cerebral cortex. The involvement of other brain regions (cerebellum, brainstem
or spinal cord) is usually associated with multifocal disease . The authors present a case of a PCNSL located in the fourth ventricle of an
immunocompetent patient. The patient is a 60-year-old woman with a history of infiltrating ductal adenocarcinoma of the left breast
underwent a left partial mastectomy and left sentinel node biopsy. She presented with the new onset of diplopia 3 months later. A magnetic
resonance (MR) image of the brain demonstrated an ovoid fourth ventricular mass that was homogeneously enhancing with contrast material and
extended from the left lateral recess of the fourth ventricle to the adjacent paramedian cerebellum without obstructive hydrocephalus
(Figure 1). Computed tomographic (CT) scans of the chest, abdomen and pelvis with and without contrast material were within normal limits.
The patient underwent a posterior fossa craniotomy for removal of the fourth ventricular tumor. Pathologic examination of the tumor revealed
discohesive, large, pleomorphic cells that were strongly immunoreactive for CD45, CD20 and CD10 proteins, with a Ki-67 proliferation index
of nearly 100% (Figure 2). Tumor cells were weakly immunoreactive for B-cell lymphoma 2 (bcl-2), B-cell lymphoma 6 (bcl-6), and paired box
protein (PAX-5), had rare reactivity for multiple myeloma oncogene 1 (MUM-1) (less than 30% tumor cells), and were negative for CD34,
lysozyme, CD3, myeloperoxidase, glial fibrillary acidic protein, synaptophysin, S-100 and EMA. This tumor lacked the angiocentric
distribution of lymphoma cells that is classically described for intraparenchymal PCNSLs . There was demarcation of the main tumor mass from
the adjacent brain tissue, which had a few scattered lymphoma cells present. In situ hybridization studies showed bcl-6 gene translocation,
in the absence of bcl-2 and C-MYC gene translocations. A quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) study showed clonal
immunoglobulin heavy locus (IgH) gene rearrangements. These findings confirmed the diagnosis of a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) type
of PCNSL. This patient had a serum complete blood count within normal limits and multiple bone marrow biopsies and cerebral spinal fluid
specimens that were negative for lymphoma. Additional body CT scan, positron emission tomographic scan and bone scan did not show any
evidence of adenopathy or metastatic breast cancer. She was placed on the DeAngelis chemotherapy protocol and tolerated the protocol well.
Six months postoperatively, she is clinically well with no sign of recurrence. Three cases of solitary PCNSL arising in the fourth ventricle
have been previously reported [5, 6, 7]. The first case was a 17-year-old woman with a clinical presentation of meningitis, and the tumor
was diagnosed post-mortem . The second case was a 33-year-old woman with headaches and vertigo . MR imaging revealed a homogeneous fourth
ventricular B-cell lymphoma that was completely excised. The third case was a 69-year-old man with a clinical presentation of 6 weeks of
intractable vomiting . MR imaging showed a homogeneously enhancing mass in the caudal fourth ventricle. Surgical excision was performed, and
pathological examination demonstrated a high-grade B-cell lymphoma. Our case, along with the other reported cases [5, 6, 7], showed that
PCNSL can arise in rare instances from the fourth ventricle as a solitary mass lesion (Table 1). All four patients were immunologically
competent, with ages ranging from 17 to 69 years. Clinical presentation involves symptoms secondary to cerebellar mass effect, including
headaches, vertigo, vomiting and diplopia. These tumors are homogeneously enhancing on MR imaging and tend to exhibit an exophytic growth
pattern into the fourth ventricle. Surgical excision of the tumor followed by chemotherapy has shown good response in 3 of the 4 patients.
The origin of these solitary fourth ventricular PCNSLs remains uncertain. In our case, the main tumor mass was demarcated from adjacent
brain tissue. There were only a few scattered lymphoma cells present in the adjacent brain tissue. The typical angiocentric infiltration
pattern of the PCNSL was not present in this tumor. The immunohistochemical studies showed that the tumor has a germinal center B-cell-like
profile (bcl-2+/bcl-6+/CD10+), which is consistent with the typical PCNSL. However, the MUM-1 immunoreactivity was only focal and patchy
(less than 30% of the tumor cells). This is different from the typical PCNSL, which has near 100% MUM-1 strong immunoreactivity . In rare
instances, PCNSL can occur as a solitary mass lesion in the fourth ventricle. Primary B-cell lymphoma should be included in the differential
diagnosis of posterior fossa mass lesions, including lesions identified in immunocompetent patients. Given the immunohistologic differences
between our specimen and the classic description of PCNSL tissue, additional studies are needed to further characterize these solitary
fourth ventricular PCNSLs when more cases become available. This work was supported by Roswell Park Cancer Institute and National Cancer
Institute (NCI) grant #P30 CA016056. The authors have no other financial relationships to disclose. We thank Paul H. Dressel, BFA, for
assistance with preparation of the illustrations and Debra J. Zimmer, AAS CMA-A, for editorial assistance. Table 1Summary of 4 cases of
fourth ventricular primary central nervous system lymphoma reported in the literature. Authors, yearPatient age/sexPrevious historyClinical
presentationMR imaging findingsOther findings (including CT scan, blood test, bone marrow biopsy)Surgical procedureDiagnosisTreatmentFollow-
upWerneck et al. 1977 17/FN/AMeningitisN/AN/AN/Aprimary CNS lymphomaN/AN/AHaegelen et al. 2001 33/Fnonevertigo and headacheshomogeneous
enhancing massnegativeexcisionlarge, high-grade B-cell lymphomachemotherapy and autologous stem-cell transplantation7 months without
recurrenceHill et al. 2009 69/MN/Aintractable vomiting, mild preceding nausea, anorexia, weight loss; no headachehomogeneous enhancing
massnegativeexcisionhigh-grade B-cell lymphomachemotherapy3 months without recurrenceThis case60/Fbreast cancerdiplopiahomogeneous enhancing
massnegativeexcisiondiffuse, large, B-cell lymphomaDeAngelis Protocol 6 months without recurrenceCNS = central nervous system, CT = computed
tomographic, F = female, M = male, mo = months, MR = magnetic resonance, N/A = not available. CNS = central nervous system, CT = computed
tomographic, F = female, M = male, mo = months, MR = magnetic resonance, N/A = not available.
