Patients with acute pulmonary embolism (PE) who has normal systemic arterial pressure and right ventricular (RV) dysfunction are considered
to have sub-massive pulmonary embolism (SPE), with 3-month mortality risk of 21% (1). The benefit of the current therapy other than
anticoagulation including thrombolytic therapy (TT), embolectomy, and IVC filter insertion, in the absence of cardiogenic shock, is still
debated (2). Vasoconstrictive mediators (including thromboxane-A and serotonin) have an important role to play in the increase of peripheral
vascular resistance (PVR) and ultimately in developing pulmonary hypertension (PH) in acute phase (3, 4). A study by Idrees et al. described
a beneficial effect of inhaled iloprost in five patients with SPE, in whom there is an improvement in WHO-functional class (WHO-FC), 6-min
walk distance (6MWD) test, and echocardiographic parameters (5). Iloprost, an inhaled prostacyclin approved for the treatment of patients
with pulmonary arterial hypertension, exerts long-term benefits through antiproliferative and antithrombotic effects, but is also a potent
acute pulmonary vasodilator with the duration of action of approximately 60 min (6). Two patients were evaluated at the Dammam Medical
Complex, Dammam, Saudi Arabia between June and December 2012. The diagnosis of PE was established by helical computed tomography (CT)
angiogram that showed a thrombus at both pulmonary arteries at presentation. They had normal systemic blood pressure, PH documented by
echocardiography demonstrated an estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure >45 mm Hg and findings of RV dysfunction suggestive of acute
changes. Both patients received therapeutic anticoagulation with low-molecular-weight heparin and targeted warfarin dose to international
normalized ratio of 2–3. They were still symptomatic and required more oxygen, for which they were offered TT. They declined TT, but agreed
to receive inhaled iloprost through a nebulized device of 2.5–5.0 µg per inhalation for 15 min, 8× daily for 3 months. The main efficacy
index was defined as the changes in WHO-FC, 6MWD, oxygen saturation, and echocardiography parameters during 3-month inhalation therapy.
These parameters were assessed at baseline, 3-month post-inhalation, and 3-month post-cessation of iloprost. Both patients tolerated the
treatment well. They showed significant improvement in their clinical symptoms and echocardiographic parameters (Table 1, Figure 1). The
mean of WHO functional class, 6MWD, and sPAP (by echo) pre- and 3 months post and 3 months post-cessation of iloprost. Clinical and
physiological parameters of both patients before and after iloprost (3 months before and 3 months post-cessation of iloprost) In conclusion,
iloprost might have favorable acute effects on symptoms, exercise tolerance, and pulmonary hypertension in sub-massive pulmonary embolism.
