We report the case of 60-yr-old female in which therapeutic hypothermia (TH) was successfully induced maintaining the target temperature of
34℃ for 12 hr despite a risk of hypothermia-induced coagulation abnormalities following an emergent coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)
due to failed percutaneous coronary intervention, who suffered a cardiac arrest. Emergent CABG may be a relative contraindication for TH in
post-cardiac arrest patients because hypothermia may increase the risk of infection and bleeding. However, the possibility of an improved
neurologic outcome outweighs the risk of bleeding, although major surgery may be a relative contraindication for TH. For post-cardiac arrest
care, early coronary reperfusion is best achieved with primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and should be initiated as indicated
in non-cardiac arrest patients, such as those with ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) (1, 2). Primary PCI can be safely combined
with therapeutic hypothermia and is associated with good neurological outcome in post-cardiac arrest patients (1, 3). Emergent coronary
artery bypass grafting (CABG) after failed PCI is required in less than 1% of cases in institutes with a high case volume (4). Emergent CABG
may be a relative contraindication for therapeutic hypothermia (TH) in post-cardiac arrest patients because hypothermia may increase the
risk of infection and bleeding (5). However, recent studies have shown the successful application of TH in post-cardiac arrest patients with
recent major surgery (6, 7) and pregnancy (8, 9), although they are relative contraindications. We report a successful experience with TH
following an emergent CABG after failed primary PCI in a woman resuscitated following out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. A 60-yr-old female
without a significant past medical history presented to the emergency department (ED) with cardiac arrest on March 14, 2012. A security
guard found her at her apartment and called for the emergency medical services (EMS). EMS personnel transported her to the ED without
patient monitoring or basic life support for 10 min. She had collapsed 25 min before ED arrival and was in asystole. Return of spontaneous
circulation (ROSC) was achieved after 14 min of advanced life support, including the application of 3 shocks, orotracheal intubation, and
the administration of 4 mg adrenaline and 300 mg amiodarone. Her initial blood pressure was 68/49 mmHg, her pulse was 90 beats per minute,
and her tympanic temperature was 36℃. The patient was comatose (Glasgow coma scale score E1VTM2=4) with a pupillary light reflex and self-
respiration. The initial electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation with ST-segment elevation in leads V5-6, II, III, and aVF, indicating
STEMI (Fig. 1). A blood gas analysis was significant for severe acidosis (pH 6.97; lactate 6.1 mM/L; BE -10.8). A 2D-echocardiogram
performed by a cardiologist in the ED revealed moderate left ventricle systolic dysfunction, an ejection fraction of 30%-40% and akinesis of
the basal-apical inferolateral wall and lateral wall. At 55 min after ROSC, she underwent PCI, which failed because the guide wire could not
pass the lesion of completely occluded left proximal circumflex artery (LCx) due to extreme angulation. She also had 70% diffuse stenosis of
the proximal and middle left anterior descending coronary artery on coronary angiogram. An intra-aortic balloon pump was applied because of
her unstable vital signs, and she was transferred to the operating room for an emergent CABG at approximately 4 hr after ROSC. A hard
segment in the proximal area of the LCx was observed in the heart, and the aortocoronary saphenous vein graft (SVG) was anastomosed to the
second obtuse marginal branch of the LCx. The CABG was finished in 6 hr 20 min. She was brought to the intensive care unit (ICU) at 10 hr 25
min after ROSC. On arrival in the ICU her rectal temperature was 34.6℃. For cerebral protection, TH was initiated using an endovascular
cooling system (Alsius Corp., Irvine, CA) with sedative and neuromuscular blocker infusion despite the risk of hypothermia-induced
coagulation abnormalities after CABG. At 2 hr after TH initiation, her body temperature reached the target rectal temperature of 34℃, which
was maintained for 12 hr. The patient was actively rewarmed to 36.5℃ at a rate of 0.25℃/hr (Fig. 2). During the maintenance of TH, her 12-hr
postoperative blood loss was approximately 1,060 mL, and blood products, including 4 U of fresh-frozen plasma, 1 U of packed red blood cells
and 1 U of single-donor platelets, were required to stabilise the patient. During TH, several coagulation parameters were altered, including
prothrombin time (PT, 15.3-50.6 sec; reference range, 10-14 sec), international normalised ratio (INR, 1.36-4.23; reference range,
0.85-1.5), and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPPT, 46.2->120 sec; reference range, 23-35 sec). No complications were associated
with hypothermia, except for coagulation abnormalities. On day 2, amplitude-integrated electroencephalography showed continuous normal
voltage, and somatosensory-evoked potential showed bilateral N20 peaks. The patient regained consciousness at 36 hr after ROSC and was
successfully extubated on day 5. Her mental state continued to show improvement to baseline despite a minor calculation disorder. She
suffered pneumonia and pancreatitis during her stay in the ward and was discharged home with a cerebral performance category scale (CPC)
score of 1 six weeks later. To the best of our knowledge, this report is the first to describe a post-cardiac arrest patient in whom TH was
successfully induced following an emergent CABG due to a failed PCI, although TH has been widely used during or after PCI for
revascularisation in cardiac arrest. Concurrent PCI and hypothermia are safe, with good outcomes reported for comatose cardiac arrest
patients who undergo PCI (1). Emergency CABG after failed PCI is required in <1% of cases, and the subjects most likely to require it are
those with evolving STEMI, cardiogenic shock, 3-vessel coronary artery disease, or the presence of a type C coronary arterial lesion
(defined as >2 cm in length, an excessively tortuous proximal segment, an extremely angulated segment, a total occlusion >3 months in
duration, or a degenerated SVG that appears to be friable) (10). However, when PCI fails, the safety of hypothermia after emergent CABG has
not been demonstrated in post-cardiac arrest patients. CABG may be a relative contraindication for TH because hypothermia may increase the
risk of infection and bleeding (5). A few cardiac anaesthesiologists have recently reported terminating cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) at a
slightly hypothermic temperature to decrease neurological complications (11, 12). In a study by Nathan et al. (13), patients were initially
cooled to 32℃ and then randomly assigned to 37℃ (control) or 34℃ (hypothermia). There was no further intraoperative warming during CPB, and
patients arrived in the ICU with temperatures of 33.6±0.5℃ in the hypothermic group and 35.3±0.6℃ in the control group. An extended period
of mild hypothermia (<5 hr) reduced the incidence and severity of cognitive deficits. The 12-hr ICU blood losses of the 2 groups did not
differ significantly (control, 812±493 mL; hypothermia, 858±592 mL; mean±SD). This finding is similar to the 12-hr ICU blood loss observed
while maintaining TH in our patient (1,060 mL), although coagulation abnormalities were observed and treated. In contrast, Insler et al.
(14) reported that patients who arrive in the ICU after coronary artery surgery with a temperature <36℃ are at a significantly increased
risk of death, excessive bleeding, and other complications compared with normothermic patients. Commonly, temperatures of 34℃ to 35℃ are
acceptable in cardiac surgery patients, while temperatures below those could potentiate an environment conducive of arrhythmogenicity. The
use of TH can be encouraged after ROSC in cardiac surgery settings because more advantageous treatment options are not available (15).
Temperatures of 33℃ to 35℃ affect platelet function only, and other coagulation factors are affected only when temperatures decrease below
33℃ (16). In our case, TH was maintained at a target of 34℃, but coagulation parameters, such as PT, aPTT, and INR, were prolonged,
indicating coagulation abnormalities. However, these abnormalities might be influenced by a high dose of heparin and CPB pump application
(17). In a case study (7), intraoperative thrombolysis was successfully used in a cardiac arrest patient undergoing caesarean delivery due
to pulmonary embolism, although massive bleeding from the uterus was anticipated. In addition, mild hypothermia (32℃ to 34℃) was induced for
12 hr with no further major bleeding from the uterus, and the patient regained consciousness on day 3. Therefore, we believe that the
possibility of an improved neurologic outcome outweighs the risk of bleeding, although major surgery may be a relative contraindication for
TH. In conclusion, this case suggests that TH (34℃ for 12 hr) following an emergent CABG after failed primary PCI can be safely used in a
comatose cardiac arrest patient. The electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation with ST-segment elevation in leads V5-6, II, III, and aVF
and ST-segment depression in leads V1-3. Tympanic (diamond) and rectal (triangle) temperatures of the patient during percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI), coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), and therapeutic hypothermia (TH). CPB, cardiopulmonary bypass; ROSC, return of
spontaneous circulation; ICU, intensive care unit.
