Slow transmural tissue necrosis may occur after an electrosurgical Bovie injury and lead to eventual bowel perforation. Bowel injury during
laparoscopic surgery is a rare but serious complication. A Bovie injury to the bowel can cause delayed perforation of the viscus, thus
increasing the possibility of a preventable morbidity. Patients presenting with perforation peritonitis within 24 hours and up to 2 to 3
weeks after laparoscopic Bovie injury to the bowel have been reported in the literature. Description: A 74-year-old woman underwent a
laparoscopic ventral hernia mesh repair. Intraoperatively, a small area of superficial Bovie injury to the small bowel was repaired with
Lembert sutures and tissue glue. Postoperatively, the patient recovered well, but she presented with perforation peritonitis 3 months after
surgery. An exploratory laparotomy showed a jejunal perforation in the same area that was injured with cautery and repaired during the
previous surgery. The patient was only using inhaled steroids for asthma on and off but had a remote history of chemotherapy and radiation
for colorectal cancer. Bovie injury to the bowel has a hidden depth, causing a slow transmural tissue necrosis, and it might also impair
local healing and eventually lead to perforation. Thus, the patient may present later than the usual period for wound healing and remodeling
as previously reported. Given the disastrous consequence, it is imperative to perform a good surgical repair of even a minor Bovie injury to
the bowel. This is the first report of a delayed presentation (>1 month) of a Bovie injury of the bowel. Bowel injury during laparoscopic
surgery is a rare but serious complication. A meta-analysis of publications from 1973 to 2001 calculated the incidences of bowel injury and
bowel perforation to be 0.13% and 0.22%, respectively.1 Despite the increased number of laparoscopic surgeries performed throughout the
years, as well as increased operative experience for the surgeons, it is a complication that has not become obsolete. Furthermore, the
consequences of bowel injury can be catastrophic. A delay in diagnosis of bowel perforation can lead to sepsis and even death if not
diagnosed and treated promptly. There has been a proposed association between a delay in diagnosis and poor outcome.2 Intestinal
perforations due to thermal injuries during laparoscopic procedures are fundamentally different from Veress needle or trocar insertion
injuries. They are usually not apparent at the time of surgery. Therefore, presentation may be delayed, obviating simple primary closure as
an option and increasing the chance of diffuse peritoneal soiling or abscess formation.3 Bowel cautery injuries, both contact and
conductive, usually occur in proximity to the field of dissection. Contact burn injuries may be recognized at the time of surgery and
treated appropriately. In contrast, conductive burns either are not recognized at all or are recognized remotely when perforation occurs 1
to 2 weeks after the initial procedure.4 Presentations have been reported from 8 days to 2 to 3 weeks after the time of actual injury.4–7
Although many of these injuries may be missed during the initial laparoscopic procedure, intestinal enterotomies are usually immediately
obvious when the abdomen is opened at reoperation.8 However, Bishoff et al.7 discussed the difficulty in diagnosing a patient with bowel
injury due to a laparoscopic injury because of the unusual patient presentation. Such patients do not show classic peritoneal signs on
physical examination and are more likely to be afebrile and leukopenic. We report a patient whose clinical presentation was unusual for a
bowel perforation. The preceding surgery that had led to the perforation was performed 3 months earlier. There have been previous reports in
the literature of patients presenting with perforation peritonitis due to a Bovie injury to the bowel within a few hours to weeks after the
initial surgery. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a patient with a delayed presentation (>1 month) of a laparoscopic Bovie
injury to the bowel. A 74-year-old woman who had been diagnosed with an upper abdominal, midline ventral hernia (Figure 1) underwent an
elective laparoscopic repair of the ventral hernia with mesh. The patient had previously undergone laparotomy, and extensive adhesiolysis
was performed intraoperatively with Bovie and sharp dissection to expose the anterior abdominal wall hernial defects. A small Bovie burn
injury of <0.5 cm on the small bowel was noted at the end of the enterolysis. The injury was judged to be superficial and was repaired with
Lembert sutures by using No. 3-0 silk and was then covered with Evicel tissue glue. The rest of the surgery was uneventful, and the hernial
defect was covered with Parietex mesh. Postoperatively, the patient recovered well and was discharged on the third postoperative day. Axial
view of computed tomography of abdomen showing midline ventral hernia (arrow). On outpatient follow-up, the patient complained of mild
intermittent abdominal pain corresponding to the site of the repaired small bowel injury. Because she had no other symptoms, she was managed
conservatively and was encouraged to undergo follow-up on an outpatient basis. Three months after the initial surgery, the patient presented
to the emergency department with acute onset of abdominal pain. The pain was localized in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. Physical
examination showed localized guarding in the upper abdomen. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis showed extraluminal air in the
region of the falciform ligament and mid abdomen consistent with a viscus perforation (Figure 2). Axial view of computed tomography of
abdomen showing extraluminal gas (arrow), consistent with perforated viscus. The patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy, and
intraoperatively, a jejunal perforation was found. The surgeon, who had performed the previous laparoscopic ventral hernia repair, noted
that the area of perforation was at the site of the previous Bovie injury that had been repaired during the initial surgery. A small bowel
resection and a side-to-side, functional end-to-end anastomosis of the jejunum were performed. Postoperatively, the patient recovered well
and was discharged on the sixth postoperative day. On outpatient follow-up, she is asymptomatic. Bowel injury due to a laparoscopic surgical
procedure, though rare, is a devastating and potentially life-threatening complication. The reported incidences of bowel injury and bowel
perforation are between 0.13% and 0.22%, respectively.1 Delayed presentation of a perforated bowel injury due to a laparoscopic procedure
has been described in the literature. Time frames vary from a few hours to up to 2 weeks postoperatively.1,5–7 The average time in cases of
Bovie injury, from injury to diagnosis, was 10.4 days.6 Chapron et al.2 reported that approximately 75% of bowel injuries were diagnosed
within the first postoperative week. Perforations that were diagnosed late generally resulted from thermal injury and were generally longer
for large bowel injury than for small bowel injury.1 Saltzstein et al.9 reported that the time delay from burn to perforation appears to be
related to the severity of the coagulation necrosis. Our patient presented with perforation peritonitis 3 months after the initial injury,
although the injury was judged to be superficial and repaired initially. She was diagnosed with and treated for an acute abdomen suspected
to be due to a perforated viscus in an appropriate and timely manner. It is her delay in presentation and the presenting signs and symptoms,
after her initial laparoscopic surgery, that are unusual. Intestinal perforations due to thermal injuries during laparoscopic procedures are
fundamentally different from Veress needle or trocar injuries. It is well known that thermal injury wounds can be deceiving, with the
visible area of necrosis only being the tip of the iceberg. They are usually not apparent at the time of surgery. Therefore, presentation
may be delayed, obviating simple primary closure as an option and increasing the chance of diffuse peritoneal soiling or abscess formation.3
However, the histologic changes of coagulation necrosis are evident hours after an ischemic injury, with most cell disintegration and
necrosis occurring within 1 week, not after a few months. In addition, the injury was recognized during the initial surgery and repaired.
Although the original insult to the bowel wall was a thermal injury, why the damage did not lead to bowel wall perforation until months
later cannot be explained by the known basic cellular physiological process of coagulation necrosis. It is unlikely that the patient's age
and other comorbidities (colorectal cancer, treated with resection and subsequent chemotherapy and radiation 10 years previously;
sarcoidosis; diabetes; and hypothyroidism) attributed to the delay in presentation. She was specifically asked about any previous or current
use of steroids because steroid use has been well described in the literature to cause a delay in diagnosis of an acute abdomen. The effects
of inhaled corticosteroid treatment on wound healing and skin changes have been reported in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. A significantly higher proportion of patients taking inhaled corticosteroids as compared with placebo participants were reported to
have easy bruising and slow healing of skin cuts or sores.10 However, the patients in the study were diagnosed with mild to moderate chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease requiring high doses of steroids daily. Our patient, in contrast, was using inhaled steroids once or twice a
week on an as-needed basis. Bishoff et al.7 reported that a patient with bowel injury after laparoscopic surgery may have an unusual
presentation and devastating sequelae. The initial presenting complaint of all patients with unrecognized bowel injury was persistent
increased pain at a trocar site without significant erythema or purulent drainage. On examination, the painful trocar site was closest to
the injured bowel segment. Symptoms then progressed to abdominal distension and diarrhea, whereas ileus, diffuse abdominal pain, nausea, and
vomiting were uncommon findings.7 These findings are similar to our patient's complaints. Although there is a small possibility that the
patient could have had a contained perforation, but her long time course with no systemic symptoms makes this possibility less likely.
Moreover, there have been no reports of contained small intestinal perforation leading to perforation peritonitis 3 months after the initial
incident. Our patient's initial presentation in the emergency department was for right upper quadrant abdominal pain with normal bowel
habits and no fever or chills. She was hemodynamically stable, and the initial laboratory findings were normal, with a normal white blood
cell count. During the follow-up after the initial surgery, she had complained of abdominal pain specific to the site of the Bovie injury,
but because of her nonspecific abdominal examination, the patient was encouraged to continue follow-up as an outpatient. Perhaps the choice
to repair the initial injury with a Lembert suture and Evicel was inadequate. In a rabbit model, the outcomes of electrosurgically induced
small and large bowel injury have been reported after suture repair versus tissue glue/sealant repair. The suture repair of a small bowel
Bovie injury was reported to have improved outcomes when compared with glue repair.11 Shirk et al.4 recommended that superficial bowel
injuries due to enterolysis or superficial burns simply require a figure-8 suture with No. 2-0 Vicryl (Ethicon, Somerville, New Jersey) or
similar material, and it was not necessary to resect the burnt injured area. Bovie injury to the bowel has a hidden depth, causing a slow
transmural tissue necrosis, and it might also impair local healing and eventually lead to perforation. Thus, the patient may present later
than the usual period for wound healing and remodeling as previously reported. Given the disastrous consequence, it is imperative to perform
a good surgical repair of even a minor Bovie injury to the bowel. This is the first report of a delayed presentation (>1 month) of a Bovie
injury of the bowel.
