Hemangiomas in the pancreas are very rare and only a few cases in adulthood have been reported in the literature. We describe a case of
pancreatic hemangiomas in an adult with unique imaging findings. A 23-year-old woman visited the hospital for an incidentally detected
pancreatic mass. CT and MRI revealed a multilocular cyst with fluid-fluid levels and no obvious enhancement. The patient underwent surgery
and the mass was confirmed as a pancreatic hemangioma. The radiological features and differential diagnosis of this rare lesion are
discussed. Hemangioma may occur in any region of the body but it typically presents as cutaneous lesions of the head, neck and trunk.
Visceral hemangiomas have been described in various organs, and they are common in the liver. Pancreatic hemangioma is very rare, especially
in adults. Only a few cases of adult pancreatic hemangiomas have been reported in the English literature (1-6). They typically appear on
computed tomography (CT) as a cystic lesion with contrast enhancement in the arterial phase. Herein, we report a case of adult pancreatic
hemangioma. The mass showed a multilocular cyst with fluid-fluid levels and no obvious enhancement on CT and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) whereas previously reported cases showed intense enhancement on CT after injection of contrast material, and high signal intensity on
T2WI on MR (1-6). In a 23-year-old woman with no symptoms, a 5.4 × 5.0 × 3.1 cm mass with internal heterogeneous hyperechogenicity in the
pancreas head was found during an annual ultrasound health examination. Blood test findings were within normal range, including the complete
blood count, liver function tests and tumor markers. The physical examination revealed no significant abnormality. CT was performed on a GE
Lightspeed VCT scanner and included a plain scan and dual-phase enhanced scans respectively. CT parameters included 64 × 0.625 mm detector
collimation, 120 kVp, 180 mAs, 1.0 pitch, 5 mm slice thickness. An enhanced scan using Iohexol (GE Healthcare, Shanghai, China) contrast
agent during the arterial phase and portal venous phases (at 32 and 70 seconds, respectively, dose 1.5 mL/kg, injection flow rate 3.0 mL/s)
were also performed. A plain CT scan of the abdomen showed a heterogeneous, well-defined mass at the pancreatic head. A contrast-enhanced CT
scan revealed a heterogeneous, nonenhancing, multilocular cyst with fluid-fluid levels at the pancreatic head. The lesion grew outward and
extended into the lesser sac (Fig. 1A-C). MR imaging was performed with a SIEMENS 1.5-T superconducting system with a body coil. Sequences
included T2-weighted fast spin echo with fat suppression (repetition time/echo time, 3250/110 msec; section thickness, 5 mm; gap, 1 mm) and
T1-weighted breath-hold gradient echo (repetition time/echo time, 160/4.9 msec; section thickness, 5 mm; gap, 1 mm). A T1-weighted gradient-
echo with fat suppression was performed during the hepatic arterial and portal venous phases (at 20 and 50 seconds, respectively) after
manual administration of 0.1 mmol/kg Gadodiamide (GE Healthcare, Dublin, Ireland). The MR findings were similar to the CT findings. On MR,
the superior fluid layer showed hyper signal intensity (SI) on T1WI and T2WI. The inferior fluid layer was slightly hyper SI to the pancreas
on T1WI and hypo SI relative to the superior fluid layer on T2WI (Fig. 1D-F). Subtotal pancreatectomy was done. At laparotomy, a soft,
blood-red tumor was found arising from the head of the pancreas. There was no invasion of the surrounding vascular structures and the
duodenum. The mass was resected from the pancreas. Gross pathologic examination revealed a reddish tumor composed of multiloculated cysts
containing intracystic hemorrhaged blood. Microscopically, the tumor showed multiple vascular cysts of variable size lined by a single layer
of uniformly flattened cells. The vascular cysts were separated by fibrous tissue (Fig. 1G, H). Histologic examination was consistent with
pancreatic hemangioma. The patient was healthy without any sign of recurrence oneyear after surgery. Typically, pancreatic hemangiomas of
previously reported adult cases were reported as well-circumscribed with homogeneous lower density and showing intense enhancement after
injection of contrast material on CT (1-6). According to the only report of its MR findings (1), pancreatic hemangiomas were reported as
lesions with iso SI on T1WI and hyper SI on T2WI, similar to cavernous hemangiomas. In our case, however, the imaging findings were
completely different to those of previous reports, which described multilocular cysts with fluid-fluid levels and no obvious enhancement.
Mulliken et al. (7) divided the natural history of hemangiomas into three phases based on physical findings and cellular features:
proliferation, involution and involuted. Histologically, multilaminated basement membrane formation beneath the endothelium in the
proliferative phase turns into a single layer of uniform and flattened cells with fibrosis and fat deposition in the involuted phase. The
microscopic findings of our case were consistent with those of the involuted phase. Moreover, MRI is the preferred cross-sectional imaging
technique for differentiating the different phases of a hemangioma a (7). In the proliferative phase, hemangiomas demonstrate intermediate
SI on T1WI and moderate hyper SI on T2WI. Especially, flow voids in and around the tumor due to the fast flow and vascular shunting can be
seen. In the involuted phase, hemangioma shows decreased flow voids within the tumor. The flow voids in and around the lesion of our case
were not displayed on MRI. Therefore, the multilocular cyst in our case may have been related to the involuted phase. The lesion in our case
rapidly expanded in the proliferative phase and subsequently a multilocular cyst formed in the involuted phase. Meanwhile, the ratio of the
cystic to solid component can influence the degree of tumor vascularity (3). The lesion of our case principally manifested as a multilocular
cyst. So, slow blood flow due to the multilocular cyst resulted in no obvious enhancement after injection of the contrast material in the CT
and MRI in our case. The fluid-fluid level demonstrates that the lesion contains different fluids of different densities so that a
sedimentation effect can occur, and can be demonstrated on CT and MR imaging, provided that the plane of the scan is perpendicular to the
horizontal (8). Fluid-fluid levels should not be considered diagnostic, as this finding may be present in various other histologic tumors as
well. Fluid-fluid levels occurring in hemangiomas of soft tissue and liver have been described in the literature (8, 9). However, to our
knowledge, we are the first to describe the CT and MRI findings of fluid-fluid levels in a pancreatic hemangioma. It is well known that
fluid-fluid levels in various histologic tumors are attributable to cystic change or hemorrhage. In our case, the lesion was composed of
multiloculated cysts containing intracystic hemorrhage. Therefore, we thought that the stagnant or slowly flowing blood resulted in the
sedimentation effect, with unclotted serous blood constituting the superior fluid layer and sedimentary red blood cells constituting the
inferior fluid layer. This hypothesis was supported by CT and MR imaging in our case. Unclotted serous blood shows characteristics of a
fluid on the CT and MRI. Red blood cells of the inferior fluid layer demonstrated higher attenuation on CT, iso SI to muscle on T1WI and
hypo SI relative to the superior fluid layer on T2WI. The radiological appearances of a multilocular cyst and the fluid-fluid levels in our
case should be differentiated from those of other multilocular cystic tumors of the pancreas, including pseudocysts, serous cystadenomas,
mucinous cystadenomas and side-branch type intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN). A fluid-fluid level is a very rare appearance in
the above mentioned tumors; however, hemorrhage has occasionally been reported when the tumor bleeds into itself (10). A possible mechanism
of hemorrhage in pancreatic pseudocysts is erosion of the pseudocyst into a vessel due to persistent compression and ischemia, and the
elastolytic actions of enzymes. Most patients with pseudocysts and accompanying hemorrhage have a ruptured intracystic pseudoaneurysm, which
is readily diagnosed as a rapidly enhancing intracystic lesion with attenuations similar to those of the aorta on CT (11). The CT
appearances of serous cystadenoma and mucinous cystadenoma are similar. A serous cystadenoma appears as a multicystic or lobulated cystic
lesion with septation, while a mucinous cystadenoma has a smooth shape, with or without septations. Calcification in serous cystadenomas is
typically central within the fibrous stroma, whereas a mucinous cystadenoma may have peripheral eggshell calcification. Side-branch type
IPMN appears as a pleomorphic cystic mass. An imaging diagnosis of side-branch type IPMN depends on identifying the communication between
the lesion and the main pancreatic duct (12). Pancreatic hemangiomas in adults are very rare. Although multilocular cyst, fluid-fluid levels
and no obvious enhancement are three findings in our case compared with the previously reported cases, knowledge of the presence of these
findings might help in determining the nature of the pancreatic hemangioma and may help in confirming the diagnosis. Twenty three-year-old
woman with pancreatic hemangioma. (A) Plain CT scan of abdomen shows heterogeneous, well-defined mass (arrowhead) at pancreatic head
(arrow). Enhanced CT scan at arterial phase (B) and at portal vein phase (C) shows mass has no enhancement and is multilocular cyst with
fluid-fluid levels (arrowhead). The pancreas (arrow) shows abvious enhancement. Superior fluid layer shows low attenuation of fluid and
inferior fluid layer shows higher attenuation. Superior fluid layer shows hyper SI on T1WI (D) and T2WI with fat suppression (E). Inferior
fluid layer is slightly hyper SI to pancreas on T1WI (D) and hypo SI relative to superior fluid layer on T2WI with fat suppression (E). Mass
shows no enhancement after injection of contrast material (F). Hematoxylin-eosin staining (G, original magnification × 40) reveals multiple
vascular spaces containing blood and septation by fibrous tissue. Hematoxylin-eosin staining (H, original magnification × 100) reveals
multiple vascular spaces containing blood, lined by single layer of uniformly flattened cells.
