Propafenone is a class Ic antiarrhythmic drug. It is a beta-adrenergic blocker that causes bradycardia and bronchospasm. It is metabolized
primarily in the liver. Its bioavailability and plasma concentration differ among patients under long-term therapy. They are genetically
determined by the hepatic cytochrome P-450 2D6. Hepatic toxicity is highly uncommon. To date, only eight patients were reported in the
reviewed world literature. In this article, one new case will be reported emphasizing the importance of medication history taking in
patients presenting with new-onset liver enzymes abnormalities. Propafenone is a class Ic antiarrhythmic drug. It is a beta-adrenergic
blocker that causes bradycardia and bronchospasm. It is metabolized primarily in the liver. Its bioavailability and plasma concentration
differ among patients under long-term therapy. They are genetically determined by the hepatic cytochrome P-450 2D6. Hepatic toxicity is
highly uncommon. To date, only eight patients were reported in the reviewed world literature. In this article, one new case is reported
emphasizing the importance of medication history taking in patients presenting with new-onset liver enzymes abnormalities. A 67-year-old
female patient presented to the emergency department of the American University of Beirut Medical Center because of the progressive
appearance of painless jaundice of two weeks duration. The patient's past medical history was noted for left breast cancer (in remission).
She denied alcohol intake or illicit drug abuse. Six weeks prior to the onset of jaundice, she had presented with high-rate atrial
fibrillation and was commenced on propafenone at 300 mg/day. Upon presentation, she was icteric. The physical examination revealed minimal
nontender hepatomegaly. A computed tomography scan performed at another facility showed prominent common bile and pancreatic ducts
suggesting a double duct sign. Her initial serum bilirubin was 9.4/7.7 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase of 384 IU/L. Her alanine transferase was
213 IU/L and aspartate transferase 228 IU/L. Her CA19-9 was 70 IU/mL [Table 1]. Endoscopic ultrasound done at our center showed normal
common bile and pancreatic ducts and no ampullary or pancreatic masses. Subsequently, viral serologic markers (IgM hepatitis A virus, IgM
Hepatitis B core, Hepatitis C virus antibodies, Epstein-Barr virus, Cytomegalovirus) were negative. The anti-nuclear, anti-smooth muscle,
anti-mitochondrial, and anti-liver and anti-kidney microsome antibodies’ levels were within normal limits. A Magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography suggested a left hepatic stricture, but Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was normal. Initial and
follow-up laboratory data A liver biopsy via a trucut needle showed active portal and periportal inflammation with moderate macrovesicular
steatosis, and bile ductular proliferation [Figure 1a and b]. (a) Liver biopsy revealed portal and periportal inflammatory infiltrate. The
liver parenchyma exhibited macrovesicular steatosis (magnification ×40). (b) Prominent bile duct injury with associated bile ductular
proliferation. The mixed inflammatory infiltrate consists of eosinophils, neutrophils, lymphocytes, and plasma cells (magnification ×200).
Mild periportal hepatocyte feathery degeneration is noted. There is no evidence of fibrosis Withdrawal of propafenone was associated with
gradual decrease in serum alkaline phosphatase and gamma-glutamyl transferase along with normalization of the aminotransferase levels and
CA19-9. A diagnosis of acute propafenone toxicity was made on the basis of the following observations: A temporal relationship between the
intake of the drug and the development of symptomsClinical and biochemical recovery occurred following the withdrawal of the drugExclusion
of other causes of liver dysfunction andThe histologic changes were consistent with drug toxicity. A temporal relationship between the
intake of the drug and the development of symptoms Clinical and biochemical recovery occurred following the withdrawal of the drug Exclusion
of other causes of liver dysfunction and The histologic changes were consistent with drug toxicity. We performed a Naranjo evaluation to
determine the probability that the clinical event experienced by the patient was due to propafenone administration. Naranjo algorithm is a
questionnaire for determining the likelihood of whether an adverse drug reaction is actually due to the drug rather than the result of other
factors. Probability is assigned via a score termed definite (>9 points), probable (between 5 and 8 points), possible (between 1 and 4
points), or zero as doubtful. We obtained a score of 7, indicating a probable adverse drug reaction from propafenone use. This report is the
eighth in the world's literature describing hepatotoxicity related to propafenone [Table 2]. The clinical presentation of propafenone
hepatotoxicity can be cholestatic and/or hepatocellular. It presents with jaundice as reported in all cases. The latency period varied
between two and six weeks. Only one reported case presented after 28 weeks [Table 2]. No cases of fulminant liver failure related to
propafenone have been reported. Clinical, biochemical, and histopathology findings in patients with propafenone hepatotoxicity as reported
in the world's literature Our experience suggests that early recognition of liver toxicity and early drug withdrawal can lead to complete
resolution of symptoms. Obtaining a detailed history about recent medication change is paramount in evaluating patients with new-onset
jaundice. In conclusion, although this drug-induced liver injury is rare, it should not be overlooked in patients complaining of an acute
cholestatic syndrome and jaundice of obscure origin. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
