Health-related quality of life (QoL) is severely impaired in acromegaly due to the physical and psychological consequences of the disease.
Pharmacological and surgical treatments, when available, can improve QoL and life expectancy. A 34-year-old male with uncontrolled
acromegaly due to a large and invasive macroadenoma, which could not be resected by transsphenoidal surgery. Over 9 years, he had limited
access to pharmacological interventions and persisted with clinically and biochemically active disease, with severe co-morbidities and a
poor QoL, which eventually lead to a premature sudden death. This case highlights the impact that active acromegaly has when treatment
resources are limited. We review the factors contributing to poor QoL in this disease, with special reference to the Latin American
scenario. Health-related quality of life (QoL) is known to be severely impaired in patients with acromegaly . Several validated tools have
been used to assess QoL in patients with acromegaly, including one disease-specific instrument called the acromegaly quality of life
questionnaire (AcroQoL), which involves 22 items concerning the physical dimension of the disease and two separate psychological dimensions
connected with appearance and personal relations [4, 5]. Although improvements in QoL can be achieved with pharmacological and surgical
interventions, physical and psychological residual morbidity and worse coping strategies can lead to persistently impaired QoL, even in
acromegalic patients with long-term biochemical remission [2, 3, 6–11]. As such, QoL considerations in both treated and untreated patients
are important for the long-term management of acromegaly. In this article, we provide a brief overview of the factors contributing to poor
QoL in acromegaly, with reference to a Latin American case study, and discuss how QoL can be improved.Fig. 1MRI scans of pituitary tumor at
diagnosis (December 1994, left) and 9 years after surgery and radiotherapy without medical treatments (January 2008, right) MRI scans of
pituitary tumor at diagnosis (December 1994, left) and 9 years after surgery and radiotherapy without medical treatments (January 2008,
right) The available evidence from both disease-specific and generic QoL tools consistently shows that patients with acromegaly (even those
in biochemical remission) have reduced QoL compared to matched populations without acromegaly [1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 12, 13]. The most affected
aspects of QoL in acromegaly are related to appearance and the least affected are related to personal relations [2, 5, 14]. Several factors
appear to predict worse QoL in acromegaly, including disease activity, female gender, older age, longer disease duration, the presence of
specific symptoms/comorbidities, certain treatment modalities and delays in diagnosis [2, 5–7, 15]. In terms of disease activity, some (but
not all) studies have shown that patients in biochemical remission have significantly better QoL (at least in some dimensions) than patients
with persistent disease, or that improvements in biochemical parameters correlate with improved QoL [1, 5, 8, 11, 12, 14, 16–19]. However,
it should also be noted that patients with acromegaly who develop growth hormone deficiency (GH) after treatment also have decreased QoL .
Several disease-specific symptoms or comorbidities of acromegaly are associated with poor QoL. Joint-related complications (leading to pain
and immobility), in particular, are frequently encountered in acromegaly and have been shown to have a significant negative impact on QoL
[7, 21–25]. These complications may persist during biochemical remission and represent a major cause of morbidity [7, 23, 24]. Sleep apnea
syndrome is another common complication of acromegaly that has a negative influence on QoL [11, 26]. Other comorbidities such as depressive
mood and hypertension may also be associated with poor QoL in acromegaly [11, 22]. Among treatment modalities, radiotherapy in particular
has been associated with reduced QoL [7, 27]. In one study that followed patients with stable biochemical control over 4 years, previous
radiotherapy was the predominant predictor of progressive impairments in QoL . This may relate to the effects of GH deficiency, among other
deficiencies, that can occur with definitive therapy for acromegaly using irradiation or surgery [3, 20].Case study: 9 years of uncontrolled
disease without appropriate medical therapy: a case for poor QoL (Mirtha Guitelman, MD)A 34-year old man presented with headaches, acral
enlargement, oily skin, sleep apnea, fatigue, hyperhidrosis and generalized joint painAll these symptoms started 5 years prior to the first
consultationThe patient had no relevant backgroundPhysical exam revealed Thyroid: 30 g Typical facial features: lip, nose and tongue
enlargement Prognathism Acral enlargement (finger size: 33) No HypertensionEndocrinological lab results (Nov 1993) Baseline and post-glucose
GH 50 μg/L IGF-1: 700 μg/L (normal for age ≤500 μg/L) Prolactin: 200 μg/L (normal 5–20 μg/L) Total T4: 1.2 nmol/L (6.9 μg/dL); TSH: 1.6
mIU/L Testosterone: 6.6 nmol/L (190 ng/dL) LH: 3 IU/L; FSH: 2.8 IU/L Normal glucose metabolismMRI at diagnosis (Dec 1994) Voluminous sellar
mass with sphenoid sinus invasion, extension in the suprasellar cistern causing displacement of the pituitary stalk and invasion into the
right cavernous sinus (Fig. 1)Complementary studies Echocardiogram: Mild dilated left ventricle with appropriate systolic function. Left and
right ventricular dilatationTreatments In 1995 he received intermittently subcutaneous SSAs 300 μg/day and bromocriptine for 6 months with
no changes in IGF-1 levels or tumor size Due to the lack of drug availability and lack of response, the patient was sent to
surgery Transsphenoidal surgery (Aug 1996) Pathology: GH-Prolactin co-secreting tumor GH after surgery: 51 μg/L Transcranial surgery (Apr
1997) GH after surgery: >30 μg/L Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism Normal thyroid and adrenal function Radiotherapy 5,000 CGy (May 1998) One
year after radiotherapy IGF-1: >400 μg/L GH: 40 μg/L Prolactin: 80 μg/L Rest of anterior pituitary hormones normal Bromocriptine and
somatostatin analogs were indicatedThe patient returned (Jan 2008) after 9 years without any treatment Joint stiffness, paresthesia,
arthropathy (osteoarthritis, needed a walking stick), macroglossia, severe obstructive sleep apnea and headache Acral enlargement, increased
sweating Signs and symptoms of HypopituitarismHormonal evaluation after 9 years without treatments GH: 19.9 μg/L; IGF-1: 640 μg/L (normal
for age 101–303 μg/L) Prolactin: 860 μg/L LH: 0.2 IU/L; FSH: 0.5 IU/L; Testosterone: 0.3 nmol/L (0.1 ng/mL) Cortisol: 28 nmol/L
(1 μg/dL) Free T4: 8.4 pmol/L (0.65 ng/dL); TSH: 2.7 mIU/L Active disease plus complete Hypopituitarism For MRI scan in Jan 2008, 9 years
after surgery and radiotherapy without medical treatments, see Fig. 1 Treatment indications Hydrocortisone 15 mg/day L-T4
100 μg/day Testosterone Transdermic testosterone 5 g, one sachet/day Cabergoline 1 mg/week SSAFollow-up The patient didn’t return to the
hospital again after February 2008, in spite of attempts to contact him for follow-up The patient died suddenly in January 2010 at age of
49 At the time of death, he had been on regular L-T4, hydrocortisone and cabergoline, as well as irregular testosterone replacement He never
received somatostatin analogs due to difficulties obtaining the drug Case study: 9 years of uncontrolled disease without appropriate medical
therapy: a case for poor QoL (Mirtha Guitelman, MD) This 49-year-old man with acromegaly diagnosed at age 34, never achieved normal levels
of IGF-1 and GH despite two surgeries and radiotherapy after initially receiving suboptimal pharmacological therapy. He subsequently
received no treatment at all over a period of 9 years followed by further suboptimal pharmacological therapy and died early due to lack of
disease control. Patients with acromegaly have significantly increased mortality, even after transsphenoidal surgery . However, achievement
of biochemical control has been shown to significantly improve life expectancy . Apart from the patient’s reduced life span another
important aspect of the patient’s poor disease control was the severe debilitating complications of acromegaly that he had to endure for
many years. As a consequence, it is highly likely that this patient experienced profound long-term impairments in QoL derived from his
multiple systemic complications. The presence of severe arthropathy, in particular, is known to be a major cause of morbidity and immobility
in acromegaly and has a marked negative impact on QoL [24, 25]. Other factors, such as sleep apnea and psychological aspects associated with
his acromegalic appearance may also have reduced the patient’s QoL. The patient is also an illustrative example of the consequences of a
delayed diagnosis; had his condition been detected earlier, he would have undoubtedly had a different and better outcome. Due to the
invasive nature of this patient’s tumor, pharmacological therapy with SSAs would have been the primary treatment of choice, but these agents
were only available intermittently for a short period after diagnosis and this option could not be implemented appropriately. The question
is whether long-term pharmacological treatment with SSAs or other pharmacological therapies could have changed the QoL of this patient, as
well as improving his life expectancy. As noted above, there is some evidence to suggest that patients with biochemically controlled
acromegaly have significantly better QoL (at least on some subscales) than patients with persistent disease, although not all studies have
found a strong association [1, 5, 8, 11, 12, 14, 16–19]. One study suggests that the best QoL in treated patients seems to be achieved if
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) is normalized and the GH nadir (during an oral glucose tolerance test) is targeted to levels less than
1.0 μg/L but above 0.3 μg/L . Several studies have also shown consistently that treatment with surgery or long-acting SSAs is associated
with significant improvements in QoL . This might be expected, as these treatments can provide significant improvements in symptoms known to
be associated with poor QoL, especially in the frequency and severity of sleep apnea episodes . With the exception of radiotherapy, which is
generally associated with poorer QoL, it is hard to distinguish any notable differences on overall QoL between different treatment
modalities . Randomized comparative studies in newly diagnosed patients suggest that long-acting SSAs and surgery provide similar levels of
QoL when used as first-line therapy [32, 35]. Pharmacological combination therapy (e.g., adding pegvisomant to an SSA) may also provide
better improvements in QoL independently of having better biochemical control . It should be emphasized that, although clinically and
biochemically effective, some SSAs need to be injected by a properly trained professional, and thus, patients are required to visit the
hospital or medical office every few weeks. Although usually not a major problem, this may generate more psychological distress, social
fears and a poorer sense of well-being and may hamper improvements in QoL [17, 37]. Clinical trial and observational study evidence suggests
that patients prefer the option to administer SSAs themselves or by a partner at home rather than by a healthcare professional, and this
does not appear to compromise efficacy or safety . Further evidence also suggests that patients also prefer longer intervals between
injections, and this also appears to be achievable with certain SSAs without loss of efficacy [41, 43]. It has been suggested that targeted
psychosocial interventions, such as cognitive behavioral therapy, self-management training, and information on the negative effects of the
disease might help biochemically controlled patients with acromegaly to use more active coping strategies, which might lead to improvements
in QoL . In a recent study, greater diagnostic delay by the physician (relative to a patient first seeking medical advice) was associated
with reduced psychological QoL, depression, sleep disturbances and impaired body image, suggesting that improved physician awareness of
acromegaly (leading to earlier diagnosis) may also help to improve QoL . To our knowledge only one Latin-American study has evaluated QoL in
acromegaly using an adapted version of the AcrQoL questionnaire . This study from a tertiary care center in Mexico City found that the 50
patients with acromegaly have reduced scores in all scales of the AcroQol (physical, psychological, appearance and interpersonal
relationships) when compared to controls ; yet, no differences in any of these scales were found between active and controlled patients,
perhaps due to the relatively low number of patients . Patients with long-term uncontrolled acromegaly, as in our case study, are likely to
have severe acromegalic features, symptoms and comorbidities and consequently significantly impaired QoL and reduced life expectancy.
However, there are many unanswered questions about the benefits of controlled compared with uncontrolled acromegaly regarding QoL and other
factors, such as costs and morbidities [14, 19]. For instance, normalization of levels of IGF-1 and GH do not necessarily reflect optimal
QoL or symptom relief . As such, QoL considerations in both treated and untreated patients are important for the long-term management of
acromegaly and it has been suggested that simplified measures of QoL may provide a reliable additional measurement of disease activity in
everyday clinical practice . It is also possible that reduction in tumor mass (which may be independent of biochemical control with SSAs )
has the potential to improve QoL, although this remains to be further investigated. With the available evidence it is hard to distinguish
any notable consistent differences in QoL between pharmacological therapy and surgery (at least in the first-line setting), whereas
radiotherapy appears to be associated with a reduced QoL [14, 32, 35]. However, some factors associated with pharmacological therapy, such
as regular hospital visits for drug administration, may have an adverse impact on QoL, and there is the potential to minimize this through
the use of drug formulations that require less frequent dosing and/or can be administered at home without the help of a healthcare
professional. Longer-acting drugs may also have the potential to improve QoL through tumor shrinkage. Prompt diagnosis and targeted
psychosocial interventions may also be an important factors leading to better QoL. In summary, in patients with active acromegaly, as well
as those in remission, attention to QoL issues is highly recommended . The best balance of efficacy, cost and QoL will likely be achieved
with an individualized approach to therapy, based on available pharmacological, surgical and radiotherapeutic resources . The Latin American
Knowledge Network Initiative, including meetings and preparation of this supplement, was organized and funded by Ipsen. Medical writing
support was provided by Patrick Covernton on behalf of Arsenal-CDM Paris and funded by Ipsen. The authors were fully responsible for the
concept and all content, were involved at all stages of manuscript development, and provided approval of the final version for submission.
