Cutaneous mucinosis is a group of conditions involving an accumulation of mucin or glycosaminoglycan in the skin and its annexes. It is
described in some connective tissue diseases but never in association with mixed connective tissue disease. This report concerns two cases
of cutaneous mucinosis in patients with mixed connective tissue disease in remission; one patient presented the papular form, and the other
reticular erythematous mucinosis. These are the first cases of mucinosis described in mixed connective tissue disease. Both cases had skin
lesions with no other clinical or laboratorial manifestations, with clinical response to azathioprine in one, and to an association of
chloroquine and prednisone in the other. A mucinose cutânea é um grupo de condições em que há um acúmulo de mucina ou glicosaminoglicanos na
pele e seus anexos. É descrita em algumas doenças do tecido conjuntivo, porem nunca em associação com doença mista do tecido conjuntivo.
Relatamos dois casos de mucinose cutânea em pacientes com doença mista do tecido conjuntivo em remissão, um apresentava-se sob a forma
papular e outro sob a forma reticular eritematosa de mucinose. Estes são os primeiros casos de mucinose descritos na doença mista do tecido
conjuntivo. Ambos os casos apresentaram o quadro cutâneo de modo isolado, sem nenhuma outra manifestação clínico-laboratorial, havendo
resposta à azatioprina em um e à cloroquina associada a prednisona no outro. Cutaneous mucinosis is a group of conditions involving an
accumulation of mucin or glycosaminoglycan (GAG) in the skin and its annexes. It can occur in some diffuse connective tissue diseases (DCTD)
such as lupus erythematosus, but to the best of our knowledge it has never before been reported in association with mixed connective tissue
disease (MCTD). CASE 1: A female patient, 44-years-old, diagnosed with MCTD (Kasukawa's classification criteria) for eight years. She had
Raynaud's phenomenon, swollen hands, polyarthritis, photosensitivity, esophageal ectasia, leukopenia, lymphopenia, predominantly axonal
peripheral sensorimotor polyneuropathy, sensorineural hearing loss and anterior uveitis. Anti-RNP antibodies titers were 1/1200
(haemaglutination). The patient remained stable for over one year taking azathioprine (1.5 mg/ kg / day) and when joint activity initiated
was treated with prednisone 10 mg/ day and leflunomida, with improvement (Figure 1). A month later she noticed papules on the neck, back and
face, which were biopsied. The histopathology analysis revealed a mild lymphocytic infiltrate in lymphocytic perivascular and periadnexal
areas in the superficial dermis, with some melanophages and collagen fibers dissociation (Figure 2). The PAS showed focal increase of the
basal layer of the epidermis. The deposition of mucin was confirmed by Alcian-Blue staining. The epidermis was normal. Immunofluorescence
showed no deposition of C3, anti-IgM, anti-IgG or anti-IgA antibodies. Histopathological findings were therefore consistent with cutaneous
papular mucinosis. The appearance of this skin condition occurred independently of other manifestations of MCTD. The dose of azathioprine
was increased to 2mg/kg/day. This led to an improvement of the lesions. Case 1 - papules on the back A and C: Histopathology analysis: mild
lymphocytic infiltrate in superficial dermis, and collagen fibers dissociation, with normal epidermis. B and D: The deposition of mucin was
confirmed by Alcian-Blue staining. A (100X); B (200X); C and D(400X) CASE 2: A 42-year-old male, diagnosed with MCTD (Kasukawa's
classification criteria) for eight years. He had Raynaud's phenomenon, hand swelling, pleurisy, lymphadenopathy, arthritis, myopathy and
anti-RNP antibodies titers 1/6400 (haemaglutination. The patient remained clinically stable for more than seven months with prednisone
15mg/day and azathioprine 2.0 mg/ kg / day when he presented erythematous-violaceous indurated mildly pruritic and painless lesions in the
face, trunk and upper limbs (Figure 3). As there were no other signs of MCTD disease activity, the dose of prednisone was reduced to 7.5 mg/
day and azathioprine was discontinued. Histopathological analysis of papules of the trunk showed epidermal parakeratosis and
hyperorthokeratosis. Perivascular, interstitial and periadnexal lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate appeared in the dermis (predominantly
the former). The alcian-blue and the PAS staining revealed interstitial mucinosis in the reticular dermis. Chloroquine diphosphate was
introduced (250 mg/ day) and the prednisone dose was increased to 20 mg/ day, with improvement of the lesions. FIGURE 3 Case 2:
erythematous-violaceous indurated mildly pruritic and painless lesions on trunk Case 2: erythematous-violaceous indurated mildly pruritic
and painless lesions on trunk Cutaneous mucinosis covers a heterogeneous group of diseases involving a diffuse and/ or focal mucin
accumulation in the skin and its annexes.1,2The diseases can be classified in two groups: primary cutaneous mucinoses that manifest with
clinical dermatologic applications (e.g. lichen myxedema, reticular erythematous mucinosis and scleromixedema), and mucinosis associated
with other diseases,2including certain endocrinopathies, especially thyroid diseases, toxic diseases (toxic oil syndrome), Eosinophilia-
Myalgia Syndrome, nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy, DCTD and cancer.1,2,3 Lupus erythematosus (LE) is a rheumatic disease most often
associated with secondary mucinosis (cutaneous mucinosis can occur in up to 1.5% of LE cases).2Mucin deposits have also been reported in
other DCTD such as Sjögren syndrome, systemic sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, vasculitis and dermatomyositis.3,4 The characteristics of the
primary and secondary mucinosis overlap, but the underlying cause of the abnormal deposition of mucin is unknown.2It is suggested that in
rheumatic diseases the mucinosis could be related to circulating antibodies stimulating the synthesis of glycosaminoglycans by skin
fibroblasts. The release of cytokines is an important factor in regulating the production of mucina.3 Hyaluran and chondroitin sulfate are
able to activate and attract inflammatory cells, with a resulting local increase in cytokines in vitro. Glycosaminoglycan (GAGs) are
increased in dermatomyositis and lupus skin lesions. Their involvement in the pathophysiology of these lesions is therefore suggested.5 In
LE, the mucin deposits may occur with or without other systemic manifestations.1The LE chronic plaque featuring mucin is classically known
as lupus tumidus. The lesions appear as reticular erythematous macules, papules and plaques, located symmetrically in the center of the
chest and back, and quite similar to reticular erythematosus mucinosis (REM). However, in this form of mucinosis, the typical LE changes in
epidermis and basement membrane are absent and immunofluorescence is negative.1In the first case we found the typical histological findings
of papular mucinosis. In the second case, although the histology had shown mild epidermal involvement, there were no other changes typical
of LE; mucin deposition was found only in the reticular dermis, while in LE it would have been found throughout it. These findings point to
the diagnosis of reticular mucinosis. No specific treatment exists for cutaneous mucinosis related to DCTD. Therapy is usually directed
towards the underlying disease. In idiopathic forms, numerous treatments have already been reported, especially for the generalized forms.
In Case 1 a significant improvement was noted after increasing the azathioprine dose, and in Case 2 the response occurred using an
association of chloroquine diphosphate and prednisone. The response to antimalarial drugs has already been mentioned in various reports and
series of cases.1,2,6,7In refractory cases the use of intralesional or systemic corticosteroids could be effective, with the good response
due to suppression of T cells, keratinocytes and fibroblasts, with a consequent reduction of the proliferation of the extracelular
matrix.8Partial regression of nodular lesions has been reported with intralesional injection of hyaluronidase. In generalized forms
thalidomide was effective in some cases and isotretinoin has been used with good response.9,10Several other immunosuppressant agents such as
cyclophosphamide, melphalan and azathioprine have been used with variable responses to severe forms, but there are no reports in localized
forms. These are the first reports of mucinosis in MCTD. In both cases, the appearance of skin lesions occurred during good control of other
underlying disease. There was a clinical response to azathioprine in one case and to chloroquine plus prednisone in the other. Study
conducted at the Rheumatology and Dermatology Department of the Hospital das Clínicas of the Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo
(HC-FMUSP) - São Paulo (SP), Brazil. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None
