We present a case of bullosis diabeticorum. It is a rare disorder, probably underdiagnosed, associated with long-term diabetes mellitus. Its
etiology remains unclear. It is characterized by tense blisters, with serous content, recurrent and spontaneous on normal skin especially in
the acral regions. Displays self-limiting course. No specific laboratory tests for diagnosis of this bullous disease exist. Clinical and
conservative management to prevent secondary infection reduces morbidity in diabetic patients. Apresenta-se um caso de bulose diabeticorum,
que consiste em uma desordem rara de etiologia ainda incerta, provavelmente subdiagnosticada, associada ao diabetes mellitus de longa
evolução. Caracteriza-se por bolhas tensas, recorrentes, de conteúdo seroso e aparecimento espontâneo sobre pele pouco inflamada,
especialmente nas regiões acrais, que evolui com curso autolimitado. Não há testes laboratoriais específicos para o diagnóstico desta
bulose. O reconhecimento clínico e o manejo conservador para evitar infecção secundária reduz a morbidade nos pacientes diabéticos.
70-years-old white female presented a five-year evolution of recurrent and asymptomatic tense blisters with serous content on the second and
third left fingers, which disappeared without scarring. She denied triggering factors such as trauma. Comorbidities, hypertension and type 2
diabetes mellitus for 20 years treated irregularly with antihypertensives and oral hypoglycemics. We found on examination of the patient a
tense blister with serous content, 2 cm in diameter, located on the distal phalanx of the second left finger (Figures 1 and 2). There was
evidence of distal hypoesthesia on the hands and feet associated with normal peripheral pulses. No signs of local inflammation. Presence of
tense bubble in the distal phalanx of the second left finger. Absence of cicatricial lesion on the third finger Detail of the blister
Histologic examination revealed intraepidermal cleavage, reepithelialization and few inflammatory cells (Figure 3). Intraepidermal cleavage
with few inflammatory cells Spontaneous blisters are a specific type of skin lesion occurring in patients with diabetes mellitus.1,2 This
type of lesion in diabetic patients was first documented by Kramer, 1930,3 later described by Rocca and Pereyra in 1963.4 The term bullosis
diabeticorum was first used in 1967.5 It is a rare disease, with approximately 112 cases reported in the literature.1 It occurs in both
genders, affecting people from seventeen to eighty years old, especially in patients with long-term diabetes mellitus who generally exhibit
peripheral neuropathy5,1 Other causes include microangiopathy, nephropathy, disorders of the metabolism of calcium, magnesium and
carbohydrates.1,6 The etiology of the disorder however remains nuclear.2 It is characterized clinically by tense asymptomatic blisters
containing serous and sterile fluid which appear spontaneously on normal skin5,7. No history of previous trauma, and most cases recur.1,2,7
It can occur at a variety of anatomical sites, with the acral region, especially the feet, being the most common location.1,5 Its evolution
is self-limited and usually ceases within two to five weeks, without scarring.1,2 Diagnosis is mainly clinical. Histopathological
examination is often inconclusive. The cleavage can be intraepidermal or subepidermal, revealing different events or pathogenic
developmental stages.1,2,6 In most reported cases there is intraepidermal cleavage and no acantholysis.1 Direct and indirect
immunofluorescence are negative.2 No specific laboratory test exists for diagnosing bullosis diabeticorum.1 In these circumstances it is
necessary to exclude other possible causes of bullous diseases. Blisters caused by bullous pemphigoid may be similar, both clinically and
histologically. Differential diagnoses can include epidermolysis bullosa acquisita (EBA), porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT), erythema multiforme
or drug eruption. In the event of diagnostic uncertainty one should proceed to biopsy for histologic analysis of the bubble region and the
perilesional zone to perform immunofluorescence.1 Additional tests are not essential. Treatment is conservative. The blister must be kept
intact in order to cover the lesion and prevent secondary infection.1 The patient should be instructed to keep the wound clean and
protected. Topical therapy is not required. The above reports a typical case of bullosis diabeticorum, a rare bullous disease of unknown
etiology, in patients with long-term diabetes mellitus. It is important to emphasize the probable underdiagnosis of this disorder due to the
absence of a specific diagnostic test, and as a result correct recognition of the disease is important. Proper management helps to reduce
morbidity in diabetic patients and prevents the formation of chronic ulcers.8 Study conducted at the Pedro Ernesto University Hospital - Rio
de Janeiro State University (HUPE-UERJ) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None
