Histoplasmosis is a common endemic mycosis. Although most infections in immunocompetent individuals are self-limiting, some patients develop
severe pneumonitis or other types of chronic pulmonary infection. Specific imaging findings depend on the organisms involved, the underlying
condition of the patient, and his condition after immune depleting procedures. The disease process in immunocompetent patients is usually
limited to a solitary nodule on chest X-rays or CT scans, but enlarged hilar or mediastinal lymph nodes can also be observed.( 1 ) We report
here the case of an immunocompetent patient with histoplasmosis who presented with a halo sign on CT. A 47-year-old man presented with dry
cough, chest pain, fatigue, and fever, having started 15 days prior. He reported neither comorbidities nor a contact with environments with
mold. The patient was negative for HIV by ELISA. Laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis, elevated C-reactive protein levels (33 mg/L), and
hypertransaminasemia (three-fold higher than the upper limit of normal). CT scanning revealed a pulmonary nodule with a halo sign in his
left lower lobe (Figure 1) and left para-hilar lymph nodes. Histological examination of a pulmonary biopsy sample obtained during
bronchoscopy showed nonspecific inflammatory alterations. Cultures for mycobacteria and fungi were negative. Serology by
counterimmunoelectrophoresis was positive for histoplasmosis. Figure 1 A CT scan at the level of the lower lobes showing a nodule surrounded
by ground-glass attenuation (halo sign) in the left lower lobe. Treatment was initiated with itraconazole (400 mg/day). After 30 days, a CT
scan showed that the size of the nodule was reduced by half. The patient showed progressive improvement of clinical symptoms and a reduction
of the para-aortic adenopathy. Treatment was maintained for one year, during which the patient remained asymptomatic, the nodule completely
disappeared, and the lymphadenopathy resolved. However, histoplasmosis by counterimmunoelectrophoresis remained positive. We reported the
case of an immunocompetent patient who presented with a halo sign and lymphadenopathy caused by histoplasmosis, showing a good clinical
response after one year of treatment with itraconazole (400 mg/day). Histoplasma capsulatum is a major endemic human fungal pathogen that
can cause a broad variety of clinical presentations, ranging from mild, focal pulmonary disease to life-threatening systemic infections.( 1
) In one study, open lung biopsies of 155 patients with undiagnosed lung lesions showed that infectious etiologies were responsible for 19%
of the lesions, the most common diagnosis in this group being histoplasmosis (41%).( 2 ) The halo sign is characterized by a ground-glass
opacity surrounding a nodule, mass, or round area of consolidation.( 3 ) This sign is frequently an early indicator of invasive pulmonary
aspergillosis in immunocompromised patients,( 4 ) but it might also indicate other invasive fungal diseases. Our patient required treatment
with high doses of itraconazole for one year. Azoles, such as itraconazole and voriconazole, and amphotericin B have significant activity
against H. capsulatum. However, approximately 10% of the patients hospitalized due to histoplasmosis die,( 5 ) despite the lack of
antifungal resistance among recovered isolates.( 6 ) In conclusion, a halo sign on CT might indicate active histoplasmosis, which may
require long-term treatment, even in immunocompetent patients. A histoplasmose é uma micose endêmica comum. Embora a maioria das infecções
em indivíduos imunocompetentes seja autolimitada, alguns pacientes apresentam pneumonite grave ou outros tipos de infecção pulmonar crônica.
Achados específicos em exames de imagem dependem dos organismos envolvidos, da condição subjacente do paciente e de sua condição após
procedimentos de depleção imunológica. O processo da doença em pacientes imunocompetentes é geralmente limitado a um nódulo solitário na
radiografia ou TC de tórax, mas linfonodos hilares ou mediastinais aumentados também podem ser observados.( 1 ) Relatamos aqui o caso de um
paciente imunocompetente com histoplasmose cuja TC apresentou o sinal do halo. Um homem de 47 anos de idade apresentou tosse seca, dor
torácica, fadiga e febre, com início 15 dias antes. Não relatou comorbidades ou contato com ambientes com mofo. O resultado do ELISA foi
negativo para HIV. Os exames laboratoriais revelaram leucocitose, níveis elevados de proteína C reativa (33 mg/L) e hipertransaminasemia
(três vezes maior que o limite superior da normalidade). A TC revelou um nódulo pulmonar com sinal do halo no lobo inferior esquerdo (Figura
1) e nos linfonodos para-hilares esquerdos. O exame histológico de uma amostra de biópsia pulmonar obtida durante a broncoscopia mostrou
alterações inflamatórias inespecíficas. As culturas para micobactérias e fungos foram negativas. O resultado da sorologia por
contraimunoeletroforese foi positivo para histoplasmose. Figura 1 TC ao nível dos lobos inferiores mostrando um nódulo circundado por
atenuação em vidro fosco (sinal do halo) no lobo inferior esquerdo. O tratamento foi iniciado com itraconazol (400 mg/dia). Após 30 dias, a
TC mostrou que o tamanho do nódulo havia diminuído pela metade. O paciente apresentou melhora progressiva dos sintomas clínicos e redução da
adenopatia para-aórtica. O tratamento foi mantido durante um ano, durante o qual o paciente permaneceu assintomático, o nódulo desapareceu
completamente, e a linfadenopatia regrediu. No entanto, o resultado da contraimunoeletroforese permaneceu positivo para histoplasmose.
Relatamos o caso de um paciente imunocompetente que apresentou sinal do halo e linfadenopatia causada por histoplasmose, com boa resposta
clínica após um ano de tratamento com itraconazol (400 mg/dia). O Histoplasma capsulatum é um importante patógeno fúngico humano endêmico
que pode causar uma grande variedade de quadros clínicos, desde doença pulmonar focal leve até infecções sistêmicas mortais.( 1 ) Em um
estudo, biópsias pulmonares a céu aberto de 155 pacientes com lesões pulmonares não diagnosticadas mostraram que etiologias infecciosas
foram responsáveis por 19% das lesões, e o diagnóstico mais comum nesse grupo foi histoplasmose (41%).( 2 ) O sinal do halo é caracterizado
por uma opacidade em vidro fosco ao redor de um nódulo, massa, ou área arredondada de consolidação.( 3 ) Esse sinal é frequentemente um
indicador precoce de aspergilose pulmonar invasiva em pacientes imunossuprimidos,( 4 ) mas também pode indicar outras doenças fúngicas
invasivas. Nosso paciente necessitou de tratamento com altas doses de itraconazol durante um ano. Os antifúngicos azólicos, tais como
itraconazol e voriconazol, e a anfotericina B têm atividade significativa contra H. capsulatum. No entanto, aproximadamente 10% dos
pacientes hospitalizados por causa de histoplasmose morrem,( 5 ) não obstante a ausência de resistência antifúngica entre isolados
recuperados.( 6 ) Em suma, o sinal do halo na TC pode indicar histoplasmose ativa, que pode exigir tratamento em longo prazo, mesmo em
pacientes imunocompetentes.
