In this study, five cases of pemphigus vulgaris and two cases of pemphigus foliaceus were treated with cyclophosphamide pulse therapy
associated with prednisone, resulting in the need for a smaller maintenance dose of prednisone. In three cases of pemphigus vulgaris and one
case of pemphigus foliaceus, dexamethasone and cyclophosphamide pulse therapy associated with prednisone helped the lesions to heal more
rapidly. Neither treatment however prevented the recurrence of the disease. Amenorrhea, myelotoxicity and Stevens-Johnson syndrome were
among the cyclophosphamide side effects. All the patients treated with prednisone experienced known side effects. Neste estudo, cinco casos
de pênfigo vulgar e dois casos de pênfigo foliáceo foram submetidos à pulsoterapia com ciclofosfamida associada à prednisona resultando em
ação poupadora na dose de manutenção de prednisona. Em três casos de pênfigo vulgar e um caso de pênfigo foliáceo tratados com pulsoterapia
dexametasona/ciclofosfamida associada à prednisona houve resolução mais rápida das lesões. Nenhum destes tratamentos impediu a recurrência
da doença. Amenorreia, mielotoxicidade e síndrome de Stevens Johnson foram observados com a ciclofosfamida. Em todos os pacientes ocorreram
efeitos colaterais conhecidos da prednisona. Drug therapy for pemphigus is generally based on high-dose systemic corticotherapy. The results
of our previous studies showed that daily oral prednisone at 1-2mg/kg (maximum dose = 120mg/day) produced good initial control of pemphigus
vulgaris (PV) and pemphigus foliaceus (PF), without increasing the morbidity linked to these diseases.1,2 Indian authors have proposed
treating pemphigus using dexamethasone and cyclophosphamide pulse therapy with oral cyclophosphamide between pulses.3,4 In two of our early
publications on this subject, referring to a series of different cases, we reported the use of prednisone between pulses as part of the
scheme we developed, unlike the treatment proposed by the Indian authors.5,6 In the present observational, retrospective and cross-sectional
study, we used a new series of PV and PF patients hospitalized in the dermatology ward of the Clementino Fraga Filho University
Hospital/UFRJ in Rio de Janeiro between 2005 and 2011. The study aimed to evaluate the therapeutic results and effects of cyclophosphamide
and dexamethasone-cyclophosphamide pulse therapies associated with oral prednisone between pulses. Adults of both genders with
histopathological confirmation of PV and PF diagnoses through skin biopsy and/or oral mucosa No response to daily oral prednisone at
12mg/kg/day for 30 days. ≥ 40mg/day maintenance dose of prednisone. Ineffectiveness of azathioprine. Drug reduction leading to disease
recurrence. Severe hypertension; uncontrolled diabetes. Aseptic necrosis of the femoral head; psychosis. Dose: 600mg/m2 of body surface in
200ml of 5% glucose given intravenously in one hour. Dose: 8mg in 20ml of 0.9% saline solution given intravenously during five minutes
before cyclophosphamide. Rigorous oral rehydration from 24 hours before to 36 hours after drug application. Pulse therapy every three weeks.
Criteria for suspension: leukopenia (leukocytes< 3000/µl); thrombocytopenia (platelets <100000/µl); erythrocytes in urine sediments
(>10/µl). 1 st: complete remission of skin lesions and partial remission of oral mucosal lesions (three active lesions); 2 nd: reduction of
oral prednisone to 20mg/day (10mg every ten days); 3 rd: discontinuation of pulse therapy; 4 th: regimen of oral prednisone withdrawal every
six months (20mg to 15mg to 10mg to 5mg to 2.5mg). Five PV and two PF patients underwent cyclophosphamide pulse therapy associated with
prednisone. The treatment was suspended because of myelotoxocity (case 4) and Stevens-Johnson syndrome (case 5). At follow-up of 2-3 years,
a 20mg/day maintenance dose of prednisone was applied in three cases. The number of pulses ranged from three to nine. There was recurrence
in all cases: in the oral mucosa in PV patients (5 lesions) and on the face in PF patients (10 lesions) (Table 1). Pulse therapy with
cyclophosphamide PV =pemphigus vulgaris PF = pemphigus foliaceus F = female M = male 0 = no prednisone Our results (Table 1) showed that
cyclophosphamide exerted a sparing action on the corticosteroid (prednisone), with patients needing lower maintenance doses of prednisone.
However this did not prevent relapses.The side effects related to cyclophosphamide were amenorrhea, myelotoxicity and Stevens-Johnson
syndrome; the last two ones prevented the continuation of cyclophosphamide pulse therapy. The most common side effects related to prednisone
were: hyperglycemia, leukocytosis, weight gain, cushingoid features, hypertension and subcapsular cataract. Comparisons with other data were
not possible given the differing methodological approaches such as: inclusion and exclusion criteria, initial doses of prednisone and
outcome parameters.7-10 Adults of both genders with histopathological confirmation of PV and PF diagnoses through skin biopsy and/or oral
mucosa. Severe PV (skin + mucosa): large number of lesions; secondary infection; lesions in areas of venous punctures; poor clinical
condition. Progressive cutaneous disease (PV and PF). Rebound caused by the withdrawal of oral corticosteroid dosage. Non-control even with
a dose increase of prednisone. Pre-pulse laboratory tests: blood count, electrolytes, urea, creatinine, glucose, amylase, urine sediments,
fecal parasitological, electrocardiogram, chest radiography and ophthalmological examination. Dose: 100mg in 500ml of 5% glucose given
intravenously in two hours. Total: three pulses (one pulse/day). Blood pressure and pulse rate every 15 minutes during infusion. Interval:
every two or three weeks. Cyclophosphamide on the first or second day of dexamethasone. Criteria for suspension: hypertensive crisis,
dyspnea, palpitations, chest pain, chills, sweating, increased amylase. 1 st: complete remission of skin lesions and partial remission of
oral mucosal lesions (three active lesions); 2 nd: discontinuation of dexamethasone, maintenance of cyclophosphamide; 3 rd: reduction of
oral prednisone to 20mg/day (10mg every ten days); 4 th: discontinuation of pulse therapy with cyclophosphamide; 5 th: regimen of oral
prednisone withdrawal every six months (20mg to 15mg to 10mg to 5mg to 2.5mg). Three PV and one PF patients underwent dexamethasone
cyclophosphamide pulse therapy associated with prednisone. Our results demonstrated that dexamethasone and cyclophosphamide pulse therapy
interrupted the emergence of bullae and promoted faster involution of the lesions, but without preventing the recurrence of the disease. The
number of cyclophosphamide pulses varied between 8 and 14 (Table 2). Elevation of amylase in one case was due to dexamethasone, thereby
ruling out the continuation of dexamethasone pulse therapy.9 Comparisons with the literature data was more difficult on account of the
different methodologies employed.7-10 Pulse therapy with dexamethasone + cyclophosphamide PV = pemphigus vulgaris PF = pemphigus foliaceus F
= female M = male In all PV and PF schemes, variables such as the natural course of the disease and its severity and refractoriness cannot
be discarded. Both treatments had a similar profile with regard to relapses. Study conducted at the Dermatology Department of the Clementino
Fraga Filho University Hospital - Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (HUCFF-UFRJ) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil. Conflict of interest:
None Financial Support: None
