Flexible bronchoscopy is a routine procedure used in a wide spectrum of airway pathologies, with a rare incidence of severe complications.
We would like to present a case of a rare and odd sequence of complications in a patient treated in our clinic. A 74-year-old woman who had
metastatic angiosarcoma in the thoracic wall, with known multiple pulmonary metastases, previously treated with chemotherapy, and without
medical history of vascular diseases was admitted to our clinic due to hemoptysis and fever. At admission, the neurological status of the
patient was unremarkable, and the patient showed no signs of chest pain. Baseline electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed no significant findings
(Figure 1A). Laboratory tests revealed normocytic anemia (hemoglobin, 97 g/L; hematocrit, 0.295 g/L), leukocytosis (10.9 Ã- 109 cells/L),
and elevated C-reactive protein (219.4 mg/L). Signs of renal or hepatic impairment were not registered. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy was
indicated, and a blood clot was found in the left lower lobe bronchus. After the aspiration of the clot, there were no signs of active
bleeding. During the procedure, the patient became unresponsive, presented with mydriasis, and stopped breathing but showed no alterations
in heart rhythm. The patient was intubated, being initially manually ventilated, and started breathing spontaneously but remained
unconscious for the next six hours. At admission in the ICU, her arterial blood pressure was 95/70 mmHg, and her oxygen saturation was 93%.
The patient received oxygen support, which was discontinued when oxygen saturation was above 96% and her arterial blood pressure was normal.
Initially, the patient was treated with dextrose saline intravenous infusion, aspirin, systemic corticosteroids, and diazepam. Right bulbar
deviation, tonic spasm of the right arm, and flaccid paralysis on the left side were found. There was a negative Babinski sign on the left.
Figure 1 Electrocardiograms. In A, normal sinus rhythm with one supraventricular ectopic beat and nonspecific ST-T segment abnormalities in
precordial leads. In B, deep negative T waves in anterolateral leads. In C, slight sinus arrhythmia with no significant ST-T segment
abnormalities. Brain magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated ischemic brain lesions in the right frontal cortex without signs of hemorrhage
or cerebral metastases. Subsequently, ECG showed deep negative T waves in anterolateral leads (Figure 1B) with mildly increased troponin
levels (troponin T, 0.270 µg/L). Transthoracic echocardiography revealed characteristic findings: ejection fraction of 45%, hypokinesis of
apical and mid segments, and hiperkinesis of basal segments of the left ventricle–apical ballooning syndrome (Figure 2). Follow-up
laboratory tests showed no pathological findings indicating secondary hepatic or renal impairment. Supportive treatment with an angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitor, a beta-blocker, aspirin, and a diuretic resulted in a decrease in troponin levels within 24 h (0.130 µg/L) and
clinical improvement. The patient stayed 4 days in the ICU followed by 27 days of hospital stay. Figure 2 Echocardiogram (four-chamber view)
showing apical ballooning of the left ventricle (blue arrow) and hyperkinesis of basal segments in the left ventricle (red arrow). LA: left
atrium; LV: left ventricle; RA: right atrium; and RV: right ventricle. The patient suffered serious neurological damage with left-sided
hemiplegia, but subsequent tests revealed normalization of cardiologic findings and normal ECG (Figure 1C). During hospitalization, no
recurrence of hemoptysis was found. Neurological rehabilitation of the patient was conducted after discharge. Flexible bronchoscopy is a
diagnostic and interventional technique, widely used for various pulmonary pathologies. Introduced in the late 1960s, flexible bronchoscopy
was recognized as one of the diagnostic and therapeutic cornerstones of pulmonary medicine. It is a safe procedure. In one recent
retrospective study, the overall rate of serious complications was 0.5%.( 1 ) The most common complications were related to local anesthesia
(0.3-0.5%); hypoxemia (0.2-21.0%); arrhythmias (1-10%); bleeding following biopsy (0.12-7.50%); pneumothorax/pneumomediastinum (1-6%); and
fever (0.9-2.5%). Death occurs in 0.1-0.2% of the cases.( 2 ) One of the few serious complications that exceptionally might occur during the
procedure is the development of ischemic cerebrovascular stroke secondary to disordered heart rhythm, hypoxemia, or air embolism.( 1 , 2 )
Stress cardiomyopathy, which is recognized as a unique form of transient cardiomyopathy and was first described in 1990,( 3 , 4 ) is a
reversible cardiac impairment that mimics an acute ischemic cardiac event without significant pathomorphological changes in the coronary
arteries.( 3 ) Stress cardiomyopathy has the following characteristics: new ST-segment abnormalities on ECG (elevation and/or T-wave
inversion), modest elevation in myocardial lesion biomarkers (troponin I, troponin T, and creatine kinase MB), transient left ventricular
dysfunction, echocardiographic signs of hypokinesia/akinesia, and ballooning of the apical part of the left ventricle with reduced left
ventricular ejection fraction.( 4 , 5 ) Stress cardiomyopathy can occur after acute mental or physical stress, subarachnoid hemorrhage,
ischemic stroke, major head trauma, acute medical illness, pheochromocytoma exacerbation, and as a result of exogenous catecholamine
administration.( 6 - 9 ) The pathophysiological mechanisms for the development of these disorders are not fully understood, but there is
evidence of elevated levels of catecholamines, which indicates a connection with previously experienced extreme stress.( 10 ) All of the
changes are reversible, supportive care is usually sufficient, and normalization of the left ventricle function can be expected within 1-3
months.( 8 ) Our patient experienced a rare sequence of complications during and after fiberoptic bronchoscopy. It is known that
cerebrovascular and cardiovascular complications are more common in oncology patients, but this particular order of complications deserves
attention. Since the patient presented with hemoptysis, it was extremely important that the correct diagnosis of transient cardiomyopathy
was made because of the potential risk of recurrent bleeding in case the stress cardiomyopathy had been mistaken for acute coronary syndrome
and anticoagulant therapy had been introduced. Therefore, familiarity with and awareness of potential complications, appropriate diagnostic
tools, and management knowledge are paramount to successful treatment of such events. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of
such a sequence of bronchoscopy-related complications in one patient. A broncoscopia flexível é um procedimento de rotina usado em um amplo
espectro de patologias das vias aéreas, com rara incidência de complicações graves. Gostaríamos de apresentar um caso de uma sequência rara
e peculiar de complicações em uma paciente tratada em nossa clínica. Uma mulher de 74 anos de idade com angiossarcoma metastático na parede
torácica – com múltiplas metástases pulmonares conhecidas – previamente tratada com quimioterapia e sem histórico médico de doenças
vasculares foi admitida em nossa clínica por causa de hemoptise e febre. No momento da admissão, o estado neurológico da paciente era
normal, e a paciente não apresentava sinais de dor torácica. O eletrocardiograma (ECG) basal não apresentou resultados significativos
(Figura 1A). Os exames laboratoriais revelaram anemia normocítica (hemoglobina: 97 g/L; hematócrito: 0,295 g/L), leucocitose (10,9 Ã- 109
células/L) e proteína C reativa elevada (219,4 mg/L). Não foram registrados sinais de comprometimento renal ou hepático. A fibrobroncoscopia
foi indicada, e um coágulo sanguíneo foi encontrado no brônquio do lobo inferior esquerdo. Após a aspiração do coágulo, não houve sinais de
sangramento ativo. Durante o procedimento, a paciente parou de reagir, apresentou midríase e parou de respirar, mas não apresentou
alterações do ritmo cardíaco. A paciente foi intubada e inicialmente ventilada manualmente. Passou a respirar espontaneamente, mas
permaneceu inconsciente durante as seis horas seguintes. No momento da admissão na UTI, sua pressão arterial era de 95/70 mmHg e sua
saturação de oxigênio era de 93%. A paciente recebeu suporte de oxigênio, que foi interrompido quando sua pressão arterial tornou-se normal
e a saturação de oxigênio ficou acima de 96%. Inicialmente, a paciente foi tratada com infusão intravenosa de solução salina glicosada,
aspirina, corticosteroides sistêmicos e diazepam. A paciente apresentava desvio bulbar direito, espasmo tônico do braço direito e paralisia
flácida no lado esquerdo. A paciente não apresentava sinal de Babinski à esquerda. Figura 1 Eletrocardiogramas. Em A, ritmo sinusal normal
com um batimento ectópico supraventricular e alterações inespecíficas do segmento ST-T nas derivações precordiais. Em B, ondas T negativas
profundas nas derivações anterolaterais. Em C, arritmia sinusal leve sem alterações significativas do segmento ST-T. A ressonância magnética
cerebral demonstrou lesões isquêmicas cerebrais no córtex frontal direito, sem sinais de hemorragia ou metástases cerebrais. Posteriormente,
o ECG mostrou ondas T negativas profundas nas derivações anterolaterais (Figura 1B), com ligeira elevação da troponina (troponina T: 0,270
µg/L). Os achados da ecocardiografia transtorácica foram característicos: fração de ejeção de 45%, hipocinesia dos segmentos apicais e
médios e hipercinesia dos segmentos basais do ventrículo esquerdo – a síndrome do balonamento apical (Figura 2). Foram realizados testes
laboratoriais de controle, e não houve achados patológicos indicativos de comprometimento hepático ou renal secundário. O tratamento de
suporte com um inibidor da enzima conversora de angiotensina, um betabloqueador, aspirina, e um diurético resultou em diminuição dos níveis
de troponina dentro de 24 h (0,130 µg/L) e melhora clínica. A paciente ficou 4 dias na UTI, seguidos de 27 dias de internação hospitalar.
Figura 2 Ecocardiograma (imagem das quatro câmaras) mostrando balonamento apical do ventrículo esquerdo (seta azul) e hipercinesia dos
segmentos basais do ventrículo esquerdo (seta vermelha).AE: átrio esquerdo; VE: ventrículo esquerdo; AD: átrio direito; e VD: ventrículo
direito. A paciente sofreu danos neurológicos graves, com hemiplegia esquerda, mas testes posteriores revelaram normalização dos achados
cardiológicos e ECG normal (Figura 1C). Durante a hospitalização, não houve recorrência da hemoptise. A reabilitação neurológica da paciente
foi realizada após a alta. A broncoscopia flexível é uma técnica de diagnóstico e intervenção, amplamente usada para diversas patologias
pulmonares. Introduzida no final da década de 1960, a broncoscopia flexível foi reconhecida como um dos pilares diagnósticos e terapêuticos
da medicina pulmonar. É um procedimento seguro. Em um estudo retrospectivo recente, a taxa global de complicações graves foi de 0,5%.( 1 )
As complicações mais comuns foram relacionadas à anestesia local (0,3-0,5%), hipoxemia (0,2-21,0%), arritmias (1-10%), sangramento após
biópsia (0,12-7,50%), pneumotórax/pneumomediastino (1-6%) e febre (0,9-2,5%). A morte ocorre em 0,1-0,2% dos casos.( 2 ) Uma das poucas
complicações graves que podem excepcionalmente ocorrer durante o procedimento é o acidente vascular cerebral isquêmico secundário a ritmo
cardíaco alterado, hipoxemia ou embolia aérea.( 1 , 2 ) A cardiomiopatia induzida por estresse, reconhecida como uma forma única de
cardiomiopatia transitória e descrita pela primeira vez em 1990,( 3 , 4 ) é um comprometimento cardíaco reversível que imita um evento
cardíaco isquêmico agudo sem alterações morfopatológicas significativas das artérias coronárias.( 3 ) A cardiomiopatia induzida por estresse
tem as seguintes características: novas alterações do segmento ST no ECG (elevação e/ou inversão da onda T), modesta elevação de
biomarcadores de lesão miocárdica (troponina I, troponina T e creatinoquinase MB), disfunção ventricular esquerda transitória, sinais
ecocardiográficos de hipocinesia/acinesia e balonamento da parte apical do ventrículo esquerdo com redução da fração de ejeção ventricular
esquerda.( 4 , 5 ) A cardiomiopatia induzida por estresse pode ocorrer após estresse mental ou físico agudo, hemorragia subaracnoide,
acidente vascular cerebral isquêmico, grande trauma craniano, doença médica aguda, exacerbação de feocromocitoma e como resultado da
administração exógena de catecolaminas.( 6 - 9 ) Os mecanismos patofisiológicos para o aparecimento dessas doenças não são completamente
compreendidos, mas há evidência de níveis elevados de catecolaminas, o que indica uma ligação com estresse extremo prévio.( 10 ) Todas as
alterações são reversíveis, o tratamento de suporte é geralmente suficiente e pode-se esperar a normalização da função ventricular esquerda
dentro de 1 a 3 meses.( 8 ) Nossa paciente apresentou uma sequência rara de complicações durante e após a fibrobroncoscopia. Sabe-se que
complicações cerebrovasculares e cardiovasculares são mais comuns em pacientes oncológicos, mas essa sequência particular de complicações
merece atenção. Como a paciente apresentou hemoptise, era extremamente importante que se estabelecesse o diagnóstico correto de
cardiomiopatia transitória, em virtude do risco de sangramento recorrente caso a cardiomiopatia induzida por estresse tivesse sido
confundida com síndrome coronariana aguda e a paciente tivesse recebido terapia anticoagulante. Portanto, estar ciente das possíveis
complicações e familiarizar-se com elas, ter as ferramentas diagnósticas apropriadas e ter conhecimento do manejo são fundamentais para o
sucesso do tratamento de tais eventos. Até onde sabemos, este é o primeiro relato de caso de tal sequência de complicações relacionadas à
broncoscopia em um paciente.
