Coronary artery fistulae are rare congenital or acquired anomalies that usually communicate the coronary circulation with other vascular
structures or cardiac chambers1-3. Although they might represent only an incidental finding on diagnostic angiography1, they can manifest
clinically during childhood or adulthood as a shunt or coronary flow "steal", motivating its closure via surgical or endovascular
management4,5. In most cases, endovascular treatment has become the preferential option, not only due to the advantages of a percutaneous
procedure, but also because of its confirmed efficacy and safety6,7. The patient is a 59-year-old male with arterial hypertension,
complaining of easy fatigability, dyspnea, and chest discomfort on moderate exertion, which improved after rest, for six months. He reported
neither coronary artery disease in his family, nor other risk factors for atherosclerotic disease. After cardiac assessment, drug treatment
was initiated with acetylsalicylic acid, beta-blocker, and angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor (ACEi). Myocardial scintigraphy was
performed. The scintigraphic images obtained after physical stress associated with dipyridamole administration (due to the use of beta-
blocker) showed an ischemic pattern in the apical and inferior wall of the left ventricle, and transient myocardial dilation after stress,
evidencing left ventricular systolic dysfunction. The electrocardiogram showed a 1.5-mm depression of the ST segment on the precordial
leads, and a 1.0-mm depression on DII and aVF after 3 minutes of exertion, in addition to frequent ventricular extrasystoles after
dipyridamole injection. A transthoracic echocardiogram performed a few days after scintigraphy evidenced preserved systolic function at rest
and mild, concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, with no segmentary contractility change. The patient reported only a partial improvement
of the symptoms with the medications, being referred to cardiac catheterization. Coronary angiography showed coronary circulation free from
significant obstructive atherosclerotic lesions (only parietal irregularities), with a right dominance pattern. A large fistula (Figure 1)
was identified communicating the dilated proximal third of the anterior descending artery (ADA) with the trunk of the pulmonary artery (PA).
After discussing the case with the patient and his cardiologist, percutaneous closure of the fistula was indicated. (A) Angiography of the
left coronary artery showing the left main coronary artery (LMCA) and proximal anterior descending coronary artery (ADA), both dilated, and
a large tortuous fistula (arrow) draining to the pulmonary trunk (*). The distal segment of the ADA shows a slow and delayed opacification
compared with the others (dotted arrow). (B) Angiography of the right coronary artery. The procedure was performed with puncture of the
right femoral artery and use of a 7F introducer. After selective catheterization of the left coronary artery with a JL guide catheter, a
long extra-support 0.014" guidewire with flexible tip was advanced up to the ADA and inside the fistula. A microcatheter was advanced over
the guidewire into the fistula, until the curved segment closer to the PA. Eleven platinum detachable coils (AxiumTM, eV3, Irvine, CA, USA)
were sequentially released inside the fistula (Figure 2A), until total blood flow obstruction was achieved (Figure 2B). The procedure was
uneventful. (A) Release of the coils inside the fistula (arrow) draining to the pulmonary trunk (*). (B) Immediate result after embolization
and closure of the fistula. (C) Control angiography after seven months showing a reduction in the dilation of the left main coronary artery
and proximal anterior descending coronary artery, as well as an improvement in the flow in the distal anterior descending coronary artery
(dotted arrow). After closure of the coronary artery fistula, the patient was followed up on an outpatient basis, with no beta-blocker, and
reported total improvement of the symptoms and of his functional limitation. A control angiography performed seven months later (Figure 2C)
revealed preserved patency of the ADA, with good distal flow and no fistula. The patient remained asymptomatic after two years of clinical
follow-up, maintaining regular physical activities. New ischemia-provoking tests were not performed, because of the good clinical outcome
and medical option. A coronary artery fistula can be defined as a direct communication between a coronary artery and a cardiac chamber, a
great vessel or another vascular structure, occurring rarely as an incidental finding in 0.1% to 0.2% of the coronary angiographies1. It can
be either congenital or acquired. Acquired fistulae can originate from thoracic traumas or cardiac surgeries (mainly when the internal
mammary artery is used), endomyocardial biopsy, Takayasu's arteritis or coronary angioplasties2,3. In our patient, the fistula was
considered congenital due to absence of interventions or preceding traumas. Usually, congenital coronary artery fistulae drain to the right
ventricle, right atrium, PA or coronary sinus (in decreasing order of frequency). Those draining to the right ventricle are usually
diagnosed during infancy due to the presence of a heart murmur or symptoms resulting from a large fistula4. Those draining to the PA usually
have an insidious presentation with no heart murmur, being diagnosed later5, and should be differentiated on angiography from cases of left
coronary artery originating from the trunk of the PA, another rare congenital coronary anomaly with potential risk for sudden death1. Our
patient had symptoms equivalent to functional class II to III angina, and a positive provocative test for ischemia associated with a
component of transient myocardial systolic dysfunction during stress. The symptoms regarding coronary heart disease and left ventricular
failure might have resulted from coronary flow "steal" associated with the presence of a fistula in the coronary circulation with incipient
atherosclerotic disease. In addition, the concentric myocardial hypertrophy due to hypertensive disease might have contributed to the mild
symptoms, because of the increased oxygen myocardial consumption. Percutaneous or surgical closure of coronary artery fistula is indicated
when the fistula has a measurable hemodynamic repercussion (usually Qp/Qs > 2.0 auses myocardial ischemia (documented by symptoms or by use
of provocative tests). Currently several centers choose the percutaneous management, which has proven to be safe, preventing sternotomy and
extracorporeal circulation6,7. The use of coils for the percutaneous closure of fistulae was first described in 1990, and, since then, with
the development of new catheters and coils, the procedure has become increasingly safe. In 1996, Mavroudis et al8 recommended the
percutaneous closure in cases without multiple fistulae, well-defined drainage to a single site, absence of large lateral branches and good
accessibility to the coronary artery that supplies the fistula8. However, well-succeeded percutaneous closure of multiple fistulae in the
same patient has been reported, making that the preferential approach in most cases9,10. In our patient, 11 coils were used to completely
close the fistula. The size of the first coil was estimated based on the measure of the greatest diameter of the fistula, and chosen to be
20% greater, reducing the risk of embolization beyond the fistulous trajectory10. Then, coils of progressively smaller diameters were
sequentially used, until the local flow was interrupted. Usually the coils are released inside curved segments of the fistula to reduce the
risk of embolization to the pulmonary circulation. The possible complications of the percutaneous closure of a coronary artery fistula,
although rare, can include embolization of coils to the coronary bed or to the fistula draining bed, coronary dissection, fistula
dissection, transient myocardial ischemia, and transient atrial arrhythmias7. This case report describes the late presentation of a coronary
artery fistula of the ADA to the PA, which manifested as myocardial ischemia and heart failure, as well as its percutaneous closure,
performed safely and efficiently by use of coil embolization. Author contributions Conception and design of the research, Acquisition of
data and Writing of the manuscript: Souza FSF; Critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content and Participation in patient
care: Souza FSF, Goyanna A, Gon√ßalves HA, Avelar AL, Godinho AGL, Ramos NB Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest
relevant to this article was reported. Sources of Funding There were no external funding sources for this study. Study Association This
study is not associated with any post-graduation program.
