Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Conceived and designed the experiments: JT CB SG CF KF ST.
Performed the experiments: JT. Analyzed the data: JT CB SG CF ST. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: CB SG CF ST. Wrote the
paper: JT CB SG CF KF ST. Sample collection: KF. The ribosomal RNA content of a sample collected from a woman with bacterial vaginosis (BV)
was analysed to determine the active microbial community, and to identify potential targets for further screening. The sample from the BV
patient underwent total RNA extraction, followed by physical subtraction of human rRNA and whole transcriptome amplification. The
metatranscriptome was sequenced using Roche 454 titanium chemistry. The bioinformatics pipeline MG-RAST and desktop DNA analysis platforms
were utilised to analyse results. Bacteria of the genus Prevotella (predominately P. amnii) constituted 36% of the 16S rRNA reads, followed
by Megasphaera (19%), Leptotrichia/Sneathia (8%) and Fusobacterium (8%). Comparison of the abundances of several bacteria to quantitative
PCR (qPCR) screening of extracted DNA revealed comparable relative abundances. This suggests a correlation between what was present and
transcriptionally active in this sample: however distinct differences were seen when compared to the microbiome determined by 16S rRNA gene
amplicon sequencing. To assess the presence of P. amnii in a larger pool of samples, 90 sexually active women were screened using qPCR. This
bacterium was found to be strongly associated with BV (P<0.001, OR 23.3 (95%CI:2.9–190.7)) among the 90 women. This study highlighted the
potential of metatranscriptomics as a tool for characterising metabolically active microbiota and identifying targets for further screening.
Prevotella amnii was chosen as an example target, being the most metabolically active species present in the single patient with BV, and was
found to be detected at a high concentration by qPCR in 31% of cohort with BV, with an association with both oral and penile-vaginal sex.
The advent of molecular-based screening utilising massively parallel DNA sequencing has increased our capability to characterise the
microbial ecology of human clinical samples, both rapidly and economically . In addition it has allowed a better understanding of the normal
endogenous microbiota. The vaginal microbiota is complex, varying at different stages of reproductive life, as well as during the menstrual
cycle. Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is a condition affecting the vaginal microbiota where in the childbearing age woman the natural microbiota
(typically Lactobacillus spp.) is depleted, and replaced by an overgrowth of mixed, primarily anaerobic bacteria . This condition has
significant associations with miscarriage, premature birth and pelvic infections, and can increase a woman's risk of acquiring sexually
transmitted infections and HIV . No single aetiological agent has been identified yet for BV, and is now generally considered likely to be
of polymicrobial aetiology. BV is typically diagnosed using either the Nugent scoring method that examines bacterial composition via a Gram
smear or the Amsel criteria that considers factors such as presence of discharge, amine production, presence of clue cells and a vaginal pH
greater than 4.5. Through microbiome studies, the microbiology of BV has been better characterised. These studies have generally been
carried out using PCR-derived 16S rRNA gene fragments, using “universal” bacterial 16S rRNA gene primers . While this approach is able to
provide a comprehensive understanding of the bacterial community membership, it is not able to determine which members are transcriptionally
active. Metatranscriptomics is the analysis of the RNA transcripts being expressed by a community at a given point of time. For bacteria,
the predominant RNA classes are ribosomal (primarily 16S rRNA and 23S rRNA), which are able to be used as taxonomic identifiers. The
metatranscriptomic screening of clinical samples has been described for gut and dental microbiomes , , with only one study to date applying
this methodology to BV. An important difficulty faced with the application of this technique to clinical samples is the low levels of RNA
present in many samples and the overabundance of host RNA. This requires reduction of host RNA and subsequent linear amplification of RNA
for transcriptomic analysis , . This study describes a method to analyse microbial rRNA from vaginal samples that is applicable to variety
of clinical sample types. It demonstrates how the data gained can provide valuable information for larger qPCR based screening studies. A 26
year old woman presenting with abnormal vaginal discharge, odour, 4/4 Amsel criteria and a Nugent score of 10 was recruited with written
consent from Melbourne Sexual Health Centre (MSHC), Victoria, Australia. This patient reported no recent antibiotic use, had no recent male
sexual partner, and reported only having one female partner in the prior 3 months and three in the past 12 months. Vaginal discharge was
collected using ten flocked swabs and immediately rotated and pooled in 4 ml RNAlater (Life Technologies, Grand Island, USA). The RNAlater
solution was then stored at −80°C until processing. For the second component of this study, extracted DNA (stored at −30°C) was utilised
from a randomly selected subset of 90 samples obtained from a cross sectional study of sexually active women attending MSHC in 2003/4 . This
set of samples comprised 34 women with normal microbiota (Nugent 0–3), 20 with intermediate microbiota (Nugent 4–6) and 36 with BV (Nugent
7–10). Written consent for all de-identified participants and ethical approval for this study was obtained previously from The Alfred
Hospital Human Research Ethics Committee. Figure 1 provides an overview of the workflow for this study. Initially, total RNA was extracted
from 2 ml RNAlater solution . Total RNA extraction was performed using Trizol (Life Technologies) with use of 1-Bromo-3-chloropropane in
place of chloroform followed by RNA purification using a RNeasy column (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) . Any remaining DNA was digested using the
Turbo DNA-free enzyme (Life Technologies). Flow chart of the work plan for this study. Human ribosomal content was subtracted using the
MICROBEnrich Kit (Life Technologies) as per manufacturer instructions followed by removal of small RNAs with the MEGAclear kit (Life
Technologies). RNA concentration was determined by Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, USA). To increase the
RNA content needed for sequencing, whole transcriptome amplification (WTA) and reverse-transcription using the TransPlex® Complete Whole
Transcriptome Amplification Kit (Sigma-Aldrich Corporation, St. Louis, USA) was utilized. This resulted in a cDNA concentration of 50 ng/µl
(from original RNA content of 3.5 ng/µl) with 2 µg submitted to AGRF (Australian Genome Research Facility Ltd., Brisbane, Australia) for 454
sequencing (FLX titanium chemistry; Roche/454 Life Sciences, Branford, USA). Genomic DNA was precipitated from the remaining Trizol buffer
using 0.3 ml of 100% ethanol per 1 ml of Trizol buffer followed by two washes of the DNA pellet with 0.1 M trisodium citrate in 10% ethanol
. An amplicon-based metagenomic library was generated from the extracted DNA using the universal bacterial PCR primers 27F and 338R that
target the V1–V2 hypervariable regions of the 16S rRNA gene as previously described . Both cDNA and 16S rRNA gene amplicon libraries were
subsequently bar-coded using MID tags and sequenced together utilising a quarter region of a 454 sequencing plate. Subsequent to sequencing,
all raw sequencing data was de-multiplexed according to their MID tags and the data obtained from each sample was then imported into
Genomics Workbench version 4.5.1 (CLC Bio, Aarhus, Denmark), for removal of WTA primers and random primer sequences from each applicable
read and data was filtered (low quality score limit of 0.05; maximum 2 ambiguous nucleotides allowed; minimum sequence length of 100 nt).
Each dataset was then screened for chimeric sequences using UCHIME , with the trimmed and filtered data submitted to the MG-RAST
(http://metagenomics.anl.gov) bioinformatics pipeline for analysis (cDNA library MG-RAST ID = 4461586.3; DNA amplicon MG-RAST
ID = 4461792.3) . A 90% cut-off was used for database searches within MG-RAST as an arbitrary cut-off for genus identities using the RDP
database, and a 98% cut-off was used for species level identification . MG-RAST generates abundance counts based on the number of unique
hits a particular sequence has against a particular database. It is therefore highly likely that a single read may have multiple abundance
counts assigned to it if there is an equal relatedness. The identities for each read were sorted using Excel 2007 (Microsoft Corporation,
Redmond, USA) to eliminate multiple identical hits for individual reads, with manual analysis being carried out using the BLAST algorithm
for discrepant samples. Graphical representation of bacterial abundances was achieved using Krona charts . Functional genes from the cDNA
library were characterised by SEED analysis within MG-RAST. Reads derived from the cDNA library assigned to each major genus (comprising
>10% of total population) using MG-RAST were also imported into Lasergene 8 (DNASTAR Inc., Madison, USA) for manual sequence alignment was
carried out using a 98% sequence match cut-off. The consensus sequences of alignments were assigned an identity using the BLAST algorithm
with a ≥98% identity required to assign a species name. All assays were performed on the LC480 real-time instrument (Roche Diagnostics,
Mannheim, Germany) using 5 µl DNA in a 20 µl reaction. The bacteria targeted were Atopobium vaginae, Leptotrichia/Sneathia spp., Megasphaera
type I , Gardnerella vaginalis , and the genera Prevotella and Lactobacillus . A primer set for Prevotella amnii was developed using the
forward and reverse primers 27F and 338R with the incorporation of a TaqMan probe 5′- AAA GTT GGC CTA ATG CCC TAT G-3′, specific to P.
amnii, based on 454 sequencing data from this study and all available relevant sequences on the Genbank database. The total bacterial
content of each sample was determined by the modification of an assay by Nikkari et al. (2002) with the incorporation of a TaqMan probe,
516F (5′- TGC CAG CAG CCG CGG TAA -3′) to calculate relative bacterial abundances and to determine sample adequacy for stored DNA samples.
Relative bacterial abundances were compared using a paired t test or chi square test. The association of P. amnii with BV, defined as a
Nugent score of 7–10, was made using a chi square test, reported with odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI). All analyses were
carried out using Stata version 12 (StataCorp LP, College Station, USA) . In total, 89969 raw sequencing reads were obtained with an
ultimate post data filtration of 78285 reads (average length = 268±91 bp; GC content = 49±5%). Overall, this library consisted of 72826
(93%) bacterial reads, 3865 (4.9%) human reads and 34 (0.04%) either plastid, fungal or viral reads (Table 1). Of the bacterial reads, 31857
(43.7%) were of the 16S rRNA gene and 4349 (6.0%) were non-ribosomal RNA (eg. mRNA) with the remaining matching other ribosomal regions such
as the 23S rRNA gene and intergenic regions. Of the 16S rRNA gene reads, the most dominant genus identified was Prevotella (36% of the
reads), followed by the genera Megasphaera (19%), Leptotrichia/Sneathia (8%), Fusobacterium (8%), and 9% of the reads matching uncultured
members of the Fusobacteriales (Figure 2). Of the Prevotella reads, 78% formed contigs of ≥1000 bp in length that matched P. amnii. Analysis
of assembly free reads of the Prevotella spp. reads at the species level (11725 reads with ≥98% match to the RDP database) showed similar
results, however distinction between P. amnii and P. bivia was not possible for the majority of these sequences (data not shown). The major
Fusobacterium was F. nucleatum, and the majority of Megasphaera reads were ≥98% similar to the currently uncharacterised Veillonellaceae
bacterium S3PF24 (Genbank accession JX104009). The bioinformatics pipeline of MG-RAST was able to annotate 2053/4349 of the non-ribosomal
RNA reads, which SEED analysis revealed to consist of genes involved primarily in protein metabolism (20.6%), carbohydrate/lipid utilisation
(16.3%) and cluster based subsystems (13%). The most abundant functional gene read identities were primarily represented by genes expressed
by the genus Prevotella (Table 2). Graphical representation of the bacterial genera identified through 16S rRNA gene matches for the
Nugent = 10 cDNA using the RDP database search tool in MG-RAST. 23S rRNA gene and intergenic regions; † human coronavirus; ‡ two reads of
Schizophyllum commune cytochrome oxidase subunit 1 (cox1) gene, single reads of Botryotinia fuckeliana glycosyl hydrolase gene and
Ascomycota hypothetical protein; § unable to be assigned to any taxonomy All of the predominant bacteria with >1% total abundance identified
in the cDNA library were also detected using the 16S rRNA gene amplicon-based approach on extracted DNA. There was a significant difference
in the relative abundances given between both libraries for the most dominant taxa, such as the genus Lactobacillus (primarily L. iners)
that comprised 1.4% of the cDNA reads and 23% of the DNA amplicon library (p<0.0001). Also of particular note were reads pertaining to the
genus Gardnerella that were present in 7% of the cDNA library, but were nearly non-existent in the DNA amplicon library with only seven
reads detected (0.006%). When comparing the relative abundances of the seven taxa screened for using qPCR to the abundances given for the
cDNA library, there was no significant difference (p = 0.9093). We found that the proportion of Lactobacillus spp. determined by qPCR to be
1.9% (cDNA = 1.4%; DNA amplicon = 23.1%), and the proportion of Prevotella spp. was 48% (cDNA = 35%; DNA amplicon = 11%) (Table 3). P. amnii
was detected in 11/36 (30.6%) women possessing a Nugent score of 7–10, whereby nine had a Nugent score of 7 and two with a Nugent score of
10. This bacterium was also detected in a single case possessing intermediate microbiota with a Nugent score of 6, and in none of 34 cases
of normal microbiota (Nugent 0–3) (p<0.001; Table 4). The bacterial load of P. amnii in these 12 positive cases was high, averaging 1.41×109
copies per swab (range = 7.74×106 to 4.66×109). This bacterium was found to be strongly associated with BV (p<0.001, OR 23.3
(95%CI:2.9–190.7)) among the 90 women. When the 90 women were stratified by different sexual exposures the association between BV and P.
amnii persisted for different sexual exposures in men. While the associations between BV and P. amnii were not significant among women
reporting receptive oral sex with a woman or sex with a woman in the last 3 months, these analyses involved only small numbers (Table 4).
Chi square for proportion with Prevotella amnii in the three Nugent categories; †Haldane's estimation; OR = Odds Ratio; ND = Not Detected.
This study explored the active microbial diversity of a vaginal sample taken from a lesbian woman with symptomatic BV to demonstrate the
potential of metatranscriptomics for identifying targets for screening studies. Prevotella amnii was found to be the most active species
present in this sample and was also detected at a high concentration by qPCR in 30.6% of BV cases in sexually active women. Although we
identified P. amnii as the predominant Prevotella species in this sample (78% of Prevotella reads; 28.1% of total bacterial population),
there may be a possible overestimation in the cDNA abundance given, as conserved regions shared by multiple Prevotella spp. may be involved
through chimeric assembly. This must be kept in mind when comparing to qPCR data (33.1% of Prevotella reads; 15.8% of total bacterial
population) that would otherwise suggest that this species is more active than others in this sample. This bacteria has only recently been
associated with BV in the literature . Its closest relative, P. bivia, is highly cited as being associated with this condition, and in vitro
studies have shown this bacterium to form a symbiotic relationship with G. vaginalis . These two Prevotella spp. share many phenotypic
traits and it has been noted that culture-based methodologies may not differentiate between these two species, with full length 16S rRNA
gene sequencing recommended for species differentiation . The other predominant bacteria in this case were identified through 16S rRNA gene
as the currently uncharacterised isolate Veillonellaceae bacterium S3PF24 (phylogenetically belonging to the genus Megasphaera) that was
originally isolated from a vaginal environment, and the bacterium Fusobacterium nucleatum. F. nucleatum has been described in cases of BV
previously . Interestingly it has been implicated in amniotic infection and pre-term birth in cases where the bacterium was also detected in
the patients' oral cavity , . F. nucleatum, as well as both Prevotella and Megasphaera spp. are regularly associated with periodontal
disease , , , and it is of interest to note that the single Nugent score 10 participant analysed in this study had a history of recent
female-female oral sex. These three bacteria were more abundant than the usual predominant G. vaginalis and A. vaginae in the cDNA library,
which collectively only comprised 10% . Further work is warranted to determine the role of these bacteria, in particular P. amnii, in the
pathogenesis of BV. Of particular interest is whether their association with oral sex represents a possible route of transmission. Although
not a focus of this study, mRNA reads were also identified in this study that were primarily associated with protein metabolism and
carbohydrate/lipid utilisation pathways of the genus Prevotella. The low abundance of mRNA reads (5.6%) was not surprising, given the low
general relative abundance of mRNA in relation to total RNA in bacterial cells . To focus more upon this class of RNA transcripts, an
additional enrichment step, such as the removal of bacterial rRNA can be employed , in the same manner as human rRNA was reduced in this
study. A comparison was made between the cDNA and DNA amplicon libraries to determine what proportion of the microbial community was active,
and differences were observed between these libraries. This may suggest that there was a significant difference between what is present and
what is transcriptionally active, although these findings are limited by the fact that this is a single sampling point. The broad range
amplification of bacterial DNA using the 16S rRNA gene may have potential bias in the community structure, as has been found in numerous
studies , , , . Our data suggests that G. vaginalis was underrepresented in the DNA amplicon library when compared to the qPCR data from the
same DNA sample. Despite being one of the most utilized primers for microbiome analysis, there has been suggestion in the literature that
the forward PCR primer 27F may not reliably amplify this species , and our analysis has demonstrated this similarly through qPCR for G.
vaginalis. Also, given that L. iners was found to be underrepresented in the cDNA library when compared to the DNA amplicon library, we
applied a genus-specific Lactobacillus qPCR assay to the DNA sample, as well as one that targeted the genus Prevotella that was present at a
much higher abundance in the cDNA library. We found that there was no statistical difference in the abundances given between qPCR and the
cDNA library for these genera. Based on this limited data, we can suggest misrepresentation of several taxa in the DNA amplicon library
occurred, and that in this case, the vast majority of the bacteria physically present in this sample were also transcriptionally active.
This further highlights the advantage of transcriptomics for such analysis as our data suggest that this analysis gives better
representation of bacterial levels across the board. MG-RAST for the analysis of metatranscriptomic work can be carried out using a standard
desktop or laptop computer. However, this method may lead to misclassification of certain reads. For example, in this study it was found
that many Gardnerella reads were being classified as the genus Bifidobacterium, Megasphaera reads as the genera Veillonella and Dialister,
and those of the genera Leptrotrichia/Sneathia as Streptobacillus. Therefore care must be taken in the interpretation of results, and manual
checking of representative reads is required to ensure an accurate identification of sequencing reads to the genus level. In summary, this
study has shown how metatranscriptomics can be utilised as a useful tool to carry out an in-depth examination of the active microbial
ecology of an environment, and is capable of generating more taxonomic and potential functional data than an amplicon sequencing-based
approach alone, and avoid potential misrepresentation issues caused by PCR primer selection. We have demonstrated that this kind of
metatranscriptomic approach can be used to identify targets for screening in larger studies. As this study focussed on a single individual,
generalisations based on the data are not possible and transcriptomic analyses on a large cohort is warranted. This being said, our limited
findings reinforce that P. amnii may be an important BV-associated bacterium, and should be included in future studies investigating the
pathogenesis of BV. Its previously known association with periodontal disease, and the association with oral sex in this study, make it
interesting to speculate about transmission of pathogenic bacteria between the oral and vaginal cavities, and their role in the development
of BV. We would like to thank the staff and students of Melbourne Sexual Health Centre and Women's Centre for Infectious Diseases for their
assistance in this study, which was also supported by the Victorian Government's Operational Infrastructure Support Program.
