A 42 year-old woman was referred to our hospital with a history of fever and poor general status for the last 30 days. She presented
tachycardia and a systolic apical murmur. Laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis of 13,100/mL, hemoglobin of 8.4g/dL and positive systemic
lupus erythematosus antibodies (anti-Ro/SSA, anti-La/SSB, anticardiolipin, and antinuclear antibodies); blood culture was positive for
Streptococcus gallolyticus. Three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography was performed and revealed multiple mitral valve vegetations,
with leaflet perforation and important mitral regurgitation, as well as large aortic vegetation, with cusp perforation and severe
regurgitation. Additionally, a small vegetation was observed on the tricuspid valve, which presented moderate regurgitation. Three-
dimensional transesophageal echocardiography provides appropriate visualization of complications resulting from infectious endocarditis.
Mulher de 42 anos foi encaminhada ao hospital com história de febre e queda do estado geral há 30 dias. À admissão, apresentava taquicardia
e sopro sistólico na região apical. Os exames de laboratório mostraram leucocitose com 13.100/mL, hemoglobina 8,4g/dL e anticorpos positivos
para lúpus eritematoso sistêmico (anti-Ro/SSA, anti-La/SSB, anticardiolipina e anticorpo antinuclear); hemocultura foi positiva para
Streptococcus gallolyticus. Foi realizado um ecocardiograma transesofágico tridimensional, que mostrou múltiplas vegetações na valva mitral,
com perfuração do folheto e refluxo importante, além de grande vegetação aórtica com perfuração valvar e refluxo importante adicionalmente.
Pequena vegetação foi identificada na valva tricúspide, com um refluxo significativo. O emprego da ecocardiografia transesofágica
tridimensional proporcionou o diagnóstico de complicações decorrentes de endocardite infecciosa. Systemic lupus erythematous (SLE) is an
inflammatory autoimmune disease with multiple organ involvement(1). The natural history of the disease varies and is characterized by
periods of remission and acute disease. Women, especially those between 20 and 30 years of age, are more affected than men. The heart is
frequently affected, specially the valves. Valvar lesions vary from mild thickening to large verrucouse lesions (Libman-Sacks endocarditis).
The mitral valve is more frequently involved. Transesophageal ultrasound is a sensitive tool for diagnosis of valve impairment and can be
used to determine the extension of complications and progression of valvar disease(2). Streptococcus gallolyticus is a Gram-positive coccus
and is part of the Streptococcus bovis (Streptococcus) and Streptococcus infantarius group. It is an important cause of infectious
bacteremia and endocarditis in adults. Infections by this agent were associated with colon tumors and gastrointestinal tract lesions(3).
However, the association between Streptococcus gallolyticus endocarditis and lupus causing valve leaflet perforation has not been described
yet. The three-dimensional echocardiography allows for multiplanar spatial observation of the heart and better understanding of the anatomy
and geometry of cardiac structures. The use of three-dimensional echocardiography is recommended in the following situations: (1) to measure
the volume of the left ventricle; (2) to determine the ejection fraction of the left ventricle; (3) to evaluate mitral valve anatomy; (4) to
determine the degree of mitral valve stenosis; (5) to guide percutaneous procedures in the cath lab(4). So far, three-dimensional
echocardiography has not been extensively used for diagnostic investigation and identification of complications associated with infectious
endocarditis(4). In this case report three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography was used in a SLE patient presenting with infectious
endocarditis. A 42-year-old female patient was referred to our hospital with a history of fever and poor general status for 30 days. The
physical examination upon admission presented axillary temperature 37.6°C; heart rate 110bpm; blood pressure: 120/80mmHg; and apical
systolic murmur. Laboratory test results: 13,100 leucocytes/mL; hemoglobin 8.4g/dL; positive antibodies for SLE (anti-Ro/SSA, anti-La/SSB,
anticardiolipin and anti-nuclear). Blood cultures tested positive for Streptococcus gallolyticus. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed an
image of a large aortic vegetation with mild regurgitation, and images of multiple vegetations on the mitral valve with severe
regurgitation. Abdominal CT revealed multiple kidney, spleen and liver infarctions. Colonoscopy showed sigmoid diverticulum and two
hyperplastic polyps. Histology of the colonoscopy findings suggested no evidence of colon neoplasia. Three days later, the bidimensional and
three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiograms revealed multiple vegetations on the mitral valve, perforation of the cusp and important
reflux and also an imaging of a great vegetation with valvular perforation. In addition, the exam also revealed a small vegetation on the
tricuspid valve and severe regurgitation (Figure 1, 2, 3, 4). After four weeks of treatment, the patient's clinical picture worsened and she
developed acute pulmonary edema, which required emergency surgical intervention. The intraoperative findings were compatible with
destruction of the mitral and aortic apparatus. Surgical treatment consisted of mitral and aortic valve replacement and tricuspid
valvuloplasty. The postoperative period was satisfactory, and she was discharged two weeks after surgery. Systemic lupus erythematous (SLE)
is a pleomorphic condition that may pose a clinical challenge. In the case of this patient, the first manifestation of the disease was an
infectious endocarditis, with multiple cardiac valve involvement, which is a very rare presentation. In addition, the isolation of
Streptococcus gallolyticus from the blood was unexpected, because this agent causes important bacteremia and infectious endocarditis in
elderly and adult men(5,6). The presence of Streptococcus gallolyticus is frequently associated with lesions of the gastrointestinal tract,
which were also present in this case. The fast destruction of the valves (perforation of two leaflets) is not common in patients with
Streptococcus gallolitycus infection and is associated with increased morbidity and mortality(6) . Despite advances in medical and surgical
treatments, infectious endocarditis still leads to high morbidity and mortality rates. Early identification of patients with large
vegetations, as in the case described, is important to define the best therapeutic strategy, because, in these cases, surgical excision of
the valve and valve replacement are followed by low perioperative mortality rates(7). In patients with endocarditis, the transesophageal
echocardiogram is more suited for identification and determination of the degree of valve involvement than the transaortic echocardiogram.
More recently, the three-dimensional echocardiogram added relevant pieces of information that contribute to determining the exact mechanism
causing valve dysfunction. This is due to its higher spatial resolution and multi-angle visualization of the structures, which in the case
described allowed for the exact determination of the site of leaflet perforation.
