A 60-year-old man with a history of implantation of two bare-metal stents 2 years prior presented to the emergency department with new-onset
chest pain. He has been regularly taking angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, beta blockers and aspirin. Aspirin was suspended for 10
days prior to the current hospitalization in order to perform surgery to remove a kidney tumor. He underwent coronary angiography, which
revealed a right coronary artery with a distal intraluminal defect within the stents, suggesting thrombus. Intravascular ultrasound
demonstrated a severe malapposition and underexpansion throughout the entire length of the stents containing thrombus. In this case, the
mechanisms of very late stent thrombosis after bare-metal stent most likely were a combination of mechanical factors (severe stent
undersizing during the index procedure) and pharmacological factors (aspirin discontinuation). Paciente de 60 anos de idade, com histórico
de implante de dois stents coronários não farmacológicos durante quadro de infarto do miocárdio com supra do segmento-ST. Dois anos após,
foi admitido no pronto-socorro com quadro clínico de angina instável de início recente. O paciente fazia uso regular de inibidor da enzima
de conversão da angiotensina, betabloqueador e aspirina. A aspirina foi suspensa por 10 dias antes da atual hospitalização para a retirada
de um tumor de rim. O paciente foi submetido a angiografia coronária, que revelou artéria coronária direita com defeito de enchimento
intraluminal sugestivo de trombo intra-stent. A ultrassonografia intravascular demonstrou má aposição e expansão dos stents, além da
presença de trombo. Neste caso, o mecanismo de trombose muito tardia de stent coronário não farmacológico deveu-se possivelmente a uma
combinação de fatores mecânicos (implante de stents subdimensionados durante o procedimento índice) e farmacológico (descontinuação da
aspirina). Primary percutaneous coronary intervention with stent implantation has emerged as the treatment of choice for most patients with
evolving ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). Nevertheless, emerging data suggest that risk of stent thrombosis in STEMI is
relatively increased in patients without STEMI(1) and occurs with similar frequency in bare-metal stent (BMS) and drug-eluting stents
(DES)(2). Endothelization and healing at the site of stent implantation in patients with STEMI may be delayed substantially(3). Furthermore,
although there is no difference in the frequency of stent thrombosis with both stents types, the relatively high very late stent thrombosis
rate recently documented with BMS(2) is notable and refuses the prior conception(4) that, at least in STEMI, very late stent thrombosis is a
rare phenomenon. In addition, data and imaging documenting the mechanism of very late stent thrombosis in STEMI patients is rare. The aim of
this case was to report the potential mechanisms of very late stent thrombosis after BMS by intravascular ultrasound (IVUS). A 60-year-old
man with a history of implantation of two BMS (2.25x28mm and 2.5x28mm) for an inferior STEMI (Figure 1) 2 years prior presented to the
emergency department with new-onset chest pain. Electrocardiography showed new inferior wall changes and elevated serum creatine kinase-MB
and troponin at 3.03ng/mL and 11.10ng/mL, respectively. He had been taken regularly angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, beta blockers
and aspirin at home, but the latter was suspended for 10 days prior to the current hospitalization in order to perform surgery to remove a
kidney tumor. The patient underwent coronary angiography, which revealed a right coronary artery with diffuse ectasia containing two lesions
(at proximal and mid right coronary artery) and a distal intraluminal defect within the stents (Figure 2A, white arrows), suggesting
thrombus. The IVUS (iLab, Boston Scientific, USA) of the lesions demonstrated a distal large vessel with a severe malapposition and
underexpansion throughout the entire length of the stents containing thrombus (Figure 2B). Although it is a relatively low-frequency event,
stent thrombosis is associated with high risk of myocardial infarction and death(5). The risk of stent thrombosis in the STEMI population is
increased threefold compared with non-STEMI patients(1), and occurs with similar frequency in BMS and DES(2). The higher rate of stent
thrombosis in patients with STEMI may be related to the underlying plaque composition responsible for the condition. Stent strut penetration
of an underlying necrotic core may augment inflammation, platelet activation, and fibrin deposition and inhibit neointimal growth, resulting
in uncovered stent struts(3). Furthermore, the incidence of positive arterial remodeling and late acquired incomplete stent apposition is
higher in patients with acute coronary syndromes, especially in those with DES. Finally, infarct-related artery vasoconstriction, reduced
epicardial flow, and thrombus may lead to stent undersizing, as likely occurred in the current case at the time of STEMI treatment, when a
4.5mm vessel was treated with a 2.5mm stent. Over time, when flow was reestablished, thrombus dissolved, and the vessel increased in size,
which developed malapposition and underexpansion of the stent. In this case, the mechanisms of very late stent thrombosis after BMS most
likely were a combination of mechanical factors (severe stent undersizing during the index procedure with or without superimposed positive
remodeling and infarct-related thrombus dissolution during the 2 year follow-up period) and pharmacological factors (aspirin
discontinuation). This case reports the mechanisms of very late stent thrombosis 2 year after bare-metal stent implantation. Intravascular
ultrasound plays an important role in identifying mechanical factors related to stent thrombosis as well as guiding its therapy accordingly.
Financial sources: Dr. Mintz has received grant support from and is a consultant for Boston Scientific and Volcano.
