Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration (PCD) is a classical tumor-associated, immune-mediated disease typically associated with
gynecological malignancies, small-cell lung-cancer or lymphoma. Here we present the case of a 38-year old male with an over 12 months
rapidly progressive cerebellar syndrome. Extensive diagnostic workup revealed selective hypermetabolism of the right tonsil in whole-body
PET. Histological examination after tonsillectomy demonstrated a lymphoepithelial carcinoma of the tonsil and the tongue base strongly
suggesting a paraneoplastic cause of the cerebellar syndrome. To the best of our knowledge this is the first case of an association of a
lymphoepithelial carcinoma, a rare pharyngeal tumor, with PCD. In cases of classical paraneoplastic syndromes an extensive search for
neoplasms should be performed including whole-body PET to detect tumors early in the course of the disease. Paraneoplastic cerebellar
degeneration (PCD) is a classical paraneoplastic syndrome (PNS) of the CNS often associated with onconeural antibodies leading to a T-cell
mediated destruction of Purkinje cells in the cerebellum . Typically, PCD occurs in patients with ovarian cancer, breast-cancer, small-cell
lung-cancer (SCLC) or Hodgkin’s lymphoma . Nonetheless, PCD can be associated with other malignancies and can occur up to 5 years before
detection of the primary tumor. Here, we describe a patient who developed subacute cerebellar degeneration which was classified as a
paraneoplastic syndrome upon histological diagnosis of a lymphoepithelial carcinoma of the tonsil and tongue base. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first published case of PCD associated with a lymphoepithelial carcinoma. A 38-year old, previously healthy man
presented on his first admission with a 5-day history of dizziness, slurring of speech and disturbance of gait and balance. There was a
family history of multiple sclerosis (paternal grandfather and a paternal cousin) but not of any other cerebellar disease. The patient
smoked 30 cigarettes per day for the last 25 years. Neurological examination revealed dysarthria, trunk and gait ataxia and exaggerated
tendon reflexes of the upper and lower limbs. Spontaneous nystagmus was absent and pursuit eye movements were smooth. Routine hematology was
normal but the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed elevated cell count (407 lymphocytes/μl) and protein (1 g/l) while glucose and lactate were
normal. CSF cytology provided no evidence of malignant cells but oligoclonal IgG bands were detected in the CSF. HSV- and VZV-PCRs were
negative. Cerebellitis caused by an unknown infectious agent was suspected and a polyvalent intravenous therapy with aciclovir, ceftriaxone
and ampicilline was initiated which halted disease progression. Cerebral MRI was unremarkable. During the next months he underwent two
neurorehabilitation treatments without relevant efficacy on the residual symptoms, but 10 months after disease onset he rapidly
deteriorated. On admission this time he reported severe gait and trunk unsteadiness, difficulties in writing, massive slurring of speech and
problems of swallowing. On physical examination he showed a substantial weight loss of 15 kg over the last 12 months but no enlargement of
lymph nodes. Neurological examination revealed a cerebellar syndrome with an exaggerated horizontal nystagmus during lateral gaze and a
scanning dysarthria. Fixation suppression of the vestibulo-ocular reflex was abolished. There was no muscle weakness or sensory loss and his
limb reflexes were normal but plantar responses were bilaterally extensor. He showed severe dysmetria of all four limbs and trunk and gait
ataxia. Walking without aid was impossible. Routine biochemistry and hematology were again normal. Cranial MRI now showed marked cerebellar
atrophy. The CSF contained 18 leukocytes/μl, 0.85 g/l protein, oligoclonal IgG bands, and normal glucose and lactate concentrations. CSF
cytology was again normal. Infectiological screening of the CSF (HSV-1 and -2, VZV, CMV, EBV, HIV, treponema pallidum, brucella, borrelia)
was negative. Further biochemical examination showed normal vitamins B12 and E and very-long-chain-fatty acids. Anti-gliadin-antibodies were
negative. Squamous cell carcinoma-antigen (SCC) was mildly elevated (2.7 U/l, reference < 1.5) while NSE, PSA, CYFRA 21–1, CEA and
electrophoresis were normal. Classical onconeural antibodies (anti-Hu, -Tr, -Yo, -Ma, -Ta, amphiphysin, CV2/CRMP5) were not detected via
immunofluorescence test (IFT). MRI of the entire spinal axis did not show any metastases and search for a pulmonary or abdominal neoplasm in
CT-scans of the chest and abdomen was also unremarkable. A whole-body PET/CT-scan revealed a mild hypermetabolism of the left thyroid lobe
and the right tonsil and neighboring tongue-base (Figure 1a,b). Sonological and histological examination of the thyroid did not detect any
malignancy. Inspection of the tonsils revealed no signs of a neoplasm except for an asymmetry with a larger right tonsil. Histological
examination after tonsillectomy revealed a lymphoepithelial carcinoma of the lower tonsil and tongue base with low-grade differentiation
(Figure 1c,d). The mitosis marker Ki67 was present in 40% of tumor cells. Immunohistochemical workup revealed numerous CD3+ T- and CD20+
B-lymphocytes with positivity for bcl2. Staining was negative for CD23, CD30, CD34, CD138, and the macrophage marker KiM1P. Additional
resection of the neighboring tongue ground including neck dissection detected no further neoplastic tissue. Accordingly, the
interdisciplinary tumor board did not recommend radio- or chemotherapy. In the course of the next eighteen months the patient underwent
further intensive neurorehabilitation treatment leading to a stable cerebellar dysfunction with only slight progression of dysarthria which
was treated every three months with steroid pulses (i.v. methylprednisolone 1 g/day for 5 consecutive days). Results of the radiological and
histopathological investigation of the tonsils. a and b: Whole-body PET/CT with -fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) for tumor imaging according to the
European Association of Nuclear Medicine (EANM) procedure guideline. Thick fused multi-planar reformatted images of the oropharynx in axial
(a) and coronal (b) projection. Both images reveal an increased FDG uptake in the right tonsillar region suspicious for malignant tumor. c
and d: Histopathology of the tonsil. HE hematoxylin-eosin staining in 200 times- magnification (c) displaying sheets of atypical epithelial
cells with enlarged nuclei and vesicular chromatin, intermingled by small lymphocytes and plasma cells. Pancytokeratin immunostaining (d)
highlights the sheets of atypical epithelial cells (in red). This is the first published case of a lymphoepithelial carcinoma associated
with PCD. Classification as a classical paraneoplastic syndrome and detection of a malignant tumor within twelve months after the onset of
cerebellar symptoms establishes the diagnosis of a definite PNS . Despite missing onconeural antibodies, the substantially slowed disease
progression after tumor resection and the initial responsiveness to steroids largely exclude other differential diagnoses. The pathogenesis
in our case as in most other PCD cases is most likely a T-cell mediated cytotoxic autoimmune response against Purkinje cells . Besides the
typical tumor entities, i.e. ovarian cancer, breast cancer, lung cancer (mostly SCLC, but also adenocarcinomas) a wide range of other tumors
have been reported in association with PCD in individual cases (see Table 1, Additional file 1). List of PCD cases in PubMed not associated
with gynecological, breast, or lung cancer, or lymphoma (state: December 2012; search key words: “paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration”),
f: female; m: male) (For references given in Table 1, please see Additional file 1). The data in Table 1 reveal atypically localized
malignancies in many different body regions belonging mostly to either the hematological/immunological system (lymphomas, Langerhans’ cell
histiocytosis, thymus carcinoma), the gastro-intestinal system (esophagus, gastric, colon or pancreas carcinoma) or the urogenital system
(kidney, bladder, testis or prostate cancer). In our case histological examination demonstrated a lymphoepithelial carcinoma, which is a
rare tumor entity, typically localized in the nasopharynx region. Due to the histological association with lymphoid tissue, tumor tissue can
arise from all pharyngeal regions where lymphatic tissue is regularly located i.e. the tonsil, the hypopharynx, the tongue base and the
paranasal sinuses . Cases of lymphoepithelioma-like carcinomas of the salivary glands are also reported . Lymphoepitheliomas are poorly
differentiated tumors which contain tumor cells of epithelial origin in association with a diffuse infiltration of lymphocytes, plasma cells
or eosinophils, which has led to coining to the term “lympho-epithelioma”. In some cases, also squamous cell carcinoma cells can be
detected. The elevated tumor marker SCC in our case raises the possibility of a potential squamous cell-portion. No antibodies associated
with lymphoma (anti-Tr) or SCLC (anti-Hu, -CV2, -Ri, -Ma2, -amphiphysin) were detected so that the origin of the antigenic structure that
resulted in PCD remains unclear. We have not performed immunohistochemistry on rodent brain tissue sections with the patient’s CSF to search
for new reactivities, which can be considered a limitation of this report. There are only very few reports about paraneoplastic syndromes in
association with lymphoepithelioma-like carcinomas of various other organs (polymyositis, nephrotic syndrome, erythema elevatum diutinum)
but onconeural antibodies have not been described in these cases. Classical neurological PNS have not yet been reported in association with
this tumor entity so that this is the first case report of PCD associated with a lymphoepithelial carcinoma. Due to the localized state of
the tumor in our patient complete surgical removal of the carcinoma was feasible without additional radio- or chemotherapy. Regarding the
pathophysiological concept of PNS the tumor resection is the most important part of the therapy to reduce the amount of antigenic tumor
cells. In addition, immunomodulatory treatment with intravenous immunoglobulins occasionally shows efficacy in early stages of the disease .
Our case report highlights the usefulness of an extended tumor search - including a whole-body PET/CT scan - when a paraneoplastic syndrome
is suspected . A whole-body PET/CT scan provides superior sensitivity to detect small or atypically localized neoplasms, a precondition to
initiate causal therapy by surgical removal. The patient gave his written and informed consent for this case report to be published. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. CH, UZ, HS and JR contributed in drafting, writing and revising the article, MM and
SH contributed in writing and revising the radiological and neuropathological discussion. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2377/13/147/prepub References
of Table 1. Click here for file
