The association of anomalous right coronary artery originating from the pulmonary artery and constrictive pericarditis has never been showed
in the literature. We present the first case of this unusual association in a patient with right heart failure. After diagnosis, the patient
was referred to surgery and underwent phrenic-to-phrenic pericardiectomy; graft implant of right internal thoracic artery to right coronary
artery; and ligation of the anomalous origin of the right coronary artery from the pulmonary artery. Such procedures solved the potential
risk of sudden death related to anomalous right coronary artery originating from the pulmonary artery and alleviated the symptoms of heart
failure caused by constrictive pericarditis. A associação da artéria coronária direita anômala com origem na artéria pulmonar e pericardite
constritiva ainda não foi descrita na literatura. Apresentamos aqui o primeiro caso dessa associação inusitada em um paciente com quadro de
insuficiência cardíaca direita. Após o diagnóstico, o paciente foi encaminhado para tratamento cirúrgico, sendo submetido a pericardiectomia
frênico a frênico, implante de enxerto da artéria mamária interna direita para a coronária direita e ligadura da origem anômala da coronária
direita da artéria pulmonar. Tais procedimentos resolveram o potencial risco de morte súbita pela anomalia coronária e aliviaram os sintomas
de insuficiência cardíaca causados pela pericardite constritiva. Several heart diseases manifest as right-sided heart failure (HF), with
lower limb edema, ascites, hepatomegaly, and jugular venous distention. Constrictive pericarditis is an uncommon etiology, often
underdiagnosed, that holds importance for being a reversible cause of HF after surgical treatment(1). An anomalous right coronary artery
originating from the pulmonary artery (ARCAPA) is a rare coronary anomaly, usually incidentally diagnosed, that has been associated to
sudden cardiac death(2,3). There are no reports to date of these two unrelated conditions in the same patient. The aim of this report was to
describe the first case of this unusual association. A 24-year-old man developed lower limbs edema and exertion dyspnea in the past 3 years.
When he first came to our institution, he was already receiving high doses of furosemide, hydrochlorothiazide and spironolactone, without an
established diagnosis. On physical examination, lower limb edema and stasis dermatitis were observed. The apical impulse was normally
placed, and jugular venous distention was not present. Upon cardiac auscultation, wide inspiratory splitting of the second heart sound, and
no other sounds or murmurs. The electrocardiogram was normal. Chest radiography showed a normal cardiac silhouette, without calcifications
or signs of pulmonary congestion. The brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level was 69pg/mL (reference range <100pg/mL). Echocardiogram revealed
normal function of right and left ventricles, biatrial enlargement, and an estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 25mmHg. The
pericardium was described as normal. Coronary arteries were dilated, and the left main coronary artery measured 7.6mm and the right coronary
artery (RCA), 10mm. The diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis was considered due to the presence of symptoms and signs of HF with normal
morphology and function of both ventricles. Magnetic resonance imaging of the heart showed a diffusely thickened pericardium and
interventricular septal bounce during systole (Figure 1). Coronary computed tomography angiogram was performed to evaluate the unexpected
coronary dilation observed on echocardiogram. An anomalous RCA arising from the pulmonary artery was diagnosed (Figure 2). Surgical
resection of the diseased pericardium was performed along with coronary revascularization, by performing a right internal thoracic artery
graft to the RCA and occlusion of the anomalous origin of this vessel at the pulmonary artery. Pathological assessment of the pericardium
demonstrated a nonspecific chronic pericarditis of low intensity. Polymerase chain reaction used to detect Mycobacterium tuberculosis was
negative. The patient was discharged home with marked improvement of symptoms. The case presented describes a patient with symptoms of right
HF secondary to constrictive pericarditis, with simultaneous diagnosis of an ARCAPA. It also highlights the importance of considering the
diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis in the evaluation of right HF. Constrictive pericarditis results from chronic inflammation of the
pericardium, which becomes thickened and calcified, leading to diastolic dysfunction. Although most cases are idiopathic, it can be caused
by previous cardiac surgery, following mediastinal radiation, due to connective tissue diseases and tuberculosis. In patients with a
constrictive picture, the thickened pericardial sac impairs ventricular dilation and filling during diastole, leading to an abrupt elevation
of pressure in cardiac chambers. On inspiration, the rigid pericardium does not allow the right ventricle to accommodate the increased
venous return, which leads to a bounce of the interventricular septum, a reduction in left ventricular cavity and a low cardiac output.
These physiologic derangements may manifest as jugular venous distention, prominent venous Y waves, ascites, lower limb edema and Kussmaul's
sign. The pericardial knock, an early diastolic sound of high frequency, is diagnostic of constrictive pericarditis but it is present in
only one third of cases. Previous studies showed low accuracy of physical examination for diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis. In the
case reported, many physical findings suggestive of the condition were not seen, in part due to the high doses of diuretics the patient was
receiving. The chest radiograph may reveal a pericardial calcification in up to 30% of patients. Echocardiogram is useful to rule out other
causes of right HF, but has limited capacity to evaluate the pericardium and is often inconclusive(1). Laboratory assessment of BNP levels
may help in the differential diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis with restrictive cardiomyopathies(4). In the former, BNP levels are
usually not elevated, as observed in this case, because myocardial stretch is limited by the pericardium, while in the latter there is
significant myocardial wall stretch, and BNP levels can be strikingly increased. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging is the gold standard for
the noninvasive diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis. It clearly demonstrates the degree of pericardial thickening and the ventricular
interdependence with septal bouncing. It is also of extreme value for excluding other conditions affecting the myocardium. Many reports
demonstrated good outcomes after surgical treatment of constrictive pericarditis. While surgical mortality remains around 6 to 12%, the
5-year survival rate without symptoms of severe HF is 80%(5). Therefore, making the diagnosis of this condition is extremely important for
providing appropriate surgical care and changing the natural history of this progressively debilitating disease. The ARCAPA is a congenital
defect found in 0.002% of the population. It represents 0.12% of coronary anomalies. Its natural history is not welldefined, but in most
cases it was incidentally diagnosed in asymptomatic patients(2). In symptomatic patients, clinical features may include exertional chest
pain, syncope, sudden cardiac death, or findings of ischemic cardiomyopathy. The mechanism of sudden cardiac death is not completely
understood, but may be related to the presence of ischemia in the myocardial territory supplied by the RCA, due to insufficient collaterals
from the left anterior descending and left circumflex arteries. Coronary ectasia, a frequent finding in patients with ARCAPA, is secondary
to increased blood flow through collaterals from the left coronary artery into the RCA, followed by reverse flow in the RCA into the
pulmonary trunk. In the present report, the symptoms of right HF were caused by the pericardial pathology and were probably unrelated to the
coronary malformation. Sudden cardiac death has been linked to ARCAPA(3), and therefore surgical correction is the preferred treatment even
in asymptomatic patients. Since the patient was undergoing pericardiectomy, correction of the coronary anomaly was performed in the same
procedure. In conclusion, the case described herein characterizes constrictive pericarditis as a cause of HF of difficult diagnosis, and
also describes the presence of a rare coronary anomaly in the same patient. Two uncommon and unrelated diseases were successfully treated in
the same surgical procedure.
