Conflito de interesse: nada a declarar To present a case of a patient with clinical and radiological features of reexpansion pulmonary
edema, a rare and potentially fatal disease. An 11-year-old boy presenting fever, clinical signs and radiological features of large pleural
effusion initially treated as a parapneumonic process. Due to clinical deterioration he underwent tube thoracostomy, with evacuation of
3,000 mL of fluid; he shortly presented acute respiratory insufficiency and needed mechanical ventilation. He had an atypical evolution
(extubated twice with no satisfactory response). Computerized tomography findings matched those of reexpansion edema. He recovered
satisfactorily after intensive care, and pleural tuberculosis was diagnosed afterwards. Despite its rareness in the pediatric population
(only five case reports gathered), the knowledge of this pathology and its prevention is very important, due to high mortality rates. It is
recommended, among other measures, slow evacuation of the pleural effusion, not removing more than 1,500 mL of fluid at once. Relatar caso
de paciente con cuadro clínico y radiológico de edema pulmonar de reexpansión, patología rara y potencialmente fatal. Niño de 11 años con
fiebre y cuadro clínico-radiológico de derrame pleural voluminoso, inicialmente tratado como parapneumónico. Después de la compensación
clínica, se realizó drenaje torácico, con salida de 3000mL de líquido. Evolucionó rápidamente con insuficiencia respiratoria aguda,
necesitando ventilación mecánica. Tuvo dos extubaciones mal sucedidas y, debido a la evolución atípica, se realizó tomografía
computadorizada, cuyos hallazgos fueron compatibles con edema de reexpansión. Después de soporte intensivo, evolucionó satisfactoriamente y,
posteriormente, se diagnosticó tuberculosis pleural. Es importante el conocimiento de la patología, aunque sea rara en la población
pediátrica (encontrados solamente cinco casos descriptos), para prevención, una vez que la tasa de mortalidad es muy alta. Se recomienda,
entre otras medidas, que el vaciamiento de un derrame pleural sea lento y que el volumen total retirado no sobrepase 1500mL. Reexpansion
pulmonary edema (RPE) is a rare and potentially fatal clinical entity. It usually occurs when a chronically collapsed lung is rapidly
reexpanded after the evacuation of large amounts of fluid or air from the pleural space, often using high negative intrapleural pressures( 1
- 5 ). This study reported the case of a child with large pleural effusion who developed severe RPE after tube thoracostomy, besides
performing a review of the literature on the topic. An 11-year-old Caucasian male patient with a history of fever, adynamia, myalgia, and
chest pain for three days. Previous intermittent asthma. Physical examination: good general health status, febrile, respiratory rate of 23
breaths per minute, with no respiratory distress; pulmonary workup with vesicular breath sounds on the right side and abolished breath
sounds on the left side, with dullness on percussion. No other relevant clinical findings. Chest radiograph on admission reveled homogeneous
opacity on the left side, with obliteration of costophrenic and cardiophrenic sinuses on the left side (Figure 1). An ultrasound scan was
performed, which revealed fluid up to the upper third of the pleural cavity, with no septations or pleural thickening. Figure 1 (A) Chest
radiograph on admission homogenous opacity on the left side up to the apex, opacification of costophrenic and cardiophrenic sinuses, with
the presence of mild deviation of the contralateral mediastinum. (B) Chest computerized tomography after tube thoracostomy: axial cut,
windowing for lung parenchyma evidencing bilateral lung involvement, with areas of condensation (alveolar filling), ground-glass areas and
bilateral pleural involvement, with the left lung showing the most important findings The patient underwent thoracocentesis, removing 550mL
of citrine fluid; blood count showed - hemoglobin: 14.2mg/dL; leukocytes: 7,310/mm3 (73% segmented, 18% lymphocytes and 9% monocytes);
platelets: 445,000/mm3. Treatment for parapneumonic pleural effusion was started with crystalline penicillin (200,000U/kg/day). Laboratory
analysis of the pleural fluid revealed: 4,400 erythrocytes/mm3; 730 leukocytes/mm3 (81% lymphocytes and 19% neutrophils); glucose: 79mg/dL;
proteins: 5.1g/dL. He remained in good general health status, eupneic, and with daily fever peaks for five days. Blood cultures, the rapid
test for dengue and investigation for cold agglutinins were negative. Due to clinical worsening (chest pain and dyspnea), with no new
radiological changes, pleural drainage under general anesthesia was indicated. During anesthetic induction, he developed bradycardia and
hypoxia, which were promptly reversed. Thoracocentesis was performed, with the evacuation of 3000mL of citrine fluid during two hours,
maintained by water-seal drainage. Fluid laboratory analysis: citrine appearance; 490 erythrocytes/mm3; 233 leukocytes/mm3 (97%
lymphocytes); glucose: 94mg/dL; proteins: 4.2g/dL; pH: 7.48; lactate dehydrogenase (LDH): 623U/L (reference: exudate >300U/L). After the
procedure, when he was already extubated, the patient developed respiratory distress and decreased oxygen saturation, needing invasive
ventilation in the pediatric intensive care unit. He remained on mechanical ventilation from the sixth to the 20th day of hospitalization.
Within this 14-day post-procedural period, there were two extubations: one accidental and other planned; in both episodes, he needed to be
intubated again, resuming mechanical ventilation due to respiratory insufficiency. During the periods when the patient was stable, it was
decided to use intermittent mandatory ventilation, with peak inspiratory pressure between 20-25cmH2O, positive-end expiratory pressure
between 5-8cmH2O, respiratory rate between 12-15 breaths/minute and inspired oxygen concentration between 40-50% (the Horovitz index was
calculated to be between 180-190). There was considerable difficulty in the evolution of ventilatory parameters until tracheal cannula was
definitely withdrawn. Chest computerized tomography was carried out (Figure 1), which evidenced: massive alveolar filling of the left lung
and partial filling of the right lung, with bilateral areas of ground-glass opacity; residual pleural effusion on the left side and laminar
effusion on the right side, with bilateral pleural reaction and presence of hilar adenomegaly. Thus, the diagnostic hypothesis was
reexpansion pulmonary edema. Complementary analysis of the pleural fluid showed negative results for investigations for neoplastic cells,
fungi and bacteria; however, the investigation for adenosine deaminase (ADA) activity in the pleural fluid was positive (137.70U/L;
reference: up to 40U/L). A tuberculin skin test was performed, with a result of 19mm. Treatment was started with rifampicin, isoniazid,
pirazinamid and ethambutol, associated with prednisone (1mg/kg/day), with the diagnosis of pleural tuberculosis. Serology for HIV and
cultures for bacteria and mycobacteria were negative. From the second day of treatment on, the patient had no febrile peaks anymore and
could be weaned from mechanical ventilation; additionally, the pleural drain could be removed, at the 14th of intensive care (20th day of
hospitalization). The patient was discharged for outpatient follow-up on the 31rd day of hospitalization, with clinical and radiological
improvement. The pathophysiology of RPE is multifactorial, including changes in pulmonary capillary permeability and increase in hydrostatic
pressure. Both of them cause fluid and protein overflow into the pulmonary interstitial space and alveoli, leading to pulmonary edema( 1 - 3
, 5 ). Permeability changes occurs due to local hypoxemia, caused by lung collapse, injuring the capillary wall and decreasing surfactant
production, with subsequent release of inflammatory mediators - interleukin-8 (IL-8), monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), leukotriene
B4, nitric oxide, polymorphonuclear and free radicals- which, in turn, amplify the injury and change vascular permeability (IL-8 and MCP-1
act also in the contralateral lung, partly justifying the cases of bilateral RPE)( 2 , 3 , 5 ). Besides this aggression, the capillary also
undergoes mechanical injury by collapse compression, associated with sudden reexpansion-induced distension. In turn, the increase in
hydrostatic pressure occurs due to the abrupt increase in blood flow on reinflation( 2 , 3 ). In the case reported herein, lung aggression
was probably caused by the large cavitary effusion, associated with the increase in intraluminal pressure resulting from the reexpansion of
the organ due to the evacuation of a great amount of pleural fluid. The epidemiology of RPE is not well known yet. Reviews on the topic
cover around a hundred cases up to the end of the twentieth century( 1 , 2 ). It is estimated that its incidence is up to 1% after drainage
of intrapleural air or fluid( 6 ). However, most reports involve adult patients and there are no reviews of published pediatric cases( 7 ).
The case reports of children with RPE are summarized in Table 1 ( 7 - 11 ). Table 1 Summary of reexpansion pulmonary edema cases in the
pediatric population Risk factors associated with RPE include: chronicity of lung collapse (usually greater than 72 hours); great amount of
pleural air or fluid (>1500mL)( 1 - 3 , 5 ); high speed of reexpansion and use of high negative pressures to do so( 2 , 5 ); hypertension,
hypoxemia or other previous lung disease; pre-existing heart disease( 2 ); and male gender( 3 ). In the case described herein, the patient
presented with chronic lung collapse (at least seven days of admission before drainage plus some period prior to hospitalization,
considering a possible insidious onset of pleural tuberculosis); great intrapleural volume (3000mL); lung disease (intermittent asthma); and
male gender. Clinical findings are variable, ranging from asymptomatic patients or presenting only non-specific symptoms (fever, nausea,
vomiting, tachycardia, hypotension) to patients with severe respiratory insufficiency (dyspnea, chest pain, cough, foamy sputum, cyanosis)(
2 , 3 , 5 ). A simple chest radiograph may reveal interstitial opacities, consolidations with air bronchograms, and fissural inflammation( 2
). Chest computerized tomography may show ground-glass opacity, residual pleural effusion, atelectasis, interlobar septum thickening,
consolidations, air bronchograms, and pulmonary nodules. Nearly half of patients show diffuse involvement of the previously collapsed lung(
4 ) and bilateral pulmonary involvement is rarely observed( 1 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 10 ). The clinical picture of the patient described herein
included respiratory insufficiency and need for mechanical ventilation with high parameters, similarly to some of the reported cases of
children with RPE. However, computerized tomography findings as evident as those found by Gleeson et al( 4 ) in adults had not been
described yet in pediatric patients. The onset of RPE symptoms usually occurs in the first 24 hours after pulmonary reexpansion, most
frequently (64-89%) in the first two hours( 3 , 5 ). The duration of symptoms varies from 48 hours to seven days( 2 , 8 , 10 ), and
mortality from 19 to 21%( 2 , 3 , 5 ). In the case reported herein, the symptoms started in the first hour after the procedure and the
duration of the clinical signs was 14 days, with the need for mechanical ventilation, probably due to complications during disease evolution
(including unsuccessful extubations and extensive bilateral lung injury). The treatment of this edema is based on clinical support according
to the need of each patient( 2 , 3 , 5 ). Some authors suggest that the use of corticosteroids as stabilizers of the pulmonary vascular
membrane (3,11). More invasive measures are also described, such as occlusion of the pulmonary artery of the affected side( 2 ) and use of
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation( 11 ). In the case reported herein, it was necessary to use invasive ventilatory support for 14 days, as
well as the use of dobutamine (for four days; maximum titration of 0.45mcg/kg/day), (furosemide for 14 days, for stimulation of diuresis and
control of the water balance) e corticosteroid (although its exact role in the case could not be defined). The diagnosis of pleural
tuberculosis in the case described herein was based on clinical data (pleural effusion in febrile non-toxemic child/adolescent)( 12 , 13 ),
suggestive radiological finding (hilar adenomegaly)( 13 ) and positive skin tuberculin test( 12 ) (reaching 45 points in the scoring system
proposed by the Brazilian Ministry of Health for children and adolescents, making this diagnosis highly likely)( 14 ). In addition, the
analysis of the pleural fluid was characteristic: predominance of lymphocytes; high LDH levels; high ADA levels associated with lymphocyte-
to-neutrophils ratio >75%( 12 , 15 ). Although the culture for mycobacteria in the fluid was negative, it is known that its positivity is
low (45-55% of the cases)( 13 , 15 ). If thoracoscopy with pleural biopsy was performed, positivity could be higher, as described in the
literature( 12 ). Predicting RPE occurrence is of fundamental importance in patients at risk for developing this condition and was even the
subject of recommendations of the British Thoracic Society( 6 ). The evacuation of pleural effusion should occur slowly, not removing an
excessive amount (up to 1500mL), and there should be available means to obtain a definitive airway and start mechanical ventilation if
necessary( 2 , 3 , 5 , 6 ). It is also recommended that drainage is performed preferably with pleural pressure monitoring, not exceeding
-20mmHg( 2 , 6 ). In the case reported herein, the procedure was carried out in an operating room, with general anesthesia, by an
experienced team, with equipment for emergencies available. However, it should be pointed out that the procedure could have had a different
outcome if the amount of pleural fluid drained was lower or if the measure of cavity pressure was available on that occasion, considering
that the patient had more than one risk factor for the development of RPE. Therefore, despite its low frequency, RPE should be remembered as
a potential complication in the evolution of a pediatric patient with large pleural effusion, particularly if there were other risk factors
for the development of this complication. Instituição: Faculdade de Ciências Médicas da Universidade Estadual de Campinas (Unicamp),
Campinas, SP, Brasil Relatar caso de paciente com quadro clínico e radiológico de edema pulmonar de reexpansão, patologia rara e
potencialmente fatal. Menino de 11 anos com febre e quadro clínico-radiológico de derrame pleural volumoso, inicialmente tratado como
parapneumônico. Após descompensação clínica, realizou-se drenagem torácica, com saída de 3.000mL de líquido. Evoluiu rapidamente com
insuficiência respiratória aguda, necessitando de ventilação mecânica. Teve duas extubações malsucedidas e, devido à evolução atípica,
realizou-se tomografia computadorizada, cujos achados foram compatíveis com edema de reexpansão. Após suporte intensivo, evoluiu
satisfatoriamente e, posteriormente, foi diagnosticado com tuberculose pleural. É importante o conhecimento da patologia, ainda que seja
rara na população pediátrica (encontrados apenas cinco casos descritos), para prevenção, visto que a taxa de mortalidade é muito alta.
Recomenda-se, entre outras medidas, que o esvaziamento de um derrame pleural seja lento e que o volume total retirado não ultrapasse
1.500mL. O edema pulmonar de reexpansão (EPR) é uma entidade clínica rara e potencialmente fatal. Ocorre geralmente quando um pulmão
cronicamente colabado é rapidamente reexpandido após a retirada de grande quantidade de líquido ou ar do espaço pleural, frequentemente
utilizando-se altas pressões negativas intrapleurais( 1 - 5 ). Este estudo relatou o caso de uma criança com derrame pleural volumoso, que
apresentou quadro grave de EPR após a drenagem do líquido sendo revisada a literatura acerca do tema. Paciente masculino, 11 anos,
caucasiano, com história de febre, adinamia, mialgia e dor torácica havia três dias. Antecedente de asma intermitente. Exame físico: bom
estado geral, febril, frequência respiratória de 23 incursões por minuto, sem esforço respiratório; propedêutica pulmonar com murmúrio
vesicular presente à direita e abolido à esquerda, com macicez à percussão. Sem outros achados clínicos relevantes. Radiografia de tórax na
admissão evidenciava opacidade homogênea à esquerda, com obliteração de seio costofrênico e cardiofrênico à esquerda (Figura 1). Realizou-se
ultrassonografia, que evidenciou líquido na cavidade pleural até terço superior, sem septações ou espessamento pleural. Figura 1 (A)
Radiografia de tórax na admissão: opacidade homogênea, à esquerda, até ápice, velamento de seios costofrênico e cardiofrênico, com presença
de discreto desvio de mediastino contralateral. (B) Tomografia computadorizada de tórax realizada pós-drenagem torácica: corte axial,
janelamento para parênquima pulmonar evidenciando acometimento pulmonar bilateral, com áreas de condensação (preenchimento alveolar), áreas
de vidro fosco e acometimento pleural bilateral, com achados mais importantes em pulmão esquerdo Submeteu-se o paciente à toracocentese,
retirando-se550mL de líquido citrino; hemograma apresentava: hemoglobina: 14,2mg/dL; leucócitos: 7.310/mm3 (73% segmentados, 18% linfócitos
e 9% monócitos); plaquetas: 445.000/mm3. Iniciou-se tratamento para derrame pleural parapneumônico com penicilina cristalina
(200.000U/kg/dia). A análise laboratorial do líquido pleural revelou: 4.400 hemácias/mm3; 730 leucócitos/mm3 (81% linfócitos e 19%
neutrófilos); glicose: 79mg/dL; proteínas: 5,1g/dL. Permaneceu em bom estado geral por cinco dias, eupneico e com picos febris diários. As
hemoculturas, o teste rápido para dengue e a pesquisa de crioaglutininas foram negativos. Devido à piora clínica (dor torácica e dispneia),
sem novas alterações radiológicas, indicou-se drenagem pleural sob anestesia geral. Durante a indução anestésica, apresentou bradicardia e
hipóxia, prontamente revertidas. Realizou-se toracocentese, com retirada de 3.000mL de líquido citrino ao longo de duas horas, mantendo
drenagem em selo d'água. Análise laboratorial do líquido: aspecto citrino; 490 hemácias/mm3; 233 leucócitos/mm3 (97% linfócitos); glicose:
94mg/dL; proteínas: 4,2g/dL; pH: 7,48; lactato desidrogenase (LDH): 623U/L (referência: exsudato >300U/L). Após o procedimento, já extubado,
apresentou desconforto respiratório e queda de saturação de oxigênio, com necessidade de ventilação invasiva em UTI pediátrica. Permaneceu
em ventilação mecânica do sexto ao 20º dia de internação. Nesse ínterim de 14 dias pós-procedimento, houve duas extubações: uma acidental e
outra programada; em ambos os episódios, necessitou ser novamente intubado, reiniciando-se ventilação mecânica por insuficiência
respiratória. Durante os períodos de estabilidade do paciente, optou-se por ventilação mandatória intermitente, com pico de pressão
inspiratória entre 20â€'25cmH2O, pressão positiva de final inspiratório entre 5â€'8cmH2O, frequência respiratória entre 12â€'15
incursões/minuto e fração inspirada de oxigênio entre 40-50% (calculou-se o índice de Horovitz entre 180â€'190). Houve considerável
dificuldade na evolução dos parâmetros ventilatórios, até a retirada definitiva da cânula traqueal. Realizou-se tomografia computadorizada
de tórax (Figura 1), a qual evidenciou: preenchimento alveolar maciço do pulmão esquerdo e parcial do direito, com áreas de vidro fosco
bilateralmente; derrame pleural residual à esquerda e laminar à direita, com reação pleural bilateral e presença de adenomegalia hilar.
Dessa forma, fez-se a hipótese diagnóstica do edema pulmonar de reexpansão. A análise complementar do líquido pleural mostrou pesquisas de
células neoplásicas, fungos e bactérias negativas; porém, a pesquisa de atividade de adenosina deaminase (ADA) no líquido pleural foi
positiva (137,70U/L; referência: até 40U/L). Realizou-se teste tuberculínico, com resultado de 19mm. Iniciou-se tratamento com rifampicina,
isoniazida, pirazinamida e etambutol, associados à prednisona (1mg/kg/dia), com o diagnóstico de tuberculose pleural. A sorologia para HIV e
as culturas para bactérias e micobactérias foram negativas. A partir do segundo dia de tratamento, o paciente não apresentou mais picos
febris e pôde-se suspender a ventilação mecânica e retirar o dreno pleural, no 14º dia de internação intensiva (20º dia de internação
hospitalar). O paciente recebeu alta para acompanhamento ambulatorial no 31º dia de internação, com melhora clínica e radiológica. A
fisiopatologia do EPR é multifatorial, incluindo alteração da permeabilidade capilar pulmonar e aumento da pressão hidrostática. Ambos
acarretam extravasamento de líquido e proteínas para o interstício e alvéolos, levando ao edema pulmonar( 1 - 3 , 5 ). A alteração de
permeabilidade ocorre devido à hipoxemia local, causada pelo colapso do pulmão, lesando a parede capilar e diminuindo a produção de
surfactante, com subsequente liberação de mediadores inflamatórios -interleucina-8 (IL-8), proteína quimiotática de monócitos-1 (MCP-1),
leucotrieno B4, óxido nítrico, polimorfonucleares, radicais livres - que, por sua vez, amplificam a lesão e alteram a permeabilidade
vascular (IL-8 e MCP-1 atuam também no pulmão contralateral, justificando parcialmente os casos de EPR bilateral)( 2 , 3 , 5 ). Além dessa
agressão, o capilar também sofre lesão mecânica pela compressão do colabamento, associada à distensão brusca devido à reexpansão. Já o
aumento da pressão hidrostática ocorre pelo aumento abrupto do fluxo sanguíneo na reinsuflação( 2 , 3 ). No caso relatado, a agressão
pulmonar ocorreu provavelmente pelo volumoso derrame cavitário, associado ao aumento da pressão intraluminal, decorrente da reexpansão do
órgão pela retirada de grande volume de líquido pleural. A epidemiologia do EPR ainda é pouco conhecida. As revisões sobre o tema abrangem
cerca de uma centena de casos até o final do século 20( 1 , 2 ). Estima-se que sua incidência seja de até 1% após drenagem de ar ou líquido
intrapleurais( 6 ). Contudo, a maioria dos relatos envolve pacientes adultos e não há revisões sobre os casos publicados de pacientes
pediátricos( 7 ). Os relatos de caso de crianças com EPR estão resumidos na Tabela 1 ( 7 - 11 ). Os fatores de risco associados ao EPR
incluem: cronicidade do colapso pulmonar (geralmente maior do que 72 horas); grande volume de ar ou líquido pleural (>1.500mL)( 1 - 3 , 5 );
alta velocidade de reexpansão e uso de altas pressões negativas para tal( 2 , 5 ); hipertensão, hipoxemia ou outra doença pulmonar prévia;
cardiopatia pré-existente( 2 ); e sexo masculino( 3 ). No caso descrito, o paciente apresentava colabamento pulmonar crônico (no mínimo,
sete dias de internação pré-drenagem, mais algum período anterior à hospitalização, considerando-se a possível evolução insidiosa da
tuberculose pleural); grande volume intrapleural (3.000mL); doença pulmonar (asma intermitente); e sexo masculino. Os achados clínicos são
variáveis, desde pacientes assintomáticos ou apenas com sintomas inespecíficos (febre, náuseas, vômitos, taquicardia, hipotensão), até
pacientes com insuficiência respiratória grave (dispneia, dor torácica, tosse, expectoração espumosa, cianose)( 2 , 3 , 5 ). A radiografia
simples de tórax pode revelar opacidades intersticiais, consolidações com broncogramas aéreos e cisurites( 2 ). A tomografia computadorizada
de tórax pode apresentar opacidade em vidro fosco, derrame pleural residual, atelectasias, espessamento dos septos interlobares,
consolidações, broncogramas aéreos e nódulos pulmonares. Cerca de metade dos pacientes apresenta envolvimento difuso do pulmão previamente
colabado( 4 ) e raramente observa-se acometimento pulmonar bilateral( 1 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 10 ). O quadro clínico do paciente descrito incluiu
insuficiência respiratória e necessidade de ventilação mecânica com parâmetros elevados, assim como em alguns dos casos relatados de
crianças com EPR. Contudo, os achados de tomografia computadorizada, tão evidentes como os encontrados por Gleeson et al( 4 ) em adultos,
não haviam sido descritos em pacientes pediátricos. O início dos sintomas do EPR ocorre geralmente nas primeiras 24 horas após a reexpansão
pulmonar, sendo a maioria (64-89%) nas primeiras duas horas( 3 , 5 ). A duração dos sintomas varia de 48 horas a sete dias( 2 , 8 , 10 ) e a
mortalidade, de 19 a 21%( 2 , 3 , 5 ). No caso relatado, os sintomas iniciaram na primeira hora após o procedimento e a duração do quadro
clínico foi de 14 dias, com necessidade de ventilação mecânica, provavelmente devido às intercorrências apresentadas durante a evolução
(incluindo-se as extubações malsucedidas e a extensa lesão pulmonar bilateral do paciente). O tratamento desse edema baseia-se no suporte
clínico de acordo com a necessidade de cada paciente( 2 , 3 , 5 ). Alguns autores sugerem o uso de corticosteroides como estabilizadores da
membrana vascular pulmonar( 3 , 11 ). Medidas mais invasivas também são descritas, como oclusão da artéria pulmonar do lado afetado( 2 ) e
utilização de oxigenação por membrana extracorpórea( 11 ). No caso relatado, foi necessária a utilização de suporte ventilatório invasivo
por 14 dias, além do uso de dobutamina (por quatro dias; titulação máxima de 0,45mcg/kg/dia), furosemida (por 14 dias, para estímulo de
diurese e controle do balanço hídrico) e corticosteroide (embora seu papel exato no caso não possa ser definido). Tabela 1 resumo dos casos
de edema pulmonar de reexpansão na população pediátrica O diagnóstico de tuberculose pleural no caso descrito baseou-se em dados clínicos
(derrame pleural em criança/adolescente febril sem toxemia)( 12 , 13 ), achado radiológico sugestivo (adenomegalia hilar)( 13 ) e teste
tuberculínico positivo( 12 ) (atingiu-se 45 pontos no sistema de pontuação proposto pelo Ministério da Saúde para crianças e adolescentes,
tornando o diagnóstico muito provável)( 14 ). Ademais, a análise do liquido pleural foi característica: predomínio linfocitário; LDH
elevada; ADA elevada e associada à relação linfócitos/neutrófilos >75%( 12 , 15 ). Embora a cultura para micobactéria no líquido tenha sido
negativa, sabe-se que sua positividade é baixa (45â€'55% dos casos)( 13 , 15 ). Se a toracoscopia com biópsia pleural fosse realizada, a
positividade poderia ser maior, como descrito na literatura( 12 ). A previsão da ocorrência do EPR é de fundamental importância nos
pacientes com risco para desenvolvê-lo, inclusive sendo objeto de recomendações da British Thoracic Society( 6 ). O esvaziamento do derrame
pleural deve ocorrer lentamente, o volume retirado não pode ser excessivo (até 1.500mL) e deve-se dispor de meios para obter a via aérea
definitiva e iniciar a ventilação mecânica, caso seja necessário( 2 , 3 , 5 , 6 ). Recomenda-se, ainda, que a drenagem seja realizada
preferencialmente com monitorização da pressão pleural, não excedendo a -20mmHg( 2 , 6 ). No caso relatado, executou-se o procedimento no
centro cirúrgico, com anestesia geral, além de equipe experiente e equipamento para emergências disponível. Entretanto, ressalta-se que,
talvez, a evolução fosse diferente se o volume de líquido pleural drenado fosse menor ou se a medida da pressão cavitária estivesse
disponível naquele momento, considerando-se que o paciente possuía mais de um fator de risco para o desenvolvimento do EPR. Desse modo,
embora pouco frequente, o EPR deve ser lembrado como potencial complicação na evolução de um paciente pediátrico com volumoso derrame
pleural, especialmente se houver outros fatores de risco para o desenvolvimento dessa complicação.
