To report engorged vessel occlusion after repeated intravitreal injections of bevacizumab to treat the macular oedema in a case of
arteriovenous malformation. A 37-year-old woman presented with a sudden, painless loss of vision in her left eye. Her visual acuity was
20/200 in the left eye, and 20/20 in the right eye. Ophthalmoscopic examination revealed an abnormal tangle of vessels and enlarged draining
veins. A fluorescence angiogram revealed fluorescence leakage at a turn near the fovea. Horizontally oriented optical coherence tomography
revealed an increased macular thickness and an accumulation of intraretinal fluid, indicating macular oedema. After three intravitreal
injections of 1.25 mg bevacizumab, her vision improved to 20/20. Ophthalmoscopic examination revealed a decreased calibre of the previously
engorged draining veins and ghost vessels. Repeated horizontally oriented optical coherence tomography revealed a decreased macular
thickness and the absence of an intraretinal cyst. At the 2-year follow-up visit, the vision of the patient was stable. This finding implies
that certain middle-size vessels can become occluded during anti- vascular endothelium growth factor (anti-VEGF) therapy, which could induce
fatal complications if it occurred in the heart or brain. Clinicians should be cautious of the potential thrombotic effects on systemic
blood vessels when administering anti-VEGF treatment. Anti-vascular endothelium growth factor (anti-VEGF) agents have antiangiogenic and
oedema-diminishing actions and are used widely to diminish new vessels and reduce the oedema of ocular diseases . Anti-VEGF is believed to
diminish new vessels but not mature vessels and is therefore considered to be a relatively safe therapy . Herein, we report the first case
of a grade 1 retinal arteriovenous (AV) malformation in which the patient regained vision after repeated intravitreal injections of
bevacizumab. Unexpectedly, we observed occlusion of the engorged vessels after repeated intravitreal injections of bevacizumab to treat the
macular oedema. A 37-year-old woman presented with a sudden, painless loss of vision in her left eye. Her visual acuity was 20/200 in the
left eye and 20/20 in the right eye. Ophthalmoscopic examination revealed an abnormal tangle of vessels and enlarged draining veins
(Figure 1A); these signs were compatible with the diagnosis of a grade 1 retinal AV malformation. Fluorescence angiography revealed
fluorescence leakage at a turn near the fovea (Figure 1B). Horizontally oriented optical coherence tomography revealed an increased macular
thickness and an accumulation of intraretinal fluid, indicating macular oedema (Figure 1C). After three intravitreal injections of 1.25 mg
bevacizumab, her vision improved to 20/20. Ophthalmoscopic examination revealed a decreased calibre of the previously engorged draining
veins and ghost vessels (Figure 1D). Repeated fluorescence angiography failed to show fluorescence leakage (Figure 1E), and horizontally
oriented optical coherence tomography revealed a decreased macular thickness and the absence of an intraretinal cyst (Figure 1F). At the
2-year follow-up visit, the vision of the patient was stable. Fundus photo, fluorescence angiography and optical coherent tomography of
patient. (A). Ophthalmoscopic examination revealed an abnormal tangle of vessels and enlarged draining veins. (B). Fluorescence angiography
revealed fluorescence leakage at a turn near the fovea. (C). Horizontally oriented optical coherence tomography revealed an increased
macular thickness and an accumulation of intraretinal fluid, indicating macular oedema. (D). Six months after the third intravitreal
injection of bevacizumab, ophthalmoscopic examination revealed a decreased calibre of the previously engorged draining veins and ghost
vessels. (E). Fluorescence angiography revealed the absence of leakage at the fovea and a decreased calibre in the occluded arteries. (F).
Horizontally oriented optical coherence tomography revealed a decreased macular thickness and the absence of an intraretinal cyst. In the
present case, we chose to use anti-VEGF because we observed fluorescence leakage and retinal oedema during optical coherence tomography.
Although the vision of the patient improved to 20/20 and remained stable for 2 years after the three intravitreal injections of bevacizumab,
the regression of the abnormal, engorged mature vessels after treatment was unexpected. This thromboembolic event can be explained by either
spontaneous involution or induced platelet aggregation followed by degranulation and thrombosis through the formation of a complex with VEGF
and activation of the platelet FcγRIIa receptor . This finding represents the case-report of a single individual and must be studied more
extensively before it can be generalised on a larger basis or used to determine a standard of care. However, clinicians should be cautious
of the potential thrombotic effects on systemic blood vessels when administering anti-VEGF treatment. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for the publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review
by the Editor of this journal. VEGF: Vascular endothelium growth factor. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Chi-Chun
Lai is a current consultant of the pharmaceutical corporations Allergan, Bayer, and Novartis. The other authors have no financial
disclosures. Conceiving and designing the study (CCL, LHC); data collection (NKW, YPC); analysing and interpreting the data (NKW, WCW);
writing the manuscript (LHC), providing critical revisions (YPC, WCW) and approving the final version (CCL, LHC, NKW, YPC, WCW). All authors
read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2415/13/60/prepub Funding was provided through grants CMRPG390271 and CMRPG3A0591 from Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Linkou, Taiwan.
