18-Fluoredeoxyglucose position emission tomography and computed tomography (F-18FDG PET/CT) scanning has been useful in the evaluation of
malignant disorders and has been extensively used in cancer screening.1 However, F-18FDG uptake was not found to be specific for cancer
diagnosis. Here, we describe increased F-18FDG uptake on PET/CT caused by extensive tuberculous lymphadenitis in a 62-year-old woman with
malignant melanoma. 18-Fluoredeoxyglucose position emission tomography and computed tomography (F-18FDG PET/CT) has been useful in the
evaluation of malignant disorders and has been used in cancer screening.1 However, F-18FDG uptake was not found to be specific only for
cancer, but also for benign diseases such as infection and inflammation, particularly granulomatous diseases.2,3 Tuberculousoccurs
frequently in patients with cancers,2 and the prevalence in our country is relatively high compared to other countries.3 Therefore, false
positive cases are observed in practice during oncologic workup with F-18FDG PET/CT. Intense FDG uptake of benign diseases have sometimes
been reported to be difficult to differentiate from malignant disease.1,4 We report a case of intense F-18 FDG uptake related to extensive
tuberculous lymphadenitis mimicking distant lymph node metastasis. A 62-year-old woman was diagnosed with malignant melanoma on the left
sole of the foot and underwent wide excision of the sole melanoma with inguinal lymphadenectomy. She was well without evidence of tumor
recurrence 4 years after surgery. After 4 years, she complained of a palpable right neck mass. F-18FDG PET/CT was performed for the
recurrent melanoma evaluation. A F-18FDG PET/CT showed markedly increased FDG uptakes (SUV max: 12.4) in the bilateral neck, mediastinum,
hila, left parasternal, and abdominal lymph nodes, which were suspicious for metastases (Fig. 1A). Plain chest X-ray and PET/CT of both
lungs showed normal. Ultrasonography (US) showed multiple enlarged cervical lymph nodes considered to be suspicious for metastasis (Fig.
1B), and US guided fine needle aspiration was performed for diagnosing the cause of cervical lymphadenopathy. Cytology result was negative
for malignancy, and immunocytochemistry result for HMB45 that reacts against an antigen present in melanomas was also negative. Therefore,
excisional lymph node biopsy was performed to discover the reason behind the image-pathologic discordance. Excisional lymph node biopsy for
cervical lymph node showed chronic granulomatous lymphadenitis with caseous necrosis (Fig. 1C) and tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction
was positive, compatible with tuberculosis lymphadenitis. Finally, tuberculosis lymphadenitis was diagnosed by excisional biopsy. F-18 FDG
PET/CT has been useful in the evaluation of malignant disorders and has been extensively used in cancer screening.1 However, F-18FDG uptake
is not specific for cancer diagnosis and there have been reports of benign diseases being observed with F-18FDG uptake such as infection and
inflammation, particularly granulomatous diseases.4,5 Because of the high glucose use in granulomatous diseases, false positive FDG uptake
in patients with tuberculosis is expected to some extent. A few cases with increased FDG uptake of tuberculous lymphadenitis have been
reportedin various anatomical locations in patients with previous cancer history, with those uptakes being misdiagnosed as malignant
diseases.1,6,7 However, our case was very unusual in that it was very difficult to consider tuberculosis lymphadenitis as a first
impression. First, markedly increased FDG uptakes were observed in the extensive organs such as neck, mediastinum, and abdominal lymph
nodes, a pattern unlike other reported cases.1,6,7 Another confounding factor was the patient's past history; the diagnosis and treatment of
malignant melanoma on the left sole of the foot. Malignant melanoma is a highly malignant tumor and about one third of cases end up
suffering from distant metastasis.8 Moreover, frequently affected organs for distant metastases are lymph nodes.8 Fine needle aspiration
biopsy of lymph node is a simple and accurate diagnostic method, however, it sometimes gives a negative result for only malignancy instead
of a specific benign pathology.9 In such situations, further diagnostic biopsies such as core needle biopsy or excisional biopsy should be
considered for accurate diagnosis.9 Tuberculous lymphadenitis can show increased FDG uptake on F-18 FDG PET/CT and images similar to
multiple enlarged lymph nodes considered to be suspicious for metastasis on US. Therefore, tuberculosis should also be considered in the
differential diagnosis of increased FDG uptake in patients with previous cancer history. The authors have no financial conflicts of
interest. A 62-year-old woman was diagnosed with malignant melanoma on the left sole of the foot. Four years after operation, she visited
the hospital with complaints of a palpable lesion in her right neck. (A) The maximal intensity projection image showed multiple increased
FDG uptakes (SUV max: 12.4) in both sides of the neck, both supraclavicular fossa and mediastinum, both hila, left parasternal, perigastric,
and peripancreatic lymph node regions. (B) US showed that enlarged lymph nodeswerevery hypoechogenicity with loss of normal echogenic
hilumin the right supraclavicular fossa (arrows), which was considered to be suspicious for metastasis. US-guided fine needle aspiration was
done and the cytological result was negative for malignancy. As the cytological result was discordant with the previous image findings,
excisional biopsy for the neck node was performed. (C) A histopathologic examination of the excisional biopsy revealed chronic granulomatous
lymphadenitis with caseous necrosis which was consistent with tuberculous lymphadenitis (H&E, 200Ã—). The tuberculosis polymerase chain
reaction was positive as well. US, ultrasonography.
