To emphasize the need of an accurate diagnosis of congenital esophageal stenosis due to tracheobronchial remnants, since its treatment
differs from other types of congenital narrowing. Four cases of lower congenital esophageal stenosis due to tracheobronchial remnants, whose
definitive diagnosis was made by histopathology. Except for the last case, in which a concomitant anti-reflux surgery was not performed, all
had a favorable outcome after resection and anastomosis of the esophagus. The congenital esophageal stenosis is an intrinsic narrowing of
the organâ€(tm)s wall associated with its structural malformation. The condition can be caused by tracheobronchial remnants, fibromuscular
stenosis or membranous diaphragm and the first symptom is dysphagia after the introduction of solid food in the diet. The first-choice
treatment to tracheobronchial remnants cases is the surgical resection and end-to-end anastomosis of the esophagus. Enfatizar la necesidad
de un diagnóstico preciso de estenosis congénita del esófago por remanecientes traqueobrónquicos, una vez que su tratamiento difiere de los
otros tipos de estrechamiento congénito. Cuatro casos de estenosis congénita del esófago inferior causada por remanecientes
traqueobrónquicos, cuyo diagnóstico definitivo fue obtenido por examen histopatológico. Excepto por el último caso, en el que no se utilizó
cirugía antirreflujo concomitante, todos presentaron evolución satisfactoria después de resección y anastomosis del esófago. La estenosis
congénita del esófago consiste en el estrechamiento intrínseco de la pared del órgano asociado a la malformación de su estructura. Puede ser
causada por restos traqueobrónquicos, espesamiento fibromuscular o diafragma membranoso y tiene como primera manifestación clínica disfagia
después de la introducción de alimentos sólidos en la dieta. El tratamiento de elección para los casos de remanecientes traqueobrónquicos es
la resección del segmento estenosado con anastomosis término-terminal. The first report of congenital esophageal stenosis (CES) was
attributed to Frey and Duschl, in 1936. The authors described the case of a 19-year-old girl, whose death was attributed to the diagnosis of
achalasia and who was found to have cartilage in the cardia during necropsy. CES is a rare condition, associated with malformation of the
esophageal structure( 1 ), which may be concomitant with esophageal atresia. Tracheobronchial remnants (TBR) are the most frequent cause,
but membranous diaphragm and fibromuscular (FMS) stenosis are other possible etiologies for this type of narrowing( 2 ). In the differential
diagnostic procedure, the physician should consider achalasia and acquired forms of narrowing, such as those secondary to peptic esophagitis
by gastroesophageal reflux and caustic injuries. Dysphagia is the initial clinical manifestation, which occurs after the introduction of
solid food. An indicative history leads to investigation through esophagography and endoscopy, but the definitive diagnosis is only possible
by histopathology. Unlike other types of stenoses that respond to endoscopic dilatation and the construction of an anti-reflux valve as a
treatment option, in patients with TBR the resection of the stenotic segment followed by end-to-end anastomosis is the treatment of choice,
since in this type of stenosis, dilatation may result in esophageal perforation and its consequences. In the present study, four clinical
cases of CES due to TBR were reported with the aim to point out the importance of considering such pathology in the face of clinical cases
of dysphagia, once an accurate diagnosis is mandatory for choosing an appropriate therapeutic approach. This is a retrospective study
including all cases of TBR patients treated at Hospital Antônio Pedro, Lagoa Hospital, and in private practice. The cases were monitored and
operated on by the same surgeon from 2001 to 2011. The inclusion criterion was a diagnosis confirmed by histopathological findings. Using a
descriptive research method, the information contained in the medical records was used and compared with data obtained in the current
literature. The study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of Hospital Universitário Antônio Pedro. The first case refers to a
black male patient, admitted to the service of Pediatric Surgery at Hospital da Lagoa, at 18 months old. The parent referred vomiting after
eating from 4 months old and inability to eat solid food. An esophagogastroduodenal series (EGDS) was requested, which demonstrated a ring-
like stenosis over the distal third of the esophagus (Figure 1). The presence of a whitish stenotic ring at 22cm from the incisors prevented
the progression of the endoscopic device into the esophagus. There were no signs of changes in the integrity of the mucosa, or of
gastroesophageal reflux, and the appearance was compatible with choristoma. The infant underwent exploratory laparotomy. After
identification of the cartilaginous ring by palpation, the anesthesiologist was asked to pass a Foley catheter to define the lower limit of
the resection. After this maneuver, it was proceeded to the resection of the esophageal stenotic segment, followed by end-to-end anastomosis
and Thal fundoplication. The child evolved without postoperative complications, and the histopathology confirmed the heterotypic diagnosis.
Figure 1 Ring-like stenosis (arrow) at the distal third of the esophagus (case 1) The second case was a Caucasian female infant, less than
24 hours old, submitted to surgical repair of esophageal atresia with distal tracheoesophageal fistula in the service of Pediatric Surgery
at Hospital da Lagoa. The patient evolved without postoperative complications, with introduction of oral diet on the seventh day. After
completing 1 month of age, a control esophagography showed wide anastomosis and gastroesophageal reflux until the upper third of the
esophagus. In this examination, the radiological report made no reference to the distal esophageal stenosis, identified in the EGDS. After
clinical treatment for reflux, the infant was brought to our clinic at 7 months of age complaining of pneumonia and choking during feeding.
A new contrast study showed stenosis of the lower esophagus, confirmed during endoscopy. There was an obstacle to the passage of the
endoscope by a rigid circular ring, suggestive of choristoma (Figure 2). During the examination, there was no episode of gastroesophageal
reflux and the mucosal integrity was intact. Exploratory laparotomy was indicated and it was proceeded to resection of the esophageal
stenotic segment, with end-to-end anastomosis and Thal fundoplication. During the surgery, the remaining cartilage was not identified and
the postoperative endoscopic exam guided the limits of esophageal resection. The child recovered without complications and histopathology
revealed choristoma, with identification of small plates of cartilage and mucous glands. Figure 2 Rigid circular distal ring (R), suggestive
of choristoma. Broad esophageal anastomosis (EA) (case 2) The third case was a black female patient, who was admitted at the service of
Pediatric Surgery at Hospital Universitário Antônio Pedro at 23 months old, with history of vomiting after meals since 4 months old. Up to
that moment, she had been receiving clinical treatment for gastroesophageal reflux, without responding to the therapy. Two months before the
hospitalization, a contrasted study in the esophagus showed stenosis over the lower third of the esophagus, and a proximal filling defect.
Then, an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy (UGIE) showed intact mucosal integrity, normal color, with crescent-shaped narrowing in the distal
esophagus, and food retention. With the diagnostic hypothesis of choristoma, exploratory laparotomy was indicated. During the surgery, it
was not possible to feel the cartilage, so endoscopic aid was necessary for the segmental resection of the esophagus. After anastomosis,
Thal fundoplication was added to the procedure. In the histopathologic examination of the object, cartilage rings and aggregate mucous
glands were found (Figure 3). During the patientâ€(tm)s follow-up period, the esophagography and the endoscopy were normal. Figure 3
Cartilage ring (C) and mucous glands over the esophageal wall (case 3) The last case was a Caucasian female patient, admitted to Hospital
Universitário Antônio Pedro at 4 years of age. The history made reference to regurgitation and vomiting after eating since 6 months of age,
when solid food was introduced to the diet. Empirically, clinical treatment for gastroesophageal reflux disease was performed, with no
improvement. She was submitted to UGIE for removal of foreign body (food remains). During the examination, the mucosa was intact and there
was a crescent-shaped narrowing in the distal esophagus. The area of stenosis was then dilated, with temporary improvement. An
esophagography confirmed the stenosis over the transition from the middle to the lower third of the esophagus (Figure 4). The patient
underwent a right posterolateral thoracotomy, the stenotic segment was resected, and traffic was restored by end-to-end anastomosis. The
esophagus was tapered, without palpable cartilage and, therefore, without definition of the resection area. Endoscopy was again required to
establish these limits. The histopathologic examination of the resected esophageal segment revealed esophageal mucous glands and respiratory
epithelium. Approximately 2 months after surgery, there was recurrence of stenosis. Nissen fundoplication was indicated and the child is
under a dilation program at the present moment. Figure 4 Stenosis (arrow) over the lower third of the esophagus (case 4) The incidence of
CES ranges from 1:25,000 to 1:50,000 live births and there is a slight predominance in males( 3 ). Defined as an intrinsic narrowing of the
esophagus, they are associated with malformation of the structure of the esophageal wall. Congenital esophageal stenoses may be caused by
tracheobronchial remnants, fibromuscular stenosis, or membranous diaphragm( 4 ). CES due to TBR, also referred to as choristoma or
heterotopy( 5 ), is rare, but corresponds to one of the most frequent causes of lower CES, especially in Japan( 6 ). The presence of a
cartilaginous ring in the esophageal wall is the likely result of a failure in embryonic separation of the esophagus from the respiratory
tract on the 25th day of gestation. This deposit of cartilage may involve completely or incompletely the distal third of the organ, causing
partial obstruction of its lumen( 7 ). Although sequestration of cartilage should occur in the upper esophagus, this is found in a more
distal position, usually within 3cm of the cardia( 7 , 8 ), due to normal growth( 6 ). Indeed, the tracheobronchial remnants may contain
cartilage, respiratory epithelium, or seromucous glands - each alone or in combination. In cases where there is no cartilage, they may not
develop stenosis( 9 ). The association of esophageal choristoma with other congenital malformations is especially rare, being esophageal
atresia with or without tracheoesophageal fistula the most frequent anomaly( 3 , 6 , 9 , 10 ). In the postoperative of atresia, special
attention should be given to the control contrasted study, with may reveal this lesion early10). It should be considered, however, that a
normal esophagography at this point does not rule out CES( 9 ). Other malformations may be present, such as anorectal malformations,
congenital heart disease, trisomy 21, microphthalmia with coloboma of iris, atresia or duodenal duplication, malrotation, Meckelâ€(tm)s
diverticulum, celiac disease, microgastria, diaphragmatic hernia, tracheomalacia, tracheoesophageal fistula in "H," vesico-ureteral reflux,
and hemangioma( 3 , 4 , 6 , 10 ). The onset of symptoms usually occurs at the time of transition from liquid to solid diet, when the patient
begins to show dysphagia. Regurgitation and vomiting are the most frequent complaints( 7 ). Other symptoms may be: hypersalivation, stridor
during feeding, development deficits, recurrent pneumonia secondary to aspiration, upper respiratory tract infections, and foreign body or
food impactions( 3 , 8 , 9 ). The severity of symptoms appears to be proportional to the degree of involvement of the esophageal wall( 7 ).
The diagnosis should be suspected from the correlation of the clinical, endoscopic and esophagography findings. The contrast study
demonstrates segmental narrowing of the esophagus, with upstream dilation. The extent of stenosis should be measured, and extrinsic
compression, foreign body, and fistula should be excluded( 1 ). During endoscopy, the impossibility of progression of the device and the
absence of signs of esophagitis rule out other causes, such as achalasia, peptic stricture or stenosis by ingestion of caustic substances.
The monitoring of pH and the esophageal manometry are useful to exclude or associate gastroesophageal reflux disease( 1 , 2 , 9 , 11 ). To
distinguish FM stenosis from stenosis due to TBR an endoscopic ultrasound may be used( 3 , 4 ). In fact, the diagnosis is only definitive
with the completion of the histopathology, which will identify in the resected esophageal segment, the presence of cartilage, seromucous
glands, and pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium, alone or in combination( 9 ). Zhao et al( 3 ) observed a delay from 2 to 2 and
1/2 years between the onset of symptoms and the diagnosis of TBR. The early diagnostic differentiation is essential, therefore, in order not
to delay definitive treatment. Although there are reports of endoscopic dilatation as treatment for CES due to TBR, its results are
ineffective( 3 , 4 ) and its use should be limited to cases without cartilage( 9 ), as it can result in serious complications such as
perforation of the esophagus( 1 , 3 , 10 , 11 ). The treatment of choice should be surgery( 3 , 4 , 10 ). The operation consists of
segmental resection of the esophagus, via abdominal or thoracic, and primary anastomosis. During the procedure, the vagus nerve must be
dissected and isolated with wire to prevent its damage. The identification of the cartilage ring by palpation can be difficult, and at this
moment, the use of pre-operative or endoscopic passage of a balloon catheter is most useful in defining the boundaries of resection( 4 , 11
, 12 ). The endoscopic ultrasound is another resource to be used in the attempt to identify the structure of cartilage during surgery( 4 ).
In cases located in the distal esophagus and addressed via abdominal, fundoplication is associated to the procedure to prevent
gastroesophageal reflux and protect the suture. Surgical treatment has low morbidity and mortality, being stenosis of anastomosis the
prevailing postoperative complication, but which responds to dilation( 3 ). In selected cases, enucleation of the remaining cartilage,
myotomy, and myectomy may be treatment options( 4 , 12 , 13 ). Thus, the etiologic diagnosis of a CES owing to TBR is essential to define
the gold standard treatment that comprises resection of the esophageal stenosis, end-to-end anastomosis, and the construction of an anti-
reflux valve. However, dilatation of the esophagus as an alternative therapy can be disastrous, causing perforation of the organ and serious
consequences. Instituição: Universidade Federal Fluminense (UFF) e Hospital Federal da Lagoa, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brasil Enfatizar a
necessidade de um diagnóstico preciso de estenose congênita do esôfago por remanescentes traqueobrônquicos, já que seu tratamento difere dos
outros tipos de estreitamento congênito. Quatro casos de estenose congênita do esôfago inferior causada por remanescentes traqueobrônquicos,
cujo diagnóstico definitivo foi obtido por exame histopatológico. À exceção do último caso, em que não se realizou cirurgia antirrefluxo
concomitante, todos apresentaram evolução satisfatória após ressecção e anastomose do esôfago. A estenose congênita do esôfago consiste no
estreitamento intrínseco da parede do órgão associada à malformação de sua estrutura. Pode ser causada por restos traqueobrônquicos,
espessamento fibromuscular ou diafragma membranoso e tem como primeira manifestação clínica disfagia após introdução de alimentos sólidos na
dieta. O tratamento de escolha para os casos de remanescentes traqueobrônquicos é a ressecção do segmento estenosado com anastomose término-
terminal. Atribuiu-se o primeiro relato de estenose congênita do esôfago (ECE) a Frey e Duschi, em 1936. Os autores descreveram o caso de
uma jovem de 19 anos, cuja morte fora atribuída ao diagnóstico de acalásia e à presença de cartilagem na cárdia durante a necropsia. A ECE é
rara, associa-se à malformação da estrutura esofagiana(1) e pode ser concomitante à atresia do esôfago. Remanescentes traqueobrônquicos
(RTB) constituem a causa mais frequente, mas membrana diafragmática e espessamento fibromuscular (FM) são outras possíveis etiologias para
esse tipo de estenose( 2 ). No diagnóstico diferencial, devem-se considerar acalásia e formas adquiridas de estreitamento, como as
secundárias à esofagite péptica por refluxo gastresofágico e as cáusticas. Disfagia é a manifestação clínica inicial, que ocorre após a
introdução de dieta sólida. A história sugestiva leva à investigação por esofagograma e endoscopia, mas o diagnóstico definitivo só é
possível mediante estudo histopatológico. Diferentemente de outros tipos de estenose que admitem a dilatação endoscópica e a confecção de
uma válvula antirrefluxo como opção terapêutica, na ECE por RTB a ressecção do segmento estenosado com anastomose término-terminal é o
tratamento de escolha, já que, nesta, a dilatação pode resultar em perfuração esofágica e suas consequências. Optou-se por relatar quatro
casos clínicos de ECE por RTB para salientar a importância de se lembrar de tal patologia frente a quadros clínicos de disfagia, pois o
diagnóstico preciso propicia uma abordagem terapêutica mais adequada. Trata-se de estudo retrospectivo, englobando todos os casos de ECE por
RTB atendidos no Hospital Universitário Antônio Pedro, no Hospital da Lagoa e em consultório particular. Os casos foram acompanhados e
operados pelo mesmo cirurgião, de 2001 a 2011. O critério de inclusão foi o diagnóstico confirmado por achados histopatológicos. Utilizou-se
o método descritivo e as informações contidas nos prontuários, comparando-se os dados obtidos com a literatura atual. O estudo foi aprovado
pelo Comitê de Ética do Hospital Universitário Antônio Pedro. O primeiro caso refere-se a paciente masculino, negro, admitido no serviço de
Cirurgia Pediátrica do Hospital da Lagoa, aos 18 meses de idade. A responsável referia vômitos pós-alimentares desde os quatro meses e
incapacidade de ingerir alimentos sólidos. Solicitou-se seriografia esofagogastroduodenal (SEED), que demonstrou estenose anelar no terço
distal do esôfago (Figura 1). A presença de um anel estenótico esbranquiçado a 22cm dos incisivos impediu a progressão do aparelho
endoscópico no esôfago. Não havia sinais de alteração na integridade da mucosa, nem de refluxo gastroesofágico, sendo o aspecto compatível
com coristoma. O menor foi submetido à laparotomia exploradora. Após identificação do anel cartilaginoso por palpação, solicitou-se ao
anestesista a passagem de uma sonda de Foley para definição do limite inferior da ressecção. Após essa manobra, procedeu-se à ressecção do
segmento esofágico estenosado, com anastomose término-terminal e fundoplicatura à Thal. O menor evoluiu sem intercorrências no pós-
operatório e a histopatologia confirmou a heterotipia. Figura 1 Estenose anelar (seta) no terço distal do esôfago (caso 1) O segundo caso
foi o de recém-nascido, com menos de 24 horas de vida, feminino, branca, submetida à correção cirúrgica de atresia do esôfago com fístula
traqueoesofágica distal no serviço de Cirurgia Pediátrica do Hospital da Lagoa. A paciente evoluiu sem intercorrências no pós-operatório,
com início da dieta oral no sétimo dia. Após completar um mês de idade, um esofagograma de controle evidenciou anastomose ampla e refluxo
gastroesofágico até o terço superior do esôfago. Nesse exame, o laudo radiológico não fez referência à estenose distal do esôfago,
identificada na SEED. Iniciado tratamento clínico para o refluxo, o lactente foi trazido ao consultório aos sete meses de idade com queixa
de pneumonia e engasgo durante a alimentação. Um novo estudo contrastado evidenciou estenose do esôfago inferior, confirmada durante
endoscopia. Havia obstáculo à passagem do endoscópio por anel circular rígido, sugestivo de coristoma (Figura 2). Durante o exame, não houve
episódio de refluxo gastroesofágico e a mucosa encontrava-se íntegra. Indicou-se a laparotomia exploradora e procedeu-se à ressecção do
segmento esofágico estenótico, com anastomose término-terminal e fundoplicatura à Thal. Na cirurgia, não se identificou o remanescente
cartilaginoso e o exame endoscópico peroperatório orientou os limites da ressecção esofagiana. A criança evoluiu sem intercorrências e a
histopatologia revelou coristoma, com identificação de pequenas placas de cartilagem e glândulas mucosas. Figura 2 Anel (A) circular rígido
distal, sugestivo de coristoma Anastomose esofágica ampla (AE) (caso 2) O terceiro caso foi de paciente feminino, negra, que deu entrada no
serviço de Cirurgia Pediátrica do Hospital Universitário Antônio Pedro aos 23 meses de idade, com história de vômitos pós-alimentares desde
os quatro meses de vida. Até aquela data, vinha recebendo tratamento clínico para refluxo gastroesofágico, sem apresentar resposta à
terapêutica instituída. Dois meses antes da internação, um estudo contrastado do esôfago evidenciou estenose no terço inferior do esôfago,
com falha de enchimento proximal. Submetida à endoscopia digestiva alta (EDA), verificou-se mucosa íntegra, de coloração normal, com
estreitamento em meia lua no esôfago distal e retenção alimentar. Com a hipótese diagnóstica de coristoma, indicou-se laparotomia
exploradora. Durante o ato cirúrgico, não foi possível palpar a cartilagem, sendo necessário auxílio endoscópico para a ressecção segmentar
do esôfago. Após a anastomose, adicionou-se ao procedimento uma fundoplicatura à Thal. No exame histopatológico da peça, observaram-se anéis
de cartilagem e agregado de glândulas mucosas (Figura 3). No seguimento da paciente, o esofagograma e a endoscopia revelaram-se normais.
Figura 3 Anel de cartilagem (C) e glândulas mucosas na parede esofágica (caso 3) O último caso foi de paciente feminino, branca, internada
no Hospital Universitário Antônio Pedro aos quatro anos de idade. A história fazia referência a regurgitação e vômitos pós-alimentares desde
os seis meses de idade, quando se introduziram alimentos sólidos à dieta. De forma empírica, realizou-se tratamento clínico para doença do
refluxo gastroesofágico, sem melhora do quadro. Foi submetida à EDA para retirada de corpo estranho (restos alimentares). Durante o exame, a
mucosa encontrava-se íntegra e havia estreitamento em meia lua no esôfago distal. A zona de estenose foi então dilatada, com melhora
transitória do quadro. Um esofagograma confirmou a estenose na transição do terço médio e inferior do esôfago (Figura 4). Submetida à
toracotomia posterolateral direita, ressecou-se o segmento esofágico estenosado e o trânsito foi restabelecido por meio de anastomose
término-terminal. O esôfago encontrava-se afunilado, sem cartilagem palpável e, portanto, sem definição da área de ressecção. A endoscopia
foi novamente necessária para estabelecer esses limites. O exame histopatológico do segmento esofágico ressecado revelou glândulas mucosas e
epitélio respiratório. Aproximadamente dois meses após a cirurgia, houve recidiva da estenose. Indicou-se fundoplicatura à Nissen e a
criança encontra-se, no momento, em programa de dilatação. Figura 4 Estenose (seta) no terço inferior do esôfago (caso 4) As ECE incidem de
um para 25 mil a um para 50 mil nascidos vivos e apresentam discreta predominância no sexo masculino( 3 ). Definidas como um estreitamento
intrínseco do esôfago, associam-se à malformação da estrutura da parede esofagiana. As ECE podem ser causadas por restos traqueobrônquicos,
espessamento fibromuscular ou diafragma membranoso( 4 ). A ECE por RTB, também chamada coristoma ou heterotopia( 5 ), é rara, mas
corresponde a uma das causas mais frequentes de ECE inferior, especialmente no Japão( 6 ). A presença de um anel cartilaginoso na parede
esofágica é o provável resultado de uma falha na separação embrionária do trato respiratório e do esôfago primitivo no 25º dia de gestação.
Esse depósito de cartilagem pode envolver completa ou incompletamente o terço distal do órgão, determinando uma obstrução parcial de sua
luz( 7 ). Embora o sequestro de cartilagem deva ocorrer no esôfago superior, esta é encontrada em posição mais distal, geralmente nos 3cm
proximais ao cárdia( 7 , 8 ), devido ao crescimento normal( 6 ). De fato, os RTB podem conter cartilagem ou apenas epitélio respiratório
e/ou glândulas seromucosas. Nessa última situação, os pacientes podem não desenvolver estenose( 9 ). A associação do coristoma esofagiano
com outras malformações congênitas é rara, sendo a atresia do esôfago com ou sem fístula traqueoesofágica a anomalia associada mais
frequentemente observada( 3 , 6 , 9 , 10 ). No pós-operatório da atresia, deve-se dar especial atenção ao estudo contrastado de controle,
que pode revelar precocemente a lesão( 10 ). Vale lembrar, entretanto, que um esofagograma normal nesse momento não descarta uma ECE( 9 ).
Outras malformações podem estar presentes e devem ser lembradas, como anomalia anorretal, doença cardíaca congênita, trissomia do cromossoma
21, microftalmia com coloboma de íris, atresia ou duplicação do duodeno, má- rotação, divertículo de Meckel, doença celíaca, microgastria,
hérnia diafragmática, traqueomalácia, fístula traqueoesofágica em "H", refluxo vesicoureteral e hemangioma( 3 , 4 , 6 , 10 ). O início do
quadro clínico ocorre geralmente no momento de transição da dieta líquida para a sólida, quando o paciente passa a apresentar disfagia.
Regurgitação e vômitos constituem as queixas mais frequentes( 7 ). Podem-se observar também hipersalivação, estridor durante a alimentação,
déficit de desenvolvimento, pneumonias de repetição secundárias a broncoaspiração, infecções do trato respiratório superior e impactação de
alimento ou corpo estranho( 3 , 8 , 9 ). A severidade dos sintomas parece ser proporcional ao grau de acometimento da parede esofágica( 7 ).
O diagnóstico deve ser suspeitado a partir da correlação dos achados clínicos, esofagográficos e endoscópicos. O estudo contrastado
demonstra o estreitamento segmentar do esôfago, com dilatação a montante. Deve-se medir a extensão da estenose, assim como excluir
compressão extrínseca, corpo estranho e fístula( 1 ). No exame endoscópico, a impossibilidade de progressão do aparelho e a ausência de
sinais de esofagite servem para afastar outras causas, como acalasia e estenose péptica ou por ingestão de substâncias cáusticas. A
monitorização do pH e a manometria esofágica são úteis para excluir ou associar o refluxo gastroesofágico( 1 , 2 , 9 , 11 ). Pode-se
utilizar a ultrassonografia endoscópica na diferenciação entre estenose FM ou por RTB( 3 , 4 ). De fato, o diagnóstico só é definitivo com a
realização da histopatologia, que identificará, no segmento esofágico ressecado, cartilagem, glândulas seromucosas e epitélio colunar
pseudoestratificado ciliado, isoladamente ou em combinação( 9 ). Zhao et al( 3 ) observaram um atraso de dois a dois anos e meio entre o
início dos sintomas e o diagnóstico de RTB. Torna-se importante, portanto, a diferenciação diagnóstica precoce para não retardar o
tratamento definitivo. Embora haja relatos de dilatação endoscópica como tratamento da ECE por RTB, seu resultado é inefetivo( 3 , 4 ) e sua
utilização deve-se limitar aos casos sem cartilagem( 9 ), já que pode resultar em complicações graves como perfuração do esôfago( 1 , 3 , 10
, 11 ). O tratamento de escolha é o cirúrgico( 3 , 4 , 10 ). A operação consiste em ressecção segmentar do esôfago, pela via abdominal ou
torácica, e em anastomose primária. Durante a exploração cirúrgica, o nervo vago deve ser dissecado e reparado com fio, para evitar a sua
lesão. A identificação do anel cartilaginoso pela palpação pode ser difícil e, nesse momento, a utilização da endoscopia pré-operatória ou a
passagem de um cateter balonado são de grande auxílio na definição dos limites da ressecção( 4 , 11 , 12 ). A ultrassonografia endoscópica é
outro recurso a ser utilizado na tentativa de identificar a estrutura cartilaginosa durante o ato operatório( 4 ). Nos casos localizados no
esôfago distal e abordados pela via abdominal, associa-se fundoplicatura ao procedimento para prevenir o refluxo gastroesofágico e proteger
a sutura. O tratamento cirúrgico tem baixa morbimortalidade, sendo a estenose da anastomose a complicação pós-operatória prevalente, mas que
responde à dilatação( 3 ). Em casos selecionados, a enucleação do remanescente cartilaginoso, a miotomia e a miectomia podem ser opções de
tratamento( 4 , 12 , 13 ). Dessa forma, o diagnóstico etiológico preciso de uma ECE por RTB é fundamental para se definir o padrão-ouro do
tratamento que compreende a ressecção do segmento esofágico estenosado, a anastomose término-terminal e a construção de uma válvula
antirrefluxo. A dilatação endoscópica do esôfago como alternativa terapêutica pode ser desastrosa, acarretando perfuração do órgão e suas
graves consequências.
