Breast adenomyoepithelioma is an unusual tumor characterized by a biphasic proliferation of epithelial and myoepithelial cells. Most breast
adenomyoepitheliomas are considered to be benign or to have a low-grade malignant potential, characterized by propensity for local
recurrence. Malignant changes arising in this lesion are extremely rare and may involve one or both cellular components. We discuss a case
of a 60 year-old woman who began to experience pain in her right breast in January 2009. Breast ultrasound and mammography were performed
showing a rounded, hypoechoic solid lesion with ill-defined margins in the right inner-inferior quadrant, suspicious of malignancy.
Quadrantectomy of the inner-inferior quadrant of the right breast with sampling of ipsilateral axillary lymph nodes was performed. The
histological analysis confirmed the diagnosis of adenomyoepithelioma with focal malignant change of the epithelial component, associated
with high-grade malignant myoepithelial change. The patient was treated with adjuvant radiotherapy and her right breast received a dose of
Gy 50 with a boost of Gy 10 to the tumor bed. At present, the patient shows no sign of tumor recurrence. Breast malignant
adenomyoepithelioma is a rare tumor which should be considered in the differential diagnosis of other solid breast lesions. Only few cases
have been reported in the literature. Diagnosis, optimal therapy and predicting the outcome are problematic issues due to the rarity of this
disease which appears to have hematogenous rather than lymphatic spread and usually occurs in primary tumors ≥ 1.6 cm in size. Proliferative
lesions of the mammary gland arise mainly in the terminal duct lobular unit (TDLU). Most lesions exhibit epithelial alterations; however,
some mammary lesions show myoepithelial changes . Myoepithelial basal cells are localized between luminal epithelial cells and the stroma,
which place them in an ideal position in order to communicate with both compartments. The myoepithelial cells express typical cytokeratins
of the basal layer of stratified epithelia (CK5, CK14, and CK17), filamentous α-smooth muscle actin (SMA) and the heavy chain-myosin (hc-
myosin). Some tumor suppressor proteins, including p63, p73, 14-3-3 sigma, maspin and Wilms Tumor (WT-1) have been preferentially detected
in myoepithelial cells . Recent data indicate the existence of a morphologically distinct myoepithelial cell, which lacks expression of SMA
and in some cases also lacks CK5, CK14, and CK17 , indicating that a hierarchical differentiation pattern may exist within the myoepithelial
lineage. Myoepithelial cells rarely transform; however, when they do transform, they generally give rise to benign or low-grade malignant
tumors. The lesions which show a myoepithelial component are rare in the mammary gland, and they are often benign and biphasic, with an
epithelial and a myoepithelial basal component . The adenomyoepithelioma is a biphasic tumor, either benign or with low potential of
malignancy, which can be found in salivary gland, skin adnexal and lung, but is more frequent in the mammary gland. This entity rarely
progresses to a more malignant state or gives rise to metastasis . Morphological features of malignancy that could predict the potential for
local recurrence and/or metastasis are not well-established. The likelihood of recurrence seems to be associated with incomplete removal ,
cellular pleomorphism, mitoses, necrosis, invasion of the surrounding tissue and association with other types of malignant tumors such as
invasive ductal carcinoma and undifferentiated carcinoma . The classification of the World Health Organization (WHO, 2012) divides the
adenomyoepithelioma into a benign type where both the epithelial and myoepithelial component are histologically non-malignant and a form
which shows a malignant transformation . Although rare, this malignant transformation can develop from one of the two components, epithelial
and myoepithelial, or from both. This case of malignant adenomyoepithelioma is of interest not only for its rarity, but also for the
peculiar aspects of the malignant component that in some areas shows morphological and immunophenotypical similarities to basal-like breast
carcinoma. We describe a 60 year-old female patients, of Caucasian origin, in generally good health (PS = 0), with no family history of
cancer. In January 2009, the patient developed pain in the right mammary region. The onset of this pain was initially attributed to a trauma
she had had in this area. The patient underwent several clinical examinations which included echography of both mammary glands and
corresponding axillary cavities. The ultrasonography highlighted an oval shaped hypoechoic mass of about 17 mm around the right mammary
region near the areola, on the border between superior and internal-inferior quadrants (Figure 1). The mammography confirmed the presence of
this nodular lesion which was about 20 mm (Figure 1). After the radiological examinations, a fine needle aspiration of the lesion was
performed. The sample taken was not diagnostic. After surgical videat, lumpectomy around the areola was performed on the patient. The
histological analysis of the mammary lumpectomy revealed an adenomyoepithelioma with focal malignant transformation of the epithelial
component (2.4 mm) and a more spread malignant transformation of the myoepithelial component (12 mm) without necrosis and metastasis in the
lymph nodes (Figures 2 and 3). The surgical margin was free (distance over 2 cm). For the clinical staging, the patient underwent a chest
X-ray, echography of the liver and a bone scan. All the examinations were negative. The right mammary gland of the patient was treated with
radiotherapy (gray (Gy) 50 total dose plus a boost of Gy 10 to the tumor bed). At present, the patient shows no signs of tumor recurrence.
The histological report describes a lesion with multilobulated outlines, pushing margins and biphasic aspects due to the presence of a
double population of cells. The lesion is composed of epithelioid elements with an oval-shaped nucleus, minute nucleolus and eosinophilic
cytoplasm with sharp margins (epithelial-like component). These cells are arranged in glandular-like structures, distorted and compressed by
elongated cells with clear cytoplasm (myoepithelial-like component). This second population of cells is more abundant in number. The
epithelial-like component shows an average proliferative index of three mitoses for ten high power fields. However, there is a focal area
(in the section) of 2.4 mm of highly atypical epithelioid cells arranged in sheets and clumps with features of stromal infiltration. In this
area, the epithelioid cells show an average proliferative index of seven mitoses for ten high power fields. The myoepithelial-like
component, present in larger quantities, shows in part (12 mm in diameter) histologically malignant aspects due to the presence of atypical
cells and an average proliferative index of 32 mitoses for 10 high power fields. An immunohistochemical study was then carried out using the
following antibodies: cytokeratin 5 (clone XM26 Novocastra Leica Biosystems), cytokeratin 6 (clone LHK6B Novocastra Leica Biosystems),
cytokeratin 7 (clone OV-TL 12/30 Novocastra Leica Biosystems), cytokeratin 8/18 (clone 5D3 Novocastra Leica Biosystems), cytokeratin 14
(clone LL002 Novocastra Leica Biosystems), cytokeratin 19 (clone B170 Novocastra Leica Biosystems), estrogen receptors (clone 6F11
Novocastra Leica Biosystems), progesterone receptors (clone 16 Novocastra Leica Biosystems), HER-2 (HercepTest DAKO), p53 (clone DO7
Novocastra Leica Biosystems), p63 (clone 7JUL Novocastra Leica Biosystems), CD10 (clone 56C6 Novocastra Leica Biosystems), e-cadherin (clone
36B5 Novocastra Leica Biosystems), vimentin (clone V9 Novocastra Leica Biosystems) and S100 (clone S100 Novocastra Leica Biosystems). The
immunohistochemical reactions were evaluated with a semiquantitative method. The cellular proliferative index was evaluated by Ki-67 (clone
MM1 Novocastra) and showed 10% of nuclear cellular positivity. The immunohistochemical analysis showed the epithelial luminal nature of the
epithelioid benign component because this component was positive for luminal cytokeratins (7, 8/18, 19) (Table 1). The malignant epithelioid
component of the lesion was largely positive for luminal cytokeratin 7 and locally positive for myoepithelial-basal markers (p63, S100,
cytokeratins 5, 6, 14) (Table 1). The elongated benign and malignant cells of the lesion gave a positive result with all myoepithelial-basal
markers (Table 1). Radiological characteristics of lesion; (A and B) mammography craniocaudal and mediolateral oblique views of the right
breast show an ill-defined end opacity in the inner-inferior quadrant of about 20 mm diameter; (C): ultrasonography of the right breast
shows a hypoechoic nodule of about 17 mm diameter around the right mammary region near the areola. Morphological characteristics of the
lesion; (A) the lesion shows multilobulated outlines and pushing margins (hematoxylin-eosin, magnification 4×); (B) the benign component is
composed of rounded or elongated tubules lined by a single layer of epithelial cells and one or two layers of myoepithelial cells
(hematoxylin-eosin, magnification 40); (C) the malignant component shows cytological atypia of epithelial and myoepithelial components
(hematoxylin-eosin, magnification 40×). Immunohistochemical characteristics of the lesion; (A) expression of CK 7 (magnification 10×); (B)
expression of p63 (magnification 10×); (C) expression of CK 5 (magnification 10×); (D) expression of S-100 (magnification 10×).
Immunohistochemical results Legend: EM, epithelial malignant component. EB, epithelial benign component. MM, myoepithelial malignant
component. MB myoepithelial benign component. negative (−) antibody was not found in any cell. largely positive (+) > 75% of the cells were
positive. locally positive (−/+) 25 to 75% of the cells were positive. focally positive (−/+) < 25% of the cells were positive. The
adenomyoepithelioma of the breast is uncommon, often benign or with low potential of malignancy or local recurrence. Metastases arising from
malignant variants of such tumors also occur rarely although several such cases have been reported . Review of the literature reveals that
malignant lesions appear to fall into two broad groups: those that are readily identified as consisting of areas of obvious malignancy
arising in conjunction with an otherwise typical adenomyoepithelioma and those with the overall appearance of an adenomyoepithelioma but
seen on close examination to contain foci of cellular atypia and increased mitotic activity. Recurrent tumors and distant metastases have
been reported in association of both groups. Among the 11 cases of either epithelial and myoepithelial changes included in these studies ,
two cases showed malignant transformation of the myoepithelial component only and one cases showed malignant transformation of the
epithelial component only (Table 2). Because of the capacity of adenomyoepithelioma with both epithelial and myoepithelial malignant
transformation to metastasize, this entity should preferably be treated by wide local excision with appropriate margins . The presence of
metastases was described in patients with a tumor of ≥ about 1.6 cm. The metastases spread mainly via the blood system, with brain and lungs
as main target organs. However, there are no data about sentinel lymph node removal and/or lymphadenectomy and the adjuvant radiotherapy
and/or chemotherapy. The genesis of infiltrating breast cancer today is considered to be a complex process with several phases that
originates from stem cells of the terminal duct lobular unit (TDLU) . The identification of adult stem cells in the mammary tissue in the
TDLU, that are able to differentiate themselves initially into epithelial glandular precursor cells (CK5 and CK8/18 positive), or into
precursor cells of the myoepithelial layer (CK5 and SMA positive) and, subsequently, into mature luminal cells (CK8/18 positive) and mature
myoepithelial cells (SMA positive), confirmed the distinction of the breast cancer in luminal, basal, HER-2 positive and ‘similar to normal’
breast highlighted by gene expression studies . Nielsen et al. proposed a panel composed of immunohistochemical markers anti-ER, anti-EGFR,
anti-HER2, and anti-CK 5/6 to identify basal breast cancer . In our case, the epithelioid malignant component revealed a widespread
expression of the epithelial luminal CK7 marker together with expression of the ‘staminal’ CK5 marker and the myoepithelial p63 and S-100
markers which could suggest that the origin of this component is from the stem cells of the mammary gland with an intermediate epithelial-
mesenchymal differentiation. Reis-Filho et al. showed a basal-like immunophenotype (ER-, HER2-, EGFR + and/or CK5/6 +) in 59 out of 65 cases
of metaplastic breast cancer that produces stromal matrix that is an epithelial carcinoma with areas of mesenchymal differentiation .
Futhermore, a case of malignant adenomyoepithelioma of the breast that produces stromal matrix was described with immunohistochemical
profile of myoepithelial differentiation (S100 e maspin positive) but not basal-like (CK14-negative) in the metaplastic component . The
presence of neoplastic components with an intermediate epithelial-mesenchymal differentiation in biphasic tumors of mammary gland suggests
that these lesions can originate from mammarian stem cells with the potential to differentiate themselves into epithelial or into
mesenchymal-myoepithelial cells. Malignant epithelial and myoepithelial adenomyoepithelioma of the breast with metastases: meta-analysis
Legend: F, female; Y, years; M, months; W, weeks. Breast malignant adenomyoepithelioma is a rare tumor which should be considered in the
differential diagnosis of other solid breast lesions. Only a few cases have been reported in the literature and establishing the diagnosis,
determining the optimal therapy as well as predicting the outcome are problematic issues due to the rarity of this disease. The
adenomyoepithelioma appears to have hematogenous rather than lymphatic spread and usually occurs in primary tumors ≥ 1.6 cm in size. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CK: Cytokeratins; EB: Epithelial benign component; EM: Epithelial
malignant component; Gy: Gray; MB: Myoepithelial benign component; MM: Myoepithelial malignant component; PS: Performance status; SMA:
Smooth muscle actin; TDLU: Terminal duct lobular unit; WHO: World Health Organization. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. VP have made substantial contributions to conception and design. GP have made substantial contributions to acquisition of data.
AP have made substantial contributions to conception and design. FT have made substantial contributions to acquisition of data. FZ have made
substantial contributions to acquisition of data. LR have made substantial contributions to acquisition of data. AF have made substantial
contributions to acquisition of data. FC have been involved in drafting the manuscript. BS have been involved in drafting the manuscript.
CDiC agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the
work are appropriately investigated and resolved. NP have been involved in drafting the manuscript and revising it critically for important
intellectual content. CDR have given final approval of the version to be published. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
