Gastro-intestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) of the appendix are a rare entity. To date, only eight cases has been described in the literature,
most of which have been of the benign type. We report a new case of an appendiceal GIST in a 75-year-old man. The tumor was discovered when
the patient presented with acute appendiceacal peritonitis. Preoperative diagnosis of appendiceal GIST was rarely done as tumors were
usually associated with appendicitis-like symptoms. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) are the most common primary mesenchymal neoplasms
of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. GISTs occur most commonly in the stomach (60%) and the small bowel (30%). Appendiceal GISTs are
extremely rare making up approximately 0.1% of all cases, with eight cases reported in the literature thus far, seven of these cases were
benign. Only in one reported case, the malignant nature of the lesion was confirmed. A 75-year-old man was brought to the emergency
department with a 48-hour history of abdominal pain, emesis, and low fever. He reported that the pain was progressive in nature. The
patient′s medical history was significant for hypertension. On physical exam, he was febrile (38.5°C), with normal vital signs. Physical
examination demonstrated diffuse lower abdominal tenderness with peritoneal signs. Laboratory tests showed leukocytosis (WBC: 16.000/ mm3)
and elevation of the C-reactive protein (CRP: 22 mg/dl). There were no other abnormal values on peripheral blood analysis or serum
biochemical analysis. Sonography found a noncompressible distended appendix in the right lower quadrant and free fluid in the hole abdominal
cavity. After a pre-operative reanimation, a median laparotomy was performed. The exploration showed an acute generalized peritonitis with
300 mm3 of pus, false membranes and a phlegmonous pelvic appendix perforated in its apex. An appendectomy and peritoneal toilet were
subsequently performed. A 2 cm nodular protrusion in the mid portion of the appendix was observed, and the specimen was submitted to frozen
section. The cut section of the tumor was tan-yellow with vague whorls. Histology showed a monotonous spindle morphology characteristic of
GISTs, with irregular fascicles and variably sclerosed stroma (Figure 1, Figure 2). The tumor showed strong expression of CD34 (Figure 3)
and CD117 but was negative for desmin, h-caldesmon, SMA, and S-100. The tumor was diagnosed as low-risk GISTs according to the National
Institutes of Health consensus criteria for diagnosis and risk assessment of GISTs, corresponding to prognostic groups 2 in the
classification by Miettinen and Lasota. Adjuvant therapy was not administrated to the patient and no evidence of recurrence or metastasis
was observed at the 48-month follow-up. Histopathologic findings: transition area between appendiceal cells (black arrow) and tumoral cells
(green arrow) (X200) Histopathologic findings: monotonous spindle morphology with irregular fascicles and variably sclerosed stroma (X400)
Immunohistochemical findings. Positive staining with CD34 Gastrointestinal stromal sarcomas (GISTs) are the most common mesenchymal tumours
originating in the digestive tract. They have a characteristic morphology, are generally positive for CD117 (c-kit) and are primarily caused
by activating mutations in the KIT or PDGFRA [1, 2] They are located typically in the submucosa of the stomach and the small and large
intestines, although cases arising in the esophagus, greater omentum, and mesenterial adipose tissue have been described . Appendiceal GISTs
are extremely rare making up approximately 0.1% of all cases , with eight cases reported in the literature thus far; seven of these cases
were benign and measuring less that 3 cm in diameter . Only in one reported case, the malignant nature of the lesion was confirmed . Based
on the previously reported 8 cases and our case, patients with appendiceal GISTs have a mean age of 67 years (range, 56-78 years) with a
remarkable predilection for men (3.5:1). Three tumors were associated with appendicitis-like symptoms in the absence of histologic evidence
of acute appendicitis, suggesting that the symptoms were caused by the tumor [5, 7, 8]. Three other tumors were found incidentally during
surgery for other diseases or at autopsy [5, 7]. One other tumor was associated with acute appendicitis , and with a peri-appendiceal
abscess for the last case . For our case, the tumor was discovered when the patient presented with an acute peritonitis. Consistent with the
high incidence of associated other malignancies in GIST patients in general , 4 of 9 patients with appendiceal GISTs were affected by other
cancers: 3 had carcinomas[5, 7], and 1 had a synchronous malignant gastric GIST . One patient had neurofibromatosis type 2 . The locations
were as follows: mid portion (n = 5), tip (n = 3), and proximal part (n = 1). Three tumors were extramural, and 1 was pedunculated. Their
mean size was 33.5 mm (range, 2.5- 200 mm). Seven of the eight previously reported appendiceal GISTs were spindled, mitotically inactive
lesions corresponding to prognostic groups 1 (n = 6) and 2 (n = 1) according to Miettinen and Lasota and were at very low risk (n = 6) and
low risk (n = 1) according to the National Institutes of Health consensus criteria . For one case, the size of the tumor, number of mitosis
and locally invasive surgical findings clearly confirm the malignant nature of the lesion . In our case, six previous cases examined by
immunohistochemistry showed a uniform coexpression of CD117 and CD34. None was positive for desmin, smooth muscle actin, or S-100. None of 3
patients with follow-up (mean, 49 months)had evidence of progressive disease. The main problem with our patient was whether to consider the
tumor as ruptured, as the patient was in general peritonitis, or not. In patients with tumoral rupture, it would be acceptable to administer
imatinib for more than 3 years. On the other hand, our patient had general peritonitis due to a perforation of the apex of the appendix and
the tumor was located in the mid portion, so that, adjuvant therapy was not administrated. Gastro-intestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) of the
appendix are a rare entity. To date, only eight previous cases have been described in the literature, seven of which have been of the benign
type. Preoperative diagnosis was rarely done as tumors were usually associated with appendicitis-like symptoms. The authors declare no
competing interests. All authors contributed in this work. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
