Academic Editor: An Liu A 36-year-old woman was diagnosed with a therapy-refractory cutaneous CD4+ T-cell lymphoma, T3N0M0B0, and stage IIB.
Helical irradiation of the total skin (HITS) and dose painting techniques, with 30 Gy in 40 fractions interrupted at 20 fractions with one
week resting, 4 times per week were prescribed. The diving suit was dressed whole body to increase the superficial dose and using central
core complete block (CCCB) technique for reducing the internal organ dose. The mean doses of critical organs of head, chest, and abdomen
were 2.1 to 29.9 Gy, 2.9 to 8.1 Gy, and 3.6 to 15.7 Gy, respectively. The mean dose of lesions was 84.0 cGy. The dosage of left side
pretreated area was decreased 57%. The tumor regressed progressively without further noduloplaques. During the HITS procedure, most toxicity
was grade I except leukocytopenia with grade 3. No epitheliolysis, phlyctenules, tumor lysis syndrome, fever, vomiting, dyspnea, edema of
the extremities, or diarrhea occurred during the treatment. HITS with dose painting techniques provides precise dosage delivery with
impressive results, sparing critical organs, and offering limited transient and chronic sequelae for previously locally irradiated, therapy-
refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Total skin electron beam therapy (TSEBT) is an effective treatment for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
affecting the superficial region . One of the widely used techniques TSEBT is Stanford 6-dual field technique . However, the dose in
homogeneity is reported by the literatures [3, 4]. To improve this condition, a selection of patients with advanced skin disease and
regional extension could be overcome by a combination of TSEBT and photon beam irradiation . Helical tomotherapy (HT) has advantages in
irradiating extended fields with dose painting techniques. Total marrow irradiation (TMI) via HT with low toxicities for multiple myeloma
patients could be feasible . According to the characteristics of HT, it is workable and feasible to replace conventional TSEBT technique by
HT to increase dose homogeneity and decrease toxicities. Here, we report a successful case of therapy-refractory cutaneous CD4+ T-cell
lymphoma treated with helical irradiation of the total skin (HITS) and dose painting technique to overcome the surface dose in homogeneity
of conventional radiotherapy and to spare the previous irradiating area. Additionally, the data of surface dose, critical organs doses, and
registration were analyzed too. In February, 2012, a 36-year-old woman visited our outpatient department due to the progression of a skin
disease for several months. Eight months before visiting, she found a pruritic, noduloplaque skin rash over her trunk and extremities.
Concurrently, a growing, fungating lesion 15 cm in diameter was in the left lateral chest wall. She visited one of medical center in Taiwan
for help. The Ga-67 study showed intense uptake in the lateral left chest wall that was corroborated by the clinical appearance. A whole
abdominal computer tomography (CT) showed several subcentimeter lymph nodes in the bilateral inguinal areas, and a biopsy was done. The
pathology reports showed cutaneous CD4+ T-cell lymphoma, T3N0M0B0, and stage IIB without lymph node metastasis. Many medium- to large-sized
atypical lymphoid cells infiltrated diffusely into the superficial and deep dermis (Figure 1(a)). Most of the atypical lymphoid cells were
positive for CD3 (Figure 1(b)) and CD4 (Figure 1(c)). Only a small portion of them were positive for CD8 (Figure 1(d)), CD79a (Figure 1(e)),
and CD56 (Figure 1(f)). They were all negative for CD30 (Figure 1(g)). The prescriptions were interferon alpha, psoralen plus ultraviolet A
photochemotherapy, and Accutane (Isotretinoin). In addition, local electron radiotherapy was delivered to the left chest wall and right
axillary area with 50 Gray (Gy) in 25 fractions, respectively. After local radiotherapy, the producing newly-formed plaques over the trunk
and buttock outside the radiation field were noted. Oral methotrexate (2.5 mg) 5 mg twice per day was prescribed immediately but disease
progressed. The patient was referred to our hospital for total skin irradiation. HITS with dose painting techniques were applied from head
to toe and avoided the previously treated areas. (Figures 2(a) and 2(b)) The patient was dressed with the diving suit (3 mm thick) to
increase the superficial dose. The Polyflex II tissue equivalent material (Sammons Preston, Warrenville, IL, USA) was used as bolus for
lesions over ears, fingers, and toes. The conformal bolus (R.P.D., Albertville, MN, USA) was used to cover the lesions in trunk. BlueBag
immobilization system (Medical Intelligence, Germany) and thermoplastic fixation were used to fix head and neck, main trunk, and
extremities. For tomotherapy treatment planning, a computed tomography (CT) image set of the whole body was required. The patients were
scanned in a large bore (75 cm) CT scanner (GE, Discovery VCT PET/CT Imaging System) from head to toe. The level at 15 cm above knee was
used as a reference point to separate the upper and lower set. The geometric edges of both fields were abutted at the HT treatment's 50%
isodose plane. Both image sets were using the Philips Pinnacle3 treatment planning system for contouring. After that, the plan was
transferred to the Tomotherapy Hi Art Planning system (v. 4.0.4. Tomotherapy, Inc., Madison, Wisconsin, USA). The clinical target volume
(CTV) included the entire body surface system with subcutaneous 0.5 cm. To account for setup variability and respiratory motion, a planning
target volume (PTV) was generated with a 0.5 cm margin at first. After 4 days treatment, the data of MVCT showed 0.5 cm for PTV was
insufficient for some parts of body, such as shoulder, chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Therefore, the margins for PTV in these areas were
changed accordingly. The anterior margin of the chest and abdomen was 1.0 cm with two-dimensional expansion and the shoulder was 0.8 cm with
three-dimensional expansion, respectively. The CTV and PTV were sepacrated into five parts of head, chest, abdomen, pelvis, and upper
extremities for the body plan. The hypothetical bolus was 1.0–1.5 cm in thickness from skin surface. Five mm was setting on the outer layer
of PTV as hypothetical boluses during HITS plan to avoid the overhit of the inverse planning. Due to the different PTV margin used in the
different part of body, the thicknesses of hypothetical boluses were variable. A central core complete block (CCCB) 2.5 cm away from PTV in
HT planning system was used to restrict the photon beams to be an oblique incidence for increasing the superficial dose and reducing the
internal organ dose (Figure 2(c)). Thirty Gy with 40 fractions interrupted at 20 fractions with one week resting, 4 times per week were
prescribed. Total doses of 30 Gy to 95% of the PTV were delivered to the total skin area and tumor part, respectively. The normal tissue
dose constraints utilized were based on the results of the survey of the clinical outcome of the target dose and dose limits to various
organs at risk (OARs). The field width, pitch, and modulation factor (MF) used for the treatment planning optimization were 2.5, 0.287 cm,
and 3.5, respectively. The dose volume histograms (DVHs) were calculated for the target and individual OARs. Toxicity of treatment was
scored according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v4.0 (CTCAE v4.0). Daily check of patient positioning was performed
by the megavoltage CT (MVCT) system integrated in the tomotherapy machine. MVCT scan from head to thigh were performed to check the
patient's whole body alignment. Image fusions were evaluated by the attending physician and physicist. Any translational shifts suggested by
the image fusion results were applied to the final patient setup before treatment delivery. The tolerance of setup error allowed only a 5 mm
difference in any of the three translation directions and 1° of difference in roll. Additional selected MVCT scans were performed after
treatment to verify patient immobilization. Radiochromic EBT2 film (International Specialty Products Inc. Wayne, NJ, USA) with thickness of
0.234 mm and effective measurement depth of 0.153 mm in a layer was used for dose measurements during HITS. Each film sheet was cut into
smaller pieces as 5 × 5 cm that were placed on the lesions, head, chest, abdomen, pelvis, back, and extremities for calibration and
measurement. The starting day in first period, 128 EBT2 films were measured (Figure 2(d)). In the starting day of second period, only 69
EBT2 films were putting on the important area of body to confirm the previous data. An Epson Perfection V700 flatbed scanner (Epson Seiko
Corporation, Epson Seiko Corporation, Nagano, Japan) with the software of ImageJ Version 1.43 (National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD,
http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/) was used to scan all of the films at least 24 hours after film exposure. Films were scanned at a central
scanner location and with the same orientation. The settings used were 48 bit color and 150 dpi (0.017 cm per pixel). Calibration was
performed by irradiating each calibration film individually in a plastic water phantom perpendicularly to a 6 MV beam at dose levels from 0
to 150 cGy. The calibration curve was fitted using a polynomial function with the pixel value (PV) for each measurement film converted to
dose accordingly (Figure 3). According to the calibration curve, the dose of the exposued EBT2 films can be measured. Patient data was
collected with the approval of the Institutional Review Board of our Hospital. Thirty gray were delivered to the patient from March 19, 2012
to June 29, 2012. The tumor regressed progressively over the entire body without further noduloplaques (Figures 4(a), 4(b), and 4(d)). After
HITS, the following pathologic report showed only inflammation change without tumors persist (Figures 1(h) and 1(i)). Grade I dermatitis,
mucositis, xerostomia, fatigue, and body weight loss (51 to 46 kg) were noted during the HITS and onycholysis during the two months
following completion of the treatment (Figure 4(c)). Additionally, grade I anemia, thrombocytopenia, and grade 3 leukocytopenia were also
noted during the HITS procedure (Figure 5). No epitheliolysis, phlyctenules, tumor lysis syndrome, fever, vomiting, dyspnea, edema of the
extremities, or diarrhea occurred during the treatment. No abnormal liver, renal, thyroid functions, or gonadotropin hormone were noted
during or after treatment (Figure 5). Transient alopecia was noted during HITS but she recovered without permanent partial alopecia 3 months
later. Skin itching off and on over the trunk persisted from the beginning until the final report. Two months later, she developed grade 4
pancytopenia but recovered to grade 3 leukocytopenia and thrombocytopenia in the 3rd months after the treatment was completed. Supportive
measures were provided including hematopoietic colony-stimulating factors (CSF), steroids, antioxidants, oral glutamine, and yeast-derived
1,3/1,6 glucopolysaccharide. From the treatment until now, a complete response was noted, with the white cell count recovering to grade 2,
and the hemoglobulin and platelet counts recovering to grade 1 (Figure 5). Isodose distributions and dose volume histogram to the target and
OARs were shown in Figures 2(b) and 2(c). The mean doses of HITS to various OARs of head, chest, and abdomen were 2.1 to 29.9 Gy, 2.9 to
8.1 Gy, and 3.6 to 15.7 Gy, respectively (Table 1(a)). The surface doses in skin were listed in Table 1(b). The mean dosage of lesions was
84.0 cGy (ranged 73.6 to 89.4 cGy). The average dosage of left side pretreated area was 32.5 cGy. In here, the dose was decreased 57%. The
average beam-on time for the upper and lower part took roughly 48.1 ± 7.9 min and 8.1 ± 0.8 min, respectively. The maximum average value of
registration for upper torso versus lower extremities in different translation directions were 2.8 mm versus 0.9 mm for pretreatment and
0.7 mm versus 0.6 mm for posttreatment, respectively (Table 1(c)). This is a case of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma patient refractory to
multiple modality therapies with disease progression then search for further management to avoid previous irradiation area. TSEBT could be
an efficient and tolerable palliative treatment for patients with cutaneous manifestations of advanced, therapy-refractory cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma . Consensus guidelines for delivery of TSEBT have been published by the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
(EORTC) . The EORTC recommends a total dose of 31 to 36 Gy prescribed to the skin surface to produce a dose of at least 26 Gy at a depth of
4mm in the truncal skin along the central axis . In the report by Anacak and colleagues, data of thermoluminescent dosimetry (TLD)
measurements for TSEBT demonstrated that the dose in homogeneity throughout the skin surface is around 15% . However, for less
radiosensitive skin lymphomas, ±15% in homogeneity is not acceptable and innovative techniques are required. In the current study, the doses
were 110% (82.5 cGy) at the surface and 100% (75 cGy) at a depth of 1 cm in the HITS plan (Figures 2(a) and 2(b)), sparing the previously
treated area and fitting the requirement of recommendtions with high homogeneity. The deviations of up to 40% occur from the prescription
dosage and the surface dose in homogeneity can vary as much as 90% in body areas such as the perineum and eyelid . Additionally, cutaneous
tumors often exceed the 4 mm depth and are consequently underdosed when treated with TSEBT alone. HT has advantages in irradiating extending
area that make it possible to replace total body irradiation with total marrow irradiation, lowering the toxicities, and sparing critical
organs . Using these characteristics of HT, HITS provides dose homogeneity with precise depth penetration and decreased toxicities. In the
current study, the CTV included the entire body surface system with subcutaneous 0.5 cm. The maximum average value of registration for upper
torso versus lower extremities in different translation directions were 2.8 mm versus 0.9 mm for pretreatment and 0.7 mm versus 0.6 mm for
posttreatment, respectively. Generous PTV with a 0.5 cm margin, the shoulder with 0.8 cm margin, and the anterior of the chest and abdomen
with 1.0 cm margin was acceptable for compensating the clinical setup variability and breathing motion (Table 1(c)). The hypothetical bolus
was designed during HITS plan to avoid overhitting. Diving suit and actual boluses were used in daily practice to increase surface dose.
Both hypothetical and actual boluses contributed to skin doses of whole body delivering no more than 125% and no less than 95%. The lowest
and highest doses of measurement were located in left anterior lower leg (73.2 cGy) and upper-middle chest (92.6 cGy), respectively. The
mean dosage of lesions was 84.0 cGy and the dosage of left side pretreated area was decreased 57% that was matched with the planning
expectation (Table 1(b)). Now we have the possibility of replacing conventional TSEBT with HITS with dose painting technique, while still
achieving encouraging results (Figures 1(h), 1(i), 4(a), 4(b), and 4(d)). Common acute toxicities from TSEBT include pruritus, dry
desquamation, erythema, alopecia, xerosis, bullae of the feet, edema of the hands and feet, hypohidrosis , hyperpigmentation of the skin ,
phlyctenules , and loss of fingernails and toenails [11, 12]. Rare acute side effects include gynecomastia in men and mild epistaxis or
parotitis . Long-term complications are typically mild and may include permanent nail dystrophy, xerosis, telangiectasias, partial scalp
alopecia, and fingertip dysesthesias . Young patients should be thoroughly counseled regarding risks of gonadal toxicity . In addition, a
grade 3 erythema with bullous reaction during TSEBT was recorded in 26–32% of the cases [5, 7, 14]. The central CCCB techniques in HITS
planning restrict the photon beams delivering obliquely and reduced doses of OARs (Figure 2(c)). The mean doses of thyroid, lung, liver,
right kidney, left kidney, intestine, and uterine and ovary were 24.7, 4.6, 5.2, 3.9, 4.3, 4.3, 4.7, and 4.3 Gy, respectively (Table 1(a)).
On the other hand, most of the toxicities during and after HITS are grade 1 with complete recovery. No destruction of the liver, renal,
thyroid or gonadotropin functions was noted (Figure 5). For TSEBT combined with photon beam irradiation, hematological complications related
to the photon were a concern. Maingon and colleagues noted myelosuppression (grade 2 WHO) in 17 cases. Additionally, after total body
irradiation, 2/20 patients had a neutropenia below 500 granulocytes reversible without complication. Using HITS techniques, the
hematological complications were reversible. Hematopoietic damages were treated with supportive measures including hematopoietic CSF ,
steroids , antioxidants , oral glutamine , and yeast-derived 1,3/1,6 glucopolysaccharide to stimulate the granulocytes (neutrophils and
eosinophils), monocytes, macrophages, and NK cell production and to modulate the immune system. The mean doses to the bone marrows (BMs) of
the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine, sacrum, and bilateral iliac bone were 5.8, 6.3, 4.0, 4.8, and 8.7 Gy, respectively. In the future,
the constraints for these BMs in the HITS plan should be stricter to diminish the possibility of hematological damages. To our best
knowledge, this is the first report of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma treated with HITS techniques to alternate TSEBT. HITS with dose painting
techniques provide precise dosage delivery with impressive results, sparing critical organs, and offering limited transient and chronic
sequela for advanced, previously locally irradiated, therapy-refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. The proposed technique could be
considered an acceptable alternative to TSEBT once the techniques are further improved to avoid the hematologic complications. Long-term
followup is needed to confirm these preliminary findings. We have no personal or financial conflict of interest and have not entered into
any agreement that could interfere with our access to the data on the research or upon our ability to analyze the data independently, to
prepare paper, and to publish them. All authors read and approved the final paper. Chen-Hsi Hsieh and Pei-Wei Shueng carried out all CT
evaluations, study design, target delineations, and interpretation of the study. Chen-Hsi Hsieh drafted the paper. Shih-Chiang Lin, Meng-Hao
Wu, Jen-Yu Wang, and Yu-Jen Chen took care of the patients. Hui-Ju Tien and An-Cheng Shiau made the treatment planning of HITS and carried
out the evaluations. Yueh-Hung Chou and Chi-Kuan Chen provided the report of pathology. This work was supported by the Far Eastern Memorial
Hospital Grants (FEMH-2012-C-055 and FEMH 101-2314-B-418-010-MY3). Pathology reports. (a) Atypical lymphoid cells infiltrated diffusely into
the superficial and deep dermis. (b) Most of the atypical lymphoid cells were positive for CD3 (×200). (c) Most of the atypical lymphoid
cells were positive for CD4 (×200). (d) Only a small portion of them were positive for CD8 (×200). (e) Only a small portion of them were
positive for CD79a (×200). (f) Only a small portion of them were positive for CD56 (×200). (g) All negative for CD30 (×200). (h) Negative
for CD3 (×40). (i) Negative for CD20 (×40) showed inflammation change without residual T-cell lymphoma. Irradiation techniques. (a) Helical
irradiation of the total skin (HITS) with dose painting technique for total skin irradiation (white arrow indicates dose painting on the
previous irradiation area). (b) The dose volume histograms (DVHs) of the target and individual organs at risk (OARs). (c) The hypothetical
bolus was placed on the skin surface with 1–1.5 cm. A central core complete block (CCCB) 2.5 cm away from PTV in HITS planning. (d) The
locations of radiochromic EBT2 film on the body surface. Calibration curve of radiochromic EBT2 film. Treatment results. (a) Positron
emission tomography study for tumor. (b) The tumor regressed progressively over the entire body without further noduloplaques. (c)
Onycholysis during the two months following completion of the treatment. (d) The whole view of total body, transient alopecia was noted
during HITS but she recovered without permanent partial alopecia 3 months later. Laboratory results. No abnormal liver, renal, thyroid
functions, or gonadotropin hormone were noted. Grade I anemia, thrombocytopenia, and grade 3 leukocytopenia were noted during the HITS
procedure. Two months later, she developed grade 4 pancytopenia but recovered to grade 3 leukocytopenia and thrombocytopenia in the 3rd
month after the treatment was completed. (a) The doses of organs at risk in helical irradiation of the total skin (HITS) with dose painting
technique. (b) The surface doses of skin from head to toes measured with radiochromic EBT2 film in helical irradiation of the total skin
(HITS) with dose painting technique. (c) The mean values of registration with pretreatment and posttreatment using kVCT-MVCT fusion for
helical irradiation of the total skin (HITS) with dose painting technique. (a) D10: The dose received to 10% of the organ volume. D90: The
dose received to 90% of the organ volume. (b) (c)
