Intrathoracic goiter is commonly located in the anterior mediastinum. Here we report a case of a 58-year-old Chinese male in whom we
successfully removed the intrathoracic goiter and eased his dyspnea by a right posterolateral thoracotomy approach. Posterior mediastinal
thyroid goiter with mediastinal compressive symptoms is an indication of surgery. The intrathoracic thyroid adenoma or goiter is mostly
located in the anterior mediastinum, about 10%-15% are in the posterior mediastinum . It is derived from embryonic thyroid tissue and
developing into isolated thyroid tumor within the mediastinum or descending into the retrosternal loose tissue space from neck, which may
cause various compressive symptoms when it reaches a certain size. Most of the anterior mediastinal goiters can be removed by a transcerival
approach, but posterior mediastinal goiters may require additional extracervical incisions . A 58-year-old Chinese male was admitted to our
hospital with a chief complaint of chest tightness and shortness of breath after activities for more than 4 months. Physical examinations
show his heart rate of 96 beats/min, blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg, and no obvious mass in the neck. Hematological examinations show thyroid
function was normal. Computed Tomography (CT) of the neck and chest showed a goiter of low density in the right thyroid, and a giant cystic
nodule on the back of the right thyroid which grew into the right posterior mediastinum (Figure 1A). The tumor was located between the spine
and the dorsal part of trachea and esophagus, its lower edge extended beyond the aortic arch and compressed the trachea to the left (Figure
1B-D). Other laboratory tests revealed no abnormalities. In March 2012, surgery was done by right posterolateral thoracotomy of the fourth
intercostal space, a posterior mediastinal tumor (10.0 × 9.0 × 9.0 cm) fitting the location on CT was seen, and the right gland lobe was not
excided. The mass was completely encapsulated with large tension (Figure 1E), and this cyst-solidary mass was hypervascular. Microscopy
showed thyroid hyperplasia without malignancy. The final diagnosis was a secondary giant thyroid goiter in posterior mediastinum. In
December 2012, the latest follow-up showd that patient now had no symptoms after activities or thyroid dysfunction. CT scanning and complete
excision of giant thyroid goiter in posterior mediastinum. (A) Enhanced CT scanning reveals the right thyroid lobe (in red arrow) with a
small cyst and a giant goiter (in blue arrow) in low density is on the back of the right lobe. (B) CT clavicle cross section reveals the
giant goiter was located in the posterior mediastinum, compressing the trachea and esophagus. (C) CT of the chest reveals the goiter is well
beyond the aortic arch and compressing the superior vena cava. (D) CT of the chest reveals the lower edge of the goiter reachs the carina of
trachea. (E) The tumor is in a complete capsule with large tension, 10.0 × 9.0 × 9.0 cm in size. Intrathoracic goiter refers to a goiter
where most of its mass is found within the mediastinum. According to the originations of thyroid tissue, intrathoracic goiter can be divided
into primary intrathoracic goiter and secondary intrathoracic goiter. The vast majority of intrathoracic goiters are secondary ones which
arise from the lower part of one lobe or both lobes of cervical thyroid or isthmus and grow down through the thoracic inlet. Swallowing,
gravity and thoracic negative pressure help the growing goiter direct into the chest cavity. Anatomically speaking, goiter in the chest
cavity generally grows to the position of relatively low resistance. At first, the tumor will grow into the anterior superior mediastinum
between trachea and sternum, forming the common retrosternal thyroid goiter. Because there are thymus (may atrophy), left and right
brachiocephalic veins and superior vena cava in the front, aortic arch and its three branches (phrenic nerve and vagus nerve have smaller
resistance) in the middle left of retrosternal space, tumor growth will be resisted there. Right posterior mediastinum has relatively low
resistance than left posterior mediastinum, and it helps form right posterior mediastinal goiter. The primary intrathoracic goiter only
accounts for 0.2 ~ 1% of all the intrathoracic goiters, it affects females more often (male: female = 1 : 3 or 1 : 4) . Its causes are
totally different from the ones of secondary intrathoracic goiter. During the embryonic developmental period of thyroid gland, part or all
of the thyroid blastoma leaves primordium and is pulled into the thoracic cavity by the descendent heart and great vessels, then continues
to develop in the thoracic cavity, forming the final primary intrathoracic goiter. Because of different originations, secondary posterior
mediastinal goiter is often continued with the cervical thyroid gland, with blood supply from inferior thyroid artery and its branches while
primary posterior mediastinal goiter maintains little or no connection with the cervical thyroid gland, and has a blood supply derived from
intrathoracic arteries . Patient generally has no symptoms when the goiter is small, many cases are only found in occasional chest
radiographic examination or autopsy. As the goiter increases in size, a variety of clinical symptoms may appear due to compression of
surrounding organs and tissues (i.e. trachea, esophagus, lungs, or even superior vena cava). Most investigators agree that respiratory
symptoms are caused by compression of the airway . Thyroid function test has a low susceptibility in predicting goiter, for most patients
are normal and only 10 ~ 15% show hypothyroxinemia. Radiographic image is the most effective and necessary diagnostic method for
intrathoracic goiter. CT scan is the most common one for preoperative evaluation. On CT films, intrathoracic goiter usually manifests as a
clear boundary mass, its density varies due to the amount of iodine contained: when the amount of iodine in the mass is low, its density is
close to the soft tissue of chest wall, and when the amount of iodine is high, its density could be greatly higher than soft tissue. In
addition, its density can be uneven due to colloid cysts and calcified plaque. Radionuclide scan is also one of the common diagnostic
methods, but it is not so effective when compared with its usage in thyroid goiter of other regions because the intrathoracic goiter does
not always uptake iodine. The differential diagnosis of intrathoracic goiter are of great variety, it should be differentiated from
lymphadenopathy, branchial cleft cyst, arterial aneurysm, neurogenic tumour, pheochromocytoma, spinal cord injury, hiatus hernia, etc. When
the trachea, esophagus or vena cava is compressed, surgical resection of intrathoracic goiter must be done. Preventive operation is also
feasible for asymptomatic patients in order to avoid future compression. Secondary intrathoracic goiter is always taken out through inferior
cervical collar incision, but posterior mediastinal goiters which extended beyond the aortic arch may require additional extracervical
incisions . A variety of operation modes exist, including sternotomy, clavicular resection, anterior posterolateral thoracotomy and Video
Assisted Thoracoscopic Surgery (VATS). A specific mode depends on the location, size of the mass and its relationship with surrounding
important organs. Attention should be payed to some special points during anesthesia. Similar to the anesthesia of mediastinal giant tumors,
intravenous anesthesia combined with tracheal intubation is used. But because the tumor is located in the posterior mediastinum, compressing
adjacent organs, especially the carina, plus various factors such as mental stress, thick sputum or postural changes, extreme hypoxia or
heart arrest may occur at any time, resulting in failure of anesthesia induction and tracheal intubation, in which cardiopulmonary bypass
(CPB) may be needed. When patient needs to be changed to lateral position after anesthesia induction, compression of heart or great vessels
by the tumor should be watched out. Chest must be opened as soon as possible to decompress the heart when cardiac output decreases and blood
pressure drops sharply. Common surgical complications include postoperative airway collapse, respiratory tract infection and bleeding .
Posterior mediastinal goiter with mediastinal compressive symptoms is an indication of surgery. Lateral thoracotomy is an alternative
approach for intrathoracic goiter extending into the posterior mediastinum. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. CT: Computed tomography; VATS: Video assisted thoracoscopic surgery; CPB: Cardiopulmonary bypass. The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. XC wrote the article, HFX and YMN collected the clinical information, KS selected the images and carryed
out the diagnosis, WDL drafted the final manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript to be published. The authors thank
Bin Li and Chengcheng Li (Zhejiang University School of Medicine) for improving the use of English in the manuscript.
