Tropheryma whipplei endocarditis differs from classic Whipple disease, which primarily affects the gastrointestinal system. We diagnosed 28
cases of T. whipplei endocarditis in Marseille, France, and compared them with cases reported in the literature. Specimens were analyzed
mostly by molecular and histologic techniques. Duke criteria were ineffective for diagnosis before heart valve analysis. The disease
occurred in men 40–80 years of age, of whom 21 (75%) had arthralgia (75%); 9 (32%) had valvular disease and 11 (39%) had fever. Clinical
manifestations were predominantly cardiologic. Treatment with doxycycline and hydroxychloroquine for at least 12 months was successful. The
cases we diagnosed differed from those reported from Germany, in which arthralgias were less common and previous valve lesions more common.
A strong geographic specificity for this disease is found mainly in eastern-central France, Switzerland, and Germany. T. whipplei
endocarditis is an emerging clinical entity observed in middle-aged and older men with arthralgia. Whipple disease was first described in
1907 (1). This chronic infection is characterized by histologic indication of gastrointestinal involvement, determined by a positive
periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) reaction in macrophages from a small bowel biopsy sample (2). It is caused by Tropheryma whipplei and encompasses
asymptomatic carriage of the organism to a wide spectrum of clinical pathologic conditions, including acute and chronic infections (1,2). In
1997, T. whipplei was first implicated as an agent of blood culture–negative endocarditis in 1 patient by use of broad-range PCR
amplification and direct sequencing of 16S rRNA applied to heart valves from patients in Switzerland (3). Two years later, 4 additional
cases were reported in Switzerland (4). In 2000, the first strain of T. whipplei was obtained from the aortic valve of a patient with blood
culture–negative endocarditis (5). Blood culture–negative endocarditis accounts for 2.5%–31.0% of all cases of endocarditis. The incidence
rate of T. whipplei endocarditis among blood culture–negative endocarditis cases has not been established; however, at our center
(Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Marseille, Marseille, France), this incidence rate was estimated to be 2.6% (6). In Germany, the reported
incidence rate for T. whipplei endocarditis is 6.3%: T. whipplei was the fourth most frequent pathogen found among 255 cases of endocarditis
with an etiologic diagnosis and was the most common pathogen associated with blood culture–negative endocarditis. This incidence rate
exceeds rates of infections caused by Bartonella Quintana; Coxiella burnetii; and members of the Haemophilus, Actinobacillus,
Cardiobacterium, Eikenella, Kingella spp. group (7). Smaller studies found incidence rates of 3.5% in Denmark (8), 4.3% in Switzerland (9),
7.1% in the Czech Republic (10), 2.8% in Spain (11), and none in Algeria (12). We describe 28 cases of T. whipplei endocarditis and compare
them with cases reported in the literature. Our center in Marseille, France, has become a referral center for patients with T. whipplei
infections and blood culture–negative endocarditis (2,5,6). We receive samples from France and other countries. Each sample is accompanied
by a questionnaire, completed by the physician, covering clinico-epidemiologic, biological, and therapeutic data for each patient. We
analyzed data from October 2001 through April 2013. Diagnosis of T. whipplei endocarditis was confirmed by positive results from PAS
staining and/or specific immunohistochemical analysis and 2 positive results from specific PCRs of a heart valve specimen in addition to
lack of histologic lesions in small bowel biopsy samples or lack of clinical involvement of the gastrointestinal tract. DNA was extracted
from heart valves, 200 µL of body fluid (blood in a tube containing EDTA, saliva, or cerebrospinal fluid), small bowel biopsy samples, and
≈1 gram of feces by using QIAGEN columns (QIAamp DNA kit; QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) was performed by using a LightCycler instrument (Roche Diagnostics, Meylan, France) and the QuantiTect
Probe PCR Kit (QIAGEN) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. From October 2001 through September 2003, all specimens were tested by
qPCR selective for the 16S–23S rRNA intergenic spacer and the rpoB gene, as described (13); from October 2003 through March 2004, all
specimens were tested by qPCR selective for T. whipplei repeated sequences (repeat PCR), as described (13). When an amplified product was
detected, sequencing was systematically performed. Since April 2004, all specimens have been tested by a qPCR selective for T. whipplei
repeated sequences, which used specific oligonucleotide Taqman probes for the identification (13). To validate the tests, we used positive
and negative controls (13). For determination of DNA extract quality, the human actin gene was also detected. For positive specimens, T.
whipplei genotyping was performed as described (14). In parallel, all heart valves and blood samples from patients with suspected
endocarditis underwent systematic PCR screening for all bacteria (16S rRNA) and all fungi (18S rRNA) and underwent specific real-time PCR
selective for Streptococcus oralis group, Streptococcus gallolyticus group, Enterococcus faecium and E. faecalis, Staphylococcus aureus,
Mycoplasma spp., Coxiella burnetii, Bartonella spp., and T. whipplei as described (6). For histologic analysis, formalin-fixed paraffin-
embedded heart valves and small bowel biopsy samples were cut in thin sections. Samples stained with hematoxylin-eosin-saffron and special
stains were examined, and immunohistochemical investigations with a specific antibody were performed as reported (15). Cardiac valve and
heparinized blood specimens were injected into cell and axenic cultures (5,16). Serologic assays were based on Western blot analyses (17).
Statistical analyses were performed by using EpiInfo6 (www.cdc.gov/epiinfo/Epi6/EI6dnjp.htm). A p value <0.05 was considered significant.
Data for the population of France were extracted from the National Institute for Statistics and Economical Studies website
(www.insee.fr/fr/). We searched the PubMed database (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/) through April 2013, using the keywords “Tropheryma,”
“Whipple’s disease,” and “endocarditis.” We then performed a cross-reference analysis on the results of the search. For this literature
review, the patient inclusion criteria were lack of histologic evidence of small bowel involvement or lack of diarrhea. Among the 28
patients for whom data enabled the diagnosis of T. whipplei endocarditis; 16 have been previously reported or cited (2,5,18,19). According
to current modified Duke criteria (20) before the examination of heart valve specimens, only 1 (3.6%) patient met the criteria for
endocarditis and 17 (60.7%) met the criteria for possible endocarditis (Technical Appendix Table 1) All 28 patients underwent heart valve
replacement because of valve damage (21). All patients were male (Table 1), and mean age (± SD) was 58.6 (± 10) years (range 40–80 years).
Among the 27 patients from France, 13 (48.1%) were living in the Rhône-Alpes area and 5 (18.5%) in the Pays de la Loire area. Although
samples are sent from all over France, 66.6% of the patients were from only these 2 areas. If we focus on the 702 patients with blood
culture–negative endocarditis in France referred to our center from May 2001 through September 2009 (Technical Appendix Table 2), the
patients from these 2 areas were significantly more affected than the rest of the population (Rhône-Alpes 9/106 vs 7/596 , p<0.001 and Pays
de la Loire 4/26 vs 12/676; p<0.001) (6). Incidence rates of T. whipplei endocarditis in these 2 areas are also significantly higher than
those in the rest of France (Rhône-Alpes 0.25 cases/1 million inhabitants/year, p<0.001; Pays de la Loire (0.15 cases/1 million
inhabitants/year, p<0.001) (Figure 1). *All patients were male, and none had diarrhea. IS, immunosuppressive therapy; PACA, Provence-Alpes-
Côte-d’Azur; N, no; PM, pacemaker; Y, yes; HF; heart failure; AIS, acute ischemic stroke; AV, aortic valve; MV, mitral valve; BAV, bicuspid
aortic valve; CS, coronary stent; AVB, aortic valve bioprosthesis; AVI, aortic valve insufficiency; MVI, mitral valve insufficiency; NA, not
available; PAE, peripheral arterial embolism; AAR, acute articular rheumatism. †This patient was from Poland but resided in Corsica for 8
years. Number of reported cases of Tropheryma whipplei endocarditis per 1 million inhabitants in each area of France over 10 years. Data
from this series and the literature (22–24) were included. Among the metropolitan areas in France, the incidence of T. whipplei endocarditis
is significantly more frequent in the Rhône-Alpes area than in 11 others areas (Alsace, Aquitaine, Basse-Normandie, Bourgogne, Centre,
Champagne-Ardenne, Haute-Normandie, Ile de France, Languedoc-Roussillon, Midi-Pyrénées, and Nord Pas-de-Calais; p = 0.04, p = 0.004, p =
0.048, p = 0.04, p = 0.01, p = 0.04, p = 0.02, p<0.001, p = 0.04, p = 0.007, p = 0.006, respectively). The incidence rate is also
significantly more frequent in the Pays de la Loire area than in 6 other areas (Aquitaine, Bretagne, Centre, Ile-de France, Lorraine, Midi-
Pyrénées, Nord Pas de Calais; p = 0.04, p = 0.04, p = 0.04, p = 0.003, p = 0.03, p = 0.02, respectively). Immunosuppressive therapy had been
given to 7 (29%) patients, of which 3 received a tumor necrosis factor inhibitor. Arthralgia was reported for 21 (75%) patients; mean delay
between arthralgia onset and endocarditis diagnosis was 8.5 years. Among 12 patients who had been interviewed by 1 of the authors (D.R.),
arthralgia was detected in 11. Among these 12, arthralgia was retrospectively noticed by 1 patient who, after beginning treatment for
endocarditis, reported the disappearance of slight pain that had been present for many years. Previous heart valve disease was known for 9
(32%) patients. Heart failure occurred in 20 (71.4%) patients, acute ischemic stroke in 7 (29.2%), and peripheral arterial embolism in 4
(16.6%). Fever was detected in 11 (39%) patients, and weight loss was experienced by 4 (14.3%). Echocardiography was performed for all 28
patients: transthoracic echocardiography for 4 patients, transesophageal echocardiography for 9 patients, both procedures for 7 patients,
and unspecified procedures for 8 patients. Cardiac vegetations were found in 22 (78.6%) patients, and aortic valve involvement was found in
18 (64.2%). At the time of T. whipplei endocarditis diagnosis, increased C-reactive protein levels were detected in 17 (81%) of 21 patients,
anemia in 6 (37.5%) of 16, and leukocytosis in 5 (29.5%) of 17. T. whipplei endocarditis was diagnosed by heart valve analysis (either PCR
for T. whipplei or histologic analysis) for 27 of the 28 patients (Technical Appendix Table 3). Other molecular analyses were negative for
other microorganisms on all heart valves and in blood samples (when available). Blood samples were positive for T. whipplei for 5 (31.2%) of
16 patients. For 1 patient (patient 12), at 4 days before heart valve replacement, a blood sample was positive for T. whipplei according to
repeat PCR and negative according to 16S rRNA PCR. For another patient (patient 1), a pacemaker was positive for T. whipplei by PCR. T.
whipplei was detected in 1 (6.7%) of 15 saliva samples, 2 (16.6%) of 12 fecal samples, and none of 8 cerebrospinal fluid samples. T.
whipplei–infected heart valves show the typical histologic features of infective endocarditis: vegetations, inflammatory infiltrates, and
valvular destruction (15). They show fibrotic, scarred areas. Valvular inflammatory infiltrates mainly consisted of foamy macrophages and
lymphocytes. The foamy histiocytes were filled with dense and granular material that was strongly positive on PAS staining and resistant to
diastase or immunopositive with a specific antibody against T. whipplei. T. whipplei–infected macrophages were seen in the vegetations on
the surface of the heart valves and more deeply in the valvular tissues (Figure 2). An arterial embolus surgically removed from the lower
limb of patient 22 was positive by immunodetection (15). However, 1 year before the heart valve was removed, this embolus had been
histologically analyzed but infection was not suspected. Only after the valve was found to be positive for T. whipplei did subsequent
analyses show that the embolus was positive for T. whipplei. Small bowel biopsy samples were obtained for 19 patients; all samples were
negative by PAS staining, probably ruling out asymptomatic involvement of the gastrointestinal tract. Aortic valve from patient with
Tropheryma whipplei endocarditis. A) Hematoxylin–eosin–saffron stain (original magnification ×100). B) Foamy macrophages containing
characteristic inclusion bodies (periodic acid–Schiff stain; original magnification ×200). C) Immunostaining of T. whipplei with polyclonal
rabbit antibody against T. whipplei and Mayer’s hemalum counterstain (original magnification ×100). No destruction of this valve is visible.
Two strains of T. whipplei were isolated from blood specimens, and 7 strains (including the strain from the index case-patient) from heart
valve culture (5). For patient 20, a strain was isolated from the blood and heart valve specimens. The delay in primary isolation was 2
weeks for the heart valve sample and 8 weeks for the blood sample. No other microorganism was isolated. Serum was available for 18 patients.
According to our previously established criteria, 10 (55.5%) patients had a negative or weakly positive serologic profile, as is observed
for patients with classic Whipple disease, and 8 (44.5%) patients had a frankly positive profile, as is observed for chronic carriers. This
finding suggests a potentially less decreased antibody-mediated immune response for these patients (17). Thus, the previously established
serologic profile for patients with classic Whipple disease is observed significantly less frequently among patients with T. whipplei
endocarditis (10/18) than among patients with classic Whipple disease (56/60; p<0.001). The serologic profile previously observed for
chronic carriers also occurs significantly less frequently among patients with endocarditis (24/26 vs 8/18; p = 0.01). T. whipplei genotype
was obtained for 19 heart valves samples. Genotype 3 was detected in 5 samples, and genotype 1 was detected in 2 samples. The other 12
samples harbored a unique genotype. Genotypes for 4 patients were those previously detected in other circumstances (genotypes 8, 11, 19, and
97). Only patients with T. whipplei endocarditis had genotypes 7, 24, 87, 90, 96, 99, 113, 117. For 1 of these patients (patient 13),
genotype 7 was detected in a heart valve sample at the time of diagnosis in 2002, but genotype 101 was detected in saliva and fecal samples
in 2011 (Table 2). The patient did not have characteristics that favor endocarditis relapse. *Team from Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de
Marseille, Marseille, France. All patients had undergone heart valve surgery. AMX, amoxicillin; GEN, gentamicin; HCQ,, hydroxychloroquine;
PAS, periodic acid–Schiff; CEF, ceftriaxone ; AMC, amoxicillin–clavulanate; VAN, vancomycin; DOX, doxycycline; OFX, ofloxacin. †DOX at 100
mg 2×/d and HCQ at 200 mg 3×/ d; SXT at 320 mg trimethoprim and 1,600 mg sulfamethoxazole 3×/d. We focused on 14 patients for whom the
entire treatment was managed by our team, 13 of whom regularly consulted author D.R. (Table 2). Overall, 12 patients received a combination
of doxycycline and hydroxychloroquine for 7–18 months, and 2 received trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole. One patient who experienced relapse
received treatment for 7 months. According to analysis of saliva and fecal samples, 2 patients had been colonized by T. whipplei at another
time. Colonization of 1 of these patients was with a new strain, but neither had cardiac abnormalities. We prescribed treatment for these
patients, including 1 who had been taking lifelong prophylactic doxycycline, as reported for a patient with classic Whipple disease (25).
After checking for repeated reporting, we found 49 patients who met our criteria for T. whipplei endocarditis reported in the literature
(Technical Appendix Table 4); 7 (14.5%) were female (3,4,7–11,22–39). The patients were predominantly from Germany (15 ) and Switzerland (12
). Figure 3 shows the number of reported cases of T. whipplei endocarditis per million inhabitants in Europe. The number of cases reported
in the literature since 2010 has dramatically increased (Figure 4). Number of reported cases of Tropheryma whipplei endocarditis per 1
million inhabitants in each country of Europe (www.statistiques-mondiales.com/union_europeenne.htm). Number of cases of Tropheryma whipplei
endocarditis reported in the literature since the first detection of this condition in 1997. Cases in 2013 are reported through April. Among
the cases reported in the literature, fever was scarcely observed (8/33, 24.2%), but vegetations (28/33, 84.8%) and involvement of the
aortic valve (29/48, 60.4%) were frequent. The clinical manifestations were mainly heart failure (25/35, 71.4%), acute ischemic stroke
(9/35, 25.7%), and peripheral arterial embolism (4/35, 11.4%). Arthralgia was observed significantly less frequently among patients reported
in the literature (15/37, 40.5%) than among the patients we report (75%, p = 0.01). However, if the 14 patients from the recently published
series from Germany (7) are excluded from the analysis, this difference is not significant (14/23, 60.9%; p = 0.4). The percentage of
patients with a history of valvular heart disease was similar among the patients reported here (32%) and the patients reported in the
literature (12/33, 36.4%; p = 0.9), but this analysis excludes the series from Germany. The patients in the Germany study experienced
significantly more valvular heart disease before diagnosis with endocarditis (13/15, 87%; p = 0.002). The diagnosis was performed by
analyzing the removed heart valve for all but 2 of these patients (patients 25 and 33). The clinical manifestations for 2 patients were
mainly weight loss, not cardiac disease. The diagnosis for patient 25 was made by a positive PCR on blood and pleural effusion and for
patient 39 by a positive PCR from a duodenal biopsy sample. According to the current modified Duke criteria (20), before the examination of
the heart valve specimens, only 2 (4.25%) patients met the criteria for definite endocarditis (Technical Appendix Table 1). Data regarding
treatment were available for 45 patients (Technical Appendix Table 4). A total of 43 patients received antimicrobial drugs; at least 15
compounds were used. The most common treatment was trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole (34 patients); 10 of these patients had previously received
ceftriaxone for 2 weeks. The maximum duration of treatment was 2 years; 24 patients received treatment for 1 year. Death was reported for 8
(21%) of 38 patients. Although the first description of T. whipplei endocarditis was made 15 years ago, diagnosing this disease remains
difficult because clinical signs are often those of cardiac disease rather than infection. The first case was detected by chance when a
broad-spectrum PCR was systematically applied to heart valve specimens (3). However, the diagnosis of T. whipplei endocarditis is still the
result of chance because there are no diagnostic criteria. Thus, diagnosis is still made after 16S rRNA PCR of a removed valve. The
incidence of a disease depends of 3 parameters: physician vigilance, available diagnostic tools, and the true incidence. A team in
Switzerland was the first to apply systematic broad-spectrum molecular diagnostics to heart valves (3). Although the efforts of that team
might explain the high number of reported cases in Switzerland, studies in Marseille, France, that used the same technique did not detect T.
whipplei in heart valves (40). In Germany, several physicians have been interested in Whipple disease for a long time, resulting in the
development of new tools (1,32). In the Rhone-Alpes area of France, physicians have been interested in Whipple disease for several years,
resulting in increased attention to T. whipplei (26). With regard to the global effects of T. whipplei endocarditis, there seems to be a
geographic gradient with higher incidence in eastern-central France, Switzerland, and Germany. Because 16S rRNA PCR is used in many areas to
test for blood culture–negative endocarditis, which would enable detection of T. whipplei in heart valves, and significant differences in
incidence rates exist, a potential bias seems unlikely (6,12). Whipple disease reportedly occurs mainly in white persons (1). Genotyping
shows that a same strain of T. whipplei can be involved in chronic infections, acute infections, and chronic carriage. In addition, T.
whipplei strains are heterogenic; thus, a patient could be colonized multiple times by a new strain (14). These data argue for the presence
of specific host defects in patients with chronic infections. These defects could be linked to genetic factors that could explain the
geographic distribution. Even in the absence of diagnostic criteria, the reports of ≈50 cases in the literature enabled us to propose
several characteristics that might help clinicians recognize potential T. whipplei endocarditis. This disease occurs mainly in white men who
are ≈50 years of age with cardiac manifestations including heart failure, acute ischemic stroke, and peripheral arterial embolism. These
patients might have complained about arthralgia for several years and might have recently received immunosuppressants (4,7,28,33,34).
Arthralgia was not frequently reported among patients in the Germany series (7) but was reported as a more prominent symptom by others
(4,9,26,29,31,33,37,38). Arthralgia is sometimes subtle and noticed only after a careful clinical investigation (37). Because we have never
received articular specimens from these patients, we do not know whether the joints are reactive or correspond to a second localization of
T. whipplei. Of note, however, these arthralgias are highly sensitive to antimicrobial drugs. Overall, middle-age and older men with
subacute endocarditis and no fever or low-grade fever should be asked about the presence of arthralgia because the combination of
endocarditis and arthralgia suggests T. whipplei infection. For now, diagnosis of T. whipplei endocarditis is made late, performed by
molecular analysis of surgically obtained heart valves; specific repeat PCR is used because broad-spectrum PCR might lack sensitivity (40).
Serologic assays only distinguish between classic Whipple disease and gastrointestinal carriage (17). Screening of saliva and fecal specimen
has poor predictive value for diagnosis. The diagnostic situation is not satisfactory, but diagnostic improvements are challenging. Only
optimization of molecular techniques and culture will enable diagnosis before heart valve analysis. Currently, 16S rRNA amplification
performed on blood specimens lacks sensitivity (6). Specific repeat PCR is more sensitive (13), enabling diagnosis of 31.2% of the patients
reported here. In Marseille, for cases of blood culture–negative endocarditis, we systematically apply specific repeat PCR on blood
specimens; this protocol enables us to make the diagnosis before heart valve removal (6). We suggest adding performance of repeat PCR for T.
whipplei on blood specimens as a major criterion in the Duke classification for endocarditis, as PCR or serologic testing for C. burnetii
have been added (20). The application of this criterion for patients who have benefited from molecular analysis of blood specimens
significantly increases the definitive diagnosis of endocarditis (1/18 vs 6/18; p = 0.03) before the heart valve analysis. In the future,
blood specimens from patients with blood culture–negative endocarditis should be also inoculated systematically on specific media. For
patients for whom echocardiography is not informative, preliminary data have shown that positron emission tomography and computed tomography
show promise, mainly for the detection of silent peripheral embolic events and infectious metastases (21). There is no standard treatment
for T. whipplei endocarditis. Our series represents a large study with a standardized treatment strategy and follow-up. On the basis of drug
sensitivity data, reported resistance of T. whipplei to trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole, and prior experience, a combination of doxycycline
and hydroxychloroquine was used. A 12- to 18-month treatment strategy and analysis of the drug concentrations every 3 months seem
reasonable. Patients must be forewarned about the risk for photosensitivity when taking doxycycline. All patients in our series have
benefitted from heart valve removal; but in the future, to make the diagnosis before heart valve surgery is performed, we advise following
the current recommendations for the surgical indications in infective endocarditis (21). Even if the approach lacks sensitivity, for patient
follow-up, we suggest checking for the presence of T. whipplei in the saliva, fecal samples, and blood 2 months after the end of treatment.
Subsequent analysis should be performed every 6 months for 2 years and every year for the life of the patient. Echocardiography should be
performed yearly to detect relapses. We decided to treat T. whipplei recolonization, but we do not know if this measure is necessary. T.
whipplei endocarditis differs from classic Whipple disease. Classic Whipple disease involves most organs. Its diagnosis is based on the
presence of T. whipplei–infected macrophages in intestinal tissues. T. whipplei endocarditis is an infection and not a potential
cardiovalvular colonization with the bacterium because T. whipplei is the only infectious agent detected in heart valves, surrounded by an
inflammatory process, and inside the macrophages. For white men >40 years of age with subacute endocarditis and arthralgia, T. whipplei
infection should be suspected and the organism searched for in blood specimens by using specific repeat PCR and axenic culture, sampled in
EDTA and heparin tubes, respectively. Classification of the patients with Tropheryma whipplei endocarditis; proportion and geographic
distribution of Tropheryma whipplei endocarditis cases; PCR and histological results for samples from 28 patients with Tropheryma. whipplei
endocarditis; and characteristics of patients with endocarditis according to literature review. Suggested citation for this article:
Fenollar F, Célard M, Lagier J-C, Lepidi H, Fournier P-E, Raoult D. Tropheryma whipplei endocarditis. Emerg Infect Dis . 2013 Nov [date
cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1911.121356 We are grateful to all the patients who took part in this study and thank the staff members
of the referring medical institutions for help in obtaining specimens. This study was supported by the Crédit Ministériel “Programme
Hospitalier de Recherche Clinique” 2009. Dr Fenollar is a physician and research scientist at the Unité des Rickettsies, Aix-Marseille
Université. Her main research interests include T. whipplei and Whipple disease.
