We report molecular evidence of Tula hantavirus as an etiologic agent of pulmonary-renal syndrome in an immunocompromised patient. Acute
hantavirus infection was confirmed by using serologic and molecular methods. Sequencing revealed Tula virus genome RNA in the patient’s
blood. This case shows that Tula virus can cause serious disease in humans. Hantaviruses are enveloped RNA viruses carried by rodents and
insectivore species. At least 5 hantavirus species are known to circulate in Europe: Dobrava-Belgrade virus, Puumala virus (PUUV), Seoul
virus, Saarema virus, and Tula virus (TULV). The first 3 are well-characterized human pathogens; however, little is known about TULV human
pathogenicity. The species Tulavirus was first described by Plyusnin et al. (1) in voles (Microtus arvalis and M. levis) caught in Tula,
Russia, in 1987. The presence of TULV was also documented in other vole species in several European countries including Germany,
Switzerland, Slovenia, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Austria, Poland, and Serbia (2). In Central Europe, M. arvalis is the main reservoir of
TULV. The TULV antigen was found in 10% of the population of common voles in southern Moravia in the Czech Republic (3). The pathogenic
potential of Tula virus in humans is considered to be low. The causative agents of hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome in Central Europe
are Dobrava-Belgrade virus and PUUV (4). These viruses seem to circulate in geographic areas that overlap with the areas where TULV
circulates. Despite the massive population of common voles in the Czech Republic and a high prevalence of TULV in its rodent reservoir,
human TULV infection has not been reported. A 14-year-old boy from a rural region in the northeast part of the Czech Republic (Opava region)
has received treatment for acute lymphoblastic leukemia since July 2011. Because of the biologic properties of the malignity, the boy was
classified into the high-risk group of the treatment protocol. The intensive part of the treatment was finished in August 2012, and the
patient has continued maintenance therapy since then. During his first week of maintenance therapy, the patient experienced a respiratory
infection with temperatures of ≈38°C, mild dyspnea, and a cough. These symptoms spontaneously disappeared. One week later, the patient had
temperatures up to 38.5°C. He reported a headache, lack of appetite, and vomiting but no cough or respiratory distress. Upon the patient’s
admission to the hospital, at the end of September 2012, his conditions deteriorated. He was febrile at 39.3°C and moderately dehydrated.
Dyspnea with desaturation developed, so he was transferred to the intensive care unit to receive oxygenotherapy. The antileukemic
maintenance therapy therefore had to be interrupted. The x-ray and high-resolution computed tomographic scan revealed severe bilateral
bronchopneumonia with a major fluidothorax and bilateral dystelectasis. He was then given amoxicillin/clavulanate, amikacin, and antimycotic
drugs. Oliguria also developed, with a minimum of 0.3 mL/kg/h, and it was managed by diuretic medication. Hemodialysis was not needed. He
had transiently increased blood pressure followed by hypotension. Laboratory results revealed eosinophilia in the patient’s differential
leukocyte count at a maximum of 59.3% (reference range 0%–5%), anemia with a minimal value of hemoglobin of 60.0 g/L (reference range
135–175 g/L), thrombocytopenia at 12 × 109/L (reference range 150–440 × 109/L), and C-reactive protein 70 mg/L (reference range 0–10 mg/L).
Elevated values were detected for serum urea measured at 8.40 mmol/L (reference range 1.8–6.4 mmol/L), creatinine at 103 µmol/L (reference
range 27–88 μmol/L), and D-dimers at 3.53 μg/mL (reference range 0–0.5 μg/mL). Other coagulation parameters were not affected. Moreover,
erythrocyturia and hyaline cylinders were observed in urine samples. The serum amylase and liver enzyme levels were within reference ranges.
The relapse of acute lymphoblastic leukemia was excluded by the bone marrow examination. Because of the patient’s severe thrombocytopenia,
thromboconcentrate was administered. During the course of the patient’s hospitalization, his clinical condition, computed tomographic scan,
and chest radiographic findings, and laboratory parameters improved. His renal failure gradually subsided with a transient polyuric phase.
After 3 weeks of hospitalization, the patient resumed maintenance antileukemic therapy, and he was discharged from the hospital in good
condition. Serum samples taken on days 11, 12, 20, and 39 were tested for IgG and IgM antibodies to hantaviruses by using ELISA (Anti-Hanta
Virus Pool 1 “Eurasia”; Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany). The serum sample taken on day 12 was further tested for IgG and IgM antibodies by using
Immunoblot (Anti-Hanta Profile 1; Euroimmun). ELISA results are considered positive when the index value (optical density divided by the
cutoff value) is >1.1. Serology results suggested that the causative agent was a hantavirus antigenically closer to PUUV (Table 1). *Bold
font indicates positive results. IP, positivity index; ND, not done. †ELISA serology is considered positive when the index value (optical
density divided by the cutoff value) is >1.1. RNA was extracted from an EDTA plasma sample taken on day 11. Hantavirus RNA was detected by
nested reverse transcription PCR performed with pan-hantaviral large (L) segment specific primers (5) (Table 2). Direct sequencing was
performed with each separate nested primer and BigDye Terminator v1.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (LifeTechnologies, Grand Island, NY, USA) on ABI
3130 platform. TULV RNA detection was confirmed by another PCR and sequencing experiment with small (S) segment Tula virus-specific primers
previously published (6,7) for the first and second PCR step respectively (Table 2). The sequences were aligned to consensus sequence by
using SeqScape software (Life Technologies) and compared with sequences available at BLAST database
(http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi). Phylogenetic trees using neighbor-joining analysis with maximum composite likelihood method and
bootstrap values were constructed by using MEGA5.2 software (http://www.megasoftware.net/). The EDTA plasma sample collected during the
acute phase was positive for hantavirus RNA. Sequencing analysis of both L- and S-segments confirmed that the causative agent was TULV. The
phylogenetic trees for partial L- and S-segments (Figures 1, 2) indicated that the identified Tula virus strain belongs to the lineage
representing strains from middle Europe (Czech Republic, west Slovakia, Austria, and Slovenia). Partial L- and S-segment sequences of the
TULV isolated RNA have been deposited in GenBank under accession numbers KC522413 and KC494908, respectively. Phylogenetic tree (neighbor-
joining analysis with maximum composite likelihood method) of Tula virus on the basis of large segment partial sequences (nt 2957–3337),
Ostrava, Czech Republic, October 2012 GenBank accesion numbers: Haantaan virus (NC_005222), Puumala virus (Z66548), Prospect Hill virus
(EF646763), 09/1905/Magr (HQ728460), 08/712/Arv (HQ728453), 09/2155/Arv (HQ728456), 08/525/Marv (HQ728461), 152/Arv (HQ728459), 78/Marv
(HQ728464), 20/Marv (HQ728462), 109/Arv (HQ728457), 127/Arv (HQ728458), 09/1026/Arv (HQ728455), Moravia/5302v (AJ005637), JiTr/Opava /12
(KC522413), Hodos/Ma99/99 (FJ495101), Sred ob Dravi/Ms51/97 (FJ495102), Griblje/Ma57/01 (FJ495099), Sestrze/Mag98/02 (FJ495100). Bootstrap
values ≥70%, calculated from 1,000 replicates, are shown at the tree branches. Arrow indicates strain isolated in this study. The tree is
drawn to scale. The scale bar indicates an evolutionary distance of 0.05 substitutions per position in the sequence. Phylogenetic tree
(neighbor-joining analysis with maximum composite likelihood method) of Tula virus on the basis of small segment partial sequences (nt
428–758), Ostrava, Czech Republic, October 2012 GenBank accession numbers: Haantaan virus (NC_005218), Puumala virus (NC_005224), Prospect
Hill virus (Z49098), Isla Vista virus (U19302), Karatal322 (AM945877), Taldykorgan343 (AM945879), Karatal340 (AM945878), Omsk23 (AF442621),
Tula76 (Z30941), Tula53 (Z30942), Tula175 (Z30943), Lodz-1 (AF063892), Lodz-2 (AF063897), Cottbus/D63/98 (AF289821), Cottbus/D5/98
(AF289819), Cacak/Serbia (AF017659), Kosice/667 (Y13980), Kosice/144 (Y13979), Waldnaab/g20-s (AF164093), c109s (AF164094), Wels/O64
(U95309), Wels/O24 (U95302), JiTr/Opava /12 (KC494908), Moravia/02 (Z49915), Moravia/94 (Z48741), Moravia/86 (Z48573), Moravia/93 (Z48574),
Koziky/47 (AJ223600), Koziky/76 (AJ223601), Korneuburg/K11 (U95305), Korneuburg/K26 (U95310), Malacky/370, Malacky/32. Bootstrap values
≥70%, calculated from 1,000 replicates, are shown at the tree branches. Arrow indicates strain isolated in this study. The tree is drawn to
scale. The scale bar indicates an evolutionary distance of 0.02 substitutions per position in the sequence. Although the presence of TULV in
the common vole population in the Czech Republic has been documented, no evidence of its pathogenicity in humans has been shown. Specific
antibodies against TULV have been identified in a healthy blood donor in the Czech Republic (8) and in German forestry workers (9),
suggesting that TULV can be transmitted to humans. A case of a serologically detected symptomatic TULV infection that followed a rodent bite
has been reported in Switzerland (10). However, because of the late occurrence of specific antibodies and because the symptoms were atypical
for hantavirus infection, the evidence for the Tula virus as an etiologic agent in this case is questionable (11). Renal and pulmonary
syndrome with biphasic course associated with TULV was documented in northern Germany. The diagnosis was made on the basis of the highest
neutralizing titer against TULV and detection of TULV RNA in common voles in the region where the patient lived (12). We provide the
molecular evidence of human symptomatic TULV infection. The clinical symptoms included both renal and pulmonary involvement with dominating
respiratory failure corresponding to the hantavirus pulmonary syndrome. The course of the disease was severe, and the delayed occurrence of
TULV IgG was most likely caused by the patient’s immunodeficiency. The laboratory findings were typical for hantavirus infection, with
strongly decreased platelet count but only moderately elevated serum creatinine and urea. Furthermore, during the acute stage, viral RNA was
detected in the patient’s serum, which strongly suggests that TULV is a causative agent of the critical stage. This case illustrates that
TULV can cause life-threatening disease in an immunocompromised patient, although under normal circumstances it is a nonpathogenic virus
(8). Suggested citation for this article: Zelená H, Mrázek J, Kuhn T. Tula hantavirus infection in immunocompromised host, Czech Republic.
Emerg Infect Dis . 2013 Nov [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1911.130421 The authors contributed equally to this article. We thank
Zuzana Dostálová for language correction. Dr. Zelená is a head of the Department of Virology (Institute of Public Health Ostrava) and of the
National Reference Laboratory for Arboviruses of the Czech Republic. Her main research interests include arboviruses and vector-borne
viruses, imported and emerging viruses, and diagnostic electron microscopy.
