Dear Sirs, The striking paradox of pure autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia (AD HSP), in contrast to capsular stroke or primary
lateral sclerosis, for example, is that despite extensive corticospinal tract (CST) degeneration and prominent lower limb spasticity, leg
weakness is not a prominent early feature of the disease. Therefore, other descending motor pathways presumably compensate for CST
degeneration, though, until the recent article by Nonnekes et al. in the Journal of Neurology, this assumption had remained unproven. Using
startling acoustic stimuli (SAS), they showed that the reticulospinal tract (RST) is not only functioning in patients with HSP, but that it
compensates for lower limb deficits of postural control caused by CST degeneration. In most patients with pure AD HSP, electrophysiological
evidence of CST disease is limited to the lumbosacral cord . However, some AD HSP genotypes (e.g., SPG4) are associated with a more severe
phenotype and have motor-evoked potential (MEP) abnormalities in the upper limbs , consistent with post-mortem evidence of CST degeneration
at all levels, from the medulla to the lumbo-sacral cord . We tested MEPs (see Supplementary Methods) in two patients (father and son) with
SPG31 AD HSP (REEP1 exon 5 c.337C > T/p.Arg113X ). In patient 2 (age 42; disease duration 37 years) MEPs were ‘typical’ of pure AD HSP ,
with prolonged central motor conduction times (CMCTs) in the lower limbs (CMCT 22.2 ms) and normal CMCTs in the upper limbs. However, in
patient 1 (age 68; disease duration 64 years) CMCTs were significantly prolonged in the upper limbs (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Examples of rectified
motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) obtained from a 68-year-old patient with SPG31/REEP1 HSP (black) and an age-matched control (grey), aligned
to the stimulus. a Upper limb MEPs recorded from right first dorsal interosseous (R FDI) and extensor digitorum (R EDC) muscles and evoked
with a single transcranial magnetic stimulus (indicated by an arrow) at 70 % of maximum stimulator output (MSO), equivalent to 1.9 times the
active motor threshold (AMT; for details see Supplementary Methods). Each trace is an average of 20 individual MEPs. Voltage calibration
bars apply to both patient and control MEPs. b Lower limb MEPs recorded from right extensor digitorum brevis (R EDB) and tibialis anterior
(R TA) muscles using a stimulus strength of 1.6x AMT (70 % MSO). c Right upper limb (FDI) central motor conduction time (CMCT). d Right
lower limb (EDB) CMCT. In c and d, peripheral motor conduction times were subtracted from the FDI and EDB MEPs shown in a and b, revealing
the CMCT and the result plotted on a longer time base. Solid vertical lines show the mean CMCT within the normal population (aligned to the
start), and the grey boxes between vertical dashed lines extend two standard deviations above and below the mean . Arrow heads indicate MEP
onset Examples of rectified motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) obtained from a 68-year-old patient with SPG31/REEP1 HSP (black) and an age-
matched control (grey), aligned to the stimulus. a Upper limb MEPs recorded from right first dorsal interosseous (R FDI) and extensor
digitorum (R EDC) muscles and evoked with a single transcranial magnetic stimulus (indicated by an arrow) at 70 % of maximum stimulator
output (MSO), equivalent to 1.9 times the active motor threshold (AMT; for details see Supplementary Methods). Each trace is an average of
20 individual MEPs. Voltage calibration bars apply to both patient and control MEPs. b Lower limb MEPs recorded from right extensor
digitorum brevis (R EDB) and tibialis anterior (R TA) muscles using a stimulus strength of 1.6x AMT (70 % MSO). c Right upper limb (FDI)
central motor conduction time (CMCT). d Right lower limb (EDB) CMCT. In c and d, peripheral motor conduction times were subtracted from the
FDI and EDB MEPs shown in a and b, revealing the CMCT and the result plotted on a longer time base. Solid vertical lines show the mean CMCT
within the normal population (aligned to the start), and the grey boxes between vertical dashed lines extend two standard deviations above
and below the mean . Arrow heads indicate MEP onset Given the absence of clinical upper limb weakness in patient 1, we measured EMG onset
latencies in a Start-React paradigm to see whether the RST might be compensating for the CST deficit in the upper limbs (Supplementary
Methods), as illustrated in Fig. 2a. Experiments had the relevant institutional ethical approval and complied with the Declaration of
Helsinki, and were performed in both patients and 11 controls, aged 56–82 years. Traditionally, the effects of SAS on the visual reaction
time (VRT), and the visual start-react time (VSRT), are normalized, thus:1\documentclass{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym}
\usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
\begin{document}$$ \Updelta {\text{VRT}}\left( \% \right) = \frac{{\left( {\text{VRT - VSRT}} \right)}}{\text{VRT}} \times 100.
$$\end{document}Fig. 2 a Example of normal raw rectified EMG data recorded from right biceps brachii in a 61-year-old male control subject
performing the Start-React task. The EMG burst from which the VRT was measured is plotted in black, that from which the ART was derived is
plotted in grey and the VSRT response is plotted in red. b, c Mean ∆T SR /∆T AR ratios calculated from EMG onset latencies measured in
Start-React experiments are plotted. b Right first dorsal interosseous (R FDI) and c right biceps brachii (R BB). Error bars are standard
error of the mean. Note that in patient 1, the R BB ratio is significantly increased (one-sample t test; p < 0.01) a Example of normal raw
rectified EMG data recorded from right biceps brachii in a 61-year-old male control subject performing the Start-React task. The EMG burst
from which the VRT was measured is plotted in black, that from which the ART was derived is plotted in grey and the VSRT response is plotted
in red. b, c Mean ∆T SR /∆T AR ratios calculated from EMG onset latencies measured in Start-React experiments are plotted. b Right first
dorsal interosseous (R FDI) and c right biceps brachii (R BB). Error bars are standard error of the mean. Note that in patient 1, the R BB
ratio is significantly increased (one-sample t test; p < 0.01) The normal ∆VRT is ~50 % , and a ∆VRT of less than 50 % is indicative of
disease affecting the RST. However, because we were interested in measuring any change in the gain of the RST output, accessed via auditory
pathways, we have used a ratio that incorporates the auditory reaction time (ART) following a low-intensity sound, as
follows:2\documentclass{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy}
\usepackage{mathrsfs} \usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$ \Updelta T_{\text{SR}} /\Updelta
T_{\text{AR}} = \frac{{ ( {\text{VRT }} - {\text{VSRT)}}}}{{ ( {\text{VRT}} - {\text{ART)}}}} $$\end{document} where ∆TSR is the shortening
effect of a SAS on the visual reaction time and ∆TAR measures the shortening of reaction time provided by a non-startling auditory stimulus,
which presumably does not activate RST pathways. The results of this analysis are shown in Fig. 2c, d. Patient 2, who had no evidence of
cervical CST disease, had normal ∆TSR/∆TAR ratios. However, patient 1, who had MEP evidence of cervical CST disease, had significantly
increased ratios, but only when measured from biceps brachii EMG, despite normal ARTs and VRTs (Supplementary Results/Fig. 2). This result
supports the notion that the RST mitigates the effects of disease within the cervical CST. The RST appears to compensate by increasing its
output gain by a factor of around 1.5. Although the RST does project to both proximal and distal upper limb muscles , the effects of SAS are
only seen in distal muscles in some tasks , possibly explaining why we detected differences only in the biceps muscle. These observations
suggest that therapeutic interventions aimed at increasing the gain of RST outputs could improve recovery from neurological disorders
characterized by CST dysfunction. Supplementary material 1 (DOCX 242 kb) This research was funded by the Wellcome Trust, the Academy of
Medical Sciences, and National Institute for Health Research. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
