Although the benefits of antipsychotic pharmacotherapy can be pronounced, many patients develop unwanted adverse effects including a variety
of movement disorders. Compared with the traditional antipsychotics, the atypical antipsychotics have a decreased risk for associated
movement disorders. Drug-induced movement disorders can occur, however, and the risk of adverse events can increase significantly when
medications are abused. We describe the case of a 13-year-old male who presented to an emergency department with acute movement disorders
after nasal insufflation of crushed quetiapine. The patient was admitted and successfully treated for neuroleptic toxicity with intravenous
antihistamine pharmacotherapy. His primary care provider and psychiatrist were notified of the abuse, quetiapine was discontinued, and the
patient was discharged and referred to a drug and alcohol awareness and abuse program. The abuse of quetiapine has unfortunately become more
common. This unique case report of acute movement disorders following nasal insufflation of quetiapine highlights the need for heightened
vigilance when prescribing quetiapine and for increased awareness and education regarding medication-abuse. Quetiapine is an atypical
antipsychotic, and its indications include psychosis, mood disorders, and bipolar disorder. It is intended for oral administration with
total daily doses up to 800 mg in adults. Quetiapine has good efficacy, but also has some potential for abuse (see Table 1). Routes of abuse
include insufflation and intravenous entries. Case report of quetiapine abuse Quetiapine has been associated infrequently with tardive
dyskinesia and with acute movements disorders including myoclonus , dystonia , parkinsonism and akathisia . Drug-induced movement disorders
have also been associated with cases of abuse ; however, most subjects were either psychotic inpatients or incarcerated individuals. This
case is unique in that it involves an adolescent abusing quetiapine, via nasal insufflation, in an out-patient setting. A 13-year old male
presented to an ED with complaints of “frequent eye blinking” and reoccurring episodes of “stiffening and abnormal movements of the hands
and neck” and “flickering of the upper lips” that began 24 hours prior to his arrival. About one week prior to presenting at the ED, the
patient had been discharged from a psychiatric hospital, and his discharge medications for his mood disorder (Mood Disorder Not Otherwise
Specified) included quetiapine 500 milligrams (mg) by mouth (PO) daily (qd) and valproic acid (VPA) 500 mg PO at bedtime (qhs). His dosing
regimen of quetiapine for the three months before that hospitalization had been 100 mg qd, and he had not previously been prescribed VPA.
The patient reported having insufflated two crushed tablets of quetaipine 500 mg on four separate occasions in the previous forty-eight
hours. His desire to experience euphoria motivated him to abuse his prescription quetiapine. He reported having not taken his prescribed VPA
in three days and also reported that he had not recently used any other medications, supplements, or illicit drugs. His symptoms began two
hours after the last insufflation of quetiapine, the episodes of excessive eye-blinking and lip-flickering were intermittent, and the
twitching of his eyelids was continuous. At the time of presentation, the patient was fully alert and had a Glascow Coma Scale of 15. He was
afebrile, tachycardic (115 beats/minute), tachypnic (18 respirations/minute), and had normal oxygen saturation without supplemental oxygen.
Physical exam abnormalities included only active twitching of both upper eyelids and bilateral dilated pupils (4/5). During observation in
the emergency department, the patient had two myoclonic episodes of the extremities and intense flickering of the eyelids that the patient
reported were associated with him turning his head to the right. The episodes lasted about two minutes, and the patient was alert and
oriented during the episodes. The patient reported feeling restless and had a constant desire to walk. Results from a 10-panel urine
toxicology screen performed at admission were negative for common drugs of abuse, and lorazepam 1.5 mg intravenous (IV) was given to relax
the patient. His restlessness worsened, however, and he was admitted for observation and treatment of neuroleptic toxicity. Diphenhydramine
50 mg IV was administered, and he was in stable condition within 24 hours. Quetiapine was discontinued, and the patient was discharged and
referred for substance abuse evaluation and treatment. His primary care provider and psychiatrist were notified regarding the medication
abuse. We report a case of acute movement disorders in an adolescent that likely resulted from quetiapine abuse (nasal insufflation of
crushed tablets). Many patients embellish or malinger to obtain quetiapine, and its abuse is not uncommon . Quetiapine tablets can be
crushed into powder, and many abusers will either insufflate the powder or will solubilize the powder and inject it intravenously. Abusers
choose these routes of administration in order to experience more rapid onset of quetiapine’s anxiolytic effects. The toxicokinetics of
intranasal insufflation of quetiapine have not been fully characterized, but this route of administration undoubtedly leads to significant
acute levels of quetiapine in the central nervous system. This sudden substantial exposure is likely responsible for the acute episodes of
dyskinesia, myoclonus and akathisa described in this case. The movement disorders described in this case were not likely related to use of
VPA because their associations with VPA are extremely rare and the patient had not been exposed to VPA (half-life 9–16 hours) in several
days. Exposure to other drugs of abuse (e.g., cocaine, phencyclidine) can cause acute movement disorders; however, the urine toxicology
results and the patient report do not suggest that other drugs of abuse were involved in this case report. Per Hill’s Criteria of Causation
, one can reasonably conclude that this patient’s dyskinesia was related to quetiapine exposure. According to Narnajo’s Adverse Drug
Reaction (ADR) scale for this case, the score was 6, indicating probable cause (> 9 = definite ADR, 5–8 = probable ADR, 1–4 = possible ADR
0 = doubtful ADR). The quick response to anticholinergic pharmacotherapy is also suggestive of acute neuroleptic-associated dyskinesia.
Limitations of our report include a lack of serum quetiapine measurements. This report, however, highlights the need for increased
prescribing vigilance and abuse-potential awareness. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal guardian and from the
patient for publication of this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. GABA:
Gamma-aminobutyric acid; Mg: Milligrams; PO: By mouth; qd: Daily; qhs: At bedtime; IV: Intravenous; VPA: Valproic acid; ADR: Adverse drug
reaction. The authors declare that they do not have any financial or any non-financial (political, personal, religious, ideological,
academic, intellectual, commercial or any other) competing interests regarding this manuscript. MG, MH, AC, and SS were responsible for the
medical care of the patient and assisted in the literature review and drafting of the Case Report. LK and JPK were responsible for the
literature review and drafting of the Case Report. All authors contributed to the Conclusions, and all authors approve the final manuscript.
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2431/13/187/prepub The authors have no
acknowledgments regarding this manuscript. There was no funding source for the writing of this manuscript.
