Saquinavir is an antiviral agent FDA- approved for the treatment of HIV. It inhibits HIV protease, a crucial enzyme for the HIV life cycle
that cleaves viral polypeptides into essential proteins. When used in combination with nucleoside analog reverse-transcriptase inhibitors,
protease inhibitors are highly effective in reducing HIV viral loads (1,2). In general, saquinavir is safe and well tolerated. Long-term
exposure to protease inhibitors is associated with moderate hyperglycemia and insulin resistance in a minority of patients (3). We here
report saquinavir as a causing agent of acutely developed extreme hyperglycemia in an HIV patient. A 35-year-old HIV-infected male
originating from Ghana presented with a hyperosmolar, hyperglycemic syndrome (glucose 48 mmol/L). He had been diagnosed with HIV-1 infection
2 years previously, with tenofovir, lamivudine, and saquinavir as initial combination antiretroviral therapy. He also suffered from
decompensated liver cirrhosis with hepatitis B infection (Child-Pugh C). Previous glucose levels were normal, and HbA1c had not been
measured before. At presentation, he used emtricitabine/tenofovir and saquinavir as combination antiretroviral therapy. He was not
lipodystrophic, and there was no ketoacidosis. Signs of an acute infection were absent, and HIV viral load was 123 copies/mL (low, but not
undetectable). The saquinavir concentration was 0.9 mg/L (4â€“5 times above the therapeutic range). Levels of HbA1c and C-peptide were 15.2%
and 740 pmol/L, respectively. He was treated with insulin, and saquinavir was replaced by raltegravir to reduce pill burden. At discharge,
the patient used insulin aspart 20 units t.i.d. and insulin glargine 24 units once daily. One week after the saquinavir replacement, the
patient discontinued his insulin therapy because he suffered from symptoms of hypoglycemia, which disappeared after cessation of insulin
therapy. Glucose concentrations then varied between 4.7 and 7.0 mmol/L, HbA1c had decreased from 15.2 to 8.3%, and C-peptide was 2,700
pmol/L in this normoglycemic situation. His viral load was undetectable. In summary, we report an insulin-treated new-onset diabetes that
recovered completely within 1 week after switching from saquinavir to raltegravir. The temporal relation of the development of diabetes
during saquinavir therapy and the complete and prompt recovery after cessation thereof implicates saquinavir as the cause. The C-peptide
level of 740 pmol/L in the hyperglycemic condition was relatively low and could suggest a diminished insulin production, while the
subsequent level of 2,700 pmol/L in the later normoglycemic condition reflects a considerable insulin production. The duration of the
evident hyperglycemia, which had developed while the patient used saquinavir, could not be determined retrospectively. The rapid recovery
after cessation suggests a rather acute effect of saquinavir on the hyperglycemia. The elevated saquinavir concentration may have arisen as
a consequence of deranged hepatic function since saquinavir is metabolized in the liver and adequate dosing is difficult. Most probably, the
clinical diabetes emerged by the increasing insulin resistance and inhibition of insulin secretion by saquinavir (4,5) due to its diminished
clearance and increased plasma levels. Caution and monitoring should be exercised when prescribing saquinavir in patients at high risk of
developing diabetes and with liver dysfunction. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. M.A.D.v.Z. and
H.W.d.V. drafted the manuscript with comments by A.I.M.H. H.W.d.V. is the guarantor of this work and, as such, had full access to all the
data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. Parts of this study were
presented in abstract form at the 23rd Annual Meeting of the Netherlands Association of Internal Medicine, and at the 12th International
Symposium of Current Topics in Infectious Diseases, Grindelwald, Switzerland.
