We report MR imaging findings of a rare case of endocervical mucinous borderline tumor (MBT) involving the cul-de-sac and left fallopian
tube arising from extensive pelvic endometriosis with pathologic correlation in a 35-year-old woman presented with vague pelvic pain.
Endocervical MBT is a type of endometriosis-associated carcinoma. Imaging findings of endocervical MBT are unilocular or oligolocular cystic
lesions with enhancing mural nodules, which are different from those of the more common intestinal type MBT. Endometriosis is a common
gynecologic condition which is characterized by the presence of endometrial tissue implants composed of endometriotic glands and stroma
outside the uterus. Endometriosis is considered to be a precancerous disease, and approximately 2.5% of women with endometriosis develop an
endometriosis-associated ovarian cancer (1). Endometrioid and clear cell carcinomas are the most commonly reported histologic types of
endometriosis-associated ovarian cancers (2, 3), but endocervical MBTs are also reported to be endometriosis-associated tumors that are much
less common than endometrioid or clear cell tumors. To the best of our knowledge, there is no literature on the imaging features of
extraovarian endocervical MBT (4, 5). Therefore, we report a rare case of extraovarian endocervical MBT involving the cul-de-sac and
fallopian tube associated with extensive pelvic endometriosis. A 35-year-old woman (gravida 0, para 0, abortus 0) presented with
dysmenorrhea and vague lower abdominal pain. Her past history was unremarkable. At the time of presentation, she was having regular
menstrual cycles. She was afebrile and her abdomen was soft and flat without any tender points. Laboratory data were normal except for the
elevated level of CA 125 (44 U/mL; normal 0-35 U/mL) and CA 19-9 (271 U/mL; normal 0-37 U/mL). MRI showed an elongated tubular cystic lesion
with high signal intensity on both T1- and T2-weighted images in the left adnexa, which was diagnosed as hematosalpinx. An axial T2-weighted
image showed a stellate low signal intensity lesion with obliteration of the cul-de-sac, suggestive of deep infiltrating endometriosis. The
uterus was diffusely enlarged with focal adenomyosis and an intraumral myoma in the posterior wall. Two small cystic lesions with mural
nodules were present in the cul-de-sac along the posterior margin of the uterus. These cystic components showed high signal intensity
similar to that of urine on T2-weighted images as well as high signal intensity that was slightly higher than that of myometrium on fat-
suppressed T1-weighted images. Peripheral nodular enhancement was seen in the cystic lesions on gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted images,
raising the possibility of malignancy (Fig. 1). Mural nodules were not definitely seen in the left fallopian tube. Surgery revealed severe
pelvic endometriosis involving bilateral ovaries, the cul-de-sac, rectosigmoid colon and left hydrosalpinx. On histopathologic examination,
cul-de-sac masses and the left fallopian tube showed mucin-filled cysts and branching papillary projections. The papillae were lined by
endocervical type mucinous cells. Microscopic examination revealed a gradual transition from the epitheliums of endometeriosis to mucinous
tumor cells. The pathologic diagnosis was confirmed as endocervical mucinous boderline tumor involving the cul-de-sac and left fallopian
tube arising from extensive pelvic endometriosis. Endometriosis, like cancer, is characterized by growth of blood vessels (angiogenesis) and
a decrease in the number of cells undergoing apoptosis (6). Therefore, endometriosis is considered as a possible precancerous disease.
Malignant transformations have been reported in women with endometriosis with a frequency of about 2.5%; with 80% in the ovary and 20% in
the extraovarian sites (2, 7, 8). Extraovarian endometriosis-associated cancers were reported to occur in various anatomic locations in the
following frequencies: rectovaginal sites (36%), colorectum (11%), bladder (9%), vagina (7%), pelvic ligaments (4%), umbilicus (4%), cervix
(4%) and fallopian tube (4%) (7). The histopathologic criteria for the diagnosis of endometriosis-associated ovarian carcinoma, first
proposed by Sampson in 1924, require a combination of the following three findings: 1) demonstration of both cancerous and benign
endometrial tissues in the tumor, 2) histology of the neoplasm is compatible with an endometrial origin, and 3) no other primary tumor sites
affected. These criteria are still used and extended to extraovarian sites (8). In addition, Scott added the strict criteria of the presence
of the dysplastic phase or transition zone between the benign endometriosis and the carcinoma, but the transition zone is only detected in
36-42% of cases at the present time (8, 9). Although much less common than clear cell or endometrioid carcinomas, endocervical MBT is known
to be associated with pelvic endometriosis (10). Ovarian mucinous tumors are currently classified into two subtypes based on pathologic
findings: intestinal type and endocervical or m√ºllerian type (11). Intestinal type mucinous ovarian tumors are much more common than
endocervical type tumors, and nearly all reports of mucinous ovarian tumors describe the former. However, endocervical MBTs show different
clinicopathologic features from intestinal MBTs. First, intestinal MBTs are bilateral in only 0-10%, whereas endocervical MBTs are commonly
bilateral (12-47%). Secondly, intestinal types are almost never associated with endometriosis, but endocervical types are often associated
with endometriosis (30-53% of cases). Thirdly, intestinal types are usually multilocular cysts without papillary features, whereas
endocervical types are unilocular or oligolocular cysts with fine papillary projections, resembling serous borderline tumors or malignant
tumors arising in endometriosis such as endometrioid or clear cell carcinomas. The imaging findings of intestinal and endocervical MBTs are
also quite different. The well-known imaging features of ovarian MBTs are multilocular cystic lesions with variable signal intensities in
each locule, known as stained glass appearance, which may reflect the imaging findings of more common intestinal MBTs. In contrary, imaging
findings of endocervical MBTs in our case and from other reports show unilocular or paucilocular cystic lesions with papillary projections
or mural nodules corresponding to the gross features (4, 12). However, these findings can also be seen in clear cell or endometrioid
borderline tumors as well as in carcinomas (5). Kataoka et al. (4) suggested mural nodules in three cases of endocervical MBTs showing
marked high signal intensity on T2-weighted MR images due to prominent mucin and stromal edema, which may be helpful to differentiate
endocervical mucinous borderline tumors from other carcinomas arising from endometriotic cysts. However, Tanaka et al. (13) analyzed 49
cases of ovarian endometriotic cysts and revealed that both benign and malignant mural nodules may show high signal intensity on T2-weighted
images. Also, the mural nodules in our case did not show striking high signal intensity on T2-weighted images. Therefore, it may be
difficult to differentiate borderline ovarian tumors from invasive carcinomas based on the signal intensity of mural nodules. Our case is
different from previous reports in that the endocervical MBT occurred in the extraovarian site including the cul-de-sac and fallopian tube,
but the imaging findings of extraovarian endocervical MBTs were similar to those of ovarian endocervical MBTs. The prognosis of endocervical
MBTs is much better than clear cell or endometrioid carcinomas arising from endometriotic cysts (4). However, endocervical MBT is of
clinical significance because the tumor occurs more often in young, nulliparous or infertile women, many of whom wish to preserve their
fertility and thus agree to only limited surgery such as cystectomy (10). If preservation of potential fertility is supreme, then careful
inspection of both the remaining and contralateral ovary for any residual tumor or endometriotic foci is critical, as these may be future
sources of recurrent tumors. In summary, endocervical MBT is an additional tumor type arising from endometriosis and can involve the ovary
as well as extraovarian sites. Imaging findings of endocervical MBT arising from endometriosis involving the ovary or extraovarian sites are
unilocular or oligolocular cystic lesions with enhancing mural nodules, which are quite different from those of the more common intestinal
type MBT. Although the imaging findings of endocervical MBT are not specific, radiologists should keep in mind that extraovarian involvement
of MBT can occur in patients with endometriosis. Thirty five-year-old woman with extraovarian endocervical mucinous borderline tumor arising
from pelvic endometriosis. Consecutive axial T2-weighted (A, B), fat-suppressed T1-weighted (C, D) and contrast-enhanced fat-suppressed
T1-weighted (E, F) MR images. MR images show elongated tubular cystic lesion (asterisk in A, C) with high signal intensity on both T1- and
T2-weighted images in left adnexa, which is diagnosed as hematosalpinx. Axial T2-weighted image (B) shows stellate low signal intensity
lesion (arrow in B) with obliteration of cul-de-sac, suggestive of deep infiltrating endometriosis. Uterus is diffusely enlarged with focal
adenomyosis and intramural myoma in posterior wall. Two small cystic lesions (arrowheads in A, D) with high signal intensity on T2-weighted
image and slightly high signal intensity on T1-weighted image are present in cul-de-sac along posterior margin of uterus. Following
contrast-infusion, peripheral nodular enhancement is noted in cystic lesions (arrowheads in E, F), raising possibility of malignancy.
Histopathologic findings of cul-de-sac masses show multiple mucin-filled cysts (asterisks in G) and papillary projections (arrows in G)
lined by endocervical type mucinous cells. These masses were confirmed as endocervical mucinous borderline tumors. Gradual transition from
epitheliums of endometriosis (white arrow in H) to mucinous tumor cells (black arrow in H) was identified.
