We investigated 4 related human cases of cowpox virus infection reported in France during 2011. Three patients were infected by the same
strain, probably transmitted by imported pet rats, and the fourth patient was infected by another strain. The 2 strains were genetically
related to viruses previously isolated from humans with cowpox infection in Europe. On September 12, 2011, an 8-year-old girl (patient 1)
was admitted to the regional hospital of Epinal, France, for a cutaneous lesion on the lateral part of her neck that had evolved to a necro-
ulcerative rash (Figure 1, panel A). Her sister (patient 2, age unknown) had similar cutaneous lesions. The family had purchased 4 rats
(Rattus norvegicus) from a pet shop on August 19, 2011. The rats had been imported from a breeding facility in the Czech Republic by a local
pet dealer. Locomotor disorders developed in 1 rat, and it died 4 days after the purchase. Two other rats became ill during the following
weeks: the first, displaying symptoms of coryza, was examined by a veterinarian on September 5; the second was examined by the same
veterinarian on September 12 for a vestibular syndrome that evolved to severe respiratory failure and then death on September 15. The fourth
rat died without visible signs of disease. No biologic samples were collected. Cowpox virus infection in 4 persons in France. The case-
patients were infected in 2011 by virus transmitted from infected pet rats. A) Cutaneous lesion on patient 1. B) Cytopathic effects observed
on Vero cell monolayers with isolate CEPAD332. Scale bar represents 500 μm. C) Cytopathic effects observed on Vero cell monolayers with
isolate CEPAD335. Scale bar represents 500 μm. D) Negative-staining electron microscopy image of isolate CEPAD332. Scale bar represents 100
nm. E) Negative-staining electron microscopy image of isolate CEPAD335. Scale bar represents 100 nm. Patient 3 was the 26-year-old female
veterinarian who examined the sick rats. She kept their corpses in her office for a few days before destroying them. On September 20, she
displayed cutaneous lesions similar to those of patients 1 and 2; samples of her lesions were collected 3 days later. Patient 4 (age
unknown) was the cousin of patients 1 and 2. He spent a few days in their house several weeks after the purchase of the rats but did not
report any direct contact with them. On October 13, he displayed cutaneous lesions that were noticeably smaller than those of the other
patients. We conducted molecular testing of the patients’ lesion samples by using 14-kDa protein gene–targeting real-time PCR for
orthopoxvirus detection (1). All samples gave a positive result with the orthopoxvirus probe and a negative result with the variola virus-
specific probe, indicating the presence of orthopoxviruses with the exclusion of variola virus. The ≈600-nt PCR products were sequenced, and
a BLAST search (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) identified cowpox virus (CPXV; family Poxviridae, genus Orthopoxvirus) in all
cases. The clinical samples were inoculated onto Vero cells (ATCC CC-81). Samples from patients 1, 2, and 3 gave rise to massive cytopathic
effect (CPE), whereas no CPE was observed in cell cultures inoculated with samples from patient 4 (Table). Therefore, the samples from
patient 4 were used to inoculate 2 additional cell lines, BHK-21 (ATCC CCL-10) and MRC-5 (ATCC CCL-171). A low CPE was observed 7 days
postinoculation for both cell lines. An additional passage (passage 2) was performed on Vero cells for all the isolates. At this second
passage, compared with the 3 other isolates, CEPAD335 (from patient 4) produced smaller plaques on Vero cells (Figure 1, panels B, C).
Negative-stain electron microscopy performed on supernatant of cell cultures infected by isolates CEPAD332 and CEPAD335 showed typical
poxvirus-like particles (Figure 1, panels D, E). *CPE, cytopathic effect; ND, not done. After DNA extraction from cell culture supernatants,
the viral genome was amplified by PCR by using primer pairs that targeted 3 additional genomic regions (2,3): hemagglutinin (HA; ≈900 nt),
C18L (≈850 nt), and G1L (≈850 nt), according to CPXV strain GRI nomenclature (Figure 2) (4). The sequences of the corresponding amplicons
were determined and were deposited into GenBank under accession nos. KC592396–KC592411. The isolates CEPAD332, 333, and 336 were identical
in the C18L, G1L, and HA regions; CEPAD333 diverged slightly from CEPAD332 and CEPAD 336 in the 14-kDa region (3 substitutions out of 576
nt). The results suggested that these 3 isolates originated from a unique CPVX strain. By contrast, CEPAD335 clearly diverged from the 3
others in all 4 studied regions (nucleotide divergence >2.5% in each region, large nucleotide insertions in the G1L region), indicating that
patient 4 was infected by a different CPXV strain. Schematic representation of cowpox virus (CPXV) GRI genome (A) and phylogenetic
relationships between 4 genomic regions of CPXV isolates collected in France during 2011 and other CPXVs: C18L (B), 14-kDa (C), G1L (D),
hemagglutinin (E). The sequenced regions are shaded in black in panel A. Nucleotide sequences were aligned by using CLC Main Workbench 6.0
software (CLC Bio,Aarhus, Denmark). Neighbor-joining phylograms were constructed in MEGA4 (www.megasoftware.net) by using the maximum
composite likelihood method; the robustness of the resulting trees was assessed with 1,000 bootstrap replicates. The length of the branches
is proportional to the number of base substitutions per site. The percentage bootstrap values are indicated if >70. Circles indicate the
2011 isolates from France; for other isolates, the year and country of isolation are indicated. Scale bars indicate nucleotide substitutions
per site. Phylogenetic studies were conducted by comparing the sequences of the 4 isolates with CPXV reference sequences (4–6) and sequences
of CPXV isolates previously isolated in Europe (7–11) (Figure 2). In the HA region, CEPAD332, 333, and 336 showed 100% identity to several
strains isolated in France and Germany in 2008 and 2009 from patients also infected by imported pet rats (7,9,11). Because these strains
have not been sequenced in other genomic regions, it was impossible to study their relationships with our isolates. In 3 genomic regions,
CEPAD335 was closely related to isolate NANCY, a CPXV isolated in France in 2001 (4). Only 1 nt change was observed in each C18L and HA
region; in G1L, CEPAD335 sequence contained a 84 nt-long insertion compared with NANCY, but only 1 nt change was observed in their matching
parts. By contrast, CEPAD335 and NANCY were found relatively distant in the 14-kDa gene phylogram (18 nt changes out of 594 nt). At least 2
different CPVX strains were involved in the occurrence of 4 related human cases. Patients 1, 2, and 3 were probably infected by the same
strain acquired from the pet rats, but the origin of the infection with the second strain remains unclear. We propose 2 hypotheses to
explain these infections. The first hypothesis is the co-infection of the pet rat batch by the 2 CPXV strains. However, patient 4 did not
report direct contact with the pet rats; furthermore, his lesions were observed at least 4 weeks after the death of the rats, while the CPXV
incubation period is believed to be <2 weeks in humans (12). Alternatively, this patient might have been infected by other animals; he
reported regular, close contact with horses and domestic cats that go outdoors, and horses and cats are known to transmit cowpox viruses to
humans (12). In France and other European countries, human infection with CPXV has been known as a zoonosis transmitted mainly by feral cats
and, more rarely, dairy cows. However, the outbreak of CPXV that occurred in Germany and France in 2008 in pet rat owners brought attention
to this new source of infection. Several cases of pet rat–to–human CPXV transmission have been reported recently (7,9,13–15). The use of
rodents as pets is likely to lead to an increase in CPXV human cases in the future, especially because persons younger than 30 years do not
exhibit cross-reactive immunity conferred by smallpox vaccination, which was stopped at the end of the 1970s. Veterinary investigations were
conducted in the pet shop in France where the 4 rats in this study had been purchased. Because no animals were ill, no samples were
collected. No investigations were performed at the facility in the Czech Republic. Four previous human CPXV contaminations observed in
France in 2009 were caused by contacts with infected pet rats that also originated from the Czech Republic (9). Small wild rodents are
believed to constitute the natural reservoir of CPXV, but this virus is able to infect a wide range of mammals, such as cats, cows, horses,
elephants, and dogs (12). Our observation of human infections by 2 different CPXV strains genetically closely related to strains isolated
years ago in France and Germany suggest the circulation of genetically stable viral strains among wild or domestic animals and their
sporadic emergence among humans. Further studies regarding the molecular relationships between CPXV strains isolated from humans and from
wild or domestic animals would help clarify the epidemiology of this virus. The authors are indebted to Lenaig Louboutin (French Direction
générale de l’armement). Ms Ducournau is a BSc research associate at French National Reference Center for Orthopoxviruses. She is interested
in poxvirus diagnosis and surveillance and has developed kits for detecting poxviruses.
