Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease and is the second most common form of young onset
dementia after Alzheimer's disease (AD). An autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance is present in around 25–50% of FTLD cases indicating a
strong genetic component. Major pathogenic mutations of FTLD have been demonstrated independently in the progranulin (GRN) gene and the
C9orf72 hexanucleotide expansion repeat. In this study we present a family that have been identified as carrying both a GRN Cys31fs mutation
and the C9orf72 hexanucleotide expansion repeat. In the present study we describe the clinical and genetic details of family members and
pathological features of two family members that have come to post-mortem. The mean age at disease onset was 57 years (48–61 years) and mean
duration 4 years (2–7 years). The most common presenting syndrome was behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia. Brain imaging from
available cases showed a symmetrical pattern of atrophy particularly affecting the frontal and temporal lobes. Pathologically two cases were
classified as FTLD-TDP type A with TDP-43 positive inclusions, with additional p62-positive ‘star-like’ inclusions found in the hippocampal
formation and cerebellum. The type and distribution of the pathological lesions in these two cases were in keeping with FTLD cases carrying
only the C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat. However the driving force of the pathological process may be either pathogenic mutation or a
combination of both converging on a singular mechanism. Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease
and is the second most common form of dementia with presenile onset after Alzheimer's disease (AD). Clinically, there are three major
syndromes, behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), semantic dementia (SD) and progressive non-fluent aphasia (PNFA), whilst
pathologically, the majority of cases have inclusions containing either tau (FTLD-tau) or TDP-43 (FTLD-TDP). A family history of FTLD, often
showing an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance is present in around 25–50% of cases indicating a strong genetic component . Major
genetic causes of FTLD include mutations in the MAPT and progranulin (GRN) genes both located on chromosome 17. Recently, two independent
studies identified a GGGGCC hexanucleotide expansion in the chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9orf72) gene as a further common genetic
cause of FTLD . The clinical phenotype of individuals with a GRN mutation is variable with patients presenting with bvFTD, PNFA or in some
cases, a corticobasal syndrome . The first GRN mutation associated with FTLD was identified in 2006. Since then over 70 different GRN
mutations have been reported in more than 230 families worldwide, which accounts for 5–20% of cases of familial FTD and 1–5% of sporadic
cases . Most mutations are predicted to result in premature termination codons and it has been shown that the mutant mRNA is rapidly
degraded through the process of nonsense mediated decay, resulting in a functional null allele . All cases with known GRN mutations are
associated with underlying FTLD-TDP type A pathology, characterized by neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (NCIs), occasional neuronal
intranuclear inclusions (NIIs) and short neurites. C9orf72 expansions are associated with a heterogeneous clinical presentation and are
highly variable between and within family members . Between 7% and 12% of all FTD cohorts are found to have the mutation 9–11. Patients can
present with FTD, ALS or mimic several other neurodegenerative disease syndromes . The FTD subtype is most often bvFTD with PNFA being
observed occasionally. ALS typically shows early involvement of both upper and lower motor neurones and bulbar presentation is common 13–18.
The neuropathology associated with the C9orf72 expansion repeat combines both FTLD-TDP and ALS. Previous mutations associated with FTLD,
have fallen neatly into one of the pathologically determined subtypes; GRN with FTLD-TDP type A and VCP with FTLD-TDP type D. However, the
C9orf72 expansion repeat crosses the pathological boundaries and has been shown to be associated with two FTLD-TDP subtypes; type A and B .
Cases with this expansion also show unique pathology in addition to the TDP-43 inclusions with TDP-43 negative, p62-positive NCIs found
predominantly in the hippocampal formation and cerebellar granule cell layer . In the present study we present a family that have been
identified as carrying both a GRN Cys31fs (g.90_91insCTGC) pathogenic mutation in addition to the C9orf72 hexanucleotide expansion repeat.
We describe the clinical, genetic and pathological features of two of the family members that have now come to post-mortem. We compare the
clinical and pathological findings with FTLD cases affected by either a GRN or a C9orf72 hexanucleotide expansion and discuss the relevance
of both mutations, speculating which may be driving the pathogenic mechanism. The two reported cases donated their brains to the Queen
Square Brain Bank but had clinically been seen in the Dementia Research Centre (UCL), they underwent a standard clinical history,
neurological examination and cognitive assessment. Ethical approval for the study was obtained from the National Hospital for Neurology and
Neurosurgery Local Research Ethics Committee. DNA extraction, Rs3849942 genotyping, hexanucleotide repeat number assessment, DNA sequencing
and Southern blotting were carried out as described previously . We assessed this in a formal analysis of the volume difference between the
right and left hemispheres in a group of 15 patients with C9orf72 expansions [10 men, 5 women, mean (standard deviation) age 59.5 (7.8)], 10
patients with GRN mutations [6 men, 4 women, 61.0 (7.0)] and 15 cognitively normal controls [10 men, 5 women, 57.7 (5.3)] using the
following methods : a whole-brain region was created by segmenting the brain using a semi-automated technique in the MIDAS software package
. Scans and associated whole-brain regions were then transformed into standard space by registration to the Montreal Neurological Institute
(MNI) Template. The left and right hemispheric regions were defined using the MNI average brain which was split by dividing the whole volume
along a line coincident with the interhemispheric fissure. An intersection of each individual's brain region and the hemispheric regions
defined on the MNI template was generated to provide a measure of brain volume in left and right hemispheres, with the difference between
the two hemispheres calculated by subtracting one from the other. Brains were routinely dissected and blocks removed according to the Queen
Square Brain Bank protocol. Seven micron thick tissue sections were immunostained using commercially available antibodies to the following
proteins: TDP-43 (Abnova, Taipei City, Taiwan; 1:800); p62 (BD Transduction Labs, Oxford, UK; 1:200); ubiquitin (Dako, Ely, UK; 1:200);
ubiquilin2 (Abnova, Taipei City, Taiwan; 1:1000); α-synuclein (Vector, Peterborough, UK; 1:50), tau (AT8 clone; Autogen Bioclear, Wiltshire,
UK; 1:600); CD68 (Dako, Ely, UK; 1:150), GFAP (Dako, Ely, UK; 1:1000) as previously described . Briefly, immunohistochemistry for all
antibodies required pressure cooker pre-treatment in citrate buffer pH 6.0. Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 0.3% H202 in
methanol and non-specific binding with 10% dried milk solution. Tissue sections were incubated with the primary antibodies, followed by
biotinylated anti-mouse IgG (1:200, 30 minutes; DAKO) and ABC complex (30 minutes; DAKO). Colour was developed with di-aminobenzidine/H202.
Double-label immunofluorescence was carried out on the hippocampus and cerebellum using the anti-p62 antibody in combination with anti-
TDP-43 or anti-ubiquilin2 antibodies. After appropriate pre-treatment tissue sections were incubated with anti-p62 antibody as described
above, followed by a biotinylated secondary antibody (Dako, 1:200), ABC and developed using the TSA Rhodamine kit (Roche). Sections were
then incubated with either the anti-TDP-43 or anti-ubiquilin2 antibody followed by Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK; 1:300) for one
hour at room temperature. 4′-6-diamidino-2-phenylindol (DAPI) was used for nuclear counterstaining. Appropriate controls were used to
confirm that no cross reactivity existed between the visualization of the two antibodies. Sections were viewed with a Leica DM5500B
fluorescence microscope using 3D deconvolution post-processing. The extent and severity of p62 and TDP-43 positive pathology was evaluated
in cases with only a GRN mutation or C9orf72 expansion repeat along with the two cases carrying the double mutations (cases 2.1 and 2.2). A
five-tiered semi-quantitative grading scale was used in which the pathological lesions were scored as ‘0’ describing the absence of
p62-positive NCIs and NIIs, score ‘+’ corresponded to 1–5 inclusions present in an average of at least five microscopic fields using a ×20
objective, score ‘++’ was given when the number of lesions was 6–10 while score ‘+++’ was given when the number of inclusions was between 11
and 20. Score ‘++++’ corresponded to greater than 20 lesions. The DRC 240 family are from the south of the UK and have an autosomal dominant
history of speech, cognitive and gait impairment (Figure 1). Little is known about previous generations but case 1.2 was said to have
dementia with impaired speech and gait from the age of 61, dying 2 years later whilst case 1.3 also had a young onset dementia with onset at
60 and disease duration of 4 years. Pedigree of the family. Limited clinical information is available for cases 1.2 and 1.3. Both clinical
and pathological data is available for both 2.1 and 2.2. This 62-year-old woman presented with a 3-year history of speech, gait, behavioural
and cognitive impairment. Her initial problem was of impaired articulation which steadily deteriorated with subsequent development of an
unsteady gait. Over the same time period she had developed a change in her personality, becoming less extrovert than previously and less
interested in doing her normal hobbies. In the year before presentation she also developed impairment of her language, spelling and
arithmetic skills as well as dysphagia. She had coeliac disease but had been otherwise well previously. On examination her Mini Mental State
Examination (MMSE) was 27/30. She had a bulbar dysarthria with decreased palatal elevation and orofacial apraxia. She had mild generalized
wasting in the limbs but no fasciculation's. Power was mildly decreased in all muscle groups. Reflexes were brisk throughout with downgoing
plantars. She had bilateral dysdiadochokinesis and gait ataxia. Neuropsychometry showed a verbal IQ of 84 and performance IQ of 86. Episodic
memory was impaired with difficulties on tasks of naming, spelling, calculation and limb praxis. There was evidence of executive dysfunction
but visuoperceptual skills were intact. EMG showed evidence of mild chronic denervation in tibialis anterior bilaterally but was otherwise
normal. MRI brain showed relatively symmetrical generalized cortical atrophy with a frontotemporal predominance as well as mild cerebellar
atrophy (Figure 2). A diagnosis of probable FTD-MND was made at this time although the features of ataxia were felt to be unusual. She was
not seen again and died 4 years later. MRI scan of case 2.1. Showing symmetrical atrophy of the hemispheres and enlarged lateral ventricles.
This 48-year-old woman presented with a 2-year history of speech, gait and cognitive impairment. She had coeliac disease but had been
otherwise well previously. A CT scan showed mild symmetrical generalized atrophy. She died 2 years later. GRN gene sequencing of DNA from
both frozen brain and peripheral lymphocytes demonstrated the frameshift mutation Cys31fs (g.90_91insCTGC) in exon 2 that results in a null
allele reported to be pathogenic . rpPCR assessment of C9orf72 hexonucleotide number demonstrated a minimum of 67 repeats in DNA from both
patients on one allele and 2 repeats on the other allele. The presence of a large expansion was confirmed by Southern blotting (Figure 3)
which revealed a maximum repeat number in the DNA from brain from case 2.2 (PDG1083) as 4153 repeats, minimum 1205 (modals measured at 3822,
2500 and 2050 repeats), and in DNA from peripheral lymphocytes from case 2.1 (PDG 3296) a maximum of 3316 was measured and minimum of 812
(modal 2780). Genotyping of rs3849942 demonstrated heterozygosity at this polymorphic site for both patients. Presence of a heterozygous
hexanucleotide expansion in C9orf72. Southern blot analysis on DNA using a probe directed to the hexanucleotide repeat (GGGGCC)5shows the
presence of an expansion in cases 2.1 and 2.2. The presence of a large expansion was confirmed by Southern blotting which revealed a maximum
repeat number in the DNA from brain from patient 1 (PDG1083) as 4153 repeats, minimum 1205 (modals measured at 3822, 2500 and 2050 repeats),
and in DNA from peripheral lymphocytes from patient 2 (PDG 3296) a maximum of 3316 was measured and minimum of 812 (modal 2780). Cases 2.1
and 2.2 came to post-mortem. The unfixed brain of case 2.1 weighed 1000 g, the left-half brain weighed 452 g after fixation in 10% buffered
formaldehyde. There was a significant degree of frontal atrophy, which was also apparent over the medial surface. Coronal slices revealed
the left lateral ventricle to be significantly dilated and focal thinning of most of the frontal cortex. There was severe reduction in bulk
of the frontal white matter while the white matter of the temporal lobe was relatively better preserved. The lateral aspect of the putamen
showed significant grey discolouration, although its bulk was not apparently reduced. However, the size of the caudate was reduced and it
had a flattened rather than convex outline towards the left frontal horn. The thalamus was significantly reduced in bulk, whereas the globus
pallidus, subthalamic nucleus, amygdala and hippocampus were of normal size. The substantia nigra showed severe pallor, whereas the locus
coeruleus was well pigmented. The proportions of the pontine tegmentum and base were preserved and, in particular, the transverse pontine
fibres were clearly visible. The medulla, the cerebellar cortex, white matter and dentate nucleus were also of normal appearance. In case
2.2 the right fixed half brain weighed 516 g. Some of the gyri in the frontoparietal region were narrowed and the intervening sulci widened.
Coronal slices showed that the right lateral ventricle was moderately enlarged. The cortical ribbon had a blotchy appearance and the border
between the cortex and white matter in many places appeared blurred. The hippocampus was macroscopically unremarkable. The substantia nigra
and the locus coeruleus were pale. The cerebellum showed no macroscopic abnormality. Case 2.1 and 2.2 were both previously diagnosed
pathologically as FTLD-TDP type A with GRN mutation. Both cases demonstrated TDP-43 NCIs predominantly in layer 2 of the cortex. Numerous
small neurites and occasional NIIs were also seen (Figure S1). However, with the identification of p62-positive inclusions in the
hippocampus and cerebellum the cases were screened for the C9orf72 expansion repeat. A detailed pathological review of both cases was
undertaken due to the identification of the second pathogenic C9orf72 mutation. Histological slides of the frontal cortex from both cases
showed a significant degree of superficial spongiosis, moderate degree of neuronal loss and astrogliosis in the grey matter. TDP-43
immunohistochemistry demonstrated moderate numbers of neurites and TDP-43-positive NCIs. The parietal cortex also showed superficial
spongiosis and the presence of TDP-43 positive NCIs were observed. The temporal and occipital cortices also contained the occasional TDP-43
NCI to a lesser extent. p62 immunohistochemistry highlighted the TDP-43 positive inclusions, although a minority of NCI's exhibited a ‘star-
like’ shape, which were negative for TDP-43. In case 2.1 neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and neuropil threads (NTs) were found in the
hippocampus, entorhinal and transentorhinal cortices. TDP-43 positive NCIs were observed in the granule cells of the dentate fascia but
these were outnumbered by numerous p62-positive ‘star-like’ inclusions (Figure 4). The majority of the p62-positive inclusions were also
immunostained with ubiquilin2 (Figure 4), although there were still inclusions that were only positively stained with p62. The p62-positive
‘star-like’ inclusions were also found in the CA4 subregion, which was negative for TDP-43. Case 2.2 showed a similar distribution of TDP-43
and p62 inclusions as that observed in cases 2.1; however no additional pathology was evident. TDP-43, p62 and Ubiquilin2
immunohistochemistry in case 2.1. Numerous p62 positive neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (NCIs) were evident in the granule cell layer (GCL)
of the hippocampus (A) compared to sparse numbers of TDP-43 positive NCIs in the GCL (B, arrows). Ubiquilin2 positive NCIs were also found
in the GCL showing similar numbers to those observed with p62 (C). The cerebellum granule cells (D) and the neurones found in other
subregions of the hippocampus (CA4) were also found to contain p62-positive ‘star-like’ inclusions (E). TDP-43 pathology was evident in the
frontal cortex (F) and found in the frontal cortex white matter (G). Double fluorescent immunohistochemistry revealed that the number of p62
(I) positive inclusions were greater than those immunostained with Ubiquilin2 (H). TDP-43 and p62 immunohistochemistry was combined in the
GCL and cerebellum, where a TDP-43 NCI (L, arrow) was outnumbered by the smaller ‘star-like’ p62 positive inclusions (K). This was also seen
in the cerebellum where normal nuclear staining of TDP-43 was observed (O) and no colocalization was seen with the p62 positive inclusions
(N). Bar on A represents 50 microns on A, B and C; 20 microns on D, F and G; 10 microns on E. The original magnification on panels H-P ×40.
The putamen and caudate showed gliosis in case 2.1 confirmed with GFAP immunohistochemistry, where the dorsal regions of these nuclei were
more affected than the ventral parts. The subthalamic nucleus was well populated with neurones. Immunostaining for TDP-43 showed numerous
neurites in the striatum, some of which had a swollen appearance. NIIs and NCIs, both skein-like and compact were also found. Subcortical
grey nuclei were not available for analysis from case 2.2. Case 2.1 demonstrated a significant loss of pigmented neurones together with
pigment incontinence and gliosis in the substantia nigra, whereas case 2.2 showed only rare extraneuronal pigment. There were no NFTs or
Lewy bodies observed in the nigra or other midbrain nuclei in either case. The locus coeruleus was well populated with neurones as were the
griseum pontis and other pontine nuclei. The inferior olive showed mild loss of neurones with sparse TDP-43-positive irregular inclusions.
No TDP-43 or p62-positive inclusions are identified in the XIIth nerve nucleus in case 2.1. The cerebellar cortex in both cases 2.1 and 2.2
showed a moderate degree of Purkinje cell loss and Bergmann gliosis, while the cerebellar dentate nucleus showed a slight depletion of
neurones. No TDP-43-positive inclusions were found in any of the cerebellar subregions. However, frequent p62-positive inclusions were found
in the cerebellar granule cell layer (Figure 4). Case 2.1 also demonstrated pathological ageing (Braak and Braak stage II NFT pathology) and
cerebrovascular (small vessel) disease, although no Aβ or alpha-synuclein pathology was observed. Whereas in case 2.2 no additional Aβ, tau
or alpha-synuclein pathology was observed. The main clinical features in the family are of progressive speech, gait and cognitive
impairment. In the case for which most information is known (2.1), a diagnosis of FTD-MND was made with prominent bulbar features. This
would be most consistent with an expansion in C9orf72 although there are rare cases of FTD-MND in association with GRN mutations.
Interestingly, case 2.1 had cerebellar features clinically, which are not seen in GRN mutations, but have been described in some cases of
C9orf72 (Table 1). Case 2.1 had impaired executive function, episodic memory and dominant parietal lobe function – this might be seen in
either GRN or C9orf72, with early episodic memory impairment perhaps more suggestive of C9orf72, and early parietal lobe involvement more
suggestive of GRN, although none of these cognitive features are particularly specific. The brain imaging showed a relatively symmetrical
pattern of atrophy (Figure 2), which would be much more in keeping with an expansion in C9orf72 in comparison to GRN mutations where atrophy
is asymmetrical. We assessed this in a formal analysis of the volume difference between the right and left hemispheres. In case 2.1, the
volume difference between the right and left hemispheres was 10 ml which is not significantly different to a series of fifteen patients with
C9orf72 expansions where the mean (standard deviation) right-left hemisphere volume difference was 13 ml (9 ml), or a group of fifteen age
and gender matched cognitively normal controls where the volume difference was 5 ml (5 ml). These were all significantly different to the
asymmetrical GRN mutation series (10 patients) where the volume difference was 66 ml (30 ml). Demographic and clinical data from GRN/C9orf72
cases compared to GRN and C9orf72 cases The microscopic pathology observed in cases 2.1 and 2.2 was compared with that seen in 3
heterozygous C9orf72 cases and 3 heterozygous cases carrying only the frameshift Cys31fs mutation in exon 2 of GRN gene. We compared
representative areas of the frontal and temporal cortices along with hippocampal subregions and cerebellum (Table 2). In all C9orf72
mutation cases along with the TDP-43 positive inclusions, additional p62-positive ‘star-like’ inclusions were found in the granule cells of
the dentate fascia, CA4 subregion of the hippocampus and the granule cell layer of the cerebellum. This was evident when the number of
TDP-43 and p62 positive inclusions were assessed in a semi-quantitative manner (Table 2). The three GRN only cases only demonstrated TDP-43
positive inclusions in all regions and the p62 positive immunohistochemistry mirrored what was observed with the TDP-43. No additional
p62-positive star-like inclusions were found in the hippocampus or cerebellum of the GRN only cases. In all the GRN cases the amount of
TDP-43 pathology was increased in the frontal and temporal cortices as well as the number of NCIs observed in the GCL compared to case 2.1
and 2.2. Distribution of TDP-43 and p62 positive lesions in GRN/C9orf72 cases compared to GRN and C9orf72 cases Semi-quantitative analysis
of TDP-43 and p62 positive lesions observed in three cases carrying the C9orf72 expansion repeat, three cases carrying a GRN mutation and
the two family members carrying both the C9orf72 and GRN mutation. Score is an aggregate of all lesions present including neuronal
cytoplasmic, neuronal intranuclear inclusions and neurites. Grading: 0 = absent; + = mild; ++ = moderate; +++ = frequent; ++++ = severe.
GCL, granule cell layer. In this study we describe a family that carry both a GRN pathogenic mutation and the newly identified C9orf72
hexanucleotide repeat expansion. Pathologically the two cases were classified as FTLD-TDP type A, with additional p62-positive ‘star-like’
inclusions throughout the different brain regions but predominantly in the hippocampal formation and cerebellum. The family described here
were known to segregate for a causal GRN mutation. The possibility of concurrence was prompted by the histopathological findings, which were
in keeping with those found in C9orf72 expansion repeat cases. The chance concurrence of the two mutations can be crudely estimated from the
population frequencies of the mutations. Pathogenic GRN mutations have not been found in the healthy population whereas C9orf72 mutations
are found in approximately 1:700 . As we examined ∼20 GRN distantly related cases post-mortem, the probability of a single chance
concurrence was approximately 0.03 (20/700). A further possibility is that the concurrence of the mutations increases the penetrance of
FTLD; however, in several studies; the penetrance of each mutation in isolation is high. Others have described concurrence of C9orf72 and
TDP-43 mutations and C9orf72 expansions with 2 novel missense mutations in GRN (Y294C) and in PSEN-2(I146V) . A systematic study of all
causal genes in neurodegeneration will be required to assess whether concurrent causal mutations are found more often than would be expected
by chance alone. From a clinical perspective the possibility of concurrent mutations may lead to serious complications when providing
genetic testing for affected families. Following the discovery of the link between GRN and FTLD, many at-risk family members have come
forward for predictive genetic testing, often with influences on major life decisions. The subsequent discovery of a second causal mutation
in the family is clearly a tragedy for those having completed such a process and seemingly freed from risk of the family disorder. From a
genetic counselling perspective it would therefore be of importance to clarify whether these concurrences are extremely rare and purely
chance events, or if they are found more frequently than would be expected because of increased penetrance. Pathologically both cases
demonstrated TDP-43 deposition with numerous NCIs, occasional intanuclear inclusions and short neurites, which are in keeping with the FTLD-
TDP type A subtype, previously observed in both GRN mutation and C9orf72 expansion repeat cases. The ‘star-like’ p62 inclusions, found
throughout different brain regions, which were readily visible in areas lacking TDP-43 pathology, are characteristic for cases with C9orf72
expansion repeat. Additional pathology was confirmed in one of our cases in the form of NFT pathology corresponding to Braak and Braak stage
II and this case also showed evidence of cerebrovascular disease, which was thought to be ‘age-related’ as this patient was 11 years older
at death than the patient without additional pathology. It remains to be determined how the C9orf72 expansion repeat length affects the
clinical phenotype and the underlying pathology once the expansion repeat can be sized accurately. The two cases analysed in this study
demonstrated different repeat lengths, 4153 in case 1 and 3316 in case 2. However, it is of note that in one case brain tissue was used for
DNA extraction while peripheral lymphocytes in the other, which may be relevant as it is not known whether the C9orf72 repeat length is
different when it is determined in peripheral tissue or brain tissue. Both our cases carry two confirmed pathogenic mutations, which raises
the question of which of the two genetic abnormalities is driving the underlying pathology or whether both contribute to it. Clinically the
main features of this pedigree are of progressive speech, gait and cognitive impairment. A diagnosis of FTD-MND was made in one of the
cases, which would be most consistent with an expansion in C9orf72, although there are rare cases of FTD-MND in association with GRN
mutations . Brain imaging showed a symmetrical pattern of atrophy, which would be in keeping with an expansion in C9orf72, whereas GRN
mutations show a more asymmetrical pattern of atrophy . In both of our cases the TDP-43 pathology corresponds to FTLD-TDP type A, which is
the pattern seen in cases with GRN mutations , although cases with C9orf72 repeat expansion alone can also be associated with this FTLD-TDP
subtype . The Cys31fs GRN mutation, as identified in the family reported here, is a tetranucleotide insertion in the coding region causing
frameshift and premature translation termination, resulting in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, causing a loss of GRN function rendering the
protein less active or ineffective. Neurologically normal controls have been identified to carry expansion greater than 45 repeats .
However, to date, no data from Southern blot analysis are available in control cases, which would provide information about the size of the
expansion repeat. Furthermore, in control cases carrying a C9orf72 repeat expansion no pathological data are available either about whether
TDP-43 and/or p62 pathology is present in such cases, which would indicate that they represent a ‘preclinical disease stage’. Therefore
without more knowledge of the pathogenic repeat length the C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion and data of detailed TDP-43 and p62
immunohistochemical studies in ‘normal’ control cases it would be difficult to suggest the C9orf72 expansion is merely a risk factor
contributing to the susceptibility to the disease in our cases as it has been suggested for another GRN mutation case combined with C9orf72
expansion . However, in that case it remains to be proven if the missense GRN mutation is pathogenic or not. In conclusion, the cases
presented here carry ‘double’ pathogenic mutations, both of which have an effect on the cellular pathways finally manifesting in TDP-43
pathology. Future studies are required to understand the precise mechanisms and contribution the two different genetic abnormalities make in
such cases. The authors would like to thank the patients and their families for their generosity and goodwill, as without their support none
of this research would have been possible. This work was undertaken at UCLH/UCL with a proportion of funding from the Department of Health's
NIHR Biomedical Research Centres funding scheme. The Queen Square Brain Bank, UCL Institute of Neurology is supported by the Reta Lila
Weston Institute of Neurological Studies and the Progressive Supranuclear Palsy (Europe) Association. T.L. is in receipt of an Alzheimer's
Research UK fellowship. Wellcome Trust Senior Clinical Fellowship to J.D.W.; T.R. receives research grants from the Multiple System Atrophy
Trust and Parkinson's UK. The Dementia Research Centre is an Alzheimer's Research UK Coordinating Centre and has also received equipment
funded by the Alzheimer's Research UK. JR is an NIHR Clinical Lecturer. All the genetic analysis was supported by the MRC (UK). Part of this
work was undertaken at UCLH/UCL who received a proportion of funding from the Department of Health's NIHR Biomedical Research Centres
funding scheme and, in part, funded/supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Unit in Dementia
based at University College London Hospitals (UCLH), University College London (UCL). The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health. Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of
this article at the publisherï's web-site TDP-43 pathology in GRN/C9orf72 cases. Cases 2.1 and 2.2 both demonstrated FTLD-TDP type A
pathology. Neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions were found in the granule cell layer of the hippocampal formation (A, arrow). Occasional neuronal
intranuclear inclusions were found in the frontal cortex (B, arrow) together with neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions mainly found in layer two
of the cortex (C). Many short dystrophic neurites were also found (D).
