Treatment strategy to prevent perioperative cerebral infarction in patients with asymptomatic severe stenosis of the internal carotid artery
is not fully established. Two patients were treated for skull base tumor in the presence of severe stenosis of the internal carotid artery,
unilateral in one patient and bilateral in the other patient. Both patients were asymptomatic but had reduced vascular reserve capacity. The
extended transsphenoidal approach was planned avoiding the low perfusion pressure region, with only conventional methods of maintaining
blood pressure and PaCO2 rather than performing prophylactic vascular reconstruction surgery, and successful tumor removals were achieved
without causing further neurological or radiological deficits. If the surgical route is planned to avoid the distribution of stenotic
vessels and low perfusion pressure, prophylactic vascular reconstruction surgery would be unnecessary. Although more experiences based on
sub-classified etiology for internal carotid artery stenosis are required, various types of operations including intracranial-extracranial
vascular surgery might be justified based on this principle. No protocol has been established to prevent perioperative cerebral infarction
in patients with asymptomatic internal carotid artery (ICA) severe stenosis. Antiplatelet agents are sometimes administered in addition to
management of any atherosclerotic disease including hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and hyperlipidemia . However, these procedures are not
supported by high-grade evidence, and the indications for prophylactic vascular reconstruction surgery depend on individual clinical
characteristics . Prophylactic carotid endarterectomy and/or extracranial-intracranial bypass may reduce the perioperative risks of cerebral
infarction for patients during coronary artery bypass grafting , or at least show no significant difference between the vascular
reconstruction group and non-reconstruction group . Similar problems present in brain tumor surgery. Most previous cases involved
suboccipital fossa and cranial convexity surgery , and some cases of partially removed pituitary adenomas and craniopharyngiomas through the
transsphenoidal approach . One patient with sphenoidal ridge meningioma with bilateral ICA stenoses suffered vast cerebral infarction and
severely deteriorated after surgery . Undoubtedly extremely delicate surgical procedures are required, but identification of the optimum
indications for prophylactic vascular reconstruction surgery will greatly contribute to post-surgical improvement in this critical
situation. We report two surgical cases of skull base tumor with severe ICA stenosis. Both patients were asymptomatic but with reduced
vascular reserve capacity, and successful tumor removals were performed without neurological or radiological deficits. Case 1: A 46-year-old
female was introduced to our department with severe visual disturbance. She had only light perception in the right eye and temporal
hemianopsia in the left eye. She had a history of hypertension since age 30 years, and medication for diabetes mellitus and epilepsy, which
had been diagnosed 5 years previously at screening for moyamoya disease. She had since been treated with an antiplatelet agent and no
ischemic symptom had occurred. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging showed a well-demarcated skull base tumor extending from the planum
sphenoidale to the diaphragm sellae. Abnormal mesh-like enhancement was seen in the right half of the tumor around the right ICA terminal,
and also at the distal portion of the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) in the convexity [Figure 1a, b]. MR angiography showed severe stenoses
in the bilateral ICA terminals and moyamoya vessels around the horizontal segment of the ACA and the middle cerebral artery (MCA) [Figure
1c]. Iodine-123 N-isopropyl-p-iodoamphetamine single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) using the autoradiographic method indicated
reduced cerebral blood flow (right ACA distribution/right MCA distribution 38.4/31.4 ml/100 g/min, left ACA distribution/left MCA
distribution 39.7/43.1 ml/100 g/min), and acetazolamide administration disclosed the steal phenomenon (right ACA distribution/right MCA
distribution 33.9/28.9 ml/100 g/min, left ACA distribution/left MCA distribution 39.1/42.5 ml/100 g/min) [Figure 2]. Case 1. Coronal (a) and
sagittal (b) head MR images with contrast medium showing a well-demarcated skull base tumor, and abnormal mesh-like enhancement around the
right ICA terminal and at the distal portion of the ACA. MR angiogram showing severe stenoses of the bilateral ICA terminals and moyamoya
vessels (c). Iodine-123 N-isopropyl-p-iodoamphetamine single photon emission computed tomography scans revealing severe reduction of
cerebral blood flow especially in the right hemisphere, and the steal phenomenon bilaterally after injection of acetazolamide. Tuberculum
sellae meningioma was suspected and surgery was planned through the extended transsphenoidal route, which could avoid the low perfusion
pressure region. Somatosensory evoked potentials were monitored by left tibial and median nerve stimulation throughout the surgery. PaCO2
was maintained over 40 mmHg, and hematocrit of peripheral blood over 35% (37.4% of preoperative state). Mean arterial pressure was
maintained within the ranges between 75 and 95 mmHg. Minute feeding arteries around the tumor were selectively coagulated and devascularized
one by one, and Simpsonâ€™s grade 2 removal was achieved. The patient recovered consciousness soon after the operation, and postoperative head
MR imaging showed no ischemic lesions or evident tumor bulk [Figure 3]. She was discharged on the 12th postoperative day with no
neurological or endocrinological deficits except for the same degree of visual disturbance in her right eye as detected preoperatively. Case
1. Postoperative coronal (a) and sagittal (b) MR images revealing gross total removal of the tumor. Case 2: A 19-year-old female was
introduced to our hospital suffering from tumor re-enlargement. She had a history of initial treatment for craniopharyngioma, which had been
detected at screening examination for low stature and moderate memory disturbance. Surgery through the transcranial basal interhemispheric
approach resulted in subtotal tumor removal, and 50 Gy of fractionated irradiation to the remnant was given postoperatively. Four years
later she suffered cerebral infarction in her right frontal lobe. MR angiography showed severe stenosis of the right ICA, and antiplatelet
agent administration was started. No ischemic symptoms had occurred since then. Seven years after the initial treatment the tumor had re-
grown, and she was introduced to our hospital. On admission, MR imaging showed a partially ossified solid tumor in the suprasellar cistern,
which had compressed the optic chiasm upwards, and a large cyst with thin wall in the third ventricle [Figure 4a, b]. MR angiography showed
the right ICA was severely narrowed in the cavernous portion, and both A1 and M1 were only faintly visualized [Figure 4c]. Iodine-123
N-isopropyl-p-iodoamphetamine SPECT indicated slight reduction of cerebral blood flow (right ACA distribution/right MCA distribution
27.9/24.8 ml/100 g/min, left ACA distribution/left MCA distribution 27.9/28.4 ml/100 g/min), but acetazolamide administration indicated
compromised cerebrovascular reactivity (right ACA distribution/right MCA distribution 36.1/28.3 ml/100 g/min, left ACA distribution/left MCA
distribution 43.4/54.6 ml/100 g/min) [Figure 5]. Case 2. Coronal (a) and sagittal (b) head MR images with contrast medium showing a
dumbbell-shaped, partially solid and partially cystic tumor extending from the suprasellar cistern to the third ventricle. MR angiogram
showing showed severe stenosis of the right ICA in the cavernous portion, and both A1 and M1 were only faintly visualized (c). Iodine-123
N-isopropyl-p-iodoamphetamine single photon emission computed tomography scans revealing slight reduction of cerebral blood flow in the
right hemisphere, and the vascular reserve capacity was markedly reduced after injection of acetazolamide. Surgery was planned through the
extended transsphenoidal route to avoid the low perfusion pressure region. Somatosensory evoked potentials were monitored using left tibial
and median nerve stimulation throughout the surgery. PaCO2 was maintained over 40 mmHg, and hematocrit of peripheral blood over 35% (44.6%
of preoperative state), and mean arterial pressure was maintained within the ranges between 74 and 100 mmHg. The atrophic pituitary stalk
was cut just at the transitional region to the posterior lobe, and the solid and cystic portions were removed simultaneously en-bloc. The
patient recovered consciousness soon after the operation, and postoperative head MR imaging showed no ischemic lesions or evident tumor bulk
[Figure 6]. She was discharged on the 12th postoperative day with no neurological deficits except for moderate recent memory disturbance,
which was detected preoperatively. Case 2. Postoperative coronal (a) and sagittal (b) MR images revealing gross total removal of the tumor.
Although a few surgical cases of brain tumor with severe ICA stenosis have been reported involving brain stem glioma and other cerebellar
hemispheric tumors , partially removed pituitary adenomas and craniopharyngiomas through the transsphenoidal approach , surgery for complex
and maximal tumor removal in the basal subarachnoid spaces is only rarely reported . The difficulty of such procedures is mainly due to the
tiny compensatory collateral circulation through reverse flow of the posterior communicating artery and/or posterior pericallosal artery,
and leptomeningeal anastomosis makes the situation more complicated. Incision and detachment of the dura mater may damage this collateral
circulation, and slight compression or dislocation of cerebral cortex could easily lead to extensive cerebral infarction. Prophylactic
carotid endarterectomy for the patients with severe stenosis of the ICA or extracranial-intracranial bypass for occlusion of the ICA may
reduce the risk of cerebral infarction during coronary artery bypass grafting , or at least not carry a higher risk of stroke and mortality
. This recommendation is still controversial, but the results might vary according to the timing of the endpoint . The mechanism of ischemic
incidence during vascular surgery involves multiple factors including embolism, whereas the problem during tumor removal can be specifically
described as maintaining local perfusion pressure. In our cases strict but simple attention to the maintenance of PaCO2 level and hematocrit
adjustment brings successful removals without any ischemic events. Therefore, if the surgical route is planned to avoid the distribution
depending on stenotic vessels and low perfusion pressure, prophylactic vascular reconstruction surgery would be unnecessary even in patients
with low vascular reserve capacity. Selection of the surgical procedure for ruptured basilar artery aneurysm with moyamoya disease should
emphasize preservation of the normal circulation . Therefore, intracranial brain tumor surgery could possibly be performed safely by
avoiding the low perfusion pressure distribution. Although more experiences based on sub-classified etiology for internal carotid artery
stenosis are required, various types of procedures including intracranial-extracranial vascular surgery might be justified based on this
principle. We successfully treated two cases of skull base tumor associated with severe stenosis of the ICA. Both patients were asymptomatic
but had reduced vascular reserve capacity. If the surgical route can be planned to avoid the distribution of stenotic vessels and low
perfusion pressure, prophylactic vascular reconstruction surgery would be unnecessary. Written informed consent was obtained from both
patients for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. Copies of the written consents are available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. YO performed tumor removal and analyzed the
patient data, and was a major contributor in writing the manuscript. TT gave an essential suggestion and supervised this manuscript. Both
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
