Financial support: This study received financial support from the Fundação de Apoio ao Ensino, Pesquisa e Assistência (FAEPA, Foundation for
the Support of Instruction, Research and Treatment). Tuberculosis and cryptococcosis are infectious diseases that can result in the
formation of single or multiple nodules in immunocompetent patients. Exposure to silica is known to raise the risk of infection with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. We report the case of an elderly man with no history of opportunistic infections and no clinical evidence of
immunodeficiency but with a six-month history of dry cough and nocturnal wheezing. A chest X-ray revealed a mass measuring 5.0 × 3.5 cm in
the right upper lobe. The diagnostic approach of the mass revealed tuberculosis. The histopathological analysis of the surrounding
parenchyma reveled silicosis and cryptococcosis. Cryptococcosis was also found in masses identified in the mediastinal lymph nodes. The
surgical approach was indicated because of the degree of pleuropulmonary involvement, the inconclusive results obtained with the invasive
and noninvasive methods applied, and the possibility of malignancy. This case illustrates the difficulty inherent to the assessment of
infectious or inflammatory pulmonary pseudotumors, the differential diagnosis of which occasionally requires a radical surgical approach.
Despite the presence of respiratory symptoms for six months, the first chest X-ray was performed only at the end of that period. We discuss
the possible pathogenic mechanisms that might have led to the combination of three types of granulomatous lesions in the same lobe, and we
emphasize the need for greater awareness of atypical presentations of pulmonary tuberculosis. Although the World Health Organization
estimates that the overall tuberculosis incidence rate has been declining since 2004,( 1 ) the high prevalence of the disease worldwide,
especially in tropical countries, is still responsible for a high number of deaths and the segregation of individuals with debilitating
sequelae.( 2 ) The classic symptoms of pulmonary tuberculosis consist of dry or productive cough, asthenia, anorexia, fever, and weight
loss, which, when associated with certain radiological patterns,( 3 , 4 ) lead to a rapid diagnosis. However, certain, unusual, clinical and
radiological presentations or presentations associated with other, chronic, lung diseases can make the etiologic diagnosis time-consuming
and challenging.( 2 , 5 ) Among occupational diseases, silicosis is known to be a contributing factor to pulmonary tuberculosis and other
fungal infections.( 6 ) Because of its opportunistic nature, tuberculosis is common in immunocompromised patients.( 7 ) The development of
tuberculosis depends on the known interaction between the host immune status and the aggressiveness of the infectious agent, which is
expressed by virulence, concentration of agents, and ability to induce hypersensitivity.( 8 ) In this context, it is necessary to consider
the modifying effect of the disease, which changes the life status of current populations, who benefit from better nutrition, housing, and
health conditions. Such changes include increased susceptibility to infections in people living with HIV and increased resistance to
infections in those not living with HIV. Our objective was to report the case of an elderly male patient who was oligosymptomatic and
apparently immunocompetent. The patient was a former construction worker. He underwent lobectomy because of a tumor mass in the right upper
lobe. Pathological examination revealed tuberculosis. In addition, silica infiltration and cryptococcosis were found in the surrounding lung
parenchyma, the latter being also found in the mediastinal lymph nodes. The literature lacks information regarding tuberculous pseudotumor.
We report the case of a 73-year-old White male patient who was a retired construction worker, having worked as a mason's assistant most of
his economically active life. The patient was a former smoker (smoking history, 10 pack-years). Over a 6-month period, he had daily episodes
of dry cough, dyspnea, and wheezing that improved, albeit partially, with the use of intravenous xanthine and an inhaled β2 agonist, having
often sought emergency room treatment. The patient was referred to our hospital after the identification of a lung tumor on a chest X-ray.
He reported no fever, chest pain, or bloodstained sputum. In addition, he reported weight loss (3 kg) during that period. The patient had
systemic arterial hypertension and reflux esophagitis, both of which were controlled. He reported no diabetes, dyslipidemia, chronic
respiratory diseases, or contact with tuberculosis patients. The patient reported no alcoholism. In addition, he reported that he had raised
animals when he was young and that he had been exposed to smoke from wood-burning stoves until the age of 25 years. Physical examination
revealed good general health. The patient had pallor of the skin and mucosa, and his body mass index was 29.7 kg/m2. He was well hydrated
and was breathing normally, having no jaundice or cyanosis. In addition, he had no digital clubbing or lymph node enlargement. Respiratory
findings included increased anteroposterior chest diameter, normal breath sounds, and diffuse wheezing. Arterial oxygen saturation was 90%
on room air. Cardiovascular and abdominal examination was normal. No leg edema, varicose veins, or ulcers were observed. Spirometry revealed
mild obstructive lung disease unresponsive to bronchodilators. The Mantoux tuberculin skin test (TST) was performed, and the induration was
15 mm. Counterimmunoelectrophoresis for antifungal serum antibodies was negative for cryptococcosis, aspergillosis, histoplasmosis, and
paracoccidioidomycosis. A CT scan of the chest (Figure 1) showed a hypodense tumor mass located in the right upper lobe and measuring 5.0 ×
3.5 cm. The major axis of the mass was directed toward the pulmonary hilum. Figure 1 Chest CT scan. In A, lung window. In B, mediastinal
window. The lung mass showed no enhancement after contrast administration, being accompanied by a slight apical displacement of the right
pulmonary hilum and by a few mediastinal lymph nodes with calcifications. Wegener's granulomatosis was ruled out by negative antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibody test results associated with an absence of specific upper airway and nervous system symptoms. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy
was performed on two occasions, having shown extrinsic obstruction of the right upper lobe bronchus and its segmental bronchi. In addition,
the bronchial mucosa appeared to be infiltrated. However, analysis of the biopsy samples was inconclusive, a surgical approach being
therefore adopted. The surgical specimen consisted of a cavitary mass in the right upper lobe (the contents of which were thick) and
enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes. Pathological examination of the mass revealed a dense chronic inflammatory infiltrate that was
granulomatous and exudative, as well as extensive areas of caseous necrosis, fibrosis, and giant cell reaction (Figure 2); none of the
various sections examined met histopathological criteria for malignancy. The presence of intracytoplasmic crystalloid structures in the
adjacent lung parenchyma (as revealed by H&E staining) constituted evidence of silicosis (Figure 3). The mediastinal lymph nodes showed a
marked chronic inflammatory infiltrate that was granulomatous and exudative, as well as extensive areas of necrosis, lymph node architecture
being extensively effaced. Figure 2 Pulmonary tuberculosis. Photomicrograph (H&E; magnification, ×100) showing caseous necrosis (upper half)
and granulomatous inflammatory infiltrate containing lymphocytes, epithelioid macrophages, and numerous multinucleated giant cells (lower
half). Ziehl-Neelsen staining and the Grocott-Gomori methenamine-silver stain technique were used in order to screen for AFB and fungi,
respectively, and the results were negative for all histological slides. Figure 3 Silicosis. Photomicrograph under polarized light (H&E;
magnification, ×400) showing lung parenchyma with an area of inflammatory infiltrate containing lymphocytes and macrophages, the cytoplasm
of which contained numerous elongated crystalloid structures that were bright under polarized light, being consistent with silicosis.
Fibrotic regions, which were also associated with silicosis, were observed in other areas. Serial histological sections were examined under
oil immersion (total magnification, ×1,000). Ziehl-Neelsen staining and the Grocott-Gomori methenamine-silver stain technique were used in
order to screen for AFB and fungi, respectively, and the results were negative for all histological slides. However, culture was positive
for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The lung mass was tested in an automated culture system, and there was M. tuberculosis growth. In this
technique, the tubes containing the biopsy material (classically macerated and decontaminated) are monitored in an automated culture system
(BACTEC Mycobacteria Growth Indicator Tube (MGIT) 960; Becton Dickinson, Sparks, MD, USA) for up to 42 days of incubation, and any
microorganism growing in a given tube emits fluorescence detectable by the system sensors, which indicate the tube as positive. Ziehl-
Neelsen staining was used in order to screen the positive material for AFB, and the material was cultured on Löwenstein-Jensen medium for
approximately 10 days. Mycobacterial colonies were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction, which identified M. tuberculosis by insertion
sequence IS6110. Culture of the lung tissue surrounding the mass was negative; the lymph node samples were lost. Lung tissue and mediastinal
lymph node samples were cultured on Sabouraud agar, Cryptococcus neoformans having been isolated after 72 h of incubation. For metabolic
recovery of the yeast and identification of Cryptococcus sp., a subculture of that isolate was performed, also on Sabouraud agar. The genus
and species were confirmed by the VITEK 2 Compact and 21343 YST Test Kit VTK 2 automated system (bioMérieux, Marcy I'Étoile, France). The
turbidity of the final suspension of saline solution containing the isolated colonies was analyzed with a DensiCHEK Plus device
(bioMérieux), the results being within the 1.80-2.20 range, as established by the manufacturer. A fragment of the lung mass was cultured,
and the results were negative. The patient received pharmacological treatment, being treated with a regimen of rifampin, hydrazide,
pyrazinamide, and ethambutol for 2 months, followed by rifampin and hydrazide for 4 months, in accordance with current recommendations for
the treatment of tuberculosis.( 7 ) In addition, he received itraconazole for 6 months. At 5 months of pharmacological treatment for
tuberculosis, the patient presented with a symmetric and painful increase in the mammary glands, which remained increased after the end of
the treatment. We attribute this to a rare side effect of hydrazide, which has been reported by other authors.( 9 ) In the case reported
here, the primary lesion was identified by histology and culture as tuberculous granuloma. In the context of pulmonary tuberculosis,
parenchymal pseudotumoral tuberculosis is considered rare in adults.( 10 ) Although host immunocompetence contributes to pulmonary
cryptococcosis presenting as nodules, such nodules are typically subpleural and smaller in size, as described in guidelines published in
2008.( 11 ) A low level of symptoms is not uncommon, being found in cases of tuberculosis( 10 ) and in approximately 25% of all cases of
cryptococcosis( 11 ) in immunocompetent patients. Nevertheless, in the present case, the finding of cryptococcosis widely present in the
mediastinal lymph nodes and sparsely present in the lung parenchyma prompted a reassessment of the immune status of the patient. His
immunocompetence was evidenced by a negative HIV test (ELISA) result, normal serum immunoglobulin levels, a negative antinuclear factor test
result, a negative rheumatoid factor test result, a high proportion of nitroblue tetrazolium-positive cells (spontaneous, 55 %; stimulated,
71%), and normal levels of CD4 and CD8 lymphocytes. The concomitant presence of those two processes in a single lung lobe, which was also
affected by silica infiltration and right apical mediastinal and pleural involvement, mimicked the radiological appearance of a lung
neoplasm. Although the conflict involving the differential diagnosis of lung masses in view of the possibility of malignancy is well known,
the present case is unusual because of the capricious combination of common and severe diseases, as well as because of the difficulty in
identifying the etiologic agents. This difficulty is due to the intrinsic characteristic of these infectious lesions; they have a low
concentration of agents, which stands in contrast with the host immune response. Pulmonary pseudotumoral tuberculosis in adults has been
defined by the presence of one or more masses in the parenchyma, such masses being caused by M. tuberculosis and arising as a primary or
post-primary process. The pathological material, consisting of coalescing pulmonary infiltrates and caseous necrosis resulting from the
presence of M. tuberculosis in the airways, can achieve large tumor size and only later reach the bronchial lumen,( 10 ) generating cavities
and causing elimination of sputum potentially containing bacilli. The combination of an atypical radiological presentation of pulmonary
tuberculosis with a lack of classic symptoms and expected symptoms of an infectious disease producing pulmonary necrosis might be related to
advanced age.( 12 ) However, in a recent series of eight cases of pulmonary pseudotumoral tuberculosis,( 10 ) the mean age was 36.0 ± 13.6
years; all patients reported a history of dry cough and had a Mantoux TST induration of 15-25 mm (as did our patient), whereas only two
reported a history of fever and hemoptysis, another two having reported constitutional symptoms. It has been argued that atypical
tuberculous lesions possibly represent delayed presentation of primary infection.( 13 ) This should be taken into consideration in view of
improvements in the health and living conditions of certain populations, as well as of programs to prevent and combat the disease. However,
in the present case, the positive TST result-which represents effective specific immunity-and the apical location of the lesion are
suggestive of secondary tuberculosis, which therefore results from the reactivation of quiescent foci resulting from the primary infection
or from exogenous reinfection. In Brazil, lung lesions of less than 3 cm in diameter are likely to be diagnosed as tuberculoma, whereas
tuberculous lesions the size of lung masses have rarely been reported and are limited to examples of radiological images.( 3 - 5 , 14 ) This
possibly contributed to our decision to focus on lung cancer in the present case, given that it is quite common in elderly patients with no
comorbidities. In our patient, the histopathological finding of silicosis was surprising because of the type of exposure, which is not among
the most common risks( 15 ) and which did not allow radiological recognition. This, however, does not rule out a strong correlation with
tuberculosis. Although the mechanisms involved have yet to be fully elucidated, the relationship between chronic exposure to silica (even in
the absence of silicosis) and an increased risk of developing tuberculosis is a harsh reality that is well documented in the literature.( 16
- 18 ) The risk of developing tuberculosis has a direct relationship with the burden of exposure and, possibly, the duration of exposure
(even if individuals are no longer exposed).( 19 ) The guidelines for the diagnosis of lung masses require that physicians be able to
discriminate between malignant and benign lesions in order to avoid delays in the treatment of a malignant process or inadvertent
interference with a benign process.( 5 , 20 ) Therefore, physicians should rely on all available diagnostic methods, including invasive
methods.( 5 ) An analysis of the chain of increasingly complex interventions required for diagnosing an uncommon presentation of pulmonary
tuberculosis under aggravating conditions shows the need for wider dissemination of information on atypical forms of pulmonary tuberculosis
and their respective outcomes. Study carried out at the University of São Paulo at Ribeirão Preto School of Medicine, Ribeirão Preto,
Brazil. A tuberculose e a criptococose são infecções que podem cursar com a formação de nódulos isolados ou múltiplos em pacientes
imunocompetentes. A exposição à sílica reconhecidamente eleva o risco de doença pelo Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Apresentamos o caso de um
paciente idoso sem antecedentes de infecções oportunistas, sem evidência clínica atual de imunodeficiência, com história de tosse seca e
sibilos, principalmente noturnos, com duração de seis meses, cuja radiografia de tórax evidenciava uma imagem tumoral medindo 5,0 × 3,5 cm
em lobo superior do pulmão direito. A abordagem diagnóstica da massa evidenciou tratar-se de tuberculose, e a análise histopatológica do
parênquima circunvizinho revelou a presença de criptococose e de silicose. Criptococose foi diagnosticada também em massas linfonodais
mediastinais. A conduta cirúrgica foi imposta pelo grau de comprometimento pleuropulmonar localizado, pelo caráter inconclusivo das
abordagens diagnósticas invasivas e não invasivas realizadas, assim como pela possibilidade de tratar-se de neoplasia. Este caso ilustra a
dificuldade inerente ao diagnóstico diferencial de massas pulmonares de natureza infecciosa ou inflamatória simulando neoplasia, o que
ocasionalmente impõe uma conduta cirúrgica radical. Apesar da presença de sintomas respiratórios por seis meses, a primeira radiografia do
tórax só foi realizada tardiamente. São discutidos os possíveis mecanismos patogenéticos que possam ter levado a associação de três tipos de
granulomatose no mesmo lobo pulmonar e é enfatizada a necessidade de uma maior divulgação das apresentações atípicas da tuberculose
pulmonar. Embora nas estimativas da Organização Mundial da Saúde a taxa de incidência global da tuberculose esteja em declínio desde 2004,(
1 ) a alta prevalência mundial da doença, especialmente nos países tropicais, ainda é responsável por um elevado número de mortes e pela
segregação de pessoas acometidas por sequelas debilitantes.( 2 ) Os sintomas clássicos da doença no pulmão consistem em tosse seca ou
produtiva, astenia, anorexia, febre e perda de peso, os quais, quando associados a determinados padrões radiológicos,( 3 , 4 ) induzem a um
rápido raciocínio diagnóstico. Porém, algumas apresentações clínicas e radiológicas infrequentes ou associadas a outras doenças pulmonares
crônicas podem tornar a busca pelo diagnóstico etiológico um exercício demorado e desafiador.( 2 , 5 ) Entre as doenças ocupacionais, a
silicose é reconhecidamente um fator de agregação de tuberculose pulmonar e, por vezes, de outras infecções produzidas por agentes
fúngicos.(6) Por seu caráter oportunista, em pacientes com baixa defesa imunológica, a possibilidade de tuberculose está sempre presente.(7)
O desenvolvimento da doença pelo bacilo da tuberculose depende da conhecida interação entre fatores imunológicos do hospedeiro e a
agressividade do agente infeccioso, expressa por sua virulência, concentração de agentes e capacidade de induzir hipersensibilidade.( 8 )
Nesse contexto, torna-se necessário considerar o efeito modificador da doença, proporcionado pelas mudanças no estado de vida das populações
atuais, tais como a maior suscetibilidade das pessoas que convivem com o HIV, por um lado, e a maior resistência de pessoas comuns a
infecções, que são beneficiadas hoje por melhores condições de alimentação, de moradia e de saúde. O objetivo do presente relato foi
apresentar um caso de um paciente idoso, oligossintomático, aparentemente imunocompetente, ex-auxiliar da construção civil, que foi
submetido a uma lobectomia devido a uma massa tumoral circunscrita no lobo superior pulmonar direito, cujo exame anatomopatológico
evidenciou tratar-se de tuberculose; além disso, foram encontrados no parênquima pulmonar circunvizinho infiltrado silicótico e
criptococose, sendo que esta última foi encontrada também nos linfonodos mediastinais. A literatura carece de informações a respeito de
tuberculose pseudotumoral. Paciente de 73 anos, branco, aposentado da construção civil, onde trabalhou a maior parte da vida ativa como
auxiliar de pedreiro, e ex-fumante de 10 anos-maço. Iniciou com um quadro clínico que evoluiu por seis meses com crises diárias de tosse
seca, dispneia e sibilos que melhoravam parcialmente com uso de xantina endovenosa e β2-agonista inalatório, em idas frequentes ao pronto-
atendimento. Foi encaminhado ao nosso hospital após a identificação de um tumor pulmonar à radiografia de tórax. Negava febre, dor torácica
ou escarro hemoptoico e referia perda de 3 kg de peso nesse período. Apresentava hipertensão arterial sistêmica e um diagnóstico de
esofagite de refluxo, ambas controladas; negava diabetes, dislipidemia, doenças respiratórias crônicas ou contato com portadores de
tuberculose. Negava etilismo; informou que criou animais quando jovem e conviveu com fogão à lenha até os 25 anos de idade. Ao exame físico
apresentava bom estado geral, com índice de massa corpórea = 29,7 kg/m2 e leve palidez cutâneo-mucosa. Estava hidratado, anictérico,
acianótico e eupneico. Não apresentava hipocratismo digital nem linfonodomegalia. No aparelho respiratório, evidenciava um aumento do
diâmetro anteroposterior do tórax, murmúrio vesicular preservado e normalmente distribuído e sibilos esparsos ocasionais. A saturação
arterial de oxigênio era de 90% em ar ambiente. O exame cardiovascular e abdominal era normal, e os membros inferiores não apresentavam
edemas, varizes nem ulcerações. Uma espirometria evidenciou distúrbio obstrutivo de grau leve sem resposta ao broncodilatador, e uma
intradermorreação de Mantoux de 15 mm foi detectada. A contraimunoeletroforese para anticorpos séricos antifúngicos foi negativa para
criptococose, aspergilose, histoplasmose e paracoccidioidomicose. A TC do tórax (Figura 1) evidenciava uma massa tumoral hipodensa,
localizada no lobo superior direito, medindo 5,0 × 3,5 cm, com o maior eixo direcionado para o hilo pulmonar. Figura 1 TC de tórax em janela
pulmonar (em A) e em janela mediastinal (em B). A massa pulmonar não exibia reforço após contraste, acompanhava-se de um pequeno
deslocamento apical do hilo pulmonar direito e de alguns linfonodos mediastinais com calcificações. O diagnóstico de granulomatose de
Wegener foi afastado pelo resultado negativo da pesquisa do anticorpo anticitoplasma de neutrófilos associado à ausência de sintomas
específicos em vias aéreas superiores ou sistema nervoso. Através de fibrobroncoscopia, realizada em duas ocasiões, foi evidenciada uma
obstrução extrínseca do brônquio do lobo superior direito e dos respectivos brônquios segmentares, além de mucosa brônquica de aspecto
infiltrado. Entretanto, o material das biópsias realizadas foi inconclusivo, e optou-se pela abordagem cirúrgica. O material intraoperatório
consistiu em uma massa cavitada no lobo superior direito com conteúdo espesso e linfonodomegalia mediastinal em todas as cadeias. A análise
anatomopatológica da massa circunscrita do lobo superior direito revelou um denso infiltrado inflamatório crônico granulomatoso e
exsudativo, associado a extensas áreas de necrose caseosa, fibrose e reação gigantocelular (Figura 2), assim como ausência de critérios
histopatológicos para malignidade, nos vários recortes avaliados. Foi evidenciada silicose no parênquima pulmonar adjacente, pela presença
de estruturas cristaloides intracitoplasmáticas (Figura 3) pela coloração H&E. Os linfonodos mediastinais exibiam um acentuado infiltrado
inflamatório crônico granulomatoso e exsudativo, associado a extensas áreas de necrose, com escassa representação de arquitetura linfonodal.
Figura 2 Tuberculose pulmonar. Fotomicrografia (H&E, aumento 100×) mostrando necrose caseosa na porção superior e infiltrado inflamatório
granulomatoso contendo linfócitos, macrófagos epitelioides e frequentes células gigantes multinucleadas na porção inferior. As colorações
especiais para BAAR (Ziehl-Neelsen) e fungos (Gomori-Grocott) resultaram negativas nas amostras histológicas. Figura 3 Silicose.
Fotomicrografia em luz polarizada (H&E; aumento 400×) mostrando parênquima pulmonar com área de infiltrado inflamatório contendo linfócitos
e macrófagos que apresentam no citoplasma frequentes estruturas cristaloides alongadas, que brilham sob luz polarizada, compatíveis com
silicose. Em outras áreas foram observadas regiões fibróticas, também associadas à silicose. As colorações para a pesquisa de BAAR e fungos
resultaram negativas em todas as lâminas histológicas, obtidas por cortes histológicos seriados, coradas pelos métodos de Ziehl-Neelsen e
Gomori-Grocott com prata metenamina, respectivamente, e examinadas com aumento total de 1.000× em óleo de imersão. Porém, o exame de cultura
revelou a presença do agente etiológico da tuberculose. No estudo micobacteriológico da massa pulmonar houve crescimento do Mycobacterium
tuberculosis em cultura automatizada. Nessa técnica, os frascos contendo o material de biópsia macerado e descontaminado da forma clássica
são monitorados em um método automatizado BACTEC Mycobacteria Growth Indicator Tube (MGIT) 960 (Becton Dickinson, Sparks, MD, EUA) por até
42 dias de incubação e qualquer micro-organismo crescendo no frasco emite uma fluorescência detectável pelos sensores do equipamento, que
acusam o frasco como positivo. Realizou-se a coloração de Ziehl-Neelsen no material positivo para evidenciar a presença de BAAR, e o cultivo
desse material foi realizado em meio de Löwenstein-Jensen por cerca de 10 dias. As colônias de micobactérias foram analisadas por reação em
cadeia de polimerase, que identificou o M. tuberculosis utilizando-se a sequência genética IS6110. A cultura foi negativa no tecido pulmonar
circunvizinho à massa; o material de linfonodo sofreu extravio. A micologia de fragmento pulmonar e de linfonodo mediastinal evidenciou o
crescimento de Cryptococcus neoformans isolado em ágar Sabouraud após 72 h de incubação. Um repique daquele isolado, feito em outro tubo de
ágar Sabouraud, serviu para a recuperação metabólica da levedura e para a realização das provas de identificação do gênero Cryptococcus sp.
A confirmação do gênero e espécie foi feita pelo sistema automatizado VITEK 2 Compact e 21343 YST Test Kit VTK 2 (bioMérieux, Marcy
l'Étoile, França). A análise da turvação da suspensão final de solução salina contendo as colônias isoladas foi realizada no aparelho
DensiCHEK Plus (bioMérieux), com resultados dentro do intervalo de 1,80 a 2,20, conforme estabelecido pelo fabricante. A cultura foi
negativa em fragmento da massa pulmonar. O paciente recebeu também um tratamento medicamentoso com um esquema de rifampicina, hidrazida,
pirazinamida e etambutol por dois meses, seguidos de rifampicina e hidrazida por quatro meses, conforme as recomendações atuais para o
tratamento da tuberculose,(7) além do tratamento com itraconazol por seis meses. O paciente apresentou, a partir do quinto mês do tratamento
medicamentoso para a tuberculose, um aumento simétrico e doloroso das glândulas mamárias, que persistiu após o término do tratamento.
Atribuímos esse fato a um raro efeito colateral da hidrazida, já observado por outros autores.( 9 ) A lesão principal, que veio a ser
identificada histologicamente e por meio de cultura como granuloma tuberculoso, é considerada rara no quadro da tuberculose pulmonar, qual
seja a apresentação pseudotumoral parenquimatosa no adulto.( 10 ) Muito embora a imunocompetência do hospedeiro também favoreça o padrão
nodular de apresentação da criptococose pulmonar, os nódulos nessa última condição são tipicamente de localização subpleural e com dimensões
mais reduzidas, segundo diretrizes de 2008.( 11 ) O baixo grau de sintomas não é achado incomum, estando presente tanto na tuberculose( 10 )
quanto em cerca de 25% dos casos de criptococose( 11 ) em pacientes com imunidade preservada. Ainda assim, no presente caso, o achado de
criptococose extensamente presente nos linfonodos mediastinais e com manifestações esparsas no parênquima pulmonar motivou uma reavaliação
da imunidade do paciente, sendo essa imunidade reforçada pela negatividade do teste de ELISA para anti-HIV, pelos níveis normais de
imunoglobulinas séricas, pela negatividade do fator antinuclear e do fator reumatoide, pelos níveis elevados no teste de nitroazul de
tetrazólio (espontâneo, 55%; estimulado, 71%) e pelos níveis normais de linfócitos CD4 e CD8. A concomitância desses dois processos em um
único lobo pulmonar, acometido também por infiltrados de sílica e envolvimento mediastinal e pleural apical direito, mimetizou um quadro
radiológico de neoplasia pulmonar. Embora seja bem conhecido o conflito que envolve o diagnóstico diferencial de massas pulmonares em face
da possibilidade de neoplasia, o presente caso se revela inusitado pela caprichosa combinação de doenças comuns e graves, associada a não
menos caprichosa dificuldade de identificação dos agentes etiológicos. Tal dificuldade está vinculada à característica intrínseca dessas
lesões infecciosas em questão, por possuírem baixa concentração de agentes em oposição à resposta imune do hospedeiro. A tuberculose
pseudotumoral pulmonar no adulto tem sido definida pela presença de uma ou mais massas no parênquima, causadas pelo M. tuberculosis, que
podem surgir como um processo primário ou pós-primário. O material patológico, constituído por infiltrados pulmonares coalescentes e necrose
caseosa, decorrentes da instalação do bacilo no interior das vias aéreas, pode atingir grandes dimensões tumorais e só tardiamente dar vazão
para a luz brônquica,( 10 ) gerando cavidades e expulsão de escarro potencialmente bacilífero. A associação de um padrão radiológico atípico
de tuberculose pulmonar, com escassez de sintomas clássicos e de sintomas previsíveis para uma doença infecciosa que produz necrose no
pulmão, poderia, de acordo com a literatura, estar relacionado à senilidade.( 12 ) Porém, vale a pena ressaltar que, em uma série recente
com oito casos de tuberculose pseudotumoral pulmonar,( 10 ) a média de idade foi 36,0 ± 13,6 anos; à semelhança do paciente aqui
apresentado, todos os pacientes daquela série referiram histórico de tosse seca e todos apresentaram teste de Mantoux com enduração entre 15
e 25 mm, enquanto somente dois dos oito indivíduos daquela série referiram histórico de febre e hemoptise e outros dois referiram sintomas
constitucionais. Tem-se discutido que lesões tuberculosas atípicas representem possivelmente a primoinfecção com apresentação tardia,( 13 )
fato que precisa ser lembrado face às melhorias nas condições de saúde e de vida de algumas populações, assim como aos programas de
prevenção e combate à doença. Entretanto, no presente caso, a resposta positiva ao teste cutâneo da tuberculina, que representa a eficácia
da imunidade específica, assim como a localização apical da lesão neste idoso, fala a favor de tuberculose possivelmente secundária,
decorrente, portanto, da reativação de focos quiescentes resultantes da primoinfecção ou de reinfecção exógena. Em nosso meio, ao contrário
da bem conhecida alta chance de diagnóstico de tuberculoma presente em lesões pulmonares com diâmetro inferior a 3 cm, as lesões com
dimensões de massa pulmonar causadas por tuberculose têm sido raramente relatadas e limitadas a exemplos de imagens radiológicas.( 3 - 5 ,
14 ) Esse fato contribuiu, possivelmente, para a decisão dos autores de orientar o presente caso para o enfoque da neoplasia pulmonar, uma
situação bem mais presente no quotidiano do médico quando se trata de pacientes idosos e isentos de comorbidades. A presença de silicose nos
achados histopatológicos foi surpreendente pelo tipo de exposição a que o paciente esteve submetido, que não está incluído entre os riscos
mais frequentes,( 15 ) e que, por outro lado, sequer permitia um reconhecimento radiológico, fato esse que não descarta uma forte correlação
com a tuberculose. Embora por mecanismos ainda não completamente esclarecidos, a ligação entre a exposição crônica a sílica, mesmo na
ausência de silicose, e o risco aumentado de desenvolver tuberculose é uma dura realidade bem documentada na literatura,( 16 - 18 ) e tal
risco guarda uma relação direta com a carga de exposição e, possivelmente, com o tempo de exposição, ainda que já encerrada.( 19 ) As
orientações diagnósticas para as massas pulmonares exigem do médico um discernimento perfeito entre lesões de natureza possivelmente maligna
ou benigna a fim de se evitar atrasos na terapêutica de um processo maligno ou uma invasão inadvertida em um processo benigno.( 5 , 20 )
Isso nos remete à necessidade de utilização irrestrita dos métodos diagnósticos disponíveis, ainda que invasivos ou mesmo cruentos.( 5 ) A
análise dessa cadeia de intervenções, que chegaram ao nível máximo de complexidade para revelar um diagnóstico de tuberculose pulmonar de
apresentação incomum em condições agravantes, adiciona uma ênfase à necessidade de uma maior divulgação das formas atípicas da tuberculose
pulmonar e de seus respectivos desfechos. Trabalho realizado na Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão
Preto (SP) Brasil. Apoio financeiro: Este estudo recebeu apoio financeiro da Fundação de Apoio ao Ensino, Pesquisa e Assistência (FAEPA).
