Infective endocarditis is a relatively rare complication of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Infective endocarditis in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy is almost always seen in patients with outflow obstruction and is more common in those with both outflow obstruction and
atrial dilatation. We present a case of culture negative mitral valve endocarditis in a previously asymptomatic woman with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy who died in the course of the disease. Antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer recommended in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM) in current guidelines unless otherwise indicated. We present a case of endocarditis in a patient with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy with significant outflow obstruction, and intend to discuss the use of antibiotic prophylaxis in such patients. A 37-year-old
woman was admitted due to a week-long history of malaise, myalgia, sweating and high fever. On admission, she had a body temperature of
39°C, a heart rate of 100 beats/ min and a blood pressure of 110/80 mmHg. The auscultation revealed a systolic murmur suggestive of mitral
regurgitation. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed a sinus tachycardia of 100 beats /min, signs of left ventricular hypertrophy and abnormal
lateral repolarization. The chest X-ray showed a normal cardiothoracic index. Laboratory investigation revealed leukocytosis (13.700 /mm3)
and raised inflammatory markers. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated minimally pericardial effusion, septal hypertrophy (wall
thickness: 1.7cm) with systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve, left atrial enlargement (47 mm), mild to moderate mitral regurgitation
and a suspected image of vegetation on the anterior mitral leaflet (Fig. (1) and supplementary video 1). A gradient of 130 mmHg was measured
with continuous wave Doppler in the outflow tract. Transesophageal echocardiography showed vegetation on both atrial and ventricular aspects
of the mitral anterior leaflet and mild to moderate mitral insufficiency (Fig. (2) and supplementary video 2). On detailed examination of
her medical history, it was learned that she had a tooth extraction 3 weeks ago and no antibiotic prophylaxis was given. The empirical
antibiotherapy (aqueous crystalline penicillin G and gentamicin sulfate) was started after blood samples were drawn for cultures. On the
second day of hospitalization, she was entubated as she developed severe dyspnea and hypotension. The bedside TTE revealed moderate to
severe mitral regurgitation. The patient died of cardiac arrest subsequently before the planned surgery could be carried out. The patient’s
blood cultures were later found to be negative. Infective endocarditis (IE), although not very common, has been reported in HCM patients in
the literature. The data relating the prevalence of IE are limited, and the most comprehensive study of prevalence and incidence was done by
Spirito and colleagues . They followed 810 patients, and the incidence of IE was reported to be 1.4 per 1000 person/year. The major risk
factors were found to be outflow tract obstruction and left atrial dilatation. The underlying pathogenesis of IE in patients with HCM could
be explained by the occurrence of endocardial damage secondary to the turbulent blood flow during ejection and the contact between the
mitral anterior leaflet and the septum during systole . Consequently, the vegetations were most commonly found on the ventricular aspect of
anterior mitral leaflet. Some significant changes have been made relating the antibiotic prophylaxis in recent guidelines [4, 5]. The
reasons for changes could be summarized as follow; (1) bacteraemia could be caused by daily routine activities such as tooth brushing,
flossing or chewing, (2) the lack of scientific evidence for the efficacy of IE prophylaxis, and (3) the possible emergence of resistant
microorganisms and the risk of anaphylaxis. Unfortunately, decisions regarding antibiotic prophylaxis are being made without evidence from
prospective, randomized, controlled trials. As for HCM patients, data are even more limited, and a definite decision regarding the
prophylaxis could not be justified easily. Especially in patients with significant outflow tract obstruction, endothelial damage by
turbulent flow and subsequent IE is likely, and further consideration should be made relating the prescription of antibiotic prophylaxis for
prevention of this deadly complication. In conclusion, scientific evidence for antibiotic prophylaxis against IE is lacking for both HCM and
other patient population, and more studies are needed. Declared none. The authors confirm that this article content has no conflict of
interest. Supplementary material is available on the publisher’s web site along with the published article. Transthoracic apical four-
chamber view showing vegetation (arrow) on mitral anterior leaflet (LA: left atrium, LV: left ventricle). Transesophageal modified long-axis
view showing vegetations on both atrial (arrow) and ventricular aspects (dotted arrow) of the mitral anterior leaflet (LA: left atrium, LV:
left ventricle).
