A 50 year-old male patient was referred to our clinic due to a floating mass in the right eye. The uncorrected visual aquity was 10 / 10 in
both eyes.The patient did not have any systemic disorder and trauma history. His ophthalmological examination revealed an unremarkable
anterior segment with no signs of inflammation. Indirect opthalmoscopy and posterior segment biomicroscopy performed with 90D lens was
unremarkable in the left eye, while in the right eye a single oval cyst was identified floating freely in the vitreous. The cyst was
partially masking the underlying retinal vasculature. B-scan ultrasound revealed an echo-free, round-shaped cyst that was free from
surrounding vitreous strands or retina localised at the posterior vitreous. Fluorescein angiography (FA) ruled out the presence of intra and
overlying vascularisation of the cyst. Indeed, FA showed a clear-edged hypofluorescence due to a pre-retinal masking effect. The indirect
hemaglutinin tests of the patient for ecinococcus and cysticercosis were negative. Eosinophilia was not detected in the preripheral blood
smear. Based on these findings the patient was diagnosed as primary vitreal cyst. The presented case was mild symptomatic so the patient was
decided to be followed up without any treatment. Vitreous cysts are rare ocular curiosities. They are usually detected during routine
ophthalmological examination. Patients can be asymptomatic or may have floaters or transient blurry vision. Vitreous cysts can be congenital
or acquired . In December 2010, a 50 year-old male was referred to our clinic due to a floating mass in his right eye. The patient
complained about floaters in the right eye which he had experienced since childhood. The patient`s uncorrected visual acuity was 10 / 10 in
both eyes and he did not have any systemic disorder or history of trauma. His ophthalmological examination revealed an unremarkable anterior
segment with no signs of inflammation. The intraocular pressure was 16 mmHg and 15 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Indirect
opthalmoscopy and posterior segment biomicroscopy performed with a 90D lens were unremarkable in the left eye, but a single, oval 6Ã—5 mm
diameter cyst was identified in the right eye, floating freely in the vitreous. The cyst was partially masking the underlying retinal
vasculature (Fig. 1). Optical coherence tomography was normal in both eyes. A B-scan ultrasound revealed an echo-free, round-shaped cyst
that was free from surrounding vitreous strands and retina, and was located in the posterior vitreous (Fig. 2). Fluorescein angiography (FA)
ruled out the presence of intra- and overlying vascularization of the cyst. Indeed, FA showed a clear-edged hypofluorescence due to a pre-
retinal masking effect (Fig. 1). The indirect hemagglutinin tests of the patient for ecinococcus and cysticercosis were negative.
Eosinophilia was not detected in the preripheral blood smear. Ultrasonography of the liver, spleen and kidney revealed no pathology. Based
on these findings the patient was diagnosed with a primary vitreous cyst. Intravitreal cysts are divided into congenital and acquired cysts.
Congenital cysts are associated with residues of the hyaloid vascular system and are occasionally present in perfectly normal eyes. These
cysts are usually non-pigmented, with a smooth surface, pedunculated or sessile, and located anterior to the optic disc. Some congenital
cysts can be limited in movement due to vitreous strands that link them to the optic discs . Aqcuired cysts are more often associated with
some type of inflammation due to intraocular infection, such as parasitic vitreitis, toxoplasmosis, and uveitis, or retinitis pigmentosa,
choroidal atrophy and retinoschisis . Trauma may play an important role in the generation of the cysts. Awan in 1975, reported a history of
trauma in 2.7% of patients with intravitreal cysts. In cases of patients with traumatic cysts, the cyst is mostly transparent, but its wall
may be pigmented . Additionally, trauma may dislocate the cyst and move it close to the visual axis. Due to this phenomenon, patients may
become symptomatic after traumas. Though the role of the trauma remains unclear. Trauma may trigger cyst formation or dislocate an already
formed cyst and cause the patient to become symptomatic . In the presented case, the patient had no history of trauma and the infective
causes of the cysts were ruled out by negative serological tests. B-mode ultrasonography did not show any embryonal remnants. FA revealed
that the inside and the surface of the cyst were avascular. Upon fundus examination, there was no any accompanying pathology that had been
previously reported in the literature, such as retinitis pigmentosa, retinoschisis, etc. In the literature, patient age has been reported to
range from 5 to 68 years, though the majority of the patients are between 20 and 40 years. Vitreous cysts that have been described
previously are normally single monolateral, single bilateral, or multiple monolateral. The presented case is of a single monolateral cyst.
Bilateral cases are usually observed patients with retinitis pigmentosa . Patients are usually asymptomatic, but because the cysts may be
mobile, patients may suffer from floaters. Mioreover, when the cysts approach the visual axis, permanent visual disturbances may occur .
There is no treatment indication for asymptomatic or mild cases of vitreous cysts. As reported previously in two cases followed for 17
years, intravitreal cysts do not enlarge in diameter. In previously reported symptomatic cases, argon laser photocystotomy, YAG (Yttrium
aluminium garnet) laser cystotomy, and pars plana aspiration have been attempted in order to relieve symptoms . In the presented case, the
patient was mildly symptomatic, so we decided to follow up with the patient in order to monitor the cyst, but provide any treatment. In
conclusion, intravitreal cysts are rare ophthalmological disorders that have been discussed for a century, but the treatment of these
'ocular curiocities' remain debatable. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. There is a cyst floating
inside the eye and partially masking the underlying the vasculature of the retina (A). There is a closer view of the cyst (B). In (C) and
(D), there is fluorescein angiography (FA) of the fundus showing no vascularisation inside and on the surface of the cyst. FA also, shows a
clear-edged hypofluorescence due to a pre-retinal masking effect. B-mode ultrasonography of the cyst located in the posterior vitreous.
There is no any attachments to the internal structures of the eye.
