Extrinsic compression of the central airway is usually related to the presence of adjacent solid lesions, the most common being primary or
secondary mediastinal tumors. Cystic lesions account for 12-30% of mediastinal masses and are usually benign and asymptomatic. Obstructive
or compressive symptoms are extremely uncommon.( 1 ) Here, we describe the case of a 56-year-old man with a 6-week history of progressive
dyspnea who presented with dry cough and hoarseness. He had no fever, dysphagia, or weight loss. He was a former smoker (20 pack-years) and
reported no history of surgical intervention or tracheal intubation. Physical examination revealed that the patient's blood pressure was 165
× 95 mmHg, he had tachydyspnea at rest, dysphonia, and noisy respiration, and he was unable to tolerate the supine position; there was a
hard, painless, smooth-surfaced swelling at the left supraclavicular fossa, the thyroid gland was not palpable, and there was no
lymphadenopathy in the neck. Heart and lung auscultation was normal. A chest X-ray revealed mediastinal widening and tracheal deviation to
the right. A chest CT scan revealed a cystic lesion without capsular calcification, measuring 12.1 × 7.3 × 7.2 cm. The lesion was located in
the middle mediastinum and caused compression of the mediastinal trachea, deviating it to the right and reducing its caliber. The unilocular
cystic lesion extended to the superior mediastinal aperture, adjacently to the left lobe of the thyroid gland, displacing the esophagus to
the left (Figure 1). The results of laboratory and thyroid function testing, as well as the marker levels, were within the normal range.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, which was performed with the patient in a semi-sitting position because of severe dyspnea, revealed distal
erosive esophagitis, severe erosive antral gastritis, and no compression or deviation of the esophagus. Figure 1 Chest CT scans. In A,
coronal reconstruction showing compression of the trachea (light arrow) by the lesion and contact of the lesion with the lower pole of the
left lobe of the thyroid gland (dark arrow). In B, C, and D, respectively, sagittal, axial and coronal reconstructions showing a cystic
lesion without calcification, located in the visceral compartment of the mediastinum and causing severe compression of the mediastinal
trachea (light arrows). Note lack of intravenous contrast enhancement. The presumptive diagnosis of bronchogenic cyst or thyroid goiter with
compression of the airway and associated vocal dysfunction was regarded as an indication for video-assisted flexible laryngotracheal
bronchoscopy under topical anesthesia with intubation under bronchoscopic visualization, because of dyspnea, during the same anesthesia. The
examination revealed paresis of the left vocal fold, which remained abducted; severe extrinsic tracheal compression with narrowing of the
tracheal lumen in its proximal two-thirds; and architectural distortion of the distal trachea with normal mucosa. The patient then underwent
orotracheal intubation guided by video-assisted bronchoscopy, was anesthetized, was placed in the left lateral decubitus position, and
underwent right posterolateral thoracotomy in the fourth intercostal space with preservation of the latissimus dorsi muscle. A 30º endoscope
(Karl Storz Instruments, Tuttlingen, Germany) was inserted into the right seventh intercostal space, on the posterior axillary line, and
revealed an encapsulated, cystic mediastinal lesion, measuring 12 cm in diameter, in the visceral compartment above the azygos vein, between
the trachea and the esophagus. Resection consisted of a complete, video-assisted extracapsular dissection of the anterior, posterior, and
inferior edges of the cyst, with preservation of the right recurrent laryngeal nerve. Dyspnea resolved in the immediate postoperative
period, and hoarseness resolved on postoperative day 2. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 4. Histopathology revealed a thin,
elastic cyst wall composed of cuboidal cells arranged linearly among columnar epithelial cells. Immunohistochemical analysis was positive
for parathyroid hormone, confirming the diagnosis of benign, nonfunctioning parathyroid cyst (Figure 2). Figure 2 In A, histological section
of the cyst wall, which consisted of fibrous tissue covered by cuboidal epithelium (H&E; magnification, ×20). In B, positive
immunohistochemical reaction for parathyroid hormone in the epithelial lining (magnification, ×20). Parathyroid cysts are generally
asymptomatic and mimic thyroid lesions. Symptomatic parathyroid cysts are extremely rare, with about 200 cases having been reported. Of
those, only 10 had recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis and dysphonia.( 1 , 2 ) Parathyroid cysts are slow growing and are usually seen
posteriorly to the left lobe of the thyroid gland, a common ground for intrathoracic thyroid goiters. Approximately 80% of these lesions are
nonfunctioning and asymptomatic.( 3 ) Functioning cysts usually manifest as hyperparathyroidism caused by abnormal parathyroid hormone
production leading to hypercalcemia. There has been one report of a large functioning parathyroid cyst mimicking a thyroid goiter with
compressive symptoms.( 4 ) Compression of neighboring structures can lead to laryngeal stridor, dyspnea, and dysphagia; however, the
combination of these factors in the presence of a nonfunctioning lesion, as in the case describe here, is extremely uncommon. The absence of
dysphagia despite the large size of the cyst can be explained by the notorious capacity of the esophagus to accommodate itself in the
mediastinum, even when compressed by large lesions. The symptoms and characteristics of the patient's cyst are similar to those described by
one group of authors, who performed a transcutaneous puncture to empty a cyst of its contents that resulted in subsequent recurrence,
requiring surgical resection.( 5 ) Although there have been reports of cyst aspiration and sclerotherapy, this is not the recommended
approach, which is why we did not perform it. In retrospect, however, it must be considered that, in the presence of severe airway
obstruction, such as that described in our patient, the risk of this type of puncture would be reasonable in order to improve the
ventilatory status until definitive treatment. Nevertheless, our choice to perform bronchoscopy and intubation under bronchoscopic
visualization proved to be safe and effective. We did not perform scintigraphy or ultrasonography of the thyroid, because we considered that
the results of these tests would not change the therapeutic approach. On CT scans, functioning cysts present as low-density homogeneous
areas, whereas, on nuclear magnetic resonance imaging, they are seen as isointense areas because of their serous fluid content. In the case
reported here, nuclear magnetic resonance imaging was not performed, because the CT findings were sufficient to establish the nature and
limits of the cyst, especially in terms of its relationship with the mediastinal vascular structures. There have been isolated reports of
functioning cystic parathyroid carcinomas of the mediastinum.( 6 ) Cystic degeneration resulting from an adenoma or adenocarcinoma has a
distinct behavior from that resulting from a parathyroid cyst. The content of an adenoma or adenocarcinoma is characterized predominantly by
hemorrhagic or chocolate-like fluid, and the capsule is not surrounded by an epithelial layer. The content of a simple cyst is characterized
by pearly clear fluid and is covered by a layer of flat columnar to cuboidal epithelial cells that have histological features typical of the
parathyroid glands.( 4 ) Surgical resection is recommended for functioning cysts and for nonfunctioning cysts associated with compressive
symptoms, in which case aspiration alone leads to recurrence of the lesion and symptoms. We chose to perform resection via video-assisted
thoracotomy because of the topography of the visceral mediastinum and because of the need for detailed viewing of the structures so as to
avoid injury to the right recurrent laryngeal nerve. The present case demonstrates that, although nonfunctioning mediastinal parathyroid
cysts are rare, they can be the cause of severe obstruction of the central airway and dysphonia, especially when they reach large sizes.
Surgical treatment is the most effective and safe way to resolve compressive symptoms completely, and it should be preceded by careful
diagnostic work-up and careful planning. A compressão extrínseca da via aérea central está usualmente relacionada à presença de lesões
sólidas adjacentes, sendo as mais frequentes as neoplasias primárias ou secundárias do mediastino. As lesões císticas representam 12-30% das
massas mediastinais e são usualmente benignas e assintomáticas. Os sintomas obstrutivos ou compressivos são extremamente infrequentes.( 1 )
Descrevemos aqui o caso de um homem de 56 anos, atendido por dispneia progressiva por 6 semanas, com tosse seca, rouquidão, sem febre,
disfagia ou perda ponderal. Era ex-tabagista (20 anos-maço) e negava procedimentos cirúrgicos ou intubação traqueal prévios. Ao exame
físico, apresentava pressão arterial de 165 × 95 mmHg, taquidispneia em repouso, disfonia e cornagem, não tolerando o decúbito dorsal; havia
abaulamento indolor na fossa supraclavicular esquerda de consistência firme e superfície lisa com glândula tireoide impalpável e sem
linfadenomegalia no pescoço. A ausculta cardíaca e pulmonar foi normal. A radiografia de tórax evidenciava alargamento mediastinal e desvio
traqueal para a direita. À TC de tórax, lesão cística medindo 12,1 × 7,3 × 7,2 cm, sem calcificações capsulares, situada no mediastino
médio, determinando compressão da traqueia mediastinal, desviando-a para a direita e com redução de seu calibre. A lesão cística unilocular
estendia-se até o estreito mediastinal superior, adjacente ao lobo esquerdo da tireoide, deslocando o esôfago para a esquerda (Figura 1).
Exames laboratoriais, provas de função tireoidiana e dosagens de marcadores estavam dentro dos valores normais. A esofagogastroduodenoscopia
foi realizada com o paciente semissentado devido à intensa dispneia, revelando esofagite erosiva distal, gastrite erosiva elevada no antro
sem compressão ou desvio do trajeto do esôfago. Figura 1 TCs de tórax. Em A, reconstrução coronal demonstrando a compressão traqueal (seta
clara) pela lesão e o contato com o polo inferior do lobo esquerdo da tireoide (seta escura). Em B, C e D, lesão cística sem calcificações
no compartimento visceral do mediastino com compressão severa da traqueia mediastinal (setas claras) nas reconstruções sagital, axial e
coronal, respectivamente. Nota-se a ausência de realce após injeção de contraste endovenoso. Com as hipóteses diagnósticas de cisto
broncogênico ou bócio tireoidiano com compressão da via aérea e disfunção vocal associada, foi indicada uma laringotraqueobroncoscopia
flexível videoassistida sob anestesia tópica com intubação assistida devido à dispneia no mesmo tempo anestésico da cirurgia. O exame
revelou paresia da prega vocal esquerda em abdução, severa compressão traqueal extrínseca com redução da luz em seus 2/3 proximais e
distorção arquitetural da traqueia distal com mucosa normal. Procedeu-se com a intubação orotraqueal orientada pela broncoscopia
videoassistida, o paciente foi anestesiado, posicionado em decúbito lateral esquerdo e submetido à toracotomia posterolateral direita no
quarto espaço intercostal com preservação do músculo grande dorsal. Uma ótica de 30º (Karl Storz Instruments, Tuttlingen, Alemanha) foi
inserida no sétimo espaço intercostal direito, linha axilar posterior, visualizando-se uma lesão mediastinal cística de 12 cm de diâmetro,
encapsulada no compartimento visceral acima da veia ázigos, entre a traqueia e o esôfago. A ressecção constou de dissecção extracapsular
videoassistida completa do cisto nos limites anterior, posterior e inferior, com preservação do nervo laríngeo recorrente direito. Houve
resolução da dispneia no pós-operatório imediato e da rouquidão no segundo dia. O paciente obteve alta hospitalar no quarto dia pós-
operatório. A histopatologia revelou parede cística fina, elástica, constituída de células cuboides dispostas de forma linear em meio a
células colunares epiteliais. A análise imuno-histoquímica foi positiva para paratormônio, confirmando-se o diagnóstico de cisto
paratireoidiano benigno não funcionante (Figura 2). Figura 2 Em A, corte histológico da parede do cisto, constituída por tecido fibroso
revestido por epitélio cuboide (H&E; aumento, 20×). Em B, reação imuno-histoquímica demonstrando a positividade para paratormônio no
revestimento epitelial (aumento, 20×). Cistos paratireoidianos são geralmente assintomáticos e mimetizam lesões da tireoide. Os sintomáticos
são extremamente raros, com cerca de 200 casos relatados. Desses, apenas 10 apresentavam paralisia de nervo laríngeo recorrente com
disfonia.( 1 , 2 ) São de crescimento lento, usualmente visualizados posteriormente ao lobo esquerdo da tireoide, território comum aos
bócios tireoidianos intratorácicos. Aproximadamente 80% dessas lesões são não funcionantes e assintomáticas.( 3 ) Os cistos funcionantes se
manifestam usualmente através de hiperparatireoidismo pela produção anômala de paratormônio causando hipercalcemia. Há um relato de cisto
paratireoidiano funcionante de grandes dimensões simulando bócio tireoidiano com sintomas compressivos.( 4 ) A compressão das estruturas
vizinhas pode levar a estridor laríngeo, dispneia e disfagia; entretanto, a combinação desses fatores na presença de lesão não funcionante,
como no caso que descrevemos, é extremamente incomum. A ausência de disfagia a despeito das grandes dimensões do cisto pode ser explicada
pela notória capacidade de acomodação do esôfago no mediastino, mesmo quando comprimido por lesões de grandes dimensões. Os sintomas e
características do cisto do paciente assemelham-se aos descritos por um grupo de autores, que realizaram uma punção transcutânea do cisto
para seu esvaziamento que resultou em recidiva subsequente, necessitando ressecção cirúrgica.( 5 ) Apesar dos relatos de aspiração e
escleroterapia do cisto, a conduta não é a prática recomendada, razão pela qual não a realizamos. Entretanto, em retrospecto, há de se
ponderar que, na vigência de severa obstrução ventilatória, como a descrita em nosso paciente, o risco desse tipo de punção seria
justificável no intuito de melhorar a condição ventilatória até o tratamento definitivo. Não obstante, nossa opção pela broncoscopia e
intubação sob auxílio broncoscópico mostrou-se segura e eficaz. Não foram realizadas cintilografia nem ultrassonografia da tireoide uma vez
que ambas não modificariam a conduta terapêutica. À TC, os cistos não funcionantes apresentam-se como imagens homogêneas de baixa densidade,
enquanto, na ressonância magnética nuclear, esses se mostram como áreas isointensas devido ao seu conteúdo fluido seroso. Em nosso caso, a
ressonância magnética nuclear não foi realizada, pois as informações da TC foram suficientes para a definição da natureza e limites,
sobretudo no que tange à relação do cisto com as estruturas vasculares mediastinais. Existem relatos isolados de carcinoma cístico
funcionante da paratireoide no mediastino.( 6 ) A degeneração cística oriunda de um adenoma ou de um adenocarcinoma apresenta um
comportamento distinto de um cisto paratireoidiano. No primeiro, há predomínio de líquido hemorrágico ou achocolatado em seu conteúdo, sendo
que a cápsula não é circundada por uma camada epitelial. No cisto simples, o conteúdo é de líquido claro, perolado, recoberto por uma camada
de células epiteliais colunares achatadas a cuboidais que guardam características da histologia típica das paratireoides.( 4 ) A ressecção
cirúrgica é recomendada para os cistos funcionantes e para os não funcionantes associados com sintomas compressivos, nos quais a aspiração
isolada leva a recidiva da lesão e dos sintomas. Nossa opção pela ressecção via toracotomia videoassistida baseou-se na topografia do
mediastino visceral e na necessidade de visualização detalhada das estruturas para se evitar a lesão do nervo laríngeo recorrente direito. O
presente caso demonstra que os cistos paratireoidianos mediastinais não funcionantes, embora raros, podem ser causa de grave obstrução de
via aérea central e disfonia, sobretudo quando atingem grandes dimensões. O tratamento cirúrgico é a forma mais eficaz e segura de resolução
completa dos sintomas compressivos, devendo ser precedido de investigação diagnóstica e planejamento criteriosos.
