Epipericardial fat necrosis is a rare, benign, and self-limited cause of acute chest pain, with only 35 cases reported in the literature.( 1
, 2 ) It presents as new-onset pleuritic chest pain in otherwise healthy patients, and, therefore, it is an important differential diagnosis
for acute chest pain in this group of individuals. The pathophysiology has been labeled as idiopathic or related to an acute damage of this
fat tissue secondary to vascular torsion, trauma, or microvascular bleeding. We report the case of a 23-year-old healthy female patient, a
chronic oral contraceptive user, who presented to the emergency department with a two-day history of right-sided pleuritic chest pain,
associated with mild dyspnea. No fever, cough, wheezing, or other respiratory symptoms were present. Physical examination in the emergency
department revealed oxygen saturation on room air of 98%, temperature of 36.8ºC, HR of 110 bpm, RR of 24 breaths/min, and blood pressure of
110 × 65 mmHg. Laboratory tests were unremarkable. Electrocardiography showed normal sinus rhythm, whereas chest X-ray showed a slight right
paracardiac opacity and tiny right pleural effusion (Figure 1A), and CT revealed a round encapsulated lesion with fat attenuation in the
right epipericardial fat with subtle peripheral strands, which are typical abnormalities due to epipericardial fat necrosis (Figures 1B and
1C). Pulmonary embolism was ruled out by a contrast-enhanced protocol. The patient was then treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs, and her symptoms resolved in the next few days. Four weeks later, CT scans of the chest showed complete resolution of all findings
(Figure 2). Figure 1 In A, posteroanterior chest X-ray showing tiny pleural effusion and slight right paracardiac opacity. In B, CT scan of
the chest revealing a round encapsulated lesion with fat attenuation and subtle strands in the right epipericardial fat (arrow). In C,
coronal and sagittal views of the round encapsulated lesion in the right epipericardial fat (arrows), suggesting epipericardial fat
necrosis. Figure 2 CT scan of the chest performed four weeks after admission showing complete resolution of the previous findings.
Epipericardial fat necrosis is a rare entity, being first reported in 1957 by Jackson et al.( 3 ) Since then, other similar cases have been
reported, and the most recent studies have characterized this condition as benign and self-limited. The epicardial or visceral layer of fat
tissue is found in the interventricular groove along the atria and extends to the right and left pleural surface. It can be more prominent
in obese individuals, in whom it can completely cover the epicardial surface.( 1 ) The physiopathology of necrosis of epipericardial fat is
still under debate, but an acute torsion of a vascular pedicle has been proposed.( 3 ) Indeed, small parts of fat tissue attached to the
heart by a pedicle have been found in some patients submitted to cardiac surgery,( 4 ) and an acute torsion of the vascular pedicle could
lead to necrosis. Another explanation would be a pre-existing structural abnormality of the adipose tissue, making this fat vulnerable to
trauma caused by the beats of the heart.( 5 ) In addition, it has been postulated that straining or heavy lifting could trigger abrupt
changes in the intravascular pressure associated with the Valsalva maneuver, causing hemorrhage into the adipose tissue that is loosely
attached to the pericardium.( 1 ) The most common presentation of epipericardial fat necrosis is acute pleuritic chest pain. There is no age
or gender predilection. The pain can be associated with dizziness, syncope, dyspnea, tachycardia, or diaphoresis. Physical examination is
usually unremarkable. In general, the pain lasts only a few days, but it can persist for weeks and recur in intermittent episodes.( 6 )
Cardiac enzymes and other laboratory tests typically show no abnormalities. Electrocardiography is characteristically normal, but it
occasionally shows findings suggestive of resolving pericarditis.( 1 ) During the first days, chest X-rays can be normal or reveal small
pleural effusion. Thereafter, an ill-defined round mass appears near the cardiophrenic angle on the side of the chest pain. These findings
are nonspecific and formerly led patients to undergo surgery due to the lack of cross-sectional imaging or the need to rule out
malignancies, such as lung cancer and liposarcoma.( 7 ) The pathologic findings have been described as necrotic fat cells surrounded by
macrophages, neutrophils, or fibrous tissue, resembling the features of epiploic appendagitis. Since 2005, when the first case of successful
conservative management of epipericardial fat necrosis was described,( 3 ) CT has played an important role in the diagnosis and follow-up.
The typical finding is a round encapsulated fat-containing lesion with strands in the epipericardial fat, which can be mild or marked.
Pericardial thickening and ipsilateral pleural effusion can also be present. Once this finding is present in a typical clinical context and
other causes of acute chest pain are ruled out, physicians should consider epipericardial fat necrosis as the cause of pain.( 8 ) Our
patient was a young user of oral contraceptives who presented with severe right-sided pleuritic chest pain, which implicates pulmonary
embolism as the main diagnosis to be ruled out. Pulmonary embolism was excluded, and epipericardial fat necrosis was visualized by CT scans,
which led to the correct diagnosis and allowed the institution of conservative management with excellent results. It is imperative that
clinicians and radiologists be aware of this condition in order to manage it properly in emergency departments. Necrose da gordura
epipericárdica é uma causa rara, benigna e autolimitada de dor torácica aguda, com apenas 35 casos relatados na literatura.( 1 , 2 )
Apresenta-se como dor torácica pleurítica de início recente em pacientes saudáveis e, portanto, é um importante diagnóstico diferencial de
dor torácica aguda nesse grupo de indivíduos. A fisiopatologia tem sido rotulada de idiopática ou relacionada a dano agudo a esse tecido
adiposo, secundário a torção vascular, trauma ou sangramento microvascular. Relatamos o caso de uma paciente saudável de 23 anos de idade,
usuária crônica de contraceptivo oral, que se apresentou ao departamento de emergência com história de dois dias de dor torácica pleurítica
à direita, associada a dispneia leve. Não apresentava febre, tosse, sibilância, ou outros sintomas respiratórios. O exame físico realizado
no departamento de emergência revelou saturação de oxigênio de 98% em ar ambiente, temperatura de 36,8ºC, FC de 110 bpm, FR de 24 ciclos/min
e pressão arterial de 110 × 65 mmHg. Os exames laboratoriais foram normais. O eletrocardiograma mostrou ritmo sinusal normal, ao passo que a
radiografia de tórax mostrou ligeira opacidade paracardíaca direita e pequeno derrame pleural à direita (Figura 1A), e a TC revelou uma
lesão encapsulada arredondada com atenuação de gordura na gordura epipericárdica direita com filamentos periféricos sutis, que são
anormalidades típicas atribuídas à necrose da gordura epipericárdica (Figuras 1B e 1C). Embolia pulmonar foi descartada por meio de um
protocolo com contraste. A paciente foi então tratada com anti-inflamatórios não esteroides, e seus sintomas resolveram em poucos dias.
Quatro semanas depois, a TC de tórax mostrou resolução completa de todos os achados (Figura 2). Figura 1 Em A, radiografia de tórax em
incidência posteroanterior mostrando pequeno derrame pleural e ligeira opacidade paracardíaca direita. Em B, TC de tórax revelando uma lesão
encapsulada arredondada com atenuação de gordura e filamentos sutis na gordura epipericárdica direita (seta). Em C, vista coronal e sagital
da lesão encapsulada arredondada na gordura epipericárdica direita (setas), sugerindo a presença de necrose da gordura epipericárdica.
Figura 2 TC de tórax realizada quatro semanas após a admissão, mostrando resolução completa dos achados anteriores. A necrose da gordura
epipericárdica é uma entidade rara, relatada pela primeira vez em 1957 por Jackson et al.( 3 ) Desde então, foram relatados outros casos
semelhantes, e os estudos mais recentes têm caracterizado essa condição como benigna e autolimitada. A camada epicárdica ou visceral de
tecido adiposo encontra-se no sulco interventricular ao longo dos átrios e estende-se para a superfície pleural direita e esquerda. Pode ser
mais proeminente em indivíduos obesos, nos quais pode cobrir completamente a superfície epicárdica.( 1 ) Embora a fisiopatologia da necrose
da gordura epipericárdica ainda esteja em debate, propôs-se torção aguda de um pedículo vascular.( 3 ) Com efeito, pequenas partes de tecido
adiposo ligado ao coração por um pedículo foram encontradas em alguns pacientes submetidos a cirurgia cardíaca,( 4 ) e uma torção aguda do
pedículo vascular poderia levar a necrose. Outra explicação seria uma anormalidade estrutural pré-existente do tecido adiposo, a qual
tornaria essa gordura vulnerável ao trauma causado pelas batidas do coração.( 5 ) Além disso, supôs-se que fazer força ou levantar peso
poderia provocar mudanças bruscas na pressão intravascular associadas à manobra de Valsalva, causando hemorragia no tecido adiposo
fracamente ligado ao pericárdio.( 1 ) A apresentação mais comum da necrose da gordura epipericárdica é dor torácica pleurítica aguda. Não há
predileção por idade ou gênero. A dor pode estar associada a vertigem, síncope, dispneia, taquicardia ou sudorese. O exame físico é
geralmente normal. Em geral, a dor dura apenas alguns dias, mas pode persistir durante semanas e recidivar em episódios intermitentes.( 6 )
Enzimas cardíacas e outros exames laboratoriais tipicamente não apresentam anormalidades. O eletrocardiograma é caracteristicamente normal,
mas ocasionalmente apresenta achados que sugerem a presença de pericardite em processo de resolução.( 1 ) Durante os primeiros dias, a
radiografia de tórax pode ser normal ou revelar pequeno derrame pleural. Em seguida, uma massa arredonda mal definida aparece perto do
ângulo cardiofrênico no lado da dor torácica. Esses achados são inespecíficos e levavam a cirurgia em virtude da ausência de imagens
transversais ou da necessidade de descartar neoplasias malignas, tais como câncer de pulmão e lipossarcoma.( 7 ) Os achados patológicos
descritos incluem células adiposas necróticas circundadas por macrófagos, neutrófilos, ou tecido fibroso, com características semelhantes às
de apendicite epiploica. Desde 2005, quando foi descrito o primeiro caso de tratamento conservador bem-sucedido de necrose da gordura
epipericárdica,( 3 ) a TC tem desempenhado um papel importante no diagnóstico e acompanhamento. O achado típico é uma lesão encapsulada
arredondada que contém gordura, com filamentos na gordura epipericárdica, que pode ser leve ou acentuada. Espessamento pericárdico e derrame
pleural ipsilateral também podem estar presentes. Uma vez que esse achado esteja presente em um contexto clínico típico e outras causas de
dor torácica aguda tenham sido descartadas, os médicos devem considerar a necrose da gordura epipericárdica como a causa da dor.( 8 ) Nossa
paciente era uma jovem usuária de contraceptivos orais que apresentou dor torácica pleurítica grave à direita, que implica embolia pulmonar
como o principal diagnóstico a ser descartado. A embolia pulmonar foi excluída, e a TC revelou a presença de necrose da gordura
epipericárdica, o que levou ao diagnóstico correto e permitiu a instituição do tratamento conservador, com excelentes resultados. É
imperativo que clínicos e radiologistas estejam cientes dessa condição, a fim de tratá-la apropriadamente em departamentos de emergência.
