Acute motor and sensory axonal neuropathy (AMSAN) are recently described subtypes of Guillain-Barre syndrome characterized by acute onset of
distal weakness, loss of deep tendon reflexes, and sensory symptoms. A 21-yr-old male was transferred to our hospital due to respiration
difficulties and progressive weakness. In laboratory findings, immunoglobulin M antibodies against hepatitis A were detected in blood and
cerebrospinal fluid. The findings of motor nerve conduction studies showed markedly reduced amplitudes of compound muscle action potentials
in bilateral peroneal, and posterior tibial nerves, without evidence of demyelination. Based on clinical features, laboratory findings, and
electrophysiologic investigation, the patient was diagnosed the AMSAN following acute hepatitis A viral infection. The patient was treated
with intravenous immunoglobulin and recovered slowly. Clinicians should consider this rare but a serious case of AMSAN following acute
hepatitis A infection. Many infectious agents and immunological mechanisms may play a role in pathogenesis of Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS).
It is possible to identify the four most common subtypes: the acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy (AIDP), the acute
motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN), the acute motor and sensory axonal neuropathy (AMSAN) and Miller Fisher's syndrome (1). Above mentioned
subtypes, AMSAN is considered to be a rare variant of GBS, and one that usually has a more serious clinical course and slower recovery than
the classic demyelinating form of GBS (2). AMSAN has been associated with antecedent Campylobacter jejuni (C. jejuni) infection (2).
Although viral hepatitis is common in Korea, acute viral hepatitis A (HA), as an antecedent infection of AMSAN, was extremely rare (3). We
present a case of GBS-subtype AMSAN following acute HA infection and review the literature. A 21-yr-old male was transferred to our hospital
due to respiration difficulties and progressive weakness at 16th July 2010 from a local hospital where the patient had been admitted after a
7-day history of symptoms of acute viral hepatitis. In addition, the patient did not have a past history of respiratory or gastrointestinal
infection within 1 month before onset of progressive weakness. Physical examination upon referral to our hospital showed the patient
presented with anorexia, jaundice, and elevated transaminase levels (serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase, 385 IU/L; serum glutamic
pyruvic transaminase, 376 IU/L). Immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies against HA were detected in blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Based on
impaired liver function tests, clinical features, and the presence of anti-HA IgM antibody; the absence of markers for hepatitis B, C, D, E,
diagnosis of acute HA was established. CSF analysis showed protein, 156 mg/dL; glucose, 61 mg/dL, with no pleocytosis. Results of
serological and CSF tests for C. jejuni, cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and Haemophilus influenzae (H. influenzae)
infection were negative. Anti-GQ1b and GM1 antibodies were not found in serum. An abdominal ultrasound showed altered echotexture of liver
parenchyma. On neurological examination, the mental status of the patient was alert. By the Medical Research Council (MRC) grading, the
patient had weakness with areflexia in both proximal upper limbs (MRC grading 4), both distal upper limbs (MRC grading 2), both proximal
lower limbs (MRC grading 4), and both distal lower limbs (MRC grading 2). Pin-prick, vibratory, and joint position senses were reduced in
glove and stocking distribution. Nerve conduction studies (NCSs) were performed at 2 weeks after the onset of weakness. The findings of
motor NCSs showed markedly reduced amplitudes of CMAPs whereas distal latencies and motor conduction velocities were normal in bilateral
peroneal, and posterior tibial nerves, without evidence of demyelination. The findings of sensory NCSs revealed decreased amplitudes of
SNAPs and normal conduction velocities in bilateral median, ulnar, and sural nerves (Table 1). F-wave response was absent in the right
median and both peroneal nerves. The needle electromyography examination demonstrated markedly abnormal reduction in recruitment, with
positive sharp waves in the bilateral tibialis anterior and peroneus longus muscles. Based on clinical features with motor and sensory
involvement, laboratory findings and electrophysiologic investigation, this patient was diagnosed the AMSAN subtype of GBS following acute
HA viral infection according to proposed diagnostic criteria of GBS (4). The patient was treated with 0.4 mg/kg/day of intravenous
immunoglobulin for 5 days and recovered slowly. Four months later, the patient continued to exhibit marked wasting and weakness of the
distal upper and lower limb muscles. AMSAN has been recently described as a subtype of GBS characterized by acute onset of distal weakness,
loss of deep tendon reflexes, and sensory symptoms (2). AMAN and AMSAN, axonal subtypes of GBS, can be preceded by C. jejuni enteritis (2).
However, in this case, we diagnosed the AMSAN subtype of GBS following acute HA infection using clinical evidence, electrophysiological
studies, and HA virus-IgM antibodies in the serum and CSF. The exact pathogenesis by which the virus causes the disease is not clear. The
involvement of the central nervous system in the viral disease could be due to direct invasion of the central nervous system by the virus,
as evidenced by the presence of HA antibodies in the CSF. Therefore, it seems most likely that transport of antibodies occurs across a
disrupted blood-nerve barrier during inflammatory reaction of nerve roots. In AMAN and AMSAN, the pathological features differ from the
features of AIDP in that macrophages invade the space between the Schwann cell and axon, leaving the myelin sheath intact (2). Griffin et
al. (5) proposed the attractive hypothesis that AMAN and AMSAN are part of the spectrum of a single type of immune attack on the axon, but
the relationship between AMAN and AMSAN has yet to be clarified. The AMSAN cases differ from the AMAN pattern of GBS in terms of slow
recovery, in addition to sensory fiber involvement, but the pathologies are very similar (6). The number of GBS-subtype AMSAN cases is very
small (< 10% of AMAN cases) (7). In this case, clinical, serological, and electrophysiological studies suggested a diagnosis of GBS-subtype
AMSAN following acute HA infection. Nervous system complications of HA viral infection appear to be very rare. A variety of neurological
syndromes including GBS have been reported in serologically confirmed hepatitis A (8,9). Clinical features of GBS following HA can be
summarized as follows: 1) Most of the patients are men. 2) The interval between the onset of hepatitis and the development of neuropathic
symptoms is less than 14 days. 3) There is a frequent association with facial nerve palsy. 4) Joint position and vibratory sense are
frequently impaired, in addition to superficial sensation. 5) A uniformly good outcome of the neuropathic symptoms is independent of the
level of ALT, which corresponds to the severity of liver dysfunction (10). Most electrodiagnostic studies were compatible with an acquired
demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy, but a few cases showed dominant axonal involvement i.e., acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN) (11,12).
The prognosis of HA virus-associated GBS was favorable, both in earlier reports (management with supportive care only) and in more recent
reports (treatment with either intravenous immunoglobulin or plasmapheresis) (9). Therefore, HA virus-associated GBS appeared to run a
course similar to "typical" GBS, and the outcome of GBS did not correlate with the severity of acute hepatitis (9). The pathogenesis of HA
virus-associated GBS is unknown. A cross-reaction between Schwann cells, myelin or other peripheral nerve antigens remains a possibility,
but any molecular resemblance between hepatotropic viruses and structural components of peripheral nerves has not been explored (9). In our
case, there was no recent infection of usual agents that have been reported to be associated with axonal degeneration, such as CMV, EBV, H.
influenzae and C. jejuni (13). Taking into account these facts, we presume that the epitope of HA virus and the axonal component of
peripheral neural tissue might have molecular mimicry. Further studies are needed to ascertain this exact mechanism. Our patient had the
AMSAN subtype of GBS following acute HA viral infection. AMSAN subtype has a fulminant course with slow recovery. Determination of the well-
known agents related with GBS, such as C. jejuni and CMV, is clinically and immunologically important to diagnosis and prognosis of GBS
subtypes. Also, unusual agents associated with GBS subtypes including AMSAN may be identified in order to clarify the pathogenic mechanism
of GBS subtypes. Therefore, we suggest that a careful and broad view is needed to determine the causative relationship between an infection
and the development of GBS subtypes. Nerve conduction study of the patient at 2 weeks after onset of 4 limbs weakness NCV, nerve conduction
velocity; R/L, right/left; F-W, finger-wrist; W-E, wrist-elbow; AP, action potential (motor-mV, sensory-ÂµV).
