Pyoderma gangrenosum is an uncommon and recurrent neutrophilic dermatosis of unknown cause. The lesions usually start as tender sterile
papulopustules or erythematous nodules that undergo necrosis followed by ulceration. The lower limbs are most commonly affected and around
half of the cases are associated with systemic disorders. Although rare, cases of pyoderma gangrenosum with extramucocutaneous sterile
neutrophilic infiltrate have been reported, with the lungs being the most commonly affected organ. We report a case of pyoderma gangrenosum
with splenic and renal impairment. Pyoderma gangrenosum should be considered a multisystemic disease with classic cutaneous manifestations
and potential involvement of internal organs. Pioderma gangrenoso é uma dermatose neutrofílica incomum, recorrente e de etiologia
desconhecida. As lesões geralmente se iniciam como papulopústulas estéreis ou nódulos eritematosos que sofrem necrose seguida de ulceração.
Os membros inferiores são mais comumente afetados e quase a metade dos casos está associada a doenças sistêmicas. Apesar de raros, casos de
pioderma gangrenoso com infiltrado neutrofílico estéril extramucocutâneo foram relatados e os pulmões são os órgãos mais comumente
acometidos. Nós relatamos um caso de manifestação esplênica e renal do pioderma gangrenoso. Pioderma gangrenoso deve ser considerado doença
multissistêmica com manifestações cutâneas clássicas e potencial envolvimento de órgãos internos. Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) is a rare,
recurrent, idiopathic, neutrophilic and inflammatory dermatosis that affects predominantly women between 20 and 50 years of age. The classic
clinical presentation is sterile, tender follicular papulopustules or erythematous nodules that undergo necrosis and rapidly progress to
ulceration with a purulent base and irregular and undermined borders. Bullous, pustular and superficial granulomatous variants are also
described. In general, one of the clinical forms that can coexist in the same patient predominates, and the location of the lesions is
variable, with preference for lower limbs. Due to the polymorphous nature of the skin lesions and a significant variation in laboratory and
histopathologic findings, diagnosis of PG depends on a close clinicopathologic correlation. In around 50% of the cases an underlying
systemic disease (usually inflammatory bowel disease, arthritis, vasculitis, lymphoma, leukemia, monoclonal gammopathy and other
mieloproliferative disorders) can be detected. The pathergy phenomenon occurs in approximately 30% of patients with PG.1-5 Cases of PG with
visceral involvement, with the presence of a sterile neutrophilic infiltrate in sites other than the skin and/or mucous membranes, are
extremely rare.6-10 We report a patient with PG with splenic and renal impairment. A 22-year-old female patient was referred for evaluation
of tender bullae and nodules on her lower limbs that rapidly progressed to ulcers with purulent and necrotic base and irregular and
undermined borders (Figure 1). Lesions had been present for the previous four months and the patient also complained of fever (38º C) and
abdominal pain. Her medical history revealed a persistent anemia since childhood. On physical examination, splenomegaly and pallor of ocular
mucosa were detected. Ulcers with purulent and necrotic base and irregular and undermined borders Clinical diagnosis of PG was corroborated
by the histopathologic finding of a dermal lymphocytic and histiocytic infiltrate with some perivascular neutrophils and plasmocytes.
Subcutaneous fat tissue was densely infiltrated with lymphocytes and histiocytes and numerous interlobular polymorphonuclear leukocytes
(Figure 2). Gram stain and KOH examination of the ulcer discharge yielded negative results. A and B. Dermal lymphocytic and histiocytic
infiltrate with some perivascular neutrophils and plasmocytes. Subcutaneous fat tissue (2B) was densely infiltrated with lymphocytes and
histiocytes and a large number of interlobular polymorphonuclear leukocytes Laboratory workup showed a positive ANA (titer 1:160; nuclear,
fine, speckled pattern) normocytic and normochromic anemia, low serum iron and high ferritin levels. Bone marrow aspiration displayed
hypercellularity and 23% of sideroblasts, but no ringed sideroblast. Normal or negative exams included anti-SM, anti-Ro, anti-La, P-ANCA,
C-ANCA, rheumatoid factor, antiphospholipid antibodies, cryoagglutinins, anti-HIV, hepatitis serology, blood and urine cultures, complement
fractions C3 and C4. Multiple splenic nodular structures were detected on abdominal US. MRI showed intrasplenic and subphrenic collections
(Figure 3). Gram staining and bacterial culture of needle aspirated material from the spleen were negative (cold abscess). A and B. MRI
showed intrasplenic and subphrenic collections Treatment with an association of corticosteroid, cyclosporine and sulfasalazine resulted in
significant improvement (Figure 4). A control US detected reduction of the dimensions of both the spleen and intrasplenic collections. Skin
lesions in healing process Lesions recurred upon tapering of corticosteroid and withdrawal of cyclosporine. A second MRI detected
intrasplenic and subdiaphragmatic collections and an altered sign on the right kidney upper pole (Figure 5). Gram staining and bacterial
cultrure from material obtained by renal biopsy was negative. Histopathologic findings were consistent with PG adjacent to the renal
parenchyma with a dense granular and mononuclear infiltrate, xanthomatous macrophages and a large area of necrosis (Figure 6). Altered sign
on the right kidney upper pole A and B. Histopathologic findings were consistent with PG adjacent to the renal parenchyma with a dense
granular and mononuclear infiltrate, xanthomatous macrophages and a large area of necrosis Although not fully understood, PG pathogenesis
involves abnormalities in both cell-mediated and humoral immunity and neutrophil and monocyte function.4 Half the cases are associated with
systemic diseases, most commonly autoimmune disorders. Pathergy is a phenomenon that occurs in about 30% of cases and is associated with
dermal trauma, which may lead to the worsening of pre-existing lesions.1-5 Extramucocutaneous neutrophilic infiltrates are seldom seen in
neutrophilic dermatoses. The lungs are the most frequently affected organ, but involvement of the heart, central nervous system, liver,
spleen, lymphnodes, pancreas, joints, gastrointestinal tract and eyes has been reported.6-10 Visceral involvement may be antecedent,
coincident or subsequent to the skin lesions.8 Differential diagnosis should include infections, neoplasias, vasculitis, ulcers secondary to
peripheral venous or arterial insufficiency and factitious dermatitis. Bacterial cultures are required to rule out infectious processes.5 In
the case reported here the cold abscesses of the spleen were initially considered as an associated disorder likely to have triggered PG.
Later on, with renal biopsy displaying histopathologic changes compatible with PG, the authors considered the possibility that both spleen
and renal lesions could be regarded as a visceral manifestation of PG. Although spleen biopsy was not performed, the striking improvement of
the splenic lesions after treatment of the skin ulcers favors this hypothesis. PG should be approached as a multisystemic disease frequently
associated with an underlying internal disorder. PG involvement is primarily cutaneous but with potential visceral extension. * Work
performed at the Dermatology Department of the Hospital das Clínicas, Federal University of Minas Gerais (HC-UFMG) - Belo Horizonte (MG),
Brazil. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None
