Herein we report a case of bilateral anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (AION) showing histopathologic evidence of AL-amyloidosis of the
temporal arteries. It is known that light-chain (AL) amyloidosis may rarely affect the temporal arteries, mimicking giant cell arteritis,
while, to our knowledge, the association between AL-amyloidosis and AION was not previously described. A 64 year-old woman with AL-
amyloidosis secondary to a monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) referred to our hospital for acute painless drop of
vision due to bilateral AION. Age greater than 50 years, high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and bilateral AION were suggestive of
giant cell arteritis (GCA). However, a temporal artery biopsy excluded GCA, showing segmental stenosis of the lumen caused by amyloidosis of
the artery wall. The present case shows that AL-amyloidosis may present with AION, high ESR, and temporal artery involvement, mimicking GCA.
In patients with monoclonal gammopathies, C-reactive protein may be a more specific index of GCA compared with the ESR. Patient medical
history and pathology are crucial for a correct diagnosis. Arteritic Anterior Ischemic Optic Neuropathy (Arteritic-AION) is one of the most
serious complications of giant cell arteritis (GCA) or Horton’s disease, and it is caused by the occlusion of the posterior ciliary
arteries, supplying the optic nerve head (ONH) . Arteritic-AION is the most frequent ophthalmological complication of GCA (81.2%), followed
by central retinal artery occlusion (14.1%), retrobulbar ischemic optic neuropathy (7%), and ocular ischemia (1.2%) . Light-chain (AL)
amyloidosis, or primary amyloidosis, is a hematological disease characterized by the deposition in tissues of monoclonal light-chain
variable-region immunoglobulin fragments, which may involve any tissue or organ. It is usually associated with monoclonal gammopathy of
undetermined significance (MGUS) or smoldering myeloma, less frequently with symptomatic multiple myeloma . The vascular system is often
involved by the deposition of the amyloidal-proteins, which principally affect the small-caliber vessels . The localization to medium- or
large-size vessels is less frequent; nonetheless, deposits of the amyloidal-protein were found in the coronary arteries , and arterial
thromboembolic events associated with cardiac AL-amyloidosis were reported . AL-amyloidosis of the temporal arteries has also been shown in
patients with symptoms and signs suggestive of GCA . Here we report a case of bilateral AION showing clinical and laboratory signs
suggestive of GCA, which was subsequently excluded by pathology and further laboratory findings. Positivity of the temporal artery biopsy
(TAB) for light-chain amyloidosis prompted us to evaluate the possibility that AL-amyloidosis may be a - yet undescribed - cause of
bilateral AION, mimicking GCA. A 64 year-old woman referred to the emergency service of our department for acute painless drop of vision.
The patient reported a complete loss of vision in the right eye and a loss of the inferior visual field in the left eye since waking up in
the morning. Past medical history revealed AL-amyloidosis secondary to monoclonal gammopathy of unknown origin (immunoglobulin G light chain
k, IgGk) with main involvement of kidneys (nephrosic syndrome), arterial hypertension, and hypercolesterolemia. The diagnosis of AL-
amyloidosis had been posed two years before by biopsy of both kidney and periumbilical fat, while negative bone marrow puncture confirmed
MGUS. During the previous year the patient had been treated for amyloidosis (one week per month, for 8 months) with dexamethasone
(40 mg/day), bortezomib (1.3 mg/m2 two times weekly), and cyclophosphamide (20 mg/Kg once monthly). However, the therapy for amyloidosis was
suspended because of hepatic toxicity two months before the presentation of the visual symptoms. At presentation the patient treatment
included omeprazole 20 mg/day, ramipril 2.5 mg/day, furosemide 100 mg/day, spironolactone 25 mg/every other day, and atorvastatin 20 mg/day.
Lens corrected visual acuity at presentation was light perception in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. Pupil light reflex examination
showed a marked relative afferent defect (RAPD) of the right eye. Visual field examination was not executable in the right eye, while in the
left eye it revealed an inferior altitudinal scotoma (Figure 1). Biomicroscopy showed normal anterior segment, while at fundoscopy an ONH
edema was found in both eyes: in the right eye the edema involved the entire ONH, while in the left eye there was limited involvement of the
superior half of the ONH, in keeping with the visual field examination (Figure 1). Visual field examination at presentation. Kinetic
(upside) and static (downside) perimetry of the left eye of the patient at presentation, showing an altitudinal scotoma affecting the
inferior visual field. Visual field examination was not executable in the right eye. Blood analyses were performed at presentation,
revealing abnormally high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR = 78 mm/h, laboratory range 2-30 mm), as well as high serum levels of both
fibrinogen (745 mg/dL, laboratory range 150-400 mg/dL) and D-dimer (331 ng, laboratory range 0-245 ng). Serum levels of C-reactive protein
were within the normal range (CRP = 0.41 mg/dL, laboratory range 0.001-5.0 mg/dL). Recent medical history was negative for claudicatio
mandibularis or temporal tenderness. The patient was admitted to the rheumatology service of our hospital for suspect silent GCA, and high
dose corticosteroid therapy was immediately started (1 g methilprednisolone/day i.v. in the first three days, then oral prednisone
50 mg/day). The patient did not report any change of the visual symptoms after starting the corticosteroid therapy. A brain MRI was
performed three days after presentation, showing bilateral optic nerve head thickening and multiple chronic ischemic lacunae in sub-cortical
and profound white matter. The ultrasound study of the temporal arteries showed tortuosity and segmental stenosis of the arterial lumen,
without significant limitation of the blood flow. Ultrasound morphologic alterations typical of GCA (hypo-ecogenic concentric mural
thickening) were not found. Carotid Doppler-ultrasound did not identify significant alterations of blood flow. A biopsy of the right
temporal artery was obtained and analyzed histopathologically ten days after presentation, showing diffuse mural infiltration of amyloidal
substance, causing the segmental stenosis of the arterial lumen. The amyloid substance showed immunologic positivity for immunoglobulin k
light chains and for amyloidal P-substance, and the tunica intima was thickened by fibrosis and calcific deposits, with subocclusion of the
vessel. No pathologic signs of GCA were found. Acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg/day p.o. was consequently started, and steroids were slowly
tapered. An ophthalmological evaluation was repeated one month and one year after presentation. At one-month the ONH edema had almost
disappeared, and just a slight masking of the peripapillary vessels was noticeable. At one-year a pallid atrophic ONH was observed in the
right eye, and sector atrophy of the ONH was present in the left eye (Figure 2A). Optical coherence tomography (OCT) study of the retinal
nerve fiber layer (RNFL) showed a uniformly reduced thickness of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) in the right eye, and sector reduction
of RFNL thickness in the inferior quadrants in the left eye (Figure 2B). Visual acuity and visual field examination remained stable during
the follow-up. Optic nerve head evaluation at one-year of follow-up. A. Color pictures of the optic nerve head of the right and left eye of
the patient at one-year of follow-up. B. Optical coherence tomography evaluation of the Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer thickness (RNFL thickness)
at one-year of follow-up, showing relative preservation of the ganglion cell fibers in the inferior quadrants of the left eye, compared with
the diffuse reduction of RNFL thickness in the right eye. The case herein described presented a problematic differential between arteritic
(AAION) and non-arteritic anterior optic neuropathy (NAION). In fact, age greater than fifty years, bilateral eye involvement, and high ESR
at presentation were suggestive of a diagnosis of AAION. However, a high ESR is a common laboratory finding in patients with serous
monoclonal gammopathies , hence its specificity for the diagnosis of AAION may be scarce in these patients. CRP values, instead, were within
the normal range in the present case, suggesting that CRP could be a more specific index of AAION in patients with coexisting plasma cell
dyscrasias. The TAB excluded the diagnosis of GCA in the present case, showing diffuse amyloid infiltration of the artery wall. A possible
hypothesis explaining the pathogenesis of the optic nerve head ischemia is that the AL-amyloid deposition found in the temporal artery
specimen may also have affected the posterior ciliary arteries, causing arterial stenosis and insufficiency, or reduced adaptability to
blood pressure variations. As the pathological processes characteristics of GCA commonly involve the posterior ciliary arteries, it is
possible that the arteries of this district share with the temporal arteries common histological features causing their preferential
susceptibility to GCA. Similarly, the posterior ciliary arteries could share with the temporal arteries a common susceptibility to the
deposition of amyloid substance. High blood viscosity due to MGUS, arterial hypertension, and hypercholesterolemia were other factors
increasing the risk of NAION in our patient. The presentation of AION at the awakening in the morning further supports this hypothesis. In
fact, blood pressure dips are more commonly encountered during the night, and they are associated to a higher risk of NAION . The arterial
stenosis combined with a hypotensive dip of the arterial blood pressure could have caused bilateral optic nerve head ischemia in our
patient. AION is rarely bilateral at its exordium . In the present case it can’t be excluded that the patient was not aware of a preexistent
monolateral AION until the contralateral eye was involved. However, the appearance of the optic discs at presentation was symmetrical, and
indicative for a recent exordium of the ischemia in both the eyes. Maybe fluorescein angiography (FA) could have provided useful elements
for the diagnosis and characterization of the present clinical case. Unfortunately, in our hospital FA is not performed routinely in
patients with diagnosis of AION, relying on TAB findings for differential diagnosis between AAION and NAION. When the patient was controlled
after the TAB response one month had passed from presentation and the ONH edema had partially regressed, hence it was decided not to perform
the angiography. In conclusion, the present case shows that AL-amyloidosis may present with bilateral AION, mimicking giant cell arteritis
not only for the visual symptoms, but also for high ESR values and temporal artery involvement. Moreover, AL-amyloidosis and giant cell
arteritis might share similar pathogenetical mechanisms, leading to affect the same small arterial districts. Patient medical history and
pathology are crucial for a correct diagnosis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report
and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. AAION: Arteritic anterior
ischemic optic neuropathy; AION: Anterior ischemic optic neuropathy; AL-amyloidosis: Light-chain amyloidosis; CRP: C-reactive protein; ESR:
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate; FA: Fluorescein angiography; GCA: Giant cell arteritis; IgGk: Immunoglobulin G light-chain k; MGUS:
Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance; NAION: Non arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy; OCT: Optical coherence
tomography; ONH: Optic nerve head; RAPD: Relative afferent pupillary defect; RNFL: Retinal nerve fiber layer; TAB: Temporal arteries biopsy.
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Supported in part by funding from University and IMEM-CNR of Parma, Parma, Italy,
and from Grant "eRare RHORCOD". AN contributed to the clinical management, acquisition and analysis of data, and drafted the manuscript. PR
was responsible of the clinical management of the patient. CM have been involved in drafting the manuscript. SAG participated in the design
of the case report and revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this
paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2415/13/82/prepub
