This case report demonstrates the safe application of laparoscopic excisional myomectomy in the first trimester of pregnancy. Uterine
leiomyomas (fibroids) are seen in up to 4% of pregnancies, and most commonly present with pain in pregnancy, which can be due to red
degeneration or torsion. Most cases previously have been managed with open resection. We report the case of a 35-y-old primagravida woman,
presenting with acute lower abdominal pain at 11 wk gestation. Ultrasound demonstrated an 8-cm fibroid only. She demonstrated features of
lower abdominal peritonitis and was scheduled for a diagnostic laparoscopy. At operation, a torsed subserosal fibroid was found. She
successfully underwent laparoscopic myomectomy with the endoGIA vascular stapler and subsequent Pfannenstiel delivery. The patient was
discharged 48 h postoperatively to continue her pregnancy. This case demonstrates the safe application of laparoscopic excisional myomectomy
in the first trimester of pregnancy. Previously reported cases in the literature have focused on open resection or bipolar diathermy
enucleation and morcellation. A high degree of suspicion should be maintained for the diagnosis in patients presenting to the surgical
service with acute lower abdominal peritoneal signs during pregnancy. Uterine leiomyomas (fibroids) are common benign growths affecting the
uterus.1 During pregnancy, they can become symptomatic by undergoing red degeneration, bleeding, or torsing around a stalk if they are
pedunculated.2 Previous case reports have described open laparotomy for management of such cases in the first trimester.3,4 We describe the
first case in the published surgical literature of a successful laparoscopic management of torsion of a pedunculated subserosal fibroid
presenting as an acute abdomen in the first trimester of pregnancy. This 27-y-old primagravida woman had an uncomplicated first 11 wk of
pregnancy. She was otherwise healthy and took no regular medications. She experienced lower abdominal pain that started suddenly and then
progressed over 24 h. She presented to her local obstetrics department and ultrasound demonstrated an intrauterine pregnancy and a large
anterior fibroid. On comparison to a previous ultrasound undertaken 2 y earlier for pelvic pain, this had increased from 3 cm in size to its
current 8 cm diameter. Her pain did not resolve over the following 24 h. Laboratory studies demonstrated rising inflammatory markers (CRP
100 g/dL and WBC 13g/dL) and so a surgical opinion was sought. A repeat ultrasound demonstrated no free fluid and no other abnormal
intraabdominal findings. On clinical examination, the patient appeared flushed and had signs of lower abdominal peritonitis. She was
therefore scheduled for diagnostic laparoscopy. With the patient under general anaesthetic, an open Hassan approach was undertaken with a
10-mm infraumbilical camera port, 5-mm suprapubic port, and 10-mm left iliac fossa port. On laparoscopy, the omentum was found to be densely
adherent to the pelvis with some straw-colored fluid visible, but no frank pus. Blunt dissection was undertaken to free the omentum and
search for the appendix, which was normal. Examination of the small and large bowel was also inconsequential. Further dissection of the
pelvis demonstrated a large fibroid arising from the anterior surface of the uterus that was adherent to the sigmoid and small bowel. After
gentle dissection from the bowel, the fibroid was investigated jointly by the surgical and gynecology teams, and found to be a torsed
pedunculated subserosal variant. This was detorsed with gentle mobilization. In view of the risk of myomectomy during pregnancy, a decision
was made to proceed via the laparoscopic approach, and a 5-mm laparoscopic vascular stapler was introduced through the 10-mm umbilical port
and the camera switched to the left iliac fossa port. Successful myomectomy was undertaken by this approach. A small Pfannenstiel incision
was undertaken to deliver the fibroid. A small drain was left in the pelvis and was removed 24 h postoperatively. The patient was discharged
48 h later to continue with her pregnancy. Uterine leiomyomas are seen in up to 4% of pregnancies, and with the increasing age of obstetric
patients they are increasingly common.1 Fibroids predispose to pregnancy complications including early miscarriage, antepartum bleeding, and
preterm labor.5 Most remain asymptomatic for the duration of pregnancy; however, symptomatic fibroids present in a manner dependent on their
anatomical location and size.2 Fibroids may be intramural, submucosal (where 50% of the mass may be in the myometrium), cervical,
extrauterine, or subserosal, as in our case. Pain is the most common complication of fibroids during pregnancy (occurring in up to 15% of
cases),6 which can be severe if the fibroid undergoes “red degeneration” or torsion. As our case demonstrates, the painful presentation can
be sufficiently acute to give signs of lower abdominal peritonitis. Pedunculated subserosal fibroids are especially at risk of torsion, and
this risk will increase if the fibroid enlarges. Some studies have suggested that smaller fibroids are more likely to increase in the first
half of pregnancy.7 Our patient was noted to have a small prepregnancy fibroid, which had significantly enlarged by presentation. Ultrasound
is the mainstay of abdominal imaging assessment in pregnancy.2 Fibroid complications that can be seen include red degeneration, in which
there is significant internal echogenic change.8 Torsion can be defined using Doppler assessment of vessels especially for pedunculated
variants if the stalk can be adequately visualized,9 although often, as in our case, the stalk may not be satisfactorily imaged
preoperatively. Therefore, the diagnosis of torsion still must be kept in mind, because it is essentially a clinical diagnosis. CT10 and
MRI11 have been demonstrated to be of use in imaging assessments of fibroid torsion in pregnancy, although in the acute situation they may
unnecessarily delay management. Myomectomy during pregnancy has traditionally been reserved for cases of severe, intractable pain late in
pregnancy. Risks of gravid myomectomy include hysterectomy secondary to severe hemorrhage, pregnancy injury, and pregnancy loss.12 Select
case reports have provided evidence of satisfactory outcome for open myomectomy during pregnancy.3,4,13 Ardovino et al.14 report a case of
myomectomy of a painful adhered pedunculated fibroid at 14 wk gestation. They enucleated and morcellated the fibroid prior to excision.
Pneumoperitoneum was created using the Veress technique in their case. Our case demonstrates the safe use of the open Hasson method in the
first trimester. The key technical message is to adjust port site to gravidity and fundal height for safety to be assured.15 Most previous
cases undertaken laparoscopically have enucleated the fibroid using bipolar diathermy.16–19 We have demonstrated the successful application
of a laparoscopic vascular stapling device to achieve safe excisional myomectomy. Although morcellation has been reported effectively
elsewhere, this approach can risk intraabdominal injury, prevents histological analysis, and is comparatively expensive.20 We detorsed the
fibroid prior to excision, a contentious approach in ovarian torsion due to the theoretical risks of venous thromboembolism from the ovarian
vein, although recent studies suggest this risk may have been overestimated.21 However, these risks are less likely in fibroid torsion.
Torsion of uterine fibroids is an uncommon condition during pregnancy, but carries significant risk if left untreated. A high index of
suspicion is required, as despite useful assistance of imaging modalities such as ultrasound, the diagnosis remains essentially clinical.
Our case demonstrates the safe and successful laparoscopic management of a torsed subserosal fibroid using the endoscopic vascular stapling
device. Surgical awareness of the entity and its management is vital, because it can present as acute lower abdominal peritoneal signs
during pregnancy, which will mandate surgical referral.
