The Mulvihill-Smith Syndrome was first recognized in 1975. After the recognition of the Mulvihill-Smith Syndrome, ten cases have been
described. This article describes the eleventh case of this syndrome in a male patient, 24 years-old with short stature and microcephaly
with mild cognitive impairment, deafness and allergic conjunctivitis. The patient was hospitalized several times for repeated infections,
and the presence of multiple melanocytic nevi on his skin was noticed. Based on the entire set of signs and symptoms presented in our study,
it was diagnosed the patient with Mulvihill-Smith Syndrome. The Mulvihill-Smith Syndrome was first recognized in 1975 by David Smith Weyhe
(*1926, ł1981), professor of Pediatrics at the University of Washington, and his student and future professor of Genetics at the University
of Oklahoma, John Mulvihill . The first case described was a male patient, 17 years-old, with short stature, microcephaly, hypodontia,
recurrent infections, intellectual impairment, with multiple melanocytic nevi in the skin and insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus . After
the recognition of the Mulvihill-Smith Syndrome, ten cases have been described . This article describes the eleventh case of this syndrome
in a male patient, 24 years-old with short stature and microcephaly with mild cognitive impairment, deafness and allergic conjunctivitis.
The patient was hospitalized several times for repeated infections, and the presence of multiple melanocytic nevi on his skin was noticed.
The patient was 24 years-old male, born in Maua, Sao Paulo, Brazil. He was the eighth child of a 32 year-old woman, who had two
miscarriages, did not do prenatal care and smoked during pregnancy. His parents were not consanguineous and he was delivered through vaginal
delivery without perinatal complications, and born at term with adequate weight. His neurodevelopment was normal until five years of age,
when the patient, previously healthy, presented with vomiting and diarrhea lasting about a month, staying in hospital at the beginning of
the clinical features to correct dehydration. After this episode the mother told that he started to lose weight and ceased growth. He no
longer understood commands and the difficulty to communicate worsened slowly. He had major mood swings, with periods of agitation,
aggression and insomnia. Since the age of six he used hearing aids. At the age of nine he was transferred to a “special school” where he
remained for two years, however, he had no progress in learning. He had several hospitalizations for diarrheal episodes and
bronchopneumonia. He underwent bilateral orchiectomy at 12 years of age due to cryptorchidism. He presented diagnosis of bilateral allergic
conjunctivitis and myopia on the right eye. Dental agenesis was observed in the second premolar bilaterally and the right maxillary central
incisor. Absence of subcutaneous fat was noted on his general physical examination. Skin and hair were undernourished. He had dry and aged
appearance with multiple nevi on the face and trunk (Figure 1). His lips were thin and ears were prominent. He had teeth in bad condition.
He had clinodactyly on hands and feet (Figure 2). There were no pulmonary, cardiac and abdominal alterations. Face and trunk of the patient.
Clinodactyly on hands and feet of the patient. Our patient could keep contact with the environment through sight and hearing (a hearing aid
in use). He had poor language, speech difficult to understand, in a hoarse and high voice. There was little collaboration with the examiner
and extremely childish behavior. Despite no formal neuropsychological assessment was made, the patient was considered to have intellectual
impairment of moderate degree. He had hypertrophy widespread in all muscle groups. Gait, balance, deep reflexes, muscle strength, tone and
cranial nerves were preserved. Coordination was difficult to assess due to no collaboration. Imaging tests such as Magnetic Ressonance
Imaging (MRI) of skull and sella turcica and Computed Tomography (CT) were nonspecific. The X-ray revealed a bone age compatible with the
age of ten. The metabolic tests performed were total cholesterol and fractions, triglycerides, TSH, T4, serum GH, GOT, GPT, Gamma GT,
amylase, blood glucose, blood gas analysis, screening of inborn errors of metabolism blood and urine. Were also analyzed blood count,
electrolytes, renal function, ANA, RF, hemoglobin electrophoresis, serology for CMV, Rubella, Toxoplasmosis, Hepatitis B and Epstein Barr,
CD3, CD4, CD8, IGF-1 and IGFBP. His blood count revealed lymphocytosis, the dosage of growth hormone and IGF-1 were below the reference
value. The CD4 counts were at the lower limit and presented a very high parameter of immunoglobulin G to infection with Epstein Barr VCA.
All other metabolic tests results were shown normal. A standard resolution karyotype was also normal, and no further genetic investigations
were performed. The hypothesis was diagnosed based on clinical criteria. The Mulvihill-Smith syndrome is a rare and complex genetic
disorder, which involves different systems and organs. The description of a patient born to consanguineous parents , and the presence of the
syndrome in both males and females, suggests of autosomal recessive inheritance. However, it is worth noting that our patient the only one
affected offspring of eight offspring. This would still compatible with recessive inheritance, possibly with one mutation inherited from
either one parent and the other mutation arisen de novo. The causative gene has not been identified so far . Since the description of the
first case of Mulvihill-Smith Syndrome, a number of signs and symptoms have been reported (Table 1). Cases described All cases describe
microcephaly and pigmented nevi on skin. Short stature is absent only in one case . Four previously reported patients also exhibited the
early onsets of tumors: signer ring cell carcinoma of the stomach in a 23 year-old patient , and squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue in a
25 year-old patient . Pancreatic cancer was described in a female patient of 28 years of age , and skin melanoma have also been described.
Sleep disorders are described in three cases . The loud and raucous (high-pitched voice) observed in this case and in seven cases, perhaps
reflects the abnormal structures of the face . Ohashi et al. described urogenital abnormalities in other cases, with cryptorchidism,
hypospadias, descended under test, and amenorhoea. The cryptorquidia is present in this case . In almost all cases low levels of
immunoglobulins and T and B cells were found. This information associated with the presence of rhinitis and allergic conjunctivitis and
recurrent infections, strengthens the idea that immunodeficiency can be one of the characteristics of the syndrome . Mulvihill-Smith
Syndrome has been associated with several levels of intellectual impairment, so far present in every case described. Our patient also has
clinodactilia also reported in four other cases. Only one case was not identified with deafness . Given the identified cases and the entire
set of signs and symptoms described in our case we clinically diagnosed the patient with Mulvihill Smith Syndrome. Written informed consent
was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available
for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. All authors participated in
results collection, study design and manuscript draft. All authors agreed with the final version of the manuscript. The pre-publication
history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2377/14/4/prepub The study received financial support from
the School of Medicine of ABC.
