The diagnosis of prosthetic valve endocarditis is challenging. The gold standard for prosthetic valve endocarditis diagnosis is trans-
esophageal echocardiography. However, trans-esophageal echocardiography may result in negative findings or yield images difficult to
differentiate from thrombus in patients with prosthetic valve endocarditis. Combined computed tomography and fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography is a potentially promising diagnostic tool for several infectious conditions and it has also been employed in patients
with prosthetic valve endocarditis but data are still scant. We reviewed the charts of 6 patients with prosthetic aortic valves evaluated
for suspicion of prosthetic valve endocarditis, at two different hospital, over a 3-year period. We found 3 patients with early-onset PVE
cases and blood cultures yielding Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus epidermidis and Staphylococcus lugdunensis, respectively; and 3
late-onset cases in the remaining 3 patients with isolation in the blood of Streptococcus bovis, Candida albicans and P. aeruginosa,
respectively. Initial trans-esophageal echocardiography was negative in all the patients, while fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission
tomography showed images suspicious for prosthetic valve endocarditis. In 4 out of 6 patients valve replacement was done with histology
confirming the prosthetic valve endocarditis diagnosis. After an adequate course of antibiotic therapy fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission
tomography showed resolution of prosthetic valve endocarditis in all the patients. Our experience confirms the potential role of
fluoroseoxyglucose positron emission tomography in the diagnosis and follow-up of prosthetic valve endocarditis. The ageing population with
prolonged life expectancy and the improvement of surgical procedures determines that a greater number of patients may live with prosthetic
valve and/or implantable cardiac devices . Prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) remains a severe complication of valve surgery, still
carrying a high mortality and accounting for 1% to 6% of valve replacement . Due to the high prevalence of comorbidities in patients with
PVE and the growing incidence of difficult-to-treat pathogens in healthcare-associated infection, an early diagnosis and an aggressive
therapeutic management is mandatory . The gold standard for diagnosis of PVE is trans-oesophageal echocardiography (TEE); however TEE can be
non conclusive or falsely negative in the initial phases of the disease and it should be repeated if initially negative . Moreover in
patients with cardiac devices, the usual imaging of endocarditis at TEE is less frequent. Positron emission tomography (PET) and computed
tomography (CT), are routinely used for the diagnosis and follow up of malignancies, based on the increased glycolytic rate in malignant
cells. Similarly, many infective and inflammatory conditions can be imaged with PET due to the increased uptake of F-Fluorodesossiglucose by
inflammatory cells (granulocytes, monocytes as well as lymphocytes) and granulation tissue as these cells use glucose as an energy source .
In fact, combined computed tomography and fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (CT/FDG-PET) is increasingly used for the
management of several infectious conditions, mainly when associated to vascular devices: it was successfully used in patients with
prosthetic vascular graft infections, allowing the diagnosis with a sensitivity (SE) of 88-93% and specificity (SP) of 70-91% . In addition,
SE and SP of FDG-PET alone for aortic graft infection were 91% and 64%, compared with SE and SP of CT that were 64% and 86%, thus a higher
benefit with combined CT/FDG-PET is expected . Moreover, CT/FDG-PET may be an excellent tool for the diagnosis of bacterial embolism and
metastatic infections difficult to detect, such as mycotic aneurysms . Finally, the CT/FDG-PET allows to calculate the standardized uptake
value (SUV), a reproducible quantitative parameter useful for assessing the efficacy of therapy in the follow-up . Despite this promising
rationale, the current literature on the role of CT/FDG-PET in the diagnosis of PVE is scant and mostly based on case reports. Here we
report a case series of PVEs with initial negative echocardiography in whom the PVE diagnosis was achieved using CT/FDG-PET. A 42-year-old
male patient with a history of previous intravenous drug abuse and osteosynthesis implant on the left femur in 2004, was admitted to our
hospital in February 2010 for persistent fever. One month before admission, he underwent major heart surgery with graft replacement of
aortic valve, aortic root and ascending aorta (Bentall procedure). On admission, his physical examination was unremarkable with exception of
fever. Chest X-ray was negative, blood tests showed white-blood cells (WBC) count of 10.420 cells/mm3 and C-reactive protein 17.13 mg/dL.
The patient underwent transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) followed by TEE and signs of infection were excluded. He was treated with
clindamycin and meropenem for 3 weeks with resolution of fever. A few days after antibiotic discontinuation, fever relapsed and he was
transferred to our Infectious Disease Unit. A repeated TEE was once again negative; blood cultures yielded a Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain
susceptible to all tested antibiotics. Because of the high clinical suspicion of PVE, a CT/FDG-PET was performed, and revealed a focal
uptake, of aortic valve and ascending aorta consistent with infection with maximal standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 3.5 (Figure 1). The
patient underwent surgical replacement of the Bentall prosthesis and was treated with levofloxacin for 4 weeks. Intraoperative and
histological results confirmed the PVE diagnosis. At 1-year follow-up the patient showed no further evidence of PVE by TTE/TEE and CT/FDG-
PET. Case 1: the image below shows a focal uptake (SUVmax = 3.5) at anterior wall of mechanical aortic prostethic valve, consistent with an
acute infection. a. CT. b. PET. c. Fusion image. d. Maximum intensity projection. A 53-year-old male was admitted in July 2012 to our unit
for a sepsis with isolation of a fluconazole-susceptible Candida albicans from blood cultures. He had a history of aortic valve replacement
with mechanical prosthesis in May 2010. He underwent abdominal surgery for intestinal volvulus in April 2012 complicated with secondary
peritonitis and candidemia by a fluconazole-susceptible C. albicans treated with a 3-week course of fluconazole. At admission, TEE excluded
cardiac involvement and treatment with fluconazole was started again. Despite adequate therapy and clinical response, blood cultures
(+14 days) still yielded a fluconazole susceptible C. albicans. TEE was repeated one week after admission being still negative for valve
vegetation or other signs of cardiac involvement. Despite the negative TEE, the patient developed a popliteal artery embolism that was
managed with a Fogarty-catheter thromboembolectomy. A CT/FDG-PET was done showing a focal uptake (SUVmax = 3.2) on the mechanic aortic
valve. Combination antifungal therapy with liposomal amphotericin B plus caspofungin was started and the patient underwent emergency
mechanical aortic valve replacement. Intra-operatory findings and histological examination were consistent with PVE. The physical
exploration and the laboratory findings at 6-month follow-up are unremarkable, both TTE/TEE and CT/FDG-PET tested negative as well. A
71-year-old was admitted on September 2012 to a medical ward for persistence of fever despite an empirical antibiotic course. His medical
history revealed a composite replacement of the aortic root and valve with Bentall procedure for an ascending aortic aneurysm with aortic
insufficiency in October 2010. On admission, there were no signs of vegetation and no abscess formation at TTE. After antibiotics
discontinuation, blood cultures yielded Streptococcus bovis and a treatment with ceftriaxone was initiated with resolution of fever. One
week later TEE revealed good prosthetic valve function without vegetation or other signs of PVE. However, due to the high suspicion of
endocarditis a CT/FDG-PET was performed at the end of the second week of treatment showing uptake on aortic valve graft (SUVmax = 3.8) and
upper pole of spleen (SUVmax = 7.4). Three weeks later, despite the appropriate antimicrobial treatment, the patient developed clinical
signs of cardiac failure, thus a new TEE was performed revealing a small peri-prosthetic mass (7 mm) suggestive for an abscess formation.
This feature was confirmed by a new CT/FDG-PET demonstrating higher focal uptake (SUVmax = 4.2). The patient underwent a surgical valve and
Bentall prosthesis replacement. Intraoperative findings and histological examination confirmed PVE diagnosis. At 1 year follow-up the
patient is symptom-free and in good clinical condition, no further evidence of an infectious process has been found by TTE/TEE and CT/FDG-
PET. A 46-year-old man was admitted on November 2011 to our hospital for remittent fever. He had a medical history of severe aortic stenosis
underwent mechanical prosthesis replacement fifteen years before and re-operated in 2010 for valve dysfunction with a Bentall procedure. A
month before admission he had been successfully treated as outpatient with a short antibiotic course with levofloxacin for a community-
acquired pneumonia. At admission, blood cultures yielded ceftazidime and piperacillin resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa; TEE was negative and
CT of aorta did not show leak, defects or peri-prosthetic collections. The patient was started on a 4 week-regimen with meropenem and
ciprofloxacin, with favourable clinical course and discharge home. One month later, he was re-admitted for fever relapse. A P. aeruginosa
strain with the same susceptibility pattern of the prior isolate was again isolated from the blood cultures. TEE was unremarkable, but
CT/FDG-PET showed high uptake on lateral and anterior prosthetic wall (SUV = 10) and peri-valve tissue (SUV = 6). Surgical treatment was
deemed unfeasible for the high patient EUROscore (European System for Cardiac Risk Evaluation). Antimicrobial treatment with meropenem and
ciprofloxacin was maintained for 4 weeks and then switched to suppressive life-long therapy with ciprofloxacin. The patient remained
symptom-free and a CT/FDG-PET performed one year later showed a 50% reduction of focal uptake. A 59-year-old man was admitted to our
hospital for an ileocolic artery thrombosis and fever in January 2012. His past medical records revealed an aortic biological prosthestic
valve replacement for severe stenosis in October 2011, complicated in the post-operative period by a bloodstream infection due to
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis with negative TEE. On admission TEE revealed a good valve function and no sign of
vegetation. However, due to the persistence of low grade fever a CT/FDG-PET was performed showing a high uptake on the annulus of the aortic
prosthetic valve (SUVmax = 10). He was started on daptomycin, oxacillin and rifampin and surgical valve replacement was scheduled. A
preoperative TEE showed a 12.7 mm valve vegetation as well as surgical and histological findings confirmed the diagnosis of infective
endocarditis. After a total 6 weeks of antibiotic therapy the patient was discharged, at 6-month follow-up the patient is free from disease,
as confirmed by a new TTE and CT/FDG-PET. A 80-year-old woman was admitted for fever, hypotension and confusion in March 2012. She had a
history of aortic valve replacement with biological prosthesis and double coronary artery by-pass in April 2011. At admission, blood
cultures yielded a Staphylococcus lugdunensis. The patient was started on oxacillin with resolution of fever. The diagnostic work-up,
including TEE and CT-angiogram of the aorta, was negative for PVE; whereas CT/FDG-PET revealed a diffuse uptake on prosthetic valve (SUVmax
4.2). Two weeks after hospital admission a new TEE showed a peri-valve tissue abscess with aortic vegetation. Surgical treatment was
considered at high risk, thus the patient continued on antimicrobial treatment without recurrence of fever and improvement of general
conditions. After 6 week of treatment a new CT/FDG-PET confirmed a reduction of the focal uptake. The patient was discharged on long-term
antibiotic therapy, at 6-month follow-up she is free from symptoms. We described six patients with aortic prosthetic valve and high clinical
suspicion of PVE. In all of them the TEE was firstly negative, and only in two the TEE became further positive. In all cases CT/FDG-PET
showed a high uptake on the peri-prosthetic valve level. The diagnosis of PVE was then confirmed by histology in all the 4 patients who
underwent surgery. In the remaining 2 patients in whom the surgery was deemed as unfeasible, a reduction of the uptake on the prosthetic
valve was documented by follow-up with CT/FDG-PET under long-term antibiotic therapy (Table 1). Prosthetic valve endocarditis cases
diagnosed by combined computed tomography and fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography MRSE, Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus
epidermidis; TEE, transesophageal echocardiography; Y, Yes; N, No. The major Duke’s criteria include positive blood cultures and evidence of
cardiac involvement at TTE/TEE both for native and prosthetic endocarditis. However this indication, targeting TEE as the gold standard for
instrumental diagnosis, could be disappointing in PVE. In fact, its performance may be sub-optimal for detecting the classical features of
endocarditis such as vegetation because the damage due to biofilm-producing microorganisms may be localized at the level of valve annulus or
peri-valve tissue resulting in leakage . In addition, a highly skilled well-trained operator and patient compliance are needed for an
optimal performance of the echocardiography tool. Conversely, CT/FDG-PET owing its ability to demonstrate the metabolic activity of organs
and tissues may allow earlier diagnosis, as in our cases. Another advantage of CT/FDG-PET is the possibility to quantify the standardized
uptake value (SUV), this can be useful to assess the amount and extension of local infection. Additionally, CT/FDG-PET shows concomitantly
the presence of secondary infection foci such as embolisms and/or metastatic infections. This tool is of pivotal value either for
establishing the timing of surgery in those patients with brain embolisms, either for deciding the duration of antimicrobial therapy .
Indeed, the quantification of SUV may provide early information on the long term response to antibiotic therapy in patients not selected for
surgery . In fact, as we have already demonstrated in the setting of vertebral osteomyelitis, a correct antibiotic exposure quickly reduces
the metabolic activity of the infectious process. Indeed, the change in SUV at two weeks of antibiotic treatment provides important
information on the outcome, and it is predictive of the long term response . In the current series, 2 patients had not received surgery, in
both of them a repeat CT/PET during appropriate antibiotic course showed reduction or disappearance of focal uptake. On the other hand, the
high influence of antibiotic treatment on SUV (the longer is the treatment, the biggest the decline) represents the Achilles’ heel of the
CT/FDG-PET diagnostic yield. Thus, the first SUV quantification should be assessed prior to any antibiotic treatment. In fact in our series,
3 out of 6 cases showed a low initial SUV, ranging from 3.2 to 3.8, very likely because of they were largely treated with antibiotics before
carrying out the CT/FDG-PET. Despite this limitation, diagnosis of PVE was successfully achieved in all 6 patients, enabling a prompt
surgical intervention in 4 of them. Therefore, a routine application of CT/FDG-PET, performed as soon as possible, without previous
antibiotic exposure could improve significantly the diagnostic yield and clinical usefulness of CT/FDG-PET. Although literature data is
mainly based on case reports or small case series, like ours, the possible role of nuclear medicine tools in the diagnosis of infective
endocarditis continues to be hypothesized . Thus, the time for an update of Duke criteria specifically regarding the PVE, could be come: in
PVE, CT/FDG-PET could be a true alternative/complementary imaging tool, when TTE/TEE is negative or inconclusive (for instance in patients
with poor acoustic window) . In conclusion, CT/FDG-PET is a novel useful tool for early diagnosis of occult infectious processes, including
PVE. The most consistent hypothesis is that this method is able to offer some diagnostic elements (such as a metabolic active process)
earlier than TEE, allowing earlier diagnosis. However, its actual sensitivity and specificity for native and prosthetic valve endocarditis,
as well as for other infections (e.g. cardiac implantable electronic devices), still have to be validated in larger prospective studies.
Written informed consents were obtained from all of the patients in this case series for publication of this Case Report and any
accompanying images. Copies of the written consents are available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. PVE: Prosthetic valve
endocarditis; TEE: Trans-esophageal echocardiography; CT: Computed tomography; FDG-PET: Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography;
CT/FDG-PET: Combined computed tomography and fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography; SE: Sensitivity; SP: Specificity; SUV:
Standardized uptake value; TTE: Trans-thoracic echocardiography. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. MB, FT, RB, CN,
PGS, FC, PV, SF, MG LR and GF have made substantial contributions to conception and acquisition of data; MB, MG, FT, PV, PGS, CR, RB and CN
have been involved in drafting the manuscript and revising it critically. All authors gave final approval for publication.
