*Both authors contributed equally to this work. Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a hereditary neurodegenerative disorder that is characterized
by progressive cerebellar ataxia, ocular or cutaneous telangiectasia, oculomotor apraxia, choreoathetosis, and dysarthria. In addition,
hypersensitivity to radiation, increased malignancy risk, immunodeficiency, and recurrent infection are frequently seen in patients
afflicted with this disorder . A-T is caused by mutations in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene that is located on chromosome
11q22-23. Mutations to this gene lead to DNA instability and decreased protein kinase activity [2, 3]. The reported prevalence of A-T ranges
from 1 in 40,000 to 1 in 300,000 live births, depending on the geographic or ethnic region studied [4, 5]. A-T is the most common cause of
progressive ataxia in childhood in most countries, and several cases have been reported in China and Japan [1, 6, 7]. In Korea, 3 cases of
A-T have been reported thus far, and only 1 family was genetically confirmed by ATM gene analysis . In this report, we present the case of
an 18-yr-old female patient with clinical features of A-T, in whom the diagnosis was confirmed by the identification of 2 novel splicing
mutations in the ATM gene. The patient visited the Neurology Department for gait disturbance. She had developed gait instability and had
experienced frequent falls from the age of 3 yr. She showed slight unsteady gait and slurred speech for her own age group, which progressed
slowly. Ocular telangiectasia had been frequently observed for the previous 5 yr. Her perinatal history was unremarkable, and developmental
delay was not observed. No family history of A-T was noted. Neurologic examination revealed dysarthria, gaze-evoked nystagmus, and
oculomotor apraxia. Deep tendon reflexes were also diminished, and bilateral limb dysmetria and ataxic gait were observed. Sensory dominant
polyneuropathy was detected on nerve conduction study. Mild ocular telangiectasia was noted bilaterally, but there was no cutaneous
telangiectasia (Fig. 1). The serum α-fetoprotein (AFP) level was elevated (77.1 ng/mL), and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed
marked bilateral cerebellar atrophy (Fig. 2). There was no history of infection, and serologic testing revealed no immunodeficiency (IgG,
852 mg/dL; IgA, 212 mg/dL; IgE, 1.5 mg/dL; CD4 lymphocyte, 1.19×109/L; CD8 lymphocyte, 0.64×109/L; CD4/CD8 ratio, 1.85). Chromosome
analysis, in which the patient's lymphocytes were stimulated with phytohemagglutinin and harvested for 72 hr, revealed balanced
translocations or pericentric inversions involving 14q11.2, 7q32, and 7p15.1, besides metaphases with a regular female karyotype (Fig. 3):
46,XX,t(7;14) (q32;q11.2). During evaluation for possible malignancy, follicular thyroid cancer was detected, and the patient underwent a
right thyroid lobectomy. After 19 yr from disease onset, the overall neurologic deficits, including limb ataxia and gait disturbance, had
worsened, but the rate of progression was slower than that described in prior reports of classic A-T . Currently, she can walk independently
and complete household chores. To date, no signs of infection have emerged and additional organ involvement has not developed. After
obtaining informed consent from the patient and her parents, sequence analysis of the ATM gene was performed and 2 novel intronic variants
were identified: c.3154-2A>C in intron 21 and c.7090-2A>C in intron 48 on the basis of the reference sequence NM_000051.3 (Fig. 4).
Additional genetic analysis of the patient's parents revealed that her father was heterozygous for the c.3154-2A>C variant, whereas her
mother was heterozygous for the c.7090-2A>C variant. Since these 2 variants alter the consensus splice acceptor sequences, reverse
transcription PCR (RT-PCR) sequencing followed by thymine/adenine (TA) cloning for the PCR product was performed in order to check for
possible splicing aberrations. As expected, the c.3154-2A>C variant resulted in the insertion of 14 nucleotides from intron 21 into the
transcript, causing a frameshift mutation that disrupted the 3' AG splice site (p.Ala1052Phefs*17; Fig. 5). The c.7090-2A>C variant resulted
in the deletion of 4 nucleotides at exon 49, introducing a premature stop codon in exon 49 at amino acid position 2364 (p.Ala2364*; Fig. 6).
In Korea, A-T is extremely rare that the diagnosis in our patient might have been delayed. Although curative treatments for A-T are not
available, early diagnosis is of particular importance, given the associated increased risk of malignancies and the high risk of side
effects due to subsequent cancer treatment [11, 12]. Furthermore, T lymphocytes from patients with A-T demonstrate specific aberrations
involving chromosomes 7 and 14 in 5-10%, with breakpoints occurring at the sites of immunoglobulin and T cell receptor genes .
Translocations may induce tumorigenic processes, resulting in the preferential proliferation of an aberrant cell clone with neoplastic
potential. This increased level of nonspecific translocations may contribute to the elevated frequency of malignancies in homozygote and
heterozygote carriers of ATM gene mutations . Therefore, this case emphasizes the importance of clinical suspicion of A-T, even though it is
a rare diagnosis in Korea. Genetic study for the ATM gene is useful in the diagnosis, especially in the early stages, of classic A-T or in
variant A-T . Mutations of the ATM gene cause A-T, resulting in an abnormal cellular response to DNA damage, which leads to multi-organ
impairment. Recently, Verhagen et al. postulated that phenotypic manifestations in A-T have a continuous spectrum that depends on the
presence of the ATM protein and kinase activity. Patients with truncating mutations of the ATM gene and an absence of ATM kinase activity
presented with the severe classic form of A-T. Patients with classic, childhood-onset A-T developed neurologic deficits at around 1 yr of
age, and were wheelchair-bound before the age of 12 yr. Conversely, missense or splice-site mutations of the ATM gene tend to present
clinically milder forms of A-T. Compared to classic A-T, the milder form of A-T had an older age of onset, and independent walking was
better preserved . In our case, the patient presented with an ataxic gait in early childhood, but the rate of ataxia progression was
relatively slow. At the age of 22 yr, she can still walk independently and complete household chores. Variable immunodeficiency is a common
clinical manifestation of A-T. In a large cohort study of 100 patients with A-T, immunoglobulin deficiencies were frequently observed,
including that of IgG4 (65%), IgA (63%), IgG2 (48%), and IgE (23%) . However, immunodeficiency was not found in patients with variant A-T,
which is defined as the absence or presence, later in life, of some of the hallmark findings of classic A-T . Our patient exhibited no
evidence of immunodeficiency or history of infection, suggesting a possibility of variant A-T. In our mutation analysis, the patient was
identified as a compound heterozygote with 2 novel genetic mutations. The c.3154-2A>C mutation, located in intron 21, represented a novel
mutation. However, an A>G mutation at the same site was previously described by Laake et al. and was reported to create a new cryptic 5'
splice site that caused a frameshift mutation. This scenario was identical to the putative protein product detected in our patient. In
addition, the c.7090-2A>C mutation, located in intron 48, was also a novel variant that resulted in a premature stop codon. This finding was
confirmed by RT-PCR. In summary, we report a Korean female with clinical features of A-T, carrying 2 novel splicing mutations in the ATM
gene. Although A-T is extremely rare in Korea, patients exhibiting clinical features of the disease should be checked for this disease in
order to prevent its delayed diagnosis. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. Bilateral ocular
telangiectasias. (A) Right eye. (B) Left eye. Sagittal T1-weighted magnetic resonance image of the patient's brain. Pronounced cerebellar
atrophy is evident. Giemsa-banded karyograms of the peripheral blood lymphocyte culture. (A) 46,XX,t(7;14)(q32;q11.2). (B)
46,XX,t(7;14)(p15.1;q11.2). (C) 46,XX,inv(7)(p1?q3?). Arrows indicate the breakpoints on each chromosome. Genomic DNA sequence analysis of
the ATM gene in the patient and in her parents. (A) The solid arrow indicates a heterozygous A>C transition (c.3154-2A>C). (B) The open
arrow indicates a heterozygous A>C transition (c.7090-2A>C). Molecular effects of the c.3154-2A>C mutation. (A) The cDNA sequence from a
normal control, and schematic representation of normal/aberrant mRNA splicing of the ATM gene. (B) The cDNA sequence from the patient. (C)
The predicted amino acid sequence (inserted nucleotides are shaded). Abbreviation: TA, thymine/adenine. Molecular effects of the c.7090-2A>C
mutation. (A) The cDNA sequence from a normal control, and schematic representation of normal/aberrant mRNA splicing of the ATM gene. (B)
The cDNA sequence from the patient. (C) The predicted amino acid sequence (deleted nucleotides are shaded). Abbreviation: TA,
thymine/adenine.
