Oncologic patients who are extreme responders to molecularly targeted therapy provide an important opportunity to better understand the
biologic basis of response and, in turn, inform clinical decision making. Malignant neoplasms with an uncertain histologic and
immunohistochemical characterization present challenges both on initial diagnostic workups and then later in management, as current
treatment algorithms are based on a morphologic diagnosis. Herein, we report a case of a difficult to characterize sarcoma-like lesion for
which genomic profiling with clinical next generation sequencing (NGS) identified the molecular underpinnings of arrested progression(stable
disease) under combination targeted therapy within a phase I clinical trial. Genomic profiling with clinical next generation sequencing was
performed on the FoundationOne™ platform (Foundation Medicine, Cambridge MA). Histopathology and immunohistochemical studies were performed
in the Department of Pathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center (Houston, TX). Treatment was administered in the context of a phase I clinical
trial ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: (NCT01187199). The histology of the tumor was that of a spindle cell neoplasm, grade 2 by FNCLCC
standards. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for S100 and CD34. Genomic profiling identified the following alterations: a
KIAA1549-BRAF gene fusion resulting from a tandem duplication event, a homozygous deletion of PTEN, and frameshift insertion/deletions in
CDKN2A A68fs*51, SUFU E283fs*3, and MAP3K1 N325fs*3. The patient had a 25% reduction in tumor (RECIST v1.1) following combination therapy
consisting of sorafenib, temsirolimus, and bevazicumab within a phase I clinical trial. The patient responded to combination targeted
therapy that fortuitously targeted KIAA1549-BRAF and PTEN loss within a spindle cell neoplasm, as revealed by genomic profiling based on
NGS. This is the first report of a tumor driven by a KIAA1549-BRAF fusion responding to sorafenib-based combination therapy. Tumors that
defy ready histopathologic characterization are difficult to rationally approach in the setting of treatment algorithms which are based on
the anatomic origin of the neoplasm. Spindle cell neoplasms are such tumors that defy characterization even with ancillary methods such as
immunohistochemistry. In such cases, genomic profiling based on next generation sequencing (NGS) can identify the genomic alterations (GA)
that drive oncogenesis and thus prospectively suggest aberrantly activated pathways for pharmacologic inhibition independent of tumor site
origin. Conversely, in the case of exceptional responders to targeted therapy, diagnostic genomic profiling may uncover the linked
underlying alterations retrospectively. We report one such case of a patient with a malignant spindle cell neoplasm who exhibited clinical
and radiographic improvement with simultaneous RAF kinase inhibition (sorafenib/Nexavar®), mTOR inhibition (temsirolimus/Torisel®) and VEGF
(bevacizumab/Avastin®) targeted therapy who had been refractory to standard cyototoxic chemotherapy. A Clinical Laboratory Improvement
Amendments (CLIA) laboratory performed NGS-based diagnostic genomic profiling which identified this tumor as the first reported case of the
KIAA1549-BRAF fusion in a PTEN null background as a driving genomic alteration susceptible to targeted therapy. We reviewed the medical
records of a patient with spindle cell neoplasm who presented to the Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics at The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center after failing standard of care therapy. Treatment and consent on investigational trial, and data collection
were performed in accordance with the guidelines of the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center Institutional Review Board (IRB).
Tumor response was determined using RECIST (version 1.1) by CT scans obtained about every six to eight weeks. Clinical evaluation and
assessments were performed per protocol. Next-generation sequencing was performed by using the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments
(CLIA)-approved FoundationOne™ platform (Foundation Medicine, Cambridge, MA, USA). FoundationOne™ is a targeted assay utilizing next
generation sequencing in routine cancer specimens. The assay simultaneously sequences the entire coding sequence of 236 cancer-related genes
(3,769 exons) plus 47 introns of 19 genes frequently rearranged in cancer to a minimum coverage depth of 250X. The assay detects all class
of genomic alterations (including base substitutions, insertions and deletions, copy number alterations and rearrangements) using routine
FFPE tissue samples that may be as small as 0.6 mm3. A 55 year old female presented to the clinical center for targeted therapy to discuss
treatment options for a progressive metastatic spindle cell neoplasm. Disease at presentation included a left chest wall mass measuring more
than 6 cm in greatest dimension. Extent of disease evaluation also revealed a lytic lesion in the left seventh rib and a second smaller mass
centered in the pleura. Pathologic examination of formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) biopsied tissue from the presumed primary tumor
site revealed a spindle cell proliferation, which was diagnosed to be a malignant spindle cell neoplasm, favor sarcoma, which is akin to a
diagnosis of exclusion. The diagnosis of a malignant solitary fibrous tumor was also entertained, but the features were not typical for such
a diagnosis (Figure 1 A,B upper left and right panels with 100× and 400× magnification, respectively). Immunohistochemical stains for S-100
and CD34 were positive (Figure 1 C,D lower left and right panels, respectively). Notably, mitoses were counted at 6/10 per high powered
field (HPF), and no necrosis was identified. Using FNCLCC guidelines for the histopathologic grading of soft tissue sarcomas as a reference,
this difficult to characterize neoplasm would be intermediate grade . Histopathologic examination of formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE)
biopsied tissue from the presumed primary tumor site. (A) Low power (100x). Cellular tumor composed of spindled cells. (B) High power
(400x). Short atypical spindle cells with few mitotic figures. Immunohistochemical studies reveal the tumor to be reactive for (C) S-100
protein and (D) CD34. The patient was initially treated with doxorubicin (Adriamycin®) 75 mg/m2 and ifosfamide (Ifex®) 10 g/m2. She
progressed during two cycles of this treatment, and was then started on gemcitabine (Gemzar®) 900 mg/m2 and docetaxel (Taxotere®) 100 mg/m2.
The patient then progressed after two cycles of her second regimen. The patient was then enrolled in a phase I clinical trial
(ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01187199) of bevacizumab and temsirolimus in combination with sorafenib for the treatment of advanced
cancer . The patient was treated with bevacizumab 10 mg/kg intravenously (IV) every 21 days, temsirolimus 20 mg IV on Day 1, 8 and 15, and
sorafenib 200 mg orally twice daily. After of two cycles of therapy, the patient had a 25% reduction in greatest unidimensional tumor
measurment per RECIST 1.1 (Figure 2 A,B), which is stable disease (SD), and also just below the criteria for a partial response (PR). Pain
secondary to the chest wall mass decreased and dyspnea, likely secondary to the resolving pleural effusion, lessened. She tolerated therapy
well, except for experiencing grade 3 hypertension related to bevacizumab that required anti-hypertensive therapy. She also had grade 2–3
hand-foot-syndrome related to sorafenib, leading to a dose reduction to 200 mg once daily. The patient continued on therapy for seven months
since the initiation of therapy. Imaging studies pre and post- treatment. A: Pre-treatment CT scan of the Chest shows left chest wall tumor
invading the ribs and left sided pleural effusion. B. Post-treatment CT scan of the Chest shows a decrease in size of the tumor and decrease
in pleural effusion. Contemporaneously with the entrance of patient into the clinical trial, FFPE tumor cell-predominant tissue from the
biopsy was submitted to a commercial CLIA-certified, CAP-accredited laboratory for genomic profiling based on next generation sequencing
(NGS) based. At the time of this report, the patient’s overall response was stable disease for eleven cycles. She had the following ongoing
toxicities that were felt to be at least possibly related to the study drug: grade 1 altered taste, grade 2 proteinuria, grade 1 hand-foot
syndrome, grade 2 hypoalbuminemia, and grade 2 mylagias. The patient did not experience a dose limiting toxicity from the combination
therapy. Unfortunately, the patient developed an acute myocardial infarction, hypotension, clinically deteriorated and died because of this
co-morbidity. 3769 exons of 236 cancer-related genes and 47 introns from 19 genes frequently rearranged in cancer were sequenced to a depth
of coverage of 835×. A tandem duplication predicted to generate a KIAA1549-BRAF fusion gene (Figure 3), was identified as well as a
homozygous deletion of PTEN. Other genomic alterations identified in this tumor were frameshift insertion/deletions in CDKN2A A68fs*51, SUFU
E283fs*3, and MAP3K1 N325fs*3. KIAA1549-BRAF fusion protein. Of the two components of the KIAA1549-BRAF fusion protein, BRAF is a cytosolic
serine/threonine kinase that is activated by binding of RAS-GTP. The function of KIAA1549 remains unknown. This fusion merges intron 15 of
KIAA1549 and intron 8 of BRAF, although several other configurations of these fused genes have been observed. The kinase domain and ATP
binding pocket of BRAF are retained but the N-terminal conserved region 1 (CR1) and conserved region 2 (CR2) are lost. CR1 auto-inhibits the
kinase domain, but this inhibitory allosteric interaction is disrupted by the binding of RAS-GTP to CR1. Thus, loss of the CR1 domain
suggests a dysregulation of the kinase activity of this fusion. KIAA1549-BRAF is a recurrent oncogenic driver in sporadic pilocytic
astrocytoma, but is described here in a spindle cell neoplasm for the first time . To our knowledge, moreover, this case is the first report
any tumor expressing this fusion to be successfully treated by targeted therapy. The patient initially received two lines of standard
chemotherapy for soft tissue sarcoma, and did not respond. For this patient, the administered combination of sorafenib, temsirolimus, and
bevacizumab provided durable disease control and symptomatic benefit. Likely, the magnitude and rapidity of this response was due to
treatment that precisely and fortuitously targeted the genomic alterations present in this tumor. A possible pathologic diagnosis for this
tumor could be that of a malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) due to the positive S100 immunohistochemical stain and histologic
phenotype of spindle cells, although that diagnosis was not made here. Interestingly, the known activating V600E BRAF mutation is observed
in a non-syndromic and sporadic subset of MPNST cases . The identification of a BRAF fusion in this spindle cell tumor is consistent with
molecular and phenotypic correlation of an activated BRAF in some MPNST cases. Of the two components of the KIAA1549-BRAF fusion protein,
BRAF is a cytosolic serine/threonine kinase that is activated by binding of RAS-GTP. The function of KIAA1549 remains unknown. This fusion
joins intron 15 of KIAA1549 and intron 8 of BRAF, although several other configurations of these fused genes have been observed . The kinase
domain and ATP binding pocket of BRAF are retained but the N-terminal conserved region 1 (CR1) and conserved region 2 (CR2) are lost. CR1
auto-inhibits the kinase domain, but this inhibitory allosteric interaction is disrupted by the binding of RAS-GTP to CR1. Thus, loss of the
CR1 domain suggests a dysregulation of the kinase activity of this fusion. Sorafenib is a small molecule inhibitor of WT BRAF and other
kinases including VEGFR 1/2/3, PDGFRB, and RAF family, that has an IC50 for WT BRAF at 25 nm and binds to the hydrophobic pocket of the ATP
binding cleft to indirectly compete with ATP. The structure of the fusion protein readily suggests that sorafenib may also inhibit activity
of KIAA1549-BRAF as the BRAF kinase domain is completely conserved. Interestingly successful targeting by sorafenib of BRAF-fusion bearing
cells specifically the AGK-BRAF fusion that contains the first 33 amino acids of AGK and the C-terminal portion of BRAF starting from
position 328 of BRAF with loss of the CR1 domain (not KIAA1549-BRAF) has been recently reported . In the experiments carried out the
patient-derived AGK-BRAF expressing melanoma cell line demonstrated an increased sensitivity to sorafenib . Remarkably, sorafenib was also
active against RAF fusion proteins reported in prostate cancer . Notably, pediatric astrocytoma patients expressing this fusion progressed
on sorafenib monotherapy in a small phase II trial . This observation suggests that sole inhibition of the BRAF fusion is insufficient for
tumor response. An analogy can be made to non-melanoma solid tumors expressing the activating V600E mutant BRAF, where vemurafenib treatment
is sometimes ineffective, ie as in the colon . In such instances of resistance aberrant activation of the P13K/PTEN/mTOR pathway has been
implicated . This leads to the premise that combined BRAF and mTOR pathway inhibition may overcome the innate and/or acquired resistance to
BRAF-target monotherapy, as has been demonstrated in other systems . Thus, the combination therapy administered in this patient seemingly
targeted the existing genomic alterations. Interestingly, in murine models of pilocytic astrocytoma, the KIAA1549-BRAF fusion hyperactivates
the mTOR pathway , as does loss of PTEN . In this context, the success of this combination therapy suggests both inhibition of the BRAF
fusion protein by sorafenib and of the downstream mTOR pathway by temsirolimus synergizes, although the specific mechanism of tumor
regression awaits further investigation. Bevacizumab was also administered, but the contribution of this therapy to the patient response is
difficult to ascertain. As has been theorized for other tumor types, it is possible that bevacizumab enhanced delivery of the other
therapeutics by normalizing the tumoral vasculature . What are the implications of this case for treating tumors that express the
KIAA1549-BRAF fusion such as pediatric pilocytic astrocytomas? As patients with such tumors on sorafenib monotherapy progressed rapidly in a
very small Phase II study , sorafenib combination therapy combined with mTOR inhibitors is an alternative avenue. While this is suggestive,
additional in vitro and in vivo studies well outside the scope of this report are required. Sorafenib is indeed not a specific inhibitor of
BRAF and as such the effects may not be mediated by targeting KIAA1549-BRAF in this tumor. Specifically, genomic profiling based on
clinical-grade NGS could identify whether PTEN loss or other GAs activating the mTOR pathway are present alongside the BRAF fusion in a
pilocytic astrocytoma of patient, thus suggesting a potential responsiveness to combined sorafenib/mTOR targeted therapy. As a possible
therapeutic alternative, a recent in vitro study suggested that second generation BRAF inhibitors may be capable of effectively inhibiting
this fusion protein . A prospective clinical trial with prospective diagnostic genomic profiling will best answer whether tumors driven by
KIAA1549-BRAF fusions typically coincide with alterations in the mTOR pathway, and whether such patients can be effectively treated with
targeted therapy on that basis. However, this case already indicates such treatment possibilities exist for patients possessing
KIAA1549-BRAF fusions, whether in pediatric astrocytomas or difficult to characterize sarcoma like lesions. In general, genomic profiling
based on NGS may be of great relevance in the management of patient with solid tumors that defy pathologic definition, as this case
demonstrates that such diagnostics can reveal unexpected but effective avenues of targeted treatment. • KIAA1549-BRAF fusion, a recurrent
oncogenic driver in sporadic pilocytic astrocytoma, is described here in a spindle cell neoplasm for the first time. • This case is the
first report any tumor expressing KIAA1549-BRAF fusion with PTEN loss to be successfully treated by targeted therapy. • Genomic profiling
based on Next-generation sequencing (NGS) may be of great relevance in the management of patient with solid tumors that defy pathologic
definition, as this case demonstrates that such diagnostics can reveal unexpected but effective avenues of targeted treatment. KW, SMA, VAM,
PJS, GAP, and JSR are all employees of and own stock in Foundation Medicine. All authors contributed to writing the manuscript. VS, VAM and
SMA conceived the manuscript. VS and DA provided clinical expertise. SNW is the primary investigator for the clinical trial and VS is the
co-primary investigator for the clinical trial. VS, SNW, KW, WW, VAM, JR, PJS, GAP and SMA analyzed the data. WW, JR, SMA provided pathology
expertise. VS and SMA wrote the paper. VS and DA provided sarcoma expertise. VS and SMA provided cellular, molecular and targeted therapy
expertise. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. VS would like to thank the patient and family for their motivation in seeking
targeted therapy. VS and SNW would like to thank Melody Smart, the clinical research coordinator for assistance in scheduling the patient
visits. The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center is supported by Cancer Center Support Grant no. CA 016672. SW is supported by a
K12 Paul Calabresi Clinical Oncology Research Career Development Grant, K12 CA88084. VS has clinical trial research support from
Genentech/Roche, GSK and Northwest Biotherapeutics.
