Histopathological and immunohistochemical examinations were made on a cutaneous tumor on the head of an 11-year-old female mixed-breed dog.
The tumor was well demarcated and comprised multilobular structures of neoplastic epithelial cells with abundant plump peritumoral stromal
cells. The neoplastic cells formed irregular cell cords or trabeculae and were arranged in characteristic palisades at the periphery.
Immunohistochemically, neoplastic cells were positive for p63 and the several cytokeratins examined. In contrast, the plump peritumoral
stromal cells were positive for vimentin and unevenly for nestin, a neuroepithelial stem cell protein. The stromal cells prominently
proliferated in proximity to epithelial neoplastic cells, suggesting a close interaction between these two cell types. The trichoblastoma is
a benign cutaneous tumor that may derive from the hair germ of a developing follicle [3, 4, 9]. It is common in dogs and is histologically
classified into several types, including ribbon, trabecular, granular cell and spindle cell [3, 9]. Most tumors contain a mixture of these
patterns with a predominance of ribbon architecture [3, 5]. The neoplastic epithelial structures are embedded in a paucicellular fibrous
stroma. The evidence of trichogenic differentiation is present in the form of abortive hair papillae formation (so called papillary
mesenchymal bodies), consisting of the stroma forming into nests of neoplastic epithelial cells, reminiscent of the relationship between
primitive hair germ and papilla. In humans, the trichoblastoma is a rare tumor, and five main patterns have been described as large nodular,
small nodular, cribriform, racemiform and retiform . Recently, we encountered an atypical case of canine trichoblastoma with prominent
proliferation of plump peritumoral stromal cells with occasional expression of nestin. Nestin, a neuroepithelial stem cell protein, was
initially identified as a marker for neuronal progenitor cells in the brain, but was subsequently found in mesenchymal stem cells from bone
marrow, lung, muscle and pancreas . In human cases of trichoblastoma, the nestin protein is usually found in the peritumoral stromal cells,
but not in the epithelial component of these tumors [6, 8]. Brachelente et al. reported nestin expression in the neoplastic epithelial cells
of canine trichoblastoma. However, nestin expression in the peritumoral stromal cells was not mentioned in the study. In this report, we
describe the morphological and immunohistochemical findings of a case of trichoblastoma in a dog, which showed abundant plump stromal cell
proliferation. An 11-year-old mixed-breed female dog was brought to a local veterinary clinic, because of development of a cutaneous mass on
the head (Fig. 1Fig. 1.The cutaneous neoplasm on the head. Bar=5 mm). The mass was round and non-ulcerated, sized 45 × 30 × 7 mm, and its
cut surface was white and lobulated. Excision was performed, and the mass was submitted to our laboratory for histopathological examination.
During the 7 months since surgical excision, no local recurrence or metastasis has been recognized. The cutaneous neoplasm on the head.
Bar=5 mm The mass was fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, sectioned and stained with hematoxylin and eosin,
periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and Masson trichrome stain. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed by the immunoenzyme polymer method using the
primary antibodies shown in Table 1Table 1.Primary antibodies and immunostaining protocol in the current
studyAntibodya)CloneDilutionSourcePositive reactions in canine tissuesb)Antigen retrievald)Pan-CKAE1/AE31:50Dako Denmark A/S.,Glostrup,
DenmarkEpidermis, ORS, AG, SG, Hair medullac)MW, 95°C, 10 minPan-CKKL11:100Immunotech.,Marselle, FranceEpidermis (except for the basal
layer)ORS (innner cells), Hair medullaMW, 90°C, 10 minPan-CKCAM5.2predilutedBecton Dicknson.,Heidelberg, GermanyIRS, AG (luminal
cells)Proteinase K, 37°C, 10 minCK14LL0021:100Serotec., Weisbeden,GermanyEpidermis (basal layer), ORS,AG (myoepithelial cells) SG, Hair
medullaMW, 90°C, 10 minCK18Ks 18.4predilutedProgen Biotechnik.,heidelberg, GermanyAG (luminal cells)Proteinase K, 37°C, 11 minE-
cadherin4A2C71:100Invitrogen., Camarillo,CA, USAEpithelial cellsAC, 121°C, 20 minVimentinSP201:100Nichirei Corp., Tokyo,JapanMesenchimal
cellsMW, 95°C, 10 minSMA1A41:100Dako Denmark A/S.,Glostrup, DenmarkSmooth muscle cellsNo treatmentp634A41:150Thermo Fisher
Scientific.,Waltham, MAEpidermis (basal layer), ORS,AG (myoepithelial cells) SG (reserve cells),Hair matrix cellsAC, 121°C, 20
minAdipophilinAP1251:50Dako Denmark A/S.,Glostrup, DenmarkSG (sebocytes)MW, 90°C, 10 minMelanAA1031:50Dako Denmark A/S.,Glostrup,
DenmarkMelanocytesMW, 95°C, 10 minS-100aPolyclonal1:100Dako Denmark A/S.,Glostrup, DenmarkNeuron cellsMW, 90°C, 10
minNestinPolyclonal1:200Millipore., Billerica,USAMiddle portion of hair follicleTripsin, 37°C, 30 minKi67MIB-11:100Dako Denmark
A/S.,Glostrup, DenmarkEpidermis (basal layer)AC, 121°C, 20 mina) CK=cytokeratin; SMA=α-smooth muscle actin, b) IRS=inner root sheath;
ORS=outer root sheath; AG=apocrin sweat gland; SG=sebaceous gland, c) The positivity against CK AE1/AE3 is variable between indidual. Most
consistent are shown in this table. d) Trypsin=0.1% trypsin (Dako A/S); MW=microwave, citrate buffer (PH 6.0). Proteinase K=0.4 mg/ml
proteinase K (Wako Pure Chemical Industries Ltd. Osaka; Japan), AC=autocleve, citrate buffer (PH 6.0); Pepsin=0.4% pepsin (Sigma-Aldrich
Co., St. Louis, MO, U.S.A.). . Peroxidase-conjugated anti-mouse (Histofine Simple Stain MAX-PO (M); Nichirei Corp., Tokyo, Japan) or anti-
rabbit (Histofine Simple Stain MAX-PO (R); Nichirei) immunoglobulin (Ig) G was used as secondary antibodies. After immunoreaction, the
sections were colorized with diaminobenzidine (DAB) and followed by counterstaining by Mayer’s hematoxylin with/without PAS reaction.
Immunohistochemical staining was performed on this case as well as five cases of common type trichoblastoma (ribbon type) and five normal
canine skin tissues for comparison. Double-labeled immunohistochemistry was also performed using anti-cytokeratin (CK) AE1/AE3 and anti-
vimentin antibodies. This assay used FITC-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (EY Laboratories, San Maeto, CA, U.S.A.) and rhodamine-conjugated
goat anti-rabbit IgG (Chemicon, Temecula, CA, U.S.A.) to label anti-CK AE1/AE3 and anti-vimentin, respectively. Fluorescence was analyzed
using a FSX100 fluorescence microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). a) CK=cytokeratin; SMA=α-smooth muscle actin, b) IRS=inner root sheath;
ORS=outer root sheath; AG=apocrin sweat gland; SG=sebaceous gland, c) The positivity against CK AE1/AE3 is variable between indidual. Most
consistent are shown in this table. d) Trypsin=0.1% trypsin (Dako A/S); MW=microwave, citrate buffer (PH 6.0). Proteinase K=0.4 mg/ml
proteinase K (Wako Pure Chemical Industries Ltd. Osaka; Japan), AC=autocleve, citrate buffer (PH 6.0); Pepsin=0.4% pepsin (Sigma-Aldrich
Co., St. Louis, MO, U.S.A.). The mass was well demarcated and comprised many lobules (Fig. 2Fig. 2.The cutaneous neoplasm is well-demarcated
and densely cellular. The mass is comprised of variably sized lobules. Hematoxylin and Eosin (HE) stain. Bar=1,000 µm.). Each lobule was
composed of epithelial neoplastic cells together with abundant plump stromal cells. The neoplastic cells formed irregular cell cords or
trabeculae and were arranged in the characteristic palisades at the periphery. These neoplastic cells were mainly composed of trichoblastic
cells with small ovoid nuclei and scant cytoplasm (Fig. 3Fig. 3.The tumor composed of neoplastic basaloid cells together with a lot of plump
stromal cells morphologically resembling hair papilla cells. HE. Bar=100 µm.). The second minor population of tumor cells consisted of cells
with small monomorphic nuclei and PAS-positive granules in the clear cytoplasm, resembling outer root sheath cells. Mitotic activity of
neoplastic cells was moderate, at 4 mitoses per 10 high-power fields. The cutaneous neoplasm is well-demarcated and densely cellular. The
mass is comprised of variably sized lobules. Hematoxylin and Eosin (HE) stain. Bar=1,000 µm. The tumor composed of neoplastic basaloid cells
together with a lot of plump stromal cells morphologically resembling hair papilla cells. HE. Bar=100 µm. On the other hand, characteristic
stromal cells prominently proliferated around these neoplastic cells accompanied by scant collagen fibers (Fig. 3). These cells were
characterized by plump, oval or elongated nuclei and eosinophilic scant cytoplasm. Cytological atypia of these cells was mild and showed
moderate mitotic activity, at 3 mitoses per 10 high-power fields. These plump stromal cells were located in the entire peritumoral stroma.
Interlobar stroma was composed of plump stromal cells, elongated spindle stromal cells and scant collagen fibers. The results of
immunohistochemical examinations of the present case and other five trichoblastomas are summarized in Table 2Table 2.Reslts of
immunostaining of the neoplastic epithelial cells and stromal cellsa)Cell
typeAE1/AE3KL1CAM5.2CK14CK18E-cadherinVimentinSMAp63AdipophilinMelanAS-100aNestinKi67b)Neoplasticepithelial cellsPresent case++
(>5%)c)–+–+––+––––6.4%Common type trichoblastoma (n=5)+––+–+––+––––6.2 ± 4.7%d)Stromal cellsPresent case––––––+–––––+ (>10%)9.4%Common type
trichoblastoma (n=5)––––––+––––––/±e)1.0 ± 0.6%d)a) –=negative; +=positive, b) positive rate for Ki67, c) Only central part of epithelial
cells resembling outer root sheath cells is positive for KL-1, d) mean ± SD, e) A few number of mesenchymal cells are positive for nestin (2
of 5).. In the present case, neoplastic epithelial cells were consistently positive for CK AE1/AE3 (Fig. 4Fig. 4.Double-labeled
immunofluorescence microscopy of the tumor tissue. Green color indicates positive staining for CK clone AE1/AE3. Red color shows positive
staining for vimentin. Nuclei are colored blue with 4,6-diamino-2-phenylindole. Neoplastic epithelial cells are positive for CK AE1/AE3, but
not for vimentin. In contrast, stromal plump stromal cells are positive for vimentin, but not for CK AE1/AE3. Bar=50 µm.), CK 14 (Fig. 5Fig.
5.Immunostaining of CK14 in the tumor tissue. Neoplastic epithelial cells are positive for CK14. Bar=100 µm.) and p63, but negative for CK
CAM5.2, CK 18, vimentin, SMA, adipophilin, melan A, S-100a and nestin. However, only the central part of the neoplastic epithelial cells
resembling outer root sheath cells was positive for CK KL-1. Plump stromal cells were negative for all cytokeratins examined, E-cadherin,
SMA, p63, adipophilin, melan A and S-100a, but were consistently positive for vimentin (Fig. 4). In addition, these peritumoral stromal
cells unevenly expressed nestin (Fig. 6Fig. 6.Immunostaining of nestin in the tumor tissue. A part of peritumoral plump stromal cells
express nestin (arrow). Bar=50 µm.). Both neoplastic epithelial cells and plump stromal cells expressed Ki67 at a high rate (Fig. 7Fig.
7.Immunostaining of Ki67 with Mayer’s hematoxylin stain and PAS reaction in the tumor tissue. Brown color shows Ki67 positive nuclei
(arrows). PAS-positive basement membrane (arrowheads) encircled epithelial components. Bar=50 µm.). In normal canine skin tissues, nestin
expression was not detected. Peritumoral stromal cells in other five cases of trichoblastoma consisted of two types of stromal cells, plump
cells and thin ﬁbroblasts. The proportion of the two cell types varied from lesion to lesion, although the later was constantly predominant.
These stromal cells showed either no expression or very rare expression of nestin and low positive rate for Ki67. a) –=negative; +=positive,
b) positive rate for Ki67, c) Only central part of epithelial cells resembling outer root sheath cells is positive for KL-1, d) mean ± SD,
e) A few number of mesenchymal cells are positive for nestin (2 of 5). Double-labeled immunofluorescence microscopy of the tumor tissue.
Green color indicates positive staining for CK clone AE1/AE3. Red color shows positive staining for vimentin. Nuclei are colored blue with
4,6-diamino-2-phenylindole. Neoplastic epithelial cells are positive for CK AE1/AE3, but not for vimentin. In contrast, stromal plump
stromal cells are positive for vimentin, but not for CK AE1/AE3. Bar=50 µm. Immunostaining of CK14 in the tumor tissue. Neoplastic
epithelial cells are positive for CK14. Bar=100 µm. Immunostaining of nestin in the tumor tissue. A part of peritumoral plump stromal cells
express nestin (arrow). Bar=50 µm. Immunostaining of Ki67 with Mayer’s hematoxylin stain and PAS reaction in the tumor tissue. Brown color
shows Ki67 positive nuclei (arrows). PAS-positive basement membrane (arrowheads) encircled epithelial components. Bar=50 µm. On the basis of
histopathological findings, the tumor was diagnosed as a trichoblastoma. However, the present case was not typical, because of accompanying
prominent proliferation of plump peritumoral stromal cells. The development of adnexa is the result of intimate interaction between
trichoblastic cells of the epidermis and mesenchymal cells. The precursor of the hair follicle is a local thickening of the embryonic
epidermis, also known as a placode, in the development of dermal papilla cells. Soon after, a dense collection of plump mesenchymal cells of
the future follicular papilla forms beneath the placode. The basal cells become trichoblastic cells of the hair follicle that will give rise
to the specialized components of the follicle, the hair shaft, the internal root sheath and the external root sheath . Benign adnexal
neoplasms are thought to recapitulate the embryonic development of adnexal structures . The peritumoral stroma in our case was composed of
abundant plump cells and scant collagen fibers, while, in contrast, stromal cells were mainly thin spindle cells with thick collagen fiber
in the other trichoblastomas. Moreover, some of the peritumoral stromal cells expressed the neuroepithelial stem cell protein, nestin.
Therefore, plump appearances of the peritumoral stromal cells in canine trichoblastoma might be reminiscent of embryonic mesenchymal cells
or follicle dermal papilla cells. We suspect that neoplastic epithelial cells might relate to proliferation of the stromal cells. The clonal
analysis might provide valuable information regarding the nature of stromal cells as confirmed in human mammary phyllodes tumor . This paper
is the first report of canine trichoblastoma with abundant plump stromal cells showing expression of nestin. This work was supported in part
by the Grant-in-Aid for Challenging Exploratory Research (25660237) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).
