SRD5A3 is responsible for SRD5A3-CDG, a type of congenital disorder of glycosylation, and mutations have been reported in 15 children. All
the mutations are recessive and truncating. We present 2 brothers at the age of 38 and 40 years with an initial diagnosis of cerebellar
ataxia. We found the candidate disease loci via linkage analysis using data from single nucleotide polymorphism genome scans and homozygous
truncating mutation SRD5A3 p.W19X, which was previously reported in 3 unrelated children, by exome sequencing. Clinical investigations
included physical and ocular examinations and blood tests. Severe ocular involvement with retinal bone spicule pigmentation and optic
atrophy are the most prominent disabling clinical features of the disease. The serum transferrin isoelectric focusing (TIEF) pattern is
abnormal in the patient investigated. Our patients are older, with later onset and milder clinical phenotypes than all patients with
SRD5A3-CDG reported so far. They also have atypical ocular findings and variable phenotypes. Our findings widen the spectrum of phenotypes
resulting from SRD5A3 mutations and the clinical variability of SRD5A3-CDG, and suggest screening for SRD5A3 mutations in new patients with
at least a few of the clinical symptoms of SRD5A3-CDG. Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are multisystemic disorders caused by
defects in protein glycosylation. Since the first clinical description in 1980, about 60 CDG types with a very broad spectrum of clinical
presentations have been reported . SRD5A3, encoding steroid 5-alpha-reductase 3, is responsible for a rare CDG, namely, SRD5A3-CDG [CDG1Q;
MIM 612379] . So far, 15 children with SRD5A3-CDG in 12 families carrying 10 different recessive mutations and with variable phenotypes have
been reported . The disorder is characterized by severe early visual impairment and variable ocular anomalies including coloboma, optic
nerve hypoplasia, congenital cataract, and glaucoma, as well as some degree of intellectual disability. Other clinical features, such as
cerebellar ataxia and cerebellar malformations, ichthyosiform skin disorders, hypertrichosis, congenital heart defects, and abnormal
coagulation vary considerably not only among families but also within a family . Although the transferrin isoelectric focusing (TIEF)
pattern is generally abnormal in affected individuals, one patient with SRD5A3-CDG was reported to have a normal pattern . Therefore, even
in the absence of an abnormal TIEF pattern, the clinically distinctive features of SRD5A3-CDG warrant genetic testing. Kahrizi syndrome is a
similar disease and has been described in a single family. It has been characterized by intellectual disability, coloboma, cataract, and
kyphosis but a normal TIEF pattern . It was later shown to result from a homozygous truncating SRD5A3 mutation, indicating that SRD5A3-CDG
and Kahrizi syndrome are allelic disorders . The affected siblings were aged 40 years and older. In contrast, all patients with SRD5A3-CDG
reported so far have been children. The parents were second cousins. They had 2 affected sons and 4 healthy daughters. Peripheral blood
samples were obtained after written informed consent, and DNA was isolated from leukocytes by a standard protocol. Single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) genome scans were performed for the parents and the 2 affected sibs using an Illumina 370 Duo chip. Linkage analysis for
calculating multipoint logarithm of the odds (LOD) scores was performed with Allegro using SNPs at intervals of 0.07 cM and sets of 100, and
assuming recessive inheritance and a disease allele frequency of 0.001. Four candidate loci yielded the highest score of 2.66 (Additional
file 1). The largest locus was maximally 52 Mbp at chromosome 4q12-24. The others were 0.55 to 5.5 Mbp at 6q25.1-25.2 (maximally between
rs912561 and rs1407490), 12p13.31-p13.1 (rs1868798 and rs873218), and 22q12.1 (rs1547358 and rs5752043). We considered the largest locus
(4q12-24) the most likely disease locus. The region with shared homozygosity was delineated by rs2067951 and rs11733406 (55,805,555 and
107,751,089 bp) and harbored 437 genes . At the time, there were no similar diseases mapped to any of the loci. The abundance of the genes
at the loci discouraged us from applying the candidate gene approach, and we launched exome sequencing. A DNA sample from the older brother
was subjected to exome sequencing analysis, aiming to cover 95% of the CCDS database, as previously described . Ten novel exonic variants
were found at 4q12-24. The best candidate responsible for the disease was the homozygous mutation c.57G > A (p.W19X) in SRD5A3 exon 1,
converting codon 19 (tryptophan) to a termination codon. We validated the mutation by Sanger sequencing (Additional file 2). The mutation
segregated with the disease in the family. Fifty-six unrelated individuals from the population were screened for the mutation by single
strand conformational polymorphism analysis and found not to carry it. The mutation was reported in 3 unrelated children with SRD5A3-CDG .
The affected brothers were 38 and 40 years old and had complaints of abnormal gait and visual impairment, and the initial diagnosis five
years ago was diagnosed with cerebellar ataxia. According to the parents, their prenatal, natal, and postnatal histories were uneventful.
They walked and spoke single words by the age of 2 years. Whether they had childhood ichthyosiform dermatitis or coagulation abnormalities
could not be assessed with certainty. Progressive ataxic gait and visual impairment began in early childhood. The older brother had a
relatively more severe phenotype and could not complete primary school due to intellectual disability and ophthalmologic problems. At
present, he lives with his parents, needs help with activities of daily living partly due to ophthalmologic problems, and does not have a
job. The younger brother was able to complete primary school but not high school mainly due to ophthalmologic problems. At present, he works
in an office and can use a computer. He is married and has 4 healthy children. Recent examinations of both patients revealed ataxic gait,
dysmetria, dysdiadochokinesia, and scanning speech. Muscle tonus was normal, deep tendon reflexes were increased, and Achilles clonus was
present. No pathologic reflex was observed. Cranial nerves were intact. The mental performance of the younger patient seemed much better.
His sensory examination was normal and visual acuity was at the level of counting fingers from 25 cm. The older brother’s visual acuity was
at the level of awareness of hand movements right in front of his face. In both patients, eye examination showed bilateral horizontal
nystagmus, bilateral posterior subcapsular cataract, bilateral optic disk hypoplasia, thinning of the retinal arterioles, bilateral optic
atrophy, and retinal bone spicule pigmentation (Figure 1). The younger patient also had 30–40° exotropia, bilateral keratoconus, and
degenerated vitreous. Neither of the patients had glaucoma, dysmorphism, or organomegaly. Skin examinations were normal. The upper
extremities of the older brother were slightly short. Whole blood count, coagulation studies, urine analysis, and serum biochemistry were
performed for him, and the results were unremarkable. Ocular findings. A: Waxy pallor of the optic disc with attenuated retinal vessels and
bone spicule-shaped pigment deposits in the periphery (indicated with arrows) in the older patient. B: Blurry fundus due to vitreous
degeneration and a posterior subcapsular cataract in the younger brother. In order to verify that the disease was SRD5A3-CDG, we performed
serum TIEF (in the older brother) and found an abnormal pattern compatible with SRD5A3-CDG: 5.371% disialotransferrin, 3.546%
trisialotransferrin, 86.012% tetrasialotransferrin, and 5.071% pentasialotransferrin. The presence of disialotransferrin and a decreased
ratio of trisialotransferrin to diasialotransferrin of 0.66 (normal ratio >1.25) was supportive of a type I pattern. Considering all
evidence together, the patients were diagnosed with SRD5A3-CDG. The 2 brothers were initially evaluated as having a novel neurologic
disorder. We performed genome-wide linkage analysis and found 4 candidate loci. We then launched exome sequencing and found a homozygous
nonsense mutation in SRD5A3 exon 1. The premature translational termination signal was deduced to result in a null protein by deleting 300
residues from the native 318-amino acid protein. The gene has recently been shown to be responsible for SRD5A3-CDG, and all mutations
reported so far are truncating . Each of the mutations was found in a single family, except for p.W19X, the mutation in our patients. This
mutation was previously reported in the homozygous state in 3 unrelated children . The variability and severity of the clinical phenotypes
of those patients plus the two patients we present herein with the same homozygous mutation further establish that there is no
genotype–phenotype correlation in SRD5A3-CDG and clinical manifestations may vary even within the same family. Both of the previously
reported Turkish patients with p.W19X were initially diagnosed with CDG-x but later shown to have SRD5A3 mutation . One of those patients
presented with stereotypical dystonic hand movements, truncal hypotonia, cerebellar vermis atrophy, psychomotor retardation, and
ophthalmologic abnormalities such as optic atrophy, nystagmus and strabismus . The other patient had floppiness, roving eye movements, and
normal social contact in early infancy. Muscle hypotonia developed at the age of 5 months, and severe mental delay, visual impairment, optic
atrophy, nystagmus, cerebellar ataxia, and recurrent episodes of reduced activity followed . The third patient reported with p.W19X was a
6-year old Pakistani boy with clinical features of hypertonia, psychomotor retardation, and nystagmus but no ocular findings at the age 5
months . In contrast, our patients had progressive ataxic gait and visual failure since early childhood, and the older brother had a more
severe phenotype. Our findings widen the clinical spectrum of SRD5A3 mutations, especially at the adult stage. Our patients are around 40
years of age, whereas all previously reported cases of SRD5A3-CDG were children. The most striking clinical features in our patients are
ophthalmologic malformations including bilateral optic atrophy, cataracts and visual failure, ataxia and mental status best described as
borderline in the younger brother and moderate intellectual disability in the older brother. The phenotype of the younger patient is quite
mild and very slowly progressive. The clinical features of our patients and those of the reported patients with SRD5A3 mutation are compared
in Table 1. The leading clinical pathology in SRD5A3-CDG seems to include ophthalmic malformations involving both the anterior and posterior
segments of the eye, such as ocular coloboma, hypoplasia of the optic nerve, cataract, glaucoma, and variable visual impairment with
nystagmus. Both of our patients have severe visual impairment, optic atrophy, and cataracts. Cataracts were reported in only 2 patients with
SRD5A3-CDG but in all 3 patients with Kahrizi syndrome . It was suggested that cataracts could develop later in patients with SRD5A3-CDG, if
not already present at infancy . Congenital colobomas, although extremely rare in CDG syndromes, are suggestive of SRD5A3-CDG whenever
present, and glaucoma is described in SRD5A3-CDG but not other types of CDG . Neither of these 2 pathologies was observed in our patients.
However, bone spicule pigmentation, which is a fundus feature in retinitis pigmentosa, another rare ocular pathology, was present in both of
our patients. Although retinitis pigmentosa has been reported in SRD5A3-CDG , our patients had a specific form resulting from the migration
of pigment-containing cells to perivascular sites in the inner retina. Retinitis pigmentosa might be a late sign in SRD5A3-CDG, and so is
optic disc hypoplasia. Only 3 of the 12 patients in the Morava cohort had this feature, whereas both our patients had it. It remains to be
seen whether bone spicule pigmentation, observed so far only in our patients, is a frequent late manifestation of SRD5A3-CDG. It was not
reported in the 3 siblings with Kahrizi syndrome either; they had cataracts and iris coloboma but not optic atrophy, optic disc hypoplasia,
or retinitis pigmentosa. Characteristics of patients with SRD5A3 mutation ? = the number of patients having the phenotype was not specified;
NA = phenotype not assessed. We suggest screening for SRD5A3 mutations in new patients with at least a few of the clinical symptoms of
SRD5A3-CDG such as ophthalmologic malformations, visual impairment, cerebellar abnormalities, ichthyosiform skin lesions, abnormal
coagulation, and psychomotor retardation, bearing in mind that a normal TIEF pattern does not exclude the diagnosis. The disorder is a
clinically recognizable cerebello-ophthalmo-cutaneous syndrome; therefore, even in the absence of abnormal TIEF results, the above-mentioned
distinctive features warrant genetic testing for SRD5A3. Only one family has been reported with Kahrizi syndrome, an allelic disease; the 3
affected siblings were 40 years or older and had normal TIEF patterns. It was suggested that the TIEF pattern might become normal in adults
and the normal pattern in those patients could be due to their older age . The abnormal TIEF pattern in our patient does not support this
hypothesis. Our findings widen the spectrum of the clinical manifestations of SRD5A3-CDG. We emphasize that ocular signs seem to increase
with age and patient follow-up with this knowledge in mind could benefit patients diagnosed at a young age. Informed consent was obtained
for all 4 participants. The father signed the consent forms for the sons. Written informed consent had been obtained also from the fifty-six
unrelated individuals who were screened for the mutation; the samples are part of the anonymized group used for mutation screening in our
laboratory. The Boğaziçi University Institutional Review Board for Research with Human Participants approved the study protocol. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Series Editor of this journal. CDG: Congenital disorder of glycosylation; TIEF:
Transferrin isoelectric focusing. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. BK performed clinical analyses and co-wrote the
manuscript; ÖA generated and analyzed genetic data and co-wrote the manuscript; GG performed clinical analyses and co-wrote the manuscript;
NB performed ophthalmologic studies and co-wrote the manuscript; AT supervised genetic analyses, obtained funding, coordinated the work and
co-wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can
be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2350/15/10/prepub Multipoint linkage results in chromosomes yielding >2 LOD scores.
Click here for file Chromatograms showing homozygous mutation SRD5A3 c.57G > A (p.W19X) and the reference sequence. The region was amplified
using primers with sequences 5′-GGAGGCCGAGCACTCG and 5′-GCAGCCCGGGAGCAG. Click here for file We thank the family members for their
cooperation. The genetic analyses were supported by Boğaziçi University Research Fund, grant number BAP 5708.
