Bacillus anthracis was identified in a 61-year-old man hospitalized in Minnesota, USA. Cooperation between the hospital and the state health
agency enhanced prompt identification of the pathogen. Treatment comprising antimicrobial drugs, anthrax immune globulin, and pleural
drainage led to full recovery; however, the role of passive immunization in anthrax treatment requires further evaluation. Inhalation
anthrax is a life-threatening disease caused by inhalation of Bacillus anthracis spores. In August 2011, the Minnesota Department of Health
was contacted regarding a patient with pneumonia who had blood cultures positive for nonhemolytic gram-positive rod–shaped bacilli. We
report the third naturally acquired case of inhalation anthrax reported in the United States since 1976 (1,2). A 61-year-old man with a
history of impaired glucose tolerance, hypertension, and chemical pneumonitis without chronic lung disease sought care at a community
hospital in northwestern Minnesota after experiencing 2 days of fever, productive cough, and exertional dyspnea. During recent travel
through parks in the western United States, he had been exposed to animal antlers and hides, wild bison, and donkeys. On hospital admission,
the patient’s temperature was 37.3°C, blood pressure 148/72, pulse 100, respiratory rate 20, and room air oxygen saturation 89% (median 95%,
range 65%–100%). The right lung base had diminished breath sounds and apical crackles. Laboratory tests (Table 1) and chest imaging (Figure
1) were performed. Blood samples for culture were obtained, and ceftriaxone (2 g) and azithromycin (500 mg) (Table 2) were administered
intravenously (IV) for presumed community-acquired pneumonia (CAP). *ND, not done. †Initial admission was to a community hospital; on day 4,
the patient was transferred to a tertiary referral center. ‡Reference values during patient’s hospitalization at a tertiary referral center.
Chest x-ray and computed tomographic scan images for a patient with inhalation anthrax, Minnesota, USA. A) On hospital day 1, the x-ray
image revealed a right upper lobe infiltrate and widening of the mediastinum. B) On hospital day 2, computed tomographic scan of the chest
with intravenous contrast showed dense consolidation of the right upper lobe, mediastinal adenopathy (small arrow), and bilateral pleural
effusions (large arrows). C) By hospital day 4, progressive infiltrates in the right lung were present. D) By day 6, an increasing left
pleural effusion was evident. *IV, intravenous; hospital day, number of days in hospital including day of admission; PH, post-
hospitalization days. †IV medication was discontinued and oral medication was started on day of discharge (hospital day 26) and continued
for 35 additional days to complete 60 days of therapy. On hospital day 2, the patient had increasing tachycardia and higher oxygen
requirements. A computed tomographic scan of the chest revealed multiple abnormalities (Figure 1). A Bacillus species was isolated from
blood cultures and sent to the Minnesota Department of Health Public Health Laboratory (MDHPHL) for identification, and IV ciprofloxacin was
initiated. On hospital day 3, the patient’s condition continued to decline (Table 1). MDHPHL identified B. anthracis in the blood cultures,
and meropenem and vancomycin were added to the treatment regimen. The isolate was sent to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC, Atlanta, GA, USA). On hospital day 4, the patient was transferred to a referral center with progressive respiratory failure requiring
endotracheal intubation. He remained hemodynamically stable without need for vasopressor therapy. IV ciprofloxacin was continued, and IV
rifampin and clindamycin were administered (Table 2). A chest tube was placed in the right pleural space, and 550 mL of serosanguineous
fluid was drained during the initial 24 hours. Pleural fluid analysis showed a leukocyte count of 3,389 cells/mL (neutrophils 38%,
lymphocytes 56%, monocytes 6%), a lactate dehydrogenase level of 352, and negative Gram stain results. On day 5, thoracentesis of the left
pleural space drained 250 mL of serosanguineous fluid. Anthrax immune globulin (AIG) was requested from CDC on day 4 and administered on day
5 without adverse reaction. The patient’s disease course was complicated by nonoliguric renal failure; serum creatinine peaked at 1.5 mg/dL.
On day 8, rifampin was discontinued; meropenem, which had been discontinued on day 5, was resumed for prophylaxis against nosocomial
infection and improved central nervous system coverage of B. anthracis infection. After stabilization, the patient was maintained on volume
control ventilation: tidal volume 500 mL, positive end–expiratory pressure 10 cm H2O, and fraction of inspired oxygen 0.50. After day 6,
renal dysfunction, hyponatremia, and thrombocytopenia gradually resolved. The patient was extubated on day 11, and the chest tube was
removed on day 13; left-sided pleural effusion did not recur. He completed a 10-day course of clindamycin and a 14-day course of meropenem.
Upon discharge on day 26, he was prescribed oral ciprofloxacin to complete 60 days of therapy. MDHPHL identified the blood culture isolate
as B. anthracis (Technical Appendix). CDC performed susceptibility testing using broth microdilution (Technical Appendix). In compliance
with the investigational new drug protocol for AIG administration, we obtained serial serum samples to assess levels of lethal factor (LF)
and anti–protective antigen (PA) IgG. LF levels were determined in additional fluid from the patient’s right pleura. LF endoproteinase
activity was quantified by using mass spectrometry (3). We used an ELISA to determine serum anti-PA IgG levels before and after AIG
administration (4). The lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) for this assay is 3.7 µg/mL. Seroconversion was defined as a >4-fold increase
over the LLOQ (5). Antimicrobial susceptibility testing (Technical Appendix) performed on the B. anthracis isolate showed a MIC of
penicillin of <0.015 µg/mL and MIC of ciprofloxacin of 0.12 µg/mL. The patient’s initial plasma LF level was 58.0 ng/mL, which declined to
1.5 ng/mL before AIG administration: pleural fluid LF was 16.2 ng/mL at initial drainage and declined steadily (Figure 2). Before AIG
administration, no anti-PA IgG was discernable because these quantifications were below the LLOQ (Figure 2). Immediately after AIG
administration, anti-PA IgG reached maximal value of 160.5 μg/mL and maintained a plateau thereafter. Plasma and pleural fluid lethal factor
levels and anti-protective antigen IgG (AIG) levels for a patient from the time of examination in the community hospital emergency
department to discharge from the tertiary referral center. Asterisks indicate that anti-protective AIG levels obtained before anthrax immune
globulin administration were below the lower limit of quantification. The vertical dashed line represents the time of anthrax immunoglobulin
administration. The patient’s initial plasma lethal factor level was 58.0 ng/mL and declined to 1.5 ng/mL before AIG administration. Pleural
fluid LF was 16.2 ng/mL at initial drainage and declined steadily. We describe the second US case of naturally acquired inhalation anthrax
since the bioterrorism-related infections of 2001 and the third known case worldwide in which the patient received AIG (2,6). Before this
case, the most recent case in the United States had occurred in Pennsylvania during 2006 (2). That patient had a 3-day prodromal illness,
and initial plasma LF (294.3 ng/mL) and pleural fluid LF (543.2 ng/mL) levels substantially higher than those reported here. Seroconversion
to anti-PA IgG occurred before AIG administration in the 2006 case, possibly because of a longer interval between symptom onset and AIG
infusion (10 vs. 6 days). The 2006 patient also survived. A more recent case occurred in London during 2008 (6). The patient, who appears to
have been in the fulminant phase of illness when tailored antimicrobial drug therapy was initiated on hospital day 4, died on day 7 despite
AIG treatment (6). Early recognition of inhalation anthrax is crucial to patient survival. Kuehnert et al. (7) proposed a scoring system
derived from multivariate analysis to distinguish inhalation anthrax from CAP on the basis of clinical features at disease onset. In the
case-patient described here, 3 of 5 identifying variables were present: elevated alanine aminotransferase/aspartate aminotransferase, normal
leukocyte count, and tachycardia. The 2 remaining possible variables, low serum sodium level and nausea/vomiting were not present. This
correlated with a sensitivity of 82% and specificity of 81% for diagnosing anthrax rather than CAP. Mediastinal widening, exhibited in the
patient in this report, has also been proposed as a characteristic that can distinguish anthrax from CAP. When anthrax patients were
compared with an age-, sex-, and race-matched control population, mediastinal widening occurred in 82% of anthrax patients and 8% of CAP
patients (8). A systematic review of inhalation anthrax cases showed improved survival if antimicrobial drugs were initiated during the
prodromal rather than fulminant phase of illness: 75% of patients who survived and 10% of those who died were administered antimicrobial
drugs in the prodromal phase (9). A new staging system for inhalation anthrax was proposed that divides the prodromal period into early and
intermediate progressive stages (10). Early diagnosis facilitated implementation of multi–antimicrobial drug therapy during the intermediate
progressive stage, which is associated with increased the survival rate (67% vs. 21%) (9). For the case discussed here, systems to
facilitate cooperation between a community hospital and state health agency enabled definitive identification of B. anthracis within 24
hours of culture becoming positive, leading to specific interventions including combination antimicrobial therapy, pleural drainage, and AIG
administration. Drainage of pleural fluid has also been associated with increased survival (83% vs. 9%) (9); it was performed shortly after
the current patient’s illness reached the late fulminant stage. Besides elevated LF levels in pleural fluid of recent US case-patients,
patients with bioterrorism-related cases had large quantities of B. anthracis cell wall antigens, which further supports use of drainage
procedures (11). Although no clinical studies have reported on efficacy of passive immunization of humans against anthrax as treatment,
mortality rates have been reduced in studies of inhalation anthrax in which animals were given polyclonal antibodies against PA (12). AIG
administration in the current case was associated with a reduction in toxemia, although the role of passive immunization in anthrax
treatment needs further evaluation. Identification and sensitivity testing of antimicrobial susceptibility of Bacillus anthracis. Suggested
citation for this article: Sprenkle MD, Griffith J, Marinelli, W, Boyer AE, Quinn CP, Pesik NT, et al. Lethal factor and anti-protective
antigen IgG levels associated with inhalation anthrax, Minnesota, USA. Emerg Infect Dis. 2014 Feb . http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2002.130245
We thank the Anthrax Response Team for coordinating the diagnostic and laboratory testing for the patient. For assistance in collecting
data, we thank the staff of Hennepin County Medical Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota, and the following persons: John R. Barr, Tina Bhavsar,
J. Bradford Bowzard, William Bower, Maribel G. Candela, Leslie A. Dauphin, Kate Hendricks-Walters, Susan Hollingsworth, Hye-Joo Kim,
Panagiotis Maniatis, Chung K. Marston, Stephan S. Monroe, Sean Shadomy, Evelene Steward-Clark, Robyn A. Stoddard, David Sue, Tracee A.
Treadwell, Yon Yu, Aaron Devries, Ruth Lynfield, Maureen Sullivan, and Samantha Tostenson.
