A 67-year-old woman was referred for staging of a mucosa-associated lymphoid tumor lymphoma involving the left conjunctiva. CT scan had
shown paravertebral and pelvic masses, and a breast nodule. FDG PET/CT demonstrated moderately increased uptake in the left ocular
conjunctiva and confirmed the paravertebral and pelvic masses and the breast nodule. Moreover, abnormal FDG uptake was shown in 2 breast
nodules, the flank, the gluteus maximus, and the gastric cardia. The patient received 6 cycles of rituximab-bendamustine chemotherapy with a
complete clinical and metabolic response at the 6-month follow-up PET/CT and remained relapse-free without visual acuity problem after a
36-month follow-up. A, Baseline FDG PET/CT showing increased glucose analog in the left conjunctiva (arrow) as compared with the
contralateral side (left-to-right SUV ratio, 3.0). B, Control after 3 of 6 cycles of chemotherapy showing an excellent metabolic response
with normalized left-to-right SUV ratio to 1.0 (arrowhead). A, Maximal intensity projection image of the baseline FDG PET showing
extraocular lesions with increased pathologic uptake situated in the right paravertebral mass (*), 3 left breast nodules (arrowhead), the
gastric cardia (arrow), the left flank (f), the left gluteus maximus muscle (m), and a pelvic paramedian right mass (p). B, The same maximal
intensity projection image after 3 cycles of chemotherapy showing disappearance of all abnormal FDG uptake sites. The final diagnosis made
on a biopsy of the left conjunctiva was a marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tumor (MALT) type (stage III EA). Extranodal
marginal zone lymphoma of MALT type is a relatively rare type of B-cell lymphoma accounting for 7% to 8% of non-Hodgkin lymphomas.1 They
arise in the stomach, bowel, lung, ocular adnexa, breast, thyroid, skin, soft tissue, and dura, predominantly in patients older than 60
years.2 FDG PET/CT has now become part of the diagnostic workup of patients with lymphoma. It is known as being more sensitive than CT for
extranodal lesions usually upstaging the disease extent. PET is also now playing a role in the follow-up of lymphoma and during the
chemotherapy to assess initial response and determine prognosis. It is known that the conjunctiva is one of the main sites of ocular
lymphoma and that lymphomas of conjunctival origin can be detected by FDG PET/CT.3â€“5 Likewise, tumoral lesions of the bulbar conjunctiva of
other origin can also be seen by FDG PET/CT.6,7 In the largest up-to-date reported use of PET/CT in ocular adnexal lymphomas, Zanni et al8
reported 32% of conjunctival lymphomas with FDG PET positivity in only 35% of the cases. In view of the high sensitivity of conventional
imaging (CT/MRI) to detect conjunctival involvement, FDG PET does not seem to be particularly useful for establishing the initial diagnosis,
besides helping to choose the biopsy site. However, FDG PET can be recommended for staging patients with ocular adnexal lymphomas because of
the high frequency of extraocular tumoral sites that can be multiple as in the case of our patient.3,8 FDG uptake is known to be lower or
negative in MALT lymphomas, although this has not been confirmed in ocular adnexal lymphomas.5 Nevertheless, scintigraphy with somatostatin
receptor analogs could be useful in selected cases.9,10 Indeed, the visualization of a unique lesion directly influences the treatment
strategy (surgery, radiation therapy) as compared with a disseminated disease (systemic therapy such as single-agent or combination
chemotherapy, immunotherapy with rituximab, monoclonal chimeric anti-CD20 antibodies, or radioimmunotherapy with 90Y ibritumomab tiuxetan ;
recently antichlamydial antibiotics therapy have also been proposed as an alternative).9 The prognosis of MALT lymphoma of conjunctival
origin is excellent, and the transformation into a high-grade lymphoma is exceptional. Conflicts of interest and sources of funding: none
declared.
