We report the case of a 61-year-old Brazilian female who presented with cough, hemoptysis, and fever for seven days prior to evaluation. Her
previous medical history revealed that she was a heavy smoker (80 pack-years) and had systemic arterial hypertension. No occupational
exposures were reported. Physical examination was unremarkable. Blood workup revealed leukocytosis (white blood cell count, 15,000). Chest
X-ray was also unremarkable, and the initial management was antibiotic treatment. A CT of the chest was requested, which revealed a
spiculated tumor mass of 5 cm in diameter in the right upper lobe, as well as mediastinal lymphadenopathy. The patient was then submitted to
bronchoscopy, which was negative for neoplasms. The decision was to perform pulmonary lobectomy. Gross pathology showed that the right upper
lobe weighed 300 g and measured 18.5 × 12.0 × 3.5 cm. The cut surface revealed a poorly circumscribed, tan-gray, hemorrhagic lesion
measuring 7.0 × 6.0 × 3.8 cm that infiltrated into the visceral pleura. Histologically, the tumor was composed of spindle-shaped cells with
marked pleomorphism and abnormal mitosis. These tumor cells displayed a sarcoma-like growth pattern with scarce multinucleated giant cells.
Multiple foci of necrosis were present. Squamous cell carcinoma or adenocarcinoma areas were not observed. Immunohistochemical studies were
performed using the avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex method. The tumor cells were positive for pan-cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), CK7, and
epithelial membrane antigen (Figure 1) but negative for other antibodies. The pathology report revealed sarcomatoid carcinoma of the lung,
with spindle cell features. No lymph nodes were involved. The tumor-node-metastasis staging classification, based on the findings, was
T2bN0Mx. Figure 1 Photomicrographs of pathological and immunohistochemical studies. In A, pan-cytokeratin cytoplasmic positivity of the
tumor cells (AE1/AE3 immunostaining; magnification, ×400). In B, tumor cells showing diffuse positivity for CK7 (CK7 immunostaining;
magnification, ×100). In C, carcinoma cells showing strong positivity for epithelial membrane antigen in contrast with inflammatory adjacent
non-tumoral tissue (immunostaining; magnification, ×100). Immediately after the surgery, the oncological evaluation was completed. Abdominal
CT and bone scintigraphy resulted normal. Chest CT scans revealed pneumothorax in the right upper lobe in the site of the resected tumor.
Radiotherapy and chemotherapy were proposed. However, the patient was lost to follow-up, and no adjuvant treatment was performed. After four
months without any adjuvant therapy, the patient returned to the hospital presenting with progressive, complete right hemiparesis and
impaired verbal expression/aphasia for 10 days. At admission to the neurosurgery ward, the patient was alert and cooperative, with a Glasgow
Coma Scale score of 15, the pupils were isochoric and reactive to light, and the patient presented with a grade-4 right hemiparesis in
association with aphasia. The patient was promptly submitted to a neuroimaging study, which revealed three images (one in the left inferior
frontal gyrus and two in the right parietal cortex) of lesions with different dimensions in the brain parenchyma that resembled tumor
invasion (Figure 2). Figure 2 Neuroimaging scans. In A, a CT scan of the skull taken when the pulmonary mass was discovered four months
prior to the appearance of neurological symptoms, which is apparently normal. In B, a CT scan of the skull taken four months after
readmission, when the patient presented with neurological symptoms. In C-E, magnetic resonance imaging scans revealing details of the
metastatic spread and intense vasogenic edema. The neurosurgery staff decided to perform microsurgery for the resection of the larger lesion
in the left frontal gyrus and adjuvant radiosurgery of the other lesions. The resected specimen was sent to pathology. The microscopic
findings were similar to the sarcomatoid carcinoma of the lung, characterized by the proliferation of pleomorphic spindle-shaped cells. An
immunohistochemical study was performed and revealed focal positivity of the tumor cells for CK7 and diffuse positivity for epithelial
membrane antigen. The microscopic and immunohistochemical findings were consistent with metastatic sarcomatoid carcinoma. The patient was
discharged without any postoperative complications; however, she was rehospitalized one week later with progressive worsening of her general
health status and, two months after the surgery, she died, prior to performing any adjuvant therapy. Sarcomatoid carcinoma of the lung is a
rare tumor, showing a male-to-female ratio of 7.25:1.00. The mean and median age of the patients is 65 years, and the tumor accounts for
0.1-0.3% of all lung cancers.(1-4) It arises from the central airway in two-thirds of the patients and exhibits the morphology of polypoid
airway lesions.(3) Sarcomatoid carcinoma most often presents as solitary masses in the upper lobes, with an average size of 7 cm in
diameter.(4,5) Parenchymal masses appear as cavities with marked central necrosis and peripheral rim. The association with smoking is
strong.(1-4) The treatment is essentially performed with surgical resection, chemotherapy and radiotherapy being used as adjuvant therapy or
in cases of poor surgical conditions, since there seems to be little benefit.(1-4,6,7) The five-year survival for patients with sarcomatoid
carcinoma is approximately 20% (compared with 50% for those with non-small cell lung cancer), and the median duration of survival is three
months.(1,2,5,7) The probable pathogenesis of sarcomatoid carcinoma includes malignant transformation of hamartoma, simultaneous malignant
transformation of epithelial elements and stroma, malignant transformation of cancer-derived stroma, sarcomatous change in carcinoma, and
carcinomatous change in sarcoma.(2,3) Although there are reports of systemic metastases, such as in the skin, stomach, pancreas, esophagus,
jejunum, rectum, kidneys, bones, and adrenal glands,(4-10) to our knowledge, only one report documented brain metastases,(1) especially
because of the aggressiveness and low survival time. Few reports have presented and discussed the presentation of metastatic sarcomatoid
carcinoma of the lung in the brain. In our case, we illustrate the presentation of brain metastases in a patient who had been previously
treated for sarcomatoid carcinoma of the lung and highlight the need to consider the differential diagnosis of pulmonary cancer and the
aggressive features of sarcomatoid carcinoma. The treatment, in accordance with current therapies in metastatic brain disease, consisted of
the surgical resection of the larger lesion and complementary radiosurgery in the surgical cavity, with the resection of the two smaller
lesions.(1,2,10) However, due to the progressive worsening of the general status of the patient, the radiosurgical treatment was not
performed, and the patient died two months after being diagnosed with brain metastases. The early diagnosis and proper surgical and adjuvant
therapy of the primary disease might lead to prolonged survival, and physicians should be aware of the appearance of metastatic symptoms of
sarcomatoid carcinoma, such as neurological symptoms, which can be prominent and misleading to other differential diagnoses. We would like
to thank Drs. Sílvio Tenório Gameleira Filho, Jânio Alves Ferreira, Larissa Prando Cau, Maria do Carmo Cruvinel, and Ester Nei Aparecida
Martins Coletta for their invaluable help with the present manuscript. Relatamos o caso de uma brasileira de 61 anos de idade que apresentou
tosse, hemoptise e febre durante sete dias antes de ser avaliada. A história médica da paciente revelou que se tratava de fumante pesada (80
anos-maço) com hipertensão arterial sistêmica. Não houve relato de exposição ocupacional. O exame físico não revelou nenhuma alteração digna
de nota. O hemograma revelou leucocitose (15.000 leucócitos). A radiografia de tórax também não revelou nenhuma alteração digna de nota. O
tratamento inicial consistiu em antibioticoterapia. Solicitou-se uma TC de tórax, que revelou uma massa tumoral espiculada de 5 cm de
diâmetro no lobo superior direito, além de linfadenopatia mediastinal. A paciente foi então submetida a broncoscopia, que foi negativa para
neoplasia. Tomou-se a decisão de realizar uma lobectomia pulmonar. O exame anatomopatológico macroscópico revelou que o lobo superior
direito pesava 300 g e media 18,5 × 12,0 × 3,5 cm. A superfície de corte revelou uma lesão hemorrágica mal circunscrita, cinza-amarronzado,
de 7,0 × 6,0 × 3,8 cm, infiltrada na pleura visceral. Histologicamente, o tumor era composto por células fusiformes com pleomorfismo
acentuado e mitose anormal. Essas células tumorais exibiam um padrão de crescimento semelhante ao do sarcoma, com poucas células gigantes
multinucleadas. Havia múltiplos focos de necrose. Não foram observadas áreas de adenocarcinoma ou carcinoma de células escamosas. Estudos
imuno-histoquímicos foram realizados por meio do método do complexo avidina-biotina-peroxidase. As células tumorais foram positivas para
pancitoqueratina (AE1/AE3), CK7 e antígeno da membrana epitelial (Figura 1), mas negativas para outros anticorpos. No laudo
anatomopatológico, registrou-se carcinoma sarcomatoide de pulmão, com características de células fusiformes. Não havia comprometimento de
linfonodos. Baseada nos achados, a classificação segundo o sistema de estadiamento tumor-nódulo-metástase foi T2bN0Mx. Figura 1
Fotomicrografias de estudos patológicos e imuno-histoquímicos. Em A, células tumorais apresentando positividade citoplasmática para
pancitoqueratina (imunocoloração para AE1/AE3; aumento, 400×). Em B, células tumorais apresentando positividade difusa para CK7
(imunocoloração para CK7; aumento, 100×). Em C, células de carcinoma exibindo forte positividade para antígeno da membrana epitelial, em
contraste com o tecido inflamatório não tumoral adjacente (imunocoloração; aumento, 100×). Imediatamente após a cirurgia, completou-se a
avaliação oncológica. A TC abdominal e a cintilografia óssea resultaram normais. A TC de tórax revelou pneumotórax no lobo superior direito
no local do tumor ressecado. Foram propostas radioterapia e quimioterapia. No entanto, houve perda de seguimento, e nenhum tratamento
adjuvante foi administrado. Depois de quatro meses sem qualquer terapia adjuvante, a paciente retornou ao hospital com hemiparesia completa
e progressiva à direita e comunicação verbal comprometida/afasia havia 10 dias. No momento da admissão na enfermaria de neurocirurgia, a
paciente estava alerta e cooperativa (pontuação na Escala de Coma de Glasgow: 15). As pupilas estavam isocóricas e reagiam à luz, e a
paciente apresentava hemiparesia direita grau 4 associada a afasia. A paciente foi prontamente submetida a um estudo de neuroimagem, que
revelou três imagens de lesões (uma no giro frontal inferior esquerdo e duas no córtex parietal direito) de diferentes dimensões no
parênquima cerebral, as quais se assemelhavam a invasão tumoral (Figura 2). Figura 2 Neuroimagens. Em A, TC de crânio, aparentemente normal,
realizada quando a massa pulmonar foi descoberta, quatro meses antes do aparecimento de sintomas neurológicos. Em B, TC de crânio realizada
quatro meses após a readmissão, quando a paciente apresentou sintomas neurológicos. Em C-E, imagens de ressonância magnética revelando
detalhes da disseminação metastática e intenso edema vasogênico. A equipe de neurocirurgia decidiu realizar microcirurgia para a resseção da
lesão maior no giro frontal esquerdo e radiocirurgia adjuvante das demais lesões. O espécime ressecado foi enviado à patologia. Os achados
microscópicos foram semelhantes aos do carcinoma sarcomatoide de pulmão, caracterizados pela proliferação de células fusiformes
pleomórficas. Um estudo imuno-histoquímico foi realizado e revelou positividade focal das células tumorais para CK7 e positividade difusa
para antígeno da membrana epitelial. Os achados microscópicos e imuno-histoquímicos foram consistentes com carcinoma sarcomatoide
metastático. A paciente recebeu alta sem complicações pós-operatórias; no entanto, foi hospitalizada novamente uma semana depois, com piora
progressiva de seu estado geral de saúde, e morreu dois meses após a cirurgia, antes que se realizasse qualquer terapia adjuvante. O
carcinoma sarcomatoide de pulmão é um tumor raro; a razão entre os gêneros masculino e feminino é de 7,25:1,00. A média e mediana de idade
dos pacientes é de 65 anos, e o tumor corresponde a 0,1-0,3% de todos os cânceres de pulmão.(1-4) Provém da via aérea central em dois terços
dos pacientes e apresenta a morfologia das lesões polipoides das vias aéreas.(3) O carcinoma sarcomatoide mais comumente se apresenta na
forma de massas solitárias nos lobos superiores, com um tamanho médio de 7 cm de diâmetro.(4,5) Massas parenquimatosas aparecem na forma de
cavidades com necrose central acentuada e borda periférica. A associação com o tabagismo é forte.(1-4) O tratamento consiste essencialmente
em resseção cirúrgica; a quimioterapia e a radioterapia são usadas como terapia adjuvante ou em caso de más condições cirúrgicas, pois o
benefício é aparentemente pequeno.(1-4,6,7) A taxa de sobrevida em cinco anos para pacientes com carcinoma sarcomatoide é de aproximadamente
20% (contra 50% para aqueles com câncer pulmonar de células não pequenas), e a mediana da sobrevida é de três meses.(1,2,5,7) A provável
patogênese do carcinoma sarcomatoide inclui transformação maligna de hamartoma, transformação maligna simultânea de elementos epiteliais e
estroma, transformação maligna de estroma derivado de câncer, transformação sarcomatosa de carcinoma e transformação carcinomatosa de
sarcoma.(2,3) Embora haja relatos de metástases sistêmicas (na pele, no estômago, no pâncreas, no esôfago, no jejuno, no reto, nos rins, em
ossos e nas glândulas adrenais, por exemplo),(4-10) até onde sabemos, apenas um relato documentou metástases cerebrais,(1) especialmente por
causa da agressividade e da sobrevida curta. Poucos relatos apresentaram e discutiram a apresentação de carcinoma sarcomatoide metastático
de pulmão no cérebro. No caso descrito aqui, ilustramos a apresentação de metástases cerebrais em uma paciente que havia recebido tratamento
para carcinoma sarcomatoide de pulmão e ressaltamos a necessidade de considerar o diagnóstico diferencial de câncer de pulmão e as
características agressivas do carcinoma sarcomatoide. O tratamento, conforme as terapias atuais para doença metastática cerebral, consistiu
em resseção cirúrgica da lesão maior e radiocirurgia complementar na cavidade cirúrgica, com a resseção das duas lesões menores.(1,2,10) No
entanto, em virtude da piora progressiva do estado geral da paciente, o tratamento radiocirúrgico não foi realizado, e a paciente morreu
dois meses depois de ter recebido o diagnóstico de metástases cerebrais. O diagnóstico precoce e o tratamento cirúrgico e adjuvante adequado
da doença primária podem resultar em maior sobrevida, e os médicos devem estar cientes do aparecimento de sintomas metastáticos de carcinoma
sarcomatoide, tais como sintomas neurológicos, que podem ser pronunciados e enganosos, levando a outros diagnósticos diferenciais.
Gostaríamos de agradecer aos Drs. Sílvio Tenório Gameleira Filho, Jânio Alves Ferreira, Larissa Prando Cau, Maria do Carmo Cruvinel e Ester
Nei Aparecida Martins Coletta sua inestimável ajuda com o presente manuscrito.
