Even though tuberculosis is the major theme on most of the recent articles concerning pulmonary infections published in the Brazilian
literature,(1-4) less common infectious diseases have been described and deserve attention. Studies on parainfluenza virus 3 pneumonia,(5)
pulmonary cryptosporidiosis,(6) histoplasmosis,(7) and bird fancier's lung(8) have been recently published. We would like to highlight
another infection that can cause diffuse lung disease and is common in extensive tropical and subtropical regions: malaria, caused by the
protozoan Plasmodium sp. We report the case of a 38-year-old man born in Amazonas, Brazil, who presented with intermittent fever, chills,
dyspnea, and hematuria. Laboratory tests detected anemia and transaminase elevation, and a blood smear was positive for Plasmodium
falciparum. A chest X-ray showed bilateral pulmonary infiltrates, whereas CT showed interlobular septal thickening, areas of consolidation,
and bilateral pleural effusion, suggestive of pulmonary edema (Figure 1). The patient responded well to antimalarial drugs and was
discharged from the hospital after 11 days. Figure 1 Axial CT image obtained at the level of the lower lobes and showing interlobular septal
thickening, consolidation in the right lung, and bilateral pleural effusion. Malaria is a vector-borne disease caused by Plasmodium sp. (P.
falciparum, P. vivax, P. malariae, and P. ovale), being responsible for a significant global public health problem. Nearly one million
people die annually due to complications of the disease, which is endemic in tropical and subtropical regions. The bite of an infected
anopheline mosquito transmits the infectious agent into the bloodstream through the invasion of erythrocytes. The parasitized erythrocytes
impair perfusion, nutrition, and oxygen delivery in tissues, especially the brain. (9-11) Infection with P. falciparum may result in
potentially lethal complications, including cerebral malaria, acute renal failure, and pulmonary involvement. Pulmonary manifestations occur
in 3-10% of the patients and range from asymptomatic cases to fatal pulmonary edema caused by capillary leakage.(11) Although patients with
uncomplicated malaria usually present with fever and nonspecific symptoms, severe and complicated malaria is characterized by multiorgan
involvement, including acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).(9) Pulmonary edema is a major complication of
severe malaria, with a high mortality rate. It is often difficult to differentiate between pulmonary edema and ARDS.(10) The development of
pulmonary edema in association with malaria characteristically occurs in the absence of cardiac failure or fluid overload. In patients with
acute lung injury/ARDS due to malaria, chest X-rays may reveal bilateral opacities and increased interstitial markings mimicking the pattern
observed in patients with ARDS due to other causes.(9) Small pleural effusions may be observed. Pulmonary edema may occur early due to heavy
parasitemia or later due to prolonged altered capillary permeability in severe malaria.(11) Malaria is diagnosed parasitologically and is
usually confirmed by thick (for parasitemia detection) and thin (for species identification) peripheral blood smear examinations.(9,11) In
patients with severe complicated malaria, the early administration of specific antimalarial therapy is life-saving. Quinine and artemisinin
derivatives are currently used for the parenteral treatment of severe complicated malaria.(9-11) Embora a tuberculose seja o tema principal
da maioria dos artigos sobre infecções pulmonares recentemente publicados na literatura brasileira,(1-4) doenças infecciosas menos comuns
têm sido descritas e merecem atenção. Foram recentemente publicados estudos sobre pneumonia por vírus parainfluenza 3,(5) criptosporidiose
pulmonar,(6) histoplasmose(7) e pulmão dos criadores de aves.(8) Gostaríamos de ressaltar outra infecção que pode causar doença pulmonar
difusa e que é comum em regiões tropicais e subtropicais extensas: a malária, causada pelo protozoário Plasmodium sp. Relatamos o caso de um
homem de 38 anos de idade, nascido no estado do Amazonas, Brasil, que apresentou febre intermitente, calafrios, dispneia e hematúria. Exames
laboratoriais detectaram anemia e elevação das transaminases, e o esfregaço de sangue foi positivo para Plasmodium falciparum. A radiografia
de tórax revelou infiltrado pulmonar bilateral, ao passo que a TC revelou espessamento de septos interlobulares, áreas de consolidação e
derrame pleural bilateral, o que sugeriu a presença de edema pulmonar (Figura 1). O paciente apresentou boa resposta aos antimaláricos e
recebeu alta do hospital depois de 11 dias. Figura 1 Imagem de TC axial obtida ao nível dos lobos inferiores, mostrando espessamento de
septos interlobulares, consolidação no pulmão direito e derrame pleural bilateral. A malária é uma doença transmitida por vetores que é
causada por Plasmodium spp. (P. falciparum, P. vivax, P. malariae e P. ovale) e que é um grave problema de saúde pública mundial. Quase um
milhão de pessoas morrem anualmente em virtude de complicações da doença, que é endêmica em regiões tropicais e subtropicais. A picada de um
mosquito anofelino infectado transmite o agente infeccioso à corrente sanguínea por meio da invasão de eritrócitos. Os eritrócitos
parasitados prejudicam a perfusão, nutrição e oxigenação de tecidos, especialmente o cérebro.(9-11) A infecção por P. falciparum pode
resultar em complicações potencialmente letais, tais como malária cerebral, insuficiência renal aguda e acometimento pulmonar. Manifestações
pulmonares ocorrem em 3-10% dos pacientes e variam de casos assintomáticos a edema pulmonar fatal causado por vazamento capilar.(11) Embora
os pacientes com malária não complicada geralmente apresentem febre e sintomas inespecíficos, a malária grave e complicada é caracterizada
por envolvimento de múltiplos órgãos, inclusive lesão pulmonar aguda e SARA.(9) O edema pulmonar é uma das principais complicações da
malária grave, com elevada taxa de mortalidade. É muitas vezes difícil distinguir edema pulmonar de SARA.(10) O edema pulmonar associado à
malária ocorre caracteristicamente na ausência de insuficiência cardíaca ou sobrecarga de fluidos. Em pacientes com lesão pulmonar
aguda/SARA causada por malária, a radiografia de tórax pode revelar opacidades bilaterais e aumento da trama intersticial imitando o padrão
observado em pacientes com SARA atribuída a outras causas.(9) Pequenos derrames pleurais podem ser observados. O edema pulmonar pode ocorrer
precocemente, em virtude da parasitemia elevada, ou mais tarde, em virtude da alteração prolongada da permeabilidade capilar na malária
grave.(11) A malária é diagnosticada parasitologicamente e é geralmente confirmada por esfregaço de sangue periférico, espesso (para
detecção de parasitemia) e fino (para identificação da espécie).(9,11) Em pacientes com malária grave e complicada, a administração precoce
de terapia antimalárica específica salva vidas. Quinino e derivados de artemisinina são atualmente usados no tratamento parenteral de
malária grave e complicada.(9-11)
