Drug-induced acne is a common skin condition whose classic symptoms can be similar to a rose pearl, as in the case of a male patient
presenting with this condition after excessive use of a cream containing corticosteroids. A acne medicamentosa é uma dermatose comum, que
pode apresentar no seu quadro clássico semelhanças à pérola rosa, como no caso apresentado de um paciente do sexo masculino cujo quadro
surgiu após uso intempestivo de creme contendo corticoesteróide. Drug-induced acne, or drug-induced acneiform eruption, is an adverse effect
of a series of systemic drugs, such as corticosteroids, lithium, vitamin B12, thyroid hormones, halogen compounds (iodine, bromine,
fluorine, and chlorine), antibiotics (tetracycline and streptomycin), antituberculosis drugs (INH), lithium carbonate, antiepileptic drugs
(phenobarbital and hydantoin derivatives), cyclosporin A, antimycotics, gold salts, isotretinoin, clofazimine, epidermal growth factor
receptor inhibitors (cetuximab, gefitinib, and erlotinib), and interferon-beta.1,2 Usually, topical products such as cosmetics may lead to
acneiform eruption in women, especially in the region of the chin.2 Intravenous dexamethasone and high doses of oral corticosteroids often
induce typical acneiform eruptions, with lesions predominantly located on the chest and back.1 Clinically, it is characterized by a sudden
monomorphic eruption of inflammatory papules and pustules, usually pruritic and follicular.1,2,3 Punctiform vesicles occasionally appear in
the center of papules, which may develop into small vesicopustules.2,3 An important clinical aspect in the differential diagnosis of drug-
induced acne is the fact that the skin lesions are not preceded by visible comedones.4 Discontinuation of the drug leads to remission of
symptoms. Antihistamines are recommended in case of pruritus, and oral antibiotics are recommended in case of secondary infection with
pustules or impetiginization.2,3 We can observe the usual aspect of a papular follicular eruption and, on closer look, a small papule
carefully surmounted by a pustule, which might be a possible evolution into a vesiculopustule, as cited in the literature, demonstrating the
inexorable aspect of drug-induced acne (Figure 1). We highlight the absence of comedones, which supports the diagnosis (Figures 2 and 3).
Small papule carefully surmounted by a pustule Small papules and pustules are observed as well as the absence of comedones Inflammatory
papules and pustules located in the anterior trunk The male patient reported an insect bite in the area of the anterior trunk and use of a
cream containing a combination of an antifungal agent, corticosteroid, and a topical antibiotic, with progressive worsening of the lesion in
10 days and intense pruritus. We opted for discontinuing the topical medication and prescribed a combination of clindamycin and benzoyl
peroxide, obtaining total control of the condition in 14 days. Important differential diagnosis includes pityrosporum folliculitis
(Malassezia), which presents similar follicular papules and pustules. However, in spite of the treatment recommended in the literature, that
is, topical and oral antifungal drugs, we observe slow healing and frequent recurrences. Moreover, the use of topical antibiotics brings no
benefits, as reported above. The nature of the lesions, with a pinkish erythematous aspect, resembles a rose pearl, highly used by ladies as
a bead in necklaces and bracelets; however, in this case, without its adornment function (Figure 4).5 Rose pearls, used as beads in
adornments Work conducted in a private clinic - Londrina (Paraná), Brazil. Financial Support: None Conflict of interest: None
