Bronchial stenosis can impair regional lung ventilation by causing abnormal, asymmetric airflow limitation. Electrical impedance tomography
(EIT) is an imaging technique that allows the assessment of regional lung ventilation and therefore complements the functional assessment of
the lungs. We report the case of a patient with left unilateral bronchial stenosis and a history of tuberculosis, in whom regional lung
ventilation was assessed by EIT. The EIT results were compared with those obtained by ventilation/perfusion radionuclide imaging. The
patient was using nasal continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Therefore, we
studied the effects of postural changes and of the use of nasal CPAP. The EIT revealed heterogeneous distribution of regional lung
ventilation, the ventilation being higher in the right lung, and this distribution was influenced by postural changes and CPAP use. The EIT
assessment of regional lung ventilation produced results similar to those obtained with the radionuclide imaging technique and had the
advantage of providing a dynamic evaluation without radiation exposure. Tuberculosis remains a serious public health problem worldwide and
can lead to various sequelae in the respiratory tract, one of which is bronchial stenosis.(1-5) Bronchial stenosis can lead to dyspnea due
to airflow obstruction, with the aggravating factor that it is often characterized by asymmetric, proximal airway lesions. The left main
bronchus is particularly susceptible to this complication.(6,7) Pulmonary function tests evaluate lung function as a whole, but tell nothing
about regional changes in ventilation. These changes are usually evaluated using radioisotope scintigraphy, which is costly and not widely
available in Brazil. Electrical impedance tomography (EIT) is a technique that allows safe, real-time, dynamic image reconstruction of axial
slices of the lung, making it possible to assess regional lung ventilation.(8) This tool is particularly promising in cases of asymmetric
lung disease, such as unilateral bronchial stenosis. We report the case of a female patient with stenosis of the left main bronchus and
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS), who was being treated with nasal continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) and in whom regional
lung ventilation was assessed by EIT. We highlight the effects of postural changes and of the use of CPAP on regional lung ventilation. A
53-year-old female nonsmoker who had been treated for tuberculosis at the age of 20 presented with a three-year history of progressive
dyspnea. Pulmonary auscultation revealed rhonchi and wheezing in the left hemithorax. Spirometry showed the following: FVC, 2.56 L (88%);
FEV1, 1.81 L (77%); FEV1/FVC, 0.71 (88%); and FEF25-75%, 1.15 L/s (50%). These results are consistent with mild obstructive lung disease. No
significant bronchodilator response was observed. Digital reconstruction of CT scans of the chest showed narrowing of the left main
bronchus, beginning at its origin and reaching 4.8 cm along its length, with a width of 0.5 cm (Figure 1A-D). Forced exhalation increased
the degree of bronchial stenosis, resulting in almost complete collapse and causing air trapping in the left lung. Ventilation/perfusion
radionuclide imaging (Figure 1E and 1F) showed that the blood flow and ventilation were directed to the right lung (68%). Bronchoscopy
confirmed the chest CT finding of left bronchial stenosis. Figure 1 Coronal reconstruction of multidetector chest CT scans acquired during
inhalation (A) and exhalation (B), endobronchial reconstruction of a multidetector chest CT scan (C), and volumetric reconstruction of a
multidetector chest CT scan acquired at end-exhalation showing air trapping in the left lung (D); as well as radionuclide lung perfusion (E)
and lung ventilation (F) images. The arrows show the site of the bronchial stenosis. We used an EIT device with 32 electrodes (DX 1800,
Dixtal Biomédica, Manaus, Brazil)(6,7) to assess regional lung ventilation, as well as the effects of different postures-supine position
(SP), right lateral decubitus position (RLDP), and left lateral decubitus position (LLDP)-and of CPAP use (10 cmH2O). In all situations, the
patient lay for 10 min with the head elevated 30°, and the measurements under the different conditions were taken 5 min apart. Figure 2
shows functional maps of the distribution of regional lung ventilation in the three postures during spontaneous breathing and during the use
of nasal CPAP, all of which were constructed on the basis of EIT. Figure 2 Functional map of the distribution of regional lung ventilation
as assessed by electrical impedance tomography in the supine position (SP), in the right lateral decubitus position (RLDP), and in the left
lateral decubitus position (LLDP). The three first images were obtained during spontaneous breathing. The three last images were obtained
during the use of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP; 10 cmH2O). The percentages represent the distribution of tidal volume to each
lung. At the bottom of each figure, there is the plethysmographic curve showing the variation in electrical impedance. Video 1 (available
online at http://www.jornaldepneumologia.com.br/detalhe_artigo_pre_visualizar.asp?id=2236) features a dynamic demonstration of regional lung
ventilation in the three postures during spontaneous breathing and during CPAP use. During spontaneous breathing, it is possible to see that
the ventilation was almost entirely directed to the right side, being represented by a light-blue color; a lighter shade of blue translates
to higher ventilation in that area. During CPAP use, a portion of the ventilation was distributed to the left lung. In the present case, the
relative distribution of regional lung ventilation, during spontaneous breathing, was always higher in the right lung, with values of 91%,
82%, and 58% for the SP, the RLDP, and the LLDP, respectively, which shows the effect of bronchial stenosis on the distribution of regional
lung ventilation and the influence of postural changes (Figure 2). The images obtained by EIT are consistent with those obtained with the
radionuclide imaging technique. In healthy individuals breathing spontaneously and placed in the SP, regional lung ventilation is higher in
the dependent regions than in the nondependent regions, a physiological phenomenon that has been well documented by studies using EIT.
Studies using EIT in healthy volunteers have shown the marked influence of postural changes on the distribution of lung ventilation. Studies
analyzing regional lung ventilation in healthy volunteers have shown it to be invariably higher toward the dependent lung in the lateral
decubitus positions.(9,10) During CPAP use (10 cmH2O), the differences in the regional distribution of ventilation increased. In the
postures studied, the gravitational distribution of ventilation occurred mostly toward the dependent regions. In the SP, the use of CPAP
caused a slight redistribution of regional ventilation to the left lung, predominantly to its dorsal portion. In contrast, the RLDP resulted
in an increase in ventilation asymmetry, concentrating ventilation almost entirely in the right lung. In the LLDP, ventilation to the
dependent lung increased from 42% to 48%, possibly because of mechanical bronchodilation of the left bronchus caused by CPAP use.(8) The
present case strengthens the interest in using EIT to assess regional lung ventilation, especially in cases of asymmetric airway lesions. In
addition, when compared with radionuclide imaging, EIT has the advantage of being a high-temporal resolution method that dynamically
evaluates the effects of postural changes and of CPAP use. Study carried out at the Federal University of Ceará, Fortaleza, Brazil.
Financial support: This study received financial support from the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES, Office
for the Advancement of Higher Education). Carlos Augusto Barbosa da Silveira Barros and Marcelo Silveira Matias are recipients of
scholarships from the Programa Institucional de Bolsas de Iniciação Científica (PIBIC, Institutional Program for Scientific Initiation
Scholarships), which is affiliated with the Respiration Laboratory of the Federal University of Ceará. A estenose brônquica pode comprometer
a ventilação pulmonar regional devido a limitações anormais e assimétricas ao fluxo aéreo. A tomografia de impedância elétrica (TIE) é uma
técnica que possibilita a avaliação da ventilação pulmonar regional por imagem e, portanto, pode complementar a avaliação funcional dos
pulmões. Relatamos o caso de uma paciente com estenose brônquica unilateral à esquerda, pós-tuberculose, em que se avaliou a ventilação
pulmonar regional através da TIE, relacionando-a com a cintilografia de ventilação/perfusão. Foram estudados os efeitos das mudanças
posturais e da aplicação de continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP, pressão positiva contínua nas vias aéreas) nasal, uma vez que a
paciente usava esse tratamento para síndrome da apneia obstrutiva do sono. A TIE demonstrou distribuição heterogênea da ventilação pulmonar
regional com maior ventilação no pulmão direito, sendo essa distribuição influenciada pelas mudanças de decúbitos e pela aplicação de CPAP.
A análise da ventilação pulmonar regional pela TIE se mostrou similar aos achados da cintilografia pulmonar de ventilação com a vantagem de
possibilitar uma avaliação dinâmica e sem exposição à radiação. A tuberculose persiste como um sério problema de saúde pública mundial,
podendo causar diversas sequelas no trato respiratório, sendo uma delas a estenose brônquica.(1-5) Essa pode causar dispneia por obstrução
ao fluxo aéreo, com o agravante de se caracterizar frequentemente por lesões assimétricas das vias aéreas proximais. O brônquio fonte
esquerdo é particularmente suscetível a essa complicação.(6,7) As provas de função pulmonar avaliam os pulmões de forma global, mas nada
informam sobre as alterações regionais da ventilação. Essas costumam ser avaliadas por exames de cintilografia com radioisótopos, que têm
alto custo e são pouco disponíveis em nosso meio. A tomografia de impedância elétrica (TIE) é uma técnica que possibilita a reconstrução de
imagens de um corte axial dos pulmões, em tempo real, de forma dinâmica e segura, permitindo a avaliação da ventilação pulmonar regional.(8)
Trata-se de uma ferramenta particularmente promissora em casos de doença pulmonar assimétrica, como ocorre na estenose brônquica unilateral.
Apresentamos o caso de uma paciente com estenose do brônquio fonte esquerdo e síndrome da apneia obstrutiva do sono (SAOS), tratada com
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP, pressão positiva contínua nas vias aéreas) nasal, e a ventilação pulmonar regional foi avaliada
por TIE, ressaltando os efeitos das variações de decúbitos e da aplicação de CPAP sobre a mesma. Paciente do sexo feminino, 53 anos, não
tabagista, com história de tuberculose tratada aos 20 anos de idade, relatava dispneia progressiva há três anos. Na ausculta pulmonar, havia
roncos e sibilos no hemitórax esquerdo. Foi realizada espirometria que mostrou CVF, 2,56 L (88%); VEF1, 1,81 L (77%); VEF1/CVF, 0,71 (88%);
e FEF25-75%:, 1,15 L/s (50%). Esses resultados são compatíveis com distúrbio ventilatório obstrutivo leve. Não houve variação significativa
à prova broncodilatadora. As reconstruções digitais de imagens de TC do tórax mostraram uma redução do calibre do brônquio fonte esquerdo,
iniciando na sua origem e chegando a 4,8 cm na sua extensão, com 0,5 cm de largura (Figura 1A-D). A expiração forçada agravava a estenose
brônquica, chegando a um colapso quase total e causando aprisionamento aéreo no pulmão esquerdo. A cintilografia de ventilação e perfusão
(Figura 1E e 1F) mostrou o fluxo sanguíneo e a ventilação direcionados para o pulmão direito (68%). A broncoscopia confirmou a estenose
brônquica à esquerda demonstrada na TC de tórax. Figura 1 TC com multidetectores de tórax com reconstrução coronal em inspiração (A), em
expiração B), endobrônquica (C) e com reconstrução volumétrica ao final da expiração mostrando aprisionamento aéreo no pulmão esquerdo (D);
e cintilografia pulmonar de perfusão (E) e ventilação (F). As setas mostram o sitio da estenose brônquica. Empregou-se um aparelho de TIE de
32 eletrodos (DX 1800, Dixtal Biomédica, Manaus, Brasil)(6,7) para o estudo da ventilação pulmonar regional, assim como dos efeitos da
adoção de diferentes decúbitos - decúbito dorsal (DD), decúbito lateral direito (DLD) e decúbito lateral esquerdo (DLE) - e da aplicação de
CPAP de 10 cmH2O. Em todas as situações, a paciente permaneceu por 10 min deitada, com a cabeceira elevada a 30°, com um intervalo de 5 min
entre as medidas nas diferentes condições. A Figura 2 apresenta mapas funcionais da distribuição da ventilação pulmonar regional nos
diferentes decúbitos, em respiração espontânea e com CPAP nasal, obtidos pela TIE. Figura 2 Mapa funcional da distribuição da ventilação
pulmonar regional através da tomografia de impedância elétrica nos decúbitos dorsal (DD), lateral direito (DLD) e lateral esquerdo (DLE). As
três primeiras imagens foram obtidas em respiração espontânea. As três últimas, sob continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP, pressão
positiva contínua nas vias aéreas) de 10 cmH2O. Os números representam a proporção da distribuição do volume corrente para cada pulmão. Na
parte inferior de cada figura, a curva de pletismografia da variação da impedância elétrica. O Vídeo 1 (disponível no site do Jornal
Brasileiro de Pneumologia, http://www.jornaldepneumologia.com.br/detalhe_artigo_pre_visualizar.asp?id=2236) demonstra de forma dinâmica a
ventilação regional nos vários decúbitos em respiração espontânea e com a aplicação de CPAP. Em respiração espontânea, é possível evidenciar
que a ventilação foi direcionada quase totalmente para o lado direito, sendo visualizada através da coloração azul clara; quanto mais claro
o tom de azul, maior a ventilação naquela área. Com a aplicação de CPAP, ocorreu uma distribuição de parte da ventilação para o pulmão
esquerdo. No presente caso, em respiração espontânea, a distribuição relativa da ventilação pulmonar regional foi sempre maior no pulmão
direito, com valores de 91%, 82% e 58% para DD, DLD e DLE, respectivamente, o que mostra o efeito da estenose brônquica sobre a distribuição
da ventilação pulmonar regional e a influência da variação postural (Figura 2). As imagens obtidas com a TIE são compatíveis com aquelas da
cintilografia de ventilação pulmonar. Em indivíduos sadios em respiração espontânea e em DD, a ventilação pulmonar regional é maior nas
zonas dependentes em relação às não dependentes, fenômeno fisiológico já bem documentado por estudos com TIE. Os estudos com TIE em
voluntários sadios têm demonstrado a marcada influência da variação postural sobre a distribuição da ventilação pulmonar. Estudos que
analisaram a ventilação pulmonar regional em voluntários sadios demonstraram que essa ventilação é invariavelmente maior para o pulmão
dependente nos decúbitos laterais.(9,10) Com a aplicação de CPAP de 10 cmH2O, as diferenças na distribuição regional da ventilação foram
aumentadas. A distribuição gravitacional da ventilação se deu em maior grau para as zonas dependentes nos decúbitos estudados. No caso do
DD, o uso de CPAP causou uma discreta redistribuição da ventilação regional para o pulmão esquerdo, predominantemente para sua porção
dorsal. Em contrapartida, o DLD amplificou a assimetria da ventilação, concentrando quase totalmente a ventilação no pulmão direito. No DLE,
a ventilação foi aumentada para o pulmão dependente de 42% para 48%, possivelmente por broncodilatação mecânica do brônquio esquerdo pela
aplicação de CPAP.(8) O presente caso reforça o interesse na utilização da TIE para a avaliação da ventilação pulmonar regional,
especialmente na lesão assimétrica das vias aéreas. Além disso, a TIE tem a vantagem, em relação à cintilografia, de ser um exame de alta
resolução temporal que avalia de forma dinâmica os efeitos das mudanças de decúbitos e da aplicação de CPAP. Trabalho realizado na
Universidade Federal do Ceará, Fortaleza (CE) Brasil. Apoio financeiro: Este estudo recebeu apoio financeiro da Coordenação de
Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES). Carlos Augusto Barbosa da Silveira Barros e Marcelo Silveira Matias são bolsistas do
Programa Institucional de Bolsas de Iniciação Científica (PIBIC), vinculado ao Laboratório da Respiração da Universidade Federal do Ceará.
