Cutaneous abscess is a localized collection of pus in the dermis and subcutaneous tissue usually caused by trauma. The authors report the
case of a 30-year-old male patient, gardener, that presents an ulcerated plaque in the third right finger, caused by an aculeus plant wound.
The examination of the lesion's exudate ruled out the existence of fungi and showed the presence of Staphylococcus aureus. The authors
emphasize the sporotrichosis as an important differential diagnosis, especially in endemic areas, and the indication of the exudate culture
is discussed. Abscesso cutâneo é uma coleção de pus localizada na derme e tecido celular subcutâneo decorrente, em geral, de traumatismos.
Os autores relatam o caso de um paciente de 30 anos, jardineiro, apresentando uma placa ulcerada, no terceiro quirodáctilo direito,
provocada por ferimento com acúleo de planta. O exame do exsudato da lesão descartou a presença de fungos e revelou a presença de
Staphylococcus aureus. Os autores enfatizam a importância de se lembrar da esporotricose no diagnóstico diferencial, principalmente em
regiões endêmicas e discutem a indicação da cultura do exsudato no caso apresentado. A thirty-year-old male patient, gardener, sought
treatment in the emergency department ten days after suffering a puncture wound with a rosewood aculeus. He reported pain and motion
limitation of the right hand's third finger. Dermatological examination of the finger showed a plaque with signs of inflammation, tight and
very painful. The center was ulcerated and there was drainage of purulent exudate (Figure 1). The proposed hypotheses were: bacterial
abscess and sporotrichosis. Erythematous and edematous plaque with ulceration on the lateral edge of the metacarpophalangeal region and
proximal phalanx of the 3rd right finger. Note the presence of a whitish-yellow exudate in the central ulceration Incision and drainage of
the exudate were performed and the material was sent for mycological examination, Gram staining and culture for fungi and bacteria. The
result was negative for fungi, with growth only of Staphylococcus aureus, which antibiogram showed sensitivity to nearly all tested
antibiotics (Chart 1). Antibiogram tested with the lesion's exudate Some plants have their own defense mechanisms represented by real
thorns, spines, serrated teeth, acutely shaped leaf terminations and barbs that can injure the skin on contact with them, as occurs during
handling or in case of an accidental contact without skin protection.1 A cutaneous abscess is a localized collection of pus present in the
dermis and subcutaneous tissue, usually from streptococcal or staphylococcal etiology, resulting from local trauma, burns, foreign bodies,
and sites of intravenous catheter insertion or hematogenous spread.2,3 It is clinically recognized by a tight and painful nodule with signs
of inflammation, prone to fluctuation and subsequent drainage of pus.2 There may be local cellulitis, lymphangitis, regional
lymphadenopathy, fever and leukocytosis. The diagnosis is clinical, usually without the need for additional tests. However, the
investigation and exclusion of other diagnoses are prudent and should be based on the epidemiological history. Treatment consists of an
incision over the fluctuating area, complete surgical drainage of the purulent exudate and irrigation with saline solution. Local heat and
elevation may accelerate the resolution of this condition. Antibiotic therapy should be individually evaluated for each case.2 The city of
Rio de Janeiro has experienced a sporotrichosis epidemic in recent years, and the zoonotic transmission by cats was implicated as the major
villain.4 However, this subcutaneous mycosis caused by a fungus of the Sporotrix complex, occurs more frequently among gardeners and straw
weavers, and can therefore be seen as an occupational disease.1,4 Both clinical forms, cutaneous lymphatic and fixed cutaneous, may present
ulcerated, nodular or erythematous infiltrated lesions, similar to our patient's lesion described above. The injury caused by physical
trauma from the contact with plants may be the causative factor responsible for cases of secondary bacterial infections, sporotrichosis or
paracoccidioidomycosis.1 Culture of the lesion's exudate in this case was indicated because of the possibility of fungal etiology. Although
in the present case, the diagnosis is bacterial abscess, the authors emphasize the importance of considering sporotrichosis in the
differential diagnosis, especially in endemic regions, since early specific treatment is more effective and reduces the risk of disease
complications. NOTE: In botany, the spike is an axial organ or appendage resulting from the modification of a branch, usually sprouting from
the stem, but that may also be present in the leaves.1,5 It is worth mentioning that roses have thorns (aculeus), which are projections on
the surface of the stem similar to spines (Figure 2). The aculeus detaches easily, unlike the spikes that originate in the wood's own branch
being connected to the vascular system of the plant and therefore more difficult to extract (Figure 3).5 Rose aculeus, commonly known as
thorn "Scar" cause by the detachment of an aculeus Work performed at a private practice - Ituiutaba (MG), Brazil. Financial Support: None
Conflict of interest: None
