Conflito de interesse: nada a declarar To report the uncommon association between neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and unroofed coronary
sinus. Girl with four years and six months old who was hospitalized for heart surgery. The cardiac problem was discovered at four months of
life. On physical examination, the patient presented several café-au-lait spots in the trunk and the limbs and freckling of the axillary and
groin regions. Her father had similar skin findings, suggesting the NF1 diagnosis. The cardiac evaluation by echocardiography disclosed an
atrial septal defect of unroofed coronary sinus type. This cardiac finding was confirmed at surgery. The procedure consisted of the atrial
septal defect repair with autologous pericardium. NF1 is a common autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in the NF1 gene. Among the
NF1 findings, congenital heart defects are considered unusual. In the literature review, there was no association between NF1 and unroofed
coronary sinus, which is a rare cardiac malformation, characterized by a communication between the coronary sinus and the left atrium,
resultant from the partial or total absence of the coronary sinus roof. It represents less than 1% of atrial septal defect cases. More
reports are important to determine if this association is real or merely casual, since NF1 is a common condition. Subrayar la asociación
poco común entre neurofibromatosis de tipo 1 (NF1) y seno coronario sin techo. Niña de cuatro años y seis meses, hospitalizada para
realización de cirugía cardíaca. Se descubrió el problema cardíaco con cuatro meses de vida. En el examen físico, la paciente presentaba
varias manchas café con leche en el tronco y en los miembros y lentigos axilares e inguinales. El padre poseía alteraciones de piel
semejantes, siendo posible el diagnóstico de NF1. La evaluación cardiaca mediante ecocardiograma reveló comunicación interatrial de tipo
seno coronario sin techo. Esos hallazgos cardiacos fueron confirmados en la cirugía. El procedimiento constituye en la reparación del
defecto del septo atrial con pericardio autólogo. NF1 es una enfermedad autosómica dominante común causada por mutaciones del gene NF1.
Entre los hallazgos de NF1, los defectos cardiacos congénitos son considerados poco comunes. En la revisión de la literatura, no hubo
asociación entre NF1 y el seno coronario sin techo, que es una malformación cardiaca rara caracterizada por la comunicación entre el seno
coronario y el atrio izquierdo, resultante de la ausencia parcial o total del techo del seno coronario, representando menos del 1% de los
casos de defecto del septo atrial. Más relatos son importantes para determinar si esa asociación es real o solamente casual, ya que NF1 es
una condición común. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) (OMIM 162200)( 1 ) is an autosomal dominant disorder, caused by mutations in the NF1
gene, located in 17q11.2. The incidence is described as 1/2,000-7,800 births( 2 , 3 ). NF1 is usually diagnosed based on clinical criteria
of the National Institute of Health Consensus( 4 ), which assesses the presence of findings such as café-au-lait spots, neurofibromas,
freckles in the axillary and inguinal regions, and family history of a first degree relative with NF1. Among the findings of NF1, congenital
heart defects are uncommon( 5 , 6 ). This study reported the association between NF1 and unroofed coronary sinus, not yet described in the
literature. Black female patient, aged 4 years and 6 months, hospitalized for surgical correction of a heart defect. She was the only
daughter of a non-consanguineous couple, aged 27 (mother) and 23 (father). The mother had three other healthy children from two previous
marriages. There was no history of congenital heart disease in the family. The mother reported occasional alcohol intake during pregnancy.
Syphilis was diagnosed in the 4th month of gestation and treated with Penicillin. The patient also had loss of amniotic fluid during
pregnancy. The child was born by caesarean section, cephalic presentation, 30 weeks preterm, weighing 2,075g, measuring 42,5 cm, head
circumference of 31cm, and had Apgar scores at 1 and 5 minutes, of 8 and 9 respectively. The child cried immediately after birth and was not
cyanotic. The screening test was normal. Congenital heart disease was discovered at 4 months of life. The neuropsychomotor development was
normal and there were no behavior problems. On physical examination, at 4 years and 6 months old, the patient presented weight of 17,500g
(50-75th percentile), height of 105cm (50-75th percentile), and head circumference of 48.5cm (2-50th percentile) (anthropometric measures
evaluated according the CDC Growth Charts - http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_11/sr11_246.pdf). The patient was not syndromic but had
dysmorphic features that included bilateral epicanthal folds, broad nasal root with bulbous nose, high arcade palate, large mouth with thick
lips, pectus carinatum, cubitus valgus, and clinodactyly of fifth fingers. On the skin, there were many (more than six) café-au-lait spots
measuring about 2-3cm in the trunk and limbs and freckles in the axillary and inguinal regions (Figure 1). Family history revealed that the
father had similar skin findings (multiple café-au-lait spots and freckles in the axillary/inguinal regions). This enabled the diagnosis of
NF1, which was also confirmed by dermatological evaluation. Ophthalmologic examination was normal. Cardiac evaluation of the child by
echocardiography revealed unroofed coronary sinus atrial septal defect. There was no persistence of left superior vena cava. These cardiac
findings were confirmed at surgery. The procedure consisted of repair of atrial septal defect with autologous pericardium. Abdominal
ultrasonography and spine radiography were normal. The high-resolution karyotype by GTG banding and fluorescence in situ hybridization for
22q11 microdeletion (using the probe TelVysion TM TUPLE 1, Abbott Molecular Inc.) were also normal. Figure 1 Patient at 4 years and 6 months
(A, B and C). Note especially café-au-lait spots and axillary freckles (C) The clinical findings presented by the patient, plus the family
history allowed the diagnosis of NF1( 4 ). The child was part of the sample of a study by Rosa et al( 7 ), in which, among 204 patients with
heart disease, she was the only one (0.5%) to present diagnosis of NF1. It is noteworthy that there was no description of NF1 in patients
with congenital heart disease, even in studies with large samples( 8 - 12 ). Perhaps this relates to the fact that NF1 is often diagnosed in
late childhood( 2 ), while patients with congenital heart disease are usually diagnosed earlier, due to the severity of their congenital
malformations. Cardiovascular malformations are also uncommon in individuals with NF1. The frequencies described in the literature generally
range from 0.4 to 6.4%( 6 ). Tedesco et al( 5 ) found a higher frequency (27%) of cardiovascular malformations diagnosed by echocardiography
in 48 patients with NF1. Among the heart defects, pulmonary stenosis and coarctation of the aorta were the most common. Conotruncal heart
defects, involving the outflow tract and atrioventricular septal defects, apparently presented low association with NF1( 5 ). In the
literature review, there was no association between NF1 and unroofed coronary sinus atrial septal defect. Lin et al( 6 ) reported
unspecified atrial septal defects. Tedesco et al( 5 ) found two patients with atrial septal defect, both ostium secundum. Unroofed coronary
sinus atrial septal defect is a rare cardiac malformation characterized by communication between the coronary sinus and the left atrium,
resulting in partial or total absence of the coronary sinus roof( 13 - 16 ). This communication represents less than 1% of atrial septal
defects, often from 0.2 to 0.6 cases by 1,000 live births( 16 ). The diagnosis of unroofed coronary sinus became possible after the advent
of the echocardiography. Before that, the diagnosis was only made during surgery( 14 , 15 ). The unroofed coronary sinus is strongly
associated with persistent left superior vena cava( 13 - 15 ). Despite prenatal exposure to alcohol, the case study did not meet the
diagnostic criteria for fetal alcohol syndrome( 17 ). However, it is noteworthy the fact that prenatal exposure to alcohol is also equally
associated with an increased risk (approximately 25-50%) for a number of cardiac malformations and, although there is no predominance of a
type, atrial septal defects are the most common( 13 , 17 ). In this review, however, there were no reports of alcohol exposure associated
with unroofed coronary sinus atrial septal defect. Although the patient met the diagnostic criteria for NF1 established by the National
Institute of Health Consensus( 4 ), she could also have presented a condition that was part of the differential diagnosis of NF1. The
condition that most caught the attention was the Legius syndrome (OMIM 611431)( 1 ), also an autosomal dominant genetic disease
characterized by the presence of café-au-lait spots and freckles in the axillary and inguinal regions, but without neurofibromas. However,
individuals with the Legius syndrome normally present variable dysmorphic features, such as hypertelorism, macrocephaly, and lipomas,
characteristics that were not observed in the patient described. Moreover, unlike NF1, congenital heart defects have not been described in
patients with Legius syndrome. Another condition considered in the differential diagnosis of NF1 is the Watson syndrome (OMIM 193520)( 1 ).
However, this syndrome usually presents with macrocephaly and short stature. Furthermore, the cardiac defect associated to the syndrome is
pulmonary valve stenosis. There is still an autosomal dominant condition, whose only clinical manifestations are multiple café-au-lait spots
(OMIM 114030)( 1 ), without freckles in the axillary and inguinal regions. Due to the low likelihood of such conditions in this case, the
most likely diagnosis was established as NF1. This report described the unusual association between NF1 and unroofed coronary sinus atrial
septal defect. More studies are important to determine whether this association is real of merely casual, since NF1 is a common condition.
Perhaps some patients with NF1 or even with prenatal exposure to alcohol, and unspecified atrial septal defect, may present unroofed
coronary sinus. However, the probability that NF1 and unroofed coronary sinus happen by chance together is one in 1,000,000,000. We are
thankful to the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (Capes) for the scholarship granted. Instituição:
Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre (UFCSPA) e Complexo Hospitalar Santa Casa de Porto Alegre – Porto Alegre, RS,
Brasil Fonte financiadora: Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (Capes) Relatar a associação incomum entre
neurofibromatose do tipo 1 (NF1) e seio coronário sem teto. Menina de quatro anos e seis meses, hospitalizada para realização de cirurgia
cardíaca. O problema cardíaco foi descoberto com quatro meses de vida. No exame físico, a paciente apresentava várias manchas café com leite
no tronco e nos membros e efélides axilares e inguinais. O pai possuía alterações de pele semelhantes, sendo possível o diagnóstico de NF1.
A avaliação cardíaca por meio do ecocardiograma revelou comunicação interatrial do tipo seio coronário sem teto. Esses achados cardíacos
foram confirmados na cirurgia. O procedimento consistiu na reparação do defeito do septo atrial com pericárdio autólogo. A NF1 é uma doença
autossômica dominante comum causada por mutações no gene NF1. Dentre os achados da NF1, os defeitos cardíacos congênitos são considerados
pouco comuns. Na revisão da literatura, não houve associação entre a NF1 e o seio coronário sem teto, o qual é uma malformação cardíaca rara
caracterizada pela comunicação entre o seio coronário e o átrio esquerdo, resultante da ausência parcial ou total do teto do seio coronário,
representando menos de 1% dos casos de defeito do septo atrial. Mais relatos são importantes para determinar se essa associação é real ou
apenas casual, já que a NF1 é uma condição comum. A neurofibromatose do tipo 1 (NF1) (OMIM 162200)( 1 ) é uma doença autossômica dominante,
causada por mutações no gene NF1, localizado na região 17q11.2. A incidência é descrita como entre 1/2.000-7.800 nascimentos( 2 , 3 ). A NF1
é geralmente diagnosticada com base nos critérios clínicos do National Institute of Health Consensus( 4 ), que avalia a presença de achados
como manchas café com leite, neurofibromas, efélides nas regiões axilares e inguinais e história familiar de um parente de primeiro grau com
NF1. Dentre os achados da NF1, os defeitos cardíacos congênitos são incomuns( 5 , 6 ). Este trabalho relatou a associação, ainda não
descrita na literatura, entre NF1 e seio coronário sem teto. Menina negra de quatro anos e seis meses, hospitalizada para correção cirúrgica
de um defeito cardíaco. Era a única filha de um casal não consanguíneo, com 27 (mãe) e 23 anos (pai). A mãe teve três outras crianças
hígidas de dois casamentos anteriores. Não havia história de doença cardíaca congênita na família. A mãe relatou ingesta ocasional de álcool
durante a gravidez. Sífilis foi diagnosticada no quarto mês de gestação e tratada com penicilina. A gestante também apresentou perda de
líquido amniótico durante a gestação. A criança nasceu de parto cesáreo, apresentação cefálica, prematura de 30 semanas, pesando 2075g,
medindo 42,5cm, com perímetro cefálico de 31cm e Apgar no 1º e 5º minutos de 8 e 9, respectivamente. A criança chorou logo após o nascimento
e não estava cianótica. A triagem para erros inatos do metabolismo foi normal. A cardiopatia congênita foi descoberta aos quatro meses de
vida. O desenvolvimento neuropsicomotor foi normal e não havia problemas de comportamento. No exame físico, aos quatro anos e seis meses de
idade, a paciente apresentava peso de 17.500g (percentil 50-75), altura de 105cm (percentil 50-75) e perímetro cefálico de 48,5cm (percentil
2-50) (medidas antropométricas avaliadas conforme o CDC Growth Charts - http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_11/sr11_246.pdf). A paciente
não era sindrômica, mas apresentava dismorfias que incluíam pregas epicânticas bilaterais, raiz nasal larga com nariz bulboso, palato alto,
boca grande com lábios grossos, pectus carinatum, cúbito valgo e clinodactilia dos quintos dedos. Ao nível da pele, observaram-se várias
(mais do que seis) manchas café com leite medindo cerca de 2-3cm no tronco e nos membros e efélides em regiões axilares e inguinais (Figura
1). A história familiar revelou que o pai apresentava achados cutâneos semelhantes (várias manchas café com leite e efélides em regiões
axilares/inguinais). Isso possibilitou o diagnóstico de NF1, o qual também confirmado por avaliação dermatológica. O exame oftalmológico foi
normal. A avaliação cardíaca da criança por meio de ecocardiografia revelou comunicação interatrial do tipo seio coronário sem teto. Não se
observou persistência da veia cava superior esquerda. Esses achados cardíacos foram confirmados na cirurgia. O procedimento consistiu na
reparação do defeito do septo atrial com pericárdio autólogo. A ultrassonografia abdominal e a radiografia de coluna foram normais. O
cariótipo de alta resolução por bandas GTG e a pesquisa de microdeleção 22q11 por hibridação in situ fluorescente (usando a sonda TelVysion
TM TUPLE 1, Abbott Molecular Inc.) também foram normais. Figura 1 Paciente aos quatro anos e seis meses de idade (A, B e C). Notar
especialmente manchas café com leite e efélides axilares (C) O conjunto de achados clínicos apresentados pela paciente, juntamente com a
história familiar, permitiram o diagnóstico de NF1( 4 ). A criança participou da amostra de Rosa et al( 7 ). Nesse estudo, dentre os 204
pacientes portadores de cardiopatia congênita, ela foi a única (0,5%) a apresentar o diagnóstico de NF1. Cabe ressaltar que não houve
qualquer descrição de NF1 em pacientes com doença cardíaca congênita, mesmo em estudos com grandes amostras( 8 - 12 ). Talvez isso se
relacione ao fato de que a NF1 é frequentemente diagnosticada na infância tardia( 2 ) e pacientes com cardiopatia congênita geralmente são
diagnosticados mais cedo, devido à gravidade de suas malformações. Malformações cardiovasculares também são incomuns em indivíduos com NF1.
As frequências descritas na literatura geralmente variam de 0,4 a 6,4%( 6 ). Tedesco et al( 5 ) encontraram maior frequência (27%) de
malformações cardiovasculares diagnosticadas por ecocardiografia em 48 pacientes com NF1. Dentre os defeitos cardíacos, a estenose pulmonar
e a coarctação da aorta foram os mais comuns. Defeitos cardíacos conotruncais, envolvendo a via de saída, e defeitos do septo
atrioventricular apresentaram, aparentemente, baixa associação com NF1( 5 ). Na revisão de literatura, não houve associação entre NF1 e
comunicação interatrial do tipo seio coronário sem teto. Lin et al( 6 ) relataram defeitos do septo atrial não especificados. Tedesco et al(
5 ) encontraram dois pacientes com defeito do septo atrial, ambos do tipo ostium secundum. A comunicação interatrial do tipo seio coronário
sem teto é uma malformação cardíaca rara, caracterizada pela comunicação entre o seio coronário e o átrio esquerdo, resultante da ausência
parcial ou total do teto do seio coronário( 13 - 16 ). Essa comunicação representa menos de 1% dos defeitos do septo atrial, com frequência
de 0,2 a 0,6 casos por 1.000 nascidos vivos( 16 ). O diagnóstico de seio coronário sem teto tornou-se possível após o advento da
ecocardiografia. Antes disso, o diagnóstico só era realizado durante a cirurgia( 14 , 15 ). O seio coronário sem teto associa-se fortemente
à persistência da veia cava superior esquerda( 13 - 15 ). Apesar da exposição pré-natal ao álcool, o caso apresentado não atende aos
critérios diagnósticos para a síndrome alcoólica fetal( 17 ). No entanto, chama a atenção o fato de que a exposição pré-natal ao álcool
também é igualmente associada a um risco aumentado (cerca de 25-50%) para um certo número de malformações cardíacas e, apesar de não haver
predominância de um tipo, os defeitos do septo atrial são dos mais comuns( 13 , 17 ). Na presente revisão, no entanto, não houve relatos de
exposição ao álcool associados com comunicação interatrial do tipo seio coronário sem teto. Embora a paciente relatada atendesse aos
critérios de diagnóstico para NF1 estabelecidos pela National Institute of Health Consensus( 4 ), ela poderia também apresentar alguma
condição que fizesse parte do diagnóstico diferencial de NF1. A condição que mais chamou a atenção foi a síndrome de Legius (OMIM 611431)( 1
), uma doença genética também autossômica dominante caracterizada pela presença de máculas café com leite e efélides em regiões axilares e
inguinais, mas sem neurofibromas. No entanto, indivíduos com a síndrome de Legius em geral também apresentam achados dismórficos variáveis
como hipertelorismo, macrocefalia e lipomas, características não observadas na paciente descrita. Além disso, ao contrário da NF1, defeitos
cardíacos congênitos não foram descritos em pacientes com a síndrome de Legius. Outra condição considerada no diagnóstico diferencial de NF1
é a síndrome de Watson (OMIM 193520)( 1 ). No entanto, essa síndrome geralmente cursa com macrocefalia e baixa estatura. Além disso, o
defeito cardíaco associado à síndrome é a estenose de válvula pulmonar. Há ainda uma condição autossômica dominante, cuja única manifestação
clínica são várias manchas café com leite (OMIM 114030)( 1 ), sem efélides das regiões axilares e inguinais. Devido à baixa probabilidade
dessas condições no presente caso, o diagnóstico mais provável foi estabelecido como NF1. O presente relato descreveu a associação incomum
entre NF1 e defeito do septo atrial do tipo seio coronário sem teto. Mais estudos são importantes para determinar se essa associação é real
ou meramente casual, já que a NF1 é uma condição comum. Talvez alguns pacientes relatados com NF1, ou até mesmo com exposição pré-natal ao
álcool, e defeito septal atrial não especificado possam apresentar seio coronário sem teto. No entanto, a probabilidade de que a NF1 e seio
coronário sem teto aconteçam juntos ao acaso é de um em 1.000.000.000. À Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (Capes)
pela bolsa de estudos recebida.
