We report the recent case of a 74-year-old female who had no relevant history of smoking or occupational history and presented to the
emergency room with a two-week history of dyspnea on exertion. There was no evidence of a recent respiratory infection, peripheral edema, or
orthopnea. The patient reported a history of arterial hypertension and osteoporosis and was being treated with ramipril, fluvastatin, and
ibandronate. Physical examination revealed that the patient was apyretic and breathed normally, with an SpO2 of 98%, a blood pressure of
116/68 mmHg, and an HR of 91 bpm. In addition, heart auscultation was regular, without heart murmurs and with absent breath sounds at the
right lung base, accompanied by dullness to percussion and absent vocal fremitus in this topography. A chest X-ray showed a dense opacity in
the lower half of the right lung field, consistent with massive, apparently free pleural effusion. An initial diagnostic thoracentesis
revealed a serosanguineous exudative effusion (pH, 7.33; proteins, 4.5 g/dL; lactate dehydrogenase, 728 IU/mL; glucose, 38 mg/dL; albumin,
3.0 g/dL), with a predominance of lymphocytes (60%) and an adenosine deaminase level of 10.6 IU. The first cytopathological analysis was
negative, as was the microbiological study. The patient had a neuron-specific enolase level of 16 U/mL and a cancer antigen 125 level of 124
U/mL. Blood gas analysis indicated mild hypoxemia on room air. Flexible bronchoscopy showed only thickening of the emergence of the right
upper lobe bronchus, the biopsy of which showed hyperplasia of basal cells. The second cytopathological analysis of the fluid obtained via a
second thoracentesis led to the suspicion of papillary adenocarcinoma of unknown origin. A chest CT scan (Figure 1) revealed right pleural
effusion without nodular pleural thickening or mediastinal/hilar adenopathy, and the assessment of the lung parenchyma was inconclusive
because of effusion-related atelectasis. Figure 1 Chest CT scans. In A and B, initial CT scan showing right pleural effusion with
ipsilateral parenchymal atelectasis. In C and D, post-drainage CT scan showing residual sites of pleural effusion with a nodular formation
in the medial segment of the middle lobe, with contrast enhancement. By this time, the working diagnoses were papillary adenocarcinoma of
the thyroid with pleural metastasis, papillary adenocarcinoma of the lung with pleural and thyroid metastasis, or synchronous papillary
adenocarcinoma of the lung with pleural metastasis and papillary adenocarcinoma of the thyroid. On the basis of those diagnoses, the pleural
fluid was examined for expression of tumor markers, including squamous cell carcinoma, Cyfra 21-1, CA 19-9, and thyroglobulin (TG), and the
patient was referred for medical thoracoscopy and ultrasonography of the thyroid gland. The thyroid ultrasonography showed heterogeneous
nodular hyperplasia, and aspiration biopsy of the largest nodule revealed "primitive/secondary" papillary carcinoma, which was subsequently
confirmed (in a total thyroidectomy specimen) to be primitive papillary carcinoma of the thyroid with immunohistochemical expression of
thyroglobulin, TTF-1, CK19, and galectin-3 (Figure 2). Figure 2 Photomicrographs showing papillary adenocarcinoma of the lung in A ((H&E;
magnification, ×20) and papillary adenocarcinoma of the thyroid in B (H&E; magnification, ×100). The pleural fluid was negative for
thyroglobulin but positive for Cyfra 21-1 and CA19-9. The medical thoracoscopy revealed nonspecific nodular lesions at the level of the
parietal pleura, and the pleural biopsies revealed metastatic papillary adenocarcinoma of the lung, on the basis of positive expression of
TTF-1, vimentin, and CK7 and negativity for TG. A second CT scan, performed after drainage of the fluid, made it possible to unveil a
subpleural nodular formation in the medial segment of the middle lobe, with contrast enhancement, suspected to be the primitive lung injury.
Therefore, we established the diagnosis of synchronous papillary adenocarcinoma of the thyroid and stage IV papillary adenocarcinoma of the
lung with pleural metastasis. The patient underwent pleurodesis and began chemotherapy with cisplatin and gemcitabine, with partial response
after three cycles. Although distant metastases of papillary adenocarcinoma of the thyroid are rare, cases presenting as malignant plural
effusion have been reported,(1-5) and, in some cases, the final diagnosis was only confirmed by analysis of a total thyroidectomy
specimen.(1) In contrast, lung adenocarcinoma is the type of cancer that most commonly metastasizes to the pleura, resulting in poor
prognosis,(6) and its papillary variant is unusual. There are reported cases associated with thyroid metastases.(5,7,8) We emphasize that,
in cases like the present one, with diagnosis of synchronous cancers showing the same pattern of differentiation, etiologic determination of
malignant pleural involvement is of utmost importance because, even in disseminated disease, the difference in mean survival between
papillary adenocarcinoma of the thyroid (a 5-year survival rate of 56%) and papillary adenocarcinoma of the lung with pleural dissemination
(an average of 3-5 months) is remarkable. In circumstances in which diagnostic discrimination is poor, such as that of the present case,
analysis of immunohistochemical expression is a key differentiating element. In particular, since TTF-1 is expressed in the lung and in the
thyroid, the finding of TG in the pleural fluid, and especially in the histological specimen, can facilitate the differential diagnosis.(9)
Relatamos o caso recente de uma mulher de 74 anos, sem história ocupacional ou tabágica de relevo, atendida no serviço de urgência com
queixa de dispneia por esforços com duas semanas de evolução. Não apresentava evidência de infecção respiratória recente, edemas periféricos
ou ortopneia. Relatava uma história de hipertensão arterial e osteoporose, estando medicada com ramipril, fluvastatina e ibandronato. Ao
exame físico mostrava-se apirética, eupneica, com SpO2 de 98%, pressão arterial de 116/68 mmHg, FC de 91 bpm, auscultação cardíaca regular
sem sopros e com abolição dos sons respiratórios na base direita, acompanhados de macicez à percussão e abolição do frêmito toracovocal
nessa topografia. A radiografia de tórax apresentava uma opacidade em toalha ao nível da metade inferior do hemicampo direito, compatível
com derrame pleural volumoso e aparentemente livre. Foi realizada uma toracocentese diagnóstica inicial que revelou um líquido exsudativo,
de tipo serosanguinolento (pH, 7,33; proteínas, 4,5 g/dL; desidrogenase lática, 728 UI/mL; glicose, 38 mg/dL; albumina, 3,0 g/dL), de
predomínio linfocitário (60%) e com adenosina desaminase de 10,6 UI. A primeira pesquisa citopatológica foi negativa, assim como o estudo
microbiológico. Apresentava níveis de enolase neuroespecífica de 16 U/mL e de cancer antigen (CA)-125 de 124 U/mL. A gasometria indicava
ligeira hipoxemia em ar ambiente. A broncoscopia flexível realizada mostrou somente um espessamento da emergência do brônquio lobar superior
direito, cuja biópsia mostrou hiperplasia de células basais. A segunda citopatologia do líquido obtido após uma nova toracocentese levou a
suspeita de adenocarcinoma papilar de origem desconhecida. A TC de tórax (Figura 1) evidenciou derrame pleural direito sem espessamentos
pleurais nodulares evidentes ou adenopatias mediastino-hilares, sendo a avaliação do parênquima pouco conclusiva dada a atelectasia
associada ao derrame. Figura 1 Imagens de TC de tórax. Em A e B, TC inicial evidenciando derrame pleural direito com atelectasia
parenquimatosa ipsilateral. Em C e D, TC após drenagem mostrando locais residuais de derrame pleural com formação nodular no segmento medial
do lobo médio, com realce ao contraste. A essa altura, as hipóteses de trabalho eram a possibilidade de um adenocarcinoma papilar da
tireoide com envolvimento pleural metastático, adenocarcinoma papilar do pulmão com metástase pleural e tireoidiana ou adenocarcinoma
papilar do pulmão com metástase pleural síncrona a adenocarcinoma papilar da tireoide. Com base nessas hipóteses, o líquido pleural foi
testado para a expressão de marcadores tumorais, incluindo squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), Cyfra 21.1, CA 19.9 e tiroglobulina (TG), tendo a
paciente sido orientada para a realização de toracoscopia médica e de estudo ecográfico da glândula tireoide. A ecografia tireoidiana
mostrou hiperplasia nodular heterogênea, tendo a biópsia aspirativa do maior nódulo revelado carcinoma papilar "primitivo/secundário",
posteriormente confirmado em peça de tireoidectomia total como carcinoma papilar primitivo da tireoide com expressão imuno-histoquímica de
TG, TTF-1, CK19 e galectina-3 (Figura 2). Figura 2 Fotomicrografias revelando adenocarcinoma papilar do pulmão em A (H&E; aumento, 20×) e
adenocarcinoma papilar da tireoide em B (H&E; aumento, 100×). A pesquisa de marcadores tumorais no líquido pleural foi negativa para
tiroglobulina, porém positiva para Cyfra 21.1 e CA 19.9. A toracoscopia médica revelou alterações nodulares inespecíficas ao nível da pleura
parietal, tendo as biópsias pleurais obtidas revelado metástases de adenocarcinoma papilar do pulmão, partindo da expressão de TTF-1,
vimentina, CK7 e negatividade para TG. A repetição de TC, após a drenagem do líquido, permitiu descortinar uma formação nodular subpleural
no segmento medial do lobo médio, com efeito de realce ao contraste, suspeita de constituir a lesão pulmonar primitiva. Consubstanciou-se,
assim, a presença de adenocarcinoma papilar da tireoide síncrono à existência de adenocarcinoma papilar do pulmão em estádio IV com
metástase pleural. A paciente foi submetida a pleurodese e iniciou quimioterapia com cisplatina e gemcitabina, com resposta parcial após
três ciclos. No carcinoma papilar da tireoide, apesar de a disseminação à distância ser rara, já foram relatados casos de apresentações como
derrame pleural maligno,(1-5) sendo que, em alguns, o diagnóstico final foi apenas confirmado por análise de peça de tireoidectomia
total.(1) Já o adenocarcinoma pulmonar é o tipo de neoplasia que mais frequentemente metastiza para a pleura, acarretando prognóstico
sombrio,(6) sendo a variante de diferenciação papilar pouco usual. Existem casos relatados associados a metástases tireoidianas.(5,7,8)
Realçamos que, no presente caso de diagnóstico simultâneo de neoplasias síncronas com o mesmo padrão de diferenciação, a determinação
etiológica do envolvimento pleural maligno é de acrescida importância dado que, mesmo para doença disseminada, é assinalável a diferença de
sobrevivência média entre o adenocarcinoma papilar da tireoide (56% em 5 anos) e o adenocarcinoma papilar do pulmão com disseminação pleural
(média de 3-5 meses). Em situações de difícil discriminação diagnóstica como a do presente caso, o estudo de expressão imuno-histoquímica
constitui um elemento diferenciador fulcral. Em particular, visto que há expressão de TTF-1 tanto no pulmão quanto na tireoide, a utilização
de marcação para TG quer no líquido pleural, quer sobretudo na peça histológica, pode auxiliar no exercício de diagnóstico diferencial.(9)
