The treatment of uveal melanoma has seen a shift towards eye conserving treatments. Efforts have been made towards the identification of
patients at high risk of metastatic disease with the use of prognostic fine needle biopsy, Monosomy 3 a risk factor for metastatic death
thought to occur early in the development of uveal melanoma. We report a case in which an atypical optic nerve lesion was found to be a
peripapillary primary uveal melanoma with distinct non-pigmented and pigmented halves on gross dissection and corresponding disomy 3 and
monosomy 3 halves. The tumour demonstrated rapid growth with apparent transformation from disomy 3 to monosomy 3. These are clinical
features that challenge the current concepts of the cytogenetic pathogenesis of uveal melanoma and demonstrate the potential problems and
limitations of prognostic fine needle biopsy and molecular classifications. The treatment of uveal melanoma has shifted towards eye
conserving treatments, prognostic fine needle biopsy used to identify patients at risk of metastatic disease. Monosomy 3 is associated with
a high risk of progression to metastatic death and is thought to occur early in the development of uveal melanoma . More recently, molecular
classifications using gene expression profiling have been used, dividing tumours into those with a low metastatic potential (class I), those
with a short term low metastatic potential, but higher mid to long term risk (class Ib) and those with short-term high metastatic potential
(class II) . We report a case in which an atypical optic nerve lesion, was found to be a peripapillary primary uveal melanoma with distinct
non-pigmented and pigmented halves on gross dissection and corresponding disomy 3 and monosomy 3 halves. The tumour demonstrated rapid
growth with apparent transformation from disomy 3 to monosomy 3, clinical features that challenge the current concepts of the cytogenetic
pathogenesis of uveal melanoma and demonstrate the potential problems and limitations of prognostic fine needle biopsy and molecular
classifications. A 55- year- old man presented with a 4-year history of progressively worsening visual acuity in his right eye. His
background medical history was otherwise unremarkable. On examination, visual acuity was 20/20 in the left eye and counting fingers at 1 m
in the right eye. There was a right relative afferent pupillary defect, and a right central scotoma on fields to confrontation. Extraocular
movements and intraocular pressure was within normal limits in both eyes and slit lamp examination was normal. On dilated fundoscopic
examination, there was diffuse disc edema with marked disc hemorrhage and a related serous retinal detachment, findings suggestive of an
optic nerve tumour (Figure 1a). Fluorescein angiography showed a well-vascularized mass at the optic nerve head, with fluorescein leak seen
in late phase images. A provisional diagnosis of an optic nerve meningioma was given and the patient was referred for an MRI. MRI of the
orbits however, showed an elevated intraocular lesion at the posterior pole with a moderately high signal on T1 weighted images suggestive
of a peripapillary choroidal melanoma (Figure 2a). Diagnostic ultrasound with B-scan confirmed the presence of a dome shaped lesion 4.6 mm
in thickness as well as a retinal detachment (Figure 2b). Standardized ultrasound with A-scan probe revealed a solid lesion with low
internal reflectivity and positive kappa angle (Figure 2c). These findings confirmed the diagnosis of choroidal melanoma. At that time, the
patient did not wish to proceed with further management and was subsequently lost to follow up. He did however represent 10 months later.
The lesion appeared to have rapidly increased in size, with further disc hemorrhage at the temporal border from 7 to 11 o’clock and a ring
of adjacent retinal pigmentation (Figure 1b). Clinical and pathological findings. (a) Initial dilated fundus examination: disc edema,
hemorrhage and a serous retinal detachment. (b) Fundus examination 10 months later: increase in the size of the mass, with disc border
hemorrhage and an adjacent ring of pigmentation. (c) (d) Gross pathology: uveal melanoma with distinct non-pigmented and pigmented halves.
(e) Histopathological section of the non-pigmented half of the uveal melanoma, spindle cell type. (f) Histopathological section of the
pigmented half of the uveal melanoma, of spindle cell type with melanin. Imaging and immunohistochemical findings. (a) T1 weighted MRI of
the globe: an elevated intraocular lesion at the posterior pole of moderately high signal. (b) B-scan ultrasound: dome shaped lesion at the
posterior pole. (c) A-scan ultrasound: solid lesion at the posterior pole with low internal reflectivity and a kappa angle. (d)
Immunohistochemistry: HMB-45 positive staining. Enucleation was performed. Gross pathology revealed a uveal melanoma arising in the area
adjacent to the optic nerve with distinct non-pigmented and pigmented halves (Figure 1c, d). On histopathological examination, both regions
were comprised of spindle cells (Figure 1e, f). The non-pigmented tumour however, showed no vascular loops or lymphocytes, while the
pigmented tumor did. Both tumors were positive for HMB-45 and Melan-A immunohistochemistry (Figure 2d). Cytological examination of the non-
pigmented tumour revealed no alterations on chromosomes 3 or 8, while the pigmented tumour contained monosomy 3 with alterations on
chromosome 8 also. The entire eye was formalin fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) and routinely processed and stained with hematoxylin-eosin
(H&E). This tissue was obtained and managed in accordance with the guidelines of the declaration of Helsinki. Cytomorphology was assessed on
H&E sections and categorized according to the modified Callender system . Immunohistochemical stains Melan A and HMB-45 were used to confirm
the diagnosis of uveal melanoma. Vascular loops were assessed using the PAS reagent without counterstaining. The presence of tumour
infiltrating lymphocytes was assessed using immunohistochemical antibodies for B cells, L-26 (Dako) and T cells UCHL-1 (Dako). Significance
was considered as more than 100 lymphocytes per 20 high-powered (43×) fields . Fresh tumour tissue was taken for single nucleotide
polymorphism analysis following enucleation, and further processed to assess for chromosomal abnormalities. DNA extraction from the samples
was performed using commercially available isolation kits (DNeasy Kit; Qiagen, Germantown, MD) according to the manufacturer-suggested
protocols. A labeling and detecting whole-genome genotyping sample kit (Illumina Human 660 W-Quad v1; Illumina San Diego, CA) was used to
analyze for monosomy 3. Data analysis was performed using commercial data analysis software (GenomeStudio with KaryoStudio module;
Illumina). This case of uveal melanoma showed a lesion that underwent rapid growth, enlarging and developing a ring of pigmentation over a
period of only 10 months. Furthermore, the seemingly aggressive portion of the tumour correlated with apparent transformation from a non-
pigmented slow growing normal heterodisomy 3 tumour to a pigmented monosomy 3 tumor that also exhibited other poor prognostic factors
including the presence of vascular loops and tumour associated lymphocytes. This is similar to one other case reported by Callejo et al. in
which an apparently quiescent melanoma suddenly enlarged, became necrotic, and apparently transformed from an indolent disomy 3 spindle cell
uveal melanoma to an aggressive monosomy 3 epithelioid tumour. White et al. also reported a similar case in which the uveal melanoma tumour
showed grossly distinct pigmented and non-pigmented regions. These two regions however, were morphologically different, the pigmented area
of the uveal melanoma composed of small epitheliod cells while the non pigmented area was comprised of large pleiomorphic epitheliod cells.
This morphological heterogeneity corresponded with cytogenetic heterogeneity, the two areas showing different karyotypes, the pigmented
tumor showing monosomy 3, and the non-pigmented tumour showing two normal chromosomes 3. DNA analysis of both pigmented and non-pigmented
regions revealed loss of heterozygosity at all informative loci at chromosome 3, suggesting that duplication of the monosomy 3 chromosome
had occurred (isodisomy 3) and that the non pigmented tumour had evolved from the pigmented tumour. Isodisomy 3 is thought to occur in 5-10%
of cases of uveal melanoma, and is prognostically equivalent to that of monosomy 3 status . It is associated with the high risk class II
expression signature and the development of metastasis, implying that chromosome 3 in monosomy 3 tumours, is defective at one or more tumour
suppressor loci, this then being duplicated in isodisomy 3 tumours . Intratumoural heterogeneity for chromosome 3 has also been previously
described in tumour specimens , found to occur in 14-18% of uveal melanomas . Evidence of subclone formation from analyses of harvested
cells and morphological heterogeneity corresponding with cytogenetic heterogeneity has also been reported by Sandinha et al. . These cases
suggest that monosomy 3 may arise at any stage during tumour development. As a result, this raises the question of whether small tumours and
disomy 3 uveal melanomas should be treated early to prevent progression or evolution into a high grade lesion with more malignant potential.
Furthermore, these cases in which there is clearly demonstrated intratumoral heterogeneity further emphasize its previously reported
existence . The limitations of prognostic fine needle biopsy are also highlighted; as aspirate material may not adequately represent the
tumor in its entirety. Thus, the usefulness of this investigation as a prognostic test, especially in the scenario of a negative result for
monosomy 3, may also need to be further considered. More recently, the gene expression profiling assay has been shown to not be affected by
intratumoral heterogeneity in a small sample of tumours , and in the recent Collaborative Ocular Oncology Group study , has been shown to be
technically successful and to be the most accurate prognostic marker compared with clinical and histopathological factors, a class II
signature more strongly associated with metastasis than any other prognostic factor including monosomy 3 . However, it is important to note
that although a statistically significantly small number of metastasis did occur in 3 patients (1.1%) with class I tumours compared with 44
patients (25.9%) with class II tumours at a median follow up of 17.4 months (p < 0.0001), metastases still do arise from a small number of
class I tumours . Therefore, errors relating to tissue sampling bias, tumour progression, and the unpredictable clinical behavior of uveal
melanoma with delayed development of metastases as a result of tumour dormancy, support the need for longer term follow up data of the
molecular classification to further validate its accuracy and reliability. We present an atypical peripapillary uveal melanoma that
demonstrated rapid growth and apparent transformation into a monosomy 3 tumour, a case that challenges current concepts of the pathogenesis
of uveal melanoma, and highlights intratumoural heterogeneity and sampling error as persistent sources of uncertainty. Although gene
expression profiling appears to be unaffected by this, further long-term study is needed to assess the accuracy of this molecular
classification. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. MB and SB were clinicians involved with this case. SB and MB were
involved with pathological processing and clinical assessment of the specimens. LL wrote the manuscript. LL, CM, PB, SB and MB analyzed the
data and discussion. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2415/14/13/prepub
