These authors contributed equally to the manuscript. We present a 70-year-old male patient of Greek origin with choreatic movements of the
tongue and face, lower limb muscle weakness, peripheral neuropathy, elevated creatinephosphokinase (CPK), acanthocytosis and haemolysis in
the absence of Kell RBC antigens with an additional Factor IX-deficiency. Genetic testing for mutations in the three exons of the XK gene
revealed a previously unreported hemizygous single base-pair frameshift deletion at exon 1 (c.229delC, p.Leu80fs). In conclusion, we hereby
describe a rare phenotype of a patient with McLeod syndrome which was discovered coincidentally during routine blood group testing and
consecutively genetically confirmed. • McLeod syndrome with chorea, muscle wasting, and peripheral neuropathy • Acanthocytosis and
haemolysis in the absence of Kell RBC antigens • McLeod syndrome with an additional Factor IX deficiency • Novel hemizygous single base-pair
frameshift deletion in the XK gene McLeod syndrome with chorea, muscle wasting, and peripheral neuropathy Acanthocytosis and haemolysis in
the absence of Kell RBC antigens McLeod syndrome with an additional Factor IX deficiency Novel hemizygous single base-pair frameshift
deletion in the XK gene McLeod syndrome is a rare X-linked multisystemic disease caused by mutations in the XK gene, which is thought to
encode for a membrane transporter . This rare syndrome together with autosomal recessive chorea-acanthocytosis forms the core of the
neuroacanthocytosis syndromes, both featuring an estimated prevalence of less than 1–5/1,000,000 . With an onset of neurological symptoms
mostly around the 4th decade, the McLeod syndrome is a slowly progressive multisystemic disease comprising acanthocytosis, haemolysis,
chronic anaemia, hepatosplenomegaly, cardiomyopathy, myopathy, neuropathy, choreatic movement disorders, psychiatric manifestations and
cognitive decline as the most common symptoms, with additional occurrence of more rare multi-system features being possible . Not only the
clinical phenotype of McLeod syndrome but also the mutational spectrum of the XK gene shows heterogeneity, with gross deletions, spanning
the entire or a significant part of the XK coding region, as well as small frameshift indels, and single nucleotide substitutions described
as associated with the phenotype. Their common ground is the prediction of an absent or truncated, non-functional gene product . We hereby
present a patient with a novel XK frameshift mutation associated with a McLeod syndrome without signs of chronic granulomatous disease
(CGD). A 70-year-old Greek man was referred to the Neurology Department of the Papageorgiou Hospital in Thessaloniki. The main initial
finding was choreatiform tongue movements reported by the haematology unit that detected a weak expression of K red blood cell antigens,
acanthocytosis, haemolysis, and a form of Factor IX deficiency when screening his blood type prior to a blood transfusion needed for a
scheduled surgical procedure. Those tongue movements were noted recently and were attributed by the family and the proband to his ill-
fitting denture. The patient also had a slight generalised restlessness with frequent changes of posture but without any tic-like or
choreiform movements of any particular part of his body apart from his tongue and the face. Neurological findings on examination included
chorea of the face and tongue, and lower limb muscle weakness with muscle wasting. His past medical history includes severe progressive
skeletal deformities after the age of 50, with osteoarthritis of the knees bilaterally that resulted in severe varus deformities of the
knees. The patient had a brother who died at the age of 60, and presented with severe facial dyskinesias, chorea and schizophrenia like
psychosis. His sister, who died at the age of 70 after an acute ischemic stroke, was referred as being healthy until that incident. His
38-year-old daughter and his 35-year-old son are both healthy (Fig. 1A). There is no additional family history regarding neuropsychiatric
diseases. Laboratory investigation revealed blood type group A1, DAT negative (−), IAT positive (+). Antibody identification panel testing
demonstrated panagglutination of the same intensity in all cellular lines in the LISS/Coombs phase. Enzyme phase, 4 °C incubation phase and
auto control (A/C) were negative. His detailed blood group profile was: C (+), c (+), D (+), E (−), e (+), Cw (−), K (−), k (−), Kpa (−),
Kpb (−), P1 (+), Lea (−), Leb (+), Lua (−), Lub (+), Jka (+), Jkb (+), M (+), N (+), S (+), s (+), Fya (−), and Fyb (+). Peripheral blood
smear revealed the existence of acanthocytes (Fig. 2) at a percentage of 19% of all red blood cells. Other abnormal laboratory values
included: Factor IX 8% (normal values 60−150%), Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (APTT) 58.1 (normal value 30.0 s), Partial
Thromboplastin Time Lupus Anticoagulans (PTT-LA) 61.3 (normal value < 45 s), Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 299 U/l (normal values 135–225),
creatinephosphokinase 1400 U/l (normal range in males 24–195 U/l). His further routine blood tests were normal. Electrophysiological
examination showed diffuse chronic sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy of axonal type. A brain MRI did not show any abnormal findings apart
from mild cortical atrophy (Fig. 3). Neuropsychological investigation and EEG were normal. The patient did not present any cardiac
complications and had a normal echocardiogram and 24-hour monitoring. Sequence analysis of the three exons of the XK gene detected a
hemizygous single base-pair frameshift deletion (Fig. 1B) at exon 1 (c.229delC, p.Leu80fs), leading to a very premature stop codon
(Fig. 1C). Exons 2 and 3 revealed no further mutations in this gene. Primers and conditions are available upon request. The deletion is
absent in the patient's healthy son and is present in his unaffected daughter in the heterozygous state (Fig. 1A–B). To the best of our
knowledge, this variant has not been previously reported and is not present in public databases, such as dbSNP and exome variant server.
McLeod syndrome belongs to the rare neuroacanthocytosis syndromes with approximately a few hundred cases worldwide . The disease
distribution lacks obvious clusters and McLeod syndrome has been described across Northern and Southern America, Europe, Japan and recently
China . It is heterogeneous in its clinical spectrum even within families (e.g., ), and its mutational spectrum is also wide. So far, gross
deletions, including large parts of the XK gene or even nearby genes, small frameshift indels as well as point mutations have been
described, all resulting in the absence or the truncation of a functional gene product . In our patient the neurological phenotype became
obvious rather late in life and his haematological abnormalities were revealed coincidentally during routine blood group testing.
Interestingly, our patient exhibits a Factor IX-deficiency, which to the best of our knowledge has not yet been reported as co-occurring
with McLeod syndrome. The diagnosis of McLeod syndrome is generally based on the haematological findings of weak Kell antigens. Therefore,
carriers of this phenotype could be diagnosed mainly in blood banks . However, the majority of cases have been diagnosed by neurologists due
to prominent neurological manifestations. The wide phenotypic spectrum of the disease and the insidious onset usually delays the diagnosis.
Many patients could have been diagnosed properly if there was a follow up of all carriers of the McLeod blood group phenotype that are
discovered coincidentally, as in the patient described here. The genetic testing in our patient revealed a novel single base-pair frameshift
deletion at exon 1 of the XK gene, which would lead to a very premature stop codon. Even if the protein is produced it would lack more than
330 amino acids (normal size 444 amino acids). We hereby were able to expand the mutational spectrum of XK mutations leading to McLeod
syndrome. The authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors are grateful to the UK Medical Research Council (MRC) and the Wellcome
Trust/MRC Joint Call in Neurodegeneration award (WT089698). S.W. is supported by a PhD-studentship of the Brain Research Trust. This is an
open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-No Derivative Works License, which permits
non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited. A) Family pedigree.
The arrow indicates the proband. Black filled symbols indicate affected individuals, while half-filled indicate unaffected carriers of the
mutation; B) Chromatograms depicting the mutation segregating in this family; C) Protein alignment showing conserved positions across
species and the very premature stop codon (marked with the asterisk) caused by the c.229delC frameshift mutation (WT — human wild-type
allele; Mut — human mutant allele). Acanthocytosis in peripheral blood. The smear shows frequent acanthocytes, representing ~ 19% of all red
blood cells. Proband's T1- (left panel) and T2-weighted axial (right panel) MRI at time of presentation without major abnormalities.
