Despite the frequent use of the fibular free flap, there have been no reports of severe compartment syndrome of the donor leg that
necessitated limb amputation. A 66-yr-old man had a fibular osseous free flap transfer from the left leg to the mandible that was
complicated by postoperative compartment syndrome. An extensive chronic leg wound resulted, which was treated with multiple debridements and
finally with below-knee amputation. Successful coverage of the below-knee amputation stump was accomplished with a nonisland pedicled foot
fillet flap. Various foot fillet flaps may be used acutely as a free or an island pedicled flap, but dissection of the vascular pedicle may
be difficult in a chronically inflamed wound because of inflammation and adhesions to surrounding tissue. The nonisland pedicled foot fillet
flap may be considered as a useful option for treatment of a chronically inflamed stump wound after below-knee amputation. The fibular
diaphysis can be excised along with the long peroneal artery and vein for use as a fibular free flap (1). The fibula has a bicortical
structure that enables internal fixation and reconstruction with osteointegrated implants (2). Furthermore, the rich periosteal blood supply
of the fibula enables multiple osteotomies for precise fabrication (3). Therefore, the fibular free flap is commonly used for reconstruction
of extensive defects of the long bones and facial bones that cannot be reconstructed with nonvascularized bone (4). Despite the common use
of the fibular free flap, severe donor site morbidity is uncommon. Donor site compartment syndrome is especially uncommon after fibular free
flap surgery, with only 10 previously reported cases (1-3, 5-11). Furthermore, to our best knowledge, there have been no reports of severe
compartment syndrome of the donor leg that necessitated amputation (12). Foot fillet flaps are a reconstructive option for below-knee
amputation and may be used acutely as a free or island pedicled flap (13). However, in a chronically inflamed wound, dissection of the
vascular pedicle is very difficult and the blood vessels are vulnerable to injury because of inflammation and adhesions to surrounding
tissue. Literature review showed no reports of the use of the nonisland pedicled foot fillet flap for a below-knee amputation stump wound
with typical bone length (14, 15). We treated a patient who had an extensive chronic soft tissue defect of the leg that was caused by
compartment syndrome after a fibular osseous free flap transfer. Successful coverage of the below-knee amputation stump was accomplished
with a nonisland pedicled foot fillet flap. A 66-yr-old man, who had developed compartment syndrome after a fibular osseous free flap
transfer from the left leg to the mandible on April 24, 2013, was referred to our department on postoperative day 26. The donor site, which
had been closed primarily, was opened on postoperative day 7. Evaluation showed a 20-cm fibular defect, a residual 8-cm proximal fibular
segment, an intact tibia, and extensive necrosis in all compartments of the leg. The foot was well vascularized through the posterior tibial
vessels but was insensate. Treatment included several debridements with irrigation in the operation room for 3 weeks. A suction pressure
wound therapy system was applied on the wound and changed every 3 days. After the wound improved, 3 treatment options were considered
including above-knee amputation, below-knee amputation, or flap reconstruction without amputation. Considering the patient's age, his
general condition, and the wound condition, we selected a below-knee amputation to preserve knee joint function. A foot fillet flap was
considered to reduce donor site morbidity, but dissection of the posterior tibial vessels was not possible because of inflammation, scar
formation, and adhesion to surrounding tissue. Therefore, a nonisland pedicled flap including skin and soft tissue in the pedicle was
planned. At 47 days after the initial fibular free flap transfer, below-knee amputation and coverage of the stump were performed under
general anesthesia with loupe magnification, a pneumatic thigh tourniquet without limb exsanguinations. After devitalized tissue in the
wound was debrided completely, the tibia was cut 13.5 cm distal to the tibial tuberosity. The dorsum of the foot was incised from the distal
margin of the wound near the lateral ankle to the wound at the dorsum of the foot (Fig. 1A). The toes were amputated through the
metatarsophalangeal joints. The remaining skin and soft tissue, including the vascular pedicle, were elevated at the subperiosteal level.
The distal tibial and fibular segments and all tarsal and metatarsal bones were removed. Dense fibrous tissue at the plantar surface of the
foot, large tendons, and volar plates of the metatarsophalangeal joints were excised. The intrinsic muscles of the foot were preserved, and
the posterior tibial neurovascular bundle was not debulked (Fig. 1B). The flap was rotated 180Â° and folded, and the posterior plantar part
of the flap was placed at the weight bearing aspect of the distal tibia. The anterior plantar part of the flap was placed in the soft tissue
defect at the posterior calf, and the calf part of the flap was placed at the soft tissue defect of the anterior calf below the patella.
After insertion of suction drainage tubes, the flap was sutured to the wound and remaining flap margins (Fig. 1C). Complete survival of the
flap was achieved and the knee joint was mobilized early. At 84 days after below-knee amputation and flap coverage, a debulking procedure
was performed to reduce the excess volume of the healed flap. The posterior tibial neurovascular pedicle was inevitably transected and
immediate neurorrhaphy of the posterior tibial nerve was performed. At 2 months after the debulking procedure, the patient noted tingling
sensation at the flap. Follow-up at 7 months after below-knee amputation and nonisland pedicled foot fillet flap showed that the flap was
well healed with improving sensation to the skin flap and the patient was satisfied with the result (Fig. 1D). All of the previously
reported cases of compartment syndrome after fibular free flap surgery were performed in an osteocutaneous fashion. They were not osseous
free flaps, as was our case (8). The cause of the compartment syndrome in these previous cases may have been closure of the skin under
excessive tension. Therefore, surgeons have been advised that primary closure of the donor site should be restricted to skin paddles of less
than 4-6 cm in width. When the skin paddle width is more than 4-6 cm, primary closure should not be attempted, instead, the donor site
should be covered with a split-thickness skin graft (1, 12). However, in the present patient, only the fibular bone was used as an osseous
free flap without skin paddle. Compartment syndromes have never been described after harvesting of bone only, which does not result in any
skin or fascia defect. The present case provides the lesson that primary closure of the donor leg without skin defect can also lead to
excessive tension, resulting in compartment syndrome. Compartment syndrome can develop whenever the leg fascia is closed primarily.
Potential causes for increased intracompartmental pressure even in cases where skin and fascia closures are performed without tension may be
hematoma, inadequate drainage, severe edema, and tight dressing. In all of the previous cases of compartment syndrome after fibular free
flap surgery, the leg defects were treated with debridement, dressing changes, primary closure, skin graft, and/or flap surgery but not
amputation (1, 3, 9). However, in the present case, severe compartment syndrome developed and the leg defect was treated with amputation
even though the donor leg was closed without tension. Due to the rarity of the medical records about the microvascular fibular transfer, it
was difficult to track the exact cause of this severe complication. However, because fasciotomy was performed at 7 days after the initial
fibular free flap transfer in the present case, we presume that the cause was associated with delayed diagnosis and treatment. For the
treatment of the present case, various flaps are available as coverage options for the stump wound after below-knee amputation. Various free
flaps may be used to cover the stump, including latissimus dorsi, rectus abdominis, scapular, and groin flaps (16, 17). However, they are
time-consuming procedures and they always result in additional donor site morbidity. Therefore, they had not been appropriate treatment
options for the present patient, who was exhausted because of the previous surgeries. To avoid additional donor site morbidity, various foot
fillet flaps may be used as a free or island pedicled flap (13). The free foot fillet flap may have been an option as it requires only
limited dissection of the vascular pedicle. The flap may be performed with 2 operative teams and have little blood loss during flap
dissection, but microvascular anastomoses may be impossible because the chronically inflamed vessels are vulnerable to surgical injury. The
island pedicled foot fillet flap may avoid the need for a microvascular anastomosis and may preserve continuity of the tibial nerve.
However, the dissection of a lengthy vascular pedicle may be difficult in the chronically inflamed wound because of the fragility and
adhesions to the surrounding tissue. If an island pedicled foot fillet flap would have been performed for the present patient, potential
complications including venous insufficiency of the flap and problems associated with pedicle redundancy such as pedicle kinking during flap
inset and compression of the coiled pedicle in the stump pocket may have comprised the final outcome. Therefore, both the free and the
island pedicled foot fillet flaps were not considered appropriate treatment options for the present patient. The nonisland pedicled foot
fillet flap that was used in the present patient did not require skeletonization or debulking of the vascular pedicle. Therefore, this flap
may be useful in patients who have chronic extensive soft tissue defects. In addition, this flap does not require microvascular anastomosis,
has minimal venous congestion, and avoids problems associated with pedicle redundancy. However, a debulking procedure is frequently needed
for reduction of flap volume as was performed in the present patient. The nonisland pedicled foot fillet flap was used successfully to treat
the below-knee amputation stump wound in the present patient. Although a debulking procedure was required, the safety is higher with the
nonisland pedicled foot fillet flap than a free or islanded pedicled foot fillet flap. Therefore, the nonisland pedicled foot fillet flap
may be a useful option for treatment of a chronically inflamed stump wound after below-knee amputation. This procedure is in accordance with
the ethical standards of our committee on human experimentation and with the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki. A 66-year-
old man who had a fibular osseous free flap transfer from the left leg to the mandible that was complicated by postoperative compartment
syndrome and an extensive soft tissue defect of the left leg. (A) Lateral view of the left leg at 47 days after the initial fibular free
flap transfer. The skin incisions were performed along the dashed lines. (B) Intraoperative view after tibial osteotomy and flap elevation.
(C) Immediate postoperative appearance after below-knee amputation and wound coverage with a nonisland pedicled foot fillet flap. (D)
Follow-up view at 7 months after below-knee amputation and flap coverage. The flap was well healed with improving sensation to the skin flap
and the patient was satisfied with the result.
