Visceral leishmaniasis is an anthropozoonosis that is caused by protozoa of the genus Leishmania, especially Leishmania (Leishmania)
infantum, and is transmitted to humans by the bite of sandflies of the genus Lutzomyia, such as Lutzomyia longipalpis. There are many
reservoirs, including Canis familiaris. It is a chronic infectious disease with systemic involvement that is characterized by three phases:
the initial period, the state period and the final period. The main symptoms are fever, malnutrition, hepatosplenomegaly, and pancytopenia.
This article reports a case of a patient diagnosed with visceral leishmaniasis in the final period following autochthonous transmission in
the urban area of Rio de Janeiro. The case reported here is considered by the Municipal Civil Defense and Health Surveillance of Rio de
Janeiro to be the first instance of autochthonous visceral leishmaniasis in humans in the urban area of this city. The patient was
discharged and is undergoing a follow-up at the outpatient clinic, demonstrating clinical improvement. A leishmaniose visceral é uma
antropozoonose causada por protozoários do gênero Leishmania, principalmente Leishmania (Leishmania) infantum e transmitida ao homem pela
picada do flebotomíneo do gênero Lutzomyia, destacando-se no Brasil a Lutzomyia longipalpis. Os animais reservatórios são muitos, tendo o
cão doméstico (Canis familiaris) como principal reservatório. Trata-se de uma doença infecciosa crônica, de envolvimento sistêmico e
caracterizado por três fases: período inicial, período de estado e período final. As principais manifestações são febre,
hepatoesplenomegalia, desnutrição e pancitopenia. Este artigo tem como objetivo relatar o caso de paciente diagnosticada com leishmaniose
visceral em período final, de transmissão autóctone na área urbana da cidade do Rio de Janeiro. O caso relatado neste artigo é considerado,
após investigação, pela Secretaria Municipal de Saúde e Defesa Civil do Rio de Janeiro como o primeiro caso autóctone de leishmaniose
visceral em humanos na área urbana da cidade do Rio de Janeiro. O tratamento oferecido foi eficaz e a paciente encontra-se em acompanhamento
ambulatorial. Visceral leishmaniasis is an anthropozoonosis that is caused by protozoa of the genus Leishmania, especially Leishmania
(Leishmania) infantum, and is transmitted to humans by the bite of sandflies of the genus Lutzomyia, such as Lutzomyia longipalpis. There
are many reservoirs, including Canis familiaris in urban areas, foxes and marsupials in rural areas. The first case of visceral
leishmaniasis in Brazil was recorded in 1913 in Porto Esperança, Mato Grosso do Sul. Afterward, in the 1930s, a major investigation in the
northeast part of the country confirmed 41 cases of visceral leishmaniasis during autopsies of suspected cases of yellow fever. The
following years were characterized by new cases emerging in rural areas in more than ten states. After the 1940s, with Vargas government's
investment in the urbanization of the country, cases were also recorded in areas of rural-urban transition. L. longipalpis seems to be well
adapted to peridomiciles, but the many factors that influence this organism's sporadic presence in urban areas are still poorly understood.
However, the transmission of visceral leishmaniasis in areas close to major urban centers in Brazil has been reported1,4. In 1979, the first
autochthonous case in Rio de Janeiro was reported by SALAZAR and confirmed by SOUZA in 1981, with the demonstration of the presence of the
L. longipalpis and enzootic cases of visceral leishmaniasis in dogs at this region11. Since then, there are about 87 cases of autochthonous
visceral leishmaniasis confirmed in peri-urban areas in the municipality of Rio de Janeiro7. Visceral leishmaniasis is a chronic infectious
disease with systemic involvement that is characterized by three phases: the initial period, the state period and the final period. The
incubation period can range from 10 days to 24 months, with only a small proportion of infected individuals manifesting the disease. The
initial period includes fever, pallor and hepatosplenomegaly, which are occasionally accompanied by coughing and diarrhea. Certain cases may
be oligosymptomatic. The state period is characterized by intermittent fever, weight loss and increased hepatosplenomegaly, as well as the
deterioration of the individual's general condition. The final period of disease development occurs when the individual experiences severe
malnutrition, pancytopenia, jaundice and ascites. Death is typically the result of opportunistic infections and bleeding2. This article
reports a case of a patient diagnosed with visceral leishmaniasis in the final period following autochthonous transmission in the urban area
of Rio de Janeiro. The case reported here is considered by the Municipal Civil Defense and Health Surveillance of Rio de Janeiro to be the
first instance of autochthonous visceral leishmaniasis in humans in the urban area of this city. The patient was female, 29 years old and
single; born and living in the municipality of Rio de Janeiro; resident of Cajú neighborhood, working as a cleaner in the cemetery of Cajú,
RJ. She denied any trips outside of the city limits of Rio de Janeiro throughout her life. Five months before the hospitalization, the
patient experienced an intermittent night fever of 39 °C that was not improved by antipyretics and was accompanied by poor appetite,
postprandial fullness, nausea and vomiting episodes. There was no history of liver disease or alcohol abuse. Between the months from October
to December 2012, she gradually noticed yellow sclera and skin, dark urine, and weight loss of approximately 10 kg, increased abdominal size
and a soft and cold edema of the lower limbs up to the knees. The patient sought treatment in emergency units on several occasions but only
received symptomatic prescriptions. In January 2013, she was admitted for diagnostic investigation to the 10th ward of the Gaffrée and
Guinle University Hospital, UNIRIO. A physical examination revealed poor general health, malnutrition, numbness, pallor +3/+4, dehydrated
+1/+4, jaundice +2/+4, cyanosis, fever, tachycardia and eupnea. An abdominal examination revealed moderate ascites, hepatomegaly that was 7
cm from the right costal margin and splenomegaly that was palpable 2 cm below the navel (Fig. 1). Additionally, the lower limbs showed
bilateral soft edema up to the knees. Fig. 1Abdominal examination revealing hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. 98 × 73 mm (150 × 150 DPI).
Laboratory examinations (Table 1) revealed a complete blood count showing severe pancytopenia, an extended prothrombin time, a significant
elevation of the aminotransferase levels, hypoalbuminemia and hypergammaglobulinemia accompanied by severe jaundice with a cholestatic
pattern. A total abdominal ultrasound evaluation revealed the presence of free fluid in the peritoneal cavity, hepatomegaly of approximately
20 cm, splenomegaly of 25 cm and gallstones. Table 1Laboratorial exams during
internationParameterReferences04/01/1310/01/1321/01/1306/02/1320/02/13 Hemoglobin (11.0-18.8) 6.44 5.40 8.37 11.511.4 Ht (35.0-55.0) 19.8%
15.9% 18.3% 36.7%36.9% MCV (80.0-100) 76.8 77.5 85.086.584.6 MCH (26.0-34.0) 25.0 26.326.127.226.1 MCHC (31.0-35.0)32.534.0 30.6 31.4 30.8
RDW (11.0-15.0) 20.3% 19.8% 18.3% 16.6% 15.7% WBC (4000-11000) 435 548 3210 5250 4360 Platelets (150000-400000) 30100 46400 98400 172000
106000 HSV (< 15) 28 - - 10 - INR (1.00) 3.07 1.379 - 1.584 - TTP(Rel) (1.00) Incoag 1.80 - 1.05 - Creatinine (0.7-1.3)1.02 2.58 1.031.23
1.45 Urea (10-50)48 75 3645 55 AST (< 38) 1557 137 111 42 18 ALT (< 41) 329 154 82 3724 Alcalin Fosfatase (65-300)136 545 1280 532 429 GGT
(11-50)34 284 694 486 467 Direct Bilirubin (< 0.3) 9.39 5.26 2.02 1.21 0.73 Indirect Bilirubin (< 0.8) 5.23 2.04 0.94 0.760.39 Albumin
(3.5-4.8) 1.3 2.3 3.53.8 3.4 Globulin (1.4-3.2) 4.7 3.9 3.8 3.8 3.3 K+ (3.6-5.5)4.0 2.95 2.68 3.00 2.34 Na+ (134-149)138148146 153 145 Cl–
(94-112)105 113 102106103 Ca++ (8.5-10.5)6.5 (8.7)6.7 (9.1) 8.0 (8.4) 8.99.5 (9.9) Mg++ (1.7-2.5)1.71.7 1.5 1.5 1.5 P
(2.5-4.5)3.13.12.54.13.7 The diagnostic hypotheses contemplated disseminated tuberculosis and visceral leishmaniasis. Other hypotheses
covered dengue, yellow fever, prolonged septicemic salmonellosis, brucellosis, malaria, Chagas disease and lymphoproliferative malignancies.
An evaluation by thick and thin blood smear, blood culture, stool tests, bone marrow biopsy and aspiration and serology for dengue, yellow
fever, brucellosis and Chagas disease were requested. A diagnosis of AIDS was refuted by HIV testing. The bone marrow aspirate confirmed the
presence of Leishmania amastigotes (Fig. 2). The case was reported by telephone immediately, followed by an investigation by the Municipal
Civil Defense and Health Surveillance. Infected dogs were found in the cemetery in Cajú and were sacrificed. The Municipal Civil Defense and
Health Surveillance then implemented a plan to combat the vector, to improve environmental sanitation and to search for new cases, which
initially yielded two new suspected cases. Fig. 2The bone marrow aspirate confirming the presence of Leishmania amastigotes. 282 × 211 mm
(72 × 72 DPI). For the patient, a therapeutic regimen was initiated with amphotericin B at 0.25 mg/kg/day diluted in 500 mL 5% dextrose and
1000 IU heparin and infused for 6 h. We routinely administered a dose of 100 mg hydrocortisone IV and one g dipyrone IV prior to infusion to
reduce the probability of an allergic reaction to amphotericin B. The dose of amphotericin B was increased by approximately 2.5 mg every 3-5
days if there were no complications, such as severe hypokalemia, cardiac arrhythmia or a significant increase in creatinine. Adjustments and
suspension of the amphotericin B treatment were necessary for a few days because of increased creatinine levels and hypokalemia. Electrolyte
replacements were also needed, as well as therapy to treat iron deficiency-related anemia and the extension of the prothrombin time, which
included 300 mg ferrous sulfate orally twice daily, 5 mg folic acid PO daily and 10 mg vitamin K SC in a single dose. Over a period of seven
weeks (January-February 2013), a cumulative dose of 700 mg amphotericin B was administered. Fever reduction, an improvement in the level of
consciousness, a noticeable improvement in general health and nutrition and a significant reduction of hepatosplenomegaly were noted during
the treatment. Laboratory tests showed pancytopenia and the progressive improvement of dyscrasia, the normalization of liver enzyme levels
and cholestasis (Table 1). The patient was discharged in February 2013 and is undergoing a follow up at the outpatient clinic, demonstrating
clinical improvement. The presence of the vector L. longipalpis in the state of Rio de Janeiro has been documented in the southern part of
the country, on Marambaia Island, in the municipality of the cities of Mangaratiba and Saquarema3,9. Cases of the autochthonous transmission
of canine visceral leishmaniasis were reported in the southern part of the city of Rio de Janeiro, in the Laranjeiras neighborhood, and in
the city of Angra dos Reis5,10. Moreover, sporadic cases of tegumentary leishmaniasis have been reported in the country, especially in Pau
da Fome in the Jacarepagua neighborhood6, and periurban cases of visceral leishmaniasis have been reported in the Maciço de Pedra Branca
(Serra do Barata in Realengo and Rio da Prata in the district of Campo Grande)7,8,12 and the continental slope of the Maciço de Gericinó7.
However, the case reported in this article is considered by the Municipal Civil Defense and Health Surveillance of Rio de Janeiro to be the
first report of autochthonous visceral leishmaniasis in humans in the urban area of Rio de Janeiro. Measures for vector control, reservoir
targeting and the improvement of environmental sanitation as well as a search for new cases are now underway to prevent further
transmission. According to information collected from the patient and the employees of the Cajú cemetery, dogs belonging to people buried in
the cemetery are often abandoned beside the graves of their owners. Certain cases involved people from the south of the state or other
regions with canine leishmaniasis who potentially owned infected dogs. A few cemetery employees took care of the abandoned dogs, providing
food and water and thus maintaining the presence of the animals in the cemetery. L. longipalpis has been found in the area of the Cajú
cemetery, so it is likely that this peculiar situation facilitated the urban transmission of visceral leishmaniasis in this region. The
absence of visceral leishmaniasis cases recorded in the urban area of Rio de Janeiro certainly influenced the delay to diagnose the patient,
who was diagnosed in the final phase of the disease. From a clinical perspective, this case was a typical manifestation of visceral
leishmaniasis in the final period. We chose to use amphotericin B for treatment because antimonials are contraindicated in cases of liver
failure, and the patient presented cholestatic jaundice, hypoalbuminemia and an increased INR2. Amphotericin B was used at a cumulative dose
of 0.25 mg/kg/day diluted with 500 mL 5% dextrose and 1000 IU heparin and infused for six hours. The patient had an estimated dry weight of
45 kg. The administration of a dose of 100 mg hydrocortisone IV and one g dipyrone IV, prior to infusion, was routinely performed to reduce
the probability of an allergic reaction to amphotericin B. The dose of amphotericin was increased by approximately 2.5 mg every 3-5 days if
there were no complications, such as severe hypokalemia, cardiac arrhythmia or a significant increase in creatinine. The treatment proved to
be effective at a cumulative dose of 700 mg, which required approximately seven weeks of treatment. The increased creatinine levels and
hypokalemia were controlled during hospitalization. At the end of the therapy, the patient's splenomegaly was reduced by approximately 60%,
the fever was gone, and the pancytopenia was completely reversed. This presentation dismissed any more tests for parasitologic control.
