To the Editor, Neuropathy is common in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM). The condition involves several neurological systems resulting
in a variety of symptoms and diverse treatments . Truncal neuropathy is among the spectrum of peripheral neuropathies associated with DM. It
manifests as localized chest or abdominal pain, which may be confused with referred pain from the intrathoracic or intra-abdominal organs ,
and when treated as such it may lead to extensive and unnecessary clinical investigations. Although truncal neuropathy is generally managed
using oral medication, we report here successful treatment of truncal neuropathy in a patient with type 2 DM using a topical agent and nerve
block. We also present a review of the literature. A 50-year-old male presented at the emergency department of Chonbuk National University
Hospital, South Korea, complaining of lower abdominal pain, such as burning and a lacerating pain, during the past 2 weeks. He complained of
severe lancinating pain from the lower costal area to upper inguinal area, and his numeric rating scale (NRS) pain symptom score was 10. He
had been diagnosed with type 2 DM 2 years previously and was prescribed premixed 70:30 insulin for 6 months. The patient was 168 cm tall,
weighed 45 kg, and had smoked 20-pack years. On physical examination, the patient had no diarrhea, abdominal discomfort, fever, or skin
lesions. During the previous 3 months, he experienced severe weight loss of 10 kg (20% of total body weight). Laboratory tests were as
follows: complete blood count (white blood cell 6,240/µL, hemoglobin 12.8 g/dL, platelet 357 k), sodium 139 mmol/L, potassium 3.9 mmol/L,
alanine transaminase 15 IU/L (normal range, 12 to 33), aspartate transaminase 18 IU/L (normal range, 5 to 35), erythrocyte sedimentation
rate (ESR) 13 mm/hr (normal range, 0 to 9), highly sensitive C-reactive protein 0.2 mg/L (normal range, 0 to 5), hemoglobin A1c 95 mmol/mol
(10.8%), fasting insulin 5.0 µU/mL (normal range, 2.6 to 24.9), C-peptide 1.17 ng/mL (normal range, 1.1 to 4.4), homeostasis model
assessment for insulin resistance 2.5, and albumin to creatinine ratio 91.9 mg/g. He had nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy. Tumor marker
and abdomen pelvic computed tomography were performed to screen for cancer. The scans revealed no evidence of cancer or intra-abdominal
organ pathology. Furthermore, no abnormalities in rheumatic autoantibodies, such as rheumatoid factor or antinuclear antibodies, were found
nor were there suspected symptoms of vasculitis or other connective diseases. Plain X-ray revealed no thoracolumbar spine abnormalities. The
quantitative sensory test showed small and large fiber neuropathy at the upper and lower extremities. A nerve conduction study revealed
sensorimotor polyneuropathy in the trunk. The patient was diagnosed with type 2 DM with triopathy involving truncal neuropathy. He was
managed with pregabalin 300 mg/day, nortryptiline 50 mg/day, and α-lipoic acid 600 mg/day. After 2 weeks, his NRS symptom score improved to
3, and he was discharged. However, 3 months later, the patient complained of aggravation of the same abdominal wall. His neuropathic
medications had not changed during this time. According to his self-monitored blood glucose values, fasting glucose was 80 to 110 mg/dL and
postprandial glucose was 180 to 230 mg/dL using premixed insulin. He reported recently smoking and heavy alcohol consumption following a
stressful situation. His pain symptom score increased to NRS 7. He complained of extreme aching, burning, and lancinating pain, which
severely disrupted his daily activities. His current oral medication regime was not effective for reducing his pain, and the dose could not
be increased because of side effects such as nausea and drowsiness. Thus, we prescribed topical capsaicin cream and a lidocaine patch.
Furthermore, we performed an epidural nerve block at the 10 to 11 thoracic nerve using lidocaine, ropivacine, and triamcinolone. After 2 to
3 weeks of using this topical treatment, the patient's symptom score improved to NRS 2. He was maintained on topical capsaicin cream,
lidocaine patch, and pregabalin and was able to decrease his dose of nortryptiline to 10 mg/day and discontinue α-lipoic acid. Peripheral
neuropathy is a common microvascular complication of DM. It presents in various ways such as peripheral sensory neuropathy, motor
neuropathy, and autonomic neuropathy. Factors commonly associated with peripheral neuropathy are being male, a smoker, long duration of DM,
and poor glycemic control. Painful diabetic neuropathy is best managed by maintaining good control of glucose level and using medication to
relieve painful symptoms . Truncal neuropathy is a type of acute painful neuropathy. It presents as an acute onset pain in a dermatomal
distribution over the thorax or the abdomen . The acute asymmetrical pain may be associated with local bulging of the abdominal wall. Lauria
et al. compared symptomatic and non-symptomatic skin biopsies from three patients with truncal neuropathy to investigate the
neuropathological features of truncal neuropathy. They found the loss of intraepideraml nerve fiber densities and the presence of
degenerative changes in dermal nerve fibers associated with truncal neuropathy. Furthermore, the lesions were correlated with the subjective
sensory symptoms. We did not assess nerve fiber changes before and after treatment using nerve biopsy; thus, the relationship between
topical agents and neuropathy must be clarified in future studies. Several cases of truncal neuropathy in patients with DM have been
reported previously (Table 1). Most patients have been male with a DM duration > 2 years, and the neuropathy has primarily been unilateral.
Three cases have shown abdominal wall weakness similar to an abdominal hernia. About half of patients had used systemic oral pain
medications to control pain, as in the present case. However, the present case is the only one to have used the topical medications
capsaicin cream and lidocaine to control pain. Most previous patients have had a good prognosis, and the pain spon taneously remitted in two
patients so they did not require further pain relief medication. Our patient improved following the administration of systemic oral
medication, topical cream, and epidural nerve block. Diabetic peripheral neuropathy is typically managed by controlling blood glucose levels
and administering tricyclic antidepressants, anticonvulsants, α-lipoic acid, opioids, and topical agents. Furthermore, truncal neuropathy
may be managed using oral medications such as gabapentin, pregabalin, and duloxetin (Table 1). Truncal neuropathy pain generally improves
completely 3 to 12 months following treatment. However, our patient experienced severe acute pain, which significantly disrupted his sleep
and daily activities. Thus, we used systemic oral medications, topical agents, and an epidural nerve block to treat his pain, which was
successfully relieved after 2 to 3 weeks. Epidural nerve block is generally used to control cancer pain and irreversible neuropathy pain ;
however, our case indicates that epidural nerve block may be effective for patients with inadequate pain control after optimal use of
systemic medications or intolerance to systemic analgesic side effects. It is important to manage the appropriate patient for nerve block
because postprocedure neuritis or deafferentation neuralgia may develop in some patients. Epidural nerve block has not previously been used
in patients with DM, possibly because some diabetic peripheral nerve damage may be reversible. However, as our patient demonstrates, topical
epidural nerve block may be an effective treatment for patients who have severe truncal neuropathy that is not controlled by oral
medications or for those who cannot tolerate their medications. Further studies on the efficacy of nerve block for the management of truncal
neuropathy in patients with DM are warranted. To the best of our knowledge, our patient is the first case of truncal neuropathy successfully
managed using topical cream and epidural nerve block. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article is reported. Review of
truncal neuropathy in patients with diabetes T, thoracic; L, lumbar; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; NA, not available.
