Intravascular fasciitis is an uncommon variant of nodular fasciitis, which is a reactive proliferative lesion of myofibroblasts. Since its
identification in 1981, only 32 cases of intravascular fasciitis have been reported in the English literature. The lesion is commonly
located in the head, neck, and extremities, with only three cases arising from the trunk. Here we report the fourth case involving the trunk
(the flank area). A 21-year-old African-American female presented with a subcutaneous mass on her flank. Grossly, the mass was red-tan,
oval, and well-demarcated, measuring approximately 0.5 cm in diameter. Microscopically, the mass was composed of spindle cells arranged in a
swirling and intersecting pattern inside the lumens of two blood vessels. It extended through the vascular walls into the surrounding
fibroadipose tissue; in some sections, the spindle cells were intermixed with the perivascular fibrous tissue. Elastin stain revealed
remnants of elastic lamina partially surrounding the lesion. The nuclei of the spindle cells were relatively uniform with tapered ends and
prominent nucleoli. No significant mitotic activity was observed. Multinucleated giant cells were scattered among the spindle cells, along
with infiltrating lymphocytes and extravasated red blood cells. Immunohistochemical stains showed the spindle cells were positive for smooth
muscle actin, focally positive for muscle specific actin, and negative for S-100, confirming their myofibroblastic differentiation. The
overall morphological and immunohistochemical features are consistent with intravascular fasciitis. By reporting this rare case, we would
like to raise the awareness of this non-neoplastic lesion to avoid misdiagnosing it as a sarcoma with vascular invasion. Previously reported
similar cases were also reviewed and compared with this case. Intravascular fasciitis is a rare benign lesion characterized by reactive
proliferation of myofibroblasts in the superficial or deep fascia with involvement of arteries and/or veins. Intravascular fasciitis is a
variant of the more common condition of nodular fasciitis, which does not show vascular invasion. Intravascular fasciitis was originally
described by Patchefsky and Enzinger in 1981 . Since then, a total of 32 cases have been reported in the English literature. The lesion is
commonly located in the upper extremities, and head and neck, and the upper extremities, with only three cases arising from the trunk . Here
we report the fourth case involving the trunk area. The patient was a 21-year-old African-American female who presented with a single nodule
on the flank area. Grossly, the subcutaneous nodule was red-tan, oval, and well-demarcated, measuring approximately 0.5 cm in diameter.
Microscopically, the mass was composed of spindle cells arranged in a swirling and intersecting pattern inside the lumens of two blood
vessels (Figure 1A). It extended through the vascular walls into the surrounding fibroadipose tissue; in some sections, the spindle cells
were intermixed with the perivascular fibrous tissue (Figure 1B). Elastin stain revealed remnants of elastic lamina partially surrounding
the lesion (Figure 1C). The nuclei of the spindle cells were relatively uniform with tapered ends and prominent nucleoli (Figure 1D). No
significant mitotic activity was observed. Multinucleated giant cells were scattered among the spindle cells (Figure 1E), along with
infiltrating lymphocytes and extravasated red blood cells (Figure 1F). Immunohistochemical stains showed the spindle cells were positive for
smooth muscle actin (SMA; Figure 1G), focally positive for muscle specific actin (Figure 1H), and negative for S-100 (Figure 1I), confirming
their myofibroblastic differentiation. The overall morphological and immunohistochemical features are consistent with intravascular
fasciitis. Intravascular fasciitis. (A) The mass is composed of spindle cells arranged in an intersecting pattern. (B) The mass extends
through the vascular walls into the surrounding connective tissue. (C) Elastin stain reveals remnants of elastic lamina partially
surrounding the lesion. (D) The nuclei of the spindle cells are uniform with tapered ends and prominent nucleoli. (E) Multinucleated giant
cells are scattered within the mass. (F) Infiltrating lymphocytes and extravasated red blood cells are present. (G) The spindle cells are
positive for SMA. (H) The spindle cells are focally positive for muscle specific actin. (I) The spindle cells are negative for S-100.
Thirty-two previously reported cases and the current case of intravascular fasciitis are summarized in Table 1. Intravascular fasciitis
commonly occurs in adolescent and young adult patients with an average age of 24 years old (ranging from 6 months to 66 years old). Of the
33 cases, only six patients were over age of 30. Females and males were equally affected with a female to male ratio close to 1:1. The
patients were generally healthy prior to the onset of the lesion. Possible predisposing factors including preceding trauma, thrombosis, and
pregnancy-related hormonal changes were noted in a few cases . The most common locations of the lesion are the upper extremities, head and
neck, followed by the lower extremities and trunk. In the majority of cases, the lesion presented as a solitary nodule located
subcutaneously or within muscular tissue, although one patient was reported to have a multi-nodular lesion . The size of the lesions ranged
from 0.6 to 5 cm in greatest dimension with duration from 2 weeks to 8 years. Other features such as pain/tenderness, mobility, and
demarcation of the lesion varied among cases. Intravascular fasciitis is a benign condition, and usually cured by a simple local excision.
Of the 16 cases that were followed for 6 months to 20 years, local recurrence was found in three patients . Clinical and pathologic features
of the reported cases of intravascular fasciitis *Size in greatest dimension. EMA: epithelial membrane antigen. HPF: high power field. LMWK:
low molecular weight keratin. N/A: not applicable. SMA: smooth muscle actin. Microscopically, intravascular fasciitis was characterized by a
spindle cell proliferation inside the lumens or associated with the walls of arteries or veins of all sizes. Depending on the numbers of
blood vessels involved and the longitudinal extension of the lesion, the mass exhibited a single or multi-nodular appearance. In two cases,
organizing thrombi were found within the lesion . One feature that easily mimics a sarcoma is the infiltrating growth. Indeed, it was not
uncommon to find that the lesion extended through the vascular walls into the surrounding connective tissue and neighboring blood vessels,
but the overlying epidermis was usually intact. In the original report by Patchefsky and Enzinger, they compared the sizes of intravascular
and soft tissue components, and concluded that the soft tissue component was dominant; this feature was not reported in the remainder of the
cases . The spindle cells were arranged in a storiform pattern or haphazard manner, with plump vesicular nuclei, and in some cases with
prominent nucleoli. Mitotic activity ranged from absent to prominent. However, unlike a soft tissue sarcoma, significant cytologic
pleomorphism and abnormal mitotic figures were absent. The background stroma varied from a dense hyalinized to edematous, myxoid appearance.
Scattered multinucleated giant cells were noted in more than one third of cases including the current one . Lymphocytes and red blood cells
were often seen as well. Immunohistochemistry studies showed that the spindle cells were positive for vimentin and SMA, negative for
keratin, S100 protein, desmin, CD31, CD34, and c-kit, confirming their myofibroblastic differentiation. The multinuclear giant cells were
CD68 positive, suggesting that they are cells of histiocytic origin. The pathogenesis of intravascular fasciitis has yet to be understood.
The immunohistochemical characteristics of the spindle cells confirm their myofibroblastic origin. However, the factors initiating
myofibroblast proliferation have not been clearly identified. Possible risk factors that have been proposed include preceding trauma,
thrombosis, and high levels of estrogen. Specifically, two patients developed the lesion following trauma . Organizing thrombi were found in
two cases . The occurrence of intravascular fasciitis in a 16-week pregnant woman, and a previous report showing weak expression of estrogen
receptor in nodular fasciitis, led the authors to propose that pregnancy-related estrogen changes might be a predisposing factor . However
these conditions were associated with only a minority of cases. More studies are required to clarify their roles in the development of
intravascular fasciitis. Intravascular fasciitis can be misdiagnosed as a sarcoma with vascular invasion because of its intravascular
proliferation. However, the cytologic features of intravascular fasciitis, including the absence of large atypical hyperchromatic nuclei and
abnormal mitotic figures, are helpful in distinguishing these two conditions . Intravascular fasciitis is a rare variant of nodular
fasciitis associated with blood vessels. By reporting this rare case, we would like to raise the awareness of this non-neoplastic lesion to
avoid misdiagnosis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A
copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. SMA: Smooth muscle actin; LMWK: Low molecular
weight keratin; EMA: Epithelial membrane antigen. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. MG collected and interpreted
data, and made the diagnosis. YZ and FC were the major contributors in writing and revising the manuscript. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript. We thank all the histology technologists at Buffalo General Medical Center for their technical support.
