Aim: To describe a technique for registering the positions of multiple dental implants using a system based on photogrammetry. A case is
presented in which a prosthetic treatment was performed using this technique. Study Design: Three Euroteknika® dental implants were placed
to rehabilitate a 55-year-old male patient with right posterior maxillary edentulism. Three months later, the positions of the implants were
registered using a photogrammetry-based stereo-camera (PICcamera®). After processing patient and implant data, special abutments
(PICabutment®) were screwed onto each implant. The PICcamera® was then used to capture images of the implant positions, automatically taking
150 images in less than 60 seconds. From this information a file was obtained describing the relative positions – angles and distances – of
each implant in vector form. Information regarding the soft tissues was obtained from an alginate impression that was cast in plaster and
scanned. A Cr-Co structure was obtained using CAD/CAM, and its passive fit was verified in the patient’s mouth using the Sheffield test and
the screw resistance test. Results and Conclusions: Twelve months after loading, peri-implant tissues were healthy and no marginal bone loss
was observed. The clinical application of this new system using photogrammetry to record the position of multiple dental implants
facilitated the rehabilitation of a patient with posterior maxillary edentulism by means of a prosthesis with optimal fit. The prosthetic
process was accurate, fast, simple to apply and comfortable for the patient. Key words:Dental implants, photogrammetry, dental impression
technique, CAD/CAM. Dental implants are one of the most widely used therapies for the rehabilitation of partially or completely edentulous
patients. It is scientifically proven that achieving proper passive fit of the implant-supported prosthesis improves the long-term prognosis
of this therapy (1-5). The classic system for fabricating implant-supported prostheses involves taking impressions, and after placement of
the implant analogues, subsequent casting in plasterto makeimpression transfers. In order to achievean adequate passive fit of the
prosthesis, the first step must be to obtain a correct registration of the three-dimensional position of the implants (6). Conventional
impression techniques use abutments that, screwed onto the implants’ prosthetic platforms and encompassed by setting material, should
register and transfer the spatial position of the implant. These methods involve time-consuming clinical work and the use of impression
materials and techniques that often fail to achieve a perfectly accurate master cast. Moreover, these techniques are generally unpleasant
for the patient (7,8). The literature reflects the increasing application of digital techniques at different stages of dental implant
therapy (9). At the stage when impressions are taken, intraoral scanners are being introduced into clinical practice. The technique avoids
the need for registering implant positions with impression materials and plaster modelsand so avoids the slight dimensional distortions that
these materials can cause and ensures precision when it comes to reproducing intraoral dimensions (7,10-12). These instruments are a
promising alternative for obtaining direct intraoral impressions in a fast and comfortable way for the patient. However, they are not
indicated for implant rehabilitations requiring more than 3-4 pieces. Photogrammetry is a novel option for reliable, direct intra-oral
registration of the positions of multiple implants. It is a techniquefor determining the geometrical properties of objects and their spatial
arrangement from photographic images. Its most important feature is the precision with which it can measure objects without direct contact.
Photogrammetry is useful in many sciences and fields. It has been applied mainly to topography, but there are many non-topographic
applications, including different areas of medicine such as radiology (to improve accuracy), surgery (neurosurgery, plastic surgery, sinus
surgery) or rehabilitation (13,14). In dentistry, this technique has been used to study the shapes and positions of teeth, dental arches and
maxillary and mandibular bones. In orthodontics, it allows the three-dimensional analysis of the variations of the palate while performing
rapid palatal expansion techniques and evaluating the achieved dental movement (15-18). Recently, its application in dental implant surgery
planning has also been reported (19). In the field of implant dentistry, it has been used to check the accuracy of other impression
techniques, by analyzing the differences between models obtained using different techniques and materials (20). As long ago as 1999, Jemt
and Bäck (21) proposed photogrammetry as an alternative to conventional impression taking but since then no development of this application
has been reported. The most important quality of this technology - measurement accuracy - is the key to success in implant impressions.
Therefore, its application may be a very useful technique that will improve dental implant therapy. The aim of this report is to describe
this technique applied to record the position of multiple dental implants using a system based on photogrammetry. A case is presented in
which a prosthetic treatment was performed successfully using this technique. The PICcamera® (PICdental, Madrid, Spain) is a stereo-camera
that records implant positions in the mouth by means of photogrammetry. It comprises two CCD cameras specially designed and optimized for
clinical use, which accurately determine the position of the implants by means of the identification of abutments screwed on implants with
unique individual coding (PICabutment®, PICdental). The camera has an infrared flash that constantly illuminates the scanned object while
eliminating the shadows that occur with ambient light. The PICcamera® needs to capture 50 three-dimensional photographs for every two
PICabutment®. To do this, it automatically takes ten extraoral pictures per second with an error of less than 10 microns. The registered
angles and distances between implants are interrelated and treated as a unit. System software calculates average angles and distances
between implants from these photographs, obtaining an accurate relative position of each implant in vector format. This is the PICfile® (PIC
Dental), which contains all the information on implant positions, geometries, connections, healing abutments and screws that are later
requiredby CAD/CAM software. A 55-year old male with no relevant medical history came to the Oral Surgery Unit of the University of Valencia
requesting the rehabilitation of hisedentulous right maxillary posterior region with dental implants. After checking the presence of enough
residual alveolar bone height by means of a panoramic radiograph, three Euroteknika® (Euroteknika Iberia, Barcelona, Spain) implants were
placed of 4.1 mm in diameter (Fig. 1). Figure 1 A) View at three months after the placement of three implants in the first quadrant; B)
Attachments (PICabutment®) with unique individual coding screwed onto implants; C) Digitized plaster model; D) Alignment by means ofBest-
fit®from the PICfile® vector file and digitized plaster model; E) Relative interface positions of the future prosthesis in relation to the
gums. A) View at three months after the placement of three implants in the first quadrant; B) Attachments (PICabutment®) with unique
individual coding screwed onto implants; C) Digitized plaster model; D) Alignment by means ofBest-fit®from the PICfile® vector file and
digitized plaster model; E) Relative interface positions of the future prosthesis in relation to the gums. Three months later, the position
of the implants was registered using the PICcamera® (PICdental). Firstly, the patient’s demographic and medical data were entered into the
system. Then, the positions and the references of the implants (manufacturer, model, platform diameter, diameter and height of the healing
abutments), and the code of each PICabutment® were introduced. The PICabutments® were screwed onto each implant (Fig. 1), and the PICcamera®
was placed 15-30 cm away from the patient’s mouth with a maximum angle of 45º with respect to the PICabutments®. Once the camera had
detected that the position was correct, it automatically captured 50 three-dimensional photographs foreach two attachments. For this
clinical case, 150 pictures were taken in less than 60 seconds to obtain the relative position of each implant (angle and distance) in
vector format. This information was automatically compiled into a vector PICfile® (PIC-dental). The healing abutments were placed and an
alginate impression was taken and cast in plaster. The plaster model was scanned with a 3D scanner in open STL format to obtain information
regarding the patient’s soft tissues (Fig. 1). This information was then introduced in the CAD software together with the PICfile®. The
PICfile® and the digitized plaster model were aligned with the Exocad® software (Exocad GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany) using three-point
registration and subsequently improved alignment by Best-fit® (Fig. 1). This process transferred the relative position between implants to
the digital model which provided the shape of the soft tissues, thus leaving the interfaces of the future prosthesis in relation to the
patient’s gingiva (Fig. 1). A model of the antagonist arch was also scanned,entered in the CAD software to provide occlusal references, and
the prosthetic structure was designed using Exocad® (Exocad, GmbH) in STL format (Fig. 2). The design was sent to be machined in chrome-
cobalt (Cr-Co) by a five-axis milling machine (Fig. 2). Figure 2 A) Upper and lower plaster models and design of the prosthetic structure;
B) Machined metal structure in Cr-Co; C) Digital working model; D) Sterolithography working model with false gums; E) Checking the metal
structure in the mouth; F) Periapical radiograph during the Sheffield test. A) Upper and lower plaster models and design of the prosthetic
structure; B) Machined metal structure in Cr-Co; C) Digital working model; D) Sterolithography working model with false gums; E) Checking
the metal structure in the mouth; F) Periapical radiograph during the Sheffield test. To build a working model, the digital model was
processed providing the specific geometries of the implant connections (Fig. 2) and it was manufactured by means of stereolithography using
a 3D printer (Objet 250® Eden, Israel). The model was processed in a manner that allowed the addition of false gum for further work in the
laboratory (Fig. 2). Once the internal structure of the implant-supported fixed partial denture had been fabricated, its passive fit was
checked in the patient’s mouth. The Sheffield and one-screw tests were used: a distal screw was placed–with the screw at 14 in this case -
and a periapical radiograph was obtained to check the correct prosthetic settlement on the other two implant connections (Fig. 2). The screw
resistance technique was used as a subjective complementary test of the passive fit. Distal screws (at 14 and 17) were screwed with a torque
of 10 Ncm and then a medial screw was introduced verifying that the tactile sensation was soft and presented no resistance to screwing.
After these verifications, the Cr-Co structure was sent to the laboratory to have the ceramic loaded. The prosthesis,once finished, was
screwed onto the implants (Fig. 3), with 25 Ncm torque. Occlusal adjustments were performed and the correct settlement on the implant
connections was verified with a radiograph (Fig. 3). A follow-up plan was established and twelve months after loading, the peri-implant
tissues were healthy and no peri-implant marginal bone loss was observed (Fig. 3). Figure 3 A) Placement of the finished prosthesis; B)
Radiographic check-up after 12 months. A) Placement of the finished prosthesis; B) Radiographic check-up after 12 months. The provision of
tension-free connections between implants and the prosthetic structures they support is a requirement for the medium- and long-term success
of implant-supported rehabilitations. This situation can only be achieved by carrying out a prosthodontic treatment with good passive fit.
Passive fit depends on all the clinical and laboratory procedures involved in fabricating the prosthesis being performed precisely and
accurately, keeping the margins of error and inexactitude of each step in the process to a minimum (1,22). In vitro studies have shown that
discrepancies in the super-structure will be the cause of stress on the implant-supported prosthesis and subsequent failure. As long ago as
1986, Balshi described mechanical failures which he associated with laboratory work carried out using imprecise working models. Jemt et al.
(8) and Rubenstein et al. (23) suggested that the fit between prosthesis and abutment is a key parameter for avoiding overloading of the
fixing screw which leads to prosthetic failure. For this reason, the taking of impressions is a fundamental step for obtaining structures
with a good passive fit. There is some controversy in the literature as to which impression technique is the most reliable. Bearing in mind
that with conventional techniques it is impossible to achieve a perfect passive fit, Lee et al. (6), in a literature review of the precision
of impression techniques, found that 35% of the tests performed considered the open tray technique to be the most precise, 15% the
repositioning technique and 50% found no statistically significant differences between the two. As for the number of implants in relation to
precision, with three or less implants there did not appear to any difference between techniques, while with four or more the open tray
technique was found to be recommendable (6). The greater accuracy of the open tray technique is corroborated by Del´Acqua MA et al. (24),
who studied average discrepancy with each type of impression coping, this being 116.97 µm for repositioning copings and 57.84 µm for open
tray copings. The concept of photogrammetry consists of ‘metering what is written in light,’ in other words, obtaining reliable metric
information from photographs.The photogrammetry method extends the two-dimensional information provided by photos into three dimensions;
using various cameras, the shape of each of the photographic objects and their location in space are reconstructed in relation to an
external system of reference points. To make the necessary calculations for reconstruction, special cameras are required that are able to
identify this system of reference points. Photogrammetry has been applied in various areas of medicine (13,14) and dentistry (15-19). In
implant dentistry, it has been used in vitro research to test the reliability of other impression techniques (20). As early as 1999, Jemt
and Bäck (21) described its use for registering the positions of dental implants intraorally. They compared this technique with conventional
impression taking, concluding that photogrammetry offered a valid alternative. Since then the technical advances have been considerable but
have not been accompanied by any development of the application of photogrammetry for the purposes of implant dentistry. The present article
presents this new system for registering, simply and precisely, the positions of multiple dental implants. Photogrammetry allows the
registering of the exact three-dimensional locations of the implants, transferring all the information required to fabricate the prosthesis
directly from the patient’s mouth to a computer file. The technique avoids the inconvenience accompanying conventional impression
techniques. There is no need for impression abutments, implant body analogues, trays and impression materials. The PICcamera measures angles
and distances between prosthetic attachments placed on the implants, allowing the patient total freedom of movement and the presence of
blood, saliva or any other organic or inorganic residue does not affect measurement precision. Avoiding so many procedures and materials
reduces the possibility of error, saves time – both the number of visits to the clinic and their duration – economic cost and patient
discomfort in comparison with conventional impression taking procedures. Photographic and video scanners share some of the advantages of
photogrammetry. Scanners generate 3D images on the basis of a cloud of points that are able to reproduce surfaces. To join the points they
use an algorithm called Best-fit®, which make as many points as possible coincide. Although practical evidence is limited, theoretically
these successive unions of clouds of points could cause an accumulation of error. For this reason, reliability diminishes progressively
according to the increasing number of implants analyzed (25). But in contrast with intraoral video and photographic scanners, photogrammetry
generates director vectors of the exact position of the implants in relation to one another. The information that makes it possible to
calculate the positions of the implants is obtained without superimposing photos, which potentially provides greater precision and a better
prosthetic fit. With the implant positioning determined by the PICcamera®, and an alginate impression taken of the soft tissues, the
laboratory can fabricate the prosthetic structure using CAD/CAM, without the need for casting attachments or milling (26). In addition, the
technique described in the present article does not require any impression materials or cast models, which inevitably undergo dimensional
changes that will reduce the precision of the prosthesis (27). In this way, the combination of registering implant positions by
photogrammetry and fabrication by CAD/CAM can potentially reduce the risk of errors occurring during the production of the prosthetic
structure. The clinical evaluation of passive fit between implants and prosthetic structures is difficult and not very objective. Diverse
methods for checking fit have been suggested, but none has been established as a standard test. In the present case, the Sheffield test and
the one-screw resistance test were used to check fit. The Sheffield test has been shown to be an efficient clinical test of passive fit,
especially in cases with multiple implants and extensive prosthetics. The screw resistance test has the disadvantage of introducing
subjectivity into the evaluation, but is considered a precise way of detecting discrepancies (28). Registering implant positions with the
PICcamera improves patient comfort in comparison with conventional impression taking techniques. The technique avoids the introduction of
impression materials which must be kept in place in the mouth for an average setting time of 5-8 minutes and can provoke nausea and
discomfort. Furthermore, the photogrammetry procedure can be interrupted if necessary and taken up again later on. The clinical application
of this novel photogrammetry system for registering the positions of multiple implants allowed the rehabilitation of a patient with extreme
maxillary free end edentulism with a prosthesis of optimal fit. The prosthetic fabrication process was precise, fast, simple for the dentist
and comfortable for the patient.
