Here, we describe the case of a 75-year-old man who presented with a 3-year history of progressive dyspnea on exertion (classified as grade
II/III on the modified Medical Research Council scale) and persistent dry cough. He had worked as a professional welder for 35 years,
welding alloys, polishing weldments by sandblasting and steel blasting, and regularly performing isolation of fixed appliances with asbestos
fibers. Treated in the primary care setting in the first year, the patient developed recurrent scaly skin lesions (exhibiting a
lichenified/desquamative pattern) on the limbs, Raynaud's phenomenon, sicca syndrome, and weight loss (5 kg). Physical examination revealed
that he was breathing normally, with an SpO2 of 95% and auscultatory findings of basal inspiratory crackles, and that there was no digital
clubbing. A chest X-ray showed reticular interstitial changes. A CT scan of the chest showed calcified mediastinal adenopathy exhibiting an
"eggshell" pattern, interlobular reticulation, traction bronchiectasis, and septal thickening, as well as areas of ground-glass opacity,
alveolar consolidation with a peribronchovascular distribution, and areas of pleural thickening (Figure 1). Figure 1Initial radiological
findings. In A, chest X-ray showing a reticular interstitial pattern predominantly in the lower lung fields, already denoting some loss of
volume. In B-E, CT scan showing septal thickening patterns, traction bronchiectasis, small areas of ground-glass opacity, and consolidation
with a peribronchovascular distribution. The patient underwent a skin biopsy, which showed non-specific lichenoid changes. A BAL, performed
at the level of the middle lobe (right bronchus, 4a), revealed a total cell count of 130,000 cells/mL, with 40% lymphocytes and 16%
neutrophils, as well as negative microbiological and cytological findings. Immunophenotyping showed a predominance of CD8 T lymphocytes
(CD4/CD8 ratio = 0.68) and B lymphocytes (20%). The inorganic fraction showed no asbestos bodies and was sent for determination of the
levels of hard metals and silicates by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry. This study showed high levels of silica,
copper, cobalt, chromium, rubidium, molybdenum, and zinc. Laboratory testing revealed that the patient had a hemoglobin level of 11.6 g/dL,
normal inflammatory markers, a creatinine level of 1.0 mg/dL, and an inactive urinary sediment, as well as having a beta-2 microglobulin
level of 6.56 mg/L and a serum angiotensin-converting enzyme level of 127 U/L. In addition, he had polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia (IgG
and IgA) and positive antinuclear antibodies (anti-SSA60 and anti-SSB antibodies) at high titers. Schirmer's test confirmed xerophthalmia
(right eye, 9 mm; left eye, 7 mm). Functionally, the patient had a moderate restrictive pattern (Tiffeneau index, 80; FEV1, 70.9%; FVC,
66.8%; TLC, 64.6%; and RV, 68.4%), moderately reduced DLCO (51.2% of predicted), and a short six-minute walk distance with desaturation of
5%. A surgical lung biopsy showed foci of fibroblast proliferation, macrophages with anthracotic pigmentation and birefringent particles
suggestive of silicates, multinucleated giant cells along the bronchoalveolar axes and interlobular septa, as well as alveolar macrophage
desquamation and diffuse pleural fibrosis (Figure 2). Figure 2Photomicrographs of histological sections of surgical lung biopsy specimens.
In A, chronic inflammatory infiltrate and septal fibrosing reaction (H&E; magnification, ×40). In B, active fibroblastic foci (HHF35;
magnification, ×100). In C, macrophages with anthracotic pigmentation and birefringent silica particles, as well as multinucleated giant
cells along the bronchoalveolar axes and interlobular septa (HPX; magnification, ×400). In D, lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate with T
cells (CD3; magnification, ×100). In E, foci of B cells (CD20+) in the chronic inflammatory infiltrate (CD20; magnification, ×40). In F,
predominance of T cells with a CD8 immunophenotype (CD8; magnification, ×200). A diagnosis of mixed pneumoconiosis due to silica, hard
metals, and asbestos, associated with primary Sjögren's syndrome (SS) with possible pulmonary parenchymal involvement, was established. The
patient was started on a four-month course of 0.5 mg/kg prednisolone, which resulted in decreased dyspnea on exertion and complete
resolution of the skin lesions, although there was only slight improvement in radiological findings and in DLCO. The concomitant diagnosis
of late-onset primary SS, established in accordance with the criteria proposed by the European American Consensus Group, may be related to
the long-term exposure to silica, which is in agreement with the few existing reports in the literature.(1-3) In fact, it has been shown
that intense exposure to silica can lead to the development of autoimmune processes, namely systemic sclerosis,(4) rheumatoid arthritis,(4)
and primary SS,(1-4) in a proportion of exposed workers. In this context, alveolar lymphocytosis has been correlated with pulmonary
involvement in SS and with unfavorable prognosis.(5) In the present case, the finding of peribronchovascular lymphocytic infiltration with a
significant proportion of B lymphocytes may be related to parenchymal infiltration attributable to SS. The correct exclusion of lymphoma was
essential. The pneumoconiotic component, radiologically expressed by inflammatory changes and fibrotic involvement, manifests histologically
as a periseptal and peribronchovascular fibroblastic reaction, as well as by the presence of macrophages with anthracotic pigmentation and
birefringent particles. The observed patterns of alveolar desquamation and giant cell reaction are the ones that are typically seen in hard
metal lung disease.(6-8) The areas of diffuse pleural fibrosis are relatable to exposure to asbestos. Typical histology of parenchymal
disease due to hard metals corresponds to the pattern of interstitial fibrosis with giant cell reaction and foci of desquamative
interstitial pneumonia with or without bronchiolitis obliterans.(6-8) In some cases, there can be sarcoid features or only a mixed-dust
pneumoconiosis pattern. Lung mineralogical analysis is useful in the etiological detection of particles in pneumoconiosis.(7) In the present
case, the BAL fluid levels of silicates and hard metals were determined by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry. This
type of information makes it possible to document occupational exposure, which is often mixed in nature, several decades after exposure was
discontinued, assisting in the etiological identification of some occupational respiratory diseases.(9) Although direct analysis of lung
biopsy/autopsy specimens is the most direct marker to determine particle accumulation, BAL fluid analysis is simpler and yields results that
show good agreement with those obtained from tissue specimens.(9) However, biopsy is essential in cases in which the differential diagnosis
with sarcoidosis is required. The hard metals most widely used in industry are tungsten carbide, molybdenum carbide, and chromium carbide-
cobalt and nickel being alloying elements-and they can induce antigen-specific immune responses in the lung as well as innate immune
responses characterized by inflammation and triggered by oxidative injury.(8) Of the elements detected in patient BAL fluid samples, silica,
chromium, molybdenum, cobalt, and zinc have all been associated with lung fibrosis or pneumoconiosis.(10) It is known, however, that high
concentrations of particles in tissues or body fluids indicate significant exposure but not necessarily disease. Nevertheless, when used in
cases of heavy exposure and suggestive clinical, radiological, and histological findings, such as the present case, determination of the
levels of hard metals is a valuable element in the diagnosis of less common types of pneumoconiosis, as well as in the understanding of
their pathogenesis.(7) Given the large number of workers involved, a better understanding of the impacts of exposure to welding fumes on
pulmonary function will be important for the development of better prevention strategies. Descrevemos aqui o caso de um homem de 75 anos que
apresentava queixas de dispneia de esforço progressiva (grau II/III pela escala modified Medical Research Council) e tosse seca persistente
ao longo dos últimos três anos. Havia trabalhado durante 35 anos como soldador profissional, realizando solda de ligas metálicas, polimento
das peças soldadas com jateamento de areia e granalha de aço e prática regular de isolamento de utensílios fixos com fibras de amianto.
Orientado na esfera de cuidados primários durante o primeiro ano, veio a desenvolver lesões cutâneas descamativas cíclicas nos membros, com
aspecto de liquenificação/descamação, fenômeno de Raynaud, síndrome sicca e perda ponderal de 5 kg. Ao exame físico mostrava-se eupneico,
com SpO2 de 95%, apresentando crepitações inspiratórias basais à auscultação e ausência de hipocratismo digital. A radiografia de tórax
evidenciava alterações intersticiais de tipo reticular. A TC torácica demonstrou adenopatias mediastínicas calcificadas em "casca de ovo",
reticulação interlobular, bronquiectasias de tração e espessamento de septos, com áreas em padrão de vidro fosco, consolidação alveolar de
distribuição peribroncovascular e zonas de espessamento pleural (Figura 1). Figura 1Estudo radiológico inicial. Em A, radiografia de tórax
com padrão intersticial reticular de predomínio inferior, já denotando alguma perda de volume. Em B-E, TC com aspectos de espessamento
septal com bronquiectasias de tração, com pequenas áreas em vidro fosco e consolidação com distribuição peribroncovascular. O paciente foi
submetido a biópsia cutânea, que mostrou alterações de padrão liquenoide sem especificidade apurável. O lavado broncoalveolar (LBA),
realizada ao nível do lobo médio (brônquio direito 4a), revelou celularidade total de 130.000 células/mL, com 40% de linfócitos e 16% de
neutrófilos, com estudo microbiológico e citopatológico negativos. A imunofenotipagem mostrou predomínio de linfócitos T CD8 (razão CD4/CD8
= 0,68) e de linfócitos B (20%). A fração inorgânica não revelou corpos de asbesto e foi enviada para doseamento de metais duros e silicatos
pela técnica de espectrometria de emissão atômica em plasma indutivamente acoplado. Essa pesquisa mostrou níveis elevados de sílica, cobre,
cobalto, cromo, rubídio, molibdênio e zinco. Analiticamente evidenciava hemoglobina de 11,6 g/dL, parâmetros inflamatórios normais,
creatinina de 1,0 mg/dL e sedimento urinário inativo. Apresentava uma β2-microglobulina de 6,56 mg/L, enzima de conversão de angiotensina de
127 U/L, hipergamaglobulinemia policlonal IgG e IgA, e presença de anticorpos antinucleares positivos com títulos elevados de anti-SSA60 e
anti-SSB. A xeroftalmia foi comprovada por teste de Schirmer (olho direito, 9 mm; olho esquerdo, 7 mm). Funcionalmente, apresentava um
padrão restritivo moderado (índice de Tiffeneau, 80; VEF1, 70,9%; CVF, 66,8%; CPT, 64,6%; e VR, 68,4%) com diminuição moderada da DLCO
(51,2% do previsto) e baixa distância percorrida na prova de marcha com dessaturação de 5%. A biópsia pulmonar cirúrgica evidenciou focos de
proliferação fibroblástica, macrófagos de pigmentação antracótica e partículas birrefringentes sugestivas de silicatos, associados a células
gigantes multinucleadas ao longo de eixos broncovasculares e septos interlobulares, com descamação macrofágica alveolar e fibrose pleural
difusa generalizada (Figura 2). Figura 2Fotomicrografias de cortes histológicos de biópsia pulmonar cirúrgica. Em A, infiltrado inflamatório
crônico e reação fibrosante septal (H&E; aumento, 40×). Em B, focos fibroblásticos ativos (HHF35; aumento, 100×). Em C, macrófagos com
pigmentação antracótica e partículas birrefringentes de sílica, assim como células gigantes multinucleadas ao longo de eixos
broncovasculares e septos interlobulares (HPX; aumento, 400×). Em D, infiltrado inflamatório linfocitário com presença de células T (CD3;
aumento, 100×). Em E, focos de células B (CD20+) no infiltrado inflamatório crônico (CD20; aumento, 40×). Em F, predomínio de células T de
imunofenótipo CD8 (CD8; aumento, 200×). Foi firmado o diagnóstico de pneumoconiose mista por sílica, metais duros e asbesto, associada à
síndrome de Sjögren (SS) primária com possível envolvimento parenquimatoso pulmonar. Iniciou tratamento com prednisolona 0,5 mg/kg em ciclo
de quatro meses com melhoria da dispneia de esforço e remissão completa das lesões cutâneas, embora apenas com tênue melhoria radiológica e
da DLCO. O diagnóstico paralelo da SS primária de início tardio, cumprindo os critérios propostos pelo Grupo de Consenso Euro-Americano,
pode ser relacionado com o longo período de exposição à sílica, de acordo com alguns raros casos reportados na literatura.(1-3) De fato, a
intensa exposição à sílica mostrou poder conduzir ao desenvolvimento de processos autoimunes numa fração dos trabalhadores expostos,
designadamente esclerose sistêmica,(4) artrite reumatoide(4) e SS primária. (1-4) Nesse contexto, a linfocitose alveolar foi já
correlacionada com o envolvimento pulmonar por SS e conotada com prognóstico desfavorável.(5) No caso em consideração, o achado de
infiltração linfocitária peribroncovascular com proporção relevante de linfócitos B pode relacionar-se com infiltração parenquimatosa
imputável à SS. A exclusão correta de linfoma foi essencial. O componente pneumoconiótico, expresso radiologicamente por alterações
inflamatórias já com comprometimento fibrótico, é manifestado histologicamente pela reação fibroblástica perisseptal e peribroncovascular,
assim como pela presença de macrófagos com pigmento antracótico e partículas birrefringentes. Os aspetos encontrados de descamação alveolar
e reação de células gigantes constituem os tipicamente observados na doença pulmonar por metais duros.(6-8) As áreas de fibrose pleural
difusa são relacionáveis com a exposição ao asbesto. A histologia típica da doença parenquimatosa induzida por metais duros corresponde ao
padrão de fibrose intersticial com reação de células gigantes e focos de pneumonia intersticial descamativa com ou sem bronquiolite
obliterante. (6-8) Pontualmente, poderá haver uma disposição sarcoide ou somente um padrão de pneumoconiose do tipo poeira mista. A análise
mineralógica pulmonar é útil na detecção etiológica de partículas em pneumoconioses.(7) No presente caso, a pesquisa de silicatos e metais
duros em LBA foi feita recorrendo a espectrometria de emissão atômica em plasma indutivamente acoplado. Esse tipo de informação permite
documentar exposições ocupacionais, muitas vezes mistas, várias décadas após o seu término, auxiliando na determinação etiológica de algumas
doenças respiratórias ocupacionais.(9) Apesar de a análise direta em biópsia/necropsia pulmonar constituir o indicador mais direto para
estudos de acumulação de partículas, o LBA apresenta maior simplicidade e boa concordância para com os resultados obtidos de tecido.(9) A
biópsia torna-se, contudo, indispensável em casos que imponham a distinção com sarcoidose. Os metais duros de maior aplicação industrial são
carbonetos de tungstênio, de molibdênio e de cromo - sendo o cobalto e o níquel elementos de ligação - e podem induzir tanto respostas
imunológicas antígeno-específicas no pulmão como respostas imunes inatas caracterizadas por inflamação, frequentemente desencadeadas por
lesão oxidativa.(8) Dos elementos detectados a partir de LBA do paciente, tanto a sílica como o cromo, molibdênio, cobalto e zinco foram já
associados à fibrose pulmonar ou pneumoconiose.(10) Sabe-se, porém, que altas concentrações de partículas em tecidos ou fluidos orgânicos
indicam exposição relevante mas não obrigatoriamente doença. No entanto, quando enquadradas em circunstâncias de forte exposição e contexto
clínico, radiológico e histológico sugestivos, como no presente caso, as determinações de metais duros são um elemento valioso no
diagnóstico e na compreensão patogênica de pneumoconioses menos habituais.(7) Dado o largo contingente de trabalhadores envolvidos, a melhor
compreensão das repercussões sobre a função pulmonar induzidas por exposição a fumos de soldadura será importante para o desenvolvimento de
melhores estratégias de prevenção.
