Subcutaneous phaeohyphomycosis is an infection caused by dematiaceous fungi which mainly affects immunosuppressed patients. We report a case
of subcutaneous phaeohyphomycosis on the back of the left hand in a kidney transplant patient who had been taking prednisone, tacrolimus,
and azathioprine daily for 3 years. A 55-year-old female, who had had a kidney transplant 3 years ago and from then on, had been taking
prednisone, tacrolimus and azathioprine with initial doses of 60, 150, and 2 mg/day, respectively. These doses had been reduced and she is
currently taking 10 mg prednisone, 100 mg azathioprine, and 1 mg tacrolimus daily. Two months ago while using the same drug doses she
presented asymptomatic lesions on the dorsum of her left hand without a history of local trauma. Dermatological examination revealed a
violet erythematous nodule and 2 other erythematous exulcerated papules on the dorsum of the left hand (Figure 1). Violet Erythematous
nodule and 2 other exulcerated erythematous papules on the back of the left hand An excisional biopsy of the nodule was performed for
diagnosis. Histopathology showed chronic granulomatous inflammation and the presence of dark wall yeast structures compatible with
dematiaceous fungus (Figure 2). The presence of brownish stained yeast-like organisms The other two lesions were also removed and the wound
was closed with a double advancement flap (Figure 3). A - Marking lesion to be removed. B - Removal of injuries and surgical defects caused.
C - Flap positioned Phaeohyphomycosis was diagnosed based on clinical and histopathological findings. The term Phaeohyphomycosis (PHM) was
coined in 1974 by Ajello et al. to designate all cutaneous, subcutaneous, and systemic fungal infections which may be present in a host in
any combination in the form of dark wall hyphae or pseudohyphae, hence dematiaceous fungus.1,2 Current prevalence is unknown, but in recent
years the number of cases has increased in immunosuppressed patients: chemotherapy, diabetes, and AIDS patients, and in transplant patients
treated with immunosuppressive drugs, such as corticosteroids.3-7 However, it can also occur in immunocompetent individuals.2 It can take
the following clinical forms: superficial, subcutaneous, allergic, and invasive or systemic. 8 Subcutaneous PHM is the most common
presenting with subcutaneous nodules or cysts without systemic symptoms, preferentially located in the extremities, associated with a
history of trauma, and in both immunosuppressed and non- immunosuppressed patients.1-8 This case was one of subcutaneous PHM where diagnosis
was made by clinic examination and histopathology. Dematiaceous fungal elements were seen indicating deep mycosis caused by a pigment-
producing agent (Figure 2). Direct mycology exam and lesion cultures (surgical samples from this case) were negative and we were unable to
identify the causal fungus. A history of trauma cannot always be seen in PHM, as in this case. There is doubt whether fungi are latent in
the host and only develop into lesions when there is a reduction in immunity, as mentioned by Cunha Filho RR et al.9 Differential diagnosis
for subcutaneous PHM include: lipomas, epidermal cysts, fibroids, foreign body granuloma, bacterial abscesses, and squamous cell
carcinoma.1,2 In this case, we added the hypothesis of amelanotic melanoma and cutaneous histiocytic sarcoma. The treatment of choice for
localized PHM is complete surgical lesion resection. 2 The lesions were removed and the wound closed with a double advancement flap.
Associated to surgical management, as recommended by Ferreira LM et al, 200 mg/day of itraconazole was prescribed for 6 months, without any
evidence of recurrence until now.6 Work performed at the Dermatology Service, of North Paran√° Regional University, Londrina State University
(HURNP-UEL) - Londrina, PR, Brazil Financial funding: None Conflict of interest: None
