Financial support: None. The use of immunobiological agents for the treatment of autoimmune diseases is increasing in medical practice.
Anti-TNF therapies have been increasingly used in refractory autoimmune diseases, especially rheumatoid arthritis, with promising results.
However, the use of such therapies has been associated with an increased risk of developing other autoimmune diseases. In addition, the use
of anti-TNF agents can cause pulmonary complications, such as reactivation of mycobacterial and fungal infections, as well as sarcoidosis
and other interstitial lung diseases (ILDs). There is evidence of an association between ILD and the use of anti-TNF agents, etanercept and
infliximab in particular. Adalimumab is the newest drug in this class, and some authors have suggested that its use might induce or
exacerbate preexisting ILDs. In this study, we report the first case of acute ILD secondary to the use of adalimumab in Brazil, in a patient
with rheumatoid arthritis and without a history of ILD. The use of immunobiological agents for the treatment of autoimmune diseases is
increasing in medical practice. Anti-TNF therapies and therapies with B-cell-depleting agents (rituximab) have been increasingly used in
refractory autoimmune diseases, especially rheumatoid arthritis (RA), systemic sclerosis, and systemic lupus erythematosus, with promising
results. The TNF is an interleukin secreted by activated macrophages and T cells as a common pathway in a series of inflammatory,
autoimmune, or neoplastic responses; its blockade, whether in the form of blockade of its receptors or in the form of soluble antibodies,
decreases adhesion molecule expression on the endothelial surface, decreases leukocyte migration, and inhibits the production of other
inflammatory cytokines. However, the use of such therapies has been associated with an increased risk of developing other autoimmune
diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, autoimmune hepatitis, thyroiditis, and cutaneous vasculitis. According to the literature,
the use of anti-TNF agents particularly in the lung is little effective in controlling interstitial lung disease (ILD) secondary to
collagenosis, and can lead to other complications, such as reactivation of mycobacterial and fungal infections, as well as sarcoidosis and
other ILDs.(1) There is evidence of an association between ILD and the use of anti-TNF agents, etanercept and infliximab in particular.(2)
Adalimumab is the newest drug in this class, and, because it is a humanized monoclonal antibody, it would have the potential advantage of
being less immunogenic than its precursors. However, although adalimumab is infrequently used, some authors have suggested that its use
might induce or exacerbate preexisting ILDs.(3-9) The objective of the present study was to report the first case of acute ILD secondary to
the use of adalimumab in Brazil, in a patient with RA and without a history of ILD. A 62-year-old female patient with a 20-year history of
RA had been on methotrexate, leflunomide, and prednisone. Because the articular inflammatory process persisted, we decided to start the
patient on adalimumab, continuing her on methotrexate. A chest X-ray showed no changes suggestive of previous tuberculosis or signs of
incipient ILD; and the intradermal (PPD) test for tuberculosis was negative (0 mm). One week after receiving the second dose of adalimumab
(40 mg weekly), the patient started experiencing dry cough, dyspnea on moderate exertion, and daily fever (38°C). At that point, the results
of chest X-ray, physical examination, and laboratory tests, including blood workup, were normal-hemoglobin, 13.1 g/dL; hematocrit, 39.2%;
8,380 leukocytes (75% neutrophils, 0.4% eosinophil, 9.8% lymphocytes); and 355,000 platelets, except for an increase in inflammatory markers
(C-reactive protein, 326 mg/dL; reference value < 3 mg/dL) and in ESR (67 mm, reference value < 20.2 mm). Sputum smears for AFB and blood
cultures were negative. The patient was started on empiric treatment with levofloxacin; however, she continued to have fever and dyspnea. A
HRCT scan of the chest, performed two weeks after symptom onset, revealed ground-glass opacities, predominantly in the upper and middle lung
fields, associated with areas of smooth interlobular septal thickening (Figure 1). Therefore, a presumptive diagnosis of ILD secondary to
the use of adalimumab was made. We decided to discontinue the patient from the anti-TNF agent and methotrexate and to continue her on low-
dose prednisone (5 mg/day). The patient showed progressive reduction in dyspnea, remission of fever, and normalization of inflammatory
markers, without reactivation of the articular inflammatory process. Three weeks after the onset of the condition, the results of physical
examination and spirometry were normal, with an SpO2 of 98% on room air. A second HRCT, performed three weeks after symptom onset, showed
near-complete resolution of the ground-glass areas (Figure 2). Figure 1HRCT scan of the chest showing pulmonary ground-glass opacities,
predominantly in the upper lobes, in A, and in the central regions, in B, associated with areas of smooth interlobular septal thickening
(arrows). Figure 2HRCT scan of the chest performed three weeks after the onset of the condition. A comparative analysis of the slices shows
significant spontaneous improvement in the ground-glass opacities, in relation to the first scan, in the upper lung fields, in A, and at the
level of the main carina, in B. There remain faint ground-glass opacities together with slight reticular infiltrates in the subpleural
regions, predominantly in the right hemithorax, especially in the middle lobe. The pathogenesis of anti-TNF-agent-induced lung injury
remains unknown; TNF is believed to exert a pro-fibrotic action by stimulating collagen synthesis by fibroblasts and myofibroblasts.(10) In
addition, an increased Th2-type lymphocyte response,(7) the action of IFN-γ unopposed by TNF,(7) and the synergistic action of methotrexate
are speculated to play a role in the development of lung injury.(8,9,11,12) Clinical findings are nonspecific, and include dry cough, fever,
and dyspnea,(2) which can be progressive or more intense after each administration of the medication.(6) Symptoms can appear from one
month(9) to three and a half years after treatment initiation.(7) Findings on HRCT can include ground-glass opacities, foci of
consolidation, reticulated patterns, and traction bronchiectasis.(6,8) Attributing lung injury to drugs and, in the present case, to anti-
TNF agents is a challenge. The diagnosis is usually presumptive, and the causal connection is determined by temporal association between
drug initiation and symptom onset and by improvement after drug discontinuation, always after excluding other etiologies. In such patients,
in the context of immunosuppression, infection should be considered as an important differential. (13) It should be borne in mind that the
use of adalimumab has been associated with cases of pulmonary cryptococcosis(14) and disseminated mycobacteriosis.(15) In this clinical
context, diffuse ground-glass opacities associated with intralobular septal thickening should also lead to the exclusion of other
etiologies, such as viral infections or infections with Pneumocystis jiroveci,(16) alveolar hemorrhage, pulmonary congestion, and drug
toxicity due to concomitant treatment with methotrexate. Bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage aid in the differential diagnosis. In the
largest sample of patients with lung injury secondary to anti-TNF therapy, 122 cases were reported (3 of which were secondary to
adalimumab). The mean time to symptom onset was 26 weeks. The most common histological patterns were usual interstitial pneumonia,
organizing pneumonia, diffuse alveolar damage, and even lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia. Of the cases that were followed up until the
outcome was known, 40% experienced improvement in ILD, 25% had partial resolution of ILD, and 35% had no resolution of ILD, with death
occurring in 29% of the patients. Predictors of poor prognosis were age > 65 years, late onset of symptoms, frequent use of other
immunosuppressants (especially methotrexate), and a previous diagnosis of ILD.(2) Despite an isolated report of improvement in ILD with the
use of this medication for RA,(9) it is currently recommended that adalimumab and other anti-TNF drugs should not be contraindicated in
patients with preexisting ILD or other lung diseases but that caution should be exerted.(1-3,10) The course of cases of adalimumab-induced
ILD can vary from complete remission after drug discontinuation alone to treatment refractoriness,(2,6) with rapid progression to death. (3
) The use of corticosteroids or intravenous immunoglobulin, or both, should be considered in selected cases. Because of the potential
severity of the patient's condition, we decided in favor of CT follow-up, with scans being performed within a short interval of each other
despite the resulting radiation load. Once it is confirmed that drug reaction has occurred, it is not recommended that the drug be
reintroduced or even replaced with another drug belonging to the same class of anti-TNF agents.(2,10) Therefore, adalimumab, like other
anti-TNF drugs, should always be considered in the list of drugs potentially causing lung injury. Study carried out in the Department of
Pulmonology, Heart Institute, University of São Paulo School of Medicine Hospital das Clínicas, São Paulo, Brazil. Apoio financeiro: Nenhum.
O uso de imunobiológicos no tratamento das doenças autoimunes é cada vez mais frequente na prática médica. Terapias anti-TNF têm sido cada
vez mais utilizadas nas doenças autoimunes refratárias, especialmente na artrite reumatoide, com resultados promissores. Entretanto, o uso
dessas terapias está relacionado ao aumento do risco do desenvolvimento de outras doenças autoimunes. Adicionalmente, o uso de agentes anti-
TNF pode determinar repercussões pulmonares, como a reativação de infecções por micobactérias e fungos e o desenvolvimento de sarcoidose e
de outras doenças pulmonares intersticiais (DPIs). A associação de DPI e uso dos agentes anti-TNF, em especial infliximabe e etanercepte, já
foi descrita. O adalimumabe é a mais nova droga dessa classe, e algumas publicações sugerem que seu uso pode determinar a indução ou mesmo a
exacerbação de DPIs preexistentes. Neste estudo, relatamos o primeiro caso de DPI aguda secundária à utilização de adalimumabe, em uma
paciente portadora de artrite reumatoide sem DPI prévia no Brasil. O uso de imunobiológicos no tratamento das doenças autoimunes é cada vez
mais frequente na prática médica. Terapias anti-TNF e terapias com agentes depletores de células B (rituximabe) têm sido cada vez mais
utilizadas nas doenças autoimunes refratárias, especialmente na artrite reumatoide (AR), esclerose sistêmica e lúpus eritematoso sistêmico,
com resultados promissores. O TNF é uma interleucina secretada por macrófagos ativados e células T como via comum em uma série de respostas
inflamatórias, autoimunes ou neoplásicas; seu bloqueio, seja na forma de bloqueio de seus receptores ou na forma de anticorpos solúveis,
diminui a expressão de moléculas de adesão na superfície endotelial dos órgãos alvo, diminui a migração leucocitária e inibe a produção de
outras citocinas inflamatórias. Entretanto, o uso dessas terapias está relacionado ao aumento do risco do desenvolvimento de outras doenças
autoimunes, como lúpus eritematoso sistêmico, hepatite autoimune, tireoidites e vasculites cutâneas. Na literatura, o uso de agentes anti-
TNF particularmente no pulmão é pouco eficaz no controle da doença pulmonar intersticial (DPI) secundária à colagenose, podendo levar a
outras complicações, como a reativação de infecções por micobactérias e fungos, desenvolvimento de sarcoidose e de outras DPIs.(1) A
associação de DPI e uso dos agentes anti-TNF, em especial infliximabe e etanercepte, já foi descrita.(2) O adalimumabe é a mais nova droga
dessa classe e, por ser um anticorpo monoclonal humanizado, teria a vantagem potencial de ser menos imunogênico do que seus precursores.
Contudo, apesar do uso incipiente, algumas publicações sugerem que o adalimumabe pode determinar a indução ou mesmo a exacerbação de DPIs
preexistentes.(3-9) O objetivo do presente estudo foi relatar o primeiro caso brasileiro de DPI aguda secundária à utilização de
adalimumabe, em uma paciente portadora de AR sem DPI prévia. Paciente do sexo feminino, 62 anos, com antecedente de AR há 20 anos, vinha em
uso de metotrexato, leflunomide e prednisona. Devido à manutenção do quadro inflamatório articular, optou-se pela introdução de adalimumabe,
mantendo-se o metotrexato. A radiografia de tórax não demonstrava alterações sugestivas de tuberculose prévia ou sinais de DPI incipiente; e
a intradermorreação para tuberculose (PPD) foi não reagente (0 mm). Uma semana após a segunda dose de adalimumabe (40 mg semanais), a
paciente iniciou um quadro de tosse seca, dispneia aos moderados esforços e febre diária (38°C). Naquele momento, a radiografia de tórax, o
exame físico e os exames laboratoriais, incluindo hemograma, eram normais - hemoglobina, 13,1 g/dL; hematócrito, 39,2%; 8.380 leucócitos
(75% neutrófilos, 0,4% eosinófilos, 9,8% linfócitos); e 355.000 plaquetas, exceto por um aumento dos marcadores inflamatórios (proteína C
reativa, 326 mg/dL; valor de referência < 3 mg/dL) e na VHS (67 mm, valor de referência < 20,2 mm). As pesquisas para BAAR no escarro e as
hemoculturas foram negativas. Foi iniciado o tratamento empírico com levofloxacina; porém, a paciente manteve febre e dispneia. A TCAR de
tórax, realizada duas semanas após o início dos sintomas, evidenciou opacidades em vidro fosco com predomínio nos campos superiores e médios
do pulmão, associadas a áreas de espessamento liso dos septos interlobulares (Figura 1). Foi feita então a hipótese diagnóstica de DPI
secundária ao uso de adalimumabe. Optou-se pela suspensão do agente anti-TNF e do metotrexato com manutenção de prednisona em baixa dose (5
mg/dia). A paciente apresentou melhora progressiva da dispneia, remissão da febre e normalização dos marcadores inflamatórios, sem
reativação do quadro articular. Três semanas após o início do quadro, o exame físico e a espirometria eram normais, com SpO2 de 98% em ar
ambiente. A nova TCAR realizada três semanas após o início dos sintomas mostrou resolução quase completa das áreas em vidro fosco (Figura
2). Figura 1TCAR de tórax evidenciando opacidades pulmonares em vidro fosco com predomínio pelos lobos superiores, em A, e pelas regiões
centrais, em B, associada a áreas de espessamento liso dos septos interlobulares (setas). Figura 2TCAR de tórax realizada três semanas após
o início do quadro. A análise comparativa dos cortes mostra melhora importante e espontânea das opacidades em vidro fosco com relação ao
exame anterior nos campos pulmonares superiores, em A, e no nível da carina principal, em B. Restam discretas opacidades em vidro fosco
junto a um discreto infiltrado reticular em regiões subpleurais com predomínio no hemitórax direito, especialmente no lobo médio. A
patogênese da lesão pulmonar pelas terapias com agentes anti-TNF ainda é desconhecida; acredita-se que o TNF tenha uma ação pró-fibrótica ao
estimular a síntese de colágeno por fibroblastos e miofibroblastos.(10) Especula-se ainda que o aumento da resposta linfocitária do tipo
Th2,(7) a ação do IFN-γ sem oposição pelo TNF(7) e a ação sinérgica do metotrexato possam ter um papel no desenvolvimento da lesão
pulmonar.(8,9,11,12) Os achados clínicos são inespecíficos, e incluem tosse seca, febre e dispneia,(2) que podem ser progressivas ou mais
intensas após cada aplicação da medicação.(6) Os sintomas podem iniciar-se de um mês(9) até três anos e meio após o início do tratamento.(7)
À TCAR, podem ser evidenciadas opacidades em vidro fosco, focos de consolidação, padrão reticulado e bronquiolectasias de tração.(6,8) A
atribuição da lesão pulmonar a drogas e, no presente caso, aos agentes anti-TNF é um desafio. O diagnóstico é geralmente presuntivo, e
estabelece-se o nexo causal pela associação temporal entre a introdução da droga com o início dos sintomas e pela melhora após sua
suspensão, sempre após a exclusão de outras etiologias. Nesses pacientes, no contexto de imunossupressão, deve-se considerar infecção como
um importante diferencial.(13) Deve-se lembrar que há relatos da associação entre o uso de adalimumabe com casos de criptococose
pulmonar(14) e micobacteriose disseminada.(15) Nesse contexto clínico, opacidades em vidro fosco difusas em associação a espessamento septal
intralobular também devem suscitar a exclusão de outras etiologias, como infecções virais ou por Pneumocystis jiroveci,(16) hemorragia
alveolar, congestão pulmonar e toxicidade a drogas pelo uso concomitante do metotrexato. A broncoscopia com lavado broncoalveolar auxilia no
diagnóstico diferencial. Na maior casuística de pacientes com lesão pulmonar secundária ao uso de terapia anti-TNF, foram relatados 122
casos (3 deles secundários ao adalimumabe). O tempo médio para o aparecimento dos sintomas foi de 26 semanas. Os padrões histológicos mais
comumente encontrados foram o de pneumonia intersticial usual, pneumonia organizante, dano alveolar difuso e até pneumonia intersticial
linfocítica. Nos casos onde houve seguimento até o desfecho houve melhora da DPI em 40%, resolução parcial em 25% e nenhuma resolução em
35%, com óbito em 29% dos pacientes. Fatores preditores para um pior prognóstico foram idade > 65 anos, surgimento tardio dos sintomas, uso
frequente de outros imunossupressores (principalmente o metotrexato) e diagnóstico prévio de DPI.(2) A despeito de um relato isolado de
melhora da DPI com o uso dessa medicação para AR,(9) a recomendação atual não contraindica, mas preconiza cautela quanto ao uso do
adalimumabe e de outras drogas anti-TNF em pacientes com DPI ou pneumopatias preexistentes.(1-3,10) A evolução dos casos de DPI por
adalimumabe é variável, podendo ocorrer desde a remissão completa após a simples suspensão da droga até refratariedade aos tratamentos
empregados,(2,6) com rápida evolução a óbito.(3) A utilização de corticosteroides e/ou de imunoglobulina intravenosa deve ser considerada em
casos selecionados. Pela potencial gravidade do quadro, optamos pelo seguimento tomográfico com exames realizados em curto intervalo de
tempo a despeito da carga de irradiação com o exame de imagem. Uma vez constatada a reação à droga, não se recomenda sua reintrodução ou
mesmo substituição por outro fármaco pertencente à mesma classe de agentes anti-TNF.(2,10) Dessa forma, o adalimumabe, a exemplo de outras
drogas anti-TNF, também deve ser considerado na listagem de drogas potencialmente causadoras de lesão pulmonar. Trabalho realizado na
Divisão de Pneumologia, Instituto do Coração, Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP)
Brasil.
