Perfluoroalkyl resins are compounds containing hydrophobic alkyl chains, which are partially or fully fluorinated. These resins are heat-
resistant (up to 260°C) thermoplastics used as coatings in the metallurgical industry (because of their mechanical and anti-adhesive
resistance), as waterproofing agents for coating fabric, in papers used in the food industry, and in surface-active products, waxes, and
insecticide formulations. As waterproofing agents, these resins are applied by manually-compressed or motorized spraying systems or by
sprays. Reports of respiratory symptoms or epidemics in countries in Europe, Asia, and North America, totaling a few hundred cases, are
summarized in a 2009 document by the Public Health Agency of Switzerland.(1) The cases include patients with varying degrees of clinical
impairment. We report the first case of interstitial pneumonia caused by exposure to fluorocarbon resins in Brazil. A 21-year-old male
nonsmoker with interstitial pneumonia and no history of respiratory disease was evaluated at our facility. One year earlier, the patient was
employed at a furniture factory specializing in the manufacture of sofas and armchairs. He worked as a sofa assembler for three months.
Subsequently, he was transferred to an adjacent room, where he filled cushions with synthetic flakes and foams. In that same room, a
coworker performed the waterproofing of the fabrics by using a manually-compressed spraying system (Figure 1). The work area was a
rectangular enclosure of 30 m2, with no ventilation/exhaust system, where there were waterproofing product mists. One week later, he had
flu-like symptoms that resolved with withdrawal from the workplace. When he returned to work, he developed progressive dyspnea and cough,
followed by limitation of physical activities, such as playing soccer and climbing stairs. One month later, he sought treatment from a
cardiologist, who started clinical investigation. He continued to work, and the symptoms gradually worsened. Three months later, he had
sudden pain in the left hemithorax with worsening dyspnea, a pneumothorax was diagnosed, and there was a finding of diffuse ground-glass
infiltration (Figure 2A). Twelve days later, drainage resulted in unsatisfactory lung expansion, and the patient underwent thoracotomy and
lung biopsy, which revealed desquamative interstitial pneumonia (Figures 2B and 2C). One month later, he was asymptomatic. A follow-up CT
scan showed apical and subpleural bullae and a band in the left hemithorax, which was associated with the area of previous surgical
manipulation. His alpha-1-antitrypsin level was normal (183 mg/dL). The patient was started on a 45-day course of prednisone. Spirometry
showed that FVC increased from 43%, before the pneumothorax episode, to 72%, twelve months later. Figure 1Manually-compressed resin spraying
system with a discharge valve. Note the presence of droplets on the lens of the camera as a result of the product spray. Figure 2In A, an
HRCT scan showing left pneumothorax and extensive bilateral areas of ground-glass attenuation. In B, findings of desquamative interstitial
pneumonitis on histology of an open lung biopsy sample, revealing that the architecture of the lung parenchyma and small airways is intact,
with mild interstitial thickening. There are areas of alveolar filling with pooled alveolar macrophages, without granuloma formation (H&E;
scale bar, 200 ìm). In C, detail of Figure 2B showing alveolar septa with reactive pneumocytes and intra-alveolar macrophage accumulation
(H&E; scale bar, 20 µm). The onset of the condition occurred when the patient was indirectly exposed to waterproofing product mists, the
waterproofing agent (Teximper(r); Teximper Comércio Importação e Exportação Ltda, São Paulo, Brazil) being composed of perfluoroalkyl resin
in a solvent. The parenchymal inflammation was only identified after the pneumothorax. The patient's history included acute, short-term,
flu-like symptoms, which started a few days after the change of sectors, followed by progressive dyspnea and cough, which lasted for weeks
prior to hospitalization. Exposure to fumes from fluorocarbon polymers was first described as a cause of flu-like symptoms related to
products of thermal degradation of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE or Teflon(r)), being designated "polymer fume fever".(2) Subsequently,
cases of respiratory symptoms related to industrial or household exposure to fluorocarbon polymers were described.(1) Waterproofing agents
contain fluorocarbon resins, silicones, or waxes as active elements. They are used in the form of sprays-the main use of which is to
waterproof shoes. These sprays contain a propellant gas, a resin, and a solvent. When they are applied, the solvent evaporates and the resin
adheres to the fabric. Heinzer et al.(3) reported 6 cases of patients hospitalized for respiratory failure following household exposure
between January and March of 2003 in Switzerland. The products used were of different brands; however, a little earlier, the resin supplier
had changed the solvent to heptane. During the months in which the new formulation was used, 153 cases of respiratory symptoms were reported
in Switzerland. The mechanism of pulmonary toxicity is unknown. An experimental study raised the hypothesis of a direct effect on the
surfactant, because of polymer deposition on the alveolar wall, increasing the surface tension and leading to collapse.(4) A retrospective
study evaluated 102 cases of individuals who had respiratory symptoms following household exposure to sprays of acrylic fluorocarbon
resins.(5) Those authors concluded that the findings could not be attributed to the solvent present in the formulation because of the high
volatility of that solvent, and that the clinical repercussions showed no association with the magnitude of the exposure, or with personal
histories of smoking, atopy, and chronic lung disease. Apparently, there is an association between resin toxicity and resin particle
diameter.(6) This diameter is a function of the spray generation mechanism (spray systems generate a greater mass of particulate matter < 10
µm than do pump systems) and the solvent (fast-evaporating solvents, such as heptane, generate a greater amount of small-sized particulate
matter).(1) The CT images described in other case reports(3,7) are similar to the findings of the present case. Histology showed extensive
areas of alveolar collapse, without a significant accumulation of intra-alveolar macrophages, and with strong staining of pneumocytes.
Wallace & Brown(7) and Ota et al.(8) reported similar findings in cases of patients who underwent transbronchial biopsy. Most of the cases
reported or registered in centers for the treatment of intoxication were cured, either spontaneously or with corticosteroid therapy. There
have been few reports of cases in which the DLCO remained abnormal and fibrosis was established.(7,9) Three deaths have been
reported.(5,8,10) In Brazil, waterproofing sprays for shoes are sold in shoe stores, and the practice of waterproofing upholstered chairs
and sofas is common. Items containing Teflon(r) are also present in households. Little is said about the toxicity of these products,
toxicity that might be associated with chemical pneumonias caused by inhalation of aerosols containing fluorocarbon polymers. We would like
to thank Professors Fabíola Del Carlo Bernardi and Marisa Dolnikhoff for their assistance in the histological analyses. Resinas
perfluoroalquílicas são compostos de cadeias alquílicas hidrofóbicas, parcial ou totalmente fluoradas. Constituem-se em termoplásticos com
resistência térmica de até 260°C, utilizados para revestimentos em indústria metalúrgica pela resistência mecânica e antiadesiva, em
revestimentos de tecidos como impermeabilizantes, em papéis utilizados em indústria alimentícia e em produtos tensoativos, ceras e fórmulas
de inseticidas. Como impermeabilizantes, essas resinas são aplicadas através de pulverização por sistemas de compressão manuais ou
motorizados, ou sprays. Relatos de sintomas respiratórios ou de epidemias localizadas em países da Europa, Ásia e América do Norte, somando
poucas centenas de casos, estão sumarizados em documento da Agência de Saúde Pública da Suíça de 2009.(1) Os casos incluem pacientes com
graus variáveis de acometimentos clínicos. Relatamos o primeiro caso de pneumonia intersticial por exposição a resinas fluorocarbonadas no
Brasil. Um jovem de 21 anos com quadro de pneumonia intersticial, não fumante, sem antecedentes respiratórios, foi avaliado no nosso
serviço. Um ano antes, o paciente foi empregado em uma fábrica de móveis especializada na fabricação de sofás e poltronas. Por três meses
trabalhou como montador de sofás. Posteriormente, foi deslocado para um salão contíguo, fazendo enchimento de almofadas com flocos
sintéticos e espumas. No local, outro colega fazia a impermeabilização de tecidos utilizando um pulverizador de compressão manual (Figura
1). A área de trabalho era um recinto retangular de 30 m2, sem sistema de ventilação/exaustão implantado, onde névoas do produto
impermeabilizante se dispersavam. Após uma semana, apresentou sintomas "gripais" que regrediram com seu afastamento do local de trabalho. Ao
retornar, desenvolveu dispneia progressiva e tosse, seguindo-se limitação para atividades físicas, como jogar futebol e subir escadas. Um
mês após, procurou um cardiologista que iniciou investigação clínica. Permaneceu no trabalho e os sintomas pioraram gradativamente. Três
meses após, apresentou dor súbita no hemitórax esquerdo com piora da dispneia, sendo diagnosticado pneumotórax e visualizado um infiltrado
difuso em vidro fosco (Figura 2A). Após 12 dias, não houve expansão pulmonar satisfatória com drenagem, sendo o paciente submetido a
toracotomia e biópsia pulmonar, que revelou um quadro de pneumonia intersticial descamativa (Figuras 2B e 2C). Um mês após, estava
assintomático. A tomografia de controle mostrou bolhas apicais e subpleurais e uma banda no hemitórax esquerdo, associada à área de
manipulação cirúrgica prévia. A dosagem de alfa-1 antitripsina foi normal (183 mg/dL). Foi iniciado o tratamento com prednisona por 45 dias.
A espirometria mostrou uma evolução da CVF de 43%, antecedendo o episódio de pneumotórax, indo a 72% doze meses após. Figura 1Sistema de
pulverização da resina com compressão manual e válvula de descarga. Note a presença de gotículas na lente da câmera em consequência ao spray
do produto. Figura 2Em A, imagem de TCAR demonstrando pneumotorax a esquerda e extensas areas de vidro fosco bilaterais. Em B, achados de
pneumonite intersticial descamativa atraves de histologia de fragmento de biopsia pulmonar a ceu aberto, exibindo parenquima pulmonar e
pequena via aerea com arquitetura integra, com discreto espessamento intersticial. Observam-se areas de preenchimento alveolar por
macrofagos alveolares agrupados, sem formacao de granulomas (H&E; barra de escala, 200 µm). Em C, detalhe da figura 2B, na qual se observam
os septos alveolares com pneumocitos reativos e acumulos macrofagicos intra-alveolares (H&E; barra de escala, 20 µm). O quadro teve início
quando o paciente foi exposto de forma indireta a névoas de impermeabilizante (Teximper(r); Teximper Comércio Importação e Exportação Ltda,
São Paulo, Brasil), composto por resina acrílica perfluoroalquilada em solvente. O processo inflamatório parenquimatoso só foi identificado
após o pneumotórax. Pela história, nota-se a referência a sintomas agudos similares à gripe, de curta duração, poucos dias após a mudança de
setor, seguido de sintomas progressivos de dispneia e tosse, que se estenderam por semanas precedendo à internação hospitalar. A exposição a
fumos de polímeros fluorocarbonados foi inicialmente descrita como causa de sintomas gripais relacionados à inalação de produtos de
degradação térmica de politetrafluoroetileno (PTFE ou Teflon(r)), denominada de "febre de fumos de polímeros". (2) Posteriormente, casos de
sintomas respiratórios foram descritos em relação à exposição industrial ou domiciliar a polímeros fluorocarbonados.(1) Impermeabilizantes
contêm como elementos ativos resinas fluorocarbonadas, silicones ou ceras. São utilizados sob a forma de sprays - seu principal uso é na
impermeabilização de calçados. Esses sprays contêm um gás propelente, uma resina e um solvente. Quando aplicados, o solvente evapora e a
resina adere ao tecido. Heinzer et al.(3) relataram 6 casos de pacientes internados por insuficiência respiratória após a exposição
doméstica entre janeiro e março de 2003 na Suíça. Os produtos utilizados eram de marcas distintas; porém, o fornecedor da resina, pouco
antes, havia mudado o solvente para heptano. Durante os meses de utilização da nova formulação, 153 casos de sintomas respiratórios foram
registrados na Suíça. O mecanismo da toxicidade pulmonar é desconhecido. Um estudo experimental levantou a hipótese de efeito direto sobre o
surfactante, por deposição do polímero na parede alveolar, aumentando a tensão superficial e levando ao colapso.(4) Um estudo retrospectivo
avaliou 102 casos de indivíduos que apresentaram sintomas respiratórios após a exposição doméstica a sprays de resinas acrílicas
fluorocarbonadas.(5) Os autores concluíram que os achados não poderiam ser atribuídos ao solvente presente na formulação pela sua alta
volatilidade, e que as repercussões clínicas não apresentaram uma associação com a magnitude da exposição, nem com antecedentes pessoais de
tabagismo, atopia e doença pulmonar crônica. Aparentemente, há uma associação da toxicidade das resinas com o diâmetro de suas
partículas.(6) Esse diâmetro é função do mecanismo de geração do spray (sistemas de sprays geram uma maior massa de particulados < 10 µm,
comparados ao sistema de bombas) e do solvente (solventes com rápida evaporação, como por exemplo, heptano, geram um maior número de
particulados de pequenas dimensões).(1) As descrições de imagens tomográficas de outros relatos de casos(3,7 ) são similares aos achados no
presente caso. A histologia mostrou extensas áreas de colapso alveolar, sem grande acúmulo de macrófagos intra-alveolares e intensa
reatividade de pneumócitos. Wallace & Brown(7) e Ota et al.(8) relataram achados similares em casos submetidos a biópsia transbrônquica. A
maioria dos casos relatados ou registrados em centros de intoxicação evoluiu para cura, de forma espontânea ou com corticoterapia. Há poucos
relatos de evolução com manutenção de DLCO anormal e fibrose estabelecida.(7,9) Três óbitos foram descritos.(5,8,10) No Brasil, sprays
impermeabilizantes de calçados são comercializados em lojas de calçados, assim como a prática de impermeabilizar estofados é frequente.
Artigos contendo Teflon(r) também estão presentes em domicílios. Pouco se comenta sobre a toxicidade desses produtos que pode estar
associada a pneumonias químicas por inalação de aerossóis contendo polímeros fluorocarbonados. Agradecemos às Professoras Fabíola Del Carlo
Bernardi e Marisa Dolnikhoff o auxílio nas análises histológicas.
