Financial support: None. Plastic bronchitis (PB), although a rare cause of airway obstruction, has mortality rates up to 50% in children
after Fontan-type cardiac surgery. We present the case of an 18-month-old female patient with PB following pneumonia. At 6 months of age,
the patient underwent the Glenn procedure due to functionally univentricular heart. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy revealed complete blockage of
the left bronchus by mucoid casts. Pharmacotherapy consisted of glucocorticosteroids, azithromycin, and enalapril maleate. The child also
received nebulized 3% NaCl solution, which proved to be beneficial. In children submitted to Fontan-type procedures, physicians must be
alert for PB, which can be triggered by respiratory tract infection. Plastic bronchitis (PB), despite being a rare cause of airway
obstruction, has a high mortality rate (up to 50%). Therefore, physicians should maintain a high level of clinical suspicion of PB, which is
most often seen in children with congenital heart disease (CHD) after Fontan-type procedures. However, PB can also affect adults.(1) In
addition, PB can occur due to pulmonary lymphatic abnormalities, respiratory tract allergies, infectious diseases, or acute chest syndrome
in sickle cell disease.(2) Anecdotally, PB has been reported in cystic fibrosis patients and postoperatively in heart transplant
patients.(3,4) In the pathophysiology of PB due to CHD, Fontan circulation predisposes to dysfunction of membranes, leading to leakage of
proteinaceous material into the airways. This can cause significant obstruction by the formation of branching gelatinous casts in the
tracheobronchial tree. The casts might be either spontaneously expectorated or require bronchoscopy for their removal as a life-saving
procedure. Death due to airway obstruction from a cast is not uncommon.(2) Clinical symptoms and X-ray findings are nonspecific and might
mimic foreign body aspiration or severe asthma exacerbation. There are two known types of casts, differing histologically and in their
composition(5): type 1-inflammatory, associated with underlying inflammatory disease of the lung-consisting of fibrin with eosinophilic,
neutrophilic, and lymphocytic infiltration; and type 2-acellular, associated with pulmonary hypertension and heart insufficiency due to CHD-
consisting of mucin, with no infiltration. Because PB is rare, there are no specific recommendations for treatment, and therapeutic options
are mainly based on individual experience. We present the case of an 18-month-old female patient with PB following pneumonia. At 2 months of
age, the patient was hospitalized due to pneumonia. At 6 months of age, she underwent a palliative bidirectional Glenn procedure (Fontan-
type) due to CHD (double-inlet and double-outlet ventricle with common atrioventricular canal). The perioperative period was uneventful.
Echocardiography at 12 and 18 months of age showed proper heart function (ejection fraction, 67%). At 18 months of age, she was again
hospitalized due to pneumonia that remained unresolved after three courses of antibiotics in the home setting. Infiltration and atelectasis
of the left upper lobe had been clinically suspected (because of dullness and diminished breath sounds over that region) and was confirmed
by a chest X-ray. Blood pressure was normal. However, SpO2 was approximately 50% (having previously been at 70-80%). In addition,
hypogammaglobulinemia was detected. In the differential diagnosis, we excluded atopy, cystic fibrosis, immunodeficiency disorders, viral
infections (with cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and pneumotropic viruses), and fungal infections (Aspergillus sp. and Candida sp.).
Within a few days, her coughs were more productive and there was expectoration of small mucoid casts. Despite antibiotic treatment, gamma-
globulin replacement therapy, oxygen therapy, and intensive chest physiotherapy, as well as the use of nebulized bronchodilators and
mucolytics, there was no clinical improvement. On post-admission day 17, fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FB) revealed complete obliteration of the
left bronchus. Application of suction allowed to remove bronchial casts, followed by bronchial lavage of that region (Figure 1). Cultures of
the bronchial lavage fluid were negative for fungi and bacteria. Microscopic analysis of the material collected revealed type-1 bronchial
casts. After the bronchoscopy, the inflammation of the left lobes was resolved. Treatment with azithromycin, systemic and inhaled steroids,
(6) and enalapril maleate was initiated, as was the use of nebulized 3% NaCl solution plus a bronchodilator. One week after treatment
initiation, a control FB revealed only small fragments of casts, which were removed easily and completely. On post-admission day 33, the
patient was discharged. Figure 1Branching cast from the left bronchus. In children, PB is uncommon. In one study, Madsen et al. reviewed 56
well-documented cases of PB after cardiac surgery conducted prior to 2005.(2) Thereafter, two groups of authors described the cases of 32
adults and 22 children, respectively, in China.(7,8) In addition, two studies on PB were carried out in Poland.(9,10) To our knowledge, this
is the first reported case of PB in a child with CHD in Poland. Our patient was 18 months old at admission, with moderately severe symptoms
of PB, which differs from the two fatal cases of PB after a Glenn procedure cited by Madsen et al.(2) Patients with PB due to CHD tend to be
younger and have a poorer prognosis than do those with PB due to other comorbidities. In our patient, PB occurred 9 months after the Glenn
procedure and was triggered by a respiratory infection, which is in agreement with other reports.(2) The present case highlights the fact
that PB should be considered in cyanotic children presenting with asymmetry on chest examination, a history of cardiac surgery, and
moderately severe infectious respiratory symptoms. Spontaneously expectorated bronchial casts, as were those observed in the case reported
here, usually substantiate the diagnosis. Hypothetically, the incidence of PB in children is likely to be underdiagnosed because of the
difficulty in productive expectoration at this age. Bronchoscopy could be a diagnostic and treatment option in PB.(2) In our patient, we
managed to remove the bronchial casts during the FB procedure. However, massive casts might require rigid bronchoscopy. Histological
examination is important, although not always clinically relevant. In cases of overlapping infection after cardiac surgery, inflammatory
casts might be present, as was exemplified in our patient. This is also in line with other reports, because respiratory tract infection in
children might be coincidental or causative.(10) In the present case, the results of microscopic examination of the bronchial cast justified
the modification of the treatment to the well-known options of azithromycin and systemic corticosteroids. Our patient benefited from the use
of nebulized hypertonic saline (3% NaCl), which, to our knowledge, was an empirical treatment reported for the first time in a patient with
PB. Improvement in expectoration, lack of cast recurrence, and a positive outcome were observed. Other attempts, including the use of
aerosolized urokinase, tissue plasminogen activator, and recombinant human DNase, as well as extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, have been
reported anecdotally.(8) We did not introduce sildenafil citrate, which has been reported to be used successfully in combination with
epoprostenol.(11) In summary, children with a functionally univentricular heart after a Fontan-type procedure require constant vigilance on
the part of physicians for PB, which can be triggered by respiratory tract infection. In some cases, FB might be suitable for the removal of
casts. Because of the vast spectrum of underlying comorbidities, therapy should be individualized, and the use of nebulized hypertonic
saline might be beneficial. Study carried out in the Department of Pediatrics, Chair of Pediatrics, Jagiellonian University Medical College,
Cracow, Poland. A versão completa em português deste artigo está disponível em www.jornaldepneumologia.com.br Apoio financeiro: Nenhum. A
bronquite plástica (BP), embora uma causa rara de obstrução de vias aéreas, apresenta taxas de mortalidade de até 50% em crianças submetidas
a cirurgia cardíaca do tipo Fontan. Apresentamos o caso de uma menina de 18 meses de idade com BP secundária a pneumonia. Aos 6 meses de
idade, a paciente havia sido submetida à operação de Glenn devido a coração funcionalmente univentricular. A fibrobroncoscopia revelou
obstrução completa do bronco esquerdo por moldes mucoides. A farmacoterapia consistiu em glicocorticosteroides, azitromicina e maleate de
enalapril. Adicionalmente, a criança recebeu nebulização de solução de NaCl a 3%, que provou ser benéfica. Em crianças submetidas a
operações do tipo Fontan, devemos nos manter alerta quanto à BP, que pode ser desencadeada por infecção do trato respiratório. Embora a
bronquite plástica (BP) seja uma causa rara de obstrução das vias aéreas, a taxa de mortalidade da BP é alta (de até 50%). Portanto, os
médicos devem manter um alto grau de suspeita clínica de BP, que é mais frequentemente vista em crianças com cardiopatia congênita (CC)
submetidas à operação de Fontan. No entanto, a BP também pode afetar adultos. (1) Além disso, a BP pode ocorrer em virtude de anomalias
linfáticas pulmonares, alergias respiratórias, doenças infecciosas e síndrome torácica aguda na doença falciforme.(2) Há relatos anedóticos
de BP em pacientes com fibrose cística e no pós-operatório de pacientes submetidos a transplante cardíaco.(3,4) Na fisiopatologia da BP em
virtude de CC, a circulação de Fontan predispõe a disfunção de membranas, levando ao vazamento de material proteico para dentro das vias
aéreas. Isso pode causar obstrução significativa pela formação de moldes gelatinosos ramificados na árvore traqueobrônquica. Os moldes podem
ser expectorados espontaneamente ou pode ser necessário realizar broncoscopia para removê-los, um procedimento que salva vidas. Não é
incomum que ocorra morte em virtude de obstrução das vias aéreas por um molde.(2) Os sintomas clínicos e achados radiológicos não são
específicos e podem simular aspiração de corpo estranho ou exacerbação grave de asma. Há dois tipos conhecidos de moldes, que diferem
histologicamente e na composição(5): tipo 1 - inflamatórios, associados a doença pulmonar inflamatória subjacente e compostos por fibrina
com infiltração de eosinófilos, neutrófilos e linfócitos; e tipo 2 - acelulares, associados a hipertensão pulmonar e insuficiência cardíaca
em virtude de CC e compostos por mucina, sem infiltração. Como a BP é rara, não há recomendações específicas para o tratamento, e as opções
terapêuticas baseiam-se principalmente na experiência individual. Apresentamos o caso de uma paciente de 18 meses de idade com BP após
pneumonia. Aos 2 meses de idade, a paciente foi hospitalizada por causa de pneumonia. Aos 6 meses de idade, foi submetida à operação de
Glenn bidirecional (do tipo Fontan) paliativa por causa de CC (dupla via de entrada e dupla via de saída do ventrículo com canal
atrioventricular comum). Não houve complicações durante o período perioperatório. A ecocardiografia realizada aos 12 meses e aos 18 meses de
idade mostrou função cardíaca adequada (fração de ejeção: 67%). Aos 18 meses de idade, a paciente foi novamente hospitalizada por causa de
pneumonia sem solução após três ciclos de antibióticos em ambiente doméstico. Houve suspeita clínica de infiltração e atelectasia do lobo
superior esquerdo (por causa de macicez e murmúrio vesicular diminuído na região), confirmada por uma radiografia do tórax. A pressão
arterial estava normal. No entanto, a SpO2 era de aproximadamente 50% (previamente, havia sido de 70-80%). Além disso, foi detectada
hipogamaglobulinemia. No diagnóstico diferencial, excluímos atopia, fibrose cística, imunodeficiências, infecções virais (por
citomegalovírus, vírus Epstein-Barr e vírus pneumotrópicos) e infecções fúngicas (por Aspergillus sp. e Candida sp.). Dentro de alguns dias,
a tosse se tornou mais produtiva e houve expectoração de pequenos moldes mucoides. Não obstante a antibioticoterapia, a terapia de reposição
de gamaglobulina, a oxigenoterapia, a fisioterapia respiratória intensiva e o uso de broncodilatadores e mucolíticos nebulizados, não houve
melhora clínica. No 17º dia de internação, a fibrobroncoscopia (FB) revelou obliteração completa do brônquio esquerdo. A aplicação de sucção
permitiu a remoção de moldes brônquicos; em seguida, realizou-se a lavagem brônquica da região (Figura 1). Culturas do lavado brônquico
foram negativas para fungos e bactérias. A análise microscópica do material coletado revelou moldes brônquicos do tipo 1. Após a
broncoscopia, houve resolução da inflamação dos lobos esquerdos. Iniciou-se o tratamento com azitromicina, esteroides sistêmicos e inalados
e maleato de enalapril,(6) além de nebulização de solução de NaCl a 3% associada a um broncodilatador. Uma semana após o início do
tratamento, uma FB de controle revelou apenas pequenos fragmentos de moldes, que foram removidos fácil e completamente. No 33º dia de
internação, a paciente recebeu alta. Figura 1Molde ramificado extraído do brônquio esquerdo. A BP não é comum em crianças. Em um estudo,
Madsen et al. revisaram 56 casos bem documentados de BP após cirurgia cardíaca antes de 2005.(2) Depois disso, dois grupos de autores
descreveram os casos de 32 adultos e 22 crianças, respectivamente, na China.(7,8) Além disso, dois estudos sobre BP foram realizados na
Polônia.(9,10) Até onde sabemos, este é o primeiro relato de caso de BP em uma criança com CC na Polônia. Nossa paciente tinha 18 meses de
idade quando foi internada, com sintomas moderadamente graves de BP, diferentemente dos dois casos fatais de BP após a operação de Glenn,
citados por Madsen et al.(2) Pacientes com BP em virtude de CC tendem a ser mais jovens e ter um prognóstico pior do que aqueles com BP em
virtude de outras comorbidades. Em nossa paciente, a BP ocorreu 9 meses após a operação de Glenn e foi desencadeada por uma infecção
respiratória, o que está de acordo com outros relatos.(2) O presente caso ressalta o fato de que se deve considerar a BP em crianças
cianóticas com assimetria no exame do tórax, história de cirurgia cardíaca e sintomas respiratórios infecciosos moderadamente graves. Moldes
brônquicos expectorados espontaneamente, como os observados no caso aqui relatado, geralmente comprovam o diagnóstico. Hipoteticamente, a
incidência de BP em crianças é provavelmente subdiagnosticada por causa da dificuldade de expectoração produtiva nessa idade. A broncoscopia
pode ser uma opção para o diagnóstico e tratamento da BP.(2 ) Em nossa paciente, conseguimos remover os moldes brônquicos durante a FB. No
entanto, pode ser necessário realizar broncoscopia rígida para remover moldes muito grandes. O exame histológico é importante, embora nem
sempre clinicamente relevante. Em casos de coinfecção após cirurgia cardíaca, moldes inflamatórios podem estar presentes, como mostra o caso
aqui relatado. Isso também está de acordo com outros relatos, pois a infecção do trato respiratório em crianças pode ser coincidência ou
causal.(10) No presente caso, os resultados do exame microscópico do molde brônquico justificaram a modificação do tratamento para as opções
bem conhecidas de azitromicina e corticosteroides sistêmicos. Nossa paciente se beneficiou da nebulização de solução salina hipertônica
(NaCl a 3%), que, até onde sabemos, se trata de um tratamento empírico relatado pela primeira vez em um paciente com BP. Houve melhora na
expectoração e um desfecho positivo, sem recidiva do molde. Há relatos anedóticos de outras tentativas, incluindo o uso de aerossol de
uroquinase, ativador do plasminogênio tecidual, DNase humana recombinante e oxigenação por membrana extracorpórea.(8) Nós não introduzimos o
citrato de sildenafila, usado com sucesso em conjunto com epoprostenol.(11) Em suma, os médicos precisam estar constantemente atentos à BP
em crianças com coração funcionalmente univentricular após a operação de Fontan; nesses casos, a BP pode ser desencadeada por uma infecção
do trato respiratório. Em alguns casos, a FB pode ser apropriada para a remoção de moldes. Em virtude do amplo espectro de comorbidades
subjacentes, a terapia deve ser individual, e a nebulização de solução salina hipertônica pode ser benéfica. Trabalho realizado no
Departamento de Pediatria, Cadeira de Pediatria, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade Jaguelônica, Cracóvia, Polônia.
