The authors present a male 40-year-old patient with established diagnosis of Behçet's disease which had evolved to recurrent bilateral
auricular polychondritis crises. MAGIC syndrome (mouth and genital ulcers with inflamed cartilage) is rare and groups together patients with
this clinical picture without necessarily fulfilling the clinical criteria for Behçet's disease or relapsing polychondritis, demonstrating
an independent disorder. A 40-year-old man had, since 1996, presented arthralgia of the knees, ankles, and wrists; recurrent oral and
genital ulcers; papulopustular lesions on the upper limbs and upper front torso, and painful nodules on the lower limbs. A diagnosis of
Behçet's disease was established from clinical criteria and histopathological exam. Treatment was initiated with dapsone, deflazacort,
calcium carbonate, and Vitamin D with lesion remission. In 2010 he began recurrent crises of oedema, erythema, and painful nodules on the
ear auricles, more accentuated on the left side, which abated after increased corticosteroid treatment (Figure 1). Painful erythematous
nodules of the ear auricle preferring the antihelix without affecting the lobe A smoker and drinker, he presented femural neck osteopenia
and hepatic steatosis of alcoholic aetiology. Annual ophthalmological exam was performed without ocular compromise from Behçet's disease,
although he presented hypertensive retinopathy. Laboratory exams had shown normal hepatic enzyme levels, serum negativity for hepatitis B &
C, hemogram, and electrolytes. Inflammatory tests were altered: VHS 28 mm and PCR 36.0. MAGIC syndrome (mouth and genital ulcers with
inflamed cartilage). Relapsing Polychondritis (RP) and Behçet's disease (BD) are different multisystem inflammatory diseases. Manifestations
of both diseases occurring in the same patient was reported by Firestein (1985) in a series of five cases, suggesting the existence of a
common pathogenic mechanism.1 BD can be diagnosed from criteria which were proposed by the International Study Group for Behçet´s Disease in
1990 and supported by findings of vasculitis and thrombosis subjacent to mucosal ulcers (Chart 1).2 Diagnostic criteria for Behcet's
disease. The presence of one major and at least two minor criteria are necessary to establish diagnosis 2 RP diagnosis is based on clinical
criteria by McAdam: (1) bilateral auricular chondritis; (2) serum negative non-erosive inflammatory polyarthritis; (3) nasal chondritis; (4)
ocular inflammation, including conjunctivitis, keratitis, scleritis, episcleritis, or uveitis; (5) respiratory tract chondritis; and (6)
audiovestibular lesion; at least three of these criteria should be present.3 The name MAGIC syndrome is used to designate an overview of BD
and RP manifestations, implied by a common physiopathogenic mechanism of probable autoimmune origin. This association is rare with few cases
described in literature.4-6 According to Firestein, patients with MAGIC present specific findings for BD and RP, respectively, orogenital
aphthous ulcers and chondritis (auricular, nasal, or respiratory tract), can also present less specific manifestations such as
audiovestibular dysfunction, large artery thrombosis and aneurisms, as well as other signs and symptoms common to many rheumatic disorders,
such as ocular changes, pseudofolliculitis, migratory polyarthritis, glomerulonephritis, gastrointestinal tract involvement, and central
nervous system involvement (Table 1).4-7 Frequency of clinical manifestations in MAGIC syndrome. 9 Therapeutic experience with MAGIC
syndrome is limited to case reports with very successful treatment using pentoxifyllin, corticosteroids, dapsone, and infliximab.4,5,8,9 In
this case, treatment was based on clinical manifestations and histological findings characteristic of BD; it was initially systemic
corticosteroid and dapsone, which after the appearance of chondritis, was changed to a higher dose oral corticosteroid with maintained
dapsone.10 BD and RP are long lasting and have a morbimortality potential due to multisystemic compromise. Dermatologists should be alert to
manifestations of chondritis in BD patients and the early identification of MAGIC syndrome. Work performed at the Department of Dermatology
and Radiotherapy, Botucatu School of Medicine - "Júlio de Mesquita Filho" Paulista State University (FMB-UNESP) - Botucatu, SP, Brazil.
Financial Support: None. Conflict of Interests: None.
