Ovarian cystadenocarcinoma is characterized by marked heterogeneity and may be composed of an admixture of histologic growth patterns,
including acinar, papillary and solid. In the present study, a case of isolated small intestine metastasis of ovarian papillary
cystadenocarcinoma was reported. A 7-year-old female mixed-breed dog presented with a mass in the left upper quadrant with progressive
enlargement of the abdomen, periodic bloody discharge from the vulva and incontinence. The tumor was histologically characterized by the
presence of cysts and proliferation of papillae, both lined by single- or multi-layered pleomorphic epithelial cells. Furthermore, the mass
was composed by intense cellular and nuclear pleomorphism and numerous mitotic figures. These findings indicate a tumor of high-grade
malignancy with infiterative tumor cells resembling the papillary ovarian tumor in the serosal surface of the small intestine along with an
intact serosa. Immunohistochemically, tumor was positive for CK7 and negative immunoreactivity for CK20. The histopathologic features
coupled with the CK7 immunoreactivity led to a diagnosis of high grade ovarian papillary cystadenocarcinoma. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first case of small intestine serousal surface metastasis from ovarian papillary cystadenocarcinoma. Ovarian epithelial
neoplasms are uncommon tumors in domestic and nondomestic animals, but have been reported in the bovine, pig, small ruminants, canine, cat,
mare, deer, and jaguar . Except in the dog, epithelial ovarian tumors occur less frequently than those of mesenchymal origin. In dogs, the
reported incidence of ovarian neoplasm ranges from 0.5% to 6% . Primary ovarian tumors are uncommon in domestic animals. Incidence of
ovarian tumors in dogs ranges between 1–6 percent. The exact cause of ovarian tumor is unknown. In humans, mutations of BRCA1 and BRCA2
genes have been shown to account for 5 – 15% of ovarian tumors . The histogenesis of ovarian epithelial type tumors is likely associated
with Mullerian metaplasia of the tunica vaginalis or remnants of Mullerian tissue at a testicular or paratesticular level . Epithelial
tumors are derived from the ovarian surface epithelium, a single layer of flat to cuboidal mesothelial cells that cover the ovary .
Epithelial tumors are the most frequently reported ovarian neoplasms, both in human and veterinary medicine . In women, as in female dogs,
adenocarcinomas are more common than adenomas and are characterized by early metastatic spread and poor clinical course; they extensively
implant on the peritoneum and metastasize to the lymph nodes. Papillary cystadenocarcinoma is an extremely rare malignant neoplasm that was
first defined in 1991 by WHO . Until then, it was classified as one atypical type of adenocarcinoma, and also called malignant papillary
cystadenoma , low-grade papillary adenocarcinoma , or mucus-producing adenopapillary carcinoma . This type of tumor can also occur in the
ovary, bladder, bile duct, pancreas, mammary gland, thyroid, salivary gland, and upper respiratory tract . Most ovarian cystadenocarcinoma
are unilateral but often spread transcoelomically, through the ovarian capsule with subsequent implantation in the abdominal cavity
(Maclachlan). Recent years have witnessed significant development in the use of immunohistochemistry (IHC) in diagnostic ovarian pathology .
It is also useful in diagnosing other ovarian metastatic tumors, especially in the absence of a known primary elsewhere. Cytokeratins are
intermediate filaments characteristically found in epithelial cells and their tumors. Cytokeratins comprised a family of at least 20
different polypeptides, numbered consecutively from 1 to 20, according to differences in molecular weight and isoelectric pH . CK7, a basic
keratin found in the glandular epithelium of different organs, such as endometrium, mammary gland, and the ovarian surface epithelium, is
also present in ovarian adenomas and carcinomas . We describe light microscopic and immunohistochemical findings in a canine heterologous
ovarian PC. On 18 December 2013, a 7-year-old, 38 kg, female, mixed-breed dog referred to the Small Animal Clinic of Tehran University with
complaints of unthriftiness, lethargy and progressive weight loss together with a mass in the left upper quadrant. Clinical examination
revealed a rapidly growing and progressive enlargement of the abdomen, periodic bloody discharge from the vulva and incontinence were
observed. At postmortem examination, a firm, slightly raised mass measuring 7 cm × 9 cm × 4 cm was identified on the left ovary; the
contralateral ovary was not enlarged and measured 1 cm × 0.5 cm × 0.5 cm. The ovary surface was irregularly roughened with a papillary
appearance.On cut surface, the left ovary contained multiple cysts, predominantly in the ovarian cortex, that were surrounded and separated
by gray to tan thickened foci with scattered to coalescing hemorrhage and necrosis. The uterus and regional lymph nodes were uninvolved, but
numerous, variably sized, firm nodular masses were scattered throughout the peritoneum, mesentery and were attached to the serosal and
muscular layer surfaces of the small intestine. The mesenteric mass was multiple, red, multi-nodular and had foci of necrosis centrally,
approximately 1.5 cm in length and 0.5 cm in diameter. The dog was not pregnant. No other abnormalities were found. The samples were fixed
in 10% neutral buffered formalin, processed by conventional methods, and paraffin embedded. Tumor, 2 to 4 paraffin blocks were available.
Sample, 5-μm-thick sections were obtained and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Canine POC were classified according to the human
classification. Immunohistochemical staining of both normal and neoplastic ovary was performed on deparaffinized sections by using the
avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex technique procedure7 for CK20 (mouse monoclonal antibody, clone 20 diluted at 1:3,000), CK7 (mouse
monoclonal antibody, clone OV-TL 12/30, diluted at 1:200). The primary antibodies were incubated overnight at 4°C and antigen retrieval was
done for CK20 and CK7, by incubating for 15 min at 37°C with pepsin to differentiate between primary and metastatic ovarian tumor.
Histologically, the tumor is characterized by cysts and papillary endocystic projections with a multilocular cystic ovarian tumour which
consisted of malignant serosal cystadenocarcinoma and infiterative tumor cells resembling the papillary ovarian tumor in the serosal surface
of the small intestine along with an intact serosa (Figure 1B and C). In numerous foci the tumour invaded atretic follicles, displacing the
serosal layer and forming papillary projections that extended into the follicular lumina (Figure 1A and D). On the other hand, the ovarian
tumor was composed of numerous prominent cysts. Microscopically, the normal parenchyma was completely replaced by solid tumor with multiple
areas showing a papillary pattern and the presence of necrotic and hemorrhagic foci. Neoplastic epithelial cells were arranged mainly the
cystic and papillary structures and were supported by a fibrovascular stroma. The cysts were lined by single- to multi-layered cuboidal to
columnar, pleomorphic, epithelial cells that occasionally formed arboriform papillae and these structures lined by clear cells arranged in
nests separated by vascular stroma. In addition, papillae were arranged by cuboidal to columnar cells with abundant pale eosinophilic
cytoplasm, distinct cell margins, ovoid and vesicular nuclei, and prominent nucleoli, moderate to severe nuclear and cellular pleomorphism
and numerous mitotic figures were detected (Figure 1E and F). The surface epithelium of adjacent sections exhibited multiple foci of
hyperplasia, forming small papillary projections. Numerous follicles were infiltrated by many neutrophil granulocytes that contained
abundant clear cytoplasm with phagocytized lipid. Photomicrograph of specimen from metastatic small intestinal shows a papillary ovarian
cystadenocarcinoma in a dog: Invasion of neoplastic epithelial cells forming papillary projection into the follicles with displacement of
neoplastic cells (A and D). H&E. Bar, 80 μm. Papillary projections of neoplastic cells extend to the small intestine serosal surface (B).
H&E. Bar, 50 μm. Histological findings of the left ovary showing prominent papillary and cystic growth and supported by a fibrovascular
stroma (C) (HE. ×200). Photomicrograph showing papillae lined by nuclear and cellular pleomorphic tumor cells and cubiodal to columnar cells
with abundant pale eosinophilic cytoplasm (E and F, H&E, ×400). Representative sections from the ovary tumor was stained
immunohistochemically with cytokeratin 7 (CK7) (1:100, OV-TL-12-30, DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark), CK20 (1:40, Ks 20.8, DAKO, Denmark). The
results of the immunohistochemical stains were the same in the ovarian tumors. Serosal tumor cells showed negative immunoreactivity for
CK20, but positive staining for CK7, leading to a final diagnosis of papillary ovarian cystadenocarcinoma and metastatic ovarian tumor
(Figure 2). The histology and the immunostaining profile were suggestive of a metastatic papillary ovarian cystadenocarcinoma to the small
intestine serosal surface. Papillary ovarian cystadenocarcinoma with reactivity for cytokeratin 7. We presented an uncommon case of
unilateral high grade papillary ovarian cystadenocarcinoma metastasizing to the small intestine serous layer as an initial manifestation. To
our best knowledge, our present case appears to be the first description of the metastatic ovarian cancer to the small intestine. This case
emphasizes that although rare, metastatic ovarian cancer to the small intestine should be included in the differential diagnosis of the
metastatic tumors in the small intestine. Ovarian cancer is one of the biggest problems in gynecologic oncology . Because of difficult to
diagnose at an early stage most are diagnosed at an advanced stage. Ovarian cancer usually spreads via local spreading into the peritoneal
cavity followed by attachment to the peritoneum, and via local invasion into the bowel and bladder . This kind of tumor rarely spreads out
of abdominal cavity; in our case the main localization of metastatic spread was in intestinal wall. In mammals, tumours arising from the
ovarian surface epithelium have been reported more frequently in human beings, dogs and mice than in other species . Such tumours are
thought to arise from epithelial inclusions that occur commonly in the superficial ovarian cortex of these three species. Surface epithelial
tumours, which often are bilateral, metastasize via exfoliation and implantation throughout the peritoneal cavity. Several sub-
classifications of this tumour type occur in women, but only one histological form (serous tumour) is recognized in domestic animals . Our
case described in this report showed clinical, gross, histological and immunohistochemistry features similar to those associated with
ovarian cystadenocarcinomas in mammals. Furthermore, in the present case, since neoplastic areas were predominantly adjacent to the ovarian
cortex, the tumor was considered to have originated from the surface epithelium. Immunohistochemistry can be very helpful in distinguishing
primary ovarian tumors from metastatic tumors , moreover immunohistochemistry was initially conducted for the papillary ovarian
cystadenocarcinoma in this case. In this case, ovarian neoplasm show positive staining for CK7 and negative staining for CK20, whereas ovary
tumors are most frequently positive for CK7 and negative for CK20 . In this study, based on their morphologic features diagnostic for human
neurofibrosarcoma, i.e., growth pattern and microscopic features (such as areas of high cellularity, cellular pleomorphism, various
morphologic patterns, high mitotic index and high number of undifferentiated neoplastic cells), together with the presence of intratumoral
papillary cysts and the restriction of the CK7 immunostaining to a subpopulation of the neoplastic cells, the tumour was diagnosed as
neurofibrosarcoma. But the cause of ovarian papillary cystadenocarcinoma in domestic animals has not yet been determined. This case
emphasizes that although rare, metastatic ovarian cancer to the small intestine serous surface should be included in the differential
diagnosis of tumors in the small intestinal. This case highlights the importance of considering the possibility of metastatic tumors from
the gastrointestinal tract in the diagnosis of mucinous ovarian tumors. And also recently studies breast metastases from ovarian carcinoma
(OC) have scarcely been reported . On the basis of gross morphology, histopathological and immunohistochemical features, the final tumour in
this study, a diagnosis of ovarian papillary cystadenocarcinoma was made. For understanding of these neoplasms and the development of the
effective primary diagnosis, further investigation will be needed into the clinical features and the basic science. This study described
histopathology and immunohistochemical features of canine ovarian papillary cystadenocarcinoma of the ovary region. The histological
features of these tumours would suggest that most should be classified as high-grade ovarian papillary cystadenocarcinoma. Finally, the use
of immunohistochemistry may be helpful in distinguishing this type of neoplasm from other malignancies with similar morphology. The
incidence of ovarian papillary cystadenocarcinoma in animals is unknown; we hope this will become clearer. To our knowledge, this is the
first report of ovarian high grade papillary cystadenocarcinoma in a dog, suggesting that this tumour should be included as a differential
diagnosis for ulnar spindle cell tumours. CK: Cytokeratin; WHO: World Health Organization; BRCA: Breast cancer susceptibility gene. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. FKH and MJGH participated in the histopathological evaluation, performed the
literature review, acquired photomicrographs and drafted the manuscript and gave the final histopathological diagnosis. JJ, SSH, FKH, SHH,
SRT, JYYM, ARG, FSA and AA designed and carried out all the experiments and the principal investigators of the laboratory in which the
research were performed and contributed to the interpretation of the data and writing of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. The authors thank Dr. Saeid Fathi, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Tehran University, Iran, for help with this manuscript.
