To the Editor, Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) is a primary immunodeficiency characterized by defective B-cell differentiation and
impaired immunoglobulin production . CVID occurs equally in both sexes and usually presents in the second or third decade of life. Its
prevalence is estimated to be between 1:50,000 and 1:200,000 individuals in the general population. Genetic defects that predispose to CVID
have been identified in about 10% of affected patients . The pathogenesis of CVID is complex, involving defects in both humoral and cellular
immunity. B-cell maturation is abnormal, and impaired somatic hypermutation and a lack of isotype-switched memory B-cells have been
demonstrated . The diagnosis of CVID is based on decreased serum immunoglobulins and a failure to produce antibodies in response to
vaccinations or infections. Other studies of B- and T-cell populations and subpopulations have been useful for defining the prognosis and
risk of complications . CVID has variable clinical manifestations, the most common being recurrent bacterial infections. Besides infections,
CVID patients have an increased tendency to develop autoimmune disorders, lymphoproliferative disease, and malignancy . Approximately half
of untreated CVID patients have gastrointestinal manifestations including bloating, diarrhea, and malabsorption; in 5% of cases, these
symptoms are severe and associated with histological evidence of mucosal inflammation . Because the gastrointestinal tract is the largest
lymphoid organ in the body, intestinal manifestations are expected to be common. These gastrointestinal conditions can be classified into
four groups: infection, malignancy, inflammatory, and autoimmune . The gastrointestinal tracts display a wide spectrum of histologic
patterns. The mucosa shows increased intraepithelial lymphocytes, villous blunting, nodular lymphoid hyperplasia, crypt distortion,
overexpression of apoptosis, and paucity of plasma cells . The mainstay of treatment for CVID is replacement of immunoglobulins and control
of infectious disease. However, the management of CVID enteropathy has been unsatisfactory. The T-cell mediated defects and autoimmune
phenomenon are thought to be the causes of CVID enteropathy . Therefore, immunoglobulins alone may be ineffective. Given the poor
understanding of its pathophysiology, few therapeutic options are available for enteropathy in patients with CVID. Some studies have shown
that corticosteroids improve diarrhea in these patients . Corticosteroids inhibit the immune inflammatory response partly through their
effects on T-cells; however, considerable systemic side effects limit their use. Combination therapy with steroids and immunomodulators such
as azathioprine can be used, but the efficacy and tolerability of such combination therapy are not well documented . We report herein a
patient with CVID who presented with chronic diarrhea and severe weight loss treated with immunoglobulins, corticosteroids, and
azathioprine. A 24-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital for evaluation and treatment of diarrhea and weight loss. She had a 6-month
history of episodes of diarrhea five to six times a day; it was watery to semisolid without mucus or blood and was associated with the
passage of undigested food materials. She had lost 15 kg of body weight despite a good appetite. Exhaustive evaluations at different
hospitals were unrevealing. She received several courses of antibiotics, but her symptoms did not resolve. Her medical history included
recurrent episodes of sinusitis, otitis media, pneumonia, and pyelonephritis since childhood. Her family history was unremarkable. On
admission, her blood pressure was 100/70 mmHg, temperature was 36℃, and pulse was 70 beats per minute. Her height was 159 cm and weight was
33 kg (body mass index, 13.05). On chest auscultation, inspiratory crackles were heard in the upper lung fields. Abdominal examination
revealed neither masses nor tenderness to palpation. Routine blood tests revealed a hemoglobin level of 10.8 g/dL, white blood cell count of
5,790/mm3, platelet count of 132,000/mm3, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 2 mm/hr. Blood chemistry testing showed a total protein
level of 5.8 g/dL, albumin level of 4.0 g/dL, globulin level of 1.8 g/dL, aspartate aminotransferase level of 27 IU/L, alanine transaminase
level of 20 IU/L, creatinine level of 0.5 mg/dL, glucose level of 103 mg/dL, amylase level of 59 IU/L, and lipase level of 57 IU/L.
Antibodies against syphilis, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and human immunodeficiency virus were not detected. Antinuclear antibody,
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, and isohemagglutinin were negative. Adrenal and thyroid function study results were normal. The
quantitative immunoglobulin levels were IgG 351 mg/dL (normal range, 700 to 1,600); IgA 37 mg/dL (normal range, 70 to 400); and IgM 57 mg/dL
(normal range, 40 to 230). The results of flow cytometric lymphocyte subset analysis are shown in Table 1. Urinalysis was negative for
occult blood or protein. Stool examination for bacterial cultures and parasites was also negative. Abdominal computed tomography revealed
mild splenomegaly. Gastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy findings were visually unremarkable. Random mucosal biopsies from the colon revealed
increased intraepithelial lymphocytes, paucity of plasma cells, and apoptotic bodies in the crypts (Fig. 1). According to these findings,
she was diagnosed with CVID. She began to receive therapy with intravenous immunoglobulin (400 mg/kg every 4 weeks). However, the diarrhea
and bloating continued. A trial with corticosteroids (prednisone 10 mg/day) and azathioprine (75 mg/day) was attempted. With these
therapies, the frequency of diarrhea decreased and the patient gradually regained weight. In summary, we have presented herein a case with
CVID associated with enteropathy. This case illustrates one of the varied and uncommon presentations of CVID. Although these complications
cause severe morbidity, the heterogeneity of such presentations induce delays in the diagnosis of CVID. In such patients with chronic
diarrhea, CVID should be kept in mind as a possible cause. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
Colonoscopic biopsy specimen shows (A) prominent lymphoid follicles indicating nodular lymphoid hyperplasia and variable villous blunting
with crypt atrophy (H&E, ×100) and (B) increased lymphocyte infiltration, acute inflammation in the crypt epithelium, frequent apoptotic
bodies, and a lack of plasma cells (H&E, ×400). Flow cytometric lymphocyte subset analysis
