Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is caused by an autosomal dominant gene and characterized by multiple arteriovenous
malformations in several organs, leading to bleeding or shunting. These patients often suffer severe infections and heart failure, which
should be managed in the perioperative period, when open heart surgery is indicated. We report a case of successful aortic root replacement
for active prosthetic valve endocarditis and ventricular septal perforation in a patient with HHT, who had severe heart failure. Hereditary
hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT), an autosomal dominant genetic disorder, is characterized by multiple organ involvements such as cutaneous
or mucosal telangiectasia and visceral multiple arteriovenous malformations (AVMs), which develop in the brain, liver, or lungs. Abnormal
vessel formation and subsequent bleeding form the basis of most clinical manifestations such as recurrent epistaxis. Bleeding, shunting,
thrombosis and embolus frequently occur as complications of AVMs . Although the AVMs often cause sudden and catastrophic infections and
heart failure, the mechanisms underlying these phenomena remain unknown. There are few reports on the surgical treatment of active
infectious endocarditis in HHT. Thus, we describe a successful operation for active prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) and ventricular
septal perforation in a patient with HHT who had severe heart failure. The patient was a 65-year-old woman, who had undergone aortic valve
replacement for severe aortic stenosis with a bicuspid valve, using a bioprosthesis (19-mm Carpenter-Edwards Perimount valve, Edwards
Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) 10 years earlier, at our institution. At that time, HHT was diagnosed and treated with combined ethinyl
estradiol and norgestrel therapy, as reported previously . About 1 year prior to the present admission for the fever and recurrent
epistaxis, nasal mucosal telangiectasia had appeared, followed by the increased frequency of epistaxis. Blood cultures indicated the
presence of methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus epidermidis and echocardiogram showed prosthetic valve dysfunction with aortic
regurgitation and vegetation. Despite intravenous antibiotics, congestive heart failure ensued. We administered diuretics and inotropes to
maintain a satisfactory blood pressure and she was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) to improve her general condition. Her second
echocardiogram showed evidence of ventricular septal perforation, a swaying prosthetic valve (Fig. 1a, b), and severe tricuspid
regurgitation. The pressure gradient across the tricuspid valve was 54 mmHg. Chest radiography suggested congestive heart failure (Fig. 2).
On preoperative computed tomography, the diameter of the ascending aorta was 52 mm (Fig. 3). Her progressive congestive heart failure and
uncontrollable PVE warranted emergency surgery. Before the surgery, her condition stabilized without the need for intra-aortic balloon
pumping (IABP) and tracheal intubation.Fig. 1 a Transthoracic echocardiogram showing vegetation on the bioprosthesis and annular abscess; b
transthoracic echocardiogram showing shunt flow from the left to the right ventricleFig. 2 a Chest radiography on admission. b Chest
radiography just before surgeryFig. 3Preoperative computed tomography showed a dilated ascending aorta a Transthoracic echocardiogram
showing vegetation on the bioprosthesis and annular abscess; b transthoracic echocardiogram showing shunt flow from the left to the right
ventricle a Chest radiography on admission. b Chest radiography just before surgery Preoperative computed tomography showed a dilated
ascending aorta After inserting a tracheal tube carefully, but not a nasogastric tube, median sternotomy was performed. Systemic
heparinization was delivered, and the patient’s activated clotting time was maintained at above 400 s throughout the surgery. Her primary
otolaryngologist had waited until the operation was finalized to observe her nasal condition and stop any bleeding. An aortic cannula was
inserted from the ascending aorta and cardiopulmonary bypass was established with bicaval cannulation. The ascending aorta was opened and
trimmed just below the brachiocephalic artery under moderate hypothermic circulation arrest (28 °C) and retrograde cerebral perfusion. A
24-mm tube graft (GelweaveDacron graft, Vascutek USA, Inc., Ann Arbor, MI) with a side branch was anastomosed to the distal ascending aorta.
We observed vegetation on the leaflet of the degenerated bioprosthesis. The prosthesis was partially detached from the annulus (Fig. 4).
There was ventricular septal perforation below the valve along the muscular and membranous septum and the annulus, which was severely
damaged by the endocarditis. The fragile tissue was removed carefully, following which the damaged annulus was reconstructed, and the
perforated septum was repaired with a xenopericardial patch. A 27-mm Freestyle aortic root bioprosthesis (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN,
USA) was placed in the supra-annular position and the left and right coronary arteries were reconstructed. Finally, the proximal end of the
graft was anastomosed to the distal end of the bioprosthesis (Fig. 5).Fig. 4 a Vegetation on the leaflet of the degenerated bioprosthesis.
The prosthesis was partially detached from the annulus. b Right arrow in the figure shows the range of detachment of the prosthesis from the
annulus. RCA right coronary artery, LCA left coronary arteryFig. 5This operative schema shows how we repaired the ventricular septal
perforation. RCA right coronary artery, LCA left coronary artery, RV right ventricle, LV left ventricle, MV mitral valve a Vegetation on the
leaflet of the degenerated bioprosthesis. The prosthesis was partially detached from the annulus. b Right arrow in the figure shows the
range of detachment of the prosthesis from the annulus. RCA right coronary artery, LCA left coronary artery This operative schema shows how
we repaired the ventricular septal perforation. RCA right coronary artery, LCA left coronary artery, RV right ventricle, LV left ventricle,
MV mitral valve While in ICU, the patient suffered low cardiac output syndrome and IABP was initiated to stabilize the blood pressure. A few
days after the operation, copious serous secretions started oozing from the trachea. We observed a similarity in the constituents of this
secretion and those of her plasma, hence she was given a transfusion of fresh frozen plasma and administered a steroid. Coagulated serous
secretions were removed from the inferior part of the right lung via bronchoscopy. The antibiotic infusion was continued for more than
6 weeks postoperatively, but she was not given anticoagulants or antiplatelet drugs. The postoperative echocardiogram showed no evidence of
recurrence of the infective endocarditis (IE) or heart failure. Her recurrent epistaxis also improved. When last seen, 9 months after her
operation, the patient was in good health, without remarkable symptoms. The cutaneous or mucosal telangiectasia and AVM associated with HHT
can cause multiple complications, which are difficult to manage, and may result in life-threatening events perioperatively. Several cases of
open heart surgery in patients with HHT have been reported; however, active hemorrhage caused by cutaneous or mucosal telangiectasia in the
preoperative period is rare. Although Sakata et al. suggested various methods for preventing abnormal postoperative hemorrhage, its
management remains unclear. In the present report, we described successful redo cardiac surgery in a patient with HHT, managed
perioperatively, in addition to a rare complication likely associated with HHT. Because of the AVMs, infections in HHT patients occur
primarily in the lungs, brain, and liver; however, IE and especially PVE, rarely occur with HHT. Tooth decay, atopic dermatitis, and other
infectious diseases have been described as causes of IE ; however, this patient did not have any of these disorders. Considering previous
case reports of endocarditis caused by nasal packing [4, 5], we suspect that the PVE in our patient resulted from her anterior nasal packing
for recurrent epistaxis but that bacteria were not trapped because of the pulmonary AVM. As recurrent epistaxis may increase the risk of IE,
her persistent nasal telangiectasia requires long-term follow-up. There are a few reports of complications such as high cardiac output
failure, shunt cyanosis due to pulmonary AVM, and bleeding from mucosal telangiectasia, occurring perioperatively in HHT patients undergoing
cardiac surgery for IE. Ishikawa et al. suggested that surgery may be inappropriate for an HHT patient with AVM or mucosal telangiectasia
because of the risk of life-threatening bleeding. Although we knew that our patient had AVMs and mucosal telangiectasia before her
operation, she suffered only mild hemorrhage perioperatively. Her recurrent epistaxis resolved after the operation, as described in our
previous case report . Several measures were taken during the preoperative and postoperative periods to prevent life-threatening hemorrhage,
including the administration of estrogen before the operation, not inserting a nasogastric tube, and discontinuance of anticoagulant drugs
pre- and postoperatively [8, 9]. Thus, we believe that cardiac surgery should be performed for cardiac failure in patients with HHT, even if
they have recurrent hemorrhages from mucosal telangiectasia. We also suggest that capillary syndrome is a perioperative complication of AVM
in patients with HHT. Pulmonary AVMs in HHT occur most frequently in the inferior lobe of the lungs , the vasopermeability of which is
enhanced by stress such as inflammation after cardiopulmonary bypass. In the present case, we suspect that the capillary syndrome triggered
the serous secretion overflow into the trachea from the inferior lobe. In summary, we reported a successful operation for progressive PVE in
a patient with HHT. HHT patients undergoing open heart surgery are vulnerable to various perioperative risks and complications which can be
life-threatening. Nonetheless, we recommend performing open heart surgery for these patients, with proper management in the perioperative
period. Yuki Nakamura and the other co-authors have no conflict of interest.
