A 9-year-old castrated male Shih Tzu dog was referred to us, because of chronic vomiting. The patient’s hematological, radiographic,
ultrasonographic, endoscopic and histological examinations were evaluated for diagnosis. Hematologic analysis indicated moderate anemia and
azotemia. Based on the imaging studies, an oval-shaped mass was identified in the gastric pylorus area. A proliferative mass was found on
endoscopic examination, and we performed biopsy using grasping forceps. The histopathological findings of the biopsy specimens indicated
hypertrophic gastritis, and Y-U pyloroplasty was performed. However, histopathological examination of the surgically resected mass revealed
tubular adenocarcinoma of the stomach. Then, carboplatin chemotherapy was performed 4 times for 13 weeks. Clinical signs, such as vomiting,
were resolved gradually after surgery and chemotherapy, and the patient’s condition was managed favorably until recently (30 months after
surgery). This case report describes clinical features, imaging studies, endoscopic characteristics and histopathological and
immunohistochemical features of gastric tubular adenocarcinoma as early gastric cancer in a dog. Tumors of the canine gastrointestinal (GI)
tract are uncommon and account for less than 1% of all reported neoplasms [4, 10, 36]. Evidence for the etiology of canine gastric tumor has
not been defined until now . Malignant gastric tumors have been reported more than benign tumors, followed by adenocarcinoma,
leiomyosarcoma, lymphoma, leiomyoma and adenoma. Adenocarcinoma is the most common gastric malignancy in dogs, comprising 47 to 73% of all
gastric tumors [12, 14, 28, 31]. The World Health Organization (WHO) classifies gastric carcinomas in domestic animals, dividing them into 5
types: tubular carcinoma, mucinous carcinoma, signet ring cell carcinoma, undifferentiated carcinoma and papillary carcinoma . The prognosis
of adenocarcinoma is mostly guarded, and most studies of this tumor type report that the majority of patients survive less than 6 months [2,
6, 8, 10, 15]. This case report describes clinical features, imaging studies, endoscopic characteristics and histopathological features of
canine tubular adenocarcinoma of the stomach in a dog. A 9-year-old castrated male Shih Tzu dog presented with a history of chronic vomiting
and episodic melena. According to the case history, vomiting sign was observed 8 months before presentation. A GI protectant was
administered at a local animal hospital, and no neoplastic changes were found on GI endoscopy. Since moderate anemia (hematocrit: 25%) was
identified based on a complete blood count, erythropoietin was given to the patient at the local animal hospital. The patient was referred
to us, because the chronic vomiting and anemia were not resolved after management at the local animal hospital. At the time of initial
presentation, moderate to severe anemia (hematocrit: 19.6%) and increased alkaline phosphatase and blood urea nitrogen were revealed in a
blood analysis (alkaline phosphatase, 743 U/l [reference range; 20–150 U/l]; blood urea nitrogen, 76 mg/dl [reference range; 7–25 mg/dl]).
The survey abdominal radiographs showed distension of the stomach, accumulation of gas in the esophagus and a soft tissue opacity mass,
which was summated with the gastric pylorus (Fig. 1Fig. 1.Survey lateral abdominal radiography shows (A) the presence of a well-defined,
smooth, oval-shaped mass with soft tissue opacity overlapped with the stomach caudal to the liver and (B) enhancement of the soft tissue
opacity at the cranial and middle regions of the abdomen and distension of the stomach with food, with the stomach deviating laterally and
being positioned vertically.). Abdominal ultrasonography showed an oval-shaped mass of mixed echogenicity in the gastric pylorus, which was
surrounded by thickend muscularis layers and gastric dilation with fluid and food (Fig. 2Fig. 2.Abdominal ultrasonography shows (A) vascular
flow of the pyloric region in the Doppler test, (B) the presence of thickening of the gastric wall and (C) no pyloric obstruction in
postoperative abdominal ultrasonography. (D) Fourteen months after surgery, a decrease in gastric wall thickness can be seen.). In a color
Doppler test, the muscularis layers exhibited vascular flow. These gastric changes were considered to indicate a gastric neoplasm. Survey
lateral abdominal radiography shows (A) the presence of a well-defined, smooth, oval-shaped mass with soft tissue opacity overlapped with
the stomach caudal to the liver and (B) enhancement of the soft tissue opacity at the cranial and middle regions of the abdomen and
distension of the stomach with food, with the stomach deviating laterally and being positioned vertically. Abdominal ultrasonography shows
(A) vascular flow of the pyloric region in the Doppler test, (B) the presence of thickening of the gastric wall and (C) no pyloric
obstruction in postoperative abdominal ultrasonography. (D) Fourteen months after surgery, a decrease in gastric wall thickness can be seen.
A gastrointestinal endoscopic examination was performed, and a proliferative mass was found in the pyloric outflow tract (Fig. 3AFig.
3.Serial endoscopic findings of the present patient. (A) Obstruction of the pyloric region by a proliferative mass was identified in the
initial examination. (B) Several endoscopic biopsy samples were obtained from the lesion. (C) Five months after surgery, occlusion of the
pyloric region was resolved. (D) Nineteen-months after surgery, the pylorus was open, and there were no ulcerative or hemorrhagic
lesions.Fig. 4.Resection of the mass and Y-U pyloroplasty. (A) Intraoperative photograph showing the mass at the pyloric region after
gastrotomy (arrows). (B) Resection of the mass is complete. The defect was closed by re-opposing the mucosa and submucosa with the Cushging
pattern. (C) The resected mass of the pyloric area. The margin of the mass, including the mucosa and part of the submucosa layer, was peeled
off the pylorus. (D) A completed Y-U antral advanced flap.). Multiple biopsy samples were taken with grasping forceps (Fig. 3B), and the
histopathological results for these specimens indicated hypertrophic gastritis (Fig. 5AFig. 5.Histopathological results of endoscopic biopsy
specimens (A) and surgically resected specimens (B, C, D, E, F, G and H). Panels A, B, C and D show hematoxylin and eosin staining features.
Panels E, F and G show CDX-2 immunohistochemical features of surgically resected specimens. Panel H shows p53 immunohistochemical features
of surgically resected specimens. (A) A high power image shows the involved gastric pit (crypts), which contains enlarged hyperchromatic
nuclei that became crowded nuclei (scale bar: 32 µm). (B) The gastric lesion is composed of well-formed tubules, some of which are
cystically dilated (scale bar: 467 µm). (C and D) Intestinal type (tubular type) gastric adenocarcinoma formed by glands with various
degrees of differentiation (scale bar: 47 µm). (E and F) CDX-2 expression in a moderately differentiated tubular type of canine gastric
adenocarcinoma. High power images show strong nuclear expressions of CDX-2 in moderately differentiated tumor cells in the present patient
(scale bar: 32 µm). (G and H) Moderate expression of nuclear staining for Ki-67 seen in the present patient (scale bar: 47 µm).). Then, we
performed marginal resection of the tumor and a Y-U pyloroplasty (Fig. 4). After the surgery, the patient was given partial parenteral
nutrition therapy for 10 days, because of vomiting. Eleven days after the surgery, the patient was allowed the liquid food, and clinical
signs were gradually alleviated including vomiting and diarrhea. Serial endoscopic findings of the present patient. (A) Obstruction of the
pyloric region by a proliferative mass was identified in the initial examination. (B) Several endoscopic biopsy samples were obtained from
the lesion. (C) Five months after surgery, occlusion of the pyloric region was resolved. (D) Nineteen-months after surgery, the pylorus was
open, and there were no ulcerative or hemorrhagic lesions. Resection of the mass and Y-U pyloroplasty. (A) Intraoperative photograph showing
the mass at the pyloric region after gastrotomy (arrows). (B) Resection of the mass is complete. The defect was closed by re-opposing the
mucosa and submucosa with the Cushging pattern. (C) The resected mass of the pyloric area. The margin of the mass, including the mucosa and
part of the submucosa layer, was peeled off the pylorus. (D) A completed Y-U antral advanced flap. Histopathological results of endoscopic
biopsy specimens (A) and surgically resected specimens (B, C, D, E, F, G and H). Panels A, B, C and D show hematoxylin and eosin staining
features. Panels E, F and G show CDX-2 immunohistochemical features of surgically resected specimens. Panel H shows p53 immunohistochemical
features of surgically resected specimens. (A) A high power image shows the involved gastric pit (crypts), which contains enlarged
hyperchromatic nuclei that became crowded nuclei (scale bar: 32 µm). (B) The gastric lesion is composed of well-formed tubules, some of
which are cystically dilated (scale bar: 467 µm). (C and D) Intestinal type (tubular type) gastric adenocarcinoma formed by glands with
various degrees of differentiation (scale bar: 47 µm). (E and F) CDX-2 expression in a moderately differentiated tubular type of canine
gastric adenocarcinoma. High power images show strong nuclear expressions of CDX-2 in moderately differentiated tumor cells in the present
patient (scale bar: 32 µm). (G and H) Moderate expression of nuclear staining for Ki-67 seen in the present patient (scale bar: 47 µm). The
histologic results for the surgically resected masses indicated intestinal type (tubular type) gastric adenocarcinoma. The gastric
adenocarcinoma was formed by glands with various degrees of differentiation (Fig. 5C and 5D). The gastric lesion was composed of well-formed
tubules, some of which were cystically dilated (Fig. 5B). Based on the histopathological findings, we strongly suspected gastric
adenocarcinoma. To confirm our tentative diagnosis, we performed additional immunohistochemistry to evaluate the expression of CDX-2 (Abcam,
Cambridge, MA, U.S.A.) and Ki-67 (Clone MIB-1, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark). Sections were placed in a 65°C oven for 20 min, dewaxed and
rehydrated through xylene and graded ethanol solutions to phosphate buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.4, 0.1 M). Endogenous peroxidase was blocked
by incubating the sections in 3% H202 in PBS for 20 min at room temperature (RT). After three washes in PBS, antigens were retrieved by
heating in citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for 20 min in a microwave oven (650 W at high power). Each section was then overlaid with primary
antibodies to CDX-2 (1:200) or Ki-67 (1:300) diluted in PBS. Sections were incubated with primary reagent at 4°C overnight and then washed
in PBS three times. EnVision system-HRP (DakoCytomation, Carpinteria, CA, U.S.A.) was applied for detection of binding of primary reagents.
Sections were counterstained with Harris’s hematoxylin, dehydrated and coverslipped under Permount™ (Fisher Scientific, Fair Lawn, NJ,
U.S.A.). Intense nuclear CDX-2 expression was noted in moderately differentiated tumor cells (Fig. 5E and 5F). Moderate expression of
nuclear staining for Ki-67 was seen in tumor cells (Fig. 5G and 5H). The expression of Ki-67 was partially positive, indicating that the
tumor cells had progressed to a malignant form. Based on the histopathological and immunohistochemical findings, this case was definitively
diagnosed as an early stage canine gastric adenocarcinoma. Unfortunately, marginal resection of the tumor and Y-U pyloroplasty had been
performed based on the endoscopic biopsy results (hypertrophic gastritis), and we could not be confident that all cancer cells had been
removed during the surgery. Therefore, we decided to treat with carboplatin chemotherapy (Carbotinol®, Korea United Pharm., Seoul, South
Korea; 250 mg/m2 for the first injection and then 200 mg/m2 3 times during 10 weeks). Then, we regularly performed hematologic, radiographic
and ultrasonographic examinations to evaluate the dog for metastasis or recurrence of the cancer. We performed thoracic and abdominal
computed tomographic (CT) examinations 2 times after surgery (5 and 11 months after surgery), and the results were normal. Furthermore,
gastrointestinal endoscopic examinations were performed again, and there were no remarkable findings (Fig. 3C and 3D). The status of the
patient was well controlled until recently (more than 30 months after surgery). Canine carcinoma is the most common gastric neoplasm in the
dog [9, 24]. The WHO classifies this malignancy in domestic animals based on the growth pattern of the carcinoma, but the relation between
the histological type and other characteristics associated with the prognosis has not been previously reported [2, 13]. Carcinoma of the
canine stomach may arise in any part of the stomach. Canine gastric carcinomas can assume a wide range of forms, but they mostly have the
features of tubular adenocarcinoma. This case was a mucosa form and was diagnosed as intestinal type (tubular type) canine gastric
adenocarcinoma. The diagnosis of gastric neoplasms is usually based on clinical features and imaging findings and is confirmed by
histopathological and immunohistochemical examinations . Endoscopy is a useful definitive diagnostic investigation for observing the size,
location and morphology of a tumor and for obtaining biopsy samples [10, 20]. In humans, over 90% of tumor cases can be diagnosed by
endoscopy . In the present case, the histologic result for the endoscopic forceps biopsy specimens was hypertrophic gastritis, but the
result for the surgically resected specimens was gastric tubular adenocarcinoma. Interestingly, histologic discrepancies have been reported
for gastric cancer between endoscopic forceps biopsy and surgical endoscopic treatment sample in human medicine with the incidence ranging
from 25 to 35% [11, 25]. According to one report of human gastric cancer, this discrepancy is found frequently in early gastric cancer
(EGC). EGC is defined as adenocarcinoma confined to the mucosa or submucosa, irrespective of lymph node involvement, in human medicine .
Because endoscopy cannot detect diseases that primarily involve the submucosal, muscularis or serosal layers of the stomach and the size of
the biopsy sample is restricted by the cup size , EGC may not be identified with this procedure. Based on these studies, the gastric tumor
in the present case could be thought of as equivalent to EGC in humans. The gastric tumor in the present patient was restricted to the
mucosal and submucosal areas, and there was no metastasis to other organs or lymph nodes. Furthermore, there were sessile nodules of mucosal
proliferation instead of ulcerative, hemorrhage and infiltrative lesions which are seen in most cases of adenocarcinoma on endoscopy. CDX-2
is an intestine-specific homeobox product that plays a key role in the regulation, proliferation and differentiation of intestinal
epithelial cells during normal embryonic and postnatal development. CDX-2 is known as an important nuclear transcription factor that
regulates development of intestinal metaplasia and gastric carcinogenesis [5, 21, 32, 35]. According to previous reports [5, 16, 22, 27,
35], CDX-2 is strongly associated with the intestinal phenotypic expression in gastric carcinomas. One recent veterinary report demonstrated
that all canine gastric adenocarcinomas in the study expressed CDX-2 and that 86.4% of the colorectal adenocarcinomas expressed CDX-2.
Interestingly, that report indicated that CDX-2 expression was detected in the normal canine colorectal mucosa, but was not found in the
normal canine gastric mucosa. Based on those study results , CDX-2 expression could be useful for the diagnosis of canine gastric
adenocarcinoma, as it was not detected in the normal canine gastric epithelium. One other report suggested CDX-2 expression was increased in
gastric carcinomas with less invasiveness and an intestinal phenotype, but CDX-2 expression was decreased in advanced gastric carcinomas .
Strong nuclear expressions of CDX-2 in moderately differentiated tumor cells were noticed in the present patient. However, Whether or not
CDX-2 is expressed in nonneoplastic conditions, e.g. hypertrophic gastritis, is unknown, although the normal gastric mucosa is almost
negative. Thus, we performed Ki-67 immunohistochemistry as proliferative marker for evaluating malignancy in the present patient. According
to previous reports [18, 23], Ki-67 is a nonhistone protein with expression that peaks during G2/M, so tumors with a higher proliferation
rate demonstrate greater Ki-67 expression. In the present patient, positive Ki-67 expression was detected in tumor cells, and this suggested
a malignant tumor of the gastric mucosa. Therefore, the immunohistochemistry results for CDX-2 and Ki-67 could support the diagnosis of
early stage gastric adenocarcinoma (early gastric cancer) in the present patient. Surgery is the only potentially effective treatment for
localized canine gastric carcinoma [10, 24], and partial gastrectomy is usually indicated for this malignancy . Generally, the prognosis
after surgery is poor, and most affected dogs expired within 6 months of diagnosis . In several studies that described the prognosis of
surgical treatment for canine adenocarcinoma, the median survival time was only 55 days for 29 dogs treated with surgery. [8, 10, 33]. In
human cases, endoscopic submucosal dissection or surgical resection is indicated for EGC . In the present case, we performed surgical
submucosal resection of the mass and Y-U pyloroplasty for obstruction of the pyloric outflow tract based on the initial histopathological
results. We then initiated chemotherapy since identified malignant change of the mass. According to one study in humans, adjuvant
chemotherapy was effective for prevention of postoperative recurrence in patients with EGC . In human stomach tumor, chemotherapy is
effective as an adjuvant therapy followed by surgical resection, improving overall survival [26, 29]. Carboplatin chemotherapy for
adenocarcinoma is controversial these days, but carboplatin has been shown to have an antitumor effect in human gastric tumor cells and
animal models of gastric tumor . Furthermore, carboplatin had marginal activity in patients with gastric cancer, with response rates of
6–10% as a single agent [29, 34]. In the present case, we used 250 mg/m2 carboplatin for the first injection and then used 200 mg/m2 for the
3 subsequent treatments. Despite the fact that this type of tumor is known to have a guarded prognosis, the status of the patient has been
well controlled after treatment (30 months after surgery). In conclusion, this report describes the clinical features and prognosis of a
canine tubular type gastric adenocarcinoma treated with surgical resection and chemotherapy. We suggest the possibility that a gastric tumor
similar to EGC in humans could exist in dogs. This report is the first report of a human EGC-like gastric tumor in dogs. Therefore, more
cases of suspected EGC in dogs should be studied in an attempt to investigate this type of tumor. This research was supported by the Basic
Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology
(2011-0008358).
