The authors report acyclovir-induced alopecia in a patient treated for herpetic keratouveitis. A 32-years-old female was diagnosed with
herpetic keratouveitis. She was placed on prednisolone acetate (1%) suspension four times a day, atropine sulfate (1%) thrice a day, and
oral acyclovir 400 mg twice-daily. Three weeks following oral acylovir, keratouveitis improved, but she developed alopecia without any drug
eruptions. Oral acyclovir was discontinued. Three months later, alopecia completely resolved. Alopecia may be considered a possible
complication following oral acyclovir. Acyclovir is a potent antiviral drug commonly used in the treatment of herpes simplex keratitis. Oral
acyclovir may be used to treat epithelial keratitis, stromal keratitis, and keratouveitis due to herpes simplex virus infection.1 Oral
acyclovir prophylaxis is recommended for patients undergoing penetrating keratoplasty for herpes simplex keratitis.2 Oral acyclovir is safe
and effective for herpes zoster ophthalmicus.3 Though oral acyclovir is widely used in most countries, alopecia induced by its usage has not
been previously reported. Here, we report a case of alopecia following oral acyclovir that recovered 12 weeks after discontinuing treatment.
A 32-years-old female presented with complaints of redness, watering, photophobia, and diminution of vision in the left eye with duration of
two weeks. She disclosed a history of a similar attack in the left eye one year previously. She had a visual acuity of 20/20 in the right
eye and count fingers close to face in the left eye. Examination of the right eye did not reveal any abnormality. There was mild
conjunctival congestion in the left eye. Slit lamp biomicroscopy showed corneal edema, medium-sized keratic precipitates, cells (++) and
flare (++). Fluorescein staining of the cornea did not reveal any epithelial defect. There was a marked decrease of corneal sensation in the
left eye. A diagnosis of keratouveitis due to recurrent herpes simplex virus infection in the left eye was considered. She was placed on
prednisolone acetate (1%) suspension four times daily, atropine sulfate (1%) thrice a day, and oral acyclovir 400 mg twice-daily. At one
week follow-up, there was decrease in her symptoms. The visual acuity in the left eye improved to counting fingers at three meters. Slit
lamp biomicroscopy revealed mild corneal edema, decrease keratic precipitates, cells (+) and flare(+). She was advised to continue the same
treatment. At three weeks, she felt symptomatically better, but complained of diffuse loss of hair from scalp. There was no history of drug
eruptions. Her visual acuity in the left eye was 20/200. Slit lamp biomicroscopy revealed residual corneal opacity and few old keratic
precipitates in the left eye. Examination of the scalp revealed a diffuse hair loss and no drug eruptions [Figure 1]. The color and the
texture of the hair were normal. Acyclovir-induced alopecia Oral acyclovir was discontinued, and topical prednisolone was reduced to thrice
a day for two weeks and then twice a day for two weeks. A follow up after three months of discontinuation of oral acyclovir revealed hair
re-growth in the affected area on her scalp [Figure 2]. Examination of the left eye revealed a corneal opacity, and she was advised to
undergo penetrating keratoplasty for the left eye. The patient was not on any other oral, topical or over-the-counter medication. In
addition, she did not receive any holistic, natural or home remedies during this period. Patient was moderately-built and did not suffer
from any nutritional deficiency. She had not been pregnant recently. In addition, she did not have any other systemic problem that may lead
to hormonal imbalance. She did not suffer from lupus erythematosus, hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, syphilis, sarcoidosis, HIV infection or
any systemic malignancy. Re-growth after discontinuation of acyclovir Drug-induced alopecia usually occurs as a diffuse non-cicatricial
alopecia that recovers after discontinuation of the drug.4 Drug-induced alopecia occurs as a consequence of a toxic effect of the drug on
the hair follicle matrix.5 Drugs may cause abrupt cessation of mitotic activity in rapidly dividing hair matrix cells (anagen effluvium) or
may bring the hair follicle to premature rest (telogen effluvium).4 In rare cases, alopecia may be permanent. Anagen effluvium is a
prominent adverse effect of anti-mitotic agents. Telogen effluvium may occur following administration of anti-coagulants, vitamin A, anti-
hyperlidemic drugs, anti-thyroid drugs, and oral contraceptives.6 Alopecia following oral acyclovir has not been reported. Oral acyclovir is
responsible for alopecia in our patient, as she was not taking any other oral medication. She also did not suffer from any systemic disease
including lupus erythematosus, hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, syphilis, sarcoidosis, HIV infection or any systemic malignancy that could
have resulted in alopecia.7 In addition, the complete reversal of hair loss occurred after discontinuing oral acyclovir. It is difficult to
postulate the possible mechanism of oral acyclovir-induced alopecia. Depending on the type of drug, dosage, and patient susceptibility,
drug-induced hair loss presents as telogen effluvium, anagen effluvium or both.4 Isonicotinic acid hydrazide (INH)-induced anagen effluvium
and associated lichenoid eruption has also been reported.8 In that case, the patient also had complete recovery of hair loss after
discontinuation of INH. The authors postulated that the complete recovery from anagen effluvium could have been due of the early initiation
of corticosteroids.8 Our patient did not have any drug eruptions. INH-induced alopecia in absence of lichenoid reaction has been reported.9
Complete recovery of alopecia in our patient occurred after 12 weeks of stopping oral acyclovir. We did not prescribe oral corticosteroids
in this case. She had been advised to undergo penetrating keratoplasty. If she chooses to undergo penetrating keratoplasty, she will be
placed on oral valacyclovir postoperatively.10 Oral acyclovir is safe and has been recommended for both treatment and prophylaxis for
recurrent herpes simplex keratitis. However, a rare complication alopecia may be kept in mind and the drug should be discontinued in case
alopecia occurs. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
