Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the surgical procedure of choice for symptomatic gallstones. The incidence of bile duct injury following
laparoscopic cholecystectomy is around 0.62% and, when vascular injuries also occur, the surgeon is faced with is a serious
complication1.Morbidity and mortality increase drastically when bile-duct and vascular injuries occur simultaneously and a successful
outcome is unlikely when diagnosis of these is delayed. The extent of liver damage and the need for liver resection or transplant
significantly influence the progress of patients with such injuries. A 36-year-old female with symptomatic colelithiasis was referred for
elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy. During the surgery, the chronic inflammatory process deforming the anatomy of the porta hepatis and
the appearance of bleeding and bile in the surgical field obliged the surgeons to revert to the conventional procedure (open
cholecystectomy), which involves a subcostal incision on the right hand side. Extensive hemostasis was carried out using sutures, clips and
diathermy. The assistant surgeon decided to call in the surgeons from the hepato-biliary surgery group. The new team immediately increased
the size of the incision (extending it to the subcostal area on the left hand side). Almost complete damage to the elements of the porta
hepatis was found: ligature and section of the right portal branch; ligature and section of the right hepatic artery; ligature and section
of the common hepatic duct on bifurcation; ligature and almost complete section of the left hepatic artery. It was decided to revascularize
the left hepatic artery (dissection, resection of the damaged segment primary anastomosis with prolene 7.0). Right hepatectomy was carried
out without incident. After resection of the liver an end-to-side Roux-en-Y loop hepaticojejunostomy was carried out on the left hepatic
duct. Owing to bleeding during surgery, the patient received five red blood cell concentrates and 3u of fresh plasma. She also received a
continuous infusion of antifibrinolytic (ipsilon Â®) during and after surgery. The patient remained in intensive care for five days,
initially with mild liver dysfunction and non-dialysis kidney failure (Cr>2 mg/ dl and INR>1.7). The patient received metabolic and
nutritional backup to deal with the organ dysfunctions. She was discharged from hospital after 21 days. After six months she was readmitted
to hospital to successfully carry out dilation of the stenosis of the biliary system. Eighteen months after surgery she was free of any
complications in the remaining part of the liver (Figures 1 and 2). Percutaneous cholangiogram 18 months after liver resection with short
biliary stenosis Cholangioresonance images 18 months after liver resection: hypertrophy of the left lobe with the biliary stenosis
Simultaneous biliary and vascular damage after laparoscopic cholecystectomy worsens the clinical outlook for the patient, because of the
development of biliary stenosis and hepatic necrosis2. Liver resection is usually delayed5. The most common vascular damage associated with
laparoscopic cholecystectomy is to the right hepatic artery, which is usually tolerated well3. Liver resection may be necessary in some
cases in the latter stages of treatment of these patients4. It is important to note that confirmed biliary damage should be followed by
investigation for concomitant arterial damage6. Biliovascular damage also involving the portal branch is less common7. The posterior
position in the portal-hepatic system provides the portal vein with some degree of protection during hepato-biliary surgery or trauma.
However the occurrence of damage frequently requires liver resection as the ideal form of treatment. Different from single lesions of the
right or left hepatic artery, damage to the portal branch leads to non-partial formal hepatectomies. Most reported cases state that there
was no early identification of the portal damage8. In the case described here there was early identification of imminently life-threatening
complex biliovascular damage, caused by acute liver failure6. The immediate decision to revascularize the viable liver segment and remove
the ischemic, necrotic right lobe meant that there was no need for an emergency liver transplant 9 . It should be noted that the choice of a
technical solution avoided waiting for a liver graft at a time when there is a scarcity of transplantable organs8. Financial source: none
Conflicts of interest: none
