These authors contributed equally to this work. To the Editor: Nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) signaling is known to be important for host
protection against infection. For activation, proteins of the NF-κB transcription factor must be released from constitutive interaction with
inhibitory IκB proteins (IκBα, IκBβ, and IκBε), which sequester NF-κB complexes in the cytoplasm. This occurs through phosphorylation and
degradation of IκB proteins by the upstream IκB kinase (IKK) complex, for example, following stimulation of cell surface receptors. The IKK
complex consists of 2 catalytically active kinases, IKKα and IKKβ, and the regulatory subunit IKKγ, also known as NF-κB essential modulator
(NEMO). In the canonical pathway of NF-κB activation, IκBα undergoes IKKβ-dependent phosphorylation and ubiquitin-mediated degradation,
liberating the NF-κB heterodimer, which then translocates to the nucleus.1 Mutations in 2 proteins of the NF-κB signaling pathway, NEMO and
IκBα, have been described in humans and result in immunodeficiency (ID), usually associated with ectodermal dysplasia (EDA). Hypormorphic
hemizygote NEMO mutations cause X-linked EDA-ID, while hypermorphic IκBα mutations lead to an autosomal-dominant EDA-ID.2-4 Affected
individuals are susceptible to severe infections with pyogenic bacteria and mycobacteria and in some cases opportunistic and viral
pathogens.5 In addition, an autosomal-recessive mutation in IKKα has been associated with an in utero lethal Cocoon syndrome characterized
by multiple fetal malformations.6 Here, we report an 18-month-old female, second child of first-degree consanguineous parents from the
Arabian Peninsula (see Fig E1, A, in this article's Online Repository at www.jacionline.org), who presented at age 2 months with omphalitis
and delayed separation of the umbilical cord, necessitating surgical removal. At age 3 months, she developed Salmonella sepsis and
subsequently suffered severe recurrent infections caused by a range of organisms including Acinetobacter, Enterobacter, Stenotrophomonas,
and Achromobacter species, rotavirus, and Candida. Chronic diarrhea and a generalized maculopapular rash were persistent from the neonatal
period. Disseminated BCGosis was diagnosed from skin and gut biopsies, and antimycobacterial treatment started at age 4 months. Her family
history was significant for a brother who had died at age 1 month from E coli sepsis and meningitis. In addition, 3 paternal grand uncles
had died in infancy with short febrile illnesses. At the age of 18 months, our patient had conical teeth, hepatosplenomegaly, and a severe
skin rash (Fig 1, A and B). This was confirmed to be persistent BCGosis on skin biopsy showing a mixed inflammatory infiltrate and possible
epithelioid granuloma formation (Fig E1, B), with acid-fast bacilli visible and a PCR positive for DNA of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
complex, but negative for the esat-6 gene. Initial immunology investigations demonstrated normal proportions and numbers of naive and memory
T, B, and natural killer cells, normal T-cell repertoire, and T-cell proliferation to PHA (Table I). Expression of MHC class II molecules
was preserved. Neutrophil number, respiratory burst, and integrin expression were normal, as was phenotyping for monocytes and dendritic
cell populations. Immunoglobulin levels had been documented to be low on repeated sampling at age 3 months (IgG 1.2 g/L, IgA < 0.05 g/L, and
IgM < 0.05 g/L) and therefore immunoglobulin replacement had already been commenced. Liver function test results were normal (including
aspartate transaminase, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, alkaline phosphatase, albumin, total protein, and total bilirubin levels). Whole
blood cytokine assays on 2 occasions demonstrated severely impaired production of IFN-γ to all stimuli, absent production of IL-17, and a
markedly reduced production of the proinflammatory cytokines, TNF-α and IL-6, in response to a range of Toll-like receptor ligands (Fig 1,
C). Stimulated IL-12 production was also reduced and not significantly rescued by addition of exogenous IFN-γ. The pattern of cytokine
response and clinical features were not consistent with a classical IL-12/INF-γ pathway defect but would be consistent with a defect in the
NF-κB pathway. Our patient7 was treated with ethambutol, rifampicin, isoniazid, and pyridoxine as well as prophylactic azithromycin,
fluconazole, and intravenous immunoglobulin in view of her immunodeficiency. INF-γ treatment was added at 50 μg/m2 and gradually increased
to 200 μg/m2.7 This was not well tolerated, and she developed ulcerating skin inflammation and increasing hepatosplenomegaly necessitating
low-dose steroid treatment (0.5 mg/kg) and therefore IFN-γ treatment was withdrawn. She continued to have recurrent episodes of fever and
increased inflammatory markers that most likely reflected her BCGosis. She subsequently developed a progressive respiratory distress, was
admitted to intensive care for noninvasive ventilation, and, unexpectedly, died from a massive gastrointestinal and pulmonary hemorrhage
after a surgical central line insertion at age 25 months. To identify the causative mutation, we used exome sequencing. Blood sample of the
patient was obtained with informed consent from the parents in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and with approval from the ethics
committees (04/Q0501/119 and 06/Q0508/16). Library preparation, exome capture, and sequencing have been done according to the manufactures
instructions. For exome target enrichment, Agilent SureSelect 50 Mb kit was used. Sequencing was done using Illumina HiSeq with 94 bp
paired-end reads. In the exome data, we found 22,754 single-nucleotide variants and small insertions/deletions, including 172 very rare
ones, that is, those not seen in the 1000 Genomes database (April 2012 data release) and our internal databases. Five of these variants were
homozygous (see Table E1 in this article's Online Repository at www.jacionline.org). Among these we identified a homozygous nonsense
mutation c.321C>A in the IKBKB gene that encodes the IKKβ protein, leading to a premature stop codon p.Y107X (Fig 1, D; see Fig E2, A, in
this article's Online Repository at www.jacionline.org). In the exome sequence data, we found no mutations in genes encoding IκBα, NEMO, or
other proteins of the NF-κB pathway. Because gene IKBKG that encodes NEMO was poorly covered in the exome data, we studied it by Sanger
sequencing and again found no mutations. We then confirmed the IKBKB mutation by Sanger sequencing and showed that both parents were
heterozygous carriers of this mutation (Fig E2, B). We then purified proteins from PBMCs and demonstrated that the patient completely lacked
IKKβ expression (Fig 1, E). We used polyclonal rabbit anti-IKKβ antibody (Cell Signaling Technology cat no. 2678) produced by immunizing
animals with a synthetic peptide corresponding to residues surrounding Leu570 of the 756 amino acid IKKβ protein. Therefore, presence of a
shorter IKKβ protein that potentially could be generated after reinitiation of translation seems unlikely. Further functional experiments
were not possible, because no patient-derived cell lines were available after the patient's death. Given that functional reconstitution
experiments were impossible, we cannot formally prove that the IKKβ deficiency has caused the immune phenotype of the patient, although it
is very likely in the absence of other candidate loss-of-function mutations. However, additional unknown modifier genetic or nongenetic
factors may have affected the severity of the patient's phenotype. Here we demonstrate that an autosomal-recessive human IKKβ deficiency has
a clinical presentation, which resembles both hypermorphic IκBα and hypomorphic NEMO mutations, with a prominent susceptibility to
mycobacteria and an increased frequency of other bacterial infections. No loss-of-function alleles in the IKBKB gene were previously found
in up to 6500 healthy subjects (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute exome variant server, accessed May 2013), suggesting that such
mutations are likely to be pathogenic. Recently, a conference abstract has been published describing a group of patients with severe
combined immunodeficiency with agammaglobulinemia that were associated with a frameshift mutation in the IKBKB gene, which apparently led to
an abolished IKKβ expression.8 In contrast to our patient, they had reduced numbers of natural killer cells and manifested with invasive
bacterial and viral, but not mycobacterial, infections. Furthermore, no ectodermal dysplasia was reported, which distinguishes them from our
patient and most patients with NEMO and IκBα mutations.5 The reasons for such discrepancies should be clarified when a more detailed
description of those patients is published. The IKKβ-deficient mouse embryos die because of liver degeneration and apoptosis.9-11 In
contrast, our data suggest that humans with the IKKβ deficiency can be viable. This is potentially explained by the compensatory mechanisms
involving IKKα and the noncanonical pathway of NF-κB activation that are unlikely to be affected by the IKKβ deficiency. Interestingly,
while NF-κB activation in cells of the IKKβ-deficient mice was significantly impaired, it was not completely abolished, as residual
signaling was mediated by IKKα.9,10 In the absence of IKKβ, IKKα can make homodimers, which can bind NEMO and phosphorylate IκBα, thus
partially compensating for the loss of the IKKα/IKKβ heterodimers.9,12 We did not observe significant biochemical liver disease in our
patient, which may also relate to compensatory mechanisms or result from species variation. The severe granulomatous reaction seen in our
patient may be a feature of systemic infection.13 However, altered keratinocyte function may additionally cause skin inflammation because
mice with epidermis-specific deletion of IKKβ develop a severe TNF-mediated inflammatory skin disease.14 Our patient had chronic diarrhea,
similar to most of the patients with the IκBα mutations. This is consistent with the importance of the NF-κB pathway for mucosal immunity,
maintaining intestinal epithelia integrity and homeostasis in the gut.15 In line with other defects of NF-κB signaling,
hypogammaglobulinemia and ectodermal dysplasia, characterized by peg teeth, were features of IKKβ deficiency in our case. The immunological
phenotype was characterized by a profound defect in the production of proinflammatory cytokines despite intact development of all immune
cell lineages. Although the clinical spectrum of the condition will be clarified by the identification of other affected families, the
severity of immunodeficiency in our patient and failure to respond to conservative therapy suggest that bone marrow transplantation should
be considered for children with complete IKKβ deficiency. Fig E1 A, Genealogical tree for the kindred. Arrow highlights index case.
Asterisks denote family members who died within the first 2 months of life with febrile illnesses. B, Histology showing granuloma in skin by
hematoxylin and eosin staining. Fig E2 A, Schematic IKBKB gene showing the mutation identified in our family. B, Sequence data for the index
case, parents, and healthy control showing heterozygous carriage of the c.321C>A mutation in both parents. Table E1 Rare coding homozygous
variants found by exome sequencing Chr Position Ref/Obs Transcript cDNA (change) Gene Amino acid 1 109,276,144 —/T ENST00000370017
c.2130_2131insT (frameshift insertion) FNDC7 (fibronectin type III domain containing 7) p.K710fs 1 116,280,898 C/T ENST00000261448 c.G479A
(nsSNV) CASQ2 (calsequestrin 2) p.R160H 1 120,168,566 G/A ENST00000421812 c.C158T (nsSNV) ZNF697 (zinc finger protein 697) p.P53L 2
216,197,149 A/G ENST00000236959 c.A733G (nsSNV) ATIC (5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide formyltransferase/IMP cyclohydrolase)
p.N245D 8 42,150,963 C/A ENST00000520810 c.C321A (stopgain SNV) IKBKB (inhibitor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in B cells, kinase
beta) p.Y107X A, Genealogical tree for the kindred. Arrow highlights index case. Asterisks denote family members who died within the first 2
months of life with febrile illnesses. B, Histology showing granuloma in skin by hematoxylin and eosin staining. A, Schematic IKBKB gene
showing the mutation identified in our family. B, Sequence data for the index case, parents, and healthy control showing heterozygous
carriage of the c.321C>A mutation in both parents. Rare coding homozygous variants found by exome sequencing This is an open access article
under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/). This work was supported by the Higher Education Funding Council for
England (to S.O.B.), The Wellcome Trust (grant no. 095198/Z/10/Z to S.N. and grant no. 090233/Z/09/Z to A.J.T.), The European Research
Council (Starting grant 260477 to S.N.), the European Union (FP7 collaborative grant 261441 PEVNET project to S.N.), the National Institute
for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre (to S.N. and R.D.), Great Ormond Street Hospital Children's Charity (to H.B.G. and
F.H.), the National Institute for Health Research Great Ormond Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre (to K.C.G.), and the National
Institute for Health Research University College London Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre (to S.O.B.). Disclosure of potential conflict
of interest: S. O. Burns has received research support from the Higher Education Funding Council for England and the National Institute for
Health Research University College London Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre. A. M. Jones has received an honorarium from CSL-Behring for
a lecture on subcutaneous immunoglobulin therapy and has received travel support from CSL-Behring for the 2013 AAAAI meeting. S. Nejentsev
has received research support from the Wellcome Trust, the European Research Council, and the National Institute for Health Research. The
rest of the authors declare that they have no relevant conflicts of interest. A and B, Photographs showing conical teeth,
hepatosplenomegally, and widespread rash. C, Quantitation of cytokine release from patient and healthy control PBMCs following in vitro
activation with various stimuli (y-axis). Representative data from 1 of 2 repeat experiments are shown. D, Sequence data for the index case
showing the homozygous c.321C>A mutation. E, Western blot showing that the IKKβ protein is present in the healthy donor (HD) but is absent
from the patient's (P) PBMCs. Immunology investigations IVIG, Intravenous immunoglobulin therapy. Abnormal result.
