Vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitor is an emerging therapeutic modality for various ocular diseases with neovascularization (NV).
However, for corneal NV, controversy remains regarding whether bevacizumab or ranibizumab is superior. A 32-year-old female diagnosed with
herpetic keratoconjunctivitis with refractory corneal NV despite two previous subconjunctival and intrastromal bevacizumab injections,
received two subconjunctival and intrastromal ranibizumab injections. Six months postoperatively, there was significant regression of the
neovascular area and vessel caliber. Here, the authors report a case of improvement in corneal NV with subconjunctival and intrastromal
ranibizumab injections, which was previously refractory to bevacizumab injection. The findings may suggest a new prospect in treating
corneal NV. Corneal avascularity is essential for the preservation of optimal vision. However, the corneal angiogenic privilege is
compromised under pathologic conditions such as hypoxia and inflammation , since the delicate balance between proangiogenic and
antiangiogenic factors is lost under such conditions . The proangiogenic factor, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), regulates the
development and maintenance of blood vessels, and is upregulated to maintain corneal avascularity when the cornea is injured, eventually
resulting in corneal neovascularization (NV) . Recent animal experiments and clinical trials revealed that bevacizumab and ranibizumab, two
representative VEGF inhibitors, have anti-angiogenic effects on the cornea . However, although there have been numerous studies attempting
to identify the superiority of topical bevacizumab and ranibizumab, the direct comparison between bevacizumab and ranibizumab in the
subconjunctival and intrastromal forms remains unclear, requiring further investigation. Here, we present a case of corneal NV improvement
following subconjunctival and intrastromal ranibizumab injections, which was previously refractory to bevacizumab injections. The purpose of
this report is to bring to the attention of ophthalmologists a new possible avenue for treatment of corneal NV, specifically subconjunctival
and intrastromal ranibizumab injections, especially in those patients with unsatisfactory results after bevacizumab injection. A 32-year-old
female with known corneal opacity and decreased visual acuity of the right eye, which was noticed three weeks prior to visit, was referred
to our clinic. Previously, in 2008, she visited an ophthalmologist due to decreased visual acuity measuring 20 / 50, and a pannus-like
elevated nodular opacity was found at the right superotemporal cornea (Fig. 1A). Following suspicion of herpetic keratoconjunctivitis, she
received two subcon-junctival and intrastromal bevacizumab (Avastin; Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA) injections with a one
month interval. Within one month after the last injection, the diameter of abnormal new vessels decreased to some degree, but the extent of
corneal NV and opacity remained stationary (Fig. 1B). Further bevacizumab treatment was abandoned because the lesion showed no improvement
during the next six months and no other treatment was given to the patient for the next four years. At her first visit to our clinic, the
patient's best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) measured 20 / 250 in the right eye and a central corneal opacity was observed along with new,
abnormal vessels growing in from the superotemporal side (Fig. 1C), suggestive of herpetic keratoconjunctivitis. After administration of
Virgan (0.15% ganciclovir; Samil, Seoul, Korea) ointment and Gatiflo (0.3% gatifloxacin; Handok, Seoul, Korea) eye drops for six months, the
patient underwent two subconjunctival and intrastromal ranibizumab (Lucentis, Genentech Inc.) injections in the right eye, with a one month
interval. At two months postoperatively, there was significant decline in both the neovascular area (by 8.02%) and vessel caliber compared
to the initial lesion (Fig. 1D). Anterior segment photograph taken by a built-in camera on a surgical microscope (Leica F40; Microsystems,
Wetzlar, Germany) at three months after the initial injection also revealed reduction of the lesion extent (Fig. 1E). The BCVA was improved
to 20 / 160 on her last visit at six months postoperatively and neither adverse reactions nor recurrence was apparent. Alteration in the
corneal neovascular area was determined by sequential standardized digital slit-lamp pictures, which were analyzed morphometrically using
image analysis software (Image J 1.40 g; Wayne Rasband at the Research Services Branch, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).
The procedure was approved by institutional review board of the Catholic University of Korea and the patient was provided with thorough
explanation and filled out an informed consent form. Corneal NV is a potential sequela of numerous conditions such as infection, injury,
inflammation, limbal stem cell deficiency, and contact lens use, which eventually alters visual acuity by inducing stromal edema, cellular
infiltration, lipid deposition, hemorrhage, and scarring . Conventional therapeutic modalities for corneal NV include corticosteroids,
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, laser photocoagulation, and ocular surface reconstruction. However, these treatments demonstrated
limited effects with considerable complications, leading to questions regarding whether the treatment should be continued . The development
of VEGF-inhibitors, a humanized monoclonal antibody which binds to isoforms of VEGF-A , introduced a new prospect in treating a variety of
ophthalmic conditions, including ocular surface diseases with NV. Clinically, ranibizumab and bevacizumab are currently used for the
treatment of corneal NV. Stevenson et al. compared the treatment efficacy of topical bevacizumab and ranibizumab by evaluating the
neovascular area, vessel caliber, and invasion area of corneal NV. Considering the fact that bevacizumab is a large full-length
immunoglobulin with a molecular weight of 149 kD and ranibizumab has a molecular weight of 48 kD, this may allow ranibizumab to penetrate
the ocular surface more effectively and establish a therapeutic concentration earlier in the course of treatment. The authors concluded that
topical ranibizumab was efficacious earlier in the course of treatment than topical bevacizumab, as measured by neovascular area and vessel
caliber. There were several studies demonstrating that subconjunctival administration of a VEGF inhibitor was more effective than topical
instillation. This is supported by subconjunctival injections generating higher intraocular concentrations compared to topical
administration and contributing to the slower release of pharmacologic agents. Therefore, following subconjunctival injection, VEGF
inhibitors have proven to spread into the corneal stroma and to remain there for several days . This may explain why NV was more efficiently
slowed after subconjunctival injections rather than after topical administration. Furthermore, there are major limitations for topical
application such as low penetrance through intact epithelium, difficulty of formulation, and low stability in solution with consequent
susceptibility to loss of bioactivity during long-term storage . In our case, the patient had already received two subconjunctival and
intrastromal bevacizumab injections due to corneal NV caused by herpetic keratoconjunctivitis, but the treatment turned out to be
ineffective due to the extent of the lesion and lack of regression. The patient was initially treated with antiviral ointment and
antimicrobial eye drops for six months, but the neovascular area remained stationary. Because the treatment could have restored the barrier
function of the corneal epithelium, we performed two ranibizumab injections, which is smaller in molecular weight, both subconjunctivally
and intrastromally. Six months postoperatively, there was significant decrease in neovascular area, leaving no noteworthy adverse effects.
However, to date, the direct comparison of currently applied VEGF inhibitors remains under debate. In order to justify the increased cost of
ranibizumab, it will be necessary to demonstrate meaningful treatment superiority in a randomized comparison trial to draw authoritative
conclusions. Additionally, long term follow-up is required to observe post-injection complications and the possibility of NV recurrence. To
the best of our knowledge, there have not been any identical reports domestically. Therefore, the authors present a case report
demonstrating that subconjunctival and intrastromal ranibizumab injections may be effective therapeutic options in corneal NV associated
with herpetic keratoconjunctivitis, especially for patients with refractory outcomes following bevacizumab injections. No potential conflict
of interest relevant to this article was reported. Standardized digital slit-lamp pictures of the neovascularized area in the cornea. (A)
View of anterior segment before subconjunctival and intrastromal bevacizumab injections. (B) One month after the last subconjunctival and
intrastromal bevacizumab injections, showing no specific decrease in the extent of corneal neovascularization. (C) View of the anterior
segment of relapsed herpetic keratoconjunctivitis accompanied with abnormal new vessels taken before ranibizumab injection. (D) Two months
after the last subconjunctival and intrastromal ranibizumab injections, revealing significant regression in both vessel diameter and
neovascular area. (E) Three months after the last subconjunctival and intrastromal ranibizumab injections, the lesion area seems more
reduced compared to two months postoperatively.
