Portal vein thrombosis should be included in the differential diagnosis for abdominal symptoms and/or elevated hepatic function tests after
laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Portal vein thrombosis (PVT) is a relatively uncommon complication after abdominal surgery. We report an even
more unusual case of PVT 10 days after an uncomplicated laparoscopic cholecystectomy, believed to be only the fourth reported case in the
literature of this rare complication. Albeit extremely rare, PVT should be included in the differential diagnosis for abdominal symptoms
and/or elevated hepatic function tests after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Portal vein thrombosis (PVT) is an extremely rare complication
after abdominal surgery. We report what is believed to be the fourth reported case and youngest reported patient with left PVT after
laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC). PVT after laparoscopic surgery is extremely rare but should be included in the differential diagnosis of
unexplained abdominal pain after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The patient was a 31-year-old woman who presented initially to our service
with a 6-month history of recurrent postprandial right upper quadrant pain. Her past medical history was remarkable for hypertension (which
developed during pregnancy) and thyroid nodules, and she had undergone cesarean section 7 months previously. She had no remarkable family
history of hypercoagulable state or thrombotic events. She was taking metoprolol and methyldopa daily to treat her hypertension. She was not
taking oral contraceptive pills. Abdominal ultrasonography showed cholelithiasis without other abnormal findings. Her preoperative liver
function tests showed normal transaminases (alanine aminotransferase 20 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 13 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (95
U/L), and total bilirubin (0.3 mg/dL). Preoperative coagulation parameters were all normal. She underwent an uneventful elective
laparoscopic cholecystectomy and was discharged home on the same day. Pathologic results were consistent with chronic cholecystitis. At
postoperative day 10, the patient re-presented to our emergency center complaining of right flank pain and nausea. She was afebrile and
nontachycardic. Physical examination demonstrated minimal abdominal tenderness. Her laboratory results were remarkable for elevated
transaminases (alanine aminotransferase 271 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 466 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (219 U/L), and total bilirubin
(1.1 mg/dL). Abdominal ultrasonography revealed, somewhat unexpectedly, left PVT (Figure 1), which was confirmed with a computed tomography
(CT) scan of the abdomen (Figure 2). She was admitted to our service. A hypercoagulable workup demonstrated a low protein S (35%, range
60–120). Her protein C was normal. Anticardiolipin antibiodies (IgA, IgG, and IgM) were all within normal limits. There was no evidence of a
factor II (prothrombin) G20210A mutation, factor V Leiden mutation, or JAK2 V617F mutation. She was started on therapeutic low-molecular-
weight heparin (LMWH, enoxaparin). She responded to the treatment with improved liver function tests and resolved abdominal symptoms. She
was discharged in good condition on hospital day 3 with therapeutic LMWH and oral warfarin and was expected to continue taking therapeutic
anticoagulation medication. Ultrasound demonstrating left PVT (arrow). Computed tomography of the abdomen demonstrating left PVT (arrow).
PVT is a recognized complication after laparoscopic procedures including Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, Nissen fundoplication, partial colectomy,
cholecystectomy, and appendectomy.1 Although rare, there are three cases reported in the English language literature of PVT after
laparoscopic cholecystectomy.2–4 All patients, including our patient, underwent what was described as uncomplicated laparoscopic
cholecystectomy. Formation of PVT in these patients is likely multifactorial. Pneumoperitoneum and the resultant increased intra-abdominal
pressure has been shown to result in changes in coagulation parameters,2 as manifested by changes in prothrombin time, international
normalized ratio, D-dimer, fibrinogen, and fibrin degradation products.5 Pneumoperitoneum also affects splanchnic and portal venous blood
flow.2 One study demonstrated that the diameter of the portal venous trunk and the mean portal blood flow were significantly decreased with
pneumoperitoneum of >10 mm Hg.6 Patient positioning during laparoscopic surgery may also affect portal blood flow and stasis.1 Direct injury
to the portal venous system may also be a contributing factor but is unlikely in our case because of the anatomy of the portal vein as a
posterior structure. Another significant factor in PVT is underlying coagulopathy and underlying patient disease processes. All previously
reported cases have demonstrated some hypercoagulable state (Table 1). Our patient had low protein S, which may have contributed to her
hyperocoagulable state. It is important to note, however, that in some cases, low protein S may be associated with acute thrombosis and not
be reflective of a true hypercoagulable state.7 In all cases, the contributing coagulopathy was not detected preoperatively. Review of All
Reported Cases* of PVT After Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy POD = postoperative day; SCD = sequential compression devices. Includes the
present report. The diagnosis of PVT can be established with ultrasonography or computed tomography with intravenous contrast, both commonly
used in the workup of unexplained pain and symptoms after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Other adjuncts, including angiography and magnetic
resonance imaging, may also be used. The treatment varies depending on the extent of the thrombosis and the presence or absence of bowel
ischemia. It is unknown whether preoperative antithrombotic prophylaxis affects the incidence of PVT.1 One patient required transhepatic
portal vein thrombectomy for significant thrombosis, but most patients who present with PVT after laparoscopic procedures require only
supportive treatment and anticoagulation. Our patient promptly improved after initiation of LMWH and was discharged on hospital day 3 with
an LMWH-to-warfarin bridge. The optimal duration of anticoagulation for these patients is unknown.3 If the patient has primary coagulation
disorders, lifelong anticoagulation is required. For those with no identifiable risk factors, some suggest it is reasonable to re-image the
patient after approximately 6 months of anticoagulation and stop if resolution of the thrombosis is documented. Albeit extremely rare, PVT
should be included in the differential diagnosis for abdominal symptoms and/or elevated hepatic function tests after laparoscopic
cholecystectomy.
