Congestive heart failure (CHF) occurs when the heart can no longer maintain the baseline metabolic demand triggered by physiological venous
pressure. In the pediatric population, it corresponds to a complex entity with multiple etiologies, depending on the age group assessed,
being mainly associated with congenital structural malformations, cardiomyopathies, or secondary to arrhythmogenic, infectious, ischemic,
toxic or infiltrative events1. The incidence of CHF in children also varies according to the underlying condition, ranging from 15% to 25%
in patients with congenital heart defects. In structurally normal hearts, cardiomyopathy is the major factor associated with CHF, with a 40%
incidence of CHF reported in those patients1. Isolated noncompaction cardiomyopathy is a rare disease, whose incidence in the general
population ranges from 0.014% to 1.3%. It might result from a failure in compaction of the ventricular myocardium between weeks 5 and 8 of
the embryonic life, leading to the persistence of myocardial trabeculations and deep recesses, which communicate with the ventricular
cavity, generating myocardial thickening in two distinct layers (compacted and noncompacted). Initially reported in the pediatric population
or with a congenital cardiopathy, it also affects adults with no other heart disease2,3. This failure in the regression of embryonic
sinusoids is postulated to be due to the extremely high pressures that the ventricles undergo in that developmental period. However, the
literature has reported a genetic aspect emphasizing the relationship of the disease with different genes, such as the mutation of gene G4.5
in families with severe infantile noncompaction cardiomyopathy, mutations P121L, CYPHER/ZASP, E101K, and a locus containing the disease gene
in chromosome 11p153. The major complications of patients with noncompaction cardiomyopathy are pulmonary thromboembolism, arrhythmias and
CHF3. In addition to the usual treatment of CHF, new classes of drugs, such as the phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE-5) inhibitors, have been
studied4. They are currently used for the treatment of erectile dysfunction and pulmonary arterial hypertension, and began to be studied for
the treatment of CHF after the demonstration of higher PDE-5 expression in myocytes and vascular muscle cells, as well as of markers of
oxidative stress in patients with CHF5. We report, for the first time, the clinical and laboratory findings of a patient with noncompaction
cardiomyopathy after the addition of sildenafil (PDE-5 inhibitor) to the usual treatment. The patient is a 6-year-old male, previously
healthy, admitted with clinical findings compatible with CHF. The clinical investigation ruled out causes of CHF secondary to infectious,
arrhythmogenic, infiltrative, toxic and ischemic processes and neuromuscular disorders. The serum level of type B natriuretic peptide (BNP)
was 641 pg/mL. The echocardiographic findings were as follows: left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction of 19.1%; significant biventricular
systolic dysfunction; LV diastolic dysfunction; significant LV dilation; and mild left atrial dilation. In addition, deep myocardial
trabeculae were observed, communicating with the free LV cavity, with a noncompaction to compaction ratio of 3.2:1 and no structural
malformation, establishing the diagnosis of bilateral cardiomyopathy of the noncompaction myocardial type (Figure 1). Drug treatment with
angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor (ACEI), diuretics and carvedilol was initiated. Echocardiographic study performed at the age of 6
years shows dilated left chambers, spongy left ventricle, and noncompacted to compacted myocardium ratio of 3.2:1, long axis plane (A) and
short axis plane (C), and after 7 years of clinical drug treatment (B and D). After one year of clinical follow-up and optimized
pharmacological treatment (diuretics, ACEI and beta blocker), his symptoms and functional class worsened, a new hospital admission being
necessary. Echocardiography showed persistent dilated cardiomyopathy of significant hemodynamic repercussion, with moderate tricuspid and
mild mitral regurgitations. Because of the unfavorable diagnosis and clinical course, the patient was assessed aiming at heart
transplantation. The hemodynamic evaluation showed cardiomyopathy with noncompaction of the ventricles and spongy myocardium, normal
capillary angiography and mean capillary pressure of 25 mm Hg. Rescue therapy with sildenafil at the dose of 2 mg/kg/day was indicated while
awaiting a donor. The clinical and imaging follow-up every three months showed progressive improvement, with normalization of the
ventricular function, of the BNP serum levels and of the symptoms (Table 1). The patient was then removed from the heart transplantation
list, maintaining good quality of life. Description of the clinical, laboratory and echocardiographic parameters before and after the
Introduction of sildenafil In the drug treatment HR (bpm): heart rate (beats per minute); SaO2: oxygen saturation; RV: right ventricle;
LVEDV: left ventricular end-diastolic volume; LVESV: left ventricular end-systolic volume; LVEF: left ventricular ejection fraction; BNP:
brain natriuretic peptide. We report for the first time the case of a male patient at school age with noncompaction cardiomyopathy and
myocardial dysfunction refractory to conventional clinical treatment, whose clinical, laboratory and imaging parameters significantly
improved after the addition of a PDE-5 inhibitor (sildenafil) to the baseline drug treatment. Noncompaction cardiomyopathy was first
described in 1932, on autopsy. It is a heterogeneous disease with reserved prognosis. Its treatment is based on the progression to systolic
heart failure in the presence of thromboembolic phenomena or arrhythmias secondary to LV impairment. Isolated noncompaction of the
myocardium can be identified from childhood to adulthood, occurring in both sexes6. The prognosis is extremely variable, the complications
being considerably less frequent in the pediatric age group7. In an adult case series, approximately 60% had sudden death or underwent heart
transplantation six years within the diagnosis1. Similarly, in another case series, 47% of 34 adults with isolated noncompaction
cardiomyopathy had the same outcome in a follow-up of 44 ± 39 months2. Phosphodiesterase type 5 is a specific enzyme that catalyzes the GMPc
hydrolysis in several tissues, acting on the metabolism of intracellular nitric oxide. Its inhibition favors vasodilation, via permanence of
intracellular GMPc8. However, in cardiac dysfunction, the beneficial effect of PDE-5 inhibitors seems related to the deviation of the
cascade and to the increase in AMPc production, with an increase in intracellular calcium and contractility improvement5. That effect has
also been related to the preservation of LV function and a reduction in fibrosis, apoptosis and LV hypertrophy, via inhibition of the
RhoA/Rho-kinase pathway. That physiopathological pathway is associated with atherosclerosis, cardiac hypertrophy and post-infarction
remodeling8. Sildenafil is a selective PDE-5 inhibitor initially used to treat erectile dysfunction and that has potential non urological
applications4. According to Freitas Jr. et al9, the acute administration of sildenafil and sodium nitroprusside has been associated with
reverse cardiac remodeling, a reduction in right cardiac chambers and an improvement in biventricular cardiac function9. The use of
sildenafil improves oxygen uptake, cardiac index, depression, and quality of life, and reduces aortic stiffness and systemic vascular
resistance in patients with CHF. Bocchi et al5 have shown that, during exercise, the use of sildenafil improved physical capacity, the
attenuation of heart rate increase and its reduction during recovery, on the treadmill exercise test5. Gómez-Sánchez et al10 and Freitas Jr.
et al9 have shown that one single sublingual dose of sildenafil (100 mg) was effective and safe to reduce pulmonary pressure and its
variables during the vascular reactivity test prior to heart transplantation, evidencing that, in addition to a significant reduction in the
pulmonary artery systolic pressure and in pulmonary and systemic resistances, there was an increase in cardiac output and minimal effect on
the systemic circulation9,10. Sildenafil has not been approved for routine use in the pediatric population, except for treating pulmonary
arterial hypertension. However, the lack of other therapies that could contribute to improve the patient's functional class and revert his
heart failure motivated the off-label use. Although greater extrapolations cannot be performed based on one single case report, ours
suggests that sildenafil might play an important role in the treatment of CHF in the pediatric population, even in the absence of pulmonary
arterial hypertension. This emphasizes the need for studies designed for that purpose in that specific population. Potential Conflict of
Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Author contributions Conception and design of the
research: Fontes SRF, Elias PF, Souza R, Jatene IB. Acquisition of data: Redondo ACC, Fuenmayor G, Shiraishi KS, Fontes SRF, Elias PF.
Analysis and interpretation of the data: Redondo ACC, Fuenmayor G, Shiraishi KS. Statistical analysis: Redondo ACC, Fuenmayor G, Shiraishi
KS, Souza R. Writing of the manuscript: Redondo ACC, Fuenmayor G, Souza R. Critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content:
Redondo ACC, Fuenmayor G, Fontes SRF, Elias PF, Souza R, Jatene IB. Sources of Funding There were no external funding sources for this
study. Study Association This study is not associated with any post-graduation program.
