Integrating viruses represent robust tools for cellular reprogramming; however, the presence of viral transgenes in induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) is deleterious because it holds the risk of insertional mutagenesis leading to malignant transformation. Here, we combine the
robustness of lentiviral reprogramming with the efficacy of Cre recombinase protein transduction to derive iPSCs devoid of transgenes. By
genome-wide analysis and targeted differentiation towards the cardiomyocyte lineage, we show that transgene-free iPSCs are superior to iPSCs
before Cre transduction. Our study provides a simple, rapid and robust protocol for the generation of clinical-grade iPSCs suitable for
disease modeling, tissue engineering and cell replacement therapies. Initial reports for generating induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)
involved retroviruses as a mode of transgene delivery . Although retroviruses are capable of reprogramming somatic cells to iPSCs, the
clinical applicability of such iPSCs is limited due to the integrated transgenes carrying the risk of insertional mutagenesis and tumor
formation . Moreover, continuous expression of transgenes in iPSCs negatively affects pluripotency and limits their differentiation
potential . These effects have been shown by the inability to yield live chimeric mice and the diminished endodermal differentiation of
iPSCs carrying transgenes . Alternative approaches were explored to obtain higher efficiency with minimal genetic modifications of the
cells. Various protocols circumventing viral vectors have been published, including the use of transposons , episomal plasmids , synthetic
mRNA , microRNAs , Sendai virus as well as protein transduction . iPSCs generated by these methods contain minimal or no genetic
modifications and are generally more suitable for clinical applications than cells derived by virus-based protocols. However, still there is
no gold standard for an iPSC reprogramming strategy since these non-integrating approaches exhibit limitations such as low reprogramming
efficiencies, slow reprogramming kinetics, a narrow range of cell specificity, and poor reproducibility . In terms of robustness and
efficacy, therefore, the retroviral and lentiviral system still represents the method of choice for iPSC derivation . Early attempts to
improve viral-based iPSC protocols included the use of polycistronic vectors. The core element of those vectors is a cassette, consisting of
cDNAs of the four transcription factors, linked together via 2A self-cleaving peptide sequences . This strategy allows translation of four
separate polypeptides from a single mRNA strand. Thus, instead of four viruses, a single construct is sufficient to induce cellular
reprogramming. This approach decreases the risk of insertional mutagenesis. Various biomedical applications of iPSCs will not strictly
require cells completely free from genetic modifications. Hence, a Cre-excisable lentiviral system would provide a rapid and easy
alternative for the generation of transgene-free iPSC clones. The usage of polycistronic vectors harboring loxP sites allows transgene
excision from iPSCs via transient expression of Cre recombinase . However, the reprogramming efficiency using these vectors was reported to
be only 0.01% . In 2009 Sommer and colleagues reported an improved lentiviral vector to overcome this limitation by yielding a reprogramming
efficiency of 0.1 to 1.5% . Moreover, the vector could also reprogram peripheral blood cells that are usually quite resistant towards
reprogramming . However, deletion of the loxP-flanked transgene cassette requires introduction of Cre recombinase activity. This activity
has been accomplished by either transfection of iPSCs with a Cre-encoding plasmid or using an adenoviral Cre construct and subsequent
genetic identification of successfully recombined clones. More recently, transgene-free iPSCs were obtained by excising the transgene
cassette by delivery of Cre mRNA . However, this protocol involves daily transfection of mRNA for a week to perform excision. This rather
inefficient and laborious transfection and selection procedure makes Cre/loxP-based iPSC derivation less appealing for obtaining transgene-
free iPSCs. In fact, efficient and reliable induction of Cre recombinase activity in loxP-modified iPSCs and subsequent selection of cleaned
clones represents a roadblock for the widespread use of Cre-deletable iPSC systems. Direct delivery of biologically active Cre protein has
been shown to be a highly efficient and robust method for inducing Cre recombinase activity in mammalian cells . We reported a cell-
permeable recombinant Cre protein that was generated by fusing Cre with the cell-penetrating peptide TAT and a nuclear localization sequence
. The TAT peptide confers cell permeability and the nuclear localization sequence targets the fusion protein to the nucleus. TAT-Cre was
used for site-specific recombination in human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) with more than 90% recombination efficiency . Here, we show rapid
derivation of transgene-free human iPSC clones by combining direct delivery of biologically active TAT-Cre protein with robust reprogramming
by a lentiviral polycistronic vector. We demonstrate that transgene deletion renders iPSCs that resemble more human ESCs with respect to
gene expression than transgene-harboring cells before deletion. Moreover, we show a strong enhancement of differentiation towards the
cardiac lineage in transgene-free iPSCs as compared with loxP-modified iPSCs. The human fibroblasts used in this study were obtained from a
skin punch biopsy of a 24-year-old male after obtaining informed consent and ethical clearance by the ethics committee of the University of
Würzburg, Germany (ethical report number 96/11, dated 10 June 2011). Human fibroblasts were infected with the Human STEMCCA Cre-Excisable
constitutive polycistronic (OKSM) lentiviral vector and were seeded on irradiated mouse embryonic fibroblasts in a reprogramming medium
consisting of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium/F12 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) with 20% KnockOut Serum Replacement (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA), 1 mM non-animal l-glutamine (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1 mM β-mercaptoethanol (Sigma-Aldrich), 1% non-essential amino acids
(Invitrogen), and 10 ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (Invitrogen). After 3 weeks, iPSC-like colonies were picked, expanded on matrigel-
coated dishes and characterized for the pluripotency markers Oct4 (Santacruz Biotechnology, Finnell Street Dallas, Texas 75220 USA) and
SSEA-4 (Millipore, Temecula, CA, USA) antibodies. Human iPSCs were maintained on matrigel-coated dishes in mTeSR™1 (STEMCELL Technologies,
Temecula, CA, USA) or PluriSTEM™ (EMD Millipore, Vancouver, BC, Canada) medium. Human iPSC colonies were treated with alphazyme (1 ml/well
in a six-well plate; PAA, Linz, Austria) for 5 to 10 minutes to obtain single cells. Then 100,000 to 200,000 cells were seeded in each well
of a six-well plate having mTeSR™1 or PluriSTEM™ medium with 10 μM Rock inhibitor (Y27632; Sigma-Aldrich) to prevent the cell apoptosis.
Twenty-four hours later, the medium was changed to mTeSR™1 or PluriSTEM™ containing TAT–Cre (catalogue number SCR508; EMD Millipore) with
different concentrations of 0.5 μM, 1 μM and 2 μM. Cells were incubated with TAT-Cre recombinant protein for 5 hours. Cells were grown for
1 week and colonies were expanded either monoclonally or polyclonally, and then polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed to assess
transgene deletion. Transgene-deleted clones were expanded and characterized further by immunostaining and differentiation. To confirm the
transgene deletion, genomic DNA from TAT-Cre-treated subclones were isolated and PCR was performed with the following conditions: 95°C for
2 minutes; followed by 34 cycles of 94°C for 30 seconds, 60°C for 30 seconds, and 72°C for 45 seconds; followed by a single cycle of 72°C
for 5 minutes using the primers WPRE forward, ATCATGCTATTGCTTCCCGTATGGC and WPRE reverse, GGAGATCCGACTCGTCTGAGG, and β-actin forward,
GGCTACAGCTTCACCACCAC and β-actin reverse, CCACCTTCCAGCAGATGTGG. For iPSC characterization, immunostaining was performed using Oct4 (1:100;
Santacruz Biotechnology) and SSEA-4 (1:200; Millipore) antibodies. Briefly, cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), fixed
with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 minutes and permeabilized in PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100 and 5% fetal calf serum for 30 minutes. Cells
were then incubated overnight with the Oct4 and SSEA-4 antibodies. Next day, secondary antibodies Alexa 488 and Alexa 555 (1:1000; Life
Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) were used to detect and visualize the primary antibodies. All antibodies were diluted in blocking solution.
Micrographs were taken with an Axiovert 200 M microscope (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Badenwürttemberg, Germany). The above immunostaining
protocol was also performed to characterize cardiomyocytes using cardiac Troponin T (cTNT, 1:100; Abcam, Cambridge, England) and α-actinin
(1:200; Sigma-Aldrich) as a primary antibody and Alexa 488 as a secondary antibody. Pluripotency was tested by injection of the test cell
population into the testes of immune-deficient NOD/SCID mice. Then 0.5 × 106 to 5 × 106 cells were injected using a pulled glass capillary
pipette that was advanced via the efferent ducts through the rete testis into the interstitial space of the testis. Animals were euthanized
when palpable tumors were present or at 4 months after injection, whichever came first. The teratomas were fixed in 10% neutral buffered
formalin, dehydrated (graded alcohols), cleared (xylene) and embedded with paraffin wax (formalin fixed paraffin embedded). Then 5 μm
sections were cut, floated on a water bath and picked up on positively charged slides (Probe On Plus). Sections were then deparaffinized in
three changes of xylene, rehydrated in a series of graded alcohols (100% × 2, 70% × 2, 30% × 2, distilled H2O × 2) and hematoxylin and eosin
staining was performed. Karyotype analysis was performed on 20 G-banded metaphase cells for TAT-Cre excised human iPSC clone at p13 by Cell
Line Genetics (Madiso, WI, USA). RNA was isolated using the RNeasy-Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). mRNA transcription levels were evaluated
using the Human HT-12 array (version 4, revision 2; Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), which consists of 47,323 probes and described mRNA features.
All samples were processed at least in duplicate to reduce signals arising from processing artifacts. Data processing was performed using
the GenomeStudio suite version 2011.1 and the Gene expression module version 1.9.4 (both Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). Gene expression
data analysis was carried out with the R and Bioconductor packages, and their intensities were quantile normalized. The differentially
expressed genes were determined by applying the empirical Bayes test statistics, and the Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery method was used
for multiple testing correction. Genes with fold-change >2 and P ≤ 0.5 were considered differentially expressed and were used for subsequent
analysis. The data discussed in this publication have been deposited in the National Center for Biotechnology Information Gene Expression
Omnibus . Human iPSC line del-AR1034ZIMA (del-ARiPS) clone 1.4 was treated with alfazyme to obtain a single-cell suspension. Then 200,000
cells were seeded in one well of a six-well plate in mTeSR™1 medium with 10 μM Rock inhibitor. On the next day, cells were infected with
lentivirus containing EF1α-Cre reporter–puromycin construct (modified from original construct by replacing CMV promoter by EF1α promoter).
Forty-eight hours later, the medium was changed to mTeSR™1 with puromycin (1 μg/ml) for 5 days to obtain colonies with stably integrated Cre
reporter construct. Human iPSCs were maintained on matrigel-coated plates in mTeSR™1 medium until they reached 80% confluency. Cardiac
differentiation was induced by Activin A (5 ng/ml), BMP4 (25 ng/ml) and Chir99021 (5 μM) in RPMI 1640 medium containing B27 and 2 mM
glutamine as a basal medium for 3 days. From day 4, cells were kept in basal medium containing Wnt inhibitor XAV939 for 5 days followed by
further culture in basal medium. Cells (1 × 106) were trypsinized and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes. Cells were then washed
with PBS, permeabilized in PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100 and 5% fetal calf serum for 30 minutes and incubated for 2 hours with cTNT
antibody (1:100; Abcam). No antibody was taken as a negative control. Cells were then washed once with PBS containing 0.1% Tween-20 and
resuspended in PBS containing 0.1% Triton-X 100 and 5% fetal calf serum and secondary antibody Alexa 488 anti-mouse IgG (1:1,000; Life
Technologies) for 1 hour in the dark. Finally, cells were washed again with PBS containing 0.1% Tween-20 and measured for FACS analysis.
Analysis was performed by the Flow Jo program. Previous studies have shown successful derivation of transgene-free iPSCs by excising a loxP-
flanked transgene cassette with Cre plasmid , Adeno-Cre or Cre mRNA . We aimed at improving this approach by employing Cre protein
transduction to enhance the efficiency as well as to accelerate the process of obtaining transgene-free iPSCs. Our protocol does not require
repeated transfections or viral preparations (see schematic overview in Figure 1). To generate human iPSCs we utilized the lentiviral vector
STEMCCA, which was shown to be more efficient than earlier Cre-excisable lentiviral vectors . We infected human dermal fibroblasts and
obtained the AR1034ZIMA loxP-modified iPSC line (fl-ARiPS). As described in the scheme, we treated a single cell suspension of fl-ARiPS
cells with a single application of TAT-Cre recombinant protein. TAT-Cre-treated cells were expanded either monoclonally or polyclonally to
yield transgene-excised iPSCs ready for further analyses (Figure 1B). For the confirmation of transgene excision, PCR against the viral WPRE
element was used (Figure 1C). Scheme of induced pluripotent stem cell generation and subsequent Cre protein transduction to obtain
transgene-free induced pluripotent stem cells. (A) Reprogramming of human fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) via
lentiviral vector STEMCCA. (B) Schematic representation of TAT-Cre treatment to obtain transgene-free iPSCs. (C) Schematic representation of
the genomic locus before (top) and after (bottom) Cre-mediated recombination. LTR, long terminal repeat; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
First, we used Cre protein transduction conditions that we elaborated for Cre-mediated excision in human ESCs cultivated on mouse feeder
cells . Moreover, to make it practically more feasible we adopted our iPSC lines to feeder-free conditions, which we assumed to result in
higher transgene deletion efficiency with a lower concentration of TAT-Cre. In particular, we prepared a single cell suspension of fl-
ARiPSCs by treating them with alfazyme and seeded them on matrigel-coated plates. Twenty-four hours later, cells were treated with different
concentrations of TAT-Cre for 1 to 5 hours. TAT-Cre-treated fl-ARiPS monoclones were expanded and analyzed for transgene deletion. All three
monoclones analyzed that were treated with 2 μM TAT-Cre showed excision of the transgene, while in the case of 0.5 and 1 μM TAT-Cre
treatment we observed one and two deleted clones, respectively (Figure 2A). To explore the possibility of deletion and subsequent polyclonal
cell expansion, we treated the loxP-modified iPSCs with 0.5, 1 and 2 μM TAT-Cre for 5 hours and expanded them polyclonally. Genomic PCR
analysis revealed a faint band in the cases of 0.5 and 1 μM, and no band was observed after treatment with 2 μM TAT-Cre, indicating a high
excision efficiency that was consistent with the monoclonal analysis (Figure 2B) and previously reported results employing human ESCs . In
order to validate the PCR results we mixed genomic DNA from loxP-modified and transgene-deleted iPSC clones in a standardized manner
representing corresponding deletion efficiencies. PCR analysis of this dilution series yielded a faint band even in the case of a 99%
mixture, while no band was observed with 100% deleted DNA (Figure 2C). Protein transduction was repeated with seven monoclones treated with
1.5, 3 and 6 μM TAT-Cre in each case. As listed in Figure 2D, all clones analyzed showed the deletion of transgenes. Increasing
concentrations of TAT-Cre beyond 3 μM resulted in significant cell death and affected the recovery of iPSC colonies after the treatment
(data not shown). Upon using higher concentrations of TAT-Cre, excessive cell death was prevented by shortening the time duration of TAT-Cre
treatment (5 μM TAT-Cre for 1 hour) without compromising the recombination efficiency. We obtained seven transgene-free clones out of 12
clones tested (Figure 2D). To further confirm the efficiency of TAT-Cre, we monitored the recombination event by integrating a double
fluorescence Cre reporter cassette through lentiviral transduction of fl-ARiPSC. We observed more than 95% of cells showing GFP expression
with 2 μM TAT-Cre for 5 hours (Figure 2E), confirming the high recombination efficiency determined by PCR analyses. Assessment of TAT-Cre-
mediated transgene deletion efficiency. (A) Genomic polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the confirmation of transgene deletion. Three
individual clones were treated with 0.5, 1 or 2 μM TAT-Cre for 5 hours and PCR was performed using primers against WPRE and β-actin. F,
AR1034ZIMA loxP-modified iPSC line clone 1 (fl-ARiPSC); NC, negative (water) control; WPRE, viral element; BA, β-actin. (B) Genomic PCR for
the confirmation of transgene deletion in a polyclonal population. fl-ARiPSCs were treated with 0.5, 1 or 2 μM TAT-Cre for 5 hours. Cells
were expanded polyclonally and PCR was performed using primers against WPRE and β-actin. (C) Validation of genomic PCR analysis. Genomic DNA
from loxP-modified and transgene deleted cells were mixed to create defined dilutions as given. (D) Quantification of transgene-deleted
clones using different concentrations and time duration of TAT-Cre. (E) ARiPS-Cre reporter cell line was treated with 2 μM Cre protein to
validate recombination efficiency. Cre-mediated recombination induced the expression of green fluorescence protein (EGFP), by deleting the
loxP-flanking RFP gene. Scale bar: 120 μm. To assess the pluripotency status of excised del-ARiPS clones, cells were expanded until passage
15 and stained with pluripotency-associated markers Oct4 and SSEA-4. Cells stained positive for both nuclear Oct4 and cell surface marker
SSEA-4 (Figure 3A). Furthermore, we performed genome-wide gene expression profiling on del-ARiPS cells and fl-ARiPS cells by microarray
analysis. The gene expression datasets were subjected to the recently published bioinformatics assay PluriTest to assess the pluripotency
status of reprogrammed cells. According to this analysis, both fl-ARiPS cells and del-ARiPS cells cluster with human ESC line HES I3 in the
red-colored background, indicating pluripotency, while fibroblasts are located in the blue region, confirming their nonpluripotent nature
(Figure 3B). Notably, del-ARiPS cells appear slightly more shifted to the HES I3 cells as compared with fl-ARiPS cells. Expression profiling
of pluripotency-associated genes Oct4, Sox2 and Rex1 as well as fibroblast genes Thy1 and Col5a2 showed similar expression pattern across
the iPSCs and human ESCs. Again del-ARiPS cells appear more similar to HES I3 than fl-ARiPS cells (Figure 3C). In fact, there are 63
differentially expressed genes between HES I3 and del-ARiPS cells as compared with more than 130 genes in the case of the parental fl-ARiPS
clone (Figure 3D). Furthermore, excised clone could give rise to teratoma consisting of all three germ layers, confirming its in vivo
differentiation potential (Figure 3E), and showed no chromosomal aberrations as judged by karyotype analysis (Figure 3F). Characterization
of transgene-free induced pluripotent stem cells. (A) Pluripotency analysis of transgene-excised clones. del-ARiPSCs stain positive for
pluripotency-associated markers Oct4 and SSEA-4. Scale bar: 40 μm. (B) PluriTest analysis of HES I3, fl-ARiPSC, del-ARiPSC cells and
parental fibroblasts to assess pluripotency induction. Cells are distributed based on pluripotency and novelty scores, as indicated by color
density background. Red, pluripotency; blue, nonpluripotency. (C) Heat-map representation of pluripotency and fibroblast-specific markers.
Expression of pluripotency-associated markers Oct4, Sox2 and Rex1 and fibroblast specific markers Thy1 and Col5a2 in induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs) and human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) used for this study. (D) Venn diagram showing differentially expressed genes.
Comparison of differentially expressed genes amongst HES I3, fl-ARiPSC and del-ARiPSC cells. (E) Histological analysis of teratoma analysis
of excised clone. Teratoma analysis after injection of the excised clone into SCID mice showed formation of all three germ layers: ectoderm
(primitive neuroepithelium), mesoderm (cartilage, muscle) and endoderm (glands). (F) Karyotype analysis of transgene-excised clone.
Cytogenetic analysis on G-banded metaphase cells from excised clone (p13) and all 20 cells demonstrated a normal male karyotype. HES I3,
human ESC I3 line; fl-ARiPS, fl-ARiPS iPSC clone 1; del-ARiPS, transgene-free daughter clones of ARIPS iPSC clone 1. To explore whether the
deletion of transgenes not only results in genome-wide transcriptional differences but also has functional consequences, we analyzed the
differentiation potential by differentiation into the cardiac lineage. To achieve cardiac differentiation, we modified the protocol
described by Carpenter and colleagues with the inclusion of modulation of the Wnt signaling pathway using Chir99021 to enhance cardiac
differentiation. We employed this protocol for the cardiac differentiation of fl-ARiPS cells and a polyclonal TAT-Cre-treated daughter cell
population (2 μM TAT-Cre for 5 hours) (Figure 4A,B). We decided to perform polyclonal expansion in order to reduce the time duration of the
entire procedure and to check whether it is possible to see the overall enhancement in differentiation capacity of a polyclonal TAT-Cre-
treated population. Indeed, flow cytometry analysis using cTNT as a cardiomyocyte-specific marker indicates a strongly increased
differentiation capability of del-ARiPS cells. More than 55% of differentiated del-ARiPS cells are cTNT-positive, whereas only 37% of the
parental fl-ARiPSC cells stained positive for cTNT (Figure 4C). Improved cardiac differentiation potential of transgene-free induced
pluripotent stem cells. (A) Genomic polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the confirmation of transgene deletion. fl-ARiPS clone 1 was treated
with 2 μM TAT-Cre for 5 hours and PCR was performed using primers against WPRE and β-actin (BA). (B) Cardiomyocyte differentiation of iPSCs.
fl-ARiPS clone 1 and its TAT-Cre-treated polyclonal cell progeny were differentiated towards cardiomyocyte lineage using cardio-inductive
medium. Cells were stained with α-actinin antibody at day 15. Scale bar: 40 μm. (C) Flow cytometry analysis of cardiac-specific troponin T
(cTNT) staining at day 15 of cardiac differentiation. Cardiac differentiation showed an increase from 37 to 56% cTNT-positive cardiomyocytes
in the case of TAT-Cre-treated cell populations. The experiment was repeated twice with similar results. In this study we demonstrate an
efficient way of obtaining iPSCs with minimal genetic modifications by combining the widely applied and robust lentiviral reprogramming
approach with the highly efficient and less invasive TAT-Cre-mediated transgene deletion. Earlier studies have reported the deletion of
transgenes by delivering Cre as a plasmid, as Adeno-Cre, or by mRNA transfection . The protocol elaborated by Soldner and colleagues yielded
only 16 transgene-deleted clones out of 180 analyzed after transfecting iPSCs with a Cre-encoding plasmid and subsequent selection either
with green fluorescent protein fluorescence or puromycin . The relatively low efficiency might be due to the transient transfection of Cre,
which is limiting intracellular DNA recombinase activity. Sommer and colleagues and Somers and colleagues used Adeno-Cre and Cre-IRES-Puro
constructs respectively to achieve higher excision efficiencies . A more recent study by Awe and colleagues demonstrate transgene excision
in iPSC clones with putative clinical grade status using Adeno-Cre-mediated transgene deletion. During their transgene excision analysis the
authors obtained only one transgene-excised subclone out of six Adeno-Cre-treated clones . Furthermore, deletion approaches using Cre
plasmids or Adeno-Cre constructs require transfection and subsequent selection of cells with Cre recombinase activity either by flow
cytometry sorting or by antibiotic selection. Such relatively complicated steps are undesirable because they might be stressful to the cells
. Moreover, there is the possibility that Cre-encoding plasmids or viral constructs integrate into the genome . More recently, the group of
George Daley has reported transgene excision by transfecting loxP-modified iPSC with Cre-encoding mRNA. Notably, this procedure involves
daily transfections of Cre mRNA for 4 hours up to 7 days, which again represents a complicated and stressful procedure for the cells. The
protocol developed in our study, in contrast, requires just a single application of TAT-Cre recombinant protein for 5 hours due to its high
recombination efficiency. By this, the use of TAT-Cre accelerates the process of obtaining transgene-free iPSCs with minimal technical
complexity. During our analysis, transgene-free iPSCs remain pluripotent. Moreover, microarray analysis indicates enhancement in the quality
of iPSCs, as transgene-excised iPSCs are more similar to human ESCs with respect to gene expression profiling, confirming previous studies .
In fact, transgene-free iPSCs exhibit an improved differentiation potential . In our study, we show enhanced cardiac differentiation of TAT-
Cre-treated polyclonal iPSCs. By this we show an improvement in differentiation capacity of a polyclonal cell population after the removal
of transgenes with Cre-mediated recombination. This makes TAT-Cre protein an attractive tool to obtain transgene-free iPSCs even in a
polyclonal manner as recently suggested , circumventing the laborious selection procedure of transgene-excised clones. In conclusion, our
study provides a simple, rapid and robust protocol for the generation of superior transgene-free iPSCs suitable for disease modeling, drug
and toxicity screening, as well as cell replacement therapies. In summary, our study outlines efficient derivation of factor-free human iPSC
lines by combinatorial use of the robust lentivirus human STEMCCA vector and highly efficient TAT-Cre protein transduction. We have shown
enhanced quality of transgene-free iPSCs using microarray analysis and cardiac differentiation. Moreover, we show polyclonal expansion of
transgene-deleted clones that circumvents laborious selection procedures and time-consuming analysis of subclones. cTNT: cardiac Troponin T;
del-ARiPS: AR1034ZIMA transgene-free daughter clones of ARIPS iPSC clone 1; fl-ARiPS: AR1034ZIMA loxP-flanked transgene ARiPS iPSC clone 1;
HES I3: human ESC I3 line; ESC: embryonic stem cell; iPSC: induced pluripotent stem cell; PBS: phosphate-buffered saline; PCR: polymerase
chain reaction. MLu, MLi, NG and VC are salaried employees at EMD Millipore. The remaining authors declare that they have no competing
interests. AK was responsible for the conception, design, collection and/or assembly of data, data analysis, interpretation, manuscript
writing, and final approval of the manuscript. MLu, MLi, NG, VC and TS collected and/or assembled data. RPT performed data analysis and
manuscript writing. FE was responsible for conception and design, financial support, collection and/or assembly of data, data analysis and
interpretation, manuscript writing, and final approval of manuscript. All authors contributed to the final draft of the manuscript. The
authors thank Gustavo Mostoslavsky (Boston University School of Medicine, USA) for providing the STEMCCA construct and Sarah Kittel-
Schneider as well as Andreas Reif (Klinik und Poliklinik für Psychiatrie, Würzburg, Germany) for providing human fibroblasts. They would
also like to thank Andrea Hofmann for helping to obtain gene expression data. The authors are indebted to Martina Gebhardt, Kathrin Vogt and
Nicole Russ for excellent technical support and to all members of the Stem Cell Engineering Group for support and valuable discussions and
critical reading of the manuscript. This work was supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG (ED79/1-2) and the German
Ministry of Education and Research, BMBF (01 GN 0813) and by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany.
