Immunocompromised patients may develop severe chronic anaemia when infected by human parvovirus B19 (B19V). However, this is not the case in
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients with good adherence to highly active antiretroviral treatment (HAART). In this study,
we investigated the clinical evolution of five HIV-infected patients receiving HAART who had B19V infections confirmed by serum polymerase
chain reaction. Four of the patients were infected with genotype 1a strains and the remaining patient was infected with a genotype 3b
strain. Anaemia was detected in three of the patients, but all patients recovered without requiring immunoglobulin and/or blood
transfusions. In all cases, the attending physicians did not suspect the B19V infections. There was no apparent relationship between the
infecting genotype and the clinical course. In the HAART era, B19V infections in HIV-positive patients may be limited, subtle or unapparent.
Parvovirus B19 (B19V), a member of the genus Erythrovirus within the Parvoviridae family, has been grouped into three distinct genotypes:
(i) genotype 1, with subtypes 1a (the prototypic virus) and 1b, (ii) genotype 2 (A6 and LaLi strains) and (iii) genotype 3, with subtypes 3a
(V9 strains) and 3b (D91.1 strains) (Nguyen et al. 1999, 2002, Servant et al. 2002, Fauquet et al. 2005). B19V primarily infects erythroid
cells, leading to transient inhibition of erythropoiesis. In immunocompetent individuals, it usually causes an acute and self-limited
childhood disease known as erythema infectiosum (EI) (“slapped cheek” rash or 5th disease). Adults with EI (particularly females) frequently
present with joint symptoms. However, most patients are asymptomatic (Woolf et al. 1989). Immunocompromised patients who are unable to
produce neutralising antibodies may develop severe chronic anaemia. In human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients with residual
immunity, the clinical manifestations, if any, are those of fifth disease (Frickhofen & Young 1990). With the advent of highly active
antiretroviral treatment (HAART), several studies, including one from our group (de Azevedo et al. 2012), have shown a decrease in cases of
anaemia caused by B19V (Mylonakis et al. 1999, Ware & Moore 2001). To better understand the importance of B19V infection in the HAART era, a
study to estimate the frequency of B19V seroconversion in a cohort of HIV-infected patients was conducted by our group during an eight-year
period (2001-2008) at the Infectious Diseases Department of Antonio Pedro University Hospital (HUAP) at the Fluminense Federal University
(Niterói, state of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) (de Azevedo et al. 2009). Seroconversions were detected in approximately 30% (28 of 88) of our
anti-B19 IgG-negative patients, a similar proportion to that found by others (Chernak et al. 1995, Mylonakis et al. 1999). Most
seroconversions occurred during incidence peaks of a B19V infection in Niterói (Oliveira et al. 2005, de Azevedo et al. 2012). All sera from
the 88 patients were tested by polymerase chain reactions (PCRs) and B19 DNA was detected in five of the patients, four of whom also
exhibited seroconversion. This paper describes the clinical and laboratory findings of B19V infections in these five HIV-infected patients.
Data, such as haemoglobin (Hb) concentration, CD4+ T cell counts and B19V IgG and IgM serology, were retrieved from a previous study by our
group (de Azevedo et al. 2012). ELISAs (Biotrin InternationalTM, Dublin, Ireland) were performed, according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, to detect IgG and IgM antibodies to B19 in all sera. The following definitions were used in this study: (i) anaemia was
defined according to the World Health Organization (WHO 2001) criteria as a Hb concentration below 13 g/dL in men and below 12 g/dL in women
and (ii) severe anaemia was defined as a Hb concentration below 7 g/dL. PCRs were performed to detect and genotype B19V. Briefly, viral DNA
was extracted from serum samples of 88 HIV-positive patients using a QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. For the screening of B19V DNA, PCR was performed using the primers E1905F (nt 1905-1923) and E1987R (nt
2007-1987), which amplify a 102-bp fragment of the NS1 gene as previously described by Nguyen et al. (2002), with some modifications (de
Azevedo et al. 2012). This PCR can routinely detect as few as 20 copies of the B19V DNA (Nguyen et al. 2012). To genotype the B19V strains
detected in HIV-positive patients, a semi-nested PCR using the primer pairs P12/P16 (4127-4689) and P13/P16 (4214-4689) for partial
amplification of the VP1/VP2 capsid gene was performed as described by Durigon et al. (1993). The 476-bp amplicons were purified using GFXTM
PCR DNA and the Gel Band Purification kit (GE, Healthcare, UK) and were then subjected to direct sequencing using the BigDye terminator v.
1.1 cycle sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA) (Otto et al. 2008). Sequences were retrieved and analysed by the Bio-Edit sequence
alignment editor, v. 7.0.1 (mbio.ncsu.edu/BioEdit/bioedit.html) and they were compared with the following sequences available in GenBank
(Hall 1999): genotype 1a: M24682-Wi (UK); genotype 1b: DQ35706 and DQ35705 (Ghana); genotype 2: AY06477-A6 (Denmark) and AY04416-LaLi;
genotype 3a: NC0049-V9 (Italy); genotype 3b: Z68146 (UK), AF162273 (Italy), AY083234-D01.1 (France), DQ234778, DQ234779.2 (Ghana), EF089227,
EF089229.1 (Brazil/PA) and AY647977.1 (Brazil/SP). Ethics - Written informed consent was obtained from all volunteers and the project was
approved by the Hospital Review Board (CMM/HUAP 134/05). Case 1 - A male patient diagnosed with acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)
in 1996 at 41 years of age, with poor adherence to HAART. The observation period started in December 2001 (CD4+ T cell count: 158 cells/mm3;
anti B19V IgG: negative). There was a gradual decrease in CD4+ T cell counts, which reached 3 cells/mm3 in August 2004. In February 2005,
the patient was hospitalised because of fever, hepatosplenomegaly, severe anaemia (Hb: 5.9 g/dL) and multiple opportunistic infections (oro-
oesophageal candidiasis, perianal condylomata and herpes). The patient underwent a bone marrow biopsy (February 2005) and was started on
empirical treatment for atypical mycobacteriosis. Clinical improvement was observed and the patient did well afterward, which was attributed
to a better adherence to HAART (lamivudine, stavudine, efavirenz and lopinavir/ritonavir). The biopsy report described “overall cellularity
of 60%, with presence of the three series. The myeloid/erythroid ratio was 2:1, with predominance of immature forms, numerous myeloblasts
and moderate increase in the number of red blood cells with megaloblastic maturation. Megakaryocytes were observed in the usual number, but
with frequent atypical forms. There were rare erythroblasts with nuclear viral inclusions consistent with B19V. Conclusion: myelodysplastic
changes secondary to HIV infection, compatible with B19V infection”. The patient received neither immunoglobulin therapy nor a blood
transfusion. There was a gradual recovery from anaemia during 2005. In November 2005, stavudine was replaced by zidovudine to improve
adherence. In December 2005, seroconversion (anti-B19V IgG-positive and anti-B19V IgM-positive) and the presence of B19V DNA (strain RJ
011/2005, genotype 1a) were both detected in association with an increase in the CD4+ T cell count (34 cells/mm3) and resolution of anaemia
(Hb: 13.9 g/dL) (Table I). A subsequent serum sample (June 2006) was negative for B19V DNA. TABLE I - Laboratory data of Case 1 Month/year
Dec/2001 Mar/2002 Aug/2002 Jul/2003 Feb/2004 Aug/2004 Feb/2005 Mar/2005 Jul/2005 Sep/2005 Dec/2005 IgG anti-B19V NEG - NEG NEG NEG NEG - - -
- POS IgM anti-B19V NEG - NEG NEG NEG NEG - - - - POS PCR-B19 - - - - - NEG - - - - POS CD4+ (cells/mm3) 158 - 118 45 9 3 - - 1 - 34 Hb
(g/dL) - 13.1 - - - - 5.9 6.9 10 10.5 13.9 B19V: parvovirus B19; Hb: haemoglobin; NEG: negative; PCR: polymerase chain reaction; POS:
positive; -: lack of data in the medical records. B19V: parvovirus B19; Hb: haemoglobin; NEG: negative; PCR: polymerase chain reaction; POS:
positive; -: lack of data in the medical records. Case 2 - A female patient diagnosed with AIDS in 1997 at 54 years of age, when she was
started on HAART with good adherence to therapy and immune recovery. The observation period began in December 2001 (CD4+ T cell count: 598
cells/mm3). Seroconversion to B19V (anti-B19 IgG) was observed in June 2005. There is no record of blood counts during the period of
seroconversion (November 2004-June 2005). During this period, there were no complaints or changes in physical examination suggestive of
anaemia. A serum sample collected in June 2005 (strain RJ 026/2005, genotype 1a) was B19V DNA-positive by PCR. The next available blood
sample (September 2005) remained B19V DNA-positive (Table II), but the subsequent sample (January 2006) was negative for B19V DNA. TABLE II
- Laboratory data of Case 2 Month/year Dec/2001 May/2002 Oct/2002 Oct/2003 Jun/2003 Jul/2004 Nov/2004 Jun/2005 Sep/2005 IgG anti-B19V NEG -
NEG NEG NEG NEG NEG POS POS IgM anti-B19V NEG - NEG NEG NEG NEG NEG NEG NEG PCR-B19 - - - - - - NEG POS POS CD4+ (cells/mm3) 589 - 241 474
702 712 769 613 702 Hb (g/dL) - 12.6 13.5 - - - - - 13 B19V: parvovirus B19; Hb: haemoglobin; NEG: negative; PCR: polymerase chain reaction;
POS: positive; -: lack of data in the medical records. B19V: parvovirus B19; Hb: haemoglobin; NEG: negative; PCR: polymerase chain reaction;
POS: positive; -: lack of data in the medical records. Case 3 - A woman diagnosed with AIDS in 1996 at 36 years of age, when she was started
on HAART, followed by immunological recovery. The observation period began in January 2002 (CD4+ T count: 520 cells/mm3). B19V
seroconversion (anti-B19 IgM and anti-B19 IgG) was observed in September 2005 (CD4+ T count: 649 cells/mm3). At that time, there were no
complaints or physical examination changes suggestive of anaemia. A serum sample collected in September 2005 (strain RJ 071/2005, genotype
3b) was B19V DNA-positive (Table III). Two subsequent samples collected in June 2006 and September 2006 were, respectively, positive and
negative for B19V DNA. TABLE III - Laboratory data of Case 3 Month/year Jan/2002 Oct/2002 Dec/2002 Apr/2003 Sep/2003 May/2004 Aug/2004
Feb/2005 Sep/2005 IgG anti-B19V NEG NEG - - - - NEG NEG POS IgM anti-B19V NEG NEG - - - - NEG NEG POS PCR-B19 - - - - - - - NEG POS CD4+
(cells/mm3) 520 681 483 610 649 Hb (g/dL) - - 13.7 13.2 13.9 13.1 - - - B19V: parvovirus B19; Hb: haemoglobin; NEG: negative; PCR:
polymerase chain reaction; POS: positive; -: lack of data in the medical records. B19V: parvovirus B19; Hb: haemoglobin; NEG: negative; PCR:
polymerase chain reaction; POS: positive; -: lack of data in the medical records. Case 4 - A man diagnosed with AIDS in November 2003 at 33
years of age. At that time, he presented with mild anaemia (Hb = 12.8 g/dL) attributed to HIV infection. He began HAART in September 2004.
The observation period started in November 2003 (CD4+ T cell count: 215 cells/mm3). B19V seroconversion (anti-B19 IgG) was observed in April
2007 (CD4+ T cell count: 504 cells/mm3). Hb levels below 13.0 g/dL, suggestive of mild anaemia, were observed from November 2003-July 2006,
before the period of seroconversion (anti-B19 IgG) (July 2006-April 2007). A sample collected in July 2006 (strain RJ 350/2006, genotype 1a)
was B19V DNA-positive (Table IV). A subsequent sample (April 2007) was negative for B19V DNA. TABLE IV - Laboratory data of Case 4
Month/year Nov/2003 Jan/2006 Jul/2006 Apr/2007 Jan/2008 Mar/2008 Jul/2008 IgG anti-B19V NEG NEG NEG POS POS POS POS IgM anti-B19V NEG NEG
NEG NEG NEG NEG NEG PCR-B19 - NEG POS NEG - - - CD4+ (cells/mm3) 215 364 327 504 539 285 528 Hb (g/dL) 12.8 12.3 12.5 14.2 - 13.9 13.6 B19V:
parvovirus B19; Hb: haemoglobin; NEG: negative; PCR: polymerase chain reaction; POS: positive; -: lack of data in the medical records. B19V:
parvovirus B19; Hb: haemoglobin; NEG: negative; PCR: polymerase chain reaction; POS: positive; -: lack of data in the medical records. Case
5 - A man diagnosed with AIDS in November 2001 at 35 years of age. The observation period began in January 2002 (CD4+ T cell count: 80
cells/mm3), when HAART (zidovudine, lamivudine and efavirenz) was started and it ended in October 2005 (CD4+ T cell count: 244 cells/mm3).
The patient had several opportunistic infections and anaemia during the follow-up and a decrease in Hb level (5.9 g/dL) was observed in June
2002. In addition, CD4+ T cell counts less than 100 cells/mm3 were observed until November 2002. As the first test for the presence of IgG
antibodies was indeterminate or weakly positive, these samples were tested again and found to be negative. Nevertheless, B19 DNA was
detected in one of the samples (November 2002, strain RJ 109/2002, genotype 1a). At this time, the Hb level was 9.14 g/dL and, thus, no
longer compatible with severe anaemia (Table V). There is no record of a B19V outbreak during 2002/2003 (Oliveira et al. 2005). TABLE V -
Laboratory data of Case 5 Month/year Jan/2002 Jun/2002 Nov/2002 Jun/2003 Jul/2004 May/2005 Oct/2005 Test 1 IgG anti-B19V IND NEG +/-a IND
NEG IND IND Test 2 IgG antiB19V NEG NEG NEG NEG NEG NEG NEG Test 3 IgG anti-B19V NEG NEG NEG NEG NEG NEG NEG IgM anti-B19V NEG NEG NEG NEG
NEG NEG NEG PCR-B19 - NEG POS NEG - - - CD4+ (cells/mm3) 80 61 36 314 253 344 244 Hb (g/dL) - 5.92 9.14 11.3 12.3 - 13.7 a: weakly positive;
B19V: parvovirus B19; Hb: haemoglobin; IND: indetermined; NEG: negative; PCR: polymerase chain reaction; POS: positive; -: lack of data in
the medical records. a: weakly positive; B19V: parvovirus B19; Hb: haemoglobin; IND: indetermined; NEG: negative; PCR: polymerase chain
reaction; POS: positive; -: lack of data in the medical records. According to sequence analysis of the VP1/VP2 capsid region, the strains RJ
011/2005, RJ 026/2005, RJ 109/2002 and RJ 350/2006 shared high nucleotide (nt) identity (100-99%) with 1a B19V isolates from other countries
(EU78564, M2468, M13178, EU478541, EU14278 and JN211184). One strain (RJ 071/2005) displayed 99.3-97.2% nt identity with 3b B19V Brazilian
isolates (EF089227 and EF089229). Based on their nt identity with other B19V isolates previously described, four of the B19V strains in this
study were characterised as belonging to genotype 1a and one B19V strain was characterised as belonging to genotype 3b. This is the first
study to analyse clinical manifestations in HIV-infected patients during an outbreak of B19V in Brazil. Persistent B19 infection has been
reported to be associated with HIV infection, possibly due to inability to mount a protective B19-specific antibody response (Chernak et al.
1995, van Elsacker-Niele et al. 1996) and some reports have shown that complete remission of B19-associated pure red cell aplasia can be
achieved just by treating patients with HAART (Mylonakis et al. 1999, Ware & Moore 2001). Our findings show that the impact of restoring the
immune response by either starting or continuing HAART may explain the reduction and even the elimination, of severe haematological changes
caused by B19V infections, even before a detectable increase in the number of CD4+ T cells in the blood occurs (Cases 1, 4 and 5). Although
anaemia had been detected in three patients (2 of whom had severe anaemia), all of the patients recovered and none required immunoglobulin
and/or blood transfusions, including the two patients for whom no data existed in the medical records regarding the occurrence of anaemia.
Additionally, our results also show that B19 infection may be apparent only in retrospective analyses, as there are many causes of anaemia
in HIV-infected patients, including co-infection by mycobacteria, fungus or cytomegalovirus, adverse drug effects, lymphoma or the direct
effect of HIV infection itself on the bone marrow (Abkowitz et al. 1997, Koduri 2000). As there are usually no clinical clues of a B19V
infection in these patients, the presence of anaemia, especially during B19V epidemics, should alert the physician to the possibility of B19
infection. One of our patients (Case 3) had viraemia persisting for at least nine months (from September 2005-June 2006). This propensity to
develop protracted B19V viraemias in HIV-infected and other immunosuppressed individuals was described long ago (Kurtzman et al. 1989b,
Weiland et al. 1989, Frickhofen et al. 1990, Gyllensten et al. 1994). Prolonged viraemias have also been described in healthy blood donors
(Hitzler & Runkel 2002). Dissociation between the serological and molecular markers was observed in Case 5, most likely due to the inability
of this immunocompromised patient to produce neutralising antibodies. According to Kurtzman et al. (1989a), the immune response may be
quantitatively and qualitatively altered by immunosuppression or during persistent infections. Consequently, in this clinical context,
diagnostic genome detection has been advocated by some authors (Calvet et al. 1999). It is well known that genotype 1 is the most common
B19V genotype detected world-wide (Servant-Delmas et al. 2010). In this study, genotype 1 was detected in four of the five HIV-infected
patients. This genotype was also detected in EI patients during outbreaks in Niterói (Pereira et al. 2010). Unexpectedly, a genotype 3b
strain was detected in a sample from September 2005. Ferry et al. (2009) found that the detection of B19V genotype 2 or 3 DNA was infrequent
in the blood samples of a large cohort of immunocompromised, HIV-infected anaemic patients, despite the use of highly sensitive real-time
PCR methods. All three genotypes have been identified in Brazil, although genotype 1 is the most common (Sanabani et al. 2006, Freitas et
al. 2008, Keller et al. 2009, Garcia 2010). Genotype 3b was identified in a serum sample obtained from a patient with systemic lupus
erythematosus in 1999 in Belém, state of Pará (Freitas et al. 2008); in a sample from a patient from São Paulo, state of São Paulo, with
anaemia after a kidney transplantation in 2004 (Keller et al. 2009) and in children with exanthaematic disease (Freitas et al. 2008). This
study had the limitations inherent in retrospective studies involving the review of medical records. One such limitation was the long
interval between blood collections. These long intervals made it difficult to precisely know the time of B19V seroconversion and they
prevented complete analysis of the interactions between serological (especially IgM) and molecular markers. Another limitation was not
performing quantitative PCR (qPCR), as it is known that the virus may persist for a long time and maintain persistent viraemias in HIV-
positive patients (Frickhofen et al. 1990, Miao et al. 2012). However, the following evidence of primary infections in our patients was
found: (i) the previous serum samples (in relation to the PCR-positive samples) were negative by PCR, (ii) the subsequent samples (in
relation to the PCR-positive samples) were also negative by PCR, (iii) seroconversions were observed in four of the five cases and (iv) all
but one case occurred during an outbreak of B19V infection in Niterói. If these positive PCRs corresponded to long persistent infections in
HIV-positive patients who were recovering their immunity, a decrease in the intensity of the viraemia would be expected by the time of
seroconversion, together with a switch from positive to negative PCR results. This outcome did not occur, as the PCR results changed from
negative to positive at the time of seroconversion and then changed from positive to negative afterward. Considering the high sensitivity of
qPCR and the long intervals between the blood collections, the use of this technique would be expected to detect low DNA levels in the blood
samples despite the presence of circulating IgG antibodies. However, this finding would not change the interpretation of the obtained
results. In conclusion, our findings show that B19V infections in HIV-infected patients may be limited, subtle and apparent only in
retrospective analyses due to the variety of causes of anaemia in these patients and the adequate use of HAART. The finding of four strains
of genotype 1 and one strain of genotype 3 is consistent with their relative frequency in Brazil. There were no apparent relationships
between the infecting genotype and the clinical course. To Dr Jussara P Nascimento (in memoriam), from UFF, for providing human parvovirus
tests, and to the general practitioners from the Department of Infectious Diseases/HUAP, for clinical support. Financial support: CNPq
(473432/2010-20)
