An eight-year-old girl presented with complaints of intermittent discharge from a pit situated in the medial surface of right pinna since
early childhood. The discharge was scanty, foul-smelling and mucoid, and occasionally purulent. The frequency had increased in the last year
with development of a swelling just below the pit that often got inflamed and caused pain. On examination, an opening was noted just above
the lobule leading to a swelling that reached the post-auricular sulcus (Figure 1). An area of scarring and pigmentation in the lateral
surface of the pinna in immediate vicinity to the external auditory canal (EAC) â€“ reminiscent of past inflammations involving the EAC skin,
could be seen that corresponded to the sinus tract (Figure 2A). Also, similar pits, which were asymptomatic were noted on the ascending
helix of the right (Figure 2A) as well as left pinna (Figure 2B). After controlling the infection with antibiotics, a sinogram was ordered
to assess the post-auricular lesion, which showed a sinus tract that ballooned in to the soft tissue of the neck, just below the mastoid
process and EAC, and posterior to the ramus of the mandible (Figure 3). The tract was excised under general anesthesia. Peroperatively, it
was found to end blindly stopping just short of invading the parotid tissue. Peri-auricular pits are congenital stigmata commonly
encountered by clinicians when they become infected and symptomatic. They might lead to sinuses, fistulae, cysts, or simply end in blind
tracts, and are mostly noted in the pre-auricular region(1) (above the tragus, in the region of incisura terminalis), but might be
intraauricular(2) or post-auricular. However, the clinical and embryologic implications could be different depending on their location and
composition. The pinna is formed by the union of six cartilaginous hillocks (of His) derived from the first two branchial arches. The
antitragus, antihelix, lobule and lower portion of helix are formed from the second arch, while the rest of the pinna is derived from the
first. Pre-auricular and intra-auricular sinuses/cysts are manifestations of faulty union of the two branchial arch derivatives; they are
sort of inclusion cysts/tracts and are innocuous.(1) However, clinically identical cysts, sinuses or tracts may be seen in the posterior
aspect of pinna and upper neck whose origin cannot be explained by the inclusion or entrapped tissue theory. In truth, they are duplications
of the EAC, and are derived from malformations of the first branchial sinus which contributes to the development of the EAC.(3) These may
either be lined by epithelium (type I) or formed by both ectodermal and mesodermal components (type II),(4) thereby often draining in the
EAC or in the neck, and are in close proximity to the parotid gland and facial nerve.(1) These make them vulnerable during surgical
exploration. This particular child coincidentally had both branchial arch and cleft anomaly clinically presenting as pits in close anatomic
proximity. It becomes very difficult in such cases to differentiate an inclusion cyst/sinus from a type I first branchial cleft anomaly
which is in intimate relation with the membranous EAC.(5) The situation might be misleading, and congenital syndromic disorders(1) and the
involvement of vital structures,(1,5) both of which are known associations with branchial cleft malformations, would be missed if they are
erroneously mistaken for the relatively benign and embryologically distinct preauricular and intra-auricular sinuses. Imaging (sinogram)
does contribute, but the differentiation truly lies in the knowledge of the regional embryology and per-operative findings.
