Levetiracetam is a frequently used drug in the therapy of partial onset, myoclonic and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. The main route of
elimination is via the kidneys, which eliminate 66% of the unchanged drug as well as 24% as inactive metabolite that stems from enzymatic
hydrolysis. Therefore dose adjustments are needed in patients with chronic kidney disease stage 5 D, i.e. patients undergoing dialysis
treatment. In this patient population a dose reduction by 50% is recommended, so that patients receive 250–750 mg every 12 hours. However
“dialysis” can be performed in using different modalities and treatment intensities. For most of the drugs pharmacokinetic data and dosing
recommendations for patients undergoing peritoneal dialysis are not available. This is the first report on levetiracetam pharmacokinetics in
a peritoneal dialysis patient. A 73-y-old Caucasian male (height: 160 cm, weight 93 kg, BMI 36.3 kg/m2) was admitted with a Glasgow Coma
Scale of 10. Due to diabetic and hypertensive nephropathy he was undergoing peritoneal dialysis for two years. Eight weeks prior he was put
on levetiracetam 500 mg twice daily for suspected partial seizures with secondary generalization. According to the patient’s wife,
levetiracetam lead to fatigue and somnolence leading to trauma with fracture of the metatarsal bone. Indeed, even 24 hours after
discontinuation of levetiracetam blood level was still 29.8 mg/l (therapeutic range: 12 – 46 mg/l). Fatigue and stupor had disappeared five
days after discontinuation of the levetiracepam. A single dose pharamockinetic after re-exposure showed an increased half life of 18.4 hours
(normal half life 7 hours) and levetiracetam content in the peritoneal dialysate. Both half-life and dialysate content might help to guide
dosing in this patient population. If levetiracetam is used in peritoneal dialysis patients it should be regularly monitored to avoid
supratherapeutic levels that could lead to severe sequelae. Several guidelines list levetiracetam as the drug of first choice for adult
patients with partial seizures with or without secondary generalization and as second choice for patients in the epileptic status.
Levetiracetam (molecular weight 170.2 Da) is rapidly absorbed after oral ingestion with bioavailability of almost 100%. Peak concentrations
are reached 1.3 hours after ingestion. Neither levetiracetam nor its primary metabolites are bound to plasma proteins. Its volume of
distribution is 0.5 – 0.7 l/kg. The elimination half-life in adults is 7 ± 1 hours. Only about a quarter of the dose is metabolised by
enzymatic hydrolysis in the blood. The cumulated renal excretion rate of levetiracetam is 66% in the first 48 hours . These pharmacokinetic
coordinates vividly illustrate that meticulous attention has to be paid if patients with chronic kidney disease are treated . It has been
advocated to decrease the dose in parallel with the decline of the glomerular filtration rate . For patients “on dialysis” the package
insert suggests a dose of 500–1000 mg once a day. As the small unbound molecule is easily removed by “dialysis” a supplemental dose of
250–500 mg after dialysis is suggested. Despite the fact that levetiracetam was approved 13 years ago, there are no data for dosing in
peritoneal dialysis patients. We therefore analysed pharmacokinetic data of levetiracetam in a patient on peritoneal dialysis for treatment
of partial seizures. A 73-y-old Caucasian male was admitted to our tertiary care hospital to undergo elective angioplasty due to peripheral
artery disease Fontaine’s stage IV. Diabetic and hypertensive nephropathy led to CK5D, i.e. chronic dialysis. He had been undergoing
peritoneal dialysis treatment for two years. His past medical history included Insulin-dependent Diabetes mellitus type II and heart failure
New York Heart Association stage III due to severe ischemic cardiomyopathy. He was status post aortocoronary bypass operation and had a
cardioverter-defibrillator due to recurrent monomorphic ventricular tachycardia. On admission the patient complained about fatigue and
stupor. His wife reported that that his agitated and at times hostile temper had recently completely subsided. Relieved at first, the wife
of the patient was than worried as this hallmark of his character had remained constant since they met more than 50 years ago. A thorough
history revealed this new calm and at times sleepy state coincided with the start of levetiracetam treatment. The patient received a dose of
500 mg bid due to suspected partial seizures with secondary generalization eight weeks to the recent admission. A neurological workup at
that time showed however no pathological findings. Due to the severe fatigue our patient stumbled and fractured his metatarsal bone of his
left digitus V a week prior to admission. On admission physical examination showed an obese (height: 160 cm, weight 93 kg, BMI 36.3 kg/m2)
patient with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 10 and with ulcerations of both legs. Neither popliteal, tibial nor peroneal pulses were palpable. His
blood pressure was 135/75 mmHg, heart rate 65 bpm. He presented with anemia (hemoglobin of 8.7 g/dl) and an elevated c-reactive protein of
46 mg/l. Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty could be performed with good result and without complication. As fatigue and drowsiness did
not improve over time, we assumed an overdosing of the antiepileptic drug levetiracetam with typical symptoms of overdose, particularly as
vital signs, especially blood pressure, were normal and evidence of cardiac instability were missing. Twentyfour hours after discontinuation
of levetiracetam we found levetiracetam-levels still at about 29.8 mg/l (therapeutic range: 12 – 46 mg/l). Five days after discontinuation
the level was at 2 mg/l. Unfortunately there were neither blood samples at the time of trauma, nor between discontinuation of the drug and
day 5 after discontinuation available, which would have allowed a stronger conclusion in terms of causality. Clinically, however fatigue and
stupor had disappeared five days after discontinuation of the levetiracepam. In order to establish the assumed accumulation/overdose of
levetiracetam we re-exposed the patient to the drug. After discontinuing levetiracetam for 7 days, a single dose of 500 mg levetiracetam was
administered after end of automated peritoneal dialysis (APD). Blood was taken before ingestion and at regular intervals until 24 hours
after ingestion as well as peritoneal fluid before ingestion and 7.5 h and 20 h after ingestion in order to study pharmacokinetics in
peritoneal dialysis (Figure 1). Samples were centrifuged at 2800xg for 5 min at 4°C and stored at −80°C until analysis. Levetiracetam levels
were measured using an HPLC method. In brief, after a liquid-liquid extraction of 300 μl serum to eliminate lipophile components the samples
were applied to a reversed phase HPLC with UV detection. The detection limit of levetiracetam was 1 mg/l and the linearity of the method was
from 0–100 mg/l. Intra-assay CV was 3.1% (pool serum with 15 mg/l; n = 10), Inter-assay precision (n = 8) was 7.2% (15 mg/l), and 6%
(30 mg/l), respectively. Levetiracetam half life after a single oral dose of 500 mg was found to be 18.4 hours, which is more than doubled
as compared to patients with normal renal function (half life 7 hours). Serum levels and peritoneal fluid levels were nearly equivalent at
two different time period. Levetiracetam pharmacokinetics after a single oral dose of 500 mg. The two concentrations in the peritoneal
dialysate are depicted as triangles. Drug dosing in patients with chronic kidney disease can be a challenging task, especially for those
drugs in which neither a physiological readout (blood pressure) nor laboratory data (blood glucose) are available. Peritoneal dialysis is a
rather infrequently used dialysis modality. According to the 2012 USRDS report (http://www.usrds.org) less than 30,000 patients in the US
undergo peritoneal dialysis as compared to 400,000 patients on hemodialysis, which is below the global rate of 12% . Choice of dialysis
modality is however very heterogenous and influenced by multiple factors which explains extremes such as a peritoneal dialysis rate of 0% in
Luxemburg and a rate of 49% in New Zealand among patients on maintenance dialysis . In general, the quantity of drugs removed during
peritoneal dialysis is substantially lower than that during hemodialysis, and thus, the supplemental administration of drugs, even when they
are efficiently removed during hemodialysis, is not necessary in patients receiving continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) . There
are only limited data on how newer antiepileptic drugs are handled by the kidney and especially how the different modes and intensities
affect those drugs . In a situation like this even a single case like ours can enhance the quality of pharmacokinetic information available
to clinicians, as recently asked for by a KDIGO working group . Antiepileptic drugs are frequently used in patients with renal impairment.
Safe and effective treatment requires attention to changes in pharmacokinetics and knowledge about the effect of extracorporeal treatment
methods in terms of elimination of these drugs. Therapeutic drug monitoring can be a valuable aid . For levetiracetam most individuals
display optimal response to treatment with trough serum levels 12 to 46 mg/l. Some individuals may respond well outside of this range, or
may display toxicity within the therapeutic range, thus interpretation should include clinical evaluation . Toxic levels have not been well
established but anecdotal reports show that overdose is facilitated if chronic kidney disease is present . For patients in CKD 5 D, i.e.
patient undergoing dialysis PubMed (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed) does not list a single pharmacokinetic study. The package insert
such as reference books and online resources recommend a dose of 250–500 mg bid and an additional dose of 250–500 mg after “dialysis”. Our
data from a peritoneal dialysis patient suggest that a dose as low as 500 mg bid has the potential of causing severe side effects. As dosing
guidelines for patients on thrice weekly hemodialysis should not be simply transferred to patients undergoing daily peritoneal dialysis it
is also not understandable how some online-resources advice to reduce the dose of levetiracetam in pediatric peritoneal dialysis patients by
50%. Our case illustrates that therapeutic drug monitoring should be used in this patient population whenever possible. This opportunity was
missed in the reported case and could probably have avoided the severe side effects of the levetiracepam overdose. Written consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this study. Ethical approval was for reporting this case was obtained from the Medical School
Hannover. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. RL conducted the measurement of levetiracetam. SKB, MH, and JTK were
the treating physicians of the patient reported. RL and JTK evaluated the test results. All of the authors have participated in the
discussion and in writing of the submitted manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for
this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2369/15/49/prepub The publication of the study is supported by the DFG-
project “Open Access Publication”.
