IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is characterized by a systemic involvement of tumor-like lesions with IgG4-positive plasmacytes. We
experienced a case of IgG4-RD developed in a patient with bronchial asthma (BA) and chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS). A 55-yr-old female patient
with BA and CRS complained of both eyes and neck swelling as well as a recurrent upper respiratory infection in recent 1 yr. The serum
levels of IgG4, creatinine, and pancreatic enzymes were elevated. A biopsy of the submandibular gland showed an abundant infiltration of
IgG4-positive plasmacytes. Her symptoms remarkably improved after the treatment of a systemic steroid that has been maintained without
recurrence. We report a rare case of IgG4-RD developed in a patient with BA and CRS. IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is an immune-mediated
disease which is newly recognized as a systemic disease. It was initially described there was a relationship between autoimmune pancreatitis
and IgG4 molecules in 2001 (1). However, several recent studies have revealed that IgG4 molecules have a relationship not only with the
pancreas but also with the salivary gland, lung, liver, stomach, colon, and lymph node (2, 3). IgG4-RD has been reported in almost every
organ system and is characterized by the formation of tumor-like lesions, storiform fibrosis and infiltration of IgG4-positive plasmacytes
in involved organs. A notable study reported that approximately 44% of patients with autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) also had allergic
diseases (4). However, there have been few reported cases of this disease with comorbid allergic diseases due to the low prevalence of
IgG4-RD. We report a first case of IgG4-RD accompanied with bronchial asthma (BA) and chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) in Korea. A 55-yr-old
female with BA and CRS presented swelling of both eyes and neck aggravated 1 yr ago. The symptoms first developed 10 yr ago with cough,
sputum, wheezing, nasal obstruction and rhinorrhea, which had remained with no change in size for 2 yr. She visited a local clinic due to
the enlargement of a mass-like lesion 8 yr ago and then started to take 5 mg of prednisolone every other day. The swelling was temporarily
reduced with a systemic steroid; however, the mass lesions were again aggravated whenever the steroid was stopped. She suffered from chronic
cough with sputum and recurrent upper respiratory infections recent as of 1 yr; in addition, she was diagnosed with bronchial asthma 6
months ago. Her mass lesions were also aggravated in recent 1 yr; subsequently, she visited our hospital (October 2, 2012) for an evaluation
of swelling of eyes and neck as well as recurrent respiratory infections. She experienced neither eye pain nor neck pain, did not complain
of any visual problems or show systemic symptoms (such as febrile sensation and general weakness). Her asthmatic symptoms were well-
controlled after being prescribed an inhaled corticosteroid. She had no previous history of any drug or food allergies. Her physical
examination on the first visit revealed bilaterally swollen eyes and enlarged submandibular glands, with a size of 4×5 cm (Fig. 1). The
diffuse swelling of both eyes was fairly well-demarcated, nodular and movable. There was no visual field defect or a limitation of ocular
movement. The palpable masses of submandibular glands were movable and nodular without tenderness. Other organomegalies (except the lesions
of eyes and neck) were not observed. The abdomen was not distended, there was no palpable lymph node, and her breath sound was clear without
wheezing. Laboratory findings included a blood eosinophilia of 1,900/µL and elevated levels of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 73
mm/hr, serum creatinine 1.6 mg/dL, and pancreatic enzymes (amylase 268 U/L, lipase 713 U/L). Total IgE level and eosinophil cationic protein
(ECP) were also elevated (913 KU/L and >200 µg/L respectively). Serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH, 113 U/L) level, liver function test and
cardiac enzymes were within the normal range. Chest radiography and electrocardiogram showed no specific findings. To evaluate her asthmatic
status, we performed a methacholine challenge test and the result was positive: provocative concentration causing a 20% fall in FEV1 (PC20),
0.86 mg/mL; FEV1/FVC, 64.57%; FEV1, 1.78 L; FEV1% predicted, 64.9%. A skin prick test (SPT) to all of the common inhalant allergens
(Bencard, Bradford, UK) showed negative responses. We checked the serum levels of total IgG and IgG subclasses suspecting an IgG subclass
deficiency due to an increased susceptibility to upper respiratory infection. The levels were markedly elevated: serum total IgG, 4,486
mg/dL (normal: 916-1,796 mg/dL); IgG1, 11,102.9 mg/L (normal: 3,824.0-9,286.0 mg/L); IgG2, 17,958.0 mg/L (normal: 2,418.0-7,003.0 mg/L);
IgG4, 2,106.4 mg/L (normal: 39.2-864.0). Therefore, we suspected IgG4-RD on the basis of the mass lesions and elevated IgG4 level.
Considering the possibility of systemic involvement of IgG4-RD, we performed multiple computed tomography (CT) scans of the neck, chest, and
abdomen to establish the extent of the disease and to find any subclinical diseases. Neck CT imaging disclosed hypertrophies of extraocular
muscles and the bilateral enlargements of lacrimal, submandibular and sublingual glands as well as mucoperiosteal thickening of maxillary
and ethmoidal sinus indicating CRS (Fig. 2). Chest CT imaging study revealed that both lungs were diffusely involved with bilateral hilar
lymph nodes, peribronchovascular bundle thickening, multifocal centrilobular opacities and interlobular septal thickening (Fig. 2).
Irregular low density lesions of both kidneys and multifocal strictures as well as an irregular dilatation of the pancreatic duct were noted
in the abdominal CT scan (Fig. 3). The right submandibular gland was biopsied to obtain a key pathological finding of IgG4-RD. The
pathological features showed an abundant infiltration of IgG4-positive plasmacytes around the lymphoid follicles and glandular tissues.
Cartwheel-like fibrosis (which is strongly indicative of IgG4-RD) was also noted (Fig. 4). Finally, we could confirm the diagnosis of
IgG4-RD according to the criteria in 2011 (5, 6). We started a systemic steroid therapy with methylprednisolone 0.4 mg/kg/d. The nasal and
asthmatic symptoms of the patient substantially improved and the elevated serum creatinine and pancreatic enzyme level was normalized at 2
weeks of follow-up. The masses significantly diminished with the treatment of a systemic steroid, which has been maintained with no
recurrence. We performed follow-up measurements of lung function test 2 months later. Her FEV1% had improved to 103.8% predictive (2.82 L)
compared to her initial FEV1 level (64.9% predictive, 1.78 L). We describe a rare case diagnosed with IgG4-RD that involves multiple
systemic organs including extraocular muscles, lacrimal and salivary glands, lung, lymph node, kidneys and pancreas, accompanied with BA and
CRS. IgG4-RD usually develops subacutely and most patients are not constitutionally ill despite multiple systemic involvement; subsequently,
it comes to clinical attention due to tumorous swellings or organ damage. However, it is frequently discovered incidentally through
radiographic findings or pathologic specimens. The diagnosis of IgG4-RD is still debated, with significant discussions over the
establishment of proper diagnostic criteria. Histopathological analysis of biopsy tissues remains fundamental in the diagnosis of IgG4-RD.
After the identification of the typical pathological features, we conclusively diagnosed the patient with IgG4-RD according to diagnostic
criteria suggested by Okazaki et al. (5, 6); based on mass lesions in multiple organs, elevated serum IgG4 level (more than 135 mg/dL) and
typical histopathological findings (5, 6). There are several theories that suggest the pathogenic mechanism of IgG4-RD. IgG4-RD is
associated with potential triggers of IgG4-RD; autoimmunity, molecular mimicry, and bacterial infection (7). Potential triggers activate
immune reactions in affected organs in which Th2-cell responses are predominant and augment the expression of Th2-related cytokines such as
interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13 (7, 8, 9). These cytokines induce serum eosinophilia, elevated IgE and IgG4 level, and contribute
to numerous inflammatory and IgG4-positive cell infiltrations within the affected organs. In contrast to classic autoimmune conditions,
regulatory T cells responsible with IL-10 and transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) expression are also activated (10). Overexpressed TGF-β
may stimulate fibroblasts and subsequently cause organ fibrosis (11). The pathogenic and immunologic mechanisms of IgG4-RD are unclear;
however, these mechanisms are considered to contribute to the clinical, laboratory, and pathologic features of IgG4-RD. This case is
meaningful because it is a first case report of IgG4-RD in patients suffering from chronic BA and CRS in Korea. The patient experienced
recurrent aggravations of mass lesions simultaneously with aggravation of her asthmatic symptoms and wheezing. The symptoms were initially
thought to be recurrent respiratory infections on suspicion of an IgG subclass deficiency with BA. However, after diagnosing her with
IgG4-RD, it is thought that lung involvement of IgG4-RD caused and aggravated the respiratory symptoms simultaneously with the mass lesions.
It is unclear how often pulmonary involvement is present with IgG4-RD although some patients initially present respiratory symptoms such as
cough, dyspnea, sputum, hemoptysis or chest discomfort (12, 13). Her mass lesions also developed with CRS symptoms such as rhinorrhea and
nasal obstruction and her symptoms waxed and waned together with steroid therapy. A previous study reported that about 44% of patients with
AIP had allergic diseases (4). There were 20 patients who had present and/or past history of allergic diseases composed of allergic
rhinitis, atopic dermatitis, BA, and drug allergies (4). It also showed that the peripheral eosinophil count and serum IgE level were
significantly higher in AIP patients with allergic aspects versus those without allergic aspects (4). Several other reports deal with
eosinophilia in IgG4-RD. For example, a survey of AIP in Japan showed peripheral eosinophilia (>500 cells/µL) existed in 21% of AIP patients
(14). Another study reported that 21% of AIP patients showed moderate eosinophilic infiltration histologically in the pancreas (15).
Eosinophilia and allergic manifestations of IgG4-RD are closely related because overexpressed cytokines caused by Th2 cell activation (such
as IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13) promote the production of IgG4 antibodies as well as serum eosinophilia and IgE production that result in
eosinophilic infiltration and allergic manifestations (4, 7, 16). The responsiveness of eosinophilia and allergic manifestations is unclear
since there are no randomized controlled trials dealing with the treatment of IgG4-RD. Therefore, further studies concerning these questions
are required. In conclusion, this is the first report of a Korean patient diagnosed with IgG4-RD comorbid with BA and CRS who was
successfully treated with a systemic steroid. Clinical manifestations of IgG4-related disease in the patient. (A) Facial photograph of the
patient shows bilateral periorbital swelling. (B) Facial photograph of the patient shows bilateral enlargement of the submandibular glands
and neck. Computed tomography (CT) images of the patient. (A) Chest CT image shows bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy (arrowheads). (B) Chest
CT image shows peribronchovascular bundle thickening, centrilobular opacities and interlobular septal thickening. Computed tomography (CT)
images of the patient. (A) Neck CT image shows diffuse enlargement of the sublingual (arrows) and submandibular (arrowheads) glands. (B)
Abdominal CT image shows multifocal strictures and dilatations of the pancreatic duct in the pancreas body (arrows) and multifocal low
attenuation of both kidneys (arrowheads). Histopathological features in a biopsy of the submandibular gland of the patient. The tissue
specimen from the right submandibular gland shows dense lymphoplasma cell infiltration and typical storiform fibrosis (arrowheads) (A, H&E,
×20) and IgG4-positive plasmacytes (B, immunohistostain, ×40).
