Editor: D. Raoult Peptoniphilus spp. are Gram-positive anaerobic cocci (GPAC) that were formerly classified in the genus Peptostreptococcus.
This study describes 15 cases of Peptoniphilus spp. bloodstream infection (BSI) diagnosed from 2007 to 2011 using 16S rDNA sequencing in
patients with pneumonia, pre-term delivery, soft tissue infection or colon or bladder disease. Seven out of 15 (47%) of these cases had
polymicrobial BSIs. One of the isolates was closely related to P. duerdenii (EU526290), while the other 14 isolates were most closely
related to a Peptoniphilus sp. reference strain (ATCC 29743) and P. hareii (Y07839). Peptoniphilus is a rare but important cause of BSI.
Gram-positive anaerobic cocci (GPAC) are not routinely recovered or identified from many types of clinical specimens because they may be
difficult to grow in culture and are frequently isolated as part of mixed polymicrobial infections 1. Peptoniphilus are commensals of the
human vagina and gut that were formerly classified in the genus Peptostreptococcus 2. Recent implementation of non-biochemical methods
including MALDI-TOF and 16S rDNA sequencing has allowed their accurate identification from a variety of clinical specimens. There are now
more than 15 Peptoniphilus species within the genus, seven of which were discovered in 2012 3–10. Several new Peptoniphilus spp. were also
recently discovered as part of a study of the human gut microbiome in which microbial culturomics was used to complement genetic analyses
11. To date, Peptoniphilus spp. have most commonly been associated with diabetic skin and soft tissue infections, bone and joint infections
and surgical site infections 12–15. A recent study of pre-term labour and early neonatal sepsis also isolated Peptoniphilus spp. from
amniotic fluid causing choramnionitis 16. To our knowledge, our study is the first case series of Peptoniphilus spp. causing bloodstream
infection (BSI) either alone or as part of a polymicrobial infection. A retrospective review of all adult patients (>17 years) with at least
one blood culture positive for Peptoniphilus spp. was carried out. All cases were diagnosed by the regional centralized clinical
microbiology laboratory, Calgary Laboratory Services (CLS), between 1 July 2007 and 31 December 2012. The study protocol was approved by the
Conjoint Health Research Ethics Board at the University of Calgary. All isolates were recovered from blood cultures. The regional protocol
for adult blood culture draws routinely collects two sets, each consisting of both an aerobic (iFA) and anaerobic (iFN) bottle with
incubation, culture and growth monitoring being performed by the BacT/Alert 3D System (bioMérieux, Laval, QC, Canada). Positive blood
cultures were immediately pelleted, Gram stained and plated to standard aerobic and anaerobic culture media. Peptoniphilus spp. isolates
demonstrated typical GPAC morphology on Gram stain from anaerobic Brucella blood agar. Prior to 2011, anaerobic GPAC isolates were
preliminarily identified using antibiotic (KVC) disc testing and biochemical analysis with the Vitek 2 ANC card (bioMérieux), but
subsequently, MALDI-TOF (Vitek MS; bioMérieux) has been used. Antibiotic susceptibility testing was performed using E-test strips
(bioMérieux) according to CLSI guidelines and the manufacturer's instructions 17. All isolates were susceptible to penicillin and
metronidazole, and all but one of the isolates (case #7) was also susceptible to clindamycin. Preliminary GPAC identifications were
confirmed by performing partial sequencing of the 16S rDNA gene using standard methods 2,10,18 (ABI Prism 3130 sequencer; Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The SmartGene Integrated Database Network System (IDNS) indicated the most closely related species (per
cent identity >99%) as shown in Table1. A maximum likelihood phylogeny was produced illustrating the relation of the 15 clinical isolates
with publicly available sequences 19,20. Genus-level identity (99–100%) was achieved for all 16S rDNA sequences in this study. Species level
identification by the IDNS Smartgene database often resulted in multiple species with >99% sequence similarity. Independent phylogenetic
analysis of the partial 16S rDNA sequences confirmed the similarity of CLS sequence KF963596 with P. duerdenii while the remaining 14 CLS
sequences shared highest similarity with a Peptoniphilus spp. (ATCC 29743). These sequences were also highly similar (99.6%) to P. harei
(Fig.1). Clinical characteristics and blood culture results of Peptoniphilus BSI cases CMV, cytomegalovirus; PROM, premature rupture of
membranes; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. For polymicrobial cultures identification was performed on all isolates
individually. Maximum likelihood phylogeny of partial 16S rDNA (variable regions V1–V3) sequences from the Peptoniphilus BSI isolates
(GenBank accessions KF963582–KF96396) in relation to publicly available Peptoniphilus reference strains (Genbank accession in parentheses).
Fasttree 2 software was used to create the tree using the generalized time-reversible nucleotide substitution model 20. Patient
characteristics and blood culture results are summarized in Table1. During the study period, 15 hospitalized patients were diagnosed with
Peptoniphilus BSI; nine women and six men. The mean age was 62 years (range, 20–96 years; median, 66 years) and the mean length of stay was
18 days (range, 4–62 days; median, 11 days). BSI due to P. duerdenii was confirmed in a 34-year-old female with end-stage renal disease
secondary to Goodpasture's disease and recurrent pericarditis. All of the other patients with Peptoniphilus spp. BSI were due to septic
abortion with choramnionitis (n = 3), acute exacerbation of COPD and/or pneumonia (n = 3), skin and soft tissue infection (n = 2) or
underlying bowel and/or bladder disease (n = 6) (Table1). Seven (50%) patients had polymicrobial BSIs with other bacteria besides
Peptoniphilus spp., including (i) Aerococcus urinae, (ii) Escherichia coli, (iii) Group B Streptococcus, (iv) Eggerthella lenta, (v)
Bacteroides fragilis and viridians streptococcus group, (vi) Proteus mirabilis and Staphylococcus aureus, and (vii) Enterococcus faecalis.
Most polymicrobial BSIs originated from a bowel or bladder source, except for one patient with diabetes mellitus and severe necrotizing
infection of the leg, and one elderly patient with aspiration pneumonia. Only one of the three women with Peptoniphilus BSI secondary to
septic abortion/choramnionitis was discharged home with a live infant. Three of 15 (20%) of the patients died, and all of them were elderly
with significant underlying co-morbidities. All of the other patients with Peptoniphilus BSI were successfully treated with antibiotics and
discharged from hospital. Peptoniphilus spp. would typically be recovered as a component of mixed bacterial flora in complex abscesses in
the abdomen or pelvis. We would therefore expect to recover Peptoniphilus spp. as part of a polymicrobial BSI infection in patients with
underlying bowel or bladder disease as occurred in our study. The recovery of Peptoniphilus alone indicates that this organism is a rare but
important cause of BSI as a primary pathogen in certain clinical settings (i.e. septic abortion, soft tissue infection in immunocompromised
patients and pneumonia). Sequencing of the 16S rDNA gene is a valuable tool for definitive molecular identification of important clinical
isolates that cannot be readily identified by phenotypic methods or MALDI-TOF 21. Peptoniphilus spp. are often misidentified using
biochemical methods 22, and MALDI-TOF databases currently do not include most species. Most of our isolates had highly similar sequences to
a reference Peptoniphilus spp. strain that has been called P. assacharolyticus ATCC 29743 (GenBank DQ986463). However, it is clear from our
phylogenetic analysis (Fig.1) that this reference strain is divergent from the other typed P. assacharolyticus ATCC 14963 (AF542228), and
most closely related to P. harei (Y07839). Our results support a previous report of 89.5% 16S rDNA similarity between P. asaccharolyticus
strains ATCC 29743 and ATCC 14963 while the ATCC 29743 shares 99.4% similarity with P. harei (Y07839) 22. We have therefore chosen for now
to designate most of our isolates as Peptoniphilus spp. In summary, clinical microbiology laboratories should be aware that Peptoniphilus
are rare but important causes of BSI infection either as the primary pathogen or as part of a polymicrobial infection. Isolates meeting the
preliminary phenotypic characteristics for GPAC should be referred for definitive identification using partial 16S rDNA sequencing.
Delineation of the clinical and epidemiological significance and pathogenic potential of Peptoniphilus spp. in humans is dependent upon
further isolates from clinical samples and full phenotypic and genotypic characterizations. The sequences of the Peptoniphilus strains
described here have been deposited in GenBank under accession numbers KF963582–KF963596. Kristen Brown: study design, patient chart reviews
and manuscript preparation. Tarah Lynch: composed phylogenetic tree and manuscript preparation. Deirdre Church and Daniel Gregson: study
design, 16S rDNA sequencing and manuscript preparation. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.
