Central venous catheterization can be necessary for patients undergoing a cardiac operation. Accidental suturing of the catheter to the
heart is a rare complication that is difficult to correct; excessive traction force on the central venous catheter can lead to heart
breakage or even death. We describe the case of a 56-year-old Han Chinese woman who was scheduled to undergo mitral valve replacement. The
central venous catheter placed into her right internal jugular vein was accidentally sutured to the left atrial suture line during the
operation. The stuck catheter was successfully removed without having to perform a cardiopulmonary bypass. Attaching a catheter to the heart
by cardiac sutures can occur when the tip of the catheter locates directly above the atrial-caval junction. Care should be taken when
closing the cephalad end of a left atrial incision in a mitral valve replacement. Although rare, accidental suturing of the central venous
catheter must be kept in mind, and an approach should be chosen to remove the catheter that best avoids additional insult to the heart
function. Central venous catheterization can be necessary for patients undergoing a cardiac operation to obtain central venous access for
hemodynamic monitoring (such as of central venous pressure) and administration of some drugs and fluids. The complications of this procedure
are well described. Suturing of the catheter to the heart is a rare complication that is difficult to correct ; excessive traction force on
the central vein catheter (CVC) can lead to heart breakage or even death . We report a case of a CVC placed into the right internal jugular
vein and accidentally sutured to the left atrial suture line during mitral valve replacement (MVR). The catheter was successfully removed
using a reinforcement stitch around the left atrial suture line, without requiring a cardiopulmonary bypass. A 56-year-old Han Chinese woman
(153cm, 39kg) with severe mitral valve stenosis and moderate mitral valve regurgitation was scheduled to undergo an MVR. She had a four-year
history of mitral valve disease. She also had progressive dyspnea on exertion and moderate cardiac dysfunction classified as New York Heart
Association class II or III. She was receiving vigorous diuretic and digoxin therapy. An indirect (Seldinger) technique was used to achieve
central catheterization through her right internal jugular vein (Arrow® central venous catheter, 7Fr, 20cm, 0.32 inches, two lumen; Arrow
International, Asheboro, NC, USA). No arrhythmia was observed on the monitor while the J wire was advanced. After blood aspiration, the
catheter was fixed at the 15cm mark. Her central venous pressure ranged between 7 and 13mmHg throughout the operation and she was
transferred to our intensive care unit immediately after surgery. A control anteroposterior chest radiograph of our patient was obtained on
the second day after her operation. This graph revealed that the catheter tip was fixed at the superior vena cava (SVC)-right atrial (RA)
junction which caused no attention (Figure 1). Because our patient was unstable, the catheter was not removed and fluid replacement was
performed via the CVC. Seven days later, replacement of the catheter was planned for clinically suspected catheter-related sepsis. There was
obvious resistance while removing the catheter. Despite gentle traction and clavicular maneuvering, the catheter could not be removed.
Additional posteroanterior and lateral chest radiographs were obtained, which showed that the catheter tip was still located in its previous
position, the SVC-RA junction. Anteroposterior chest X-ray. The right internal jugular cannula is visible. Arrow, catheter tip. Suture of
the catheter tip to the heart was highly suspected, and another thoracotomy was scheduled on postoperative day eight. Movement was noted at
the interatrial groove incision near the atrial-caval junction while extracting the catheter. Four needles were made with mattress suture
around the interatrial groove incision, and the catheter was removed easily after loosening the original threads, which suggested that the
catheter had been sutured to the atrial septal tissue. Our patient had an uneventful recovery and the endotracheal tube was extracted the
next day. Accidental suturing of the CVC to the heart is a rare complication. Generally, positioning the tip of the CVC in the atrium,
especially near the wall of line, can increase the likelihood of suturing the CVC to the heart. In non-cardiac cases, the tip of the CVC
should be located directly above the region where the SVC and the right atrium merge or in the atrium to get accurate central venous
pressure values . However, the proper position of the CVC tip has not been confirmed in heart surgery, especially in MVR. In our case, the
entrapment of the CVC was noted during the MVR surgery, with the CVC tip located directly above the atrial-caval junction. This could partly
be explained by our patient’s small atrium and the use of a vertical left atriotomy. During her MVR surgery, an incision was made in her
left atrium, posterior to the interatrial groove and anterior to the right pulmonary veins. The incision was extended cephalad and caudal
beneath her superior and inferior venae cavae during the difficult exposure of her small left atrium. In this situation, excessive traction
force on the CVC can lead to breakage, although the catheter material can sometimes be faulty and rupture or dilate . Breakage is a lethal
complication with an associated mortality of nearly 90% . Once entrapment of the CVC is suspected, we advocate very cautious handling of the
CVC to avoid this lethal complication. Various methods such as chest X-ray and transesophageal echocardiography can be used to confirm the
catheter tip position . Transesophageal echocardiography has been shown to accurately monitor the position of the catheter tip at the SVC-RA
junction , and it provides a more sensitive assessment than chest radiography, which does not reliably identify the position of catheter
tips at the SVC-RA junction. However, transesophageal echocardiography requires special equipment that was not available in our hospital.
Although repeated chest radiograph imaging showed that the CVC tip was located at the SVC-RA junction, suture of the CVC tip to her heart
was still suspected after the difficult removal of the CVC. Patients who receive MVR generally have poor heart function before surgery, and
inevitably experience ischemia-reperfusion injury during cardiopulmonary bypass. They have low tolerance to additional insults to heart
function, which can have a detrimental impact on short-term and long-term outcomes. Hence, the surgical approach to remove the CVC should be
carefully chosen. In our case, a reinforcement stitch was placed around our patient’s left atrial suture line and the CVC was delivered into
her atrium after loosening the original suture lines. Attaching the CVC to the heart by cardiac sutures can occur accidentally when the tip
of the CVC locates directly above the atrial-caval junction. Care should be taken while closing the cephalad end of a left atrial incision
in MVR. The SVC and the right atrium should be well retracted. If there is any doubt, the anesthetist should gently pull the CVC before the
left atrial suture line is tied. Although rare, suture of the CVC must be kept in mind, and an approach should be chosen to remove the CVC
that best avoids additional insult to heart function. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CVC:
central vein catheter; MVR: mitral valve replacement; RA: right atrial; SVC: superior vena cava. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. HYK and SSC carried out the anesthesia. HYK wrote the manuscript and XHW helped to draft the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.
