We describe an infant with respiratory distress due to bilateral dacryocystoceles and dacryocystitis who was successfully treated with
urgent bilateral endoscopic marsupialization. A male infant was brought to our outpatient department 7 days after birth, with red, acutely
inflamed swellings near the medial canthal area of both eyes. From birth, there had been bluish swelling near the medial canthal area, and
redness and swellings developed within 3 days. On physical examination, the child was afebrile but showed respiratory distress with coarse
breathing sound. That day, the infant was admitted and treated with intravenous cefotaxime 150 mg. After withholding oral intake for
appropriate preoperative fasting, urgent bilateral probing with endoscopy was done. On endoscopy, huge bilateral congenital dacryocystoceles
were found. Because of its huge size, the inferior surface of the cyst was touching the nasal floor, which made probe unable to perforate
the wall of dacryocystocele. Therefore, an endoscopy-assisted marsupialization of dacryocystoceles and bicanalicular silicone intubation
were performed. Both swellings and erythema subsided within 48 hours postoperatively, and the patient was discharged after 72 hours from
treatment. Congenital dacryocystocele is an uncommon congenital anomaly in infants and children, and 12% to 25% of patients affected have
bilateral lesions.1â€“4 Secondary dacryocystitis frequently develops within days or weeks. However, bilateral dacryocystoceles with bilateral
acute dacryocystitis, occurring within the first year of life, have rarely been observed.5 The incidence of acute dacryocystitis, shortly
after birth, is extremely rare in that only a few cases have been reported in the world, especially the bilateral case.6 Because infants are
obligate nasal breathers within the first 3 weeks, congenital dacryocystocele may cause dyspnea, especially in bilateral huge cases.7 In
this clinical report, we present an infant with bilateral dacryocystoceles with bilateral acute dacryocystitis, causing respiratory
distress. A 7-day-old male infant presented to the author, with bilateral red, acutely inflamed swellings near the medial canthal area of
both eyes (Fig. 1A). His parents had noted that bluish swelling had been presented near the medial canthal area from birth and that redness
and swelling developed gradually within 3 days. A, Photograph of an infant with a red, acutely inflamed swelling near the medial canthal
area of both eyes before the surgery. B, Photograph of 1 day after the operation. C, Photograph of 2 days after the operation. On physical
examination, the child was afebrile but showed respiratory distress with coarse breathing sound. Bilateral tense and acute inflammatory
swellings were found in the region of the lacrimal sac with edema and erythema of the surrounding skin and eyelids. Suspected to have
bilateral dacryocystoceles with bilateral dacryocystitis, the infant was admitted and treated with intravenous cefotaxime 150 mg. That day,
after withholding oral intake for appropriate preoperative fasting, the authors attempted bilateral probing with 0.65-mm probe with
endoscopy under desflurane anesthesia. On endoscopy, huge bilateral intranasal cysts were found (Figs. 2A, B). Because of its huge size, the
inferior surface of the cyst was touching the nasal floor, which made probe, via the nasolacrimal duct, unable to perforate the wall.
Therefore, an endoscopy-assisted marsupialization of dacryocystoceles and bicanalicular silicone intubation were attempted. After the right
dacryocystocele was excised with a microscissor, the probe was observed beneath the inferior turbinate with endoscopy. The remaining cyst
was also excised. Pus was expressed from the cyst, and the culture of which was collected sterilely. A 0.02% Mitomycin C packing was done
for 5 minutes. Right bicanalicular silicone intubation was done. The same procedures were also performed in the left side (Figs. 2C, D).
Endoscopic view of right dacryocystocele (A) and left dacryocystocele (B) before the surgery. Endoscopic view of right (C) and left (D)
marsupialized dacryocystoceles. Pathologic analysis demonstrated that the cyst was lined by ciliated cuboidal epithelium with acute
inflammation, and the definite diagnosis was dacryocystoceles with dacryocystitis. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus was found at
the culture. Both swellings and erythema subsided within 48 hours postoperatively, and the patient was permitted to be discharged after 72
hours from treatment (Fig. 1B, C). Three days later, the infant was followed up in the outpatient department. Swellings and erythema of both
sides resolved and the silicone tube was in place. In dacryocystocele, the lacrimal drainage system is obstructed both proximally at the
level of the common canaliculus and distally at the level of the valve of Hasner.8,9 With distal obstruction, fluids in the lacrimal sac and
nasolacrimal duct cannot drain, expansion of sac develops, and the valve of Rosenmuller can be collapsed. Thus, proximal obstruction at the
junction of the common canaliculus and lacrimal sac is functional.3,8,10 Fluid keeps entering the system but does not drain into the nasal
cavity, forming the dacryocystocele.3 A congenital dacryocystocele presents as an enlarged blue cystic lacrimal sac in the medial canthal
area, epiphora, and high tear meniscus height at birth.8,9 Secondary infection producing mucopurulent discharge or cellulitis can occur.9 A
dacryocystocele often presents as an intranasal mass in the anterior inferior meatus.9 The differential diagnosis includes capillary
hemangioma, solid dermoid, dermoid cyst, encephalocele, meningoencephalocele, nasal glioma, lymphangioma, and heterotopic brain.11,12 Thus,
infants with medial canthal mass have to be evaluated with a detailed ophthalmologic examination and nasal endoscopy.9 Ultrasonography may
be helpful in ruling out the vascular and cystic lesion, and computed tomography as well as magnetic resonance imaging may assist in
differentiating a potential intracranial connection.9 Mansour et al1 studied 54 cases of patients with a congenital dacryocystocele and
showed strong female preponderance (73%) and unilateral involvement (88%). The natural course of congenital dacryocystoceles is variable,
which makes treatment strategies controversial. Nasal obstruction and respiratory distress can occur in infants with bilateral
dacryocystoceles because infants are obligate nasal breathers.7 Parents of infants with dacryocystoceles should be carefully asked about
symptoms of nasal congestion, snoring respirations, tachypnea, and breathing difficulty with feeding.7 Infants with dacryocystoceles should
have surgical treatment on an urgent basis if there is a cyst in the nose and nasal obstruction.8 Three surgical treatment options exist for
congenital dacryocystoceles: simple probing, probing assisted by endoscopy, as well as nasal endoscopy and marsupialization of the
dacryocystocele.9 Endoscopy can visualize and help marsupializing the dacryocystocele, resulting in decompression of the lacrimal system
distally as well as identification and treatment of contralateral dacryocystocele.12,13 Bilateral congenital dacryocystoceles, with
bilateral acute dacryocystitis, are a very rare case; there have been only a few cases reported in the world, and not a single case was
reported in Korea. In this case, dacryocystoceles protruded along the direction of the lacrimal duct endonasally, beneath the inferior
turbinate, and led to nasal obstruction with respiratory distress, especially when feeding.7 We had to urgently manage the infant with
endoscopy-assisted marsupialization because bilateral congenital dacryocystoceles with bilateral dacryocystitis caused respiratory distress.
Our case shows that probing alone may not be enough to treat huge dacryocystocele because its huge size makes inferior surface of the
dacryocystocele, touching the nasal floor. We agree with Teixeira et al3 that an infant who has dacryocystoceles and respiratory distress
must be treated through the wide marsupialization of the dacryocystoceles urgently. The authors report no conflicts of interest.
