Rosai-Dorfman disease (RDD), also known as sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy (SHML), is an uncommon benign idiopathic
lymphoproliferative disorder. The histologic hallmark of RDD is the finding of emperipolesis displayed by lesional histiocytes. While RDD
most commonly affects lymph nodes, extranodal involvement of multiple organs has been reported, including the central nervous system (CNS).
However, CNS involvement in RDD is rare and is not well characterized. As a result, therapeutic approaches to CNS involvement in RDD are not
well established. Herein we report 6 cases of RDD with isolated CNS involvement and review the literature on RDD with CNS involvement. One
of the presented cases exhibited intramedullary involvement of the spinal cord—a very rare form of RDD with CNS involvement. Rosai-Dorfman
disease (RDD), or sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy (SHML), is an uncommon benign lymphoproliferative disorder with an
estimated incidence of approximately 100 cases per year in the United States.118 Initially described in 1969 as a distinct
lymphoproliferative entity by pathologists Juan Rosai and Ronald Dorfman, RDD is histologically characterized by infiltration of lymph nodes
or extranodal tissues by nonmalignant histiocytes exhibiting emperipolesis, a nondestructive phagocytosis of lymphocytes or erythrocytes,
which represents the hallmark of this disease and is required for definitive diagnosis.93 RDD has been reported in all age groups and can
involve any nodal or extranodal site, but most commonly presents as massive cervical lymphadenopathy in adolescents and young adults.118
Central nervous system (CNS) involvement has been reported, but is infrequent. It usually manifests as dura-based masses, with
intraparenchymal involvement less common. Symptomatic intramedullary spinal cord involvement is extremely rare.1 Due to the rarity of CNS
involvement by RDD, therapeutic approaches vary, and there are no uniform treatment recommendations. In localized presentations, surgical
resection is usually the therapy of choice; however, resection is not always possible and other therapeutic modalities may be required for
disease management. Herein we present 6 cases of RDD with isolated CNS involvement diagnosed and treated at the University of Miami (n = 4)
and Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical Center (n = 2). One of these cases exhibited intramedullary spinal cord involvement, which, to the
best of our knowledge, was previously reported only twice.28,82 We also present a review of the literature on CNS involvement by RDD. We
searched the pathology database at the University of Miami to identify all pathology specimens with a diagnosis of RDD and specifically
selected patients who presented with CNS disease. A total of 4 patients were identified. In addition, we identified 2 patients with RDD
presenting with CNS involvement at the Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical Center. Pathology slides of all patients were available for review
and confirmation of RDD diagnosis. The study was approved by the institutional review boards of each institution. We searched the English
literature using PubMed (National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD) and SCOPUS (Elsevier) for the period 1970 to July 2013. For the PubMed
search we used the terms Rosai-Dorfman disease, sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy, and central nervous system, and for the
SCOPUS search we used the keywords Rosai Dorfman and central nervous system. Relevant identified manuscripts in English were included, with
specific attention to exclude repeated manuscripts from both sources. In addition, we reviewed references cited in all the collected
manuscripts to identify additional reports of RDD presenting with CNS involvement. Comparison between tumor localization in isolated CNS RDD
and systemic RDD with CNS involvement was performed with the chi-square test. P values less than 0.05 were considered statistically
significant. A 32-year-old African American woman presented with worsening occipital headaches associated with photophobia and phonophobia.
There were no neurologic deficits or peripheral lymphadenopathy on initial examination. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated
a 2.5-cm enhancing extraaxial mass originating from the clivus, causing significant brainstem compression (Figures 1A and 1B). The patient
underwent 2 transsphenoidal biopsies that were nondiagnostic. Three months later she developed a left cranial nerve VI palsy and right
hemiparesis, and a follow-up MRI showed enlargement of the previously described mass and a new dural rupture measuring 1.6 × 3.1 × 2.1 cm.
Systemic workup for nodal/extranodal disease was negative. The patient underwent subtotal resection of the posterior fossa mass complicated
by left hearing loss. Histologic examination revealed a vaguely nodular proliferation of large atypical histiocytes surrounded by a chronic
lymphoplasmacytic inflammatory infiltrate (Figures 2A, B, and C). Many of the large histiocytes contained abundant amphophilic cytoplasm,
and emperipolesis was readily apparent (Figures 2D and E). By immunohistochemistry, histiocytes were positive for CD68 and S100 and negative
for CD1a (Figure 2F). Adjuvant localized radiation with a total dose of 4500 cGy in 180 cGy daily fractions resulted in clinical response,
with improvement of the hemiparesis. Three years later, the patient presented with headaches, neck stiffness, dysarthria, and right hearing
loss. A new MRI showed disease progression with an increase in the size of the original retroclival mass and a new large extraaxial lesion
in the posterior fossa extending along the inferior margin of the cerebellar vermis down to the cervical spinal canal with associated mass
effect (Figure 1C). The patient was locally re-irradiated (4500 cGy) followed by 1 cycle of adjuvant temozolomide 75 mg/m2, leading to
resolution of headaches, neck stiffness, and dysarthria without improvement of hearing loss. Six years after the initial diagnosis, the
patient’s symptoms remained stable, and follow-up MRI showed no disease progression. Neuroimaging findings in Cases 1 and 2. A, Sagittal
postcontrast T1-weighted MRI showing a lobulated enhancing extraaxial mass (arrow) in the retroclival region with secondary mass effect over
the ventral aspect of the pons and medulla oblongata in Case 1. B, Axial postcontrast T1-weighted MRI showing the same lobulated mass. C,
Sagittal postcontrast T1-weighted MRI demonstrates an extraaxial homogeneously enhancing mass in the posterior fossa extending inferiorly to
the foramen magnum and into the cervical canal with associated mass effect on the dorsal aspect of the cervicomedullary junction and
cervical spinal cord in Case 1. D, Axial postcontrast T1-weighted MRI showing an elongated homogeneous enhancing extraaxial mass (arrow) in
the left cerebellopontine angle with mild mass effect over the left aspect of the pons and anterior left cerebellum in Case 2. E, Axial
postcontrast T1-weighted MRI demonstrating nodular enhancement along the dura and tentorium (arrows) in Case 2. Pathologic findings in RDD
involving the CNS. All cases in this series had similar morphologic features, and representative images are shown. A, B, and C, Biopsies
contained an abnormal vaguely nodular polymorphous lymphohistiocytic infiltrate (hematoxylin and eosin; 4× magnification in A) composed of
abundant loosely cohesive large histiocytes admixed with numerous small mature lymphocytes and plasma cells (hematoxylin and eosin; 10×
magnification in B and C). D and E, Within the aggregates of histiocytes, the diagnostic feature of emperipolesis was identified in all
cases (hematoxylin and eosin; 50× magnification). F, The cells are positive for S-100 protein by immunohistochemistry (hematoxylin and
eosin; 20× magnification). A 51-year-old white man with a 20-year history of progressive hearing loss on both sides, with the left greater
than the right, and previous radiologic diagnosis of left acoustic neuroma, presented with complaints of blurred vision, fatigue, weakness
in 4 extremities, and sharp pain over both thighs. Except for bilateral hypoacusis, his examination was normal and there was neither
lymphadenopathy nor organomegaly. Laboratory studies were unremarkable. Initial MRI of the brain showed bilateral dura-based masses
involving the cavernous sinuses, internal auditory canals, cerebellopontine angles, and the foramen magnum (Figures 1D and 1E). The patient
underwent a left retrosigmoid craniotomy with partial resection of the left cerebellopontine angle and internal auditory canal masses.
Histologic examination revealed a heterogeneous lymphohistiocytic cell infiltrate composed of abundant large histiocytes that were focally
clustered and demonstrated copious amphophilic cytoplasm associated with numerous small mature lymphocytes and scattered plasma cells.
Emperipolesis was readily apparent. By immunohistochemistry, histiocytes were positive for CD68 and S100 and negative for CD1a. Surgery was
followed by localized radiotherapy, with a total dose of 3000 cGy in 200 cGy daily fractions. The patient had improvement of his blurry
vision but with persistent bilateral hypoacusis. Over the next 7 months, the patient remained clinically and radiologically stable.
Intracranial RDD was diagnosed in a 53-year-old white man at another institution 20 months before presentation to our outpatient clinic. He
initially presented with headaches and was found to have meningeal lesions that were partially resected and led to the diagnosis of the RDD.
Following surgery he was asymptomatic until about 3 months before his presentation to our clinic when he started to experience progressive
unsteadiness, recurrent falls, and generalized body aches. Examination revealed 3/5 paresis with decreased muscle tone of both upper and
lower extremities and ataxia. There was no evidence for lymphadenopathy or organomegaly. MRI of the brain showed enhancing lesions in the
left cavernous sinus and right prepontine cistern with mass effect over the pons and pontomedullary junction. MRI of the cervical/thoracic
spine showed diffuse intramedullary spinal cord signal abnormality with multiple areas of nodular cord enhancement, an extraaxial enhancing
lesion at C5-C6, and a T2 hyperintensity at T1-2 and T5-6 levels (Figures 3A and 3B). Neuroimaging findings in Cases 3 and 4. A, Sagittal
postcontrast T2-weighted MRI showing an abnormal hyperintense intramedullary lesion throughout the cervical cord at C5-C6 (arrow) in Case 3.
B, Axial postcontrast T1-weighted MRI demonstrating an extraaxial homogeneously enhancing mass (arrow) in the right prepontine cistern with
mass effect on the ventral aspect of the pons in Case 3. C and D, Sagittal postcontrast T1-weighted MRI demonstrates multiple areas of
nodular enhancement along the ventral aspect of the cervicomedullary junction consistent with dura-based lesion in Case 4. Diagnostic lumbar
puncture showed normal cerebrospinal fluid glucose and total protein levels without pleocytosis; immunoglobulin G of 10.7 mg/dL (0–6 mg/dL)
and myelin basic protein of 2.9 ng/mL (normal: <4 ng/mL). Gram staining, bacterial cultures, acid-fast bacilli, and fungal smears were
negative. The patient underwent left pterional craniotomy through a transsylvian and transpetrosal approach with partial resection of the
mass. Histologic examination demonstrated a vaguely nodular heterogeneous histiocytic and lymphoplasmacytic proliferative lesion that
consisted predominantly of large histiocytes and plasma cells separated by thick collagenous bundles. The histiocytes had vesicular nuclei
with abundant amphophilic cytoplasm, and the characteristic finding of emperipolesis was easily identified. The lesional histiocytes were
positive for CD163, CD68, and S-100 but negative for CD1a by immunohistochemistry. Therapy with dexamethasone (8 mg every 8 h) for 3 weeks
was associated with significant side effects and no improvement in symptoms. For this reason the steroids were tapered off and radiation
therapy was initiated to the entire spinal canal. The plan was to deliver a total of 3000 cGy, but after the patient received 2000 cGy he
decided to discontinue radiation therapy due to lack of improvement. An 18-year-old African American man presented with progressive
generalized weakness associated with episodic hand cramps. Examination revealed mild quadriparesis with preserved muscle tone and deep
tendon reflexes and without peripheral lymphadenopathy or organomegaly. A brain MRI revealed an intracranial extraaxial lesion in the
pontomedullary level extending to the upper cervical spine with a component of intraspinal infiltration. The patient underwent partial
resection of the pontomedullary mass without complications. Histologic examination identified an atypical lymphohistiocytic infiltrate
composed of numerous clustered large histiocytes that had abundant amphophilic cytoplasm and demonstrated definitive emperipolesis. The
patient completed adjuvant localized radiation therapy (4500 cGy) as well as adjuvant systemic chemotherapy with vincristine, mercaptopurine
(6-MP), prednisone, and methotrexate (MTX) for 2 years with partial remission of the disease and substantial improvement of quadriparesis.
Seven years after the initial diagnosis he continues to be relatively asymptomatic with only mild residual neurologic deficits. However,
follow-up MRI continued to demonstrate multiple areas of dural enhancement, both in the anterior and posterior cranial fossas, around the
cervical spinal canal, the tentorium, within the right internal auditory canal, as well as a 5-mm rounded enhancing lesion in the
suprasellar region (Figures 3C and 3D). Due to the lack of symptoms he was actively followed without specific treatment. A 38-year-old white
man was incidentally diagnosed to have a tuberculum sellae mass on a follow-up head computed tomography (CT) performed because of chronic
maxillary sinusitis. He was asymptomatic with normal neurologic examination, and his total body CT scan was unremarkable. On MRI, the
homogenously enhancing extraaxial mass appeared to involve anteriorly both cavernous sinuses extending to the right clinoid process. In
addition, there were 2 small asymptomatic dura-based masses, 1 in the left hemispheric convexity and another in the left foramen magnum.
With the presumed diagnosis of multiple meningiomas, the patient underwent a complete macroscopic resection of the tuberculum sellae mass,
demonstrating brain tissue infiltration by S100 and CD68 positive histiocytes with large nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and characteristic
emperipolesis, establishing a diagnosis of RDD. The patient remained asymptomatic over the next year and had no recurrence or progression of
the cranial lesions on repeat MRI studies. He was lost to follow-up after that time. A 60-year-old white man was evaluated for progressive
cognitive deterioration over 1 year associated with mild right hemiparesis. A cerebral MRI demonstrated a homogenously enhancing extraaxial
left parieto-occipital lesion, which was surgically completely resected. Histologic examination identified histiocytes that stained
positively for S100 and negatively for CD68 and CD1a, confirming the diagnosis of RDD. Whole body CT showed no systemic involvement. Regular
clinical and imaging follow-up over the next 10 years showed no signs of recurrence. Table 1 presents the main clinical and imaging features
of the 6 patients presented here with RDD with isolated CNS involvement. The disease was diagnosed at a mean age of 42 years (range, 18–60
yr), variably presenting with nonspecific headaches or location-related neurologic manifestations in 5 patients, and was incidentally
diagnosed in the final patient. Five patients had isolated extraaxial tumors, intracranial (4/5) or intracranial and spinal (1/5), while 1
patient also had an additional spinal intramedullary lesion. The diagnosis was invariably based on the presence of histiocytic infiltrations
with emperipolesis in surgically obtained tissue samples. Because 5 of the 6 patients had multiple intracranial or combined intracranial and
spinal masses, complete surgical resection could be achieved only in 1 patient with a single intracranial lesion. Due to incomplete
resection of the CNS masses, 4 patients received localized adjuvant radiotherapy, and 2 of these received systemic chemotherapy as well.
Five patients responded to therapy, achieving stable disease with follow-up periods ranging from 7 months to 10 years. One additional
patient who initially responded to surgery later experienced progressive disease without symptomatic response to localized radiotherapy or
to adjuvant systemic steroids, and opted to continue with palliative therapy (Table 1). The follow-up of our patients is significantly
longer than the follow-up of patients presented in the literature, thus demonstrating the natural history of the disease and disease course
following treatment. Characteristics, Treatment, and Clinical Outcome of 6 Patients With RDD With CNS Involvement Extranodal involvement is
observed in approximately 40% of patients diagnosed with RDD, but CNS involvement is very uncommon, with 210 cases reported in the English
medical literature, including our 6 patients (Table 2).1,3–46,48–77,79–82,84,85,87,89–91,94–113,115–127 In 174 of the reported cases, RDD
was isolated to the CNS, while in 36 patients it was part of a systemic disseminated disease (see Table 2). CNS involvement has been
described in both adults and children, with a mean age at presentation of 39 years and a male prevalence (male: female ratio: 1.8: 1.0). RDD
involving the CNS presents most commonly with dura-based extraaxial involvement of the cranium. Spinal cord involvement is exceedingly rare.
Patients may present with a single or multiple masses. Adeleye et al1 found that between 1969 and 2009, a total of 111 cases of RDD
involving the CNS were reported, with only 15 (14%) affecting the spine and 10 (9%) with both intracranial and spinal presentation. In our
updated review of a total of 210 patients (including 6 patients presented herein), 167 (79.5%) presented with intracranial lesions, 24
(11.4%) with spinal involvement, and 19 (9.0%) with both intracranial and spinal involvement (see Table 2). Anatomical localization of the
CNS lesions in RDD with isolated CNS involvement and systemic RDD with CNS involvement is shown in Table 2. Involvement of the spine was
more common in the systemic RDD with CNS involvement (p = 0.017). In addition to our Case 3, we found only 2 previous cases of
intramedullary spinal cord RDD in the literature. To our knowledge the first reported case of intramedullary RDD was described by Osenbach82
in 1996 in a 35-year-old man who presented with paraplegia associated with an intramedullary lesion in the thoracic spine detected by MRI.
The mass was fully resected, and a diagnosis of intramedullary RDD was confirmed by pathologic studies.82 El-Molla et al28 recently reported
the second case of intramedullary RDD, in a 76-year-old man with progressive right body hemiparesis and an intramedullary lesion involving
the cervical spine, detected by MRI. The intraspinal tumor was confirmed to be RDD after surgical resection.28 While in these 2 patients the
RDD presented as a localized intramedullary mass, in our Case 3 the spinal cord intramedullary mass was associated with additional
extraaxial tumors. Characteristics of CNS RDD Cases According to Type of Clinical Presentation, Present and Previous Reports* In patients
with an isolated CNS presentation, constitutional symptoms are usually absent. The neurologic symptoms and findings depend on the
localization of the lesions. Patients commonly present with headaches, seizures, focal neurologic deficits, and paraparesis or paraplegia
when the spine is affected. A review of the radiologic findings revealed that RDD may involve intracranial (82.8%) or spinal structures
(9.1%), or both anatomic locations may be concurrently involved in only 14 (8.1%) patients. Because CNS involvement by RDD is an uncommon
entity and diagnostic imaging findings mimic other more common lesions such as meningiomas, preoperative evaluation is challenging, and
without biopsy the disease is commonly misdiagnosed.8,100,113,121 Spinal involvement by RDD occurs mostly in the cervical and thoracic
regions; we found only 1 case report describing diffuse spinal involvement, including the lumbosacral area.8,45,84,108 On both CT and MRI
these intramedullary lesions can present as dura-based masses in the vicinity of bone, therefore mimicking meningiomas, and can be localized
to the anterior, middle, or posterior fossa as well as on the extradural compartment of the spine. Overall, both intramedullary and
intraparenchymal lesions are very infrequent, especially when they present as isolated masses.1,45,84 Rarely, RDD presents as
intraventricular lesions or lesions invading the dura, vascular sinuses, and bone.1,77,108 On CT scan, lesions of RDD can be seen as
homogeneous hyperdense masses with marked contrast enhancement and can be associated with perilesional vasogenic edema, causing mass effect
on adjacent structures or bone erosions. Characteristically, RDD masses do not have associated calcifications.1,35,69,92 MRI usually reveals
single or multiple well-defined lesions that are isointense to the adjacent brain parenchyma on T1-weighted images and are strongly and
homogeneously enhanced after gadolinium administration. On T2-weighted images, RDD lesions appear as heterogeneous hypo- or isointense
masses similar to that of the contiguous dura.1,25,35,69,77,92,108 These characteristics can also be seen when lesions involve the spinal
canal.8,28,45,84 The contrast T1-weighted MRI images of our cases demonstrated both intracranial and spinal homogeneously enhancing masses
with an associated mass effect over surrounding structures. Limited data exist on the applicability of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) in RDD. Deshayes et al24 recently described the potential use of 18F-FDG PET/CT to
diagnose relapsed intracranial RDD of the hypothalamus in a patient. Clearly, the role of PET/CT in the diagnosis and follow-up of RDD
involving the CNS needs further exploration. Since CNS involvement by RDD is rare, there are no prospective studies evaluating the best
therapeutic approach for this disease, and most current approaches are based on case reports and small case series. Furthermore, in most
reported cases the follow-up is short, not allowing assessment of long-term therapeutic effects. Because RDD is considered to be a benign,
non-neoplastic lymphoproliferative disorder, treatment of RDD involving lymph nodes and extranodal areas outside the CNS is advised only in
patients with symptomatic lesions or masses that are impeding the function of vital organs. In RDD patients without CNS involvement,
complete spontaneous resolution is observed in about 20% of cases, and about 70% exhibit stable asymptomatic disease.30 Based on our
experience and review of the literature, spontaneous resolution is not observed in RDD patients with CNS involvement. Surgery is the
preferred treatment for both diagnostic purposes and to obtain rapid improvement of neurologic symptoms in RDD patients with CNS
involvement.1,21,52,78,121 Complete resection of the mass should be attempted, if feasible. Although complete resection is ideal, these
masses can often adhere to surrounding critical structures, precluding complete surgical excision. In such cases, subtotal resection of
target symptomatic lesions should be done to provide a pathologic diagnosis and symptomatic relief.21,121 If neurologic impairment is
reversed after partial resection, a wait-and-watch approach can be implemented, since most patients achieve stable disease after partial
excision of the mass, as was also done in some of the patients in the current study.21,47,121 If neurologic symptoms are persistent and/or
the lesions are surrounding vital structures with potential to compromise their function, adjuvant therapies should be implemented, with
localized radiotherapy being the preferred treatment. Both fractionated radiotherapy using doses of 2000–4500 cGy with 200 cGy/dose or
stereotactic radiotherapy have been used.21,41,55 While many patients respond clinically, results vary and some patients do not show any
improvement, as was also observed in our patient with intramedullary spinal cord involvement. Systemic therapy can be attempted in these
patients. Patients with systemic RDD presenting with constitutional symptoms and/or symptomatic lymphadenopathy with rapid growth are
commonly given a therapeutic trial of steroids. While some case reports suggest that dexamethasone might be superior to other steroids in
this setting, there are no randomized trials to support this hypothesis.1,21,41 In cases with CNS involvement, steroid treatment has shown
some therapeutic benefit in a few reported cases, but the evidence is insufficient to recommend corticosteroids as the mainstay treatment
for this group of patients.1,21,41,47 While various chemotherapy regimens have been used to treat progressive systemic RDD, the responses
are not uniform, and some of the therapies cannot be used in patients with CNS involvement because of reduced blood-brain barrier
permeability. However, it is important to remember that extradural masses are not protected by the blood-brain barrier, and in patients with
such masses there is no need to select agents that penetrate the blood-brain barrier. Overall, the literature on chemotherapy for RDD with
CNS involvement is scarce, preventing the establishment of evidence-based therapeutic approaches. Pulsoni et al88 reviewed therapeutic
outcomes of 12 patients with systemic RDD without CNS involvement who were treated with vinca alkaloids, anthracyclines, antimetabolites,
and/or alkylating agents. Overall, therapeutic outcomes were disappointing. Only 2 patients achieved complete response, while the remaining
patients had no response. Remarkably, both of the patients with complete response received MTX and 6-MP, and 1 of them obtained a rapid
complete response, lasting for 36 months after failing therapy with etoposide. In the current report, Case 4 was also treated with MTX and
6-MP and achieved partial remission. Consequently, MTX with 6-MP may be useful in patients with CNS disease, as was also described in a
report of spinal compression due to RDD.68 Newer therapies, including the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib and the anti-CD20 monoclonal
antibody rituximab, have also been used in systemic RDD with variable responses.2,83,86,114 Although these therapies showed clinical
activity in classic RDD, the results cannot be extrapolated to patients with CNS involvement since none of the treated subjects had CNS
disease. In conclusion, CNS and especially intramedullary spinal cord involvement by RDD is rare, but this disease should always be
considered in the differential diagnosis of dura-based and spinal lesions with progressive growth without evidence of calcification on
neuroimaging. While randomized prospective data on therapeutic approaches in this patient population are lacking, based on our own
experience and an updated literature review, patients with limited disease should undergo surgical resection that may be consolidated with
radiotherapy. In cases with widespread CNS disease resistant to radiotherapy, steroids with or without MTX-based chemotherapy could be
considered as a feasible active therapy. In the current series, 1 patient maintained prolonged disease control using MTX-based therapy; this
was also reported previously by Tubbs et al.111 Rituximab was shown to be beneficial in systemic RDD, but its role in CNS disease is
uncertain. Since histiocytes do not express CD20, its mechanism of action and efficacy in this disease are questionable. Due to the rarity
of this entity, reports of a small patient series may provide additional valuable data on therapeutic approaches for these patients, but
only multicenter international collaborations will eventually provide valuable data necessary to develop rational treatment strategies to
improve the outcomes of these patients. Abbreviations: 6-MP = mercaptopurine, CNS = central nervous system, CT = computed tomography, FDG =
fluorodeoxyglucose, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, MTX = methotrexate, PET = positron emission tomography, RDD = Rosai-Dorfman disease,
SHML = sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy. Financial support and conflicts of interest: I.S.L. is supported by the National
Institutes of Health , Lymphoma Research Foundation, the Dwoskin and Recio Family Foundation grants. The authors have no other funding or
conflicts of interest to disclose.
