Hyperhomocysteinemia is a well-known modifiable risk factor for thromboembolism. Retinal vascular occlusion in patients having
hyperhomocysteinemia is a known entity, particularly in young patients. However, multiple extra macular branch retinal vein occlusion (BRVO)
is a rare condition, which can be a presentation of this disease. We present a patient who had multiple extra macular BRVO; on complete
systemic workup, he was found to have raised homocysteine levels. Hyperhomocysteinemia is a known risk factor for ocular and systemic vaso-
occlusive events. However, multiple extra macular branch retinal vein occlusion (BRVOs) has not been mentioned in literature with
hyperhomocysteinemia. A 45-year-old man presented with a history of blurred vision in his right eye since past 15 days. He was a known case
of bronchial asthma since 6 years. On examination, his right eye best corrected visual acuity was 20/20. Anterior segment examination and
IOP was normal. Fundus examination showed multiple cotton wool spots inferior to the papillomacular bundle, extending toward macula with
retinal hemorrhages temporal to macula [Fig. 1]. Color fundus photo showing numerous soft exudates in inferotemporal part extending toward
macula in some part, multiple vein constrictions, and occlusions Red free and fluorescein angiography [Figs. 2 and 3] showed areas of
blocked fluorescence due to hemorrhages and multiple BRVOs. Macular perfusion was not affected as foveal avascular zone was normal.
Fuorescein angiography showing multiple branch retinal vein occlusions Asterix and arrows showing partial vein obstructions Optical
coherence tomography [Figs. 3 and 4] showed normal foveal contour and anatomy. Patient underwent complete systemic workup including hemogram
with erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), lipid profile, renal function tests, ANA, c-ANCA, p-ANCA, homocysteine levels, coagulation
profile (Prothrombin time, APTT, bleeding time, clotting time, protein C and S levels), syphilis serology, echocardiography, and
electrocardiogram. Except a raised level of homocysteine (35 μM) (normal range: 5-15 μM), all other levels were within normal limits. OCT
showing normal anatomy of macula He was started on anticoagulants and homocysteine lowering agents under guidance of an internist. As
macular perfusion was not affected and there was no associated cystoid macular edema, no active ocular intervention was done. He was advised
close follow-up for early detection of any further vision threatening vein obstruction. Retinal vein occlusion (RVO) is the second most
common sight-threatening retinal vascular disorder after diabetic retinopathy. The incidence of BRVO is generally higher than the incidence
of CRVO. Patients with RVO have a higher prevalence of stroke and a greater risk of cardiovascular disease than similarly aged individuals
without RVO. BRVO prevalence has been shown to vary from 0.7% to 1.6%. BRVO is divided into two distinct entities: Major BRVO, when one of
the major branch retinal veins is occluded, and macular BRVO, when one of the macular venules is occluded. In 66% of eyes with BRVO, there
is occlusion of the major branch in the superotemporal quadrant, followed by 22-43% of eyes with occlusion of the major branch in the
inferotemporal quadrant. Major BRVO can be asymptomatic or with visual blurring, usually involving the sector of visual field corresponding
to the area of the retina involved. In macular BRVO, there is always a central visual disturbance with normal peripheral vision. Among all
conditions leading to a hypercoagulable state, hyperhomocysteinemia was the commonest cause found in 21.9% patients. Homocysteine is an
amino acid derived from methionine, which can be converted into cysteine. The metabolic pathways involving homocysteine require vitamin B12,
vitamin B6, and folate for proper functioning. Various reports on hyperhomocysteinemia depict that arterial as well as venous vessels are
involved in the disease. The rare syndrome of homocystinuria was first described in 1962 among subjects with mental retardation, ocular, and
skeletal abnormalities, as well as a high risk of thromboembolism. Increased plasma homocysteine is associated with both RVO and retinal
arterial occlusion, the elevation being greater in the arterial occlusion group. In young patients, RVO is less associated with systemic
diseases and is more strongly associated with plasma homocysteine than in older patients. Atherosclerotic plaques occur in young people with
homocystinuria who suffer from premature, aggressive occlusive disease. Plasma concentrations of homocysteine are an independent risk factor
for cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease in the general population. Mild to moderate elevation of plasma homocysteine is reported as a
risk factor for occlusive disease. Specifically, many studies demonstrate hyperhomocysteinemia as an independent risk factor for
atherosclerosis in the coronary, cerebral, and peripheral vasculature. The mechanisms by which homocysteinemia damages the blood vessel wall
by supporting prothrombotic effects seems to be multifactorial. The various mechanisms reported include homocysteine-induced oxidative
stress (redox stress), decreased bioavailability of nitric oxide, altered expression of various thrombotic factors, mutagenic effect on
arterial smooth muscle cells, and expression of acute stress-related genes. Homocysteinemia presenting as multiple extra macular BRVOs has
not been cited in literature. Patients presenting with such kind of clinical picture should be investigated thoroughly to rule out any
modifiable risk factor such as hyperhomocysteinemia to prevent any further vaso-occlusive event. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of
Interest: None declared.
