Denotes equal contribution. Non-tubal ectopic pregnancies are a rare subgroup of ectopic pregnancies implanted at sites other than the
Fallopian tube. Mortality from non-tubal ectopic pregnancies is higher compared with that for tubal ectopic pregnancies, and they are
becoming more common, partly due to the rising incidence of Caesarean sections and use of assisted reproductive technologies. Non-tubal
ectopic pregnancies can be especially difficult to treat. Surgical treatment is complex, and follow-up after medical treatment is usually
protracted. There is therefore a need for more effective medical therapies to resolve non-tubal ectopic pregnancies and reduce operative
intervention. We have recently reported successful use of combination gefitinib (an orally available epidermal growth factor receptor
inhibitor) and methotrexate for treatment of tubal pregnancies. To our knowledge, this combination has not been used to treat non-tubal
pregnancies. Here we report the use of combination gefitinib and methotrexate to treat eight women with stable, non-tubal ectopic
pregnancies at two tertiary academic teaching hospitals (Edinburgh, UK and Melbourne, Australia); five interstitial and three Caesarean
section scar ectopic pregnancies. Pretreatment serum hCG levels ranged from 2458 to 48 550 IU/l, and six women had pretreatment hCG levels
>5000 IU/l. The women were co-administered 1–2 doses of i.m. methotrexate (50 mg/m2 on Day 1, ± Day 4 or Day 7) with seven once daily doses
of oral gefitinib (250 mg). The women were monitored until complete resolution of the ectopic pregnancy, defined as a serum hCG <15 IU/l.
Time to resolution (days from first methotrexate dose until serum hCG <15 IU/l), safety and tolerability, complication rates and subsequent
fertility outcomes were also recorded. All eight women were successfully treated with combination gefitinib and methotrexate. The most
common side effects were transient acne/rash and diarrhoea, known side effects of gefitinib. All women promptly resumed menstruation and
importantly, three women subsequently conceived spontaneously. Two have delivered a healthy infant at term and the third is currently in her
second trimester of pregnancy. Hence, our case series supports a future clinical trial to determine the efficacy of combination gefitinib
and methotrexate to treat non-tubal ectopic pregnancies. Ectopic pregnancies (EPs) have an incidence of ∼1–2% of all pregnancies. They occur
when a fertilized ovum implants away from the endometrial cavity, most commonly (>95%) in one of the Fallopian tubes (Jurkovic and
Wilkinson, 2011; Fylstra, 2012). EPs can, however, implant in more unusual locations such as within a Caesarean section scar, within the
interstitial portion of the Fallopian tubes, in the cervix, on the ovary and potentially anywhere in the abdominal cavity. Mortality from
non-tubal ectopic pregnancies is higher than ectopic pregnancies generally, and they are becoming more common due to assisted reproductive
technologies, and possibly due to increasing Caesarean section rates (Chetty and Elson, 2009; Verma et al., 2011). Non-tubal ectopic
pregnancies are generally difficult to treat and often require a combination of surgical and medical methods. The literature around
management of non-tubal EPs is limited to case reports and series, describing a range of minimally invasive surgical, radiological and
medical interventions including laparoscopic and hysteroscopic resection, uterine artery embolization, ultrasound guided injections of the
gestational sac with potassium chloride and/or methotrexate, and systemic treatment with drugs such as methotrexate, mifepristone and
misoprostil (Verma et al., 2011; Fylstra, 2012). Treatment choice depends on the site, size and pretreatment serum hCG level of the non-
tubal EP. In particular, interstitial, Caesarean section scar and cervical EPs often still require surgical resection and/or instrumentation
of the uterus, with potential risks to the woman's subsequent reproductive capacity. Because of their rarity as a clinical entity, the best
management of non-tubal EPs has been difficult to establish. In preclinical studies and a phase I single arm, open label study, we
demonstrated that co-administering gefitinib (an epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor) with methotrexate to treat ectopic pregnancies
appeared safe. Furthermore, we obtained preliminary data suggesting this combination may have a time to resolution which is 34% faster
compared with treatment using methotrexate alone (Nilsson et al., 2013; Skubisz et al., 2013). This suggested adding gefitinib to
methotrexate may improve on its efficacy in medically resolving ectopic pregnancies. We therefore wondered whether this combination could be
potentially used to treat non-tubal ectopic pregnancies more effectively. Here we report a case series of eight women with non-tubal EPs
treated with gefitinib and methotrexate. Institutional human research ethics approval was sought and obtained at both participating sites
(Southern Health Human Research Ethics Committee B, 11180B, and Scotland A Research Ethics Committee, 11/AL/0350) to allow administration of
combination gefitinib and methotrexate to eight women with non-tubal EPs, and written informed consent was obtained from each participant.
The diagnosis of non-tubal EP was made according to set ultrasound diagnostic criteria (Jurkovic et al., 2003; Jurkovic, 2007) in
combination with quantitative serum hCG measurement. Inclusion criteria required the women to be assessed as haemodynamically stable (with
no pallor, postural change in blood pressure, syncope or pre-syncope, severe abdominal pain or signs of abdominal peritonism, as well as
requiring a normal serum haemoglobin and haematocrit) and to have normal baseline white cell count, renal and hepatic indices. Exclusion
criteria included severe dermatological, gastrointestinal and pulmonary comorbidities (systems most likely to be affected by combination
treatment), allergy to gefitinib and/or methotrexate and Japanese ethnicity (the latter being an increased risk factor for gefitinib-
associated interstitial lung disease). Participants were treated with daily oral gefitinib 250 mg for 7 days in addition to 50 mg/m2 of i.m.
methotrexate on Day 1. Quantitative serum hCG measurement was repeated on Day 4 and Day 7 of treatment, and initial treatment success was
defined as a ≥15% fall in serum hCG between these two measurements. Additional doses of methotrexate at 50 mg/m2 were administered where
this did not occur, or where there was a significant rise in the serum hCG between Day 1 and Day 4. Serum hCG was then measured weekly until
there was complete resolution of the EP, defined as a serum hCG of ≤15 IU/l. Haematological, renal and hepatic blood indices were monitored
at each visit. Treatment outcome parameters recorded included time to resolution (days from first methotrexate dose until serum hCG <15
IU/l), safety, tolerability and complication rates. Side effects and symptoms were classified according to the Common Terminology and
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.03 (National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, June 14, 2010). Participants were contacted at 3, 6 and 12 months post-treatment to document return of menstrual cycles and
any subsequent fertility outcomes. We recruited eight women with stable non-tubal EPs: five women with interstitial EPs and three women with
Caesarean section scar EPs. The range of pretreatment serum hCG levels of participants was between 2458 and 48550 IU/l. All women were
successfully treated with combination gefitinib and methotrexate—none of the women required surgical and/or invasive intervention to achieve
cure and furthermore, none of the participants experienced blood loss requiring transfusion. A second dose of i.m. methotrexate was
administered to 5/8 of participants, in 3/5 participants because of a significant rise in serum hCG between Days 1 and 4 of treatment and in
the remaining 2/5, because the serum hCG had not fallen ≤15% between Days 4 and 7 of treatment. Duration of follow-up ranged from 25 to 196
days. Table I summarizes the non-tubal pregnancy characteristics, treatment and outcomes of each participant. Supplementary Table I provides
participant baseline demographic data and additional ultrasound characteristics of the non-tubal pregnancies. Table IParticipant ectopic
pregnancy (EP) and treatment details.ParticipantEP typeDay 1 hCG (IU/l)Day 4 hCG (IU/l)Day 7 hCG (IU/l)Fetal heart on ultrasound?2nd dose of
MTX given?Time to resolutiona (days)1Interstitial245820492350NoYes (Day 7)312Interstitial652861636502YesYes (Day 7)383Caesarean scar871613
8369906NoYes (Day 4)484Interstitial857561254810NoNo675Caesarean scar48 55854 74747 551YesYes (Day 4)1966Interstitial973011 96612 484NoYes
(Day 4)637Interstitial264936623497NoNo258Caesarean scar870759813041NoNo53MTX, methotrexate.aResolution defined as serum hCG <15 IU/l.
Participant ectopic pregnancy (EP) and treatment details. MTX, methotrexate. aResolution defined as serum hCG <15 IU/l. The hCG courses of
the five interstitial EPs were quite varied (Fig. 1). Two participants demonstrated an adequate fall in hCG between Day 4 and Day 7
(participants 4 and 7; see Table I). Participants 1 and 2 experienced an initial fall in serum hCG between Day 1 and Day 4, but this
curiously rose to pretreatment levels at Day 7 in both cases. This was despite ultrasound evidence of treatment efficacy in participant 2,
where a fetal heart seen pretreatment was not detected on re-scanning at Day 4. In contrast, the hCG courses of the Caesarean section scar
EPs all demonstrated a fall in hCG between Days 4 and 7 of treatment, including one with an extremely high pretreatment hCG level of 48 558
IU/l and a fetal heart seen on ultrasound prior to treatment. Figure 1The serum hCG courses of participants. Interstitial ectopic
pregnancies shown in blue and Caesarean section scar ectopic pregnancies shown in red. Serum hCGs were measured on Days 4, 7 and 11 of
treatment and weekly thereafter until resolution (hCG,15 IU/l), with the protocol commencing again after a repeat dose of methotrexate on
Day 4 or Day 7 in 5/8 participants. Numbers on the diagonal correlate to the participant and arrows indicate additional doses of
methotrexate. The serum hCG courses of participants. Interstitial ectopic pregnancies shown in blue and Caesarean section scar ectopic
pregnancies shown in red. Serum hCGs were measured on Days 4, 7 and 11 of treatment and weekly thereafter until resolution (hCG,15 IU/l),
with the protocol commencing again after a repeat dose of methotrexate on Day 4 or Day 7 in 5/8 participants. Numbers on the diagonal
correlate to the participant and arrows indicate additional doses of methotrexate. The combination of oral gefitinib and systemic
methotrexate was well tolerated. The most commonly reported adverse events were a papulopustular rash (Fig. 2), diarrhoea and dizziness,
consistent with the known side effect profile of gefitinib. All adverse events were classified as either grade 1 (mild) or grade 2
(moderate) according to the CTCAE, and all women were able to continue with employment and/or family responsibilities after discharge from
hospital and during follow-up. All reported adverse events resolved spontaneously after completion of treatment, with only occasional
symptomatic treatment required. Importantly, there were no complications of treatment and in particular, none of the participants
experienced haemorrhage requiring blood transfusion. Figure 2An example of the papulopustular (acneiform) rash experienced by some
participants in response to treatment with oral gefitinib. The rash is most prominent in areas exposed to UV light, i.e. the face, neck and
décolletage. An example of the papulopustular (acneiform) rash experienced by some participants in response to treatment with oral
gefitinib. The rash is most prominent in areas exposed to UV light, i.e. the face, neck and décolletage. All participants promptly resumed
their menstrual cycles (i.e. within 6 weeks of cure), and 3/8 so far have achieved a subsequent spontaneous intrauterine pregnancy. Two of
these pregnancies have resulted in the successful births of a healthy infant at term, with a third woman in the second trimester of an
uncomplicated pregnancy. The results of this case series suggest that combination gefitinib and methotrexate therapy could be a safe and
effective treatment for non-tubal ectopic pregnancies. The combination treatment was successful in resolving the pregnancies without
recourse to surgery or more invasive medical treatments in all cases. Six of the eight women had serum hCG levels of >5000 IU/l, levels
where previous studies would suggest the single-dose methotrexate protocol (which includes a second dose if required) may be less effective
(Menon et al., 2007). Non-tubal EPs are uncommon, and consequently, their optimal management has not been firmly established. Additionally,
each type of non-tubal EP presents different management challenges (Chetty and Elson, 2009). Advances in ultrasound have enabled earlier and
more accurate diagnosis, and the use of minimally invasive techniques has significantly improved the outcomes of women diagnosed with non-
tubal EPs (Chetty and Elson, 2009). Nevertheless, non-invasive management remains key to minimizing any risk to subsequent pregnancies. Non-
invasive treatment of non-tubal and indeed all EPs is almost exclusively limited to systemic methotrexate (Hajenius et al., 2000). The
effectiveness of methotrexate in the treatment of EP is limited by the pretreatment serum hCG, with ectopic pregnancies with levels >5000
IU/l significantly less likely to be treated successfully (Menon et al., 2007). Because of difficulty accurately characterizing their
location with ultrasound, non-tubal EPs are still diagnosed at more advanced gestations with higher pretreatment serum hCG levels, thus
limiting the usefulness of this non-invasive approach (Chetty and Elson, 2009). We have demonstrated effective management of women with non-
tubal EPs and pretreatment hCGs as high as 48 558 IU/l by combining minimal doses of methotrexate with a short course of gefitinib. This co-
treatment approach can achieve better treatment outcomes with lower overall drug exposure (Nilsson et al., 2013). Another clinical factor
negatively associated with methotrexate treatment success is the presence of a fetal heart motion on ultrasound (Bachman and Barnhart,
2012). In this case series of eight women, we successfully treated two non-tubal EPs with embryonic cardiac activity, including one
participant who at repeat scanning on Day 4 of treatment, showed the fetal heart motion to have already resolved. These cases provide
further encouraging preliminary evidence that this combination treatment is efficacious. The main goal of non-invasive treatment is
preservation of reproductive potential. Importantly, all participants promptly resumed their menstrual cycles after resolution of their non-
tubal EPs with combination gefitinib and methotrexate (within 6 weeks). Three participants have subsequently conceived spontaneous
intrauterine pregnancies, with two women delivering a healthy infant at term (both normal vaginal deliveries) and a third woman being in her
second trimester of an uncomplicated pregnancy. Our continued experience with combination gefitinib and methotrexate treatment of women with
ectopic pregnancies is that it appears safe and well tolerated. There were no serious adverse events recorded during the treatment of these
eight women. Non-serious adverse events, predominantly gastrointestinal and mucocutaneous, were consistent with the known side effect
profiles of both gefitinib and methotrexate. Furthermore, all side effects were transient, requiring only occasional symptomatic management
and completely resolving after discontinuation of treatment. Treatment of non-small cell lung cancer with gefitinib is associated with
interstitial lung disease (ILD) in ∼1% of white and 5% of Japanese patients, and is fatal in up to one-third of cases (Cataldo et al.,
2011). We have had no occurrences of ILD in any of our participants from this and other studies, cumulatively 70 women treated with ectopic
pregnancies and persistent gestational trophoblastic disease from published and unpublished data (Skubisz et al., 2013). We have screened
for and excluded women with significant pulmonary comorbidities and Japanese ethnicity, and in addition to a short and limited 7-day course
of gefitinib, believe to risk of ILD in women of reproductive age to be unlikely. In conclusion, we believe that combination gefitinib and
methotrexate is a promising new treatment approach for non-tubal EPs. Whilst we understand that it requires assessment of efficacy in a
large clinical trial before it can be introduced into clinical practice, we believe that it has the potential to reduce the need for
surgical intervention, improve future reproductive outcomes and minimize the burden of treatment to both health services and women.
Supplementary data are available at http://humrep.oxfordjournals.org/. A.W.H., M.M.S., W.C.D., E.M.W., P.N. and S.T. recruited and treated
the participants. A.W.H, M.M.S, S.T. and T.G.J. collated and analysed the data. A.W.H., M.M.S. and S.T. drafted the manuscript. E.M.W. and
T.G.J. provided clinical and intellectual oversight. All authors critically reviewed the manuscript and approved the final version. This
work was supported by National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia (NHMRC) Project Grants #606611 (S.T. and T.G.J.), #1008276
(S.T., E.M.W. and T.G.J.); NHMRC Career Development Fellowship #1050765 (S.T.); The Monash Institute of Medical Research Flagship Grant
(S.T., T.G.J., E.M.W.), The Helen MacPherson Trust (ST), The Victorian Government's Operational Infrastructure Support Program (T.G.J.,
E.M.W.) and an MRC Clinician Scientist Fellowship and MRC Centenary Award (G0802808, A.W.H.). Funding to pay the Open Access publication
charges for this article was provided by the University of Edinburgh. T.G.J., and S.T. are joint holders of patents that relate to the use
of EGFR inhibition in treating ectopic pregnancies. We thank Ms Ann Doust for assisting with recruitment of participants in Edinburgh and
all the staff at the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh Pregnancy Support Centre. We also thank Professor Hilary OD Critchley for her guidance and
support.
