Recessive mutations in chromosome 10 open reading frame 2 (C10orf2) are relevant in infantile-onset spinocerebellar ataxia (IOSCA). In this
study, we investigated the causative mutation in a Korean family with combined phenotypes of IOSCA, sensorimotor polyneuropathy, and
myopathy. We investigated recessive mutations in a Korean family with two individuals affected by IOSCA. Causative mutations were
investigated using whole exome sequencing. Electrophysiological analyses and muscle and nerve biopsies were performed, along with magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and lower extremities. Compound heterozygous mutations c.1460C>T and c.1485-1G>A in C10orf2 were
identified as causative of IOSCA. Skeletal muscle showed mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletions. Both patients showed a period of normal
development until 12–15 months, followed by ataxia, athetosis, hearing loss, and intellectual disability. Electrophysiological findings
indicated motor and sensory polyneuropathies. Muscle biopsy revealed variations in the size and shape of myofibers with scattered, small,
and angulated degenerating myofibers containing abnormal mitochondria; these observations are consistent with myopathy and may be the result
of mtDNA deletions. Sural nerve biopsy revealed an axonal neuropathy. High-signal-intensity lesions in the middle cerebellar peduncles were
correlated with clinical severity, and MRI of the lower legs was compatible with the hypothesis of length-dependent axonal degeneration. We
identified novel compound heterozygous mutations of the C10orf2 gene as the cause of IOSCA with sensorimotor polyneuropathy and myopathy.
Signs of motor neuropathy and myopathy were discovered for the first time in IOSCA patients with C10orf2 mutations. These results suggest
that the clinical spectrum of IOSCA caused by C10orf2 mutations may be more variable than previously reported. The online version of this
article (doi:10.1007/s10048-014-0405-1) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Mutations in nuclear genes
involved in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) maintenance are increasingly associated with a wide range of clinical phenotypes including
encephalopathy, progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO), ataxia, myopathy, and Parkinson’s disease [1, 2]. Mutations in DNA polymerase
gamma (POLG), DNA helicase Twinkle (C10orf2), or mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) have been linked to the deterioration of mtDNA
. Chromosome 10 open reading frame 2 (C10orf2), also known as Twinkle or PEO1, encodes the mitochondrial helicase Twinkle. Defects in
C10orf2 lead to the accumulation of multiple deletions in the mtDNA of affected tissues and an associated respiratory chain defect .
Mutations in the C10orf2 gene have been shown to play a role in multiple autosomal recessive diseases including infantile-onset
spinocerebellar ataxia (IOSCA), hepatocerebral syndrome, and autosomal dominant PEO (adPEO) . However, it remains unclear why some autosomal
recessive mutations result in IOSCA while others cause hepatocerebral syndrome. The clinical symptoms of IOSCA (OMIM# 271245) are
characterized by a period of normal development, followed by onset of ataxia, hypotonia, loss of deep tendon reflexes, and athetosis between
9 and 18 months . Later stages of disease are characterized by ophthalmoparesis, sensorineural hearing loss, epilepsy, and primary
hypogonadism in female patients. Electromyographic findings are characterized by axonal sensory neuropathy; however, no reports exist
describing an IOSCA patient harboring motor neuropathy . Although adPEO patients with C10orf2 mutations usually demonstrate mtDNA deletions
in muscle [8, 9], IOSCA patients show no signs of mtDNA deletion. Muscle biopsies of IOSCA patients revealed only nonspecific fiber-type
groupings [5–7, 10]. In contrast to the more well-described adPEO, a limited number of reports have been written on IOSCA. We report the
clinical, histopathological, and genetic defects observed with IOSCA, sensorimotor polyneuropathy, and myopathy, which were associated with
novel compound heterozygous mutations in C10orf2. This study examined four members of a Korean family (family ID: FC417), two of whom were
affected by IOSCA (Fig. 1a). Phenotypic analysis of this family suggested an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance as both children
exhibited symptoms of the disease, while both parents were unaffected. No affected individuals were identified among close relatives of the
family. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants and from a parent of the participants younger than 18 years of age,
according to the protocol approved by the Institutional Review Board of Ewha Womans University, Mokdong Hospital, and the Korea National
Institutes of Health (KNIH).Fig. 1Pedigree, sequencing of C10orf2 gene mutations, and mtDNA deletions in a Korean family. a Pedigree of
family FC417. Open symbols represent unaffected individuals and filled symbols affected individuals. Proband is indicated by an arrow.
Asterisks indicate individuals whose DNA was used for exome sequencing. C10orf2 sequences are indicated below each family member. b
Sequencing chromatograms of C10orf2 mutations. Vertical arrows indicate the mutation site. c Conservation of the amino acid sequence in the
p.T487I mutation region. The mutation site is highly conserved among vertebrate species: H. sapiens, NP_068602.2; M. musculus, NP_722491.2;
R. norvegicus, NP_001101069.1; B. taurus, NP_001091933.1; M. mulatta, NP_001181370.1; G. gallus, NP_001026515.1; P. paniscus,
XP_003825527.1; E. caballus, XP_001499990.1; F. catus, XP_003994378.1; and C. lupus familiaris, XP_003433659.1. d Identification of a
4,977-bp common deletion in mtDNA. The 4,977-bp large deletion (m.8470_13446del4977) was detected using the long template PCR method.
CTL(W), wild type; CTL(D), common deletion in adPEO; II-2(B), DNA from the blood of patient II-2; II-2(T), DNA from the vastus lateralis
muscle; and M(1kb), 1-kb DNA ladder Pedigree, sequencing of C10orf2 gene mutations, and mtDNA deletions in a Korean family. a Pedigree of
family FC417. Open symbols represent unaffected individuals and filled symbols affected individuals. Proband is indicated by an arrow.
Asterisks indicate individuals whose DNA was used for exome sequencing. C10orf2 sequences are indicated below each family member. b
Sequencing chromatograms of C10orf2 mutations. Vertical arrows indicate the mutation site. c Conservation of the amino acid sequence in the
p.T487I mutation region. The mutation site is highly conserved among vertebrate species: H. sapiens, NP_068602.2; M. musculus, NP_722491.2;
R. norvegicus, NP_001101069.1; B. taurus, NP_001091933.1; M. mulatta, NP_001181370.1; G. gallus, NP_001026515.1; P. paniscus,
XP_003825527.1; E. caballus, XP_001499990.1; F. catus, XP_003994378.1; and C. lupus familiaris, XP_003433659.1. d Identification of a
4,977-bp common deletion in mtDNA. The 4,977-bp large deletion (m.8470_13446del4977) was detected using the long template PCR method.
CTL(W), wild type; CTL(D), common deletion in adPEO; II-2(B), DNA from the blood of patient II-2; II-2(T), DNA from the vastus lateralis
muscle; and M(1kb), 1-kb DNA ladder Two independent neurologists evaluated the patients by recording a detailed history of motor and sensory
impairments, deep tendon reflexes, and muscle atrophy. Flexor and extensor muscle strength were assessed manually using the Medical Research
Council (MRC) scale. To determine physical disability, we used two scales, a functional disability scale (FDS) and a Charcot–Marie–Tooth
neuropathy score (CMTNS) . Disease severity was determined for each patient using a nine-point FDS. Sensory impairments were assessed in
terms of the magnitude and severity of pain, temperature, vibration, and position perceptions. Nerve conduction studies (NCSs) were
performed using surface electrodes in the median, ulnar, peroneal, tibial, and sural nerves. Motor nerve conduction velocities (MNCVs) of
the median and ulnar nerves were determined by providing stimulation at the elbow and wrist while recording compound muscle action
potentials (CMAPs) over the abductor pollicis brevis and adductor digiti quinti, respectively. In the same manner, the MNCVs of the peroneal
and tibial nerves were determined by stimulation at the knee and ankle while recording CMAPs over the extensor digitorum brevis and adductor
hallucis, respectively. Sensory nerve conduction velocities (SNCVs) were obtained over a finger–wrist segment from the median and ulnar
nerves by orthodromic scoring; SNCVs were also recorded for sural nerves. Needle electromyography (EMG) was performed on bilateral proximal
and distal limb muscles of the upper and lower extremities. Visual evoked potentials and brainstem auditory evoked potentials in two
patients (II-1 and II-2) were done. Histopathological analysis of the skeletal muscle was performed on a 21-year-old patient (patient II-2).
The muscle biopsy was taken from the left vastus lateralis muscle under local anesthesia. Frozen sections were stained with hematoxylin and
eosin and Gomori’s trichrome stain and for nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH)-tetrazolium reductase (NADH-TR), succinate dehydrogenase
(SDH), and cytochrome oxidase (COX). Adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) activity was assessed under different pH conditions (ATPase at pH 9.4
followed by preincubation at pH 4.6 and 4.3). An ultrastructural analysis was also performed. Histopathological analysis of the distal sural
nerve biopsy was performed at 19 years of age (patient II-2). In addition to light microscopic examination, electron microscopic
observations were made using specimens fixed in 2 % glutaraldehyde in 0.025 M cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4) and processed for semi-thin and
ultra-thin studies. Semi-thin sections were stained with toluidine blue for evaluation by light microscopy. Ultra-thin sections (60–65 nm)
were contrasted with uranyl acetate and lead citrate for ultrastructural studies (H-7650, Hitachi, Japan). The density of myelinated fibers
(MFs), axonal diameter, myelin thickness, and the g-ratio of MFs were determined from semi-thin transverse sections using a computer-
assisted image analyzer (AnalySIS, Soft Imaging System, Germany). The brain, thigh, and lower leg of patients II-1 and II-2 were evaluated
by MRI using a 1.5-T system (Siemens Vision, Siemens, Germany). Whole brains were scanned using a slice thickness of 5 mm and a 2-mm
interslice gap, to produce 16 axial images. The imaging protocol consisted of T2-weighted spin echo (SE) (repetition time (TR)/echo time
(TE) = 4,700/120 ms), T1-weighted SE (TR/TE = 550/12 ms), and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) (TR/TE = 9,000/119 ms; inversion
time = 2,609 ms) images. Thigh and lower leg (calf) muscle imaging was performed in axial [field of view (FOV) = 24–32 cm; slice
thickness = 6 mm; slice gap = 0.5–1.0 mm] and coronal planes (FOV = 38–40 cm; slice thickness = 4–5 mm; slice gap = 0.5–1.0 mm). The
following protocol was used: T1-weighted SE (TR/TE = 570–650/14–20, 512 matrixes), T2-weighted SE (TR/TE = 2,800–4,000/96–99; 512 matrixes),
and fat-suppressed T2-weighted SE (TR/TE = 3,090–4,900/85–99, 512 matrixes). Whole exome sequencing was performed for two individuals (II-1
and II-2). Exome capture/enrichment of 44 Mb was performed using the Human SeqCap EZ Human Exome Library v2.0 (Roche/NimbleGen, Madison,
WI). Captured DNA was amplified and sequenced on the Solexa GAIIx (for II-1) and HiSeq2000 (II-2) Genome Analyzers (Illumina, San Diego,
CA). Paired-end sequences were mapped to the reference human genome (GRCh37, UCSC hg19) using BWA (http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/). The
variant calling process was run using SAMtools (http://samtools.sourceforge.net/). For functional annotation and genetic filtering, variants
were submitted to ANNOVAR (http://www.openbioinformatics.org/annovar/). Variants were filtered using exome data from 35 Korean patients,
including data from 29 CMT patients [13, 14] and 6 deaf patients , along with Korean-specific variants deposited in the TIARA database . To
confirm candidate variants in additional Korean controls, we used exome data from an additional 648 patient samples. Capillary sequencing
was performed to confirm candidate variants. PCR products were sequenced using an ABI 3730 automatic genetic analyzer (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA). Mutations were described according to the Human Genome Variant Society (HGVS) nomenclature (http://www.hgvs.org/mutnomen)
with nucleotide numbering based on the mRNA sequence (NM_021830.4) of C10orf2 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NM_021830). Segregation
analysis of mutations with disease phenotypes was performed for all family members. A deletion of 4,977 bp (m.8470_13446del4977) in mtDNA,
frequently referred to as the “common deletion,” was tested in DNA extracted from whole blood and the vastus lateralis muscle of patient
II-2, using an Expand Long Template PCR System (Roche, Germany). PCR primers covered nucleotides 8,225–8,247 (forward) and 13,707–13,729
(reverse) of the revised Cambridge reference sequence (NC_012920.1). We performed whole exome sequencing on an autosomal recessive IOSCA
family with sensorimotor polyneuropathy and myopathy to identify mutations causally associated with disease onset (Fig. 1a). Exome
sequencing results of two individuals are shown in Table 1. A total of 58,262 and 61,340 variants were identified in each of the two
individuals, respectively. Of these, a total of 10,714 and 9,543 variants were identified as functionally significant, resulting in
missense, nonsense, splice, or indel mutations. After filtering out all dbSNP132 variants, we were able to reduce the numbers of functional
variants to 1,231 and 824, respectively, with 365 variants shared between the two individuals. Additional filtering was performed by
excluding all variants identified in a cohort of 35 Korean control exomes.Table 1Exome sequencing results for two affected individuals of
family FC417PatientsII-1II-2Mappable yield (bp)5,206,019,9455,937,912,039On-target yield (bp)3,248,319,5593,393,707,908% Coverage of
targeted region (44 Mb) >1×97.9 %97.0 %% Coverage of targeted region (44 Mb) >10×94.0 %90.9 %Mean read depth of targeted
region73.8×77.1×Mean read depth of called variant ≥5×58.9×55.4×Number of SNPs50,73353,119Number of indels7,5298,221Total
variants58,26261,340Total coding, splicing variants21,08419,516Missense, nonsense, splice, indel variants10,7149,543After dbSNP132
filtering1,231824Shared variants between the two individuals365After filtering with Korean control exomesa 146Genes with compound
heterozygous variants2 (C10orf2 and LILRB1 genes) aExome data of 35 Koreans from other reports and the Korean genomes database, TIARA Exome
sequencing results for two affected individuals of family FC417 aExome data of 35 Koreans from other reports and the Korean genomes
database, TIARA Based upon these analyses, we were able to identify compound heterozygous variants in two genes, C10orf2 and leukocyte
immunoglobulin-like receptor, superfamily B (LILRB1) (Table 1). We compared the four variants in C10orf2 (Chr10:102749617 and
Chr10:102750192) and LILRB1 (Chr19:55143632 and Chr19:55145125) with those identified in the 248 exome dataset. Only two variants in gene
C10orf2 were absent from the 248 exome dataset (Supplementary Table 1); these variants were also absent in a larger collection of in-house
exome data (n = 400). We confirmed that both C10orf2 heterozygous mutations c.1460C>T (p.T487I) and c.1485-1G>A showed complete segregation
with the disease phenotype within the family (Fig. 1a, b). The patients’ father carried a c.1485-1G>A splicing-site mutation, while the
mother carried the c.1460C>T missense mutation. The p.T487I mutation was located at a highly conserved location (Fig. 1c) and was predicted
to be damaging, according to in silico analyses using SIFT, PolyPhen-2, and MUpro (Table 2). As several mutations in C10orf2 have been
implicated in recessive IOSCA , we therefore concluded that the two novel compound heterozygous mutations in C10orf2 described here were the
underlying cause of IOSCA in this family.Table 2 C10orf2 heterozygous mutations associated with IOSCA with sensorimotor polyneuropathy and
myopathyGeneMutationIn controlsIn silico analysisNucleotideAmino acidSIFTPolyPhen-2MUpro C10orf2 c.1460C>Tp.T487I0/6480.02a 1.00a −0.566a
c.1485-1G>ASplicing acceptor0/648––– aValues indicate prediction of significant effect on protein structure or function C10orf2 heterozygous
mutations associated with IOSCA with sensorimotor polyneuropathy and myopathy aValues indicate prediction of significant effect on protein
structure or function As mutations in C10orf2 are associated with deletions in mtDNA, we examined the mtDNA of patient 1 (II-2); this
revealed a large heteroplasmic common deletion of 4,977 bp (m.8470_13446del4977) in skeletal muscle, whereas few or no deletions were
identified in blood mtDNA (Fig. 1d). The clinical features of patients with C10orf2 mutations are described in Table 3. Patient II-2
(Fig. 2a, proband) was the second child of healthy, non-consanguineous Korean parents. He was born at full term, and the prenatal and
neonatal history was unremarkable. Early motor milestones were not significantly delayed until 1 year of age, when his parents noticed that
he had become clumsy and spoke less often than before. He was in a wheelchair by the age of 14 years. At age 17, we performed MRI of the
brain as the result of an ataxia. By 20 years of age, ataxia had become more severe, and a follow-up MRI was performed. Neurological
examination at 21 years of age revealed severe distal muscle atrophy, pes cavus, and scoliosis. Symptoms of ophthalmoplegia were not
observed. An ophthalmologist examined the patient, including dilated fundus examination, and he confirmed that no optic atrophy was present.
Vibration and position senses were more severely disturbed than pain and temperature senses. Deep tendon reflexes were absent in all
extremities. FDS and CMTNS scores were 7 and 26, respectively, with both scores classifying this patient as severely disabled. He also
exhibited substantial intellectual disability, with an intelligence quotient score of 54. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan of
patient II-2 showed decreased metabolic changes throughout the brain. An echocardiogram was normal, and there was no evidence of migraine,
seizure, or psychiatric symptoms. An electroencephalogram revealed a normal sleep record without epileptiform discharges. Secondary sex
characteristics were well developed, with no signs of hypogonadism. His blood lactate level was 17.0 μmol/L (reference interval
4.5–14.4 μmol/L), pyruvate level was 0.7 μmol/L (reference interval 0.3–0.9 μmol/L), and creatine kinase level was 155 μmol/L (reference
value <185 μmol/L), all well within normal ranges. Liver transaminase levels were normal: the AST level was 22 μ/L (reference value
<40 μ/L), and the alanine transaminase (ALT) was 27 μ/L (reference value <40 μ/L).Table 3Comparison of the clinical phenotypes of IOSCA
patients with mutations in the C10orf2 genePatients (ethnicity)KoreanEnglishFinnishTurkishMutations, Number of patients21232Onset age
(years)>1>1>1>1Normal early milestonesYesYesYesYesAthetosisYesYesYesYesAreflexiaYesYesYesYesPes cavusYesNAYesYesScoliosisYesNAYesNAHearing
lossYesNAYesYesPsychomotor retardationYesNAYesYesOphthalmoplegiaNoYesYesYesLiver involvementNoNoYesNoKidney involvementNoNoNoNoNerve
conduction studySensorimotor polyneuropathySensory neuropathySensory neuropathySensory
neuropathyElectromyographyAbnormalAbnormalAbnormalAbnormalElectroencephalographyNormalAbnormalAbnormala NormalmtDNA depletionNANABrain,
liverNAmtDNA deletionYesNANoNALiver enzymeNormalAbnormalb Abnormalc NormalCreatine kinaseNormalNANormalNALactateElevatedElevatedd
NormalNormalPyruvateNormalNANormalNALactate/pyruvate ratio45.6, 24.3NANANARespiratory chainNormalNormalNormalNABrain
MRIAbnormalAbnormalAbnormalAbnormalLower extremity MRIAbnormalNANANAMuscle biopsyMyopathy, type groupingType groupingType groupingType
groupingNerve biopsyAxonal lossAxonal lossAxonal lossNAReferencesThis study[5, 10, 22, 23] NA not available aAbnormal after epileptic
encephalopathy bWhen her symptoms worsen, liver enzymes were elevated cAbnormal in patients with compound heterozygote mutation
dInconsistently elevated in capillary lactate, while normal in CSF lactateFig. 2Images of patients II-2 (a 21 years of age) and II-1 (b
23 years of age). a Patient II-2 was unable to walk and has been wheelchair-bound since 5 years of age. Moderate-to-severe atrophies of the
lower limb muscles and high-arched feet were evident. b Patient II-1 was wheelchair-bound by 7 years of age. Atrophies of the lower leg and
hand muscles were prominent. Substantial ankle joint contractures and foot deformities were also evident Comparison of the clinical
phenotypes of IOSCA patients with mutations in the C10orf2 gene NA not available aAbnormal after epileptic encephalopathy bWhen her symptoms
worsen, liver enzymes were elevated cAbnormal in patients with compound heterozygote mutation dInconsistently elevated in capillary lactate,
while normal in CSF lactate Images of patients II-2 (a 21 years of age) and II-1 (b 23 years of age). a Patient II-2 was unable to walk and
has been wheelchair-bound since 5 years of age. Moderate-to-severe atrophies of the lower limb muscles and high-arched feet were evident. b
Patient II-1 was wheelchair-bound by 7 years of age. Atrophies of the lower leg and hand muscles were prominent. Substantial ankle joint
contractures and foot deformities were also evident Patient II-1 (Fig. 2) was the elder sister of patient II-2 and was born at full term
after an uneventful pregnancy. Early motor milestones were not significantly delayed until 15 months, when her parents noticed that she had
become clumsy. She was first examined at 3 years of age due to ataxia and athetoid movements; however, symptoms of ophthalmoplegia were not
observed. An ophthalmologist examined the patient, and he confirmed that no optic atrophy was present. A hearing deficit was found, and by
school age, she was completely deaf and began communicating with sign language. She became wheelchair bound by the age of 14 years. When we
examined her at 23 years of age, she displayed muscle weakness and atrophy of the bilateral distal muscles of the upper and lower limbs.
Loss of sensory and tendon reflexes was similar to those of her younger brother. FDS and CMTNS scores were 7 and 28, respectively, both in
the severe disability category. Pes cavus and scoliosis were observed. Like her brother, she also exhibited significant intellectual
disability. An echocardiogram was normal, and there was no evidence of migraine, seizure, or psychiatric symptoms. An electroencephalogram
revealed a normal sleep record without epileptiform discharges. Secondary sex characteristics were poorly developed, and she never
menstruated. Her lactate level was 41.0 μmol/L, pyruvate level was 0.9 μmol/L, and creatine kinase level was 71 μmol/L, all within normal
ranges. Liver transaminase levels were normal: the AST level was 23 μ/L, and the ALT level was 38 μ/L. The father (I-1, 50 years of age) and
mother (I-2, 47 years of age) were found to be normal by careful clinical and electrophysiological examinations. The electrophysiological
features of patients II-1 and II-2 are described in Table 4. NCSs were performed three times, at 19, 20, and 21 years of age for patient
II-2, and at 22 years of age for patent II-1. MNCVs of the median, ulnar, peroneal, and tibial nerves were all decreased. In patient II-2,
peroneal CMAPs were not elicited, and tibial CMAPs were reduced. Sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) of the median, ulnar, and sural
nerves were absent in both patients. The interval changes over 3 years in patient II-2 revealed slow disease progression. Needle EMG showed
fibrillation and positive sharp waves in the proximal and distal muscles. Delayed visual evoked potentials and brainstem auditory evoked
potentials were decreased in both patients.Table 4Electrophysiological features of IOSCA patients with compound heterozygous C10orf2
mutationsPatient II-1Patient II-2Normal valueAge at exam (years)22192021SideRtLtRtLtRtLtRtLtMedian nerve TL (ms)3.53.3 4.3 4.2 4.6 4.2 4.1
4.3 <3.9 CMAP (mV) 5.9 8.89.77.29.66.111.36.2>6.0 MNCV (m/s) 48.9 48.9 48.1 47.9 47.3 42.9 47.2 43.6 >50.5 F-wave (ms) 29.6 29.0 34.0 32.8
34.6 35.2 36.6 33.6 <28.0Ulnar nerve TL (ms)2.72.62.9 3.4 3.3 3.5 2.6 3.1 <3.0 CMAP (mV)11.18.610.19.010.8 7.7 9.9 7.3 >8.0 MNCV (m/s) 48.9
47.8 49.0 47.2 45.5 43.1 45.5 45.5 >51.1 F-wave (ms) 30.0 29.2 32.8 33.0 34.6 35.0 37.4 34.2 <29.0Peroneal nerve TL (ms) 5.4 5.5 A A A A A A
<5.3 CMAP (mV) 1.5 0.8 A A A A A A >1.6 MNCV (m/s) 37.4 36.6 A A A A A A >41.2 F-wave (ms) 52.2 73.8 A A A A A A <49.0Tibial nerve TL
(ms)2.83.3 7.2 5.04.24.44.24.5<5.4 CMAP (mV) 2.7 3.9 1.5 1.1 1.3 1.0 0.8 1.0 >6.0 MNCV (m/s) 36.6 37.9 24.2 27.3 28.7 29.4 28.1 32.0
>41.1 F-wave (ms) 56.6 49.0 75.8 A 75.6 70.4 72.2 71.0 <52.1Median sensory nerve SNAP (μV) A A A A A A A A >8.8 SNCV (m/s) A A A A A A A A
>39.3Ulnar sensory nerve SNAP (μV) A A A A A A A A >7.9 SNCV (m/s) A A A A A A A A >37.5Sural nerve SNAP (μV) A A A A A A A A >6.0 SNCV
(m/s) A A A A A A A A >32.1 H-reflex (ms) A A A A A A A A <30.2Bold characters indicate abnormal values. Normal conduction velocities:
median motor nerve ≥50.5 m/s; ulnar nerve ≥51.1 m/s; and sural nerve ≥32.1 m/s. Normal amplitudes: median motor nerve ≥6.0 mV; ulnar nerve
≥8.0 mV; and sural nerve ≥6.0 μV A absent potentials, TL terminal latency, CMAP compound muscle action potential, MNCV motor nerve
conduction velocity, SNAP sensory nerve action potential, SNCV sensory nerve conduction velocity, NP no potential Electrophysiological
features of IOSCA patients with compound heterozygous C10orf2 mutations Bold characters indicate abnormal values. Normal conduction
velocities: median motor nerve ≥50.5 m/s; ulnar nerve ≥51.1 m/s; and sural nerve ≥32.1 m/s. Normal amplitudes: median motor nerve ≥6.0 mV;
ulnar nerve ≥8.0 mV; and sural nerve ≥6.0 μV A absent potentials, TL terminal latency, CMAP compound muscle action potential, MNCV motor
nerve conduction velocity, SNAP sensory nerve action potential, SNCV sensory nerve conduction velocity, NP no potential Biopsy examination
revealed variations in the size and shape of fibers, characterized by small, scattered, angulated degenerating myofibers (arrows), including
abnormal condensed NADH-tetrazolium-positive cells (Fig. 3a, b). Electron microscopic examination confirmed the presence of degenerating
myofibers with diffusely scattered autophagic vacuoles, distorted myofibrillar arrangement, abnormal membranous structures, and aggregated
enlarged mitochondria with swelling, concentric cristae, and dense inclusions (Fig. 3c, d). ATPase reactions revealed groupings of both type
1 and type 2 myofibers across multiple pH concentrations (Fig. 3e, f). No differences were seen following cytochrome oxidase (Fig. 3g) or
succinate dehydrogenase (Fig. 3h) staining.Fig. 3Histopathological characterization of the vastus lateralis muscle (patient II-2). a–b NADH-
TR staining revealed a scattering of small, angulated, or elongated myofibers with condensed positive reactions (arrows). c–d Electron
micrographs revealed degenerating myofibers containing diffusely scattered autophagic vacuoles, distorted myofibrillar arrangement, abnormal
membranous structures, and aggregated enlarged mitochondria with swelling, concentric cristae, and dense inclusions. e–f ATPase staining at
pH 9.4 revealed grouping of type 1 and type 2 myofibers. g Cytochrome oxidase (COX) staining did not show COX-negative fibers. h Increased
succinate dehydrogenase staining was not observed. Original magnifications: a ×100; b ×200; c ×20,000; d ×40,000; e ×100; f ×100; g ×200;
and h ×200 Histopathological characterization of the vastus lateralis muscle (patient II-2). a–b NADH-TR staining revealed a scattering of
small, angulated, or elongated myofibers with condensed positive reactions (arrows). c–d Electron micrographs revealed degenerating
myofibers containing diffusely scattered autophagic vacuoles, distorted myofibrillar arrangement, abnormal membranous structures, and
aggregated enlarged mitochondria with swelling, concentric cristae, and dense inclusions. e–f ATPase staining at pH 9.4 revealed grouping of
type 1 and type 2 myofibers. g Cytochrome oxidase (COX) staining did not show COX-negative fibers. h Increased succinate dehydrogenase
staining was not observed. Original magnifications: a ×100; b ×200; c ×20,000; d ×40,000; e ×100; f ×100; g ×200; and h ×200 Light
microscopic examination of longitudinal and cross sections of nerve fibers showed markedly decreased size of nerve fascicles with marked
subperineurial edema and multifocal variable-sized Renaut bodies, which consists of loose EMA-positive spindle cells. Semi-thin transverse
sections showed small MFs with almost complete loss of large MFs (Fig. 4a). Remaining MFs counted 5,101/mm2 (normal distal sural nerve in
21-year-old male, 10,000/mm2). The range and average of diameter of MFs were 1.50–10.13 and 3.87 μm, respectively (The range and average of
diameter of MFs in a normal distal sural nerve of a 21-year-old male are 2.2–14.2 and 5.4 μm, respectively). The histogram of diameter sizes
showed a unimodal distribution pattern; 19.5 % of the MFs had a diameter less than 3 μm, and 97.0 % had a diameter less than 6 μm (Fig. 4b).
The MF% area in this case was 6.46 % (normal sural nerve of a 21-year-old male, 36.5 %). On electron microscopic examination, the remaining
small MFs showed occasional excessive folding of myelin with very rare evidence of regeneration (clusters of regenerating fibers, small MFs
with collars of Schwann cell processes containing small unmyelinated axons, mimicking a pseudo-onion bulb, or basal lamina onion bulb
formation) (Fig. 4c, d). Endoneurial fibroblast proliferation and collagen deposition were evident.Fig. 4Histopathological characterization
of distal sural nerve biopsy (patient II-2). a Gray scale image of toluidine blue-stained semi-thin transverse sections revealing an absence
of large MFs, along with abundant medium and small-sized MFs (5,101/mm2). b Histogram showing a unimodal distribution pattern of MFs with
diameter <6 μm, representing 97.0 % of total MFs. c–d Electron micrographs revealed small MFs with excessive folding of myelin and rare
axonal clusters. Original magnifications: a ×400; c ×5,000; and d ×12,000 Histopathological characterization of distal sural nerve biopsy
(patient II-2). a Gray scale image of toluidine blue-stained semi-thin transverse sections revealing an absence of large MFs, along with
abundant medium and small-sized MFs (5,101/mm2). b Histogram showing a unimodal distribution pattern of MFs with diameter <6 μm,
representing 97.0 % of total MFs. c–d Electron micrographs revealed small MFs with excessive folding of myelin and rare axonal clusters.
Original magnifications: a ×400; c ×5,000; and d ×12,000 An MRI revealed hyperintense signal abnormalities in the brains of both patients
(Fig. 5). In patient II-1, high-signal-intensity lesions of the bilateral middle cerebellar peduncles were observed on T2-weighted images
(Fig. 5a). In patient II-2, similar lesions were not found at the age of 17 years (Fig. 5b); however, a follow-up study performed 3 years
later revealed bilateral symmetric high-signal-intensity lesions in the middle cerebellar peduncle (Fig. 5c), with a very similar appearance
to those observed in patient II-1. Cerebellum and brainstem atrophy with prominent cerebellopontine cisternal spaces, a widened fourth
ventricle, and an enlarged cerebellar cortical sulci were noted in both patients (Fig. 5d). However, the cerebral hemisphere and basal
ganglia were normal in both patients, without evidence of atrophy or parenchymal changes.Fig. 5Brain MRI in patient II-1 (a) and patient
II-2 (b–d). a High-intensity lesions of the bilateral middle cerebellar peduncle (arrows) in T2-weighted imaging (patient II-1; 20 years of
age). b At 17 years of age, no high-intensity lesions were found in the middle cerebellar peduncle of patient II-2. c However, a follow-up
brain MRI 3 years later revealed bilateral middle cerebellar peduncle lesions (arrows). d The bilateral cerebellum and brainstem were
atrophied, with prominent cerebellopontine cisternal spaces, a widened fourth ventricle, and enlarged cerebellar cortical sulci were
observed in patient II-2 at 20 years of age Brain MRI in patient II-1 (a) and patient II-2 (b–d). a High-intensity lesions of the bilateral
middle cerebellar peduncle (arrows) in T2-weighted imaging (patient II-1; 20 years of age). b At 17 years of age, no high-intensity lesions
were found in the middle cerebellar peduncle of patient II-2. c However, a follow-up brain MRI 3 years later revealed bilateral middle
cerebellar peduncle lesions (arrows). d The bilateral cerebellum and brainstem were atrophied, with prominent cerebellopontine cisternal
spaces, a widened fourth ventricle, and enlarged cerebellar cortical sulci were observed in patient II-2 at 20 years of age Relatively
intact muscle without abnormal signal changes or muscle atrophy was observed in the thigh (Fig. 6a, b); however, both patients exhibited
hyperintense signal abnormalities with muscle atrophy in the calf (Fig. 6c, d). T1-weighted images demonstrated muscle atrophy with signal
changes in the superficial posterior compartment, including the soleus and gastrocnemius muscles (arrows). Together, these findings indicate
that the distal muscles are impaired more severely than the proximal muscles.Fig. 6Lower limb MRIs in patient II-1. MRIs of the thigh (a, b)
and lower leg (c, d) at 20 (a, c) and 23 (b, d) years of age. Follow-up studies revealed progression of atrophic changes. a, b At the thigh
level, T1-weighted images demonstrated relatively intact muscle without signal changes or atrophies. c, d In the lower leg, MRIs revealed
moderate involvement of superficial posterior compartment muscles, including the soleus and gastrocnemius muscles (arrows); however,
anterior and lateral compartment muscles were spared Lower limb MRIs in patient II-1. MRIs of the thigh (a, b) and lower leg (c, d) at 20
(a, c) and 23 (b, d) years of age. Follow-up studies revealed progression of atrophic changes. a, b At the thigh level, T1-weighted images
demonstrated relatively intact muscle without signal changes or atrophies. c, d In the lower leg, MRIs revealed moderate involvement of
superficial posterior compartment muscles, including the soleus and gastrocnemius muscles (arrows); however, anterior and lateral
compartment muscles were spared Mutations in C10orf2 are associated with autosomal recessive IOSCA, hepatocerebral syndrome, and adPEO.
Mutations cluster exclusively within the primase, linker, and helicase domains, with the majority of recessive phenotypes occurring as a
result of mutations in the helicase domain . In accordance with this mode of action, the two patients described here harbor novel compound
heterozygous mutations in the helicase domain (p.T487I and c.1485-1G>A) resulting in phenotypes characteristic of IOSCA. Mutations adjacent
to residue T487 have been associated with both dominant and recessive phenotypes: T405I, L456V, R463W, and Y508 mutations cause IOSCA [6, 7,
18], while W474C, A475P, F478I, E479K, and F485L cause PEO . The C1485-1G>A mutation may result in a shorter protein, thereby resembling
Twinky, a 582-amino-acid protein terminating with four unique residues. Although this study contained a small number of patients, the
identified mutations were clearly validated by Sanger sequencing as well as co-segregation in the kindred (Fig. 1). In addition, neither
apparent causative mutation was identified in 648 Korean control samples (Table 2). The Twinkle helicase protein, encoded by C10orf2,
localizes to mitochondrial nucleoids and functions in collaboration with DNA polymerase gamma. Mutations within this protein negatively
affect the integrity of mtDNA. Deletions of mtDNA are typically associated with adPEO and have not been reported in IOSCA patients [20, 21].
The identification of mtDNA deletions in this study suggests that compound mutations in the helicase domain affect C10orf2 activity in a
recessive manner. Although a few IOSCA patients have been described in Finland, only three cases have been reported elsewhere, with no cases
reported in Asian populations [5–7, 10, 22, 23]. Axonal sensory neuropathy is thought to be the most important pathological feature of
IOSCA; however, this report represents the first description of an IOSCA patient harboring motor neuropathy. Before referral to our clinic,
the two patients described in this report were first diagnosed with hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies (HMSN) due to sensory and
motor neuropathy and moderate to severe foot deformities including high arches. Based upon these initial observations, we believe that the
phenotypic spectrum of IOSCA may be wider than reported previously. Screening patients for C10orf2 mutations may be beneficial for patients
with sensorimotor polyneuropathy, particularly HMSN patients who present with symptoms of spinocerebellar ataxia. Histopathological analysis
of the muscle biopsy revealed myopathies harboring small, angulated, or elongated degenerating myofibers containing aggregated, enlarged
mitochondria with concentric cristae. High ratios of lactate/pyruvate were also observed. Although there was no evidence of ragged red
fibers by Gomori’s trichrome staining, or increased SDH or NADH, the presence of scattered degenerating myofibers with abnormal mitochondria
suggests an association with mtDNA deletions. Brain MRI findings from both IOSCA patients revealed high-intensity lesions of the middle
cerebellar peduncles. In patient II-2, no lesions were observed at 17 years of age; however, clear bilateral cerebellar lesions were evident
by age 20 years, consistent with observations of more severe ataxia. These results suggest a correlation between the progression of the
clinical ataxia and the increasing severity of degenerative IOSCA. Middle peduncular lesions may be useful as a prognostic biomarker of
IOSCA. MRI analysis of the lower extremities showed muscle atrophy with hyperintense signal changes in the lower leg muscles of both
patients. However, signal intensities were normal in the thigh muscles, consistent with the hypothesis of length-dependent axonal
degeneration. In conclusion, we identified novel compound heterozygous mutations c.1460C>T (p.T487I) and c.1485-1G>A in C10orf2 as the
underlying cause of IOSCA combined with sensorimotor polyneuropathy and myopathy. This study suggests greater variability in the clinical
spectrum of IOSCA than reported previously and that screening of C10orf2 may be helpful in diagnosing IOSCA, especially in patients
presenting with symptoms of axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy and myopathy. (DOC 32 kb) Infantile-onset spinocerebellar ataxia Autosomal
dominant progressive external ophthalmoplegia Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease Myelinated fibers Whole exome sequencing Mitochondrial DNA
Functional disability scale CMT neuropathy score Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy Nerve conduction studies Motor nerve conduction
velocities Compound muscle action potentials Sensory nerve conduction velocities NADH-tetrazolium reductase Succinate dehydrogenase
Cytochrome oxidase Adenosine triphosphatase This work was supported by the Korea National Institute of Health intramural research program
4800-4845-302-210-13 (2012-N61001-00) and 4800-4861-307-210-13 (2012-NG61004-00), the Basic Science Research Program through the National
Research Foundation (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (2011-0021533), and the Korean Health Technology R&D Project, Ministry of
Health and Welfare, Republic of Korea (A120182). The authors report no conflict of interest.
