To report a series of cases of ulceration of the oral mucosa linked to direct contact with ferrous sulfate in elderly patients. The first
case report concerns the occurrence of widespread oral ulceration in an 87-year-old woman with Alzheimer’s disease. The ulceration extended
from the side of the tongue to the floor of the mouth. No clear explanation was found and various local treatments were ineffective. Once it
was realized that the ferrous sulfate tablets (given as an iron supplement) were crushed prior to administration (due to the patient’s
deglutition disorder), withdrawal of this treatment led to rapid resolution of the ulceration. Nine other cases of oral ulcerations
associated with ferrous sulfate were identified in the French National Pharmacovigilance Database. All but one of the patients were over 80
years of age and the youngest patient (a 54-year-old) had dysphagia associated with facial paralysis. Only two other reports of oral
ulceration due to ferrous sulfate have been published to date. Mucosal toxicity of ferrous sulfate (which is probably related to oxidative
stress) has previously been reported for the hypopharynx, the esophageal lumen, and (after inhalation of a tablet) the tracheobronchial
tree. The mucosal toxicity of ferrous sulfate must be taken into account when deglutition disorders are present (as in elderly patients) and
appropriate pharmaceutical formulations (such as syrups) should be administered to at-risk patients. The use of iron salts other than
ferrous sulfate could be considered. In older patients, iron-deficiency anemia is associated with an elevated risk of mortality and various
morbidities (such as cardiovascular disease and cognitive dysfunction).1 Treatment of this type of anemia is based on oral iron
supplementation (with ferrous sulfate tablets in most cases). Although iron supplementation is generally well-tolerated, mucosal injury to
the upper gastrointestinal tract following iron overdose has often been described, particularly in children.2,3 Iron overdose is thought to
exert a direct, corrosive effect that causes mucosal necrosis and ulceration.2–5 However, mucosal injury has very rarely been reported in
patients receiving therapeutic dosages of ferrous sulfate, and the few case reports in the literature mainly concern gastric injury.6 Here,
we report the case of an elderly patient in whom oral ulceration was induced by direct, prolonged contact with ferrous sulfate. The presence
of a causal relationship between mouth ulceration and ferrous sulfate was assessed in accordance with the current French guidelines.7 We
also identified nine other cases of oral ulceration associated with ferrous sulfate in the French National Pharmacovigilance Database. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the largest case series described to date. An 87-year-old woman with progressing Alzheimer’s disease and
deglutition disorders developed a large, irregular area of oral ulceration. The lesion extended from the side of the tongue to the floor of
the mouth. The patient was being treated with ferrous sulfate (80 mg per day), esomeprazole (20 mg per day), macrogol (10 mg four times a
day), and lysine acetylsalicylate (75 mg per day). Histologic examination of a tissue sample from the ulcerated area revealed acute
inflammatory granular and hemorrhagic features. Perls’ staining revealed the presence of siderophages. At the time of onset, no clear
explanation for the symptoms had been found and various local treatments were ineffective. Once it was realized that the ferrous sulfate
tablets given as an iron supplement were being crushed prior to administration (due to the patient’s deglutition disorders), withdrawal of
this treatment led to rapid resolution of the ulceration. We searched the French National Pharmacovigilance Database between July 1986 and
July 2013 and found nine reports of mouth ulceration associated with the use of ferrous sulfate tablets (Table 1). The French National
Pharmacovigilance system was established in 1973. A network of 31 regional centers receives spontaneous reports of “serious and/or
unexpected” adverse drug reactions from health care professionals. Eight of the nine patients were women. The patients’ mean age was 81.5
years (range: 54–97 years). Dysphagia or prolonged presence of tablets in the mouth were reported in three cases and the use of crushed
tablets was reported in two other cases. Ferrous sulfate was always the only medication suspected and all the cases of oral ulceration
resolved or improved rapidly after withdrawal of this treatment. No cases of oral ulceration were associated with other iron salts (eg, iron
fumarate and ascorbate, which are also widely prescribed) were found in the French National Pharmacovigilance Database. In accordance with
the literature data mentioned, the database also featured cases of esophageal and gastric ulceration related to the administration of
ferrous sulfate. This case series shows that the risk of oral ulceration must be taken into account when ferrous sulfate tablets are
administered to patients (and especially elderly patients) in whom cognitive impairments and/or deglutition disorders may cause the tablets
to remain in the mouth for more than a few seconds. Furthermore, patients with dementia may have difficulty expressing discomfort and pain.
Only two other publications have reported that prolonged stasis of ferrous sulfate tablets in the mouth can cause chemical burns to the oral
mucosa.8,9 In both reports, the patients presented senile dementia.8,9 In one case, tablet stasis in the mouth was thought to be due to
torticollis associated with ankylosis of the right shoulder.9 The mucosal damage caused by high local iron concentrations may be related to
the formation of reactive oxygen species.10 Indeed, these species and free radicals have been implicated in mucosal alterations in gastric
or intestinal injuries. The fact that some animal models of gastric ulceration are based on the administration of ferrous iron emphasizes
the harmful effects of these salts on mucosal membranes.11 The mucosal toxicity of ferrous sulfate has also been reported for the
hypopharynx,12 the esophageal lumen,13 and (after inhalation of a tablet) the tracheobronchial tree.14,15 Direct, prolonged contact with a
tablet reportedly induces alterations in both the digestive and respiratory mucosae. The latter resulted from accidental inhalation and
bronchial stenosis; after removal of the tablet, the resulting, massive hemoptysis lasted for several days.15–18 The above-described cases
show that care must be taken when administering iron salts to elderly patients. Iron supplementation is frequent in this population. The
risk of mucosal toxicity may be increased by age- or disease-related dysphagia and/or cognitive impairment. It would be useful to
specifically evaluate the incidence and severity of this adverse event and define the at-risk populations. Appropriate pharmaceutical
formulations (such as syrups) should be administered to patients with deglutition disorders. The use of iron salts other than ferrous
sulfate may be a better option for correcting anemia in at-risk patients. French National Network of Pharmacovigilance Centers list of
collaborators: D Bourneau-Martin (Angers), S Logerot (Grenoble), MJ Jean-Pastor (Marseille), L Javot (Nancy), F Bellet (Saint Etienne).
Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work. Summary of cases of mouth ulceration with a suspected causal
relationship with the administration of ferrous sulfate tablets (either alone or in combination with other drugs) Note: Data from the French
National Pharmacovigilance Database (1986–2013). – no concomitant drugs in addition to trospium was reported taken by the patient.
Abbreviations: M, male; F, female.
