We report a rare case in a female infant (age, 3.5 months) with primary immunodeficiency (IFN-γ/IL-12 pathway defect) who presented with
suppurative lymphadenitis after Mycobacterium bovis BCG vaccination. The strain of M. bovis BCG identified was found to be resistant to
isoniazid and rifampin. The patient was treated with a special pharmacological regimen involving isoniazid (in a limited, strategic manner),
ethambutol, streptomycin, and IFN-γ, after which there was complete resolution of the lesions. BCG is an attenuated strain of Mycobacterium
bovis that is present in the tuberculosis vaccine, which was first used in humans in 1922.( 1 ) The vaccine produces an artificial primary
infection with non-virulent bacilli in order to increase resistance to a future infection with virulent bacilli.( 1 ) The World Health
Organization recommends vaccination with the BCG vaccine for all newborns in areas with a high prevalence of tuberculosis as a means to
prevent the disease.( 2 ) In Brazil, the use of the BCG vaccine for many years has demonstrated the effectiveness of vaccination, with
minimal adverse reactions, and with severe complications occurring only rarely.( 1 ) During the natural course of the vaccination lesion,
nonsuppurative axillary, supra-axillary, or infraclavicular lymph node swelling can be seen. However, severer lesions caused by M. bovis BCG
strains can be found in patients with immunodeficiency, who should be treated with a combination regimen of drugs, such as isoniazid,
rifampin, ethambutol, and ciprofloxacin.( 1 , 3 - 5 ) The treatment of disease caused by BCG can be complicated by resistance to
pyrazinamide, which is inherent to all strains of M. bovis, as well as by intermediate resistance of some strains to isoniazid and by the
emergence of acquired resistance during inappropriate therapy.( 5 , 6 ) The authors report a case of an infant with primary immunodeficiency
who had suppurative lymphadenitis after M. bovis BCG vaccination. The strain of M. bovis BCG identified was found to be resistant to
isoniazid and rifampin. A female infant (age, 3.5 months) was brought by her mother to the Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases of
the Federal University of Minas Gerais Hospital das Clínicas because of "inflammation" at the BCG vaccination site. It was reported that
there was a family history of two cousins who had experienced the same adverse event after BCG vaccination and had died with suspected
primary immunodeficiency in the first year of life. The physician who treated the infant noted the presence of a granulomatous lesion (not
suggestive of secondary infection) at the vaccination site, as well as ipsilateral suppurative lymphadenitis (Figure 1), and the patient was
started on isoniazid therapy (10 mg/kg daily for 45 days). The lymphadenitis resolved during treatment. However, after discontinuation of
the drug, the lesion reappeared. The patient was prescribed isoniazid for two additional months. The lesion resolved, but, at the end of
drug treatment, it returned. Figure 1Suppurative right axillary and infra-axillary lesions after BCG vaccination. The infant was referred to
the Immunodeficiency Outpatient Clinic of the Federal University of Minas Gerais Hospital das Clínicas with suspected primary
immunodeficiency. Initial immunological assessment showed that serum immunoglobulin levels and lymphocyte subpopulation levels were within
the normal range. Because the initial immunological profile was normal and the clinical course was relatively benign, we hypothesized that
the patient had an IFN-γ/IL-12 pathway defect. Serology for HIV was negative. At that same time, we chose to biopsy the affected lymph node.
Smear microscopy and mycobacterial culture of these clinical specimens were requested. Because of the isoniazid-induced reactivation of the
lesion and the family history of primary immunodeficiency, the patient was started on a combination regimen of isoniazid (10 mg/kg daily),
rifampin (10 mg/kg daily), and ethambutol (25 mg/kg daily). Ethambutol was introduced after a literature review, which showed that this drug
is introduced in severer forms of infection with M. bovis BCG.( 1 , 3 - 5 ) The infant was also referred to the department of ophthalmology
for evaluation because of the risk of ethambutol-induced optic neuritis. In the second month of treatment, there was optic disc blurring
bilaterally. At that same time, the results of smear microscopy and culture of the lymph node biopsy specimen were positive for the M.
tuberculosis complex, and susceptibility testing showed resistance to isoniazid. In view of the partial resolution of lymphadenitis and the
possibility of drug-induced optic neuritis, ethambutol was discontinued, and rifampin and isoniazid were continued despite resistance to
isoniazid. In the eighth month of treatment, the infant was hospitalized with secondary infection at the biopsy site. A chest CT performed
during hospitalization showed diffuse coalescent axillary lymphadenopathy on the right, with necrotic and fistulized lymph nodes, which
indicated lesion activity. A second lymph node biopsy was performed, and the specimen was sent to the Professor Hélio Fraga Referral Center,
located in the city of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, for mycobacterial and molecular analysis of the strain. The laboratory test results showed
that it was the M. bovis BCG strain. The identification tests used were basic biochemical tests and polymerase chain reaction restriction
analysis of the hsp65 gene. Susceptibility testing was performed in BACTEC Mycobacteria Growth Indicator Tube (MGIT) 960 (Becton Dickinson,
Sparks, MD, USA), the result of which showed resistance to isoniazid and also to rifampin. Sequencing of the rpoB gene detected the D516V
mutation, and sequencing of the katG gene detected the S315T mutation. Given the results, we chose to continue treatment with isoniazid,
restart ethambutol, and have the patient have ophthalmic follow-up weekly, as well as to add 30 doses of streptomycin (25 mg/kg daily) on
alternate days for six months and discontinue rifampin. The ophthalmic lesion remained stable throughout the treatment period. Given the
difficulty of the case, streptomycin was used because it is bactericidal and it is a first-line drug, as well as because there is a lack of
knowledge about the true in vivo response to isoniazid. The hypothesis of IFN-γ/IL-12 pathway defect was confirmed by molecular tests that
detected a homozygous mutation in IL-12 receptor β1, thus excluding probable severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID). Therefore,
subcutaneous IFN-γ three times weekly was added to the treatment regimen. After six months of treatment, the axillary lesion had completely
resolved (Figure 2). At this writing, three years after the onset of the condition, the patient remained free of lymphadenitis, and the
ocular lesion remained stable, with no impact on vision. Figure 2Healed lesions in the right axillary and infra-axillary regions after
treatment. Adverse reactions to the BCG vaccine vary according to the type of strain, bacterial load, administration of the vaccine, and
host characteristics. Nonsuppurative reactive lymphadenitis can occur in children in the first months after administration of the vaccine
and is mostly due to incorrect technique of administration. In Brazil, isoniazid has been used in the treatment of suppurative
lymphadenopathy secondary to the vaccine in immunocompetent patients. This recommendation is based on the fact that the Brazilian strain of
BCG is usually sensitive to this drug in in vitro tests.( 7 ) However, in the present case, the BCG strain proved to be resistant to
isoniazid and rifampin, showing probable in vivo response to the combination of these drugs with other drugs. Nevertheless, the vaccine can
cause complications that are more severe and, in most cases, occur in patients with immunosuppression. The incidence of disseminated M.
bovis BCG disease in European countries is estimated to be two cases per million children vaccinated, and the disease occurs only
occasionally in immunocompetent children.( 8 ) In their study, Talbot et al. reported a rate of immune defects of 86% in children diagnosed
with disseminated disease.( 9 ) In the literature, there have been reports of complications in HIV-infected patients and in patients with
primary immunodeficiency.( 4 , 7 ) Hesseling et al. described a series of 25 patients diagnosed with severe M. bovis BCG infection
associated with primary immunodeficiency.( 10 ) Santos et al. described the cases of three patients with vaccine-induced infection, one of
whom had IFN-γ/IL-12 pathway deficiency.( 3 ) An IFN-γ/IL-12 pathway defect is an immunodeficiency disorder in which there is increased
susceptibility to infections with microorganisms of the genera Mycobacterium and Salmonella.( 11 , 12 ) It is classified as a congenital
defect of phagocyte number, function, or both. Host defenses against these bacteria strongly depend on the functional integrity of
mononuclear phagocytes and their interaction with T lymphocytes. T lymphocytes and natural killer cells of affected patients express a
defective IL-12 receptor on their cell surfaces, leading to low production of IFN-γ, which is the major factor responsible for mycobacterial
death.( 13 ) The diagnosis of IFN-γ/IL-12 pathway defects requires a tiered approach and laboratory support.( 14 ) In patients with severe
disseminated mycobacterial infection, other immunodeficiency disorders, such as severe combined immunodeficiency, should be excluded first.
In some cases, the treatment of IFN-γ/IL-12 pathway defects requires aggressive use of drugs against the mycobacterium and subcutaneous
IFN-γ replacement therapy as a treatment option.( 11 ) In the present case report, ancillary tests confirmed this deficiency, which favored
the development of lesions due to M. bovis BCG. A system for classification of M. bovis BCG disease in immunocompromised patients was
developed by Talbot et al. and subsequently revised by Hesseling et al.( 9 , 10 ) Infection is classified on the basis of its presentation
as local, regional, distant, or disseminated disease. Regional disease is defined as that in which there is a lesion at the vaccination site
and ipsilateral regional lymph node involvement, with lymphadenopathy and fistula formation and/or suppuration, as in the case described
here.( 9 , 10 ) We report the course of M. bovis BCG infection in an infant with primary immunodeficiency who presented with a regional
lesion located ipsilateral to the vaccination site. The lesion was unresponsive to the recommended treatment with isoniazid, and the strain
identified was found to be resistant to two drugs (rifampin and isoniazid). Although susceptibility testing showed resistance to isoniazid,
we chose to continue treatment with this drug, since testing using a critical concentration does not quantify the level of resistance (low,
moderate, or high), which is determined using a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC).( 15 ) The level of in vitro resistance to isoniazid
was not quantified, since an MIC was not performed, as well as not reflecting the in vivo reality, and the mutation found (the katG S315T
mutation) may be related to moderate resistance to isoniazid. Since ethambutol was withdrawn from the regimen because of suspected optic
neuritis, there may have been strain selection, with acquisition of resistance to rifampin. Rifampin was discontinued, given that the
mutation found in the rpoB region (the D516V mutation) is in most cases related to a high level of resistance.( 15 ) There have been studies
of mutations and MIC associated with clinical response for M. tuberculosis, but there have been no reports regarding M. bovis BCG.
Ethambutol-induced optic neuritis was ruled out, since the alteration in the optic disk remained stable throughout the follow-up period. The
favorable outcome was possible, despite resistance to isoniazid, because of the combination of streptomycin and ethambutol, as well as
because of the inclusion of the immunomodulator, resulting in resolution of the lesions. Study carried out at the Federal University of
Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. Financial support: : This study received financial support from the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do
Estado de Minas Gerais (FAPEMIG, Foundation for the Support of Research in the state of Minas Gerais). Relatamos um caso raro em uma
lactente com três meses e meio de idade, portadora de imunodeficiência primária (defeito no eixo IFN-γ/IL-12), que apresentou linfadenite
supurativa após a vacinação por Mycobacterium bovis BCG, cepa essa resistente a isoniazida e rifampicina. Após o tratamento com um esquema
medicamentoso especial com isoniazida (de forma estratégica e limitada), etambutol, estreptomicina e IFN-γ, houve a cura completa das
lesões. O BCG é uma cepa do Mycobacterium bovis atenuada presente na vacina contra a tuberculose, que foi inoculada em humanos pela primeira
vez em 1922.( 1 ) A vacina provoca uma primoinfecção artificial, ocasionada por bacilos não virulentos, visando aumentar a resistência do
indivíduo em face de uma infecção ulterior, causada por bacilos virulentos.( 1 ) A Organização Mundial da Saúde recomenda a vacinação com a
vacina BCG em todos os neonatos de áreas com alta prevalência de tuberculose como forma de prevenção da doença.( 2 ) No Brasil, seu uso
durante muitos anos demonstrou a eficiência da vacinação, com o mínimo de reações indesejáveis, só raramente induzindo o surgimento de
complicações graves.( 1 ) Durante a evolução normal da lesão vacinal, o enfartamento ganglionar axilar, supraclavicular ou infraclavicular
não supurado pode ser observado. No entanto, lesões mais severas causadas pelo M. bovis vacinal podem ser encontradas em pacientes com
imunodeficiência, que devem ser tratados com um esquema de associação de fármacos, tais como isoniazida, rifampicina, etambutol e
ciprofloxacina.( 1 , 3 - 5 ) O tratamento da doença causada pelo BCG pode ser complicado pela resistência à pirazinamida, que é inerente a
todas as cepas de M. bovis, assim como pela resistência intermediária à isoniazida de algumas cepas e pela emergência de resistência
adquirida durante terapias inapropriadas.( 5 , 6 ) Os autores relatam um caso de uma lactente portadora de imunodeficiência primária com
linfadenite supurativa após vacinação pelo BCG, sendo essa cepa resistente a isoniazida e rifampicina. Uma lactente de três meses e meio de
idade veio trazida pela mãe ao Serviço de Infectologia Pediátrica do Hospital das Clínicas da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais devido a
uma "inflamação" no local da vacinação com BCG. Houve o relato de história familiar de dois primos que haviam apresentado o mesmo evento
adverso após a vacinação com BCG e que vieram a falecer no primeiro ano de vida com suspeita de imunodeficiência primária. O médico que
atendeu a lactente observou a presença de uma lesão granulomatosa (não sugestiva de infecção secundária) no local da vacina, além de
linfadenite supurada ipsilateral (Figura 1), sendo iniciada então a terapia com isoniazida (10 mg/kg ao dia) por 45 dias. Houve resolução da
linfadenite durante o tratamento; porém, após a suspensão da medicação, a lesão reapareceu. A isoniazida foi prescrita novamente por mais
dois meses. A lesão regrediu mas retornou mais uma vez ao fim do uso da medicação. Figura 1Lesão supurativa axilar e infra-axilar direita
após a vacinação com BCG. A lactente foi encaminhada ao Ambulatório de Imunodeficiência do Hospital das Clínicas da Universidade Federal de
Minas Gerais com suspeita de imunodeficiência primária. Foi submetida à avaliação imunológica inicial, demonstrando valores dentro da
normalidade para a dosagem sérica de imunoglobulinas e de subpopulação de linfócitos. Em função da normalidade do perfil imunológico inicial
e do quadro clínico de evolução relativamente benigna, foi aventada a hipótese de defeito no eixo IFN-γ/IL-12. A sorologia para o HIV foi
negativa. Na mesma época, optou-se pela realização de biópsia do linfonodo acometido. Foram solicitadas baciloscopia e cultura para
micobactérias dessas amostras clínicas. Devido a reativação da lesão com o uso de isoniazida e a história familiar de imunodeficiência
primária, foi iniciado um esquema de associação dos medicamentos isoniazida (10 mg/kg ao dia), rifampicina (10 mg/kg ao dia) e etambutol (25
mg/kg ao dia). O etambutol foi introduzido após uma revisão da literatura, a qual indicou que esse fármaco é introduzido em formas mais
graves da infecção por M. bovis BCG.( 1 , 3 - 5 ) A lactente foi também encaminhada ao serviço de oftalmologia para avaliação devido ao
risco de neurite óptica por etambutol. No segundo mês de tratamento, foi evidenciado borramento bilateral do disco óptico. Nessa mesma
época, o resultado da baciloscopia e da cultura da biópsia de linfonodo mostraram-se positivos para o complexo M. tuberculosis, com teste de
sensibilidade demonstrando resistência à isoniazida. Tendo em vista a melhora parcial da linfadenite e a possibilidade de neurite óptica
medicamentosa, o etambutol foi suspenso, sendo mantidos rifampicina e isoniazida apesar da resistência a isoniazida. No oitavo mês de
tratamento, a lactente foi internada com infecção secundária no sítio da biópsia. A TC de tórax realizada durante a internação mostrou
linfadenomegalia axilar direita difusa e coalescente, com linfonodos necróticos e fistulizantes, o que indicava lesão em atividade. Uma nova
biópsia linfonodal foi realizada e encaminhada para a análise micobacteriológica e molecular da cepa ao Centro de Referência Professor Hélio
Fraga, localizado na cidade do Rio de Janeiro. Os exames laboratoriais revelaram que se tratava da cepa do M. bovis BCG. Os testes de
identificação realizados foram testes bioquímicos básicos e o método molecular polymerase chain reaction restriction analysis do gene hsp65.
O teste de sensibilidade foi realizado em meio líquido automatizado BACTEC Mycobacteria Growth Indicator Tube (MGIT) 960 (Becton Dickinson,
Sparks, MD, EUA), o qual revelou resistência a isoniazida e também a rifampicina. Foi realizado o sequenciamento dos genes rpoB, com
detecção de mutação em D516V, e katG, com mutação em S315T. Diante dos resultados, optou-se pela manutenção do tratamento com isoniazida,
retorno do uso de etambutol e acompanhamento oftalmológico semanal, além da associação de 30 doses de estreptomicina (25 mg/kg ao dia) em
dias alternados por seis meses e suspensão do uso de rifampicina. A lesão oftalmológica manteve-se estável durante todo o tratamento. Diante
da dificuldade do caso, a estreptomicina foi indicada por ser bactericida e de primeira linha, assim pela falta de conhecimento da real
resposta da isoniazida in vivo. A hipótese de defeito no eixo IFN-γ/IL-12 foi confirmada por testes moleculares que identificaram mutação em
homozigose no receptor β1 de IL-12, excluindo uma provável imunodeficiência combinada grave (IDCG). Dessa forma, IFN-γ subcutâneo foi
associado ao tratamento três vezes na semana. Após seis meses de tratamento, a lesão axilar havia regredido completamente (Figura 2). Até o
momento, três anos após o início do quadro, a paciente mantinha-se sem a linfadenite, e a lesão ocular permanecia estável, sem repercussões
visuais. Figura 2Lesão cicatrizada na região axilar e infra-axilar direita após o tratamento. As reações adversas à vacina BCG variam com o
tipo da cepa, carga bacilar, administração da vacina e características do hospedeiro. A linfadenite não supurativa reacional pode ocorrer em
crianças nos primeiros meses após a aplicação da vacina e decorre, em sua maioria, da técnica incorreta na aplicação. A isoniazida vem sendo
empregada no Brasil para o tratamento da linfadenopatia supurada secundária à vacina em pacientes imunocompetentes. Essa recomendação
baseia-se no fato de que a cepa brasileira da vacina BCG normalmente é sensível a essa droga em testes in vitro.( 7 ) Porém, no presente
caso, foi demonstrada a resistência do bacilo BCG a isoniazida e rifampicina, com provável resposta in vivo quando associadas a outros
fármacos. No entanto, a vacina pode causar complicações mais graves e que, na maioria das vezes, ocorrem em pacientes com imunodepressão.
Estima-se que a incidência de doença disseminada pelo M. bovis BCG em países da Europa seja de dois casos para cada 1.000.000 de crianças
vacinadas, ocorrendo apenas ocasionalmente em crianças imunocompetentes.( 8 ) Talbot et al. descreveram em seu estudo uma taxa de 86% de
defeitos imunológicos em crianças com diagnóstico da doença disseminada.( 9 ) Existem casos relatados na literatura de complicações em
pacientes infectados pelo HIV e em pacientes com imunodeficiência primária.( 4 , 7 ) Hesseling et al. descreveram uma série de 25 pacientes
diagnosticados com infecção grave por M. bovis vacinal associada à imunodeficiência primária.( 10 ) Santos et al. descreveram três casos de
pacientes com a infecção vacinal, sendo um deles com deficiência no eixo IFN-γ/IL-12.( 3 ) O defeito no eixo IFN-γ/IL-12 é uma
imunodeficiência na qual há uma susceptibilidade aumentada a infecções por microrganismos dos gêneros Mycobacterium e Salmonella.( 11 , 12 )
É classificada como um defeito congênito de fagócitos em número, função ou ambos. As defesas do hospedeiro para essas bactérias dependem
fortemente da integridade funcional dos fagócitos mononucleares e sua interação com os linfócitos T. Linfócitos T e células natural killer
de pacientes afetados expressam um receptor de IL-12 defeituoso em suas superfícies celulares, levando a uma baixa produção de IFN-γ, sendo
esse o principal fator responsável pela morte da micobactéria.( 13 ) O diagnóstico dos defeitos no eixo IFN-γ/IL-12 requer uma abordagem
escalonada e com apoio laboratorial.( 14 ) Em pacientes com infecção micobacteriana disseminada e grave, deve-se primeiramente excluir
outras imunodeficiências, como a imunodeficiência combinada grave. Em alguns casos, o tratamento de defeitos no eixo IFN-γ/IL-12 exige o uso
agressivo de fármacos contra a micobactéria e a reposição com IFN-γ subcutâneo como uma opção terapêutica.( 11 ) No relato do presente caso,
demonstramos por exames complementares essa deficiência, o que favoreceu o desenvolvimento da lesão pelo M. bovis BCG. Um sistema de
classificação da doença causada pelo M. bovis vacinal em pacientes imunossuprimidos foi desenvolvido por Talbot et al. e posteriormente
revisado por Hesseling et al.( 9 , 10 ) A infecção é classificada de acordo com sua apresentação em doença local, regional, distante e
disseminada. A doença regional é descrita como aquela com lesão no local de inoculação da vacina e envolvimento de linfonodo regional
ipsilateral, com linfadenomegalia, supuração e/ou formação de fístulas, conforme observado no caso descrito.( 9 , 10 ) Relatamos a evolução
da infecção pelo M. bovis vacinal em uma lactente com imunodeficiência primária que apresentou lesão regional ipsilateral à vacina, não
responsiva ao tratamento preconizado com isoniazida, sendo a cepa resistente a dois fármacos (rifampicina e isoniazida). Apesar de o
resultado do teste de sensibilidade ter demonstrado resistência a isoniazida, optou-se pela manutenção dessa medicação já que testes
utilizando uma concentração crítica não revelam a realidade quantitativa da resistência (baixa, moderada ou alta), a qual é determinada por
minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC, concentração inibitória mínima).( 15 ) Não há como afirmar a relação quantitativa in vitro da
resistência a isoniazida já que a MIC não foi realizada, e a mutação encontrada pode estar relacionada à resistência moderada a isoniazida
(katG, mutação S315T), além de não refletir a realidade in vivo. Com a retirada do etambutol devido a suspeita de neurite óptica, pode ter
havido uma seleção das cepas, com aquisição da resistência a rifampicina. A rifampicina não foi mantida, pois a mutação encontrada na região
rpoB (mutação D516V) está na grande maioria das vezes relacionada a um alto nível de resistência.(15) Estudos de mutações e de MIC
associados à resposta clínica foram descritos para o M. tuberculosis, mas não há relatos na literatura referentes ao M. bovis BCG. Foi
descartada a neurite óptica pela ação de etambutol, já que a alteração do disco óptico manteve-se estável durante todo o acompanhamento da
lactente. O desfecho favorável, apesar da resistência a isoniazida, foi possível pela associação de estreptomicina e etambutol, assim como
pela inclusão do imunomodulador, o que possibilitou a cura das lesões. Trabalho realizado na Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte (MG) Brasil. Apoio financeiro: Este estudo recebeu apoio financeiro da Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de Minas Gerais
(FAPEMIG).
