A 51-year-old woman presented with dyspnea on exertion, dry cough, dyslipidemia, type 2 diabetes, and liver steatosis. Twenty years prior,
she had undergone hysterectomy and unilateral oophorectomy because of uterine leiomyomas. A chest X-ray showed a solitary pulmonary nodule
in the right upper lobe. The nodule was oval in shape, being approximately 24 mm × 30 mm. A CT scan of the chest confirmed that the lesion
was a solitary, well circumscribed-nodule that had regular borders and was located in the posterior segment of the right upper lobe. As can
be seen in Figures 1A and 1B, there was delayed contrast enhancement (50 HU before contrast injection, 55 HU within 25 s after contrast
injection, and 100 HU within 5 min after contrast injection). Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging was performed, and the nodule
showed slightly high signal intensity on T1-weighted images and homogeneous enhancement (Figures 1C and 1D). The lesion showed signal
intensity similar to that of muscle on T2-weighted images. In-phase and out-of-phase imaging, fat-saturated imaging, and diffusion-weighted
imaging provided no additional findings. A chest X-ray performed three years earlier had shown no lesions. Because the imaging findings were
inconclusive and because of the risk of malignancy, the patient underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery for nodule resection.
Pathological examination revealed a nodular proliferation composed of smooth muscle cells without atypia and areas of hyalinization, a
finding that was consistent with leiomyoma (Figure 2A). Immunohistochemical analysis of the lesion showed that estrogen receptors and
progesterone receptors were positive, and a diagnosis of benign metastasizing leiomyoma (BML) was made despite the atypical presentation,
i.e., a solitary pulmonary nodule (Figures 2B and 2C). Figure 1CT scans and magnetic resonance imaging of the chest. In A and B, chest CT
scans (lung window, in A, and mediastinal window, in B) showing an oval nodule with homogeneous density, well-defined margins, and contrast
enhancement. In C and D, fat-suppressed T1-weighted images (before injection of a paramagnetic contrast agent, in C, and after injection of
a paramagnetic contrast agent, in D), on which the nodule is slightly hyperintense and homogeneously enhanced. Figure 2Photomicrographs of
the pulmonary nodule. In A, note that the nodule consisted of smooth muscle tissue arranged in multidirectional bundles, without atypia or
mitosis (H&E; magnification, ×400). In B, note progesterone receptor positivity (immunohistochemistry; magnification, ×100). In C, note
estrogen receptor positivity (immunohistochemistry; magnification, ×100). BML is a rare neoplastic process in which leiomyomas of the uterus
metastasize to distant sites, the most common of which are the lungs.( 1 , 2 ) BML is usually asymptomatic, and the diagnosis is based on
incidental imaging findings of multiple pulmonary nodules or, more rarely, a single nodule. The term metastasizing fibroleiomyoma of the
uterus was introduced by Steiner in 1939 to described multiple nodules of proliferating smooth muscle cells in the lung of women with a
history of hysterectomy.( 2 ) Different mechanisms of spread of uterine leiomyomas have been proposed. It has been suggested that smooth
muscle cells spread to the lungs after uterine extension into pelvic venous channels; that tumors gain venous access from surgical trauma
during hysterectomy; and that the lesions represent metastatic foci arising from low-grade leiomyosarcomas.( 3 , 4 ) In cases of BML,
pulmonary nodules can be seen 3-240 months after hysterectomy or even before the procedure. They can vary in size from millimeters to
centimeters and be randomly distributed in the lung parenchyma.( 3 , 4 ) A solitary nodule, as seen in our patient, is a very rare
presentation of BML. In general, pulmonary nodules do not calcify and can remain unchanged or even regress spontaneously. Both CT and
magnetic resonance imaging can be used in order to characterize pulmonary nodules in patients with BML; such nodules have a nonspecific
appearance and usually show homogeneous contrast enhancement.( 3 , 5 ) The efficacy of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography
with CT (FDG-PET/CT) in detecting uterine leiomyomas is controversial. In the few reports available in the literature, FDG-PET/CT was unable
to detect BML.( 6 ) In the case reported here, FDG-PET/CT was not performed. Macroscopically, pulmonary nodules are ovoid, well
circumscribed, and homogeneously white. Microscopic examination reveals proliferation of well-differentiated, benign-appearing spindle cells
with eosinophilic cytoplasm, moderate degree of vascularization, insignificant nuclear atypia, mitotic activity, anaplasia, necrosis,
vascular invasion, or inflammatory host tissue response. The presence of estrogen receptors and progesterone receptors in cases of BML has
been well documented and constitutes evidence that BML originates from uterine smooth muscle. Extrauterine leiomyomas are uniformly estrogen
receptor negative. In contrast, most BMLs are estrogen receptor positive.( 4 ) The disease course varies and seems to depend on the estrogen
status of the patient. In postmenopausal women, the disease is indolent, patient mortality being commonly due to an unrelated disease
process, whereas, in premenopausal women, the progression of the disease can result in death.( 1 , 3 ) Because BML is a rare disease, with
few reported cases, there is no established treatment protocol. Given that BML is a hormonally responsive tumor, the prognosis is
favorable.( 1 , 3 ) Treatment includes hysterectomy, bilateral oophorectomy, and long-term hormone therapy. Expectant management and
pulmonary nodule resection are also therapeutic options. Menopause has been associated with lesion regression. Uma mulher de 51 anos de
idade apresentou dispneia aos esforços, tosse seca, dislipidemia, diabetes tipo 2 e esteatose hepática. Vinte anos antes, a paciente havia
sido submetida a histerectomia e ooforectomia unilateral por causa de leiomiomas uterinos. A radiografia de tórax mostrou um nódulo pulmonar
solitário no lobo superior direito. O nódulo era oval e media aproximadamente 24 mm × 30 mm. A TC de tórax confirmou que a lesão era um
nódulo solitário bem circunscrito, com margens regulares, localizado no segmento posterior do lobo superior direito. Como se pode observar
nas Figuras 1A e 1B, o realce da lesão após a administração do contraste tardou (50 UH antes da injeção do contraste, 55 UH 25 s após a
injeção do contraste e 100 UH 5 min após a injeção do contraste). Na ressonância magnética com contraste, o nódulo apresentou sinal de
intensidade levemente alto e realce homogêneo nas imagens ponderadas em T1 (Figuras 1C e 1D). A lesão mostrou sinal de intensidade
semelhante à intensidade muscular nas imagens ponderadas em T2. As sequências de imagem in-phase e out-of-phase, com saturação de gordura e
ponderada em difusão não propiciaram achados adicionais. A radiografia de tórax realizada três anos antes não revelou nenhuma lesão. Figura
1TC e ressonância magnética de tórax. Em A e B, TC de tórax (em A, janela para o pulmão; em B, janela para o mediastino) mostrando um nódulo
oval com densidade homogênea, margens bem definidas e realce após a administração de contraste. Em C e D, imagens ponderadas em T1 com
supressão de gordura (em C, antes da injeção de contraste paramagnético; em D, após a injeção de contraste paramagnético), nas quais o
nódulo está ligeiramente hiperintenso e homogeneamente realçado. Como os achados de imagem foram inconclusivos e havia risco de malignidade,
a paciente foi submetida a videotoracoscopia para a resseção do nódulo. O exame anatomopatológico revelou uma proliferação nodular composta
por células musculares lisas sem atipia e áreas de hialinização, um achado consistente com leiomioma (Figura 2A). A análise imuno-
histoquímica da lesão revelou positividade para receptores de estrógeno e progesterona; fez-se o diagnóstico de leiomioma metastático
benigno (LMB), não obstante a apresentação atípica, isto é, um nódulo pulmonar solitário (Figuras 2B e 2C). Figura 2Fotomicrografias do
nódulo pulmonar. Em A, nota-se que o nódulo consiste em tecido muscular liso disposto em feixes multidirecionais, sem atipia ou mitose (H&E;
aumento: 400×). Em B, nota-se positividade para receptores de progesterona (imuno-histoquímica; aumento: 100×). Em C, nota-se positividade
para receptores de estrógeno (imuno-histoquímica; aumento: 100×). O LMB é um processo neoplásico raro no qual há metástase de leiomiomas do
útero para sítios distantes, mais comumente os pulmões.( 1 , 2 ) O LMB é geralmente assintomático, e o diagnóstico baseia-se em achados
incidentais de imagem de múltiplos nódulos pulmonares ou, mais raramente, de um único nódulo. O termo fibroleiomioma metastático do útero
foi introduzido por Steiner em 1939 para descrever múltiplos nódulos de células musculares lisas que se proliferavam no pulmão de mulheres
com história de histerectomia.( 2 ) Foram propostos diferentes mecanismos de disseminação de leiomiomas uterinos. Sugeriu-se que as células
musculares lisas disseminam-se para os pulmões após a extensão do útero para os canais venosos pélvicos; que tumores ganham acesso venoso a
partir de trauma cirúrgico durante a histerectomia e que as lesões representam focos metastáticos provenientes de leiomiossarcomas de baixo
grau.( 3 , 4 ) Em casos de LMB, nódulos pulmonares podem ser vistos de 3 a 240 meses após a histerectomia ou mesmo antes do procedimento. O
tamanho dos nódulos pode variar (de milímetros a centímetros), e eles podem estar aleatoriamente distribuídos no parênquima pulmonar.( 3 , 4
) Um nódulo solitário, como o que foi encontrado em nossa paciente, é uma apresentação muito rara de LMB. Em geral, os nódulos pulmonares
não calcificam e podem permanecer inalterados ou até mesmo regredir espontaneamente. Tanto a TC como a ressonância magnética podem ser
usadas para caracterizar nódulos pulmonares em pacientes com LMB; tais nódulos têm aparência inespecífica e geralmente apresentam realce
homogêneo após a administração de contraste.( 3 , 5 ) A eficácia da tomografia por emissão de pósitrons com 18F fluordesoxiglicose (FDG-PET,
do inglês 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography) com TC (FDG-PET/TC) no que tange à detecção de leiomiomas uterinos é
controversa. Nos poucos relatos existentes na literatura, a FDG-PET/TC não detectou LMB.( 6 ) No caso aqui relatado, a FDG-PET/TC não foi
realizada. Macroscopicamente, os nódulos pulmonares são ovoides, bem circunscritos e homogeneamente brancos. O exame microscópico revela
proliferação de células fusiformes bem diferenciadas e de aparência benigna, com citoplasma eosinofílico e grau moderado de vascularização,
atipia nuclear insignificante, atividade mitótica, anaplasia, necrose, invasão vascular ou resposta inflamatória do tecido hospedeiro. A
presença de receptores de estrógeno e progesterona em casos de LMB está bem documentada e é prova de que o LMB provém da musculatura lisa
uterina. Leiomiomas extrauterinos são uniformemente negativos para receptores de estrógeno. Por outro lado, a maioria dos LMB é positiva
para receptores de estrógeno.( 4 ) O curso da doença varia e parece depender do estado estrogênico de cada paciente. Em mulheres na pós-
menopausa, a doença é indolente (e o óbito comumente se dá em virtude de um processo de doença não relacionado), ao passo que em mulheres na
pré-menopausa a progressão da doença pode resultar em óbito.( 1 , 3 ) Como o LMB é uma doença rara, com poucos casos relatados, não há
nenhum protocolo de tratamento estabelecido. Como o LMB é um tumor que reponde a hormônios, o prognóstico é favorável.( 1 , 3 ) O tratamento
inclui histerectomia, ooforectomia bilateral e terapia hormonal em longo prazo. A conduta expectante e a resseção dos nódulos pulmonares
também são opções terapêuticas. Há uma relação entre a menopausa e a regressão da lesão.
