Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP), or extrinsic allergic alveolitis, is an immunologically mediated disease resulting from the inhalation of
organic substances that trigger an inflammatory response in the alveolar wall, bronchioles, and interstitium in susceptible individuals.
Although HP is predominantly an occupational disease, seen in adulthood, cases in children have been described. The diagnosis of HP requires
a high degree of suspicion. The treatment consists in avoiding contact with the antigen, and, in some cases, systemic corticosteroids might
be necessary in order to prevent its progression to pulmonary fibrosis. We report the clinical cases of three children with a history of
contact with birds and a family history of HP. All three patients presented with cough and dyspnea on exertion. The disease was diagnosed on
the basis of the clinical history and ancillary diagnostic test results consistent with the diagnosis, including a predominance of
lymphocytes (> 60%, CD8+ T lymphocytes in particular) in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and a ground-glass pattern seen on HRCT of the chest.
Early diagnosis is crucial in order to prevent HP from progressing to pulmonary fibrosis. Hereditary factors seem to influence the onset of
the disease. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP), or extrinsic allergic alveolitis, is an immunologically mediated disease caused by the
inhalation of organic substances that, in susceptible individuals, trigger an inflammatory response in the alveolar wall, bronchioles, and
interstitium.( 1 - 8 ) Although HP is predominantly an occupational disease, seen in adulthood, cases in children have been described, most
of which occurred after exposure to avian proteins.( 4 , 6 ) The prevalence of HP ranges from 5-15% in individuals exposed to one allergen,(
1 - 3 ) and the frequency of the disease is related to several factors (the amount of allergen inhaled, the duration of exposure, the nature
of the antigen, and the host immune response).( 1 , 2 ) Heredity may play an important role, with families positive for HLA-DR7, HLA-B8, and
HLA-DQw3 showing a stronger predisposition.( 2 , 6 ) HP can be classified on the basis of symptoms (as acute, subacute, or chronic) or on
the basis of the dynamic nature of the disease (as acute progressive, acute intermittent non-progressive, or recurrent non-acute disease).(
1 - 3 , 5 - 6 , 8 ) The acute form corresponds to intermittent, intense allergen exposure, and it is similar to a respiratory infection of
viral etiology that resolves within 24-48 h.( 1 - 3 , 5 - 7 ) The subacute form is characterized by dyspnea on exertion, asthenia, and
weight loss, and it corresponds to continued but less intense allergen exposure.( 1 - 3 , 5 - 6 ) The chronic form is characterized by
progression to irreversible lung injury, with pulmonary fibrosis,( 1 , 3 ) and it corresponds to prolonged insidious inhalation of low
concentrations of antigen, with no history of acute disease.( 1 - 3 , 5 - 7 ) There is no pathognomonic diagnostic test, and a presumptive
diagnosis is made on the basis of a high index of suspicion, clinical history, physical examination, laboratory test results, pulmonary
function testing (PFT), and imaging study results.( 1 - 4 , 6 ) Laboratory data are nonspecific-leukocytosis, increased ESR, and increased
levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) and immunoglobulin.( 1 , 2 , 4 ) Skin tests and the presence of precipitating antibodies to the antigen
are markers of exposure, but negative results do not exclude the diagnosis.( 1 - 4 , 6 ) Inhalation challenge testing with the predisposing
antigen is the best diagnostic method when diagnostic questions persist, but it must be performed in a hospital setting.( 1 - 4 , 6 )
Usually, PFT shows a restrictive pattern, characterized by a decrease in FVC and TLC. In the chronic phase, it is possible to find an
obstructive pattern, and DLCO is usually decreased.( 1 - 4 , 6 ) Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid shows a predominance of lymphocytes (>
60%), namely suppressor T lymphocytes (CD8+), with a decrease in the CD4/CD8 index < 1% (rarely found in children).( 1 - 4 , 6 ) Chest X-ray
changes appear as a function of the degree of disease and are little related to symptom severity, ranging from normal to a
nodular/reticulonodular pattern (in acute and subacute forms).( 1 - 6 ) Chest HRCT can show a diffuse micronodular pattern (acute phase) or
obstructive emphysema, interstitial fibrotic lesions, and ground-glass areas (chronic phase),( 1 - 7 ) being the most useful test for
diagnosis. The treatment consists in avoiding contact with the antigen, which can be the sole treatment in acute forms. Systemic
corticosteroids are the treatment of choice in subacute and chronic forms.( 1 - 4 , 6 ) The prognosis varies from full recovery in acute and
non-progressive forms to pulmonary fibrosis in chronic forms. The degree of pulmonary fibrosis at diagnosis is the major prognostic factor.(
1 , 2 ) Case 1 We report the case of a 12-year-old boy with a history of asthma and a family history of HP. Living in a rural area, the boy
had contact with pigeons and canaries, which aggravated the symptoms. He presented to the emergency room with a 2-day history of productive
cough and fever, accompanied by anorexia and weight loss. A chest X-ray showed a bilateral perihilar infiltrate, and the patient was
discharged after being treated with clarithromycin, which was replaced by a combination of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid 5 days later
because of persistence of symptoms. One month later, because the patient continued to have an intermittent cough with periods of worsening
and dyspnea on minimal exertion, he again sought medical attention, presenting with perioral cyanosis, pallor, hypoxemia (SpO2 = 85% on room
air), overall retraction, and an overall decrease in breath sounds, with crackles at the lung bases. Ancillary test results were as follows:
ESR, 36 mm/h; PCR, 22.8 mg/L; IgA and IgG levels, increased; Phadiatop(r) test (Phadia, Uppsala, Sweden) for inhalation and food allergy,
negative; PPD, 0 mm induration; sweat test, 34 mEq/L; chest X-ray findings, bilateral perihilar and basilar reticulonodular infiltrate
(Figure 1); echocardiogram, unremarkable; chest HRCT findings, air-space consolidation and air bronchogram in both lower lobes, accompanied
by a diffusely distributed bilateral interstitial pattern, a centrilobular pattern with some micronodules, and ground-glass areas; serology
for Chlamydophila psittaci, negative; PFT, indicative of mild obstructive lung disease; DLCO, moderate defect; BAL fluid findings, an
intense lymphocytic alveolitis, with a marked predominance of CD8+ (CD4/CD8 ratio < 0.3%). The patient received oral corticosteroids for a
year, which resulted in complete resolution of the symptoms and complete resolution of the lesions seen on HRCT of the chest, as well as in
improvement in PFT results by the end of a three-year follow-up period. Figure 1Chest X-ray showing bilateral perihilar and basilar
reticulonodular infiltrate. A 14-year-old girl who lived in a rural area and had birds at home presented with a family history of HP. The
patient had been healthy until November of 2002, when she sought emergency room treatment due to fever and cough. Physical examination
revealed crackles and respiratory distress. A chest X-ray showed an interstitial infiltrate. The patient was discharged on clarithromycin
and prednisolone. She returned to the outpatient clinic one week later, reporting dyspnea on minimal exertion. Ancillary test results were
as follows: ESR, 24 mm/h; IgG level, increased; levels of other immunoglobulins, no abnormalities; serologies for Mycoplasma pneumoniae and
Chlamydia pneumoniae, negative; IgG and IgM, negative; chest X-ray findings, increased bronchovascular markings bilaterally and bilateral,
perihilar predominant diffuse interstitial infiltrate; chest HRCT findings, mild, slightly heterogeneously distributed parenchymal
thickening in both lungs, small nodules with ill-defined borders, and ground-glass changes (Figure 2); echocardiogram and electrocardiogram,
unremarkable; BAL fluid findings, an intense lymphocytic alveolitis and a mild neutrophilic alveolitis, with a marked predominance of CD8+
(CD4/CD8 ratio < 0.1%). The patient was maintained on inhaled corticosteroids for 2 years, which resulted in progressive clinical
improvement. Figure 2HRCT scan of the chest showing mild, slightly heterogeneously distributed parenchymal thickening in both lungs; small
nodules with ill-defined borders; and ground-glass changes. A 7-year-old boy, whose father and paternal grandmother were under investigation
for suspected HP, presented with a personal history of situs inversus totalis and recurrent respiratory infection. The boy was admitted to
the emergency room with a 5-month history of productive cough, accompanied by progressively worsening dyspnea on exertion, with no
improvement with bronchodilators and inhaled corticosteroids. It was reported that there had been a parakeet at home since the onset of the
symptoms, and that the home also had a henhouse and a cooperage. The initial examination revealed an SpO2 of 84% on room air, subcostal
retraction, and bilateral crackles. Ancillary test results were as follows: ESR, 30 mm/h; PCR, 1.41 mg/dL; IgG, IgA, and IgM levels,
increased; serologies for Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Legionella pneumophila, and Chlamydia pneumoniae (IgG and IgM), negative; chest X-ray
findings, bilateral diffuse perihilar interstitial infiltrate; sweat test, 32 mEq/L; PPD, 0 mm induration; serum precipitins to birds
droppings and feathers, negative; echocardiogram, situs inversus totalis; chest HRCT findings, pronounced ground-glass changes in both lung
fields, consistent with extrinsic allergic alveolitis (Figure 3); PFT, indicative of severe obstructive lung disease that was unresponsive
to bronchodilators; BAL fluid findings, an intense lymphocytic alveolitis and neutrophilia, with a marked predominance of CD8+ (CD4/CD8
ratio < 0.1%). The patient received inhaled corticosteroids for 2 years, which resulted in progressive clinical and radiological
improvement. Figure 3HRCT scan of the chest showing pronounced ground-glass changes in both lung fields, consistent with extrinsic allergic
alveolitis. The patients described had a family history of HP accompanied by a clinical profile that corresponded to the subacute form of
HP, with an obstructive pattern and symptoms such as cough, dyspnea on exertion, weight loss, and sometimes fever, the onset of which
occurred within weeks to months of exposure to an antigen. A high index of suspicion was essential for the diagnosis, as were analytical and
laboratory criteria. Among the major criteria, defined by Schuyler et al.,( 7 ) are symptoms consistent with the disease, evidence of
exposure to antigens as per clinical history, X-ray and CT findings consistent with HP, and lymphocytosis in BAL fluid. Chief among the
minor criteria are crackles at the lung bases and arterial hypoxemia. In only one of the patients was there a decrease in DLCO. In none of
the cases was it possible to detect precipitating antibodies to the antigen. Although they are objective markers of exposure, negative
results do not absolutely exclude the diagnosis.( 1 - 4 , 6 ) In these three cases, it was possible to detect a diffuse
reticulonodular/interstitial pattern on chest X-ray, as well as a ground-glass pattern, ground-glass areas, and micronodules, characteristic
of the subacute form. The detection of lymphocytosis in the BAL fluid from the patients, as well as the finding of a CD4/CD8 ratio < 0.1% in
two of them, lent support to the diagnosis of HP. Given that the disease was not severe in any of the cases, the treatment consisted in
avoiding contact with the allergen and using oral/inhaled corticosteroids, which resulted in progressive clinical improvement, as well as in
improvement in radiological and ventilatory parameters. The need for lung biopsy should be weighed in terms of its cost-benefit ratio, and
it should be considered in rare cases in which there is diagnostic uncertainty or in which the clinical course or treatment response is
unclear.( 3 ) HP is an uncommon disease in children and has nonspecific symptoms. For the diagnosis of HP, it is important that clinical
evaluation be performed and allergen exposure be investigated. In all three cases described above, the patients had a family history of HP,
although they were not screened for the presence of HLA. These facts lead us to believe that, although allergens are the major triggering
factor for this disease, heredity is also an important cofactor. Early diagnosis of HP is crucial in order to prevent severe and
irreversible complications, such as pulmonary fibrosis. Study carried out at the Vila Nova de Gaia/Espinho Hospital Center, Porto, Portugal.
Financial support: None A pneumonite de hipersensibilidade (PH), ou alveolite alérgica extrínseca, é uma doença imunologicamente mediada,
resultante da inalação de substâncias orgânicas que desencadeiam uma reação inflamatória na parede dos alvéolos, bronquíolos e interstício
em indivíduos susceptíveis. Apesar de ser uma doença ocupacional de predomínio na idade adulta, estão descritos casos em crianças. O
diagnóstico de PH requer grande suspeição, e seu tratamento consiste na ausência de contato com o antígeno e, em alguns casos, pode ser
necessária corticoterapia sistêmica, evitando-se a progressão para fibrose pulmonar. Relatamos três casos clínicos de crianças com história
de contato com aves e história familiar de PH. Todos os casos se apresentaram com tosse e dispneia aos esforços. O diagnóstico foi possível
por história clínica e exames auxiliares de diagnóstico compatíveis, incluindo lavado broncoalveolar com predomínio de linfócitos (> 60%,
especialmente linfócitos T CD8+) e TCAR de tórax com padrão em vidro fosco. O diagnóstico precoce é fundamental na PH para se prevenir a
evolução para fibrose pulmonar. Fatores hereditários parecem influenciar seu aparecimento. A pneumonite de hipersensibilidade (PH) ou
alveolite alérgica extrínseca é uma doença mediada imunologicamente e causada pela inalação de substâncias orgânicas que, em indivíduos
susceptíveis, desencadeia uma reação inflamatória na parede de alvéolos, bronquíolos e interstício. ( 1 - 8 ) Apesar de ser uma doença
ocupacional de predomínio na idade adulta, estão descritos casos em crianças, na sua maioria após a exposição a proteínas aviárias.( 4 , 6 )
A prevalência varia de 5-15% nos indivíduos expostos a um alérgeno,( 1 - 3 ) e a frequência da doença relaciona-se com vários fatores
(quantidade de alérgeno inalado, duração da exposição, natureza do antígeno e resposta imune do hospedeiro).( 1 , 2 ) A hereditariedade pode
ser importante, se verificando maior predisposição em famílias com HLA-DR7, HLA-B8 e HLA-DQw3 positivos.( 2 , 6 ) A PH pode ser classificada
segundo a sintomatologia (aguda, subaguda ou crônica) ou segundo a natureza dinâmica da doença (aguda progressiva, aguda intermitente não
progressiva ou doença recorrente não aguda).( 1 - 3 , 5 - 6 , 8 ) A forma aguda corresponde a uma exposição intermitente e intensa ao
alérgeno, que se assemelha a uma infecção respiratória de etiologia viral que resolve ao fim de 24-48 h.( 1 - 3 , 5 - 7 ) A forma subaguda
se caracteriza por dispneia aos esforços, astenia e perda ponderal, correspondendo a uma exposição continuada mas menos intensa ao
alérgeno.( 1 - 3 , 5 - 6 ) A forma crônica se caracteriza pela progressão para lesão pulmonar irreversível, com fibrose pulmonar,( 1 , 3 )
correspondendo à inalação insidiosa e prolongada de baixas concentrações de antígeno, sem quadro agudo prévio.( 1 - 3 , 5 - 7 ) Não existe
nenhum exame auxiliar de diagnóstico patognomônico, sendo a hipótese diagnóstica colocada perante um elevado índice de suspeição, história
clínica, exame objetivo, estudo laboratorial, provas de função respiratória (PFR) e estudo de imagem.( 1 - 4 , 6 ) Os dados laboratoriais
são inespecíficos - leucocitose, aumento da VHS e aumento dos níveis de proteína C reativa (PCR) e de imunoglobulinas. ( 1 , 2 , 4 ) Os
testes cutâneos e a presença de anticorpos precipitantes para o antígeno são marcadores de exposição, mas a sua negatividade não exclui o
diagnóstico.( 1 - 4 , 6 ) As provas de provocação mediante a inalação do antígeno predisponente são o melhor método diagnóstico na
persistência de dúvidas diagnósticas, mas essas devem ser realizadas em meio hospitalar.( 1 - 4 , 6 ) As PFR mostram geralmente um padrão
restritivo, caracterizado por uma diminuição da CVF e da CPT. Na fase crônica é possível encontrar um padrão obstrutivo, estando a DLCO
geralmente diminuída.( 1 - 4 , 6 ) O lavado broncoalveolar (LBA) apresenta um predomínio de linfócitos (> 60%), nomeadamente os linfócitos T
supressores (CD8+), com uma diminuição do índice CD4/CD8 < 1% (raramente encontrado em crianças).( 1 - 4 , 6 ) As alterações na radiografia
pulmonar surgem em função do grau de doença e relacionam-se pouco com a gravidade dos sintomas, variando de normal a um padrão
nodular/reticulonodular (na forma aguda e subaguda).( 1 - 6 ) A TCAR de tórax pode mostrar um padrão micronodular difuso (fase aguda) ou
enfisema obstrutivo, lesões fibróticas intersticiais e imagens em vidro fosco (fase crônica),( 1 - 7 ) sendo o exame de maior utilidade no
diagnóstico. O tratamento consiste na ausência de contato com o antígeno, podendo ser o único tratamento nas formas agudas. A corticoterapia
sistêmica é o tratamento de escolha nas formas subagudas e crônicas.( 1 - 4 , 6 ) O prognóstico varia da recuperação completa nas formas
agudas e não progressivas à fibrose pulmonar nas formas crônicas. O grau de fibrose pulmonar no momento do diagnóstico é o principal fator
prognóstico.( 1 , 2 ) Caso 1 Relatamos o caso de um menino de 12 anos com história de asma e história familiar de PH. Residente em zona
rural, tinha contato com pombos e canários, que agravavam os sintomas. Chegou ao serviço de urgência com tosse produtiva e febre com 2 dias
de evolução, associadas a anorexia e perda ponderal. A radiografia torácica revelou um infiltrado peri-hilar bilateral, e o paciente teve
alta após ser medicado com claritromicina, que foi substituída pela associação amoxicilina e ácido clavulânico por persistência da
sintomatologia 5 dias mais tarde. Um mês depois, por manter tosse intermitente com períodos de agravamento e dispneia aos pequenos esforços,
o paciente foi novamente atendido, apresentando cianose peribucal, palidez cutânea, hipoxemia (SpO2 = 85% em ar ambiente), tiragem global e
diminuição global dos sons respiratórios, com estertores nas bases. Os exames complementares revelaram VHS de 36 mm/h; PCR de 22,8 mg/L;
níveis de IgA e IgG elevados; teste Phadiatop(r) (Phadia, Uppsala, Suécia) inalatório e alimentar negativo; PPD de 0 mm; teste do suor de 34
mEq/L; radiografia torácica com infiltrado peri-hilar e basal de padrão reticulonodular bilateralmente (Figura 1); ecocardiograma sem
alterações; TCAR de tórax com consolidação do espaço aéreo e broncograma aéreo em ambos os lobos inferiores, associados a padrão
intersticial bilateral de distribuição difusa, padrão centrilobular com alguns micronódulos e áreas em vidro fosco; sorologia para
Chlamydophila psittaci negativa; PFR indicando alteração ventilatória obstrutiva leve; defeito moderado na DLCO; e LBA com alveolite
linfocítica intensa, com franco predomínio de CD8+ (relação CD4/CD8 < 0,3%). Realizou corticoterapia oral durante um ano com resolução
completa da sintomatologia e das lesões à TCAR de tórax, bem como melhoria nos resultados de PFR ao fim de três anos de seguimento. Figura
1Radiografia de tórax revelando infiltrado peri-hilar e basal de padrão reticulonodular bilateralmente. Uma menina de 14 anos, residente em
zona rural, com pássaros no domicílio e história familiar de PH. A paciente estava saudável até novembro de 2002, quando recorreu ao serviço
de urgência por febre e tosse; ao exame objetivo, apresentava estertores e dificuldade respiratória. Realizou radiografia torácica, que
revelou infiltrado intersticial. A paciente recebeu alta, sendo medicada com claritromicina e prednisolona. Retornou ao serviço ambulatorial
uma semana depois, referindo dispneia aos pequenos esforços. Os exames complementares revelaram VHS de 24 mm/h; aumento do nível de IgG, mas
sem alterações das outras imunoglobulinas; sorologias para Mycoplasma pneumoniae e Chlamydia pneumoniae negativas; IgG e IgM negativas;
radiografia torácica com aumento da trama broncovascular bilateralmente e infiltrado intersticial difuso de predomínio peri-hilar bilateral;
TCAR de tórax com tênue adensamento do parênquima pulmonar de ambos os pulmões com distribuição ligeiramente heterogênea, revelando pequenos
nódulos de limites mal definidos e alterações em vidro fosco (Figura 2); ecocardiograma e eletrocardiograma sem alterações; LBA com
alveolite linfocítica intensa e neutrofílica discreta, com franco predomínio de CD8+ (relação CD4/CD8 < 0,1%). A paciente foi mantida sob
corticoterapia inalatória durante 2 anos, com melhoria clínica progressiva. Figura 2TCAR de tórax revelando tênue adensamento do parênquima
pulmonar de ambos os pulmões, com distribuição heterogênea; pequenos nódulos de limites mal definidos e alterações em vidro fosco. Um menino
de 7 anos, cujos pai e avó paterna estavam sendo investigados pelo setor de pneumologia por suspeita de PH. Tinha história pessoal de situs
inversus totalis e infecções respiratórias de repetição. Deu entrada no serviço de urgência por tosse produtiva com cinco meses de evolução,
associada a dispneia aos esforços e de agravamento progressivo, sem melhoria com broncodilatador e corticoterapia inalatória. Foi relatada a
existência de um periquito no domicílio desde o início da sintomatologia, bem como um galinheiro e uma oficina de tanoaria. Ao exame
inicial, apresentava SpO2 de 84% em ar ambiente, tiragem subcostal e estertores bilaterais. Os exames complementares revelaram VHS de 30
mm/h; PCR de 1,41 mg/dL; aumento dos níveis de IgG, IgA e IgM; sorologias para Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Legionella pneumophila e Chlamydia
pneumoniae (IgG e IgM) negativas; radiografia torácica com infiltrado peri-hilar e intersticial difuso bilateral; teste do suor de 32 mEq/L;
PPD de 0 mm; precipitinas séricas para fezes e penas de aves negativas; ecocardiograma com situs inversus completo; TCAR de tórax com
exuberantes alterações em vidro fosco em ambos os campos pulmonares, compatível com alveolite alérgica extrínseca (Figura 3); PFR indicando
alteração obstrutiva grave sem resposta ao broncodilatador; LBA com alveolite linfocítica intensa e neutrofilia, com franco predomínio de
CD8+ (relação CD4/CD8 < 0,1%). O paciente recebeu corticoterapia inalatória durante 2 anos, com melhoria clínica e radiológica progressiva.
Figura 3TCAR de tórax revelando exuberantes alterações em vidro fosco em ambos os campos pulmonares, compatível com alveolite alérgica
extrínseca. Os pacientes descritos apresentavam história familiar de PH associada a um quadro clínico correspondente à forma de apresentação
subaguda de PH, com padrão obstrutivo e sintomas como tosse, dispneia aos esforços, perda ponderal e, por vezes, febre, sintomas esses
desencadeados ao fim de algumas semanas a meses de exposição a um antígeno. Para o diagnóstico foi essencial um elevado índice de suspeição,
bem como critérios analíticos e laboratoriais. Entre os critérios maiores, definidos por Schuyler et al.,( 7 ) encontram-se os sintomas
compatíveis, a evidência de exposição a antígeno mediante a história clínica, os achados radiológicos na radiografia e na TC compatíveis com
PH e a presença de linfocitose no LBA. Dentre os critérios menores, destacam-se a existência de estertores nas bases e hipoxemia arterial.
Apenas em um dos pacientes se documentou uma diminuição da DLCO. Em nenhum dos casos foi possível identificar anticorpos precipitantes para
o antígeno. Apesar de esses serem marcadores objetivos de exposição, a sua negatividade não exclui em absoluto o diagnóstico.( 1 - 4 , 6 )
Nesses três casos foi possível verificar a presença de um padrão reticulonodular/intersticial difuso na radiografia torácica, bem como a
existência de um padrão em vidro fosco, áreas em vidro fosco e micronódulos, característicos da forma subaguda. A presença de linfocitose no
LBA dos pacientes, bem como a existência de uma relação CD4/CD8 < 0,1% em dois deles, permitiu corroborar o diagnóstico de PH. Dada a
inexistência de forma grave da doença, o tratamento instituído em todos os pacientes foi a ausência de contato com o alérgeno e a utilização
de corticoterapia oral/inalatória, que resultou em melhoria clínica progressiva, assim como a dos parâmetros ventilatórios e radiológicos. A
realização de biópsia pulmonar deve ser ponderada mediante sua relação custo-benefício, devendo ser considerada em raros casos nos quais
haja dúvida no diagnóstico ou naqueles cuja evolução clínica ou resposta ao tratamento seja dúbia.( 3 ) A PH é uma patologia pouco frequente
em crianças e apresenta sintomas inespecíficos. Para o seu diagnóstico, é importante a clínica e a investigação de exposição a alérgenos. Em
todos os casos descritos havia história familiar de PH, apesar de não ter sido investigada a presença de HLA. Esses fatos levam-nos a
acreditar que apesar de o alérgeno ser o principal fator desencadeante dessa patologia, a hereditariedade também se apresenta como um
importante cofator. É fundamental o diagnóstico precoce de PH, o que permite se evitar complicações irreversíveis e graves, como a fibrose
pulmonar. Trabalho realizado no Centro Hospitalar de Vila Nova de Gaia/Espinho, Porto, Portugal. Apoio financeiro: Nenhum.
