Although ARDS is an uncommon complication of pneumonectomy, the associated mortality is high (ranging from 50% to 100%).( 1 ) Here, we
report the case of a patient with postpneumonectomy ARDS that was satisfactorily managed by extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). A
31-year-old White female patient diagnosed with cystic fibrosis 10 years prior presented with recurrent pneumonia secondary to
bronchiectasis, predominantly in the left lung (Figure 1A). In the last two years, despite continuous use of antibiotics (500 mg of
azithromycin p.o. three times a week), the patient had had seven respiratory infections, as well as purulent sputum between episodes.
Therefore, a decision was made to perform a left pneumonectomy. The postoperative course was satisfactory. However, on postoperative day 2,
the patient showed dyspnea, cough with purulent sputum, tachypnea, left-sided chest pain, inspiratory rales in the lower lung fields, and
hypoxemia (SaO2 < 70%). Initial management with noninvasive ventilation was ineffective, the patient being therefore placed on mechanical
ventilation on postoperative day 3 (Figure 1B). After 17 h of mechanical ventilation, she still had ARDS, hypoxemia, and a pH < 7.2, despite
alveolar recruitment maneuvers, attempts to reduce tidal volume, oxygen insufflation into the trachea, and neuromuscular blockade (Table 1).
Therefore, a decision was made to place her on venovenous ECMO (a RevolutionTM centrifugal pump and an EOS ECMO adult membrane oxygenator;
Sorin, Milan, Italy). Percutaneous cannulation of the femoral and jugular veins was performed by the Seldinger technique, a 19-F arterial
cannula being inserted into the right internal jugular vein for reinfusion and a 29-F venous cannula being inserted into the right femoral
vein for drainage (Maquet, Rastatt, Germany). Venipuncture and cannulation of the jugular and femoral veins were performed under ultrasound
guidance at the bedside. Continuous i.v. infusion of unfractionated heparin was used in order to achieve an activated clotting time of
160-200 s. Initially, ECMO blood flow was 60 mL . kg-1 . min-1, being subsequently adjusted to maintain a PaO2 > 50 mmHg, whereas gas flow
(sweep gas) was titrated to maintain a pH = 7.3. The temperature of the patient remained at 35.5-36.5°C. Lung rest was achieved by pressure-
controlled ventilation at protective ventilator settings (i.e., a plateau pressure = 25 cmH2O, a positive end-expiratory pressure of 5-15
cmH2O, and an FiO2 = 0.4). The patient showed progressive radiological improvement (Figure 1C), as well as progressive improvement in
arterial blood gas parameters and lung compliance, meeting the criteria for weaning on ECMO day 5 (Table 1). Three hours later, she was
successfully extubated. The patient was discharged on postadmission day 21. There were no hemorrhagic or thromboembolic complications of
ECMO. The total cost of ECMO, in Brazilian reals (R$), was 33,470.16, R$ 26,315.00 having been spent on the ECMO circuit plus medical
supplies (including cannulae), R$ 5,594.93 having been spent on the ICU stay, and R$ 1,560.23 having been spent on diagnostic tests.
However, the amount paid by the Sistema Único de Saúde (SUS, Brazilian Unified Health Care System) via the Authorized Hospital Admissions
system was R$ 5,917.88. Figure 1Chest X-rays showing the progression of the patient. In A, chest X-ray taken before pneumonectomy, showing
extensive bronchiectasis, reduced lung volume, and left pleural thickening. In B, chest X-ray taken on postoperative day 3, showing
extensive areas of consolidation on the right and the postpneumonectomy pleural space on the left. In C, chest X-ray taken on the day of
weaning from extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (i.e., on postoperative day 8), showing resolution of the right-sided consolidation. Note
the venous cannulae and their ends in the right atrium (for reinfusion) and in the intrahepatic portion of the inferior vena cava (for
drainage). In D, chest X-ray taken three months after hospital discharge, showing nearly complete closure of the pneumonectomy cavity. Table
1Clinical status before initiation of and on the day of weaning from extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Arterial blood gas results Before
ECMO On the day of weaning from ECMO pH 7 7.5 PaO2, mmHg 108 136 PaCO2, mmHg 115 57 PaO2/FiO2 107 388 Mechanical ventilation PEEP, cmH2O 8 6
FiO2 1.00 0.35 RR, breaths/min 28 15 Tidal volume/ideal weight, mL/kg 4.4 5.8 Plateau pressure, cmH2O 35 22 Peak inspiratory pressure, cmH2O
45 26 Static lung compliance, mL/cmH2O 9 20 Hemodynamics Norepinephrine, μg . kg-1 . min-1 0.16 0.00 Mean arterial pressure, mmHg 66 90 HR,
bpm 90 80 Serum test results Lactate, mmol/L 0.4 0.9 Base excess, mmol/L -3.5 17.0 C-reactive protein, mg/L 231 17 Hemoglobin, g/dL 10 9
Sedation/neuromuscular blockade/scores Midazolam, mg . kg-1 . h-1 0.2 0 Fentanyl, μg . kg-1 . h-1 4 2 Atracurium, mg . kg-1 . h-1 0.6 0.0
SOFA score 14 7 Murray score 3.0 1.2ECMO: extracorporeal membrane oxygenationPEEP: positive end-expiratory pressureSOFA: Sequential Organ
Failure Assessment : extracorporeal membrane oxygenation : positive end-expiratory pressure : Sequential Organ Failure Assessment The
incidence of ARDS after left pneumonectomy is approximately 4%.( 2 ) Possible triggers include reduced lymphatic drainage and single-lung
ventilation with hyperoxia.( 3 ) Supportive care consists of mechanical ventilation; however, in cases of refractory hypoxemia, rescue
therapies include prone positioning( 4 ) and ECMO.( 5 ) An invasive method, ECMO corrects severe hypoxemia and hypercapnia (pH = 7.2) and
reduces FiO2 (< 0.5) and plateau pressure to safer levels, allowing the lung to rest in cases of ARDS.( 6 , 7 ) Despite a PaO2/FiO2 ratio >
100 mmHg, early ECMO was recommended because of the presence of an FiO2 > 0.8, a plateau pressure > 30 cmH2O, a pH < 7.2, and a PaCO2 > 100
mmHg in our patient. In addition, her Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score was 14, indicating the absence of multiorgan involvement and
showing that the ECMO team at the Porto Alegre Hospital de Clínicas, located in the city of Porto Alegre, Brazil, abides by the policy that
ARDS patients who are not at risk of imminent death should be recognized as candidates for ECMO. This approach has been advocated by other
ECMO teams in Brazil.( 8 , 9 ) A novel technique, ECMO is currently not covered by the SUS; the reimbursement that our hospital received
from the SUS covered less than 20% of the actual costs. Therefore, there is a need for an economic evaluation of ECMO in Brazil in order to
inform the decision of whether ECMO should be included in the range of procedures covered by the SUS. On the basis of the case reported
here, we recommend early rescue therapy with venovenous ECMO for patients with postpneumonectomy ARDS accompanied by hypoxemia and
respiratory acidosis refractory to mechanical ventilation, provided that the medical team has sufficient experience with the procedure,
which is complex and costly. A SARA pós-pneumonectomia é uma complicação infrequente, porém com alta mortalidade (de 50% até 100%).( 1 )
Gostaríamos de relatar um caso manejado satisfatoriamente com extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO, oxigenação extracorpórea por
membrana). Uma mulher branca de 31 anos, com diagnóstico de fibrose cística havia 10 anos, apresentava pneumonias repetidas e secundárias a
bronquiectasias que predominavam no pulmão esquerdo (Figura 1A). Nos últimos dois anos, apesar do uso ininterrupto de antibiótico
(azitromicina, 500 mg v.o., três vezes por semana), apresentou sete infecções respiratórias, além de escarro purulento entre essas
exacerbações. Dessa maneira, decidiu-se pela pneumonectomia esquerda. A evolução foi satisfatória até o 2º dia de pós-operatório (PO),
quando ela iniciou com dispneia, tosse com escarro purulento, taquipneia, dor torácica em hemitórax à esquerda, estertores teleinspiratórios
em campo pulmonar inferior e hipoxemia (SaO2 < 70%). O manejo inicial com ventilação não invasiva foi ineficaz, o que levou à instalação de
ventilação mecânica (VM) no 3º PO (Figura 1B). Após 17 h de VM, a paciente mantinha-se com SARA, com hipoxemia e pH < 7,2, apesar das
manobras de recrutamento alveolar, tentativas de redução do volume corrente, insuflação de oxigênio pela traqueia e bloqueio neuromuscular
(Tabela 1). Assim, foi indicada a colocação da ECMO venovenosa (bomba centrífuga RevolutionTM e oxigenador adulto EOS ECMO; Sorin, Milão,
Itália) com canulação femorojugular percutânea pela técnica de Seldinger - cânula arterial 19 F na veia jugular interna direita como via de
reinfusão; cânula venosa 29 F na veia femoral direita como via de drenagem (Maquet, Rastatt, Alemanha). As punções venosas e o
posicionamento intravascular das cânulas foram realizados sob orientação ecográfica à beira do leito. Definimos o tempo de coagulação
ativada entre 160 e 200 segundos através de heparina não fracionada em infusão contínua i.v. O fluxo de sangue da ECMO, que inicialmente era
de 60 mL . kg-1 . min-1, foi posteriormente ajustado para manter a PaO2 > 50 mmHg, enquanto o fluxo de gás (sweep gas) foi titulado a fim de
sustentar um pH = 7,3. A temperatura da paciente permaneceu de 35,5-36,5°C. No mesmo momento, iniciamos o repouso pulmonar a partir da VM
sob pressão controlada com parâmetros protetores (pressão de platô = 25 cmH2O, pressão expiratória final positiva de 5-15 cmH2O e FiO2 =
0,4). A paciente apresentou melhora radiológica (Figura 1C), gasométrica e da complacência pulmonar progressivamente e, no 5º dia de suporte
extracorpóreo, preencheu os critérios de desmame da ECMO (Tabela 1). Três horas após, foi extubada com sucesso. A alta hospitalar ocorreu 21
dias após a internação. Não houve complicações hemorrágicas ou tromboembólicas associadas à ECMO. Em relação aos custos preliminares da
ECMO, foram gastos R$ 26.315,00 com o circuito de oxigenação extracorpóreo, cânulas e materiais médico-hospitalares; R$ 5.594,93 com diárias
do CTI; e R$ 1.560,23 com exames diagnósticos. O total gasto foi de R$ 33.470,16. No entanto, verificou-se que o valor faturado pela
autorização de internação hospitalar do Sistema Único de Saúde (SUS) consistiu em apenas R$ 5.917,88. Figura 1Exames radiológicos que
ilustram a evolução da paciente. Em A, radiografia de tórax no pré-operatório de pneumonectomia, com extensas bronquiectasias, redução de
volume pulmonar e espessamento pleural à esquerda. Em B, radiografia no 3º dia de pós-operatório, com extensas consolidações à direita e
cavidade pleural de pneumonectomia à esquerda. Em C, radiografia no dia do desmame da oxigenação extracorpórea por membrana, no 8º dia de
pós-operatório, demonstrando regressão das consolidações à direita. Observam-se as cânulas venosas com as respectivas extremidades no átrio
direito (linha de reinfusão) e na veia cava inferior na porção intra-hepática (linha de drenagem). Em D, radiografia retirada três meses
após a alta hospitalar, demonstrando a cavidade de pneumonectomia à esquerda quase totalmente obliterada. Tabela 1Condição clínica antes da
implantação e no dia de retirada da oxigenação extracorpórea por membrana. Gasometria arterial Pré-ECMO Desmame pH 7 7,5 PaO2, mmHg 108 136
PaCO2, mmHg 115 57 PaO2/FiO2 107 388 Ventilação mecânica PEEP, cmH2O 8 6 FiO2 1,00 0,35 FR, ciclos/min 28 15 Volume corrente/peso ideal,
mL/kg 4,4 5,8 Pressão de platô, cmH2O 35 22 Pressão de pico inspiratório, cmH2O 45 26 Complacência pulmonar estática, mL/cmH2O 9 20
Hemodinâmica Noradrenalina, μg . kg-1 . min-1 0,16 0,00 Pressão arterial média, mmHg 66 90 FC, bpm 90 80 Exames séricos Lactato, mmol/L 0,4
0,9 Excesso de base, mmol/L -3,5 17,0 Proteína C reativa, mg/L 231 17 Hemoglobina, g/dL 10 9 Sedação/bloqueio neuromuscular/escores
Midazolam, mg . kg-1 . h-1 0,2 0 Fentanil, μg . kg-1 . h-1 4 2 Atracúrio, mg . kg-1 . h-1 0,6 0,0 SOFA 14 7 Escore de Murray 3,0 1,2ECMO;
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (oxigenação extracorpórea por membrana)PEEP: positive end-expiratory pressure (pressão expiratória final
positiva)SOFA: Sequential Organ Failure Assessment ; extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (oxigenação extracorpórea por membrana) : positive
end-expiratory pressure (pressão expiratória final positiva) : Sequential Organ Failure Assessment A incidência de SARA após a
pneumonectomia esquerda é de aproximadamente 4%.( 2 ) Podemos citar como possíveis fatores desencadeantes a redução da drenagem linfática e
a ventilação monopulmonar com hiperóxia, entre outros.( 3 ) Seu tratamento de suporte é centrado na VM; entretanto, nos casos de hipoxemia
refratária, métodos como a pronação( 4 ) e a ECMO( 5 ) surgem como alternativas de resgate. A ECMO é um método invasivo que corrige a
hipoxemia grave e a hipercapnia com pH = 7,2, enquanto proporciona reduções da FiO2 (< 0,5) e da pressão de platô para níveis mais seguros,
permitindo um maior repouso pulmonar em casos de SARA.( 6 , 7 ) Em nossa paciente, a presença de parâmetros altos de VM (FiO2 > 0,8 e
pressão de platô > 30 cmH2O), associada a um pH < 7,2 com PaCO2 > 100 mmHg, levaram à indicação precoce da ECMO, mesmo que a relação
PaO2/FiO2 estivesse acima de 100 mmHg. Além disso, o valor calculado de 14 para o índice Sequential Organ Failure Assessment reflete a
ausência de comprometimento multiorgânico de nossa paciente, demonstrando a política da equipe de ECMO do Hospital de Clínicas, localizado
na cidade de Porto Alegre (RS), que busca o reconhecimento precoce de pacientes com SARA candidatos à ECMO que não se encontrem ainda em
eminente risco de óbito. Essa conduta já foi defendida por outros grupos brasileiros de ECMO.( 8 , 9 ) Em relação aos custos, a ECMO é uma
nova tecnologia ainda não contemplada pelo SUS que, por sua vez, repassou ao hospital um valor que ressarciu menos de 20% daquele gasto com
o respectivo tratamento. Dessa maneira, percebe-se a necessidade de estudos de avaliação econômica da ECMO em nosso meio a fim de sustentar
a sua inclusão como um procedimento pago pelo SUS. A partir do presente relato, sugerimos o tratamento de resgate precoce com ECMO
venovenosa de pacientes pós-pneumonectomia que desenvolvem SARA com hipoxemia e acidose respiratória refratárias à VM, desde que haja
experiência suficiente da equipe médica na condução dessa terapia, que ainda é complexa e tem alto custo.
