Chest wall reconstruction becomes necessary when there are wall defects larger than 5 cm in diameter that compromise respiratory dynamics.
Its purpose is to restore wall integrity, as well as to maintain waterproofing of the pleura, an aesthetic chest contour, and respiratory
dynamics. In addition, the purpose is to protect vital intrathoracic organs, thus preventing lung herniation and paradoxical breathing and
preserving lung compliance.( 1 , 2 ) The indication for bony reconstruction of the chest wall is related to the size and location of the
defect. Defects in the anterior, lateral, and sternal wall require reconstruction, whereas defects in the posterior wall can be covered by
the posterior muscles or by the scapula and do not require the use of prostheses.( 1 ) There is as yet no consensus on the ideal material
for use in rib reconstruction. The literature suggests the use of prostheses consisting of titanium plates (STRATOSTM, Strasbourg Thoracic
Osteosynthesis System; Diagnostic Medical Systems, Pérols, France) for that purpose, and, therefore, we report the case of a 25-year-old
female patient who presented with a nearly one-year history of chest pain and dyspnea, as well as with a volume increase in the left costal
margin. Physical examination revealed a tumor in the lower third of the anterior chest wall, affecting the left thoracoabdominal junction.
An axial CT scan of the chest showed a soft-tissue tumor that affected the region of the left anterior costal margin, extended to the
abdominal region, and compressed the left hepatic lobe, the anterior pericardium, and the lung parenchyma in the left lower lobe. However,
there were no signs of structural invasion. The tumor measured 12.0 × 11.0 × 7.5 cm. The patient underwent chest wall resection, which
included soft tissues and the anterior portion of the sixth, seventh, and eighth ribs, as well as the costal margin (Figure 1A).
Histopathological examination of the tumor showed that it was a desmoid tumor-a rare, benign, unencapsulated neoplasm with strong
infiltrative capability locally and a high rate of recurrence after surgical resection.( 3 ) Chest wall reconstruction was performed with
PHYSIOMESHTM (ETHICON(r); Johnson & Johnson, Somerville, NJ, USA) and three titanium plates (STRATOSTM; Figure 1B). Figure 1Images of the
desmoid tumor resection and chest wall reconstruction. In A, exposure of the tumor of the left costal margin during the surgical procedure,
including ribs, muscles, the distal portion of the sternum, and the diaphragm. In B, chest wall reconstruction with a two-layered mesh and
titanium bars. The ideal material for reconstruction should have the following characteristics: being adaptable; being durable; being
transparent to X-ray; causing minimal inflammatory reaction; and being resistant to infection. Typically, the materials used are nylon,
silicone, acrylic, Silastic(r) (Dow Corning Corp., Midland, MI, USA), Prolene(r) mesh, Vicryl(r) mesh (polygalactin; ETHICON(r)), Gore-
Tex(r) (polytetrafluoroethylene; Gore Company, Flagstaff, AZ, USA), and Marlex mesh (polypropylene).( 1 , 2 ) Currently, Marlex mesh is the
most widely used material, because it is easy to handle, permeable, highly resistant, durable, and inexpensive. In addition, it is hardly
susceptible to infection. However, in contact with the lung, it causes adhesions and an intense fibrotic reaction hindering possible
thoracic reoperations, as well as not providing proper support for the chest wall.( 2 ) The mesh used in our patient (PHYSIOMESHTM) is
composed of two layers: a Monocryl(r) film (polyglecaprone 25), which is partially absorbable and reduces adhesion to the visceral organs
(in the present case, the lung, the diaphragm, and the pericardium), thus facilitating performing another surgical intervention if
necessary; and a Prolene(r) film (polypropylene), which is consistent with the required resistance for the chest wall, thus providing
comfortable healing. This mesh is placed between the lung and the titanium prostheses, thus preventing lung herniation and protecting the
lung from contact with the plates. STRATOSTM consists of titanium bars and clips that form a vertical expandable prosthetic system. It has
recently been used for fixation of rib fractures and for chest reconstruction after tumor resection.( 4 ) The titanium plates, once
integrated into the chest wall, will form an oxide layer that is highly resistant to corrosion. They have the highest strength-to-weight
ratio among all metals, i.e., titanium plates have low weight but have stiffness similar to that of the ribs. The titanium plates have the
facility of integrating with the bones, which prevents detachment from the ribs over time, and are highly resistant to infections. They do
not interfere with imaging or preclude magnetic resonance imaging.( 5 ) Previously published reports of patients who were operated on and
received STRATOSTM have shown that its material does not affect the chances of local tumor recurrence. One group of authors used STRATOSTM
in a male patient with an Ewing's sarcoma of proportions similar to those of the tumor in our patient, and, after a 21-month follow-up
period, the patient had no tumor recurrence.( 6 ) Although there are no studies that define STRATOSTM as the ideal system for use in chest
wall reconstruction, it is technically simple and well tolerated. In addition, other case reports and articles comparing this system with
older techniques have reported better restoration of the contour of the ribs (Figure 2) and preservation of respiratory mechanics, as well
as greater comfort. Maintaining chest wall symmetry prevents localized chest deformity, as well as the scoliosis seen over time in patients
with a partially collapsed chest.( 4 , 6 ) Figure 2Patient appearance in the sixth postoperative month. Note that the contour of the costal
margin was maintained, being stable and symmetrical. We emphasize the importance of the present report, given that, to our knowledge, it is
the first such report in the Brazilian literature. The existing option of a substitute for ribs increases the chances of major chest wall
resections, which is an important factor in treating tumors with oncologic margins. A reconstrução da parede torácica se torna necessária
quando há defeitos de parede com diâmetro maior que 5 cm que comprometam a dinâmica respiratória. Seu objetivo é restaurar a integridade da
parede, assim como manter a impermeabilização pleural, o padrão estético do contorno do tórax e a dinâmica respiratória. Além disso,
objetiva-se proteger os órgãos vitais intratorácicos, evitando a herniação pulmonar e a respiração paradoxal e preservando a complacência
pulmonar.( 1 , 2 ) A indicação para a reconstrução óssea da parede torácica tem relação com o tamanho e a localização do defeito. Em
defeitos na parede anterior, lateral e esternal, torna-se necessária a reconstrução, enquanto defeitos na parede posterior podem ser
recobertos pelos músculos posteriores ou escápula, sendo desnecessária a utilização de próteses.( 1 ) Ainda não há consenso quanto ao
material ideal a ser utilizado em reconstrução de arcos costais. A literatura sugere a utilização da prótese de placas de titânio
(STRATOSTM, Strasbourg Thoracic Osteosynthesis System; Diagnostic Medical Systems, Pérols, França) para essa finalidade e, por tal motivo,
relatamos o caso de uma paciente do sexo feminino, 25 anos, com queixa de dor torácica e dispneia discreta há cerca de um ano, relatando um
aumento de volume do rebordo costal esquerdo. Ao exame físico, foi observada uma tumoração em terço inferior da parede torácica anterior,
com comprometimento da transição toracoabdominal à esquerda. A TC axial do tórax demonstrou uma tumoração de partes moles comprometendo a
região do rebordo costal anterior esquerdo, com extensão para região abdominal e compressão do lobo hepático esquerdo, pericárdio anterior e
parênquima pulmonar do lobo inferior esquerdo; entretanto, sem sinais de invasão das estruturas. A tumoração media 12,0 × 11,0 × 7,5 cm. A
paciente foi submetida à ressecção da parede torácica, que incluiu tecidos moles e a porção anterior dos 6º, 7º e 8º arcos costais e o
rebordo costal (Figura 1A). A análise histopatológica do tumor demonstrou ser um tumor desmoide - neoplasia benigna rara, não encapsulada,
com alto poder infiltrativo local e alta taxa de recidiva após ressecção cirúrgica.( 3 ) A reconstrução da parede torácica foi realizada com
tela PHYSIOMESHTM (ETHICON(r); Johnson & Johnson, Somerville, NJ, EUA) e três placas de titânio, o STRATOSTM (Figura 1B). Figura 1Imagens da
ressecção de tumor desmoide e reconstrução de parede torácica. Em A, tumoração do rebordo costal esquerdo exposta durante o ato operatório,
incluindo arcos costais, músculos, porção distal do esterno e diafragma. Em B, reconstrução da parede com tela de duas camadas e barras de
titânio. O material ideal para a reconstrução deve apresentar as seguintes características: adaptabilidade, durabilidade, transparência ao
raio X, mínima reação inflamatória e resistência à infecção. Os materiais geralmente utilizados são nylon, silicone, acrílico, Silastic(r)
(Dow Corning Corp., Midland, MI, EUA), tela de Prolene(r), tela de Vicryl(r) (poligalactina; ETHICON(r)), Gore-Tex(r)
(politetrafluoretileno; Gore Company, Flagstaff, AZ, EUA) e tela de Marlex (polipropileno).( 1 , 2 ) As telas de Marlex são os materiais
mais utilizados atualmente, pois são fáceis de manipular, permeáveis e possuem alta resistência, durabilidade e baixo custo; além disso, são
pouco suscetíveis à infecção. Porém, em contato com o pulmão, promovem aderências e intensa reação fibrótica que dificulta possíveis
reoperações torácicas, além de não propiciarem uma adequada sustentação da parede torácica.( 2 ) A tela utilizada em nossa paciente
(PHYSIOMESHTM) é composta por duas camadas: uma película de Monocryl(r) (poliglecaprone 25), que é parcialmente absorvível e reduz a
aderência aos órgãos viscerais (no presente caso, o pulmão, o diafragma e o pericárdio), facilitando uma nova intervenção cirúrgica caso
seja necessária; e uma película de Prolene(r) (polipropileno), compatível com a resistência necessária para a parede torácica,
proporcionando uma cicatrização confortável. Essa tela é colocada entre o pulmão e as próteses de titânio, evitando a herniação pulmonar e
protegendo o pulmão do contato com as placas. O STRATOSTM é composto por grampos e barras de titânio, que formam um sistema protético
vertical expansível. Tem sido utilizado recentemente para a fixação de fraturas de costela e na reconstrução torácica após a ressecção de
tumores.( 4 ) As placas de titânio, quando integradas à parede torácica, formam uma camada do óxido altamente resistente à corrosão. Possuem
a maior relação força-peso dentre os metais, ou seja, têm menor peso, mas mantêm uma rigidez semelhante à dos arcos costais. Apresentam a
facilidade de integrar-se com os ossos, impedindo o desprendimento das costelas ao longo do tempo, e possuem maior resistência a infecções.
Não causam interferência em exames de imagem e não impedem a realização de ressonância nuclear magnética.( 5 ) Os casos já publicados de
pacientes que foram operados e receberam o STRATOSTM demonstraram que seu material não interfere na chance de recorrência de neoplasias no
local. Alguns autores utilizaram o STRATOSTM em um paciente com sarcoma de Ewing de proporções semelhantes ao tumor em nossa paciente e,
após 21 meses de acompanhamento, o paciente não apresentou recorrência da neoplasia.( 6 ) Não há estudos que definam o STRATOSTM como o
método ideal na reconstrução de parede torácica; porém, esse é tecnicamente simples e bem tolerado. Além disso, outros relatos de caso
descritos e artigos que comparam esse sistema com as técnicas mais antigas relatam uma melhor restauração do contorno dos arcos costais
(Figura 2), preservação da mecânica da respiração e maior conforto. A manutenção da simetria da parede torácica evita a deformidade torácica
local, assim como a escoliose observada em longo prazo em pacientes com colapso de uma das porções do tórax.(4,6) Figura 2Aspecto da
paciente no sexto mês de pós-operatório. Observa-se contorno do rebordo costal mantido, estável e simétrico. Salientamos a importância do
presente relato, visto que é o primeiro descrito na literatura nacional pelo que sabemos. A opção de um substituto para os arcos costais
amplia as chances de ressecções maiores da parede torácica, fato importante para o tratamento de tumores com margens oncológicas.
