Patients with malignant neoplasms of the pelvis often have poor outcomes (Marangolo et al. 1992). An important predictor of a poor surgical
outcome is failure to achieve satisfactory resection margins (Ozaki et al. 2003, Fuchs et al. 2009). The complex bony anatomy of the pelvis
and acetabulum makes surgery notoriously difficult. Rapid prototyping is a manufacturing technology whereby computerized image data are used
to create high-precision 3D structures (Rengier et al. 2010). This is a relatively new technology; applications of rapid prototyping in
clinical medicine are being discovered every day. Very little has been published on its uses in orthopedic surgery (Frame et al. 2012). We
illustrate the use of rapid prototyping to create a 3D model of the pelvis in a patient with chondrosarcoma involving the left superior
pubic ramus. From this model, custom-made osteotomy guides were created, aiding tumor resection with adequate margins. A spiral CT series of
the pelvis (500 slices at 0.5-mm spacing) was imported into Mimics 14.1 (Materialise, Leuven, Belgium) and the bony contours outlined. As
the margins of the tumor were not well visualized on CT, an MRI scan was manually aligned with the CT series and the tumor borders checked
against the CT outline. A 3D model of the pelvis and tumor was then created and exported as an STL file to Freeform v12 (Geomagic Sensable,
Wilmington, MA). Using a sensable haptic manipulator, the planned resection planes were placed on the 3D model and checked against the
position of the tumor (Figure 1). A cutting block was then modeled using Freeform to cover a region of the anterior acetabular rim that
would be exposed during the resection. 3D model of the pelvis with chondrosarcoma. The pelvic model was extruded with 5° draft to a plane
perpendicular to the resection plane and subtracted from the cutting block model. This extrusion filled in any re-entrant regions of the
pelvis, which ensured that the cutting block could be placed onto the pelvis during surgery. The cutting block was then trimmed with the
previously determined cutting planes to produce two planar surfaces to guide the saw (Figure 2). Finally, a hole for a handle was made in
the model. Custom osteotomy guide fitted to the model of the pelvis. The finished cutting block model was processed with Catalyst 4.3
(Stratasys Inc., Eden Prairie, MN) and built in acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic on a Stratasys Dimension SST 1200 3D printer.
A handle was fitted and the whole device sterilized with ethylene oxide. The patient was positioned supine for the surgery. An ilioinguinal
approach with femoral extension was used. The abdominal wall was reflected and the bladder dissected free and protected. A Gigli saw was
used to cut through the center of the pubic symphisis. Further dissection laterally to identify and protect the obturator and femoral
neurovascular bundles was then performed. An anterior approach to the hip with femoral neck osteotomy was then required to visualize the
acetabulum. Soft tissue was dissected away from the anteromedial aspect of the acetabulum to expose the underlying bone. The custom-made
cutting guides were then used to perform osteotomies of the acetabulum, and superior and inferior pubic rami (Figures 3 and 4). The specimen
was then dissected away from the soft tissues and sent for histopathology. Intraoperative photograph showing the custom osteotomy guide on
the patient’s pelvis. Osteotomies being completed with osteotome. Part of the femoral head was then used to reconstruct the anterior column
and wall of the acetabulum. A total hip replacement was then performed. A mesh repair of the abdominal wall was executed and the wound
closed in layers over drains. A morbidly obese 60-year-old woman was referred to the orthopedic oncology clinic by her general practitioner
after noticing a painful mass in her left groin. Plain radiographs (Figure 5) and MRI (Figure 6) showed a 6-cm expansile lucent lesion
involving the left superior pubic ramus. The lesion underwent core biopsy under CT guidance and the histopathology was consistent with
grade-2 chondrosarcoma. Staging CT and positron emission tomography (PET) scan showed no evidence of systemic disease. The pelvic
chondrosarcoma. Axial MRI slice showing pelvic chondrosarcoma. At the multidisciplinary musculoskeletal tumor meeting, we decided on a wide
local excision of the tumor. The location of the tumor combined with the bodily habitus of the patient was likely to make surgery difficult.
We made a model of the pelvis with custom-made osteotomy guides to aid with the surgery. The histopathology report confirmed a grade-II
intramedullary chondrosarcoma 5 cm in maximum dimension invading through the anterior cortex into surrounding soft tissue. All margins were
well clear. The patient recovered well from surgery and was mobilizing with minimal pain within 2 weeks, and walking with one crutch at 6
weeks (Figure 7). 6 months postoperatively, the patient was pain-free and ambulating independently. There was no evidence of tumor
recurrence on imaging. Postoperative radiograph showing pelvic resection, total hip arthroplasty, and bone block fixed to anterior column.
To our knowledge, this case report is the first description of the use of rapid prototyping technology to create custom osteotomy guides for
resection of a pelvic neoplasm. Rapid prototyping (also called 3D printing) is a manufacturing technology whereby computerized image data
are used to create high-precision 3D physical structures by the sequential addition of material layers (Rengier et al. 2010). With additive
fabrication, the machine reads in data from a computerized 3D model and lays down successive layers of liquid, powder, or sheet material to
build up a model. Each layer corresponds to a cross section from the computer model. The series of layers joined together form the final
shape. This gives the user the ability to create almost any complex shape or geometric form. Rapid prototyping technology has been used in
maxillofacial surgery for several years (Lill et al. 1992). Hurson et al. (2007) looked at the difficulties in assessment, classification,
and treatment of fractures of the pelvis and acetabulum due to the complex 3D anatomy of these structures. They produced full-sized models
of acetabular fractures using rapid prototyping technology and found that they greatly assisted surgeons in understanding the character of
these complex fractures prior to surgery. Rapid prototyping models have been used successfully in preoperative planning and as an
intraoperative reference for cases of multi-plane spinal or pelvic deformities (Guarino et al. 2007). A 3D rapid prototyping model has also
been used as an aid to surgical planning in the resection of a large scapula osteochondroma (Tam et al. 2012). Custom-made osteotomy
templates, designed on the basis of a preoperative 3D computer simulation, have been produced through rapid prototyping technology (Murase
et al. 2008). They were used successfully to correct long bone deformity of the upper limb in 22 patients. Another study found that
correction of cubitus varus deformities in teenagers was successful using an osteotomy guide produced from 3D imaging and rapid prototyping
(Zhang et al. 2011). A study by Bellanova et al. (2013) investigated the use of custom-made surgical guides to reduce the width of the
resection margin (while ensuring that the margin was adequate) for osteosarcomas of the tibia in 4 children. They used technology that was
similar to that in the present study to manufacture a surgical guide by rapid prototyping, which was fitted to a unique position on the
tibia. A second instrument was manufactured to cut the bone allograft so as to fit the resection gap perfectly. Histopathological evaluation
of the resected specimens showed tumor-free resection margins in all cases. In 1 of the patients, the target margins were defined at 4 mm,
which allowed for the preservation of the growth plate. A growing number of applications is being found for rapid prototyping technology.
Tumor surgery is one area in which precision of margins is imperative. Our case demonstrates the successful use of this technology for the
resection of a pelvic chondrosarcoma. The use of this technology is likely to increase greatly as it becomes more readily available. WB was
involved with the protocol development, data collection, and drafting of the manuscript. RD is the bioengineer who developed the osteotomy
guides and wrote the technical aspects of the surgical technique. LC assisted with the surgery and with critical appraisal of the
manuscript. RCS is the head surgeon who came up with the concept and helped with critical appraisal of the manuscript. No competing
interests declared.
