A large outbreak of hepatitis E occurred in urban Bangladesh during 2008–2009, resulting in increased maternal and neonatal mortality in the
affected community. Case-patients who took paracetamol during their illness were more likely to die than other case-patients.
Background. Hepatitis E virus (HEV) causes outbreaks of jaundice associated with maternal mortality. Four deaths among pregnant women with
jaundice occurred in an urban community near Dhaka, Bangladesh, in late 2008 and were reported to authorities in January 2009. We
investigated the etiology and risk factors for jaundice and death. Methods. Field workers identified suspected cases, defined as acute onset
of yellow eyes or skin, through house-to-house visits. A subset of persons with suspected HEV was tested for immunoglobulin M (IgM)
antibodies to HEV to confirm infection. We used logistic regression analysis to identify risk factors for HEV disease and for death. We
estimated the increased risk of perinatal mortality associated with jaundice during pregnancy. Results. We identified 4751 suspected HEV
cases during August 2008–January 2009, including 17 deaths. IgM antibodies to HEV were identified in 56 of 73 (77%) case-patients tested who
were neighbors of the case-patients who died. HEV disease was significantly associated with drinking municipally supplied water. Death among
persons with HEV disease was significantly associated with being female and taking paracetamol (acetaminophen). Among women who were
pregnant, miscarriage and perinatal mortality was 2.7 times higher (95% confidence interval, 1.2–6.1) in pregnancies complicated by
jaundice. Conclusions. This outbreak of HEV was likely caused by sewage contamination of the municipal water system. Longer-term efforts to
improve access to safe water and license HEV vaccines are needed. However, securing resources and support for intervention will rely on
convincing data about the endemic burden of HEV disease, particularly its role in maternal and perinatal mortality. Outbreaks of acute
infectious hepatitis have been attributed to hepatitis E virus (HEV) since the 1950s . Large HEV outbreaks reported from Asia and Africa
have been associated with fecally contaminated drinking water . Although persons with HEV disease usually fully recover, clinical studies
report that pregnant women who become infected with HEV, and their newborns, often die , and this has also been observed during HEV
outbreaks [4, 9, 27–30]. There is no surveillance for HEV in Bangladesh, although limited studies suggest that it is the commonest cause of
fulminant hepatitis . In late 2008, icddr,b (International Center for Diarrheal Disease Research, Bangladesh) began a maternal health
project called “Manoshi” in low-income urban areas. In January 2009, a researcher with this project noted that 4 pregnant women in an urban
community called East Arichpur, approximately 15 km north of Dhaka, died following acute onset of jaundice during November and December
2008, suggesting HEV infection . A collaborative team from the Institute of Epidemiology, Disease Control and Research, the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, Government of Bangladesh, and icddr,b investigated with the goals of determining the etiology and size of the
outbreak, community perceptions about the cause of the outbreak, and risk factors for illness and death (Supplementary Appendix 1). From 12
January through 23 February 2009, we visited every household in East Arichpur and every fifth household in West Arichpur to record the
number of households and residents, their demographics, and the number of suspected cases of HEV, defined as a person with new onset of
illness with either yellow eyes or skin occurring during August 2008–January 2009. We used suspected HEV cases to calculate attack rates,
mortality rates, and case fatality; we multiplied the number of cases identified in West Arichpur by 5 to estimate the total number of
suspected cases. We inquired about all recent deaths during household surveys and investigated all deaths to determine if they had illness
with jaundice. Family members were enrolled as proxy respondents for persons who died. We invited suspected HEV cases living in the same
housing compounds as deceased suspected HEV cases to provide a 5-mL blood specimen for testing. Blood specimens were stored on ice and
transported to icddr,b where they were tested for immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies to hepatitis E and hepatitis
A viruses (MP Bio, Singapore). The outbreak investigation team observed water distribution systems in the area and tested the municipal
water supply at the originating pump and at spigots in households of deceased suspected HEV case-patients and tested those for
thermotolerant coliforms at icddr,b. Anthropologists trained in outbreak investigation conducted interviews and group discussions with
families and neighbors of suspected HEV case-patients who died and asked their opinions about the cause of jaundice in their community.
During May 2009, we randomly selected 160 households from the East Arichpur household listing who reported a suspected HEV case during case-
finding activities. The team visited these households, and if there was no one meeting the suspected HEV case definition who was currently
ill residing there, they visited the next closest household until they identified someone meeting the suspected HEV case definition who was
currently ill with jaundice. The field team collected a blood sample from persons with suspected HEV and asked about their exposures and
illness history using a structured questionnaire. Persons with suspected HEV who were ill during May 2009 and had IgM antibodies to HEV in
serum were defined as confirmed HEV cases and included as cases in the case-control analysis. To identify controls, we randomly selected 400
households from our household list and, using a random number table, selected 1 person from each selected household for possible
participation. Interviewers made at least 3 attempts to meet with the household members selected as possible controls. We first verified
that the person selected had not experienced jaundice in the previous 2 years and then collected a blood sample and exposure history using a
structured questionnaire. For the analysis, we defined a control as someone with no history of jaundice during the previous 2 years and no
evidence of IgM or IgG antibodies to HEV in their serum. The sensitivity and specificity of HEV serological tests are suboptimal , and
asymptomatic infections are common, even in outbreak settings . Therefore, we aimed to improve the positive and negative predictive values
of the tests, and thereby reduce misclassification of cases and controls, by selecting only symptomatic laboratory-confirmed cases and
asymptomatic laboratory-confirmed controls for the study. Our analysis focused on HEV disease rather than all infections because of concerns
about misclassification and the focus on public health burden caused primarily by disease. We compared confirmed HEV cases and controls in
terms of their demographics, drinking water supply, and foods consumed using univariate logistic regression. We then built a multivariate
logistic regression model to identify risk factors for HEV disease; we used backward stepwise selection and defined the best model as the
one with the lowest Akaike information criterion . Exposures were considered statistically significantly associated with HEV disease with a
P value <.05 in the multivariate model. Investigators have suggested the possibility of intrahousehold transmission of HEV infection,
presumably through fecally contaminated hands . To investigate whether HEV might have been transmitted within households through fecally
contaminated hands, we compared the proportion of households with a handwashing station with soap between households reporting 1 suspected
HEV case and households reporting >1, as this has been shown to be a predictor of hand hygiene behavior in this setting . A second household
survey was completed to estimate the increased risk of perinatal mortality associated with jaundice among women who were pregnant. During 5
March–15 April 2009, we visited every fifth household in East Arichpur and sought to identify all incident pregnancies in these households
from January 2008 through February 2009, the status and outcome of those pregnancies, and whether or not pregnant women experienced jaundice
during pregnancy. We compared the proportion of pregnancies ending in miscarriage, stillbirth, or neonatal death between women with and
without reported jaundice during their pregnancy. To identify risk factors for death among persons with suspected HEV disease, we also
compared the demographics, environmental exposures, and healthcare-seeking behaviors of persons who died with suspected HEV disease with
those who survived HEV disease in East Arichpur using univariate logistic regression. All participants provided informed written consent
prior to participation in this study, and the government of Bangladesh reviewed and approved the plans for this outbreak investigation.
Arichpur comprises an area of approximately 1.2 km2. Our census identified 29 264 households and 128 926 persons residing there—50 941
residents in East Arichpur and 77 985 in West Arichpur. People frequently lived in compounds where nuclear families shared 1 room and
multiple families shared a stove, toilet, and water source. Eighteen percent (2273/12 938) of households reported at least 1 suspected HEV
case in East Arichpur and 11% (1920/16 326) in West Arichpur during August 2008–January 2009. The attack rate was 4% overall (4751/128
926)—5% (2756/50 941) in East Arichpur and 3% (1995/77 985) in West Arichpur. Overall, 53% of suspected case-patients were male and 56% were
aged 15–34 years (Table 1). Peak incidence of suspected HEV disease occurred during November and December 2008 (Figure 1). Table 1.Age and
Sex of Persons With Jaundice in Arichpur, Onset During August 2008–January 2009Age or SexEast Arichpur (n = 2752)West Arichpur (n =
1995)aBoth Areas (n = 4747)bMedian age, y222423Age group, No. (%) 0–4 y127 (5)145 (7)272 (6) 5–14 y422 (15)290 (15)712 (15) 15–34 y1537
(56)1110 (57)2647 (56) 35–59 y613 (23)420 (21)1033 (22) ≥60 y53 (2)30 (2)83 (2)Male sex, No. (%)1394 (51)1090 (56)2484 (53)a Every fifth
household was visited in West Arichpur. The number from the survey was multiplied by 5 to estimate the total number.b Age and sex
information missing for 3 suspected cases. Figure 1.Number of new jaundice cases in Arichpur by month during August 2008–January 2009 based
on a community survey. Although cases occurred before and after these dates, we conducted only 1 survey; therefore, dates of onset for those
incident cases are missing. Age and Sex of Persons With Jaundice in Arichpur, Onset During August 2008–January 2009 a Every fifth household
was visited in West Arichpur. The number from the survey was multiplied by 5 to estimate the total number. b Age and sex information missing
for 3 suspected cases. Number of new jaundice cases in Arichpur by month during August 2008–January 2009 based on a community survey.
Although cases occurred before and after these dates, we conducted only 1 survey; therefore, dates of onset for those incident cases are
missing. There were 17 deaths among suspected HEV case-patients during the outbreak, and all but 1 occurred in East Arichpur. In addition to
the 4 deaths among pregnant women first reported by the Manoshi project, there were 6 additional deaths in women of reproductive age whose
pregnancy status was unknown, 5 deaths in adult males, and 2 deaths in neonates born to women with jaundice. The mortality rate for
suspected HEV disease in East Arichpur was 3.1 per 10 000 population. The case-fatality ratio overall for suspected HEV disease was 0.4%,
and 0.6% in East Arichpur. We collected illness histories for 90 case-patients—from proxies for 15 suspected HEV cases who died and from 75
surviving suspected HEV cases who were living in the same housing compounds as the case-patients who died. Two neonatal deaths were excluded
because their signs and symptoms of illness were more difficult to ascertain. Among these 90 case-patients, the most commonly reported signs
and symptoms were yellow eyes (100%), fever (91%), and anorexia (89%) (Table 2). Among the 75 survivors, 73 agreed to provide serum
specimens, which were tested for IgM antibodies to HEV and hepatitis A virus (HAV). Fifty-six of 73 (77%) case-patients had IgM antibodies
against HEV and 7 (10%) had IgM antibodies against HAV (Table 2). Table 2.Clinical Presentation of Fatal Cases of Suspected Hepatitis E
Virus (HEV) and Their Family and Neighbors Who Were Suspect HEV Cases and Serologic Evidence of HEV and Hepatitis A Virus Infections Among
SurvivorsCharacteristicsNo. (%)Signs and symptoms (n = 90a) Yellow eyes90 (100) Fever82 (91) Anorexia80 (89) Weakness74 (82) Nausea72
(80) Yellow skin71 (79) Vomiting46 (51) Abdominal pain45 (50) Headache28 (30) Diarrhea23 (26)Serology (n = 73b) HEV IgM positive56 (77) HAV
IgM positive7 (10) IgM antibodies to both HEV and HAV4 (6) HEV and HAV IgM negative14 (19)Abbreviations: HAV, hepatitis A virus; HEV,
hepatitis E virus; IgM, immunoglobulin M.a Includes 75 spatially matched jaundice cases and 15 adult deaths.b Includes 73 survivors who
agreed to provide a blood sample. Clinical Presentation of Fatal Cases of Suspected Hepatitis E Virus (HEV) and Their Family and Neighbors
Who Were Suspect HEV Cases and Serologic Evidence of HEV and Hepatitis A Virus Infections Among Survivors Abbreviations: HAV, hepatitis A
virus; HEV, hepatitis E virus; IgM, immunoglobulin M. a Includes 75 spatially matched jaundice cases and 15 adult deaths. b Includes 73
survivors who agreed to provide a blood sample. Respondents did not believe that jaundice was a serious illness and preferred to seek care
from traditional healers rather than allopathic practitioners. Respondents believed that the illness could have resulted from contaminated
drinking water and that, in their experience, people who regularly boiled their water did not get sick. They also believed that contact
between their feet and dirty water in the streets and the foul smell they inhaled from feces in open drains could also be a source of
infection. Community residents described that during February 2008, 1 of the 2 municipal water pumps that supplied water to the community
broke, and the remaining water pump became the water source for the entire community through June 2008. In addition, 1 of the 2 main
drainage ditches for the community became clogged and remained blocked for most of 2008, which led to a marked increase in stagnant water in
roadways and footpaths. Most community residents obtained drinking water from either shallow tube wells or from taps on their compound
connected to the municipal water supply. The investigation team observed that connections to the main municipal water supply pipes were
poorly constructed and maintained and many distribution pipes ran through open sewers to household taps. Water samples from the 2
municipality distribution pumps, an underground shallow tube well, and 7 taps located in compounds where deaths occurred were tested for
thermotolerant coliforms. Although water from city distribution pumps and the underground pump contained no thermotolerant coliforms, the
tap-water samples collected from households had 12–12 000 (median, 38) thermotolerant coliform-forming units/100 mL of water. We enrolled
159 suspected case-patients; 61 (38%) had IgM antibodies to HEV in their serum and were used as cases in the analysis. We enrolled 352
persons with no history of jaundice in the previous 2 years as potential controls; 125 (36%) of these persons had IgM or IgG antibodies to
HEV in their serum, and the remaining 227 persons were used as controls. In the univariate logistic regression, persons with confirmed HEV
disease were significantly more likely than controls to be males; work outside the home; drink municipal water outside the home; and consume
sugarcane juice, ice cream, and curd outside the home (Table 3). In the multivariate logistic regression model, persons with confirmed HEV
disease were significantly more likely than controls to ever find dirty particles in their home drinking water (odds ratio , 2.1; 95%
confidence interval , 1.0–4.3) and to drink sugarcane juice (OR, 10.0; 95% CI, 4.8–20.6) (Table 3). In addition, persons with confirmed HEV
disease were 4.3 (95% CI, 2.0–9.4) times more likely than controls to have drunk 1–5 glasses of municipal supply water outside the home each
day, and 8.1 (95% CI, 3.1–21.5) times more likely than controls to have drunk >5 glasses (Table 3). Table 3.Demographic and Environmental
Exposures Associated With Hepatitis E Virus Disease in Univariate and Multivariate Logistic Regression During March 2009CharacteristicCase-
Patients (n = 61), No. (%)Controls (n = 227), No. (%)Crude OR (95% CI)Adjusted OR (95% CI)Age group, y <2023 (38)84 (37)Ref 20–4534 (56)126
(56)0.99 (.5–1.8) >454 (7)17 (7)0.86 (.3–2.8)Male sex43 (70)93 (41)3.4 (1.8–6.7)*Work outside the home51 (84)147 (65)2.7 (1.2–6.5)*Monthly
household expenditure >US $8527 (44)103 (45)1.0 (.5–1.8)Migrated to Dhaka within last 12 mo4 (7)38 (17)0.3 (.1–1.0)*0.3 (.1–1.2)Drink
municipal supply water at home No28 (46)88 (39)Ref Yes33 (54)139 (61)0.8 (.4–1.4)No. of glasses of municipal supply water consumed per day
in the home 0 glasses28 (46)88 (39%)Ref 1–5 glasses7 (11)34 (15)0.6 (.3–1.6) >5 glasses26 (43)105 (49)0.8 (.4–1.4)Ever found odor or bad
smell in drinking water at home26 (43)77 (34)1.4 (.8–2.7)Ever found dirty particles in drinking water at home29 (48)87 (38)1.5 (.8–2.7)2.1
(1.0–4.3)*Always boil water at home before drinking8 (13)30 (13)0.99 (.4–2.4)Average No. of glasses of municipal supply water drank outside
the home per day 0 glasses19 (31)159 (70)Ref… 1–5 glasses26 (43)47 (21)4.6 (2.3–9.4)*4.3 (2.0–9.4)* >5 glasses16 (26)21 (9)6.4
(2.7–15.0)*8.1 (3.1–21.5)*Consumed from a street vendor or shop in the past mo Bottled fruit juice26 (43)79 (35)1.4 (.7–2.6) Soft drink41
(67)142 (63)1.2 (.7–2.4) Sugarcane juice42 (69)43 (19)9.5 (4.8–18.7)*10.0 (4.8–20.6)* Ice cream41 (67)119 (52)1.9 (1.0–3.6)* Curd28 (46)67
(30)2.0 (1.1–3.8)*1.9 (.9–3.9) Grilled meat kabob7 (12)12 (5)2.3 (.7–6.7)Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio.* P < .05.
Demographic and Environmental Exposures Associated With Hepatitis E Virus Disease in Univariate and Multivariate Logistic Regression During
March 2009 Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio. * P < .05. Households with 1 reported case of jaundice were no more
likely to have a handwashing station with soap than those with >1 case (57% vs 38% ; P = .169). We identified 270 incident pregnancies
between August 2008 and February 2009, among which 21 (8%) women reported having acute onset of jaundice during the pregnancy. Of these 21
pregnancies complicated by jaundice, 8 (38%) were continuing at the time of interview, 4 (19%) had ended in miscarriage (n = 2) or
stillbirth (n = 2), and 9 (43%) resulted in live births. Of the 9 live births, 2 (22%) resulted in a neonatal death. Among the 249
pregnancies uncomplicated by jaundice, 126 (51%) were continuing at the time of interview, 23 (9%) had ended in miscarriage or stillbirth,
and 99 (40%) ended in live births; 3 of these neonates died (3%). Pregnancies complicated by acute onset of jaundice had a 2.7 increased
odds (95% CI, 1.2–6.1) for miscarriage, stillbirth, or neonatal death compared with pregnancies without jaundice. In univariate logistic
regression, case-patients who died were significantly more likely to be female, to be married, to have municipal water at home, to have
visited an allopathic provider, and to have taken paracetamol (acetaminophen) during their illness (Table 4). None of the patients who died
after taking paracetamol were pregnant women. Patients who died were less likely than those who survived to report a history of seeking care
from an herbal healer and consuming sugarcane from a street vendor (Table 4). Table 4.Exposures Associated With Increased Odds of Death
Using Univariate Logistic Regression, East Arichpur, 2008–2009aExposuresDeaths (n = 13)b, No. (%)Survivors (n = 61), No. (%)Unadjusted OR
(95% CI)Visited an allopathic provider12 (92)20 (33)24.6 (4.9–122.7)dVisited homeopathic provider1 (8)4 (7)1.2 (.12–11.3)Visited herbal
healer3 (23)36 (59)0.2 (.06–.8)dVisited spiritual healer4 (31)26 (42)0.6 (.17–2.15)Female sex9 (69)18 (30)5.3 (1.3–26.4)dCurrently married12
(92)34 (56)9.5 (1.6–57.8)dWork outside the home7 (54)51 (84)0.2 (.07–.78)dMonthly household expenditure >US $855 (38)27 (44)0.8
(.2–2.7)Drank municipal supply water at home12 (92)40 (66)6.3 (.9–41.9)Consumed sugarcane juice from street vendor in past mo4 (31)42
(69)0.2 (.04–.8)dTook paracetamol during illnessc4 (40)7 (12)5.1 (1.3–20.8)dAbbreviations: CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio.a Among
suspected hepatitis E virus (HEV) case-patients who died (excluding 2 neonates) and surviving HEV case-patients.b The family of 1 case-
patient who died left the community and was not available for interview.c Families of 3 case-patients who died were unable to recall if the
patient had taken paracetamol, so only 10 deaths were included in this analysis.d P < .05. Exposures Associated With Increased Odds of Death
Using Univariate Logistic Regression, East Arichpur, 2008–2009a Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio. a Among suspected
hepatitis E virus (HEV) case-patients who died (excluding 2 neonates) and surviving HEV case-patients. b The family of 1 case-patient who
died left the community and was not available for interview. c Families of 3 case-patients who died were unable to recall if the patient had
taken paracetamol, so only 10 deaths were included in this analysis. d P < .05. This large outbreak of jaundice (>4000 suspected cases) in a
densely populated, low-income, urban community was likely due to HEV, and evidence from this investigation suggests that it was spread
through fecal contamination of the municipal water system. Although the highest risk of illness was among men who worked outside the home,
most deaths occurred in women with confirmed pregnancies, their neonates, or women of reproductive age whose pregnancy status was
unconfirmed; being female was associated with increased odds of death. Numerous clinical case series from India have reported increased
severity of HEV disease among pregnant women [24, 25, 38], and the few studies of neonates born to women with HEV show that they frequently
die and are infected [24, 26]. Verbal autopsy studies from Bangladesh have shown that approximately 19%–25% of maternal and 7%–13% of
neonatal deaths are associated with acute onset of jaundice during pregnancy , and estimates of the maternal and neonatal mortality burden
from HEV are urgently needed. Ill persons who took paracetamol, an antipyretic also known as acetaminophen and metabolized by the liver,
were significantly more likely to die than those who did not take the drug. We were unable to measure the dose of the drug that patients
took, so we cannot comment on how this may have affected their disease outcome. It is possible that patients who died were more seriously
ill and therefore took more medicines than less ill patients, including paracetamol; this is also supported by the association between
seeking allopathic care and death. However, a causal association between paracetamol use and death is plausible. Paracetamol poisoning is a
leading cause of acute liver failure in the United States , and its use or overuse is a plausible contributor to mortality among patients
with HEV infection. A study of patients with acute HAV infections in France demonstrated that patients who developed liver failure were more
likely than those who did not to have taken acetaminophen during their illness (80% vs 37%), although the difference was not statistically
significant, perhaps due to limited sample size . The possible role of paracetamol use in increasing risk of mortality among patients with
HEV deserves further study. Due to the possible added stress to the liver, patients presenting with jaundice should be offered alternative
analgesics. Drinking from the municipal supply water outside the home was highly associated with HEV disease in a dose-response manner.
Drinking sugarcane juice was also associated with HEV disease, likely reflecting another route of exposure to municipal water. Sugarcane
stalks are kept in buckets of water by street vendors and pressed by a machine to harvest the “juice” for each customer; sometimes it is
also served with ice made with municipal water. Drinking municipal water at home was not associated with disease, but could have represented
the baseline “dose” of contaminated water for cases exposed to municipal water outside the home. Although the main municipal supply water
pumps showed no evidence of fecal contamination, the water taps all had thermotolerant coliform counts above those recommended by the World
Health Organization (0 per 100 mL; available at: http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/dwq/2edvol3a.pdf, Accesssed 8 June 2014),
suggesting that drinking water becomes contaminated through poorly maintained water distribution systems. It is unlikely that this water
contamination was a newly emerging problem for this community. Rather, it highlights the ongoing risk for waterborne disease. Working
outside the home and drinking sugarcane juice from a street vendor were protective for death. The most likely explanation for this is that
males were more likely to have these exposures, but mortality risk was higher for females. There was no evidence from our investigation that
direct person-to-person transmission played a major role during this outbreak. By the time this outbreak was reported, the peak of illness
onset had already passed. We were unable to collect specimens from persons who died to diagnose their cause of death; however, family
members or neighbors who experienced jaundice at the same time as the deaths had IgM antibodies to HEV, providing strong evidence that the
deaths were likely caused by HEV. The late reporting of the outbreak also meant that exposures associated with disease in our case-control
study may have identified transmission routes related to endemic rather than epidemic transmission. HEV is preventable through provision of
clean drinking water; although effective vaccines have been developed, none are currently sold internationally [42, 43]. Interventions to
prevent HEV in the low-income countries where HEV is endemic will require redistribution of scarce health resources, which is unlikely to
materialize unless better data on the true burden of HEV justifying intervention are assembled. Given that maternal mortality is a
characteristic feature of HEV outbreaks , existing maternal health programs in HEV-endemic countries could be leveraged to measure the
burden of HEV on maternal and child health. Supplementary materials are available at Clinical Infectious Diseases online
(http://cid.oxfordjournals.org). Supplementary materials consist of data provided by the author that are published to benefit the reader.
The posted materials are not copyedited. The contents of all supplementary data are the sole responsibility of the authors. Questions or
messages regarding errors should be addressed to the author. Acknowledgments. The authors thank the residents of Arichpur for their
cooperation during the investigation, and colleagues from the Manoshi project who first reported this outbreak. Disclaimer. The findings and
conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the US Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC). Financial support. This work was supported by the CDC (cooperative agreement U01 CI000298) and the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, government of Bangladesh. The icddr,b acknowledges with gratitude the contributions of the CDC and the government
of Bangladesh to its research efforts. Potential conflicts of interest. All authors: No reported conflicts. All authors have submitted the
ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the content of the manuscript
have been disclosed.
