To the Editor: Human granulocytic anaplasmosis is a tick-borne disease caused by Anaplasma phagocytophilum, an obligate intracellular gram-
negative bacterium that infects granulocytes. The usual clinical signs and symptoms include nonspecific fever, chills, headache, and
myalgia. Infection is usually mild or asymptomatic, but severe systemic complications can occur, leading to a need for intensive care and
estimated fatality rates of 0.5%–1.0% (1,2). A. phagocytophilum was first described in 1932 in Scotland as the causative agent of tick-borne
fever in sheep (3). Although some clinical cases of human granulocytic anaplasmosis have been reported in Europe, mostly from Slovenia,
Sweden, and Poland (4), most cases have occurred in the United States. This difference cannot be explained by the prevalence of the pathogen
in ticks or human exposure to the pathogen because the 3% prevalence of A. phagocytophilum among Ixodes ricinus ticks in Europe seems to be
nearly as high as that among ticks in the United States (2). The median seroprevalence rate for A. phagocytophilum infection among humans in
Europe is 6.2%, reaching up to 21% (2). This incongruence between seroprevalence rate and number of human cases might be associated with
underdiagnosis of cases (2), a high rate of asymptomatic disease (5), or cross-reactivities in serologic tests that might lead to
overestimation of seroprevalence rate (5). In August 2013, an immunocompetent 40-year-old man sought treatment for fever (≈39°C) and other
nonspecific symptoms such as malaise, myalgia, and severe headache 3 days after becoming aware of several tick bites received while on a
hiking vacation in Scotland. The man had removed the 3 tick nymphs from his legs immediately after their discovery and stored them in a
plastic container; they were later sent to the Consultant Laboratory for Tick-borne Encephalitis in Berlin, Germany, for analysis. When the
patient returned to Germany, 5 days after the onset of symptoms and 8 days after tick removal, a blood sample was collected (sample 1) and
the bite sites were swabbed with a sterile cotton bud. By that time, the fever was gone, but malaise and other symptoms persisted. The
patient began taking doxycycline, and within 2 days all symptoms subsided and the patient recovered completely. A second blood sample was
collected 28 days after tick removal (sample 2). Complete blood counts and chemistry panels were performed for both samples. All values were
within the reference range except that for lactate dehydrogenase (248 U/L), which was moderately increased over the baseline value of <245
U/L in sample 1. Values did not differ substantially between the 2 samples. DNA from whole-blood samples and swabs was extracted (QIAamp DNA
Blood Mini Kit; QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) and tested for A. phagocytophilum, Babesia spp., Borrelia spp., and Rickettsia spp. by using
commercially available rapidSTRIPE assays for Anaplasma, Babesia, Borrelia, Rickettsia (all Analytik Jena AG; Jena, Germany). DNA extracted
from blood and swab samples was negative for all tested pathogens. After the tick specimens were taxonomically identified as I. ricinus,
DNA/RNA was extracted (blackPREP Tick DNA/RNA Kit; Analytik Jena AG) and tested for the same pathogens. All 3 ticks were negative for
Babesia spp., Borrelia spp., and Rickettsia spp., but 2 were positive for A. phagocytophilum. Indirect immunofluorescence assays (Focus
Diagnostics, Cypress, CA, USA) performed on the paired serum samples revealed an increased A. phagocytophilum–specific IgM titer, from 20 at
5 days after symptom onset to 80 at 20 days later; the A. phagocytophilum–specific IgG titer rose from a high titer of 800 to >3,200 over
this period. The presence and 4-fold increase of A. phagocytophilum–specific IgM and IgG in paired serum samples confirmed the diagnosis of
human granulocytic anaplasmosis in accordance with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention criteria (6). As described previously for
several cases of human granulocytic anaplasmosis, patient blood counts were within reference limits but serum lactate dehydrogenase level
was elevated (7). The diagnosis was further corroborated by detection of A. phagocytophilum DNA in 2 of the 3 ticks removed from the
patient’s skin. PCR amplification failed to detect A. phagocytophilum DNA in the patient’s blood, consistent with previous studies
documenting frequent lack of A. phagocytophilum DNA detection in whole blood and a substantial drop in PCR positivity after the acute phase
of illness (8). Human granulocytic anaplasmosis is not usually reported in Scotland like it is in the rest of Europe. The case originated
from an area with long-established disease occurrence in ruminants, but the literature reports only 1 case of human infection in
southwestern Scotland (9), ≈500 km from where this infection was probably acquired. Correct diagnosis would have been difficult had the
patient not conserved the ticks and contacted the Consultant Laboratory for Tick-borne Encephalitis immediately after returning to Germany.
A large number of human granulocytic anaplasmosis cases might be missed because general practitioners may not be aware of the pathogen’s
existence or its distribution. Suggested citation for this article: Hagedorn P, Imhoff M, Fischer C, Domingo C, Niedrig M. Human
granulocytic anaplasmosis acquired in Scotland, 2013 . Emerg Infect Dis . 2014 Jun [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2006.131849 We
thank José Enrique Mejía for critical reading of the manuscript. This study was supported by the German Federal Ministry of Health.
