Vascular complications from osteochondroma are rare and include essentially stenosis, occlusion, and pseudoaneurysms. The authors report an
original case of intraoperative rupture of undiagnosed popliteal artery pseudoaneurysm during resection surgery for a distal femur
osteochondroma. Exostoses are the most frequent benign bone tumors. They account from 10 to 15% of both benign and malignant bone tumors [1,
2]. Osteochondroma may be present as a solitary lesion or in exostoses multiple hereditary form. Usually, they are asymptomatic. However,
they may cause various complications such as arterial pseudo-anevrysm. This pseudo anevrysm is most often located on the popliteal artery.
Pseudo-anevrysm results from an arterial injury due to exostose. Its mechanism development is still unknown because it is usually
asymptomatic. Our case involved a 20 year-old boy with multiple hereditary exostoses. A large pseudo-anevrysm was observed and broken during
surgery. Then, He was admitted for care in our Hospital. Although arterial pseudo-anevrysms rarely develop, we must always pay attention to
patients who present multiple exostoses. A 22-year old man with hereditary multiple exostoses was scheduled for a surgical excision of
distal right femur osteochondroma. The preoperative evaluation was unremarkable, distal pulses were presents and the leg was well perfused.
Knee X-rays showed bilateral distal femoral exostosis (Figure 1) X-ray of the knee showing the bilateral exostoses of distal femur During
intervention a massive bleeding occurred, and for hemostasis, the surgeon was forced to lie the popliteal artery. Three hours later, the
patient was admitted to our emergency department with a relative ischemia of the right lower limb, with normal vital signs. On physical
examination, sensation was present but reduced to the foot, the popliteal and distal pulses were absents. Laboratory tests were normal
except for haemoglobin; it was at 9 g/dl. An arteriography was performed and clearly showed a popliteal artery occlusion opposite the
incision (Figure 2). The patient underwent surgery. The popliteal artery was exposed through a medial supra-geniculate and infrageniculate
approach. The artery was found ligated near the prior surgical site. The popliteal artery wall was repaired by veinous graft after vascular
clamps were applied (Figure 3). The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient regained his normal activity. There was no sign of
malignant transformation on histopathological examination of bone Pre-operative Digital subtraction arteriography showing the popliteal
artery occlusion Intraoperative image: popliteal artery repaired with a reversed saphenous vein interposition graft Osteochondroma is one of
the most common bone tumors. It is exceptionnaly responsible for vascular complications from which pseudo-anevrysm constitutes the most
frequent entity. Hereditary multiple exostoses is a multi-phenotypic autosomal dominant disorder that affects 1 per 50000 in the general
population for Caucasians . It is a disorder mapped to the exostoses genes (EXT) . Exostoses develop shortly after birth and continue to
develop throughout childhood and puberty . Malignant degeneration is the most severe complication . Osteochondroma may cause various
complications such as arterial pseudo-anevrysms. The vascular disease genesis is due to repeated exercices, such a s knee flexion which
could chronically abrad the popliteal artery and produce an adventicial defect followed by a pseudo-anevrysm. Exostose is often
asymptomatic. A chronic edema may reveal popliteal artery disease. It may also lead to many other problems: peripheral nerves compression,
blood vessels, distal ischemia, phlebitis and pulsative mass . In our case, the pseudo-anevrysm was revealed by the rupture which occurred
during surgery: While the exostose was being removed, a false anevrysm with arterial bleeding was found. In this case report, osteochondroma
was removed without arteriography. In addition to this patient, 2 other cases of rupture of popliteal artery have been reported in the
literature. The pathologic diagnosis of osteochondroma is made by radiographic examination which demonstrated an osteocartilaginous
exostosis . The clinical diagnosis of a false anevrysm was confirmed by a digitalized arteriography or vascular ultrasonography. The first
case is a 33 -year -old patient. Osteochondroma was located on the fibula. The rupture occurred after traumatisme.the popliteal artery was
repaired by vein patch angioplasty . The second case is a 20 -year -old patient; the exostose was located on the tibia. The rupture came
after a sport's accident. The artery was repaired by veinous graft. In our patient, the exostosis was removed by an orthopaedic surgeon. No
vascular ultrasonography or arteriography have been realized before surgery. After removing the exostosis, bleeding occurred and a ligation
of the popliteal artery was reported by the orthopeadic surgeon. A part from the surgery, there was no history of trauma that might have
caused a fracture of the exostosis. Pain, edema, pulsative mass are the most frequent pseudo-anevrysm clinical signs. However, the rupture
may reveal a pseudo-anevrysm not yet known. In this case, surgery is required. Surgical repair and excision of the adjacent osteochondroma
is considered as the treatment of choice. One case of successful transarterial embolization using helical microcoils in the treatment of
pseudoaneurysm on osteochondroma that was located on the superficial femoral artery. The popliteal artery aren&39;t suitable to this kind of
treatment. Our patient is young, the pseudoanevrysm was broken when he was admitted to our hospital and the popliteal artery was ligated by
the orthopaedic surgeon. So, surgery was required to restitute a normal vascular status. Osteochondroma may be present as a solitary lesion
or in the form of hereditary multiple exostoses. Vascular complications of exososes are infrequent and the association with false anevrysms
is exceptional. Acute rupture is rare, In a recent review of the literature, 38 cases of popliteal pseudoaneurysm secondary to exostosis
have been reported, and only two of which were ruptured. To our knowledge this is the first case of intraoperative rupture occurring during
resection surgery for distal femur osteochondroma. A combined orthopaedic and vascular surgery must always be undertaken when there is
exostose associated to a false anevrysme. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interests. Rita Hajji et Abdellatif Bouarhroum:
Redaction of the paper. All authors of this paper have read and approved the final version submitted.
