Splenosis is a rare condition defined as seeding and autotransplantation of splenic tissue, typically after blunt abdominal trauma (e.g.
from road traffic collision). Sites of splenosis ranging from intrathoracic to intrapelvic have been reported, and symptoms vary greatly
depending on the site and size of lesions. We present the use of Tc-99m sulphur colloid SPECT/CT in diagnosing a case of multiple
abdominopelvic splenosis as the cause of new-onset tenesmus and constipation, which was initially thought to be due to colorectal
malignancy, 47 years following the initial abdominal trauma. A 63-year-old man presented with new-onset tenesmus and change of bowel habit
with increasing constipation. He has no significant past medical or surgical history apart from hospitalisation as a teenager for a road
traffic accident. Clinical examination including a rectal examination revealed a smooth, soft mass at the anterior rectum with no blood or
melena. Blood tests including CBC and CEA were all within normal limits. Colonoscopy showed a focal protrusion of bowel wall with normal
mucosal appearance within the anterior rectum, which corresponds to the soft tissue mass palpated during rectal examination. A contrast-
enhanced CT revealed multiple well-defined soft tissue lesions within the abdomen and pelvis, resembling malignant mesenteric nodes or
deposits. Given the patient’s history of post-traumatic splenectomy, splenosis was suspected. Tc-99m sulphur colloid SPECT/CT was performed
and demonstrated multiple foci of uptake within the soft tissue nodules described on CT in the left paracolic gutter, the anterior abdomen
and pelvis predominantly (Fig. 1a–d). In addition, two further foci were found abutting the rectum (Fig. 1e, f). The findings were
consistent with disseminated abdominopelvic splenosis (Fig. 2).Fig. 1 a–f CT of the abdomen and pelvis with Tc99m colloid SPECT overlay,
demonstrating avid uptake of tracerFig. 2Maximum intensity projection of SPECT giving an overview of the extent of disseminated splenosis
within the abdomen and pelvis a–f CT of the abdomen and pelvis with Tc99m colloid SPECT overlay, demonstrating avid uptake of tracer Maximum
intensity projection of SPECT giving an overview of the extent of disseminated splenosis within the abdomen and pelvis Splenosis is a rare
condition where seeding and autotransplantation of splenic tissue occurs typically after blunt abdominal trauma. Tc-99m sulphur colloid and
heat-denatured erythrocytes (dRBC) scintigraphy are two highly accurate and non-invasive methods for evaluating splenosis based on
sequestration and phagocytosis of these agents in the reticuloendothelial system,1,2 with the latter allowing differentiation of hepatic
tissue from splenic tissue.3,4 The use of SPECT/CT greatly improves visualisation and localisation of tracer uptake, thus yielding higher
diagnostic accuracy.5 Although a rare condition, splenosis should be suspected when a radiological finding of well-defined intra-
abdominopelvic nodules is accompanied with a history of splenic injury. Here, a diagnosis was reached non-invasively by combining careful
history taking and highly specific scintigraphy, and invasive interventions were avoided. The patient was managed conservatively. The
authors have no conflict of interest.
