Orbital exenteration is executed by the ophthalmic surgeon to treat various neoplasms or non-malignant diseases. But it leads to several
functional, esthetic and psychological problems for the patients. Orbital prosthesis is a good alternative for cosmetic and psychological
rehabilitation, if reconstructive surgery is not possible or not desired by the patient. In the following article, different materials and
retentive aids for fabrication of an orbital prosthesis given in the literature along with few novel methods have been discussed for four
patients who underwent orbital exenteration. Factors that an ophthalmic surgeon should consider during surgery, which may later on help the
prosthodontist to obtain good cosmetic results, are also discussed briefly. Remarkable results can be obtained if both work as a team for
one common goal i.e. improvement of quality of life of the patient after orbital exenteration. An ophthalmic surgeon performs a radical
procedure like orbital exenteration for the treatment of potentially life-threatening malignancies or relentlessly progressive conditions
unresponsive to other treatments. Common indications for orbital exenteration include neoplasms like basal cell carcinoma, melanoma or
squamous cell carcinoma; painful blind eye; infection; recent injury; disfiguring blind eye; prevention of sympathetic ophthalmia etc. This
leads to devastating cosmetic, functional and psychological problems in the patients. Cosmetic rehabilitation with reconstructive surgical
procedures may not be always feasible because of the large defect size or may not be desired by the patients because of the need for further
surgical procedures, added cost, and multiple postoperative visits. So, in such cases, the surgeon should motivate the patient and refer him
for the prosthetic rehabilitation in time. To obtain good cosmetic results, the orbital defect should have a stable bone cover, healthy
boundaries, closed sinuses and should have maintained position of the eyebrow. The soft tissue defining the defect should be thin and
immobile. Maintaining depth into the defect is also crucial to achieve the depth of the prosthesis to match with that of the natural eye. A
team approach between the surgeon and the maxillofacial prosthodontist can help in fabrication of a prosthesis that is economical,
indiscernible with the adjacent natural tissues and retentive, so that the patient can wear it with full confidence. This article presents a
case series of four patients who were referred to the department of Prosthodontics and maxillofacial prostheses from the department of
Ophthalmology, AIIMS for cosmetic rehabilitation. Our purpose is to discuss different types of materials for fabrication of orbital
prosthesis and appropriate retentive aids. As the patient education begins at an early stage, proper guidance by the surgeon about the
possibilities of rehabilitation can help to reduce the psychological distress to the patient during the course of the treatment. Patient
reported with both eyes exenterated three months earlier [Fig. 1a]. Exenteration of the right socket was done in 2009 because of squamous
cell carcinoma. Patient was not referred for cosmetic rehabilitation at that time and was not aware about such possibility. Almost two years
later, patient had to undergo exenteration of the left eye due to a similar lesion Patient had to leave his job because of lack of vision
and was socially withdrawn because of facial deficit. This time patient was referred to the department of Prosthodontics for rehabilitation
with artificial prosthesis. (a) Patient with bilateral orbital exenteration, (b) Spectacle-retained prosthesis, (c) Final prosthesis on
patient's face Patient wanted an economical and user-friendly prosthesis for his cosmetic rehabilitation. So, spectacle retained acrylic
prosthesis was delivered to him [Fig. 1b and c]. It fulfilled his requirements and patient could easily place or remove the prosthesis with
the help of his tactile sensation. Patient reported with chief complaints like nasal regurgitation of food and esthetic disfigurement due to
missing right eye and associated facial structures. Patient had the history of sinonasal carcinoma with extensive necrosis that involved
right maxillary sinus, nasal cavity and right eye. Postoperative facial defect was large and continuous with the oral defect through a small
opening [Fig. 2a]. So, separate prostheses were fabricated. Treatment options available for the patient were spectacle-retained prosthesis,
adhesive-retained prosthesis or implant- retained prosthesis. Adhesive-retained prosthesis was the best suited option as patient had
associated facial defect as well [Fig. 2b]. Acrylic prosthesis in such cases would be heavy and it is not possible to hide the margins of
acrylic prosthesis with spectacle frame. Silicone gives more life like appearance and margins can be more precisely merged with the skin of
the patient. Intraoral maxillary obturator fabricated in heat-cured acrylic was delivered to the patient to help in mastication and
swallowing. Adhesive retained orbital prosthesis was delivered for cosmetic rehabilitation. (a) Patient with large orbital and facial
defect, (b) Adhesive retained silicone prosthesis Patient underwent orbital exenteration and maxillectomy of the right side because of
rhinocerebral mucormycosis. Patient was diabetic and complained of nasal regurgitation of food and was not able to go in public because of
esthetic disfigurement. Extra orally, tissue was healthy but no definite bony or soft tissue undercut was found to help in the retention of
the prosthesis [Fig. 3a]. As the intraoral and extraoral defects were continuous, orbital prosthesis was plugged with the help of pin of
electric plug (patrix) into the socket (matrix) attached to the bulb of maxillary obturator for the retention of the prosthesis [Fig. 3b and
c]. Patient was instructed to seat the obturator first and then wear the eye prosthesis [Fig. 3d and e]. (a) Continuous orbital and
maxillary defects, (b) Acrylic conformer with undercut for silicone prosthesis, (c) Tissue surface of obturator showing matrix, (d) Tissue
surface of orbital prosthesis showing patrix, (e): Final prosthesis on patient's face Patient underwent orbital exenteration and
maxillectomy of the right side because of squamous cell carcinoma eroding the right orbital floor, posterior wall of maxilla, infratemporal
fossa, right hard palate, medial wall of maxilla, right nasal cavity and right ethmoidal air sinuses. This led to the formation of
continuous intraoral and extraoral defects [Fig. 4a]. Patient was conscious about her looks but had financial constraints. Magnetic button
of wallet (to carry money etc.) was attached to the bulb of the obturator and the counterpart was attached to the tissue side of the acrylic
conformer of the silicone orbital prosthesis [Fig. 4b and c]. Patient was instructed to first insert the obturator in the mouth and then the
two magnetic parts seated like a matrix and patrix over each other when the orbital prosthesis was placed over the socket [Fig. 4d]. The
magnetic forces helped the patient to seat the prosthesis in correct position. (a) Pretreatment view of continuous orbital and maxillary
defects, (b) Magnetic button attached to obturator bulb, (c) Prostheses attached with magnets like matrix and patrix, (d) Final silicone
prosthesis An orbital prosthesis should be aesthetic, durable, light weight, economical, and most importantly retentive. Choice of material
and retentive aid depend upon patient's esthetic demands, size and type of defect, type of lifestyle, financial condition etc. Most commonly
used materials for fabrication of facial prosthesis are acrylic and silicone elastomers. Acrylic offers advantages like adequate longevity,
remarkable aging properties, low cost, easy to process, better adherence of prosthesis to spectacle frame and minimal maintenance. The
rigidity of acrylic resin is seldom a problem, as the tissue bed is rarely movable. Silicone materials are preferred nowadays, as they
provide better marginal adaptation and more life like appearance than acrylic. But they are expensive and lack the ability of
chemical/mechanical bonding with the eyeglass frame. Various methods of retention include prosthesis fastened to spectacle frame, anatomic
retention using conformer or acrylic resin template relined by a resilient denture liner, adhesives, stud attachments, implants with
magnetic attachments etc. Although spectacle-retained prosthesis is an economical retentive aid but the frame becomes bulky and it becomes
mandatory for the patient to wear spectacles every time he wants to use the prosthesis. Adhesives are being commonly used in the form of
sprays, cr√©mes or tapes but the possibility of misalignment and allergy to the adhesive are the important drawbacks reported in literature.
So, its use on sensitive skin, unhealed sockets with or without exudates is not recommended. In the patient described above with bilateral
exenteration, manual dexterity required for correct orientation of prosthesis and daily application and removal of adhesive was not feasible
due to total lack of vision. So, spectacle retained prosthesis was the best suited option for him. Retention can also be obtained to some
extent from bony or soft tissue undercuts at the defect site. But these were not sufficient in the cases mentioned above. So, in cases 3 and
4, novel methods of retention-like pin and socket of electric plug and magnetic buttons of wallet were used. These are indicated especially
for patients having continuous orbital and maxillary defects with missing anatomic undercuts. These methods are economical, provide
satisfactory retention and do not necessitate the use of adhesives or spectacles. The only disadvantage is that the patients require manual
dexterity to position the prosthesis accurately. But this can be learnt easily with time. There may also be corrosion or loss of magnetism
with time, but unlike other magnets being commonly used; magnetic buttons used here are very cheap and easily available. So, these can be
replaced easily without damaging or replacing the existing prosthesis. A hollow prosthesis can be fabricated to reduce the weight of the
prosthesis, especially in case of bilateral prosthesis, or when size of the defect is very large. It is difficult to rehabilitate the
patients with large defects as the size and the weight of the prosthesis increase. So, a hollow prosthesis can be made by scooping out the
extra wax from the tissue side of the prosthesis before investing it [Fig. 5]. But, it is also difficult to achieve satisfactory esthetics
if the width and depth of the socket after surgery is very less [Fig. 6a and b]. So, the operating surgeon should remove sufficient contents
to obtain adequate width and depth of the socket. Scooped out wax from tissue side of prosthesis (a) Pretreatment view showing inadequate
depth of socket, (b) Post-treatment view showing unsatisfactory esthetics Osseointegrated implants offer several advantages over adhesives
or other mechanical retentive aids by providing better retention even in the case of a large defect or adverse anatomy of the defect,
convenient positioning of the prosthesis, lesser influence of the environmental factors like perspiration, UV light, and increased shelflife
of the prosthesis. All these factors lead to greater patient acceptance, especially in young patients with active lifestyle. But implant
placement should be well planned with a team effort between the surgeon and the prosthodontist to ensure that implant angulation or implant
body or subsequent bar splint placement does not interfere with normal contours of the facial prosthesis. However, controversy regarding the
placement of implants in the orbit has been documented. Studies show a higher failure rate because of higher chances of soft tissue
infections, decreased vascular perfusion, poor remodeling capacity of bone-implant surface and lack of stabilizing bone volume in proximity
to the frontal sinus. Financial constraints, added surgeries, insufficient available bone, history of radiation, poor general health of the
patients, higher risk of late failure, higher hygiene maintenance requirements usually restrict us from using this option commonly. The role
of ophthalmologist is crucial in terms of removal of lesion, obtaining suitable anatomy of the residual defect and motivation of the patient
for cosmetic rehabilitation. The maxillofacial prosthodontist can successfully rehabilitate such patients by choosing appropriate material
for prosthesis and retentive aid, based upon the esthetic and functional requirements of the patient. Collaborative efforts by both
specialists can help in quick reintegration of patients with orbital defects. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
