The diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is often challenging in elderly individuals, not only for its various clinical features,
sometimes, but also for its rare changes of periodic synchronous discharges (PSD) in electroencephalogram ( EEG). So, we reported one case
of DLB and gave a detailed analysis. A Chinese patient (Female, 56 years old) presented with progressive cognitive decline and complex
visual hallucinations. Several days after admission, she gradually showed focal myoclonic jerks. Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score
was 19/30, EEG revealed PSD, Cerebrospinal fluid and 14-3-3 brain protein was negative, Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed diffuse
atrophy. To differentiate the PSD derived from DLB or from late-onset Absence Status Epilepticus, we have given the treatment with
intravenous valproate (1200 mg/24 h) and diazepam 20 mg under the EEG monitor, a clinical improvement was absent and PSD in EEG did not
disappear. Two weeks later, the patient showed akinetic-rigid syndrome and PSD in EEG persisted for a long time. According to her history
and therapy, a clinical diagnosis of DLB has been made, but no autopsy for confirmation, and in the following visit, she has a poor
prognosis. PSD in EEG may occasionally be recorded in neurodegenerative disorders such as AD, DLB other than CJD or NCSE. Hence it should
not dissuade clinicians from the diagnosis of DLB where the clinical and neuropsychological findings were consistent with suggested
diagnostic criteria for DLB. The diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is often challenging in elderly individuals because various
symptoms of this condition overlap with other conditions that are common in this population, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease (CJD) or Nonconvulsive status epilepticus (NCSE). However, DLB also has a higher mortality and morbidity just as AD or CJD.
Life expectancy in DLB is about 5–8 years Thus, a comprehensive understanding of DLB is very critical, not only for its various clinical
features, but also for its examination, especially the electroencephalogram ( EEG). The EEG has been considered as a valuable
neurophysiological method in the evaluation of the dementia so far. It is well-known that the existence of PSD in a patient with progressive
dementia is rather suggestive of CJD. Nevertheless, the periodic abnormalities have been rarely described in others types of dementia such
as AD, DLB , and have also been rarely described in the elderly men with NCSE such as late-onset Absence Status Epilepticus. In this case,
we reported one case of DLB with progressive cognitive impairment, intermittent,vivid, complex visual hallucinations,focal myoclonic jerks,
and akinetic-rigid syndrome, then gave a detailed analysis of the EEG changes. The patient’s husband has provided written informed consent
and this case report has been approved by our hospital’s Research Ethics Board. A Chinese 56-year-old female patient presented with
progressive cognitive decline accompanied with dizziness for one month, her family members told us that she was always unable to remember
somethings happened recently and was occasionally unable to find home. A week later, she gradually showed complex visual hallucinations, the
visual hallucinations were stereotypical: somebody was jumping, singing, dancing or talking with her. The visual hallucinations persisted
for several minutes and occurred dozens of times each day. At the same time, the patient was frightened. So she was admitted to our hospital
by her family members, however, after admission, she gradually showed focal myoclonic jerks. On admission, the physical examination was
unremarkable. A Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score was 19/30, revealed that she had trouble in recalling words and locating.
Comprehensive neuropsychological testing was performed, such as the Chinese Revised Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS-RC) and the
Chinese Revised Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS). She had a lower performance IQ than verbal IQ, which may indicated the impaired function of
nondominant hemisphere associated with visuospatial function, especially poor performance on visual recognition, visual regeneration and
picture recall, such as Table 1. Her EEG was performed immediately to evaluate her frequent visual symptoms and focal myoclonic jerks. We
found that her EEG was dominated by the presence of generalized periodic synchronous discharges (PSD) every 0.5 to 1.0 seconds (Figure 1),
cerebrospinal fluid revealed the normal values for protein and cells, the determination of 14-3-3 brain protein was negative. Magnetic
resonance imaging of the brain showed diffuse atrophy. WAIS-RC and WMS test results Generalized periodic synchronous discharges (PSD) in
EEG. After the EEG monitoring, two diseases have been taken into account: DLB or NCSE such as late-onset elderly Absence Status Epilepticus.
In order to differentiate the PSD derived from DLB or from late-onset Absence Status Epilepticus, we have given her intravenous valproate
(1200 mg/24 h) and diazepam (20 mg), however, a clinical improvement was absent and the PSD in EEG didn’t disappear. Two weeks later, the
patient showed akinetic-rigid syndrome and PSD in EEG persisted for a long time. Combing her detailed history with the therapy, we have made
a clinical diagnosis of DLB according to the clinical criteria : central feature such as progressive dementia, core features such as
fluctuating impaired cognition ,visual hallucinations, akinetic-rigid syndrome. In our report, the patient has a history of progressive
dementia for two months accompanied with fluctuating impaired cognition such as that she was occasionally unable to find home or remember
somethings, and showed complex visual hallucinations and akinetic-rigid syndrome plus myoclonus, which were consistent with the clinical
diagnosis criteria. The patient’s family members refused the autopsy for confirmation and the therapy. In the following visit, the patient
had difficulty in eating, developed acute pancreatitis, and will have a poor prognosis. Cognitive impairment punctuated by complex vivid
visual hallucinations, was our patient’s main complaint, which can be seen in DLB or Nonconvulsive status epilepticus, but soon after
admission, she gradually showed focal myoclonus and akinetic-rigid syndrome, which would be helpful in the clinical diagnosis of DLB. DLB
was recently defined and revised as a separate disease entity according to Mckeith et al. , included core features such as fluctuation
cognition, visual hallucinations, spontaneous parkinsonism, if two core features are presented, it will be sufficient for a diagnosis of
DLB. Besides this, if any core features is absence, one or more suggestive features will be sufficient for possible DLB, such as REM sleep
behavior disorder, severe neuroleptic sensitivity, low dopamine transporter uptake in basal ganglia demonstrated by SPECT or PET imaging.
However, supportive features are commonly presented in DLB but lack of sufficient diagnostic specificity, such as prominent slow wave
activity in EEG with temporal transient sharp waves, which may be presented in the intermediate phase of DLB. It is well-known that the
existence of PSD in a patient with progressive dementia is rather suggestive of CJD. However, because of the strong association with CJD,
PSD may cause diagnostic confusion when they occur in other disorders. Nevertheless, PSD in EEG has been rarely described in DLB. In this
case report, we found that the PSD was presented in DLB after admission, but after the therapy of valproate and diazepam, the EEG has not
been improved. According to Brenner , PSD is defined as periodic complexes occupying at least 50% of a standard 30-minute EEG, in a
symmetric, diffuse and synchronous manner (although they may be more prominent in a given region, frequently the anterior regions) and has a
periodicity less than 4.0 seconds. However, the strict criteria for the definition of PSD in CJD may possibly suggest the duration of
100–600 ms, the intercomplex interval of 500–2000 ms, which may possibly assist the differentiation . According to Ferna’ndez-Torre , the
EEG in DLB has different abnormalities in different phases. During the initial phase of DLB, EEG showed a mild slowing of background
activity with diffuse 5–7 Hz rhythms, and occasional bilateral bursts of arrhythmic irregular 1.5–2.0 Hz slow waves. During the intermediate
phase, EEG revealed a moderate slowing of background activity with diffuse 4–5 Hz rhythms and frequent burst of multifocal triphasic waves.
Finally, during the terminal phase, EEG was dominated by the presence of generalized PSD. On one hand, the patient described here fulfilled
the clinical criteria for DLB,on the other hand, the changes in EEG were rare but consistent with previous literature. Alteration of
consciousness and unresponsiveness are typical symptoms of NCSE, however, in some cases, visual hallucinations , somatic hallucinations ,
psychotic symptom or myoclonic jerks may also be seen occasionally. Late-onset Absence Status Epilepticus can be seen in elderly patient
with generalized spike-wave pattern similar to PSD, which may be difficult to be identified from DLB. But , there were still two points
helpful to make differential diagnosis: firstly, in the evolution of the DLB, akinetic-rigid syndrome have occured gradually but not in
NCSE; secondly, intravenous valproate or diazepam have terminated the NCSE immediately, but not in DLB, such as in our case. In summary, PSD
in EEG may occasionally be recorded in neurodegenerative disorders such as AD, DLB other than CJD or NCSE. The frequency of such findings in
DLB was not known, but the previous case reports suggested that it was not common. Hence it should not dissuade clinicians from the
diagnosis of DLB where the clinical and neuropsychological findings are consistent with suggested diagnostic criteria for DLB . The
pathophysiological basis of PSD in CJD was uncertain, but has been suggested to reflect the loss of inhibitory parvalbumin binding in
thalamic neurons . It would be similar neuropathological markers in other neurodegenerative diseases in which periodic discharges are
recorded. In conclusion, our case showed atypical manifestations and rare EEG findings of DLB which may be confused with NCSE or CJD. Thus,
the presence of PSD in a patient with abnormal behavioral or cognition may suggest different neurological diseases, but, DLB needs to be
considered. The pathophysiology of PSD needs further exploration. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s husband for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. DLB: Dementia with Lewy body; PSD: Periodic synchronous discharges; EEG: Electroencephalogram; NCSE: Nonconvulsive status
epilepticus; AD: Alzheimer’s disease; CJD: Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. The authors declared no conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, funding, and/or publication of this article. LS participated in the drafting the manuscript. JC collected the clinical
data.FNC participated in the design of the case report. ZW participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript.
YDL conceived of the case and be accountable for the integrity of any part of the work. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2377/14/112/prepub We thank Dr. Jiang Wu
who was involved in the conceiving manuscript or revising it critically for important intellectual content.
