Multifocal or continuous pancreatic lesion is identified frequently but finding an appropriate surgical approach is quite challenging. Total
pancreatectomy is a useful procedure. However, postoperative endocrine and exocrine disturbance is inevitable. Recently, the safety and
feasibility of parenchyma preserving pancreatectomy, including middle-preserving pancreatectomy (MPP), have been reported. MPP is a combined
procedure of pancreaticoduodenectomy and distal pancreatectomy, while preserving the body of the pancreas, for cases of multifocal
pancreatic lesions. So far, there have only been a few reports that have described MPP. We report a case of MPP for multifocal intraductal
papillary mucinous neoplasms of the pancreas, describe the surgical procedure, and discuss the feasibility of MPP as parenchyma-preserving
pancreatectomy with reference to the literature. Total pancreatectomy (TP) is a treatment option for multifocal or continuous lesions from
head to tail of the pancreas. However, the oncological benefit of TP has not been established for pancreatic cancer. TP results in a
complete loss of pancreatic function. Thus, postoperative endocrine and exocrine disturbance is inevitable. After TP, patients usually have
severe diabetes, diarrhea, or malabsorption. Therefore, in choosing this treatment, the balance should be considered between oncologic
outcome, life expectancy, postoperative complication, and quality of life. Recently, there have been an increasing number of pancreatic
surgeries. The safety and feasibility of parenchyma-preserving pancreatectomy (i.e., middle-preserving pancreatectomy , middle
pancreatectomy, enucleation, duodenum-preserving pancreas head resection, ventral pancreatectomy, resection of uncinate process) have been
reported . MPP is a relatively new procedure for lesions located in both head and tail of the pancreas. MPP is a combined procedure of
pancreaticodudenectomy and distal pancreatectomy, preserving the body of the pancreas to avoid endocrine and exocrine insufficiency. The
procedure was first reported by Siassi et al. . It was a metachronous surgery performing pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy after
previous distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy for pancreatic cancer. In 2007, Miura reported the first case of simultaneous MPP which was
performed for ampullary carcinoma in the pancreas head and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) in the pancreas tail . Since then,
there have only been a few reports of MPP. We herein report a case of MPP for multifocal IPMNs, and describe the surgical procedure. A
76-year-old Japanese man received follow-up treatment for branch duct type IPMNs of the pancreas in the pancreatic head first diagnosed in
2003. In 2011, the known lesion in the pancreatic head was enlarged, and a main duct type IPMN in the tail of the pancreas had newly
appeared following acute pancreatitis. The findings on physical examination were unremarkable. Laboratory tests were as follows: leukocyte
count 4,540/μl, hemoglobin 13.6 g/dl, albumin 4.0 g/dl, amylase 216 IU/l, total bilirubin 0.5 mg/dl, aspartate aminotransferase 21 U/l,
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 1.7 ng/ml, DUPAN-II <25 U/ml, S-pancreas-1 antigen (Span-1) <13.8 U/ml. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic
resonance cholaongiopancreatography (MRCP) showed a 3-cm multicystic mass in the pancreatic head, dilated main pancreatic duct in full
length, and a cystic lesion in the pancreatic tail (Fig. 1a, b). Endoscopic retrograde pancreatography showed the wide open papilla of Vater
and mucinous outflow from the orifice. Also, cytology of pancreatic juice was class 3. 2--fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (FDG) positron emission
tomography and CT (PET/CT) did not show abnormal accumulations in the corresponding areas. Preoperative diagnosis was IPMNs of the pancreas
with head and tail lesions.Fig. 1Abdominal CT (a) and MRCP (b) showed diffuse dilation of the main pancreatic duct, multiple cystic lesions
in the pancreatic head, and obvious dilation of the main pancreatic duct in the pancreatic tail Abdominal CT (a) and MRCP (b) showed diffuse
dilation of the main pancreatic duct, multiple cystic lesions in the pancreatic head, and obvious dilation of the main pancreatic duct in
the pancreatic tail MPP was performed. An upper abdominal incision was made. The pancreatic head adhered to the surrounding tissue due to
previous acute pancreatitis. Distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy was first carried out. The splenic artery was ligated and divided 3 cm
distal to the bifurcation of the celiac axis, and the dorsal pancreatic artery was preserved. Pancreatic parenchymal transaction line was
confirmed with intraoperative ultrasonography. The distal pancreatic parenchyma was transected at 3 cm proximal to the cystic lesion in the
pancreatic tail. Next, subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy was carried out. Above the superior mesenteric vein, the proximal
pancreatic parenchyma was transected. Intraoperative fresh frozen sections of both pancreatic stumps was negative for pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN). Eight centimeters of the pancreatic body was preserved (Fig. 2). Doppler ultrasonography showed arterial
blood supply to the remnant pancreas. Reconstruction involved pancreaticojejunostomy, end-to-side hepaticojejunostomy, and antecolic end-to-
side gastrojejunostomy. Distal pancreatic stump was sutured using the fish mouth procedure.Fig. 2Intraoperative finding. Eight centimeters
of pancreatic body was preserved Intraoperative finding. Eight centimeters of pancreatic body was preserved Upon microscopic examination,
pathology diagnosis was intraductal papillary mucinous adenoma for the pancreatic head lesion, and non-invasive intraductal papillary
mucinous carcinoma for the pancreatic tail lesion. Pancreatic epithelial cells in both pancreatic stumps showed no atypia. Postoperative
course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 21 days after surgery. The patient maintained good glucose tolerance without insulin
administration, and has remained well with no evidence of recurrence at 9-month follow-up. In this case, we performed MPP, which is a
combined procedure of subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy for branch duct type IPMN in the pancreatic head and distal
pancreatectomy with splenectomy for main duct type IPMN in the pancreatic tail, with 8 cm of the pancreatic body preserved. IPMNs of the
pancreas are mucin-producing pancreatic neoplasms, with prominent intraductal growth and frequent papillary architecture. With the advance
of radiographic imaging, recently, the diagnosis of IPMNs has been increasing. Of IPMNs found, 39–62 % were multifocal and located in
distant segments of the pancreas . International consensus guidelines suggest standard pancreatectomy and lymph node dissection when
invasive carcinoma is suspected . Moreover, parenchyma-preserving pancreatectomy is proposed for IPMNs as for other benign or low malignant
tumor . However, the oncological and functional outcome of parenchyma-preserving pancreatectomy for IPMNs is uncertain, and surgical
indication is still controversial. The appropriate surgical approach remains unclear, especially in patients with multifocal IPMNs located
in both the head and tail of the pancreas. Previous reports of simultaneous MPP are listed in Table 1 [3, 6–11]. Fifteen cases of
simultaneous MPP have been reported. The morbidity and the mortality was 53, 0 %, respectively. Pancreatic fistula occurred in six cases
(40.0 %). One patient had transient peritoneal bleeding and splenic hematoma after spleen-preserving MPP, which was managed with blood
transfusion and angiographic embolization . Another patient had postoperative bleeding at pancreatic stump 2 days after surgery, and had
undergone reoperation . Six patients (40 %) had postoperative diabetes; five patients required insulin administration, and one patient was
free from insulin. There was no case of brittle diabetes, which is hard to control.Table 1Previous report of simultaneous middle preserving
pancreatectomyAuthors (references)Histology (head/tail)Early complicationPostoperative diabetesOutcomeMiura et al. AC/IPMNPFYes6 m
alivePartelli et al. NET/NETPFNo118 m aliveNET/NETNoNo22 m aliveIPMN/IPMNNoYes20 m aliveIPMN/CPNoNo18 m aliveRC/CPNoYes14 m aliveSperti et
al. IPMN/CPBleedingYes11 m aliveOhzato et al. RCC/RCCBleedingYes30 m aliveChen et al. AC/SPTNoNo6 m aliveNoda et al. CC/NETPFNo1 m
aliveHoriguchi et al. IPMN/MLPFNo16 m deadNET/NETPFNo77 m aliveIPMN/IPMNPFYes14 m aliveBDC/IPMNNoNo7 m aliveOur caseIPMN/IPMNNoNo9 m alive
AC ampullary carcinoma, BDC bile duct cancer, CC colon cancer, CP chronic pancreatitis, IPMN intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm, m
months, ML malignant lymphoma, NET neuroendocrine tumor, PF pancreatic fistula, RC retention cyst, RCC renal cell carcinoma, SPT solid
pseudopapillary tumor Previous report of simultaneous middle preserving pancreatectomy AC ampullary carcinoma, BDC bile duct cancer, CC
colon cancer, CP chronic pancreatitis, IPMN intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm, m months, ML malignant lymphoma, NET neuroendocrine
tumor, PF pancreatic fistula, RC retention cyst, RCC renal cell carcinoma, SPT solid pseudopapillary tumor We compare MPP with other
pancreatic surgeries. Rates of pancreatic fistula, morbidity, and mortality are 9–30, 38–44 and 1–4 % in pancreaticoduodencetomy [12, 13],
0–61, 13–64 and 0–4 % in distal pancreatectomy [14, 15], 8–50, 38–62 and 0–2 % in middle pancreatectomy [16, 17], 0, 15–69 and 2–5 % in TP
[18, 19], respectively. MPP has two potential sources of pancreatic fistula, pancreatointestinal anastomosis and distal pancreatic stump.
The rate of pancreatic fistula and morbidity of MPP tend to be higher than those of pancreaticoduodenectomy, but similar to those of other
procedures. In the context of morbidity and mortality, in our opinion, MPP can be considered an alternative procedure to TP. In view of
remnant pancreatic volume after surgery, it has been suggested that 10–25 % of the pancreatic parenchyma should be preserved to maintain
pancreatic function . About 5–6 cm of the pancreatic parenchyma was preserved in previously reported MPP [3, 6–11]. Miura et al. proposed
preserving >25 % of the pancreas in MPP. In the current case, we preserved 8 cm of the pancreatic body to avoid endocrine or exocrine
insufficiency after surgery. With regard to the surgical procedure, we need to preserve the dorsal pancreatic artery in MPP. Gastroduodenal
artery, inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery, and splenic artery are divided. As a result, blood supply to the preserved pancreatic body
depends mainly on the dorsal pancreatic artery originating from the proximal splenic artery or common hepatic artery. There were no reports
of postoperative pancreatic infarction after MPP. Decreased blood flow to the remnant pancreas may cause pancreatic fistula or long term
pancreatic exocrine and endocrine disturbance. Therefore, care must be taken to preserve the dorsal pancreatic artery. Consequently, lymph
node dissection around the celiac axis or splenic artery is limited. Because of the limitations of lymph node dissection and sufficient
surgical margin, MPP should not be performed for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) in the pancreatic tail. We think benign or low-
malignancy lesions, including IPMNs, and metastatic tumors, are an adequate surgical indication for MPP. In addition, we think taking
intraoperative frozen sections is essential to prevent tumor relapse. If the frozen section is positive, subsequent additional resection or
conversion to TP would be considered. Regarding oncological outcome, one patient died of malignant lymphoma 16 months after surgery . Nine
patients underwent MPP for IPMNs. No recurrence of IPMNs was observed in these nine cases at a median follow-up of 14 months. IPMNs are risk
factors for PDAC. After MPP, appropriate follow-up is needed for recurrence of IPMNs or new occurrence of PDAC. It is difficult to define
oncological outcomes of MPP due to the small number of patients. A longer follow-up and larger series of patients are needed to confirm
results. In conclusion, we reported a case of MPP for multifocal IPMNs of the pancreas. Thus, surgeons should take MPP into consideration,
when the lesions involve the head and tail of the pancreas. MPP is a safe and feasible procedure for benign and low-malignancy tumors
including IPMNs of the pancreas. Carcinoembryonic antigen Computed tomography 2--Fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose Intraductal papillary mucinous
neoplasm Middle-preserving pancreatectomy Magnetic resonance cholaongiopancreatography Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma Positron emission
tomography and computed tomography S-pancreas-1 antigen Total pancreatectomy Masaaki Nishi, Hideki Kawasaki, Masahiko Fujii, Miya Nagahashi,
Masayoshi Obatake, Makoto Shirai, Koji Yamamoto and Masamitsu Harada declare that they have no conflict of interest. All procedures followed
were in accordance with the ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation (institutional and national) and with
the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2008(5). Informed consent was obtained from all patients for being included in the study.
