Hyponatremia has been reported from patients with severe neurological disease, and the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic
hormone and cerebral salt wasting syndrome are the two main etiologies of hyponatremia after brain injury. Here we describe a patient with a
lateral medullary infarction who experienced symptomatic hyponatremia with finding suggestive of syndrome of inappropriate secretion of
antidiuretic hormone followed by cerebral salt wasting syndrome. A 70-year-old Korean man visited emergency room complaining of sudden onset
vertigo and gait disturbance. Neurological exam showed left side ataxia, Horner syndrome, and right side hypesthesia. Brain magnetic
resonance imaging disclosed acute infarction involving left lateral medulla. His neurological status was stabilized, but he began to
complain of non-vertiginous dizziness and general weakness five days after admission. Serum sodium level dropped from 131 mEq/mL to
122 mEq/mL with reduced serum osmolarity of 265 mOsm/L. The diagnosis of syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone was
made and we restricted fluid intake, but his symptoms worsened and his mental status became drowsy. Follow up serum sodium level was
108 mEq/L with volume loss, suggesting cerebral salt wasting syndrome. We treated him with hypertonic saline and his consciousness was
recovered. This case shows symptomatic hyponatremia after lateral medullary infarction, providing insight about distinct pathogenesis of
syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone and cerebral salt wasting syndrome. Hyponatremia has been reported in patients
with severe neurological diseases such as subarachnoid hemorrhage, head trauma and meningitis, and it is associated with high mortality .
The syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH) and cerebral salt wasting syndrome (CSW) are the two main possible
etiologies of hyponatremia due to a central nervous system (CNS) injury, yet the exact pathomechanism of them is still elusive . It is of
great interest to find the location that contributes to electrolyte disturbances after CNS injuries. Here we describe a lateral medullary
infarction patient who experienced symptomatic hyponatremia with features of SIADH and CSW, and we discuss the possible pathomechanisms of
these two conditions. A 70-year-old Korean man visited the emergency room complaining of the sudden onset of vertigo and gait disturbance.
Neurologic examination showed left sided ataxia, Horner syndrome and right hypesthesia. Brain magnetic resonance imaging disclosed an acute
infarct involving the left lateral medulla (Figure 1A, B). His previous medical history was unremarkable and he was a social drinker. He
received oral aspirin 300 mg, atorvastatin 20 mg and intravenous hydration with normal saline 1 liter per day. Five days after admission, he
began to complain of non-vertiginous dizziness and general weakness. A blood test on the 6th day revealed a drop in the serum sodium level
from 131 mEq/L on admission to 122 mEq/L, with reduced serum osmolarity of 265 mOsm/L (Figure 1C). The urine osmolarity was 844 mOsm/kg and
urine sodium was 191 mEq/L. The patient was euvolemic and he was not taking any drugs except for aspirin and atorvastatin. He had normal
thyroid and adrenal function. Under the impression that he had SIADH, we restricted the fluid intake thereafter. However his symptoms
worsened with drowsy mentation and dehydrated volume status, and his body weight decreased from 50.0 kg to 46.1 kg. Follow up brain imaging
did not reveal a new lesion, and the serum sodium level on the 12th day was 108 mEq/L, with the urine sodium 58 mEq/L and the urine
osmolarity 548 mOsm/kg. Considering the laboratory findings and the volume status, he was diagnosed with CSW rather than SIADH. We treated
him with hypertonic saline and his mentation and dizziness improved, with a serum sodium level of 129 mEq/L. Brain magnetic resonance
imaging and serum sodium level. Diffusion weighted image on admission showed left lateral medullary infarction (A, B) and serum sodium level
after admission (C) demonstrated hyponatremia due to syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), and fluid
restriction aggravated hyponatremia, suggesting cerebral salt wasting syndrome (CSW) as a final diagnosis. This case shows that a small
brainstem lesion in the lateral medulla can cause hyponatremia that is severe enough to delay discharge from the hospital. Although the
etiology of hyponatremia in this case is hard to ascertain, both SIADH and CSW should be considered after reviewing the patient’s volume
status, electrolyte profiles and response to water restriction. This patient was diagnosed with SIADH because he was not dehydrated
initially and urine was concentrated inappropriately, but later, the diagnosis was changed to CSW because he was not responsive to water
restriction and volume loss was evident. The definition of CSW is renal loss of sodium during intracranial disorders leading to hyponatremia
and a decreased extracellular fluid volume, whereas SIADH can be defined as hyponatremia with inappropriately concentrated urine and
slightly increased intravascular volume due to excessive ADH . The secretion of ADH is physiologically determined by osmotic and non-osmotic
stimuli, and over-secretion of ADH from the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland is associated with SIADH after CNS disorders . There has
been a report of SIADH after lateral medullary infarction, and it was suggested that the nucleus tractus solitarius injury of the ventral
medulla might cause failure of transmission of non-osmotic stimuli from the carotid sinus via the afferent vagal nerve, which causes
disinhibition of ADH secretion at the pituitary gland, causing SIADH . Several hypotheses exist to explain the pathophysiology of CSW after
CNS disorders, including disrupted sympathetic tone which results in decreased renal sodium reabsorption and the failure to increase renin
and aldosterone in hypovolemic conditions, and the inappropriate release of natriuretic factors . Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) released
in the hypothalamus is a representative candidate for a CSW mediator, and physiological conditions known to increase its release include
increased intravascular volume, distention of the left atrium, angiotensin II, and sympathetic stimuli . The distinction between SIADH and
CSW is often difficult because they have similar clinical and laboratory findings, but it is still important to distinguish between the two
because the treatment strategies are different: SIADH patients should have restricted fluid intake, and CSW patients should receive salt
supplements . It is not certain why the patient's volume status, electrolyte profiles, and response to water restriction initially reflected
SIADH and later CSW. The SIADH might have been due to disruption of the afferent vagal response via the nucleus tractus solitarius in the
lateral medulla. The CSW could have been caused by the descending sympathetic tract injury which disrupted the sympathetic stimulus to the
kidney and mild water retention due to initial intravenous hydration with normal saline. It is also conceivable to suspect that he initially
experienced CSW without SIADH because he did not respond to water restriction. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. SIADH: Syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone; CSW: Cerebral salt wasting syndrome; BNP: Brain natriuretic
peptide; CNS: Central nervous system. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. JMK, contributed to manuscript writing and
interpretation of the data. KYP contributed to manuscript drafting and critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content. DHK,
contributed to data interpretation and drafting of the manuscript. JHB, contributed to data acquisition. DU, contributed to acquisition and
interpretation of the data. YCY, contributed to the critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content. OSK, contributed to the
critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication
history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2377/14/111/prepub This study was supported by the Basic
Science Research Program through the National Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology
(2010–0023596). The funding has no role in design, in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data; in the writing of the
manuscript; and in the decision to submit the manuscript for publication.
