The purpose of this study was to report developmental glaucoma and pseudopapilledema in a patient with Proteus syndrome. We defined the
presence of developmental glaucoma, right pseudopapilledema and myopia in a 4.5-year-old patient with Proteus syndrome. Marked right
hemihypertrophy, lipoma, macrodactyly, and asymmetry of the limbs were observed on systemic examination. A cavernoma was also detected in
magnetic resonance imaging of the brain. The patient underwent bilateral goniotomy surgery due to glaucoma. The surgical outcomes were
satisfactory in both eyes. In conclusions developmental glaucoma and pseudopapilledema might be associated with Proteus syndrome. Proteus
syndrome (PS) was first described as a clinical entity by Cohen and Hayden in two patients in 1979. Dietrich et al. titled the disease,
which has multiple, diverse, somatic manifestations, as the Greek god Proteus, who could change his form at will. PS is a complex
hamartomatous disorder involving the skeletal system, skin, soft tissues, and vascular system. PS is an exceptionally rare and overdiagnosed
disorder of mosaic growth dysregulatıon . The characteristic signs include partial gigantism of the hands a nd/or f eet, a symmetry of the
limbs, plantar hyperplasia, macrodactyly, bony exostoses, soft tissue tumors (hemangioma, lymphangioma, lipoma), varicosities, mental
retardation, bony prominences on the skull, scoliosis, kyphosis, angulation knee defects, muscle atrophy, pelvic lipomatosis, verrucous
epidermal nevi, and long bone overgrowth . About 200 cases of PS have been reported in the literature, and incidence of ocular malformations
is unknown . Fibrous tumor of the superior oblique tendon , retinal dysgenesis, retinal pigmentary abnormalities, optic nerve hypoplasia,
strabismus and high myopia , calcific band keratopathy, cataract, vitreous hemorrhage and resolved serous retinal detachment , epibulbar
tumor, posterior segment hamartoma, enlarged eye , and glaucoma characterize the syndrome. However the ocular manifestations of PS require
clarification. We report herein a patient with developmental glaucoma and pseudopapilledema, presumed to be due to PS. A 4.5-year-old male
was referred to our ophthalmology department, due to developmental glaucoma. The prenatal history was unremarkable. On physical examination,
marked right hemihypertrophy, a protuberant abdomen containing subcutaneous tumors and lipoma, macrodactyly of the third and fourth digits
of the right hand, macrodactyly in nearly all of the toes (Fig. 1), hyperpigmented skin lesions on his back and legs, verrucous epidermal
nevi, and asymmetry of the limbs were discovered. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed a temporal lobe cavernoma (Fig. 2).
However, there were no neurological symptoms related with the cavernoma. On ophthalmic examination, bilateral developmental glaucoma,
unilateral pseudopapilledema, and myopia were detected. The patient had a history of a bilateral goniotomy operation when he was four months
old. Visual acuity could not be measured due to mental-motor retardation, but central, steady, maintained fixation (CSM) was positive in
both eyes. Slit-lamp examination showed Haab's Striae with a corneal diameter of 11 mm horizontally and 12 mm vertically in the right eye.
The left eye was buphthalmic, with a corneal diameter of 12 mm horizontally and 13 mm vertically. Gonioscopy showed grade 4 open angles in
both eyes. Intraocular pressures were 12 mmHg in the right eye and 14 mmHg in the left eye with latanoprost 0.005% once a day treatment.
Central corneal thickness measurements using ultrasonic pachymetry were 557 µm in the right eye and 509 µm in the left eye.
Pseudopapilledema was also detected in the right eye. Cup/disc ratio was 0.5 in the right eye and 0.7 in the left eye (Fig. 3). Axial
lengths were 22.8 mm in the right eye, and 25.36 mm in the left eye. Cycloplegic retinoscopy showed -5.50 (-2.50 × 90) diopters in both
eyes. Best-corrected visual acuity was 20 / 40 in the right eye and 20 / 50 in the left eye. PS is thought to occur as the result of a
lethal somatic gene mutation that leads to a mosaic state. Most patients with PS are born without significant asymmetry, but some cases were
diagnosed using prenatal ultrasonography, and rapidly progressive overgrowth could paused during puberty . The most common clinical ocular
manifestations of the disease have been reported to be strabismus and epibulbar tumors . In the present case report, we defined a
concordance of developmental glaucoma, pseudopapilledema, and myopia in a 4.5-year-old male patient with PS. Clinical diagnosis of PS is
challenging and contentious. In the early stages of the disease, it may be difficult to make differential diagnosis from other overgrowth
disorders, such as neurofibromatosis, Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome, Maffucci syndrome, Congenital Lipomatous Overgrowth, Vascular
Malformations, and Epidermal Nevi (CLOVE) syndrome, and Bannayan syndrome. These disorders may present with similar manifestations as PS;
however, they had stringent diagnostic criteria that delineated a distinct cohort of patients who have parallel features of overgrowth .
According to the literature; the prognosis of the PS seems to labile and is correlated to the severity of neurological involvement, skeletal
deformities, internal lipomatosis, and neoplastic appearance . Different manifestations suggest that patients with PS should have an
ophthalmological examination. We have defined in the present report that developmental glaucoma and pseudopapileudema in a patient with PS
for the first time in the literature. The diagnosis of PS was based on the typical clinical findings including hemihypertrophy, subcutaneous
tumors and lipoma, macrodactyly, hyperpigmented skin lesions, verrucous epidermal nevi, and asymmetry of the limbs. Ophthalmologic
examination revealed developmental glaucoma which was already treated with goniotomy in both eyes. Although the intraocular pressures were
in normal limits with latanoprost 0.005% once a day treatment, left eye enlargement was evident. Although the precise mechanism of the
pathogenesis of secondary glaucoma associated with PS is unknown, the most likely explanation is the malformation of the trabecular meshwork
and iris (iridotrabeculodysgenesis) or iridocorneal dysgenesis. Hamarthomatous lesions may also be another cause of glaucoma in these
individuals. In conclusion, patients with a diagnosis of PS should be carefully reviewed by an ophthalmologist to rule out ocular
manifestations of the disease. Timely diagnosis and treatment of the developmental glaucoma may preserve visual loss in patients with PS. No
potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. (A) Right hemihypertrophy, (B) subcutaneous tumors and lipoma, (C)
macrodactyly of the third and fourth digits of the right hand, and (D) macrodactyly of nearly all the toes. Magnetic resonance imaging of
the case, showing temporal lobe cavernoma. (A) Buphthalmia in the left eye, (B) pseudopapilledema in the right eye, and (C) appearance of
left optic disc.
