Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome (WSS) is characterized by short stature, a variety of dysmorphic facial and skeletal features, characteristic
hypertrichosis cubiti (excessive hair on the elbows), mild-to-moderate developmental delay and intellectual disability. [MIM#: 605130]. Here
we report two unrelated children for whom clinical exome sequencing of parent-proband trios was performed at UCLA, resulting in a molecular
diagnosis of WSS and atypical clinical presentation. For patient 1, clinical features at 9 years of age included developmental delay,
craniofacial abnormalities, and multiple minor anomalies. Patient 2 presented at 1 year of age with developmental delay, microphthalmia,
partial 3–4 left hand syndactyly, and craniofacial abnormalities. A de novo missense c.4342T>C variant and a de novo splice site c.4086+G>A
variant were identified in the KMT2A gene in patients 1 and 2, respectively. Based on the clinical and molecular findings, both patients
appear to have novel presentations of WSS. As the hallmark hypertrichosis cubiti was not initially appreciated in either case, this syndrome
was not suspected during the clinical evaluation. This report expands the phenotypic spectrum of the clinical phenotypes and KMT2A variants
associated with WSS. Patients presenting with developmental delay and multiple dysmorphic features are a common diagnostic challenge in the
genetics clinic. Over the past decade, many new genetic syndromes have been identified within this area. A significant number of these have
been linked to genes involved in histone modification and chromatin remodeling. These include: Kabuki syndrome types 1 and 2 [MIM:147920 and
300867] , Kleefstra syndrome [MIM: 610253] , KAT6B-related disorders [MIM: 606170 and 603736] , Weaver syndrome [MIM: 277590] ,
HDAC8-related disorders [MIM:30882 and 309585] , and Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome [MIM: 605130] . These along with Rubenstein-Taybi [MIM:
180849] and Sotos Syndrome [MIM 117550] make up a broad range of conditions cause by defects in chromatin remodeling genes. Similar to the
loss of epigenetic control seen in Rett Syndrome [MIM: 312750], these disorders are thought to result from global changes in gene expression
throughout development leading to abnormalities in multiple body systems. The majority of individuals with these disorders have impaired
brain development leading to developmental delay and/or intellectual disability. As these chromatin remodeling defect disorders are rare,
with some having only a small number of cases reported, the complete phenotypic spectrum of many of them has not been well described. Thus
while careful phenotyping remains critical for clinical diagnosis, it will often be insufficient to distinguish between related disorders.
Genome-wide clinical tests such as SNP-based chromosomal microarray testing (SNP-CMA), clinical exome sequencing (CES), and clinical genome
sequencing are incredibly powerful tools at identifying disease-causing variants in these genes: SNP CMA detection rate for ID ranges
between 10-24% , while the diagnostic yield of exome sequencing, in patients with normal CMA results, ranges 10-40% . Also of note is the
strong pattern of de novo variants observed in many chromatin remodeling disorders . Complete parent-proband trio sequencing is warranted in
cases with developmental delay and dysmorphic features, as it has the power to directly identify de novo variants. In addition to expediting
the process of identifying de novo variants in the known chromatin remodeling genes, there are many histone modification genes which have
not been associated with human disease . With complete trio clinical exome sequencing, it is possible to identify candidate novel disease
gene associations using clinical information and predictive molecular tools. The two patients presented in this report were seen at
different medical institutions and by separate medical teams. Based on the reported clinical findings, there was no a priori expectation
from within the clinical laboratory that these two individuals were connected in any way. Clinical exome sequencing was performed on full
trios in both cases using clinically validated protocols (Additional file 1), detecting unique de novo likely pathogenic variants in the
KMT2A (MLL) gene in each patient. Fusions between the KMT2A gene with a variety of other genes are commonly observed in leukemic cells ,
giving the gene its original name: “myeloid/lymphoid or mixed lineage leukemia gene” or MLL. KMT2A is widely expressed, detectable in most
human tissues . It contains 36 exons and has three known mRNA isoforms (NM_001197104.1, NM_005933.3, and NM_024891.2). It is a homologue of
the d. melanogaster gene trithorax. Mice heterozygous for a knockout mutation of the homologous Ktm2a gene exhibit retarded growth, skeletal
and hematopoietic abnormalities . The KMT2A gene product KMT2A contains several functional domains. One domain is a SET domain which acts as
a histone H3 lysine 4-specific methyltransferase, thus regulating a variety of developmental genes including those in the HOX family .
Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome has been described as a clinical entity defined by the presence of hypertrichosis cubiti (hairy elbows) and
variable presentation of additional features such as facial dysmorphism, short stature, intellectual disability, and developmental delay .
In an exome sequencing study of WSS, de novo DNA variants in the KMT2A gene were identified in five out of six patients, strongly
implicating this gene as the major disease gene for WSS . Prenatal course was normal with vaginal delivery. The birth weight (3.4 kg, 50–75
centile) and length (49.5 cm, 50-75 centile) were both normal. Head circumference was not available. Poor muscle tone was noted at birth,
and by 7 months of age significant general hypotonia and muscle weakness were apparent. At 20 months her development was significantly
delayed, both for motor skills (due to continued hypotonia) and speech production. Poor feeding was noted at this time. Growth parameters at
this age were markedly low, being below the 3rd centile in height, weight, and head circumference. Receptive language appeared normal. At
4.5 years of age, premature dental eruption of adult teeth was noted. Ophthalmic exams were normal except for correctable astigmatism. Upon
intellectual ability testing at approximately age 5, she had very poor scores for “spatial ability”, “general conceptual ability” and
“special nonverbal composite”. She scored as average for “nonverbal reasoning ability” and below average for “verbal ability”. These scores
represent an estimated IQ of approximately 65–75. At approximately 10 years of age: Height is 165 cm (>95 centile); weight is 50 kg (95
centile). Hypertelorism, bulbous nose, clinodactyly, downslanting and short palpebral fissures, a wide and depressed nasal bridge, thick
eyebrows and hair, long thick eyelashes, synophris, thin lips, hypertelorism (Figure 1A-D, Table 1). Features of patient 1 (A-D) and patient
2 (E). Comparison of clinical features of patients with MLL- related WSSwith patient 1 and patient 2 Legend: + Present; −
Absent/questionably present; n.a. not ascertained. a. height (ht.), weight (wt.), head circumference (OFC) <3rd centile; b. IQ 65–75; c.
birth wt. & OFC normal, ht. < 5th centile. d. wt. and ht. (<3rd centile), OFC (<5th centile). e. synophris. The following tests were all
negative/normal: array comparative genomic hybridization, Fragile X Syndrome (FMR1 triplet repeat expansion); Rett Syndrome (MECP2
sequencing); Coffin-Lowry Syndrome (RPS6KA3 sequencing); myotonic dystrophy (DMPK sequencing); Prader-Willi Syndrome (by methylation)
3-hydroxyisobutric aciduria (valium load testing). Family history is unremarkable, with one unaffected sibling who does not share any of the
clinical features noted here. Consanguinity is denied. She is enrolled in special education classes and receives regular speech and
occupational therapy. Carnitine supplementation for hypotonia was given with limited response. She had multiple procedures to remove teeth,
and has suffered multiple urinary tract infections. He was born by Cesarean section at 38 weeks of gestation, following an uncomplicated
pregnancy, to a 21 year old mother and a 26 year-old father. The birth weight (3.02 kg, 25-50 centile) and head circumference (34.9 cm,
50-75 centile) were both normal, but the birth length of 44.4 cm was below the fifth centile. Dysmorphic features and microphthalmia of the
right eye were noted at birth. An ocular prosthetic was placed at ~3 months of age. He has a history of developmental delay beginning at
4 months of age when failed to achieve milestones (he did not roll over). At this time, vocalization was normal and object tracking was
mildly impaired. He had a weak grip, significant central hypotonia, decreased muscle bulk, and head lagging. At the time of exam (1 year) he
uses only one, non-specific word (‘dada’). He cannot sit up independently or crawl, but can “scoot”. Weight 6.24 kg (<3rd centile); length
67 cm (<3rd centile); head circumference 44.1 cm (5th centile); anterior fontanelle not fused (1.5 cm × 1.5 cm). Wight microphthalmia,
micrognathia, wide nasal bridge, thick hair, low anterior hairline, two posterior hair whorls, long and prominent eyelashes, sacral
hypertrichosis, small palpebral fissures which are down-slanted with telecanthus, tapered fingers, 3–4 partial left-hand syndactyly, mild
pectus excavatum, and small feet and hands (Figure 1E, Table 1). Normal karyotype (46, XY), SNP-CMA. Normal spinal canal ultrasound at
4 months of age, ruling out neural tube defects, and an abdominal ultrasound which ruled out gross malformations of the liver, gallbladder,
pancreas, spleen, and kidneys. No brain MRI has been performed. The family history is unremarkable except for a paternal half-brother who
was born with a unilateral dysplastic kidney. Two other paternal half-siblings and one full sibling are healthy, as are the parents.
Consanguinity is denied. He receives weekly physical and occupational therapies (started at 5 months). Substantial gains have been made in
the domains of motor functioning and expressive language. Exome Sequencing was performed in the UCLA Molecular Diagnostics Laboratories
using clinically validated protocols. The proband and both parents were sequenced in each case (trio analysis). All genes harboring de novo,
homozygous or compound heterozygous variants with allele frequencies <1% in the general population were evaluated by a Genomics Data Board
consisting of physicians, pathologists, clinical geneticists, laboratory directors, genetic counselors, and informatics specialists. See
Additional file 1 for a detailed description of the bioinformatic methods used for exome sequencing analysis. Variant Annotator X (VAX) was
used for rich annotation of DNA variants as previously described . Criteria for high confidence for de novo variants was: quality score
>=Q500 in each individual ; variant observed in <2 reads in any individual parent; variant not observed in the general population.
Clinically significant variants were confirmed using PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing of the proband and both parents (Additional
file 2). Due to the high proportion of variants being inherited from one or the other parent (>99.9%), non-paternity was excluded in both
cases. No homozygous blocks of >5 Mb were identified in either patient, indicating a very low probability of significant autozygosity. No
apparent homozygous exon deletions were identified within the primary gene lists in either patient. A primary gene list of 1,274 genes
(Additional file 3) was generated by searching Human Gene Mutation Database Professional Version 2012.4 (HGMD), Online Mendelian Inheritance
in Man (OMIM, searched February, 2013), and GeneTests.org for the following clinically relevant keywords: developmental delay, (mild) mental
retardation, intellectual disability, hypotonia, (probable) myopathy, ptosis, dysmorphic features, craniofacial abnormalities,
hypertelorism, bulbous nose, clinodactyly, tapering fingers, downslanting palpebral fissures, wide nasal bridge, astigmatism, early tooth
eruption, premature adult teeth. A total of 14,395,023,189 bases of DNA sequence were generated for Patient 1, resulting in an average read
depth (“coverage”) of 157× across RefSeq coding positions, with 95% of all targeted positions covered by > =10 independent reads (Additional
file 4). A total of 22,275 variants were identified within exomic loci (21,212 single nucleotide variants and 1,063 insertion/deletion
variants) compared the human genome reference (hg19/NCBI Build 37). One de novo variant was identified within the primary gene list: a
heterozygous c.4342T>C (p.Cys1448Arg) missense variant in the KMT2A/MLL gene (NM_001197104.1). Alignment view of this variant in the
Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) can be seen in Figure 2. In silico prediction was performed using functional prediction algorithms SIFT
(0.00: “Affected Protein Function”) and PolyPhen2 (0.995: “probably damaging”). With over 200× coverage in the all three members of the
trio, this variant is of high quality and coverage see (Additional file 4). View of aligned sequence reads spanning the KMT2A variants in
both patients and their parents using the Integrated Genomics Viewer. Other variants of uncertain clinical significance, likely benign, were
identified in VPS13B. Detailed variant information for the above mentioned variants can be found in Additional file 5. A primary gene list
of 1,553 genes (Additional file 3). The following clinical keywords: microphthalmia, poor growth, growth retardation, micrognathia,
hypotonia, developmental delay, wide fontanelle, dysmorphic, turned-out hands, syndactyly, pectus excavatum. A total of 10,744,929,539 bases
of DNA sequence were generated for Patient 2, resulting in an average read depth (“coverage”) of 127× across RefSeq coding positions, with
94% of all targeted positions covered by > =10 independent reads (Additional file 4: Materials 3b and 4). A total of 22,751 variants were
identified within exomic loci (21,498 single nucleotide variants and 1,253 insertion/deletion variants) compared the human genome reference
(hg19/NCBI Build 37). One de novo variant was observed within the primary gene list: a heterozygous c.4086+1G>A variant in the KMT2A/MLL
gene (NM_001197104.1). Alignment view of this variant in the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) can be seen in Figure 2. With over 150×
coverage in the all three members of the trio, this variant is of high quality and coverage (Additional file 4). As this variant occurs at
the first nucleotide of intron 8 of the gene, it is predicted to result in a loss of function allele due to the abolition of the canonical
splice donor site. However, the sequence of the mature mRNA produced by this allele cannot be predicted from sequence alone. Other
heterozygous variants of uncertain clinical significance in GFI1B, PCDH15 and MED13 were identified. Detailed variant information for the
above mentioned variants can be found in Additional file 6. No other variants were identified in patient 2 which were consistent with an
autosomal or X-linked recessive or de novo dominant mode of inheritance. No rare variants in genes associated with microphthalmia were
found. A subset of WSS is caused by heterozygous de novo variants in the KMT2A (MLL) gene . This subset is characterized by mild to moderate
developmental delay, dysmorphic facial features (including: long eyelashes, thick or arched eyebrows, downslanting palperbral fissures,
broad nasal bridge, and Cupid’s bow abnormality of the upper lip), and hypertrichosis cubiti (excessive hair on the elbows). A “slim and
muscular build” was noted in 3/5 initial KMT2A-related WSS cases. Other features observed in some WSS patients include high narrow palate,
tapering fingers, 5th finger clinodactyly and hypotonia. The clinical spectrum of features associated with WSS is wide and may continue to
expand as additional patients such as these are identified. Exome sequencing results for these trios are suggestive of a molecular diagnosis
of Wiedemann-Steiner Syndrome (WSS) in both patients. Our patients shares several of the features of KMT2A-associated WSS, including
postnatal growth retardation, developmental delay, wide nasal bridge, broad/bulbous nasal tip, and downslanted palpebral fissures . They do
not however have clear hypertrichosis cubiti, the clinical feature most readily associated - but not pathognomonic - with WSS. In them the
excess of hair is manifested by thick eyebrows and hair, long thick eyelashes, and the sacral hypertrichosis observed in patient 2
(Table 1). In one of our patients and one previously reported individual with WSS , there is history of recurrent infections, though it
remains unclear whether their immune dysfunction is related to KMT2A mutation. Patient 2 has several clinical features not previously
observed in individuals with WSS, including: unilateral microphthalmia, micrognathia, 3–4 finger syndactyly, and premature eruption of adult
teeth. The de novo variant identified in the KMT2A gene in patient 1 is a missense c.4342T>C variant. To date, all KMT2A variants reported
in WSS patients are premature truncation variants, suggesting haploinsufficiency as the disease mechanism. As the c.4342T>C variant does not
result in protein termination, the effect of this variant on KMT2A protein abundance and/or activity cannot be confidently predicted.
However, this missense variant is located within a PDH homeodomain zinc finger domain, a domain thought to coordinate protein-protein
interactions involved in transcriptional activation . The web-based tool Human Splicing Finder v2.4.1 was unable to provide a meaningful
prediction as to whether this variant impacts splicing. Given that typical human exomes carry between zero and five high confidence de novo
coding variants and the inclusive approach to generating the primary gene list (over 1,000 genes included in each case), the identification
of a previously unreported de novo missense variant in the KMT2A gene in a single case is not by itself a significant finding. However,
combined with the phenotypic overlap between individuals with de novo variants in KMT2A with WSS and these two unrelated patients, these
findings strongly implicate a causal relationship between the observed variants and the clinical presentation of these individuals.
Functional analysis or identification of other patients with the same variants and similar phenotypes would provide additional support. This
report highlights the value of full trio clinical exome sequencing for individuals with multiple congenital anomalies and developmental
delay whose features are not consistent with one particular syndrome, supporting the model of medical genetics practice recently suggested
by Shashi and colleagues . Without parental sequences, the variants in KMT2A would not have been singled out from among many similar
heterozygous candidate variants identified within the primary gene list. Thus full trio exome sequencing greatly improved the
interpretability of the test in these patients. Financial considerations are also an important factor in molecular testing. Full trio
clinical exome sequencing is comparable in cost to gene panel testing and, if pursued as a second-line test after clinical microarray
analysis (SNP-CMA), is likely a far more efficient use of resources than iterative single gene testing in cases with developmental delay and
dysmorphic features. For both patients, a parent or legal guardian consented to the following statement: “We [the UCLA Clinical Genomics
Center] will use your results to improve Clinical Exome Sequencing by comparing your data to others”. Additional written consent was
acquired for both patients for the use of their photographs for research publication. As the genetic testing data were obtaining using a
clinical test and appropriate written consent for testing was obtained, this report is exempt from ethics approval for medical research of
human subjects. All authors have received training and are compliant with the Health Information Portability and Accountability Act of 1996
(HIPAA). SPS, JLD, KD, HL, FQ-R, and WWG work for a fee for service laboratory providing diagnostic testing. The remaining authors declare
that they have no competing interests. SPS performed analysis and prepared the manuscript. RL and NM provided phenotype information and
photographs for patient #2. HL performed analysis and interpretation of molecular testing. ND served as liaison between sites and
contributed to the description of phenotypes for both cases. JM provided phenotype information and photographs for patient #1. PFO provided
genetic counseling and phenotype information for patient #1. JLD, EV, SFN, and WWG participated in the study design and provided clinical
laboratory testing for both cases. FQ-R conceived of the study, and participated in its design and coordination, and the Genomic data board.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript. SPS is the submitting author. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed
here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2350/15/49/prepub Bioinformatic Methods used for Data Analysis of Next Generation Sequencing
Results. Click here for file Sanger sequencing traces confirming de novo variants in the KMT2A gene. Click here for file Primary gene list
for patients 1 and 2. Click here for file Sequencing statistics and variant counts for all individuals. Click here for file Variant table
for patient 1. Click here for file Variant table for patient 2. Click here for file We thank the patients and their families for their
essential contributions to this work. Technical assistance was provided by Nora Warschaw, Traci Toy, Robert Chin, Thien Huynh and Jean Reiss
at the UCLA Molecular Diagnostics Laboratories and all members of the UCLA Clinical Genomics Center. Variant Annotator X (VAX) software was
used with the permission and guidance of its author, Michael Yourshaw and computational assistance was provided by Bret Harry. The Genomics
Data Board at UCLA is a multi-disciplinary body comprised of medical geneticists, genetic counselors, molecular geneticists and
cytogeneticists, bioinformatics specialists, and other physicians and scientists which is responsible for interpreting clinical exome
sequencing results. We would like to thank all participating members of the Genomics Data Board for their vital contributions to this work,
specifically Drs. Kingshuk Das, Cristina Palmer, Ascia Eskin, Sibel Kantarci, and Julian Martinez-Agosto. This work was partially presented
at the American Society of Human genetics annual meeting, in Boston, MA (October 22–26, 2013. Poster #3082 F).
