The A3243G point mutation in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is associated with MELAS (mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and
stroke-like episodes) and MIDD syndromes (maternally inherited diabetes and deafness). Both MELAS and MIDD patients can present with visual
symptoms due to a retinopathy, sometimes before the genetic diagnosis is made. Patient 1: 46 year-old woman with diabetes mellitus and
hearing loss was referred for an unspecified maculopathy detected during screening evaluation for diabetic retinopathy. Visual acuity was
20/20 in both eyes. Fundus examination showed bilateral macular and peripapillary hyperpigmented/depigmented areas. Patient 2: 45 year-old
woman was referred for recent vision loss in her left eye. History was remarkable for chronic fatigue, migraine and diffuse muscular pain.
Visual acuity was 20/20 in her right eye and 20/30 in her left eye. Fundus exhibited several nummular perifoveal islands of retinal pigment
epithelium atrophy and adjacent pale deposits in both eyes. Retinal anatomy was investigated with autofluorescence, retinal angiography and
optical coherence tomography. Retinal function was assessed with automated static perimetry, full-field and multifocal electroretinography
and electro-oculography. Genetic testing of mtDNA identified a point mutation at the locus 3243. Observation of RPE abnormalities in the
context of suggestive systemic findings should prompt mtDNA testing. The A3243G mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) point mutation has been associated
with a wide range of clinical manifestations, including MELAS syndrome (mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and stroke-like
episodes) and MIDD syndrome (maternally inherited diabetes and deafness) . The ocular findings of MELAS include pigmentary retinopathy,
external ophthalmoplegia, ptosis and posterior subcapsular cataract . The main ocular feature in MIDD syndrome is a pigmentary retinal
dystrophy also described as a macular pattern dystrophy . The retinopathies associated with both syndromes have heterogeneous presentations
with variable degrees of retinal pigment epithelium atrophy and hyperpigmentation at the posterior pole . De Laat et al. proposed a
classification system based on 4 grades: fine pigment abnormalities (grade 1), yellowish or mildly pigmented deposits (grade 2),
chorioretinal atrophy outside the fovea (grade 3) and atrophy affecting the fovea (grade 4) . Rath et al. described two distinctive
phenotypes of retinopathy . The first phenotype is characterized by a discontinuous perifoveal atrophy that assumes a circumferential
distribution. With time, the areas of atrophy will coalesce into a ring of pericentral atrophy. Occasionally, pale deposits can be present
at the level of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), the RPE can exhibit a granular appearance, and subretinal pigment clumping can be
found adjacent to the areas of atrophy. The second phenotype is consistent with a pattern dystrophy. It includes granularity of the RPE,
pale deposits and pigment clumping at the level of the RPE, without any significant atrophy. We report two patients with the mtDNA A3243G
point mutation who each presents one of the previously described retinal phenotypes. A 46 year-old woman was referred for an unspecified
maculopathy detected during screening evaluation for diabetic retinopathy. Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus was diagnosed at age 20. The
patient had bilateral sensorineural hearing loss since age 41 and was wearing a hearing aid. Migraine was present since age 26. Family
history revealed that her mother died from stroke at age 43. Five out of six maternal aunts and uncles were affected by diabetes mellitus
and/or hearing loss.Best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes. Fundus examination revealed bilateral hyperpigmented lesions
surrounding the macula and the optic disc, associated with depigmentation areas of the RPE. Fundus autofluorescence (Heidelberg Retina
Angiograph; Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) was characterized by a diffuse speckled appearance of the macula (Figure 1).
Fluorescein angiography displayed a mottled appearance of the posterior pole with adjacent areas of hyper- and hypofluorescence, indicating
defects of the RPE and pigment deposits, respectively. Spectral-Domain Optical Coherence Tomography (SD-OCT, Spectralis, Heidelberg
Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) scans taken through the hyperpigmented lesions showed a hyperreflective dome-shaped change that seemed to
originate from the RPE (Figure 2).Results from automated static perimetry (Octopus 300, program G1, Haag-Streit, USA), scotopic and photopic
full-field electroretinography (ERG) were normal in both eyes. Multifocal ERG (mfERG) showed a moderate and diffuse depression of potentials
in both eyes (Figure 3). Electro-oculogram (EOG) was normal with an Arden ratio of 2.2. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was
unremarkable. Genetic testing of mtDNA identified a point mutation at the locus 3243 with 35% heteroplasmy in leucocytes. Color fundus
photograph and fundus autofluorescence of Patient 1. A, B, Color fundus photograph of patient 1. Note the hyperpigmented lesions surrounding
the macula and the optic disc, associated with depigmentation areas of the retinal pigment epithelium. C, D, Fundus autofluorescence of the
same patient. The hyperpigmented spots correspond to mainly increased autofluorescence, whereas the hypopigmented spots correspond a
decreased granular autofluorescence signal. Fluorescein angiography and SD-OCT of Patient 1. A, B, Fluorescein angiography showed blockage
of background fluorescence in the areas of hyperpigmentation and hyperfluorescence due to retinal pigment epithelium window defects in the
depigmented areas. C, D, On SD-OCT scans taken through the planes indicated by the green arrows, hyperpigmented areas corresponded to a
hyperreflective dome-shaped lesion that seemed to originate from the retinal pigment epithelium (blue arrows). Multifocal ERG in Patient 1.
Multifocal ERG showed a moderate and diffuse depression of amplitudes in both eyes. Dark and light blue rings indicate the 5° and 10°
circles centered by the fovea, respectively. A 45 year-old woman was referred for recent vision loss in her left eye in the context of
unusual retinal findings. She had short stature and hearing difficulties were noticed since age 28. There was no history of diabetes
mellitus. Personal history revealed chronic fatigue, migraine, diffuse muscular pain and episodes of vomiting for the past 3 years. She was
also treated for a depressive state. Family history revealed that her mother suffered from both diabetes mellitus and hearing loss. Her
sister was diagnosed with a psychiatric disorder and suffered from recurring seizures.Best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in her right
eye and 20/30 in her left eye. Fundus examination revealed several circumferential perifoveal islands of atrophy and adjacent pale deposits
in both eyes. Autofluorescence was decreased inside the atrophic areas, and was increased in the areas corresponding to the deposits. The
retina surrounding the atrophic patches demonstrated a speckled autofluorescence (Figure 4). Fluorescein angiography showed window defects
in the area of the atrophy and a blocking effect by the pale deposits. On SD-OCT the central foveal anatomy was relatively preserved, with
parafoveal zones of attenuation of the outer layers corresponding with chorioretinal atrophy zones (Figure 5).Results from automated static
perimetry (Octopus 300, program G1, Haag-Streit, USA) and scotopic and photopic full-field ERG were within normal limits in both eyes.
Multifocal ERG showed slightly decreased potentials in a pericentral zone in both eyes (Figure 6). Electro-oculogram (EOG) was normal with
an Arden ratio of 2.7. Brain MRI was normal. Genetic testing of mtDNA extracted from a muscular biopsy identified a point mutation at the
locus 3243, and demonstrated 71% of heteroplasmy. A diagnosis of MELAS was given. Color fundus photograph and fundus autofluorescence of
Patient 2. A, B, Color fundus photograph of patient 2. Note the circumferential perifoveal patches of atrophy and the adjacent pale
deposits. C, D, Fundus autofluorescence of the same patient showed decreased autofluorescence signal inside the atrophic areas, and
increased signal in the areas corresponding to the deposits, which surrounded both the macula and optic disc. Fluorescein angiography and
SD-OCT of Patient 2. A, B, Fluorescein angiography of the patient 2, showed window defects in the area of the atrophy and a blocking effect
by the pale deposits. C, D, On horizontal OCT scans taken through the planes indicated by the green arrows, the outer retina was markedly
attenuated in the zones of chorioretinal atrophy (yellow arrows). Multifocal ERG in Patient 2. Multifocal ERG showed slightly decreased
amplitudes in a pericentral zone outside the central 5°, in both eyes. Dark and light blue rings indicate the 5° and 10° circles centered by
the fovea, respectively. We report two patients harboring the mtDNA A3243G point mutation who exhibited two different retinal phenotypes.
Namely, the degree of RPE changes was significantly different between our two patients. According to existing studies, whether the various
retinal findings associated with this mtDNA point mutation are different evolutive stages or correspond to distinct phenotypes is not fully
understood. Diagnosis suspicion of MIDD or MELAS relies on the association of characteristic retinal and systemic abnormalities, in a
context of maternal inheritance. Yet, mutation carriers can present a wide range of retinal phenotypes, and sometimes minimal or absent
systemic findings. As a consequence, characterization of retinal features is crucial for optimal diagnosis and management. Main differential
diagnoses include: late-onset Stargardt disease, multifocal pattern dystrophy, central areolar choroidal dystrophy and age-related macular
degeneration. Late-onset Stargardt disease presents in patients over 50 years of age with hyperautofluorescent flavimaculatus flecks and
relative foveal and peripapillar sparing . Flecks appear on SD-OCT as hyperreflective irregular thickening of the RPE similar to the
deposits seen in mtDNA A3243G retinopathy, as in Patient 2. However, these patients exhibit a characteristic ‘dark choroid’ on fluorescein
angiography and have recessive autosomal inheritance of ABCA4 mutations. In multifocal pattern dystrophy simulating Stargardt disease, size
and distribution of flecks are similar to Stargardt disease; yet these patients always display foveal involvement ranging from yellow-
grayish deposits to atrophic lesions, and do not have a ‘dark choroid’ on fluorescein angiography . Central areolar choroidal dystrophy
should be considered because of the wide and well-circumscribed central patch of atrophy, that usually starts outside the fovea inside a
hypopigmented area, and widens until it involves the whole macular area. Flecks are absent, but drusen-like lesions may be observed on
fundus examination . Both multifocal pattern dystrophy and central areolar choroidal dystrophy are associated with mutations of the PRPH2
gene with autosomal dominant inheritance. Finally, age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the most frequent cause of atrophic maculopahy
in older age and presents drusen that can resemble deposits seen in patients with mtDNA A3243G mutations. In addition, earing difficulties
and diabetes are also more frequent among older patients. However, in AMD drusen are located beneath the RPE on SD-OCT, are less
hyperautofluorescent, more coalescent and located more centrally than in mtDNA A3243G retinopathy. Moreover, in AMD atrophy emanates either
from these drusen or from an RPE detachment or tear. Mitochondrial disorders lead to a decreased production of ATP. The failure to meet the
cellular energetic needs will result in a clinical specific phenotype depending on the affected cells. The clinical spectrum of
mitochondrial disorders is broad. However, tissues with a high metabolic demand are typically affected . An outer retinopathy could result
from a primary dysfunction of the photoreceptors, a primary dysfunction of the RPE, or a dysfunction of both retinal layers. The RPE is
responsible for maintenance of photoreceptor function through continuous phagocytosis, recycling, and nourishment of outer segments. The
photoreceptors are constantly degraded and resynthesized, and contain clusters of mitochondria within their inner segments . Whether these
two cell layers are equally susceptible to the effects of the A3243G mtDNA mutation, or whether the photoreceptor damage is a consequence of
the RPE disease, is not known. In Patient 1, results of mfERG showed a diffuse but moderate decrease in amplitudes, whereas Patient 2
exhibited an annular slight decrease in amplitudes, outside the central 5° in which amplitudes were normal. As mfERG represents mostly a
photopic response, we can presume that Patient 1 suffered from a moderate but diffuse central cone dysfunction, roughly corresponding to the
macular lesion visible on autofluorescence, whereas the annular decrease of mfERG in Patient 2 resulted from the pericentral zones of
atrophy. Abnormalities in mfERG suggesting a damage in the cone photoreceptor outer segments have already been described in MIDD patients .
RPE function can be assessed by EOG. The two patients described herein have normal EOG. Abnormal EOGs have been reported in approximately a
third of patients, and seem more frequent in patients with advanced disease. Remarkably, reported Arden ratios are only slightly diminished
. These contradictory findings do not provide further insight into the possible etiology of the disease but indicate that the function of
the RPE is either normal or slightly diminished in patients with mtDNA A3243G mutations. Rummelt et al. described retinal histopathologic
findings in a patient with MELAS and severe retinal dystrophy . At the posterior pole, RPE cells were depleted of apical microvilli,
melanosomes and phagosomes, and contained abnormal mitochondria. Mitochondria in the inner photoreceptor segments were also abnormal and the
outer segments were atrophic. Retinal pigment epithelium and photoreceptor cells in the retinal periphery were unaffected. The two cases
presented here illustrate that the severity of systemic and ocular phenotypes could be related. Indeed, both retinal and systemic
manifestations were milder in Patient 1 than in Patient 2. Patient 1 might then represent a milder form of A3243G-associated disease.
Variability of phenotypes associated with mtDNA mutations is well recognized . Such a variation in the phenotypic appearance is presumed to
be a consequence of the variable proportions of mutated and normal mtDNA between patients, but also between different tissues within a
single individual. This is a characteristic feature of mitochondrial disease known as heteroplasmy. In this study, heteroplasmy was higher
in Patient 2 than in Patient 1. However, the direct comparison of these percentages is not appropriate since they originate from muscle and
leucocytes, respectively. Latvala et al. evaluated 26 patients with A3443G mtDNA mutation and correlated the presence of RPE abnormalities
to the severity of the systemic phenotypes . They showed that both the severity of the systemic disease and the degree of mutant
heteroplasmy in muscle correlate positively with RPE abnormalities. The risk of RPE abnormalities was almost 3-fold higher in patients who
harbored >68% mutant heteroplasmy in muscle compared to those below these limits. Hence, RPE abnormalities appear to be a retinal
manifestation associated with more severe disease phenotypes. De Laat et al. analyzed 25 patients with the A3243G mutation and retinal
abnormalities . The retinal abnormalities were classified into four grades of severity, from fine pigment abnormalities to profound
chorioretinal atrophy. The severity of retinal dystrophy was not correlated with heteroplasmy levels measured in the urinary epithelial
cells, leukocytes and buccal saliva. There were no correlation between the severity of the retinal dystrophy and the overall disease
involvement. These results are in contradiction with the study by Latvala et al. in which, remarkably, heteroplasmy was assessed from muscle
biopsies in all patients. Smith et al. found that among 13 subjects with MIDD, pigmentary retinal dystrophy and abnormal ERG findings were
more frequent in patients over 40 years of age and in those with diabetes duration longer than 5 years . In this study the presence of
systemic features of A3243G disease in all patients with retinal dystrophy, and the comparatively mild phenotypes of two subjects with no
retinal disease, also support the hypothesis of a correlation between systemic and ocular phenotypes as a consequence of heteroplasmy.
However, age and duration of diabetes were not correlated with severity of the retinal pigment abnormalities. Further, Massin et al.
analyzed 33 patients with MIDD, and found no significant correlation between severity of macular dystrophy and patients’ age or duration of
diabetes (Table 1) . RPE changes in patients with A3243G mtDNA point mutation and correlation with systemic disease MIDD = maternally
inherited diabetes and deafness; MELAS = mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes; DM = diabetes
mellitus. Finally, characteristics of the mtDNA-A3243G-associated retinopathy are variable and must be distinguished from related findings
exhibited by other retinal conditions as retinal dystrophies and AMD. Association of systemic features and maternal inheritance should
contribute to sharpen the diagnosis. Yet, the correlation between retinal and systemic phenotypes is not clear. Identification of the mtDNA
mutation confirms the diagnosis. However, up to 15% of false negative blood tests have been reported, which is explained by the heteroplasmy
affecting mtDNA . As a consequence, genetic testing should be repeated on other tissues (urinary epithelial cells, buccal mucosa or muscle)
in cases of strong clinical suspicion with previous non-contributive mutation search. Variable degrees of RPE changes are observed among
patients with the A3243G mtDNA mutation. The correlation of theses findings with the systemic involvement remains unclear. Observation of
RPE abnormalities in the context of suggestive systemic findings should prompt mtDNA testing. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patients for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor of this journal. ERG: Electroretinography; MELAS: Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes;
MIDD: Maternally-inherited diabetes and deafness; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging; mfERG: Multifocal electroretinography; mtDNA:
Mitochondrial DNA; RPE: Retinal pigment epithelium; SD-OCT: Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography. The authors declare that they have
no competing interests. AD: data collection, analysis and interpretation of data, review of the literature and manuscript draft. AM:
acquisition of data and help to draft the manuscript. F-XB: acquisition of data, coordination, clinical advice and critical revisions. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2415/14/77/prepub We thank Dr Patrizia Tschuor for her assistance in data collection.
