Leprosy skin lesions are described as hypochromic or erythematous macules, pale erythematous or reddish-brown plaques, papules, nodules, and
diffuse cutaneous infiltration, depending on the clinical form of the disease. They may be accompanied by hypo or anesthesia, alopecia, and
hypo or anhidrosis. Verrucous lesions are now quite uncommon in leprosy. The literature is sparse, with only 25 reported cases of this
association, especially in the lepromatous pole of the disease. This work is a report on two cases of lepromatous leprosy of long evolution,
coursing with vegetant verrucous lesions. Leprosy is a chronic granulomatous infection caused by Mycobacterium leprae, an intracytoplasmic
parasite of macrophages and Schwann cells, with a predilection primarily for peripheral nerves, and secondarily for the skin and internal
organs. Disease progression is slow and its clinical form depends on specific host immunity, ranging from the higher resistance pole
(tuberculoid), the lower resistance pole (lepromatous) and spectra of the disease with intermediate immunity resistance (borderline
leprosy).1,2 Leprosy skin lesions are described as hypochromic or erythematous macules, pale erythematous or reddish-brown plaques, papules,
nodules, or diffuse cutaneous infiltration, depending on the clinical form of the disease. They may be accompanied by hypo or anesthesia,
alopecia, and hypo or anhidrosis.1,2 Verrucous lesions are now quite uncommon in leprosy. The literature is sparse, with only 25 reported
cases of this association, especially in the lepromatous pole of the disease.3-9 This work is a report on two cases of lepromatous leprosy
of long evolution, coursing with vegetant verrucous lesions. CASE 1: Female, 80 years old, presented verrucous plaques on both feet, with
recurrent impetiginization associated with burning pain, for 4 years. Referred dysphagia with progressive weight loss for 15 years, "dropped
nose" for 10 years and bilateral amaurosis for 8 years. Showed madarosis, bilateral nasal collapse, no left eyeball and complete corneal
opacity in the right eye, generalized cutaneous infiltration and vegetant verrucous plaques on feet and legs, associated with hard edema and
dystrophic nails (Figures 1 and 2). Showed positive bacilloscopy and histopathological examination of vegetant lesion revealed
pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia, dermal infiltrate composed of vacuolated histiocytes containing numerous globi of intact fast-acid
bacilli, with no changes in lymphatic vessels (Figure 3). Search and culture for bacteria and fungi were negative in the fragment. There was
improvement of the lesions after initiation of multidrug therapy. Verrucous plaques on the insteps of the feet and distal extremities of the
legs Verrucous plaques on the insteps of the feet and distal extremities of the legs (lateral view) Dermal infiltrate composed of vacuolated
histiocytes containing numerous globi of intact fast-acid bacilli, with no changes in lymphatic vessels (Fite-Faraco stain, 400X) CASE 2:
Female, 41 years old, with vegetant verrucous lesions on the lower limbs, elbows and ears with mild madarosis and bilateral leg hypoesthesia
for 3 years (Figures 4 and 5). Bacilloscopy was highly positive. Histopathological examinarion of verrucous lesion showed
pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia, hyperkeratosis, hypergranulosis and spinous layer with areas of acanthosis and atrophy, with no
vacuolization and numerous fast-acid bacilli globi (Figure 6). Verrucous lesions on the knees Verrucous lesions on the feet and distal third
of the leg Epidermal hyperkeratosis with hypergranulosis and spinous layer with areas of acanthosis and atrophy, with no vacuolization and
numerous fast-acid bacilli globi (Fite-Faraco stain, 400X) The first reference to verrucous lesions in leprosy was made by Babes at the 1st
International Conference on Leprosy, in 1897.10 Souza-Araujo, in 1937, described three cases of lepromatous leprosy with verrucous lesions,
which he denominated "leprous verrucous dermatitis".5 In the same year, Baptista reported a similar case, using the name "verrucous
leproma".6 In 1939, Braga described two cases, adopting the same denomination as Baptista.7 All these patients had multibacillary leprosy
with biopsies demonstrating large amounts of bacilli. In 1938, Ramos and Silva reported a case of pure neural leprosy that developed a
verrucous plaque, the histopathological examination of which did not reveal the presence of bacilli, calling it "verrucous leprosy".9 In
1967, Pimenta, Mello and Campos described a case of tuberculoid leprosy reaction with warty lesions on the face.4 Patki described 15 cases
and classified the lesions into three morphologic features: (i) lesions having finger-like projections, and resembling filiform warts, (ii)
thick horn-like projections, and (iii) hyperkeratosis and deep transverse fissures corresponding to the skin creases on the anterior aspects
of the ankles.8 Recently, Chang and Choi reported a lepromatous leprosy case with a verrucous plaque on the ankle, initially diagnosed as
verrucous carcinoma that, histopathologically, showed an absence of epidermal atypia and presence of foamy histiocytes with great amount of
acid-fast bacilli globi.2 Finally, Yuchua-Guillen and Dofitas described a lepromatous leprosy patient with multiple verrucous nodules on the
lower extremities that, after exhaustive investigation, had their etiology attributed to Mycobacterium leprae.3 Although there are few
documented cases, vegetant verrucous lesions were relatively common in the past, in hospitalized patients with multibacillary leprosy who,
through repeated episodes of erysipela, developed lymphatic impairment and elephantiasis, resulting in the appearance classically described
as "mossy foot". However, in the reported cases, no changes were observed in lymphatic vessels upon histopathological examination and the
location of the lesions in the second case does not support this diagnosis. Given the high endemicity of the infection in our region,
leprosy should be included in the differential diagnosis of the verrucous syndrome, including paracoccidioidomycosis, leishmaniasis,
sporotrichosis, cutaneous tuberculosis, and especially chromomycosis of long evolution. It is concluded that leprosy may rarely manifest
with verrucous lesions, especially in the lepromatous pole of the disease, suggesting advanced disease.2-5,7,8 It is considered that the
verrucous lesions are an uncommon cutaneous manifestation and not a distinct variant of the disease.6 Etiology is uncertain, but sensory
loss, hypo or anhidrosis and inappropriate footwear, are factors that tend to be present.8 Conflict of interest: None Financial funding:
None Work performed at the Departamento de Dermatologia do Hospital Universit√°rio da Universidade Federal do Mato Grosso do Sul (UFMS) -
Campo Grande (MS), Brazil. How to cite this article: Medeiros MZ, Hans-Filho G, Takita LC, Vicari CFS, Barbosa AB, Couto DV. Verrucous
lepromatous leprosy: a rare form of presentation - Report on two cases. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(3):481-4.
