A 48-year-old male patient with chronic alcoholism presented with a soft, bulky, asymptomatic, and slow-growing mass in the posterior region
of the neck, as well as nodules in the deltoid region and posterior triangle of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Needle aspiration confirmed
the diagnosis of lipoma. Multiple symmetric lipomatosis (Madelung's disease) is a rare proliferation of adipocytes, of unknown etiology,
most common in middle-aged men and mainly associated with alcoholism. It predominantly affects the neck and upper trunk, causing compressive
symptoms or a imparting a pseudoathletic appearance. Surgical resection or liposuction is the most effective treatment, despite frequent
recurrence. A 48-year-old black male with chronic alcoholism presented with a soft, bulky mass lesion in the posterior region of the neck.
According to the patient, the mass had grown slowly and progressively over the course of 5 years, with later development of similar nodules
in the upper trunk. The patient sought care at the dermatology service with a chief complaint of recent weight loss, muscle weakness,
ataxia, confusion, and loss of orientation to place and time. Physical examination revealed a bulky tumor in the posterior neck, with no
defined borders on palpation. Other nodular lesions were present bilaterally in the deltoid, trapezius, and quadratus regions and in the
posterior triangle of the sternocleidomastoid (Figures 1 and 2). Symmetrically distributed cervicothoracic nodules and masses Occipital
nodules and bulky cervical and suprascapular masses, in stark contrast to the patient’s emaciated trunk Histopathological examination of a
needle aspiration specimen confirmed the diagnosis of lipoma. A systemic workup revealed no metabolic changes, only anemia and mild
elevation of liver enzyme levels. Abdominal ultrasound was within normal limits. A CT scan of the chest revealed an extensive mass isodense
to fat in the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid regions, with no infiltration of adjacent structures (Figure 3). Surgical treatment was
deferred in view of the patient's clinical condition. Computed tomography scan of the chest. Transverse section obtained at the level of the
clavicle, showing an extensive mass isodense to fat in the posterior neck, trapezius, and deltoid regions, with no evidence of infiltration
of adjacent structutres Multiple symmetric lipomatosis (MSL) was first reported by Brodie (1846), while Madelung (1888) described the
typical cervical distribution. Its pathogenesis remains unknown. It is characterized by proliferation of brown adipocytes due to a defect in
adrenergic-regulated lipolysis, leading to disordered hypertrophy and hyperplasia. There is evidence of mitochondrial abnormalities and
genetic translocations in chromosomes 12 and 3.1-3 Approximately 300 cases have been reported in the literature. It is most frequent in
adult (age 30-60 years) males (with a 20:1 predominance), and is comorbid with alcoholism in 60-90% of cases.4,5 MSL may present as one of
two phenotypes. In type 1 (Madelung's disease), lipomatosis is well-circumscribed, forming nonencapsulated masses distributed symmetrically
across the upper body. Cervicothoracic lesions take on a "horse collar" appearance, whereas masses in the posterior neck and upper back
resemble a "buffalo hump" or kyphosis.1,2 Type 2 (Launois-Bensaude syndrome) affects both sexes equally, and is associated with a gynoid fat
deposition pattern, with masses affecting the thighs and hips as well as the upper back and deltoid region, imparting a pseudoathletic or
obese appearance.1,6 The natural history of MSL is variable. Masses grow rapidly within a few years of onset and stabilize thereafter.
Ethanol consumption appears to potentiate the development of lesions in genetically predisposed patients, by downregulation of adrenergic
receptors and inhibition of alpha oxidation of adipose tissue, leading to a decline in lipolysis and increase in lipogenesis.4,6,7
Associations with hyperlipidemia, thyroid dysfunction, hypogonadism, and diabetes have been reported, as well as with myoclonus, cerebellar
ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, and proximal myopathy. Diagnosis is clinical, based on the characteristic presentation. However, imaging may
be performed to diagnose the extent of the lesions, assess potential involvement of the mediastinal cavity, and aid surgical planning. The
histopathological appearance of MSL lesions is indistinguishable from normal adipose tissue, but adipocytes are smaller and multivacuolated,
with slight interstitial fibrosis and acid proteoglycan deposition.8,9 A multidisciplinary treatment approach is required, with cessation of
alcohol intake to slow the progression of the disease and decrease postoperative recurrence rates; management of comorbidities; and
lipectomy or liposuction. Lesions tend to recur because the plane of dissection is poorly individualized. Surgical resection is indicated in
cases of cosmetic deformity or compressive symptoms (such as difficulty breathing).8,10 Use of hypolipidemic agents such as fibrates has
been reported, with varying results.1,10 Prognosis is good. Complications of alcoholism are the leading cause of mortality. Conflict of
Interests: None. Financial Support: None. How to cite this article: Orasmo CR, Ocanha JP, Barraviera SRC, Miot HA. Do you know this
syndrome? Madelung's disease. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(3):525-6. Work performed at the Department of Dermatology and Radiotherapy,
Faculdade de Medicina de Botucatu - Universidade Estadual Paulista "Júlio de Mesquita Filho" (UNESP) - Botucatu (SP), Brazil.
