Confluent and reticulated papillomatosis of Gougerot and Carteaud is a dermatosis that despite showing characteristic clinical signs is
often poorly recognized and diagnosed. The authors present a case with extensive skin involvement, discuss its association with obesity and
describe dermoscopic findings making the histopathological correlation. Confluent and reticulated papillomatosis (CRP) of Gougerot-Carteaud
is characterized by the presence of brown, spotted, warty papules measuring about 5 mm in diameter that coalesce in the center and have a
peripheral reticulate pattern, usually forming plaques often desquamative and with imprecise limits.1,2,3 It is more frequent among the
female sex, nonwhite race, and overweighted individuals, occurring most usually around the second or third decades of life. The lesions are
located in the inter-scapular, epigastric and intermammary regions, sparing, in general, the mucosae and palmoplantar areas.1,3 In extensive
cases it may affect the neck, shoulders, axillae and pubic areas.1 The differential diagnosis is made mostly with acanthosis nigricans and
pityriasis versicolor.1,2,3 However, because of their similar and overlapping clinical features, some authors consider PCR and acanthosis
nigricans as one spectrum of the same entity.2 Dermoscopy is a noninvasive and quick auxiliary method that allows the correlation of
structures, which are not visible to the naked eye, with histopathological examination of the lesions, thus being an increasingly common
tool in clinical practice.4 Hence, we present an extensive case of PCR that evolved with significant reduction of lesions after the patient
adopted measures to control his weight, including physical activity and diet, and we also describe dermoscopic findings of lesions and their
histopathological correlation. Thirty-six year-old male patient reported the presence of desquamative and pruritic hypertrophic lesions on
the trunk and back for the last 14 years. He related several treatments with topical medications, without satisfactory results. The patient
denied comorbidities and was not using any medication at that moment. Dermatological examination showed macules and papules with a velvety
and scaly surface, converging centrally and with a peripheral reticulate pattern (Figure 1). The patient presented axillary, cervical and
pubic hyperpigmentation. Weight: 98 kg. Height: 1.78 m. BMI: 30.9 (obesity class I). Dermoscopy evidenced a brownish pigmentation of poorly
defined borders, covered with white scales and a pattern of "sulci and gyri" (Figure 2). Direct mycological examination of the lesion was
negative and culture did not show fungi growth. Lesion biopsy on the dorsal area demonstrated mild parakeratosis, compact hyperkeratosis,
hyperpigmentation of the basal layer, papillomatosis and superficial perivascular mononuclear infiltrate (Figures 3 and 4). PAS staining was
negative. Diagnosis of confluent and reticulated papillomatosis of Gougerot and Carteaud was established and weight loss was initially
suggested. The patient returned after 45 days presenting a significant reduction in the number of lesions (Figure 5). (A-B) Macules and
papules of velvety and desquamative surface, centrally confluent and with a peripheral reticulate pattern Brownish coloration with
poorlydefined borders, covered in white scales and “sulci and gyri” pattern Discreet parakeratosis, compact hyperkeratosis, basal layer
hyperpigmentation, papillomatosis and superficial perivascular mononuclear infiltrate Higher magnification showing in detail parakeratosis,
compact hyperkeratosis, papillomatosis and pronounced irregular hyperpigmentation of the basal layer Significant reduction in the number of
lesions 45 days after adopting weight loss measures PCR is a rare disease, often underdiagnosed by dermatologists. Its cause is unknown.2,3
Associations with endocrine disorders, such as obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus, hirsutism, Cushing's syndrome, menstrual abnormalities,
and thyroid dysfunction have been suggested, however endocrinopathy is not a sine qua non condition for the development of the disease. Some
authors also advocate connections with vitamin A deficiency, genetic factors, photosensitivity, cutaneous amyloidosis, tissue reaction to
skin colonization by lipophilic yeasts of genus Malassezia, staphylococci or Propionibacterium acnes, and especially keratinization
defects.1-3 Body mass index (BMI) is a rapid and easy method for evaluating the optimal weight of individuals and also an international
predictor of obesity adopted by the World Health Organization (WHO) (Table 1).5 Obesity is recognized as a multifactorial disease that
predisposes to several other comorbidities, particularly cardiovascular illnesses.6 In dermatology, it is markedly associated to acanthosis
nigricans, psoriasis, and hidradenitis suppurativa, among others.6-9 We emphasize its connection to CRP and highlight the improvement of
this dermatosis with weight control measures. Obesity classification according to body mass index (BMI) After a dermoscopic-
histopathological correlation, the authors propose that the appearance of brownish pigmentation with poorly defined edges, covered with
white scales would correspond to basal layer hyperpigmentation, parakeratosis, compact hyperkeratosis, and that the aspect of "sulci and
gyri" (depressions and elevations) would correspond to papillomatosis. PCR treatment is often frustrating, because there is the possibility
that it may not respond properly, and also the recurrence of symptoms that may occur after therapy discontinuation. Usually therapeutic
success is not achieved with monotherapy and the rates of dissatisfaction are very expressive.1,2,3,10 Several drugs used in the treatment
of PCR are described in chart 1 and they present varying response rates. Medications used in topic and systemic treatment of CRP Because our
case depicts an exuberant clinical form of confluent and reticulated papillomatosis of Gougerot-Carteaud, the clinical improvement of
lesions after weight loss and also for demonstrating the standard "sulci and gyri" at dermoscopy, it constitutes a relevant publication.
Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None Work performed at Professor Rubem David Azulay Dermatology Institute - Hospital Santa
Casa da Misericórdia do Rio de Janeiro (IDPRDA - SCMRJ) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil. How to cite this article: Bernardes Filho F, Quaresma
MV, Rezende FC, Kac BK, Nery JAC, Azulay-Abulafia L. Confluent and reticulate papillomatosis of Gougerot-Carteaud and obesity: dermoscopic
findings. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(3):507-9.
