Percutaneous device closure for secundum atrial septal defects (ASDs) has been performed commonly and safely with high success rates.
However, it is still challenging to close ASDs that are surrounded with deficient or hypermobile rims and could be compromised with an
unexpected migration of device. We report a case of percutaneous Amplazter Septal Occluder (ASO; St. Jude Medical Inc., St. Paul, Minnesota,
USA) device closure for an ASD with a thin and floppy interatrial septum, which immediately migrated into the right atrium and was not
pulled back into the delivery sheath. To our knowledge, this is the first report on a successful percutaneous retrieval and redeployment of
the device in such a situation, preventing any vascular injury or unplanned emergency open heart surgery. The Amplazter Septal Occluder
(ASO; St. Jude Medical Inc., St. Paul, Minnesota, USA) has been widely used to occlude secundum atrial septal defects (ASDs) (1, 2). ASO
migration or embolization after deployment is rare, with a reported rate ranging from 0.5% to 3% (3, 4), and it occurs more frequently in
cases of ASD without sufficient surrounding rims. Once it arises it may lead to an emergency surgical approach, however the unique design of
the ASO allows for retrieval of the migrated device percutaneously. Herein, we report a case of percutaneous retrieval of a migrated ASO
into the right atrium and its successful redeployment without any complications. A 45-yr-old woman with no previous illnesses presented with
exercise intolerance on 7th March 2013. Physical examination showed a normal blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg with a regular heart rate of 68
beats/min and an oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. Cardiac auscultation revealed the fixed splitting second heart sound. An oval-shaped
secundum-type ASD with a left-to-right shunt was detected on transthoracic echocardiography (TTE). The defect size was 12 mm√ó18 mm on
3D-transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), which was surrounded with thin, floppy interatrial septum (IAS) and deficient aortic rim (Fig.
1A-C). On cardiac catheterization, the calculated Qp/Qs and Rp/Rs were 1.88 and 0.03, respectively. We decided to close the defect
percutaneously with the ASO under TEE and fluoroscopic guidance. Since the balloon stretched diameter was 19 mm, we chose a 20 mm-sized ASO.
The device was loaded onto an 8-French (Fr) delivery system (AGA Medical, Golden Valley, Minnesota, USA) and advanced into the left atrium.
At first, improper alignment of the ASO with the plane of IAS and the flimsy rim prohibited the left atrial (LA) disc from holding the
inferior rim firmly, resulting in herniation into the right atrium. To overcome these difficulties, we used the left upper pulmonary vein
technique; opened the LA disc partially in the left upper pulmonary vein and released the waist and the right atrial (RA) disc quickly
before the alignment of the system changed significantly. With this maneuver we could place the ASO in a proper position confirmed by
2D-TEE. We performed the "Minnesota wiggle" to ensure a firm position of the device. However, the 3D-TEE just after detachment of the ASO
from the delivery cable noted that the device settled in an oblique position with its superior portion prolapsing into the right atrium
(Fig. 1D). Although more than 75% of the rim was trapped by the discs, it was slipping down into the right atrium with the heart movements,
resulting in a left-to-right shunt (Fig. 1E). Given the high risk of migration, we captured the device using a GooseNeck snare (St. Jude
Medical, Sylmar, CA, USA) with surgical backup. We paid special attention not to lose the accessibility to the snared ASO. The attempt to
reposition the prolapsed part of the disc using a 7-Fr internal mammary catheter via another approach through femoral vein was failed. The
device completely migrated into the right atrium but still was held on to the snare (Fig. 2A). We pulled back the snared ASO into the
femoral vein because the 8-Fr delivery sheath could not accommodate it. At that position, the delivery sheath was replaced by a 12-Fr
femoral sheath through which the device was re-snared and retrieved (Fig. 2B). The device was remounted on the cable and the defect was
closed successfully in the same manner (Fig. 1F, 2C). The patient was discharged uneventfully on the next day. The occluder has been in the
correct position without a residual shunt on Doppler echocardiography at 30 days after the procedure. The overall incidence of ASD occluder
complications has been reported as ranging from 5.2% to 8.6% (1). Among them, device embolization or migration are the most frequent major
complications with an incidence from 0.5% to 3% (2). A deficient aortic rim and a thin and floppy posterior rim have been known as the
causative factors for migration (5). One of the solutions to this problem is slight oversizing - that is, using a device 2 to 4 mm larger
than the stretched diameter. However, because of concerns about erosion, we selected a just 1 mm larger device in this case. (6). Although
we could achieve an acceptable position wherein more than 75% of the rim was trapped around the defect, the hypermobile atrial septum could
not offer enough support for device stabilization, leading to migration. Once it is migrated, adjusting the device into a safe position to
prevent further embolization is the first key step. It can be achieved by supporting with some devices including stiff wire or bioptome for
stabilization and snare loop, tulip shaped snare, basket or alligator clamps to grab the device (4, 7, 8). When this step is failed or not
suitable, an emergency surgical correction should be considered. If the device is recaptured again, it can be retrieved into the delivery
sheath and this procedure could be done more easily with use of a 2-Fr sizes larger sheath than the recommended size for device delivery. We
believe that when it is difficult to pull back the snared device into the delivery sheath and size of the device is considered suitable
enough not to cause vascular or any surrounding structural injuries, it is prudent to place the device in the femoral vein, from where it
can be easily retrieved through another large-sized femoral sheath, as in the present case. Our case demonstrated several points: 1) 3D-TEE
can provide additional information on the anatomic relationship between the device and the ASD; 2) the device slipping in one portion and
sitting on a floppy septum should be rectified, and 3) moving the migrated device into the femoral vein could be an alternative method for a
safe retrieval in such a situation for the moderate sized ASO. Echocardiographic findings. (A) 3D multi-planar reconstruction (MPR) view
showed inferior and superior vena cava (SVC) rims. (B) While aortic rim was almost absent, posterior rim seemed to be sufficient but was
thin and floopy. (C) On the view from right atrium (RA), an oval-shaped, secundum-type atrial septal defect (*) was shown in this 3D MPR
image. (D) Just after device deployment, 3D transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed the oblique settlement of the device with its
superior portion slipping into the RA. (E) Remnant shunt flow at the side of SVC rim was noted in color doppler image. (F) The successfully
closed defect with the device was shown in this 3D-TEE image. IVC, inferior vena cava; SVC, superior vena cava; LA, left atrium; RA, right
atrium; ASO, Amplater Septal Occluder. Fluoroscopic findings during procedure. (A) The GooseNeck snare captured the screw on the right
atrial side of the device. (B) After femoral sheath change into the larger one, the device was jammed into the sheath and was removed. (C)
Subsequently, the same device was deployed successfully. TEE, transesophageal echocardiography; ASO, Amplatzer Septal Occluder.
