Eccrine syringofibroadenoma is a rare benign neoplasia derived from acrosyryngium cells of the eccrine sudoriferous glands. It affects the
extremities of elderly individuals as solitary tumors, or may also present as multiple lesions. There are controversies about the
pathogenesis and differentiation of the tumor. Eccrine syringofibroadenoma has been associated with subjacent conditions, such as for
example, hypohidrotic ectodermic dysplasias. The authors describe a case report of a patient with Clouston Syndrome, who presented papules
and nodules in extremities, clinically and histologically compatible with eccrine syringofibroadenoma. There are only three cases described
in the literature, associated with Clouston Syndrome, and this is the fourth case. Congenital hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, also knows
as Clouston Syndrome, is a rare autosomal dominant genodermatosis characterized by nail dystrophy, alopecia and palmoplantar
hyperkeratosis.1 Eccrine syringofibroadenoma (ESFA) is a rare neoplasm, that originates from acrosyryngium cells of the eccrine sudoriferous
glands. It was described in 1963 by Mascaro, being classified as a hamartoma. Clinical presentation is variable, non-specific, varying from
single lesions on extremities of the elderly to papules and nodules.2 When multiple, ESFA may be associated with diabetes mellitus or
hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasias. Clouston syndrome associated with ESFA was described in only 3 previous cases.3,4 Therefore the authors'
proposal is to describe a clinical case of ESFA in a patient carrying Clouston syndrome. Female patient, 41 years old, of mixed race, from
Tremedal, Bahia, came to the dermatology ambulatory reporting that since birth she had not had hair anywhere in her body besides nail
dystrophy and palmoplantar hyperkeratosis (Figures 1 and 2). She denied previous history of cutaneous neoplasms, dental abnormalities,
intolerance to heat or other significant medical problems and also informed that two of her siblings presented similar symptoms. Clinical
aspect of alopecia A. clinical aspect of nail dystrophy; B. clinical aspect of palmar hyperkeratosis She reports that for 10 years
coalescent papules and nodules of pinkish color, verrucous aspect appeared on her feet and hands, growing in number and size with time. She
denied pain, burning sensation or bleeding at the site of the cutaneous lesions. During physical examination the presence of coalescent
pinkish papules was noticed, forming plaques with cobblestone aspect on the feet, besides alopecia and nail dystrophy. Laboratory exams were
normal. The possible differential diagnoses of cutaneous lesions included diffuse eccrine poromatosis, plane warts, Clouston Syndrome,
pachyonychia congenita and other forms of ectodermal dysplasias (Figure 3). A. Clinical aspect of lesions demonstrating coalescent pinkish
papules forming plaques with cobblestone aspect on feet; B. Clinical aspect of lesions demonstrating coalescent pinkish papules forming
plaques with cobblestone aspect on feet An incisional biopsy of the right foot lesion was performed, which revealed thin cords of
anastomosed epithelial cells in continuity with the epidermis. The cords were composed of round and oval nucleated cells. Luminal structures
which varied in size were also found, whose walls contained a single layer of cells. These findings were compatible with the diagnosis of
ESFA (Figure 4). PCR for HPV 10 was negative. Histopathologica l exam revealing thin cords of anastomosed epithelial cells in continuity
with the epidermis. Cords composed of round nucleated cells, luminal structures which vary in size and walls with a single layer of cells.
(HE, 40X) ESFA was described in 1963 by Mascaro as a rare benign cutaneous disorder with eccrine differentiation.5 It is characterized by
the presence of anastomoses of thin epithelial cell cords embedded in a fibrovascular stroma.6 Clinical presentation varies from solitary
lesions to multiple papules, nodules and plaques. Although it occurs more frequently between the seventh and eighth decades of life, it can
occur in younger patients.4 Complications include an association with Squamous Cell Carcinoma and malignant transformation into eccrine
syringofibrocarcinoma.7 There are several etiological factors associated with the development of syringofibroadenoma, among them the HPV
type 10.3 This type of tumor may appear in patients with Clouston syndrome, but it is a rare event, with only 3 cases described in the
literature.4 Ectodermal dysplasias are heterogeneous, hereditary disorders, characterized by hindered development of epidermal appendages,
which involve one or more of the following tissues: hair, teeth, nails or sweat glands. More than 170 syndromes have been characterized; of
such, 30 were evaluated at the molecular level with identification of the causing gene. Clouston syndrome is an ectodermal dysplasia caused
by mutations in the connexin gene, autosomal dominant, with no sex differences.8 The clinical characteristics of this syndrome include nail
dystrophy, alopecia and palmoplantar hyperkeratosis. Although the association of this syndrome with ESFA has been described, it is rare. In
a study with 45 individuals affected by Clouston syndrome, none of them was identified as presenting ESFA, emphasizing the relative rarity
of this clinical phenomenon.9 In the present case, the exuberance and rarity of cutaneous lesions were the reasons for its description.
Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None Work performed at Universidade Estadual do Sudoeste da Bahia (UESB) - Jequi√© (BA),
Brazil. How to cite this article: Andrade ACDV, Vieira DC, Harris OMO, Pithon MM. Clouston syndrome associated with eccrine
syringofibroadenoma. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(3):504-6.
