T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma comprises approximately 85-90% of all lymphoblastic lymphomas. It often arises as a mediastinal mass, and with
bone marrow involvement. Presentation at other sites without nodal or mediastinal localization is uncommon. We describe clinical,
histologic, immunohistochemical, and molecular features of two cases of primary T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma arising respectively in
uterine corpus and testis. The tumors were composed by medium to large cells, exhibiting a diffuse pattern of growth but sometimes forming
indian files or pseudo-rosettes. The neoplastic cells strongly expressed TdT and T-cell markers in both uterine corpus and testis. However,
the testis case also showed aberrant expression of B-cell markers, thus molecular biology was necessary to achieve a final diagnosis. T-cell
receptor gene rearrangement analysis identified a T-cell origin. To the best of our knowledge, only one doubtful previous case of primary
uterine T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma and no previous cases of primary testicular T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma have been reported. Due to
the morphology of neoplastic cells, a challenging differential diagnosis with all the tumors belonging to the so-called small round blue
cell tumor category is mandatory. In ambiguous lineage cases, molecular biology may represent an adequate tool to confirm diagnosis. The
virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1559880973128230 Precursor lymphoid
neoplasms include acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALLs) and lymphoblastic lymphomas (LBLs) of either B- or T-cell origin . According to the
last World Health Organization (WHO) classification of Tumors of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues, T-cell ALL/LBL is a neoplasm of
lymphoblasts committed to the T-cell lineage involving bone marrow and blood (T-ALL) . T-LBL comprises approximately 85-90% of all
lymphoblastic lymphomas; similarly to its leukemic counterpart, it is most frequent in males and in late childhood, constituting only a
small percentage of adult cases . T-LBL usually presents as a mediastinal mass, and with bone marrow localization. Skin, tonsil, liver,
spleen, central nervous system (CNS) and testis in males may be affected, although presentation at these sites without nodal or mediastinal
involvement is uncommon . The lymphoblasts in T-ALL/LBL (small to medium-sized cells with scant cytoplasm, convoluted or round nuclear
contours, high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, immature nuclear chromatin with usual inconspicuous nucleoli) are morphologically
indistinguishable from those of B-ALL/LBL. The neoplastic cells express terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT), CD34, CD99 and variable
CD2, CD3, CD4, CD5, CD7, CD8 . Treatment is generally divided into three phases employed by using different drugs: induction (dexamethasone,
prednisone or prednisolone, vincristine, asparaginase and/or doxorubicin), consolidation (high dose methotrexate plus mercaptopurine, high-
dose asparaginase or reinduction), maintenance (weekly methotrexate plus daily mercaptopurine) . Given that standard doses of chemotherapy
may not reach leukemia cells in brain and spinal cord, the cells are able to find sanctuary in the CNS, especially for cases with testicular
involvement. Therefore, another important therapeutic strategy to prevent CNS relapse is prophylaxis by intrathecal injection . Unlike to
ALL and B-cell LBL, there are no clear prognostic factors that may predict remission or survival in T-cell LBL, although it frequently
occurs in older patients showing high white blood cell count, both features associated with an adverse clinical course . It has been
recently demonstrated that a treatment strategy that includes planner consolidation with stem-cell transplantation (SCT) produces long-term
outcome in selected adult patients . The main differential diagnoses of LBL include Burkitt lymphoma (BL), diffuse large-B cells lymphoma
(DLBCL), blastic variant of mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), small lymphocytic lymphoma, B1 thymoma, acute myeloid leukaemia, myeloid sarcoma,
small round blue cell tumors (including Ewing sarcoma-ES/peripheral neuroectodermal tumour-PNET, neuroblastoma, embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma,
medulloblastoma) . We describe two cases of primary T-LBL arising in atypical sites, respectively uterine corpus and testis. The importance
of differential diagnosis with other lymphoid and non lymphoid neoplasms is underlined. A 64 years-old female was admitted to Siena
University Hospital for persistent vaginal bleeding. Physical examination revealed marked enlargement of the uterus, and abdominal
ultrasonography showed a 6.0x4.0 cm hypoechoic mass in uterine corpus. Endometrial biopsy was performed. The surgical specimen consisted of
three brownish fragments ranging from 0,2 to 0,7 cm in maximum diameter. Histological examination of the formalin fixed paraffin-embedded
sections showed a polypoid lesion with atrophic endometrium. On this background, a diffuse proliferation of round blue cells infiltrating
endometrial glands and stroma, and dissecting the muscle fibres was observed (Figure 1A). Cells were medium to large and exhibit a diffuse
pattern of growth sometimes forming indian files or pseudo-rosettes (Figure 1B). A vaguely starry-sky appearance was also present.
Cytologically, some cells showed scant cytoplasm, dense nuclear chromatin and multiple inconspicuous nucleoli, whereas other demonstrated
prominent nucleoli. There were numerous mitotic figures. Neoplastic cells were positive for TdT (Figure 1C), CD2 (Figure 1D), CD7, CD3,
CD10. Proliferative index (Ki-67) was high (about 90%). Molecular studies evidenced a clonal T-cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangement.
Diagnosis of T-LBL was made. Histological and immunohistochemical features of uterine T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma. A diffuse proliferation
of round blue cells infiltrating endometrial glands and stroma and dissecting the muscle fiber is observed (A). Cells exhibit a blastic
appearance (B). They are positive for TdT (C) and CD2 (D). [A-B: haematoxylin and eosin (H & E), C: TdT stain, D: CD2 stain; A, C-D:
original magnification (O.M.), 20×, B: O.M., 40×]. The patient underwent bone marrow biopsy with negative results and complete staging
evaluation with whole body computed tomography (CT)-scan revealed that the disease was limited to the uterine corpus. Treatment with
systemic cyclophosphamide, vincristine sulfate, adryamicin, dexamethasone (hyper-CVAD) protocol together with intrathecal chemotherapy
started. The patient died after eighteen months follow-up for a pulmonary infection. A 38-year-old male presented to Garbagnate Milanese
Hospital for a sudden unilateral enlargement of the scrotum. His past medical history was unremarkable. On physical examination, a painful
solid mass of the left testis was observed. The ultrasound sonography showed a highly vascularized, hypoechoic lesion, completely
infiltrating the testis. The clinical diagnosis was testicular neoplasm and a total orchiectomy was performed.On gross examination, a
complete replacement of the testis by a fleshy, whitish, homogenous mass infiltrating the para-testicular tissues was observed.
Microscopically, an extensive infiltrate of blue uniform cells between and displacing seminiferous tubules was noted. The neoplastic cells
presented an interstitial pattern of growth, surrounding and focally infiltrating the lining epithelium of seminiferous tubules
(Figure 2A-B). High endothelial venules were also observed. The neoplastic population typically grew in indian file (Figure 2B arrow) and
showed a lymphoid appearance with morphologic features of a precursor lymphoma. They consisted of small to medium sized cells with round to
oval nuclei, sometimes convoluted, with dispersed nuclear chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, and scanty, faintly basophilic cytoplasm.
Mitoses were frequent. The neoplastic population expressed TdT (Figure 2C), and both T- (Figure 2D) and B-cell markers. The proliferative
index (Ki-67) was high (about 95%). As the lineage was ambiguous due to the positivity to CD2, CD7, Pax-5 and CD79a, molecular biology was
carried out, showing a clonal rearrangement of the gamma TCR gene. Histological and immunohistochemical findings in T-cell lymphoblastic
lymphoma of the testis. The tubules are separated by a proliferation of blue uniform cells with an interstitial pattern of growth,
occasionally invading the lining epithelium (A-B). The neoplastic population expresses TdT (C) and CD2 (D) (A-B: H & E, C: TdT stain, D: CD2
stain; A: O.M., 5×; B, D: O.M., 20×; C: O.M., 40×). Bone marrow biopsy was negative, whole body CT-scan showed neither lymphoadenopathies
nor mediastinal mass, thus a diagnosis of primary T-LBL was made. The patient was treated with hyper-CVAD protocol associated to systemic
and intrathecal injection of drugs plus high-dose cytarabine and methotrexate. At the last follow-up (27 months after the diagnosis) the
patient is alive and under consolidation therapy. In the last WHO classification, T-cell LBL is considered an immature malignancy, thought
to be the nodal/extra-nodal presentation of ALL . Most patients are adolescent or young adults who present with mediastinal mass and bone
marrow localization . Although rarely, the tumor may involve lymph nodes and extra-nodal sites (spleen, liver, testis and CNS) . However,
its occurrence as a primary tumor of the reproductive system is uncommon and rarely described in literature . The peculiarities of our cases
are multiple: the site of presentation (uterus and testis), the absence of bone marrow involvement, the age of the patients (64 and 38 years
respectively), the ambiguous lineage of the neoplastic cells at immunohistochemistry in one case. In addition, none of our patients
developed a leukemic disease at the last follow-up (18 months in the first case and 27 months in the second case). The criteria to assess
the primitivity of a LBL establish that diagnosis is correct only if the disease is confined to the organ and no signs of leukemia are
present at diagnosis or develop during follow-up . Therefore, our cases may be considered as primary T-LBL. To the best of our knowledge,
only one previous case of T-LBL of the uterus was described in the literature, occurring in a 25 years old female . However, the lack of a
complete immunohistochemical study of the case, as well as of bone marrow biopsy and CT-scan, renders diagnosis not confirmed. As far as
primary testicular T-LBL is concerned, no previous case has been reported. Due to the morphology of neoplastic cells (small to medium-sized
blast cells with scant cytoplasm, moderately condensed to dispersed nuclear chromatin and indistinct nucleoli to larger blasts with finely
dispersed nuclear chromatin and relatively prominent nucleoli), differential diagnosis include both lymphoid and non lymphoid neoplasm, as
BL, DLBCL, blastoid variant of MCL, small lymphocytic lymphoma, B1 thymoma, myeloid sarcoma, small cell carcinoma, ES/PNET,
rhabdomyosarcoma, seminoma, Merkel cell carcinoma . A challenging differential diagnosis, especially in younger patients, is with all the
tumors belonging to the so-called small round blue cell tumor category . The age of the patient, the clinical presentation, a careful
morphologic examination and, finally, immunophenotyping generally permit distinction among these diagnostic entities. In the uterine case,
the differential diagnosis among DLBCL, BL, myeloid sarcoma, blastoid variant of MCL, small lymphocytic lymphoma, small (oat) cell
carcinoma, rhabdomyosarcoma and PNET was proposed (Table 1). However, an immunohistochemical panel including lymphoid, myeloid, epithelial
and mesenchimal markers, ruled out any doubts. In the testicular case, the differential diagnosis among seminoma, BL, DLBCL, myeloid
sarcoma, PNET, neuroblastoma, and embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma was made (Table 1). Also in this case, immunohistochemistry was helpful in
achieving diagnosis. However, the ambiguous lineage of neoplastic cells induced us to perform TCR and immunoglobulin heavy chain gene (IgH)
rearrangement to confirm the final diagnosis. It is noteworthy that patients with T-cell LBL often do express antigens more commonly
associated with other lineages, including B-cell associated antigens CD10, CD20 and CD79a as a consequence of an initial oncogenic hit
affecting the hematopoietic stem cell or a common lymphoid precursor element. Therefore, in a minority of cases, lineage assignment on the
basis of immunophenotype still remains unclear despite the application of a suitable panel of markers, thus molecular biology analysis is
necessary. Although, Pax-5 completely arrests T-cell development, its expression has been reported in some mature T-cell lymphomas but not
in T-cell LBL . Nonetheless, experimental evidence have shown that aberrant Pax-5 expression in thymocytes drives malignant transformation .
These findings suggest that Pax-5 may play a role in T-cell lymphomagenesis, including T-LBL. Differential diagnosis of uterine and
testicular T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma B-LBL: B lymphoblastic lymphoma; BL: Burkitt lymphoma; DLBCL: diffuse large B-cell lymphoma; AML:
acute myeloid leukemia, MDS: myelodysplastic syndrome; MPN: myeloproliferative neoplasm; MDS/MPN: myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative
syndrome; MCL: mantle cell lymphoma; ES: Ewing sarcoma; PNET: peripheral neuroectodermal tumour; +: positive; −: negative; IgH:
immunoglobulin heavy chain gene; TCR: T-cell receptor gene. Once diagnosis of T-LBL has been confirmed, a complete staging is required to
exclude bone marrow or other organ involvement, as in our cases. T-LBL is a clinically aggressive disease with a high risk of induction
failure, frequent relapse and poor survival . Accordingly, high dose combined systemic and intrathechal chemotherapy, followed by intensive
consolidation treatment, improves prognosis, especially in young adults . Hematopoietic SCT produces favorable long-term outcome in selected
adult patients . Our patients were both treated by the hyper-CVAD protocol associated to intrathecal prophylaxys. The female patients did
not underwent treatment with high-dose cytarabine and methotrexate as it has been yielded no clear benefits in older patients . Only the
patient with testicular lymphoma is alive at the last follow-up, perhaps for his younger age. We reported two patients (ageing respectively
64 and 38 years) with T-LBL presenting as an uterine and testicular mass. Only one doubtful previous case of primary uterine T-LBL and no
previous cases of primary testicular T-LBL have been described so far. Although the frequency of this type of lymphoma at these sites is
very low, primary T-LBL lymphoma still needs to be considered in the differential diagnosis of diffuse small blue cells proliferation.
Molecular biology may represent an adequate tool to confirm diagnosis in ambiguous lineage cases. Unfortunately, no clear prognostic factors
that may predict remission or survival are well established for T-LBL . Minimal residual disease detection is one of the strongest
predictors of relapse risk ; however, identification of other clinical, biological and radiological parameters is critical for risk
stratification, especially in adult patients, to select those who may benefit of SCT . Written informed consent was obtained from the
patients for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. TdT: Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase; ALLs: Acute lymphoblastic leukemias; LBL: Lymphoblastic
lymphomas; CNS: Central nervous system; SCT: Stem cell transplantation; CVAD: Cyclophosphamide, vincristine sulfate, adryamicin,
dexamethasone; BL: Burkitt lymphoma; DLBCL: Diffuse large-B cells lymphoma; ES: Ewing sarcoma; TCR: T-cell receptor; PNET: Peripheral
neuroectodermal tumor; IgH: Immunoglobulin heavy chain.; TCR: T-cell receptor; MCL: Mantle cell lymphoma; MDS: Myelodysplastic syndromes;
MPN: Myeloproliferative neoplasm. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. MRA wrote the paper; MO, BJR and GP evaluated
the immunoassays; AG and GL made contributions to acquisition of clinical data; ADV supplied information on the therapeutic approach; FDN
and RS contributed their expertise in the field and fruitful discussion; SL gave final approval of the version to be published. MRA and SL
coordinated the work. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
