A 47-year-old woman (gravida 1, para 1) with menorrhagia and pelvic pain was found to have an enlarged fibroid uterus and bladder mass on
ultrasonographic imaging. The patient underwent an abdominal supracervical hysterectomy and transurethral bladder mass resection.
Histopathologic findings revealed leiomyoma uteri, intramural adenomyosis, and bladder endometriosis. Most case series of bladder
endometriosis include women that present with urinary symptoms. This is a rare case of obstructive uropathy secondary to bladder
endometriosis in a patient without any urinary signs or symptoms. Endometriosis is characterized by the presence of active endometrial
tissue outside of the uterine cavity.1 It has an estimated prevalence of 15% and has considerable health and economic implications.2
Endometriosis can involve the genitourinary tract, with the bladder being the most commonly affected site.3 Symptomatic urinary tract
involvement is rare, occurring in 1% to 2% of women, and it typically presents with dysuria, suprapubic pain, and, rarely, hematuria.4
Medical therapy is palliative and definitive therapy is surgical. A 47-year-old African American woman (gravida 1, para 1) with a 25-week
size fibroid uterus presented with pelvic pain and menorrhagia and wanted definitive surgical management. Despite prior management with
Depot-Lupron and a prior open myomectomy, the patient continued to complain of heavy vaginal bleeding, with increasing dysmenorrhea and
occasional dyspareunia. The patient reported pelvic pressure symptoms but denied any urinary symptoms of hematuria or flank pain on
evaluation and review of her past medical records. Her past medical history was significant for hypertension, and her past surgical history
included laparoscopic surgery for endometriosis and an open myomectomy. A pelvic examination revealed a uterus palpable 4 cm above the
umbilicus that was fixed and slightly tender. There were no other masses noted on the examination and there was no fullness or tenderness of
the bladder. Transvaginal ultrasonography demonstrated a 17-cm uterus with multiple intramural myomas, the largest being 5 × 5 cm; a 4 ×
4-cm submucosal myoma, normal right adnexa, and a left adnexa and bladder could not be visualized. A computed tomography scan of the abdomen
and pelvis from a prior emergency department visit demonstrated left hydronephrosis with marked cortical thinning and the possibility of a
5-cm bladder mass described along the dome of the bladder (Figure 1). Computed tomography scan of the abdomen and pelvis. A, The arrow shows
the left marked hydronephrosis with cortical thinning (B) 5.5 × 3.2-cm irregular enhancing lesion within the left bladder (arrow). The
patient's surgery was a joint case between the urology and gynecology departments, and the patient underwent an abdominal supracervical
hysterectomy because of extensive pelvic adhesive disease, enterolysis, and transurethral resection of a bladder mass. Findings at the
surgery included a 25-week size uterus with multiple fibroids on the anterior uterus, fundus, and bilateral broad ligaments, overlying small
intestine on the anterior surface of the uterus and adherent to the left pelvic side wall. There was also severe pelvic adhesive disease to
the posterior surface of the uterus, posterior cul-de-sac endometriosis, contributing to a distorted pelvic anatomy. A cystoscopy was
performed and revealed a 5- to 7-cm lobulated and nodular solid mass at the left hemitrigone that involved the left ureteral orifice (Figure
2, A and B). A retrograde pyelogram demonstrated severe left hydronephrosis and narrowing of the distal ureter. Despite multiple attempts, a
ureteral stent was unable to be passed. The right ureter was not involved and demonstrated efflux of the indigo carmine dye. A transurethral
resection of the bladder mass with negative margins was performed, with a preliminary diagnosis of endometriosis. A, Nodular and lobulated
bladder mass found medial and superior to the left ureter on cystoscopy. B, Zoomed view of the mass seen involving the left ureter. The
black arrow points to the left ureteral orifice. Postoperatively, a nuclear renal scan showed a nonfunctioning left kidney. The
histopathology of the specimens revealed leiomyoma uteri weighing 1191 g and intramural adenomyosis. A panel of immunohistochemical stains
was performed on the bladder mass that were positive for estrogen and progesterone receptors and Ck7 with the diagnosis of endometriosis.
The patient recovered well after her surgery and is currently being treated with 3 monthly Depot Lupron injections and daily 5-mg
norethindrone add-back therapy. She will be followed up with a cystoscopy and pelvic magnetic resonance imaging scan in 6 months to check
for endometriosis recurrence. Bladder endometriosis (BE) usually affects women in the reproductive age-group, at an average age of 35
years.5 Within the urinary system, the bladder is the most commonly affected site in 85% of cases.3 As many as 30% of patients remain
asymptomatic and diagnosis is incidental3 Although symptomatic, urinary tract involvement is rare, occurring in 1% to 2% of women; it
typically presents with dysuria, suprapubic pain, cyclic urgency, and rarely hematuria, symptoms similar to those of recurrent cystitis,
which may be responsible for its delayed diagnosis.3,6 According to the onset type, BE is defined as “primary” or “secondary.” Primary BE is
a spontaneously occurring disease, whereas secondary BE is an iatrogenic lesion occurring after pelvic surgery. In fact, up to 50% of
patients with BE have a history of prior pelvic surgery5 with lesions from implanted endometrium or extensions from adenomyosis from the
anterior uterine wall. Our patient had a prior pelvic surgery of an abdominal myomectomy, and we speculate her bladder lesion may have
emerged from implanted endometrial tissue. The pathogenesis of BE is controversial, but the lesion has been described to evolve from the
serosal surface of the bladder toward the mucosa. It is often multifocal, with the trigone and the dome the most frequently affected sites.7
Imaging modalities for BE include transvaginal bladder ultrasonography, with specificity and positive and negative predictive values of
100%, and pelvic magnetic resonance (MR) reaching a sensitivity of 88% and specificity of 99%.3 Cystoscopy is one of the most cost-effective
tests and may reveal isolated or multifocal lesions usually located at the dome or base of the bladder. Calculating the distance between the
ureteral orifices and the lower endometrotic margin is critically important to define the most correct surgical approach.3 Endoscopic biopsy
is critical to exclude bladder carcinomas, varices, papillomas or angiomas, as well as detrusor mesenchymal tumors.3 Although long-term
medical management is preferred over serial surgeries for the management of endometriosis, a recent study showed that 25% of patients who
underwent surgery for endometriosis had additional surgery within 4 years.8 In our case, a supracervical hysterectomy was performed because
of extensive anatomical distortion caused by her fibroids, and we have successfully controlled her symptoms postoperatively with medical
suppression therapy. The main surgical debate is whether to preserve the ovaries at the time of hysterectomy. Data have shown that women who
undergo hysterectomy with ovarian preservation have a higher risk of undergoing repeat surgery up to 7 years later as opposed to women who
have ovarian removal.9 However, health implications of ovarian removal need to be reviewed with the patient, and the surgical plan must be
individualized based on health risks and benefits. On the other hand, the treatment of BE is controversial because of the rarity of the
condition. Treatment includes medical therapy using gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist10 and antagonist,11 progestins,12 and combined
oral contraceptives.13 Medical therapy, however, has a high recurrence rate after treatment cessation and is often considered a palliative
modality for the treatment of BE.3 Surgical management of BE includes transurethral resection, which has a higher incidence of recurrence
compared with partial cystectomy, laparotomy, or laparoscopy, with or without associated cystoscopy, combined transurethral partial
cystectomy, and laparoscopic reconstruction of the bladder, robotic approach to surgery, and association of surgical and medical therapy;3
whereas ureteral endometriosis is treated by surgery; ureterolysis is preferred for nonbstructive lesions, and ureteral resection for
obstructive lesions. Bladder endometriosis is rare and is commonly associated with severe urinary symptoms. Both adequate diagnosis and
successful treatment should be completed with a multidisciplinary team with a dedicated gynecologist and urologist. Hormone therapy still
remains an option, while surgical treatment leads to satisfactory long-term outcome results.
