Opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome is a very rare neurological disorder associated with some viral infections and exceptionally with the West
Nile virus. A 57-year-old Caucasian woman presented with fever, dizziness, balance difficulties, vomiting, dancing eye, altered speech,
tremor, generalized myoclonus and failure to rise or stand. Our objective is to describe a patient with West Nile infection, which was
identified both in her serum and cerebrospinal fluid and was associated with encephalitis and opsoclonus-myoclonus-ataxia syndrome.
Opsoclonus-myoclonus-ataxia syndrome continued for 4 weeks after onset, when she died. There was no evidence for any other etiology
responsible for her opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome. Her opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome appeared associated with West Nile encephalitis and had
an unfavorable evolution despite treatment. Opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome (OMS) also known as the dancing eye syndrome is a very rare
neurological disorder, affecting 1 in 10,000,000 people per year. In children, OMS was associated with neuroblastoma; in adults it may be
associated with breast carcinoma or small-cell lung carcinoma, uterus or ovarian cancers, rare gall bladder, pancreas and renal cell
carcinoma. It can also be consequent to toxic medication (amitriptyline, haloperidol, diazepam), metabolic disorders , hydroelectrolytic
disorders, brain anoxia or autoimmune cause – Hashimoto's encephalopathy , autoantibodies against neurons and cerebellar Purkinje cells ,
celiac disease, and one of the paraneoplastic syndromes. Although it is not considered an infectious disease, it can be associated with some
viral infections, which may trigger the debut of OMS , such as the Epstein–Barr virus, coxsackie B2, B3 virus, Saint Louis encephalitis
virus, human immunodeficiency virus , hepatitis C infection , rubella, mumps , varicella-zoster virus , and West Nile virus . OMS was
reported as a poststreptococcal infection associated with antibodies against a 56 kDa protein , in adolescents following an infection with
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Rickettsia and as a manifestation of acute Borrelia burgdorferi infection and sometimes with vaccination. The
conventional therapies with corticosteroids, intravenous immunoglobulin, plasmapheresis, adrenocorticotropin hormone, antiepileptic drugs
are associated with long-term neurological morbidity; the combination of cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone pulse therapy or rituximab
administered in the refractory cases are promising . The best treatment in adults is not very clear. Steroids, baclofen, clonazepam,
intravenous immunoglobulin, and immune-adsorption therapy are used currently . We report a case of opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome associated
with West Nile encephalitis. Our patient was a 57-year-old Caucasian woman who had an acute onset of dizziness 2 days prior to presentation
to hospital. She began to have fever, 38.8°C, vomiting, diarrhea, and sleepiness. Her past medical history was dominated by larynx neoplasm
(surgically eradicated 4 years before) and high blood pressure. She was not on any medications. On admission she presented a respiratory
rate of 26 breaths/minute, arterial oxygen saturation 93%, heart rate 72 beats/minute, blood pressure 120/80mmHg, opsoclonus with rapid,
involuntary, multivectorial, conjugated fast eye movements persisting during sleep, no modification of her visual field, generalized
myoclonus (brief, involuntary twitching of muscles), and she was unable to perform the finger to nose test; sleep disturbance, altered
speech, mild neck stiffness, positive Kernig's sign, abnormal plantar responses and diminished osteotendinous reflexes. Work up included
blood test and spinal fluid analysis, which are summarized in Tables 1 and 2 (only pathological results). Paraneoplastic antibodies anti-Hu,
−Ri, −Yo were negative. Cerebrospinal fluid studies Serum studies A cranial native computed tomography scan examination was performed and
showed infra and supratentorial focused ischemia lesions. The conclusions drawn from brain magnetic resonance imaging were: cortical and
cerebellum atrophy; lacunary infarcts and bilateral infra-tentorial and over-tentorial demyelinating lesions; and ethmoid sinusitis. She was
given intravenous dexamethasone, symptomatic treatment with clonazepam, cerebral depletion treatment (such as administration of intravenous
solutions like mannitol), supportive therapy with intravenous fluid, and antibiotics to prevent other types of bacterial infection. She had
persistent OMS. After 2 weeks she presented an acute retention of urine and 4 weeks after admission she died. A postmortem examination did
not reveal any malignancy, systemic diseases or toxic etiology. The West Nile virus is a mosquito-borne zoonotic arbovirus of the
Flaviviridae family that is found in temperate and tropical regions. It can cause a serious neurological illness in less than 1% of infected
people: encephalitis, meningoencephalitis, acute flaccid paralysis – poliomyelitis-like, Guillain–Barré syndrome and optic neuritis. In
Romania, in 1996, the West Nile was responsible for a high number of neuroinvasive diseases. In recent years there has been a sporadic
spread in this area, and a few cases of meningitis or encephalitis have been recorded annually. This is the first West Nile encephalitis
with OMC diagnosed in our country. OMC may occur transiently in hyperglycemic coma but our patient presented hyperglycemia only on the first
day after admission and the West Nile infection was shown both in her serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination. Opsoclonus can be
associated with severe evolution to an immunocompromised host. Her CSF examination was associated with a low CSF pleocytosis of 49
leukocytes/mm3 with 25% neutrophilic pleocytosis, more characteristic of West Nile neuroinvasive disease than most other common forms of
viral encephalitis. CSF glucose was higher because the blood glucose levels were higher. In our patient the OMS appeared associated with
West Nile encephalitis and had an unfavorable evolution despite treatment with corticosteroids. It is essential to combine available
treatments but the evolution is less satisfactory. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s next of kin for publication of
this case report and any accompanying images. The study was accepted by the Ethics Committee of the hospital and they encouraged us to
publish the article. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CSF: Cerebrospinal fluid;
OMS: Opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome. The authors received no funding for the manuscript preparation or for publishing the article. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. VB made substantial contribution to conception and design of the manuscript. VB also
performed the analysis and interpretation of data. RB was involved in drafting the manuscript and acquisition of data. Both authors read and
approved the final manuscript. We express our special thanks to Alexandru George BRATU for language assistance.
