Cilnidipine is a 4th generation dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker approved recently for the treatment of essential hypertension. It is
not known to present with ankle edema like amlodipine. Moreover, it has been proposed as an alternative anti-hypertensive for patients with
amlodipine-induced edema. We report a case of cilnidipine induced ankle edema. Ankle edema, is a common adverse effect of L-type calcium
channel blocker (CCB) and can sometime progress to anasarca. CCB commonly known to cause ankle edema are amlodipine, nifedipine, diltiazem,
felodipine, isradipine, lacidipine, lercanidipine, nisoldipine and manidipine. Cilnidipine is a 4th generation dihydropyridine CCB approved
for the treatment of hypertension with efficacy and safety that is comparable to amlodipine. It is a unique L-type Ca2+ channel blocker with
an inhibitory action on the sympathetic N-type Ca2+ channels. It has a slow-onset but the long-lasting action. It was introduced in the
market, with a claimed superiority over amlodipine. In a study by Shetty et al., therapy with cilnidipine resulted in complete resolution of
amlodipine-induced edema in all the cases without significant worsening of hypertension or tachycardia and thus it has been suggested as an
alternative antihypertensive for patients with amlodipine-induced edema. We report an isolated case of cilnidipine induced ankle edema.
Although, it was a relatively mild and non-serious adverse effect, it can lead to reduced drug compliance or complete discontinuation of
therapy. This was a case report of a 40-year-old male patient, weighing 64 kg was recently diagnosed as a case of uncomplicated hypertension
(stage 1) as per JNC 7 guidelines. He was advised to start cilnidipine 5 mg once daily with salt restriction and lifestyle management. He
had no history of smoking and alcohol consumption. There was no associated pathology or any history of concurrent drug intake. He presented
with bilateral pitting ankle edema after the 6th week of the drug therapy [Figure 1]. There was no history of such an episode in the recent
past. Clinical examination revealed no symptoms and signs of liver, pulmonary, renal, cardiac and rheumatological disease. Investigations
revealed a normal X-ray chest. All basic investigations such as complete blood count, total lecucocyte count, differential lecucocyte count,
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, platelet count, routine urine and stool examination, blood sugar, blood urea, creatinine, liver function
test, lipid profile, hr-C-reactive protein, T3, T4 and thyroid stimulating hormone and serum uric acid were normal. Electrocardiography
(ECG) and echocardiography were normal. Ultrasonography abdomen and pelvic organs and color Doppler of lower extremities were also normal.
The patient was advised to stop the suspected drug cilnidipine. The patient was changed over to telmisartan with hydrochlorothiazide (40 +
12.5 mg) once day. The edema disappeared completely on the 14th day after stopping cilnidipine with achievement of normotension. Further re-
challenge was not carried out in the interest of the patient. Thus, the appearance of ankle edema in a patient taking cilndipine could not
be explained by a concurrent disease, drug or chemicals while dechallenge improved the condition. The current case was reported to ADRM
Centre GMC/Jammu, vide no. 2916/010713/ADRM/Pharma/GMC/JMU. Cilnidipine Induced Pedal/Ankle Edema Common adverse effects reported with
cilnidipine are nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, constipation, dry mouth, gingival hypertrophy, heartburn, headache, dizziness, light
headedness and insomnia. Rarely, hot flushes, palpitations, ECG abnormalities, chest pain, atrioventricular block, hypersensitivity
reactions, photosensitivity, frequent urination and elevated liver enzyme. Cilnidipine has been recently suggested to result in complete
resolution of amlodipine-induced edema and has been recommended as an alternative antihypertensive for patients with amlodipine-induced
edema. However, on the contrary our case presented with bilateral ankle pitting edema with cilnidipine therapy. One report of clinidipine
induced ankle edema has been published in the literature. The mechanism of this adverse effect is unknown. However, number of mechanisms has
been postulated for CCB-induced edema including inhibition of pre-capillary vasoconstriction through arteriolar dilatation and thus,
promoting interstitial edema. CCBs are known to cause ankle edema. The structural similarity of clinidipine with other dihydropyridines is
hypothesized to be the probable reason for this adverse drug reaction (ADR). This ADR has “probable” causal relationship with clinidipine as
assessed by Naranjo score (Score = 6) and with World Health Organization-Uppsala Monitoring Centre scale for causality assessment. The
present ADR was not studied for dose dependent response and was unpredictable/unusual. Thus it is difficult to label it as Type-A or B class
of ADR. The usual approach to patients with CCB-induced edema involves cessation of therapy and substitution with an alternative
antihypertensive, typically as a thiazide diuretic or angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI) or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs)
as was carried out in our case. A combination therapy of ARBs, diuretic CCB are usual in clinical practice in such cases. The current case
report is in contradiction to study of Shetty et al. In 27 patients with essential hypertension with amlodipine-induced edema cannot become
the basis for recommendation of cilnidipine in these patients. However, it is in accordance to the study of Narita et al., 2011 which
documented leg edema in 16% of patients, receiving cilnidipine. Moreover, the present case report leaves another important message for the
practicing physicians, that never be first and last to prescribe any new drug. In this case report, the conventional practice to prescribe
thiazide diuretic or ACEI or ARBs should be carried until larger clinical trial supports the role of clindipine in such conditions. Source
of Support: Nil Conflict Interest: No
