Rivaroxaban is an oral anticoagulant agent that directly inhibits Factor Xa and interrupts both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathway of the
coagulation cascade and is currently indicated for use in patients for atrial fibrillation and prophylaxis of deep venous thrombosis. The
present case reports of spontaneous rectus sheath hematoma during rivaroxaban therapy for atrial fibrillation in a 75-year-old woman.
Recently, new oral anticoagulants have been approved as alternatives to warfarin for patients with atrial fibrillation. Rivaroxaban is one
of the novel anticoagulants, which is an oxazolidinone derivative and inhibits both free Factor Xa and Factor Xa bound with the
prothrombinase complex. It is a highly selective direct Factor Xa inhibitor with oral bioavailability and rapid onset of action. There are
some advantages of the new agents compared with warfarin including rapid anticoagulation after an oral dose and lack of dietary or drug-drug
interaction. However, there are no specific antidotes for the anticoagulant effect of rivaroxaban in the event of a major bleeding, unlike
warfarin. We present a case of spontaneous rectus sheath hematoma (RSH) during rivaroxaban therapy for atrial fibrillation in an elderly
female patient. A 75-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with the complaints of fatigue and abdominal pain after coughing.
The patient had been started on new oral anticoagulant agent rivaroxaban therapy for nonvalvular atrial fibrillation for 3 days. The dose of
20 mg/day rivaroxaban was started because the creatinin clearance of the patient was above 50 mL/min. She had a blood pressure of 70/40 mmHg
and an irregular heart rate of 115 beats/min on admission. Physical examination revealed tenderness and mild abdominal swelling with no skin
discoloration. The patient had no history of any trauma or surgery; she reported that the symptoms started after vigorous coughing. The
patient also denied taking any other drugs that could cause bleeding. Blood analyses revealed leukocytosis (26.5 k/uL) accompanied by severe
anemia (5.4 g/dl). Platelet counts were within normal ranges and her international normalized ratio (INR) was 1.48. Her abdominal X-ray was
normal and the stool occult blood test was negative. Anticoagulant treatment was stopped and was resuscitated with fluid and packed red
blood cells. After the first treatment, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Repeated abdominal examination in the
ICU revealed increased tenderness and a palpable mass on the left side of the umbilicus. Noncontrast abdominal computerized tomography scan
showed a left-sided RSH, 102 Ã— 45 mm in size [Figure 1]. A specific antidote for rivaroxaban is not available then the patient was treated
with fluid resuscitation and packed red blood cells. The patient was referred to surgery because of the hemodynamic instability. Computed
tomography scan of the abdomen shows a left-sided rectus sheath hematoma (arrow) Rivaroxaban is an oral anticoagulant agent that directly
inhibits Factor Xa and interrupts both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathway of the coagulation cascade. Rivaroxaban is currently indicated
for use in patients for atrial fibrillation and prophylaxis of deep venous thrombosis. It does not require INR monitoring like warfarin.
With the increasing use of the new anticoagulant agents like rivaroxaban in atrial fibrillation, bleeding complications due to these agents
have been frequently seen. There are no specific antidotes for the anticoagulant effect of rivaroxaban and other new oral anticogulants
unlike warfarin, thus the management of the bleeding complications include support and observation. Currently, no available specific
antidote exists for the management of rivaroxaban-associated bleeding events, but supporting therapy is useful which are likely to be
effective for the majority of patients because of the short half-lives of these agents. Recent studies showed that rivaroxaban was
noninferior to warfarin for the primary endpoint of stroke and systemic embolism. There was no reduction in rates of mortality or ischemic
stroke, but a significant reduction in hemorrhagic stroke and intracranial hemorrhage. The primary safety endpoint was the composite of
major and clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding, which was not significantly different between rivaroxaban and warfarin but, with
rivaroxaban, there was a significant reduction in fatal bleeding, as well as an increase in gastrointestinal bleeds and bleeds requiring
transfusion. Rectus sheath hematoma is a rare but important complication of anticoagulant therapy. The main causes of the RSH include
anticoagulant therapy, hematological disorders, trauma, excessive physical exercise, coughing, sneezing, and pregnancy. Especially in
elderly patients the risk of RSH may be increased due to the impaired functional status and weakened rectus muscle. Early recognition, rapid
assessment and treatment are important to reduce the complications such as hemodynamic instability, abdominal compartment syndrome,
multiorgan dysfunction and even death. The treatment of such a hematoma includes transfusion with packed red blood cells and supporting
therapy based on regularly monitoring of hemoglobin levels. The offending agent must be discontinued as quickly as possible. Rivaroxaban has
a mean terminal half-life of 7-11 h so in bleeding events supporting therapies are likely to be effective for the majority of patients.
There is no obvious antidote to reverse the effects of the rivaroxaban. Several studies have shown that prothrombin complex concentrate may
be useful in reversing the effects of rivaroxaban. Other possible measures include the use of recombinant Factor VIIa to reduce bleeding or
the use of activated charcoal to reduce absorption in cases of overdose. Several factors are reported which increase the risk of patients
developing hemorrhage while receiving rivaroxaban, these include advanced age, hypertension, history of hepatic/renal disease, previous
stroke, coagulopathy, concomitant use of antiplatelet agents and alcohol consumption. Jaeger et al. have reported a 61-year-old female
patient who developed a spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma after being treated by rivaroxaban. Boland et al. also reported acute onset
severe gastrointestinal tract hemorrhage in a postoperative patient taking rivaroxaban after total hip arthroplasty. In our patient, there
was no other medication except rivaroxaban that could cause the hematoma. Based on Naranjo's scale, a score of 7 showed that the rivaroxaban
was the probable cause of the RSH. Several case reports of muscle hematoma due to the antiplatelet and anticoagulant agents have been
reported previously, but this is the first reported case of spontaneous RSH due to the rivaroxaban. Source of Support: Nil Conflict
Interest: No
