*These authors contributed equally to this work. See doi:10.1093/brain/awu181 for the scientific commentary on this article. Mutations in
the gene encoding the dopamine-synthetic enzyme GTP cyclohydrolase-1 (GCH1) cause DOPA-responsive dystonia (DRD). Mencacci et al.
demonstrate that GCH1 variants are associated with an increased risk of Parkinson's disease in both DRD pedigrees and in patients with
Parkinson's disease but without a family history of DRD. GTP cyclohydrolase 1, encoded by the GCH1 gene, is an essential enzyme for dopamine
production in nigrostriatal cells. Loss-of-function mutations in GCH1 result in severe reduction of dopamine synthesis in nigrostriatal
cells and are the most common cause of DOPA-responsive dystonia, a rare disease that classically presents in childhood with generalized
dystonia and a dramatic long-lasting response to levodopa. We describe clinical, genetic and nigrostriatal dopaminergic imaging (N-ω-
fluoropropyl-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-iodophenyl) tropane single photon computed tomography) findings of four unrelated pedigrees with DOPA-
responsive dystonia in which pathogenic GCH1 variants were identified in family members with adult-onset parkinsonism. Dopamine transporter
imaging was abnormal in all parkinsonian patients, indicating Parkinson’s disease-like nigrostriatal dopaminergic denervation. We
subsequently explored the possibility that pathogenic GCH1 variants could contribute to the risk of developing Parkinson’s disease, even in
the absence of a family history for DOPA-responsive dystonia. The frequency of GCH1 variants was evaluated in whole-exome sequencing data of
1318 cases with Parkinson’s disease and 5935 control subjects. Combining cases and controls, we identified a total of 11 different
heterozygous GCH1 variants, all at low frequency. This list includes four pathogenic variants previously associated with DOPA-responsive
dystonia (Q110X, V204I, K224R and M230I) and seven of undetermined clinical relevance (Q110E, T112A, A120S, D134G, I154V, R198Q and G217V).
The frequency of GCH1 variants was significantly higher (Fisher’s exact test P-value 0.0001) in cases (10/1318 = 0.75%) than in controls
(6/5935 = 0.1%; odds ratio 7.5; 95% confidence interval 2.4–25.3). Our results show that rare GCH1 variants are associated with an increased
risk for Parkinson’s disease. These findings expand the clinical and biological relevance of GTP cycloydrolase 1 deficiency, suggesting that
it not only leads to biochemical striatal dopamine depletion and DOPA-responsive dystonia, but also predisposes to nigrostriatal cell loss.
Further insight into GCH1-associated pathogenetic mechanisms will shed light on the role of dopamine metabolism in nigral degeneration and
Parkinson’s disease. Parkinson’s disease is a common neurodegenerative disease mainly characterized by severe loss of dopaminergic neurons
in the substantia nigra pars compacta and by the formation of α-synuclein positive aggregates (Lees et al., 2009). Nigral neuron
degeneration and consequent decrease in dopaminergic striatal innervation result in classic Parkinson’s disease motor symptoms. Symptomatic
treatment with levodopa or dopamine agonists is effective in alleviating these symptoms, although, along with disease progression, levodopa-
induced motor complications (e.g. dyskinesias, wearing-off, on-off fluctuations) may appear. In recent years several Mendelian loci have
been unequivocally linked to hereditary forms of Parkinson’s disease (Houlden and Singleton, 2012) and genome-wide association studies have
succeeded in identifying many common, low risk variants (Plagnol et al., 2011). The GCH1 gene (14q22.1-q22.2; OMIM 600225) encodes GTP
cyclohydrolase 1, the enzyme controlling the first and rate-limiting step of the biosynthesis of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), the essential
cofactor for the activity of tyrosine hydroxylase, and for dopamine production in nigrostriatal cells (Kurian et al., 2011). Mutations in
GCH1 are the most common cause of DOPA-responsive dystonia (DYT5; OMIM#128230) (Clot et al., 2009), a rare movement disorder that presents
typically in childhood with lower limb dystonia and subsequent generalization (Nygaard, 1993b). The hallmark of the disease is an excellent
and sustained response to small doses of levodopa, generally without the occurrence of motor fluctuations (Trender-Gerhard et al., 2009).
Reduction of CSF levels of pterins, dopamine and serotonin metabolites (Assmann et al., 2003), or an abnormal phenylalanine-loading test
(Bandmann et al., 2003) are supportive findings in the diagnosis of DOPA-responsive dystonia. Inheritance is usually autosomal dominant with
incomplete penetrance (Furukawa et al., 1998), though recessive cases have been described (Opladen et al., 2011). Dominant GCH1 mutations
result in a significant reduction of GCH1 activity through a dominant negative effect of the mutant protein on the normal enzyme (Hwu et
al., 2000). Neuropathological examination in a limited number of cases with DOPA-responsive dystonia, revealed marked reduction of melanin
pigment and dopamine content in nigrostriatal neurons, but no evidence of nigral cell loss or degeneration (Furukawa et al., 1999).
Parkinsonian features are frequently detected in patients with DOPA-responsive dystonia (Tassin et al., 2000) and family studies have shown
that carriers of GCH1 mutations may develop adult-onset parkinsonism in the absence of dystonia (Nygaard et al., 1990). Based on previous
studies, the prevailing hypothesis was that parkinsonism represented an atypical, age-specific, presentation of DOPA-responsive dystonia
without nigral degeneration (Nygaard and Wooten, 1998). The aim of this study was to further explore the relationship between GCH1 mutations
and parkinsonism and consider whether adult GCH1 mutation carriers are at increased risk of developing neurodegenerative Parkinson’s
disease. We first describe the clinical, genetic and nigrostriatal dopaminergic imaging findings of DOPA-responsive dystonia pedigrees in
which pathogenic GCH1 variants were identified in family members with adult-onset parkinsonism. We subsequently explore the hypothesis that
GCH1 variants might be associated with an increased risk for Parkinson’s disease, even without a family history for DOPA-responsive
dystonia, through examination of whole-exome sequencing data from a large cohort of cases and controls. The clinical and demographic
features of the pedigrees with GCH1 mutations involved in this study are described in the ‘Results’ section. DOPA-responsive dystonia
pedigrees were included in the study, where family members affected with adult-onset parkinsonism were available for clinical and genetic
examination and in whom dopaminergic studies had been performed. Local ethics committees approved the study and informed consent for genetic
testing was obtained in all cases. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes using standard procedures. Probands were
screened for GCH1 mutations (NCBI transcript NM_000161.2) by standard bi-directional Sanger sequencing of all six coding exons and exon-
intron boundaries (primer sequences available on request). Dosage analysis for GCH1 exonic deletions and duplications was performed by
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA, MRC). Dopaminergic striatal innervation was evaluated as dopamine reuptake
transporter (DAT) density by means of single photon computed tomography (SPECT) and N-ω-fluoropropyl-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-iodophenyl)
tropane (123I-FP-CIT). SPECT data acquisition and reconstruction has been described in detail elsewhere (Isaias et al., 2010). To obtain
comparable measurements among different centres, 123I-FP-CIT binding values for the caudate nucleus and putamen were calculated by means of
the basal ganglia matching tool (Nobili et al., 2013). The study initially involved 1337 unrelated subjects with Parkinson’s disease and
1764 control subjects of European origin or North American of European descent that underwent whole-exome sequencing. Cases, originating
mainly from the USA, UK, Holland and France, were recruited by the International Parkinson Disease Genomics Consortium (IPDGC), an
international collaboration to understand the genetics of Parkinson’s disease. A further 190 cases with Parkinson’s disease were recruited
through a community-based epidemiological study of Parkinson’s disease in Estonia (University of Tartu, Estonia). Cases with Parkinson’s
disease were clinically diagnosed according to the UK Parkinson’s Disease Society Brain Bank (UKPDSBB) criteria (Hughes et al., 1992).
Control samples were collected by the UCL-exomes, a consortium of researchers within University College London (London, UK) designed to
share raw read level data from multiple exome sequencing projects. Control subjects had no diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease, DOPA-responsive
dystonia or any other movement disorder. Whole-exome sequencing data from an additional 4300 North American individuals of European descent
were analysed from the publicly available NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project Exome Variant Server (EVS) database
(http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/). Paired-end sequence reads (TruSeq chemistry sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2000) were aligned with
Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (for IPDGC) and novoalign (for UCL-exomes) against the reference human genome (UCSC hg19). Duplicate read removal,
format conversion, and indexing were performed with Picard (http://picard.sourceforge.net/). The Genome Analysis Toolkit was used to
recalibrate base quality scores, perform local realignments around possible indels, and to call and filter the variants. ANNOVAR software
was used to annotate the variants (Wang et al., 2010). Pathogenicity of the identified missense variants was predicted using the following
bioinformatics tools: HumVar-trained PolyPhen-2 model (http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/), SIFT (http://sift.jcvi.org/), LRT
(s.wustl.edu/jflab/lrt_query.html) and MutationTaster (http://www.mutationtaster.org/). Evolutionary conservation of the mutated amino acids
was evaluated using ClustalW2 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/). Frequencies of coding and splice-site GCH1 variants in cases and
controls were compared by means of Fisher’s exact (statistical significance set at P-value < 0.05 using a two-tailed test) and odds ratios
(OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated. Analyses were performed using the statistical analysis program R
(http://www.r-project.org/). The proband (Case III-1, Fig. 1A) is a British 18-year-old male who had a difficult caesarean birth, with
perinatal distress and subsequent developmental delay. At 18 months he developed inward turning of his feet with walking difficulties and
frequent falls. He was diagnosed clinically with DOPA-responsive dystonia at the age of 3 years and administration of levodopa (300 mg/day)
markedly improved his symptoms. FP-CIT SPECT, performed at age 17, was normal (data not shown). Figure 1Pedigrees and 123I-FP-CIT SPECT scan
images of the four families with GCH1 mutations involved in this study. Subject I-2 of Family D was reported to be affected by a movement
disorder (hand tremor) but was not available for clinical or genetic assessment. P = Parkinson’s disease; D = DOPA-responsive dystonia.
Pedigrees and 123I-FP-CIT SPECT scan images of the four families with GCH1 mutations involved in this study. Subject I-2 of Family D was
reported to be affected by a movement disorder (hand tremor) but was not available for clinical or genetic assessment. P = Parkinson’s
disease; D = DOPA-responsive dystonia. The proband’s father (Case II-1), who was initially thought to have cerebral palsy due to a birth
injury, was subsequently diagnosed, at the age of 42, with DOPA-responsive dystonia. The proband’s grandfather (Case I-1) is a 65 year-old
male with a 6-year history of progressive asymmetric rest tremor in the right upper limb. Examination showed signs of typical Parkinson’s
disease with hypomimia, unilateral rest tremor and asymmetric bradykinesia. He did not present signs of dystonia. 123I-FP-CIT SPECT showed
bilateral reduced tracer uptake more marked on the left (Fig. 1A), consistent with nigrostriatal dopaminergic denervation. He responded well
to levodopa therapy (300 mg/day). GCH1 analysis revealed a heterozygous splice site mutation (c.343+5G>C) in the three affected individuals.
We previously detected c.343+5G>C in a recessive pedigree, carried by the unaffected mother of two very severely affected children who also
inherited the K224R mutation from their unaffected father (Bandmann et al., 1996b; Trender-Gerhard et al., 2009). However the c.343+5G>C
mutation has not been previously described in DOPA-responsive dystonia dominant pedigrees, making its pathogenicity uncertain. Complimentary
DNA analysis showed aberrant splicing resulting in a premature stop codon and retention of intron 1 in a proportion of mutant transcripts,
confirming the loss-of-function effect of the variant. See Supplementary material for details of the RNA analysis. The proband (Case III-1;
see Fig. 1B) is a 12-year-old right-handed female of German origin with DOPA-responsive dystonia, with an onset at age 11, with writing and
foot dystonia. Her mother (Case II-1) presented at age 39 with progressive loss of dexterity and slowness in her right arm and dystonic
posturing of the right foot. Examination showed an asymmetric rigid-akinetic parkinsonian syndrome without tremor and severe right foot
fixed dystonia. Levodopa therapy resulted in marked improvement of both dystonic and parkinsonian symptoms. 123I-FP-CIT SPECT revealed an
asymmetric bilateral reduced tracer uptake, more marked in the left striatum. There was sustained response to levodopa therapy although
there was an increase in dose requirement (up to 800 mg/day). Levodopa-induced dyskinesias developed 6 years after initiation of levodopa.
Examination of the proband’s 66-year-old grandmother (Case I-1) revealed oromandibular dyskinesias and upper limb dystonic features. She
declined a trial of levodopa. Her 123I-FP-CIT SPECT displayed border-line reduced DAT values in both putamens. GCH1 screening in this family
revealed two variants: c.68C>T;p.P23L (carried by Cases III-1 and II-1) and c.312C>A;p.F104L (carried by Cases II-1 and I-1). There were no
GCH1 exonic rearrangements. F104L is absent in public control data sets and has been previously reported in association with DOPA-responsive
dystonia (Clot et al., 2009). P23L (rs41298432) is a benign polymorphism present in population controls at a frequency of 1–2% (Jarman et
al., 1997; Hauf et al., 2000). To confirm GCH1 deficiency, phenylalanine-loading test (100 mg/kg) was performed in Cases I-I and II-I and
showed pathologically elevated phenylalanine/tyrosine ratios in both (Supplementary Fig. 2). CSF analysis, performed in Case III-I,
displayed low levels of BH4 (13 nmol/l; 18–53 nmol/l) and neopterin (6 nmol/l; 10–31 nmol/l), consistent with GCH1 deficiency. Given the
benign nature of P23L, we hypothesize that the GCH1 deficiency confirmed in this patient may be the result of an—as yet—unidentified non-
coding causative mutation. The proband (Case II-1, Fig. 1C) is a German 41-year-old female, affected by DOPA-responsive dystonia, who
presented at age 4 years with bilateral foot inversion on walking. Her father (Case I-1) is a 67-year old male with a 1-year history of
typical Parkinson’s disease with left hand rest tremor, bilateral rigidity and bradykinesia and mild gait difficulties. There was no
dystonia. 123I-FP-CIT SPECT examination revealed asymmetrically reduced DAT-density in the striatum. Rasagiline and pramipexole were started
with good response. The mother (Case I-2), aged 62 years, had a normal neurological examination. The proband was compound heterozygous for
two GCH1 missense variants, c.610G>A;p.V204I, inherited from the asymptomatic mother, and the novel variant c.722G>A;p.R241Q, which was
paternally inherited. R241Q is absent in public control data sets, is predicted deleterious by all in silico prediction tools and involves
an amino acid residue conserved down to invertebrate species. Furthermore a pathogenic mutation at the same residue has already been
reported (Bandmann et al., 1998). CSF analysis in the parkinsonian case supported a pathogenic effect of the R241Q mutation on GCH1
activity: pterin analysis revealed low BH4 (8 nmol/l; 18–53), but normal neopterin (24 nmol/l; 10–31); neurotransmitter analysis showed low
homovanillic acid (95 nmol/l; 115–455) and 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid (59 nmol/l; 61–204), which are metabolites of dopamine and serotonin,
respectively. The proband is an Italian 58-year-old female (Case II-1, Fig. 1D), who developed progressive tremor and clumsiness in the
right arm at age 44 years. Clinical examination showed typical Parkinson’s disease with hypomimia, hypophonia and asymmetrical bradykinesia
and rigidity. Action dystonic tremor (right > left), poor postural reflexes and slow gait were also evident and there was a sustained
response to levodopa. The dose was gradually increased up to 400 mg/day, after which rotigotine 4 mg/day was added. Dyskinesias and wearing-
off symptoms developed 6 years after levodopa initiation. 123I-FP-CIT SPECT revealed asymmetrically reduced DAT binding values in the
striatum. Her sister (Case II-2; Fig. 1D), aged 60, had a childhood onset of mild walking difficulties. At age 55, she developed exercise-
induced left foot dystonia and dystonic tremor in both arms. She had no bradykinesia or other parkinsonian signs. Low-dose levodopa (100 mg
alternate days) was started with excellent symptom control. 123I-FP-CIT SPECT was normal. Their father was reported to have a tremulous
condition, but was not available for clinical or genetic examination. GCH1 sequencing revealed that both sisters were heterozygous for the
previously reported pathogenic mutation c.626+1G>C (Garavaglia et al., 2004). The main clinical features of the GCH1 mutation carriers with
adult-onset parkinsonism and abnormal 123I-FP-CIT SPECT imaging are summarized in Table 1. Their clinical features fully met the UKPDSBB
criteria for definite Parkinson’s disease diagnosis. None of these cases presented significant diurnal fluctuations, worsening of symptoms
in the evening or substantial sleep benefit, features often recognized in cases with DOPA-responsive dystonia (Kurian et al., 2011). DAT
binding values are reported in Supplementary Table 1. Table 1Characteristics of parkinsonian cases with GCH1 pathogenic variants and
abnormal dopaminergic imaging described in this study and present in the literatureOriginSex/age at scan/age at onset (y)MutationRelatives
with DRDAge at levodopa start (y)Current treatment dose (mg/day)Parkinsonian featuresH&Y scoreDystonic featuresLevodopa-induced
complicationsScan resultReferenceUKM/65/59c.343+5G>C/wSon and grandson60l-DOPA 300Hypomimia, R hand rest and re-emergent postural tremor,
and bilateral rigidity and bradykinesia (R>L)2NoNoBilateral (L>R) reduced DAT densityPresent study (Family A)GermanyF/47/39F104L/
P23LDaughter and mother41l-DOPA 800Hypomimia, bilateral rigidity, bradykinesia, reduced arm swinging (R>L), and mild gait difficulties2R
foot dystoniaDyskinesias after6 y of therapyBilateral (L>R) reduced DAT densityPresent study (Family
B)GermanyM/67/66R241Q/wDaughter/Rasagiline 1 Pramipexole 0.375Hypomimia, L hand rest tremor, bilateral bradykinesia and rigidity (L>R), and
mild gait difficulties2NoNoBilateral (R>L) reduced DAT-densityPresent study (Family C)ItalyF/58/44c.626+1 G>C/wSister53l-DOPA 400Rotigotine
4Hypomimia, bilateral rigidity and bradykinesia (R>L), mild postural instability, and gait difficulties2Bilateral (R>L) upper limb dystonic
tremorDyskinesias after6 y of therapyBilateral (L>R) reduced DAT densityPresent study (Family D)JapanM/54/39R184H/wNo40l-DOPA 600Cogwheel
rigidity, akinesia, and postural instabilityNADystonic posture in the four limbs (R>L)Wearing-off and dyskinesias after10 y of
therapyBilateral reduced FD intakeKikuchi et al., 2004DenmarkM/38/28P199S/wBrother33l-DOPA 350EntacaponeSelegiline 5Bradykinesia and
rigidity in the L armNADystonia of neck, trunk and four limbs, action tremor (L>R)Dyskinesias after2 y of therapyBilateral (R>L) reduced DAT
densityHjermind et al., 2006GermanyF/65/50Complete deletion of the GCH1 gene/wDaughter60 (for 10 y on dopamine agonist only)l-DOPA
200Selegiline 5Tremor in the R hand, reduced dexterity and mild gait disturbanceNANoNoBilateral (L>R) reduced DAT densityEggers et al.,
2012ItalyM/59/NADeletion of exons 5-6/wSon with DRD, sister with MSANANAHypomimia, L hand rest tremor. bradykinesia (L>R), mild gait
difficultiesNANoDyskinesias after 10 y of therapyBilateral reduced DAT densityCeravolo et al., 2013NA = not available; DRD = DOPA-responsive
dystonia; H&Y = Hoehn and Yahr; F = female; M = male L = left; R = right; MSA = multiple system atrophy; y = years; w = wild-type.
Characteristics of parkinsonian cases with GCH1 pathogenic variants and abnormal dopaminergic imaging described in this study and present in
the literature Dyskinesias after 6 y of therapy l-DOPA 400 Rotigotine 4 Dyskinesias after 6 y of therapy Wearing-off and dyskinesias after
10 y of therapy l-DOPA 350 Entacapone Selegiline 5 Dyskinesias after 2 y of therapy l-DOPA 200 Selegiline 5 NA = not available; DRD = DOPA-
responsive dystonia; H&Y = Hoehn and Yahr; F = female; M = male L = left; R = right; MSA = multiple system atrophy; y = years; w = wild-
type. We hypothesized that pathogenic variants in GCH1 could be found in subjects with Parkinson’s disease without a family history for
DOPA-responsive dystonia. To investigate this we examined whole-exome sequencing data of a large cohort of patients predominantly affected
by early-onset or familial Parkinson’s disease and controls. After quality control checks (removal of gender mismatches, duplicate, related
and non-Caucasian samples, samples with low call rate or excess of heterozygosity), 1318 cases with Parkinson’s disease and 1635 controls
remained. Additional control data (n = 4300) were obtained from the publically available Exome Variant Server (EVS) data set. In total 1318
cases and 5935 controls were analysed for the presence of GCH1 coding (including small insertions/deletions, missense and stop-gain changes)
or splice-site variants (± 5 base pairs from the coding exons). The mean age of subjects with Parkinson’s disease was 55.7 ± 13.9 years
(range 17–101; data available for 970 cases) and the mean age at onset was 46.7 ± 13.8 years (range 6–98; data available for 1194 cases).
Four hundred and twenty-three of 1194 (35.4%) were early-onset cases (age at onset ≤ 40 years) and ∼630 were familial cases (positive family
history for Parkinson’s disease in a first or second-degree relative). Coverage of the six GCH1 coding exons (NCBI transcript NM_000161.2)
was comparable in the three data sets (IPDGC, UCL-ex and EVS; Supplementary Table 2). No common variants (frequency >1%) were identified.
The benign polymorphisms P23L (rs41298432) and P69L (rs56127440), detected at similar frequencies in cases and controls, were not included
in the analysis. The main results of GCH1 analysis are summarized in Table 2. Combining cases and controls, 11 unique heterozygous GCH1
variants (10 missense and one stop-gain mutation) were identified in 16 individuals. Six variants were found only in cases with Parkinson’s
disease (Q110X, Q110E, A120S, D134G, G217V and M230I), three in controls alone (T112A, I154V and R198Q) and two were detected in both groups
(V204I, K224R). The frequency of GCH1 variants was significantly higher in cases with Parkinson’s disease (10/1318; 0.75%) than in
individual (UCL-ex controls 1/1635; 0.06%; P = 0.003; OR 12.4 95% CI 1.7–541.1; EVS database 5/4300; 0.11%; P = 0.0004; OR 6.5, 95% CI
2.0–24.5) and combined data sets of controls (6/5935; 0.1%; P = 0.0001; OR 7.5, 95% CI 2.4–25.3). Table 2List of GCH1 variants identified by
exome sequencing in patients with Parkinson disease and controlsaMutationExondbSNPPrediction scorebPreviously described in DRD?PD patients
(n = 1318)UCL-ex controls (n = 1635)OR (95% CI)P-valueEVS controls (n = 4300)OR (95% CI)P-valueTotal controls (n = 5935)OR (95%
CI)P-valueAll variants10 (0.75%)1 (0.06%)12.4 (1.7–541.1)0.0035 (0.11%)6.5 (2.0–24.5)0.00046 (0.1%)7.5 (2.4–25.3)0.0001c.328C>T;
p.Q110X1NAYes, in dominant and recessive pedigrees1000c.328C>G; p.Q110E12No1000c.334A>G; p.T112A2rs1999904342No0011c.358G>T;
p.A120S24No1000c.401A>G; p.D134G24No1000c.460A>G; p.I154V32No0101c.593G>A; p.R198Q5rs2012389260No0011c.610G>A; p.V204I5rs2008919694Yes, in
sporadic and recessive cases3011c.650G>T; p.G217V64No1000c.671A>G; p.K224R6rs412984422Yes, in dominant and recessive pedigrees1022c.690G>A;
p.M230I64Yes, in a sporadic case1000NA = not applicable; DRD = DOPA-responsive dystonia; PD = Parkinson disease; UCL-ex = University College
of London exomes consortium; EVS = Exome Variant Server.P-values were calculated by means of Fisher’s exact test.a NCBI transcript
NM_000161.2..This count includes all detected coding and splice-site variants at any frequency, but the two benign variants P23L and P69L.b
This score, ranging from 0 to 4, indicates the number of tools (Polyphen-2, SIFT, LRT and MutationTaster) predicting a pathogenic effect on
the protein function. List of GCH1 variants identified by exome sequencing in patients with Parkinson disease and controlsa NA = not
applicable; DRD = DOPA-responsive dystonia; PD = Parkinson disease; UCL-ex = University College of London exomes consortium; EVS = Exome
Variant Server. P-values were calculated by means of Fisher’s exact test. a NCBI transcript NM_000161.2..This count includes all detected
coding and splice-site variants at any frequency, but the two benign variants P23L and P69L. b This score, ranging from 0 to 4, indicates
the number of tools (Polyphen-2, SIFT, LRT and MutationTaster) predicting a pathogenic effect on the protein function. All carriers of
variants in GCH1 were negative for pathogenic mutations in the known genes associated with Mendelian forms of parkinsonism (SNCA, LRRK2,
VPS35, PARK2, PARK7, PINK1, ATP13A2, PLA2G6 and FBXO7). The presence of copy number variants in the SNCA, PARK2, PARK7, and PINK1 genes was
excluded by MLPA in all cases. One case was heterozygous for the GBA mutation E326K. This is a relatively common variant (∼1–2% Caucasians)
that was recently shown to be associated with a modest but significant increase in the disease risk (Duran et al., 2013). The main features
of the 10 cases with Parkinson’s disease with pathogenic or possibly pathogenic GCH1 variants are listed in Table 3. Table 3Clinical
features of Parkinson disease cases with GCH1 variants identified in the exome-sequencing studyCaseOriginSex/age/age at onset (y)GCH1
mutationFamily history of PDAge at l-DOPA start (y)Current treatment (mg/day)Parkinsonian featuresl-DOPA responsi-venessH&Y scoreCognitive
symptomsOther non-motor featuresDystoniaLevodopa-induced complications1USAF/47/43M230I/wNo/Pramipexole 0.75Asymmetric onset, bilateral
involvement with rest and postural tremor, bradykinesia and rigidity, mild gait difficultiesGood2NoNoNoNo2USAM/55/37K224R/wYes
(father)NANAAsymmetric onset, moderate bilateral involvement with rest tremor, bradykinesia and rigidity, postural instability and gait
difficultiesGood3NoFatigueNoDyskinesias and wearing-off3HollandM/49/35G217V/wNo43l-DOPA 600Tolcapone 400Pramipexole 3Asymmetric onset,
slurred speech, mild L arm rest and postural tremor, moderate bilateral bradykinesia and rigidity, postural instabilityGood3Subjective loss
of memory (MMSE 29/30)Hyposmia, ICDNoInitial dyskinesias and wearing-off4UKM/63/32V204I/wYes (1st degree cousin)36DBS, l-DOPA 200 Amantadine
100Rotigotine 8Asymmetric onset, hypomimia, slurred speech, hypophonia, marked bilateral rest and postural tremor, moderate bilateral
rigidity and bradykinesia, postural instabilityGood4NoHyposmia, constipation, RBDRight foot exercise-induced dystonia at onsetDisabling
dyskinesias and on-off fluctuations5EstoniaM/75/61V204I/wYes (mother)61l-DOPA 400Pramipexole 3.15Asymmetric onset, rest and postural tremor
(R>L), bradykinesia and rigidity, mild gait disorder, hypomimiaGood3Mild cognitive impairmentHyposmia, fatigue, sleep and bladder
disorderLower limb off-dystoniaOn-off fluctuations (30% of waking day in off-state)6EstoniaM/72/59V204I/wYes (mother)65l-DOPA 600Entacapone
800Asymmetric onset, bilateral bradykinesia and rigidity (L>R), no tremor. Mild gait difficulties and postural instabilityGood3NoHyposmia,
sleep and bladder disorderNoDyskinesias (30-40% of waking day), wearing-off7USAM/57/52D134G/wYes (father and paternal aunt)/Ropinirole
14Asymmetric onset, unilateral left arm rest tremor, bradykinesia and rigidity. Reduced arm swingGood1NoNANoNo8USAF/59/51A120S/waYes
(mother)NANAAsymmetric onset, bilateral bradykinesia and rigidity. No tremor. Mild gait difficultiesGood2NoNANoNA9PortugalF/73/17Q110X/wYes
(sister; father had tremor)49l-DOPA 600 Trihexyphenidyl 6Bilateral rest and postural tremor (L>R), bilateral rigidity and bradykinesia. Some
postural instabilityGood3NoUrinary urgencyLower limb dystonia at onsetMarked limb and truncal dyskinesias, off phases in the
morning10EstoniaM/58/45Q110E/wNo55l-DOPA 400Entacapone 800Rasagiline 1Amantadine 300Bilateral severe bradykinesia and rigidity, postural
instability, mild tremor, hypomimiaGood3NoHyposmia, constipation, fatigue, sleep disorderNoMild dyskinesias and wearing-offNA = information
not available; M = male; F = female; PD = Parkinson disease, y = years, ICD = Impulse control disorder, DBS = deep brain stimulation, RBD =
REM behavioural sleep disorder, H&Y = Hoehn and Yahr; MMSE = Mini-Mental State Examination.aThis case also carries in the heterozygous state
the GBA E326K variant. Clinical features of Parkinson disease cases with GCH1 variants identified in the exome-sequencing study l-DOPA 600
Tolcapone 400 Pramipexole 3 DBS, l-DOPA 200 Amantadine 100 Rotigotine 8 l-DOPA 400 Pramipexole 3.15 l-DOPA 600 Entacapone 800 l-DOPA 400
Entacapone 800 Rasagiline 1 Amantadine 300 NA = information not available; M = male; F = female; PD = Parkinson disease, y = years, ICD =
Impulse control disorder, DBS = deep brain stimulation, RBD = REM behavioural sleep disorder, H&Y = Hoehn and Yahr; MMSE = Mini-Mental State
Examination. aThis case also carries in the heterozygous state the GBA E326K variant. The age at onset of GCH1-mutated cases was 43.2 ± 13.4
years (range 17–61). Seven had a positive family history of Parkinson’s disease. DNA of other family members was available for only one case
and we showed segregation of the same GCH1 mutation (Q110X) in the affected sister of the index case. All cases exhibited a variable
combination of asymmetrical bradykinesia, rigidity, rest and postural tremor, walking difficulties, postural instability and excellent
response to dopaminergic treatment, consistent with a clinical diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease. The two subjects with the youngest age at
onset of symptoms (Cases 4 and 9, who developed symptoms at age 32 and 17, respectively) presented with dystonic features in the lower limbs
at onset, a well recognized characteristic of young-onset Parkinson’s disease cases (Bozi and Bhatia, 2003). Case 5 developed lower limb
dystonia in off periods over the course of the disease. The remainder did not present with any symptoms or signs of dystonia. Detailed
information about treatment was available for eight cases: the two cases (Cases 1 and 7) with the shortest disease duration (≤5 years) were
treated only with a dopamine-agonist, whereas the other cases were taking a combination of levodopa and other anti-parkinsonian drugs. Mean
disease duration was 17.6 ± 15.4 years (range 4–56). Cases with longer disease duration displayed a more severe clinical picture with some
degree of postural instability (Hoehn and Yahr score ≥ 3), indicating disease progression in spite of the dopaminergic treatment. In those
patients taking levodopa and for whom follow-up information was available (n = 7), all developed clinically relevant motor complications of
chronic levodopa treatment, including wearing off, motor fluctuations and dyskinesias. Dyskinesias in Case 4 were so disabling that he
required treatment with deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nuclei at age 60. Most cases exhibited some of the typical non-motor
features often recognized in Parkinson’s disease (Lees et al., 2009), such as cognitive difficulties (Case 5), hyposmia (Cases 3–6 and 10)
constipation (Cases 4 and 10), urinary problems (Cases 5, 6 and 9), fatigue (Cases 2 and 5) and sleep disturbances (Cases 4–6 and 10). We
report here four unrelated DOPA-responsive dystonia pedigrees in which loss-of-function GCH1 mutations (two splice-site mutations and two
missense mutations, confirmed to be pathogenic by metabolic or CSF studies) were found in individuals, asymptomatic for DOPA-responsive
dystonia during childhood, who developed adult-onset parkinsonism. They all met the UKPDSBB clinical criteria for a definite diagnosis of
Parkinson’s disease and had imaging evidence of a Parkinson’s disease-like nigrostriatal dopaminergic denervation. A parkinsonian syndrome
in the absence of dystonia has been reported in adults who are first-degree relatives of children with DOPA-responsive dystonia. In a series
of 21 families, Nygaard showed that 7/50 (14%) individuals older than 40 years had parkinsonism (Nygaard, 1993a) and Hagenah et al. (2005)
reported that 8/23 (34.7%) patients of their series had a positive family history for Parkinson’s disease. GCH1 mutations have also been
shown to segregate in pedigrees with multiple individuals affected by isolated parkinsonism (Irie et al., 2011). Our study provides evidence
that in most of the cases the parkinsonian phenotype in adult GCH1 mutation carriers is likely due to nigrostriatal degeneration, rather
than being simply part of the phenotypic spectrum of metabolic GCH1-related striatal dopamine deficiency. This is consistent with other
previous isolated reports of adult-onset parkinsonism in GCH1 mutation carriers with abnormal nigrostriatal imaging (features summarized in
Table 1) (Kikuchi et al., 2004; Hjermind et al., 2006; Eggers et al., 2012; Ceravolo et al., 2013). Our imaging findings are, however, in
apparent contrast to a previous report by Nygaard et al. (1992). The authors described a large DOPA-responsive dystonia pedigree, in which
three subjects had a late-onset benign parkinsonism, two of which had normal nigrostriatal dopaminergic function determined by means of
18F-fluorodopa PET. Compensatory mechanisms at the presynaptic level (e.g. increased dopamine-intake and dopamine-decarboxylation activity)
may result in relatively higher striatal 18F-fluorodopa uptake in the initial phase of Parkinson’s disease, underestimating the degree of
nigral cell decrease (Nandhagopal et al., 2011). DAT values are therefore a more precise indicator of dopaminergic innervation loss (Ito et
al., 1999). We speculate that GCH1-parkinsonian cases with normal 18F-fluorodopa-PET scan could have upregulated compensatory dopaminergic
activity at the presynaptic level, possibly masking the presence of striatal denervation. In agreement with our findings, Gibb and Lees
reported in 1991 a case that presented with juvenile-onset parkinsonism and dystonia with good response to levodopa (commenced at the age of
30) and occurrence of disabling dyskinesias after 1 year of treatment. The patient died at 39 years and pathological examination showed a
striking combination of low melanin content in nigral neurons and devastating neuronal loss with reactive gliosis. Furthermore, Lewy bodies
were found in surviving nigral cells and in the locus coeruleus (Gibb et al., 1991). This case was subsequently demonstrated to be carrier
of a heterozygous mutation in GCH1 (c.276delC) (Segawa et al., 2004). We subsequently showed, in a large cohort of patients with Parkinson’s
disease without family history of DOPA-responsive dystonia, that rare GCH1 coding variants are associated with Parkinson’s disease and
increase the disease risk by 7-fold on average. Among the GCH1 variants identified by exome sequencing, two (Q110X and K224R) have been
shown to cause GCH1 deficiency and DOPA-responsive dystonia in dominant pedigrees (Leuzzi et al., 2002; Saunders-Pullman et al., 2004) and
two (V204I and M230I) have been reported in heterozygous sporadic or in recessive cases with DOPA-responsive dystonia (Segawa et al., 2004;
Trender-Gerhard et al., 2009; Opladen et al., 2011). It was not possible to functionally investigate (e.g. phenylalanine-loading test or CSF
analysis) the other heterozygous variants identified in this study, therefore their effect on GCH1 activity remains undetermined. However,
three of the four novel variants (A120S, D134G and G217V) detected in cases with Parkinson’s disease were located at amino acid positions
that are fully conserved through species down to invertebrates and were predicted to be pathogenic by all in silico prediction tools,
whereas this was not the case for any of the novel mutations present in controls. Nevertheless, the limitations of prediction tools in
reliably distinguishing benign from pathogenic missense changes are well known and therefore we did not exclude any variant from the
association test based on predictions scores, possibly underestimating the effect size of GCH1 pathogenic variants. Previous studies
investigating the contribution of rare coding GCH1 variants in small cohorts of cases with Parkinson’s disease have reported negative
results although these were insufficiently powered to draw conclusions (Bandmann et al., 1996a; Hertz et al., 2006; Cobb et al., 2009). An
as-yet unpublished meta-analysis of existing genome-wide association study data has, however, identified GCH1 as a common low-risk locus
(Singleton, personal communication), consistent with the hypothesis of a causal role for GCH1 in Parkinson’s disease. The mechanism whereby
GCH1 mutations could predispose to nigral cell degeneration is uncertain. Biochemical evidence of GCH1 deficiency and reduced dopamine
production has been reported in asymptomatic carriers of GCH1 mutations (Takahashi et al., 1994; Furukawa et al., 2002). We speculate that
GCH1 deficiency and the consequent chronic dopamine deficiency could directly predispose to nigral cell death. This would suggest that
normal levels of dopamine exert a protective role on the survival of nigral neurons. There is increasing evidence that levodopa is not toxic
to nigral neurons as was previously thought (Parkkinen et al., 2011). Furthermore, activation of dopamine receptors may have a strong anti-
apoptotic effect and increase survival of dopaminergic neurons (Nair et al., 2003; Vaarmann et al., 2013). In animal models, levodopa has
been shown to promote recovery of nigrostriatal denervation (Datla et al., 2001). Another possibility is that GCH1 mutation carriers who do
not develop symptoms of DOPA-responsive dystonia in childhood may have compensatory mechanisms that allow for normal nigrostriatal
dopaminergic transmission. The maintenance of these mechanisms may increase nigral cell vulnerability to ageing or other environmental and
genetic factors, favouring degeneration. It is also possible that the reduced striatal basal dopamine levels found in GCH1 mutation carriers
may simply lower the threshold of nigral cell loss before parkinsonian symptoms are exhibited. Lastly, we cannot exclude that other yet
unrecognized cellular pathways, not related to dopamine synthesis, may be disrupted by GCH1 and BH4 deficiency. However, the observation
that no DOPA-responsive dystonia cases, treated with levodopa since childhood, have been shown to develop nigral cell loss (Snow et al.,
1993; Turjanski et al., 1993; Jeon et al., 1998), supports the notion that levodopa may indeed have a role in reducing the risk of
degeneration. First, dopamine transporter imaging was not available for the cases with Parkinson’s disease with GCH1 variants identified in
the exome sequencing study. It remains a possibility therefore that some of these cases (in particular Case 9, who presented at age 17, with
lower limb dystonia and parkinsonism) may represent DOPA-responsive dystonia cases with a parkinsonian phenotype, which may have been
misdiagnosed as Parkinson’s disease. However, removal of the aforementioned case from the statistical analysis did not change substantially
the significance of the association (P = 0.0003). Furthermore, most of the patients for whom clinical follow-up data were available showed a
progressive disease course with increasing levodopa requirements, emergence of motor complications due to chronic treatment with levodopa
and presence of classic non-motor features of Parkinson’s disease, strongly supporting nigrostriatal cell loss as the underlying pathology.
Although dyskinesias have been rarely described also in DOPA-responsive dystonia cases, these are significantly different from the ones
generally observed in Parkinson’s disease. Indeed they tend to appear at the beginning of the treatment and subside after dose reduction
without reoccurring with subsequent slow dose increase (Furukawa et al., 2004; Lee et al., 2013). Second, we could not determine at the
individual level the effect on pterin and dopamine metabolism of the GCH1 variants detected in the exome sequencing study. Reduced
penetrance of GCH1 pathogenic variants for the DOPA-responsive dystonia phenotype is a well-established feature. Nevertheless it has been
repeatedly reported, through analysis of brain tissue (Furukawa et al., 2002), CSF (Takahashi et al., 1994) and urine (Leuzzi et al., 2013),
that even completely asymptomatic carriers of GCH1 mutations have abnormal metabolism of biopterins and dopamine, although to a lesser
extent than DOPA-responsive dystonia cases. This indicates the existence of a metabolic endophenotype, which we speculate could be the
pathogenic mechanism underlying the increased risk for Parkinson’s disease. Third, we evaluated a cohort enriched with early-onset and
familial Parkinson’s disease cases. Thus the frequency of detected GCH1 variants may not reflect the frequency in late-onset sporadic cases.
Finally, we did not assess our samples for the presence of GCH1 copy number variants, possibly underestimating the frequency of GCH1
mutations. We provide evidence that rare GCH1 coding variants should be considered as a risk factor for Parkinson’s disease. This is derived
both from imaging evidence of striatal dopaminergic denervation in GCH1 pathogenic variant carriers with a clinical diagnosis of definite
Parkinson’s disease (in DOPA-responsive dystonia pedigrees) and from exome sequencing data that show a significant association between GCH1
coding variants and an increased risk for the disease. These findings expand the clinical and biological relevance of GCH1 deficiency,
suggesting a role not only in biochemical dopamine depletion and DOPA-responsive dystonia, but also in nigrostriatal degeneration. The
question as to how the same variants known to cause a Mendelian disease may also exist as risk alleles in Parkinson’s disease may be
explained by the well-known reduced penetrance of GCH1 pathogenic variants. Whether additional genetic or epigenetic factors play a role in
determining the clinical phenotype of GCH1 variant carriers should be addressed by future studies. A better understanding of the
relationship between GCH1 deficiency and Parkinson’s disease will shed light on the role of dopamine metabolism on nigral neuron survival,
with potential therapeutic implications for patients. We used DNA panels, samples, and clinical data from the National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke Human Genetics Resource Centre DNA and Cell Line Repository. People who contributed samples are
acknowledged in descriptions of every panel on the repository website. We would like to thank the NINDS sponsored Neurogenetics Repository
hosted by Coriell Cell Repositories for the use of both case and control samples. The authors also thank the French Parkinson’s Disease
Genetics Study Group: Y. Agid, M. Anheim, A-M. Bonnet, M. Borg, A. Brice, E. Broussolle, J-C. Corvol, P. Damier, A. Destée, A. Dürr, F.
Durif, S. Klebe, E. Lohmann, M. Martinez, P. Pollak, O. Rascol, F. Tison, C. Tranchant, M. Vérin, F. Viallet, and M. Vidailhet. This study
was supported by the Wellcome Trust/Medical Research Council (MRC) Joint Call in Neurodegeneration award (WT089698) to the UK Parkinson's
Disease Consortium whose members are from the UCL/Institute of Neurology, the University of Sheffield, and the MRC Protein Phosphorylation
Unit at the University of Dundee. This project was also supported by the National Institute for Health Research University College London
Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre and the Grigioni Foundation for Parkinson Disease. This work was also supported in part by the
Intramural Research Programs of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), the National Institute on Aging (NIA),
and the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences both part of the National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human
Services; project numbers Z01-AG000949-02 and Z01-ES101986. In addition this work was supported by the Department of Defense (award
W81XWH-09-2-0128), and the Michael J Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Disease Research. This work was supported by National Institutes of
Health grants R01NS037167, R01CA141668, American Parkinson Disease Association (APDA); Barnes Jewish Hospital Foundation; Greater St Louis
Chapter of the APDA; Hersenstichting Nederland; Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam; the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB 936); and the
section of medical genomics, the Prinses Beatrix Fonds. The KORA (Cooperative Research in the Region of Augsburg) research platform was
started and financed by the Forschungszentrum für Umwelt und Gesundheit, which is funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education,
Science, Research, and Technology and by the State of Bavaria. This study was also funded by the German National Genome Network (NGFNplus
number 01GS08134, German Ministry for Education and Research); by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (NGFN 01GR0468,
PopGen); and 01EW0908 in the frame of ERA-NET NEURON and Helmholtz Alliance Mental Health in an Ageing Society (HA-215), which was funded by
the Initiative and Networking Fund of the Helmholtz Association. As with previous IPDGC efforts, this study makes use of data generated by
the Wellcome Trust Case-Control Consortium. A full list of the investigators who contributed to the generation of the data is available from
www.wtccc.org.uk. Funding for the project was provided by the Wellcome Trust under award 076113, 085475 and 090355. The work was also funded
in part by Parkinson's UK (Grants 8047 and J-1101) and the Medical Research Council UK (G0700943, G1100643) for H.R.M and S.J.L. DNA
extraction work that was done in the UK was undertaken at University College London Hospitals, University College London, who received a
proportion of funding from the Department of Health’s National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centres funding. This study
utilized the high-performance computational capabilities of the Biowulf Linux cluster at the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md.
(http://biowulf.nih.gov). This work was also supported by the France-Parkinson Association and the French program “Investissements d’avenir”
funding (ANR-10-IAIHU-06). This study was also partly supported by the Grant 3.2.1001.11-0017 of the EU European Regional Development Fund
and the Grant IUT2-4 of the Estonian Research Council. The study was also partially supported by European Regional Development Fund in the
frame of Centre of Excellence for Translational Medicine. Supplementary material is available at Brain online. tetrahydrobiopterin dopamine-
transporter N-ω-fluoropropyl-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-iodophenyl) tropane single photon computed tomography
