Disclaimer: The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of
the Department of the Navy, Department of Defense, or the United States Government. The authors are or were military service members. This
work was prepared as part of their official duties. Title 17 USC §105 provides that “Copyright protection under this title is not available
for any work of the United States Government.” Title 17 USC §101 defines a U.S. Government work as a work prepared by a military service
member or employee of the U.S. Government as part of that person's official duties. A 33-year-old male presented for resection of an
intracranial mass after 1 year of recurrent headaches and dizziness. Cerebrospinal fluid testing had shown a lymphocytic pleocytosis (163
cells/mm3, 59% lymphocytes, 20% neutrophils) with normal protein (42 mg/dL), glucose (54 mg/dL), cultures, and serologic testing. Multiple
brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies showed enlarged ventricles but no masses. Immediately before surgery, a discrete cystic
structure was visible on imaging (Figure 1 Figure 1.(A) Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showing evidence
of a fourth ventricular cystic structure. (B) Histopathology of a surgically removed cyst with i) cuticular layer with microvilli, ii)
cellular layer, and iii) reticular layer. (C) Dissected cyst (neurocysticercosis) protruding from fourth ventricle. (D) Cyst post-
excision.). A large cyst consistent with neurocysticercosis was identified intraoperatively. No additional lesions were observed, and he had
complete resolution of symptoms. He received 7 days of albendazole, dexamethasone, and levetiracetam per guidelines for a solitary lesion.1
Follow-up imaging using higher resolution (1 mm versus 6 mm planes) and volumetric sequencing displayed an extra-parenchymal cyst with a
visible scolex lateral to the fourth ventricle (Figure 2 Figure 2.Axial T2. Follow-up imaging 2 months post-surgical. (A) 1.2 cm cyst
located at the right Foramen of Luschka (lateral recess of the fourth ventricle) consistent with neurocysticercosis cyst with internal
scolex. (B) Post-surgical image displaying post-surgical changes to the fourth ventricle without evidence of residual cyst.). As a result of
surgical excision, there was no evidence of a residual fourth ventricle cyst. His MRI spine was negative, and he received two additional
months of therapy until radiographic resolution, per guidelines for extra-parenchymal lesions.1 This thin walled extra-parynchymal cyst was
uncovered with higher quality imaging using both finer planes and an ultrafast MRI technique known as volumetric imaging (e.g., fast imaging
employing steady-state acquisition sequencing). Ideally, higher quality imaging would have revealed these cysts preoperatively. However, his
films were suggestive of mass lesion and thus volumetric imaging was not performed until the surgical pathology provided a definitive
diagnosis. This case displays the role that high quality volumetric imaging plays in the diagnosis of neurocysticercosis. (A) Gadolinium-
enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showing evidence of a fourth ventricular cystic structure. (B) Histopathology of a
surgically removed cyst with i) cuticular layer with microvilli, ii) cellular layer, and iii) reticular layer. (C) Dissected cyst
(neurocysticercosis) protruding from fourth ventricle. (D) Cyst post-excision. Axial T2. Follow-up imaging 2 months post-surgical. (A) 1.2
cm cyst located at the right Foramen of Luschka (lateral recess of the fourth ventricle) consistent with neurocysticercosis cyst with
internal scolex. (B) Post-surgical image displaying post-surgical changes to the fourth ventricle without evidence of residual cyst. We
thank Daniel Hawley of the NMCSD Department of Radiology and Jeffrey Tomlin NMCSD Department of Neurosurgery for their assistance with
interpretation of the magnetic resonance imaging. Authors' addresses: Michael J. Kavanaugh and Ryan C. Maves, Naval Medical Center San Diego
- Internal Medicine/Infectious Diseases, San Diego, CA, E-mails: michael.kavanaugh@med.navy.mil and ryan.maves@med.navy.mil. W. Christopher
Fox, Columbia University - Department of Neurological Sugery, New York, New York, E-mail: chrisfox@gmail.com.
