There are cases in which the presence of a foreign body (FB) is difficult to diagnose based on history taking or clinical examination. We
report a case of subconjunctival FB confused with uveal prolapse. A 68-year-old man, who had the history of pterygium excision in his right
eye, complained of irritation and congestion in that same eye. He also had the history of growing vegetables in a plastic greenhouse. It
seemed to be a suspected uveal mass bulging through a focal scleral thinning site. On the basis of slit-lamp magnification, the lesion was
presumed to be a hard and black keratinized mass embedded under the conjunctiva. Histopathologically, the removed mass was revealed to be a
seed of the dicotyledones. Patients who show signs of prolapsed uvea or scleral thinning, possibility of a subconjunctival FB should be
considered as differential diagnosis. In addition, a removed unknown FB should be examined histopathologically. Ocular foreign bodies (FBs)
are often encountered in clinical practices. In most cases, medical history referring to the nature of injury may be enough to suggest the
presence of a FB. However, there are cases in which the presence of the FB is difficult to diagnose based on history taking or clinical
examination. A 68-year-old man, who had the history of pterygium excision in his right eye 10 years ago, complained of irritation and
congestion in that same eye, which were developed approximately 1 week prior to his visit to our department. The patient did not have any
other specific medical or ocular history. However, we noted that the patient grew vegetables in a plastic greenhouse. Slit-lamp examination
showed a suspected uveal mass bulging through a focal scleral thinning site in the nasal region of the right eye [Fig. 1]. With the slit-
lamp magnification, the lesion was presumed to be a hard and black keratinized mass. The mass was removed with a forceps and sent to a
parasitologist for examination. The underlying sclera displayed mild thinning accompanied by inflammations. Topical therapy was started with
0.5% moxifloxacin solution 3 times a day, 0.1% fluorometholone solution 3 times a day, and dexamethasone ointment once a day. One month
after the initial visit, the FB removal site was well-recovered. When the removed unknown FB was examined on a light microscopy, it was
revealed to be not a parasite but suspected a larva state of an insect or seed of a plant [Fig. 2]. With botanist consultation, the FB was
confirmed as a seed of the dicotyledones, which is a grouping formerly used for the flowering plants whose seed typically has two embryonic
leaves. Considering the patient's history of growing vegetables, the FB might have entered the surface of conjunctiva accidently during the
work. However, if it is impossible to distinguish the precise identity of the FB, based on history taking or clinical examination, then the
genetic information (18S ribosomal deoxyribonucleic acid sequence) of the organism need to be compared with those of other known organisms.
An unknown mass embedded under the nasal bulbar conjunctiva posterior to limbus which was initially misdiagnosed as uveal prolapsed
Histopathologic features of a removed unknown foreign body. It was revealed to be a seed of the dicotyledones on light microscope
examination (magnification Ã—100) There are several reports on ocular FBs involving larvae or wings of insects, beans, and plants. Living
organisms such as a larva or an insect wing can be diagnosed easily in most cases. However, a prolonged ocular FB combined with inflammation
or granulation, like scleral thinning or necrotizing scleritis after pterygium surgery, can be difficult to be diagnosed. Therefore,
patients who display signs of prolapsed uvea or localized scleritis, possibility of a subconjunctival FB should be considered for
differential diagnosis. Source of Support: This study was supported by a grant of the Korean Health Technology R and D Project, Ministry of
Health and Welfare, Republic of Korea (A070001) Conflict of Interest: None declared
