The surgical and anatomical basis for using the colon as a substitute for the esophagus were established in 1911 by Kelling and Vuillet1 and
for many years was the technique of choice for esophageal replacement2. Its use is helpful in benign diseases, such as caustic or peptic
strictures, and malignancies1,3, especially when the stomach cannot be used, and also in children with congenital anomalies2,4. However,
this procedure is subject to early complications, as ischemia of the colon and leakage5, or late problems as anastomosis stenosis, ischemic
colitis, fistula due to diverticulitis and malignant lesions4. The transposed colon cancer is a rare complication. Since 2007, six new cases
were reported and two reviews published. Hwang et al6 found 10 reported cases of adenocarcinoma in the transposed colon and Bando et al7
also reviewed 10 cases in the literature, encompassing adenomas and adenocarcinomas. The aim is to report an unique case of synchronous
adenocarcinoma of the transposed colon. Woman with 53-years-old diagnosed with congenital esophageal atresia, underwent to several surgical
procedures in childhood, the latest was a cervical retrosternal esophagocoloplasty at 11 years old. After 42 years she was evolved with
cervical dysphagia, and an initial diagnosis of stenosis of the esophagocolic anastomosis was performed, treated with endoscopic dilation
without improvement. Later, biopsies were performed in the area of ​​stenosis in proximal colonic segment (Figure 1) and polypectomy of
sessile polyp of 10 mm, 5 cm distal to the stenosis (Figure 2). The pathological assessment showed tubular-villous intramucosal
adenocarcinoma at the resected polyp and the area of ​​stenosis was a invasive adenocarcinoma in colonic mucosa. Colonoscopy of remained
colon was normal. Staging performed with CT scan showed an eccentric wall thickening of proximal colon transposed with luminal reduction
target of left innominate vein; densification of mediastinal fat plane adjacent and regional lymph nodes up to 1.9 cm. Endoscopic view of
the stenotic area in proximal colonic segment with advanced adenocarcinoma Endoscopic view of the sessile polyp with sincronous intramucosal
adenocarcinoma at the transposed colon more distal Surgical treatment was performed with neck incision, sternotomy and laparotomy with
resection of the colon transposed and a tactic transhiatal esophagectomy of the atresic esophagus in order to pull up the greater curvature
gastric conduit obtained by the posterior mediastinum route. Resection of a portion of the left innominate vein which was invaded by the
tumor was also performed. The pathological examination of surgical specimen showed moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma invading
pericolical tissues and the left innominate vein, with no affected lymph nodes - p T4 N0 (0 / 42) M0. The patient developed postoperative
superior vena cava syndrome, treated by anticoagulation. She had ischemia of the proximal portion of the stomach transposed being performed
partial gastrectomy, and respiratory complications. She remained in intensive care and under multidisciplinary clinical support. Discharge
of the hospital was after 128 days. Patient developed recurrent disease (lung metastases), started chemotherapy, and died nine months after
surgery due to pneumonia. There are basically three options for replacement after esophageal resection: stomach, colon and small bowel8. For
many years, the colon was considered the organ of choice, but the stomach has been the most widely used in recent decades due facility of
preparation of the gastric conduit and its more robust vascular supply as a result of a rich submucosal vascular layer9. Resection of the
gastric lesser curvature allows elongation and a safe cervical anastomosis8,10,11. In cases of previous gastrectomy, gastric caustic or
peptic strictures, tumor involvement of the stomach or failed gastroplasty the colon is used9. Colonic interposition may have early
complications as transposed colon ischemia and anastomotic fistula. Late complications as anastomotic stricture "redundant graft",
ulceration, colitis, perforation, diverticulitis, or tumor in the colonic segment are reported4,5. Must be remembered that colorectal cancer
has a high incidence; is the third leading cause of cancer diagnosed in men and second among women in the world12 and this colonic segment
has a risk for malignancy too. There are 21 cases of adenoma/adenocarcinoma in transposed colon described in literature1,3-7. This case
shows that all patient underwent to esophagocoloplasty and develops dysphagia during late follow-up should be investigated for malignancy
and the initial diagnosis of stenosis of the esophagocolic anastomosis without biopsy should be evoid. Financial source: none Conflicts of
interest: none
