Herein, we report the clinical findings, treatment choice, and clinical course of a rare case of Mycoplasma pneumoniae (M. pneumoniae)
infection with the sole manifestation of optic neuritis (ON). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case presenting
monosymptomatic visual loss without papillitis, neurological symptoms, and abnormal findings on brain imaging. Related articles about ON
after M. pneumoniae infection were reviewed to summarize the clinical presentation, possible mechanisms, clinical survey, treatment, and
prognosis of this condition. We propose that a Mycoplasma profile is necessary in children who present with ON, especially when this
condition is accompanied by prodromal symptoms of the respiratory tract infection. The Mycoplasma pneumoniae (M. pneumoniae) pathogen can
cause atypical pneumonia that is occasionally accompanied by extrapulmonary infections. Ocular manifestations other than conjunctivitis are
uncommon. M. pneumoniae infection with optic neuritis (ON) as the only presentation is relatively rare. We describe the case of an 8-year-
old boy who developed monosymptomatic ON following M. pneumoniae infection along with the clinical findings, treatment approach, management,
and prognosis. In addition, the literature on ocular and central nervous system (CNS) manifestations associated with this pathogen were
collected and summarized to provide essential information about such cases. An 8-year-old boy with the underlying condition of prematurity
had normal developmental milestones. He presented with sudden onset, profoundly blurred vision (oculus uterque ) accompanied by prodromal
symptoms of upper respiratory infection. Initial ocular examination revealed that his best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) had deteriorated
to light perception only (oculus dexter )/hand motion (HM) at 70-80 cm (oculus sinister ), a fixed and dilated pupil (6.0 mm), and normal
fundus appearance [Fig. 1]. Pediatric neurologists did not find neurological symptoms or signs. A visual field (VF) examination could not be
performed because of severe visual loss. Optic coherence tomography [Fig. 2] revealed that the retinal nerve fiber layer thicknesses were
within the normal range. The visual evoked potential (VEP) [Fig. 3] showed severe prolonged latency (OU). The brain magnetic resonance image
(MRI) did not show a brain lesion nor optic nerve enhancement in the T1-weighted image with contrast. Laboratory analyses revealed a high
Mycoplasma-IgM titer (+, >75 BU/mL) in his blood, but the glucose (62 mg/dL) and total protein (18.6 mg/dL) levels in his cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) were within normal limits. Based on the profile above, bilateral ON associated with M. pneumoniae infection was suspected. Color
fundus did not reveal papillitis or an active retinal lesion Disc optical coherence tomography (OCT). Disc OCT revealed normal bilateral
disc appearance and nerve fiber layer thickness Visual evoked potential (VEP). Pattern VEP showed a severely prolonged latency and aberrant
waves A pulse steroid therapy of intravenous methylprednisolone (750 mg/day) was given for 3 days followed by oral prednisolone (10 mg/day).
However, because the BCVA persisted at HM (OU) after the 3-day pulse therapy, an intravenous immunoglobulin (1 g/kg·day) was prescribed for
2 days. After the 3-day pulse therapy, the initially fixed and dilated pupil (size, 6.0 mm) responded to light (size, 3.5 mm), but a
relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) was still noted in the right eye. His BCVA improved to 12/20 (OD), 6/20 (OS) and the VF [Fig. 4a]
showed a severely constricted VF with a central tunnel (OD)/inferior arcuate VF defect (OS) 2 weeks after pulse therapy. His visual outcome
dramatically improved with a BCVA of 20/20 (OD), 20/20 (OS) and an improved VF result 7 weeks after treatment [Fig. 4b], and these factors
improved further at 15 weeks after treatment [Fig. 4c]. Visual field (VF) after treatment. Initially 2 weeks after treatment (a), a VF
defect was noted with a severely constricted VF with a central tunnel (oculus dexter)/inferior arcuate VF defect (oculus sinister).
Progressive improvement was noted 7 weeks after treatment (b) and 15 weeks after treatment (c) ON, which is strongly associated with
multiple sclerosis, infectious causes should be given a high priority in young patients. A review article indicated that specific infectious
pathogens such as measles, mumps, chickenpox, rubella, brucella, pertussis, mononucleosis, and Epstein-Barr virus have been reported for
pediatric ON; furthermore, this review proposed that postinfectious ON is the result of an autoimmune reaction to the infection. Bilateral
involvement with profound visual loss is more common in ON in children than in adults. Symptoms may include RAPD, headache, eye pain, or
bilateral papillitis. The VEP signal may initially present as an absent or diminished amplitude, with a more abnormal latency than is
observed in adults. M. pneumoniae is an atypical pathogen that mainly causes respiratory infection and is among the most important bacterial
causes of “atypical” community-acquired pneumonia with overall prevalence of 22.7%. However, M. pneumoniae is also responsible for
extrapulmonary symptoms. The most common extrapulmonary complications of M. pneumoniae are neurological, such as encephalitis, myelitis, and
central white matter disease. It may also show ocular involvement such as conjunctivitis, third or sixth nerve palsies, homonymous
hemianopia, nystagmus, anterior uveitis, and very rarely, optic neuropathy. Although the primary diagnosis of M. pneumoniae-associated
disease is based on clinical presentation, elevated immunoglobulin titers in the serum are an acceptable diagnostic confirmation in clinical
practice. Due to the rare incidence of ON associated with M. pneumoniae infection, we reviewed articles about ON after M. pneumoniae
infection published from 1998 to 2011 [Table 1]. In total, five patients with M. pneumoniae-induced ON reported in the available literature.
The following characteristics were noted: All cases had prodromal symptoms of respiratory tract infection, only two ON cases occurred in
children; four cases had bilateral profound visual loss, one case had a VF defect of disclosed marked restriction, four cases did not have a
light reflex; three cases had papillitis, and two cases had abnormal MRI findings. Compared to the patients listed in Table 1, our patient
was the first to present with monosymptomatic visual loss without papillitis, neurological symptoms, and an abnormal MRI; furthermore,
papillitis is the common presentation of ON in children, but our patient presented with retro-bulbar form. Literature review of M.
pneumoniae-induced optic neuritis with clinical manifestations Direct invasion of the CNS and a postinfectious immune response are among the
suggested mechanisms of M. pneumoniae extrapulmonary complications. Another study suggested an autoimmune mechanism because antibodies to
myelin and neural tissue have been detected in some cases and the removal of these antibodies by plasmapheresis ameliorated neurological
symptoms. The ON treatment trial suggests intravenous administration of methylprednisolone followed by oral prednisolone for a fast recovery
and low recurrence, but no effect on final visual outcome. Although the management of ON is well-described in adults, evidence-based,
prospective clinical data on its management and treatment in a pediatric population is scarce. The current treatment of pediatric ON,
consisting of 3-5 days of intravenous methylprednisolone (4-30 mg/kg·day) followed by oral corticosteroid. The alternative treatment
includes intravenous administration of immunoglobulin and plasmapheresis while being refractory to corticosteroid. However, the effect of
immunomodulation on visual recovery has not been established. As for our patient, improvement could not be recognized as the attribution to
steroid or immunoglobulin therapy. Regarding the prognosis of pediatric ON, visual recovery is excellent in most cases, especially in
younger children (<6 years of age). In our patient, the clinical course of ON presumably due to M. pneumoniae infection was recovery of the
pupil response to light 3 days after pulse therapy and an improvement of the VA to the normal range in 7 weeks; however, the VF defect
persisted 2 months after ON onset. Mycoplasma infection-induced monosymptomatic ON is rare. Evaluation of anti-Mycoplasma antibodies (IgM
and IgG) and a CNS survey (MRI and CSF study) should be performed routinely when ON is suspected, especially in children. Immunomodulatory
therapy may be considered after a poor response to methylprednisolone pulse therapy. The visual outcome was favorable in our case with
recovery of visual acuity 2 months after treatment. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared
