Osteolytic vertebral erosion is usually related to tumours, spondylitis or spondylodiscitis. Few reports in the literature describe lytic
lesions of anterior lumbar vertebral bodies resulting from abdominal aortic aneurysm or false aneurysm. We report a case of abdominal aortic
false aneurysm that caused lytic lesions of the second and third vertebral bodies in an 80-year-old man who underwent endovascular aneurysm
repair. Fluoroscopy guided biopsy excluded infection or tumour. We performed a posterior spinal fusion and decompression because of bone
loss of the second and third lumbar vertebral bodies and central stenosis. Postoperatively the patient showed satisfactory relief in low-
back and thigh pain but, unfortunately, he died 1 month after surgery because of respiratory complications. This case suggests that when a
lytic lesion of a lumbar vertebral body is discovered in a patient who has undergone endovascular aneurysm repair, an abdominal aortic false
aneurysm may be the cause of the vertebral erosion even in cases without infective pathogenesis. Osteolytic vertebral erosion is usually
related to tumour, spondylitis or spondylodiscitis. Vertebral erosion determined by an abdominal aortic aneurysm is rare but already
described . Very few cases of vertebral lesion caused by false aneurysm secondary to prosthetic stent have been reported , and this is the
first case of vertebral erosion due to a false aneurysm in a patient who underwent endovascular aneurysm surgery in absence of disco-
vertebral infection. An 80-year-old man, with multiple co-morbidities was admitted to the author’s hospital for severe low-back pain, lower
limbs motor impairment and bilateral thigh pain. Nine months before admission to our department, he underwent endovascular aneurysm repair
(EVAR) for an abdominal aortic aneurysm (Fig. 1). A computed tomography (CT) scan performed 1 month after the endovascular abdominal aortic
aneurysm repair did not show any signs of lumbar vertebral or disc erosion (Fig. 2). Three months after the endovascular procedure, he
developed a progressive lower back pain and bilateral thigh pain that did not respond to conservative treatments. At this time, in another
hospital, MRI of the lumbar spine showed severe bone loss in the anterior half of the third lumbar vertebral body and L3 vertebroplasty was
performed without any significant relief of the symptoms (Fig. 3). On admission in our hospital, 9 months after EVAR, clinical evaluation
showed severe low-back pain, bilateral thigh pain, motor deficit of the lower limbs and the patient was not able to walk (Frankel C) .
Laboratory findings were within normal limits: haemoglobin, 12.5 g/dl (normal 12–16 g/dl), white blood cell count, 6.3 × 109/l (normal
4.3–10.8 × 109/l) with a normal differential, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 25 mm/h (normal 2–30 mm/h), C-reactive protein 2.4 mg/l (normal
0.00–3.00 mg/l). A new MRI of the lumbar spine, performed at admission, showed the false aneurysm and its relation to L2–L3 bodies causing
vertebral and disc erosion (Fig. 4). Fluoroscopy guided biopsy was performed, but it was negative as regards microbiological and
histopathological examination for tumours or infections. A more accurate evaluation of MRI of the lumbar spine uncovered an extensive
abdominal aortic false aneurysm, corresponding with the prosthetic stents that had eroded the vertebral bodies of L2–L3. The vascular
surgeon did not consider revision surgery necessary at that time. Laboratory findings, fluoroscopy guided biopsy and PET-CT (Fig. 5) had
excluded infection, and for this reason we avoided draining the fluid at the L2–L3 disc space, but we opted for a posterior decompression of
the central canal stenosis, between L2 and L3, to improve the neurologic condition of the patient. In addition a long and extensive
instrumentation of T12–L5 was performed to avoid the risk of implant failure due to the presence of severe vertebral osteopenia (Fig. 6).
Moreover, an autologous iliac bone graft was utilized to obtain better postero-lateral fusion. In the disc space L2–L3 we just found
abundant serum-hematic fluid. Another biopsy of the L2–L3 disc performed during surgery confirmed the absence of tumours or infections.
Postoperatively, laboratory findings were: haemoglobin 9.2 g/dl, white blood cell count 8.5 × 109/l, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 35 mm/h,
C-reactive protein 3.00 mg/l. After surgery the patient obtained excellent relief of low-back and thigh pain with a satisfactory regain of
walking (Frankel D). Unfortunately, 1 month after surgery the patient died because of respiratory complications. We excluded sepsis as a
possible cause of death because the patient in the postoperative period had no fever and laboratory findings were within normal
limits.Fig. 1Intraoperative angiography before (a) and after (b) the endoprosthesis deployment. No signs of rupture are
evidentFig. 2Computed tomography scan 1 month after endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. No signs of vertebral erosion are
presentFig. 3Lumbar spine X-ray showing vertebroplasty procedure performed 3 months after aneurysm repairFig. 4a MRI 9 months after
endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair showed the false aneurysm and its relation to L2–L3 vertebrae. b L2–L3 central
stenosisFig. 5PET-CT section 9 months after endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair was not significative of
infectionFig. 6Postoperative X-ray of lumbar spine Intraoperative angiography before (a) and after (b) the endoprosthesis deployment. No
signs of rupture are evident Computed tomography scan 1 month after endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. No signs of vertebral
erosion are present Lumbar spine X-ray showing vertebroplasty procedure performed 3 months after aneurysm repair a MRI 9 months after
endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair showed the false aneurysm and its relation to L2–L3 vertebrae. b L2–L3 central stenosis PET-CT
section 9 months after endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair was not significative of infection Postoperative X-ray of lumbar spine
Osteolytic vertebral erosion is usually caused by neoplasms, spondylitis or spondylodiscitis. Some reports in the literature report that an
abdominal aortic aneurysm can cause erosion of the lumbar vertebral body, due to a progressive aneurysmatic sac expansion . Few authors [6,
7] have reported lumbar vertebral erosion resulting from abdominal aortic contained rupture aneurysm in patients surgically treated for an
abdominal aortic aneurysm by a conventional open surgical repair. Other authors have reported vertebral lesions resulting from endovascular
abdominal aneurysm repair complicated by an infection [8, 9]. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a case in which an
endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) for an abdominal aortic aneurysm was complicated by an abdominal aortic false aneurysm which caused
severe erosion of two lumbar vertebral bodies and disc through an inflammatory mechanism, without signs of infective pathogenesis. It is
possible to assume that, despite the endovascular procedure, the pseudo-aneurysmatic sac can cause an inflammatory stimulus that is erosive
for the adjacent vertebrae and discs. Pre-existing osteopenia, frequently observed in old patients, can contribute to the development of the
vertebral erosion. If the patient is in good general condition, an anterior approach with the removal of the prosthesis and L2–L3
decompression and fusion should be considered. We assume that when a lytic lesion of a lumbar vertebral body or disc is discovered in a
patient treated for an abdominal aortic aneurysm by endovascular repair, an abdominal aortic false aneurysm can be the cause of the
vertebral or disc erosion even in cases without infective complication. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. The
patient provided his consent to the publication of this case report.
