Patients suffering from aortic arch aneurysms continue to encounter few treatment options. Because of co-morbidities, most are deemed to not
be open surgical candidates. The two cases presented here demonstrate a novel endovascular approach in the care of an arch aneurysm
complicated by dissection. Even though final graft configurations differed slightly between the two cases, all three great vessels were
successfully de-branched through the combination of standard endovascular aneurysm repair techniques and modifications to off-the-shelf
devices. Aortic flow was compartmentalized in the ascending aorta at or near the level of the sinotubular junction. This was done with a
physician-assembled endografts. One of these lumens was dedicated to the descending aorta, while the other was further divided into three
channels used to stent the great vessels. Completion angiography demonstrated patency in the arch, great vessels, and descending aorta. No
endoleaks have been reported. Although data is limited, this approach appears promising. Open repair of aortic arch aneurysms requires
minimizing blood loss, cerebral perfusion or deep circulatory arrest, and relatively low-risk patients. An alternative endovascular approach
for repairing the diseased aortic arch with a triple side-branch device was pioneered by Dr Inohoue.1 His innovative device was implanted
through a trans-femoral approach. Unfortunately, one of the two patients treated with this device experienced significant cerebrovascular
accident. More recently, Dr Abraham also used a trans-femoral delivered multi-branched stent graft to treat six patients. Again, he reported
two incidences of stroke and cerebrovascular accident.2 Soon after Dr Inohoue’s innovative device was reported, Dr Chuter began working on a
device that could be implanted through the innominate artery. After several iterations of improving his prototype, he arrived at his optimal
solution. After a carotid–carotid and carotid–subclavian bypass, the device would be delivered from the innominate artery and landed in the
ascending arch. One branch would stent the innominate while the other would be extended to the descending aorta. The device was implanted in
one patient with good results.3 Here, we would like to propose a modular stent graft system that can be delivered from the subclavian or
axillary artery and that can stent all three great vessels and the descending aorta. The device can theoretically be used to treat virtually
any aneurysmal or dissected anatomy while stenting all three great vessels and maintaining continuous perfusion to the brain as well as the
descending aorta. We present two patients who were denied open repair as an option due to comorbidities and extensive dissection. The
dissection in these two patients extended from the ascending arch to the iliac arteries. The dissection also extended up into all three
great vessels. This degree of dissection may complicate the process of creating open bypasses, because it can be challenging to determine
true from false lumen when creating the anastomoses. An endovascular approach allows for continuous perfusion and the use of angiography and
ultrasound to ensure access in true lumen of the great vessels prior to stenting. In both of the cases, an endovascular technique using
modified off-the-shelf devices was used after appropriate patient consent for physician-assembled off-label device use. Retrospective chart
review was performed to collect case details with IRB approval. A 47-year-old female with a history of systolic heart failure, hypertension,
and multiple sclerosis was seen by our services following the denial for repair of a thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm (TAAA) secondary to
aortic dissection at several other medical centers. Further imaging of the chest demonstrated aneurysmal disease throughout the arch and
into the three great vessels. The dissection actually extended from the ascending aorta through the arch down into the left iliac. All
visceral vessels and iliacs were fed by true lumen. A max diameter of 58 mm was noted just distal to the left subclavian artery with
progressive back pain. To repair this lesion, two PAEGs were created, a double barrel (Figure 1(a)) and a manifold (Figure 1(b)). The
thoracic double barrel was created by shortening two 24-mm Valiants to 50 mm in length and sewing them together on the proximal end with a
common seam. Then they were sewn in an end-to-end anastomosis to a 46-mm Valiant, which was also shortened to 50 mm. The manifold was
created by first sewing two 10-mm diameter and 30-mm long Viabahns together with a common seam on the proximal end. Then a 25 × 16 × 124 mm3
Endurant had its ipsilateral limb shortened to be 10 mm shorter than the contralateral limb. The double 10-mm Viabahns were sewed to the
ipsilateral limb in an end-to-end anastomosis. The two PAEGs were then re-sheathed for deployment. Figure 1. Physician-assembled endografts
used to treat patient 1: (a) thoracic double barrel and (b) thoracic manifold. Physician-assembled endografts used to treat patient 1: (a)
thoracic double barrel and (b) thoracic manifold. In both of the above constructs, the grafts were fully constrained by wrapping with 20
gage surgical wire. To resheath the constructs, the wire was unwound as the outer sheath was re-advanced over the newly constructed grafts
(Captivia Delivery System, Endurant Delivery System, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN). Right subclavian, left carotid, left brachial, and
bilateral femoral accesses were performed. Ten millimeter conduits were attached to the right subclavian and one femoral artery. A Premium
6500 unipolar temporary myocardial pacing lead (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN) for overdrive pacing was placed in the right ventricle from
a right femoral venous access. After access and angiograms were performed, the thoracic double barrel stent graft was positioned and
deployed at the level of the sinotubular junction from the right subclavian conduit (Figure 2(a)). During placement, respirations were held
and overdrive pacing was used. The thoracic manifold was then positioned and deployed in one of the two 24-mm limbs of the thoracic double
barrel via the subclavian conduit (Figure 2(b)). Once again overdrive pacing was used during deployment. Before we brought up the arch and
descending thoracic graft, we established retrograde wire access in the other two limbs of the thoracic manifold. It is to be noted that
access to the innominate was via our delivery wire from the right subclavian artery. The arch and descending thoracic grafts were brought
up-and-over the arch and into the open 24-mm limb of the thoracic double barrel from a femoral conduit. The graft was positioned and
deployed, effectively resulting in exclusion of the aneurysmal sac from half of the aortic blood flow (Figure 2(c)). Next, we de-branched
the left common carotid artery and left subclavian artery with iCast balloon-expandable covered stents (Figure 2(d)). These were both lined
with Protégé self-expanding stents (eV3; Plymouth, MN). Lastly, the innominate was de-branched. Using a 16 × 20 × 82 mm3 Endurant limb which
was shortened to 55 mm, the innominate was stented. A 28-mm Gore cuff was then used to extend seal into the innominate. Figure 2.Animation
describing the sequential steps of implanting the graft system in patient 1: (a) the double barrel is placed through the right subclavian
access; (b) the manifold is placed in the ipsilateral limb of the double barrel through the right subclavian access; (c) the transverse limb
is brought up and over the arch and placed in the contralateral limb of the double barrel after wire access is secured in the left
subclavian and left common carotid; and (d) the three great vessels are stented. Animation describing the sequential steps of implanting the
graft system in patient 1: (a) the double barrel is placed through the right subclavian access; (b) the manifold is placed in the
ipsilateral limb of the double barrel through the right subclavian access; (c) the transverse limb is brought up and over the arch and
placed in the contralateral limb of the double barrel after wire access is secured in the left subclavian and left common carotid; and (d)
the three great vessels are stented. Completion angiography demonstrated a patent aortic arch and patent great vessels. Flow was retained in
the innominate, right- and left-common carotids, and bilateral subclavian arteries (Figure 3). All contact points were balloon
angioplastied. The procedure required 147 cc of contrast and 105 min of fluoroscopy. For an unknown reason, the patient experienced
significant pulmonary issues and required two additional days on the ventilator. She was discharged to home on post-op day 13, and has been
followed at 1 month, 6 months, and 12 months. Post-operative imaging showed no endoleaks (Figure 4). Figure 3.Completion angiogram showing
stents into each of the three great vessels. Figure 4.3D reconstruction of contrasted CT scans of Patient 1 from the 1 month follow-up.
Figure 5.Physician-assembled endografts used to treat patient 2. Completion angiogram showing stents into each of the three great vessels.
3D reconstruction of contrasted CT scans of Patient 1 from the 1 month follow-up. Physician-assembled endografts used to treat patient 2. A
70-year-old male was referred to our service to evaluate a large transverse and descending aneurysm. This individual had previously
undergone open surgical repair of the ascending aorta secondary to a Type A dissection four years prior. Imaging revealed aneurysmal disease
throughout the arch with dissection extending into the great vessels and descending aorta to the iliacs. Patient 2’s left renal artery came
off false lumen. When we did split perfusion angiography, we found that the left kidney was atrophic and non-functional. He was denied open
repair, and again because of the extent of his dissection in the great vessels, we avoided hybrid repair. The patient underwent a similar
procedure as described for Patient 1. The main body graft, as used on Patient 1, was determined to be too long for Patient 2 due to his
shorter ascending arch. It was decided that joining the two grafts into a unitary configuration would be a better fit (Figure 5). The
unitary manifold was created by first shortening the ipsilateral limb of a standard 28 × 16 × 124 mm3 Endurant main body stent graft. This
limb was shortened to the crotch of the Endurant main body. Attached to the shortened ipsilateral limb were two 10-mm Viabahn covered stent
grafts which were shortened to 30 mm. The contralateral limb was trimmed to 35 mm. A 24 × 24 × 82 mm3 Endurant iliac limb extension was then
sutured to the modified Endurant main body forming a common seam; this limb was also trimmed to 35 mm. A 46 × 46 × 100 mm3 Valiant stent
graft was deployed and trimmed to 30 mm. A running lock-stitch suture was used to connect the Valiant and modified Endurant thereby forming
the unitary manifold (Figure 5). The entire length of the manifold graft was 60 mm. The thoracic manifold was then re-constrained into its
original sheath. Figure 6.3D reconstructions of contrasted CT scan of Patient 2 from the 1 month follow-up. 3D reconstructions of contrasted
CT scan of Patient 2 from the 1 month follow-up. The procedure used to treat Patient 2 was similar to the procedure used to treat Patient 1,
with the main exception being the main body graft configuration. The procedure for Patient 2 required 61 cc of contrast and 83.1 min of
fluoroscopy. Patient 2 had an uneventful postoperative period and was discharged to home on postoperative day 4. There are no noted
endoleaks seen on postoperative imaging (Figure 6). The patient has been seen for his 1-month and 6-month follow-up since surgery. The
benefit of snorkels and chimneys is that they have parallel take offs and gently sweeping centerlines in their bridging stents. We feel this
lends itself to smooth laminar blood flow and long-term patency. Unfortunately, snorkels and chimneys do not provide for circumferential
seal or fixation. Hence they may be prone to endoleaks. In the aortic arch, circulatory motion combined with high flow rates may increase
the risk of endoleaks. We believe our proposed system lends itself well to long-term bridging stent patency while also providing for
circumferential seal and fixation. What’s more is that the flow of chimney stents are often taken from the outer edge of aortic flow, which
is the slowest flow of the aorta which has a parabolic velocity profile. Our bridging stents obtain more of their flow from central portions
of the aorta, which provides for higher flow rates and greater perfusion of the great vessels. As mentioned above, aortic arch main body
grafts that are delivered from a trans-femoral location may carry an increased risk of peri-operative stroke. Dr Abraham elaborates more on
the possible reason for the increased risk in his manuscript. As the relatively stiff delivery catheter and branched graft construct pass
through significant aortic thrombus, they can mobilize emboli. As these stiff devices are driven up-and-over the arch, these mobilized
emboli can shower the great vessels leading to stroke. Because of this risk, we decided to deliver our main body grafts through the
subclavian artery. We feel this approach pioneered by Dr Chuter is preferable. The straight shot into the ascending arch from the subclavian
and innominate also makes alignment of the main body graft in zone 0 more controllable. By compartmentalizing flow at the level of the
sinotubular junction, we were able to endovascularly de-branch all three great vessels of the arch while maintaining flow to the descending
aorta throughout the procedure. Again the main body grafts are delivered through the right subclavian access, which allows for us to secure
wire access in the innominate artery from the beginning. This is important, because it allows for surgical options in the event that we
cannot secure wire access from the left common carotid or left subclavian artery. Once the innominate is stented, we always have the option
to perform open debranch of the left common carotid and left subclavian arteries as needed. We are also very careful to establish and
maintain wire access in all three great vessels before we deploy the arch graft which provides flow to the descending aorta. We feel this is
important so that the arch graft does not jail the great vessels. Once the arch graft is positioned and deployed, we now make the critical
connections between the arch manifold and the native great vessels. In case where there is significant thrombus formation in the arch,
stenting the great vessels prior to delivery of the arch and descending graft remains an option. This acts to protect the great vessels from
embolic debris. We feel the ability to stent all three great vessels is an important next step in the evolution of endovascular arch repair.
If only one of the great vessels is repaired, such as the innominate, and accompanied by concomitant bypasses, then the entire
cerebrovascular system becomes vulnerable. If the health of that single vessel becomes compromised, the whole cerebrovascular system will be
compromised. Stenting all three great vessels maintains the natural redundancy of the three great vessels. In both of these cases the goal
was to cover the entry tear. The descending thoracic aorta was covered down to the height of the mid-thoracic aorta, and the great vessels
were excluded from the dissected arch aneurysm. Beings dissections tend to be a life-long issues, these patients will be monitored carefully
for the rest of their lives. Thus far, neither patient has required significant reintervention. In the event it is determined they require
reintervention, it will be important to take into account the multiple fenestrations in the membrane separating the true and false lumen as
well as any lumbars feeding the false lumen. The proposed procedure appears to be a suitable alternative to open and hybrid repair. It is
less invasive and has the potential for a significant reduction in hospital stay. The final stent configuration and procedural design can
accommodate many aneurysmal and patient anatomies while maintaining flow to the brain and periphery throughout the procedure. Furthermore,
this technique offers the surgeon great flexibility to stage the intervention to best fit the patient’s tolerance. Even though this
technique has only been performed on two patients, the results show promise. A larger sample size with prospective examination of patient
outcomes and graft durability is a logical next step. The author is currently working toward obtaining a Sponsor-Investigator IDE. This
research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. None declared.
