To the Editor: Imaging studies play an important role in the tumor-node-metastasis staging of lung cancer, particularly in the evaluation of
tumor size/extent and regional lymph node involvement. There is a learning curve for interpreting positron emission tomography (PET)
findings; PET allows the estimation of the metabolic activity of a lesion, therefore facilitating the differential diagnosis between benign
and malignant disease, as well as the determination of the extent of malignancy. When used in the study of lung cancer, PET can give false-
negative results in cases of decompensated hyperglycemia, small lesions, or lesions with low metabolic activity, among others.( 1 , 2 ) In
addition, PET can give false-positive results in cases of inflammatory disease or concomitant tumors. We report the case of a 61-year-old
male patient who, in October of 2011, presented to our emergency room with airway infection. A chest X-ray revealed right upper lobe
atelectasis, which was confirmed by chest CT (Figure 1A). Figure 1In A, posteroanterior chest X-ray showing a radiopaque triangular image in
the right upper lobe determining cranial, fissural, and hilar retraction, suggestive of atelectasis. In B, coronal proton emission
tomography and CT fusion images of two oval nodes with increased radiotracer uptake. One of the images represents a right upper lobe
paramediastinal mass, which occluded the right upper lobe bronchus and therefore caused atelectasis. The other image represents a lesion in
the right paratracheal lymph node station. Although the image was suggestive of lymph node enlargement, histopathological examination
revealed a schwannoma. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy showed an exophytic lesion in the right upper lobe orifice. The lesion caused total bronchial
lumen occlusion and affected the secondary carina, without tracheal involvement. The histopathological findings were consistent with
moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Blood and kidney function test results were normal, the exception being serum glucose
levels, which were elevated. A PET scan showed a solid, lobulated paramediastinal lesion in the right upper lobe. The lesion measured 3.0 cm
× 2.4 cm, and the standardized uptake value (SUV) was 12.2. The lesion occluded the right upper lobe bronchus and therefore caused the
atelectasis. In addition, the PET scan showed a right-sided image that was suggestive of lymph node enlargement in the superior mediastinum
and measured approximately 2.0 cm, the SUV being 3.8 (Figure 1B). The patient underwent right upper sleeve lobectomy and radical
lymphadenectomy, the affected lymph node being resected (Figure 2A). Histopathology of the lesion in the right lung apex revealed invasive,
moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma measuring 3.2 cm × 1.6 cm, with angiolymphatic invasion, marked desmoplasia, necrotic
foci, and scattered foci of squamous differentiation. Analysis of the nodule in the superior mediastinum revealed, instead of lymph node
enlargement, a well-defined, benign encapsulated schwannoma (Figure 2B) without cellular atypia or necrotic areas. There were no
postoperative complications, and the patient underwent chemotherapy. Screening tests performed one year later were negative for metastatic
disease and recurrence. Figure 2In A, photograph of the resected right upper lobe and mediastinal lesion. In B, photograph of the
mediastinal lesion. Schwannomas (also known as neurilemmomas) and neurofibromas account for 95% of all benign neurogenic mediastinal tumors.
A schwannoma is a mesenchymal neoplasm originating from Schwann cells of the nerve sheath. Although schwannomas commonly affect the
mediastinum, they can be found in the abdomen, in the pelvis, and, much more rarely, in the chest wall. Schwannomas affect males and females
alike, being benign in up to 90% of cases. In general, schwannomas are well defined and asymptomatic, being diagnosed incidentally, usually
after the age of 30 years.( 3 , 4 ) Given that schwannomas show variable 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake, with the SUV ranging from 1.9
to 12.0, PET has limited utility in distinguishing between schwannomas and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors.( 5 ) In many cases, it
is impossible to distinguish between a schwannoma and a malignant tumor before biopsy or surgery precisely because schwannomas can show high
FDG uptake. Accurate staging is required for proper treatment of patients with lung cancer, staging being based on tumor size, regional
lymph node involvement, and the presence of metastases. Although chest CT is considered the modality of choice for the diagnosis of
intrathoracic metastases, there is no consensus regarding the study of metastases. PET-CT was introduced and developed as an integrated
modality for accurate nodal staging and for detection of metastatic lesions in the entire body. Commonly, PET-CT is more effective than
chest CT for lung cancer staging, assisting in detecting distant metastases that are not detected by traditional methods in 5-20% of
patients; in addition, PET-CT can influence the treatment strategies and assist in predicting survival.( 6 ) Although the degree of regional
lymph node involvement in our patient was classified as N2, surgery was recommended because only one lymph node was affected, and it was
resectable. Given that schwannomas show highly variable FDG uptake-which is why it is difficult to differentiate between schwannomas and
other tumors by means of images alone-PET findings in patients with lung masses should be interpreted carefully, as should lymph nodes with
high SUV, which should be biopsied, in order to avoid an incorrect diagnosis or incorrect staging and the hazardous consequences of false-
positive results. Ao Editor: Os exames de imagem costumam ter um papel importante no estadiamento pelo sistema tumor-nódulo-metástase das
neoplasias pulmonares na avaliação dos fatores tumor e nódulo. A interpretação da positron emission tomography (PET, tomografia por emissão
de pósitrons) passa por uma curva de aprendizado na avaliação dos achados; essa técnica permite estimar a atividade metabólica da lesão,
facilitando assim o diagnóstico diferencial entre doenças malignas e benignas, bem como a extensão de uma doença maligna. A utilização da
PET no estudo da neoplasia pulmonar pode induzir a resultados falso-negativos, tais como na presença de hiperglicemia descompensada, lesões
pequenas ou lesões de baixa atividade metabólica.( 1 , 2 ) Ademais, podem ocorrer resultados falso-positivos, como nos casos de doenças
inflamatórias ou na ocorrência de tumores concomitantes. Relatamos o caso de um paciente do sexo masculino (61 anos) com infecção das vias
aéreas que procurou atendimento em nossa unidade de urgência em outubro de 2011. A radiografia de tórax revelou atelectasia do lobo superior
direito, confirmada pela TC de tórax. (Figura 1A) Figura 1 Em A, radiografia do tórax na incidência posteroanterior demonstrando imagem
triangular radiopaca no lobo superior direito que determina retração cranial, fissural e do hilo correspondente, sugerindo atelectasia. Em
B, imagem de tomografia por emissão de prótons e TC com fusão de imagens no plano coronal demonstrando duas imagens ovaladas com
hipercaptação do radiofármaco, sendo uma paramediastinal em lobo superior direito, que determinava oclusão do brônquio para o lobo superior
direito e, consequentemente, atelectasia. A segunda imagem de lesão situava-se na cadeia paratraqueal direita sugerindo linfonodomegalia
inicialmente mas confirmada pelo exame histopatológico como schwannoma. À fibrobroncoscopia, foi evidenciada lesão vegetante em óstio do
lobo superior direito, causando oclusão total da luz brônquica e envolvimento da carina secundária, sem acometimento de traqueia. O estudo
histopatológico da lesão foi compatível com carcinoma de células escamosas moderadamente diferenciado. Com exceção da glicose sérica
aumentada, os demais exames de função sanguínea e renal foram inalterados. A PET revelou uma lesão paramediastinal sólida em lobo superior
direito, de contornos lobulados, medindo 3,0 × 2,4 cm e standardized uptake value (SUV, valor padronizado de captação) de 12,2. A lesão
determinava oclusão do brônquio para o lobo superior direito, sendo assim responsável pela atelectasia. Ademais, o exame indicava a presença
de uma imagem sugestiva de linfonodomegalia no mediastino superior, à direita, com cerca de 2,0 cm e SUV de 3,8 (Figura 1B). O paciente foi
submetido a uma lobectomia em manga do lobo pulmonar superior direito e linfadenectomia radical, com abordagem da cadeia comprometida
(Figura 2A). A análise histopatológica da lesão em ápice pulmonar direito foi carcinoma de células escamosas moderadamente diferenciado, de
caráter infiltrativo, medindo 3,2 × 1,6 cm, apresentando infiltração angiolinfática e constando acentuada desmoplasia e focos necróticos,
além de esparsos focos de diferenciação escamosa. A análise do nódulo em mediastino superior identificou, em lugar de linfonodomegalia, um
schwannoma benigno encapsulado (Figura 2B), bem delimitado, sem atipias celulares ou áreas de necrose. Não houve complicações pós-
operatórias, e o paciente foi submetido à quimioterapia. Após um ano, os exames de rastreamento de metástase estavam negativos para doença
metastática ou recidiva. Figura 2 Em A, fotografia do lobo superior direito e da lesão mediastinal ressecados. Em B, fotografia da lesão
mediastinal em destaque. Dentre os tumores neurogênicos benignos que acometem o mediastino, os schwannomas (ou neurilemomas, como também são
chamados) dividem com os neurofibromas a incidência de 95% dos casos. O schwannoma é uma neoplasia mesenquimal originada das células de
Schwann da bainha dos nervos e comumente afeta o mediastino, podendo também ser encontrado em abdome, pelve e, com acentuada raridade, na
parede torácica. Essas neoplasias costumam atingir igualmente homens e mulheres e são benignas em até 90% dos casos. Apresentam-se, em
geral, bem delimitados e assintomáticos, sendo diagnosticados incidentalmente, geralmente após os 30 anos de idade.( 3 , 4 ) Como a absorção
de 18F-fluordesoxiglicose (FDG) pelos schwannomas é variável, com SUV variando de 1,9 a 12,0, a PET possui uma limitação importante na
distinção entre o schwannoma e as neoplasias malignas da bainha de nervos periféricos.( 5 ) É justamente devido a essa possibilidade de
captação de altos valores de FDG que, muitas vezes, o schwannoma não pode ser distinguido de um tumor maligno antes da biópsia ou cirurgia.
O tratamento adequado do câncer pulmonar necessita de estadiamento acurado, que é baseado no tamanho do tumor, no envolvimento linfonodal
regional e na presença de metástases. Embora a TC de tórax seja considerada como a modalidade de escolha para o diagnóstico de metástases
intratorácicas, não há consenso em relação ao estudo das metástases. A PET-TC foi introduzida e desenvolvida como uma modalidade integrada
para o estadiamento nodal acurado e a detecção de lesões metastáticas de corpo inteiro. Comumente, a PET-TC tem uma eficácia maior que a TC
de tórax para o estadiamento do câncer pulmonar, ajudando a identificar metástases à distância que não são encontradas por métodos
tradicionais em 5-20% dos pacientes, e pode influenciar nas estratégias de tratamento e ajudar a predizer a sobrevida.( 6 ) Apesar de a
doença neoplásica ser considerada neoplasia no estádio N2, a cirurgia foi indicada por tratar-se de um só gânglio comprometido,
potencialmente ressecável. Uma vez que a absorção de FDG pelos schwannomas é amplamente variável, dificultando sua diferenciação apenas por
meio de imagens, os achados da PET no estudo de massas pulmonares devem ser analisados com cuidado, assim como os linfonodos com SUV alto
que devem ser biopsiados, a fim de evitar um diagnóstico ou estadiamento errôneo e os efeitos deletérios de resultados falso-positivos.
