Financial support: None. Venlafaxine is a serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor used as an antidepressant. Interindividual variability
and herb-drug interactions can lead to drug-induced toxicity. We report the case of a 35-year-old female patient diagnosed with synchronous
pneumonitis and acute cardiomyopathy attributed to venlafaxine. The patient sought medical attention due to dyspnea and dry cough that
started three months after initiating treatment with venlafaxine for depression. The patient was concomitantly taking Centella asiatica and
Fucus vesiculosus as phytotherapeutic agents. Chest CT angiography and chest X-ray revealed parenchymal lung disease (diffuse micronodules
and focal ground-glass opacities) and simultaneous dilated cardiomyopathy. Ecocardiography revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction
(LVEF) of 21%. A thorough investigation was carried out, including BAL, imaging studies, autoimmune testing, right heart catheterization,
and myocardial biopsy. After excluding other etiologies and applying the Naranjo Adverse Drug Reaction Probability Scale, a diagnosis of
synchronous pneumonitis/cardiomyopathy associated with venlafaxine was assumed. The herbal supplements taken by the patient have a known
potential to inhibit cytochrome P450 enzyme complex, which is responsible for the metabolization of venlafaxine. After venlafaxine
discontinuation, there was rapid improvement, with regression of the radiological abnormalities and normalization of the LVEF. This was an
important case of drug-induced cardiopulmonary toxicity. The circumstantial intake of inhibitors of the CYP2D6 isoenzyme and the presence of
a CYP2D6 slow metabolism phenotype might have resulted in the toxic accumulation of venlafaxine and the subsequent clinical manifestations.
Here, we also discuss why macrophage-dominant phospholipidosis was the most likely mechanism of toxicity in this case. Drug-induced lung and
heart disease can result from individual drug toxicity or drug-to-drug interactions, with impairment of kinetics and metabolization.( 1 , 2
) The causal link between drug intake and an idiosyncratic reaction is usually difficult to recognize, especially in cases of patients
treated with multiple medications.( 1 , 3 ) Therefore, high clinical suspicion and a thorough study are often necessary. The molecular basis
of toxic lung injury is still poorly defined for the majority of the presently known offending drugs.( 2 ) We report the third case of a
patient with synchronous interstitial pneumonitis and acute cardiomyopathy induced by venlafaxine, with a new insight regarding the
potential lesion mechanism. A 35-year-old female patient presented with progressive dyspnea over the previous three months, New York Heart
Association (NYHA) functional class III, myalgia, and dry cough. She was hospitalized and submitted to CT angiography of the chest, which
excluded pulmonary thromboembolic disease but revealed hazy parenchymal micronodules, thickening of interlobular septa, and subtle bilateral
areas of ground-glass attenuation, mainly in the upper lobes, without adenopathies or pleuropericardial effusion (Figure 1). A chest X-ray
revealed a mixed (reticular and micronodular) pattern and cardiomegaly (Figure 2). Simultaneously, she was diagnosed with subacute severe
heart failure due to a dilated cardiomyopathy. Figure 1Chest CT scans at admission revealing hazy parenchymal micronodules (short arrows)
with thickening of interlobular septa and subtle diffuse areas of ground glass attenuation (long arrows). Figure 2In A, a chest X-ray taken
at admission showing a mixed interstitial pattern (reticular and micronodular) and cardiomegaly. In B, a chest X-ray taken at discharge
showing the normalization of the lung fields and of the cardiac silhouette. The patient had a history of depression and was started on a
slow-release formulation of venlafaxine three months prior. For the last year, she had been taking Centella asiatica and Fucus vesiculosus
as phytotherapeutic supplements for weight loss. The patient had no history of smoking, alcohol use, or illicit drug use. Previous medical
examinations had been negative for heart disease, and there was neither a relevant family history nor a history of occupational exposure.
Clinical examination revealed apyrexia, mild hypotension, and an SpO2 of 94%. On auscultation, there were crackles at both lung bases, with
a grade II/VI holosystolic murmur typical of mitral regurgitation. The jugular vein was not turgescent, nor was there hepatomegaly or
peripheral edema. Electrocardiography showed a normal sinus rhythm, ventricular premature beats, and T-wave inversion in leads V4-V6,
referred to as "strain"; an initial left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 21% was identified on radionuclide angiography; biatrial
dilatation, severe left ventricular enlargement (71/60 mm), and severely impaired global systolic function (LVEF = 20%) were also found;
moderate right ventricular enlargement with systolic impairment-tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion of 15 mm (normal value, 15-20
mm), S' velocity of 0.06 m/s (normal value, > 0.15 m/s)-and severe functional mitral and tricuspid regurgitations were found on
echocardiography. Heart catheterization revealed normal coronary arteries and a cardiac index of 2.36 L . min−1 . m−2 (normal value, 2.6-4.2
L . min−1 . m−2). Myocardial biopsies presented mixed cellularity without fibrosis or any other form of infiltration. Tests for DNA
detection were negative for herpes simplex virus, human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6), HHV-8, cytomegalovirus, BK virus, and Epstein-Barr virus.
Pulmonary function test results were normal. However, the diffusion capacity was slightly low (PaO2/FiO2 = 320). Blood workup presented
normal inflammatory parameters, euthyroidism, and a brain natriuretic peptide level of 963.6 pg/mL (normal value, < 100 pg/mL). Renal and
hepatic parameters, complement proteins, and urinary sediment were all normal. The serological panel was negative for HIV, syphilis,
Mycoplasma sp., Coxiella sp., cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, parvovirus B19, and HHV-6. The results of testing for autoimmune disease
were unremarkable. Bronchoscopy results were normal. The BAL fluid presented normal cellularity, a low CD4/CD8 lymphocyte ratio (0.7), and a
massive presence of foamy macrophages (Figure 3). The microbiological study on BAL fluid was negative. No transbronchial lung biopsies were
obtained, because of ventricular tachycardia during the examination. Figure 3Photomicrograph showing foamy macrophages in the BAL fluid
(May-Grümwald-Giemsa; magnification, ×400). The patient was started on standard therapy without improvement. Inotropic support was then
initiated. However, no improvement was seen over the course of a week. At that time, the decision was made to discontinue venlafaxine. Two
weeks later, an HRCT revealed notorious improvement, with only a few centrilobular nodules remaining in the right lower lobe. Together with
that radiological upswing, there was an overall improvement, and the LVEF was up to 35% at discharge. Four months later, the patient
presented with an LVEF close to normal (50%), NYHA functional class I, maintaining only mild left ventricle enlargement (60/40 mm), and mild
mitral regurgitation. Most of the cardiac medications were therefore discontinued. There have been various reports on adverse effects
related to venlafaxine. Acute and subacute interstitial pneumonitis have been reported( 4 - 7 ) as have cases of eosinophilic pneumonia,( 8
, 9 ) although the mechanisms involved have yet to be elucidated. The diagnosis of drug-induced interstitial lung disease is hindered by its
clinical nonspecificity, interindividual variations, the confounding effect of comorbidities, and treatment with multiple medications.( 4 )
In addition, cases of venlafaxine-induced acute heart failure have been described, some even in previously healthy patients under standard
dosing regimens.( 4 , 10 ) One group of authors reported dilated cardiomyopathy and cardiogenic shock in a patient with previously normal
heart function, with recovery of the LVEF after the discontinuation of the medication. ( 10 ) Using the Naranjo Adverse Drug Reaction
Probability Scale,( 11 ) a probable link with venlafaxine was found.( 10 ) Although the mechanism of heart injury is still not fully
understood, drug-induced inhibition of myocardial norepinephrine reuptake and blockade of cardiac sodium channels have been reported.( 12 )
The cytochrome P450 (CYP) superfamily is present in human lung tissue and participates in the enzymatic inactivation of numerous
xenobiotics.( 13 ) Metabolic differences related to CYP polymorphisms contribute to interindividual variability reflected in drug responses
and unexpected toxicity.( 2 ) One group of authors showed that, among 59 patients with drug-induced interstitial lung disease, 54 (91.5%)
had at least one of the studied CYP variant genes.( 2 ) In 87% of those patients, the presence of such genes was found to be relevant to
their clinical profile.( 2 ) Venlafaxine is an antidepressant that is metabolized to O-desmethylvenlafaxine (ODV) by the isoenzyme CYP2D6
and, to a lesser extent, by CYP3A4.( 14 ) For numerous psychotropic drugs, CYP2D6 is a high-affinity/low-capacity enzyme whose polymorphisms
can phenotypically determine slow, extended, or rapid metabolization.( 15 , 16 ) Because a less functional variant might be able to
precipitate severe manifestations,( 15 ) the administration of venlafaxine to CYP2D6 slow metabolizers or the coadministration with CYP2D6
inhibitor drugs carries the risk of drug accumulation and subsequent cellular/organic insult.( 16 ) It has been shown that Centella asiatica
can induce moderate-to-strong inhibition of CYP2D6( 17 ) and that Fucus vesiculosus can also inhibit the cytochrome P450 enzyme complex. (
18 ) Accordingly, although the CYP2D6 profile of our patient had not been tested, we hypothesize that she was a CYP2D6 slow metabolizer or
that the inhibitory action of the concomitant use of the herbal drugs contributed to venlafaxine accumulation, leading to cardiopulmonary
toxicity. Drug-induced phospholipidosis (DIP) is characterized by intracellular accumulation of phospholipids in various body tissues and
formation of lamellar bodies, leading to a foamy macrophage appearance at light microscopy. ( 19 ) It can be caused by over 50 drugs sharing
a particular molecular structure, with hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions, denominated cationic amphiphilic drugs (CADs).( 20 ) The
venlafaxine formulation used by our patient was analyzed by the Department of Organic Chemistry, University of Coimbra, Portugal. The
patient was taking a formulation of the racemic mixture of (R/S)-1--cyclohexanol hydrochloride. Its structure combines a hydrophilic
cationic component (terminal amine and tertiary alcohol groups) with a hydrophobic nonpolar component (aromatic ring methoxylation and
cyclohexyl group), conferring amphiphilicity.( 21 ) In addition, it has a cationic property,( 22 ) because ODV presents an acidic phenol
group (from the hydrolysis of the methyl ethers connected to the aromatic ring) and the amine group can undergo extensive intramolecular
protonation, becoming a CAD by staying in zwitterion form (negative aromatic-O- and positive H+ amine groups). This fact, supported by the
clinical context and the massive presence of foamy macrophages observed in the BAL fluid, strongly suggests a mechanism of venlafaxine-
induced phospholipidosis. Although DIP can occur from hours to months after the beginning of treatment,( 19 ) its precise mechanisms have
yet to be completely clarified. Lysosomes act as a place of accumulation of CADs and phospholipids because of their direct connection with
CADs and the inhibition of phospholipases.( 19 , 20 ) Because lysosomes participate in a wide variety of cellular processes, there might be
ionic transport impairment, oxidative phosphorylation, heterophagy, autophagy, organelle recycling, cell membrane repairing, and cell cycle
regulation. Three recognized damage patterns can occur: macrophage-dominant phospholipidosis (the commonest), parenchymal-cell-dominant
phospholipidosis, and localized phospholipidosis.( 19 ) Another typical feature of DIP is its reversibility after drug discontinuation.( 1 )
Because phospholipid levels normalize and drug efflux occurs, organic, functional, and radiological abnormalities usually improve from weeks
to months.( 19 ) Reversibility is usually complete, but permanent damage can subside in cases of more severe organic injury.( 2 ) The
present case details the occurrence of cardiopulmonary toxicity, which was probably associated with venlafaxine. The case occurred in a
previously healthy 35-year-old patient submitted to exhaustive investigation after the exclusion of other possible causes. Only two similar
cases have been reported in the literature.( 4 ) We recognized the concomitant intake of two herbal drugs known to inhibit the specific
metabolizing isoenzyme of venlafaxine, which would explain the accumulation of venlafaxine and ODV to toxic levels. The strong temporal
connection between the drug intake and the clinical manifestations and, conversely, between the drug discontinuation and the rapid
improvement in lung abnormalities and heart function, provides additional support for that hypothesis. For ethical reasons, rechallenge with
venlafaxine was not carried out. After an objective analysis, considering the Naranjo Adverse Drug Reaction Probability Scale,( 11 ) we made
a diagnosis of venlafaxine-induced cardiopulmonary toxicity. A DIP could be the mechanism of toxicity, because venlafaxine is a potential
CAD, as well as because there were striking quantities of foamy macrophages in the BAL fluid, a low CD4/CD8 T lymphocyte ratio in the blood
and BAL fluid, and features that were consistent with a "macrophage-dominant phospholipidosis" subtype pattern. The present case highlights
the importance of high clinical suspicion for the timely recognition of drug-induced cardiopulmonary toxicity, especially in cases of
initially unexplained disease. Prompt discontinuation of the drug usually results in remarkable clinical and prognostic improvement. The
authors would like to thank Professor Vítor Sobral of the Department of Chemistry of the University of Coimbra for his vital contribution in
the analysis of the chemical structure of venlafaxine. Study carried out in the Department of Pulmonology, Department of Cardiology,
Advanced Heart Failure Treatment Unit, and Department of Anatomopathology, Coimbra Hospital and University Center, Coimbra, Portugal. A
versão completa em português deste artigo está disponível em www.jornaldepneumologia.com.br A venlafaxina é um inibidor de recaptação de
serotonina e noradrenalina utilizado como antidepressivo. A variabilidade individual ou interações entre fitoterápicos e fármacos podem
causar toxicidade induzida por drogas. Relatamos o caso de uma paciente de 35 anos diagnosticada com pneumonite intersticial e
miocardiopatia dilatada atribuídas à venlafaxina. A paciente procurou atendimento médico devido a dispneia e tosse seca, que começaram três
meses após iniciar tratamento com venlafaxina para depressão. Concomitantemente tomava suplementos fitoterápicos contendo Centella asiatica
e Fucus vesiculosus. A radiografia e a CT de tórax revelaram doença pulmonar parenquimatosa (micronódulos difusos e opacidades em vidro
fosco) e, simultaneamente, foi diagnosticada uma miocardiopatia por ecocardiograma, que revelou uma fração de ejeção ventricular esquerda
(FEVE) de 21%. Uma investigação ampla foi realizada, incluindo LBA, estudos de imagem, detecção de doenças autoimunes, cateterismo cardíaco
direito e biópsia miocárdica. Após a exclusão de outras etiologias e a aplicação da Escala de Probabilidade de Reações Adversas a
Medicamentos de Naranjo, foi assumido o diagnóstico de pneumonite/miocardiopatia síncronas associadas à venlafaxina. Já foi demonstrado que
os suplementos fitoterápicos utilizados pela paciente podem inibir a isoenzima do complexo enzimático citocromo P450, responsável pelo
metabolismo da venlafaxina. Após a descontinuação da venlafaxina, verificou-se uma rápida melhora clínica com regressão das alterações
radiológicas e normalização da FEVE. Este é um importante caso de toxicidade cardiopulmonar induzida por droga. A administração
circunstancial de inibidores da isoenzima CYP2D6 e a presença de um fenótipo de metabolização lenta de CYP2D6 podem ter resultado na
acumulação tóxica da venlafaxina e na manifestação clínica subsequente. Aqui, é discutida a hipótese de a fosfolipidose macrofágica ser o
mecanismo de toxicidade. Doença pulmonar e cardíaca induzida por drogas pode resultar da toxicidade dos fármacos para o indivíduo ou da
interação entre fármacos, com comprometimento da cinética e do metabolismo.( 1 , 2 ) O nexo de causalidade entre a administração de drogas e
uma reação idiossincrática é geralmente difícil de reconhecer, especialmente em casos de pacientes tratados com múltiplos medicamentos.( 1 ,
3 ) Portanto, são frequentemente necessários alta suspeição clínica e estudo amplo. A base molecular da lesão pulmonar tóxica ainda é pouco
definida para a maioria dos medicamentos ofensivos conhecidos atualmente.( 2 ) Relatamos o terceiro caso de paciente com pneumonite
intersticial e miocardiopatia dilatada induzidas pela venlafaxina, com uma nova percepção sobre o potencial mecanismo de lesão. Paciente do
sexo feminino, 35 anos de idade, apresentava dispneia progressiva nos últimos três meses, classe funcional III da New York Heart Association
(NYHA), mialgia e tosse seca. Foi internada e submetida a angiografia por TC de tórax, que excluiu doença tromboembólica pulmonar mas
revelou micronódulos parenquimatosos indistintos, espessamento dos septos interlobulares e áreas de atenuação em vidro fosco bilaterais e
sutis, principalmente nos lobos superiores, sem adenopatias ou derrame pleuropericárdico (Figura 1). A radiografia de tórax revelou padrão
misto (reticular e micronodular) e cardiomegalia (Figura 2). Simultaneamente, foi diagnosticada com insuficiência cardíaca subaguda grave
causada por miocardiopatia dilatada. Figura 1 TC de tórax na admissão hospitalar revelando micronódulos parenquimatosos indistintos (setas
curtas) com espessamento dos septos interlobulares e áreas de atenuação em vidro fosco difusas e sutis (setas longas). Figura 2 Em A,
radiografia de tórax na admissão hospitalar mostrando padrão intersticial misto (reticular e micronodular) e cardiomegalia. Em B,
radiografia de tórax na alta hospitalar mostrando a normalização dos campos pulmonares e da área cardíaca. Apresentava história de depressão
e havia iniciado tratamento com uma formulação de liberação lenta de venlafaxina há três meses. Desde o ano anterior, estava tomando
suplementos fitoterápicos de Centella asiatica e Fucus vesiculosus para perda de peso. Não apresentava história de tabagismo, de uso de
álcool ou de uso de drogas ilícitas. Exames médicos anteriores haviam sido negativos para doenças cardíacas, e não havia história familiar
relevante nem história de exposição ocupacional. O exame físico revelou apirexia, hipotensão leve e SpO2 de 94%. Na auscultação, havia
estertores crepitantes bibasais, com sopro holossistólico de grau II/VI típico da regurgitação mitral. A veia jugular não apresentava
inchaço; tampouco havia hepatomegalia ou edema periférico. O eletrocardiograma mostrou ritmo sinusal normal, batimentos ventriculares
prematuros e inversão da onda T em V4-V6, conhecida como "tensão"; uma fração de ejeção ventricular esquerda (FEVE) de 21% foi identificada
na angiografia de radionuclídeos; também foram encontradas dilatação biatrial, dilatação grave do ventrículo esquerdo (71/60 mm) e função
sistólica global gravemente comprometida (FEVE = 20%); dilatação moderada do ventrículo direito com comprometimento sistólico - excursão
sistólica do plano anular da valva tricúspide de 15 mm (valor normal, 15-20 mm), velocidade de S' de 0,06 m/s (valor normal, > 0,15 m/s) - e
regurgitações funcionais mitral e tricúspide graves foram encontradas no ecocardiograma. O cateterismo cardíaco revelou artérias coronárias
normais e índice cardíaco de 2,36 L . min−1 . m−2 (valor normal, 2,6-4,2 L . min−1 . m−2). As biópsias miocárdicas apresentaram celularidade
mista sem fibrose ou qualquer outra forma de infiltração. Os testes de detecção de DNA foram negativos para vírus do herpes simplex,
herpesvírus humano 6 (HHV-6), HHV-8, citomegalovírus, vírus BK e vírus Epstein-Barr. Os resultados dos testes de função pulmonar foram
normais. Porém, a capacidade de difusão mostrou-se um pouco diminuída (PaO2/FiO2 = 320). O hemograma apresentou parâmetros inflamatórios
normais, eutireoidismo e nível de peptídeo natriurético cerebral de 963,6 pg/mL (valor normal, < 100 pg/mL). Os parâmetros renais e
hepáticos, as proteínas do complemento e o sedimento urinário estavam todos normais. O painel sorológico foi negativo para HIV, sífilis,
Mycoplasma sp., Coxiella sp., citomegalovírus, vírus Epstein-Barr, parvovírus B19 e HHV-6. Os resultados dos testes para doenças autoimunes
foram normais. Os resultados da broncoscopia foram normais. O LBA apresentou celularidade normal, relação de linfócitos CD4/CD8 diminuída
(0,7) e presença maciça de macrófagos espumosos (Figura 3). O estudo microbiológico do LBA foi negativo. Não foram obtidas biópsias
pulmonares transbrônquicas, em razão de taquicardia ventricular durante o exame. Figura 3 Fotomicrografia mostrando macrófagos espumosos no
LBA (May-Grümwald-Giemsa; aumento, 400×). Foi iniciado o tratamento padrão, sem melhora. Foi então iniciado suporte inotrópico. Porém,
nenhuma melhora foi observada ao longo de uma semana. Na época, tomou-se a decisão de descontinuar a venlafaxina. Duas semanas depois, a
TCAR revelou uma melhora notória, com a permanência de apenas alguns nódulos centrolobulares no lobo inferior direito. Juntamente com essa
recuperação radiológica, verificou-se uma melhora geral, e a FEVE foi até 35% na alta hospitalar. Quatro meses depois, a paciente
apresentava FEVE próxima à normal (50%), classe funcional I da NYHA, apresentando somente dilatação leve do ventrículo esquerdo (60/40 mm) e
regurgitação mitral leve. A maioria dos medicamentos cardíacos foi, portanto, descontinuada. Vários trabalhos relatam efeitos adversos
relacionados à venlafaxina. Há relatos de pneumonite intersticial aguda e subaguda( 4 - 7 ) e também de casos de pneumonia eosinofílica,( 8
, 9 ) embora os mecanismos envolvidos ainda não estejam esclarecidos. O diagnóstico da doença pulmonar intersticial induzida por drogas é
dificultado por sua inespecificidade clínica, por variabilidades individuais, pelo efeito de confusão causado por comorbidades e pelo
tratamento com múltiplos medicamentos.( 4 ) Além disso, foram descritos casos de insuficiência cardíaca aguda induzida pela venlafaxina,
alguns até mesmo em pacientes previamente hígidos em uso de regimes padronizados de dosagem.( 4 , 10 ) Alguns autores relataram
miocardiopatia dilatada e choque cardiogênico em um paciente com função cardíaca previamente normal, com recuperação da FEVE após a
descontinuação do medicamento.( 10 ) Com o uso da Escala de Probabilidade de Reações Adversas a Medicamentos, proposta por Naranjo et al.,(
11 ) encontrou-se uma provável ligação com a venlafaxina.( 10 ) Embora o mecanismo de agressão cardíaca ainda não seja totalmente
compreendido, há relatos de inibição da recaptação da noradrenalina pelo miocárdio e de bloqueio dos canais de sódio cardíacos, ambos
induzidos por drogas.( 12 ) A superfamília do citocromo P450 (CYP) está presente no tecido pulmonar humano e participa da inativação
enzimática de inúmeros xenobióticos.( 13 ) Diferenças metabólicas relacionadas a polimorfismos do CYP contribuem para a variabilidade
refletida em respostas a drogas e toxicidade inesperada.( 2 ) Alguns autores mostraram que, entre 59 pacientes com doença pulmonar
intersticial induzida por drogas, 54 (91,5%) apresentavam pelo menos um dos genes variantes do CYP estudados.( 2 ) Em 87% dos pacientes, a
presença de tais genes mostrou-se relevante para o perfil clínico.( 2 ) A venlafaxina é um antidepressivo que é metabolizado em
O-desmetilvenlafaxina (ODV) pela isoenzima CYP2D6 e, em menor escala, pela CYP3A4.( 14 ) Para inúmeras drogas psicotrópicas, a CYP2D6 é uma
enzima de alta afinidade/baixa capacidade cujos polimorfismos podem fenotipicamente determinar uma metabolização lenta, prolongada ou
rápida.( 15 , 16 ) Como uma variante menos funcional pode ser capaz de precipitar manifestações graves,( 15 ) a administração de venlafaxina
em metabolizadores lentos de CYP2D6 ou a coadministração com inibidores de CYP2D6 traz o risco de acúmulo de fármacos e subsequente agressão
celular/orgânica.( 16 ) Demonstrou-se que a Centella asiatica pode induzir inibição moderada a forte da CYP2D6( 17 ) e que o Fucus
vesiculosus pode também inibir o complexo enzimático citocromo P450.( 18 ) Dessa forma, embora o perfil de CYP2D6 de nossa paciente não
tenha sido testado, temos como hipótese que ela era uma metabolizadora lenta de CYP2D6 ou que a ação inibitória do uso concomitante de
medicamentos fitoterápicos contribuiu para o acúmulo da venlafaxina, levando a toxicidade cardiopulmonar. A fosfolipidose induzida por
drogas é caracterizada pelo acúmulo intracelular de fosfolipídios em vários tecidos corporais e pela formação de corpos lamelares, levando a
uma aparência espumosa dos macrófagos à microscopia de luz.( 19 ) Pode ser causada por mais de 50 fármacos que compartilham uma estrutura
molecular específica, com regiões hidrofóbicas e hidrofílicas, denominados drogas anfifílicas catiônicas.( 20 ) A formulação de venlafaxina
utilizada por nossa paciente foi analisada pelo Departamento de Química Orgânica, Universidade de Coimbra, Portugal. A paciente estava
tomando uma formulação da mistura racêmica de cloridrato de (R/S)-1-- ciclohexanol. Sua estrutura combina um componente catiônico
hidrofílico (grupos amina terminal e álcool terciário) com um componente apolar hidrofóbico (metoxilação do anel aromático e grupo
ciclohexil), conferindo anfifilicidade.( 21 ) Além disso, tem propriedade catiônica,( 22 ) pois a ODV apresenta um grupo fenol acídico
(proveniente da hidrólise dos éteres metílicos ligados ao anel aromático) e o grupo amina pode sofrer grande protonação intramolecular,
tornando-se uma droga anfifílica catiônica ao assumir a forma zwitterion (grupos amina aromática O- e amina H+). Esse fato, associado ao
contexto clínico e à presença maciça de macrófagos espumosos no LBA, sugere fortemente um mecanismo de fosfolipidose induzida pela
venlafaxina. Embora a fosfolipidose induzida por drogas possa ocorrer horas ou meses após o início do tratamento,( 19 ) seus mecanismos
exatos ainda não estão totalmente esclarecidos. Os lisossomos atuam como um local de acúmulo de drogas anfifílicas catiônicas e
fosfolipídios por causa de sua ligação direta com as drogas anfifílicas catiônicas e da inibição das fosfolipases.( 19 , 20 ) Como os
lisossomos participam de uma grande variedade de processos celulares, pode haver comprometimento do transporte iônico, fosforilização
oxidativa, heterofagia, autofagia, reciclagem de organelas, reparação da membrana celular e regulação do ciclo celular. Três padrões
reconhecidos de dano podem ocorrer: fosfolipidose macrofágica (o mais comum), fosfolipidose celular parenquimatosa e fosfolipidose
localizada.( 19 ) Outra característica típica da fosfolipidose induzida por drogas é a sua reversibilidade após a descontinuação da droga.(
1 ) Como os níveis de fosfolipídios se normalizam e ocorre efluxo da droga, as alterações orgânicas, funcionais e radiológicas geralmente
melhoram em semanas ou meses.( 19 ) A reversibilidade geralmente é total, mas danos permanentes podem diminuir em casos de lesão orgânica
mais grave.( 2 ) O presente caso detalha a ocorrência de toxicidade cardiopulmonar, provavelmente associada à venlafaxina. O caso ocorreu em
uma paciente previamente hígida de 35 anos de idade que foi submetida a investigação exaustiva após a exclusão de outras possíveis causas.
Apenas dois casos semelhantes foram relatados na literatura.( 4 ) Reconhecemos a administração concomitante de dois medicamentos
fitoterápicos sabidamente inibidores da isoenzima específica do metabolismo da venlafaxina, o que explicaria o acúmulo de venlafaxina e ODV
a níveis tóxicos. A forte relação temporal entre a administração da droga e as manifestações clínicas e, inversamente, entre a
descontinuação da droga e a rápida melhora das alterações pulmonares e da função cardíaca fornece suporte adicional a essa hipótese. Por
razões éticas, não foi feita reexposição à venlafaxina. Após uma análise objetiva, considerando-se a Escala de Probabilidade de Reações
Adversas a Medicamentos de Naranjo,( 11 ) foi feito o diagnóstico de toxicidade cardiopulmonar induzida pela venlafaxina. Uma fosfolipidose
induzida por drogas poderia ser o mecanismo de toxicidade, pois a venlafaxina é uma droga anfifílica catiônica em potencial, e também porque
havia grandes quantidades de macrófagos espumosos no LBA, relação de linfócitos T CD4/CD8 diminuída no sangue e no LBA e características
consistentes com um padrão do subtipo "fosfolipidose macrofágica". O presente caso destaca a importância da alta suspeição clínica para o
reconhecimento oportuno da toxicidade cardiopulmonar induzida por drogas, especialmente em casos de doença inicialmente inexplicável. A
descontinuação imediata da droga geralmente resulta em notável melhora clínica e do prognóstico. Os autores agradecem o Professor Vítor
Sobral do Departamento de Química da Universidade de Coimbra sua vital contribuição na análise da estrutura química da venlafaxina. Apoio
financeiro: Nenhum. Trabalho realizado no Serviço de Pneumologia, na Unidade de Tratamento de Insuficiência Cardíaca Avançada do Serviço de
Cardiologia e no Serviço de Anatomopatologia, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
