To the Editor: I read with great interest the article by Malcon et al. reporting the occurrence of unilateral pulmonary agenesis in an
8-year-old asymptomatic male child without other associated malformations, and I congratulate the authors on it.( 1 ) I would like to report
that we treated a 3-month-old female infant, from the city of Belo Horizonte, Brazil, who had been born at term and had undergone prenatal
testing uneventfully. The infant was taken to the Department of Pediatrics of the São José University Hospital in that same city on March of
2012 with a 4-day-history of cough and fever. Her parents reported that she had no comorbidities or previous hospitalizations. The patient
presented with acute respiratory failure and required oxygen by nasal catheter. Examination of the respiratory system revealed diminished
breath sounds throughout the left hemithorax, without adventitious sounds. A chest X-ray (Figure 1) showed complete opacification of the
left hemithorax, together with deviation of the trachea and mediastinum to the left. The left lung was not seen on chest CT (Figure 2).
Doppler echocardiography showed agenesis of the left pulmonary artery, without other cardiac abnormalities, and bronchoscopy revealed
complete absence of the left lung and absence of bronchial stump. A diagnosis of left lung agenesis was therefore established. The patient's
course was satisfactory, and she is under outpatient follow-up. Congenital malformations of the lung are rare and vary widely in their
clinical presentation and severity, depending mostly on the degree of lung involvement and their location in the thoracic cavity.( 2 ) The
earliest stage of lung development occurs during the first 50 days of gestation and is called embryonic stage: around the 26th day, the
anterior part of the foregut invaginates and forms the laryngotracheal bud; subsequently, the two main bronchi are formed. After 48 days of
gestation, the segmental and subsegmental bronchi start forming. The pulmonary arteries form from the sixth aortic arch, and the pulmonary
veins form from the invagination of the sinoatrial region of the heart. The development of the conducting airways starts early, whereas the
respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, and alveoli form later in gestation, in the stages called pseudoglandular, canalicular, saccular,
and alveolar. Figure 1Chest X-ray showing absence of the left lung. Figure 2Chest CT scans showing absence of the left lung. In unilateral
pulmonary agenesis, the right or left main bronchus does not develop, and there is absence of bronchi, parenchyma, and pulmonary vessels.
The origin of pulmonary agenesis is unknown, and its prevalence, including the bilateral and unilateral forms, is 0.5-1.0 per 10,000 live
births. The bilateral form is incompatible with life.( 3 ) In unilateral pulmonary agenesis, the mortality rate in the neonatal period is
approximately 50%, especially if there are other associated malformations (especially cardiac malformations). ( 4 ) Musculoskeletal,
gastrointestinal, and renal abnormalities may also be present. The mortality rate is higher when there is agenesis of the right lung. This
difference can be explained by a greater mediastinal shift, leading to tracheal compression. ( 3 ) Agenesis of the left lung is more common,
causing compensatory growth of the remaining lung and its herniation into the contralateral hemithorax.( 5 ) Asymptomatic patients do not
require intervention, especially in the absence of associated anomalies. However, pulmonary infections or other lung diseases should be
treated early, and the patient should have clinical follow-up to detect possible abnormalities, such as pulmonary hypertension. Sometimes,
the diagnosis of unilateral pulmonary agenesis is delayed, being made in adulthood in asymptomatic patients. Other associated malformations
and recurrent respiratory infections are factors that aid in earlier diagnosis. The prognosis is better when there is agenesis of the left
lung and when there are no cardiac malformations. Ao Editor: Li com bastante interesse e congratulo os autores Malcon et al. que relatam a
ocorrência de agenesia pulmonar unilateral em uma criança assintomática do sexo masculino de oito anos de idade, sem outras malformações
associadas.( 1 ) Gostaríamos de relatar que atendemos uma criança do sexo feminino, de três meses de idade, procedente da cidade de Belo
Horizonte (MG), nascida a termo, com exames pré-natais realizados sem intercorrências. Ela foi conduzida ao serviço de pediatria do Hospital
Universitário São José, localizado na mesma cidade, em março de 2012, com queixa de tosse e febre que duravam 4 dias. Os pais negavam
quaisquer comorbidades ou internações prévias da criança. A paciente apresentava-se com insuficiência respiratória aguda e necessitava de
oxigênio por cateter nasal. Ao exame do aparelho respiratório, encontrou-se murmúrio vesicular diminuído em todo o hemitórax esquerdo, sem
ruídos adventícios. Na radiografia de tórax (Figura 1), via-se opacificação total de hemitórax esquerdo, com traqueia e mediastinos
desviados para a esquerda. Na TC de tórax, o pulmão esquerdo não foi visualizado (Figura 2). O ecodopplercardiograma revelou agenesia da
artéria pulmonar esquerda, sem outras alterações cardíacas, e a broncoscopia demonstrou ausência completa do pulmão esquerdo e inexistência
do coto brônquico. Foi estabelecido, então, o diagnóstico de agenesia pulmonar unilateral esquerda. A paciente evoluiu satisfatoriamente e
está sendo acompanhada ambulatorialmente. Figura 1 Radiografia de tórax revelando ausência do pulmão esquerdo. Figura 2 TCs de tórax
revelando ausência do pulmão esquerdo. As malformações congênitas do pulmão são raras e variam muito na sua forma de apresentação clínica e
gravidade, dependendo principalmente do grau de envolvimento pulmonar e de sua localização na cavidade torácica.( 2 ) O início do
desenvolvimento pulmonar ocorre durante os 50 primeiros dias de gestação, período denominado etapa embrionária: ao redor do 26º dia, ocorre
invaginação da parte anterior do intestino primitivo e se forma o broto laringotraqueal; a partir daí, são formados os dois brônquios
principais. Após 48 dias de gestação se inicia a formação dos brônquios segmentares e subsegmentares. As artérias pulmonares se formam a
partir do sexto arco aórtico, e as veias pulmonares formam se a partir de invaginação da parte sinoatrial do coração. O desenvolvimento das
vias aéreas condutoras se inicia precocemente; já os bronquíolos respiratórios, ductos alveolares e alvéolos formam-se posteriormente na
gestação, nas etapas denominadas pseudoglandular, canalicular, sacular e alveolar. Na agenesia pulmonar unilateral, o brônquio fonte de um
dos lados não se desenvolve, ocorrendo a ausência de brônquio, parênquima e vasos pulmonares. Tem origem desconhecida e sua prevalência é de
0,5-1,0 para cada 10.000 nascidos vivos, incluindo as formas bilateral e unilateral. A forma bilateral é incompatível com a vida.( 3 ) Na
agenesia pulmonar unilateral, a taxa de mortalidade no período neonatal é de aproximadamente 50%, principalmente se houver outras
malformações associadas, principalmente as cardíacas.( 4 ) Alterações músculo-esqueléticas, gastrointestinais e renais também podem existir.
A taxa de mortalidade é maior quando a agenesia é no pulmão direito. Tal diferença pode ser explicada por um maior desvio mediastinal,
levando a compressão traqueal.( 3 ) O acometimento da agenesia é mais frequente à esquerda, ocasionando crescimento compensatório do pulmão
remanescente e herniação do mesmo no tórax contralateral.( 5 ) Pacientes assintomáticos não necessitam de intervenção, principalmente na
ausência de anomalias associadas; contudo, infecções pulmonares ou outras doenças pulmonares devem ser tratadas precocemente, e o paciente
deve ter acompanhamento clínico para detectar possíveis alterações, como a hipertensão pulmonar. Às vezes, o diagnóstico da agenesia
pulmonar unilateral é mais tardio, estabelecido na vida adulta em pacientes assintomáticos. Outras malformações associadas e infecções
respiratórias de repetição são fatores que auxiliam o diagnóstico mais precoce. O prognóstico é melhor quando a agenesia pulmonar é
unilateral à esquerda e quando estão ausentes malformações cardíacas.
