Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD A 60 year old female, with a history of atrial fibrillation who was on warfarin therapy,
presented to our emergency department with chief complaint of the most severe headache that she ever had. Her vital signs, systemic and
neurological examinations were normal. She had emergency computed tomography (CT) of the brain with suspicion of intracranial hemorrhage
that revealed a lesion in fat dansity in the lateral ventricle and interhemispheric fissure (Figure a). Her international normalized ratio
was 3,2. She underwent cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that revealed a hyperintense lesion in T1 and T2 sequances in the lateral
ventricles, pericallosal area and interhemispheric fissure that did not show contrast enhancement (Figure b and c). After the symptomatic
relief by analgesics she was discharged from the emergency department for out-patient follow-up. Intracranial lipomas are rare and benign
congenital malformations accounting for 0,1% to 0,46% of all intracranial tumors.1 Since half of all cases are asymptomatic, they are
usually an incidental finding during neuroimaging studies. Headache is the most common symptom in adults if it becomes symptomatic.2 The
deep interhemispheric fissure, especially the corpus callosum, is the most common localization of intracranial lipomas.1 Intracranial
lipomas are often associated with other malformations of the central nervous system, such as callosal agenesis or hypogenesis, spina bifida
or a cranium bifidum.1,3 Noncontrast cranial CT and brain MRI allow definitive diagnosis. The appearance of the corpus callosum lipoma on
the cranial CT scan is quite typical, with the low attenuation seen only in adipose tissue, which ranges from −40 to −100 hounsfield
units.4,5 In the brain MRI the lesion presents characteristics of fatty tissue, with a hyperintense signal in both T1 and T2-weighted
studies.6 Most lipomas are treated conservatively and rarely requires neurosurgical treatment because of their benign nature.1 Our patient
did not have any accompanying lesion and was discharged to follow-up as an out-patient. Full text available through open access at
http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to
disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias.
The authors disclosed none. Image (a) shows cranial computed tomography. There is a homogenously hypodense lesion measuring 33 mm × 30 mm in
the lateral and third ventricles with about −101 to −110 Hounsefield unit. Image (b) and (c) show magnetic resonance imaging with
hyperintense mass lesion in lateral ventricle (T1-weighted and T2-weighted images, respectively).
