Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heterogeneous group of inherited disorders that occur owing to the abnormalities in type 1 collagen, and
is characterized by increased bone fragility and other extraskeletal manifestations. We report the case of a patient who was diagnosed with
OI following subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) secondary to a ruptured saccular intracranial aneurysm (IA). A 37-year-old woman was referred to
our hospital because of sudden headache and vomiting. She was diagnosed with SAH (World Federation of Neurosurgical Society grade 2) owing
to an aneurysm of the middle cerebral artery. She then underwent surgical clipping of the aneurysm successfully. She had blue sclerae, a
history of several fractures of the extremities, and a family history of bone fragility and blue sclerae in her son. According to these
findings, she was diagnosed with OI type 1. We performed genetic analysis for a single nucleotide G/C polymorphism (SNP) of exon 28 of the
gene encoding for alpha-2 polypeptide of collagen 1, which is a potential risk factor for IA. However, this SNP was not detected in this
patient or in five normal control subjects. Other genetic analyses did not reveal any mutations of the COL1A1 or COL1A2 gene. The
cerebrovascular system is less frequently involved in OI. OI is associated with increased vascular weakness owing to collagen deficiency in
and around the blood vessels. SAH secondary to a ruptured IA with OI has been reported in only six cases. The patient followed a good
clinical course after surgery. It remains controversial whether IAs are caused by OI or IAs are coincidentally complicated with OI.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable connective tissue disorder, caused by abnormalities in type 1 collagen, and is characterized by
bone fragility and other extraskeletal features, including hearing loss, blue sclerae, dentinongenesis imperfecta and hyperlaxity of the
ligaments and skin . Patients with OI show a wide range of clinical severities from being nearly asymptomatic, with individuals leading a
normal life, to being severe, with individuals showing bone and connective tissue deformities resulting in perinatal death . OI can cause
diverse vascular complications such as aortic and carotid artery dissection, cardiac valvulopathy and coronary artery aneurysms . It has
been reported that the collagen type 1 alpha-2 gene (COL1A2) may predispose patients to intracranial aneurysms (IAs) , and that the
cerebrovascular system is less frequently involved in OI. We report the case of a patient in whom OI was diagnosed following subarachnoid
hemorrhage (SAH) secondary to a ruptured intracranial saccular aneurysm. A 37-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because of sudden
headache and vomiting. She had no family history of aneurysms. Neurologic examination revealed slight disturbance of consciousness (Glasgow
Coma Scale score, 14) and neck stiffness without any focal deficit. Brain computed tomography (CT) showed diffuse SAH (Fisher stage 3) and
an arachnoid cyst of the right middle fossa (Figure 1). Subsequent cerebral digital subtraction angiography (DSA) indicated a saccular
aneurysm of the middle cerebral artery (Figure 2). Because of the ruptured IA, a diagnosis of SAH (World Federation of Neurosurgical Society
grade 2) was made. The patient had blue sclerae (Figure 3), hypertension, and mitral regurgitation (New York Heart Association class 2), and
had sustained repeated fractures of the extremities such as left elbow joint and left ankle joint prior to puberty. Her height was 158 cm
(equal to the average height of Japanese women) with no major skeletal deformities. The patient’s son also had blue sclerae and a history of
multiple fractures; however there was no history of bone fragility in her parents, two brothers or daughter. According to these findings,
the diagnosis of OI type 1A was made during admission . Computed tomography scan of the brain on arrival at the hospital, indicating diffuse
subarachnoid hemorrhage and an arachnoid cyst at the right middle fossa. Preoperative cerebral digital subtraction angiography showing a
right middle cerebral artery aneurysm (5 mm in diameter). (A) Right internal carotid angiography in the anteroposterior direction. (B)
Three-dimensional angiography. Photograph of the patient’s eyes, showing typical blue sclerae. Surgical clipping of the aneurysm was
performed, and the patient was asymptomatic after one week. Follow-up DSA demonstrated a completely clipped aneurysm (Figure 4). The patient
underwent rehabilitation and was discharged from the hospital four weeks after admission. Postoperative cerebral digital subtraction
angiography showing a right middle cerebral artery aneurysm that has been successfully clipped. (A) Right internal carotid angiography in
the anteroposterior direction. (B) Three-dimensional angiography. The patient’s left femoral bone density was 0.752 g/cm2, which was in the
Japanese female average. We also measured levels of serum bone metabolism markers, and they were within normal limits found in adult women;
pyridinoline cross-linked carboxyterminal telopeptide of type I collagen, 1.1 ng/mL (normal range, <4.5); intact amino-terminal propeptide
of type I procollagen, 16.6 μg/L (normal range, 14.9-68.8); tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase-5b, 147 mU/dL (normal range, 120–420);
osteocalcin, 10 ng/mL (normal range, 2.5-13); and bone-specific alkaline phosphatase, 9.2 μg/L (normal range, 2.9-14.5). We performed
genetic analysis for a single nucleotide G/C polymorphism (SNP) of exon 28 of the COL1A2 gene, which was reported as a potential risk factor
for IAs . However, this SNP was not detected in this patient or five normal control subjects (Figure 5). And no mutation of the COL1A1 or
COL1A2 gene was detected with genetic analyses. Results for determining a single nucleotide G/C polymorphism (SNP) of exon 28 of the gene
encoding for alpha-2 polypeptide of collagen 1 in the patient (upper panel) and one of normal control subjects (lower panel). The SNP28 of
COL1A2 was not detected in any of them. The diagnosis of OI is based mainly on clinical signs, symptoms, and positive family history . Most
patients with OI have a mutation of either the COL1A1 or COL1A2 gene, which are the two genes that code for alpha-1 and alpha-2 chains of
type 1 collagen, respectively. More than 2,000 different type 1 collagen mutations have been identified in patients with OI and are listed
in a database . Type 1 collagen is the most abundant connective tissue in the vertebrate and is found in other tissues, including blood
vessels . Interstitial type 1 collagen was reported to be deposited on the surfaces of smooth muscle cells or along elastin filaments in the
cerebrovascular wall, and thus, type 1 collagen might play a role in the rigidity and elasticity of the vascular wall. We did not identify
any known mutation in COL1A1 or COL1A2 in our patient. However, OI was directly diagnosed in this patient because of the presence of bone
fragility, extraskeletal features, including blue sclerae and mitral regurgitation, and a positive family history, despite her normal bone
density and normal bone metabolism markers. The association between OI and an intracranial arachnoid cyst is also known , similarly as
demonstrated in brain CT scan of this patient. Yoneyama et al. reported the association between the functional variant SNP28 of COL1A2 and
Japanese familial IA. However, in that study, SNP28 was observed in only 10.4% of total IAs (n = 260) and 5.5% of control subjects
(n = 291). Although SNP28 was not detected in our patient and normal control subjects, we consider these results as acceptable regarding low
prevalence of the SNP. Meanwhile, most of the vascular complications in patients with OI have been reported as artery dissections . A few
sporadic case reports described intracranial artery dissections complicated by OI . To our knowledge, SAH secondary to ruptured IA in
patients with OI has been reported in only six cases (Table 1) . Three case reports have described patients with a saccular anterior
communicating artery aneurysm , and another described a patient with a saccular aneurysm at a fenestrated basilar artery ; this is the only
case report of SAH in a patient with OI in whom the SNP28 of the COL1A2 gene was detected. The fifth report described a patient with a
ruptured dissecting-type pseudoaneurysm at the right superior cerebellar artery ; this is the only case in which SAH secondary to an
intracranial artery dissection was reported. The sixth and most recent report described a patient with a saccular aneurysm of the vertebral
artery . It is difficult to determine whether ruptured, in particular saccular, IAs are truly caused by OI or accidentally complicated by
OI. Case reports of subarachnoid hemorrhage secondary to ruptured intracranial aneurysm with osteogenesis imperfecta SAH; subarachnoid
hemorrhage, F; female, M; male, A-com A; anterior communicating artery, VA; vertebral artery, SCA; superior cerebellar artery, MCA; middle
cerebral artery. We described a case of SAH secondary to ruptured saccular intracranial aneurysm in a 37-year-old female patient with
clinically diagnosed OI. She was successfully treated with the surgical neck clipping of the aneurysm. Although no mutation in the COL1A1 or
COL1A2 gene was detected, it is obvious that this patient is clinically OI. There may be some causative relationship between OI and SAH
because there are several reported cases of SAH secondary to cerebral aneurysm in patients with OI. We obtained written informed consent
from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by
the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. OI: Osteogenesis imperfecta; COL1A2: Collagen type 1 alpha-2 gene; IA: Intracranial aneurysm; SAH:
Subarachnoid hemorrhage; DSA: Digital subtraction angiography; SNP: Single nucleotide polymorphism. We have no disclosures and did not
receive any financial support. TH participated in treatment of the patient, and drafted the all manuscript. SM, TI, SY, HN, YS, SM, KH and
MM participated in treatment of the patient, and helped to draft the manuscript. AM performed the genetic analysis for a SNP of exon 28 of
the COL1A2. AM conceived of the case study, and participated in its design and management. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. AM is the professor of Department of Neurosurgery, Teikyo University, transferred from Teikyo University Chiba Medical Center in
April, 2014. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2377/14/150/prepub
