Sarcoidosis is a multisystem granulomatous disease of unknown cause. The osteoarticular involvement in sarcoidosis is rare and is often
associated with cutaneous and long-standing chronic multisystem disease. More common in black women, osseous sarcoidosis is difficult to
diagnose, with an incidence of 3 to 13%. The most characteristic radiological clinical picture evidences rounded, well-defined cysts, with
no periosteal reaction and without peripheral sclerosis. The small bones of hands and feet are the most frequently involved sites. This
report aims to demonstrate a rare case of osteoarticular sarcoidosis with characteristic clinical presentation, and highlight the importance
of detecting osteoarticular involvement in this pathology. Sarcoidosis is a complex multisystem granulomatous disease of unknown cause. The
lung is the most affected organ, however virtually any organ can be involved, like the skin and, more rarely, the osteoarticular system. The
prevalence is slightly higher in women. Age distribution follows a bimodal pattern with peaks in the 3rd and 5th decades. Black individuals
tend to present a more severe disease, refractory and with extrapulmonary involvement. Its physiopathology is not yet understood. Likewise,
the manner in which the extrapulmonary sarcoidosis lesions occur has not yet been clarified. The skin is involved in about 20 to 35% of the
cases, a fact that places the dermatologist in an important role in diagnosing the disease. The most characteristic cutaneous manifestation
of sarcoidosis is Lupus pernio, which affects mainly women and the central region of the face in the form of papular nodular lesions of
purplish-red color, with telangiectasias. Osteoarticular manifestations of sarcoidosis are rare, predominating on fingers and toes and
frequently accompanied by cutaneous lesions. The most characteristic radiological clinical picture evidences rounded, well-defined cysts,
with no periosteal reaction and without peripheral sclerosis. An 83-year-old female patient, black, hypertensive and diabetic, complained
about nasal lesions and deformities on hands for 16 years. At the examination she presented purplish erythematous nodules with
telangiectasias located on the nose, with "apple jelly" aspect to diascopy (Figure 1). On hands she presents important deformities, with
shortened, swollen and bent fingers and presence of nodules in interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal articulations, painful to palpation
(Figure 2). She reported that this situation started around 16 years before, the nasal lesion being painless; a short time afterwards the
hand joints became painful and swollen. Through the years she started presenting deformities on hands, which became progressively
aggravated. She reported that at this time she was mistakenly diagnosed with Hansen's and received treatment for such disease, with no
improvement. Radiography of hands showed destructive lytic bone lesions of the distal phalanges, with pathological fractures and presence of
well-defined cystic lesions on proximal and distal phalanges (Figure 3). Thorax radiography did not present changes. Histopathology of nasal
lesion showed granulomatous dermatitis of tuberculoid type (sarcoid granuloma) (Figure 4). We started the treatment with systemic corticoid,
with fast improvement of articular pain and decrease of cutaneous lesion. Classical lesion of cutaneous sarcoidosis on nasal region:
purplish erythematous nodule with telangiectasias Exuberant deformities in hands: articular nodules, deviations and shortening of fingers
Radiography: lytic and cystic osseous lesions on phalanges Anatomopathologic examination of cutaneous lesion: Sarcoid granuloma
Osteoarticular involvement in sarcoidosis is rare and is associated with long-standing chronic multisystem disease.1 More frequent in black
women, it is a pathology of difficult diagnosis, for it is usually asymptomatic.2 The incidence varies from 3 to 13% and it is clinically
significant in 2 to 5% of the cases.1,2 The forms of osseous involvement vary from lytic and cystic lesions (the last two being the most
common) to invasive lesions with trabecular irregularity, destructive lesions with periosteal reaction and disseminated lesions, which may
cause diagnostic confusion with myeloma and bone metastases. Patients with osseous involvement frequently have pulmonary diseases (8090%),
which was not found in our case, and are more prone to having cutaneous involvement, especially lupus pernio (48-70%), as in the case
presented.3 The small bones of hands and feet are the most frequently involved sites.3 The most common form of clinical presentation is
dactylitis, which occurs mainly in black patients, and is very similar to the form seen in psoriatic arthritis.4 The so-called JÃ¼ngling
disease or multiple cystoid osteitis corresponds to the most characteristic radiological picture which evidences round cysts, well-
delimited, with no periosteal reaction and without peripheral sclerosis.5 Periosteal reaction is rare, and in severe cases, fragmentation
and bone resorption may occur, besides presence of soft tissue edema. Cysts are small focal lesions, however, large cysts may involve the
cortex as well as the bone marrow predisposing to pathological fracture.1 Acute arthritis occurs in 10% to 40% of patients with sarcoidosis,
mainly in the initial phases of the disease, possibly being the first manifestation or as part of Lofgren's syndrome.6 This syndrome is
characterized by triad hilar adenopathy, acute polyarthritis and erythema nodosum.2 It is more frequent in women and it is believed that it
arises from the presence of circulating immune complexes. Most of the time it is symmetric and oligoarticular. The most involved
articulations are ankles, however knees, wrists and elbows may also be involved. Other articulations, such as small articulations of hands
and feet, hips and sternoclavicular and sacroiliac joints are less frequently involved. Normally, it is self-limited and recurrences are
uncommon.1,7 Chronic sarcoid arthritis is uncommon, being usually associated with long-standing sarcoidosis in patients with cutaneous
involvement. It presents in the polyarticular form, involving hands, wrists, shoulders, ankles and knees. It is frequently accompanied by
lupus pernio, chronic uveitis and progressive pulmonary sarcoidosis; erythema nodosum is almost never found.8,9 It is characterized by
remission and exacerbation periods or it can be persistent. Articular deformity is rare, occurring in 1% to 4% of the patients with
sarcoidosis, and it has already been described as Jaccoud's arthropathy, which is characterized by metacarpal deviation of fingers,
metacarpophalangeal subluxations and "swan neck" and boutonniere deformities, besides "Z" thumb deformity. The different forms of chronic
arthritis that may occur among patients with sarcoidosis are: non-deforming arthritis with granulomatous synovitis; Jaccoud-type deformity
(non-erosive); articular edema adjacent to the osseous lesion by sarcoidosis; dactylitis (soft tissue edema in one or more digits). The
natural history of Osteoarticular Sarcoidosis varies from rare cases of recovery to progressive cases with self-amputation.1,6 It presents
poor response to treatment. Due to its rarity, there are few studies guiding its therapy. Corticoids are still the basis of therapy, but
other immunosupressors may be used. Biological drugs seem to be a promising future approach. The case presented demonstrates the clinical
and radiological findings characteristic of Osteoarticular Sarcoidosis and its association with the cutaneous clinical picture. The
detection of osteoarticular involvement in sarcoidosis may help the clinician in the diagnosis and the start of adequate therapy avoiding
possible associated morbidities. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None Work performed at Universidade de Santo Amaro (UNISA) -
Santo Amaro (SP), Brazil. How to cite this article: Haddad N, Oliveira Filho J, Nasser KR, Corbett AMF, Tebet ACF, Reis MLJ. Musculoskeletal
and cutaneous sarcoidosis: exuberant case report. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(4):660-2.
