Three days after donation of peripheral blood stem cells to a recipient with acute myeloblastic leukemia, dengue virus was detected in the
donor, who had recently traveled to Sri Lanka. Transmission to the recipient, who died 9 days after transplant, was confirmed. Dengue virus
(DENV), an arthropod-borne RNA virus of the Flaviviridae family, has 4 serotypes that cause dengue fever or dengue hemorrhagic fever in
humans. DENV has become a worldwide public health problem: current estimates indicate 390 million DENV infections and 96 million clinically
apparent cases in 2010 (1). The virus is found in tropical and subtropical regions around the world and is hyperendemic to areas in Asia and
Latin America (1). Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation has become a major treatment option for patients with hematopoietic malignancies
and immune deficiencies. Each year, >50,000 allogeneic transplants are performed worldwide (2). Despite mandatory testing of donors and
strict exclusion criteria to prevent transmission, risk remains for transmission of communicable diseases, including tropical diseases for
which screening is not usually performed. To the best of our knowledge, only the transmission of malarial parasites has been reported during
stem cell transplantation (3,4). Here, we report transmission of DENV to a peripheral blood stem cell recipient by a donor who had recently
traveled to an area to which the virus is endemic. We recommend testing of recent travelers returning from areas to which DENV is endemic
before allowing such donations. Acute myeloblastic leukemia was diagnosed in a 51-year-old man in Germany in September 2012. According to
international standards, cytogenetic and molecular examination determined that this form of leukemia was “poor risk” at the time of
diagnosis. Because of the patient’s risk status, the physicians intended to perform allogeneic stem cell transplantation after induction and
consolidation chemotherapy, which was scheduled to end in January 2013, and a conditioning chemotherapy regimen, which was planned to be
given in March. Because of lack of a related HLA-matched donor, an international donor search was performed; 1 fully matched unrelated
female donor was identified in the German National Registry. The 24-year-old woman, who was registered as a volunteer donor in the German
Bone Marrow Donor Registry, was selected. The donor had scheduled a trip to Sri Lanka, and was to return 3 days before the scheduled start
of granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) application. According to German (http://www.zrkd.de/de/_pdf/ZRKD_Standards-V9_deutsch.pdf)
and international (http://www.worldmarrow.org/fileadmin/Committees/STDC/20140101-STDC-WMDA_Standards.pdf) guidelines, such travel should
have led to the postponement of donation because many infectious diseases are endemic to Sri Lanka. However, the donor was unable to
postpone her trip, and the recipient was in urgent need of the transplant. The transplant physicians agreed to keep the dates as scheduled
and confirmed the exception as Declaration of Urgent Medical Need of the transplant. Five days before the scheduled transplant (day –5), the
recipient tested positive for Klebsiella pneumoniae infection of the central venous catheter. The catheter was removed and
piperacillin/tazobactam treatment was initiated. The donor had returned from her trip 3 days before the start of G-CSF-injections without
any signs of infection. On the day of apheresis (day 0), the donor showed signs of a respiratory infection with axillary temperature of
<39°C, bone pain, and headache. Oral azithromycin (2 × 250 mg/d) and ibuprofen 400 mg were given. The stem cell mobilization result was
poor: 11 CD34+ cells/μL peripheral blood (0.04% of leukocytes) were measured at the beginning of apheresis. Before apheresis, the donor’s
blood count showed mild thrombocytopenia (134,000 cells/μL) after G-CSF mobilization. Standard leukopheresis processing of 14 L of blood
from the donor was performed without problems. Approximately 90 × 106 CD34+ cells, corresponding to 106 CD34+ progenitor cells per kg
bodyweight of the recipient, could be collected. A second apheresis or a bone marrow collection was considered, but neither was performed
because the clinical condition of the donor worsened. Her temperature increased to 41°C, the platelet count dropped from 84,000 cells/μL on
day 0 to 74,000/μL the day after. In the morning of the second day after apheresis (+2), the platelet count dropped to 47,000/μL,
procalcitonine level was elevated at 1.10 μg/L, C-reactive protein level was elevated at 10.5 mg/L, and a slight skin rash developed.
Because of the clinical course, on day +1, physicians suspected a possible DENV infection. A serum sample test showed a weak positive result
for DENV by using IgM and IgG antibody tests (in-house indirect immunofluorescence assay), as used by Tappe et al. (5), and a strong
positive result for DENV nonstructural protein-1 (NS1) antigen, demonstrating acute DENV infection. Quantitative real-time reverse
transcription PCR for DENV RNA (6) was positive and showed a DENV RNA load of 2.6 × 1010 copies/mL. Testing of the sample containing the
progenitor cells showed a DENV RNA load of 4.8 × 108 copies/mL. After being informed about possible infection of the donor, the transplant
physicians administered immunoglobulin to the recipient intravenously (0.5 g/kg/y for 4 days). At posttransplantation day +3, antibiotic
drug therapy was switched from piperacillin/tazobactam to meropenem. On the same day, physical examination revealed painful hepatomegaly and
increased total bilirubin, diagnosed as hepatic veno-occlusive disease (Table). Therefore, defibrotide prophylaxis, which had been initiated
on day –8, was increased to treatment dose. On day +7, empiric antifungal therapy was added. On the same day, Staphylococcus epidermidis was
detected in blood cultures and vancomycin was given. On day +8, the recipient experienced severe abdominal pain accompanied by hematochezia,
hypoxia, and metabolic acidosis. Bacteriologic culture of a tracheal aspirate grew Acinetobacter baumannii, which was only susceptible to
colomycin and tigecyclin. The recipient was transferred to the intensive care unit and died from cardiopulmonary arrest 9 days
posttransplant. A blood sample from the recipient on day +3 was retrospectively analyzed and tested negative for DENV IgM and IgG but
positive for DENV NS1 antigen and DENV RNA with a DENV RNA load of 8.6 ×107 copies/mL. Sequencing of the DENV amplicons from all samples
demonstrated a DENV serotype 1 (DENV 1) genotype 1 infection of the donor and recipient. Phylogenetic analysis of the complete envelope
protein coding gene of DENV 1 strains revealed that the DENV 1 genotype 1 strains detected in the donor were closely related to currently
circulating DENV 1 genotype 1 strains in Sri Lanka (Figure). *NA, not applicable. Bayesian phylogenetic tree based on complete envelope
protein coding gene of dengue virus 1 (DENV-1) serotype. The tree was constructed by using the Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling
method and BEAST software (http://beast.bio.ed.ac.uk). The general time reversible model of sequence evolution with gamma-distributed rate
variation among sites and a proportion of invariable sites and a relaxed (uncorrelated log-normal) molecular clock model were used. Bayesian
posterior probabilities and percentages of replicate trees in which the associated taxa clustered in the bootstrap test (1,000 replicates)
obtained by using a maximum-likelihood analysis are shown at the branches. Strains are denoted by GenBank accession number, name, year of
isolation, and country of origin. The strain BNI-5201 from this study is highlighted. Scale bar indicates mean number of nucleotide
substitutions per site. This case demonstrates the transmission of DENV by allogeneic blood stem cell transplantation. However, although the
transmission of DENV was demonstrated, the patient’s death was probably caused by hepatic veno-occlusive disease and toxic enterocolitis
related to the conditioning regimen. To avoid transmission of tropical viruses such as DENV, under German Federal Ministry of Health rules,
blood and stem cell donors are excluded from donation 4 weeks after returning from areas to which such disease agents are endemic (7). DENV
has an incubation period of 3–14 days, and the risk for transmission of such viruses under this exclusion is very low. Few cases of DENV
transmission by blood transfusion or organ transplantation have been published or reported (8–11). This case represents a difficult
situation: a patient in urgent need of a lifesaving transplant that must be performed without delay, and the only matched donor scheduled
for travel to a region to which DENV is endemic. The physician decided to proceed with the scheduled transplantation date because of the
urgent need of his patient, although he was aware of the risk for transmission of tropical diseases. In such situations it is difficult to
estimate the risk/benefit ratio, so it will require a case-by-case decision between donor interests and recipient needs. All diagnostic
tools should be used to minimize the risk for viral transmission before transplantation. This could have been easily accomplished in this
case, because preprocedure samples from the donor tested positive for DENV NS1 antigen. Thus, we recommend highly sensitive and specific
testing for DENV NS1 antigen (12) of every donor returning from regions to which DENV is endemic for DENV NS1 antigen if transplantation
cannot be postponed because of urgent medical need. Suggested citation for this article: Punzel M, Korukluoğlu G, Caglayik DY, Menemenlioglu
D, Bozdag SC, Tekgündüz E, et al. Dengue virus transmission by blood stem cell donor after exposure to endemic population, Germany, 2012.
Emerg Infect Dis. 2014 Aug [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2008.140508 We thank Alexandra Bialonski, Insa Bonow, Corinna Thomé,
Birgit Hüsing, Ihsan Durmaz, and Sabine Köhler for technical assistance. This dispatch is dedicated to the late Ursula Herrmann (1927–2014),
for making this study possible. Dr Punzel is a lecturer at Technical University of Dresden Medical School. His research interest is
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
