To the Editor: Fleaborne disease is highly prevalent in Laos, mainly attributed to murine typhus (Rickettsia typhi infection), transmitted
by Xenopsylla cheopis fleas, but data on other fleaborne diseases are limited (1). We screened blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from
participants in 2 large prospective studies in Laos for Rickettsia spp. using a genus-specific 17-kDa-based Rickettsia real-time
quantitative PCR assay, and positive results were confirmed by DNA sequencing (2,3). In samples from >2,500 patients (2,540 blood and 1,112
CSF), we detected 3 cases of sequence-confirmed R. felis infections. A 50-year-old man, an official in Vientiane City, was admitted to a
hospital with fever and headache in October, 2008. HIV infection and cryptococcal meningitis were diagnosed. Treatment with intravenous
amphotericin B, then oral fluconazole, was successful; antiretroviral treatment was initiated 1 month after diagnosis. Among a panel of
diagnostic PCRs, the CSF sample specimen tested positive for genus-specific 17-kDa-Rickettsia quantitative PCR, but was negative for Orentia
tsutsugamushi and R. typhi. DNA sequencing of 434 bp of the 17-kDa gene (Macrogen, Seoul, South Korea) revealed a 100% homology to the R.
felis URRWXCal2 strain (Table). *qPCR, quantitative PCR; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; leukocyte; RFLP, restriction fragment length
polymorphism; ICT, immunochromatographic test.�?"�? Uni-GoldTM HIV, Trinity Biotech, Ireland; Alere Determine HIV-1/2 Ag/Ab Combo, Alere
Medical, Japan.�?"�?�ICT Diagnostics, Cape Town, South Africa. R. felis positivity in CSF is rare; 4 have been reported (3). The combined
findings of R. felis infection and severe immunodeficiency in this patient led to a reevaluation of the 2 reported R. felis infections in
Laos (2). Before this study, R. felis DNA or culture had not been handled in our facility. The interval between processing positive samples,
dedicated separate areas for samples before and after PCR, and the low positivity rate make DNA contamination highly unlikely. A 39-year-old
housewife from Luang Namtha in northern Laos had a history of diabetes mellitus, which had been treated with glibenclamide. On arrival at
the hospital in November, 2008, she had fever, headache, myalgia, and an eschar. She was empirically treated with doxycycline (Table). An
eschar biopsy specimen was PCR-positive for Rickettsia spp. and O. tsutsugamushi; PCR of buffy coat detected O. tsutsugamushi DNA only (2).
Molecular characterization included 17-kDa�?" and sca4- gene sequencing, which both revealed amplicons of 100% identity to the R. felis-
URRWXCal2 strain. Serologic evidence for O. tsutsugamushi infection (scrub typhus) included a 4-fold rise in IgM and IgG titers, and IgM and
IgG titers against typhus group rickettsiae, spotted fever group rickettsiae, and R. felis (isolate B377 in XTC-2 cells, Australian
Rickettsial Reference Laboratory) were negative in admission and convalescent-phase samples (6-day interval) (Table). A 13-year-old boy from
Salavan, in southern Laos, had fever, headache, and nonspecific symptoms in July, 2009. P. falciparum malaria and dengue were diagnosed,
both confirmed by PCR (Table). PCR results for the buffy coat specimen were positive for the 17-kDa gene; subsequent sequencing confirmed R.
felis with 100% identity to the URRWXCal2 strain. The fever resolved after treatment with antimalarial drugs and ceftriaxone; neither would
be expected to be efficacious for R. felis infection. These data suggest that R. felis occurs in Laos, and is possibly emerging, but whether
it results in clinical disease or commonly causes subclinical infection is unknown. The screened cohorts of consecutively enrolled patients
with febrile illnesses across 3 diverse geographic regions are representative of etiologic agents of fever across Laos. PCR has previously
been used for detection of R. felis and resulted in the discovery of a new R. felis-like organism in fleas in Kenya, Candidatus Rickettsia
asemboensis (4). Reports from Southeast Asia suggest that R. felis is not a common cause of febrile illness (1,2), which contrasts with
findings in Kenya, where R. felis was found in �%^7% of febrile patients (4,5), and also in �%^3% of afebrile patients (5). The high R.
felis carriage rate in fleas found in Laos (77% overall; 53% in Ctenocephalides felis felis, 89% in C. f. orientis) contrasts strongly with
the apparent low incidence of R. felis human infections (6). Among febrile hospitalized patients in Vientiane, 1 case of R. felis infection
was serologically diagnosed by using species-specific cross-absorption (1). Seroprevalence studies in the region could elucidate exposure to
this pathogen and unmask subclinical infections missed in fever etiology studies. The 3 patients from Laos described herein had
comorbidities associated with variable degrees of immunodeficiency (HIV infection and malaria with cellular and humoral deficiencies,
diabetes with functional neutrophil/macrophage impairment) (7,8). R. felis infections have not been associated with immunosuppression, but
few investigations of this possible association have been published. Of the 3 patients, the woman and the boy had other vectorborne
infections: scrub typhus, transmitted by Leptotrombidium mites, and P. falciparum malaria and dengue, transmitted by Anopheles and Aedes
mosquitoes, respectively. Recent reports described R. felis within a great diversity of vectors, including mites in South Korea and
Anopheles and Aedes mosquitoes in Africa (9,10). More work is needed on the role of non-flea vectors in transmission of R. felis and the
consequences this may have in terms of mixed infections of diverse vectorborne pathogens. The rare detection of R. felis in patients,
combined with high flea carriage rates, unusual signs and symptoms linked to immunodeficiencies or multiple infections, and reports from
Africa describing R. felis in asymptomatic patients, underscore the need for further investigations into the organism�?(tm)s natural history
and its uncertain role as a pathogen. Suggested citation for this article: Dittrich S, Phommasone K, Anantatat T, Panyanivong P, Slesak G,
Blacksell SD, et al. Rickettsia felis infections and comorbid conditions, Laos 2003�?"2011 . Emerg Infect Dis. 2014 Aug [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2008.131308 We thank the patients and the families of those who participated in the studies. We also thank
Rattanaphone Phetsouvanh, Mayfong Mayxay, and the staff of Mahosot Hospital, with special appreciation to the Microbiology Laboratory and
Luang Nam Tha. We thank the Salavan Hospital directors and staff, especially Phouvieng Douangdala, and Phoutthalavanh Souvannasing. We also
thank Ampai Tanganuchitcharnchai and Suthatip Jintawon for performing the IFAs. Funding for this study was provided by the Wellcome Trust of
Great Britain.
