Breast carcinoma with choriocarcinomatous features (BCCF) is a rare variant of breast cancer, characterized by high expression of human
chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) in cancer cells such as multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast-like giant cells. The first case of BCCF was
reported in 1981 by Saigo and Rosen. Only one case of BCCF was reported to show no component of breast ductal carcinoma, and only partially
cancer cells, such as multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast-like giant cells, expressed HCG in all previous BCCF cases. Here, we report the
first BCCF case without any component of breast ductal carcinoma in which HCG was found to express in all cancer cells. A 32-year-old female
patient presented with a small lump in her left breast 3 years prior. The mass was clinically suspected to be breast infiltrating ductal
carcinoma based on breast excisional biopsy and magnetic resonance imaging findings. Due to rupture and bleeding of the left kidney, the
left kidney excisional biopsy was performed. After a retrospective analysis of the initial excised breast cancer and breast cancer
metastatic to the kidney, the cancer cells were positive for HCG by immunohistochemistry, and multinucleated or mononucleated giant cells
resembled syncytiotrophoblastic and cytotrophoblastic cells which could be seen in a background of poor differentiated breast carcinoma and
extensive necrosis and hemorrhage in the lesion. Thus, a final diagnosis of BCCF and BCCF metastatic to the kidney was made. After
combination of surgical resection (the affected left breast and left kidney wereremoved) and consecutive chemotherapy consisting of
docetaxel, epirubicin, cisplatin, lobaplatin, and capecitabine, the patient achieved favorable therapeutic efficacy (the HCG level returned
to normal values, the metastatic lesions in the lungs disappeared, and the survival was 37 months). Capecitabine was very efficient and
highly recommended due to its superior efficacy in reducing the HCG level and eliminating the metastatic lesions in the lungs. This is the
first report of a rare case of BCCF without any component of breast ductal carcinoma, featured by high expression of HCG in all cancer
cells. Combination of surgery and chemotherapy (especially capecitabine) achieved a favorable therapeutic efficacy. Breast carcinomas can
produce various hormones normally not secreted by the breast, including human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), human placental lactogen (HPL),
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and norepinephrine . HCG has been detected in the serum in 12% to 33% of patients with breast carcinomas
. However, histologic examination of cancer did not reveal any evidence of choriocarcinomatous differentiation, nordid the clinical
examination suggest any other source of HCG . Breast carcinoma with choriocarcinomatous features (BCCF) is a rare variant of breast
carcinoma and was first reported by Saigo and Rosen in 1981 . BCCF is characterized by HCG-expressing highly atypical cancer cells
morphologically similar to choriocarcinoma cells admixed with a malignant epithelial and/or mesenchymal component . Most cases of BCCF have
shown breast-infiltrating ductal carcinoma or ductal carcinoma in situ with choriocarcinomatous features . Only one case of BCCF showed no
component of breast ductal carcinoma . In all previous BCCF cases, only some cancer cells, such as multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast-like
giant cells, expressed HCG . Here, we report a rare case of BCCF without any component of breast ductal carcinoma, featured by high
expression of HCG in all cancer cells. In this case report, the history, physical examination, laboratory findings, imaging studies, and
pathological findings of BCCF in a 32-year-old woman are described and previous literatures about BCCF are reviewed. A 32-year-old woman,
gravida 2 and para1, withregular menstruation, detected a small lump of 2 × 1.5 cm in her left breast upon self-examination in July 2010.
The breast ultrasound confirmed the presence of a 1.8 × 1.2 cm lump of low echo-levels in August 2010. In January 2011, the position
emission tomography-computer tomography (PET-CT) of the whole body revealed that there were metabolism-elevating occupying lesions in the
left breast, left kidney, and two lungs. Computed tomography (CT) confirmed the occupying lesions in the lung and left kidney (Figure 1A,B).
The core needle biopsy in the left breast was performed, but no cancer cells were detected. The levels of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)
was 22,931 U/L (normal values: 0–5 U/L). In February 2011, the breast excisional biopsy was performed and a diagnosis of breast infiltrating
ductal carcinoma was made. In the chemotherapy regimen, one cycle was 21 days. Two cycles of docetaxel (75 mg/m2, once per cycle) combined
with epirubicin (75 mg/m2, once per cycle) reduced the lesions in the lungs and kidney and the HCG level (5,773 U/L at the end of the first
cycle but 9,026 U/L at the end of the second cycle), while new lesions appeared in the lungs. The chemotherapy regimen was then changed to
two cycles of docetaxel (75 mg/m2, once per cycle) and cisplatin (75 mg/m2, once per cycle), and the lesions in the lungs remained stable;
the HCG level continued to decrease to 1,490 U/L at the end of the regimen. During this regimen, resection of the left kidney was performed
due to rupture and bleeding. The left kidney excisional biopsy was also performed and a diagnosis of high-level infiltrating renal carcinoma
(breast cancer metastatic to the kidney) was made. The chemotherapy regimen was changed to one cycle of docetaxel (75 mg/m2, once per cycle)
and lobaplatin (35 mg/m2, once per cycle), and the HCG level continued to decrease to 57.86 U/L at the end of the regimen. Due to the severe
marrow depression of docetaxel and lobaplatin, the chemotherapy regimen was changed to three cycles of docetaxel (75 mg/m2, once per cycle)
and capecitabine (2 g/m2) (one cycle means once-daily administration for 2 weeks followed by 1 week of rest). At the end of the regimen, the
HCG level continued to decrease to 17.64 U/L and the lesions in the lungs remained stable. A single capecitabine was then used instead of
docetaxel and capecitabine. After two cycles of capecitabine (2 g/m2, one cycle means once-daily administration for 2 weeks followed by 1
week of rest), the HCG level continued to decrease to 0.12 U/L as didthe lesions in the lungs. The excised breast cancer and breast cancer
metastatic to the kidney were retrospectively analyzed using HCG immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining. The IHC results demonstrated that all
the cancer cells strongly expressed HCG, and the final pathological diagnosis was corrected to BCCF and BCCF metastatic to the kidney
(Figures 2 and 3). After a further 9 cycles of capecitabine (2 g/m2, one cycle means once-daily administration for 2 weeks followed by 1
week of rest), the HCG level returned to normal values and the lesions in the lungs disappeared (Figure 1C). At this time, the patient was
still alive (the survival was 37 months), and was undergoing her 26th cycle of capecitabine (2 g/m2, one cycle means once-daily
administration for 2 weeks followed by 1 week of rest) with no additional treatment. CT (computed tomography) imaging of the lung and kidney
of the patient. Breast carcinoma with choriocarcinomatous features (BCCF) metastatic to the lung (A) and left kidney (B). The metastatic
lesions are indicated with black arrows. (C) The lesions in the lungs disappeared after a further 9 cycles of capecitabine. Histology of
breast carcinoma with choriocarcinomatous features (BCCF). (A) Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining at a low magnification. The BCCF showed well-
demarcated borders with extensive hemorrhage (the BCCF is indicated with black lines), and no infiltrating ductal carcinoma and ductal
carcinoma in situ found. Error bars represent 100 μm. (B) Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining at a high magnification. A sheet-like arrangement
of oval-shaped epithelial cells with prominent nucleoli was seen. Multinucleated giant cells (indicated by black arrows) with oval nuclei,
prominent multiple nucleoli, and irregular chromatin clumping resembling syncytiotrophoblastic cells could be also be seen. Error bars
represent 50 μm. (C) Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) demonstrates that all the cancer cells show strong HCG
staining. Error bars represent 50 μm. Histology of breast carcinoma with choriocarcinomatous features (BCCF) metastatic to the kidney. (A)
Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining at a low magnification. The BCCF metastatic to the kidney (presented as a thin border of intact
choriocarcinoma, indicated with black lines) is well-circumscribed and cystic, surrounded by normal renal tissue, with extensive hemorrhage
around it. Error bars represent 100 μm. (B) HE staining at a high magnification. In the background of hemorrhage, giant cells with prominent
pleomorphic nuclei, and abundant acidophilic and vacuolated cytoplasm resembling cytotrophoblastic cells could be seen. Error bars represent
50 μm. (C) Immunohistochemistry of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) demonstrates that all the cancer cells show strong HCG staining. Error
bars represent 50 μm. Grossly, the left breast of the patient was normal and BCCF did not protrude through the skin surface. The BCCF was
3.2 × 3.2 × 1.8 cm in size, and was a solid, well-circumscribed, and dark red mass, with extensive necrosis and hemorrhage in the lesion.
The BCCF metastatic to the kidney was 5 × 3.5 × 2 cm in size, and was a solid, well-circumscribed, and chromatic mass, with extensive
necrosis and hemorrhage in the lesion.Histologically, the BCCF showed well-demarcated borders with extensive hemorrhage, and no infiltrating
ductal carcinoma and ductal carcinoma in situ could be found (Figure 2A). At high magnification, a sheet-like arrangement of oval-shaped
epithelial cells with prominent nucleoli was seen. Multinucleated giant cells with oval nuclei, prominent multiple nucleoli, and irregular
chromatin clumping resembling syncytiotrophoblastic cells could also be seen (Figure 2B). The BCCF metastatic to the kidney showed a very
similar pattern in histology (Figure 3A,B). The cancer (presented as a thin border of intact choriocarcinoma) was well-circumscribed and
cystic, surrounded by normal renal tissue, with extensive hemorrhage around it (Figure 3A). In the background of hemorrhage, giant cells
with prominent pleomorphic nuclei, and abundant acidophilic and vacuolated cytoplasm resembling cytotrophoblastic cells could be seen
(Figure 3B). In all, the BCCF and BCCF metastatic to the kidney were made up of proliferation of large sized cells with high
nucleus/cytoplasm ratio and increased nuclear chromatin. Multinucleated or mononucleated giant cells resembling syncytiotrophoblastic and
cytotrophoblastic cells could be seen. This finding was similar to choriocarcinoma originating from genital tract. No subtypes of breast
infiltrating ductal carcinoma or ductal carcinoma were identified in the cancer. No lymphovascular invasion was identified. IHC staining was
performed on paraffin-embedded tissue sections, using a standard avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex method. The IHC staining demonstrated that
all the cancer cells strongly expressed HCG in the BCCF and BCCF metastatic to the kidney (Figures 2C and 3C). In BCCF, other IHC markers
were described as follows: HER-1 (++); HER-2 (-); p53(-); Cyclin D1 (-); ER (-); Ki-67 (+ >75%); PR (-); Top-IIα (+50% to 75%); p120 (++);
CK5 (-); CK7 (+); CK20 (-); CK (+); EMA (+); and GCDFP-15 (+). In BCCF metastatic to the kidney, other IHC markers were described as
follows: HER-2 (-); ER (-); Ki-67 (+ >75%); PR (-); CK (+); CK7 (+); CK20 (-); EMA (+); p63 (-); Vimentin (-), and PLAP (-). According to
the IHC study findings, the diagnosis of BCCF and BCCF metastatic to the kidney was confirmed. BCCF is a rare variant of breast cancer,
characterized by high expression of HCG in cancer cells such as multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast-like giant cells . The origin of BCCF is
not clear. Some researchers suggested that osseous and/or sarcomatoid metaplasia usually occurs in the development of breast infiltrating
ductal carcinoma . If metaplasia occurs in the breast infiltrating ductal carcinoma expressing HCG, the breast infiltrating ductal carcinoma
cells will show choriocarcinomatous features . Since the first BCCF was reported in 1981 by Saigo and Rosen , there have been 18 cases of
BCCF reported (including thecase in our current study). Only one case of BCCF was reported to have no component of breast ductal carcinoma .
Furthermore, only partially cancerous cells, such as syncytiotrophoblastic cells or cytotrophoblastic cells-like giant cells, expressed HCG
in all previous BCCF cases . In our case of BCCF, no component of breast ductal carcinoma could be found, and HCG was found to be expressed
in all cancer cells. We summarized the characteristics of all the 18 cases in Table 1 and Table 2. In the 18 cases, the age of all patients
ranged from 22 to 71 years (the average age is 46.5 years) and most tumors were located in the right breast (13/18), although several tumors
were also located in the left breast (5/18); our patient presented with left-breast tumors only. The tumors ranged from 1 to 10 cm, and the
metastatic tumors had the same histology as the primary tumors. Most cases (16/18) of BCCF presented with breast ductal carcinoma, whereas
only two cases presented with no breast ductal carcinoma, including one case reported by Hematiet al. and the case in our study. The
pathological feature of BCCF is similar to that of choriocarcinoma in the female genital tract . The cytopathologic characteristics of BCCF
were hemorrhagic necrosis in the background and multinucleated bizarre giant cells resembling syncytiotrophoblasts in the chorion. Another
characteristic is a sheet-like arrangement of oval-shaped epithelial cells with prominent nucleoli considered to be intermediate
trophoblasts. The positive HCG staining contributes to the diagnosis of BCCF. The pathological feature of BCCF in our case is similar to
that reported by Hematiet al. ; both cases presented with poor differentiated carcinoma, with no component of breast ductal carcinoma or
other types of breast cancer, extensive necrosis and hemorrhage in the lesion, and multinucleated or mononucleated giant cells resembling
cytotrophoblastic cells or syncytiotrophoblastic cells could be seen. The percentage of HCG-positive cancer cells varied in all the 18
cases. Murata et al. reported that the percentage of HCG-positive cancer in all cancer cells was estimated to be 2% to 3% , whereas a
percentage of ~30% was also reported by Resetkova et al. . In Hematiet al.’s case, only somecancer cells were found to express HCG . It is
noteworthy that, in our case, approximately 100% of the cancer cells expressed HCG. However, the mechanism underlying the high expression of
HCG in our case remains to be elucidated. Summary of reports in literature Summary of reports in literature (continued) “+”, Positive; “–”,
Negative; “/”, Unknown. “Lost”, Lost to follow-up. L, Left breast; R, Right breast; LN, Lymph node status; IDC-DCIS, Infiltrating ductal
carcinoma-ductal carcinoma in situ; HPL, Human placental lactogen; HCG, Human chorionic gonadotropin; CK, Cytokeratin; ER, Estrogen
receptor; PR, Progesterone receptor; EMA, Epithelial membrane antigen; PALP, Placental alkaline phosphatase; DFS, Disease free survival; S,
Surgery; C, Chemotherapy; R, Radiotherapy; E, Endocrine therapy. The diagnosis of BCCF is difficult, and should be discriminated from many
other diseases. Initially, the first differential diagnoses were metastatic choriocarcinoma to the breast and poor differentiated anaplastic
breast-infiltrating ductal carcinoma. Most patients with metastatic choriocarcinoma to the breast are pregnant and have a definite history
of reproductive system tumors, and primary breast cancer could not be present in the breast cancer. However, acomponent of primary breast
cancer, such as breast-infiltrating ductal carcinoma and/or ductal carcinoma in situ, could be commonly found in BCCF. Further, a positive
staining of GCDFP-15 in BCCF also supports that BCCF is a primary breast cancer . Although our case presented with a component of poor
differentiated carcinoma without any component of breast ductal carcinoma, other evidence supports the diagnosis of BCCF: an
immunohistochemical profile of GCDFP-15 (+), CK7 (+), CK20 (-), CK (+), CK5(-), EMA (+), 32-year-old female with regular menstruation and no
history of reproductive system tumors,and no pregnancy during disease occurrence. Thus, our case should be diagnosis as BCCF. Furthermore,
the differential diagnosis with poor differentiated anaplastic infiltrating ductal carcinomas mainly depends on the positive staining of HCG
. Another differential diagnosis is the primary renal tumor expressing HCG (usually high stage renal transitional-cell carcinoma), a very
rare form of renal tumor . However, in our case, no component of transitional-cell carcinoma was discovered, HCG was found to be expressed
in both breast and kidney cancer, both of which showed a very similar pattern in histology. Further, animmunohistochemical profile of CK7
(+), CK20 (-), CK (+), and PLAP (-) in kidney cancer was found, supporting a diagnosis of the BCCF metastatic to the kidney. BCCF is a
highly malignant breast cancer with a poor prognosis. Most patients die from multiple metastases within a few months . However, two of four
patients reported by Erhan et al. were disease-free 2 and 4 years after diagnosis, respectively , and BCCF patients who were disease-free 1
year after surgery have also been reported . The etiology behind the poor prognosis of BCCF still remains to be elucidated, although a
possible mechanism is described as follows: pregnancy-associated proteins such as HCG act as immunosuppressive reagents, and make cancer
cells in BCCF invade the immune defense of the host immune system, causing BCCF to become a highly invasive cancer . The patient in our case
underwent resection of both BCCF and BCCF metastatic to the kidney, and the serum level of HCG is normal. Thus, HCG might not play an
immunosuppressing role in the presentcase. Current therapeutic strategies for BCCF mainly consist of endocrine therapy, surgery, and
chemotherapy. So far, most cases of BCCF presented with double negative staining of estrogen and progesterone (our case also presented with
double negative staining of estrogen and progesterone), whereas only one case was estrogen-positive and one case was progesterone-positive .
Tamoxifen-based endocrine therapy was ineffective in treating BCCF patients, whereas other endocrine therapies, such as gonadotropin-
releasing hormone analogues, are also ineffective . In all, there has not been effective endocrine therapy towards BCCF so far. Surgery is
generally considered to be effective in treating BCCF. Although there are BCCF patients who presented with multiple metastases and a short
survival period after surgery , the BCCF patients who had a disease-free survival period of more than 1 year all underwent surgical
resection . The two patients reported by Erhan et al. who were disease-free 2 and 4 years after diagnosis also underwent surgical resection
. The chemotherapy in BCCF regimen still remains unclear . Fluorouracil or etoposide, methotrexate, vincristine, and doxorubicin are
reported to be effective in treating BCCF , whereas methotrexate, actinomycin D, and cyclophosphamide are reported to be ineffective .
Several studies suggested that BCCF patients received postoperative chemotherapy but their efficacy was not reported . For the BCCF patients
who could not receive surgery, chemotherapy has proved both effective and ineffective . In our case, the combination of surgery and
chemotherapy was used in treating BCCF, achieving a favorable therapeutic efficacy (the HCG level returned to normal values, the metastatic
lesions in the lungs disappeared, and the survival was 37 months). In our chemotherapy regimen, capecitabine may play an important role in
achieving favorable therapeutic efficacy. The reason why capecitabine exerts superior therapeutic efficacy towards BCCF is described as
follows. In common chemotherapy regimens for the treatment of choriocarcinoma, 5-fluorouracil is recognized as an effective drug, and
capecitabine is an oral prodrug of 5-fluorouracil . In the tumor, capecitabine is selectively activated and exertsa therapeutic effect
towards tumors . Thus, capecitabine may also exert a superior therapeutic efficacy towards BCCF, which is breast carcinoma with
choriocarcinomatous features. Thus, combination of surgery and chemotherapy (especially capecitabine) was recommended in treating BCCF. This
is the first report of a rare case of BCCF without any component of breast ductal carcinoma, featured by a high expression of HCG in all
cancer cells. A combination of surgery and chemotherapy (especially capecitabine) achieved favorable therapeutic efficacy (the HCG level
returned to normal values, the metastatic lesions in the lungs disappeared, and the survival was 37 months). Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. ACTH: Adrenocorticotropic hormone; BCCF: Breast carcinoma with choriocarcinomatous features;
CK: Cytokeratin; CT: Computed tomography; EMA: Epithelial membrane antigen; ER: Estrogen receptor; GCDFP-15: Gross cystic disease fluid
protein 15; HCG: Human chorionic gonadotropin; HE: Hematoxylin-eosin; HPL: Human placental lactogen; IDC-DCIS: Infiltrating ductal
carcinoma-ductal carcinoma in situ; IHC: Immunohistochemistry; LN: Lymph node status; PALP: Placental alkaline phosphatase; PET-CT: Position
emission tomography-computer tomography; PR: Progesterone receptor. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All authors
have contributed substantially to the study. YZ, ML, JL, FJ, RL, and XG contributed to the design of the study, analysis of data, and
writing of manuscript. JY and SJ contributed to the conception and design of the study. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
This study was supported by the China Cancer Foundation (Grant No. XH2011-0001).
