Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 23 Final Diagnosis: Thyroid storm Symptoms: Delirium • diarrhea • fever •
hypertension • hyperventilation • tachycardia • weight loss Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: Endocrinology and Metabolic
Unusual clinical course The clinical presentation of thyroid storm includes fever, tachycardia, hypertension, and neurological
abnormalities. It is a serious condition with a high mortality rate. Furthermore, some other complications affect the clinical course of
thyroid storm. Although it is reported that prognosis is poor when thyroid storm is complicated by disseminated intravascular coagulation
syndrome (DIC) and leukopenia, reports of such cases are rare. A 23-year-old man presented with delirium, high pyrexia, diarrhea, and weight
loss of 18 kg over 2 months. According to the criteria of Burch and Wartofsky, he was diagnosed with thyroid storm on the basis of his
symptom-complex and laboratory data that confirmed the presence of hyperthyroidism. Investigations also found leukopenia, thrombocytopenia,
and disseminated intravascular coagulation, all of which are very rare complications of thyroid storm. We successfully treated him with
combined therapy including anti-thyroid medication, despite leukopenia. Early diagnosis and treatment are essential in ensuring a good
outcome for patients with this rare combination of medical problems. The classic clinical presentation of thyroid storm is a symptom-complex
of pyrexia, heart failure, altered mental status, dehydration, vomiting, and diarrhea . It is a life-threatening condition that is difficult
to treat even when the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism is made promptly . The prognosis is poor when thyroid storm is complicated by
disseminated intravascular coagulation syndrome (DIC) and leukopenia; however, reports of such cases are rare. Graves’ disease is an
autoimmune disorder characterized by hyperthyroidism, ophthalmopathy, and dermopathy, which can be complicated by various autoimmune blood
disorders, including hemolytic anemia , idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura , and iron deficiency anemia . Here, we present a case of
thyroid storm complicated by bicytopenia and disseminated intravascular coagulation, which was successfully treated as a result of prompt
diagnosis and treatment. A 23-year-old man presented with gradual onset consciousness disturbance, high pyrexia, diarrhea, and weight loss
of 18 kg over 2months. He was treated with intravenous fluids and oral fosfomycin for 2 days, but was transferred to our hospital after his
condition deteriorated. He had developed consciousness disturbance, bicytopenia, and hepatic dysfunction. Abdominal computed tomography
showed marked hepatic enlargement and splenomegaly. On physical examination at admission, his temperature was 40°C, blood pressure 140/97
mm-Hg, pulse rate 97 beats/min with a regular rhythm, respiratory rate 16 breaths/min, and reduced level of consciousness. His pulse rate
increased to 110/min later on the same day, and remained thereafter until our treatments showed some effects. An apical systolic murmur
(Levine 3/6) was audible. He had a fine tremor in his hands and excessive sweating. The thyroid gland was slightly enlarged. Laboratory
findings on admission are shown in Tables 1 and 2. The patient’s complete blood count (CBC) showed bicytopenia, with leukopenia of
1.8×103/µL (normal level; 3.9–9.8×103/µL) and thrombocytopenia of 71×103/µL (13.1–36.2×103/µL). Serum C-reactive protein (CRP) was 2.88
mg/dL (0.0–0.3 mg/dL). Hepatic dysfunction was evident; aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was 93 IU/L (10–35 IU/L); alanine aminotransferase
(ALT) 88 IU/L (5–40 IU/L); lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 393 IU/L (120–230 IU/L); alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 390 IU/L (110–360 IU/L); and
γ-glutamyltranspeptidase (γ-GTP) 91 IU/L (10–50 IU/L). Serum levels of fibrin degradation products and D-dimer were also increased to 82.7
µg/mL (0.0–0.5 µg/mL) and 43.51 µg/mL (0.0–1.0 µg/mL), respectively, diagnostic of DIC (6). Thyroid function test results showed a high free
triiodothyronine (FT3) level of 6.5 pg/dL (2.3–4.0 pg/dL), free thyroxine (FT4) level of 4.0 ng/dL (0.9–1.7 ng/dL), and a low thyroid
stimulation hormone (TSH) concentration of less than 0.01 µIU/mL (0.5–5.0 µIU/mL). His thyrotoxicosis was diagnosed as a Graves’ disease
because serum TRAb was detected at a concentration of 3.0 IU/L (under 2.0 IU/L). An electrocardiogram revealed tachycardia and ventricular
trigeminy. Ejection fraction was normal on echocardiography. Ultrasound tomogram of the thyroid showed mild enlargement and increased blood
flow. His blood culture and fecal culture results were all negative. We diagnosed his condition as a thyroid storm because of the presence
of consciousness disturbance, high pyrexia, and diarrhea, with Graves’ disease equivalent to Burch-Wartofsky score of 50 out of 140 ,
complicated by bicytopenia and DIC. On the day of admission, we started 20 mg/day of thiamazole for thyroid storm (Figure 1) and continued
rehydration, after which his conscious level began to improve. Nevertheless, his fever was unable to be reduced by cooling with ice packs
placed on major arteries. Therefore, we added 15 mg/day potassium iodide and 30 mg/day propranolol on the second day. Thereafter, body
temperature declined to 37°C, and although his diarrhea persisted for about 4 days, it gradually improved. Blood pressure and pulse rate
also normalized. By the sixth day, CBC count showed improvement in the white blood cell counts at 3.6×103/µL, and platelet count at
163×103/µL. On the thirteenth day of admission, the course of potassium iodide was completed, and on the fifteenth day he was discharged on
thiamazole monotherapy. Thyroid storm is a serious condition with a mortality rate in excess of 20%, but it affects less than 10% of
patients admitted because of thyrotoxicosis . It is of utmost importance to be aware that the serum-free T3 and T4 concentrations may lie
within their respective normal range in thyroid storm, which risks delay in commencing prompt treatment and risking poor outcome .
Generally, the Thyroid Storm Scoring System proposed by Burch and Wartofsky is used to make the diagnosis . The score of our case was
sufficiently high (50 out of 140) to suggest the diagnosis of thyroid storm. The notable features of this case are the variety and severity
of complications. First, the patient had bicytopenia, manifested as leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. Thyroid hormones facilitate the
production of blood cells by stimulating hematopoietic stem cells . However, they also reduce the life-span of blood components by a
β-adrenergic mechanism or by stimulation of the reticulo-endothelial system. Although this suggests that pancytopenia is likely to be a
complication of thyrotoxicosis, cases of isolated anemia or thrombocytopenia are more frequently reported . Autoimmune mechanisms may also
play a role, suggested by the potential complication of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and pernicious anemia , and there have
been reports that thyrotoxicosis might directly suppress hematopoiesis in the bone marrow . However, examination of the blood film and bone
marrow aspirate excluded these in our case. In this case, bicytopenia resolved rapidly as thyroid function returned to normal, suggesting
that a direct effect of thyroid hormones on blood cell lifespan was likely to be the underlying mechanism. The treatments for thyroid storm
consist of: a) suppression of production and excretion of thyroid hormones; b) inhibition of the peripheral effects of circulating thyroid
hormones; c) general supportive care; and d) treatment of underlying disorders . Generally, anti-thyroid drugs such as propylthiouracil and
methimazole are used to suppress the level of circulating thyroid hormones. Because it can take about 3–4 days for these drugs to act,
inorganic iodine and β-adrenoceptor blockers are administered at the same time. One of the serious adverse effects of anti-thyroid drugs is
agranulocytosis . We initially considered avoiding an anti-thyroid drug, since our patient had leukopenia on admission. Nevertheless, the
leucopenia improved with combined therapy that included thiamazole, suggesting that the leucopenia was a direct consequence of the thyroid
storm. In our case, we ruled-out septic state caused by enteric bacteremia, because his blood culture and fecal culture were all negative.
Furthermore, this patient’s condition improved 3 days after starting inorganic iodine and β-adrenoceptor blockers. A septic state would not
have improved so easily and so fast. The clinical course in this case was also characterized by DIC, which could have been another cause of
thrombocytopenia in this case. Although there has been a report of DIC complicating multiple organ failure caused by congestive heart
failure in a thyroid storm, this complication is very rare . Infection, surgical intervention, or trauma may cause thyroid storm, which can
also induce DIC. However, we could not ascertain the apparent cause in this case. We considered whether it may have been triggered by
Epstein-Barr virus or cytomegalovirus infection, hemophagocytic syndrome, or myeloproliferative diseases, but these differential diagnoses
were excluded on further investigation. Furthermore, because the DIC also resolved as the thyroid storm was treated, we hypothesize that in
this case the thyroid storm directly provoked DIC. In conclusion, we report a case of thyroid storm complicated by bicytopenia and DIC, an
extremely rare combination of pathophysiologic conditions. Rapid diagnosis and prompt treatment, including anti-thyroid drugs, despite the
presence of leucopenia, ensure a good outcome for these patients. Conflict of interest statement The authors state that they have no
conflicts of interest to declare. Clinical course of our patient. After admission, thiamazole 20 mg/day was administered. Tachycardia
improved gradually after potassium iodide and propranolol were co-administered. There were also steady improvements in complete blood count
parameters and serum thyroid concentrations. Laboratory findings on admission. WBC – white blood cells; Neu – neutrophil; Lym – lymphocyte;
Mo – monocyte; Eo – eosinophil; Baso – basophil; RBC – red blood cells; Hb – hemoglobin; Ht – hematocrit; Plt – platelets; TP – total
protein; Alb – albumin; BUN – blood urea nitrogen; Cr – creatinine; T-Bil – total bilirubin; D-Bil – direct bilirubin; AST – asparate-
aminotransferase; ALT – alanine-aminotransferase; LDH – lactate dehydrogenase; ALP – alkaline phosphatase; G-GTP – γ-glutamyltranspeptidase;
CK – creatine kinase; CRP – c-reactive protein. Laboratory findings on admission. TSH – thyroid stimulating hormone; fT4 – free T4; fT3 –
free T3; TRAb – thyroid stimulating hormone receptor antibody; TSI – thyroid stimulating immunoglobulins; PT – prothrombin time; APTT –
activated partial thromboplatin time; Fib – fibrinogen; FDP – fibrin degradation product; AT3 – antithrombin III; ANA – antinuclear
antibodies; dsDNA-IgG – double-stranded DNA-IgG; HBs-Ag – hepatitis B virus antigen; HCV-Ab – hepatitis C virus antibody; HIV-AgAb – human
immunodeficiency virus antigen antibody; EB-IgG anti-VCM – Epstein-Barr virus-IgG anti-VCM; EB-IgM anti-VCM – Epstein-Barr virus-IgM anti-
VCM; EB-EBNA-IgG – Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen-IgG; CMV-IgG – cytomegalovirus-IgG; CMV-IgM – cytomegalovirus-IgM.
