The case presented is the first patient with concurrent acute interstitial pneumonia and pulmonary embolism associated with combined
treatment of peginterferon and ribavirin for hepatitis C. Peginterferon and ribavirin are the backbone of anti-viral therapy for hepatitis C
virus infection. Pulmonary complications occur very rarely, the most common are interstitial pneumonia, sarcoidosis, pleural effusion,
bronchiolitis obliterans organized pneumonia (BOOP), and asthma episodes. Patients with chronic pulmonary disease are more predisposed to
venous thromboembolism (VTE) with a two-fold increased risk of VTE. Here, we present a case of concurrent acute interstitial pneumonia and
pulmonary embolism during treatment with peginterferon alpha-2a and ribavirin in a patient with hepatitis C. A 47-year-old female patient
presented to the emergency unit with sudden-onset of shortness of breath. On examination, the patient had tachycardia, tachypnea, and
hypotension. The patient was suffering from hepatitis C (genotype 1b) and she had been receiving peginterferonalfa-2a (100 mcg/week/sc) and
ribavirin (400 mg twice daily) for the past 3 months. She had taken weekly dose of peginterferon 3 days ago. Hepatic function tests,
hemogram, and C-reactive protein (CRP) analyses were within normal ranges. Arterial blood gas analysis demonstrated hypoxia and hypocarbia
(arterial blood gases showed: pH 7.50, PO2 56 mmHg, and PCO2 26 mmHg). D-dimer was 0.89 (0-0.5). There was no risk factor for VTE, and there
was no history of smoking. The patient's echocardiogram [Figure 1] showed ejection fraction (EF) 60%, septal flattening, and thrombosis
extending from the main pulmonary artery to left pulmonary artery. Diagnosed with pulmonary embolism, the patient received thrombolytic
treatment from the cardiology intensive care unit. Following thrombolytic treatment, hypotension was corrected, although no improvement in
hypoxia or tachypnea was achieved. Chest radiography [Figure 1] demonstrated heterogeneously increased density involving inferior and mid
lobes bilaterally. Pneumonia was diagnosed and antibiotic (Clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily) was initiated. The patient developed fever on
the 4th day of hospitalization. The thoracic computed tomography (CT) [Figure 2] demonstrated bilateral symmetric heterogeneously increased
density and areas of ground-glass density [Figure 3]. Both main pulmonary arteries and branches were open. Despite antibiotic treatment
(meronem 1 gm three times daily + targocid 400 mg/day), fever and hypoxia (sO2: 85-88%) persisted and methylprednisolone (Prednol®) 1 mg/kg
was added for suspected acute interstitial pneumonia. Fever response was achieved at 24 hours with methylprednisolone treatment, and
tachypnea and hypoxia were corrected at 36 hours. Open lung biopsy confirmed non-specific interstitial pneumonia. Methylprednisolone was
down-titrated gradually over 3 weeks and discontinued. The patient had no recurrence of interstitial pneumonia during follow-up visits.
Follow-up thoracic CT image at 1 month post-treatment is provided in Figure 4. Anti-viral treatment of patients was not completed. The
hepatitis C virus ribonucleic acid (HCV RNA) viral load of 187.405 UI/ml was detected on the final visit. Sustained virologic response (SVR)
to antiviral therapy for chronic hepatitis C virus infection could not be achieved because of discontinued antiviral treatment. Causality
assessment of adverse drug reactions (ADR) obtained with WHO-UMC (World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring, the Uppsala Monitoring Centre) criteria and Naranjo ADR probability scale were categorized into “probable/likely” and
“probable”, respectively. ECHO image of the thrombosis extending from the main pulmonary artery to left pulmonary artery Chest radiography
shows heterogeneous density increase at mid and inferior zones bilaterally, being more pronounced at the lower right lobe Thoracic CT
demonstrates bilateral symmetric ground glass appearance involving the all lung areas Thoracic CT at month 1 of treatment demonstrates
almost complete regression The most common adverse effects of the combination therapy are flu-like symptoms, fatigue, lack of appetite, hair
thinning, and skin reactions. Pulmonary complications are rare and may include pneumonia, lung tissue inflammation, and pulmonary
hypertension. In a review involving 24 cases, the most frequent symptoms in patients developing interstitial pneumonia were shortness of
breath, dry cough, arthralgia, and fever. Bilateral or unilateral fine rales may be heard on physical examination. Arterial blood gas
demonstrated hypoxia in 88% of the patients, and it should be borne in mind that pulmonary radiography may be normal. It is characterized by
bilateral ground-glass appearances with thoracic CT, which are more common in the mid and inferior lobes. Interstitial pneumonia diagnosis
was confirmed with transbronchial, thoracoscopic, or open lung biopsies in 14 of the 27 cases. It is believed that interferon might be
responsible for the pulmonary adverse effects. The immunomodulator activity of interferon was suggested as the pathophysiology of the lung
damage. Interferon toxicity increases proportionally to the dose and duration of treatment. Interstitial pneumonias due to peginterferon
have a much mortal course compared to those caused by the conventional interferon. Analyses of the deceased patients revealed that these
patients were young and had no previous history of a pulmonary disease. Given the paucity of reports with interstitial pneumonitis after
ribavirin monotherapy, ribavirin is believed to be unrelated to pulmonary toxicity. For the treatment of interstitial pneumonia secondary to
the combined treatment, the drugs should be discontinued as the first step. If symptoms persist, methylprednisolone is the first treatment
choice. Azathioprine is the second choice in patients who are refractory to prednol. Patients with chronic pulmonary disease are more
predisposed to VTE due to decreased production of natural anti-coagulant factors such as protein S, protein C, and antithrombin III. There
is a report of pulmonary embolism as a complication secondary to the combined treatment for hepatitis C. Our patient developed pulmonary
embolism 3 days after receiving the weekly dose of the drug. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case of concurrent acute
interstitial pneumonia and pulmonary embolism secondary to peginterferon and ribavirin therapy. Although a rare complication, health care
professionals should consider the diagnosis in patients receiving peginterferon and ribavirin who develop shortness of breath, cough, and
fever. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: No
