We report a rare case of retained sub-retinal cortical material, which underwent spontaneous resorption. Patient presented with a left eye
traumatic retinal detachment with a large retinal tear and posteriorly dislocated cataractous lens. Vitrectomy, lensectomy, silicone oil
injection, and endolaser were performed. A good visual result was achieved. The report draws attention to this condition and highlights
possible technique for minimizing risk of this complication in similar cases. We report a unique case of sub-retinal cortical lens material,
which underwent spontaneous resorption. Spontaneous resorption of residual lens cortex is well documented in the anterior segment such as
anterior chamber, endothelial surface, chamber angle, and capsular bag. Reports also exist of resorption of cortical material from the
vitreous jelly or residual pieces of cortex after vitrectomy for dropped nucleus. However, no reference in literature could be found for
spontaneous resorption of sub-retinal cortical lens material. A 45-year-old female patient was referred to the vitreoretina unit of our
tertiary eye care hospital with a history of diminished vision in the left eye of one week duration following blunt trauma to the left eye.
On examination, the vision in the left eye was perception of light with good projection in all quadrants. Slit lamp biomicroscopy showed a
clear cornea with few descemet folds, a deep anterior chamber, iridodonesis, and aphakia. The pupil had traumatic mydriasis. The vitreous
face was broken, and tobacco dusting was present in the anterior vitreous. Indirect ophthalmoscopy showed presence of a dislocated
crystalline lens in the posterior vitreous with intact capsule and early cataractous changes. There was a total retinal detachment with a
large peripheral retinal tear just short of 90 degrees extending from 12 to 2:30 o clock. A localized vitreous hemorrhage was noted.
Gonioscopy did not show presence of angle recession. The other eye had vision of 20/20 with no abnormality. The patient underwent a routine
3 port 20 G pars plana vitrectomy with peribulbar anesthesia after being explained the guarded prognosis. The procedure was done using the
Accurus vitrectomy system and visualization through a BIOM coupled to VISU microscope. A complete posterior vitrectomy with removal of
posterior hyaloid was performed. Lensectomy was performed using a phacofragmatome in 3D mode, and all visible nuclear and cortical material
was emulsified and/or aspirated in the mid vitreous cavity. Peripheral cuff of retina anterior to the tear was trimmed to prevent
proliferation. This was followed by a fluid air exchange and air silicone oil exchange. Meticulous Endolaser was performed along the
posterior margin of the break. Iridotomy was performed at 6’o’ clock. At the end of FGE intra-operatively, the surgeon noticed a fluffy
piece of hydrated lens cortical material lying sub-retinal, approximately 1.5 mm in diameter, just within the inferotemporal arcade. Removal
of the sub-retinal cortex would have involved turning over the flap and searching for the cortex. The risk to benefit of successfully
locating and removing the cortex, without causing surgical trauma, was weighed. The surgeon decided to go ahead with the remaining steps of
surgery as planned without attempting to remove the cortex [Fig. 1]. Immediate post-op day 3 fundus photo showing sub-retinal lens cortex
just within inferotemporal arcade The patient had an uneventful post-operative course with no undue inflammation or raised intraocular
pressure. There was complete absorption of the lens cortex over a period of 3 months [Fig. 2]. Fundus photo after 3 months showing
spontaneous resorption of cortical lens material. Reflexes from oil over foveal area Subsequently, Silicone oil removal was performed, and
the patient had a best corrected visual acuity of 20/40 with an attached retina [Fig. 3]. RPE changes in the form of stippling were visible
over the underlying RPE [Fig. 4]. These were confirmed on FFA. On last follow up 20 months after surgery, the patient had a flat retina with
best corrected visual acuity of 20/40 and presence of RPE changes at the site of the cortex. Fundus photo Silicone oil removal showing flat
retina and presence of RPE stippling in affect area FFA early phase confirms presence of changes in underling RPE in affected area It is not
common to encounter sub-retinal lens cortical material under the retina. The presence of a large retinal tear coupled with a posterior
dislocated lens requiring fragmentation resulted in this unique condition. During phacofragmentation, it is not uncommon to have cortical
and nuclear pieces of the lens to be dispersed in the vitreous cavity. In this clinical setting with a detached retina and almost giant
retinal tear, the cortical fragment got lodged behind the freely mobile torn retinal edge. Use of perfluorocarbon heavy liquid after
vitrectomy and prior to starting phacofragmentation could have minimized the chances of the same, as prevention is the only viable option.
The mechanism of spontaneous absorption is similar to the removal of sub-retinal blood. RPE cell convert in scavenger cells and mop up the
material. This is usually associated with permanent changes in the underlying RPE, as was confirmed in this case on FFA. It is important to
note that the decision to leave behind the cortex near or under the fovea would have resulted in poor visual recovery due to underlying RPE
changes and attendant overlying photo receptor damage. While this presentation was unique and visual recovery good, the possibility of this
complication should be borne in mind in such clinical situations and suitable intra-operative preventive measures taken. Dr (Col) Madan
Deshpande, Chief med director, HVDEH. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared
