The aim of the present analysis was to assess the feasibility, toxicity, and the tumor control of reirradiation as a salvage treatment for
progressive pediatric non-pontine high-grade gliomas (HGG). The database of the Reference Center for Radiation Oncology of the German HIT
(HIT = German acronym for brain tumor) treatment network for childhood brain tumors was screened for children who were reirradiated for
progressive non-pontine HGG. We identified eight patients (WHO grade III: n = 5; WHO grade IV: n = 3) who underwent reirradiation between
April 2006 and July 2012. Median age was 13.5 years at primary diagnosis and 14.8 years at first progression. All patients initially
underwent surgery (incomplete resection, n = 7; biopsy, n = 1) followed by radiochemotherapy. Relapses occurred inside (n = 2), at the
margin (n = 4), and outside of the preirradiated area (n = 2). In all patients, reirradiation was tolerated well without significant acute
toxicity. Temporary clinical improvement and tumor regression on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) following reirradiation was reported
(n = 3). However, all patients finally died by disease progression. Median survival time was 26.2 months from initial diagnosis and
11.4 months after first progression. Median time interval between initial radiotherapy and first reirradiation was 9.0 months. In six
patients, all macroscopic tumor deposits were reirradiated. In these patients, median progression-free (overall) survival from the start of
reirradiation was 2.4 (4.6) months. Our analysis, although based on a limited patient number, suggests that reirradiation of progressive
non-pontine HGG is feasible in children. Benefit in terms of quality of life and/or survival needs to be assessed in a prospective and
ideally in a randomized manner. Until present, prognosis of progressive high-grade gliomas (HGG) has remained dismal. Based on numerous
retrospective studies reporting on encouraging survival rates and favorable toxicity profile, reirradiation has been widely accepted as an
useful therapeutic option for adult patients with relapsed HGG . However, as tumor and molecular biology differs between adult and pediatric
HGG and as the juvenile brain is particularly vulnerable to radiation-induced injury, results from the above mentioned studies cannot be
extrapolated to children . In this analysis we specifically address the feasibility, outcome, and radiation-induced toxicity in a small
cohort of pediatric patients with progressive non-pontine HGG who underwent a salvage treatment containing a second course of radiation
therapy. The database of the Reference Center for Radiation Oncology of the German HIT (HIT = German acronym for brain tumor) treatment
network for childhood brain tumors was screened, between 2006–2012, for children who underwent a second course of radiation therapy for
progressive non-pontine HGG. Clinical information was extracted from patient medical charts. The date of initial diagnosis was defined as
the date of the first tumor resection or biopsy. The date of progression was determined by neuroradiological imaging. Progression-free (PFS)
and overall survival (OS) were assessed using the Kaplan–Meier method. All statistical analyses were performed with SPSS, version 20 (SPSS
Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). General informed consent had been given for data acquisition and analyses in the context of the corresponding
clinical trials of the first-line treatment. We identified eight pediatric HGG patients (male, n = 5) who underwent a second course of
radiation therapy between April 2006 and July 2012. Median age was 13.5 years (range, 10.3 – 16.7 years) at initial diagnosis and 14.8 years
(range, 11.0 - 17.5 years) at first progression after initial treatment. Surgery included incomplete resection (n = 7), or biopsy (#6). All
patients were treated by adjuvant radiochemotherapy (median total dose 59.4 Gy, range, 54.0 Gy – 60.0 Gy) according to the German HIT-GBM D
(EU-205100, NCT00278278) (n = 4) or HIT-HGG 2007 (EudraCT 2007-000128-42; ISRCTN19852453) (n = 4) protocols. One patient (#2) received
methotrexate (MTX) prior to radiochemotherapy (according to the HIT-GBM D protocol, arm M), and second look surgery of the irradiated tumor
was performed. Another patient (#6) received chemotherapy consisting of carboplatin, etoposide and vincristine (VCR) prior to
radiochemotherapy as a supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumor (CNS-PNET) had been initially suspected before central review
confirmed a HGG. All patients received maintenance chemotherapy consisting of temozolomide (TMZ) (n = 5) or lomustine (CCNU), VCR and
steroids (n = 3) (Table 1).Table 1 Patients characteristics I, first-line treatment and time to first progression PatientAge at initial Dx
(years)/genderTumor locationPathologyFirst-line treatmentRT 1 Gy/fractions/concurrent chemotherapyMaintenance chemotherapyTime from initial
Dx to first relapse (months)111/Mtemporo-parietalAApSx → RCT → mCT54.0/27/ PEV/VCR/PEIVTMZ9.5215/McentralAA/GBM*pSx → MTX → RCT → second
surgery → mCT59.4/33/ PEV/VCR/PEIVCCNU/VCR (VBL)17.4310/FfrontalAODpSx → RCT → mCT59.4/33/
PEV/VCR/PEIVCCNU/VCR/prednisolone9.4413/Fparietal + insularGBMpSx → RCT → mCT60/30/TMZTMZ5.0513/MfrontalGBMpSx → RCT → mCT59.4/33/
TMZTMZ49.9614/MhemisphericAABx →CT (carboplatin, etoposide, VCR) → RCT → mCT54/30/ PEV/VCR/PEIVCCNU/VCR/prednisolone12.2710/MtemporalGBMpSx
→ RCT →PD → mCT59.4/33/ TMZTMZ2.5816/FthalamicAApSx → RCT →mCT59.4/33/ TMZTMZ9.0Dx: diagnosis, M: male, F: female, AA: anaplastic
astrocytoma (WHO grade III), AOD: anaplastic oligodendroglioma (WHO grade III), GBM: glioblastoma multiforme (WHO grade IV), Bx: biopsy,
pSx: partial surgery, RT: radiation therapy, RCT: radiochemotherapy, mCT: maintenance chemotherapy, TMZ: temozolomide, CCNU: lomustine, PEV:
cisplatin, vincristine, CCNU, VCR: vincristine, VBL: vinblastine, PEIV: cisplatin, vincristine, CCNU, ifosfamide, PD: progressive disease.
→: followinged by the next treatment.*AA at initial diagnosis, GBM at first recurrence. Patients characteristics I, first-line treatment and
time to first progression Dx: diagnosis, M: male, F: female, AA: anaplastic astrocytoma (WHO grade III), AOD: anaplastic oligodendroglioma
(WHO grade III), GBM: glioblastoma multiforme (WHO grade IV), Bx: biopsy, pSx: partial surgery, RT: radiation therapy, RCT:
radiochemotherapy, mCT: maintenance chemotherapy, TMZ: temozolomide, CCNU: lomustine, PEV: cisplatin, vincristine, CCNU, VCR: vincristine,
VBL: vinblastine, PEIV: cisplatin, vincristine, CCNU, ifosfamide, PD: progressive disease. →: followinged by the next treatment. *AA at
initial diagnosis, GBM at first recurrence. Histological assessment initially revealed five WHO grade III (anaplastic oligodendroglioma
(AOD) n = 1, anaplastic astrocytoma (AA) n = 4) and three WHO grade IV tumors (glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)). In addition, the tumor tissue
from one patient with an AA (#2) showed at the time of the first relapse histopathological features fulfilling the diagnostic criteria of a
GBM (AA → GBM). All cases were centrally reviewed (German Brain Tumor Reference Center, Bonn, Germany). Salvage treatment after first
relapse differed considerably between the eight patients. Patient #1 (AA) relapsed at the margin of the preirradiated area 9.5 months after
surgery. Subsequently, he received stereotactic hypofractionated reirradiation (single doses of 4 × 5 Gy and 1 × 4.2 Gy) to a total dose of
24.2 Gy and concurrent TMZ. Prior exposition to radiotherapy in the reirradiated area was approximately 24 Gy. Salvage treatment was
tolerated well without major complications. After reirradiation, two additional cycles of PCV chemotherapy consisting of procarbazine, CCNU
and VCR were administered. Three months after the start of reirradiation, a deterioration of the patient’s general condition was observed. A
cranial MRI showed clear evidence for a progressive disease. The patient died 4.9 months after the relapse. Patient #2 (AA) relapsed at the
margin of the preirradiated area 17.4 months after surgery. Prior radiation exposure was approximately 30 Gy. An incomplete tumor resection
was performed. Interestingly, whereas the histopathological assessment of the initial tumor revealed an AA, the tissue of the relapsed tumor
showed clear evidence for a GBM. Subsequently, a treatment with TMZ (orally) and intraventricular MTX was administrated. Approximately
13 months after the relapse tumor resection cranial MRI demonstrated again a progressive disease. A reirradiation (single dose 1.8 Gy, total
dose 55.8 Gy) with concurrent TMZ was performed. Apart from a focal alopecia and moderate erythema no acute radiation-induced adverse
reactions or toxicities were reported. Hematotoxicity was mild. Of note, the boy was able to attend the school during the treatment.
Following re-radiochemotherapy high-dose TMZ was administered. Regrettably, the child did experience disease progression only 2.4 months
after the start of reirradiation. Despite a further salvage treatment attempt with nimotuzumab, the patient died of disease progression
20.5 months after the first recurrence. Patient #3 (AOD) relapsed at the margin of the preirradiated area 9.4 months after the surgery.
Following partial resection, the girl received reirradiation with 6 × 5 Gy without any complications. Then, the girl received dendritic cell
vaccination, 1.6 months after start of the reirradiation, the cranial MRI again revealed disease progression. The child finally died due to
tumor progression 5.3 months after the first relapse. Patient #4 (GBM) recurred at the margin of the radiation field 5.0 months after the
initial surgery. Salvage treatment consisted of reirradiation (17 × 1.8 Gy) with concurrent TMZ, and this treatment was tolerated well.
Subsequently, the girl received metronomic chemotherapy with the COMBAT regimen . The tumor responded and the neurological status of the
patient significantly improved. Unfortunately, 35.9 months after the start of reirradiation the patient experienced a multilocular second
relapse. The girl died 39.5 months after the first relapse despite the girl was treated with a salvage chemotherapy consisting of CCNU and
trofosfamide. Patient #5 (GBM) experienced a relapse within the preirradiated area 49.9 months after primary surgery. The salvage
chemotherapy with TMZ was initiated and this resulted initially in a tumor regression. Due to a second tumor progression the patient finally
received reirradiation with 17 × 1.8 Gy. This treatment was tolerated remarkably well, despite a relatively large radiation field due to the
large tumor volume of 125 cm3. Moreover, the patient received bevacizumab every second weeks. Four weeks after the end of the reirradiation,
a cranial MRI showed a very good partial response of the relapsed tumor (Figure 1). At the same time, the neurological status of the boy
improved. Unfortunately, 2.9 months after the start of reirradiation, the patient experienced a multilocular tumor progression within and
outside of the reirradiated area. Despite an intensification of the ongoing bevacizumab treatment by addition of irinotecan, the patient
died 11.5 months after the first relapse.Figure 1 Patient 5: Contrast enhanced T1 weighted MRI, coronal plane, a) before, b) four weeks
after reirradiation: partial remission of the relapsed tumor four weeks after a second course of radiation therapy with 17 × 1.8 Gy = 30.6
Gy. Patient 5: Contrast enhanced T1 weighted MRI, coronal plane, a) before, b) four weeks after reirradiation: partial remission of the
relapsed tumor four weeks after a second course of radiation therapy with 17 × 1.8 Gy = 30.6 Gy. Patient #6 (AA) had a multilocular relapse
outside of the preirradiated volume 12.2 months after initial surgery. With a palliative objective, he received reirradiation focused on a
symptomatic tumor deposit in the left cerebellar peduncle (25 × 1.8 Gy). Metronomic TMZ was administered simultaneously. Treatment was
effective. Neurological status, especially the gait pattern, significantly improved. Six weeks after the end of irradiation, cranial MRI
demonstrated a tumor regression within and progressive disease outside of the reirradiated area. There were no radiation-induced side
effects reported requiring any supportive treatment. Approximately two months later, the boy received radiation therapy for the third time.
The radiation therapy was directed at a tumor deposit in the area of the right lateral ventricle (17 × 1.8 Gy). The treatment was well
tolerated. Two months after the end of the third irradiation, the MRI again showed disseminated tumor progression, however not in the
preirradiated areas. Subsequently, high-dose TMZ (5 days on/5 days off) was started. Finally, a fourth course of stereotactic radiation
therapy to a tumor deposit in the right cerebellopontine angle (3 × 5 Gy) was given without any acute side effects. The patient finally died
11.3 months after the first relapse. Patient #7 (GBM) relapsed locally 2.5 months after the initial surgery. The relapsed tumor was
incompletely resected. The boy received dendritic cell vaccination . The patient finally experienced a multilocular relapse with
leptomeningeal spread along the entire craniospinal axis. He subsequently underwent palliative craniospinal irradiation with 10 × 3 Gy with
concurrent TMZ. Nevertheless, the disease progressed and the boy finally died 10.6 months after the first relapse. Patient #8 (AA)
experienced a local relapse, 9.0 months after the initial surgery. The relapsed tumor progressed slowly. In the further course of the
disease, a cerebellar metastasis with brain stem infiltration occurred. This tumor manifestation was subsequently irradiated with
conventionally fractionated reirradiation to a total dose of 54 Gy. There were no supportive treatments requiring radiation-induced side
effects. Shortly after, the patient suffered from a multilocular progression and refused further treatment. She finally died 9.2 months
after the beginning of reirradiation and 20 months after first relapse (Table 2).Table 2 Patients characteristics II, salvage treatment,
time from first to second progression and time from initial diagnosis to death PatientLocation of first relapseSalvage treatment and further
course of diseaseR (C) T 2 (Gy)/fractions/ concurrent chemotherapyTime from start of second RT to progression (months)Time from start of
second RT to death (months)Time from first relapse to death (months)1margin of RT 1 fieldsRCT → PCV → PD → death24.2/5/ TMZ3.24.64.92margin
of RT 1 fieldpSx (GBM) → CT (MTX + TMZ) → second relapse → RCT 2 → mCT (TMZ) → PD → nimotuzumab → PD → death55.8/31/TMZ2.46.120.53margin of
RT 1 fieldpSx → RT 2 → PD → dendritic cell vaccination → PD → dendritic cell vaccination + TMZ → PD → death30/61.63.85.34margin of RT 1
fieldRCT 2 → COMBAT chemotherapy → multilocular recurrence → lomustine, trofosfamide → death30.6/17/TMZ35.938.339.55within RT 1 fieldTMZ →
PD → RT 2 → 30.6/17 → bevacizumab → multilocular recurrence → irinotecan + bevacizumab → death30.6/172.96.711.56multilocular, outside RT 1
fieldRCT 2 (cerebellar peduncle) → mCT (TMZ) → RT 3 (30,6 Gy, lateral ventricle) → PD → TMZ → multilocular progress → TMZ + RT 4 (3 × 5 Gy,
cerebellopontine angle) → PD → death45/25/TMZnot reasonably measurable*10.311.37within RT 1 fieldpSx → dendritic cell vaccination →
extensive dissemination → RCT 2 (CSI + TMZ) → PD death30/10 /TMZ1.43.910.68outside RT 1 fieldwatch and wait →local PD and metastasis to
cerebellum → RT (cerebellum) → multilocular relapse → further treatment refused → death54/30not reasonably measurable*9.220.0RT: radiation
therapy, RCT: radiochemotherapy, sRCT: stereotactic radiotherapy + concurrent chemotherapy, PCV: procarbazine, lomustine, vincristine, PD:
progressive disease, TMZ: temozolomide, pSx: partial surgery, GBM: glioblastoma multiforme (WHO grade IV), CT: chemotherapy, MTX:
methotrexate, mCT: maintenance chemotherapy, COMBAT: Combined Oral Metronomic Biodifferentiating Antiangiogenic Treatment (including low-
dose daily temozolomide, etoposide, celecoxib, vitamin D, fenofibrate and retinoic acid), CSI: craniospinal irradiation. →: followed by the
next treatment.*as only part of the relapsed tumor deposits were irradiated. Patients characteristics II, salvage treatment, time from first
to second progression and time from initial diagnosis to death RT: radiation therapy, RCT: radiochemotherapy, sRCT: stereotactic
radiotherapy + concurrent chemotherapy, PCV: procarbazine, lomustine, vincristine, PD: progressive disease, TMZ: temozolomide, pSx: partial
surgery, GBM: glioblastoma multiforme (WHO grade IV), CT: chemotherapy, MTX: methotrexate, mCT: maintenance chemotherapy, COMBAT: Combined
Oral Metronomic Biodifferentiating Antiangiogenic Treatment (including low-dose daily temozolomide, etoposide, celecoxib, vitamin D,
fenofibrate and retinoic acid), CSI: craniospinal irradiation. →: followed by the next treatment. *as only part of the relapsed tumor
deposits were irradiated. The median survival time from initial diagnosis was 26.2 months (range, 13.1 – 61.4 months) (Figure 2) and
11.4 months (range, 4.9 – 39.5 months) from the time of the first recurrence. Median time interval between the end of the initial
radiotherapy and the beginning of the reirradiation was 9.0 months (range, 3.8 – 52.1 months). The tumor control of the six patients, who
received reirradiation of all visible tumor lesions was moderate with a median progression-free (overall) survival after the start of
reirradiation of 2.4 ± 0.8 months (4.6 ± 1.4 months) (Figure 3).Figure 2 Progression-free and overall survival after initial diagnosis of 8
children with high-grade gliomas, who underwent a second course of radiotherapy after tumor progression. Figure 3 Progression-free and
overall survival after the start of reirradiation of the six children, in whom the planned target volume of reirradiation contained all
macroscopic tumor deposits. Progression-free and overall survival after initial diagnosis of 8 children with high-grade gliomas, who
underwent a second course of radiotherapy after tumor progression. Progression-free and overall survival after the start of reirradiation of
the six children, in whom the planned target volume of reirradiation contained all macroscopic tumor deposits. In the present analysis, we
retrospectively assessed eight pediatric patients with non-pontine HGG who underwent reirradiation as part of their salvage treatment after
disease progression. Our series is small, however, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on reirradiated pediatric non-
pontine HGG. Surprisingly, the idea of reirradiating progressive childhood HGG dates back to the 1980ies. In the Children’s Cancer Group
(CCG) study 943, patients who showed tumor recurrences 12 months after the diagnosis could optionally receive irradiation to the recurrent
tumor sites up to a dose of 3000 rad in 15–18 fractions. However, in none of the 43 relapsed patients the possibility of reirradiation was
exhausted . Apparently, pediatric radiation oncologists have been reluctant to reirradiate relapsed or progressive HGG due to their
increased vulnerability of the CNS to radiation therapy. Hence, the fear of an unacceptably high incidence of neurological and other
radiotherapy-induced toxicity and sequelae may have limited the use of a second course of radiation therapy. Moreover, even in adult
patients, the benefit of reirradiation in terms of survival is still an issue of debate. To assess the impact of reirradiation in adult
recurrent GBM patients, the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 1205 randomized phase II trial is currently validating the survival
benefit of reirradiation in a prospective randomized setting. In our small series, we report on children receiving a second course of
radiation therapy. In four cases (patients #1 – #4) the target volumes for reirradiation were located at the margins of and in two cases
(patients #5 and #7) even within the former radiotherapy fields. Hence, significant ionizing preloads to the surrounding normal brain tissue
ranging between 25 Gy (see patients #1 and #2) and almost 60 Gy had to be expected. Moreover, at least in patient #4, the time interval
between the end of initial and the beginning of the reirradiation was rather short (3.8 months). Most experts in the field suggest a
radiation-free interval of at least six months between the first and second irradiation . However, our very limited experience might provide
evidence that some patients may tolerate reirradiation within a shorter (<6 months) radiation-free interval. The reirradiation was tolerated
remarkably well in our small cohort. Alopecia and reddening of the skin were reported. No major unexpected toxicities, and no treatment-
related deaths were reported. Moreover, no reirradiation-induced necrosis which would have required treatment did occur in any patient
during the further course of the disease. This is in accordance with the conclusions of two important reviews on normal brain tissue
tolerance which stated that radiation-induced necrosis has to be expected only at cumulative normalized total doses (single dose, 2 Gy; α/β,
3 Gy) > 102 Gy and just 1–2 years after irradiation, i.e. after the expected survival time in progressive HGG patients [11, 12]. In three of
our patients, temporary but significant improvement of the neurological status and regression of the (re-) irradiated tumor deposits were
reported (patient #4, #5, and #6). These findings are in agreement with the experiences reported by Fontanilla and colleagues. They
published a series of five children with diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas whose disease progressed after initial radiochemotherapy and
subsequent salvage chemotherapy. A second course of radiotherapy was given with concurrent chemotherapy up to a dose of 20 Gy or 18 Gy. Four
patients had substantial clinical improvement of their symptoms (improvement in speech, ataxia, and swallowing). Three patients showed an
improved mobility after reirradiation. Four patients had decreased tumor size on posttreatment MRI. Acute radiation-related toxicities were
fatigue (n = 2), alopecia (n = 2), and reduced appetite (n = 1). No grade 3 or 4 toxicities were reported . Regrettably, in our small
series, reirradiation did not demonstrate convincing efficacy in terms of long-term tumor control and survival. In six patients the target
volume of reirradiation contained all macroscopic tumor deposits. Only one of these patients (patient #4) showed sustained stable disease
for 35.9 months after reirradiation. Surprisingly, the histology of the tumor was a GBM, and the child had progressed only five months after
initial diagnosis despite intense first-line treatment consisting of surgery, followed by adjuvant radiochemotherapy (TMZ) and TMZ
maintenance chemotherapy. The other five patients did progress less than 3.5 months after the start of reirradiation. Median progression-
free (overall) survival from the start of reirradiation was 2.4 ± 0.8 months (4.6 ± 1.4 months) and hence by far less than hoped on the
basis of prior experiences gained in adults who had undergone a second course of radiation therapy for refractory HGG. Scholtyssek et al.
recently reported a median progression-free (overall) survival of 4.3 (7.7) months in a cohort of 64 adult HGG patients (53 × WHO grade IV,
11 × WHO grade III), who had been treated at progression using a second series of radiotherapy with or without concurrent/subsequent
chemotherapy . Other authors even reported much more favorable outcomes with median overall survivals ranging between 9.5 and 11 months . Of
note, the impact of reirradiation on survival appears to be difficult to interpret in our series as we report on a limited number of
patients with differing primary treatment and heterogeneous salvage therapy approaches. In addition, three of our patients (patients #2, #5
and #7) received a second course of radiation therapy at the time of the second relapse thereby influencing the survival data of the present
study (Table 2). In summary, our findings, although based on a limited patient number, suggest that reirradiation might be feasible in
progressive pediatric non-pontine HGG. The recommended radiation dose depends on the location of the relapse, the age of the patients, and
the ionizing preloads of the relapse area. Further evaluation of such cases is necessary in order to better delineate feasibility, toxicity,
and impact on outcome of this new treatment approach in pediatric non-pontine HGG patients with relapsed tumors. This manuscript is in
accordance with the ethical standards laid down in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its subsequent amendments. Competing interests The
authors indicate no potential conflicts of interest. Authors’ contributions Conception and design: KM, AOvB. Collection and assembly of
data: KM, HS, AOvB. Data analysis and interpretation: KM. Manuscript writing: KM. Manuscript editing: HS, AOvB, SP, CMK, RDK. Final approval
of manuscript: All authors. We thank all the participating centers for their valuable cooperation. The HIT-HGG trial office and the
reference institutions (Neuropathology, Prof. Dr. Torsten Pietsch et al. / Neuro-Radiology: Prof. Dr. Monika Warmuth-Metz et al./Radio-
Oncology: Prof. Dr. Rolf-Dieter Kortmann et al.) are supported by the German Children’s Cancer Foundation (Deutsche Kinderkrebsstiftung). We
thank Michael Josef Kerber for proofreading and linguistic revision of the manuscript. We would like to thank Gudrun Leyerer for
administrative support. We acknowledge the contributions by Drs. Torsten Pietsch (central pathologic review), Monika Warmuth-Metz (central
review of imaging), Uwe Kordes and Annette Sander (provision of study patients). We also acknowledge support by the Open Access Publication
Funds of the Goettingen University.
