A 68-year-old man presented with redness of left eye since six months. Examination revealed bilateral corneal furrow degeneration. Left eye
lesion was suggestive of conjunctival squamous cell carcinoma, encroaching on to cornea. Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-
OCT) confirmed peripheral corneal thinning. Fluorescein angiography confirmed intrinsic vascularity of lesion. Patient was managed with “no
touch” surgical excision, dry keratectomy without alcohol, cryotherapy, and primary closure. Pathologic examination of removed tissue
confirmed clinical diagnosis. Management of this particular case required modification of standard treatment protocol. Unlike the alcohol-
assisted technique of tumor dissection described, ethyl alcohol was not used for risk of corneal perforation due to underlying peripheral
corneal thinning. Likewise, topical steroids were withheld in the post-operative period. Three weeks post-operatively, left eye was healing
well. Hence, per-operative usage of absolute alcohol and post-operative use of topical steroids may be best avoided in such eyes. A 68-year-
old man noted redness in his left eye (operating system, OS) for 6 months. Visual acuity was 20/25 right eye and 20/20 OS. Examination
revealed bilateral corneal furrow degeneration and coincidental foreign body “rust ring.” [Fig. 1] A sessile papillary squamous cell
neoplasm was found OS. This measured 10 mm in diameter and overhung the cornea [Figs. 2 and 3]. Anterior segment optical coherence
tomography (AS-OCT; Visante OCT 3.0; Carl Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA) confirmed 1-2 mm of peripheral corneal thinning. [Fig. 4] Fluorescein
angiography established intrinsic tumor vascularity [Fig. 5]. Tumor was surgically managed with “no touch” excision, dry keratectomy without
alcohol application, cryotherapy, and primary double-layer closure. Histopathology disclosed squamous cell carcinoma in situ (CIS) of
conjunctival epithelium. Tumor cells were immunoreactive for squamous cell carcinoma marker p63 [Figs. 6 and 7]. Bilateral corneal furrow
degeneration with additional “rust ring” (arrow) right eye and vascular mass (arrow-head) left eye Sessile, vascular conjunctival epithelial
tumor left eye Corneal furrow degeneration with peripheral corneal thinning (arrow-head) and conjunctival tumor overlying cornea (arrow)
Anterior segment optical coherence tomography confirms peripheral corneal thinning consistent with corneal furrow degeneration (arrow)
Fluorescein angiography highlights vascular pattern of conjunctival tumor Histopathology discloses sessile papillomatous proliferatoin of
atypical squamous cells consistent with squamous cell carcinoma in situ (CIS). Intralesional vessels and characteristic abrupt margin
between normal epithelium and the thick plaque of atypical squamous cells are seen in higher magnification image below. (H and E, top × 25,
bottom ×100) Atypical squamous cells comprising conjunctival intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) show positive nuclear staining (brown color)
for p63, an immunohistochemical marker for squamous cell carcinoma. (Immunohistochemistry P63, ×250) Corneal furrow degeneration is
painless, bilateral thinning of peripheral cornea between corneal arcus and limbus, predominantly affecting elderly. Commonly, there is no
inflammation, vascularization, or induced corneal astigmatism. Subjects are usually asymptomatic. Depending on severity, management involves
observation, lubrication, or punctal occlusion. Conjunctival squamous cell carcinoma in situ (CIS) of conjunctival epithelium is a malignant
neoplasm that usually arises from limbal stem cells. Part of the spectrum of conjunctival intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN), it may invade
through epithelial basement membrane into the conjunctival or corneal stroma or rarely the interior of eye or orbit. Corneal furrow
degeneration is not associated with higher incidence of CIN or related malignancies, despite the similar location. Management of CIN
involves alcohol-assisted de-epithelialization of CIN, complete tumor removal, cryotherapy of margins, and tissue closure. In this case,
alcohol was not used for possible risk of corneal perforation in degenerated corneal guttter. Similarly, topical steroids or 5-fluorouracil
were avoided. Post-operative healing was unremarkable. In such cases, alteration of surgical technique should be considered. Dr. Jerry A.
Shields (JAS) for his help with preparation of this manuscript. Source of Support: Support provided by the Eye Tumor Research Foundation,
Philadelphia, PA (PR, CLS, JAS) and the Noel T. and Sara L. Simmonds Endowment for Ophthalmic Pathology, Wills Eye Institute. The funders
had no role in the design and conduct of the study, in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of the data, and in the preparation,
review or approval of the manuscript. Carol L. Shields, M.D. has had full access to all the data in the study and takes responsibility for
the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis Conflict of Interest: None declared
