Abbreviation list BMS - Bare metal stent BVS - Bioresorbable vascular scaffold DES - Drug-eluting stent ISR - In-stent restenosis LAD - Left
anterior descending OCT - Optical coherence tomography PCI - Percutaneous coronary intervention Bioresorbable vascular scaffolds (BVS)
demonstrate favourable outcomes in patients with stable coronary disease with simple de novo coronary lesions1,2 and are considered the
"fourth revolution" in percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) technology. BVS represent a promising alternative to drug-eluting stents
(DES) while offering the same advantages. We present the first case of in-stent restenosis (ISR) successfully treated with an everolimus-
eluting BVS (ABSORB; Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA) and discuss its potential advantages in such lesion. A 72-year-old male presented
with a 3-week history of relapsing Canadian Cardiovascular Society class 3/4 angina. He had undergone PCI of the proximal left anterior
descending (LAD) 4 years prior using a 2.75 x 18 mm sirolimus-eluting stent (Cypher Cordis, Miami, FL). His medical regimen included aspirin
and a statin. Resting ECG and cardiac biomarkers were normal. Given the severity of his symptoms and his past medical history, it was
decided to proceed directly to coronary angiography. The coronary angiogram showed a severe 95% ISR lesion of the proximal LAD with thrombus
and multiple areas of contrast staining outside the stent contour, compatible with coronary micro-aneurysms (Figure 1A). Thromboaspiration
revealed white thrombus. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) was compatible with a localized hypersensitivity reaction to first-generation
DES (Figure 1B). After consensus with the referring physician, an ABSORB everolimus-eluting BVS 3.0 x 18 mm was deployed (Figure 2A).
Repeated OCT showed good scaffold apposition and coverage of the micro-aneurysms (Figure 2B). The patient was discharged the following day
on dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and ticagrelor. The patient was asymptomatic at 6 months clinical follow-up. Baseline Angiogram
and Optical Coherence Tomography (A) Baseline angiogram showing a severe restenotic lesion of the proximal left anterior descending artery
with 2 micro-aneurysms (asterisk), with contrast staining outside the previously implanted drug-eluting stent suggesting late-acquired
malapposition secondary to hypersensitivity vasculitis. (B) Optical coherence tomography performed after initial thrombectomy and balloon
dilatation angioplasty showing typical late acquired malapposition features with “sunflower” appearance (top right panel) and 2 small
pockets representing micro-aneurysms (asterisk; lower panel). Post PCI Angiogram and Optical Coherence Tomography (A) Final coronary
angiography showing exclusion of the 2 micro-aneurysms present at baseline. (B) Final optical coherence tomography showing good BVS
apposition with covering of the 2 micro-aneurysms and thrombus entrapment. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report describing
the use of a BVS in a case of ISR and late acquired malapposition secondary to first-generation DES. The ABSORB BVS consists of resorbable
polymers containing the antiproliferative drug everolimus. Prospective studies of BVS showed favourable outcomes in simple, de novo coronary
lesions1,2, with long-term positive vessel remodelling, late lumen enlargement, complete resorption of the vascular scaffold, and
progressive filling of the previously occupied space with proteoglycans at follow-up3. However, these studies specifically excluded ISR
lesions. In the current report, a local delayed hypersensitivity vasculitis caused by a sirolimus-eluting stent was suspected to be the
causal mechanism leading to late acquired stent malapposition, restenosis, with superimposed very late thrombosis4. Typical angiographic
findings present in our patient, including positive remodelling and micro-aneurysms of the mid-segment of the stent. This hypersensitivity
reaction has been attributed to the polymer coating of sirolimus-eluting stents, which, importantly, differs from the one used in the ABSORB
BVS4. In this particular case, the use of BVS had several advantages: avoidance of accumulation of multiple layers of metallic stent,
avoidance of re-exposure to the same "allergic antigen" and most importantly, hypothetically, the healing process of BVS characterized by
late lumen enlargement and replacement of the platform by proteoglycans, resulting in filling of the micro-aneurysms and exclusion of the
nidus involved in the genesis of neo-thrombi. Angiographic follow-up with OCT imaging at 2 years or beyond will potentially validate the
latest hypothesis. BVS are a promising addition to the PCI arsenal in managing complex coronary lesions. This case report demonstrates novel
use of this technology to treat an ISR lesion of DES characterized by late acquired malapposition. Potential Conflict of Interest The author
Erick Schampaert has conflict with Abbott Vascular Consultant and Philippe Genereux has conflict with Abbott Vascular Speaker Fee. Author
contributions Cadrin-Tourigny J and Dong L, conception and design of the research, acquision of data, analysis and interpretation of the
data, statistical analysis, writing of the manuscript and critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content; Maehara A,
conception and design of the research, acquision of data, analysis and interpretation of the data, obtaining financing, writing of the
manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content; Schampaert E and Genereux P, conception and design of the
research, acquision of data, analysis and interpretation of the data, writing of the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for
intellectual content. Sources of Funding There were no external funding sources for this study. Study Association This study is not
associated with any thesis or dissertation work.
