Vanishing bile duct syndrome has been associated with different pathologic conditions (adverse drug reactions, autoimmune diseases, graft
versus host disease, and cancer). Though its causes are unknown, an immune-related pathogenesis is the most likely one. Vanishing bile duct
syndrome can evolve to hepatic failure and, eventually, to death. The treatment is uncertain, but it needs the resolution of the underlying
pathologic condition. We describe the association of Hodgkin’s lymphoma with a syndrome characterized by cholestasis, aminotransferase
elevation and an histological picture of bile duct loss. All other causes of hepatic function impairment were excluded (in particular,
drugs, viral and autoimmune related diseases) eventually leading to the diagnosis of vanishing bile duct syndrome. Despite the fact that the
dysfunction is not caused by hepatic Hodgkin’s lymphoma involvement, liver impairment can limit the optimal therapy of Hodgkin’s lymphoma. A
treatment consisting of ursodeoxycholic acid, prednisone, and full dose chemotherapy restored hepatic function and achieved complete and
long-lasting remission of Hodgkin’s lymphoma. We reviewed all case reports showing that vanishing bile duct syndrome is a dismal
paraneoplastic syndrome being fatal in a high proportion of patients if not adequately treated. Indeed, this syndrome requires both an early
recognition and an appropriate aggressive treatment consisting of full dose upfront chemotherapy which is the only way to achieve a
resolution of the vanishing bile duct syndrome. Delayed or reduced intensity treatments unfavorably correlate with survival. Vanishing bile
duct syndrome (VBDS) is defined as an intrahepatic cholestasis with paucity of interlobular bile ducts . The cause is unknown and it has
been associated with different pathologic conditions: adverse drug reactions, autoimmune diseases, graft versus host disease, and cancer.
These associations make the immune-mediated pathogenesis the most likely one. Histology is characterized by marked cholestasis without
evidences of an accompanying hepatitis, but with a characteristic loss of bile ducts in the portal tracts. Clinical outcome is hepatic
failure unless the underlying disease can be appropriately cured. We present a case of a VBDS that heralded the successive diagnosis of
Hodgkin’s lymphoma (HL). A 42-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to an infectious disease unit because of jaundice and fever. Her medical
past history was unremarkable except for a mild allergy to cat hair. On admission her abnormal chemical tests were: total and direct
bilirubin of 18.3 milligrams/deciliter (mg/dL) and 15.3 mg/dL, respectively (normal value up to 1.3 and 0.4 mg/dL, respectively); aspartate
(AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 151 and 322, respectively (normal value up to 35 units/liter (U/L) and 40 U/L, respectively);
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 322 U/L (normal value up to 240 U/L); gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) 482 U/L (normal value up to 35 U/L).
Blood counts were normal except for leukocytosis (15170/μL). The patient was not taking any drug, and an extensive infectious disease work-
up was negative. Particularly, hepatotropic viruses such as hepatitis A virus (HAV), hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV)
were excluded as well as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV). A computed tomography (CT) scan showed enlarged mediastinal
lymph nodes without any abdominal pathological feature, and no sign of biliary tract dilatation. At that time, the patient was referred to
our center, and a mediastinal biopsy was performed showing a picture of classic HL of nodular sclerosis histotype. Furthermore, the most
common antibodies responsible for autoimmune hepatitis (ANA - antinuclear antibodies, ASMA – anti-smooth-muscle antibodies, anti-LKM1 –
anti-liver-kidney microsomal type 1, anti-SLA - antibodies against soluble liver antigen, AMA - antimitochondrial antibody, antiphospholipid
antibodies) were evaluated without any pathological findings. Since biochemical cholestasis had worsened (total bilirubin 33.8 mg/dL), a
hepatic biopsy was performed showing marked cellular and canalicular perivenous cholestasis. Remarkably, bile ducts were absent (Figure 1)
in all seven portal tracts examined and no sign of HL could be detected in a picture consistent with a VBDS . Bone marrow trephine was
negative. We also carried out a positron emission tomography (PET) scan that showed increased 18 F-fluoro-deoxy-glucose (18 F-FDG) uptake in
multiple mediastinal lymph nodes defining a stage IIB HL. She was started on ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) (1350 mg daily) and prednisone
(50 mg daily). A dramatic improvement of her clinical and biochemical conditions occurred with a decreased total bilirubin to 10 mg/dL. At
this point, doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine and dacarbazine (ABVD) chemotherapy was delivered and, after 4 cycles, we performed interim
restaging with the PET scan showing a complete response. Therefore, she subsequently received two additional cycles of ABVD with a complete
response confirmed after six cycles. Despite the fact that total bilirubin was increased at the time of the first cycle, we delivered a full
dose of doxorubicin and vinblastine. At completion, prednisone was tapered and UDCA interrupted. The patient declined to receive a hepatic
biopsy at the end of chemotherapy. Six years later, she is still in complete remission with a thoroughly normal hepatic function.Figure 1
Paraffin embedded section of the liver biopsy stained in hematoxylin-eosin showing fibrotic portal spaces without evidence of biliary
interlobular ducts. (Panel A 5x magnification, Panel B 20x magnification, Panel C 40x magnification). Paraffin embedded section of the liver
biopsy stained in hematoxylin-eosin showing fibrotic portal spaces without evidence of biliary interlobular ducts. (Panel A 5x
magnification, Panel B 20x magnification, Panel C 40x magnification). Several conditions may cause jaundice in HL. Biliary obstruction
secondary to lymph nodes enlargement, hemolysis, hepatotropic and other viruses (e.g. CMV) are among the most common causes. Hepatic direct
involvement by HL is a relatively rare, but well known complication . The association of cholestatic jaundice and hepatic bile duct loss (a
picture called “ductopenia”) in HL has been described in other 39 other cases in the literature (Table 1). This is a severe complication
with a high rate of death in a neoplastic disease otherwise curable in more than 80% of patients. In 18 HL patients steroid plus lymphoma
treatment (both chemotherapy and radiotherapy) was described to improve hepatic function and eventually led to complete remission of both
hepatic and Hodgkin’s diseases. All other cases died because of hepatic failure. A clear pathogenetic relationship between HL and VBDS
cannot be identified. Nevertheless, the concomitance of the two diseases and the case reported by Allory makes the hypothesis of VBDS likely
to be a paraneoplastic manifestation of HL. Furthermore, Bruguera has shown hepatic sinusoidal dilatation (a feature of VBDS) in 90% of
patients presenting systemic symptoms (so called B symptoms) without any evidence of direct liver involvement by the lymphoma. This datum
suggests the role of HL as the trigger event of cytokine-mediated hepatic damage . There is evidence that biliary epithelial cells express
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) antigens (both class I and II) as well as adhesion molecules like intercellular adhesion molecule 1
(ICAM-1) in response to cytokines produced by HL. In this context, both types of molecules may contribute to adhesion and cytotoxicity due
to T lymphocytes. As of today, there is no recognized treatment for VBDS. We, as well as other authors, used UDCA because of its
demonstrated activity in primary biliary cirrhosis. Indeed, beneficial effects of treatment with UDCA have been reported in other immune-
mediated disease involving the biliary tree as primary sclerosing cholangitis or hepatic involvement by graft versus host disease . UDCA
acts at three levels: increasing the expression of transporter proteins into the canalicular membrane, inhibiting apoptosis induced by toxic
bile acids, and altering the composition of the micelles of bile acids .Table 1 Summary of all cases reported in the literature regarding
vanishing bile duct syndrome in lymphomas AuthorNumber of patientsHodgkin lymphoma treatment*DosageUrsodeoxycholic acidOutcomeBouroncle B.
2YesFullUnknownHepatic failureYesReducedHepatic failureJuniper K. 1YesReducedUnknownHepatic failureGroth C. 1YesFullUnknownHepatic
failurePerera D.R. 3YesFullUnknownHepatic failureYesFullUnknownCureYesFullUnknownCurePiken E.P. 1YesFullUnknownUnknownTrewby P.N.
4YesFullUnknownCureYesFullUnknownCureYesFullUnknownUnknownNoNoUnknownUnknownLieberman D.A. 1NoNoNoRespiratory arrestBirrer M.J.
1YesFullUnknownSepsisHubscher S.G. 3YesReducedNoHepatic failureJansen P.L.M. 1YesFullLateHepatic failureWarner A.S. 1YesFullNoCureGottrand
F. 1NoNoNoHepatic failureCrosbie O.M. 1YesFullYesCureDe Medeiros B.C. 2YesFullNoHepatic failureFullYalcin S. 2NoNoNoHepatic
failureYesFullNoCureDourakis S.P. 1YesReducedNoHepatic failureYusuf M.A. 1NoNoLateHepatic failureRossini M.S. 1YesFullNoHepatic
failureAllory Y. 1YesFullYesCureOzkan A. 1NoNoLateHepatic failureRipoll C. 2YesFullNoHepatic failureYesFullYesCureKomurcu S.
1YesFullNoHepatic failureLiangpunsakul S. 1YesFullNoCureGuliter S. 1YesFullLateHepatic failureCórdoba Iturriagagoitia A. 1YesFullNoCureHan
W.S. 1NoNoNoRecurrent Hodgkin’s LymphomaSchmitt A. 1NoNoNoHepatic failureBarta S.K. 1YesFullNoCureDeBenedet A.T. 1YesReducedNoHepatic
failureLeeuwenburgh I. 1YesReducedNoCurePass A.K. 2YesReducedYesCureYesReducedNoHepatic failureBallonoff A. 1YesFullNoCureUmit H.
1UnknownUnknownUnknownUnknownGill R.M. 1YesReducedNoHepatic failureForamiti S. 1YesFullYesHepatic failureGagnon MF 1YesFullNoCureWong KM
1YesFullNoCureAleem A1 1YesFullNoHepatic failureNader K 1YesFullNoHepatic failureOur patient1YesFullYesCure*either chemotherapy or
radiotherapy. Summary of all cases reported in the literature regarding vanishing bile duct syndrome in lymphomas *either chemotherapy or
radiotherapy. In the present report we stress two aspects. First, the therapeutic choice to use high-dose of UDCA and prednisone which
rapidly determined an improvement of our patients. Secondly, although still icteric, we delivered a full dose chemotherapy achieving a
sustained complete remission that, in a paraneoplastic disease, is the most important result. An appropriate aggressive treatment (either
chemotherapy or radiotherapy) was reported in all patients who were, in the end, cured (Table 1). Notwithstanding, several good reasons
stand for a dose reduction in both doxorubicin and vinblastine in a jaundiced patient, we emphasize the “full dose” chemotherapy choice.
ABVD chemotherapy is conceived as a 2-weekly treatment and, therefore, 25 mg/m2 doxorubicin was felt appropriate regardless of jaundice.
Indeed, it is half the dose used in other combinations (e.g. CHOP regimen - Cyclophosphamide, Doxorubicin, Vincristine, Prednisone or
CODOX-M/IVAC – Cyclophosphamide, Vincristine, Doxorubicin, Methotrexate, Ifosfamide, Etoposide, Cytarabine [47, 48]). Moreover, it is well
known that the ABVD dose intensity affects the HL outcome [49, 50]. Lastly, only 1 out of 8 (12%) patients receiving an upfront reduced
chemotherapy overcame the vanishing bile duct, compared to 51% (17/33) of patients treated with upfront full dose chemotherapy (see
Table 1). In these patients the efficacious treatment of the lymphoma preceded the hepatic improvement and, ultimately, the cure. This case
report demonstrates that in the presence of a histological diagnosis of HL associated with signs of cholestasis and liver function
impairment without gross liver involvement or biliary tract dilatation, the prompt treatment of the underlying disease in association with
high doses of UDCA is crucial. Indeed, data available in the literature strengthen the theory that the therapy able to restore liver
function is full dose chemotherapy only. In this setting, waiting for the histological confirmation of VBDS may be harmful because a delayed
start might be detrimental to patient outcome. Indeed, liver impairment could evolve to liver insufficiency and eventually to death as is
clearly outlined in Table 1. In conclusion, VBDS must be considered a rare but possible complication of HL. Its prompt recognition and
appropriate treatment can dramatically affect patients’ outcome. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
Competing interests All authors declared no competing interests. Authors’ contributions DRS, DC, FCS, LD, FT, PB, AN, MA, GG were involved
in the differential diagnosis of VBDS, in the clinical care of the patient and in the data collection and report. AM performed the biopsies.
GD performed the histological diagnoses. All authors revised the manuscript and approved the final version for submission. All authors
acknowledge the nurses who helped in the clinical care of this patient. We thank Ms Elisa De Boni and Ms Hannah Gregory for language
editing. None of the authors received funding for writing this article.
