Corresponding author: Tatsuya Kobayashi, MD, PhD Chairman, Nagoya Radiosurgery Center, Nagoya Kyoritsu Hospital, 1-172 Hokke, Nakagawa-Ku,
Nagoya 454-0933, Japan Tel:+81-52-362-5151, Fax: +81-353-9126, E-mail: ttkobayashi@kaikou.or.jp The median survival time of malignant
pleural mesothelioma (MPM) has been 9 months. Given the short survival, there have been only few cases in which brain metastases have been
diagnosed and treated before death. Three cases of brain metastases treated by gamma knife radiosurgery (GKR) are reported. Case 1 showed a
metastatic lesion in the right frontal lobe which was treated by GKR two years after diagnosis of MPM. The lesion markedly reduced and the
symptoms were improved, But the patient died of progression of pleural tumor four months after GKR. A year and three months after the
diagnosis, asymptomatic bifrontal lesions were treated with GKR. However, Case 2 died of abdominal mass a month after. Case 3 showed
headache one and half year after the diagnosis. Three brain lesions were treated by GKR, which disappeared in 4 months. The patient died of
new multiple brain metastases and periventricular dissemination seven months after. The autopsy revealed a MPM occupying the left pleural
cavity. No neoplastic lesion was found in gamma knife-treated sites. The cause of death was the mass effect by new metastatic lesions. GKR
was found effective also for the treatment of brain metastasis of MPM. Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is a rare and extremely
malignant tumor. The time from diagnosis to death has been 4 to 12 (median 9) months.1,2) Almost 90% of male cases of MPM have reportedly
been related to asbestos exposure.3) Although remote metastases are found in the liver, adrenal gland, kidney and lung, death is often due
to the progression of the primary tumor. Brain metastasis is found in only 3% of cases.4) There have been many reports of brain metastasis
with verification by autopsy, in which only 7 cases were symptomatic before death, and surgical removal was done. The results of surgical
removal with or without chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy have not been very effective.5,6) The life expectancy of MPM was limited by
the shortage of new treatments for MPM. Recently, new chemotherapeutic drugs and boron neutron caputure therapy (BNCT) have been effective
for primary MPM.7) Therefore, treatment of brain metastasis of MPM will become more feasible. GKR was chosen for its effectiveness and less
invasivenesss in the treatment of brain metastases. We experienced two symptomatic and one asymptomatic brain metastases from MPM, which
were treated by GKR and followed-up while the patients were alive as shown in Table 1. Three cases underwent GKR at Nagoya Radiosurgery
Center using the Leksell Gamma Knife Model 4C (Elekta Instrument AB). Prescribed marginal dose was 20 Gy for those lesions. After the
treatment, patients were evaluated by head MRI and neurological changes every two months. Summary of Three Cases of Brain Metastases from
MPM treated by Gamma Knife Radiosugery f=female, m=male, Y=year, M=month, T.=tumor, GKR=gamma knife radiosurgery, Rt=right, Lt=left,
mets.=metastasis, exp.=exposure, GK=gamma knife V.=ventricular, Front.=frontal, Temp.=temporal, Cbll.=cerebellum, Abdom.=abdominal A single
large lesion decreased markedly at 3 months with improvement of symptoms after the treatment in Case 1 (Fig 1A) and three lesions
disappeared in 4 months in Case 3 (Fig. 1B). No follow-up study was available in Case 2 because of early death of the patient. The response
of metastatic lesions of MPM to GKR seemed similar to those of other malignant tumors, however two patients died by progression of primary
lesions four and one month (Case 1,2) after GKR. Another died of new brain metastases and periventricular dissemination seven months after
GKR (Case 3). It was also found that MRI and pathological study revealed complete disappearance of the metastatic lesions in Case 3 which
were treated by GKR. The time from diagnosis of MPM to death in 3 patients was 3 years, one year 4 months and 2 years 4 months,
respectively, of which the mean survival time was 26.7 months. Follow-up MRI of Case 1 and Case 3 after Gamma Knife Radiosurgery: (A) Rt-
frontoparietal metastatic lesion (left MRIs) showed marked reduction 3 months after GKR (right MRI) in Case 1. (B) Three metastatic lesions
(circles, upper MRIs) were disappeared at 4 months after GKR (lower MRIs) in Case 3. A 71-year-old man had cough, sputum and left thoracic
pain since middle of 2008. The patient had been working at a company with asbestos exposure for ten years since 1970. He showed weight loss
of 5 kg in a month of summer and also had hemorrhagic pleural fluid accumulation in a month later, when a chest X-ray showed narrowing of
left pleural cavity with pleural mass. Diagnosis of MPM was obtained by needle biopsy of pleura and cytology of the pleural fluid. Three
courses of chemotherapy with carboplatin plus pemetrexed were undertaken in 2009, followed by 5 courses of pemetrexed alone and 4 courses of
vinorelbine. The primary lesion seemed to be controlled. The patient complained of headache, in the early 2010, and brain MRI showed three
round enhanced lesions 1 cm in diameter at the right and left frontal, and temporal lobe with perifocal edema (Fig. 1B, upper). Multiple
liver lesions were also detected by abdominal CT. GKR was made for brain lesions with marginal dose of 20 Gy. Additional three courses of
chemotherapy with carboplatin and gemcitabine were continued for the following 6 months. Three lesions had disappeared on MRI four months
after the GKR (Fig. 1B, lower). No further follow-up by brain MRI was made and the patient showed gradual deterioration of sensorial level
at 7 months after GKR. The final MRI revealed new, multiple brain metastases with periventricular disseminations (Fig. 2A,B). The patient
became comatous and died two weeks after the MRI study. Autopsy showed corresponding findings of MRIs (Fig. 2A, 2B) on coronal sections of
the brain (Fig. 2C,D). MRI and Autopsy Findings of Brain at Recurrence of Metastatic Lesions in Case 3. Periventricular dissemination of the
lateral ventricles and new multiple brain metastases are shown on T1 enhanced axial (A) and coronal MRI images (B). Coresponding lesions are
shown in the coronal cerebral (C) and cerebellar (D) sections of autopsy brain. MPM occupied the left intrapleural cavity and extended into
the pleural diaphragma, mediastinum and the lung. Original pathological findings (Fig. 3A) changed to a more aggressive form by the
metastasis to the brain (Fig. 3B). New metastases in the cerebrum and cerebellum with periventricular disseminated lesions were verified at
autopsy (Fig. 2C,D). No tumor was found macro- and microscopically at the locations treated by GKR. Immunohistochemcal studies of metastatic
brain and lung lesions from autopsy revealed they were highly positive for calretinin, focally positive for D2-40 and AE1/AE2, negative for
CEA. A sign of tentorial herniation was found at the tectum of midbrain, which was thought to be the cause of death. Pathological Findings
of the Pleural Tumor and Metastatic Brain Tumor HX-E stain show epithelial-type arrangement of pleural tumor (A), whch is changed to
sarcomatous arrangement in the metastatic brain tumor (B). ×200 Asbestos exposure was initially found to be closely related to mesothelioma
in 1960,8) and patients with asbestos-related mesothelioma have increased in numbers over the last few decades.5,9) A case control study had
indicated that almost 90% of males with MPM have reported prior exposure to asbestos.3) One of our patients worked in a factory with
asbestos exposure for 10 years and had been observed as a patient of pneumonopathy (Case 3). Case 2 had short-time asbestos exposure before
diagnosis of MPM, and asbestos exposure was not confirmed in Case 1. It has been recently found that the malignant change of asbestos
exposure cells originated from excessive iron particles which accumulated in the cells.10) Prophylactic procedure to remove iron particles
from the cells will be a preventive therapy for MPM. MPM is classified into four pathological types11,12); fibrous or sarcomatous,
epithelial, undifferentiated, and mixed. Epithelial type is the most common and the sarcomatous type is the rarest but this type appears to
be predominant in brain metastasis.4,13) It was confirmed that Case 3 had already been diagnosed as the epithelial type of MPM by biopsy,
and a sarcomatous component was predominant in the brain metastasis at autopsy (Figure 3). MPM typically spreads by local extension, and
metastasis to the brain is rare.2,4) A review of 172 autopsy cases of MPM revealed that the most frequently involved organs were the
liver(55.9%), adrenal glands (31.3%), kidney (30.1%), and the contralateral lung (26.8%). Brain metastases were observed in only 3% of
cases.4) The majority of brain metastases of MPM were reported as autopsy cases4,14,15) and only 9 patients had antemortem diagnosis, in
which 7 cases undergone surgical removal.2,9,12,15-18) Regarding the treatment method, four of them were combined with radiotherapy12,16-18)
and three were treated by surgery alone.2,9,15) The other two19,20) and the present 3 cases had undergone radiotherapy and radiosurgery
alone. Two of four patients of combined treatment survived more than 36 months17,18) and the other two survived 6 and 8 months after surgery
(mean of 21.5 months). Two patients treated by surgery alone survived only 10 days15) and 3 months.2) The results of radiotherapy alone were
also poor,19,20) but the present 3 cases survived a mean of 4.3 months after GKR (Table 1). MPM had a poor prognosis with a median survival
time of 9 (4–12) months,1,6) but long-term survival can be expected by the application of new multimodal approaches6,17) such as new
chemotherapy or boron neutron capture therapy7) for primary lesion. The mean survival of the present three patients was 26.7 months from
diagnosis, two of which died of original tumor and one by brain metastases. Stereotactic radiosurgery has developed as an indication for
metastatic lesions. To our knowledge, this will be the first report of effectiveness of GKR for brain metastasis of MPM with combination of
chemotherapy. Many opportunities for treating brain metastasis with MPM will emerge in the future not only by stereotactic radiosurgery but
also by stereotactic radiotherapy. This paper was presented at the 21th Annual Meeting of The Japanese Society for Stereotactic Radiosurgery
at Maebashi on June 1st, 2012 and The 4th Annual Meeting of The Japan Radiosurgery Society on January 19 th, 2013. The authors have no
personal, financial or institutional interest in any of the drugs, materials or divices in this article.
