Corresponding author: Shiro Imagama Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai Showa-
ward, Aichi 466-8550, Japan Phone:+81-52-744-1908, fax: +81-52-744-2674, E-mail: imagama@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp Spinal epidural hematoma (SEH)
is an uncommon disorder, and chronic SEHs are rarer than acute SEHs. However, there is few reported involving the bone change of the
vertebral body in chronic SEHs. We present a case report of lumbar epidural hematoma that required differentiation from extramedullary
spinal tumors by a long process because the CT scan revealed scalloping of the vertebral body and review the relevant literature. A 78-year-
old man had experienced a gradual onset of low back pain and excruciating pain in both legs. Lumbar MRI on T1-weighted images revealed a
space-occupying lesion with a hyperintense signal relative to the spinal cord with no enhancement on gadolinium adminisration. Meanwhile,
T2-weighted images revealed a heterogeneous intensity change, accompanying a central area of hyperintense signals with a hypointense
peripheral border at the L4 vertebra. Moreover, the CT scan demonstrated scalloping of the posterior wall of the L4 vertebral body which is
generally suspected as the CT finding of spainal tumor. During the epidural space exploration, we found a dark red-colored mass surrounded
by a capsular layer, which was fibrous and adhered to the flavum and dura mater. Microscopic histological examination of the resected mass
revealed a mixture of the relatively new hematoma and the hematoma that was moving into the connective tissue. Accordingly, the hematoma was
diagnosed as chronic SEH. The particular MRI findings of chronic SEHs are helpful for making accurate preoperative diagnoses of this
pathology. Spinal epidural hematoma (SEH) is an uncommon disorder, accounting only for 0.3–0.9% of all space-occupying lesions in the
vertebral canal.1) SEHs can be acute or chronic; chronic SEHs are rarer than acute SEHs. Acute SEHs tend to be located in the cervical and
thoracic spine.2) Meanwhile, chronic SEHs are generally located in the lumbar spine.3) However, there is few reported involving the bone
change of the vertebral body in chronic SEHs. Here, we present a case report of lumbar epidural hematoma that required differentiation from
extramedullary spinal tumors by a long process because the CT scan revealed scalloping of the vertebral body. A 78-year-old man was admitted
to our institution for low back pain and back pain. He had experienced a gradual onset of low back pain for over 9 months and progressive,
excruciating pain in both legs for 3 months. He had a history of hypertension with medication and total gastric resection for carcinoma. He
did not report any major or minor low back trauma and had not undergone any invasive spinal procedures. He was referred to our institution
for the operation of a spinal extradural tumor suspected by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the lumbar region at a local hospital. Upon
admission, the physical examination revealed the hypesthesia of the bilateral plantar fascia, but no evidence of motor, bowel, or bladder
dysfunction. The straight-leg raising test and femoral nerve stretch test revealed signs of tension, but the deep tendon reflexes in the
bilateral lower extremities were diminished. The Japanese Orthopaedic Association (JOA) lumbar score was 9 out of 29 (29 being the best as a
measure of low back pain and lower extremity function). Results of all blood and coagulation tests (e.g., platelet count, prothrombin time,
and partial thromboplastin time) were normal. Plain spinal radiography revealed mild degenerative changes of lumbar intervertebral disc and
L4 degenerative spondylolisthesis. Lumbar MRI on T1-weighted sagittal images revealed a space-occupying lesion with a hyperintense signal
relative to the spinal cord with no enhancement on gadolinium administration. Meanwhile, T2-weighted sagittal images revealed a
heterogeneous intensity change, accompanying a central area of hyperintense signals with a hypointense peripheral border at the L4 vertebra
(Fig. 1). Axial images revealed a space-occupying lesion that extended out of the intervertebral foramen from the vertebral canal; this was
accompanied by an intensity change similar to that of the extradural left side. Moreover, the CT scan demonstrated scalloping of the
posterior wall of the L4 vertebral body which is generally suspected as the CT finding of spinal tumor (Fig. 2). We assumed the presence of
a tumor, abscess, or hematoma as a differential diagnosis of this space-occupying lesion. Surgery was subsequently planned because of the
severity of the pain. L4 hemilaminectomy and L3-5 posterior lumbar interbody fusion (PLIF) were initially performed. During the epidural
space exploration, we found a dark red-colored mass surrounded by a capsular layer at the level between L3/4 intervertebral and the inferior
margin of L4, which was fibrous and adhered to the flavum and dura mater (Fig. 3). After we carefully separated the mass from the periphery,
it was resected en bloc. On gross examination, the mass contained old hemorrhage fluid. Microscopic histological examination of the resected
mass revealed a mixture of the relatively new hematoma and the hematoma that was moving into the connective tissue (Fig. 4a). Hemosiderin
deposits were observed at the other site at boundary between the connective tissue and hematoma (Fig. 4b). Accordingly, the hematoma was
diagnosed as chronic SEH. The postoperative course was uneventful with rapid and complete pain relief. Postoperative MRI of the lumbar spine
revealed no residual hematoma at the operative site. There was no recurrence and the patient remained well at the 2-years clinical follow-
up. MRI of the lumbar spine. (a) Sagittal T1-weighted image reveals the extradural space-occupying lesion with a hyperintense signal
relative to that of the spinal cord under the L4 vertebra. (b) Sagittal T2-weighted image reveals a heterogeneous intensity change
accompanying the central area of hyperintense signals with a hypointense peripheral border. (c) Sagittal T1-weighted image after gadolinium
administration shows no enhancement. Axial MRI and CT scan at the L4 level. Scalloping (arrow) is apparent on CT at the same site at which
the space-occupying lesion is shown on MRI. Intraoperative image shows an encapsulated fibrous dark-red hematoma adhering to the flavum and
dura mater (arrow). Hematoxylin and eosin stain, 200×. (a) Photomicrograph shows a mixture of the relatively new hematoma and the hematoma
moving into the connective tissue. (b) A hemosiderin deposit was observed at the boundary between the connective tissue and hematoma
(arrow). The cause of SEH is classified as idiopathic, spontaneous, or secondary.1) Idiopathic SEH is defined as SEH without any associated
causative factors.4) Spontaneous SEH is defined as SEH with causative risk factors such as minor trauma,5) anticoagulant usage,6)
hypertension,7) and Paget’s disease.8) Secondary SEH are defined as SEH due to distinct causes such as coagulopathies,9) vascular
malformations,10) neoplasms,1) trauma with or without fracture,1) and medical procedures.11) Most chronic SEHs are idiopathic or spontaneous
and are defined as spinal compression for months or years with mild symptoms and slight pain. To our knowledge, only 22 cases of chronic
lumbar SEH, excluding our case, have been described thus far. Therefore, the present case is a rare, chronic, spontaneous lumbar SEH
associated with hypertension. And chronic SEH is caused by bleeding of smaller vessels inside the ligamentum flavum.1) In this case, we
consider the similar bleeding source because encapsulated hematoma adhered to the flavum and dura mater was founded. When the extradural
space-occupying lesion is detected by MRI of the spine, it is very difficult to distinguish whether it is a tumor, abscess, or hematoma. The
differential diagnosis is shown in Table 1. Although metastatic tumors, schwannomas, lipomas, and malignant lymphomas are possible in cases
of spinal extradural tumors, the changes in their intensities on MRI differ. Metastatic tumors appear hypointense on T1-weighted images and
hyperintense on T2-weighted images compared to the spinal cord, are either enhanced or not enhanced after gadolinium administration.12)
Schwannomas appear hypo- to isointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images compared to the spinal cord, gadolinium
enhancement varies from intense homogeneous to faint enhancement.13) Lipomas appear hyperintense on both T1- and T2-weighted images and are
not enhanced after gadolinium administration. Lymphomas appear hypo- to isointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense or even
hypointense on T2-weighted images compared to the spinal cord; they tend to be uniformly and diffusely enhanced after gadolinium
administration.14) Spinal epidural abscesses appear hypo- to isointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images
compared to the spinal cord. Liquid pus in spinal epidural abscesses typically has low signal intensity on T1-weighted images, while
granulation tissue typically has a rim of enhancement after gadolinium administration.15) MRI signal intensities of SEHs, however, are
variable and related to the timing of imaging relative to the age and biochemical evolution of the hematoma.4,16) Acute SEHs appear iso- to
hyperintense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images, as compared to the spinal cord;17) they sometimes appear slightly
enhanced after gadolinium administration.18) Therefore, since acute SEHs resemble schwannomas, lymphomas, and epidural abscesses on MRI
examination, they may be difficult to differentiate. In the early phase of chronic SEHs, hematomas appear homogeneously hyperintense on both
T1- and T2-weighted images.15) During the late phase, chronic SEHs appear isointense to the spinal cord on T1-weighted images and very
hypointense on T2-weighted images15) due to ferritin and hemosiderin contents; furthermore, gadolinium administration very rarely enhances
chronic SEHs.19) The present case had a chronic course, and lumbar T1-weighted MRI revealed the space-occupying lesion with hyperintense
signal relative to the spinal cord with no enhancement after gadolinium administration; T2-weighted sagittal images revealed a heterogeneous
intensity change that accompanied a central area of hyperintense signals with a hypointense peripheral border. However, it was difficult to
carry out a differential diagnosis of the tumor type, because the CT scan revealed scalloping of the posterior wall of the L4 vertebral
body. Since the hematoma and hemosiderin deposits were revealed by the histological examination after the extraction of the mass, it was
thought that the early and late phases of chronic SEH were intermingled in this case. In the literature, there is only 1 reported case
involving scalloping of the posterior wall of the vertebral body in chronic SEH.20) These finding suggests that the bone change was caused
by the hematoma chronically pressing against the vertebral body, and requires differentiation with a tumor. MRI findings, such as the
difference of intensity on T1-weighted images, enhancement after gadolinium administration, and the timing of imaging relative to the age,
are helpful in differentiating between chronic SEH and a tumor. The differential diagnosis according to MRI of the epidural space-occupying
lesion We present a rare case of chronic spontaneous lumbar epidural hematoma with scalloping of the vertebral body, simulating an
extradural spinal tumor. The particular MRI findings of chronic SEHs are helpful for making accurate preoperative diagnoses of this
pathology. None
