We report the case of a patient who had a non-functional metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour (pNET), which changed in functionality
during the course of the disease. This case demonstrates the effectiveness of conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy in the management of
select group of patients with this rare, challenging condition. Our patient was a 34 year old man under oncology follow up, diagnosed with a
non-functional metastatic pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour treated with a Whipple’s procedure two years ago. Despite treatment with
somatostatin analogues and sunitinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, he had demonstrated radiological progression of his metastatic disease.
He now presented with a short history of Cushing’s syndrome. A presumptive diagnosis of a rapidly progressive, metastatic, functional pNET
with ectopic ACTH production was made, confirmed biochemically and with liver biopsy. The proliferative index, Ki-67 of 20% of the liver
biopsy prompted us to treat him with conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy using streptozocin, 5-fluorouracil and doxorubicin. Prior to its
administration clinical and biochemical control of the hypercortisolemic state was achieved with metyrapone. However the clinical,
biochemical and radiological response to chemotherapy was so dramatic obviating the need for metyrapone therapy. Non-functional pNETs may
evolve in their clinical and biologic behaviour producing functional hormonal syndromes. Chemotherapy may be an effective therapeutic
modality in such circumstances. ACTH secretion in functional pNETS is rare and it is even more rare for non-functional pNETs to evolve into
ACTH secreting functional tumours with only very few cases reported in literature. We describe such an interesting and rare case of
evolution in functionality of a non-functional pNET. Apart from control of hypercortisolaemic state, preventing disease progression can be a
real challenge despite various therapeutic modalities being increasingly used in the last decade. We report the case of a young patient who
had a non-functional pNET, which later started secreting ACTH, highlighting the importance of being very vigilant during the follow up of
such patients. Despite novel chemotherapeutic options and PRRT (Peptide Receptor Radionuclide Therapy), conventional chemotherapeutic agents
still have a very important role and should be tried if the above agents fail to control disease state as demonstrated by our case. We
report the case of a 34-year-old man who presented with a one-month history of lethargy, generalised upper and lower limb weakness and
significant weight gain. He had been recently diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus and initiated on pre-mixed insulin injections 30 units
twice daily (HbA1c 85 mmol/mol). He had been diagnosed with a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour (pNET) two years previously, having presented
with jaundice and abdominal pain. An abdominal CT had demonstrated tumour in the head of the pancreas with loco-regional metastases
(peripancreatic lymph nodes and nine hepatic metastatic lesions varying in size from 7–18 mm) for which he underwent a Whipple’s procedure
with resection of lymph nodes and an intra-operative liver biopsy. Measurement of a full fasting gut hormone profile showed elevated
chromogranin A but was otherwise normal, consistent with a non-functional tumour. Immunohistochemistry of the pancreatic specimen was
positive for chromogranin and synaptophysin with a Ki-67 index of 2% confirming the diagnosis of a Grade 2 pNET (ACTH staining not
performed); the liver biopsy appearances were similar morphologically. A careful family history of endocrine tumours or endocrine disorders
had been unremarkable. On follow up imaging he had developed further liver metastases, so was commenced on a long-acting somatostatin
analogue (Lanreotide), for its anti-proliferative potential, and a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (Sunitinib) was thereafter added upon evidence
of further radiological progression. Two years subsequently, he presented with cushingoid features with a moon face, easy bruising,
abdominal striae, centripetal fat distribution and marked proximal myopathy. Blood pressure was normal. Biochemical investigations revealed
serum potassium concentration of 2.5 mmol/l, glucose 17 mmol/l and significantly elevated random serum cortisol of 2003 nmol/L and serum
ACTH concentration 50 pmol/L (normal range 2–11 pmol/L). Basal pituitary biochemistry and gadolinium enhanced MRI imaging was otherwise
unremarkable. MRI scan of the liver revealed solid and cystic metastatic deposits ranging between 7.8-9.2 cm in segments 6, 7 and 8
indicating further progression despite sunitinib.111In-labeled octreotide scanning demonstrated somatostatin receptor positive disease in
five of his liver metastatic deposits but not in any other sites (Figure 1). (upper figure) 111Indium-labeled Octreotide scan. Figure 1
(lower figure) Ki-67 immunostaining of liver metastasis (at recurrence) showing a high proliferative rate of 20%. A diagnosis of a rapidly
progressive, functional, metastatic pNET with ectopic ACTH production causing Cushing’s syndrome was made, with an assumption that the
tumour had evolved in its functionality from its previous non-functional status. Treatment options discussed at the supra-regional
multidisciplinary team meeting (ENETS Centre of Excellence) considered metyrapone, bilateral adrenalectomy, peptide receptor radionuclide
therapy (PRRT) or cytotoxic chemotherapy. Mutational analysis of the gene for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) was negative.A
repeat liver biopsy was performed to provide an accurate histological grade of the liver metastases, on the premise that primary NETs, and
their synchronous/metachronous metastases, frequently differ in grade and proliferative index (Ki-67). Immunohistochemistry was strongly
positive for chromogranin and synaptophysin with a Ki-67 index of 20% (ACTH staining not performed) (Figure 1). The treatment decision based
on this result was to administer conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy with streptozocin, 5-fluorouracil and doxorubicin, with metyrapone
given pre-chemotherapy to control the hypercortisolaemic state. Incremental doses of metyrapone (up to 1 g qds) effected a dramatic clinical
response (with resolution of his symptoms and reduction of his insulin dosage) and an equally dramatic biochemical response (normalisation
of serum potassium and lowering of mean cortisol concentrations on cortisol day curves) prior to his chemotherapy.Three months after
starting his chemotherapy, he had managed to completely discontinue his metyrapone with excellent mean cortisol concentrations on his
cortisol day curve of 315 nmol/L (Figure 2 graph), with serum ACTH concentration of 11pmol/l. He discontinued all insulin injections with
excellent glycaemic control (HbA1c 53 mmol/mol) and cross-sectional imaging (abdominal CT) showing a dramatic reduction in the size of the
hepatic metastases with more necrotic/cystic contents than previously. He remains clinically stable three months later. Cortisol day curves
demonstrating cortisol concentrations on incremental doses of metyrapone, up to 1 g qds prior to chemotherapy, and effects of chemotherapy
with patient having discontinued metyrapone. pNETs are rare with a reported incidence of 1-2/100,000. They may be functional tumours, with
an associated clinical syndrome, or non-functional, which despite not producing any hormone-specific symptoms, frequently either secrete
other peptides (such as pancreatic polypeptide, chromogranin A, neuron specific enolase) or may stain positively on immunohistochemistry for
certain hormones. The most common functional pancreatic NET syndromes relate to insulinoma and gastrinoma. ACTH secretion occurs only
rarely, presenting with features of Cushing’s syndrome, but more than 95% are malignant with an average age at diagnosis of 50–55 years and
an equal sex distribution . Functional pNETs account for 4-16% of patients with ectopic ACTH secretion . The diagnostic approach is similar
to that in suspected Cushing’s syndrome, first to confirm excess cortisol production and then to localise the tumour source. Even more
rarely, initially non-functional pNETs have been reported to evolve into functional tumours. In a series of 353 patients described by Wynick
et al., 24 patients demonstrated de novo evidence of secretion of a second hormone during the course of the disease (median delay of
19 months and 92% reflecting liver metastases) . Several reports have highlighted clinical cases of ectopic ACTH/Cushing’s syndrome, where
secondary deposits stained strongly positive for ACTH despite a primary tumour being negative on ACTH staining . In our case, ACTH staining
was not deemed necessary with biochemical confirmation, considering the high cost involved and availability of ACTH staining in only a
single United Kingdom centre. However, as above, our patient presented after 24 months of the initial diagnosis of non-functional pNET with
hepatic metastatic disease and de novo Cushing’s syndrome, highlighting evolution in tumour functionality should be considered during follow
up of patients with pNETs. Treatment aims are twofold involving biochemical control of hypercortisolaemia and preventing disease
progression. Adrenal blocking agents like metyrapone, or bilateral adrenalectomy in patients who fail to respond to metyrapone therapy, may
be used to address hypercortisolaemia. Medical treatment of the neuroendocrine tumour may involve long acting somatostatin analogues (SSA)
or occasionally alpha interferon may be effective. Surgery is recommended even in the presence of metastatic disease, including localized
liver metastases, if potentially resectable, and symptomatic control of the hormone excess state through cytoreductive surgery or
radiofrequency ablation. However, our patient had large, multiple liver metastatic deposits and hence surgery was not deemed to be an
option. In patients with advanced, surgically non-resectable, progressive pNETs, everolimus and sunitinib are novel chemotherapeutic options
and PRRT (Peptide Receptor Radionuclide Therapy) may also have a role. Ki-67 index is important in deciding treatment options and triage
patients into the most appropriate treatment arm. Conventional chemotherapy with streptozocin, 5- fluorouarcil and doxorubicin still has a
place as in the management of some patients with more aggressive tumours. Our patient failed to respond to SSAs and sunitinib, but had an
excellent treatment response to conventional chemotherapy. This clinical case offers several important learning points. Firstly, there
should be vigilance to the possibility of an evolution or change of functionality of pNETs, during tumour progression, particularly in non-
functional pNETs considering their pluripotency with awareness of the various clinical syndromes that may arise. Secondly, repeat
histological examination of metastatic deposits may indicate different biological behaviour of the tumour and this may modify the treatment
regime. In the case described, we observed the evolution towards Cushing’s syndrome from a non-functional tumour, with repeat histological
findings modifying our treatment approach and facilitating effective treatment with chemotherapy. The different proliferative potential may
represent inherent heterogeneity within the tumour or across different anatomical sites but may reflect evolution in the histology towards a
higher grade. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy
of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. pNET: Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour; PRRT: Peptide receptor
radionuclide therapy; MEN: Multiple endocrine neoplasia; SSA: Somatostatin analogues; ACTH: Adrenocorticotrophic hormone. The authors
declare that they have no competing interest. SPR drafted the initial manuscript, which was revised by DJC and CD. SM was involved in the
management of our patient and helped in preparing the manuscript. MT performed the immunohistochemistry. DHP was involved in the oncological
management and helped in the revision of the script. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history
for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6823/14/70/prepub
