Intermittent claudication is frequently associated with atherosclerotic disease, but differential diagnosis must be sought in patients with
no traditional risk factors. Cystic adventitial disease, of unknown etiology, most frequently affects the popliteal artery, and occasionally
presents as intermittent claudication. We report a case of this disease and the surgical treatment, and discuss some aspects related to
etiopathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment of this condition. Cystic adventitial disease of the popliteal artery is a rare clinical entity of
unknown etiology, which may present as calf intermittent claudication, usually unilateral, in healthy middle-aged individuals, who do not
smoke and have no risk factors for atherosclerotic disease. The objective of the current report is to present a case of intermittent
claudication caused by cystic adventitial disease of the popliteal artery, and discuss its etiology, diagnosis and treatment. A 64-year-old
male patient, business administrator, from São Paulo (SP), played tennis 30 days before the medical appointment and complained of pain in
the posterior muscles of the left leg, which was relieved after resting. Whenever he played tennis or walked fast, pain would recur. He did
not smoke and had no diabetes or dyslipidemia. He was on irregular use of enalapril maleate for hypertension. Upon physical examination, he
was moderately hypertensive (blood pressure 150/90mmHg). The arterial examination revealed decreased intensity in the popliteal and podal
pulses in the left lower limb. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed dilated left popliteal artery, with irregularities and stenosis
of the lumen, anechoic content in the wall, which the radiologist interpreted as aneurysm with parietal thrombi. Duplex-scan demonstrated
that the anechoic images in the wall were septated adventitial cysts with significant stenosis of the arterial lumen (70%). The patient was
operated on by direct approach of the affected popliteal artery, with partial resection and replacement by an autogenous great saphenous
vein graft. The artery was dilated with increased texture and parietal irregularities (Figure 1). After excision, a yellowish viscous
material was observed in its adventitia (Figures 2 and 3). The pathological examination revealed cystic adventitial disease of the popliteal
artery. Figure 1Surgical site. Observe parietal irregularities in the popliteal artery Figure 2Incision in the artery. Drainage of a viscous
material Figure 3Surgical specimen The cystic adventitial disease was described in 1947 in a man presenting intermittent claudication due to
a myxomatous tumor in the external iliac artery.(1) It predominates in males in the ratio of 15:1, and it is more frequent in the fourth and
fifth decades of life. It is estimated to occur in 1 out of every 1,200 of individuals suffering from claudication. It is characterized by
formation of multiple cysts filled with a clear or yellowish viscous material, rich in mucoproteins and mucopolysaccharides, located in the
adventitia and compressing the lumen of the vessel, which may lead to obstruction. Hence, it is different from the cystic degeneration of
the medial layer that is observed in the aorta and in the elastic or muscular arteries, when the smooth muscles in this layer are affected.
The cystic adventitial disease (or cystic adventitial degeneration) predominantly occur in arteries, and rarely in veins and the popliteal
artery is the most often involved (85 to 90% of cases). Regarding histopathology, there are various cysts with viscous material containing
proteoglycans, mucopolysaccharides and mucoproteins, in addition to hyaluronic acid, located in the adventitia of the vessel.(2) The
etiopathogenesis remains controversial, and there are many theories trying to explain the formation of these cysts. One approach is that
these vessels are close to joints, and this may be related to the theory that repeated microtraumas cause cystic degeneration of the
adventitia, due to stretching and distortion of the arterial segment adjacent to the joint.(3) However, this disease is not frequent in
athletes. There is an articular (synovial) theory that one branch (the middle genicular artery) would be the conduit taking synovial cells
from the knee joint, which would dissect the adventitia and implant in the popliteal artery. The embryological theory would explain the
disease by implanting mesenchymal cells of adjacent joints in the adventitia of blood vessels during the embryological development.(4) Due
to similar symptoms, the differential diagnosis of the cystic adventitial disease of the popliteal artery should be made with peripheral
arterial disease and popliteal entrapment syndrome. Due to muscle activity and flexion of the knee, the cysts may compress the artery,
explaining pain reported by our patient. The arterial pulses can be normal in the affected limb in the neutral position, and they are less
intense or disappear with knee flexion. In the present case, the popliteal and podal pulses in the affected leg were weaker as compared to
the contralateral limb, due to a stenotic arterial lesion visualized in the computed tomography angiography. Ultrasonography is a non-
invasive method, with greater sensitivity to demonstrate arterial cystic disease:(5) in a gray scale (B-mode), it shows the presence of
cysts as hypoechoic or anechoic masses, involving the vessel; on Doppler, stenosis or arterial occlusion are observed. In the case
described, this imaging method was crucial to make diagnosis of the disease. Other imaging methods have also been useful to diagnose
arterial cystic disease, such as computed tomography (CTA) and magnetic resonance imaging angiography (MRA). In our patient, CTA was not
enough to elucidate diagnosis, since it suggested a popliteal artery aneurysm. Neverthless, the irregularities and stenosis of the vessel
lumen – which are not found in aneurysms, led to uncertain diagnosis. Hence, a more accurate analysis of tomography after ultrasound led to
the correct diagnosis of cystic disease. Since this condition is rare, there is no consensus about treatment. Although there are occasional
reports on spontaneous resolution of the disease, mainly when the arterial wall cysts have some communication with the knee joint,(6) early
treatment can prevent thrombosis of the popliteal artery. The therapy most frequently used for this disease is the resection of the impaired
arterial segment and replacement by an autogenous venous graft,(2) which was performed in the present case. This management was chosen due
to extension of the disease in the arterial wall, associated to marked stenosis of the lumen. Several authors preserve the artery by just
excising the adventitial cyst, but recurrence of the disease is not uncommon.(7) Ultrasound-guided aspiration of the cyst content has been
described as a less invasive method.(8) Needle aspiration is not always possible since the material is quite thick. Endovascular treatment
has been frequently employed today in most cases of peripheral arterial disease,(9) but this is not true for this condition, since it has
not been effective,(10) probably because the popliteal mobile segment is usually involved. Cystic adventitial disease of the popliteal
artery should be considered in the differential diagnosis of intermittent claudication, especially in patients with no traditional risk
factors for atherosclerosis. A claudicação intermitente está frequentemente associada à doença aterosclerótica, mas diagnósticos
diferenciais devem ser pesquisados em pacientes sem fatores de risco tradicionais. A doença cística adventicial, de etiologia incerta,
acomete em maior proporção a artéria poplítea e, eventualmente, apresenta-se como claudicação intermitente. Apresentamos um caso da doença e
seu manejo cirúrgico, e discutimos a etiopatogenia, os aspectos diagnósticos e terapêuticos da enfermidade. A doença cística adventicial da
artéria poplítea é uma entidade clínica pouco frequente, cuja etiologia é desconhecida, que pode se manifestar por dor do tipo claudicação
intermitente de panturrilha, geralmente unilateral, em indivíduos saudáveis de meia-idade, não fumantes e sem fatores de risco para doença
aterosclerótica. O objetivo do presente trabalho foi apresentar um caso de claudicação intermitente cuja causa era a doença cística
adventicial da artéria poplítea, discutindo sua etiologia, diagnóstico e tratamento. Paciente ASP, masculino, 64 anos, administrador,
procedente de São Paulo (SP), há 30 dias, jogando tênis, referiu dor na musculatura posterior da perna esquerda, que cedeu com o repouso. A
dor passou a ocorrer sempre que jogava tênis ou andava depressa. Negava tabagismo, diabete, dislipidemia. Referia uso inconsistente de
maleato de enalapril para hipertensão. No exame físico, estava moderadamente hipertenso (pressão arterial de 150/90mmHg). O exame arterial
revelou diminuição de intensidade dos pulsos poplíteo e podais no membro inferior esquerdo. Angiotomografia revelou artéria poplítea
esquerda dilatada, com irregularidades e estenose da luz, além de conteúdo anecoico em sua parede, interpretada pelo radiologista como
aneurisma com trombos parietais. Duplex-scan mostrou que as imagens anecoicas na parede eram cistos septados adventiciais com estenose
significativa da luz arterial (70%). O paciente foi submetido à cirurgia: abordagem direta da artéria poplítea comprometida, com ressecção
parcial e substituição por enxerto venoso (veia safena magna autógena). A artéria apresentava-se dilatada, com consistência aumentada e
irregularidades parietais (Figura 1). Após secção, observou-se saída de material gelatinoso amarelado de sua adventícia (Figuras 2 e 3). O
exame anatomopatológico confirmou tratar-se de doença cística adventicial da artéria poplítea. Figura 1Sítio operatório. Observar
irregularidades parietais da artéria poplítea Figura 2Secção da artéria. Saída de material gelatinoso Figura 3Espécime cirúrgico A doença
cística adventicial foi descrita em 1947 em um homem que apresentava claudicação intermitente como um tumor mixomatoso na artéria ilíaca
externa.(1) Predomina no gênero masculino na proporção de 15:1, incidindo com maior frequência na quarta e quinta décadas de vida e em
1:1.200 dos claudicantes. Caracteriza-se pela formação de múltiplos cistos preenchidos por material gelatinoso rico em mucoproteínas e
mucopolissacárides, incolor ou amarelado, localizados na camada adventicial, que comprimem a luz do vaso, podendo resultar em sua obstrução.
Difere, assim, da degeneração cística da média, que ocorre na aorta e nas artérias elásticas ou musculares, na qual a musculatura lisa dessa
camada fica comprometida. A doença cística adventicial (ou degeneração cística adventicial) acomete predominantemente artérias e raramente
as veias. Dentre as artérias, a poplítea é a mais frequentemente acometida (85 a 90% dos casos). Do ponto de vista histopatológico,
encontram-se vários cistos com material mucinoso contendo proteoglicanos, mucopolissacárides e mucoproteínas, além de ácido hialurônico,
localizados na adventícia do vaso.(2) A etiopatogenia permanece controversa, havendo várias teorias que tentam explicar a formação desses
cistos. A proximidade desses vasos com as articulações fez surgir a teoria dos microtraumas repetidos com degeneração cística da adventícia,
devido ao alongamento e à distorção do segmento arterial adjacente à articulação.(3) No entanto, não se observa ocorrência mais frequente
dessa doença em atletas. Outra teoria é a articular (sinovial), segundo a qual um ramo (artéria genicular média) seria o conduto que levaria
células sinoviais da articulação do joelho que dissecariam a adventícia e se implantariam na artéria poplítea. A teoria embrionária
explicaria a doença pela implantação de células mesenquimais de articulações adjacentes na adventícia de vasos sanguíneos durante o
desenvolvimento embrionário.(4) O diagnóstico da doença cística adventicial da artéria poplítea se confunde em razão da similaridade dos
sintomas com os portadores de doença obstrutiva crônica periférica e com a síndrome do encarceramento da poplítea. Com a atividade muscular
e a flexão do joelho, pode haver compressão da artéria pelos cistos, o que explicaria a queixa do paciente. Os pulsos arteriais podem ser
normais no membro afetado na posição neutra, diminuindo de intensidade ou desaparecendo com a flexão do joelho. No caso em questão, os
pulsos poplíteo e podais no membro afetado estavam mais fracos do que no membro contralateral, em decorrência da lesão arterial estenosante
visualizada na angiotomografia. O ultrassom é um método não invasivo e de maior sensibilidade para demonstrar a doença cística arterial:(5)
em escala cinza (Modo B), revela a presença dos cistos como massas hipo ou anecoicas, envolvendo o vaso e, no modo Doppler, mostra a
estenose ou oclusão arterial. No caso descrito, esse método de imagem foi decisivo para o diagnóstico da doença. Outros métodos de imagem
também têm sido úteis no diagnóstico da doença cística arterial, como a tomografia computadorizada, a angiotomografia e a angiorressonância.
A angiotomografia, no nosso paciente, não foi suficiente para elucidar o diagnóstico, pois sugeriu tratar-se de aneurisma da artéria
poplítea. No entanto, as irregularidades e a estenose da luz do vaso, achados não encontrados nos casos de aneurisma, deixaram em dúvida
esse diagnóstico; assim, análise mais acurada da imagem tomográfica, após se ter a avaliação ultrassonográfica, permitiu o diagnóstico
correto da doença cística. Devido à raridade dessa condição, não existe consenso sobre o tratamento. Embora haja descrição ocasional de
resolução espontânea da doença, principalmente quando os cistos da parede arterial mostram comunicação com a articulação do joelho,(6) o
tratamento precoce da afecção pode prevenir trombose da artéria poplítea. Os métodos terapêuticos mais frequentemente utilizados são a
ressecção do segmento arterial afetado e a substituição por enxerto venoso autógeno,(2) técnica empregada no presente caso. Essa conduta foi
adotada devido à extensão da doença na parede arterial associada à estenose importante da luz do vaso. Preservação da artéria com somente
excisão do cisto adventicial foi empregada por vários autores, porém não é infrequente a recidiva da doença.(7) A aspiração do conteúdo do
cisto guiada por ultrassonografia tem sido descrita como um método terapêutico menos invasivo.(8) Como se trata de material espesso, nem
sempre é possível sua aspiração com agulha. O tratamento endovascular, aplicado com grande frequência nos dias de hoje para a maior parte
dos casos de doença arterial obstrutiva periférica,(9) tem sido relatado com pouca frequência e não tem se mostrado efetivo nessa
afecção,(10) − talvez porque o segmento móvel da artéria poplítea é usualmente o mais acometido. Trata-se de doença que deve ser considerada
no diagnóstico diferencial de claudicação intermitente, em especial em pacientes com ausência de fatores de risco tradicionais para
aterosclerose.
