Zygomycosis is an invasive disease that affects both immunocompetent and immunocompromised, depending on the type of strain. This disease
diagnosis is clinical and histopathological, and its treatment is based on antifungal therapy and surgical cleaning. This paper reports a
case of a boy with invasive zygomycosis rinofacial who final treatment was successful after underwent antifungal and surgical therapies.
Zygomycosis is a rare fungal, severe, invasive and lethal disease with rapid progress. This disease is prominent in countries with warm and
humid climate.(1, 2) Its incidence in Brazil is unknown because of the scarcity of reports in the literature, but it is well known that
several cases occur in north and northeast region of the country.(3) There is a tendency in international literature, mainly in
immunocompromised patients, of increase in the incidence of fungal invasive disease. An incidence of zygomycosis of 2-4% was found in
autopsies of cancer patients both in Japan and the United States.(3) The zygomycosis has several clinical presentations (cutaneous,
pulmonary, systemic and gastrointestinal), however, the rhino-orbital-cerebral is the most common one.(4, 5) Zygomycosis etiologic agents
originate from Mucorales that primarily affects immunocompromised patients and base disease carriers, and from the Entomophthorales that is
commonly found in immunocompetent individuals and rarely causes angioinvasive disease.(1, 5) The diagnosis is based on a combination of
mycologic and histopathological tests, and clinical presentation.(6) The fungal infection could be determined by direct examination with
potassium hydroxide (KOH) and culture on Sabouraud’s medium. The histopathological analysis shows nonseptate hyphae with branches at 90°
angle, which usually does not invade tissues and blood vessels.(7) Common symptoms include nasal congestion, nasal discharge and chronic
sinusitis,(8) however, the infection may also present fever, lethargy, headache, retro-orbital pain, sudden vision loss, proptosis,
periorbital cellulitis, epistasis and seizure.(9) At physical examination necrotic crusts can appear on the nasal septum, turbinates and
palate. Initially, the orbital involvement can be show by proptosis and periorbital cellulitis with subsequent ophtalmoplegy and
amaurosis.(6) Later, the spread of the infection to the central nervous system can occur by the ethmoid bone and sphenoid sinus after bone
destruction. Treatment success depends on rapid diagnosis(5) and the combined approach of surgical procedures and antifungal therapy.(4) The
amphotericin B is the drug of choice for initial treatment. There are studies reporting increase of up to 79% in patient survival after
adoption of this drug. For the effective control of the disease, high doses of amphotericin B must be used. These doses range from 0.8 to
1.5mg/kg daily, which correspond to doses very close to nephrotoxic levels.(9) The use of hematopoietic as stimulating factors and
hyperbaric oxygen therapy may be beneficial, but few studies had established the efficacy of these procedures.(10) There are also studies
reporting success by the oral administration of potassium iodide.(1, 6) Surgical debridement, which main goal is to remove as much
devitalized tissue as possible, in addition to establish adequate sinus drainage, has a significant impact on the disease morbidity and
mortality.(1) Prevention of the disease consists in environmental control, avoidance or reduction of direct contact with fungal propagules,
which are found in plants, flowers and house dust.(7, 10) Poor prognosis factors are delayed initiation of treatment, intracranial
(hemiplegia and hemiparesis), palate or orbital involvement as well as bilateral facial sinus involvement, and facial necrosis.(7) This
paper reports a case of immunocompetent patient with late diagnosis and who initially had unfavorable clinical evolution. Treatments were
based on the experience of the responsible physician and case reports previously published in the literature. The result was total remission
of the disease and no sequelae. A 9-year-old boy from city of Belém (PA) was referred to the pediatric unit of the Hospital Israelita Albert
Einstein (HIAE) in São Paulo, for treatment of rhino facial zygomycosis. He was a previously healthy and had a habit of smelling roses. In
March 2010, the patient presented tumors inside his left nostril that increased progressively. The child was diagnosed with cellulitis and
treated with antibiotics, topic and systemic corticoids, however, the lesions did not improve but got worse. The computed tomography of the
skull revealed sinusopathy of left paranasal sinuses (Figure 1). Almost 3 months later, the patient was submitted to surgical cleaning of
facial sinus along with resection of lesion on nasal wall. The histopathological exam showed zygomycosis. After two weeks, he become to
present painful cellulitis in orbital region (Figure 2). Treatment was initiated with amphotericin B and caspofungin. Despite the
introduction of medication, the disease continued to progress and the pain worsened, being also observed a decrease in ocular motility and
proptosis. The magnetic resonance test showed periorbital invasion with probable contiguity to the skull base (Figure 3). With this clinical
picture, the child was submitted again to two surgical cleanings, and the antifungal treatment was extended. Subsequently, the patient
condition improved and lesions and periorbital edema reduced. The Conidiobollus sp was isolated from paranasal secrections culture. Figure
1Computed tomography of the face sinuses. Signs of persistence of lesion in edges of surgical sites toward left pterygopalatine fossa,
remaining antral cavities to the left and large orbital component also to the left, which infiltrated pre and post-septal plans and the
lachrymal apparatus Figure 2External involvement of facial mycosis Figure 3 (A and B). Infiltrative lesion that affects the face and
sinuses, especially the left orbital region, nose and oropharynx, with greater accumulation of secretions in the sinuses and slight increase
in edema and/or inflammation at the base of the anterior cerebral fosse After stabilization of patient’s condition, he returned to Belém to
complete the treatment with amphotericin B. The appearance of side effects such as hypocalcemia, hyperthermia and body pain caused his
hospitalization at intensive care unit for hemodynamic and hydroelectrolytic stability. After his discharge from intensive care unit, the
treatment was replaced by oral antifungal posaconazole that caused a worsening in clinical picture. The patient returned to our service in
August 2010 and a new magnetic resonance exam of the skull showed progression of infiltrative lesions affecting the left hemiface, orbits
and large extension of ethmoid and sphenoid sinus, besides affect the pachymeningeal (Figure 4). Because of clinical picture worsening,
persistence fever and complications related to hospitalization a therapeutic scheme was used with amphotericin B, caspofungin, terbinafine,
terbinafine, itraconazole, corticoids, acyclovir, erythropoietin, ceftriaxone, cefepime and ciprofloxacin at different times and also
hyperbaric oxygenotherapy. Fifteen days after the last session of hyperbaric chamber, a magnetic resonance showed lesions but without signs
of invasion of healthy tissues (Figure 5). After almost 2 months, the patients underwent another surgical cleaning and at that time there
were improvement on obstructive symptoms and practically, the cure of the disease. Figure 4Thickening and enhancement involving bulb and
olfactory nerves and the floor of the anterior cranial fossa. There is displacement of the base of the left frontal lobe and suggestive
lesions of inflammation and/or edema in straight orbital`s frontal gyri at the same side Figure 5Decreased infiltrative lesion that affects
the subcutaneous tissue, mainly in the left periorbital region and reduction of proptosis at the same side. Lesion reduction in nasopharynx,
hypopharynx and sinuses, compared to previous images The Conid iobollus sp is a saprophytic organism that grows on the floor and propagules
in vegetation. This parasite often affect arthropods; human infection is accidental.(10) Fungal infections can be acquired by inhalation or
direct inoculation, being this latter the case of our patient.(8) The most common presentation of the disease is an initial clinical picture
with nasal lesion of rapid growing that provoke obstructive signs that, within few weeks, spread to periorbital region and cause edema,
ptosis and proptosis.(1) The late diagnosis, about 3 months, justifies the high morbidity of this disease and it can be explained by several
types of differential diagnosis for the initial symptoms.(2) In our case, the skin lesion was first treated as impetigo and other
obstructive symptoms such as sinusitis. The lack of therapeutic response resulted in surgical cleaning and biopsy.(3) It is important to
mention that intravenous amphotericin B has been considered the treatment of choice.(1, 6, 7) In our patient, this fact was well registered
because in the period that he received this medication by the adequate route the response was more satisfactory. However for a completely
adequate treatment it is necessary to be careful with drug administration in order to avoid side effects, which were also observed in the
child in our report. The hyperbaric oxygenotherapy might contributed to the improvement, although there is no evidences of its use for
treatment of zygomycosis.(10) The surgical cleaning is an essential part of the therapeutic strategy, because it removes as much infected
material as possible and enables to observe the sinus drainage, which was observed in our case. For this reason, the use of surgical
cleaning should be emphasized.(7) The zygomycosis is a severe fungal disease that can affect both immunocompetent and immunocompromised
individuals. The literature shows that rapid diagnosis and early adequate treatment are fundamental for the disease prognosis. The patient
described in this case, although with little delay in the diagnosis, had a favorable progress due to treatments used. A zigomicose é uma
doença invasiva, que acomete tanto imunocompetentes como imunocomprometidos, dependendo do tipo da cepa. O diagnóstico é clínico e
histopatológico, e o tratamento é baseado em antifúngico e em limpeza cirúrgica. O presente relato de caso é sobre um menino com zigomicose
rinofacial invasiva com tratamento final bem-sucedido, após terapias antifúngicas e limpezas cirúrgicas. Zigomicose é uma doença fúngica
rara, grave e invasiva, de evolução rápida e fulminante, que predomina em países de clima úmido e quente.(1, 2) A incidência dessa doença no
Brasil é desconhecida, já que existem apenas poucos relatos de casos descritos na literatura, porém sabe-se que há um predomínio de casos
nas Regiões Norte e Nordeste.(3) Na literatura mundial, existe uma tendência de aumento na incidência de doenças fúngicas invasivas,
principalmente em pacientes imunodeprimidos. Tanto no Japão como nos Estados Unidos, foi encontrada uma incidência de zigomicose de 2 a 4%
nas autópsias de pacientes de centros oncológicos.(3) A zigomicose possui diversas apresentações clínicas (cutânea, pulmonar, sistêmica e
gastrintestinal), porém a rino-orbito-cerebral é a mais frequente.(4, 5) Os agentes etiológicos são zigomicetos de duas ordens: Mucorales,
que acomete principalmente pacientes imunodeficientes e portadores de doenças de base, e Entomophthorales, que atinge pessoas
imunocompetentes e raramente causa doença angioinvasiva.(1, 5) O diagnóstico está apoiado na correlação entre os exames micológico e
histopatológico, e nas manifestações clínicas.(6) A pesquisa do fungo pode ser realizada pelo exame direto com KOH e pela cultura em meio
Sabouraud. A análise histopatológica revela a presença de hifas não septadas com ramificações em 90°, geralmente sem invasão de tecidos e de
vasos sanguíneos.(7) Os sintomas mais comuns incluem: obstrução nasal, coriza e sinusite crônica,(8) porém a doença pode se manifestar
também com febre, letargia, dor de cabeça, dor retro-orbitária, perda abrupta de visão, proptose, celulite periorbitária, epistaxe e
convulsão.(9) Ao exame físico, podem ser encontradas crostas necróticas no septo nasal, cornetos e pálato. O envolvimento orbitário pode ser
demonstrado, inicialmente, por proptose e celulite periorbitária, com subsequente oftalmoplegia e amaurose.(6) Tardiamente a infecção pode
se disseminar para o sistema nervoso central, por meio do etmoide e do seio esfenoidal, após destruição óssea. O sucesso do tratamento
depende da rapidez do diagnóstico(5) e de uma abordagem combinada entre procedimento cirúrgico e terapia antifúngica.(4) A droga de escolha
é a anfotericina B. Existem trabalhos que mostram um aumento na sobrevida dos pacientes após a introdução desse tratamento em até 79%. Para
controle efetivo da doença, devem-se usar doses elevadas, que variam de 0,8 a 1,5mg/kg/dia − doses muito próximas dos níveis
nefrotóxicos.(9) A utilização de fatores de estimulação hematopoiética e oxigenioterapia hiperbárica pode ser benéfica, porém poucos estudos
comprovam a eficácia desses procedimentos.(10) Há relatos descrevendo sucesso com a inclusão de iodeto de potássio via oral.(1, 6) O
debridamento cirúrgico, o qual tem o objetivo de remover o máximo de tecido desvitalizado possível, além de estabelecer adequada drenagem
sinusal, tem grande impacto na morbimortalidade da doença.(1) A prevenção consiste no controle ambiental, evitando ou minimizando o contato
direto com propágulos fúngicos presentes em plantas, flores e na poeira doméstica.(7, 10) São fatores de mau prognóstico: atraso no início
do tratamento, envolvimento intracraniano (hemiplegia e hemiparesia), palatal ou orbital, assim como envolvimento bilateral de seios da face
e a necrose facial.(7) Este trabalho relatou o caso de um paciente imunocompentente, cujo diagnóstico foi tardio e a evolução clínica,
inicialmente desfavorável, sendo a maioria dos tratamentos baseada na experiência do médico que o assistia e em relatos de casos encontrados
na literatura, resultando em remissão total do quadro, sem nenhuma sequela. Paciente de 9 anos, gênero masculino, procedente de Belém (PA),
internado na enfermaria de pediatria do Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein (HIAE), em São Paulo (SP), para tratamento de zigomicose
rinofacial. Criança previamente hígida, com o hábito de cheirar rosas. Em março de 2010, apresentou tumoração em região interna da narina
esquerda de aumento progressivo. Diagnosticada como celulite, o paciente foi tratado com antibióticos e corticoides tópicos e sistêmicos,
sem melhora e até com piora da lesão. Realizada tomografia computadorizada de crânio que evidenciou sinusopatia de seios paranasais
esquerdos (Figura 1). Cerca de 3 meses depois, foi submetido à limpeza cirúrgica dos seios faciais com ressecção da lesão de parede nasal. O
exame histopatológico evidenciou zigomicose. Duas semanas após, o paciente passou a apresentar celulite acompanhada de dor na região
orbitária (Figura 2). Foram iniciadas anfotericina B e caspofungina. A doença continuou a evoluir, apesar das medicações, com piora da dor,
diminuição da mobilidade ocular e proptose. O exame de ressonância magnética mostrou invasão periorbitária, com provável contiguidade para a
base do crânio (Figura 3). Com esse quadro, a criança foi novamente submetida a duas limpezas cirúrgicas, e o tratamento antifúngico foi
prolongado. A partir de então, a evolução passou a ser favorável, com redução das lesões e do edema periorbitário. Na cultura das secreções
paranasais, foi isolado o fungo Conidiobollus sp. Figura 1Tomografia computadorizada de seios da face. Sinais de persistência de lesão junto
aos limites dos sítios cirúrgicos, na fossa pterigopalatina esquerda, nas cavidades antrais remanescentes à esquerda e de maior componente
orbitário também à esquerda, infiltrando planos pré e pós-septais e o aparelho lacrimal Figura 2Acometimento externo da micose facial Figura
3 (A e B). Lesão infiltrativa que acomete a face e cavidades paranasais, principalmente na região orbitária esquerda, nariz e orofaringe,
com maior acúmulo de secreção nas cavidades paranasais e aumento discreto do edema e/ou processo inflamatório na base da fossa cerebral
anterior Após estabilização do quadro, a criança retornou a Belém para completar o tratamento com anfotericina B. O aparecimento de efeitos
adversos da medicação, como hipocalcemia, hipertermia e dores no corpo, resultou em internação em unidade de cuidados intensivos para
estabilização hemodinâmica e hidroeletrolítica. Após alta da unidade de terapia intensiva, o tratamento foi substituido pelo antifúngico
posaconazol via oral, com deterioração do quadro clínico. O paciente retornou para o HIAE em agosto de 2010, e um novo exame de ressonância
magnética de crânio evidenciou progressão da lesão infiltrativa (Figura 4), acometendo hemiface esquerda, órbitas e maior extensão dos seios
etmoidal e esfenoidal, além de acometimento paquimeníngeo. A piora clínica, com a presença de febre persistente e de complicações inerentes
à internação hospilar, levaram ao esquema terapêutico com anfotericina B, caspofungina, terbinafina, itraconazol, corticoide, aciclovir,
eritropoetina, ceftriaxone, cefepime e ciprofloxacina em tempos diferentes, além de oxigenoterapia hiperbárica. Quinze dias após a última
seção da câmera hiperbárica, a ressonância magnética já mostrava lesão localizada sem sinais de invasão de tecidos sãos (Figura 5). Após
aproximadamente 2 meses, submeteu-se à nova limpeza cirúrgica, dessa vez com melhora da sintomatologia obstrutiva e praticamente cura da
doença. Figura 4Espessamento e realce envolvendo bulbo e nervos olfatórios e soalho da fossa craniana anterior. Há deslocamento da base do
lobo frontal esquerdo, e lesão sugestiva de inflamação e/ou edema nos giros retos e frontais orbitários deste lado Figura 5Diminuição da
lesão infiltrativa que acomete o tecido subcutâneo, principalmente periorbitário esquerdo, e redução da proptose do mesmo lado. Redução da
lesão na rinofaringe, hipofaringe e seios da face, em comparação com os anteriores Conidiobollus sp é um saprófita do solo e seus propágulos
estão presentes na vegetação em geral. Pode parasitar artrópodes, sendo a infecção humana acidental.(10) A contaminação com o fungo se dá
por via inalatória ou inoculação direta, como no caso do paciente descrito.(8) O quadro clínico inicial, com lesão nasal de crescimento
rápido provocando sinais obstrutivos que, em poucas semanas, difunde-se para a região periorbitária, causando edema, ptose e proptose, é a
apresentação mais comum da doença.(1) A demora de cerca de 3 meses até o diagnóstico definitivo justifica a alta morbidade da doença e pode
ser explicada pelo grande leque de diagnósticos diferenciais para os sintomas iniciais.(2) A lesão de pele foi inicialmente tratada como
impetigo e os sintomas obstrutivos foram tratados como sinusite. A ausência de resposta terapêutica resultou na limpeza cirúrgica e na
biópsia.(3) É importante considerar que a anfotericina B por via intravenosa tem sido apontada como tratamento de escolha.(1, 6, 7) No
paciente em questão, esse fato ficou bem documentado, uma vez que, nos períodos nos quais ele recebeu essa droga pela via adequada, a
resposta foi mais satisfatória. No entanto, para que o tratamento possa ser feito de modo completo, são indispensáveis os cuidados com a
administração do medicamento, a fim de evitar os efeitos adversos também observados nesta criança. A oxigenoterapia hiperbárica pode ter
contribuido para a melhora, embora não existam evidências consistentes sobre seu emprego nessa indicação.(10) Finalmente, a limpeza
cirúrgica é parte essencial da estratégia terapêutica, já que retira o máximo de material infectado possível e permite viabilizar a drenagem
sinusal, como observado no caso, devendo seu emprego ser enfatizado.(7) A zigomicose é uma doença fúngica grave, que pode acometer tanto
pessoas imunocompetentes como aqueles com a imunidade comprometida. A literatura mostra que a rapidez no diagnóstico e o início precoce do
tratamento adequado são fundamentais para o prognóstico da doença. Porém, o paciente descrito no caso, embora tenha tido um atraso no
diagnóstico, evoluiu de forma favorável, devido às máximas terapêuticas empregadas.
