The impingement syndrome is defined by the compression of the rotator cuff tendons against the coracoacromial arch. Several factors
contribute to this condition and they are classified as structural or functional factors. The former are changes in the coracoacromial arch,
proximal humerus, bursa and rotator cuff, and the latter are related to the mechanism of the upper limb by means of synchronized activity
and balanced between the rotator cuff and scapular girdle muscles. The authors report here a case of parosteal lipoma of the proximal
humerus, located between the muscles deltoid, teres minor and infraspinatus causing clinical signs of impingement. It is a rare occurrence,
characterized as a structural cause for the onset of this symptom. Lipomas are the most common benign tumors of the connective tissue, made
up of encapsulated nodules of fat that may contain fibrous tissue. Microscopically they are composed of mature adipose cells, without any
evidence of cellular atypia.(1, 2) These tumors are more common in females between 30 and 60 years of age, clinically they present as a soft
circumscribed, movable generally painless mass.(2) According to Enzinger and Weiss,(3) there are two types of lipomas: superficial and deep.
The superficial lipomas are more commonly found in the shoulder, neck and abdominal region. The deep lipomas occur less frequently, and are
located in the anterior mediastinum, chest wall and retroperitoneal region, and they are divided into the following types: intramuscular,
intermuscular, parosteal and intra-osseous. Among the deeply located lipomas, the intramuscular and intermuscular types are the most common;
parosteal lipoma is infrequent; and the intraosseous is rare.(1)-4) The parosteal lipoma is a deep lipoma that grows in an exophytic manner
in the periosteum, and can produce bone erosion, neural compression or focal cortical hyperostosis. It is a rare, slow growing
histologically benign tumor, comprising 0.3% of all lipomas.(1, 3, 4) When studying 18,677 mesenchymal tumors, Kransdorf(5) observed that
16% were lipomas – in that, 1.3% was intramuscular and 2.6% were located in the shoulder and axilla, in a deep site. The present case
describes a patient with diagnosis of parosteal lipoma of the proximal humerus inducing the clinical signs of impingement syndrome.
Searching the literature, no similar case was found. An 82-year-old female patient, with history of pain in the left shoulder for two years,
reported more intense pain over the last two months. Upon onset of symptoms she sought medical treatment. The diagnosis of supraspinatus
tendonitis was made based on the clinical examination and ultrasonography. The patient was prescribed conservative treatment as physical
therapy (analgesia and kinesiotherapy). For the following 18 months, the symptoms alternated between periods of relief and intensification.
Over the last 2 months, her pain markedly increased, with loss of functional capacity of the left upper limb affecting her daily activities.
Elevation of this limb caused intense pain and at night, pain woke her up many times. On physical examination, the patient presented mild
hypotrophy of the deltoid and on dynamic inspection, active elevation was 90° and passive 160°. Reduction in supraspinatus muscle strength
during the empty can test,(6) and a positive Neer sign(7) were verified. Other tests in physical examination and the range of motion in
lateral and medial rotation compared to the opposite side were assessed and considered normal. After an injection of 10mL xylocaine in the
subacromial space, pain disappeared and the patient was able to move her shoulder normally (positive Neer test).(7) Anteroposterior
radiographs of the left shoulder, axillary and supraspinatus tunnel (outlet view) were ordered. A type-II acromion, according to Bigliani(8)
classification, was observed. The magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the left shoulder (Figures 1A and 1B) revealed supraspinatus tendonitis,
with no rupture of the rotator cuff tendon and a massive soft tissue tumor (probably a lipoma) measuring 6.2x5.8x2.4cm, visible between the
bellies of the deltoid, teres minor and infraspinatus muscles. Figure 1. (A) Sagittal view showing subdeltoid lipoma not invading the
subacromial space and tapering of the supraspinatus tendon (arrow). (B) Axial view showing the lipoma between the teres minor (narrow arrow)
and deltoid (wide arrow) muscles Removal of the tumor was indicated, and it was performed by posterior approach. The soft tissue tumor did
not invade the subacromial space (Figure 2A). Its upper extremity was situated at the height of the posterior acromion and the lower
extremity was attached to the periosteum of the proximal humerus, anteriorly to the tendon insertions of the infraspinatus and teres minor
muscles (Figure 2B). The vessels present at this site and penetrating the tumor capsule were cauterized. Figure 2. (A) Intraoperative image
demonstrating that the lipoma (narrow arrow) does not invade the subacromial space (wide arrow). (B) Lipoma adhering to the humerus,
anteriorly to teres minor tendon (narrow arrow) and infraspinatus (wide arrow) muscles The tumor was resected by a marginal excision (as
“shelling out the tumor”), and the deltoid reinserted in the posterior acromion. The resected mass measured 7.0x5.5x1.5cm (Figure 3A). The
histological examination report was parosteal lipoma (Figure 3B). Figure 3. (A) Image of the surgical specimen. (B) Photomicrograph of the
histological section of the lipoma (hematoxylin and eosin, 200x) In the postoperative period the patient remained with thoracobrachial
immobilization for the first 6 weeks, only making passive movements of lateral and medial rotation. This was followed by mild active
exercises without resistance, and after 2 months, she began on muscle strengthening. The patient has been asymptomatic 26 months after
surgery. The normal function of the shoulder muscle structure depends on specific requirements such as: preserved integrity and tonus of the
rotator cuff muscles (spraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor and subscapular), normal capsular laxity, integral coracoacromial arch, thin
and lubricating bursae, and concentricity of the glenohumeral and coracoacromial rotational spheres. Alterations of this intricate mechanism
are the most common causes of shoulder pain problems.(9) The shoulder is shaped by four anatomic barriers (space circumscribed by a thick
wall of collagen of the fascias and tendons, and the bones): the scapula with its muscles; the clavicle; the proximal humerus; and the
deltoid muscle. In these spaces, the tumors grow centrifugally when in contact to these anatomic barriers.(2) In the case reported, the
lipoma was of the parosteal type, growing in the compartment between the deltoid, infraspinatus, teres minor muscles and the humerus. The
tumor of this patient increased the pressure in this compartment upon muscle contraction, altering the concentric relation of the rotational
spheres. In its movement arch, the joint between the humerus and scapula is formed by two concentric spheres. The humeral sphere is
represented by the head of the humerus (with a smaller radius) and the sphere of the coracoacromial arch formed by the lower surface of the
anterior acromium and the coracoacromial ligament (with a larger radius). Both spheres have the same rotational center and together maintain
the best condition of stability for the shoulder and for the available surface for transfer of the scapular load.(9) The range of motion in
arm elevation in the scapular plane is zero to 180°. In the initial stage of movement up to 90°, fixation of the scapula occurs over the
chest wall by contraction of the trapezius and anterior serratus muscles. The muscles of the rotator cuff lower and fix the head of the
humerus in the glenoid cavity, and, at this time, the deltoid muscle, with predominance of its mid- and posterior portions, acts by raising
the arm. When the upper limb reaches an elevation of 90°, the greater tuberosity in order to move under the coracoacromial arch, requires
the external rotation of the humerus, produced by the contration of the infraspinatus and the teres minor muscles. These muscles act in
synchrony producing a smooth and coordinated motion.(9) In this case, when raising her arm, the synchrony in contraction of the deltoid,
infraspinatus and teres minor muscles is interrupted, due to the lipoma interposed between them. The motion loses its coordination causing
the impact of the greater tuberosity against the coracoacromial arch. Resection of the tumor restored the concentricity of the two spheres
of movement (head of the humerus and anterior acromion and coracoacromial arch) during the lateral rotation in the final degrees of
elevation, due to the recovery of congruity of the glenohumeral joint in its entire movement arch, leading to relief of symptoms of
impingement syndrome. A limitation of this case report was the lack of electroneuromyography requested to patient; this diagnostic exam
could detect a compression of axillary nerve in the quadrangular space that mimics the symptoms of patients. To find articles evaluating
patients with subacromial syndrome related to lipoma, we searched MEDLINE via PubMed (1966 to July 2013), EMBASE (1980 to 2013 Week 20), and
LILACS (1982 to July 2013). There was no language or publication status limitation to our search. We also checked references of articles and
reviews for other potentially relevant studies. Our search strategy combined the specific terms (“shoulder impingement syndrome” OR
“shoulder joint” OR “rotator cuff” ) AND “lipoma” . The search strategy (completed in July 2013) identified a total of 36 records from the
following databases: PubMed (19), EMBASE (11), LILACS (6). The search resulted in the identification of six articles that evaluated patients
with shoulder condition associated with lipoma.(10)-15) Rohrbough and Jobe(10) reported a case of lipoma located in the subdeltoid region,
that produced symptoms of glenohumeral instability. Nisolle et al.(11) presented a 44-year-old man with bursal lipoma arborescens of the
right shoulder associated with a rotator cuff tear. Relwani et al.(12) described a case of a 52-year-old woman with classic signs of
shoulder impingement and the patient had an anterior subacromial lipoma causing the symptoms. Two case-report articles illustrated two cases
of a 45-year-old man and a 51-year-old man with signs and symptoms consistent with impingement syndrome whose etiology was intramuscular
lipoma involving the supraspinatus muscle.(13, 14) In addition, a recent case report presented a 38-year-old male patient with symptoms
mimicking both glenohumeral instability and subacromial impingement(15) due a subdeltoid intermuscular lipoma. In all cases the symptoms
disappeared after surgery and physical therapy. We considered our search strategy comprehensive, with no language restrictions applied. It
also included handsearching (grey literature) and searches for ongoing and recent narrative reviews and case reports. However, it is
possible that we have neglected some potential studies describing a similar case. Therefore, to our knowledge, the present case illustrated
in this article is an atypical case of a parosteal lipoma of the proximal humerus that caused signs and symptoms of subacromial impingement.
The mechanism that trigger the symptoms was preoperatively diagnosed by the MRI test. A síndrome do impacto é definida pela colisão dos
tendões dos músculos que formam o manguito rotador contra o arco coracoacromial. Vários fatores concorrem para essa doença e são
classificados como estruturais ou funcionais. Os primeiros são alterações do arco coracoacromial, úmero, bursa e manguito rotador; os
fatores funcionais estão relacionados com o mecanismo de elevação do membro superior, por meio da atividade sincronizada e equilibrada entre
o manguito rotador e os músculos da cintura escapular. Os autores relatam aqui, o caso de um lipoma parosteal do úmero proximal, situado
entre os ventres musculares do deltoide, redondo menor e infraespinhal ocasionando os sinais clínicos da síndrome do impacto. Trata-se de
uma ocorrência rara, caracterizada como uma causa estrutural para o desencadeamento dessa sintomatologia. Lipomas são os tumores de tecido
conjuntivo mais frequentes, formados por nódulos encapsulados de gordura que podem conter tecido fibroso. À microscopia, são compostos por
células adiposas maduras, sem qualquer evidência de atipia celular.(1, 2) São mais comuns em mulheres de 30 a 60 anos e se apresentam
clinicamente como uma massa móvel, circunscrita, de consistência macia e, em geral, indolor.(2) Há dois tipos de lipomas, segundo Enzinger e
Weiss:(3) o superficial e o profundo. Os lipomas superficiais são geralmente encontrados em ombros, pescoço e região abdominal. Já os
profundos são menos frequentes, localizam-se no mediastino anterior, na parede torácica e na região retroperitoneal, sendo classificados nos
seguintes subtipos: intramuscular, intermuscular, parosteal e intraósseo. Entre os lipomas profundos, os tipos intramuscular e intermuscular
são os mais comuns; o lipoma parosteal é pouco frequente, e o intraósseo é raro.(1)-4) O lipoma parosteal é um tumor profundo, de
crescimento exofítico no periósteo, que pode causar compressão de nervos, erosão óssea ou hiperostose cortical focal. É um tumor raro,
benigno e de crescimento lento, que representa 0,3% de todos os lipomas.(1, 3, 4) Ao estudar 18.677 tumores mesenquimais, Kransdorf(5)
observou que 16% eram lipomas, sendo 1,3% intramuscular e 2,6% localizados no ombro e na axila, em região mais profunda. Este relato de caso
descreve uma paciente com diagnóstico de lipoma parosteal no úmero proximal, que desencadeou os sinais clínicos da síndrome do impacto.
Nenhum caso semelhante foi encontrado em busca na literatura médica. Paciente do gênero feminino, 82 anos, com história de dor no ombro
esquerdo há 2 anos e queixa de intensificação da dor nos últimos 2 meses. Procurou assistência médica com o início dos sintomas. O
diagnóstico de tendinite do supraespinhoso foi feito com base no exame clínico e na ultrassonografia. Foi prescrita fisioterapia (analgesia
e cinesioterapia) como tratamento conservador. Durante 18 meses, apresentou alternância de sintomas, com períodos de alívio ou
intensificação. Nos últimos 2 meses, a dor aumentou muito, com perda de capacidade funcional no membro superior esquerdo, que interferiu em
suas atividades diárias. A elevação desse membro causava dor intensa, que a fazia despertar à noite muitas vezes. Ao exame físico, a
paciente apresentou hipotrofia leve do deltoide e, à inspeção dinâmica, a elevação ativa foi de 90° e a passiva foi de 160°. Observaram-se
redução na força do músculo supraespinhoso, durante o teste de Jobe (empty can test),(6) e sinal positivo no teste de Neer.(7) Outros testes
no exame físico e a amplitude de movimento na rotação lateral e medial foram comparados ao membro contralateral e considerados normais. Após
uma injeção de 10mL de xilocaína no espaço subacromial, a paciente sentiu alívio completo da dor e pode movimentar o ombro normalmente
(teste de Neer positivo).(7) Foram solicitadas radiografias em incidência posteroanterior do ombro esquerdo, axila e túnel do
supraespinhoso. Foi relatado acrômio tipo II pela classificação de Bigliani.(8) A ressonância magnética (RM) do ombro esquerdo (Figuras 1A e
1B) mostrou tendinite no supraespinhoso, sem ruptura do tendão do manguito do rotador, além de um grande tumor de tecido mole (provavelmente
um lipoma), medindo 6,2x5,8x2,4cm, visível entre os ventres dos músculos deltoide, redondo menor e infraespinhoso. Figura 1(A) Corte sagital
mostra lipoma subdeltoide, que não invade o espaço subacromial, e redução do tendão do supraespinhoso (seta). (B) Lipoma entre os músculos
redondo menor (seta estreita) e deltoide (seta larga) Foi indicada a excisão do tumor, que foi realizada por acesso posterior. O tumor de
tecido mole não invadiu o espaço subacromial (Figura 2A). Sua extremidade superior estava no nível do acrômio posterior, e a inferior,
aderida ao periósteo do úmero proximal, anterior à inserção do tendão dos músculos infraespinhoso e redondo menor (Figura 2B). Os vasos
existentes no local e que penetravam a cápsula do tumor foram cauterizados. Figura 2(A) Imagem intraoperatória mostra que o lipoma (seta
estreita) não invade o espaço subacromial (seta larga). (B) Lipoma aderindo ao úmero, anteriormente ao tendão dos músculos redondo menor
(seta estreita) e infraespinhoso (seta larga) Foi realizada exérese do tumor, com excisão das margens pela técnica shelling out, e o
deltoide foi reinserido no acrômio posterior. A massa removida media 7,0x5,5x1,5cm (Figura 3A). O laudo do exame histológico foi lipoma
parosteal (Figura 3B). Figura 3(A) Imagem do espécime cirúrgico. (B) Fotomicrografia do corte histológico do lipoma (hematoxilina e eosina,
200x) No período pós-operatório, a paciente permaneceu com imobilização toracobraquial nas primeiras 6 semanas, e fazia apenas movimentos
passivos de rotação lateral e medial. Depois, passou a fazer exercícios leves e ativos, sem resistência, e, após 2 meses, iniciou o
fortalecimento muscular. A paciente esteve assintomática por 26 meses após a cirurgia. A função normal da estrutura muscular do ombro
depende de alguns requisitos específicos, como integridade preservada e tônus dos músculos do manguito do rotador (supraespinhoso,
infraespinhoso, redondo menor e subscapular), frouxidão capsular normal, arco coracoacromial íntegro, bursas delgadas e lubrificadas, e
concentricidade das esferas de rotação glenoumeral e coracoacromial. As alterações desse intricado mecanismo são as causas mais comuns de
problemas de dor nos ombros.(9) O ombro é moldado por quatro barreiras anatômicas (espaço circunscrito por uma espessa parede de colágeno de
fáscias e tendões, e os ossos): escápula com seus músculos; clavícula; úmero proximal; e o músculo deltoide. Nesses espaços, os tumores
crescem na direção centrífuga, quando em contato com essas barreiras anatômicas.(2) No caso relatado, o lipoma era do tipo parosteal e
crescia no compartimento entre os músculos deltoide, infraespinhoso, redondo menor e o úmero. O tumor desta paciente aumentava a pressão do
compartimento nas contrações musculares, alterando a relação concêntrica das esferas de rotação. Em seu movimento de arco, a articulação
entre o úmero e a escápula é formada por duas esferas concêntricas. A esfera umeral é representada pela cabeça do úmero (com o menor raio),
e a esfera do arco coracoacromial é formada pela superfície inferior do acrômio anterior e o ligamento coracoacromial (com o raio maior). As
duas esferas têm o mesmo centro de rotação e juntas mantêm a melhor condição de estabilidade para o ombro e para a superfície disponível
para transferir a carga escapular.(9) A amplitude de movimento na elevação do braço, no plano escapular é de zero a 180°. Na fase inicial do
movimento até 90°, a fixação da escápula ocorre sobre a parede torácica, pela contração dos músculos trapézio e serrátil anterior. Os
músculos do manguito do rotador abaixam e fixam a cabeça do úmero na cavidade glenoide, e, ao mesmo tempo, o músculo deltoide, com
predominância das porções média e posterior, atua ao levantar o braço. Quando o membro superior alcança uma elevação de 90°, a tuberosidade
maior, para se movimentar por baixo do arco coracoacromial, requer a rotação externa do úmero, produzida pela contração dos músculos
infraespinhoso e redondo menor. Esses músculos agem em sincronia, e produzem um movimento suave e coordenado.(9) Neste caso, ao levantar seu
braço, a sincronia na contração do deltoide, infraespinhoso e redondo menor é interrompida, devido ao lipoma interposto entre os músculos. O
movimento perde sua coordenação e causa o impacto da tuberosidade maior contra o arco coracoacromial. A ressecção do tumor restabeleceu a
concentricidade das duas esferas de movimento (cabeça do úmero e acrômio anteriores, e arco coracoacromial) durante a rotação lateral nos
graus finais de elevação. Isso ocorreu pela recuperação da congruência da articulação glenoumeral em seu arco completo de movimento, que
levou ao alívio de sintomas da síndrome do impacto. A limitação deste relato de caso foi a falta de eletroneuromiografia, solicitada à
paciente. Esse exame complementar poderia detectar a compressão do nervo axilar no espaço quadrangular, que mimetiza os sintomas de
pacientes. Para encontrar artigos que avaliassem pacientes com a síndrome subacromial relacionada ao lipoma, fizemos a busca em MEDLINE via
PubMed (1966 a julho de 2013), EMBASE (1980 a 2013, semana 20) e LILACS (1982 a julho de 2013). Não houve limites de idiomas ou estado da
publicação em nossa busca. Verificamos também as referências de artigos e revisões para outros estudos potencialmente relevantes. Nossa
estratégia de busca combinou os termos específicos (“shoul der impingement syndrome” OU “shoulder joint” OU “rotato r cuff” ) E “Lipoma”
[“síndrome do impacto no ombro” OU “articulação do ombro” OU “manguito do rotador” E “lipoma”]. A estratégia de busca (finalizada em julho
de 2013) identificou um total de 36 registros nos seguintes bancos de dados: PubMed (19), EMBASE (11), LILACS (6). O resultado da busca foi
a identificação de seis artigos que avaliaram pacientes com doença de ombro associada à lipoma.(10)-15) Rohrbough e Jobe(10) relataram um
caso de lipoma localizado na região do subdeltoide, que causava sintomas de instabilidade glenoumeral. Nisolle et al.(11) apresentaram o
caso de um homem de 44 anos com lipoma arborescente na bursa do ombro direito, associado à laceração do manguito do rotador. Relwani et
al.(12) descreveram o caso de uma paciente de 52 anos, com sinais clássicos de impacto no ombro; a paciente tinha um lipoma subacromial
anterior que causava os sintomas. Os dois artigos de relato de caso ilustram dois casos de pacientes masculinos – 45 e 51 anos, com sinais e
sintomas consistentes com síndrome do impacto, cuja etiologia era lipoma intramuscular que envolvia o músculo supraespinhoso.(13, 14) Além
disso, um relato de caso recente apresentou um paciente masculino, de 38 anos, com sintomas que mimetizavam tanto a instabilidade
glenoumeral como o impacto subacromial,(15) devido a um lipoma intermuscular subdeltoide. Em todos os casos, os sintomas desapareceram após
a cirurgia e fisioterapia. Consideramos nossa estratégia de busca abrangente, sem nenhuma restrição quanto a idiomas. Incluímos também busca
manual (literatura cinzenta) e buscas por revisões e relatos de casos recentes e em andamento. Entretanto, é possível que tenhamos
negligenciado alguns estudos potenciais que descreviam um caso semelhante. Portanto, em nosso entender, o relato deste artigo é um caso
atípico de um lipoma parosteal do úmero proximal, que resultou em sinais e sintomas de impacto subacromial. O mecanismo que desencadeou os
sintomas foi diagnosticado no pré-operatório por RM.
