A 22-day-old male infant, the first child of non-consanguineous parents, who was delivered from a followed-up and normal pregnancy, and
without alterations in analytical and echographic evaluation. He was born by cesarean section at 39 weeks, because the labor failed to
progress, with Apgar score of 9 at 1 minute and of 10 at 5 minute, weighting 3,240g at birth without intercurrences in the neonatal period.
The newborn was exclusively breastfed with adequate weight gain (with 22 days of life he weighed 3,650g). The infant was admitted to the
urgency service with mild fever, swelling, preauricular flushing and effacement of the mandibular angle with 1 day of evolution (Figure 1).
At examination we detected a purulent exudate exiting Stensen’s duct (Figure 2). Laboratory tests revealed: leukocytes 17,000/mm3 with 68%
neutrophils and C-reactive protein 1.3mg/L. In microbiologic exam of the exudate exiting Stensen’s duct revealed the methicillin-sensitive
Staphylococcus aureus. At hospital admission the newborn began the treatment with intravenous flucloxacillin and gentamicina and after
discharge he completed treatment with oral flucloxacilin (after antibiogram). The infant evolved without complications and was discharged in
good clinical condition. Figure 1Swelling and left preauricular flushing Figure 2Purulent drainage from Stensen’s duct This report showed
the typical manifestations of a rare disease in newborn, the acute neonatal suppurative parotitis.(1)-4) The etiopathogeny of acute neonatal
suppurative parotitis is not completely known and is associated with common predisposing conditions include prematurity, dehydration, and
duct stasis,(1, 2) which were not found in our case. This infection often affects male gender and could be bilateral.(1)-2) Purulent
drainage from Stensen’s duct is pathognomonic of this condition.(3) The most common etiologic agent found is the Staphylococcus aureus.(3)
The infection has a good prognosis, rare recurrence(1)-4) and complications (facial plasy, fistula, mediastinitis and extension to external
auditory canal). Recém-nascido de 22 dias, do gênero masculino, primeiro filho de pais não consanguíneos, fruto de uma gravidez vigiada de
evolução normal, com avaliação analítica e ecográfica sem alterações, parto na 39ª semana, de cesariana, por não progressão do trabalho de
parto, com índice de Apgar ao 1º minuto de 9 e, ao 5º minuto, de 10, e peso de nascimento de 3.240g, sem intercorrências no período
neonatal. Alimentação com aleitamento materno exclusivo, com adequada progressão ponderal (com 22 dias de vida, tinha peso de 3.650g).
Observado no Serviço de Urgência por febre baixa, tumefacção e rubor pré-auricular esquerdo, com apagamento do ângulo da mandíbula com 1 dia
de evolução (Figura 1). À observação, foi detectada adicionalmente saída de exsudado purulento do canal de Stensen (Figura 2).
Analiticamente, apresentava leucócitos 17.000/mm3 com 68% neutrófilos e proteína C-reactiva de 1,3mg/dL. No exame microbiológico do exsudado
do canal de Stensen, foi isolado Staphylococcus aureus meticilino-sensível. Durante a internação, foi efetuada terapêutica endovenosa, com
flucloxacilina e gentamicina, tendo completado tratamento em ambulatório, com flucloxacilina oral (após antibiograma). A evolução decorreu
sem complicações, tendo alta clinicamente bem. Figura 1Tumefacção e rubor pré-auricular esquerda Figura 2Drenagem de conteúdo purulento no
canal de Stensen O caso descrito demonstra as manifestações típicas de uma doença rara no recém-nascido: a parotidite aguda supurativa
neonatal.(1)-4) Sua etiopatogenia não está completamente esclarecida, sendo descritas, como fatores de risco, a prematuridade, a
desidratação e a estase ductal,(1, 2) ausentes neste caso. É mais frequente no gênero masculino e pode ser bilateral.(1, 2) O diagnóstico é
clínico e seu aparecimento é mais frequente entre o 7º e 14º dia de vida.(1)-3) A drenagem de conteúdo purulento do canal de Stensen é
patognomônica.(3) O agente etiológico mais frequente é o Staphylococcus aureus.(3) Tem bom prognóstico,(1)-4) sendo raras as complicações
(paralisia facial, fístula, mediastinite e extensão ao canal auditivo externo). A recorrência é rara.(1)-4)
