Vulvovaginal-gingival syndrome is characterized by erosions and desquamation of the vulva, vagina, and gingiva. We reported a case of a
32-year-old woman presenting with an 8-year history of damage to the vulval and perianal anatomy and limitation of mouth opening. The
patient's symptoms were relieved after treatment with topical tacrolimus cream. A 32-year-old woman presented with an 8-year history of
damage to the vulval and perianal anatomy and limitation of mouth opening. Physical examination showed diffuse gingivitis along the inferior
gingival mucosa. Asymptomatic white-grey reticulated plaques were detected on the labial-buccal aspect of the maxillary gingivae and the
buccal mucosa (Figure 1). There was cutaneous atrophy on the vulval and perianal area. The structures of the labia minora, labia majora and
clitoris were lost, with erosions around the vaginal orifice (Figure 2). Scarring of the mucosa of the vaginal orifice and anus manifested
as mild stenosis. A biopsy taken from the vulva revealed hyperkeratosis, liquefaction degeneration of the basal cells and inflammatory cells
in the upper dermis without atypia (Figure 3). Gingivitis of the inferior gingival mucosa. White-grey reticulated plaques on the buccal
mucosa Cutaneous atrophy on the vulval and perianal area, and loss of structure of labia minora, labia majora and clitoris Hyperkeratosis,
liquefaction degeneration of the basal cells and inflammatory cells in the upper dermis without atypia (hematoxylin and eosin, Ã— 400) The
patient was treated with topical tacrolimus cream. Erosions improved after 3 weeks. Vulvovaginal-gingival syndrome is a specific type of
mucosal lichen planus, characterized by erosions and desquamation of the vulva, vagina, and gingiva.1 The main sequelae are scar formation,
mucous stenosis, impact on specific functions and risk of malignant change.2 Although few cases of vulvovaginal-gingival syndrome have been
reported to date, recognizing the syndrome remains a major challenge. Once the mucous stenosis is formed, recovery becomes complicated.
Approximately half the patients had been treated repeatedly for presumed vaginal yeast infections by physicians who had misjudged their
disease. Several diseases must be considered in the list of differential diagnoses for vulvovaginal-gingival syndrome, including idiopathic
desquamative vaginitis, idiopathic erosive vulvitis and vulvar lichen sclerosus. Recognition of desquamative vaginitis syndrome may avoid
unnecessary medical and surgical procedures.1 Early active therapy is required to alleviate symptoms and prevent genital sequelae.3 Topical
corticosteroids are the most commonly used drugs for treating the syndrome. Systemic agents used to treat the disorder include
corticosteroids, azathioprine, and mycophenolate mofetil.4 Recently, topical tacrolimus was shown to be effective.5 Conflict of Interests:
None. Financial Support: None. How to cite this article: Wu Y, Qiao J, Fang H. Do you know this syndrome? Vulvovaginal-gingival syndrome. An
Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(5):843-4. Study carried out at The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University - Zhejiang,
China.
