The recent development of high-frequency ultrasound, associated with the improved sensitivity in color Doppler, enabled the identification
of various skin structures and layers. In basal cell carcinoma, the 22 MHz frequency ultrasound permits the delimitation of tumor margins,
while color Doppler, determines its vascularization. We present two cases in which the association of both exams allowed an in vivo analysis
of the tumor's morphology, size, thickness and vascularization, thus contributing to a better pre-operative evaluation. Used since the 70s
in dermatology, ultrasonography is based on the reflection of sound waves throughout the tissues.1,2 According to the anatomical structure,
its vascularization and density, the ultrasound waves are reflected back to the transducer that converts them into a gray scale, observed on
the monitor.3 The higher the frequency of the waves emitted by the transducer, the better the spatial resolution and subsequent
visualization of structures near it. The introduction of transducers with frequency higher than 15 MHz produced the high-frequency
ultrasound (HFUS). The shortest wavelength obtained by this frequency allowed a better assessment of superficial structures, significantly
expanding its use in cutaneous diseases.4 In normal skin, the echogenicity of each layer depends on its main component, which in the
epidermis is represented by keratin, in the dermis by collagen and in the subcutaneous tissue by fat lobules. In the ultrasound image, the
epidermis appears as a hyperechoic line, the dermis as a hyperechoic band less bright than the epidermis and the subcutaneous tissue as a
hypoechoic layer with hyperechoic fibrous septa in between.3 Dermoscopy is a complementary exam of great impact in dermatological practice
that permits an early differentiation between malignant and benign cutaneous lesions. A study by Altamura et al, aimed at determining the
accuracy of this method in the diagnosis of basal cell carcinoma, demonstrated a high sensitivity rate (87%).5 Basal Cell Carcinoma (BCC) is
an epithelial neoplasm, which corresponds to approximately 7580% of cutaneous tumors in middle-aged individuals with fair skin. It usually
affects areas exposed to solar radiation, with the highest incidence rate in the face.6 Overestimation of the tumor area can lead to
unnecessary aesthetic problems. On the other hand, incomplete excisions are charged with changing the tumor structure, thus generating a
more aggressive behavior.7,8 Sartore et al reports that 5 to 50% of BCC are incompletely excised.7,9 The determination of the tumor extent
and the adequate safety margins are of paramount importance for surgical intervention.9 With dermoscopy, it is possible to assess the
extension of the lesion in the longitudinal and horizontal axes. However, it is not feasible to determine its depth and the potential
invasion of adjacent structures, such as cartilage and muscle, based only on clinical and dermoscopic evaluation. With HFUS, it is possible
to delimit the tumoral margin based on the difference in refraction between the hypoechoic tumor area and the hyperechoic perilesional
region. In parallel, it is possible to assess tumor vascularization, its nature and distribution with color Doppler exams.7 Two patients,
one male and one female, aged 67 and 73 years presented lesions on the nose and right flank, respectively (Figures 1 and 2). Dermoscopy
(DermLite DL3, 3rd Gen, USA) and 22MHz HFUS (Esaote, My Lab Touch, Italy) were performed in both patients. The male patient reported a past
medical history of having one lesion removed in the same location, three years ago. Dermoscopic examination showed, in both cases, the
presence of arborizing telangiectasias and ovoid nests (Figures 3 and 4). HFUS (22 MHz) demonstrated a hypoechoic lesion in the dermis of
the first patient, measuring 1mm deep by 1.9 mm in its largest diameter, surrounded by a slightly less echogenic area consistent with
fibrosis (Figure 5A). Color Doppler exam showed the presence of blood vessels permeating the tumor (Figure 5B). Hypoechoic lesions measuring
1 x 3.5 mm, delimitated by the hyperechoic surrounding dermis were observed on the second patient; color Doppler aspects were similar to
those of the previous exam (Figure 6A and 6B). Patients underwent excision of the lesions after adequate delineation of tumoral margins,
guided by dermoscopy and HFUS. Histopathological examination revealed, in the first case, nests of basaloid cells amidst old scarring,
reaching 1 mm deep and 1.8 mm laterally (Figure 7). The second patient had a similar histopathological result, with the lesion measuring 1
mm deep and 3.5 mm laterally (Figure 8). Normochrom ic papular lesion, on the nose, over prior surgical scar Erythematou s papule on the
right flank Dermoscopy showing classic arborizing telangiectasias and slightly pigmented amorphous area Dermoscopy presenting white -
reddish glossy areas and fine telangiectasias. Discrete ovoid nests A. Gray scale in the ultrasound shows well delimited, hypoechoic oval
lesion, involving the dermis. B. Color Doppler shows increased vascularity on the tumor A. 22 MHz HFUS showing hypoechoic tumoral lesion. B.
Color Doppler shows blood vessels positioned in the inferior portion of the lesion Histopathological exam shows a basaloid epithelial tumor.
H&E 10X Histopathological exam: basaloid lesion infiltrating the dermis. H&E, 40X Currently, histopathological examination is the gold
standard for diagnosis and morphological and structural assessment of BCC. However, new techniques for in vivo investigation have been used
to expedite diagnosis and optimize pre-operative evaluation. Studies indicate that HFUS represents an innovative method for exploring
cutaneous tumors, including BCC. Unfit to assess tumor cellularity, this exam cannot be used to confirm diagnosis, but it enables a detailed
preoperative study: by assessing the different skin layers and their respective thicknesses, the tumor size and involvement of deep planes.
Color Doppler exam can estimate the blood flow on the lesion and its surroundings. Histopathological analysis confirmed the assessment of
pre-operative tests. In summary, we report two cases that exemplify how the association of HFUS with dermoscopy adds substantial value to
the analysis of tumoral dimensions, which also permits the safe determination of their margins and vascularization patterns prior to tumor
excision. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None How to cite this article: Barcaui EO, Carvalho ACP, Valiante PMN, Barcaui CB.
High-frequency ultrasound associated with dermoscopy in pre-operative evaluation of basal cell carcinoma. An Bras Dermatol.
2014;89(5):828-31. Work performed at the Radiology and Pathology Department at Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro (FM-UFRJ) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
