Thymoma is associated with various paraneoplastic autoimmune disorders. Herein, we report paraneoplastic neuromyelitis optica (NMO)
associated with both anti-aquaporin-4 (AQP4) immunoglobulin G (IgG) and type 1 antineuronal nuclear antibody (ANNA-1) in an invasive thymoma
patient. A woman presented with a sudden onset of bilateral progressive visual loss associated with recurrence of invasive thymoma, 6 years
after thymectomy and immunosuppressive treatment. AQP4-IgG and ANNA-1 were present in the patient’s serum. Visual outcome was poor despite
immunosuppressive treatment. Longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis developed 27 months after the onset of visual symptoms. We have
reported a case of paraneoplastic NMO associated with both AQP4-IgG and ANNA-1 autoantibodies in an invasive thymoma patient. Thymoma is
associated with various paraneoplastic autoimmune disorders . However, there has been no report of paraneoplastic neuromyelitis optica (NMO)
associated with both anti-aquaporin-4 (APQ4) immunoglobulin G (IgG) and type 1 antineuronal nuclear antibody (ANNA-1) in an invasive thymoma
patient. We found a patient with invasive thymoma who developed bilateral progressive visual loss and showed circulating APQ4-IgG and ANNA-1
autoantibodies. Lower extremity weakness and tingling sense developed 27 months after the onset of visual symptoms, and she was finally
diagnosed as definite NMO. A 55-year-old woman showed a sudden onset of painless progressive vision loss in her right eye for 1 week. Six
years ago, she underwent thymectomy for invasive thymoma (WHO classification B2) followed by chemotherapy (adriamycin, cisplatin,
vincristine, and cyclophosphamide) and radiation therapy. The thymoma had completely regressed following chemoradiation, and no metastasis
or recurrence were detected during follow-up examinations.On ocular examination, her visual acuities were hand motion in the right eye and
20/20 in the left eye, with a relative afferent pupillary defect in the right eye. The anterior segment and media of both eyes were normal.
Intraocular pressure of both eyes were 14 mmHg. Ocular motility was normal without any pain during extraocular muscle movements. Ptosis or
exophthalmos were absent in either eye. Fundus examinations of the optic disc and retina were unremarkable. She could not recognize the
demonstration plate of Ishihara color vision test and any of the Hardy, Rand, and Rittler (HRR) color vision test with the right eye, but
could recognize all of the Ishihara color vision test and HRR color vision test with the left eye. Goldmann perimetry showed a small nasal
island in the right eye. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an abnormal contrast-enhancement of the right optic nerve extending to
the prechiasmatic portion, suggesting an acute inflammatory or demyelinating process (Figure 1). No treatment was administered owing to the
patient’s refusal. After 2 months, visual acuity and visual field defects of the right eye showed a further gradual deterioration without
recovery and the patient was lost to follow-up. Brain magnetic resonance imaging 1 week after clinical onset of visual loss in the right
eye. Axial fat saturated T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) (A) and contrast-enhanced T1WI (B) shows enhancement of the intraorbital portion of the
right optic nerve (white arrow). The patient returned to our hospital after 5 months, presenting with a sudden onset of visual acuity
decrease in the left eye for 1 week. In the right eye, she had visual acuity of light perception, and the visual acuity of the left eye had
reduced to 20/30 from 20/20. Color vision tests revealed a moderate red-green and blue-yellow color defect in the left eye. Visual field
testing revealed a generalized reduction of sensitivity and a cecocentral scotoma in the left eye. The anterior segment and media of both
eyes were normal. Funduscopy showed total pallor of the optic disc in the right eye, but a normal optic disc without edema or pallor in the
left eye. Visual evoked potentials were delayed in both eyes. MRI of the orbit and brain revealed high signal intensities of both optic
nerves on T2-weighted images and increased abnormal enhancement of the right optic nerve extending to the prechiasmatic portion. However,
there was no evidence of brain metastasis or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) seeding. Systemic evaluation was performed to investigate the
presence of malignancy; chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a 4.7-cm nodule in the left lower lobe and lung biopsy confirmed the
diagnosis of a malignant epithelial neoplasm with cytokeratin expression, no epithelial membrane antigen, no CD5 expression, and no
neuroendocrine marker expression. It was histopathologically similar to her prior thymoma and the possibility of recurrent thymoma was
considered. Whole body positron emission tomography showed no other areas of abnormal hypermetabolic lesions. Serological examination for
major paraneoplastic autoantibodies revealed the presence of APQ4-IgG and ANNA-1, while anti-Yo antibody, ANNA-2, anti-Ri, anti-
acetylcholine receptor antibodies, anti-recoverin, anti-alpha-enolase, and anti-collapsin response-mediator protein-5 (CRMP5) antibodies
were absent. Blood analysis, including erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, thyroid function tests, and angiotensin-
converting enzyme levels were within normal range, and tumor markers (CEA, CA19-9, and CA125) were absent. Microbiological tests were
negative for varicella zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, syphilis, and HIV. Antinuclear antibody, anti-double stranded DNA
and anticardiolipin antibodies were negative. Cytological examination of the CSF showed no abnormal findings, including oligoclonal bands.
Primary mutations for Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy of 11778/ND4, 3460/ND1, 14484/ND6 and 4171/ND1 were absent. On the basis of the
clinical presentation, neuroimaging, and presence of autoantibodies, her condition was diagnosed as NMO spectrum disorder associated with
invasive thymoma. Intravenous methylprednisolone was administered, followed by oral prednisolone (60 mg) and oral cyclosporine (600 mg)
daily for 2 weeks. However, her visual acuities continuously deteriorated to no light perception in the right eye and counting fingers in
the left eye. After 6 weeks of onset in her left eye, optical coherence tomography showed diffuse atrophy of the retinal nerve fiber layers
in both eyes, but the outer retina and photoreceptor layers were relatively intact. Standard electroretinograms (ERG) were normal in both
eyes, but multifocal ERG (mfERG) showed a decreased response in the macula of both eyes. Follow-up MRI examination revealed increased
abnormal enhancement of the left optic nerve. The patient received 6 cycles of chemotherapy with etoposide, paclitaxel, and prednisolone
over the next 6 months and was maintained with azathioprine. The left lower lung mass had regressed on follow-up chest CT; however, visual
acuities were unchanged. No evidence of tumor recurrence or neurologic signs of limb weakness and sensory abnormalities occurred up to
13 months after chemotherapy, when suddenly, she developed symptoms of lower limb weakness and tingling sense. Neurologic examination
revealed proximal dominant weakness in both lower extremities of grade 4. Tingling sense below sensory level T10 developed with
pain/temperature, vibration and positional sense hypesthesia. Whole spine MRI revealed longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis with
central T2 high signal intensity of the spinal cord from level T3/4 to T11. She was diagnosed as definite NMO and her myelitis improved
after administration of intravenous methylprednisolone. Thymoma has been associated with several immunologically mediated diseases, and
various paraneoplastic autoantibodies . Although rare, thymoma associated with visual symptoms has been reported in association with
paraneoplastic autoantibodies, such as cancer-associated retinopathy (CAR) with anti-retinal antibodies, paraneoplastic optic neuropathy
(PON) with anti-CRMP5 antibody, or NMO with AQP4-IgG . However, there has been no report of the combined presence of APQ4 and ANNA-1
autoantibodies. Our patient showed predominant involvement of the retinal ganglion cells associated with severe retinal nerve fiber layer
thinning, while the outer retina and photoreceptor layers were relatively intact. Standard ERG were normal in both eyes. MfERG responses
were slightly depressed in the center. However, for patients with poor fixation, the accuracy of mfERG results may be difficult to interpret
. Particularly, central mfERG amplitudes are most affected by unsteady fixation as in our patient. Therefore, there was no evidence to
suspect retinal abnormalities . The abnormal contrast-enhancement of the optic nerve on MRI suggested an inflammatory or demyelinating
pathology. APQ4-IgG is known to be highly specific for NMO with specificity reported up to 94% . An earlier study conducted before the
discovery of APQ4-IgG has reported central nervous system and thymic epithelial cell–specific antibodies in a patient with thymoma and
myasthenia gravis during the acute phase of NMO, suggesting that the NMO was linked to the thymoma . Transverse myelitis developed 2 years
after the onset of visual loss, which is not typical for definite NMO historically with a monophasic course of bilateral optic neuritis and
myelitis with short intervals between the index events . The long interval between events may be attributed to the long-term
immunosuppression and chemotherapy that may have decreased APQ4-IgG titers, thus preventing further relapse or development of myelitis
during the course of the disease. Weinshenker et al have reported the importance of serum AQP4-IgG in the disease progression of NMO
patients, and suggested that immunosuppressive treatment may lessen the chance of a second or subsequent attack of transverse myelitis even
before the clinical criteria for NMO are satisfied. On the other hand, Matiello et al have shown that after a median of 9 years of follow-
up, 50% of APQ4-IgG seropositive patients with initial optic neuritis may experience an episode of myelitis and fulfill the criteria of
denite NMO. Therefore, a longer follow-up for several years may reveal a subsequent myelopathy as in our case. A long-term follow-up of
serum autoantibodies as well as serial neurologic examinations is warranted in such cases. The clinical significance of APQ4-IgG associated
with cancer is unclear. APQ4-IgG was found to be associated with cancer in 0.004% of cases, including 1 thymoma patient screened for
paraneoplastic autoantibodies . Six of these patients had NMO spectrum disorders before or after cancer detection (3–18 months), whereas 2
did not have any neurological evidence of an NMO spectrum disorder . A previous study has also reported serum positive APQ4-IgG in a patient
with possible paraneoplastic NMO associated with lung cancer . Therefore, the clinical utility of this autoantibody as a cancer marker
warrants prospective investigation. ANNA-1 is recognized as an IgG marker for small-cell lung carcinoma, and has rarely been found in
thymoma patients with neurologic autoimmunity. The oncologic implication of ANNA-1 seropositivity has been shown in a previous report of 172
thymoma patients, where 3% of cases were positive for ANNA-1 . However, isolated visual symptoms have not been reported with ANNA-1, and
thus it may not be directly related to optic neuropathy. The presence of paraneoplastic NMO-associated serum APQ4-IgG alone may lead to a
poor visual prognosis which is refractory to immunosuppressive treatment. Thus, the implication of the coexistence of ANNA-1 remains to be
elucidated. Thymoma could be associated with paraneoplastic NMO with both APQ4-IgG and ANNA-1 autoantibodies. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. The work was carried out in collaboration
between all authors. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2415/14/106/prepub
