Neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas are rare neoplasms representing approximately 2% of all pancreatic tumors9. Due to the progress of
diagnostic imaging and radioimmunoassay, its diagnosis has become more frequent. Recent epidemiological studies suggest increased
frequency12. Among the functioning tumors, vipoma (tumor cells producing vasoactive intestinal polypeptide) is also known as WDHA syndrome
(watery diarrhea, hypokalaemia, and achlorhydria), Werner MorrisonÂ´s syndrome and pancreatic cholera; it is still rare neoplasia, mainly
characterized by profuse diarrhea with hydro-electrolytic disorders. It has an estimated incidence of 0,2 to 0,5 per million inhabitants per
year3. Approximately 90% of these tumors originate in the pancreas; however, there are descriptions located in other segments of the
gastrointestinal tract, bronchus, adrenal, sympathetic ganglia and liver. There are few cases described in the medical literature of extra-
pancreatic location in adults8. Due to its low incidence, it is unknown the true epidemiological data of this unique neoplasm. The objective
of this report is to present another case of extra-pancreatic vipoma. Man of 54 years old had for four months diarrhea, watery stools, often
in every three hours lasting 15 days; had 14 kg weight loss during this period, with asthenia, anorexia, malaise, muscle weakness and
cramps. Laboratory tests showed VIP (intestinal polypeptide active vessel) 242 pg/ml (<75); Na=138; K=1.6; and creatinine=1.53.
Ultrasonography showed hypoechoic image on segment IV of 4.2 cm, confirmed by CT with the presence of several hypervascular images in liver
segments IV, III, II (Figure 1). Ultrasonography guided biopsy was performed in one liver nodule that revealed metastatic neuroendocrine
carcinoma by immunohistochemistry. Laparotomy confirmed multiple liver metastases (Figure 2). Intraoperative ultrasonography showed nodule
in pancreatic body. Bodycaudal pancreatectomy with splenectomy (Figure 3) and left hepatic trisegmentectomy were performed (Figure 4). No
tumor was found in the pancreatic parenchyma. Histopathology showed acinar atrophy and hyperplasia of islets in the caudal region. In peri-
pancreatic adipose tissue was confirmed the presence of five nodes with well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma infiltrating the
adipose tissue adjacent the neoplastic infiltration beyond perineural and angiolymphatic (Figure 5). Hepatic lesions confirmed the diagnosis
of metastatic well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma. Immunohistochemical analysis showed positivity for sinaftofisin, chromogranin
and intestinal polypeptide active vessel (VIP). Ki-67 was positive in 10%. Patient had no major complications. There was immediate
regression of diarrhea and electrolyte abnormalities. After 12 months, returned again with the same initial clinical picture. Liver CT
images showed multiple metastatic nodulation diffusely distributed. Therapy with somatostatin analogue with prolonged action (LAR) and
chemotherapy with inhibitors of mTOR (everolimus) was started with regression of liver lesions and clinical symptoms. At the third year
postoperatively he was without clinical signs of disease recurrence. MRI shows lesions in multiple segments IV, III and II in the liver
(arrows) Intraoperative aspect of liver lesions (arrows) Surgical specimen showing the body, tail and peripancreatic nodule (arrow) Surgical
specimen, the product of the left hepatic trisegmentectomy Surgical specimen, aspect of the pancreatic parenchyma with peripancreatic nodule
(arrow) Although there is a previous report, this neoplasm was first described by Werner and Morrison in 1958 in two patients with profuse
diarrhea and hypokalemia associated with malignancy of non insulin-producing pancreatic islets. Its pathophysiological aspects were more
well-known since 1973, the time in which Bloom et al.2 associated WDHA syndrome with increased serum vasoactive intestinal polypeptide5, a
fact later confirmed by the studies of Kane et al.7 reproducing this syndrome after intravenous administration of VIP in five volunteers6.
It is an aminoacid peptide produced by the delta-2 pancreatic islet cells and is also present in the central and peripheral nervous system
and considered as a neurotransmitter. High concentrations are found in the gastrointestinal tract. Among its effects are described:
stimulation of the smooth muscles of the gastrointestinal tract; increasing intestinal and pancreatic secretions; vasodilation; inhibition
of gastric acid secretion; increased glycogenolysis and hypercalcemia4. Classically, vipomas present profuse diarrhea with consequent
electrolyte repercussions, weight loss, and, more rarely, skin lesions, tachycardia and low back pain. Relatively often, these patients are
initially investigated by a number of more common diseases whose main symptom is diarrhea. Much of this neoplasm originates in the pancreas
and is sporadic; but may also be associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia11. However, these tumors can arise in the ganglia of the
sympathetic nervous system, especially in children. Extra-pancreatic vipomas can be classified by their origin in neurogenic and non-
neurogenic, the latter very little reported in literature5. From the clinical, laboratory and histopathological findings, it is not possible
to differentiate neurogenic extra-pancreatic tumors. The neurogenic appears to have less severe clinical picture, lower VIP levels when
compared to gastrointestinal disturbances, lack of production of pancreatic polypeptide and histopathological different characteristics8.
The clinical diagnosis is confirmed by the increase in the level of serum VIP and radiological findings, mostly performed by computed
tomography or magnetic resonance, localizing the tumor in the pancreas topography in most cases, due to the fact that most of these tumors
have more than 3 cm. Likewise, more than 60% of these tumors have liver or lymph node metastasis at the time of diagnosis1. The therapeutic
approach is to initially control the electrolyte disturbances, use of somatostatin analogues and subsequently surgical approach. Similar to
others gastroenteroneuroendocrine diseases, also to other cancers, surgical resection is the best way to control the clinical symptoms and
prolong survival10; it also can be performed cytoreductive operation, resection of liver metastases and even liver transplantation. The
completion of adjuvant chemotherapy appears to play an important role in controlling the disease and have been described in addition to
biotherapy with somatostatin analogues for long-term use to increase survival with good quality of life6,9. In this patient, besides the
surgical treatment of liver metastases and the recurrence of the disease, there was considerable gain in life expectancy with the use of
adjuvant chemotherapy. Conflicts of interest: none Financial source: none
