Scoliosis is a complex genetic disorder of the musculoskeletal system, characterized by three-dimensional rotation of the spine. Curvatures
caused by malformed vertebrae (congenital scoliosis (CS)) are apparent at birth. Spinal curvatures with no underlying vertebral abnormality
(idiopathic scoliosis (IS)) most commonly manifest during adolescence. The genetic and biological mechanisms responsible for IS remain
poorly understood due largely to limited experimental models. Here we describe zygotic ptk7 (Zptk7) mutant zebrafish, deficient in a
critical regulator of Wnt signalling, as the first genetically defined developmental model of IS. We identify a novel sequence variant
within a single IS patient that disrupts PTK7 function, consistent with a role for dysregulated Wnt activity in disease pathogenesis.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that embryonic loss-of-gene function in maternal-zygotic ptk7 mutants (MZptk7) leads to vertebral anomalies
associated with CS. Our data suggest novel molecular origins of, and genetic links between, congenital and idiopathic forms of disease.
Scoliosis is a complex genetic disorder characterized by spinal curvature. Here, the authors present experimental zebrafish models of
idiopathic and congenital scoliosis and suggest a role for dysregulated Wnt activity in scoliosis aetiology. Scoliosis refers to spinal
curvature >10 degrees and can occur as a consequence of vertebral malformations, underlying congenital or juvenile disease, or with no
identifiable primary cause12. Scoliosis caused by congenital vertebral malformation (CVM) is referred to as congenital scoliosis (CS) and
affects 0.13–0.5 of 1,000 live human births13. CVMs like hemivertebrae, wedge-shaped vertebrae, vertebral fusions and/or vertebral bar can
exist throughout the spine and often impose severe deformity on affected individuals. In mammals, vertebral bodies are derived from
somites—periodic segments of paraxial mesoderm that form in pairs along the cranial-to-caudal axis in response to an internal ‘segmentation
clock’. Briefly, a molecular network of Notch, canonical Wnt/β-catenin and FGF signalling pathways generate travelling waves of gene
expression along the posterior body axis that drive rhythmic somite production from the presomitic mesoderm (PSM) (reviewed in ref. 4). To
date, most mutations associated with human CS disrupt Notch segmentation genes56789. However, the genetic basis of the majority of CVMs
remains unknown. The most prevalent forms of human spinal curvature are idiopathic (that is, with no underlying pathology). Idiopathic
scoliosis (IS) affects ~3% of children worldwide, with many individuals eventually requiring some form of clinical intervention110. IS
typically presents during adolescence as a three-dimensional rotation of the spine that has a propensity to increase in magnitude up to
sexual maturity. These deformities range in both severity and progression with a significant bias for severe curves in females1112. Familial
clustering and concordance among monozygotic twins indicates a primary genetic cause for IS (refs 13, 14) and genome-wide association
studies have identified polymorphisms associated with IS in divergent human populations151617. However, phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity
have typically made it difficult to define causative mutations in humans. Limitations inherent to the available developmental and genetic
animal models of scoliosis have slowed our basic understanding of IS pathogenesis1819. Fundamentally, scoliosis does not readily develop in
most laboratory animals and induction of IS-like deformities requires drastic surgical or systemic interventions that preclude relevance to
human disease18. Rodents are quadrupeds and the structure of their spine and centre of gravity are quite different from humans. Tellingly,
rodents only become susceptible to spinal curves when forced to walk upright2021, revealing the importance of biomechanics and spinal
loading during IS progression. Bipedalism has made induced chick models popular; however, in chick, anatomical restraints on spinal mobility
are likely protective and prevent the full range of spinal curvatures that can develop in humans22. In contrast, spinal deformity is
naturally common among teleosts, with nutritional, environmental and/or genetic factors associated with curvature in different species and
fish populations1223. Teleosts experience cranial-to-caudal spinal loads (similar to humans) that are generated as a function of swimming
forward through dense media/water coupled with caudal tail-propulsion. Thus, similar biomechanical forces along the spine may make fish more
susceptible to late-onset spinal curvatures12. Interestingly, heritable scoliosis-like phenotypes have been characterized in fish raising
the intriguing possibility that teleosts can effectively model human IS1223. However, the genetic lesions responsible for late-onset spinal
curvatures in these fish models have not yet been identified. We have previously reported the generation of protein tyrosine kinase 7 (ptk7)
mutant zebrafish (ptk7a, Ensembl Zv9; ref. 24). Ptk7 is an evolutionarily conserved atypical receptor tyrosine kinase that has been
implicated in vertebrate Wnt, Semaphorin/Plexin and VEGF signal transduction24252627282930. Our analysis of patterning and morphogenesis
defects in maternal-zygotic ptk7 mutant embryos (MZptk7), which demonstrate early and complete loss-of-gene function, revealed essential
roles for Ptk7 in regulating multiple branches of Wnt signal transduction24. Specifically, we demonstrated a key role for Ptk7 in
potentiating non-canonical Wnt/planar cell polarity (PCP) signals that coordinate polarized cell movements to shape the body axis during
gastrulation and neurulation31, as well as negatively regulating canonical Wnt/β-catenin activity24. Remarkably, embryonic defects are fully
rescued in Zptk7 mutant embryos, highlighting an important role for early maternal gene function in developmental patterning and
morphogenesis. In this study we characterize Zptk7 and MZptk7 mutant zebrafish as functional models of idiopathic and congenital scoliosis,
respectively. We demonstrate that zygotic ptk7 mutant fish display fully penetrant late-onset spinal curvature that is not associated with
vertebral malformations, is sexually dimorphic and variable in both time of onset and severity. Our work thus establishes Zptk7 mutant
zebrafish as the first genetically defined developmental model of human IS. Moreover, we demonstrate that a novel PTK7 mutation identified
in a single human IS patient disrupts both PCP and Wnt/β-catenin signalling, further suggesting that dysregulated Wnt activity may
contribute to disease. Conversely, early loss of Ptk7 function in MZptk7 mutant larvae results in CS-like vertebral malformations. These
CVMs may be attributed to earlier defects in segmentation caused by PCP and Wnt/β-catenin signalling defects. Together, our data suggests a
genetic link between CS and IS and highlights the utility of zebrafish for modelling human spinal deformities. Zptk7 mutant embryos do not
show defects in embryonic patterning or morphogenesis, as maternal Ptk7 is sufficient to rescue early development24. However, at late larval
and early juvenile stages, all Zptk7 mutant fish develop scoliosis with spinal curvatures of variable magnitude observed in both the
sagittal and coronal axes (Fig. 1a,b). In zebrafish, spinal deformities can often be caused by Pseudolomoa neurophilia, Aeromonas
hydrophila, and mycobacterium spp. infection. To determine whether observed scoliosis was secondary to an infectious agent, Zptk7 mutant
fish with severe spinal curvatures were sent to the Zebrafish International Resource Center Health Services (Eugene, Oregon) for
histopathology. All samples tested negative for infection, indicating a more direct link between ptk7 mutation and spinal curve development.
To determine whether observed scoliosis resulted from CVMs, vertebrae formation was imaged in Zptk7 mutant and control animals using calcein
stain (a vital, fluorescent calcium-binding chromophore)32. Larvae were analyzed at 4, 4.5 and 6.0 mm standard length. No defects in
vertebral patterning or formation were observed in Zptk7 mutants (n=33) compared with ptk7/+ siblings (n=40; Fig. 2a–f). High-resolution
micron-scale computed tomography (microCT) was then performed to further examine spinal curvature and vertebral structure in Zptk7 mutant
zebrafish. Three-dimensional skeletal reconstructions of 12 Zptk7 mutant adults and 3 ptk7/+ siblings revealed the profound late-onset
curvatures typical of mutant fish and confirmed that abnormal vertebral patterning is not a general aspect of the Zptk7 mutant phenotype
(Fig. 1i,m; Supplementary Movies 1–5). To characterize vertebral shape changes, we measured the length of individual thoracic and tail
vertebrae along the dorsal, ventral, left and right sides. We calculated dorsal:ventral and left:right length ratios to assess possible
length asymmetries in the dorso-ventral and medio-lateral planes, respectively. Asymmetric or ‘wedge-shaped’ vertebral distortions were
associated with the apex of spinal curves in adult fish, consistent with human IS where vertebrae become misshapen with disease progression
(Fig. 2g,h)33343536. The affected vertebrae occurred throughout the trunk and tail with no strong positional bias (Fig. 2i,j). Analysis of
vertebral bone density revealed no significant difference between Zptk7 mutant and ptk7/+ animals (Fig. 2k–m). To pinpoint the onset of
scoliosis in mutant animals, the length and physical appearance of ptk7/+ and Zptk7 mutant larvae were closely monitored over the first 6
weeks of life (Fig. 3a). Curve onset could first be detected in Zptk7 mutants at 8 mm standard length (~28 days post fertilization (dpf)),
as fish began to exhibit mild body distortions (n=18/23, 78%; Fig. 3e) associated with sagittal curvature of the spine (as confirmed by
microCT, Fig. 3f). Of note, curve development correlated with the onset of a period of accelerated growth (Fig. 3a). By 1.2 mm standard
length (~40 dpf) all Zptk7 mutants displayed obvious axial curvatures, with some showing three-dimensional rotations (n=5/23; Fig. 3m) that
increased in magnitude up to late juvenile stages. Curve severity did not visibly progress after sexual maturity (~3 months of age) and
adult fish could be grouped into four classes (type 1–4) based on increasing magnitude of spinal curvatures (Fig. 1c–m)37. Notably, female
Zptk7 mutants demonstrated a clear bias towards severe curves (93%, n=58; Fig. 1c). Late-onset spinal curvatures of Zptk7 mutant zebrafish
thus closely model the defining attributes of human adolescent IS. To investigate the mutational burden that PTK7 may contribute to human
IS, we Sanger sequenced PTK7 coding exons of 96 human IS samples and identified four distinct missense variants (Supplementary Table 1). Two
missense variants were rare (<1% frequency in public databases). We genotyped the two variants, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
rs34021075 and rs34865794 in a follow-up cohort of 755 non-Hispanic white (NHW) cases and 1,392 NHW controls, but neither was significantly
associated with IS independently or in combination (Supplementary Table 2). Of particular interest was a novel heterozygous PTK7 sequence
variant identified in a single IS patient and his father (who did not display spinal deformity). The patient, a 15-year-old male of Asian
descent, presented with typical features of IS, a 49 degree right thoracic curve and no other associated clinical findings (Fig. 4a). His
curve eventually progressed and required corrective surgery. The PTK7 missense variant occurred in exon 11, predicting a proline to alanine
substitution (PTK7P545A) within an evolutionarily conserved residue of the sixth extracellular Ig loop. This mutation was novel, as it was
not found in any public database (for example, dbSNP or the NHLBI exome variant server), nor in our in-house exome sequencing controls. The
variant was also not present in 1,030 additional IS cases and 400 genotyped controls. We have previously shown that the extracellular domain
of zebrafish Ptk7 is essential for its role in Wnt signal transduction24. To determine the functional consequence of the PTK7P545A mutation
in vivo, we compared the activity of both wild-type (WT) and mutant isoforms following messenger RNA (mRNA) injection into zebrafish
embryos. In western blots of whole embryo lysates, PTK7P545A accumulated at greater levels than WT, suggesting increased stability and/or
differential modification of PTK7P545A protein (Fig. 4b,c; Supplementary Fig. 1). Similarly, membrane localization of yellow fluorescent
protein-tagged PTK7P545A was dramatically increased compared with WT PTK7 (normalized to co-injected membrane-localized monomeric red
fluorescent protein, Fig. 4d–i), suggesting that the P545A variation affects trafficking and/or turnover of PTK7 at the plasma membrane.
Injection of full length zebrafish ptk7 mRNA into one-cell staged MZptk7 mutant embryos can rescue patterning and morphogenesis defects
associated with dysregulated Wnt signalling24. To determine how the P545A variant affects PTK7 function, we performed similar rescue assays
using human PTK7 mRNA. Strikingly, although injection of 100 pg of WT PTK7 mRNA into one-cell staged embryos significantly rescued PCP-
mediated axial extension defects of MZptk7 mutants, injection of equal amounts of PTK7P545A mRNA had no effect (Fig. 4j–l). This data
indicates that the P545A PTK7 mutation disrupts its non-canonical Wnt/PCP signalling activity. Similarly, injection of WT PTK7 mRNA could
rescue central nervous system patterning defects caused by wnt8 overexpression (loss of eyes and reduced forebrain at 36 hours post
fertilization (hpf)). However, injection of equal amounts of PTK7P545A mRNA failed to rescue, indicating that the P545A variant also
significantly disrupts PTK7 function in inhibiting canonical Wnt/β-catenin activity (Fig. 4m–p). Together, these data suggest that the P545A
variant is a hypomorphic allele of PTK7. Although pathogenesis of the PTK7P545A variant in IS remains uncertain, our results highlight the
utility of the zebrafish model for investigating the functional consequence of IS-associated PTK7 mutations in vivo. To further investigate
the function of Ptk7 in spine morphogenesis, we analyzed vertebrae formation in MZptk7 mutant fish, which demonstrate loss-of-gene function
at the earliest stages of embryogenesis24. Strikingly, unlike Zptk7 mutants, MZptk7 larvae displayed severe congenital vertebral
abnormalities at 4.8 mm standard length, including missing or smaller vertebral segments, hemivertebrae and/or vertebral fusions (Fig. 5a).
The majority of MZptk7 mutant larvae die before their vertebrae are fully mineralized. Therefore, to determine the role for Ptk7 in later
aspects of vertebral patterning, we generated genetic chimeras. Briefly, 100–200 MZptk7 mutant cells were transplanted into the ventral
domain of shield stage WT embryos (Fig. 5b), which is fated to contribute to multiple lineages of the trunk and tail, including spinal cord
and vertebrae38. We screened host embryos at 24 hpf for significant MZptk7 cell contribution within the embryonic tail (Fig. 5c), and raised
chimeric zebrafish to larval stages. At 6.2–6.5 mm standard length, calcein staining revealed multiple vertebral malformations in ~27% of
chimeric larvae, including smaller and irregularly shaped vertebral bodies and mislocated sclerotome-derived vertebral spines (n=8/30, Fig.
5e). These results indicate that chimeric loss of ptk7 in the tail is sufficient to disrupt vertebral patterning at later stages of
development. Transplantation of WT cells into a WT embryonic tail bud did not affect vertebral patterning (n=42, Fig. 5d), indicating that
observed phenotypes were specific to loss of ptk7. CVMs are a hallmark of CS, and are thought to arise during early embryogenesis as a
result of abnormal segmentation and somite formation339. To determine whether segmentation is disrupted in MZptk7 mutant embryos, we
performed in situ hybridization of her7 and dlc (direct reporters of the Notch segmentation mechanism and nascent somite differentiation)40
within the PSM of 18–20 somite-staged MZptk7 mutant embryos, looking for possible irregularities in gene expression. The PSM domain was
broader and expanded relative to total body length in MZptk7 mutants, consistent with a role for Ptk7 in tail-bud patterning and
morphogenesis24. Of note, although her7 (n=24) and dlc (n=18) gene expression appeared to oscillate normally in MZptk7 mutant embryos (Fig.
6a,b), occasional irregularities in the symmetry of gene expression were observed (n=9/24 in her7; Fig. 6a), indicating possible defects in
somite patterning. Strikingly, myoD and Xirp2a (ref. 41) expression analysis revealed severe defects in the regular morphology and spacing
of the somites in MZptk7 mutants, as well as somite fusions (Fig. 6c–f). Visualization of pax9 gene expression also revealed abnormalities
in the regular pattern of sclerotome in MZptk7 mutants (Fig. 6g,h), consistent with abnormal somite patterning. Importantly, we did not
observe segmentation defects in Zptk7 mutant embryos (Fig. 7). This indicates that maternally derived ptk7 gene product (present at the one-
cell stage) is sufficient to rescue somitogenesis in Zptk7 mutant zebrafish. More importantly, since maternal ptk7 is not expected to
persist beyond early embryonic stages42, our data strongly suggest that CVMs observed in MZptk7 mutants are directly linked to early
embryonic defects in patterning and morphogenesis. It is well-understood that Wnt/β-catenin signalling within the PSM is required for axial
segmentation434445. Since MZptk7 display activated Wnt/β-catenin signalling in the embryonic tailbud24, we treated WT embryos with the
canonical Wnt/β-catenin agonists LiCl46 or 6-bromoindirubin-3′-oxime (BIO)47 throughout somitogenesis to determine the consequence on
segmentation and vertebral patterning. Both regiments resulted in somite boundary defects at 40 hpf (Fig. 8a,b) as well as smaller and/or
fused vertebral segments at larval stages (Fig. 8c,d), which closely phenocopied MZptk7 mutant animals. Ptk7 is also required for non-
canonical Wnt/PCP signalling. Although previous studies suggest that somite segmentation is unaffected in PCP mutant zebrafish48, our
analysis of 40 hpf vangl2 mutant embryos (also known as trilobite, deficient for a core and specific regulator of PCP signal transduction)49
revealed segmentation defects that were similar to MZptk7 animals (n=8/8, Fig. 8e). Furthermore, injection of Xdd1 mRNA (a dominant-negative
Dishevelled construct that specifically disrupts PCP)50 produced similar phenotypes (n=15/18; Fig. 8f). vangl2 mutant and Xdd1-injected
embryos both die before mineralized vertebrae can be visualized. Therefore, to determine the consequence of abnormal PCP on vertebrae
formation, we transplanted mutant cells into the tail bud of WT host embryos and scored vertebral development at larval stages. Both
MZvangl2 mutant and Xdd1-injected chimeras (n=8/12 and 9/16, respectively) demonstrated malformed vertebral centra and/or vertebral arches
analogous to those observed in MZptk7 mutant larvae (Fig. 8g,h). Therefore, our data indicates that defects in both PCP and Wnt/β-catenin
signalling can contribute to segmentation defects and vertebral malformations, suggesting novel genetic and developmental etiologies of CS.
Ptk7 is a key regulator of canonical Wnt/β-catenin and non-canonical Wnt/PCP signalling activity and is required for vertebrate embryonic
patterning and morphogenesis242628. However, maternal rescue of early developmental abnormalities in Zptk7 mutant zebrafish reveals an
important later requirement in spine morphogenesis. As demonstrated, Zptk7 mutant zebrafish develop fully penetrant, late-onset, three-
dimensional curvatures of the spine at late larval/early juvenile stages—a period associated with accelerated growth. Females demonstrate a
strong bias for severe curves, which can progress in magnitude until sexual maturity. Zptk7 mutant phenotypes thus closely model defining
attributes of human adolescent IS. As stated, while IS has been difficult to model in more conventional lab animals, spinal curvature is a
common phenotype among fish2351. It has been postulated that cranial-to-caudal spinal loads generated by teleost locomotion mimic
biomechanical forces and spinal loads resulting from human upright posture—a contributing factor in IS development and progression. Indeed a
number of heritable late-onset scoliosis models have been reported in fish3752, although genetic lesions responsible for these phenotypes
have not yet been identified. Zptk7 mutant zebrafish thus represent the first genetically defined developmental model of human IS. A
comprehensive investigation into the contribution of PTK7 mutations in human IS is yet to be performed. However, conservation of Ptk7
function between zebrafish and humans allowed us to directly assess the consequence of a novel PTK7 sequence variant identified in a single
IS patient. Remarkably, the PTK7P545A allele disrupts both canonical Wnt/β-catenin and non-canonical Wnt/PCP signalling activity, consistent
with a role for dysregulated Wnt signalling in IS. Ptk7 is known to interact with Wnt ligands, Frizzled 7 and LRP6 co-receptors285354,
suggesting that PTK7 is a functional component of the Wnt receptor complex. Since receptor complex endocytosis is an essential component of
both Wnt/PCP and Wnt/β-catenin signal activation555657, observed increases in PTK7P545A plasma membrane localization suggest that the P545A
variant could disrupt Wnt signalling by altering complex trafficking. Pathogenesis of the PTK7P545A variant in IS remains to be determined.
Despite strong conservation of the PTK7 P545 residue among mammals, it is not conserved in zebrafish confounding requisite ‘knock-in’
studies. Nevertheless, our functional and genetic results suggest that PTK7 and other Wnt signalling pathway members warrant further re-
sequencing in large IS cohorts. Unexpectedly, maternal-zygoticptk7 mutant larvae develop vertebral malformations typically associated with
CS. Although canonical Wnt/β-catenin signalling activity has previously been implicated in segmentation344, we demonstrate that non-
canonical Wnt/PCP defects may also contribute to vertebral malformations and CS pathogenesis. Previous studies have correlated PCP-related
axial defects (neural tube disorders) with CVMs5859. Our analysis of Vangl2 mutant embryos and chimeras clearly show a direct role for PCP
in segmentation and vertebral patterning. Of interest, MZptk7 mutants did not exhibit severe misregulation or asymmetries in somite gene
patterning that are typically observed following disruption of core segmentation genes606162. However, mild abnormalities/asymmetries in PSM
domain morphology may be sufficient to cause the irregular somite defects observed during later stages of development. Consequently, the
MZptk7 mutant phenotype may be more reminiscent of non-syndromic mild or moderate cases of CS where individuals display relatively few CVMs
at irregular locations along the length of the spine3. To summarize, depending on the timing of loss of Ptk7 function, MZptk7 and Zptk7
mutant zebrafish develop distinct spinal deformities that model CS and IS, respectively (Fig. 9). Although CS and IS have long been
classified as distinct and separate disorders, a number of independent studies have reported an increased incidence of IS among the family
members of CS subjects56364. Our study thus provides further evidence that congenital and idiopathic forms of scoliosis may share a common
genetic basis. The biological relationship (if any) between CS and IS is yet to be determined. Although somite and vertebral patterning
defects are not observed in Zptk7 mutant embryos, it remains possible that subtle defects in segmentation may be later accentuated by
additional genetic or environmental cues. Alternatively, the underlying cause of IS may be completely distinct from CS. Ptk7, Wnt/PCP or
Wnt/β-catenin signalling have not previously been associated with human IS. However, since the genetics, biomechanics and physiology
underlying zebrafish and human development are conserved, shared biological mechanisms underlying spinal curve progression are likely.
Zebrafish ptk7 mutant models thus present unique opportunities for investigating the aetiology and pathogenesis of IS and CS, and promise to
yield fundamental insights into the developmental, cellular and molecular origins of disease. Established zebrafish husbandry protocols were
adhered to and all protocols were performed in accordance with Canadian Council on Animal Care (CCAC) guidelines. MZptk7 and Zptk7 (hsc9)
were generated as previously described24. The vangl2 mutant allele tri(tk50f) contains a deletion in the vangl2 coding sequence49. Fish were
staged based on standard body length, except in the case of MZptk7 mutant larvae, which were staged based on external anatomy and vital
staining65. Adult zebrafish were fixed for 1 week in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4 °C followed by two, 1 h washes with phosphate-buffered saline
with 0.1% Tween 20 (PBST). Fish were stained with 0.01% Alizarin red (Sigma) in 1% KOH for 1 week and washed in PBST for 3 days (1 wash/day)
Tissues were cleared in 0.5% trypsin digestion for 1 day followed by multiple washes with PBST. The skin was manually removed and the
skeleton was imaged on a Leica MZ16 dissecting scope using AxioVision (Zeiss) software. Zebrafish larvae were incubated in 0.2% Calcein
(Sigma), pH 7.5 for 15 min and washed twice in system water. Larvae were immobilized using 0.003% Tricaine (Sigma) and mounted in 3% methyl
cellulose. Imaging was performed on an Axio Imager.M1 (Zeiss) compound microscope. Adult zebrafish were fixed in 10% neutral-buffered
formalin for 1 week and mounted in 1% low-melt agarose (Sigma) in a plastic vial. Specimens were scanned for 1 h using SkyScan1172 high
resolution Micro-CTanner (Bruker micro-CT, Belgium) with the X-ray power at 45 kVp and 218 μA. All three-dimensional Micro-CT data sets were
reconstructed with 18 μm isotropic resolution. The images were then analyzed using Amira software (TGS Inc., Berlin, Germany) WT human PTK7
was cloned from MGC clone:30347652 using primers: forward 5′- GGGGACAAGTTTGTACAAAAAAGCAGGCTTCGCCACCATGGGAGCTGCGCGGGGATC -3′ and reverse 5′-
GGGACCACTTTGTACAAGAAAGCTGGGTGTCACGGCTTGCTGTCCACGGTG -3′. PTK7P545A was cloned a in two fragments using primers: forward1 5′-
ATGGGAGCTGCGCGGGGATC -3′, reverse1 5′- CACTCTGCGAGGCTGCTC -3′, and forward2 5′- GCAGAGTGGGTGACAGACAA -3′, reverse2 5′ TCACGGCTTGCTGTCCACGGTG
3′ and assembled by PCR (10 cycles of annealing and extension without primers followed by 30 cycles using WT human PTK7 forward and reverse
primers). Both PTK7 and PTK7P545A were inserted into pCS2+ expression vectors (plasmid 22423: pCSDEST, ADDGENE) using Gateway technology
(Invitrogen). All mRNA was transcribed using the mMESSAGE mMACHINE System (Ambion) and was injected at the one-cell stage. All research
subjects included in the PTK7 re-sequencing study provided written informed consent to participate as approved by the University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center Institutional Review Board. Twenty coding exons of PTK7 were PCR amplified from 96 IS samples as described in
the text and sequenced by the Sanger method (oligonucleotide primer sequences and PCR conditions available on request). This identified four
nonsynonymous changes. Two highly conserved nonsynonymous SNPs, SNPs rs34021075 and rs34865794, were genotyped by Taqman assay in 736 IS NHW
cases and 740 NHW controls and tested for allelic association with IS. MZptk7, MZvangl2 or Xdd1mRNA-injected cells were labelled with
rhodamine dextran (red 10,000 MW, Sigma) by injections at the one-cell stage. Labelled cells were transplanted from sphere (4 hpf) stage
embryos into the ventral margin of unlabelled WT hosts at shield stage (6 hpf) as previously described38. Embryos were screened at 24 hpf on
an Axio Imager.M1 (Zeiss) compound microscope and embryos containing significant rhodamine-labelled cells (mutant/Xdd1 cells) in the
embryonic tail were grown to larval stages. MyoD (ref. 66), krox20 (ref. 67), her7 (ref. 68), and dlc (ref. 40) plasmids were obtained.
Ripply1 and Xirp2a were cloned from an embryonic complementary DNA library made from total RNA using oligo(dT)12–18 primer (Invitrogen) and
SuperscriptII reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) as per manufacturer’s instructions. The following primers were used: ripply1 forward 5′-
GGGACAAGTTTGTACAAAAAGCAGGCTTCATGAATTCTGTGTGCTTTGCCA -3′, reverse 5′- GGGGACCACTTTGTACAAGAAAGCTGGGTGGTTGAAAGCTGTGAAGTGACT -3′, and Xirp2a
forward 5′- GGGGACAAGTTTGTACAAAAAAGCAGGCTTCAGAGAGCATCCAGGCCACTA -3′, reverse 5′- GGGGACCACTTTGTACAAGAAAGCTGGGTGGGCCACACGACTGCAATTTT -3′. PCR
products were inserted into pDONR221 vectors (Invitrogen) using Gateway technology (Invitrogen) and linearized using Apa1 restriction
endonuclease. All antisense RNA probes were prepared by in vitro transcription (DIG RNA Labeling Kit, Roche) in the presence of
digoxigenin-11-UTP from linearized DNA templates. Embryos were either fixed and flat mounted in 80% glycerol or cleared in 100% methanol,
mounted in benzylbenzoate:benzylalcohol (2:1) and imaged on an Axio Imager.M1 (Zeiss) compound microscope. Embryos were incubated in 10 μM
LiCl (Sigma) or 10 μM BIO (Sigma) from bud stage (10 hpf) until 24 hpf, washed in system water and grown to larval stages for vertebrae
analysis. Embryos were incubated in 0.1 M LiCl or 100 μM BIO from late somite stages until 24 hpf, washed in system water and fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde for WISH. Zebrafish embryos were deyolked69, followed by lysis in 1% NP-40 protein lysis buffer. Protein was denatured
using β-mercaptoethanol buffer at 95 °C for 10 min, and separated on an 8% SDS–PAGE gel. PTK7 was detected using goat anti-human PTK7
antibody (LSBio) and mouse anti-actin (Sigma) was used as a loading control. Live embryos were immobilized on a coverslip in 1% agarose, and
imaged using a Zeiss LSM 710 microscope. Z-stacks were collected and processed using ImageJ software. M. Hayes and B.C. were involved in the
conception, design, zebrafish experimentation and analysis. X.G., C.A.W. were involved in the human sample data collection, analysis and
interpretation. L.X.Y., M. Henkelman were involved in the microCT data collection. How to cite this article: Hayes, M. et al. ptk7 mutant
zebrafish models of congenital and idiopathic scoliosis implicate dysregulated Wnt signalling in disease. Nat. Commun. 5:4777 doi:
10.1038/ncomms5777 (2014). Supplementary Figure 1 and Supplementary Tables 1-2 Control Type 0. Three-dimensional microCT reconstruction
(18μm isotrophic resolution) of adult ptk7 heterozygous zebrafish. Type 1 spinal curve. Three-dimensional microCT reconstruction (18μm
isotrophic resolution) of adult Zptk7 mutant zebrafish representative of Type 1 spinal curvature. Type 1 curves are the mildest of those
observed in Zptk7. Type 2 spinal curve. Three-dimensional microCT reconstruction (18μm isotrophic resolution) of adult Zptk7 mutant
zebrafish representative of Type 2 spinal curvatures. Type 2 curves are moderate and primarily localized to the tail Type 3 spinal curve.
Three-dimensional microCT reconstruction (18μm isotrophic resolution) of adult Zptk7 mutant zebrafish representative of Type 3 spinal
curvatures. Type 3 curves are progressed with both trunk and tail regions affected. Mild mediolateral rotations are also observed. Type 4
spinal curve. Three-dimensional microCT reconstruction (18μm isotrophic resolution) of adult Zptk7 mutant zebrafish representative of Type 4
spinal curvatures. Type 4 curves are severe with extreme trunk, tail and mediolateral rotations. We gratefully acknowledge Dr Benjamin Alman
for helpful discussion, and Angela Morley and Allen Ng for excellent zebrafish care. This work was supported in part by funding from the
Canada Research Chairs program, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (MOP-111075) and the March of Dimes Foundation (#1-FY13-398) to
B.C.; the National Institutes of Health (R01 HD052973), the Crystal Charity Ball and the TSRHC Research Fund to C.A.W.; and a CIHR Doctoral
Research Award to M.H. (a,b) Lateral views of trunk and tail skeleton stained with alizarin red for (a) ptk7/+ and (b) zygotic ptk7 (Zptk7)
mutant male zebrafish at ~6 months of age. Scale bars, 1 mm. (c) Graph depicting phenotypic and gender distributions for type 1–4
classification based on curve severity at sexual maturity (~3 months of age). Quantification is represented as a percentage of the total for
male (n=92) and female (n=58) zebrafish. (d–h) Adult ptk7/+ and Zptk7 mutant zebrafish representative of each curve severity class: (d)
unaffected ptk7 heterozygote zebrafish (type 0); (e) mild curvature (type 1); (f) moderate curvature (type 2) primarily isolated to the
tail; (g) progressed curvature (type 3) with trunk, tail and mild medio-lateral rotations; (h) severe curvature (type 4) with extreme trunk,
tail and medio-lateral rotations. Scale bars, 1 mm. (i–m) Lateral and (i′–m′) dorsal views of three-dimensional microCT renderings of adult
(i) ptk7 heterozygote as well as (j) type 1, (k) type 2, (l) type 3 and (m) type 4 Zptk7 mutant zebrafish. (a–f) Live calcein staining of
(a,b) 4 mm, (c,d) 4.5 mm and (e,f) 6.0 mm (a,c,e) ptk7 heterozygote and (b,d,f) zygotic ptk7 (Zptk7) mutant larvae. All scale bars, 0.5 mm.
(g,h) Lateral views of caudal vertebrae from three-dimensional microCT renderings of adult (g) ptk7 heterozygote and (h) Zptk7 mutant
zebrafish. Ptk7 mutant vertebrae display a wedge-shaped morphology at the apex of curves. (i,j) Graphs depicting dorsal:ventral and
left:right length ratios of trunk and tail vertebrae in ptk7 heterozygote (i; n=3) and Zptk7 mutant (j; n=12) zebrafish. To characterize
vertebral shape changes, we measured the length of individual thoracic and tail vertebrae along the dorsal, ventral, left and right sides.
We calculated dorsal:ventral and left:right length ratios to assess possible length asymmetries in the dorso-ventral and medio-lateral
planes, respectively. Horizontal dotted lines demarcate arbitrary±0.1, determined by the maximum deviation from 1 in ptk7 heterozygote
controls and used to illustrate the deviation of Zptk7 vertebrae from normal. Deviation from 1±0.1 is evident at multiple vertebrae in three
dimensions along the entire length of the spine. Type 1–4 Zptk7 mutants are grouped by point colour, and each individual fish is represented
by a unique point shape and colour. The graph’s horizontal axis spans anterior (A) to posterior (P), from the first abdominal vertebrae to
the last caudal vertebrae. The Weberian and caudal tail vertebrae were excluded from our analysis. (k,l) Maximum intensity projections (MIP)
in the cranio–caudal direction from high-resolution micro-computed tomography (microCT) of (k) ptk7/+ and (l) Zptk7 mutant zebrafish. Dorsal
is up and ventral is down. (m) Quantification of maximum pixel intensity corrected for background intensity to infer approximate bone
density in ptk7/+ (n=3) and Zptk7 (n=12) zebrafish. Maximum pixel intensities of the vertebrae were extracted from MIPs made from 10
sequential microCT slices. Three locations from trunk to tail were quantified and averaged for each fish. Error bars represent standard
deviation. NS, not significant. (a) Graph depicting standard body length measurements65 of Zptk7 and ptk7/+ larvae during the first 42 days
of development (sample numbers: 6 dpf=16, 14 dpf=89, 17 dpf=72, 20 dpf=51, 22 dpf=48, 24 dpf=47, 28 dpf=48, 35 dpf=48, 42 dpf=40). Zptk7
began to display axial curves at 8 mm standard body length (red arrow) and curves progress through to juvenile stages, which represents a
time of accelerated growth (orange box). After 8 mm standard body length, Zptk7 mutant juveniles were not included as axial curvatures
prevented accurate measurements. Data points represent average body length and error bars represent standard deviation. (b–d) ptk7/+ and
(e–g) Zptk7 mutant zebrafish at 8 mm standard body length. (h–j) ptk7/+ and (k–m) Zptk7 mutant zebrafish at 12 mm body length. Scale bars,
1 mm. (c,f,i,l) Lateral and (d,g,j,m) dorsal views of three-dimensional microCT renderings of (c,d,i,j) ptk7/+ and (f,g,l,m) Zptk7 mutants.
At the time of onset, Zptk7 mutants display sagittal spinal curves (arrows in f) that can increase in severity to three-dimensional
scoliosis (medio-lateral deviation, arrow in m). (a) Patient X-ray. (b) Human PTK7 in total cell lysates made from uninjected wild-type (WT)
shield-staged zebrafish embryos, or WT embryos injected at the one-cell stage with 250 pg of either PTK7 or PTK7P545A mRNA. Actin is used as
a loading control. (c) Quantification of relative PTK7 and PTK7P545A protein levels (n=3, **P=0.0036). Protein levels were normalized to
actin and PTK7 was set to 1. (d–i) Confocal images of the animal cap of embryos at 60% epiboly co-injected at the one-cell stage with
membrane-localized monomeric red fluorescent protein (membrane RFP)70 and either yellow fluorescent protein (YFP)-tagged PTK7 (250 pg) or
PTK7P545A (250 pg) mRNA. Scale bars, 200 μm. Co-expressed (d) membrane RFP and (e–f) YFP-PTK7 visualized at (e) low (720 V) and (f) high
(920 V) intensity. Co-expressed (g) membrane RFP and (h) YFP–PTK7P545A at low (720 V) and (g) high (920 V) intensity. Numerical values
represent average membrane YFP intensity normalized to membrane RFP fluorescent intensity (low P<0.001, high P<0.001; n=60 for each sample).
At high (920 V) intensity the YFP–PTK7P545A signal was above saturation. Lateral views of (j) MZptk7 and (k) MZptk7 embryos injected with
PTK7 (100 pg) mRNA at 24 hpf. Scale bars, 200 μm. (l) Quantification of tail length (mm) at 24 hpf measured from the base of the yolk
extension to the tail tip in MZptk7 mutant embryos (n=13) or MZptk7 mutant embryos injected with 100 pg of either PTK7 (n=58) or PTK7P545A
(n=60) mRNA. The bottom and top of each box represent the first and third quartile, respectively; central line represents the median; bars
represent the minimum and maximum tail lengths. PTK7 rescues tail extension defects in MZptk7 (***P<0.0001, Student’s t-test). PTK7P545A
mRNA (100 pg) has no effect on axial extension, suggesting reduced PCP signalling activity. (m–p) Over-expression of wnt8 disrupts central
nervous system pattern, demonstrated by loss of eyes and reduced forebrain. Lateral views of 48 hpf (m) WT embryos and embryos injected with
(n) wnt8 (10 pg) or (o) wnt8 (10 pg) plus PTK7 (250 pg) mRNA. Co-injection of PTK7 (250 pg) mRNA rescues wnt8-induced phenotypes. (p)
Quantification of phenotypes observed with injection of wnt8 (10 pg) mRNA, and with co-injection of wnt8 with PTK7 (250 pg) or PTK7P545A
(250 pg) mRNA. Embryos were scored as being ‘eyeless’ only if the eye was completely absent. PTK7P545A is less efficient than PTK7 at
rescuing wnt8-induced phenotypes, indicating reduced activity in Wnt/β-catenin inhibition. NS, not significant. (a) Live calcein staining of
WT and MZptk7 larvae at wild-type 4.8 mm standard length. Insets highlight representative vertebral malformations present in MZptk7 mutants.
Asterisks and arrowheads highlight missing and hemivertebrae, respectively. Bracket highlights vertebral fusions. Hashtags highlight smaller
vertebral segments. Scale bars, 0.5 mm. (b) Transplant strategy used to generate chimeric zebrafish for late larval-stage analysis. MZptk7
cells were labelled with rhodamine red and transplanted at 4 hpf into the ventral marginal zone (fated to become the embryonic tail bud) of
shield stage (6 hpf) unlabelled wild-type embryos.38 (c) Lateral view of 24 hpf chimeric embryo with fluorescently labelled MZptk7 mutant
cells present in the tail of an otherwise wild-type embryo. (d) Lateral views of caudal vertebrae in a control chimeric larvae and (e) in an
MZptk7 chimeric larva at 6.2–6.5 mm standard length. MZptk7 cell contribution to the tail leads to vertebral malformations in otherwise
wild-type larvae. Arrowheads highlight multiple abnormal vertebrae. Asterisks highlight mislocated vertebral spines (sclerotome derived).
Scale bars, 100 μm. (a,b) Whole-mount in situ hybridization (WISH) of somite patterning gene expression at the 18–20 somite stage. All
images are posterior views with the embryonic tail bud pointing towards the bottom of the field of view. WT and MZptk7 mutant embryos
stained for (a) her7, (b) dlc expression. The expression domains of these markers is expanded within MZptk7 mutants consistent with PSM
morphogenetic defects24. Arrowhead in a highlights anterior domain asymmetry in one MZptk7 mutant embryo. Scale bars, 50 μm. (c,d) myoD
(somite) staining in (c) WT and (d) MZptk7 embryos to visualize segmentation during somitogenesis. MZptk7 display defects in the regular
spacing and morphology of the somites at this stage. Scale bars, 100 μm. (e,f) Lateral view of WISH for Xirp2a expression to mark somite
boarders41 in (e) WT and (f) MZptk7 mutant embryos at 40 hpf. The horizontal brackets and asterisks highlight examples of somite fusions.
Defects in the shape and size of the somites are also apparent in MZptk7 mutants. Scale bars, 100 μm. (g,h) pax9 expression in (g) WT and
(h) MZptk7 mutant embryos to visualize sclerotome. Scale bars, 100 μm. (a) her7 and (b) dlc expression in ptk7/+ and Zptk7 mutant embryos at
the 18–20 somite stage. No obvious defects in somitogenesis exist in Zptk7 mutant embryos. Scale bars, 50 μm. (c,d) myoD (somite) staining
in (c) ptk7/+ and (d) Zptk7 embryos to visualize segmentation during somitogenesis. Scale bars, 100 μm. (e,f) Lateral view of WISH for
Xirp2a expression to mark somite boarders41 in (e) ptk7/+ and (f) Zptk7 mutant embryos at 40 hpf. Zptk7 do not display defects in embryonic
segmentation, indicating maternal rescue of the axial patterning defect. Scale bars, 100 μm. (a,b) Lateral view of whole-mount in situ
hybridization (WISH) at 40 hpf for Xirp2a expression to mark somite boundaries41 in embryos treated during mid-somitogenesis (10
somites—24 hpf) with canonical Wnt/β-catenin agonist (a) 0.1 M LiCl or (b) 10 μM BIO. Brackets highlight segmental fusions. Scale bars,
100 μm. (c,d) Lateral views of live calcein staining in 5–6 mm standard length wild-type larvae treated throughout somitogenesis (bud
stage—24 hpf) with (c) 10 μM LiCl or (d) 1 μM BIO. Scale bars, 100 μm. Activation of canonical Wnt/β-catenin signalling leads to vertebral
abnormalities phenotypically similar to MZptk7 loss-of-function including smaller vertebral segments (white asterisk) and/or vertebral
fusions (white bracket). (e,f) Lateral view of WISH for Xirp2a expression to mark somite boundaries41 in (e) vangl2 mutant embryos and (f)
embryos injected with Xdd1 (150 pg) mRNA. Asterisks highlight examples of somite fusions. Scale bars, 100 μm. Disruption of non-canonical
Wnt/PCP signalling results in defects in embryonic segmentation. (g,h) Lateral views of live calcein staining in wild-type host larvae at
6.2–6.5 mm standard length that were transplanted with (g) MZvangl2 mutant cells or (h) cells injected with Xdd1 (150 pg) mRNA.
Transplantation was performed to bypass early lethality of MZvangl2 mutants or Xdd1 overexpression. Donor cells were transplanted into the
ventral margin (future tail bud) of wild-type hosts.38 Scale bars, 100 μm. Disruption of non-canonical Wnt/PCP signalling in the tail-bud
region results in vertebral abnormalities phenotypically similar to MZptk7 loss-of-function, including smaller vertebral segments (black
asterisk), asymmetric (white bracket) or mislocated vertebral arches (white asterisk). Maternal ptk7 is deposited in the egg and drives
early development including Ptk7-dependent morphogenesis24 and segmentation. Loss of maternal (solid blue line) and zygotic ptk7 (solid red
line) leads to segmentation defects and vertebral malformations that recapitulate human CS. Zygotic loss of ptk7 leads to late-onset spinal
curvature with no underlying vertebral malformations that recapitulate human IS.
