Mucormycosis is an invasive mycotic disease caused by fungi in the zygomycetes class. Although ubiquitous in the environment, zygomycetes
are rarely known to cause invasive disease in immunocompromised hosts with a high mortality even under aggressive antifungal and surgical
therapy. Clinically, mucormycosis frequently affects the sinus occasionally showing pulmonary or cerebral involvement. However skeletal
manifestation with Rhizopus microsporus (RM) osteomyelitis leading to emergency surgical proximal femoral resection with fatal outcome has
not been described yet. We report the case of a 73-year-old male suffering from myelodysplastic syndrome with precedent bone marrow
transplantation. Six months after transplantation he consulted our internal medicine department in a septic condition with a four week
history of painful swelling of the right hip. Radiography, computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging revealed multiple bone
infarcts in both femurs. In the right femoral head, neck and trochanteric region a recent infarct showed massive secondary osteomyelitis,
breaking through the medial cortex. Emergency surgical proximal femoral resection was performed due to extensive bone and soft tissue
destruction. Microbiological and basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) analysis revealed RM. Amphotericin B and posaconazole treatment
with septic revision surgery was performed. However the disease ran a rapid course and was fatal two months after hospital admission. This
alarming result with extensive RM osteomyelitis in the proximal femur of an immunocompromised patient may hopefully warn medical staff to
perform early imaging and aggressive surgical supported multimodal treatment in similar cases. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/1471-2334-14-488) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Zygomycetes are environmental
nonseptate molds widely distributed in soil, plants, and decaying material [1, 2]. The class zygomycetes contain the order mucorales, the
latter including the genus Rhizopus. A clinically important Rhizopus species is Rhizopus microsporus (RM), being one of the main causes of
mucormycosis, an opportunistic life-threatening infection in immunocompromised patients. Fungi like Rhizopus, Mucor and Rhizomucor account
for over 75% of all mucormycosis cases . Being ubiquitous in the environment, acquirement is usually generated through inhalation of spores
often leading to rhinocerebral (39%) or pulmonary (24%), seldom to cutaneous (19%) or disseminated disease (23%) in predisposed individuals
[2, 6, 7]. Previously reported risk factors for mucormycosis are prolonged neutropenia, immunosuppression, iron overload and prolonged
hyperglycemia or manifest diabetes. Patients treated with allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT) often suffer from a
combination of these risk factors . The prognosis and outcome of invasive mucormycosis in patients with immune deficiency or hematologic
malignancies is generally rather poor [1, 4, 8]. However in most reported cases fatal outcome could be prevented [8, 9]. Here we describe
the unique case of fatal invasive osteomyelitis in an allo-HSCT recipient caused by RM. Extensive diagnostic evaluation revealed multiple
old bone infarcts complicated with invasive fungal disease. Although systemic antifungal treatment and repetitive radical surgery was
started immediately cure could not be provided. We report on a 73-year-old male with recently diagnosed myelodysplastic syndrome RAEB I
showing complex karyotype. A routine-checkup revealed a tricytopenia in the blood count as well as a mild splenomegaly, further examinations
including bone marrow biopsy confirmed the diagnosis. Facing the high-risk constellation of this disease (IPSS-R risk score: poor; ) and the
excellent clinical condition of the patient with no relevant comorbidities, allogeneic stem cell transplantation was considered the sole
option for a cure. With no HLA-identical siblings available, unrelated donor search was initiated resulting in the identification of a
suitable HLA-matched donor. Eleven months later allogeneic matched unrelated donor stem cell transplantation after conditioning chemotherapy
with fludarabine, treosulfane as well as antithymocyte globuline and prophylactic immunosuppressive medication containing of cyclosporine
and mycophenolatmofetile was performed successfully. No relevant complications occurred during the first weeks of follow-up besides moderate
acute graft versus host disease of the skin which was immediately responsive to steroid treatment. Bone marrow examinations one month after
transplantation showed complete cytogenetic remission of the disease as well as complete donor chimerism. With no further signs of graft
versus host disease and a good clinical condition of the patient the immunosuppressive treatment could be constantly tapered during the
following months. Continuous prophylactic antiinfectious medication with acyclovir, co-trimoxazole and posaconazole was administered. Six
months after transplantation without remaining medication the patient was presented to our internal emergency department with a critical
septic condition showing fever (body temperature above 40°C) and dyspnea, and was immediately transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU).
Intubation and mechanical ventilation had to be initiated due to respiratory failure. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed bilateral
infiltrations referring to atypical pneumonia and regional osteopaenia with mild focal bone lysis at the level of the lumbar spine. Lumbar
spondylodiscitis was ruled out by magnetic resonance tomography imaging (MRI). No relevant bacterial, viral or fungal cause could be
identified by bronchoalveolar lavage and multiple blood culture collections during the stay on the ICU. Cardiac echocardiography was
performed and culture-negative endocarditis could be ruled out. The patient constantly improved under combinatory empiric antibiotic,
antiviral and antifungal (azole) medication, extubation could be performed 7 days after intubation. While the respiratory situation
completely stabilized, the clinical condition of the patient constantly deteriorated in the following days. For the first time the patient
reported right hip pain.In consequence ultrasound, CT and MRI of the right hip and thigh were performed in order to identify and localize a
potential inflammatory focus. The imaging revealed multiple old bone infarcts in both femurs as well as a new infarct with massive secondary
osteomyelitis in the right femoral head, neck and trochanteric region, breaking through the medial cortex into the surrounding soft tissue
(Figure 1). With emergency surgical intervention extensive bone and soft tissue destruction with ubiquitous blackened tissue became evident
(Figure 2a). Proximal femoral resection with a broad antibiotic (vancomycin, gentamycin, clindamycin) and antimycotic (amphotericin B)
loaded spaceholder and extensive tissue debridement were performed. Microbiological and histopathological analysis and basic local alignment
search tool (BLAST) identified RM (Figure 2b-d). Bacteria could not be identified even after prolonged microbiological culturing for
10 days. Immediate high dosed liposomal amphotericin B (6 mg/kg bodyweight/day), supplemented with high dosed posaconazole (4 × 200 mg/day)
was administered. After a short-term improvement of the patient’s condition with promising regression of inflammatory markers and a fever-
free period, the wound at the level of the proximal thigh showed increased wound secretion and shading of the surrounding skin. Despite
another 3 surgical interventions with debridement, lavage and vacuum assisted closure-therapy (VAC) the intraoperative and cutaneous state
deteriorated with RM invading the tissue in a diffuse manner and ultimately perforating the skin. With this dramatic disease progression a
whole-body-MRI was conducted 6 weeks after re-admission. Multiple other bone infarctions (left femur, both humeri, both tibiae) with
suspected superinfection of RM became evident. Considering the drastic disease progression under maximal multimodal care further therapeutic
interventions were stopped in consent with the patient and his family and palliative home care support was initiated. The patient passed
away a few days later.Figure 1 Radiological assessment of the right hip showing large intramedullary cystic lesions with soft tissue
abscesses. Multipanel with coronal (a, d), proximal transverse (femoral neck; b, e) and distal transverse (lesser trochanter; c, f) CT (a,
b, c) and T2-weighted MRI (d, e, f) views focusing the right hip region. Large cavitary lesions with invasion of soft tissue corresponding
to abscess formation (white arrows). Underlying bone marrow osteonecrosis of both femurs (black arrows).Figure 2 Intraoperative aspect of
the right hip demonstrating excessive destruction of bone and soft tissue with ubiquitous blackened tissue (a). Femoral end (asterisk) after
proximal femur resection with surrounding necrotic musculature (arrows). Culture specimen after 48 hours (40°C) showing grayish, fluffy RM
colonies filling out the whole Sabouraud dextrose agar plate (b). RM under 300-400× magnification (c, d). Sporangia filled with
sporangiospores (arrows) being partially extruded. Radiological assessment of the right hip showing large intramedullary cystic lesions with
soft tissue abscesses. Multipanel with coronal (a, d), proximal transverse (femoral neck; b, e) and distal transverse (lesser trochanter; c,
f) CT (a, b, c) and T2-weighted MRI (d, e, f) views focusing the right hip region. Large cavitary lesions with invasion of soft tissue
corresponding to abscess formation (white arrows). Underlying bone marrow osteonecrosis of both femurs (black arrows). Intraoperative aspect
of the right hip demonstrating excessive destruction of bone and soft tissue with ubiquitous blackened tissue (a). Femoral end (asterisk)
after proximal femur resection with surrounding necrotic musculature (arrows). Culture specimen after 48 hours (40°C) showing grayish,
fluffy RM colonies filling out the whole Sabouraud dextrose agar plate (b). RM under 300-400× magnification (c, d). Sporangia filled with
sporangiospores (arrows) being partially extruded. Invasive disseminated Rhizopus-infections develop in fewer than ¼ of localized forms and
have an estimated mortality rate of 78–100% in allo-HSCT recipients . We describe the fatally ending case of a disseminated RM osteomyelitis
of an immunocompromised patient suffering from myelodysplastic syndrome. To the best of our knowledge, a comparable case has not been
reported in the literature yet. Immunocompromised patients, particularly suffering from hematological diseases treated by allo-HSCT face a
high risk of invasive fungal infections . Invasive aspergillosis and candidiasis represent the leading cause of invasive mold infection,
whereas invasive mucormycosis is less common . A recent increase in the incidence of mucormycosis may be explained by the increasing use of
antifungal agents lacking activity against the class zygomycetes and the growing number of high risk bone marrow transplantations .
Zygomycetes are found worldwide with distribution throughout the whole environment (e.g., air, soil, food, and wood). The class zygomycetes
contain the order mucorales and the genus Rhizopus. Rhizopus can be further subdivided in several species. Some species e.g. RM are known
human pathogens . However, reports on RM-related infections are relatively rare compared with those related to other Rhizopus species .
Wilkins reported the case of a non-immunocompromised patient with a postoperative RM osteomyelitis of the femur after anterior cruciate
ligament repair. Multimodal treatment led to eradication of the disease . A successful treatment of RM osteomyelitis of the right tibia in
an immunocompromised patient was presented by Vashi . Compared to focal RM fungal infections disseminated infections are even more seldom
[2, 13, 14]. Especially HSCT recipients run high risk of developing invasive fungal infections during the immediate post-transplant and the
pre- and post-engraftment period and the engraftment period up to 3 months after transplantation . Our patient showed suspected infection
about 3 months after transplantation. Mucormycosis spreads from isolated infection hematogenously to other organs. The most common sites of
origin are sinuses (39%), lungs (24%), and skin (19%) [2, 15]. Dissemination commonly affects lung and brain, whereas liver, heart, and
kidneys are rarely colonized . Our patient showed multiple lesions in the final state as demonstrated by MRI. Due to the concomitant
presence of bone necrosis and metastatic fungal implants we believe that initially bone infarction, caused by immonostatic drugs, lead to an
ideal environment for fungal growth. A similar clinical constellation with Rhizopus species-superinfection after B-19 virus-induced bone
marrow necrosis in a patient with sickle-cell disease was presented by Fartoukh et al. . However, surgical intervention was not performed.
In our case the focus of verifiable RM infection was the right proximal femur and its surrounding soft tissues with huge abscess formations.
Other lesions at the left lower extremity and both upper extremities obviously followed or had preexisted in a dormant state. Furthermore
establishing the diagnosis of invasive fungal infections, primarily based on standard culture-based mycological methods is often difficult,
especially in early stages . Accordingly high rates of delayed treatment beginnings are described . Routinely taken blood culture samples
confirm the diagnosis in less than 10% of all cases . Therefore surgical intervention is often required not just for treatment but to gain
tissue specimens to increase diagnostic accuracy. Direct microscopy with optical brighteners, microbial cultures and histopathology are
recommended allowing a rapid narrowing-down of the diagnosis . With direct microscopy hyphae of mucorales display a typical appearance. They
show a variable width (6–25 μm), are non- or pauci-septate, have an irregular, ribbon-like appearance and a variable angle of branching.
Differentiation between various genera is based on the presence and location of rhizoids, the branching nature of the sporangiophores, the
shape of the columella, the size and shape of the sporangia, and the maximum growth temperature . In addition to microscopy culture of
specimens is considered an essential investigation. Although the sensitivity of culture is not high, it allows identification and
susceptibility testing . Currently molecular testing displays the most reliable diagnostic tool for identification of human pathogenic
mucorales. As the detection of mucorales-specific antigens so far has not become generally accepted for diagnostic purposes because of its
relatively low sensitivity , currently the most effective method for mucorales-detection is PCR . The internal transcribed fungal spacer
(ITS) region (18S rRNA and 28S rRNA) is sequenced and the isolates are identified by e.g. Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST®). In our
case we were able to identify RM by a combination of phenotypic methods (Figure 2b-d) and genetic sequencing. Therapy for mucormycosis
infections includes systemic antifungal drugs and local surgical debridement . Regarding antifungal treatment azole, which are used for
aspergillosis are not appropriate for invasive mucormycosis. Moreover, mucormycosis can even arise in patients receiving azole for
prophylaxis or for treatment of invasive aspergillosis [22, 23]. Being aware of our patient’s critical illness and according to current
treatment concepts, systemic treatment was started with high-dosage liposomal amphotericin B and posaconazole after confirmation of the
diagnosis [18, 24, 25]. Possibly due to this regimen, blood inflammatory markers temporarily decreased significantly and a fever-free
interval was achieved. Amphotericin B, commonly accepted as first-line treatment for invasive mucormycosis can be combined with
posaconazole, which is strongly recommended for salvage treatment . After a short improvement of clinical status under systemic antifungal
therapy the patient’s condition deteriorated again. Salvage surgery was indicated after MRI-proved progression of disease at the level of
the right hip. Unfortunately the local situation was out of control at that time and further fungus invasion could not be stopped. Mortality
rates of 10% have been reported for localized cutaneous mucormycosis, 26% after extension to deeper structures, and 94% with disseminated
disease . These rates clearly emphasize the importance of early aggressive therapeutic intervention. In our patient early dissemination was
present lowering chances of cure significantly from the beginning. This dramatic case of rapidly progressive and ultimately fatal RM
infection of the bone illustrates the diagnostic and therapeutic challenges of mucormycosis in immunocompromised hosts. Amongst others,
abscess formations should always be suspicious of invasive fungal infection under these circumstances. Rapid and exact diagnosis by both
morphology and molecular techniques is crucial for starting early treatment of fungal infection. Amphotericine B should be used as soon as
mucormycosis is suspected. If the patient’s condition is not improving, addition of posaconazole should be considered. At the same time,
early and aggressive surgical debridement has to be performed first to detect the pathogen and second to establish local control.
Comprehensive multimodal therapy for mucormycosis may create more opportunities to improve patient’s outcome despite the very low overall
survival rate in disseminated cases. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the editor of this journal. Below are the links to the
authors’ original submitted files for images.Authors’ original file for figure 1Authors’ original file for figure 2 Authors’ original file
for figure 1 Authors’ original file for figure 2 Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation Basic local alignment search tool
Computed tomography Intensive care unit Magnetic resonance imaging Rhizopus microsporus. Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contribution NH, IJB, MH, UL, AT, IR and MV treated the patient and collected the primary data. NH,
IJB, PMP and MV were responsible for drafting the manuscript, MH and UL for generating the figures. AT, CP, RvE-R and IR critically revised
and approved the final version of the manuscript before submission. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Images of cultured
specimens, BLAST and invaluable microbiological support were provided by Mrs. Hosemann S. (Insitute of Medical Microbiology, Klinikum rechts
der Isar, Technical University of Munich, Germany). We would also like to thank Mrs. Sitter G. and Mrs. Holoubek-Seidl S. for careful
language editing. Financial support / funding was not provided for this manuscript.
