Idiopathic CD4 lymphopenia constitutes a heterogeneous group of immunodeficiencies with characteristically low CD4+ T-cell counts with
largely unknown genetic etiology. We here sought to determine the underlying molecular cause in an index family with two patients suffering
from combined immunodeficiency that evolved into predominant CD4+ lymphopenia. The more severely affected index patient also presented with
selective antibody deficiency against bacterial polysaccharide antigens. For the genetic analysis, we used combined homozygosity mapping and
exome sequencing. Functional assays included immunoblot analysis, flow cytometry and TCR Vβ spectratyping. A novel homozygous missense
mutation was revealed in the kinase domain of JAK3 (c.T3196C, p.Cys1066Arg). Further analysis showed revertant chimerism in CD8+ T-cells in
both patients. The additional presence of revertant CD4+ T-cells was associated with a milder clinical and immunological phenotype in the
second patient, although the role somatic chimerism plays in amelioration of disease phenotype is uncertain, as presence of revertant cells
had no effect on residual CD4 cell JAK3 signaling function. Residual activity of JAK3-dependent STAT3 and STAT5 signaling was also found in
immortalized B-cell lines indicating a hypomorphic nature of the described mutation which likely contributes to the milder clinical
phenotype. We here present the first case of revertant mosaicism in JAK3 deficiency, manifesting as combined immunodeficiency evolving into
predominant CD4+ lymphopenia. Revertant chimerism or hypomorphic mutations in genes typically associated with more severe T-cell deficiency
should be considered when assessing patients with milder forms of combined immunodeficiencies. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1007/s10875-014-0088-2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Idiopathic CD4 lymphopenias (ICLs)
constitute an enigmatic and heterogeneous group of disorders which are collectively characterized by prolonged low CD4+ T lymphocyte count
of less than 300 cells/μl or less than 20 % of lymphocytes on more than one determination in the absence of known causes such as HIV
infection, malignant disease or medication . The clinical phenotype of ICL is variable and ranges from asymptomatic laboratory abnormality
of CD4+ T-cell count to increased susceptibility to infections, opportunistic infections and autoimmune diseases [3, 4]. Current knowledge
on the molecular pathogenesis of ICL is limited. Genetic studies of patients with combined immunodeficiency (CID) with predominant CD4 cell
deficiency have revealed mutations in genes encoding regulatory factors of the expression of MHC class II molecules such as CIITA, RFXANK,
RFX5 or RFXAP . The associated disease is termed MHC class II deficiency, characterized by low numbers of CD4+ T-cells while numbers of CD8+
T-cells are normal or elevated . Furthermore, mutations in P56LCK, a tyrosine kinase in the downstream of the TCR activation pathway, were
described to cause CID with CD4 deficiency . Recently, a mutation in MAGT1, a gene encoding a Mg2+ transporter, was reported to cause a
disorder associated with CD4 deficiency denominated as XMEN – X-linked immunodeficiency with magnesium defect and EBV infection and
neoplasia . Other studies have reported CID with CD4 lymphopenia in patients bearing hypomorphic mutations in genes which are typically
associated with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) phenotype, such as RAG1, which is known to cause SCID when mutated in amorphic
manner . In this study, we investigated a consanguineous family with two affected siblings suffering from CID that evolved into predominant
CD4 lymphopenia in order to define hitherto unknown genetic etiologies underlying this condition. The protocol for this study was approved
by the Ethics Committee at the Medical University of Vienna, Austria. Blood samples from index patients and their family members from a
Turkish family were obtained with informed consent in agreement with the Declaration of Helsinki. For isolation of genomic DNA from whole
blood, a commercially available kit (Wizard® Genomic DNA Purification Kit, Promega Corporation) was employed according to the manufacturer’s
instruction. For isolation of DNA from FACS-sorted leukocyte subsets, a commercially available Qiagen DNA Micro Kit was used according to
the manufacturer’s instruction. Subsequently, DNA was amplified by Whole Genome Amplification using the commercially available Qiagen
Repli-g kit. Capillary sequencing of genomic DNA from both patients was performed with primers designed for the variant in the JAK3 gene
with PrimerZ (www.primerz.org) and purchased from Eurofins/MWG Operon (Ebersberg, Germany). The sequences of the primers are
AAGTGCTCTGACTTGCCACA (forward) and CACCTTTCTGACCCCTTCAC (reverse). Expand High Fidelity PCR System (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) was applied
for PCR amplification and Big Dye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany) for capillary sequencing.
Sequences were acquired using an ABI 3130xl Sequencer (Applied Biosystems) and analyzed using 3130xl Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems)
and Sequencher DNA Software 4.10.1 (Gene Codes Corporation, Ann Arbor, MI, USA). Homozygous intervals were determined as previously
described using Affymetrix® Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 technology. The outcome data was analyzed using Affymetrix® Genotyping Console™
software version 4.0.1.8.6. Homozygous intervals were mapped using Homozygosity Mapper (www.homozygositymapper.org/). Exome sequencing was
performed for patient 2. Illumina TruSeq DNA Sample Preparation Guide and the Illumina TruSeq Exome Enrichment Guide version 3 were used.
Genomic DNA (1 μg) was sheared to fragments of 200–300 bp. Blunt ending, adenylation and adapter-ligation allowing the fragments to
hybridize onto the flow cell were carried out. Exonic DNA fragments were enriched and clusters were generated using the Illumina cBot
Cluster Generation System following the TruSeq PE Cluster Kit v3 Reagent Preparation Guide. The DNA fragment clusters ran in a multiplexed
pool with five other samples distributed on two lanes of the flow cell. Data analysis was performed as previously described . Reads were
aligned using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) to the human genome 19. Insertion/deletion realignment was performed as well as Genome Analysis
Toolkit (GATK version 1.5)-based quality score recalibration. For single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and Deletion/Insertion variants (DIVs)
calling, Unified Genotyper and GATK Variant quality score recalibration were performed. SNVs and DIVs lists were uploaded to SeattleSeq
Annotation database with dbSNPbuild135. Variants present in 1000Genomes and dbSNP were excluded and the lists were filtered for nonsense,
missense and splice-site variants present within the overlapping homozygous intervals of both patient. At last, SNVs were filtered according
to a validation prediction score. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of both patients were isolated by density gradient
centrifugation using Ficoll-Hypaque (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) and stained with the following antibodies: CD3-FITC, CD4-APC (BD,
Biosciences, Schwechat, Austria), CD8-PECy7 (Beckmann Coulter, Krefeld, Germany), CD19-PerCPCy5.5 (eBioscience, Vienna, Austria) and
CD56-V450 (BD, Biosciences, Austria). Subsequently, the stained cells were sorted into different subgroups of leukocytes
CD3+CD4+CD8-T-cells, CD3+CD4-CD8+ T-cells and CD3-CD19+ B-cells using a MoFlo Astrios Cell Sorter from Beckmann Coulter. The screening for
maternal cells in the peripheral blood of the patient investigated was performed by quantitative chimerism testing, as described previously
[15, 16]. Five informative microsatellite/short tandem repeat (STR) markers including D3S3045, D4S2366, D12S1064, D16S539, D17S1290, and
SE-33 were analyzed by PCR analysis and capillary electrophoresis with fluorescence-based detection . The examination of TCR Vβ repertoire
was performed by spectratyping analysis as described by Pannetier et al. with the modification of the sequence for primers listed in the
table below. Target of the primer Sequence Primers for variable regions
BV02ACATACGAGCAAGGCGTCGABV04CATCAGCCGCCCAAACCTAABV07CAAGTCGCTTCTCACCTGAATGCBV17TGTGACATCGGCCCAAAAGAABV21GGAGTAGACTCCACTCTAAGBV24CCCAGTTTGGAAAGCCAGTGACCC
Primer for the constant region CßB1 (used for BV05, BV06BC, BV20)CGGGCTGCTCCTTGAGGGGCTGCG Fluorescently labeled primer for the constant
region FAM-marked primer for the constant regionACACAGCGACCTCGGGTGGG For the fragment analysis, sequences were acquired using an ABI 3130xl
Sequencer (ABI Applied Biosystems) and analyzed using GeneMapper software version 3.7. PBMCs were isolated from heparinized peripheral blood
by density gradient centrifugation (Lymphoprep, Axis-Shield PoC AS, Oslo, Norway) and transformed with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) using the
supernatant from the B 95–8 marmoset cell line (ATCC, Rockville, MD) according to a standard protocol . Growing cells were expanded in
complete RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10 % heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (FCS, PAA), 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 IU/ml penicillin, and
100 μg/ml streptomycin (Gibco, Paisley, Scottland) at 37 °C in the presence of 5 % CO2. EBV-transformed B-cells were lysed for 30 min in
ice-cold lysis buffer [20 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1 % Nonidet P-40, protease inhibitor cocktail (Complete; Roche)] and
insoluble material was removed by centrifugation (16,000 x g, 10 min, 4 °C). 20 micrograms of protein was resolved by 8 % SDS-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), electrotransferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Immobilon-P; Millipore), and immunoblotted with
anti-JAK3 antibody (C-21; Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., Santa Cruz, CA, USA), anti-Stat5 antibody (89; BD Biosciences) and anti-GAPDH
antibody (Santa Cruz). Detection was performed using the SuperSignal West Pico ECL detection system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
Measurement of STAT3 and STAT5 activation was performed by flow cytometry: Phosphorylation-state analysis was performed on EBV-transformed
B-cells or CD4+ T-cells contained within the PBMC fraction using BD PhosFlow technology, according to the manufacturer’s instructions (BD
Biosciences, Mississauga, ON). After 2 h of culture in 1 % FCS, cells were stimulated with recombinant human IL-2 at 100, 1,000 and 10 000
U/ml (Bio-Rad AbD Serotec, Germany), IL-4 plus IL-21 at 100 ng/ml (Gibco/Life Technologies, Vienna, Austria) or IL-6 at 100 ng/ml (Bio-Rad
AbD Serotec, Vienna, Austria) for 15 min at 37 °C, fixed with BD Cytofix Fixation buffer and permeabilized in ice-cold BD Perm buffer III
(BD Biosciences). Cells were stained with Alexa Fluor 647-labeled anti-STAT3-pY705 or anti-STAT5-pY694 (both from BD Biosciences). CD4+
T-cells contained within the PBMC fraction were identified by gating in dual-colour flow cytometry. Fluorescence was measured by flow
cytometry using a FACS Calibur (Becton Dickinson, Heidelberg, Germany) and data analyzed with the CellQuest software (Becton Dickinson).
Crystal structures of the kinase domain of JAK3 tyrosine kinase were created using the ICM-Browser Software (Molsoft LLC, San Diego, US).
Patient 1 (currently 15 years of age) is the first child of healthy consanguineous parents of Turkish origin. She was admitted to hospital
for the first time at the age of 20 months because of recurrent episodes of infection of the upper and lower airways with pulmonary
infiltrates at varying locations, subsequently complicated by development of atelectases. Parenteral antibiotic therapy was initiated and
led to improvement of clinical symptoms and discharge from hospital. No further severe infectious episodes occurred thereafter. Because of
the recurrent infectious episodes primary immunodeficiency was suspected and an immunological work-up was initiated which revealed CID with
CD4 lymphopenia on multiple occasions, IgG2-IgG4-subclass deficiency, and selective antibody deficiency against bacterial polysaccharide
antigens (Table 1 and online supplementary Table 2). Intravenous Immunoglobulin (IVIG) substitution therapy was initiated at the age of five
years and continued for over a year. Re-evaluation of antibody production after cessation of IVIG therapy confirmed selective polysaccharide
antibody deficiency and showed a decreased IgG antibody response against other antigens e.g. diphtheria toxoid vaccination (Table 1). At the
age of nine, subcutaneous immunoglobulin (SCIG) home therapy was started which is still being carried out.Table 1Immunological phenotype of
both patients at representative time pointsA. Serum levels of immunoglobulins, antibacterial antibodies and antibodies against vaccination
antigensPatient 1 (II - 1)Patient 2 (II - 2)22 m9 years3 years8 years IgG (mg/dl)585(570–1322)743(790–1700)801(696–1518)943(790–1700) IgA
(mg/dl)114(23–97)144(76–450)48(46–177)43(76–450) IgM (mg/dl)307(76–187)247(90–350)160(97–228)147(90–350) IgG1
(mg/dl)497(457–734)554(500–880)616(400–983)732(500–880) IgG2 (mg/dl)<23(56–200)21(150–600)60(70–400)108(150–600) IgG3
(mg/dl)<6(20–81)22(20–100)24(20–81)36(20–100) IgG4 (mg/dl)<8(0–40)<8(8–120)<6(0–40)<7(8–120) Tetanus-IgG
(IU/ml)0,45*3)(> = 0,40)1,57*4)(> = 0,40)0,6*3)(> = 0,40)1,02*5)(> = 0,40) Diphteria-IgG
(IU/ml)0,15*3)(> = 0,40)0,17*4)(> = 0,40)0,08*3)(> = 0,40)0,09*5)(> = 0,40) Pn23-IgG (reciprocal
titer)<20(> = 200)81*1)(> = 200)<20(> = 200)249*2)(> = 200) Pn23-IgM (reciprocal
titer)198(> = 100)393*1)(> = 100)414(> = 100)999*2)(> = 100) Hib-IgG (μg/ml)5,41*3)(> = 1)0,17(> = 1)2,57*3)(> = 1)0,47(> = 1)B. Lymphocyte
subpopulationsPatient 1 (II - 1)Patient 2 (II - 2)22 m10 year3 years8 years CD4 (%Ly)7(31–66)22(31–66)11(31–66)22(31–66) CD4
(abs.Nr/μl)430(386–2022)326(386–2022)417(386–2022)554(386–2022) CD4 + CD45RA + (%Ly)2(11–38)5(11–38)4(11–38)7(11–38) CD4 + CD45RA + (abs.Nr/μl)95(170–1097)74(170–1097)152(170–1097)176(170–1097) CD8
(%Ly)35(7–41)39(21–43)42(7–41)49(21–43) CD8 (abs.Nr/μl)2150(107–1175)578(297–1011)1593(107–1175)1233(297–1011) CD8 + CD62L + CD45RA + (% of
CD8+)n.a.10,7(25–61)n.a.7,8(25–61) CD19 (%Ly)15(7–23)7(7–23)18(7–23)13(7–23) CD19
(abs.Nr/μl)921(71–549)104(71–549)683(71–549)327(71–549) CD56 (%Ly)25(6–29)29(6–29)34(6–29)25(6–29) CD56
(abs.Nr/μl)1536(98–680)430(98–680)1289(98–680)629(98–680) CD3 (%Ly)10(53–85)54(53–85)30(53–85)62(53–85) CD3
(abs.Nr/μl)614(694–2976)800(694–2976)1138(694–2976)1560(694–2976) HLA-DR (%Ly)82(4–18)48(10–36)53(10–36)74(10–36) HLA-DR
(abs.Nr/μl)5036(75–505)711(200–800)2010(200–800)1862(200–800) CD3 + HLA-DR (%Ly)7(1–8)23(2–12)13(2–12)44(2–12) CD3 + HLA-DR
(abs.Nr/μl)430(19–219)341(20–250)493(20–250)1107(20–250)C. Lymphoproliferative response to mitogenic stimulation (3H-thymidine
incorporation)Patient 1 (II - 1)Patient 2 (II - 2)22 m10 year3 years8 years PHA 1.6μg
(dpm)10135(> = 30000)101821(> = 20000)25678(> = 20000)72068(> = 20000) CON A 1.2μg
(dpm)1415(> = 5200)69767(> = 5000)42126(> = 5000)63988(> = 5000) PWM 1:100
(dpm)7450(> = 40000)45225(> = 20000)4599(> = 20000)47075(> = 20000) Medium (dpm)183(<=600)60(<=400)75(<=400)109(<=400)D. B-cell
subpopulationsPatient 1 (II - 1)Patient 2 (II - 2)15 years11 year CD38+ CD24+ transitional B-cells
(%CD19)3,8(3,9–7,8)10,7(3,9–7,8) CD27-IgD+ naïve B-cells (%CD19)76,3(75,2–86,7)70,1(75,2–86,7) CD27+ IgD+ non-switched memory B-cells
(%CD19)7,6(4,6–10,2)9,3(4,6–10,2) CD27+ IgD- switched memory B-cells (%CD19)10,9(3,3–9,6)13,3(3,3–9,6) CD27-IgD- memory B-cells
(%CD19)5,2(2,3–5,5)7,2(2,3–5,5) CD24-CD38+ plasmablasts (%CD19)2,2(0,3–1,7)1,3(0,3–1,7)Pn23, 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine;
HiB Haemophilus influenzae Type B%Ly, percentage of lymphocytes; abs.Nr/μl, absolute number/μl blood; n.a. = data not available PHA
phytohaemagglutinin; CON A Concanavalin A; PWM Pokeweed-Mitogen; dpm, disintegrations per minute%CD19, percentage of CD19+ cellsNormal
ranges are indicated in brackets, next to patient values*1) measured following three vaccinations with Pn23 at the age of 5, 7 and
8 years*2) measured following two vaccinations with Pn23 at the age of 3,5 and 7 years*3) measured following four vaccinations*4) measured
3 months after tetanus-diphtheria booster vaccination*5) measured following a total of six vaccinations against tetanus and diphtheria
Immunological phenotype of both patients at representative time points Pn23, 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine; HiB Haemophilus
influenzae Type B %Ly, percentage of lymphocytes; abs.Nr/μl, absolute number/μl blood; n.a. = data not available PHA phytohaemagglutinin;
CON A Concanavalin A; PWM Pokeweed-Mitogen; dpm, disintegrations per minute %CD19, percentage of CD19+ cells Normal ranges are indicated in
brackets, next to patient values *1) measured following three vaccinations with Pn23 at the age of 5, 7 and 8 years *2) measured following
two vaccinations with Pn23 at the age of 3,5 and 7 years *3) measured following four vaccinations *4) measured 3 months after tetanus-
diphtheria booster vaccination *5) measured following a total of six vaccinations against tetanus and diphtheria The siblings of patient 1
were tested for immunodeficiency due to positive family history. Only one sister (patient 2) showed CD4 lymphopenia on initial determination
that improved during follow-up and IgG2-IgG4-subclass deficiency, while generation of selective polysaccharide antibodies was intact
(Table 1, online supplementary Table 2). She received antibiotic prophylaxis until the age of six years. Immunological findings in the other
two siblings were within normal range with the exception of a slight hypogammaglobulinemia but intact antibody production against all
antigens tested. Immunological findings in the parents were unremarkable (data not shown). The immunological phenotype of both patients is
depicted in Table 1. A marked reduction in the number of CD4+CD45RA+naïve T helper cells was observed in both patients, more pronounced in
patient 1. Numbers of CD4+ memory T-cells were within the normal range while numbers of naïve CD8+ cells were also significantly
reduced(CD8+CD62L+CD45RA+cells shown in Table 1). In contrast, numbers of naïve B lymphocytes were comparable to an age-matched control.
CD4+ and CD3+ lymphocytes were below the normal range in both patients, while numbers of NK cells as identified by CD56 staining were
increased initially but returned to normal during follow-up (Table 1 and online supplementary Fig 1). In patient 1, this predominant CD56+
lymphocyte cell type was further characterized and found to be positive for several markers including CD8, HLA-DR-dim, CD2, CD7, CD11b and
negative for CD4 and CD3 (data not shown). Patient 1 initially showed a T-B+NK+SCID phenotype at the age of 22 months with low numbers of
both CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells but with a normal number of total CD8 cells, most of which constituted NK-cells. During follow-up, this phenotype
evolved into predominant CD4 lymphopenia. A comparable development from a combined CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell deficiency to predominant CD4
lymphopenia was also observed in patient 2 (Table 1 and supplementary Figure 1). The reduction in naïve CD4 cells is still detectable
although it became less pronounced (Table 1 and online supplementary Fig 1). T-cell activation in response to mitogenic stimuli was
decreased in both patients during younger age and normalized during follow up (Table 1). Further investigation of the capacity of T-cells to
respond to activation was performed in patient 1 and revealed a substantial impairment of TCR/CD3-dependent lymphoproliferative responses
following stimulation with recall antigen (tetanus toxoid) despite four previous vaccinations; anti-CD3- and staphylococcal superantigen-
induced T-cell proliferation was decreased as well (online supplementary table 1). Repeated booster vaccinations normalized the T-cell
response to recall antigen, while mitogen-induced IL-2 and IFN-gamma release was still impaired (online supplementary table 1). In both
patients, IgG2 and IgG4 subclass deficiency was present (Table 1). The IgG-response following four tetanus- and haemophilus influenzae type
B vaccinations was within the normal range, and neutralizing antibodies against all three polio vaccine strains were detectable in patient 1
(serum titer of 1:1,280 against strains I to III). However, IgG antibody production against other vaccination antigens was impaired,
diphtheria IgG antibodies remained low in both patients despite four vaccinations in the first two years of life and were only borderline
detectable at the age of 10 years despite repeated booster vaccinations (Table 1). In patient 1, EBV capsid-IgG antibodies were positive and
EBV–IgM antibodies negative, indicating a history of primary EBV infection; EBNA-IgG-antibodies remained negative up to the age of nine
years (time of last follow-up control without SCIG substitution therapy). She had also experienced previous CMV infection as CMV-IgG
antibodies were positive and CMV–IgM antibodies negative. Patient 1 displayed a selective IgG antibody deficiency against bacterial
polysaccharide antigens while in patient 2 this B-cell function was within the lower normal range (Online supplementary table 2). At the age
of 2 to 3 years, pneumococcal IgG antibodies were undetectable in the serum of both patients who had never been vaccinated against
pneumococcal polysaccharide before. Patient 1 failed to mount a significant IgG antibody response following each of three pneumococcal
vaccinations at the age of 5, 7 and 8 years, while the IgM response was within the normal range. In contrast, IgG antibody production was
within the lower normal range after two pneumococcal vaccinations in patient 2, and she developed a significant IgM response (online
supplementary table 2). Several molecular defects known to lead to primary T-cell deficiency were examined in patient 1 and found to be
normal, adenosine deaminase and purine nucleoside phosphorylase deficiency (examined by measuring the respective enzyme in peripheral blood
erythrocytes), a defect in chromosome breakage repair (examined following treatment of cultured cells with Diepoxybutan), NBS1-gene
deletion, and 22q11 microdeletion were excluded. Levels of alpha-1-fetoprotein in serum as a potential indication for ataxia telangiectasia
as well as flow cytometric analysis of IL-7Rα, IL-2Rγ, CD3 und CD45 expression in peripheral blood leukocytes showed normal results. Given
the family history including consanguinity, an autosomal recessive Mendelian trait was suspected. Thus, we employed a combination of
homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing to detect the underlying genetic cause of the disease. Homozygosity mapping of the affected
siblings revealed seven and thirteen homozygous intervals, respectively. Three intervals on chromosome six, eight and nineteen were
homozygous in both patients (Fig 1a). As the causative genetic defect was assumed to be located in an overlapping homozygous interval, exome
sequencing data were filtered for the described homozygous intervals (Fig 1b). Among those was a homozygous variant in the JAK3 gene
(c.T3196C, p.Cys1066Arg) encoding a tyrosine kinase bound to the common gamma chain of various interleukin receptors . JAK3 deficiency is
commonly known to cause SCID . Using Sanger sequencing, this variant could be validated and it showed perfect segregation with the disease
(Fig 1c). Multiple sequence alignment revealed that this position is highly conserved throughout evolution (Fig 1d) with a potentially
critical function within the kinase domain of JAK3 (Fig 1e).Fig. 1 a Homozygosity mapping results showing homozygous intervals highlighted
in red color b Filtering strategy for exome sequencing data c Pedigree of the index family with sequence of the JAK3 mutation site
highlighted in gray background d Multiple sequence alignment with the JAK3 mutation site highlighted in red background e Crystal structure
of the JAK3 kinase domain. The described mutation site is marked with a black arrow a Homozygosity mapping results showing homozygous
intervals highlighted in red color b Filtering strategy for exome sequencing data c Pedigree of the index family with sequence of the JAK3
mutation site highlighted in gray background d Multiple sequence alignment with the JAK3 mutation site highlighted in red background e
Crystal structure of the JAK3 kinase domain. The described mutation site is marked with a black arrow TCR Vβ spectratyping is a well-
established method to assess TCR diversity and restriction. Several T-cell deficiencies are known to use a restricted TCR Vβ repertoire [22,
23]. We employed TCR Vβ spectratyping to assess the clonality of the TCR repertoire and observed a restricted TCR repertoire in both index
patients (Fig 2a and online supplementary Fig 2).Fig. 2 a Subfamilies Vβ20-22 of normal donor and patient 1 are shown as representatives of
Vβ TCR Spectratyping data. b Sequencing of the JAK3 in genomic DNA derived from sorted lymphocyte subsets of both index patients. The
mutation site is highlighted with a gray background a Subfamilies Vβ20-22 of normal donor and patient 1 are shown as representatives of Vβ
TCR Spectratyping data. b Sequencing of the JAK3 in genomic DNA derived from sorted lymphocyte subsets of both index patients. The mutation
site is highlighted with a gray background Somatic chimerism has been observed in several primary immunodeficiencies such as Wiskott Aldrich
Syndrome , ADA-deficiency [28, 29] or X-linked SCID [30, 31] and is possibly associated with an amelioration of the clinical phenotype of
disease . Thus, we speculated whether somatic chimerism may have contributed to the relatively mild clinical phenotype despite the
homozygous JAK3 mutation in a critical protein domain in both index patients. Hence, CD4+ T-cells, CD8+ T-cells and CD19+ B-cells were FACS-
sorted, followed by Sanger sequencing for an amplicon harboring the identified JAK3 mutation. CD8+ T-cells of both index patients showed
somatic chimerism whereas revertant CD4+ T-cells were present only in the second patient (Fig 2b). Whether this finding contributes to the
milder clinical phenotype in this patient is unclear at the moment, as further studies are required to formally prove this assumption. To
exclude maternal chimerism, DNA derived from total leukocyte preparations from peripheral blood was assessed and revealed no indication of
maternal cells above the detection limit of 1 % (data not shown). To further study possible biological consequences of the observed JAK3
mutation on a cellular level, we generated EBV-transformed B-cell lines from the patients homozygous for the mutation, their heterozygous
father and an unrelated healthy control. Sanger sequencing confirmed that the patients’ B-cell lines indeed showed a homozygous JAK3
mutation, while heterozygous expression of this mutation was detected in the father’s B-cell line (online supplementary Fig 3). We then
examined protein lysates from EBV-transformed B-cells to assess whether the mutation led to destabilization and consequently reduced protein
levels of the altered JAK3. Western blot analysis showed presence of JAK3 protein in both patients at reduced levels compared to her father,
the normal control or a γc-deficient XSCID patient (Fig 3a). STAT5 protein expression was comparable in all cell lines tested (data not
shown).Fig. 3 a Analysis of JAK3 protein expression in B-cell lines of a healthy control (1), father of the patients (2), patient 1 (3),
patient 2 (4) and a γc-deficient SCID patient (5). Examination of GAPDH protein expression served as a loading control. b Analysis of JAK3
signaling function in B-cell lines of a healthy control, patient 1 (II-1), her father (I-1) and a γc-deficient SCID patient after
stimulation with IL-4 and IL-21. Numbers in the top left and right corners of each histogram in panel B indicate the Mean Fluorescence
Intensity (MFI) values of unstimulated and cytokine-stimulated cells, respectively. c Analysis of JAK3 signaling function in CD4+ peripheral
blood T-cells of a healthy control, patient 1 (II-1) and patient 2 (II-2) after stimulation with IL-2. Histogram overlays represent
intracellular levels of phosphorylated STAT5 in CD4+ T-cells without stimulation or after stimulation with IL-2 or IL-6. Numbers in the left
top corner and middle part of each histogram indicate percentages of cells with a positive staining for pSTAT5 following stimulation with
IL-2 or IL-6, respectively, while numbers in right corner constitute percentages of pSTAT5-positive unstimulated control cells a Analysis of
JAK3 protein expression in B-cell lines of a healthy control (1), father of the patients (2), patient 1 (3), patient 2 (4) and a γc-
deficient SCID patient (5). Examination of GAPDH protein expression served as a loading control. b Analysis of JAK3 signaling function in
B-cell lines of a healthy control, patient 1 (II-1), her father (I-1) and a γc-deficient SCID patient after stimulation with IL-4 and IL-21.
Numbers in the top left and right corners of each histogram in panel B indicate the Mean Fluorescence Intensity (MFI) values of unstimulated
and cytokine-stimulated cells, respectively. c Analysis of JAK3 signaling function in CD4+ peripheral blood T-cells of a healthy control,
patient 1 (II-1) and patient 2 (II-2) after stimulation with IL-2. Histogram overlays represent intracellular levels of phosphorylated STAT5
in CD4+ T-cells without stimulation or after stimulation with IL-2 or IL-6. Numbers in the left top corner and middle part of each histogram
indicate percentages of cells with a positive staining for pSTAT5 following stimulation with IL-2 or IL-6, respectively, while numbers in
right corner constitute percentages of pSTAT5-positive unstimulated control cells IL-2 activates STAT5, IL-4 activates STAT5 and STAT6 ,
while IL-21 activates STAT1, STAT3 and STAT5 in a JAK3-dependent manner . We exposed EBV-transformed B-cells from patient 1 and her father
to IL-4 and IL-21 and assessed activation of STAT3 and STAT5 by flow cytometry with phospho-STAT (p-STAT) specific antibodies. Results show
that STAT3 phosphorylation was clearly detectable but diminished to a different extent in patient 1 and her father as compared to the
healthy control (Fig 3b). Furthermore, STAT5 phosphorylation was severely decreased in patient 1 while being moderately reduced in her
father. In a second run, B-cells of patient 1 and 2 were stimulated with IL-2 in order to quantify phosphorylation of STAT5 (online
supplementary Fig 4). Compared to the healthy control, it was remarkably diminished but still detectable. Both experiments showed that
neither STAT3 nor STAT5 phosphorylation were activated in a γc-deficient XSCID B-cell line. We next investigated JAK3-signaling in CD4+
T-cells from the two patients and a healthy control. PBMCs were stimulated with IL-2 before activation of STAT5 was assessed by dual colour
flow cytometry and gating on CD4+ lymphocytes. We observed that the presence of revertant CD4+ T-cells in patient 2 had no effect on
IL-2-induced, JAK3-dependent STAT5-phosphorylation which was diminished to a comparable extent in both patients (Fig. 3c). Since IL-6 is
known to induce both STAT3 phosphorylation and, to a lesser extent, STAT5 phosphorylation , in a JAK3-independent manner, we investigated
intactness of these pathways in PBMCs from the patients under study. IL-6-induced STAT5-phosphorylation (shown in Fig. 3c) as well as
STAT3-phosphorylation (29,8 % in healthy control and 29,8 % in patient 2, data not illustrated) were both normal. This confirms the presence
of a JAK3-specific signaling defect in the patients’ CD4+ T-cells. JAK3 is an intracellular protein tyrosine kinase which is predominantly
expressed in hematopoietic cells and belongs to the Janus kinase family. It binds to the common gamma chain (γc) of receptors of
interleukin(IL)-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15 and IL-21 and plays an essential role in cytokine receptor signaling pathway . Upon ligand
binding of the IL receptors, JAK3 is activated by autophosphorylation, enabling binding and phosphorylation of different STAT proteins
including STAT1, 3, 5 and 6 [38, 39]. Consequently, STATs can build homodimers (and heterodimers ) and translocate to the cell nucleus in
order to regulate the expression of several genes involved in development, proliferation and function of lymphoid cells . Similar to γc
chain-deficient X-linked SCID, deficiency of JAK3 is known to cause autosomal recessive SCID with a reduced number of T-cells and natural
killer cells as well as dysfunctional B-cells in normal cell count (T−B+NK− SCID) and hypogammaglobulinemia . As in other SCID subtypes,
affected children typically suffer from recurrent or persistent infections, often with opportunistic pathogens, intractable diarrhea, thrush
and failure to thrive. Without prompt and adequate therapy by means of stem cell transplantation, they have a significant mortality during
the first two years of life [41, 43, 44]. Recently, hypomorphic mutations in JAK3 have been reported to widen the spectrum of clinical and
immunological phenotypes of JAK3 deficiency to include T-cell lymphopenia with maternal T-cell engraftment and defective antibody responses
. Due to the severe phenotype associated with deficiency of JAK3, it was surprising to find a mutation in JAK3 in the index family with a
relatively mild phenotype in terms of CID evolving into predominant CD4 deficiency. In retrospect, patient 1 showed a T-B+NK+SCID at the age
of 22 months with a low number of CD3 lymphocytes, low numbers of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells but with a normal number of total CD8 cells, most of
which constituted NK-cells. During follow-up, this phenotype evolved into predominant CD4 lymphopenia. A comparable development from (S)CID
to predominant CD4 lymphopenia was also observed in patient 2 (Table 1 and supplementary Fig. 1). The described novel homozygous mutation in
JAK3 (c.T3196C, p.Cys1066Arg) affects a highly conserved amino acid site which is located in the kinase domain of JAK3 . Similar to other
JAK3 deficient patients [22, 23], we observed an oligoclonal restriction of the TCR Vβ repertoire in both index patients (Fig 2a and online
supplementary Fig 2). To investigate the molecular etiology of the relatively mild clinical disease phenotype in both index patients, we
hypothesized that (i) the novel missense mutation may be of hypomorphic nature or (ii) a molecular chimerism event may have occurred in
these patients. In other primary immunodeficiency disorders, such molecular chimerism has been linked to atypical and relatively milder
disease courses, including ADA-deficient SCID [28, 29], X-linked ectodermal dysplasia and immunodeficiency , γc deficiency [30, 31] or
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome . Our results from Sanger sequencing of DNA extracted from FACS-sorted leukocyte subsets indeed revealed somatic
chimerism in CD8+ T-cells in both patients and additional chimerism in CD4+ T-cells in patient 2 (Fig 2b). In view of this constellation, it
is interesting to note that patient 1 with no somatic reversion in CD4+ T-cells presented in childhood with recurrent infections of the
respiratory tract and received IVIG substitution therapy whereas patient 2 with somatic chimerism in CD4+ T-cells showed no clinical sign of
immunodeficiency and merely laboratory investigations showed CD4+ lymphocytopenia and IgG subclass deficiency. The presence of somatic
reversion in both patients of the same family despite somatic reversion being a rare event indicates a selective proliferative advantage of
lymphocytes with a reverted over non-reverted JAK3 genotype due to restored development and differentiation. Although it is tempting to
assume that the somatic chimerism may have attenuated the severity of the disease phenotype in the described individuals, formal proof of
this assumption would clearly require further studies. Preliminary results show that the presence of revertant cells had no effect on the
level of residual JAK3 signaling activity when CD4+ T-cells from both patients were compared. Furthermore, the present data do not allow for
exact quantification of the percentage of revertant cells contained within the T-cell subsets. Interestingly, analyses of phosphorylation of
STAT3 and STAT5 in an EBV-transformed B-cell line from patient 1 and from the heterozygous father after stimulation with IL-4 and IL-21
showed detectable levels of phosphorylated STATs that were diminished to a different extent. Although reduced JAK3 protein expression might
have contributed to this finding, it suggests that the specific JAK3 mutation in this family may be hypomorphic, thus allowing for residual
γc- and JAK3-mediated signaling function, which is a likely explanation for the relatively mild clinical phenotype observed in our
JAK3-deficient patients. The phenomenon of null or hypomorphic mutations in the same gene causing different phenotypes of immunodeficiencies
has already been described previously. For instance, null mutations of RAG1 are known to cause SCID while hypomorphic mutations have been
associated with Omenn syndrome or idiopathic CD4 lymphopenia . Taken together, we here describe for the first time JAK3 deficiency due to a
hypomorphic JAK3 mutation and with somatic chimerism, causing a phenotype of T-cell deficiency evolving into predominant CD4 lymphopenia. It
is conceivable that other patients with primary CD4 lymphopenia may, in a similar fashion, bear hypomorphic mutations and/or somatic
chimerism in other genes which are usually associated with SCID phenotypes. However, it appears likely that other subgroups of patients with
CD4 lymphopenia are caused by novel nosological entities involved in T-cell homeostasis. Due to improvement of genomic technologies, the
number of gene defects causing an incomplete impairment of T-cell development is increasing, leading to a broader understanding of normal
and pathologic immune system development . The availability of state-of-the art genomic technologies such as so-called “next generation
sequencing” approaches will be instrumental in defining and classifying the range of genomic variations underlying this group of
immunodeficiencies. (PDF 123 kb) (PDF 118 kb) (PDF 243 kb) (PDF 582 kb) (PDF 253 kb) (PDF 299 kb) Kaan Boztug and Hermann Wolf contributed
equally to this manuscript and should be considered aequo loco. The authors would like to thank the patients and their family members as
well as the staff of the Immunology Outpatient Clinic for the cooperation, Andreas Spittler (Medical University of Vienna) for the help in
cell sorting for analysis of somatic chimerism, Nina Prengemann for the help in generating the crystal structure, Martina Schwendinger and
Christine Jandrasits (all from the CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences) for the help in
analyzing the exome sequencing data and Helga Daxberger for her help with chimerism analysis. This work has been funded in part by the FWF
START programme (to K.B.). KB and HW were the principal investigators and take primary responsibilities for the paper. SB identified the
mutation in JAK3 together with ES, performed immunological experiments, analyzed data, wrote the first draft together with KB, ME and HW and
critically participated in all revisions of the manuscript. ES performed exome sequencing data analysis, fluorescence-based cell sorting and
helped with the manuscript preparation. AL, CG, ESV, WG, and RO performed sample preparation for exome sequencing and immunological assays.
CS provided clinical patient data, and TL performed maternal chimerism analysis. ME and HW provided clinical and immunological data,
critically assessed data, and were critically involved in the initial draft and all revisions of the manuscript. KB, HW and ME provided
laboratory resources. All authors approved the final manuscript and declare no potential conflicts of interest.
