The detection of a small growing pulmonary nodule on chest CT raises the suspicion of lung cancer, but proof of malignancy must be
established by either needle biopsy or nodule resection.( 1 ) Pulmonary nodules ≤ 10 mm with ground-glass opacity should be considered to
have a high possibility of malignancy.( 2 ) Various centers perform the excision of these small growing nodules using video-assisted
thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) in order to minimize postoperative morbidity, as well as to remove as small a volume of lung tissue as
possible. Small nodules are often visible with the thoracoscope if they lie within 5 mm of the visceral pleural surface; however, if they
are located deeper in the lung, palpation is required in order to locate them for excision. A previous study found that, in a series of 92
consecutive patients undergoing VATS, 50 (54%) required conversion to thoracotomy.( 3 ) The most common reason for conversion to full
thoracotomy was failure to locate the nodule. Univariate and multivariate analysis of the eleven variables studied showed that if the
distance from the pleural surface to the nodule edge was greater than 5 mm, the probability of failure to detect a nodule was 63%,( 3 ) and
40% of those nodules were found to be malignant. Because of the difficulty in localizing a nodule during surgery and the increasing clinical
load due to the identification of small lung nodules for lung cancer screening using CT, there has been extensive investigation for
improving nodule localization techniques in order to assist the resection of small nodules during VATS. We would like to report the first
use of a new technique for the intraoperative localization of such nodules in Brazil: CT-guided placement of platinum coils. A 72-year-old
woman underwent a chest CT for the evaluation of chronic cough. The CT scans demonstrated a 1-cm ground-glass nodule in the central portion
of the right upper lobe (Figure 1A). The nodule was later biopsied, and the final pathological examination revealed atypical cells suspected
of being adenocarcinoma in situ (formerly known as bronchioalveolar carcinoma). Surgical resection using VATS was planned; however, because
of the ground-glass nature of the nodule and its distance from the pleural surface, preoperative wire localization was requested. Using CT
guidance, the tip of the loaded Chiba needle was percutaneously placed approximately 5 mm deep into the lung nodule (Figure 1B). The guide
wire was introduced up to the first mark, advancing 30 mm of the fiber-coated coil out of the Chiba needle and into the lung parenchyma,
where it assumed a tightly coiled helical configuration into the nodule (Figures 1C and 1D). The patient underwent VATS, and the coil was
easily localized by lung palpation through a 3-cm minithoracotomy (Figure 1E). The final diagnosis was pulmonary adenocarcinoma. Figure 1In
A, a CT scan demonstrating a 1-cm ground-glass nodule in the central portion of the right upper lobe. In B, volume rendering of a CT scan
demonstrating the needle inside the ground-glass nodule in right upper lobe. In C, volume rendering of a CT scan demonstrating the CT-guided
placement (arrow) of a platinum microcoil inside the ground-glass nodule. In D, a CT scan taken after the procedure, demonstrating the
platinum coil (arrow) inside the ground-glass nodule. In E, a photograph of the surgical specimen showing the coil. Techniques for the
localization of pulmonary nodules have been classified into three types. ( 1 , 4 ) The first class uses intraoperative imaging (either
ultrasonography or CT). Localization with intraoperative ultrasound is difficult because the lung must be completely collapsed in order to
allow the visualization of small nodules.( 1 , 4 ) This technique lengthens the surgical time, since the complete collapse of the lung can
take 30-150 min and is often contraindicated in patients with extensive emphysema. Not only is experience with real-time CT-guided
thoracoscopic resection limited, but also artifacts caused by instruments and staples degrade the CT image, and the limited space within the
scanner gantry makes the procedure difficult.( 1 , 4 ) The second class of targeting techniques includes the percutaneous injection of dyes,
contrast media, radionuclides, or colored adhesive agents.( 1 , 4 , 5 ) Diffusion away from the nodule is a limitation of these techniques
and imposes restrictions on the allowable time between the CT localization procedure and the thoracoscopic resection. This can cause
difficulties in the operating room scheduling. In addition, certain dyes, such as methylene blue, carry a possible risk of anaphylactic
reactions following their injection and are often difficult to visualize on the visceral pleural surface in patients with extensive
anthracotic pigmentation of the lungs. ( 1 , 4 , 5 ) Because these materials are not water-soluble, they carry a potential risk of stroke if
they gain access to the pulmonary veins. The third class of targeting techniques uses coils or microcoils that are soft and pliable and
cause little damage to lung tissue, even when dislodged. A previous study compared the use of microcoils and hook wires for the localization
of nodules in freshly harvested goat lungs.( 5 ) The authors reported that when a coil was displaced, it would uncoil, causing minimal
tissue damage. In addition, the "fuzzy" fiber coating on these microcoils induces coagulation and increases the adhesion of the coil to the
lung tissue. The coiled configuration and the fiber coating virtually eliminate the risk of embolization. In conclusion, we would like to
highlight this new method of nodule localization, which is a safe and effective technique and increases the success rate of nodule excision
using VATS, especially for small, ground-glass nodules. Embora a detecção de um pequeno nódulo pulmonar crescente na TC de tórax levante a
suspeita de câncer de pulmão, a malignidade se comprova por meio de biópsia com agulha ou resseção do nódulo.( 1 ) Deve-se considerar que a
possibilidade de malignidade é grande em nódulos pulmonares ≤ 10 mm com opacidade em vidro fosco.( 2 ) Em vários centros, a excisão desses
pequenos nódulos crescentes é feita por meio de videotoracoscopia, a fim de minimizar a morbidade pós-operatória e remover o menor volume
possível de tecido pulmonar. Nódulos pequenos podem ser vistos por meio de um toracoscópio se estiverem a 5 mm da superfície pleural
visceral; no entanto, se estiverem mais fundos no pulmão, a palpação é necessária a fim de localizá-los para a excisão. Em uma série de 92
pacientes consecutivos submetidos a videotoracoscopia, foi necessário converter o procedimento em toracotomia em 50 (54%). ( 3 ) O motivo
mais comum da conversão da videotoracoscopia em toracotomia completa foi a impossibilidade de localizar o nódulo. A análise univariada e
multivariada das onze variáveis estudadas mostrou que a probabilidade de não detecção de um nódulo era de 63% se a distância entre a
superfície pleural e a margem do nódulo fosse maior que 5 mm,( 3 ) e 40% dos nódulos revelaram-se malignos. Por causa da dificuldade em
localizar um nódulo durante a cirurgia e da carga clínica cada vez maior em virtude do uso de TC para identificação de pequenos nódulos
pulmonares no rastreio de câncer de pulmão, tem havido extensa investigação para melhorar as técnicas de localização de nódulos, a fim de
auxiliar a resseção de pequenos nódulos durante a videotoracoscopia. Gostaríamos de relatar o primeiro uso no Brasil de uma nova técnica
para a localização intraoperatória de tais nódulos: a inserção de micromolas de platina guiada por TC. Uma mulher de 72 anos com tosse
crônica foi submetida a TC de tórax para avaliação. As imagens revelaram um nódulo de 1 cm em vidro fosco na porção central do lobo superior
direito (Figura 1A). O nódulo foi posteriormente submetido a biópsia, e o exame anatomopatológico final revelou células atípicas que
levantaram a suspeita de adenocarcinoma in situ (anteriormente denominado carcinoma bronquioalveolar). Planejou-se a resseção cirúrgica por
meio de videotoracoscopia; no entanto, como se tratava de um nódulo em vidro fosco - e em virtude da distância entre o nódulo e a superfície
pleural - solicitou-se a localização pré-operatória com fio guia. Por meio de orientação tomográfica, a ponta da agulha de Chiba carregada
foi inserida no nódulo pulmonar, por via percutânea, até a profundidade de aproximadamente 5 mm (Figura 1B). O fio guia foi introduzido até
a primeira marca, empurrando 30 mm da micromola revestida de fibra para fora da agulha de Chiba e para dentro do parênquima pulmonar, onde
assumiu uma configuração helicoidal firmemente enrolada dentro do nódulo (Figuras 1C e 1D). A paciente foi submetida a videotoracoscopia, e
a micromola foi facilmente localizada por meio de palpação pulmonar através de uma minitoracotomia de 3 cm (Figura 1E). O diagnóstico final
foi de adenocarcinoma pulmonar. Figura 1Em A, imagem de TC mostrando um nódulo de 1 cm em vidro fosco na porção central do lobo superior
direito. Em B, reconstrução tridimensional de uma imagem de TC mostrando a agulha dentro do nódulo em vidro fosco no lobo superior direito.
Em C, reconstrução tridimensional de uma imagem de TC mostrando a colocação, guiada por TC (seta), de uma micromola de platina no interior
do nódulo em vidro fosco. Em D, imagem de TC obtida após o procedimento, mostrando a micromola de platina (seta) no interior do nódulo em
vidro fosco. Em E, fotografia da peça cirúrgica mostrando a micromola. As técnicas para a localização de nódulos pulmonares foram
classificadas em três tipos. ( 1 , 4 ) A primeira classe emprega exames de imagem intraoperatórios (ultrassonografia ou TC). A localização
por meio de ultrassonografia intraoperatória é difícil porque o pulmão deve estar em completo colapso para que se possam visualizar nódulos
pequenos.( 1 , 4 ) Essa técnica aumenta o tempo cirúrgico, pois o colapso total do pulmão pode levar de 30 min a 150 min e é frequentemente
contraindicado em pacientes com enfisema extenso. Além de a experiência com resseção toracoscópica guiada por TC em tempo real ser limitada,
artefatos causados por instrumentos e grampos degradam a imagem da TC, e o espaço limitado dentro do pórtico (gantry) do tomógrafo torna o
procedimento difícil.( 1 , 4 ) A segunda classe de técnicas de localização inclui a injeção percutânea de corantes, meios de contraste,
radionuclídeos ou agentes adesivos coloridos.( 1 , 4 , 5 ) A difusão longe do nódulo é uma limitação dessas técnicas e impõe restrições
sobre o tempo admissível entre o procedimento de localização por TC e a resseção toracoscópica. Isso pode causar dificuldades na programação
do centro cirúrgico. Além disso, há risco de reações anafiláticas após a injeção de certos corantes, como o azul de metileno, e é muitas
vezes difícil visualizá-los na superfície pleural visceral em pacientes com extensa pigmentação antracótica dos pulmões.( 1 , 4 , 5 ) Como
esses materiais não são solúveis em água, há risco de acidente vascular cerebral caso cheguem às veias pulmonares. A terceira classe de
técnicas de localização emprega molas ou micromolas que são macias e flexíveis e causam pouco dano ao tecido pulmonar, mesmo quando se
desalojam. Um estudo anterior comparou micromolas e fios em forma de gancho quanto a seu desempenho na localização de nódulos em pulmões de
cabra recém-colhidos.( 5 ) Os autores relataram que a micromola se desenrolava sempre que se deslocava, causando dano mínimo ao tecido. Além
disso, o revestimento "felpudo" de fibra dessas micromolas induz a coagulação e aumenta a aderência da micromola ao tecido pulmonar. A
configuração espiral e o revestimento de fibras praticamente eliminam o risco de embolização. Em suma, gostaríamos de destacar esse novo
método de localização de nódulos, que se trata de uma técnica segura e eficaz e que aumenta a taxa de sucesso de excisão de nódulos por meio
de videotoracoscopia, especialmente em casos de pequenos nódulos em vidro fosco.
