The expression "contusio cordis" defines a lesion of the cardiac myocyte, hemorrhagic or fibrotic, due to the application of violent kinetic
force resulting from a blunt trauma to the precordial region1. Syncope is almost always the first clinical manifestation observed, and
commonly precedes death. Contusio cordis differs from commotio cordis, the latter representing a cardiac electromechanical disorder
consequent to a blunt trauma to the precordial region, at a critical moment of the cardiac cycle, which occurs within 10 to 30 ms from the
T-wave peak, a period susceptible to the development of ventricular fibrillation2-5. Both forms are fatal most of the time2,3,6-9. Commotio
cordis is a form of ventricular fibrillation, rather than a lesion in cardiomyocytes or adjacent organs2,3. It is a rare condition, leading
most cases to death6 , and being more prevalent among men, because of its relationship to high-impact sports3,6. The accurate incidence of
both entities is unknown, because there is no systematic way to register all cases; however, although rare in the literature, they are
believed to be more common than reported3,6. Contusio cordis associated with complete atrioventricular block (CAVB) is an even rarer
condition, with few cases reported7. The objective of the present study is to report a case of contusio cordis associated with CAVB and
tricuspid regurgitation (TR). The patient is a 37-year-old male with a history of admission to an emergency unit nine years before due to
syncope after blunt trauma to his precordial region. That chest trauma was caused by a stone that hit the patient while inside a train at
high speed. At the time, he received local care, denied cardiovascular symptoms and previous diseases, and was discharged. However, the
patient reported dyspnea one year later and a new syncopal episode. He was then diagnosed with CAVB and submitted to permanent VVI pacemaker
implantation. The patient reported being asymptomatic and skipping follow-up and pacemaker review for seven years, until one year ago, when
dyspnea, fatigue and syncope resumed. On examination, he had dyspnea, bradycardia, pathological jugular venous distension, cannon A wave,
lateral displacement of the apex beat, and heart murmur compatible with TR. Chest teleradiography evidenced heart enlargement. The
electrocardiogram (Figure 1) showed CAVB. The echocardiogram (Figure 2) confirmed important TR secondary to rupture of tricuspid chordae
tendineae and right ventricular dysfunction, allowing free communication between the right atrium and right ventricle, with significant
right ventricular enlargement (5.0 cm). The other echocardiographic measures were as follows: left atrium, 3.4 cm; left ventricular systolic
and diastolic volumes, 113 mL and 154 mL, respectively. Important systolic dysfunction was evidenced, with ejection fraction of 27%.
Electrocardiogram showing complete atrioventricular block Echocardiogram evidencing tricuspid regurgitation Complete failure of the
pacemaker generator was detected, motivating its replacement. Heart failure (HF) treatment was optimized, being the patient discharged
asymptomatic (NYHA functional class I) on carvedilol (12.5 mg/day), enalapril maleate (10 mg/day), and spironolactone (25 mg/day). Cardiac
lesions resulting from chest trauma vary widely as follows: cardiac contusion; free wall rupture; septal rupture; and valvular lesion.
Traumatic TR is rare8,9 , and often underestimated, because it is hemodynamically well tolerated and lesions in other organs are more
valued. Commotio cordis is frequently reported in the practice of competitive sports, such as martial fights and soccer, in car accidents,
torture, and other high-impact traumas6,9. That is an electromechanical disorder of the heart due to a blunt trauma on the precordial
region, at a critical point of the cardiac cycle. Usually, when chest trauma occurs during the QRS, a trend towards CAVB exists; however,
when chest trauma occurs within the 10 to 30 ms preceding the T wave, ventricular fibrillation usually results. Only at that particular
point in time, a mechanical energy of at least 50J can cause ventricular fibrillation. The small window of vulnerability explains the rarity
of commotio cordis manifesting as severe arrhythmia. Considering a sinus rhythm of 60 bpm, the cardiac cycle lasts approximately 1000 ms;
thus, the likelihood of a trauma occurring at the particular point of ventricular repolarization ranges from 1% to 3%. Contusio cordis is a
rare condition, being lethal in most cases. It rarely involves only the heart8. It is commonly seen in high-impact accidents, such as car
accidents, Formula 1 grand prix, in which, despite the existence of cockpit protection, it is unable to absorb all the kinetic energy of a
shock at 300 km/h reduced to 0 km/h in a few seconds. The kinetic force usually affects other organs, such as the lungs, trachea, esophagus,
and costal arches, leading to pulmonary contusion and costal arch fractures. Thus, contusio cordis is more related to lethal cases. However,
studies comparing both entities still lack. The situation here reported is unusual, and no similar report has been found in the bases
searched. The sum of the force vectors of the train and the stone has contributed to increase the magnitude of the trauma. The right
ventricle and tricuspid valve are most often affected because of their anterior anatomical position in the chest; however, TR is rare, and,
when present, is well tolerated5,9,10. Usually TR results from the rupture of the papillary muscle or of the anterior cusp9. Symptoms can
begin immediately after chest trauma or be delayed for years. The diagnosis is usually based on clinical signs and echocardiographic
findings. The signs most often present are as follows: pathological jugular venous distension; hepatojugular reflux; holosystolic murmur
exacerbated with inspiration; paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea; hepatomegaly, with palpable and pulsatile liver; lower limb edema; and varicose
veins. The deviation of the electrical axis to the right complements the picture. In related case, predominant symptoms and signs of CAVBB -
dizziness, wave in the cannon and bradycardia. The electrocardiogram confirmed CAVB and, paradoxically, showed rotation of the electrical
axis to the left Right ventricular dysfunction and HF led to drug treatment, which compensated the patient (NYHA functional class I). The
need for repair surgery or tricuspid valve change is exceptional. The most common clinical manifestations of contusio cordis are chest pain
resulting from local trauma and syncope8. The clinical findings might vary, and unspecific symptoms, such as fainting, nauseas and vomiting,
can be reported. Clinical assessment, searching for TR, in addition to electrocardiography and echocardiography should be used when damage
to the tricuspid valve or conduction system is suspected. In the present case, HF was only detected after decompensation, which might have
been aggravated by bradycardia secondary to CAVB. The fact that the patient skipped follow-up for seven years, which means that, having an
implanted pacemaker, he should have attended at least two consultations per year, and the aggravation of clinical findings, propitiated the
appearance of many classical HF manifestations, which are commonly seen among patients lacking information and access to a health care
system. There are several case reports on cardiac laceration or arrhythmias caused by chest trauma, whose diagnosis is missed on a first
inspection. In such cases, some tests, such as baseline electrocardiography, Holter monitoring, echocardiography, and nuclear magnetic
resonance imaging, might help the complementary investigation. The early diagnosis can prevent a fatality. Author contributions Acquisition
of data: Longo Neto GC, Martins WA, Viallacorta H, Silva EN, Haffner PM, Gerardt D; Analysis and interpretation of the data: Longo Neto GC,
Martins WA, Viallacorta H, Silva EN, Haffner PM, Gerardt D; Writing of the manuscript: Longo Neto GC and Martins WA; Critical revision of
the manuscript for intellectual content: Longo Neto GC, Martins WA, Viallacorta H, Silva EN, Haffner PM, Gerardt D. Potential Conflict of
Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Sources of Funding There were no external funding sources
for this study. Study Association This article is part of the thesis of associate professor submitted by Giulio Cesare Longo Neto, Wolney
Andrade Martins, Humberto Villacorta, Eduardo Nani da Silva, Paula Ma√≠ra Haffner and Davyson Gerardt from Universidade Federal Fluminense.
