Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 23 Final Diagnosis: Rabdomyolysis Symptoms: Cardiac arrest • cardiac
arrhythmia • hypercalcemia Medication: — Clinical Procedure: — Specialty: — Unusual clinical course Rhabdomyolysis is frequently complicated
by multiple electrolyte abnormalities, including hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, and hypo/hypercalcemia. Hypercalcemia can be severe and
life-threatening. A 23-year-old white male suffered severe trauma to his lower extremities after a motor vehicle accident, leading to severe
muscle damage, cardiac arrhythmia, cardiac arrest, and oliguric acute kidney injury (AKI), requiring hemodialysis treatment. As expected, he
was hypocalcemic during the oliguric phase but during the diuretic phase he developed severe symptomatic hypercalcemia requiring
hemodialysis treatment in spite of volume replacement and administration of pamidronate. Hypercalcemia reached a peak of 17.1 mg/dL,
corrected for serum albumin and urine output was as high as 11.9 liters daily. Hypercalcemia lasted for 3 weeks and then it returned back to
normal levels. Plasma levels of 25-OH and 1–25(OH)2 vitamin D were low, intact parathyroid hormone level was appropriately suppressed, and
24-hour urine calcium was 1194 mg (normal up to 350 mg/daily). Mobilization of calcium from calcium phosphate deposits in the injured
muscles seems to be the main reason for hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria in rhabdomyolysis-induced AKI. Hypercalcemia is not uncommon during
the recovery phase of ATN. Unattended, it can cause severe morbidity and even mortality. Fluid administration, pamidronate, and calcium-free
dialysis are some methods used to correct severe hypercalcemia. Over time, hypercalcemia improves in almost all cases. Rhabdomyolysis is a
common phenomenon that results from muscle breakdown due to trauma, extreme exertion, or myotoxins, causing the release of intracellular
contents including potassium, calcium, and phosphorus , which results in acute kidney injury (AKI) in 10–65% of cases . Early hypocalcemia
is often seen due to precipitation of calcium with phosphate released from damaged muscle cells, and occasionally hypercalcemia can be seen
during the recovery phase due to mobilization of calcium phosphate deposits . Herein we present a case of rhabdomyolysis complicated by AKI
and profound hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria. A 23-year-old white male suffered severe trauma to his lower extremities after a motor
vehicle accident, leading to rhabdomyolysis and oliguric acute renal injury requiring renal replacement therapy. He was admitted to the
intensive care unit of another health care facility where he was found to have severe hyperkalemia leading to 5 episodes of cardiac arrest.
He was stabilized and then transferred to the Veterans Hospital for continuation of care. In the VA hospital he had severe damage of lower
extremities, including compartment syndrome, which eventually culminated in an above the knee amputation of his left lower extremity. While
in the intensive care unit, he was oliguric and uremic, and hemodialysis treatment was continued. About 3 weeks after his initial injury,
his renal function began to recover; he entered the polyuric phase of AKI, and came off dialysis. During this phase, his serum calcium
started to rise, reaching a peak of 17.1mg/d, corrected for serum albumin (Figure 1), causing nausea, weakness, drowsiness, and polyuria,
with urine output up to 11 liters per day. He was treated with intravenous fluids, calcitonin, and pamidronate but he continued to be
hypercalcemic. Therefore, he was treated one time with calcium-free dialysate, which he tolerated well and brought down his serum calcium
from 15.1 to 7.3 mg/dL, uncorrected for serum albumin. Overall hypercalcemia lasted for about 3 weeks and gradually decreased to normal
levels. During this time, plasma levels of 25-OH and 1–25(OH)2 vitamin D levels were 12 ng/mL (normal >30 ng/mL) and <8 ng/mL (normal >30
ng/mL), respectively. Intact parathyroid hormone level was appropriately suppressed and was less than 2.5 pg/mL. A 24-hour urine collection
showed excretion of 1194 mg of calcium (normal up to 350 mg/day). A technetium pyrophosphate scan (Figure 2) showed extensive calcium
deposition in his left thigh muscles, where he had severe muscle injury and compartment syndrome. Rhabdomyolysis occurs when there is an
insult to muscle cells, such as trauma, extreme exertion, ischemia, infection, metabolic derangements, or exposure to myotoxins , which
triggers a chain of events causing progressive derangements in intracellular calcium homeostasis and eventual cell death. In health, the
cytoplasmic calcium concentration is very tightly regulated by various calcium pumps/exchangers (e.g., calcium channels, 2Na+/Ca2+
exchanger, and Ca2+ ATPase pump). Calcium is transported from the cytoplasm into the sarcoplasmic reticulum via the calcium ATPase pump,
where it is released on stimulation from neural impulses causing muscle contraction. Calcium is also pumped from the cytoplasm to the
extracellular space by the 2Na+/Ca2+ exchanger, which moves sodium down its concentration gradient into the cell while moving calcium out of
the cell against its concentration gradient. The net result is that the intracellular cytoplasmic ionized calcium concentration is 10 000
times lower than the extracellular ionized calcium concentration . In rhabdomyolysis, the 2 main mechanisms that trigger the cascade of
events resulting in the demise of the cell are: 1) a lack of ATP, which causes dysfunction of the Na+/K+ ATPase and Ca2+ ATPase, thus
causing accumulation of cytosolic calcium; and 2) loss of integrity of the sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane, which also causes increase in
cytoplasmic calcium concentration. The increase in cytosolic calcium concentration activates neutral proteases or phospholipases, which
damage cell membranes. The release of intracellular contents to the extracellular space further compounds the problem by damaging nearby
cells. The inflammatory response to this insult causes ischemia and progressive muscle damage . As the muscle cells are damaged, the
intracellular contents, which include potassium, phosphorus, uric acid, and creatinine kinase, are released . Since potassium is a
predominantly intracellular cation with 70% of the intracellular potassium in muscle cells , rhabdomyolysis can cause significant
hyperkalemia, with resultant arrhythmias, as seen in this patient. The release of intracellular phosphorus can cause early hypocalcemia due
to formation of calcium phosphate deposits on the injured muscles , as seen in our patient. During the recovery phase of AKI, the calcium
phosphate deposits mobilize, causing hypercalcemia in up to one-third of patients . However, it is uncommon to see hypercalcemia as severe
as in this case. A review of the 60 current PubMed indexed case reports on hypercalcemia associated with rhabdomyolysis (with available
abstracts and/or full-text articles) reveals that this is the third-highest calcium level associated with rhabdomyolysis in the current
literature. The highest level of hypercalcemia associated with rhabdomyolysis was 20 mg/dL . There have only been 5 other cases of
hypercalcemia with serum calcium level >15 mg/dL in the past 40 years . Of the cases in the past 20 years in which the duration of
hypercalcemia was reported, the average was 8.6 days, with a median of 10 days. This demonstrates the importance of recognizing the severity
of hypercalcemia, which can be associated with rhabdomyolysis. The long duration of hypercalcemia in our case may have been because he was
young, as well as the severity of his injuries. The mechanism of hypercalcemia seems to be the dissolution of deposited calcium phosphate
during the diuretic phase of acute kidney injury. Various studies have evaluated parathyroid hormone and vitamin D response to hypocalcemia
during the oliguric and to hypercalcemia during the polyuric phase, and the response seems to be appropriate . The fact that our patient had
suppressed level of intact parathyroid hormone and low levels of 25-OH and 1–25(OH)2 vitamin D and hypercalciuria is consistent with this
line of thinking. It is crucial to remember that patients with rhabdomyolysis are not out of danger when serum creatinine and urine output
start to improve. One must be aware of and watch for severe hypercalcemia, which may occur during the diuretic phase of rhabdomyolysis-
induced acute injury. Close follow-up and meticulous management of fluids and electrolytes is of utmost importance to the eventual recovery
of kidney function. Serum calcium levels during the oliguric and diuretic phases of AKI. Serum Ca is demonstrated in mg/dL on the ordinate
and the timeline by date on the abscissa. Arrow indicates use of calcium free dialysate and its impact on serum calcium. Heavy deposition of
calcium in the injured tissues of the left thigh. The left leg has already been amputated.
