A 15-year-old female patient presented to our hospital with a history of recurrent pneumonia and complaints of productive cough and episodes
of bronchospasm. Physical examination revealed crackles in the right hemithorax. Laboratory test findings were normal. A chest X-ray showed
right paracardiac opacities. Axial CT (Figure 1A) demonstrated consolidations with cystic areas in the right paracardiac region. A
reformatted coronal image showed an accessory cardiac bronchus (ACB; Figure 1B, arrow) arising from the medial wall of the intermediate
bronchus. Three-dimensional shaded surface display coronal reformatting showed the ACB (Figure 1C, arrow) and a correspondent lobule with
cystic dilatations (arrowheads). Bronchoscopy confirmed the presence of the ACB arising from the intermediary bronchus. Bronchoalveolar
lavage and cultures were negative for Mycobacterium spp. and fungi. Surgery demonstrated infected cystic structures and small bronchioles
and alveoli with retained secretions distally to the ACB. Figure 1In A, an axial CT image demonstrating consolidations with cystic areas in
the right paracardiac region. In B, a reformatted coronal image showing an accessory cardiac bronchus (arrow) arising from the medial wall
of the intermediate bronchus. In C, threedimensional shaded surface display coronal reformatting, showing the accessory cardiac bronchus
(arrow) and a correspondent lobule with cystic dilatations (arrowheads). Bronchial division anomalies are common, although most are
encountered incidentally in asymptomatic adults. They might be isolated or associated with a variety of other congenital disorders.( 1 ) ACB
is a rare congenital anomaly of the tracheobronchial tree, characterized by an anomalous bronchus originating from the intermediate bronchus
opposite to the origin of the right upper lobe bronchus or originating from the medial wall of the right main bronchus. (1-3) From its
origin, it runs medially and caudally toward the heart.(2) An ACB might be a short, blind-ended structure or a long, branching bronchus that
develops into a series of small bronchioles, which might end in vestigial parenchymal tissue in the bronchioles or in cystic degeneration,
or it might be associated with small amounts of pulmonary parenchyma.( 1 , 3 ) Most patients with ACB are asymptomatic, and the anomaly is
discovered incidentally during bronchoscopy or imaging studies conducted for unrelated reasons.(1,4) However, an ACB can become symptomatic
due to recurrent infection, empyema, hemoptysis, and malignant transformation.(1,2,4,5) These symptoms are caused by the accumulation of
secretions in the ACB, leading to inflammation and infection, extensive microvascularization, and hemoptysis, especially when the ACB is
long or has an accessory lobe.(2,4) Thus, the short type of ACB tends to be asymptomatic, whereas the accessory-lobed and long diverticular
types are more susceptible to complications.( 5 ) Histological examination suggested that the specimen resected from our patient was the
accessory bronchus, including an accessory lobe with retained secretions. The finding of scar tissue, but no alveoli, on the peripheral
accessory lobe suggested that it had been deteriorated or ruptured by constant infection, leading to bronchopneumonia and empyema.( 4 ) An
ACB is not generally visible on chest X-ray, but it can be visualized well with other imaging modalities. Surgical resection of a long ACB
or of one with an accessory lobe is advised as soon as symptoms occur.( 4 , 5 ) In conclusion, pulmonologists and radiologists should
recognize normal bronchial anatomy as well as developmental bronchial anomalies because this is important to establish a correct diagnosis.
Although an ACB is not pathological per se, it is occasionally associated with clinical symptoms and complications. Uma paciente de 15 anos
de idade apresentou-se em nosso hospital com história de pneumonia recorrente e queixas de tosse produtiva e episódios de broncoespasmo. O
exame físico revelou estertores crepitantes no hemitórax direito. Os achados laboratoriais foram normais. A radiografia de tórax mostrou
opacidades paracardíacas direitas. A TC axial (Figura 1A) mostrou consolidações com áreas císticas na região paracardíaca direita. Uma
imagem coronal reformatada mostrou um brônquio cardíaco acessório (BCA; Figura 1B, seta) proveniente da parede medial do brônquio
intermediário. A reformatação coronal tridimensional por exibição de superfície sombreada mostrou o BCA (Figura 1C, seta) e um lóbulo
correspondente com dilatações císticas (pontas de seta). A broncoscopia confirmou a presença de BCA proveniente do brônquio intermediário. A
lavagem broncoalveolar e as culturas foram negativas para Mycobacterium spp. e fungos. A cirurgia revelou estruturas císticas infectadas e
pequenos bronquíolos e alvéolos com secreções retidas, distais ao BCA. Figura 1Em A, imagem de TC axial mostrando consolidações com áreas
císticas na região paracardíaca direita. Em B, imagem coronal reformatada mostrando um brônquio cardíaco acessório (seta) proveniente da
parede medial do brônquio intermediário. Em C, reformatação coronal tridimensional por exibição de superfície sombreada, mostrando o
brônquio cardíaco acessório (seta) e um lóbulo correspondente com dilatações císticas (pontas de seta). Anomalias de divisões brônquicas são
comuns, embora a maioria seja encontrada por acaso em adultos assintomáticos. Podem estar isoladas ou acompanhadas de várias outras doenças
congênitas.( 1 ) Uma rara anomalia congênita da árvore traqueobrônquica, o BCA é um brônquio anômalo proveniente do brônquio intermediário
oposto à origem do brônquio do lobo superior direito ou proveniente da parede medial do brônquio principal direito.( 1 - 3 ) A partir de sua
origem, estende-se medial e caudalmente até o coração.( 2 ) Um BCA pode ser uma estrutura curta e sem abertura ou um brônquio longo
ramificado em uma série de pequenos bronquíolos, que pode terminar em tecido parenquimatoso residual nos bronquíolos ou em degeneração
cística, ou pode estar associado a pequenas quantidades de parênquima pulmonar.( 1 , 3 ) A maioria dos pacientes com BCA é assintomática, e
a anomalia é descoberta por acaso durante uma broncoscopia ou exames de imagem realizados por outros motivos, sem relação com a anomalia.( 1
, 4 ) No entanto, um BCA pode se tornar sintomático em virtude de infecção recorrente, empiema, hemoptise e transformação maligna.( 1 , 2 ,
4 , 5 ) Esses sintomas são causados pela acumulação de secreções no BCA e levam a inflamação e infecção, microvascularização extensa e
hemoptise, especialmente quando o BCA é longo ou tem um lobo acessório.( 2 , 4 ) Assim, os BCA curtos tendem a ser assintomáticos, ao passo
que os tipos lobo acessório e longo apendicular são mais propensos a complicações.( 5 ) O exame histológico sugeriu que o espécime ressecado
de nossa paciente era o brônquio acessório, incluindo um lobo acessório com secreções retidas. O achado de tecido cicatricial, porém sem
alvéolos, no lobo acessório periférico sugeriu que havia se deteriorado ou rompido em virtude de infecção constante, levando a
broncopneumonia e empiema.( 4 ) Um BCA geralmente não é visível na radiografia de tórax, mas pode ser visto nitidamente por meio de outros
métodos de imagem. Recomenda-se a resseção cirúrgica de um BCA longo ou de um com lobo acessório assim que ocorram sintomas.( 4 , 5 )
Conclui-se que pneumologistas e radiologistas devem reconhecer a anatomia brônquica normal e anomalias do desenvolvimento brônquico, pois
isso é importante para estabelecer o diagnóstico correto. Embora um BCA não seja patológico em si, associa-se às vezes a sintomas clínicos e
complicações.
