Commotio retinae (CR) is an outer retinal disorder following blunt trauma to the eye. Histologically it is characterized by disruption of
the photoreceptor outer segments (OS), typically without injury to other retinal layers. Using spectral-domain optical coherence tomography
(OCT) the condition is visible as hyper-reflectivity of the OS. Most cases of CR are associated with transient grey-white discoloration of
the retina and are easily diagnosed clinically, but there have been reports of OCT-confirmed CR without retinal discoloration. It is likely
that this subclinical variant of CR is under-recognized as the OCT features of CR are subtle. Here, we report a case of OCT-confirmed
subclinical CR that demonstrated prominent infrared hypo-reflectance, using the infrared protocol of the SPECTRALIS® OCT, Heidelberg
Engineering. This case suggests that infrared reflectance may have a role in diagnosing cases of subclinical CR. The defining feature of
commotio retinae (CR) is traumatic disruption of the photoreceptor outer segments (OS), visible on spectral-domain optical coherence
tomography (OCT) as hyper-reflectivity of the OS layer. Transient retinal discoloration is a characteristic feature, but when this sign is
absent, the diagnosis of subclinical CR may be easily missed. Here, we present a case of subclinical CR that demonstrated prominent infrared
hypo-reflectance. The case suggests a role for infrared imaging as a diagnostic adjunct for cases of CR that are not readily detectable on
examination. A 68-year-old male presented complaining of sudden and profound loss of central vision in his left eye following blunt eye
trauma. He reported seeing a large, dense, central scotoma that began fading 1 h after the injury. He was emmetropic, phakic, and had no
significant ophthalmic history. On examination, 24-h postinjury, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in the left eye was reduced to 20/40
from a baseline of 20/25. There were periocular ecchymosis and subconjunctival hemorrhage but no identifiable retinal injury on examination.
OCT of the left macula (SPECTRALIS®, Heidelberg Engineering, 5-line raster acquisition protocol) revealed abnormal hyper-reflectivity and
nodularity of the photoreceptor OS layer. The history, examination, and OCT features were consistent with subclinical macula CR.
Interestingly, the patient was found to have prominent abnormalities on infrared imaging using the infrared reflectance protocol of the
SPECTRALIS® OCT [Fig. 1]. Infrared imaging of the left fundus revealed diffuse infrared hypo-reflectance dotted with spots of very low pixel
value (dark), creating a stippled appearance. Point-to-point correlation between the infrared and OCT images using the SPECTRALIS® software
(Heidelberg Engineering, Germany) demonstrated that the infrared dark spots correlated with foci of thickened OS seen on 5-line raster OCT.
No pathology of the superficial retina, retinal pigment epithelium or choroid was detected using red-free reflectance, fundus auto-
fluorescence, and enhanced-depth imaging (EDI), respectively. No treatment was given to the patient. By day 30 posttrauma, and at 8 months
posttrauma, BCVA in the left eye was 20/25 and the retina appeared normal on examination and when imaged with infrared reflectance, 5-line
raster OCT, fundus auto-fluorescence, and EDI [Fig. 2]. Left fundus images at day 1 postblunt trauma to the left eye. (a) Color fundus
photograph. (b) Infrared confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscope fundus image demonstrating stippled hypo-reflectance at the macula. (c)
Optical coherence tomography of the macula demonstrating abnormal hyper-reflectivity of the outer segments (between arrowheads). (d) Fundus
auto-fluorescence Left fundus images at day 30. (a) Optical coherence tomography demonstrates restoration of normal outer retinal
architecture. The outer segments layer is now clearly defined. (b) Infrared confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscope fundus image reveals
resolution of the infrared hypo-reflectance In this case, there is a clear temporal relationship between eye trauma, transient vision loss,
transient OCT changes consistent with CR, and transient infrared hypo-reflectance. Cases of CR detectable on OCT, but not fundus examination
have been described, confirming that some cases of CR are subclinical. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, the detection of subclinical
CR using infrared imaging has not been described previously. The pathology of CR has been studied histologically and on OCT, and comprises
fragmentation of the photoreceptor OS without injury to the inner retina. As demonstrated by our case, this manifests on 5-line raster OCT
as abnormal hyper-reflectivity of the OS layer. This OCT feature is subtle and is easily overlooked if the study is not carefully
scrutinized. Our case implicates infrared imaging as a diagnostic adjunct for detecting subclinical CR. Since focal dark spots on infrared
imaging correlated with points of nodular OS thickening in our case, we infer that the infrared hypo-reflectance in CR is caused by
increased absorption of infrared light by an abnormal OS layer. With a wavelength of 820nm, the infrared mode of the SPECTRALIS® OCT
penetrates deeper into the retina than modalities using visible wavelengths of light. It is, therefore, useful for detecting outer retinal
pathology, such as that of CR. The SPECTRALIS® uses a confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscope (CSLO) and records infrared reflectance without
barrier filters. Compared with conventional recording techniques, CSLO improves image resolution by using a higher emission of light energy
and by reducing the capture of scattered light. We acknowledge that our findings in this case lack generalizability at present. Further
studies are required to determine whether infrared hypo-reflectance is a consistent feature in all cases of CR, and whether this imaging
modality has greater sensitivity for detecting subclinical CR than 5-line raster OCT. Nevertheless, this case suggests that infrared imaging
may have a role as a diagnostic adjunct for detecting subclinical CR. We recommend that clinicians consider performing infrared imaging of
the retina when managing a patient who presents with unexplained vision loss after blunt trauma and a normal-appearing fundus. Source of
Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
