We report a 32-year-old male who presented with blurring of vision in the right eye since 1.5 years. He had history of swelling over the
extensor surfaces of large joints which were migratory in nature. Few of them spontaneously subsided following suppuration of chalky white
discharges except over the gluteal region. Ophthalmological examination revealed visual acuity of counting fingers (CF) at 1 m in the right
eye and perilimbal conjunctival calcific deposits and retinal angiod streaks in both eyes. There was choroidal neovascular membrane with
subretinal hemorrhage in right eye, confirmed by fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) and optical coherence tomography (OCT). B scan
ultrasonography and simultaneous vector A scan detected calcification of the subretinal neovascular membrane and the adjoining sclera.
Tumoral calcinosis (TC) is a rare familial disorder of phosphate metabolism. It is characterized by single or multiple painless, lobular,
well-demarcated periarticular soft tissue swelling/s. These are mostly distributed along the extensor surfaces of large joints due to
ectopic deposition of calcium. In TC serum phosphate level is elevated with or without increase in level of serum 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D
and usually with normal serum calcium and parathyroid hormone levels. Genetically it is a posttranslational defect where autosomal recessive
mutation had been reported to genes GALNT3 or fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF 23). Ocular involvement in TC has been reported, but in
Indian literature such report was not found (PubMed search - ocular tumoral calcinosis). We report a rare case of ocular involvement in TC
where scleral calcification was its unique feature in addition to other findings. A 32-year-old male presented with a history of acute and
painless blurring of vision in right eye since 1.5 years. He had been suffering from multiple, migratory large joint swellings. All the
swellings spontaneously subsided following suppuration of chalky white material and scar formation except over the gluteal region.
Ophthalmological examination revealed best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of counting fingers (CF) at 30 m in the right eye and 20/20 vision
in the left eye. Slit lamp examination of the anterior segment detected perilimbal calcific deposits [Fig 1]. Ocular fundus examination
revealed angiod streaks in both eyes and choroidal neovascular membrane with subretinal hemorrhage in the right eye [Fig 2]. Fundus
fluorescein angiography (FFA) confirmed the above findings [Fig 3]. Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) also showed
subretinal membrane and fluid in the macula in the right eye [Fig 4]. B scan ultrasonography with simultaneous vector A scan showed elevated
macular area with high reflective echo, one each over the subretinal membrane and the sclera. These findings were suggestive of focal
calcification of both the structures in the right eye [Fig 5]. Perilimbal calcifications Color montage photographs of the ocular fundi. (a)
Right fundus showing angiod streaks with subretinal hemorrhage and neovascular membrane. (b) Left fundus showing the angiod streaks (a and
b) Fundus fluorescein angiogram showing angiod streaks in both eyes. Retinal hemorrhage is the cause of blocked fluorescence and
hypofluorescence is due to subretinal neovascular membrane in the right eye (a and b) Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (OCT)
showing a big subretinal membrane and fluid in the macular region B scan ultrasonography with vector A scan showing elevated macular area
with (a) a high reflective echo over the surface and (b) another high reflective echo on the outer surface of the sclera with shadowing
affect, suggesting focal calcification in the membrane and the sclera, respectively Systemic examination revealed scoliosis, shortening, and
deformity of the right upper limb and left lower limb. There were scars and multiple discharging cutaneous sinuses over both the gluteal
folds [Fig 6]. A multilobulated swelling with shiny overlying skin was present over the right shoulder [Fig 7]. On physical examination, no
findings suggestive of pseudoxanthoma elasticum, Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome, scleroderma, or dermatomyositis were found. X-ray pelvis and
computed tomography (CT) scan of chest and pelvis showed nodular calcifications in periarticular soft tissues, bilateral adrenal glands, and
spleen [Figs 8â€“10]. Photograph of the dorsal aspect of the patient showing scars over both the elbow and the hip joints and the right
scapula and multiple cutaneous discharging sinuses over the gluteal folds Photograph of the ventral aspect of the right shoulder joint
showing a lobulated fresh lesion with shiny skin Plain X-ray pelvis showing multilobulated, well-demarcated, densely calcified masses (as
indicated by arrows) confined to the soft tissue on the extensor surface of the hip joint and adjoining areas (both gluteal regions) Axial
computed tomography (CT) chest showing nodular calcification between chest wall and the scapula (as indicated by the arrow). The lesion is
predominantly homogenous suggesting lower metabolic activity (a) Axial CT pelvis and (b) volume-rendering technique (VRT) image showing
extensive nodular calcifications (as indicated by arrows) surrounding the hip joints On laboratory investigations, serum phosphate and serum
calcium levels were 4.9 and 7.9 mg/dl, respectively. Renal function was normal. Based on the clinical features and radiological and
laboratory findings, the condition was diagnosed as TC with ocular involvement. TC is a rare systemic disorder. It is also known as
Teutschlaender disease. Inclan et al., differentiated the condition from dystrophic and metabolic calcifications and coined the term TC. In
the present case, the radiological findings were typical of TC. Subject had high serum phosphate levels with normal renal function. However,
serum calcium level was low and cystic spaces showing fluid levels, usually seen in TC, were not found in our present case. This was
probably because of the healing stage of the disease. The lesions were homogenous without any adjoining osseous destruction suggesting a
reduced metabolic activity, thereby excluding neoplasm. To our best knowledge (PubMed search), this is the first report of TC presenting
with ocular manifestations in Indian literature. The case remained undiagnosed till the ophthalmic manifestations occurred. The systemic
involvement started at 8 years of age and visual symptoms at 20.5 years of age, which is the usual age of ocular involvement. Except for
scleral calcification, all other findings found in the present case like limbal calcific deposits, angiod streaks, and subretinal
neovascular membrane, have been reported in literature. Angiod streak in the retina may be related to GALNT3 or FGF23 gene mutation. Since
sclera is a connective tissue, similar mechanism may also be responsible for calcification in the periarticular as well as scleral
connective tissue. The other known causes of sclerochoroidal calcification like hyperparathyroidism, pseudohypoparathyroidism, and renal
tubular acidosis were carefully excluded. Considering the rarity of the case, difficulty in diagnosis and scleral calcification, which was a
new finding, the present case has been reported. 1)Dr. P. Hatimota MD, and Dr. HS Das MD, DCCP, for providing X Ray and CT images2)Dr. (Mrs)
Hemlata Deka MS, for B scan ultrasonography3)Dr. (Mrs) K. Gogoi MD, for biochemical studies4)Mr. K. Patgiri for fundus fluorescein
angiography5)Mr. Priyanshu Talukdar for editing photographs Dr. P. Hatimota MD, and Dr. HS Das MD, DCCP, for providing X Ray and CT images
Dr. (Mrs) Hemlata Deka MS, for B scan ultrasonography Dr. (Mrs) K. Gogoi MD, for biochemical studies Mr. K. Patgiri for fundus fluorescein
angiography Mr. Priyanshu Talukdar for editing photographs Source of Support: Sri Sankaradeva Nethralaya, 96, Basistha Road, Guwahati,
Assam. Conflict of Interest: None declared
