A 45-year-old caucasian man with progressive dyspnea appeared to have a giant intrathoracic cyst in the anterior mediastinum encasing the
heart and compressing both lungs. He underwent succesful removal of the cyst through a median sternotomy. Recovery was uneventful. Gross
examination revealed a thin-walled cyst filled with clear fluid. Microscopic histopathologic examination revealed a cyst wall lined by cubic
cells and underlying loose connective tissue with remnants of thymic tissue. The definitive diagnosis was an intrathoracic (simple)
mesothelial cyst. An intrathoracic mesothelial cyst is a benign, generally asymptomatic tumor that can be located in the anterior
cardiophrenic angle, the paravertebral or paratracheal regions, or in the anterior mediastinum. It can become rather large before it becomes
symptomatic, at which point surgical removal is generally warranted. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13019-014-0152-2)
contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. An intrathoracic mesothelial cyst is a congenital abnormality and
represents 3-6% of mediastinal tumors . These cysts are generally asymptomatic and located in the anterior cardiophrenic angle , but can
also be found in the paravertebral or paratracheal regions or in the anterior mediastinum, as shown in this case. A 45-year-old caucasian
man with no significant past medical history was referred to our institution with progressive dyspnea. A chest X-ray showed a large mass in
the anterior mediastinum (Figure 1A,B). Transthoracic echocardiography showed a large echolucent space around the heart (Figure 1C;
parasternal long-axis view). Computertomography showed a large cyst in the anterior mediastinum encasing the heart (Figure 1D; transverse
view at the level of the aortic valve). The cyst was 33 × 22 × 4 cm in size with a radiodensity of 12 to 18 Hounsfield units.Figure 1
Imaging. Preoperative posterioranterior (A) and lateral (B) chest X-ray showing a large mass in the anterior mediastinum with posterior
displacement of the heart. Transthoracic echocardiography (C) showing a large echolucent space around the heart (parasternal long-axis
view). Computertomography (D) showing a large cyst in the anterior mediastinum encasing the heart with compression of both lungs (transverse
view at the level of the aortic valve). Gross examination (E) revealed a thin-walled cyst filled with clear fluid. A postoperative
posterioranterior chest X-ray (F) showed a remarkable improvement and a normal cardiac silhouette. Microscopic histopathologic examination
(G) showed a cyst wall lined by cubic cells and underlying loose connective tissue with remnants of thymic tissue. Imaging. Preoperative
posterioranterior (A) and lateral (B) chest X-ray showing a large mass in the anterior mediastinum with posterior displacement of the heart.
Transthoracic echocardiography (C) showing a large echolucent space around the heart (parasternal long-axis view). Computertomography (D)
showing a large cyst in the anterior mediastinum encasing the heart with compression of both lungs (transverse view at the level of the
aortic valve). Gross examination (E) revealed a thin-walled cyst filled with clear fluid. A postoperative posterioranterior chest X-ray (F)
showed a remarkable improvement and a normal cardiac silhouette. Microscopic histopathologic examination (G) showed a cyst wall lined by
cubic cells and underlying loose connective tissue with remnants of thymic tissue. The patient chose to have the cyst removed due to its
symptomatic nature and he underwent successful removal of the giant cyst through a median sternotomy. Due to the location and size of the
cyst and in order to keep the cyst intact during resection, we were required to perform a median sternotomy. The cyst did not involve the
pericardium or other surrounding structures. Only mild adhesions were encountered and the cyst was left intact during resection. The cyst
was thin-walled and filled with clear fluid (Figure 1E). A postoperative chest X-ray showed a remarkable improvement and a normal cardiac
silhouette (Figure 1F). Postoperative recovery was uneventful with resolution of the patient’s symptoms. Microscopic histopathologic
examination (Figure 1G) showed a benign cyst (wall) lined by cubic cells and underlying loose connective tissue with remnants of thymic
tissue. Although remnants of thymic tissue were found, the cyst did not seem to originate from the thymus, as thymic cysts are generally
lined by (simple) squamous epithelium. The definitive diagnosis was an intrathoracic (simple) mesothelial cyst. An intrathoracic mesothelial
(or “coelomic”) cyst is a congenital abnormality. Little is known about the exact embryology, but mesothelial cysts are hypothesized to
occur as a result of an anomaly in the development of the pericardial coelom . Mesothelial cysts comprise 3-6% of mediastinal tumors and are
usually diagnosed when patients are between 40 and 60 years of age . An intrathoracic mesothelial cyst is a benign tumor that can become
rather large before it becomes symptomatic. The optimal management of intrathoracic mesothelial cysts is unknown. Due to its benign nature
most asymptomatic cysts only require serial follow-up imaging . Symptomatic cysts usually require treatment. Percutaneous ultrasound-guided
or computed tomography-guided needle drainage of the cyst can be performed when symptoms are mild or if cytologic evaluation is required .
Cysts with more severe symptoms or complex cysts (irregular, multi-loculated, unusual location) require surgical resection . Surgical
resection can usually be performed with a limited thoracotomy or a videothoracoscopic procedure , but sometimes a median sternotomy may be
required. An intrathoracic mesothelial cyst is a benign, generally asymptomatic tumor that can be located in the anterior cardiophrenic
angle, the paravertebral or paratracheal regions, or in the anterior mediastinum. It can become rather large before it becomes symptomatic,
at which point surgical removal is generally warranted. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Below are
the links to the authors’ original submitted files for images.Authors’ original file for figure 1 Authors’ original file for figure 1
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions WB and TK collected the data and wrote
the manuscript. CW, WT, and MM participated in the design of the manuscript and they revised and critically reviewed the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. This study was financially supported by University Medical Center Groningen and the
Groningen University Institute for Drug Exploration.
