Statins, also known as 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaril-CoA reductase inhibitors, are well-tolerated drugs used for prevention of atherosclerosis
and cardiovascular events. Although they are generally considered safe, some serious adverse effects, such as myositis, myopathy, and
rhabdomyolysis can rarely occur. Furthermore, recent data from long-term follow-up on patients who have been taking statins for a long
period of time suggest that prolonged exposure to statins may trigger autoimmune reactions. The exact mechanism of statin-induced autoimmune
reactions is unclear. Statins, as proapoptotic agents, release nuclear antigen into the circulation and may induce the production of
pathogenic autoantibodies. Herein we report the case of a 70 year-old man who developed a relapse of pemphigus erythematosus, a syndrome
with features of both lupus erythematosus and pemphigus, after atorvastatin intake. Pemphigus erythematosus (PE) was described for the first
time in 1926 by Senear and Usher as a syndrome with features of both lupus erythematosus and pemphigus.1 Since the original reports there
has been a debate on whether PE is an overlap syndrome or simply a localized variant of pemphigus foliaceus. In fact, clinical and
histological findings are similar to those of pemphigus foliaceus. Erythematous scaly lesions over the nose and cheeks in a butterfly
distribution simulate cutaneous lupus erythematosus or seborrhoeic dermatitis. Sunlight may exacerbate the disease. Lesions on the trunk,
either localized or generalized, are similar to those in pemphigus foliaceus. The antibodies recognize the pemphigus foliaceus antigen,
desmoglein 1; in addition, immunoglobulin G (IgG) and C3 deposition on cell surface of keratinocytes can be revealed in a group of patients.
A positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) is detected in 30%–80% of PE patients but only a few patients have been reported to have PE and lupus
erythematosus concurrently.2,3 As for pemphigus vulgaris, several exogenous factors are able to induce PE in genetically predisposed
individuals, including drug intake, viral infections, exposure to physical agents, and others. Among these factors, drugs are the most
common ones, as numerous reports of drug-induced pemphigus show.4 Herein we report the case of a 70-year-old man who developed a relapse of
PE that had been in remission for 10 years. The recurrence of the disease occurred after the intake of atorvastatin, a potent second-
generation statin. On the basis of the close relationship between the onset of cutaneous lesions and statin administration, a diagnosis of
pemphigus relapse induced by atorvastatin was suspected. Statins have been associated with several drug-induced autoimmune reactions but, to
the best of our knowledge, no case of induction of pemphigus has been described in literature until now. In September 2004 a 60-year-old man
presented for the first time to the Department of Dermatology, Second University of Naples with erythematous scaly plaques which involved
the cheeks in a butterfly distribution symmetrically and crusted lesions localized on the upper part of the chest. Skin biopsy showed
intraepithelial superficial blister; Tzanck test revealed acantholytic cells with rare dyskeratotic changes and leukocytes; direct
immunofluorescence on perilesional skin showed deposits of IgG and C3 on keratinocytes’ surface and along the dermo-epidermal junction.
Laboratory screening showed a high titer of anti-desmoglein 1 antibodies (89 U/mL) and low titer of anti-desmoglein 3 antibodies (11 U/mL).
ANA test was positive at the titer of 1:180, complement levels were normal. On the basis of these findings a diagnosis of PE was made.
Systemic therapy with corticosteroids and azathioprine combined with topical treatment with clobetasol propionate resulted in a remission of
cutaneous lesions within 3 months. For 6 months, the patient took only azathioprine as maintenance therapy, then all drugs were suspended.
The patient remained healthy until October 2013 when he returned to our department for the appearance of numerous erosions and crusted
lesions involving seborrheic areas of the chest (Figure 1). Mucous membranes were disease-free. A recurrence of PE was hypothesized;
confirmation of diagnosis was made by routine histopathology and both direct and indirect immunofluorescence microscopy. ANA level was
increased (1:320) compared to the level during previous hospitalization. The clinical history disclosed that the patient had been taking
atorvastatin for 3 months to treat a severe hypercholesterolemia. He was not taking any other medications apart from atorvastatin, so a
diagnosis of PE relapse possibly induced by atorvastatin intake was made. Atorvastatin was immediately suspended. Systemic treatment with
deflazacort (90 mg daily) and hydroxychloroquine (400 mg daily) and topical treatment with clobetasol propionate (twice a day) resulted in a
regression of the disease within 12 weeks. The systemic corticosteroid therapy was gradually reduced while hydroxychloroquine was still in
use.5 The patient is currently controlling cholesterol levels only with diet and sport. Statins, also known as 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaril-
CoA reductase inhibitors, are a class of hypolipidemic drugs that are very effective at lowering low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol
with modest effects on lowering triglycerides and raising high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. They are among the most prescribed
drugs in the world for the important role in both the primary and secondary prevention of coronary heart disease, myocardial infarction,
stroke, and peripheral artery disease. Statins are widely considered as safe but some serious adverse effects, such as myositis, myopathy,
and rhabdomyolysis can rarely occur. In the last years, statins have often been associated with drug-induced reactions, including systemic
lupus erythematosus, subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, polymyositis,6 and generalized eczematous skin rash.7 Six
cases of spiny keratoderma in patients treated with statins have been described.8 There are some reports about induction of alopecia by
statins.8 Pravastatin can induce porphyria cutanea tarda, phototoxicity in the UVB range, and lichenoid drug eruptions. Simvastatin is
reported to induce cheilitis, generalized exanthematous pustulosis, chronic actinic dermatitis, radiation reaction recall, and occupational
contact dermatitis. Atorvastatin is reported to induce linear immunoglobulin A (IgA) bullous dermatosis, and toxic epidermal necrolysis.8 To
the best of our knowledge, no case of pemphigus induced by statins has been reported in literature until now, but an interesting case of
statin-induced lichen planus pemphigoides9 and a case of pemphigus associated with an over-the-counter drug containing polyphenols have been
described.10 The exact mechanism of statin-induced autoimmune reactions is unclear. Cellular apoptosis could be involved, in fact, statins
are potent pro-apoptotic agents.11–13 The release of nuclear antigens from apoptotic cells into the circulation may evoke the production of
pathogenic autoantibodies. The same mechanism involving the release of nuclear antigens might be implicated with other environmental factors
such as UV radiation, which is a well-known triggering factor in systemic lupus erythematosus, subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus, and
dermatomyositis. Apoptosis could have a similar mechanism in the induction of pemphigus. In fact, a dysregulation of the normal programmed
cell death of epidermal keratinocytes and/or deficient and inadequate clearance of apoptotic material (specifically desmoglein) may render
it antigenic with the consequent production of autoantibodies. In the last years, numerous significant reports have shown that Fas-mediated
apoptosis may play a central role in the acantholytic phenomenon.14–16 By lowering cholesterol levels, statins can influence the response of
T-lymphocytes to exogenous signals. In fact, cholesterol is present in high concentrations in some areas of cell membranes implicated in the
activation of immune response, defined as lipid rafts. Therefore lipid rafts act as a platforms for the activation of immune cells.6 In
light of this, statins could alter T-lymphocyte behavior resulting in the release of forbidden clones. Other evidence suggests that statins
may directly modulate T-lymphocyte activation by promoting Th2 bias with consequent activation of B-lymphocytes and production of pathogenic
autoantibodies,6 possibly including those responsible for pemphigus. We found the case of our patient interesting because the disease re-
appeared after many years, in a clinically more limited form but accompanied by an increase of the ANA titer, probably due to the
concomitant use of atorvastatin. Further studies are needed to evaluate the real role of statins in the induction of autoimmune diseases
including pemphigus. Therefore, the increasing number of severe, sometimes fatal reactions to these drugs call for very careful
pharmacovigilance, because of the well-known and less known side effects of statins, which are currently largely prescribed worldwide.
Disclosure There are no funding sources. The authors have no conflict of interest or competing interests to disclose. Crusted lesions
involving seborrheic areas of the chest.
