Proteasome inhibitors are a relatively new class of chemotherapeutic agents. Bortezomib is the first agent of this class and is currently
being used for the treatment of multiple myeloma. However, recent reports have linked exposure to bortezomib with the development of
thrombotic microangiopathy. A new agent in this class, carfilzomib, has been recently introduced as alternative therapy for relapsing and
refractory multiple myeloma. We report a case of renal thrombotic microangiopathy associated with the use of carfilzomib in a patient with
refractory multiple myeloma. A 62 year-old Caucasian man with hypertension and a 4-year history of multiple myeloma, had been previously
treated with lenalidomide, bortezomib and two autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplants. After the second hematopoietic stem cell
transplant, he developed acute kidney injury secondary to septic shock and required dialysis for 4 weeks. Subsequently, his serum creatinine
stabilized at 2.1 mg/dL (185.64 μmol/L). Seventeen months after the second hematopoietic stem cell transplant, he was initiated on
carfilzomib for relapse of multiple myeloma. Six weeks later, he developed abrupt worsening of lower extremity edema and hypertension, and
new onset proteinuria. His kidney function remained stable. Kidney biopsy findings were consistent with thrombotic microangiopathy. Eight
weeks after discontinuation of carfilzomib, proteinuria and hypertension improved. Due to progression of multiple myeloma, he died a few
months later. In view of the previously reported association of bortezomib with thrombotic microangiopathy, the temporal association of the
clinical picture with the initiation of carfilzomib, and the partial resolution of symptoms after discontinuation of the drug, we conclude
that carfilzomib may have precipitated a case of clinically evident renal thrombotic microangiopathy in our patient. Because impairment of
kidney function in patients with multiple myeloma (MM) can be caused by a variety of conditions, ascertaining the etiology of kidney
dysfunction in patients with MM represents a challenging task for the practicing nephrologist. Patients with MM are at risk of acquiring
acute kidney injury (AKI) as a result of light chain cast nephropathy , hypercalcemia , bisphosphonate-induced tubular injury and
lenalidomide nephrotoxicity . Similarly, syndromes of glomerular involvement can also occur in MM as a result of light or heavy chain
deposition disease, amyloidosis or bisphosphonate-induced podocytopathy. Furthermore, patients with MM who undergo hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (HSCT) are also at risk of acquiring renal syndromes inherent to HSCT, such as ischemic acute tubular necrosis and
thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) [5, 6]. The clinical features of TMA syndromes include microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia,
and organ injury. The pathological features are vascular damage manifested by arteriolar and capillary thrombosis with characteristic
abnormalities in the endothelium and vessel wall. Renal pathology in TMA is characterized by thickened capillary walls, occlusion of
vascular lumens, fibrin deposition and endothelial separation with expansion of subendothelial zone. Over the last few years, multiple
reports have unveiled an association between anti-angiogenic therapy and TMA. Antineoplastic drugs designed to target vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) such as sunitinib, sorafenib, bevacizumab, and others, have been linked to the development of a syndrome characterized
by severe hypertension and/or acute or chronic kidney injury, with or without proteinuria, and associated with histopathological evidence of
TMA in the kidney [7, 8]. Bortezomib is a proteasome inhibitor that was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2003 for the
treatment of refractory MM and subsequently in 2008 as an initial treatment of patients with MM. Although it does not target VEGF directly,
bortezomib has also been reported to be associated with TMA. In July 2012, a new member in its class, carfilzomib, was approved by the FDA
for the treatment of relapsing or refractory MM. In this report, we summarize the case of a patient with MM status post autologous HSCT and
chronic kidney disease who experienced worsening hypertension along with a substantial increase in proteinuria shortly after the initiation
of carfilzomib for the treatment of refractory disease. We propose carfilzomib as a possible trigger of malignant hypertension and renal TMA
in this case. The patient was a 62 year-old Caucasian man with a long-standing history of essential hypertension and a 4-year history of MM
(IgG kappa subtype). The latter was diagnosed after suffering a T7 compression fracture. At that time, his kidney function was normal (serum
creatinine: 0.9 mg/dL (79.56 μmol/L)) and his blood pressure was fairly well controlled on four agents (carvedilol extended-release 80 mg
daily, diltiazem 60 mg three times daily, valsartan 320 mg daily and hydralazine 25 mg three times daily). As initial therapy for MM, he
received melphalan for conditioning, four cycles of lenalidomide and dexamethasone, followed by autologous HSCT. Three months later, his
kidney function remained within normal limits. He subsequently developed a few episodes of volume depletion associated with transient
increases in serum creatinine level, after which his serum creatinine stabilized at a level of 1.4 mg/dL (123.76 μmol/L). Ten months after
HSCT, he was started on bortezomib, cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone (VCD) due to progression of MM. He received five cycles of VCD. His
blood pressure remained fairly well controlled with no changes to his anti-hypertensive regimen. Fifteen months after the first HSCT and
1 month after completing VCD, he underwent a second autologous HSCT for relapse. This time, the hospital course was complicated with septic
shock and a severe bout of AKI, with serum creatinine peaking at 7.4 mg/dL (654.16 μmol/L). After requiring four weeks of acute
hemodialysis, he partially regained kidney function, ultimately being discharged from the hospital with a new baseline serum creatinine of
2.1 mg/dL (185.64 μmol/L). At the time of discharge, his antihypertensive regimen was modified to avoid blockade of the renin-angiotensin
system in the setting of AKI. Accordingly, he was switched to hydralazine 50 mg three times daily, diltiazem extended-release 360 mg daily,
metoprolol 200 mg twice daily and a clonidine patch 0.3 mg/24 h. Seventeen months after the second HSCT, a follow-up bone marrow biopsy
specimen revealed persistent plasma cell infiltration. As a result, he was initiated on carfilzomib (20 mg/m2; followed by 27 mg/m2, four
weeks apart), thalidomide 100 mg daily and dexamethasone 20 mg per week. Six weeks after the initiation of chemotherapy, the patient
developed abrupt worsening of lower extremity edema and his hypertension became more difficult to control. After being stable with four
agents (hydralazine, diltiazem, metoprolol and clonidine) averaging a blood pressure of 142/74 mmHg during previous office visits, he
presented with a blood pressure of 206/100 mmHg (Figure 1). His physical examination also revealed pallor, but otherwise no additional
abnormalities. Laboratory data showed: hemoglobin 8.2 g/dL (5.09 μmol/L), platelet count 53 K/cumm, serum creatinine 2.1 mg/dL
(185.64 μmol/L), lactate dehydrogenase 183 IU/L, haptoglobin 23 mg/dL (0.23 g/L), total bilirubin 0.6 mg/dL (10.26 μmol/L), C3 112.3 mg/dL
(1.123 g/L) (normal range: 88–201 mg/dL), C4 54.4 mg/dL (0.544 g/L) (normal range: 16–47 mg/dL), albumin 2.8 g/dL (28 g/L), serum kappa free
light chain 82.4 mg/dL (normal range: 0.33-1.94), serum lambda free light chain 0.69 mg/dL (normal range: 0.57-2.63), serum free
kappa/lambda ratio 119.42 (normal range: 0.26-1.65). Urinalysis showed 300 mg/dL protein on dipstick but no hematuria or pyuria. Urine
protein electrophoresis showed elevated kappa light chain in the gamma zone at 11.9 mg/dL (232 mg per 24 hours) and a 24-hour urine
collection revealed 2.6 grams of protein (53.3% albumin). Previous testing had shown presence of low-grade proteinuria (less than 0.5 grams
per day) (Table 1). In addition to his antihypertensives, he was also taking acyclovir, citalopram, esomeprazole, zolpidem, tramadol and
aspirin. He required the addition of eplerenone 25 mg daily, nifedipine extended-release 90 mg daily and benazepril 30 mg daily, for a total
of 7 antihypertensives. Despite the 7-drug combination, he remained hypertensive averaging 190/95 mmHg. A renal sonogram revealed a right
kidney of 10.8 and a left kidney of 10.6 cm of longitudinal diameter with moderately increased cortical echogenicity. Following acute
reduction of blood pressure with intravenous labetalol, an ultrasound-guided percutaneous kidney biopsy was performed to evaluate the newly
developed overt proteinuria. Histological examination of the biopsy specimen on light microscopy disclosed 8 out of 17 globally sclerotic
glomeruli, some mesangiolysis (Figure 2a), moderate interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy, and severe arteriolar hyalinosis. There was
no evidence of myeloma cast nephropathy. No thrombi were identified in the glomerular capillaries or arterioles. Congo red stain was
negative. Immunofluorescence showed 4 out of 14 glomeruli with global sclerosis and one small artery that stained intensely for fibrin
(Figure 2b), C1q, IgM and C3. The corresponding H&E-stained cryosection showed a thrombus in that artery. The specimen was negative for
linear deposition of IgG or kappa along the glomerular and tubular basement membranes. Electron microscopy of one glomerulus showed diffuse
foot process effacement, endothelial cell swelling and some loops with flocculent material between the endothelial cell and the glomerular
basement membrane (Figure 2c). There was no immune complex deposition or finely granular electron dense deposits along the glomerular or
tubular basement membranes. In summary, the findings were consistent with TMA, glomerular podocytopathy, hypertensive-related injury and
chronic scarring.Figure 1 Schematic illustrating the clinical and laboratory presentation of our patient. Proteinuria in month 5 was
measured on a spot urine sample. Proteinuria in months 6 and 8 was estimated from a 24-hour urine collection. Black arrows reflect
carfilzomib administration (20 mg/m2 in month 4, and 27 mg/m2 in month 5). Schematic illustrating the clinical and laboratory presentation
of our patient. Proteinuria in month 5 was measured on a spot urine sample. Proteinuria in months 6 and 8 was estimated from a 24-hour urine
collection. Black arrows reflect carfilzomib administration (20 mg/m2 in month 4, and 27 mg/m2 in month 5). Laboratory values Abbreviations:
LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; NA, not available; UPEP, urine protein electrophoresis. Renal histologic findings in the patient. a. Light
microscopy: mesangiolysis on Jones’ methenamine silver stain. b. Immunofluorescence: Small artery intensely stained for fibrin. c. Electron
microscopy: Endothelial cell swelling and flocculent material between endothelial cell and glomerular basement membrane. After the results
of the kidney biopsy were reviewed and discussed, carfilzomib was discontinued. Eight weeks later, proteinuria slightly improved to 1 gram
on a 24 hour urine collection. His serum creatinine remained stable at 1.7 mg/dL (150.28 μmol/L) at that time. His arterial blood pressure
improved significantly averaging 135/75 mmHg on 5 agents. Due to progression of MM and a joint decision of not pursuing further treatment,
the patient died four months later. We present a case of an individual who experienced abrupt worsening of hypertension and proteinuria
6 weeks after receiving carfilzomib for the treatment of refractory MM. A kidney biopsy specimen revealed a TMA lesion along with
podocytopathy and evidence of chronic scarring. No previous report of renal TMA associated with carfilzomib was found in published
literature. Applying the Naranjo criteria for adverse drug reactions , the present case meets the criteria of ‘possible’ association with
TMA. First, the timing of the administration of the drug and the subsequent clinical syndrome support our contention. The onset of worsening
hypertension and proteinuria coincided with the initiation of carfilzomib, as depicted in Figure 1. Secondly, there is a precedent of
reports of a drug of a similar class being associated with TMA. Thirdly, the patient partially recovered after the drug was discontinued.
Renal TMA is a known complication of HSCT that typically occurs approximately 3 months post-transplantation (range 14 – 240 days) . Notably,
it is much more likely to occur after allogeneic compared to autologous HSCT, occurring in 8-12% following allogeneic HSCT. Although factors
inherent to HSCT, such as graft-versus-host disease, high-dose chemotherapy, and total body irradiation have been implicated in the
pathogenesis of allogeneic HSCT-associated renal TMA, it is generally thought that the use of calcineurin inhibitors (CI) may largely
explain the increased incidence of renal TMA [5, 6] after allogeneic HSCT given the well-described association between CIs and TMA in solid
organ transplantation . On the other hand, TMA associated with autologous HSCT is extremely rare, only case reports were found in the
literature . In our case, the second autologous HSCT was performed more than a year prior to the onset of worsening proteinuria and
malignant hypertension. Therefore, the type of HSCT, the absence of CI therapy and the timing of the clinical presentation do not favor
autologous HSCT as the primary etiology of renal TMA in our patient. Radiation therapy was not given in this case. The development of overt
proteinuria along with uncontrolled hypertension stimulated the clinical decision to perform a kidney biopsy. In addition to the TMA lesion,
the biopsy specimen revealed evidence of podocytopathy in the form of diffuse foot process effacement, thereby explaining the proteinuric
nature of the renal syndrome. Various degrees of focal or diffuse foot process effacement were reported in all the patients included in a
case series describing the association of TMA and chemotherapy with monoclonal antibodies against vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
. We identified 4 cases of bortezomib-associated TMA in the medical literature. Two of those reports described cases of patients with MM who
developed microangiopathic hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia during the course of the first cycle of bortezomib [15, 16]. ADAMTS13
activity was normal in both cases. The subjects improved after drug discontinuation. Two additional reports described cases of
microangiopathic hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia complicated with AKI [17, 18]. Although kidney biopsy was not performed, a renal TMA
lesion was suspected. In addition to drug discontinuation, those patients underwent plasmapheresis. Bortezomib is a dipeptide boronate 20S
proteasome inhibitor. It inhibits nuclear factor kappa B (NF-KB) translocation/transcription activity by blocking the degradation of its
inhibitor iKB. Inhibition of NF-KB leads to a decrease in VEGF transcription . Production of VEGF by podocytes is indispensable for
maintenance of the adjacent glomerular endothelium. Anti-VEGF chemoagents, such as bevacizumab and sorafenib, can cause TMA by direct
microvascular toxicity initiated by endothelial injury [8, 20, 21]. Bortezomib can also inhibit IL-6 induced proliferation and angiogenesis
and enhance the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-6 and TNF-alpha) and generation of cell mediated immune response . In addition, it
has been shown that VEGF, acting through VEGFR-2, activates endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) activity, leading to increased
vasodilatory nitric oxide production. Anti-VEGF therapies might cause systemic deficiency of nitric oxide with consequent hypertension [23,
24]. Therefore, it has been speculated that the mechanism by which proteasome inhibitors may induce TMA also involve modulation of VEGF.
Notably, although bortezomib is being increasingly used to treat antibody-mediated rejection in organ transplantation, no reports of
associated TMA have emerged to date . Therefore, the strength of the association requires further validation. Carfilzomib is a tetrapeptide
epoxyketone proteasome inhibitor. In preclinical studies, carfilzomib showed greater selectivity than bortezomib for the proteasome and had
anti-proliferative activity in cells resistant to bortezomib . In view of the previously reported association of bortezomib with TMA , we
speculate that carfilzomib could have been involved in the pathogenesis of renal TMA in our case. In contrast to previous reports of
proteasome inhibitor-associated TMA , our case describes a patient who presented with overt proteinuria and worsening hypertension but
without extrarenal features of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, i.e., renal-limited TMA. Undoubtedly, it could be argued that the long-
standing history of essential hypertension could be responsible of some of the histological findings in the kidney biopsy specimen knowing
that the renal TMA lesion in our patient is similar to that of malignant hypertension. Nonetheless, we hypothesize that the abruptness of
the clinical presentation may reflect the onset of a mechanism of injury induced by carfilzomib, triggering malignant hypertension in a
patient who was perhaps at high risk of developing it due to his underlying essential hypertension. In summary, we suggest that clinicians
should be aware of the possibility of an association between exposure to carfilzomib and the development of a clinical syndrome
characterized by worsening proteinuria and uncontrolled HTN and pathological evidence of renal TMA. Discontinuation of the drug should be
considered only after careful evaluation of risks and benefits of the chemotherapy and the prognosis of the existing malignancy. Informed
consent was obtained from the next of kin for publication of this case. Acute kidney injury Endothelial nitric oxide synthase Food and drug
administration Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation Multiple myeloma Nuclear factor kappa B Thrombotic microangiopathy Bortezomib,
cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone vascular endothelial growth factor. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions JCV and LH were the physicians who treated the patient in this report. SS was the pathologist who read the
biopsy. The manuscript was prepared by LH under the direct supervision of JCV. All the authors participated in discussions about the
manuscript and approved the final version. Support J.C.Q.V. is supported by a grant from Dialysis Clinics Incorporated. Financial disclosure
J.C.Q.V. is a member of the Speaker Bureau for Otsuka Pharmaceuticals and Questcor Pharmaceuticals.
