Physiological functioning of the testes is important for cardiac health besides for virilisation, physical strength, behavior and
reproduction; moreover, hypogonadism has been demonstrated as a significant risk marker of increased all-cause and cardiovascular mortality.
We reported two cases of long-standing hypogonadotropic hypogonadism presenting with wasting, bradycardia and heart failure. The two
patients were admitted to emergency department for deep weakness, unresponsive anemia and severe bradycardia, requiring in one case the
implanting of a monocameral pace-maker for treatment of heart failure. No previous cardiologic disorders were known and cardiac ischemia was
ruled out in both patients. The first patient presented congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism combined with mild central hypothyroidism
and growth hormone deficiency occurred in the peripubertal age, while the second one was diagnosed with isolated adult-onset severe central
hypogonadism. Testosterone deficiency was the main feature in both patients as physical examination revealed clinical stigmata of
hypogonadism and testosterone replacement induced a dramatic improvement of general condition. Genetic analysis of genes involved in
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism failed to identify alterations. Long-standing hypogonadism in males can be associated with life threatening
body alterations including severe bradycardia and heart failure. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is defined as a clinical syndrome that
results from gonadal failure due to abnormal pituitary gonadotropin levels, resulting from either absent or inadequate hypothalamic
gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion or failure of pituitary gonadotropin secretion. The condition may be isolated as well as in
association with other pituitary hormone deficiency states. Causes of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism may be acquired, frequently due to
structural lesions of the hypothalamic-pituitary region, functional or congenital, as a growing list of genes has been implicated in the
molecular pathogenesis of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Clinical presentation of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism depends on the time of
onset, as a prepubertal onset lead to delayed sexual development, eunuchoidal proportions, and cryptorchidism as well as the severity of the
defect and the presence of associated conditions. Besides infertility and sexual impairment, androgen deficiency is associated with a number
of extra-gonadal metabolic changes like decline in energy, depression, reduced muscle and bone mass and increased abdominal fat . Recently,
low testosterone levels have been demonstrated as a significant risk marker of increased all-cause and cardiovascular mortality , suggesting
an emerging role of testosterone on cardiac health in males. Low levels of testosterone have been found to be associated with cardiovascular
diseases including heart failure, where hypogonadism could play a role in favoring the onset of some peculiar features like decreased
exercise capacity, diminished muscle mass and energy handling and final cachexia . However, isolated hypogonadism is rarely associated with
an acute onset with bradycardia and heart failure , while hypopituitarism may be life-threatening, especially when adrenocorticotropic
hormone deficiency occurs , and may present with cardiovascular events like cardiac arrhythmia or congestive heart failure due to dilated
cardiomyopathy . Here we described two cases of severe long-standing hypogonadotropic hypogonadism associated with acute presentation in an
emergency setting of bradycardia, heart failure and wasting syndrome besides the classical hypogonadal phenotype. The first patient
presented with multiple pituitary defects as severe hypogonadotropic hypogonadism was associated with mild central hypothyroidism and growth
hormone (GH) deficiency, while the second patient was diagnosed as isolated adult-onset severe central hypogonadism. In both patients,
androgen deficiency was long-standing and occurred in their very early adulthood. A 65 years-old male was admitted to emergency department
for heart failure due to severe bradycardia (27 bpm), third degree atrioventricular block, mild hypokinetic cardiomyopathy and anemia
[hemoglobin 7.2 g/dl (n.v. 12.0-15.0)]. A monocameral pace-maker was successfully implanted. No previous cardiologic disorders were known.
The patients presented lethargic and bed bound from few days, but experienced progressive physical deterioration in the last year.
Consanguinity was absent and puberty occurred at the expected age in siblings. At the age of 14 years he was diagnosed for delayed puberty
due to isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. The patient was treated with testosterone for few months, then he refused all the therapeutic
effort, in agreement with his parents, and spent all his life without testosterone replacement. His cognitive ability was normal, he
completed his study and worked as employed till he retired. Indeed, he lived alone with poor socialization. Drug abuse and alcohol
consumption were ruled out; he denied the use of any medications. Psychiatric evaluation excluded eating disorders. Physical examination
showed feminine appearance characterized by female body fat distribution, high-pitched voice and eunuchoidal body proportions (height
175 cm, arm span 177 cm, BMI 27.2 kg/m2). He had minimal body hairs, mild gynecomastia and elephantiasis for chronic lymphedema. Genital
examination revealed underdeveloped scrotum, microphallus and bilateral cryptorchidism. Gender dysphoria was absent. Multiple osteoporotic
vertebral fractures (T6-T7-T8) were detected by x-ray imaging study. Hormonal assessment was performed two months later, after the
stabilization of the cardiac condition, confirming severe hypogonadotropic hypogonadism [testosterone <0.02 ng/mL; follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH) 0.18 mU/mL; luteinizing hormone (LH) <0.1 mU/mL]. Concomitant central hypothyroidism [thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
7.0 mU/L (n.v. 0.4-4), freeT3 2.1 pg/ml (n.v. 2.6-4.4), freeT4 0.65 ng/dl (n.v. 0.9-1.7)], growth hormone (GH) deficiency [peak GH of
1.3 ng/ml after combined stimulation with GHRH 1 μg/kg body weight + arginine 30 g; insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) 25 ng/ml (n.v.
117–252)] and mild hyperprolactinemia (34 ng/ml; n.v. < 20) were diagnosed. Pituitary-adrenal axis function was normal. Pituitary MRI
revealed partial empty sella. Testosterone and L-thyroxine replacement was started; six months of therapy induced a mild masculinization,
weight gain (+7 kg) and resolution of anemia. Nonetheless, central hypothyroidism and GH deficiency did not resolve (TSH 0.08 mU/L, freeT4
0.83 ng/dl, IGF1 25 ng/ml). The karyotype was 46XY and genetic screening for mutations in the hypogonadotropic hypogonadism genes was
negative. In particular, the analysis of the PROKR2 gene coding sequence, whose allelic variants have recently been described also in cases
of hypopituitarism, was negative . A 30 years-old man was admitted to emergency department for hypotension, fatigue, anemia and deep
bradycardia (32 bpm). He experienced a 19 Kg weight loss in the last year, once-weekly fainting episodes, progressive diffuse myalgia and
anxious-depressive disorder preventing the patient to attend minimal daily activity. He was born from consanguineous parents. He suffered
from neurosensorial hypoacusia consequent to infantile measles meningitis. Spontaneous puberty occurred at age of 14 years. Since few months
he complained low sexual desire and erectile dysfunction, while olfactory was normal. Physical examination revealed BMI 19 kg/m2. On genital
examination, testes were small (volume 5 ml) and soft in the scrotum, while external genitalia were normal. Cardiac conduction was
investigated: Holter-ECG confirmed severe bradycardia with minimal nocturnal heart rate of 28 bpm; any significant pause was recorded. An
electrophysiological study failed to demonstrate conduction abnormality. Echocardiography showed normal cardiac function, absence of
congenital anomaly; ischemia was ruled out at cardiac stress test. Malabsorption, alcohol and drug consumption and eating disorders were
excluded. Two months later the emergency admission, he received an endocrine evaluation that revealed mild hypothyroidism [TSH 5.5 mU/L,
freeT3 1.7 pg/ml (n.v. 2.6-4.4), freeT4 0.8 ng/dl (n.v. 0.9-1.7)], low IGF1 levels [107 ng/ml (n.v.117-252)], normal adrenal function and,
remarkably, severe hypogonadotropic hypogonadism [testosterone 1.3 ng/ml (n.v. 2.4-10.0), LH 0.6 mU/ml, FSH 1.1 mU/ml]. Pituitary MRI was
normal. He promptly started testosterone and L-thyroxine replacement that induced after six months a dramatic improvement of his well-being:
the patient experienced a 12 Kg weight gain with improvement of muscle mass and heart rate (56 bpm). Hypothyroidism resolved, L-thyroxine
was discontinued and IGF1 levels normalized. Genetic screening for mutations in the candidate genes for hypogonadotropic hypogonadism,
namely FGFR1, PROK2, PROKR2, GNRH1, GNRH2, was negative. The occurrence of hypogonadism during early adult life, when testosterone
production rate is maximal, has detrimental effects to the whole body, including the heart. Here, we reported two cases experiencing wasting
and deep bradycardia, a life-threatening condition, due to long-standing severe testosterone deficiency occurring during their early
adulthood. The link between testosterone deficiency and cardiac impairment was confirmed as bradycardia was completely rescued by
testosterone replacement in the Case 2, though in the Case 1 this information was unavailable since a monocameral pace-maker was implanted
before starting testosterone replacement. In this setting, the two patients did not complain about sexual dysfunction as general disease
state was dominant in Case 2, while psycho-social reasons blunted this aspect in Case 1. Lack of sexual complaints helped to fail the
diagnosis of hypogonadism. Testosterone deficiency was the main finding and hypogonadal features were evident when appropriately
investigated. Typical gonadal-related features, namely small and soft testis, small size penis, reduced body hair did not catch the
attention of physicians during initially evaluation as extra-gonadal features were prominent. In particular, both patients showed severe
reduction in skeletal muscle mass and strength, hypoxic condition due to heart failure, in Case1, and severe anemia and bradycardia with
hypotension, in Case 2. In both cases, gonadal failure had a pituitary origin not associated with organic lesions; nonetheless, the
screening for mutations of genes involved in hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism was negative. At the presentation in both patients
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism was associated with low IGF1 and low freeT4 levels associated with mildly elevated TSH levels. Thyroid
autoimmunity and goiter were absent. On serum samples, the diagnosis of central hypothyroidism is usually suggested by the finding of low
freeT4 concentrations associated with low/normal TSH levels. Nevertheless, some central hypothyroid patients have high serum immunoreactive
TSH levels but are devoid of full biological activity. In these cases, TSH elevations are similar to those generally found in subclinical or
mild primary hypothyroidism and may lead to the misdiagnosis . Nonetheless, differential diagnosis of central hypothyroidism includes non-
thyroidal illness syndrome, which occurs in the presence of comorbidities. Patients with non-thyroidal illness syndrome have values of
thyroid function testing that largely overlap with those with central hypothyroidism. Considering the outcomes of the two cases, Case 1 was
diagnosed with central hypothyroidism, while Case 2 findings were consistent with non-thyroidal illness syndrome due to detrimental
hypogonadism. A similar pattern of presentation was observed for GH secretion. Supporting the pituitary origin of the hormonal deficiency in
Case 1, mild hyperprolactinemia, usually seen in pituitary defects and secondary to the hypothalamic thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH)
stimulation, was detected. Though the effect of central hypothyroidism on cardiac presentation could not be ruled out in these patients, the
mild freeT3 reduction and the recovery of euthyroidism in the Case 2 supported a dominant role of long-standing gonadic failure rather than
hypothyroidism in determining the clinical presentation. It is worth noting that in the Case 1, GH and TSH deficiencies were likely to
become manifest later than hypogonadism as the patient had been previously diagnosed with isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and no
growth failure or short stature were detected. The impact of testosterone on the cardiovascular system is controversial. Nonetheless,
testosterone seems to be beneficial to the heart and low levels of testosterone negatively affect cardiovascular system . Moreover,
testosterone has been shown to exhibit potential antiarrhythmic properties in the form of decreasing action potential duration and shortened
QTc interval and low levels of testosterone in obese men have been suggested to contribute to their arrhythmogenic profile . Long-standing
severe central hypogonadism in males is here reported to be associated with life-threatening body alterations including severe bradycardia.
We suggested that unexplained bradycardia or heart failure in an otherwise healthy heart might require a metabolic-endocrine screening
comprehensive of pituitary function evaluation. Written informed consent was obtained from both the patients for publication of these Case
reports. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. SC, EP and FD visited the two patients, performed the hormonal evaluation and made the diagnosis. MB and LP performed
the genetic screening for mutations in the hypogonadotropic hypogonadism genes. EP and SC wrote the present manuscript, with the supervision
of all the co-authors. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6823/14/78/prepub The study was supported by Ricerca Corrente Found of the IRCCS Policlinico San Donato.
