Folinic acid-responsive seizures (FARS) are a rare treatable cause of neonatal epilepsy. They have characteristic peaks on CSF monoamine
metabolite analysis, and have mutations in the ALDH7A1 gene, characteristically found in pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy. There are case
reports of patients presenting with seizures at a later age, and with folate deficiency due to different mechanisms with variable response
to folinic acid supplementation. Here, we report 2 siblings who presented with global developmental delay and intractable seizures who
responded clinically to folinic acid therapy. Their work-up included metabolic and genetic testing. The DNA sequencing was carried out for
the ALDH7A1 gene, and the folate receptor 1 (FOLR1) gene. They had very low 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5-MTHF) in CSF with no systemic folate
deficiency and no characteristic peaks on neurotransmitter metabolite chromatogram. A novel mutation in the FOLR1 gene was found. The
mutation in this gene is shown to affect CSF folate transport leading to cerebral folate deficiency. The response to treatment with folinic
acid was dramatic with improvement in social interaction, mobility, and complete seizure control. We should consider the possibility of this
treatable condition in appropriate clinical circumstances early, as diagnosis with favorable outcome depends on the specialized tests.
Folinic acid-responsive seizures (FARS) are a well-recognized cause of vitamin-responsive neonatal epilepsy.1 Patients present with
seizures, either myoclonic or clonic, apnea, and irritability within 5 days after birth. Neuroimaging shows brain atrophy and variable white
matter abnormalities. Some patients respond to pyridoxine alone, or have an initial response to it, only to become resistant later on and
responding to folinic acid. The response to treatment has been variable. Gallagher et al2 reported that all surviving patients were
developmentally delayed and 5 of 10 reported cases were deceased. Subsequently, it was demonstrated that FARS and pyridoxine-dependent
epilepsy (PDE) are allelic; indeed, the molecular genetic basis of the 2 conditions is identical in at least some cases. Cerebrospinal fluid
5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5-MTHF) analysis was carried out in one of 7 cases, and reported normal in Hyland & Arnold’s study.1 A few cases
of cerebral folate deficiency (CFD) presenting with seizures onset beyond the neonatal period (7 months to 11 years of age) have recently
been reported with severe developmental regression,3 and movement disturbances with chorea,4 dystonia, and difficult ambulation.3,4
Neuroimaging showed brain atrophy and variable white matter abnormalities.3,4 The CSF biogenic metabolite did not show characteristic peaks,
CSF 5-MTHF levels were found low,4 and FOLR1 gene mutations were reported.3,4 Mutations in the FOLR1 gene are associated with severely
reduced concentrations of CSF 5-MTHF indicating that its gene product, folate receptor alpha (FRα), plays a crucial role in this transport
process. This FRα defect causes a cerebral folate transport deficiency (MIM 136430), a progressive neurological disorder of late infantile
onset that is characterized by psychomotor regression, epilepsy, and disturbed brain myelination as well as a depletion of white matter
choline and often inositol.3 All of the cases responded to folinic acid supplementation becoming seizure free, or with better seizure
control, and disappearance of chorea, and dystonia with better ambulation.3,4 Our objective in presenting these cases is to highlight that
FARS is not uncommon. Early diagnosis and management can lead to better outcome. Two siblings born to Saudi parents with first degree
consanguinity at term through normal vaginal delivery, the boy weighing 2.6kg (second in birth order), and the girl weighing 2.5kg (third in
birth order) had uneventful pregnancy, delivery, and early neonatal period. Both presented together to our services for intractable
seizures. Two other siblings were healthy with no history of similar or other undiagnosed medical condition. The patient presented at the
age of 5 years and 8 months with intractable seizures for the previous 15 months despite adequate doses of valproate (30 mg/kg/day) and
vigabatrin (50 mg/kg/day). Seizures were in the form of drop attacks and myoclonic jerks, 3-5 episodes per day, mostly before going to sleep
or after getting up. He had global developmental delay and rolled over at 9 months, sat at 12 months, crawled at 14 months, walked at 2
years, had vocabulary of only 30 words, and was not toilet trained. His symptoms were consistent with an autistic spectrum disorder. The
neurological evaluation revealed generalized hypertonia, hyperreflexia, down going planters with unsteady wide-based gait with no neuro-
cutaneous stigmata, with a head circumference of 51 cm. Systemic examination was unremarkable. Hearing and ophthalmological examination was
normal. The brain MRI revealed sub cortical white matter abnormal high intensity consistent with hypomyelination with cerebellar atrophy
(Figure 1). The electroencephalography (EEG) showed hypsarrhythmia initially changing one year later to generalized slowing and multifocal
epileptic discharges, with an occasional attenuation of the EEG activity, which correlated with clinical drop attacks (Figures 2 & 3).
Extensive metabolic work-up before starting empirical therapy including blood for ammonia, lactate, pyruvate, acylcarnitine, fatty acid
profile, amino acids, biotinidase and urine for amino acids, organic acid, with CSF for glucose, lactate, pyruvate, and amino acids were
normal. The serum folate was also normal (30.7 nmol/L, normal: 12-33). The CSF 5-MTHF was low (7 nmol/l, normal: 40-128), but neopterin,
tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), 5-hydroxyindolaceticacid (5-HIAA), homovanillic acid (HVA), 3-O-methyl dopa (3-O-MD) were normal, and did not
show the characteristic peaks of FARS. He was started on pyridoxine, with folinic acid (0.75 mg/kg/day), which was gradually increased to
the present dose of 1.7 mg/kg/day. At this dose of folinic acid he is free from seizures for the last 10 months, has marked improvement in
his gait and social interaction, and EEG. He had breakthrough seizures once earlier when he ran out of his supplies of folinic acid for a
2-week period. The DNA analysis for ALDH7A1 gene mutation was normal, rather a homozygous novel mutation c.398C>A (p.Pro133His) in the FOLR1
gene was found. Analysis on prediction software (Polyphen-2 and Mutation Taster) (GCG Genetics, Lisbon, Portugal) indicates that it is
probably pathogenic. Magnetic resonance imaging (Flair) of a 5 years and 8 month-old male patient with cerebral folate deficiency showing
normal myelin signal of callosal structures with decreased myelin signals for white matter and loss of myelin signals around occipital
horns. Electroencephalography (EEG) showed generalized slowing and generalized irregular epileptic discharges. Electroencephalography (EEG)
showed generalized slowing and multifocal spikes and sharp waves. In the second half of the EEG when patient developed drop attack (sudden
fall), it correlates with generalized slow waves followed by generalized attenuation of the EEG. This younger sister of patient one
presented with drops attacks starting at the age of 4 years, which stopped with valproate for a few months, only to recur despite continued
medication. Seizure semiology, frequency, and delayed development were similar to her brother. Neurological evaluation and EEG findings were
the same. She had mild myopia, but normal hearing with a head circumference of 47 cm (between the third and fifteenth percentile for age).
The brain MRI revealed increased signal intensity in sub cortical white matter, putamen, and head of caudate nucleus, and sub insular and
anterior limbs of internal capsule hypomyelination with cerebellar atrophy. The MR spectroscopy was normal. All of the metabolic work-up was
unremarkable except for the CSF 5-MTHF levels of 11 nmol/L (normal=40-150). She was started on pyridoxine (6mg/kg/day), and folinic acid
like her brother, which was increased to 2mg/kg/day. She had dramatic EEG and neurological improvement like her brother. The DNA analysis
for a ALDH7A1 gene mutation was normal, and she had the same homozygous mutation c.398C>A (p.Pro133His) in the FOLR1 gene, identical to her
brother. Parents’ genetic screening was not obtained. Both patients were followed for 24 months after starting them on folinic acid. They
stopped seizing, and their development improved markedly. They are going to special education schools, and are noticed to have better
receptive and expressive language. We report 2 siblings from the Middle East with CFD. This autosomal recessive disorder manifests in late
infancy with severe developmental regression, movements disturbances, epilepsy, and leukodystrophy with low CSF 5-MTHF (the active folate
metabolite) in the presence of normal folate metabolism outside the CNS.3 Folinic acid therapy can reverse the clinical symptoms and improve
brain abnormalities and function.3 Mutations in the FOLR1 gene coding for folate receptor alpha (FRα) predominantly affecting cerebral
folate transport leads to low CSF 5-MTHF levels. The choroid plexus is rich in FRα, and is the main site of folate delivery to the brain. To
date 10 cases have been reported in the literature with a mutation in the FOLR1 gene. These are missense (the most common mutation),
nonsense, splice mutation, or duplication. These mutations lead to decreased protein expression, and/or loss of surface localization,
mistargeting to intracellular compartments and thus absence of cellular binding of folic acid. These patients were Finnish, German, Italian,
Turkish, Azerbaijani Gambian background with a high percentage of consanguineous marriages. All the 10 cases had ‘extremely low’ CSF 5-MTHF
levels of ≤5 nmol/l. Other 4 cases with similar levels were found to have no mutation in FOLR1 or other folate transport genes. All of them
with FOLR1 mutation presented initial with symptoms such as developmental delay, ataxia, and seizures within the first 3 years of life, and
most of them developed motor deficits as well as behavioral abnormalities including autistic behavior. Apart from slow background and
multifocal epileptiform activity in the EEG, most showed delayed myelination or hypomyelination of the cerebral white matter with pronounced
cerebellar atrophy.5 Our siblings had a similar presentation, but the CSF 5-MTHF levels were slightly higher (7 and 11 nmol/l versus ≤5
nmol/l). They did not have low choline or low inositol as reported earlier in 4 out of 5, and 2 out of 5 cases.5 The lower the CSF 5-MTHF
level, the higher are the chances of having a FOLR1 gene mutation, as 71% (10 out of 14) with levels ≤5 nmol/l had it, but it should still
be considered in compatible clinical and radiological settings as seen with our cases. The CFD has also been linked to the presence of
autoantibodies against the folate receptor in CSF,6 though most of these cases were earlier described as ‘idiopathic CFD’ earlier. Secondary
forms of CFD have been recognized during chronic use of antifolate and anticonvulsant drugs, and various known conditions such as Rett
syndrome,7 dihydropteridine reductase deficiency, and Kearns-Sayre syndrome.8 Deficiency of dihydrofolate reductase, the enzyme responsible
for catalyzing the conversion of dihydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate, causes cerebral folate deficiency with generalized tonic-clonic and
focal seizures and megaloblastic anemia or pancytopenia.9 The CSF 5-MTHF levels tend to be less profoundly low in these cases as well as in
those associated with folate receptor antibodies (FRA). Cerebral folate deficiency has been shown to be strongly associated with autism or
autistic spectrum disorders (ASD), the features were seen in our cases as well. In one large series of 93 ASD patients, all 16 CSF 5-MTHF
values were below the normative mean CSF concentration, 75.3% of all 93 patients had FRα auto antibodies (FRA) in the serum samples, and an
inverse relationship between the blocking FRA and CSF 5-MTHF was found. Approximately one-third of these, treated with folinic acid
demonstrated moderate to much improvement in this study.10 The 5-MTHF is the precursor of the methyl-group donor S-adenosylmethionine, which
is used in more than 100 chemical reactions. The methylation of arginine at position 107 within myelin basic protein is necessary to
maintain stability of CNS myelin, and this might explain the hypomyelination seen in our cases. Biosynthesis of tetrahydrobiopterin is also
dependent on 5-MTHF,5 and low levels of the later might be associated with low 5-HIAA, and HVA concentrations. We did not find low levels of
these 2 in our patients, as with other cases.3,8 Our patients did not show the reduced choline and inositol peak on brain MRS as previously
seen in some cases.3,5 In conclusion, patients presenting with intractable seizures beyond the neonatal period, especially in the setting of
otherwise, unexplained global developmental delay or of features consistent with autistic spectrum disorder calls for consideration of
cerebral folate deficiency. As only a limited number of cases are reported yet, more cases in the future will help us study the phenotype
and better characterization of this new clinical entity. Case reports will only be considered for unusual topics that add something new to
the literature. All Case Reports should include at least one figure. Written informed consent for publication must accompany any photograph
in which the subject can be identified. Figures should be submitted with a 300 dpi resolution when submitting electronically or printed on
high-contrast glossy paper when submitting print copies. The abstract should be unstructured, and the introductory section should always
include the objective and reason why the author is presenting this particular case. References should be up to date, preferably not
exceeding 15.
