A young female presented with acute abdominal pain of two days duration consistent with acute pancreatitis. During her stay in the hospital
she had a sudden drop in hemoglobin to 6 g/dl without any overt blood loss. On evaluation, it was evident that she had acute pancreatitis,
in addition to displaying features of autoimmune hemolytic anemia. She had been a known case of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and had
discontinued her treatment. She was managed with methylprednisolone pulse therapy. Her clinical condition improved, and she has been
regularly attending our clinic for the last 2 years. According to a literature search in Medline, it would appear that this is the first
report of a case in which SLE with autoimmune hemolytic anemia has been associated with acute pancreatitis in a single case. Eine junge Frau
stellte sich mit akuten Bauchschmerzen von zwei Tagen Dauer, die auf eine akute Pankreatitis hinwiesen, vor. Während ihres Aufenthaltes im
Krankenhaus erlitt sie einen plötzlichen Abfall des Hämoglobins auf 6 mg/dl ohne offenen Blutverlust. Die Untersuchung ergab, dass sie eine
akute Pankreatitis hatte und zusätzlich Symptome einer autoimmunhämolytischen Anämie zeigte. Die Patientin hatte eine bekannte Vorgeschichte
von systemischem Lupus erythematodes (SLE) mit Behandlungsabbruch. Sie wurde mit Methylprednisolon-Pulstherapie behandelt. Ihre klinischer
Zustand verbesserte sich, und sie wird seit den letzten 2 Jahren regelmäßig in unserer Klinik untersucht. Nach einer in Medline
durchgeführten Literaturrecherche scheint es, dass dies der erste Bericht über einen Fall ist, in dem SLE mit autoimmunhämolytischer Anämie
und akuter Pankreatitis zusammen auftritt. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune inflammatory disease characterized by the
presence of a plethora of autoantibodies and immune complex formation targeted to various organs of the body. SLE presents with
mucocutaneous, musculoskeletal and/or renal involvement. Hematological disturbances are also common in SLE. Anemia in SLE is multi-factorial
and can be part of the disease process or a complication of the treatment itself. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) is often associated
with thrombocytopenia, lupus nephritis, and central nervous system activity. In comparison, common gastrointestinal (GI) manifestations of
SLE are non-specific and reflect either lupus of the GI tract or the effects of medication. Serious gastrointestinal manifestations of SLE
can include mesenteric vasculitis, acute pancreatitis and intestinal pseudo-obstruction. This report describes a rare combination of
hematological and gastrointestinal complication found in a patient with SLE flare. A 22-year-old woman came to the emergency department of
the King Fahad Medical City in Riyadh, a tertiary care center in Saudi Arabia, presenting with history of acute abdominal pain of 2 days
duration. She described the pain as severe (score of 6/10). The pain was in the epigastrium with reference to the back. There was no history
of offending drug intake, jaundice or fever. She had also had two episodes of non-bilious vomiting She had been diagnosed as suffering from
SLE (American College of Rheumatology ACR, criteria 5/11) 5 years prior to the current presentation, but had discontinued treatment of her
own volition. On examination she showed stable vitals, with mild epigastric tenderness and no organomegaly. Her systemic examination was
unremarkable. She had a hemoglobin of 9.8 g/dl, a leucocytic count of 11,500 and a platelet count of 110×103. Her serum amylase was 380 IU
(Ref. 110 IU) and the lipase levels were 850 IU. She was managed as a case of acute pancreatitis, was kept nil per mouth and was given
normal saline intravenously. Her abdomen CT scan was consistent with grade B pancreatitis (Balthazar classification). She had a normal
hepatobiliary system, and her serum lipids and serum calcium levels were also normal. On further evaluation, it appeared that she had an
elevated ESR 66 mm/1st hr. Her antinuclear antibody (ANA) levels were elevated 1:60 (reference 1:35 IU/ml), as were her double stranded DNA
(DsDNA) levels (>19 AU/ml). During the hospital stay, her hemoglobin dropped further to 6 g/dl. She had no bleeding, and further evaluation
was suggestive of acute hemolysis (positive direct Coombs test, indirect hyper-bilirubinemia 8.6 g/dl, corrected retic count of 4%, elevated
serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 822 U/L). As a result of her past diagnosis of SLE, she was managed with pulse methylprednisolone 500 mg
IV for 3 days. Her abdominal pain settled and her hemoglobin levels remained stable. She was later started on tab. prednisolone 40 mg once
daily, which was tapered on follow-up. She has been asymptomatic for the past 2 years, and is regularly attending our clinic. The diagnosis
of acute pancreatitis is an important differential in the evaluation of abdominal pain in a patient with SLE. The patients usually present
with pain of variable intensity. Several factors have been implicated in the pathogenesis of this condition, such as vasculitis, drugs and
antiphospholipid antibodies. The role of corticosteroids as an etiologic factor remains controversial. Ben et al. described acute
pancreatitis in six SLE patients, with favorable outcomes following steroid treatment . Recently, data on 4,053 SLE patients from China
showed the overall prevalence of pancreatitis to be 0.67%, an annual incidence of 0.56% with a mortality rate of 37.04%. The authors of this
study concluded that a combination of SLE activity and multiple organ system involvement were predictors both of severity and mortality due
to acute pancreatitis in SLE patients. In this study, further glucocorticoid treatment was considered to lead to a better outcome in a
majority of SLE patients . The index case had been diagnosed with SLE 5 years prior to her current presentation and she had discontinued
treatment of her own accord. It is quite possible that, in her case, stopping the maintenance dose of steroids was responsible for both the
acute pancreatitis and the acute autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA). The association of acute pancreatitis in a cohort study of 551 SLE
patients included the withdrawal of a maintenance dose of steroids, the presence of seizures and of arthritis, and the authors of this study
found no independent predictor of this complication . In yet another study, hypertriglyceridemia appeared to be a strong associate of
pancreatitis in SLE patients. Authors in this study further observed that SLE patients with psychosis and pleurisy were at increased risk
for pancreatitis . The index case had a normal lipid profile and no CNS or pleural involvement. The combination of SLE and acute
pancreatitis is a very serious complication, which could even be fatal, as reported by Cairoli et al. . The spectrum of SLE is not solely
restricted to acute pancreatitis as the association of SLE with chronic pancreatitis has been reported as well . In addition to her acute
pancreatitis, the index case also developed features of acute autoimmune hemolytic anemia during her hospital stay. Overt autoimmune
hemolytic anemia has been noted up to 10% of SLE patients . AIHA may manifest itself in SLE patients at the time of diagnosis, or within the
first year following diagnosis. In this case, however, the index case presented with this complication 5 years after the diagnosis. AIHA is
often associated with thrombocytopenia, lupus nephritis and CNS activity. To address the natural history and treatment response in AIHA
among SLE patients, Gomrad et al. studied 26 patients with severe isolated AIHA. The authors observed that AIHA is a serious complication of
SLE, requiring urgent and appropriate management. In their study, patients responded to steroids in 96% of the cases and a recurrence rate
of only 3 per 100 person-years was observed. Furthermore, in the same study, 7 patients (27%) experienced a relapse of AIHA and required
immunosupressants. Based on their results, the authors recommended steroids as the first line of treatment, and advocated additional therapy
with rituximab, danzol in refractory cases. Our index case responded well to the steroid treatment, with no relapse over the two years of
follow-up. Massive hemolysis due to any reason has been found to be another cause of acute pancreatitis. Drum et al. retrospectively studied
acute hemolysis due to different reasons in forty patients with drop of hematocrit greater than 12% over a period of 12 hours. Pancreatitis
was observed to be a complication of massive hemolysis with a prevalence of above 20%. The authors were of the opinion that the back pain
often found in acute hemolysis may originate from the pancreas rather than the kidneys. Experimental models have supported massive hemolysis
as a cause of acute pancreatitis, and, in addition, histological changes following massive hemolysis have been observed in the pancreas in
these experimental models . Having said this, it is pertinent to mention here that the index case presented with acute pancreatitis and
developed severe hemolysis during her stay in hospital, so there seems to be no temporal relation between the two (acute pancreatitis with
hemolysis). However, it is possible that low grade hemolysis taking place a few days before the manifestation of the acute pancreatitis
actually precipitated the attack, as she had no other established risk factor of acute pancreatitis. We cannot rule this out with any
certainty. However, it is certain that due to massive hemolysis during her hospital stay, her pancreatitis could have worsened had she not
been managed in time. In conclusion, it may be said that the present case brings to the fore the multiple complications of SLE, a clinical
scenario due to the generation of multiple autoantibodies directed towards the pancreas and the hemopoietic system. Acute vasculitis with
its varied clinical presentation is often the commonest cause of abdominal pain in SLE, but acute pancreatitis and acute autoimmune
hemolytic anemia, with its consequences, should be kept in mind in a given case of SLE. Further, this case emphasizes the need for close
follow-up and proper health education in an SLE patient in order to circumvent any complication. The author declares that he has no
competing interests.
