Symptomatic paroxysmal hypertension without significantly elevated catecholamine concentrations and with no evidence of an underlying
adrenal tumor is known as pseudopheochromocytoma. We describe the case of a female patient with paroxysmal hypertensive crises accompanied
by headache, vertigo, tachycardia, nausea and altered mental status. Previously, she was treated for a longer period with alprazolam due to
panic disorder. Causes of secondary hypertension were excluded. Neurological triggers (intracranial tumor, cerebral vascular lesions,
hemorrhage, and epilepsy) could not be detected. Setting of the diagnosis of pseudopheochromocytoma treatment was initiated with alpha- and
beta-blockers resulting in reduced frequency of symptoms. Alprazolam was restarted at a daily dose of 1 mg. The patient’s clinical condition
improved rapidly and the dosage of alpha- and beta-blockers could be decreased. We conclude that the withdrawal of an anxiolytic therapeutic
regimen may generate sympathetic overdrive resulting in life-threatening paroxysmal malignant hypertension and secondary encephalopathy. We
emphasize that pseudopheochromocytoma can be diagnosed only after exclusion of the secondary causes of hypertension. We highlight the
importance of a psychopharmacological approach to this clinical entity. Pseudopheochromocytoma is a rapid onset of a constellation of
symptoms generated by sympathoadrenal overdrive . In most cases, this clinical syndrome includes paroxysmal (malignant) hypertension,
tremor, palpitation, sweating, chest pain, headache, nausea, dizziness, and pseudoseizures . The episodes of clinical symptoms and
complaints may last from minutes up to hours. Importantly, the basic difference between pheochromocytoma and pseudopheochromocytoma is that
in the latter no biochemical and anatomical background can be clarified; however, evidence of mild to moderate catecholamine release may be
proven during any of the paroxysms . It has been suggested that a number of factors interact leading to the development of this clinical
condition in any one individual (Table 1). Furthermore, there are differences in the severity and clinical characteristics between patients
that may result in the diversity of pseudopheochromocytoma . Interestingly, besides the already known clinical causes, psychological
childhood traumas may also play a role in the genesis of this clinical entity, where psychotherapy can effectively relieve symptoms .
Furthermore, it has to be emphasized that this condition may be secondary to certain drug therapies (for example, sympathomimetic agents,
tricyclic antidepressants, or reboxetine), all of which can contribute to the emergence of sympathetic overdrive . However, it has not been
clearly elucidated whether the modification or the termination of a former psychopharmacological therapy may be able to generate such severe
symptoms leading to the diagnosis of pseudopheochromocytoma . Throughout our work, we aimed to clarify the role of the withdrawal of the
anxiolytic drug alprazolam in the genesis of the characteristic clinical features of pseudopheochromocytoma by presenting one of our
patients’ clinical history.Table 1 Various clinical conditions can present in a similar way to pseudopheochromocytoma
EndocrineHyperthyroidism, carcinoid, mastocytosis, hypoglycemia, insulinoma, menopausal syndrome, adrenal medullary hyperplasia,
reninomaPharmacologicTricyclic antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, cocaine, alcohol withdrawal, abrupt clonidine
withdrawalCardiovascularIschemic heart disease, arrhythmias, baroreflex failure, renovascular disease, postural orthostatic tachycardia
syndromeNeurologicMigraine headache, cluster headache, stroke, diencephalic autonomic epilepsy, meningiomaOtherPreeclampsia or eclampsia,
obstructive sleep apnea, anxiety or panic attacks, acute intermittent porphyria, recurrent idiopathic anaphylaxis Various clinical
conditions can present in a similar way to pseudopheochromocytoma In January 2014, a 55-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our
Emergency Unit with paroxysmal malignant hypertension accompanied by headache, vertigo, tachycardia, lacrimation, nausea and altered mental
status. Her medical history included a caesarean section (1984), an abdominal surgery due to mechanical ileus, a laparoscopic
cholecystectomy (1995), gastro-oesophageal reflux and a total thyroidectomy due to a benign non-toxic multi-nodular goiter, later requiring
thyroid hormonal substitution. In 2008, an elevated fasting glucose level pointed to an underlying type 2 diabetes mellitus. Hypertension
and sinus tachycardia was first diagnosed in 2003. Consequently, the patient underwent several examinations in various hospitals but no
underlying organic causes of her complaints could be detected. Endocrinological disorders - especially pheochromocytoma - were excluded on
several occasions. Her altered mental status during the hypertensive crises raised the possibility of neurological deficiency, but no signs
of intracranial tumor, cerebral vascular lesion, hemorrhage or even epilepsy were detectable. Moreover, cardiac arrhythmias and ischemic
heart disease were also excluded. Eventually, in 2004, after numerous diagnostic procedures, panic syndrome was diagnosed; therefore
anxiolytic and antidepressant medications were initiated. Between 2004 and 2013 the patient was treated with this combination of
psychopharmacological agents. During a thorough psychiatric follow-up period the frequency of the paroxysms dropped noticeably, but the
patient seemed to be addicted to the psychopharmacological regimen so the medications were withdrawn in another center. During the following
year the patient did not show any clinical symptoms of paroxysmal hypertension. At the time of the current admission to our clinic the
patient’s medical therapy consisted of metoprolol 100 mg twice daily, esomeprazole 40 mg daily, levothyroxine 100 μg daily, allopurinol
100 mg daily, and insulin therapy (glulisine insulin 3 times a day and glargine insulin once a day). The patient presented herself at the
Division of Rare Diseases for further etiologic examinations. During the first clinical evaluation a very severe attack could be observed.
The patient became unconscious and her blood pressure rapidly rose to 230/100 mmHg, with a regular heart rate of 160 to 180/minute
(Figure 1). Moreover, focal muscle twitching appeared on her left face, and excessive lacrimation and flushing could also be observed.
Because of her unstable clinical condition she was immediately admitted to our ICU. Before the administration of additional medications, the
patient’s severe clinical condition improved significantly without assistance. By the end of the paroxysm the frequency of sinus rhythm
decreased to 90/minute and her blood pressure was also normalized. After the crisis, no signs of arrhythmia or long-standing neurological
defects could be observed. No other significant clinical abnormalities could be found during further clinical examinations. Afterwards,
during the first week of hospitalization she had attacks two to four times a day. These paroxysmal hypertensive crises lasted for three to
five minutes and then disappeared spontaneously without any medical interventions. Between the paroxysms the patient was asymptomatic.
Because of the repeated attacks, a combination of alpha- and beta-adrenoceptor blockers was given, which was able to lower her blood
pressure and heart rate during the paroxysms, but not the frequency of the attacks. Holter electrocardiography recordings and twelve-lead
surface electrocardiograms revealed sudden onset of episodic sinus tachycardia without any signs of further atrial or ventricular
arrhythmias (Figure 2). Renal Doppler ultrasound examination was performed to exclude renovascular disease. It revealed physiological blood
flow in both renal arteries, with no significant difference regarding resistive indices (0.67 versus 0.7, respectively). Although previous
examinations were not able to prove any endocrinological background of the paroxysms, a repeated laboratory testing of pheochromocytoma and
carcinoid was performed. Laboratory results of our patient are shown in Table 2. An elevated serum chromogranin A level appeared, but it
proved to be a false positive result due to concomitant proton-pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy (after cessation of the PPI, the chromogranin A
level was in the normal range). Surprisingly, an adenoma could be detected in the left adrenal gland during computed tomography. Due to the
repeated severe clinical symptoms, we were obliged to start treatment of the pheochromocytoma; thus, a cardio-selective beta-blocker
(bisoprolol 5 mg twice daily) in combination with an alpha-adrenoceptor-blocker (doxazosine 4 mg once daily) was initiated. During this
time, urine concentrations of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA), metanephrine, normetanephrine and dopamine were found to be normal.
Although, we measured slightly elevated serum concentrations of noradrenalin and dopamine during an attack, the levels did not fulfill the
criteria for pheochromocytoma (Table 3). To ensure the safe exclusion of pheochromocytoma, an iodine-131-metaiodobenzylguanidine (131I-MIBG)
scan was also performed, which did not reveal any abnormalities relating to adrenal gland dysfunction (Figure 3). Furthermore,
hyperaldosteronism as a very rare cause of paroxysmal hypertension could also be excluded. Further laboratory tests helped to exclude any
hormonal abnormalities; thus the aforementioned adrenal gland adenoma was regarded as an ‘incidentaloma’. Thyroid laboratory tests showed
the effective hormonal substitution of hypothyroidism secondary to the previous thyroidectomy. After excluding the possibility of endocrine
disorders we focused on anxiolytic medication. For this reason psychiatric examination was performed and alprazolam was re-administered in a
daily dose of 1 mg (0.5 mg twice daily). We could demonstrate an immediate clinical improvement; furthermore, the daily dose of alpha- and
beta-blockers could also be decreased. During the administration of alprazolam at a daily dose of 1 mg, sleepiness and fatigue occurred,
therefore we decreased the daily dose to 0.5 mg. Consequently, the paroxysmal increase in blood pressure reappeared so further therapy of
1 mg was necessary for maintenance. After a four-week period on the ICU, the patient was discharged though still with mild symptoms but with
an improved quality of life. The systolic and diastolic blood pressures and heart rate collected after the discharge of our patient were
inserted into the manuscript (Table 4).Figure 1 During the first clinical evaluation of the patient a very severe attack could be observed.
The patient became unconscious, her systolic blood pressure rapidly rose above 230 mmHg. Similar trends were observed during the repeated
paroxysms. BP: blood pressure.Figure 2 Holter electrocardiogram revealed a paroxysmal sinus tachycardia during the attack. No other atrial
arrhythmias or life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias (ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation) were observed.Table 2 Laboratory data of
the patient Laboratory variables Results Laboratory references Na+ 144133 to146mmol/LK+ 4.23.5 to 5.3mmol/LCl− 10799 to 111mmol/LCa2+
(total)2.332.1 to 2.6mmol/LBlood urea nitrogen4.23.6 to 7.2mmol/LCreatinine6644 to 97μmol/LeGFR (EPI)89> 90mL/minute/1.73 m2 Glucose63.6 to
6.0mmol/LHgbA1C7.84.2 to 6.1%Albumin4235 to 52g/LTotal protein6360 to 80g/LAST26< 40U/LALT38< 40U/LLDH194135 to 220U/LAlkaline
phosphatase7440 to 115U/LAmylase23< 100U/LLipase17< 70U/LCRP1.9< 4.6mg/LWBC8.664.8 to 10.8Giga/LRBC3.974.2 to 5.4Tera/LHemoglobin123115 to
150g/LHematocrit0.350.35 to 0.47Platelet277150 to 400Giga/LMCV88.980 to 99fLMCH3127 to 31pgALT: alanine transaminase; AST: aspartate
transaminase; CRP: C reactive protein; EPI: epidemiology collaboration; GFR: glomerular filtration rate; HgbA1c: hemoglobin A1c; LDH:
lactate dehydrogenase; MCH: mean corpuscular hemoglobin; MCH: mean corpuscular hemoglobin; MCV: mean corpuscular volume; MCH: mean
corpuscular hemoglobin; MCH: mean corpuscular hemoglobin; RBC: red blood cell; WBC: white blood cell.Table 3 Hormone levels of the studied
patient Hormonal variables Results Laboratory references Plasma samplesThyroid stimulating hormone2.30.3 to 4.2mU/LACTH (8 hours)< 19<
75ng/LCortisol245.8138 to 690nmol/LPlasma reninNon- detectable0.5 to 1.9 x hrsμg/LPlasma aldosterone54.128 to 291pmol/lChromogranin A (with
PPI)875.420 to 100μg/LChromogranin A (without PPI)48.320 to 100μg/LPlasma samples during paroxysmAdrenaline0.32<
0.41nmol/LNoradrenaline3.370.37 to 2.6nmol/LDopamine2.73< 0.88nmol/LUrine samples (24-hour collection)Adrenaline163
to109nmol/dieNoradrenaline18789 to 473nmol/dieDopamine2,171424 to 1,612nmol/dieHomovanillic acid319.1 to 33.8μmol/dieVanillyl mandelic
acid31< 34μmol/die5-HIAA233.7 to 42.9μmol/dieMetanephrines356375 to 1,506nmol/dieNormetanephrines1,340573 to
1,932nmol/die3-metoxytyramine702< 900nmol/die5-HIAA: 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid; ACTH: adrenocorticotropic hormone; PPI: proton-pump
inhibitor.Figure 3 For 131 I- MIBG acquisition, 40 MBq radiopharmaceutical was injected. A whole body (4 cm/minute) and abdominal SPECT/CT
acquisition were performed on MEDISO AnyScan SC system (Budapest, Hungary) 72 hours after the injection. SPECT parameters were:
1 minute/projection, 64 views, matrix size 64 × 64. A 16-slice CT was used, with 120 mAs and 120 kV abdominal filter. For the SPECT
reconstruction OSEM method was performed. None of the adrenal regions showed abnormal focal uptake. MIBG: metaiodobenzylguanidine, SPECT:
Single-Photon Emission Computed Tomography, CT: computed tomography, OSEM: Ordered Subset Expectation Maximization.Table 4 Data on blood
pressure and heart rate obtained after the discharge of our patient revealed the lack of reoccurrence of the paroxysms Maximum Minimum Mean
BP sys (mmHg)145133140BP dia (mmHg)857982Heart rate (beats/minute)936574BP: blood pressure; dia: diastolic; sys: systolic. During the first
clinical evaluation of the patient a very severe attack could be observed. The patient became unconscious, her systolic blood pressure
rapidly rose above 230 mmHg. Similar trends were observed during the repeated paroxysms. BP: blood pressure. Holter electrocardiogram
revealed a paroxysmal sinus tachycardia during the attack. No other atrial arrhythmias or life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias
(ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation) were observed. Laboratory data of the patient ALT: alanine transaminase; AST: aspartate
transaminase; CRP: C reactive protein; EPI: epidemiology collaboration; GFR: glomerular filtration rate; HgbA1c: hemoglobin A1c; LDH:
lactate dehydrogenase; MCH: mean corpuscular hemoglobin; MCH: mean corpuscular hemoglobin; MCV: mean corpuscular volume; MCH: mean
corpuscular hemoglobin; MCH: mean corpuscular hemoglobin; RBC: red blood cell; WBC: white blood cell. Hormone levels of the studied patient
5-HIAA: 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid; ACTH: adrenocorticotropic hormone; PPI: proton-pump inhibitor. For 131 I- MIBG acquisition, 40 MBq
radiopharmaceutical was injected. A whole body (4 cm/minute) and abdominal SPECT/CT acquisition were performed on MEDISO AnyScan SC system
(Budapest, Hungary) 72 hours after the injection. SPECT parameters were: 1 minute/projection, 64 views, matrix size 64 × 64. A 16-slice CT
was used, with 120 mAs and 120 kV abdominal filter. For the SPECT reconstruction OSEM method was performed. None of the adrenal regions
showed abnormal focal uptake. MIBG: metaiodobenzylguanidine, SPECT: Single-Photon Emission Computed Tomography, CT: computed tomography,
OSEM: Ordered Subset Expectation Maximization. Data on blood pressure and heart rate obtained after the discharge of our patient revealed
the lack of reoccurrence of the paroxysms BP: blood pressure; dia: diastolic; sys: systolic. The clinical constellation of paroxysmal
hypertension without a clear underlying cause and without proof of pheochromocytoma has been introduced as pseudopheochromocytoma, which may
lead to severe disability and a worsening quality of life. Importantly, this clinical entity is characterized by paroxysmal episodes of
serious hypertension and concomitant symptoms due to sympathoadrenal overdrive, which are not related to emotional stress . However, some
patients may experience anxiety but only in reaction to the distressing symptoms and complaints. On the other hand, panic disorder is
characterized by mild blood pressure elevation where panic and fear are inevitably discoverable . Despite the different provoking mechanisms
these clinical entities bear resemblance to each other. Unfortunately, in the case of lacking emotional distress, paroxysmal hypertension is
usually thought to be an unexplained disorder . Numerous clinical conditions may manifest as paroxysmal hypertension and should be clarified
where clinically appropriate. Paroxysmal hypertension is mostly accompanied by tachycardia (palpitation) where the sympathoadrenal system
activation is likely to be the underlying factor. Previously, it has been shown that patients with pseudopheochromocytoma show beta- and
alpha-1-adrenoceptor hypersensitivity . The effective response to alpha- and beta-blockers also seems to support this hypothesis. However,
in some circumstances these drugs are not effective in symptom control . In these particular cases psychopharmacological therapeutic
approach may be useful in the prevention of the paroxysms and restoring quality of life . Previously, antidepressant agents (desipramine,
paroxetine) in combination with anxiolytic drugs and psychotherapeutic interventions have been shown to be effective in the prevention and
elimination of the attacks . Importantly, the aforementioned management strategy may be able to control the clinical symptoms but the
disease itself is never eradicated. Moreover, it is important to note that paroxysmal hypertension and the concomitant symptoms may be
secondary to drug therapy which may raise sympathetic activity. It has not been established whether the withdrawal of an anxiolytic therapy
may be able to result in such serious consequences. Benzodiazepines (for example, alprazolam) are known for their anxiolytic, sedative,
hypnotic, euphoric, anticonvulsant, and muscle relaxant effects while acting on gamma-aminobutyric acid A (GABAA) receptors. The GABAA is an
ionotropic receptor and ligand-gated chloride ion channel. Its endogenous ligand is GABA, which is an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the
central nervous system. Furthermore, it has been shown that neuronal cholecystokinin (CCK) receptors are also implicated in these mechanisms
. The CCK receptor activation has been proven to be responsible for controlling fear and panic attacks. Consequently, the withdrawal of the
benzodiazepines unarguably can lead to the liberation of CCK receptors from their inhibition (Figure 4). The concomitant chance for panic
attacks is increased; moreover, alterations in vascular tone, sudden increase in blood pressure and life-threatening hypertensive
encephalopathy are considerable sequels .Figure 4 The effects of benzodiazepines on GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) receptor and
cholecystokinin (CCK) are shown. On one hand, binding of GABA molecules to their sites triggers the opening of a chloride ion-selective pore
resulting in the hyperpolarization of the cell. On the other hand, benzodiazepines are likely to antagonize the CCK-induced neuronal
activation. The effects of benzodiazepines on GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) receptor and cholecystokinin (CCK) are shown. On one hand,
binding of GABA molecules to their sites triggers the opening of a chloride ion-selective pore resulting in the hyperpolarization of the
cell. On the other hand, benzodiazepines are likely to antagonize the CCK-induced neuronal activation. In our work we described the medical
history of a female patient who was treated with the anxiolytic drug alprazolam for years, due to panic disorder. Lately, the anxiolytic
therapy was terminated because her symptoms had improved and because the danger of addiction was considerable. Recently, our patient was
admitted to our center due to episodes of severe, paroxysmal hypertension with accompanying symptoms reflecting increased sympathetic tone.
Importantly, these clinical signs were not initiated by fear or emotional stress. After ruling out all potential secondary underlying causes
that may have contributed to the worsening of the clinical status, diagnosis of pseudopheochromocytoma was established. Considering the
patient’s severe symptoms, alpha- and beta-adrenoceptor blocker treatment was introduced, although these drugs were not effective enough to
prevent further paroxysms. It was realized that the cessation of alprazolam treatment might have been responsible for the sudden worsening
of the clinical condition. Thus, alprazolam therapy was restarted resulting in a rapid improvement of the patient’s symptoms and quality of
life. The reappearance of elevated blood pressure secondary to the temporary decrease in the daily dose of alprazolam is considered to be a
positive challenge test. To our best knowledge, this is the first paper to report the possible role of anxiolytic withdrawal in the genesis
of pseudopheochromocytoma. Therefore, we emphasize that the termination of an anxiolytic therapeutic regimen may generate severe sympathetic
overshooting resulting in life-threatening paroxysmal malignant hypertension and secondary encephalopathy. We emphasize that
pseudopheochromocytoma can be diagnosed only after the exclusion of secondary causes of hypertension. Importantly, pheochromocytoma has to
be safely ruled out. Besides the administration of alpha- and beta-blockers, we stress the importance of psychopharmacological and
psychotherapeutic approach to this clinical entity. A written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this
paper and the accompanying images. 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid cholecystokinin computed tomography gamma-aminobutyric acid intensive care
unit iodine-131-metaiodobenzylguanidine Ordered Subset Expectation Maximization proton pump inhibitor Single-Photon Emission Computed
Tomography Competing interest All authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AP: has taken part in the
observation and management of the patient in the ICU and has drafted the manuscript. GB: has taken part in the observation and management of
the patient in the ICU and has drafted the manuscript. AE: has taken part in the observation and management of the patient in the ICU. LS:
has participated in the observation and management of the patient. ÁC: has participated in the establishment of the diagnosis and the
observation of the patient in the Emergency Room and has drafted the manuscript. SB: has analyzed the radiologic images. PK: has
participated in the observation and management of the patient. DP: has participated in the observation and management of the patient. GyP:
has participated in the observation and management of the patient. GyP: has participated in the observation and management of the patient.
ZSz: has taken part in the observation and management of the patient in the ICU and has drafted the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. The authors take the opportunity to express their appreciation to Professor Zoltán Szilvássy for his helpful
assistance and critical remarks which have contributed to the improvement of the academic standards of the paper.
