Propanil is an important cause of herbicide poisoning in Sri Lanka, accounting for about 2% of all cases of self-poisoning. The outcome is
extremely poor when the poisoning is severe and current medical care is of limited efficacy. Death usually occurs due to the severe and
prolonged methaemoglobinaemia. We describe a case of severe Propanil poisoning, successfully treated by exchange transfusion at a tertiary
care hospital in Sri Lanka. A 17-year old Sri Lankan male (body weight – 42 kg), presented to a local hospital 1 hour after self-ingestion
of nearly 500 ml (4.3 g/kg) of liquid Propanil (concentration – 360 g/l). On admission he had dizziness and peripheral cyanosis. He was
given intravenous methylene blue (1 mg/kg) within one hour of admission, which was repeated subsequently due to minimal response. The next
day morning, (18 hours after poisoning) the patient was transferred to the National Hospital of Sri Lanka (NHSL) for further management. On
admission to NHSL, he was drowsy and confused, had a shallow respiratory effort and marked central and peripheral cyanosis. Respiratory rate
was 20/min, with a pulse-oximetry of 77% on room air. The arterial blood gas analysis was as follows; pH–7.24, HCO3−–12 mmol/l,
pCO2–28 mmHg, pO2–239 mmHg and O2 saturation–100%. Exchange transfusion was commenced within two hours of admission to NHSL. A dramatic
improvement in oxygen saturation was observed immediately afterwards, with the saturation in pulse-oximetry rising to >95%. The level of
consciousness and respiratory effort also improved. He was discharged subsequently 8 days after the initial poisoning. Propanil has
potential to produce severe life threatening clinical manifestations, despite categorization as a herbicide with low toxicity. In cases of
severe poisoning, exchange transfusion may be life saving. Since methylene blue, intensive care and exchange transfusion facilities are also
not readily available in local hospitals, which frequently encounter cases of severe Propanil poisoning, early transfer of patients to
tertiary care hospitals should be considered. Exchange transfusion may be helpful even in late stages in patients with severe poisoning.
Propanil (3,4-dichloropropionanilide) is an important cause of herbicide poisoning. It is a widely used selective acetanilide . It is
possibly the most extensively used herbicide in rice cultivation worldwide . However, available literature suggests that Propanil is a rare
cause of poisoning. Ingestion leading to severe morbidity and death has been reported with Propanil, particularly in South Asian countries
such as Sri Lanka [1, 3]. It is estimated that Propanil accounts for about 2% of all cases of self-poisoning admitted for hospital care in
Sri Lanka, where it is the second most lethal herbicide after paraquat [1, 4]. Although rare, the outcome is extremely poor when the
poisoning is severe and current medical care in severe poisoning is of limited efficacy . Propanil and its major metabolite, 3,
4-dichloroanilide induces the conversion of Fe2+ in haemoglobin to Fe3+, forming methaemoglobin . This results in the lowering of the oxygen
carrying capacity of blood and tissue hypoxia. Clinical features include; gastrointestinal irritation causing abdominal pain, nausea and
vomiting, central and peripheral cyanosis due to methaemoglobinaemia, headache, dizziness, stupor, convulsions, bradycardia, hypotension,
respiratory depression, acidosis and haemolytic anaemia . Death usually occurs due to the severe and prolonged methaemoglobinaemia . We
describe a case of severe Propanil poisoning, successfully treated by exchange transfusion at a tertiary care hospital in Sri Lanka. A
17-year-old Sri Lankan male, presented to a local hospital after self-ingestion of nearly 500 ml of liquid Propanil (360 g/l), in an attempt
at deliberate self harm after a domestic dispute. The family had unsuccessfully attempted induced emesis at home with soap water. He was
brought to the nearby local hospital one hour after ingestion. On admission the patient had dizziness, peripheral cyanosis and burning
abdominal pain. The local hospital induced emesis using NaHCO3. However gastric lavage was not done and activated charcoal was not given.
Subsequently, the patient developed marked respiratory difficulty, central and peripheral cyanosis and drowsiness. He was given intravenous
methylene blue (1 mg/kg) within one hour of admission. Due to minimal improvement in respiratory difficulty, central and peripheral cyanosis
and drowsiness methylene blue infusion was repeated one hour after the initial dose. In addition oral ascorbic acid (2 g three times per
day) was given together with IV fluids and supplementary O2 via face mask, while vital parameters were also monitored. The next morning,
nearly 18 hours after ingestion, the patient was transferred to the National Hospital of Sri Lanka, the premier tertiary care hospital in
the country. The reasons for transfer were further deterioration, non-availability of further IV methylene blue preparations and the lack of
intensive care and exchange transfusion facilities at the local hospital. The patient arrived at the National Hospital of Sri Lanka 22 hours
after ingestion of the poison, including 4 hours for transport from the local hospital. On admission to the National Hospital of Sri Lanka,
he was drowsy and confused, but arousable. He had a shallow respiratory effort and marked central and peripheral cyanosis. On admission the
heart rate was 120 beats/min with regular rhythm, blood pressure 100/60 mmHg. The respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min, with a pulse oximetry
of 77% on room air and clear lungs on auscultation. The abdomen was soft, with epigastric tenderness. Neurological examination was
unremarkable. The arterial blood gas analysis was as follows; pH – 7.24, HCO3− – 12 mmol/l, pCO2 – 28 mmHg, pO2: 239 mmHg and O2 saturation
– 100%. Intensified monitoring was commenced and supportive care was provided with IV fluids and supplementary O2 (6 l/min) via face mask.
Although the patient showed mild improvement in his respiratory status, there was no change in his cyanosis yet and pulse oximetry
demonstrated an oxygen saturation fluctuating between 75%-85%. Serum methaemoglobin levels were not measured due to the non-availability of
facilities. The patient’s clinical condition continued to deteriorate with worsening drowsiness, increased respiratory rate (30 breaths/min)
and tachycardia (130 beats/min), so it was decided it to commence on exchange transfusion without delay. Exchange transfusion was performed
within two hours of admission to the tertiary care hospital, via a femoral catheter. The total blood volume removed was 1875 ml, which was
replaced with 1780 ml of packed red cells and 800 ml of normal saline (body weight – 42 kg, estimated blood volume – 3150 ml). A dramatic
improvement in oxygen saturation was observed immediately after the procedure with the saturation rising to more than 95%, which remained
stable until discharge. The second day after the exchange transfusion he exhibited marked improvement in the peripheral and central
cyanosis. The level of consciousness, respiratory effort (18 breaths/min) and heart rate (80 beats/min) also improved. The patient developed
a mild haemolysis on the second day after exchange transfusion, with indirect hyper-bilirubinaemia (total bilirubin – 3.9 mg/dl, indirect –
2.4 mg/dl and direct – 1.5 mg/dl), increased LDH level (900 iu/l) a blood picture demonstrating polychromatic red cells, and urinalysis
showing increased urobilinogen levels. It improved gradually and the results of the serial full blood count reports are summarized in
Table 1. His electrocardiogram, blood coagulation profile, renal and liver function tests remained normal throughout the hospital stay. He
was discharged subsequently 8 days after the initial poisoning.Table 1 A summary of the patients full blood count from admission to
discharge 1 stDay (pre-ET)1 stDay (post-ET)2 ndDay3 rdDay4 thDay5 thDay6 thDay8 thDayWhite cell count
(μl)10,38010,7909,9008,9007,6006,8406,4006,500 Neutrophils (%)74.768.763.064.966.664.264.064.2 Lymphocytes
(%)14.921.124.520.217.818.917.918.0 Monocytes (%)6.66.48.47.58.37.611.511.0 Eosinophils (%)3.64.01.33.75.35.25.25.1 Basophils
(%)0.20.22.83.72.04.11.41.9 Haemoglobin (g/dl)14.713.014.614.613.614.012.813.6 Platelets
(μl)135,000180,000107,00096,00095,00092,000101,000151,000ET – Exchange Transfusion. A summary of the patients full blood count from
admission to discharge ET – Exchange Transfusion. Propanil is a highly effective herbicide from acetanilide group, it is sold in at least 20
different brand names, mostly as 36% solutions . It is often described in the toxicology literature as being a mild form of poison, with
limited toxicity . The current case demonstrates that it can be a severe form of self poisoning, especially after heavy ingestion. The
lethal dose in man is probably as little as 10 ml of undiluted compound and ingestion of more than 200 ml of diluted Propanil is usually
considered as a severe poisoning . The onset of the development of methaemoglobinaemia is said to be proportional to the level of toxicity .
Clinical toxicity is characterised by cyanosis, acidosis and progressive end-organ dysfunction which are consistent with severe and
prolonged methaemoglobinaemia . Methaemoglobinaemia occurs due to bioconversion of propanil to 3,4-dichlorophenylhydroxylamine, which is co-
oxidised with oxyhaemoglobin (Fe2+) in erythrocytes to the ferric state (Fe3+) . This leads to end-organ dysfunction, manifesting
particularly as central nervous system depression, hypotension and acidosis . However, toxic mechanisms other than methaemoglobinaemia may
contribute to clinical outcomes via lipoperoxidation, myelotoxicity, and immune dysfunction . The elimination half-life of Propanil in
humans is about 3.2 hours, however, the concentration of its major metabolite 3,4-dichloroaniline (DCA) is generally higher, more persistent
and more variable than Propanil . This is due to DCA having a longer half-life and being slightly less lipophilic than propanil and
therefore likely to have a smaller volume of distribution . Given that poisoning manifests early post-ingestion and yet the time to death is
usually greater than 24 hours there are ample opportunities for interventions that prevent death . Our patient presented with a rapid onset
of methaemoglobinaemia, central nervous system depression, respiratory distress and haemolysis, which probably occurred rapidly due to the
accelerated formation of methaemoglobin following ingestion of large quantities of Propanil. Haemolysis occurs in nearly 1/3rd of the
patients with Propanil poisoning, possibly due to direct oxidant damage to red cells from the poison . Methylene blue is considered as the
drug of choice in methaemoglobinaemia, it is given in doses of 1-2 mg/kg IV . It increases the rate of conversion to of methaemoglobin to
haemoglobin. However, the condition of our patient continuously deteriorated, despite repeated doses of methylene blue soon after admission.
However, the dose used in the present patient could have been inadequate, and IV methylene blue was not readily available in the hospital to
administer repeated doses. Hence he was transferred to a tertiary care hospital for the commencement of exchange transfusion. Exchange
transfusion replaces methaemoglobin and may also remove the remaining poison . However, the efficiency of this varies inversely with the
proportion of poison located outside the vascular compartment, which depends on the volume of distribution. The volume of distribution is
high since both propanil and its major metabolite 3,4-dichloroaniline (DCA) are lipophilic . Hence, from this it may be questioned whether
the poison load will be markedly lowered by exchange transfusions . Exchange transfusion can improve oxygen delivery by donation of
erythrocytes, although their function is temporarily impaired post-transfusion due to depletion of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) during
storage . Exchange transfusions are usually performed when patients fail to improve with the initial administration of methylene blue and in
severe poisoning it may be a life saving measure . Complications of exchange transfusion are mostly those related to any blood transfusion,
such as transmission of blood-borne infections, electrolyte imbalance and transfusion reactions, in addition venous catheter site infections
can also occur . Our patient’s condition rapidly improved following exchange transfusion. Considering the rapid improvement, we suggest that
exchange transfusions may be life saving, in cases of severe Propanil poisoning and recommend early commencement. In addition studies from
Sri Lanka have shown that management difficulties in Propanil poisoning arise due to the lack of IV methylene blue, inability to measure
methaemoglobin levels and paucity of intensive care unit beds, especially in the setting of smaller regional hospitals . Furthermore,
facilities for exchange transfusion are also not readily available in these hospitals. Hence in cases of severe poisoning we recommend early
transfer of patients to tertiary care hospitals with facilities for exchange transfusion, which can be life saving as in the case of our
patient. Exchange transfusions were commenced in this patient nearly 28 hours after the ingestion of the poison, demonstrating that it can
be helpful even in late stages in patients with severe Propanil poisoning. However further studies are required to determine the best timing
for the exchange transfusion. Furthermore, since it is a relatively common and a readily treatable cause of poisoning, there is also an
urgent need to formulate evidence based management guidelines. In addition since Propanil poisoning is relatively common in Sri Lanka we
also recommend that biomarkers to determine severity and response to treatment should be measured, including changes in methaemoglobinaemia
should be measured and facilities should be made available at least in tertiary care hospitals. Propanil despite categorization as a
herbicide with low toxicity, has potential to produce severe life threatening clinical manifestations. In cases of severe Propanil
poisoning, exchange transfusions may be life saving, and probably requires early commencement. Since facilities for exchange transfusion are
also not readily available in local hospitals, which frequently encounter cases of severe Propanil poisoning, early transfer of patients to
tertiary care hospitals should be considered. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal guardian for publication of
this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
Intravenous. Competing interest The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions PR and SAD participated in
acquisition of data and drafting the manuscript. IA, PK and AG participated in revising critically the manuscript and giving the final
approval of the version to be published. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
