Warfarin is the most common and cheap oral anticoagulant currently used in clinical practice. A high inter-individual variation is seen in
the response to warfarin. Recently, pharmacogenetics has gained importance in managing patients on warfarin, both in predicting the optimum
required dose as well as in decreasing the risk of bleeding. This case report is a description of a 49-year-old patient who had a lethal
subdural hematoma with low-dose warfarin. He was subsequently found to have CYP2C9 gene polymorphism (*1/*3). This case report stresses the
importance of pre-prescription assessment of genetic analysis for those initiated on warfarin. Warfarin is the most commonly used oral
anticoagulant both for prophylaxis as well as treatment for arterial and venous thromboembolic conditions. It has a narrow therapeutic index
and is metabolized by hepatic cytochrome P450 2C9 enzyme (CYP2C9). Various polymorphisms exist in the gene that code for CYP2C9, of which *1
is the wild form expressing normal activity. Amongst the variants, *2 and *3 are more common than the rest and exhibit lesser enzymatic
activity. The anticoagulant effect of warfarin is measured by prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR). Warfarin exerts its
anticoagulant effect by reducing the regeneration of active vitamin K through inhibition of vitamin K epoxide reductase, encoded by vitamin
K epoxide reductase complex subunit 1 gene (VKORC1). Increased risk of deranged INR or bleeding has been reported in patients harboring
mutant form of either CYP2C9 or VKORC1. This case report describes a patient on low-dose warfarin, who succumbed to a subdural hematoma and
was found to have polymorphic CYP2C9 (*1/*3). A 49-year-old male patient, who was a known case of superior sagittal sinus thrombosis for the
past 8 years on tablet warfarin 2.5 mg every night, was brought to the hospital unconscious. There was no history of any head injury,
headache, fever or vomiting. The patient was non-compliant in not following up with his physician nor did he check his PT-INR levels
regularly for the past 1 year. The patient's relative, however, maintained that the patient was regular in taking the prescribed dose of
warfarin (2.5 mg) every night. On physical examination, he was found to be unconscious (Glasgow Coma Scale score of 3), pulse was feeble and
the blood pressure was not recordable. Pupils were 6 mm dilated with no reaction to the light. Immediate resuscitative measures including
invasive ventilation and inotropic support were given in the ICU. A plain computed tomography (CT) brain revealed 24.2 mm hyperdense
cresentic subdural hematoma in left fronto-temporo-parieto-occipital region with subfalcine extension and midline shift [Figure 1]. His PT-
INR was found to be 9 [normal (in the absence of anticoagulation therapy) is 1 and it has to be maintained between 2 and 3 for an
appropriate therapeutic effect for warfarin]. Fresh frozen plasma was initiated at a dose of 15 ml/kg/day. Blood (5 ml) was collected from
the patient and genotyping was done for both CYP2C9 and VKORC1. Genomic DNA was extracted by phenol-chloroform method. CYP2C9 was found to
be polymorphic for *3 (*1/*3) and VKORC1 was found to be wild-type (normal). The patient succumbed on 5 day of admission. Plain CT brain
revealing 24.2 mm hyperdense cresentic subdural hematoma (red arrow) in left fronto-temporo-parieto-occipital region Pharmacogenetics is the
study of genetic influence on inter-individual variation in the response of a drug. Pharmacogenetics has been shown to be of value in
detecting an optimal response as well as in preventing adverse reactions following drugs such as warfarin, clopidogrel, and phenytoin.
Warfarin is metabolized by CYP2C9 and over 30 polymorphic alleles have been identified in the gene coding for CYP2C9. The wild form of the
gene is *1 and the most common polymorphic forms include *2 and *3. Allelic frequency of CYP2C9*2 and *3 in various populations including
Indians were found to be in the range of 0-20%. A recent systematic review concluded that in comparison to the patients with CYP2C9*1/*1
genotype, the CYP2C9*1/*2, CYP2C9*1/*3, CYP2C9*2/*2, CYP2C9*2/*3, and CYP2C9*3/*3 patients required warfarin doses that were 19.6, 33.7,
36.0, 56.7, and 78.1% lower, respectively. Similarly, in the VKORC1 gene, two alleles have been identified in VKORC1 namely G and A.
Patients with GG (wild type) are resistant requiring a higher dose of the drug whereas AA are sensitive requiring a lesser dose and GA
requires intermediate. A randomized clinical trial has also shown that pharmacogenetic-based dosing of warfarin was associated in
maintaining the PT-INR levels within the acceptable range for a longer time than by the standard dosing. United States Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) has recently modified the warfarin labeling by suggesting CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genotyping before initiating the drug to
ensure warfarin safety. Our patient had a fatal subdural hematoma despite low-dose (2.5 mg HS) of warfarin. He had massively deranged INR of
9, was brought in with Glasgow Coma Scale of 3. The *1/*3 variant CYP2C9 explained this serious adverse event with low-dose warfarin. The *3
variant is less than 5% as active as the wild type whereas *2 retains around 12% of the activity. A recent Indian review of oral
anticoagulant use revealed lack of proper laboratory facilities, with irregular PT-INR monitoring in 25% patients and deranged INR values in
a high proportion of patients. Pharmacogenetic testing needs to be done only once and hence can be considered cost-effective. Studies have
shown that along with age, gender, body weight, CYP2C9 and VKORC1 polymorphisms account for almost 64% of the variability in the dose of
warfarin required for an individual. Hence, by doing these genetic testing a priori to the treatment initiation, there is a high possibility
that the patients may receive an appropriate dose than just by routine practice. Even, several international algorithms for predicting dose
of warfarin have been developed with these predicting factors of which, Gage's and Wadeliusâ€™ algorithms have been shown to be the most
accurate. Recently, an algorithm for Indian patients has also been developed, which was found to be more accurate, sensitive and
significantly reduced the risk of overestimation of dose of warfarin. This algorithm can be used for predicting the appropriate dose of
warfarin in our population with the genotype details of CYP2C9 and VKORC1. To conclude, this case highlights the necessity of adopting the
practice of routine genetic testing for CYP2C9 and VKORC1 while initiating warfarin therapy. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: No
