Symmetrical drug-related intertriginous and flexural exanthema (SDRIFE) is an adverse drug reaction which has been reported to be caused by
various drugs. In this report, we describe a case induced by ranitidine, a drug which has not been previously reported to cause SDRIFE.
Symmetrical drug-related intertriginous and flexural exanthema (SDRIFE) is a self-limiting cutaneous adverse drug reaction characterized by
symmetrical erythema involving the gluteal and intertriginous areas in the absence of systemic involvement. Î²-lactam antibiotics and
chemotherapeutic agents are the common offending drugs. Recently many drugs have been reported to precipitate SDRIFE. Here we report a case
of SDRIFE possibly induced by ranitidine. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of SDRIFE induced by ranitidine, an H2
receptor blocker. An 8-year-old boy was referred to our department with sharply demarcated, pruritic, erythematous, scaly lesions involving
the neck and groin, with scattered erythematous, scaly papules, and plaques over the chest and axillae, since 1 week [Figure 1]. Five days
prior to the onset of the lesions, he had been prescribed ranitidine for gastric discomfort associated with hepatitis A viral infection. He
was already receiving cetirizine 10 mg daily for the last 1 month for generalized pruritus associated with the infection. There was no
history of any other drug ingestion. Systemic symptoms were absent. The liver function derangement that the patient had developed due to
viral hepatitis, was improving. Other laboratory investigations including absolute eosinophil count, chest radiography, and ultrasound
abdomen were normal. A skin biopsy from the lesion in the axilla showed superficial perivascular dermatitis. (a) V-shaped erythema and
scaling of the inguinal area (b) Erythematous, scaly plaques on the neck Ranitidine was stopped, cetirizine was continued for the pruritus
and topical 0.05% betamethasone dipropionate cream was added. The skin lesions resolved in a week. Skin patch testing performed 2 months
later with 10% and 50% ranitidine in petrolatum and ranitidine tablet, was negative. The child's parents declined permission for an oral
provocation test with ranitidine. Andersen's original description in 1984, of a particular type of systemic contact dermatitis characterized
by exanthema with involvement of the buttocks and flexures after ingestion or systemic absorption of a contact allergen in a sensitized
individual, was called the baboon syndrome. Two decades later, the term SDRIFE was proposed as more appropriate for those reactions
occurring after exposure to systemic drugs, by Hausermann, Harry and Bircher. The majority of the reported cases of SDRIFE were due to
antibiotics, especially amoxycillin (with over 15 cases). Other causative drugs reported are antihypertensives, intravenous immunoglobulin,
barium sulphate, mitomycin C, oxycodone, rivastigmine, and radiocontrast media. The diagnostic criteria for SDRIFE include: Exposure to the
systemic drug at first or repeated dose, erythema of the gluteal or perianal area and/or V-shaped erythema of the inguinal area, involvement
of at least one other intertriginous localization, symmetry of affected areas, and absence of systemic toxicity. All these features were
seen in the present case. The postulated reasons for the flexural predilection are: Occlusion, sweating, excretion of certain drugs or
metabolites from the eccrine gland, a recall phenomenon from previous mechanical stimulation, or intertrigo. SDRIFE can affect individuals
of any age, with a male preponderance. It is thought to be a type IV hypersensitivity reaction which occurs 9-14 days after the first
exposure, but the duration may be longer. The short interval between drug intake and the rash in SDRIFE is explained by the direct binding
of the drug to T-cell receptors. Dermal infiltration by CD3 + and CD4 + T cells has been demonstrated in SDRIFE with an expansion of CD26
P-selectin, which normally plays a role in recruitment of memory or effector type 1 helper T cells to sites of inflammation, in the
endothelial and keratinocyte layers. The histological features vary from a superficial perivascular inflammatory infiltrate composed of
lymphocytes and eosinophils (as observed in the present case), to subcorneal pustules or vacuolar changes and hydropic degeneration in the
basal cell layer with subepidermal bullae and necrotic keratinocytes. A patch test is positive in only up to 50% of patients, probably due
to the reduced absorption of drugs by the skin, whereas an oral provocation test is positive in most patients with SDRIFE. Our patient was
receiving both ranitidine and cetirizine when he developed SDRIFE. We considered the possibility of ranitidine induced drug reaction, as the
latent period between the onset of cetirizine intake and the appearance of symptoms was longer than the usual time interval observed in
SDRIFE. The patient had been on cetirizine for the past one month and ranitidine was introduced 5 days prior to the development of symptoms.
This was further confirmed by the resolution of the symptoms on withdrawal of ranitidine. The remote possibility of cetirizine induced
reaction was ruled out as he showed improvement despite continuation of cetirizine. The causality assessment by the WHO-UMC scale and the
Naranjo's algorithm (score 7) showed that the likelihood of this adverse drug reaction being due to ranitidine was probable. We are
reporting this case to highlight the importance of considering SDRIFE in any patient manifesting a symmetric intertriginous eruption
involving multiple body folds shortly after drug intake. Early recognition of this uncommon condition can ensure prompt treatment and a
significant reduction in morbidity. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: No
