The syndrome of immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X linked (IPEX) is a rare disorder caused by mutations in the FOXP3
gene. Diarrhea, diabetes and dermatitis are the hallmark of the disease, with a typical onset within the first months of life. We describe
the case of a twelve-year old male affected by a very late-onset IPEX with intractable enteropathy, which markedly improved after starting
Sirolimus as second-line treatment. This case suggests that IPEX should always be considered in the differential diagnosis of watery
intractable diarrhea, despite its unusual onset. The syndrome of immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked (IPEX) is a
rare disorder, characterized by diarrhea, type-1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) and dermatitis with onset within the first months of life .
Diarrhea is intractable and persists despite dietary exclusions and bowel rest, resulting in malabsorption and failure to thrive ; T1DM can
precede or follow enteritis ; dermatitis is severe with eczematiform, ichthyosiform or psoriasiform aspects , other autoimmune diseases are
often associated . IPEX is caused by germ-line mutations in the FOXP3 gene, a key regulator of immune tolerance, located in the X-chromosome
at Xp11.23-Xq13.3 . It is critical for the function of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T-cells (TREG) and for the maintenance of peripheral immunologic
tolerance . We describe a 12-year-old boy born at term from natural birth after an uncomplicated pregnancy from unrelated parents, referred
to our hospital for severe enteritis started one month before with liquid mucus-haematic diarrhoea (height: 50th centile, weight: 10th
centile, regularly vaccinated). No potentially triggering events have been reported, such as vaccinations, viral infections or changes in
nutrition. In his past history he had recurring episodes of mild atopic dermatitis since the first year of life, a high level of total IgE
(400 UI/L), and a constipated bowel (once every two/three days). On admission, he was dehydrated (7% of weight loss). Blood tests revealed
hypoproteinaemia and hypogammaglobulinemia (Table 1), so albumin was replaced.Table 1 The molecular and clinical features of the patient
with IPEX who received sirolimus have been reported Patient Mutation Clinical features Histology Management Outcome Ref. Age at onset age at
dg Nucleotide change AA change FOXP3 Molecular defect Previous therapy SIR HSCT 17 y 10 yc.968-20A>CNANANADermatitis,
enteropathyLymphoplasmocellular eosinophilic infiltrate. Villous atrophy.Steroids, AZA, CsA, FK, MTX. TPN, Total colectomy at 10 yYNStable
at 16 yr on SIR+MTX.2* 2 m NANAEnteropathy, erythematous eczema-like dermatitisLymphoplasmocellular infiltrate with marked eosinophilia.
High rate of enterocyte apoptosis. Subtotal villous atrophy.Steroids, FK, AZAYNStable for 1.5 yr on SIR+AZA3* 2 m NANAEnteropathy,
erythematous eczema-like dermatitisSimilar findings with that of his brother (pt.4)Steroids, FK; AZAYNStable for 6 m on SIR+AZA42 y 4 y1061
delCFrameshift P354QNAPremature stop codon. Truncated FKH domainEnteropathy, nonspecific dermatitisMild villous bluntingMetronidazole,
steroids, mesalamine, IFX, AZA, 6-MPYNStable at 7 yr51 w 7 y200G>TQ70HNAPredicted abnormal reading frameEczema, enteropathy, AHA, ITP,
arthritisInflammation with villous atrophyIVIG, steroids, TPN, antibioticsYNStable at 8 yr6* 3 w NAg.-6247-4859delNA↓Accumulation of
unspliced mRNASkin/food allergies, Enteropathy, erythematous- eczematous skin rashLymphoplasmocellular infiltrate with marked eosinophilia.
High rate of enterocytes apoptosis. Severe to total villous atrophySteroids, FK, AZA TPNYNStable for 6 yr on SIR+AZA7* 2 m
NAg.-6247-4859delNA↓Accumulation of unspliced mRNASkin/food allergies, Eczema, EnteropathyNASteroids, FK, AZA TPNYNStable for 4 yr on
SIR+AZA85 w NAg.-6247-4859delNA↓Accumulation of unspliced mRNAEnteropathy, Eczema, AllergyNASteroids, FK, AZAYNStable at 9 yr on SIR+AZA93 w
NAg.-6247-4859delNA↓Accumulation of unspliced mRNAEnteropathy, Eczema, HP gastritis, AllergyNASteroids, FK AZAYNStable at 6 yr on
SIR+AZA10Birth NAg.-1121 T>GF374C↓Full length FOXP3 with abnormal FKH domainT1DM, HTH, Enteropathy, Eczema, AHA, ITP, Allergy.NASteroids,
FK506YNDied at 14 m during HSCT induction116 w NA751-753 del GAGE251del↓Disrupts FOXP3 oligomerisationEnteropathy, Eczema, HTH, Interstitial
Nephritis, AHA, Allergy.NAFK506YYDied at 10 yr after HSCT121 m 6 y1150G>AA384T↓Full length FOXP3 with abnormal FKH domainEnteropathy,
Eczema, FTT, T1DM, AHA, Interstitial Pneumonia, Alopecia, Thyroiditis.Eosinophil infiltration without villous atrophyIVIG, CsA, steroids,
TPN, fludarabine-autologous lymphocytes, FK, MTX, Rituximab, cyclophosphamide.YNStable at 16 yr on others drugs13Birth 7 w1150G>AA384T↓Full
length FOXP3 with abnormal FKH domainEnteropathy, T1DM, Exfoliative Dermatitis, HTH, PancytopeniaNATPNYNDied at 7 w14Birth 4½
yAAUAAA/AAUAAGNA↓Polyadenylation defect resulting in unstable FOXP3 mRNAEnteropathy, Dermatitis, FTT, T1D.NAMTX, steroids, TPN.YYStable at 1
yr151 w1015C>GP339A↓Missense mutation. Predicted to yield full length FOXP3Enteropathy, Eczema, T1DM, FTT, Euthyroid Thyroiditis, AIH,
AHAVillous atrophySteroids, FK; AZAYNDied at 5.5 m before HSCT163 m 1yExon 10NANANAFTT, Enteropathy, Eczematous Dermatitis, ITP
stomatitisNACyclophosphamide, VCR, TPNYNStable 2½ yr on other drugs *Brothers; 6-MP 6-Mercaptopurina; AHA autoimmune haemolytic anaemia; AIH
Autoimmune hepatits; AZA Azathioprine; CsA Cyclosposporine; FTT: failure to thrive; FK: tacrolimus; HSCT hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation; HTH Hypothyroidism; IFX Infliximab; ITP immune thrombocytopenic purpura; IVIG Intravenous Immunoglobulin; Y: Yes; yr:
years; m: months; MTX Methotrexate; NA Not Available; N: No; Ref. References; SIR Sirolimus; T1DM Type 1 Diabetes mellitus; TPN Total
Parenteral Nutrition; VCR Vincristine; w: weeks; ↓: reduction of expression. The molecular and clinical features of the patient with IPEX
who received sirolimus have been reported *Brothers; 6-MP 6-Mercaptopurina; AHA autoimmune haemolytic anaemia; AIH Autoimmune hepatits; AZA
Azathioprine; CsA Cyclosposporine; FTT: failure to thrive; FK: tacrolimus; HSCT hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; HTH Hypothyroidism;
IFX Infliximab; ITP immune thrombocytopenic purpura; IVIG Intravenous Immunoglobulin; Y: Yes; yr: years; m: months; MTX Methotrexate; NA Not
Available; N: No; Ref. References; SIR Sirolimus; T1DM Type 1 Diabetes mellitus; TPN Total Parenteral Nutrition; VCR Vincristine; w: weeks;
↓: reduction of expression. Abdominal ultrasound highlighted wall thickening of the bowel loops. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGDS) and
colonoscopy revealed ulcerative lesions at the stomach, duodenum, terminal ileum and colon, giving rise to a suspect of inflammatory bowel
disease. Biopsies revealed villous blunting and inflammatory infiltration of the mucosa. After starting intravenous methylprednisolone,
metronidazole and parenteral nutrition a partial remission was observed. Ten days later, for a worsening of symptoms, EGDS and colonoscopy
were repeated, with a superimposable picture. Particularly, the biopsies of the colon showed lympho-granulocytic acute inflammation with
Graft versus Host Disease-like aspect, a lesion typically reported in IPEX (Figure 1) . Due to the inability to control the symptoms the
patient underwent ileostomy.Figure 1 Biopsy of the colon mucosa highlights a marked inflammatory infiltrate. (A: H&E 5x) with a GVHD-like
aspect characterized by a prevalence of lymphocytes CD8+ (red; B) than lymphocytes CD4+ (red; C). Rare lymphocytes expressing FOXP3 were
found (red; D). Biopsy of the colon mucosa highlights a marked inflammatory infiltrate. (A: H&E 5x) with a GVHD-like aspect characterized by
a prevalence of lymphocytes CD8+ (red; B) than lymphocytes CD4+ (red; C). Rare lymphocytes expressing FOXP3 were found (red; D). Despite the
age of the patient was atypical for the onset of IPEX, we evaluated the presence of autoantibodies to harmonin, which resulted positive
(>100 U.A.). Then, diagnosis was confirmed by the genetic examination of FOXP3 gene, revealing a mutation in the exon 9 (1040G > A), with
substitution of Arginine to Histidine (R347H). The mother resulted negative. The total number of lymphocyte and lymphocyte subpopulations
was normal, particularly TREG were 5% of the total number. Intravenous cyclosporine (range: 200-350 mg/dl) and methylprednisolone (2 mg/kg)
were started, which reduced diarrhea and abdominal pain. After sixty days of parenteral nutrition the patient returned to oral feeding with
the normalization of albumin levels (Table 1). Because of the onset of post-prandial hyperglycaemias, we excluded T1DM (Table 1) and
glycaemia normalized after tapering steroid therapy. For a new worsening of the disease we introduced sirolimus (0.15 mg/kg/day; range:
8-12 mg/dl). The patient improved with a progressive reduction of intensity and frequency of abdominal pain and mucus emission. A new
colonoscopy highlighted a marked decrease of the inflammation. After thirty-four days since the beginning of sirolimus, cyclosporine was
suspended. After twelve months the patient is well, without recurrence of the disease. This case indicates that IPEX can have an atypical
age of presentation. Thus, it should always be considered in the differential diagnosis of intractable diarrhea. Four patients have been
previously reported with IPEX with the same amino-acid substitution (R347H) found in our patient. The age of onset for all these subjects
was within the first year of life and the first symptoms were recurrent ear infection, high IgE levels, T1DM, and gastritis. All had
gastrointestinal symptoms with failure to thrive: two intractable diarrhea, two severe gastritis with mucosal atrophy or eosinophilic
infiltration. Other symptoms were: coombs-negative haemolytic anaemia, food allergy, pancreatic exocrine failure, intractable hypertension,
intestinal metaplasia, steatorrhea, and hypogammaglobulinemia. Patients received corticosteroid and calcineurin inhibitors. One patient died
after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) due to an infection. Recently, evidence that patients with a severe form of
IPEX may have circulating FOXP3+ T cells, as it is the case of our patient, which suggests that the cellular basis for the disease may be a
result of a functional defect of Treg cells . Mainly, R347H mutated-FOXP3 has been demonstrated as effective as wild-type-FOXP3 in
converting normal T cell into Treg in vitro and in maintaining the ability to suppress the production of cytokines, hallmark of Treg cells,
conferring suppressive capacity on CD4+ T cells. In 2005, three patients were successfully treated with sirolimus . Since then, 16 patients
received sirolimus and nine are in complete or partial remission (Table 2). Considering that sirolimus seems to be as effective as the
calcineurin inhibitors, with less toxic effects, it can be considered as a valid therapeutic option for bringing these patients to HSCT in
their best clinical condition.Table 2 Variables of our patient at the time of admission to our hospital, when he started the second line
therapy with Sirolimus and after three months since the begging of this therapy Variables Reference range, age and sex-adjusted Admission
Start SIROLIMUS 3 months after SIROLIMUS White-cell count — per mm 3 4.5 - 13.515.014.045.01 Hemoglobin — g/dl 11.5 - 14.516.311.711.5
Hematocrit —% 35 - 4246.034.435.7 Differential count —% Neutrophils40.0 - 74.089.651.248.0Lymphocytes19.0 - 48.06.630.338.0Monocytes3.0 -
9.02.413.57.6Eosinophils0.0 - 6.00.41.74.4Basophils0.0 - 1.50.31.10.7 Platelet count — per mm 3 250 - 550522247273 Glucose — mg/dl 60 -
10012510777 Insulinemia — microU/mL 7 - 246.8 C-peptide — ng/mL 1.1 - 4.42.7 Islet cell autoantibodies NegNegNeg Glutamic acid
decarboxylase— UI/ml <10 NegNegNeg>10 Pos UREA — mg/dl 15 - 50724018 Creatinine — mg/dl 0.5 - 10.910.540.35 Uric Ac. — mg/dl 2.2 -
6.68.65.23.4 Total Colesterol — mg/dl 130 - 204121 TG — mg/dl 31 - 10840 HDL — mg/dl > 3562 LDL — mg/dl < 17050 Electrolytes — mmol/L
Sodium136 - 146128139142Potassium3.5 - 5.35.54.34.3Chlorine98 - 10685103105Calcium8.8 - 10.89.69.39.2 Phosphorus — mg/dl 2.9 - 5.47.654.4
Magnesium — mg/dl 1.6 - 2.62.21.62.1 Plasma Osmolarity — mOsm/L 278 - 305266 Protein — g/dl Total6,4 - 8.14.16.26.7Albumin3.5 - 52.44.24.3γ
–Globulin —%11.1 - 18.810.511.413.4 Bilirubin — mg/dl Total0.20 - 1.101.540.440.3Direct/Indirect0.00-0.30/< 0.800.48/1.060.21/0.230.1/0.2
AST/ALT — U/L < 38/< 4144/3416/1022/17 Total Amylase — U/L 30 - 1005060 Iron — μg/dl 53 - 1194752 U.I.B.C./T.I.B.C. — μg/dl
110-330/250-400300/347273/325 Ferritin — ng/mL 7 - 1402216 TSH — microU/mL 0.6 - 6.31.931.02 FT3 — pg/mL 2.5 - 5.53.64.1 FT4 — pg/mL 9.0 -
17.020.712.9 ATA — UI/mL < 1152316 Anti TPO Ab — UI/mL < 341213 ESR — mm < 156159 CRP — mg/dl < 0.50.052.050.09 Ab anti harmonine IgG — U.A.
< 3.0 absent>100> 0.3 present ANA < 1:80< 1:80 AMA < 1:40< 1:40 ENA < 0,7 NegNeg0.7 - 1-0 Bl> 1.0 PosALT Alanine aminotransferase, AMA Anti-
mitochondrial antibodies, ANA Antinuclear antibodies, anti-TPO Ab Anti-ThyroidPeroxidase Antibodies, AST aspartate aminotransferase, ATA
Anti-Thyroglobulin Antibodies, Bl Borderline, CRP C-reactive protein, ENA Extractable Nuclear Antigens, ESR erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
FT3 Free Triiodothyronine, FT4 Free Thyroxine, HDL High-Density Lipoprotein, LDL Low-Density Lipoprotein, Neg Negative, Pos Positive,
T.I.B.C. Total iron-binding capacity, TG triglycerides, TSH Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone, U.I.B.C. Unsaturated Iron Binding Capacity.
Variables of our patient at the time of admission to our hospital, when he started the second line therapy with Sirolimus and after three
months since the begging of this therapy ALT Alanine aminotransferase, AMA Anti-mitochondrial antibodies, ANA Antinuclear antibodies, anti-
TPO Ab Anti-ThyroidPeroxidase Antibodies, AST aspartate aminotransferase, ATA Anti-Thyroglobulin Antibodies, Bl Borderline, CRP C-reactive
protein, ENA Extractable Nuclear Antigens, ESR erythrocyte sedimentation rate, FT3 Free Triiodothyronine, FT4 Free Thyroxine, HDL High-
Density Lipoprotein, LDL Low-Density Lipoprotein, Neg Negative, Pos Positive, T.I.B.C. Total iron-binding capacity, TG triglycerides, TSH
Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone, U.I.B.C. Unsaturated Iron Binding Capacity. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents of the
patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Internal ethical committee of Sant-Orsola approved the study. Syndrome of immune dysregulation,
polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X linked Type-1 diabetes mellitus Esophagogastroduodenoscopy Forkhead/winged helix domain Mammalian target
of rapamycin Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions ZD and IC reviewed relevant articles on the literature, collected all the patient’s data and drew the manuscript. FS and PA
contributed to the diagnosis and provided clinical assistance. RM, ML and AP contributed to the conception and design, and revisited
critically the manuscript. EG carried out the molecular genetic studies and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
