An 8-year-old boy was referred to Pusan National University Yangsan Hospital with left ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction. He had
experienced episodes of intermittent gross hematuria that had first presented at the age of 5 years. He was otherwise healthy and had no
previous medical problems. He had no history of urinary tract infections or stones. A physical examination showed no left flank pain. A
complete blood count with differential and the results of renal function tests were within normal limits. Urinalysis revealed microscopic
hematuria, whereas the urine culture was negative. Urine cytology showed no evidence of malignancy. Ultrasonography (USG) showed grade 3
left hydronephrosis according to the Society of Fetal Urology classification, with renal pelvis dilatation of a maximum diameter of 6.4 cm.
Longitudinal USG showed a mildly echogenic mass at the dilated upper ureter (Fig. 1A). The right side was normal. The intravenous pyelogram
(IVP) revealed hydronephrosis and a dilated renal pelvis that had corkscrew narrowing on the left side. Below the dilated renal pelvis, an
S-shaped ureteral fold was observed, with an intraluminal nonopaque and smooth filling defect of about 3 cm in length (Fig. 1B). An
obstructive pattern in the left kidney was revealed by 99mTc diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) renography. A serial excretion film
demonstrated isotope retention in the left kidney of up to 59 minutes (Fig. 1C). An open pyeloplasty with upper ureteral segmental resection
was performed. In the intraoperative findings, the S-shaped ureteral fold was observed below the dilated renal pelvis and no aberrant
vessels were found. We carefully dissected the fascia around the UPJ, ureteral folding, and renal pelvis. We transected between the ureteral
fold and the UPJ area. Upon opening the ureter, we found multiple slender, cylindrical ureteral polyps with smooth surfaces (Fig. 2A, B).
Our pathologic findings demonstrated fibroepithelial polyps (FEPs) with chronic inflammation (Fig. 2C). FEPs of the ureter in children are
rare benign tumors that can occur throughout the urinary tract . The current literature indicates that FEPs can occur in children and adults
but commonly present in adults in the third through the fifth decades of life, with a male-to-female ratio of 3:2 . A review of the English-
language literature up to 2007 revealed a total of 28 cases of FEPs causing UPJ obstruction in patients less than 14 years of age . Although
the etiology of FEPs is unclear, various theories have been proposed, including developmental defects and acquired conditions . Because of
the relatively higher incidence of FEPs in younger children, developmental defects are suspected as a main cause. Acquired conditions, such
as allergic factors, trauma, and chronic irritation, have also been proposed. The usual location of an FEP of the ureter is in the UPJ or
the upper ureter . FEPs are also found in the renal pelvis, and a small number develop in the posterior urethra or bladder . Most polyps are
single and are shorter than 5 cm. However, some studies report long, multiple, and bilateral polyps . The most common symptom resulting from
urinary tract obstruction by FEPs is flank pain . Other presenting features, such as urinary frequency, hematuria, and dysuria, have also
been reported. However, because of the slow growth and nonmalignant nature of FEPs, some patients with FEPs may be asymptomatic. FEPs have
smooth surfaces; are tan-gray, grayish-white, or pink in color; and can be single long, slender cylindrical masses or multiple finger-like
projections attached to a single base . In most cases, FEPs are longer than they are wide . They are usually distal to the base as a result
of the urinary flow and the peristalsis of the ureter. Histologically, FEPs are benign tumors of mesodermal origin . FEPs are covered with
normal urothelium and consist of thick, loose, and fibrous connective tissues that are rich in smooth muscle cells, blood vessels, and dense
collagen . The preoperative diagnosis of ureteral polyps is difficult. The USG can show hydronephrosis secondary to UPJ obstruction. In the
USG, FEPs are shown as mildly echogenic and nonshadowing, with well-defined margins outlined by a urine-distended pelvis . If a USG suggests
the presence of UPJ obstruction or other ureteral problems, IVP may be indicated. In the IVP, FEPs can appear to be long, smooth ureteral
filling defects with various degrees of hydronephrosis. However, the detection rates of FEPs through IVP vary from 36% to 100% according to
current literature . When a filling defect is found in the IVP, other conditions, such as nonopaque renal calculi, blood clots, or mucosal
folds, should be excluded . The use of ureteroscopy for the diagnosis and endoscopic removal of FEPs has been reported, but ureteroscopy is
not useful in young children because of the small working space available . Treatment of ureteral FEPs includes segmental resection with
ureteroureterostomy, nephroureterectomy, local coagulation by laser, and polypectomy by ureteroscopy . In the past, FEPs within the ureter
were treated by nephroureterectomy because of potential malignancy . However, because FEPs are benign lesions, a conservative approach is
now taken in most cases . In children, therefore, the operation of choice for FEPs causing UPJ obstruction is resection of the tumor-bearing
ureteral segment, with or without dismembered pyeloplasty . Laparoscopic surgery is also performed as a minimally invasive treatment and can
achieve complete resection of the polyp in children . Recently, many reports have described success with the use of ureteroscopy and with
holmium: yttrium-aluminium-garnet laser excision and coagulation . Although ureteroscopic excision is a less invasive and widely available
alternative to an open procedure, it presents difficulties in patients with multiple long polyps . Before endoscopic procedures are carried
out, surgeons should consider the possibility of incomplete resection. In our case, we performed the upper ureteral segmental resection with
open pyeloplasty because the IVP showed a dilated renal pelvis. Although we did not perform ureteroscopy, we would pick open surgery again
because of the high possibility of ureteral stricture after endoscopic procedures in a case such as this with multiple FEPs. This work was
supported by Pusan National University Yangsan Hospital Research Grant. The authors have nothing to disclose. (A) Longitudinal
ultrasonography showed a mildly echogenic mass (arrowhead) and dilated upper ureter (arrow). (B) Intravenous pyelogram showed left
hydronephrosis with a dilated renal pelvis with corkscrew narrowing and intraluminal nonopaque and smooth filling defects (arrow). (C) 99mTc
diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid renography showed the obstructive pattern of the left kidney on the renogram after furosemide
administration. A serial excretion film demonstrated isotope retention in the left kidney of up to 59 minutes. Intraoperative images and
histologic findings. (A) Fibroepithelial polyps (FEPs) were exposed via ureterotomy. Multiple slender, cylindrical ureteral polyps with
smooth surfaces were observed. (B) Morphology of the multiple excised long FEPs. (C) Histologic examination showing FEPs composed of loose
fibrovascular connective tissue covered with a layer of normal urothelium (H&E, Ã—40).
