The authors contributed equally to this work. Dear Editor, The urachus, which is a vestigial structure between the dome of the bladder and
umbilicus, usually, retracts from the bladder before birth. However, the urachal remnant was continuous with the bladder cavity even in
adults in 32% of bladder in one autopsy study.1 For this reason, tumors may develop from the remnants, most of which are well-differentiated
mucinous adenocarcinomas, which is a rare form of vesical malignancy, accounting for <1% of all bladder cancers. Although local spread to
the peritoneum is common at presentation, distant metastases without local recurrence are rarely detected following surgical excision of
clinically localized disease. To the best of our knowledge, distant metastases have been reported in a number of organs, including the lung,
omentum, liver, bone, brain, ovarian, and maxilla.1234 Now we report the first case of genitourinary cutaneous metastasis resulting from
urachal adenocarcinoma. We report a urachal adenocarcinoma metastatic to genitourinary skin in a 53-year-old Chinese man. In May 2008, after
admission to Changhai Hospital in Shanghai, imageological examination reveared 2.0 by 1.5 cm mass extending from the vertex of the urinary
bladder to the median umbilical ligament, and there was no evidence of metastasis on B-ultrasonic wave and computed tomography. Then a
partial cystectomy with urachal remnant resection was performed. Surgical findings indicated no invasion of surrounding bladder tissues and
no local extension into the abdominal wall, peritoneum or any viscera other than the bladder. Pathologic examination identified urachal
adenocarcinoma that limited to the shallow muscle layer and showed morphologically enteric type differentiation (Figure 1a), mucinous
adenocarcinoma (Figure 1b) and ring cell carcinoma (Figure 1c). Histopathology showed the original and metastatic urachal tumor. (a) The
overlying urothelium was involved by enteric adenocarcinama. (b) Well-differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma was seen. (c) There were signet
ring cells floating within the mucinous material. (d) Metastatic urachal denocarcinoma destroied the skin of scrotum (H and E) (scale bars =
200 μm). Two months after surgery, for this complaint a 2 cm diameter mass originated from penile and scrotum was made nothing of. And 5
years later, he was diagnosed with a 10 cm as the longest meridian erysipeloid-like mass on physical examination (Figure 2a). The total
resection of penis, scrotum and groin skin, was performed to confirm the origin of the tumor, besides radical total cystectomy and urinary
diversion. And postoperative incision was shown as Figure 2b. Histopathological diagnosis of all resected tumors showed mucinous
adenocarcinoma that was morphologically similar to the patient's original tumor (Figure 1d). Immunohistochemical studies using the following
antibodies (monoclonal; DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark) demonstrated that the neoplastic epithelial cells to be positive for CAM5.2, CDX2, CA199
(Figure 3a–3c) and negative for p63 (Figure 3d), p53, p16 (data not shown). Currently, the patient (because of poor physical condition)
without chemotherapy or radiotherapy remains disease free after 7 months of follow-up. Traces of the patient for pre- and post-surgery (a)
ulcerative lesions located on the prepuce and scrotum; (b) postoperative changes of perineum. Immunohistochemical staining patterns in
urachal carcinoma: (a) Strong, diffuse cytoplasmic staining for CAM5.2. (b) Strong, diffuse nuclear staining for CDX2. (c) Diffuse
membranous staining for CA199. (d) The neoplastic epithelial cells stain negative for p63, whereas urothelium stain positive (scale bars =
100 μm). Primary urachal adenocarcinoma is extremely rare, accounting for <1% of all malignant bladder cancers. Approximately, 20%–30% of
these are urachal in origin.5 They may show a variety of histopathological glandular patterns but are most commonly the mucinous type. Age
at diagnosis is in the late fifties with a little over 1:1 male: female ratio.4 It may be asymptomatic leading to the diagnosis, but can
present with hematuria, pelvic pain, pelvic neoplasm, and urinary infection.6 Unfortunately, no absolute consensus exists regarding
diagnostic criteria now. Local recurrence is frequent after surgery. Distant metastases usually occur late in the natural history of the
disease. And so it carries a dismal prognosis especially for carcinoma cell metastasis to the skin.7 Cutaneous involvement due to urological
malignancy is uncommon, the incidence of cutaneous metastasis from bladder malignancies ranges from 0.84% to 3.60%.8 And this patient is the
first to present with genitourinary cutaneous metastasis from urachal adenocarcinoma. They represent a significant challenge because of no
consensus on how to manage those cases. Unlike other cancers, there is currently no standard adjuvant or metastatic chemotherapy or
radiotherapy regimen for the treatment of urachal carcinoma.9 Undoubtedly, surgical approach represents the mainstay of treatment for
urachal carcinoma, especially for recurrent or metastatic urachal cancer.10 And recently, complete laparoscopic removal of complicated
urachal adenocarcinoma seems to be a safe, effective approach. However, the question as to whether partial or radical cystectomy is suitable
for localised disease is difficult to answer since urachal tumors are rare. In general, cutaneous metastases tend to most frequently occur
in the vicinity of the primary cancer. Whereas for genitourinary cutaneous metastasis resulting from urachal adenocarcinoma, direct invasion
by hematogenous metastasis may be thought to be one of the most important pathways. Currently, because of the limitation of the number of
total patients with skin metastasis, there were lots of questions to answer, such as the approach and timing of surgery, the choice of
radiotherapy or chemotherapy regiments and the underlying mechanism of cutaneous metastasis. In summary, our case experience and literature
review suggest that the early finding of the urachal mass and complete resection, besides, combined modalities treatment are required for
patients with genitourinary cutaneous metastasis resulting from urachal adenocarcinoma. YHY was responsible for the acquisition of data,
drafting and editing the manuscript; XWZ, JGH, HJT were involved in clinical management of the patient and interpretation of data; YZ was
responsible for the interpretation of pathology; WHX was the supervisor of clinical management of the patient and interpretation of data.
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. This work was supported by the Youth fund of Heilongjiang Province of China (No.
QC2014C111) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81270022).
