Warburg micro syndrome (WARBM) is a genetic heterogeneous disease characterized by microcephaly, intellectual disability, brain, ocular, and
endocrine anomalies. WARBM1-4 can be caused by biallelic mutations of the RAB3GAP1 (RAB3 GTPase-activating protein 1), RAB3GAP2, RAB18 (RAS-
associated protein RAB18), or TBC1D20 (TBC1 domain protein, member 20) gene, respectively. Here, we delineate the so far largest intragenic
homozygous RAB3GAP1 microdeletion. Despite the size of the RAB3GAP1 gene deletion, the patient phenotype is mainly consistent with that of
other WARBM1 patients, supporting strongly the theory that WARBM1 is caused by a loss of RAB3GAP1 function. We further highlight osteopenia
as a feature of WARBM1. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13023-014-0113-9) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users. Warburg micro syndrome (WARBM) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by neurodevelopmental
abnormalities such as congenital or postnatal microcephaly, severe intellectual disability, pachy- or polymicrogyria, and
hypoplasia/agenesis of the corpus callosum as well as ocular manifestations including congenital cataract, microcornea, microphthalmia, and
optic atrophy . Further features of WARBM comprise hypothalamic hypogonadism, epilepsy, limb spasticity, and joint contractures. WARBM1
(MIM#600118) is caused by biallelic mutations of the RAB3 GTPase-activating protein 1 gene RAB3GAP1 (2q31; MIM*602536), WARBM2 (MIM#614225)
by mutations of the RAB3 GTPase-activating protein 2 gene RAB3GAP2 (1q41; MIM*609275), WARBM3 (MIM#614222) by mutations of the RAS-
associated protein RAB18 gene RAB18 (10p12.1; MIM*602207), and WARBM4 (MIM#615663) by mutations in the TBC1 domain protein, member 20, gene
TBC1D20 (MIM*611663). Most mutations were predicted to result in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and/or loss-of-protein-function , putatively
explaining the lack of a genotype-phenotype correlation. We here report the largest RAB3GAP1 gene microdeletion to date in patients with
WARBM1 and compare their phenotype with that of other WARBM1 patients. The two index patients were born at term without complications as the
first and second child of healthy, consanguineous parents of Kurdish-Armenian descent (Figure 1). Pregnancies were uneventful, and
anthropometric data in the first months of life were reported to be normal by the parents. Both patients were diagnosed with bilateral
cataracts in the first months of life, and cataract surgery was performed in patient IV.2. The parents noted progressive hypotonia with loss
of head control and finally developmental delay when their child did not attempt to roll within the first year of life. At first
presentation at 6 (IV.1) and 5 (IV.2) years-of-age, the patients were not able to roll over, sit, stand, or speak, exhibited a short
stature, dystrophy, and microcephaly (IV:1: height 90 cm, 16 cm <3. centile, −5.2 SD; weight 11 kg, 4 kg <3. centile, −3.4 SD; head
circumference 47 cm, 1.5 cm <3. centile, −2.6 SD; IV.2: height 95 cm, 6 cm <3. centile, −3.3 SD; weight 10,3 kg, 5 kg <3. centile, −3.7 SD;
head circumference 45 cm, 4 cm <3. centile, −3.8 SD), and had bilateral cataracts (unilateral iatrogenic aphakia in IV.2), microcornea, and
microphthalmia. Bilateral cryptorchidism was present in IV.2. In both patients, poor head control, sparse voluntary movements, axial
hypotonia, thoracolumbar scoliosis, lower-limb-spasticity and contractures, and unilateral hip dislocation were apparent. Cranial MRI
revealed bilateral parietal pachygyria, dysgenesis of the corpus callosum with agenesis of the splenium, prominent fissura sylvii, mild
cerebellar atrophy, and hypotrophic optic chiasma in both patients (Figure 1, Additional file 1: Figure S1). Their short stature was
associated with severe osteopenia, mild growth hormone deficiency (levels −2.2 to −3 SDS), but appropriate bone age and normal calcium,
phosphate, alkaline phosphatase serum levels (Figure 1). Vitamin D supplementation over 8 months did not improve osteopenia.Figure 1
Phenotype of the index patients with WARBM1. (A) Pedigree. (B) Pictures of the index patients illustrating severe dystrophy, microcephaly,
and distal contractures. Facial features include a prominent nasal root, relatively short nose, large ears, and a mild facial
hypertrichosis. (C) Appropriate skeletal age but severe osteopenia on conventional X-rays of left hand of patient IV.2 when compared to an
age- and sex-matched control. (D-G) Cranial MRI of patient IV.2 revealed parietal pachygyria (D, axial T2), widened sylvian fissure (E,
axial T2), cerebellar atrophy (F, coronal T2), and corpus callosum dysmorphism with agenesis of the splenium corpi (G, sagittal T2). (H)
Scheme depicts all previously reported mutations in the RAB3GAP1 gene in patients with WARBM1 and the novel deletion in our index patients.
Phenotype of the index patients with WARBM1. (A) Pedigree. (B) Pictures of the index patients illustrating severe dystrophy, microcephaly,
and distal contractures. Facial features include a prominent nasal root, relatively short nose, large ears, and a mild facial
hypertrichosis. (C) Appropriate skeletal age but severe osteopenia on conventional X-rays of left hand of patient IV.2 when compared to an
age- and sex-matched control. (D-G) Cranial MRI of patient IV.2 revealed parietal pachygyria (D, axial T2), widened sylvian fissure (E,
axial T2), cerebellar atrophy (F, coronal T2), and corpus callosum dysmorphism with agenesis of the splenium corpi (G, sagittal T2). (H)
Scheme depicts all previously reported mutations in the RAB3GAP1 gene in patients with WARBM1 and the novel deletion in our index patients.
We identified the largest intragenic RAB3GAP1 microdeletion published to date in the index patients through combined Sanger sequencing and
array CGH (arr2q21.3(135.837.294 × 2,135.857.789 - 135.872.940 × 0,135.896.068 × 2) and arr4p16.3(68.185×2,72.477-156.130×1,165.852×2)) and
further characterized the deletion breakpoints using multiple PCR amplicons (Figure 1, Additional file 2: Supplemental Data). The additional
small 4p16.3-deletion, containing parts of the genes ZNF718 and ZNF595 is likely not relevant for the phenotype of the patients. The
deletion is very small, encompassing only 84 kb, and overlaps with deletions documented in the normal population in the database of genomic
variants (DGV). All deletions listed in decipher affecting the respective chromosome are vastly larger. Moreover, both corresponding genes
have not been associated with clinical phenotypes (search in: OMIM, PubMed, Uniprot, Genecards). However, we confirmed a homozygous
2q21.3-deletion of 50.4 kb encompassing exons 4–15 of RAB3GAP1 corresponding to about 45% of the coding gene sequence:
135,840,320-135,891,847 (hg 19) in both patients, which is heterozygous in the parents as shown by qPCR. The extensive size of the patients´
deletion, their phenotypes resemble previous descriptions of WARBM1 (Table 1), thereby firmly supporting the theory that all WARBM1
phenotypes are caused by a loss of RAB3GAP1 function and/or by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Surprisingly, some WARBM1-associated neuro-
ophthalmological anomalies were absent in our patients, such as ptosis and nystagmus, delayed myelination, cerebral atrophy, and seizures .
Such mild phenotypic variability of WARBM1 is not well understood.Table 1 Comparison of phenotypic features of the index patients with those
described in other patients with Warburg micro syndrome 1–3 and Martsolf syndrome Characteristics and symptoms HPO ID Patient Patient WARBM1
WARBM2 WARBM3 MS Pedigree IDII.1II.2GenderFemaleMaleAge at last assessment (years)5.94.5 Growth Short stature0004322++++++Postnatal failure
to thrive0001508++++++Growth hormone deficiency0000824++NRNRNR+ Head and neck Postnatal
microcephaly0000252+++++(+)Micrognathia0000347+-+--+Large ears0000400-+++--Microphthalmia0000568++++++Microcornea0000482++++++Congenital
cataract0000519++++++Ptosis0000508--(+)---Nystagmus0000639--(+)---Epicanthal folds0000286-----+ Genitourinary
Cryptorchism0086889NA+++++Hypogenitalism0003241-+++++ Skeletal Osteoporosis0000939++++NRNRNRNRKyphoscoliosis0002751+++NR++Joint
hypermobility0001382--(+)---Joint contractures0002803+++++-Foot deformities0001760--++-+ Hair Facial hypertrichosis0002219+++--- Neurologic
Intellectual deficit0001249+++++++++++Optic atrophy0000658+++++-Hyperreflexia0007034++++++Muscular hypotonia0001290++++++Spastic
diplegia0001264+++++(+)Seizures0001250--+-+-Inability to walk0002540+++++(+)Absent speech0001344+++(+)+(+) Cranial MRI Abnormal corpus
callosum0001273+++++(+)Cerebral atrophy0002059--+(+)+(+)Cerebral
malformations0007319--+---Polymicrogyria0002126--+(+)+(+)Pachygyria0001302+++---Enlarged sylvian fissures0100952+++-+(+)Cerebellar
hypoplasia0001321+++(+)+-Dysmyelination0007266--+(+)+- Cardiovascular Cardiomyopathy0001638--NRNRNR+Cardiac failure0001635--NRNRNR+
Respiratory Recurrent infections0002205--NRNRNR+All symptoms are listed according to the nomenclature and the systematics of the OMIM
“Clinical Synopsis” and the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO ). Abbreviations: +, present; −, not present; (+) mild or rare; ++, severe; NA,
not applicable; NR, not reported; HPO, human phenotype ontology; WARBM1-3, Warburg micro syndrome 1–3; MS, Martsolf syndrome. Comparison of
phenotypic features of the index patients with those described in other patients with Warburg micro syndrome 1–3 and Martsolf syndrome All
symptoms are listed according to the nomenclature and the systematics of the OMIM “Clinical Synopsis” and the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO
). Abbreviations: +, present; −, not present; (+) mild or rare; ++, severe; NA, not applicable; NR, not reported; HPO, human phenotype
ontology; WARBM1-3, Warburg micro syndrome 1–3; MS, Martsolf syndrome. Osteopenia present in our patients has not been highlighted in WARBM
so far. While osteopenia can result from vitamin D deficiency, it may also be caused by RAB3GAP1 dysfunction itself as RAB3GAP1 arrests the
activity of the osteoclastic bone resorption promoter RAB3D . Uncontrolled activity of the latter is associated with bone structure defects
in humans . Osteopenia through RAB3GAP1 deficiency is supported by (i) the serum findings in our patients arguing against a severe rachitis
secondary to vitamin D deficiency and (ii) the ineffectiveness of vitamin D supplementation with respect to osteopenia in the patients. In
summary, we report that even the largest microdeletion of 45% of RAB3GAP1 provokes a rather typical WARBM1 phenotype. We thereby strongly
support the theory that all truncating RAB3GAP1 mutations generate a loss-of-protein-function and/or nonsense-mediated-mRNA-decay and
therefore result in a similar phenotype. Only hypomorphic RAB3GAP1 mutations induce the milder Martsolf syndrome phenotype . Severe
osteopenia needs to be considered as a feature of WARBM, and future insight into the role of RAB3D in WARBM may help to understand skeletal
abnormalities and assist in establishing a therapeutic approach. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients’ legal guardian for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Additional file 1: Figure S1. Cranial MRI of index patient IV.1 with WARBM1. Additional file 2: Supplemental Data. Cranial MRI
of index patient IV.1 with WARBM1. Supplemental Data. RAB3 GTPase-activating protein 1 RAB3 GTPase-activating protein 2 RAS-associated
protein RAB18 TBC1 domain protein, member 20 Warburg micro syndrome Standard deviation score Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions CH, AMK, and SPM recruited subjects, gathered patient history as well as clinical
information and contributed clinical samples. BS analyzed radiological images. EK and DH performed array CGH and further genetic analysis.
AB and BH analyzed the breakpoint boundaries of the patient’s deletion. SPM and AMK wrote the manuscript, which was read, corrected and
approved by all coauthors. Authors’ information SPM is a Resident in Pediatrics interested in Pediatric Neurology. CH is head of the
Pediatric Neurology Department of the Charité, and AMK is a Pediatric Neurologists and Clinical Scientist working on developmental diseases.
AB, BH, EK, and DH are Geneticists; DH heads the Genetic Outpatient Clinic. BS heads the Department of Pediatric Radiology. The authors
thank Theodor Michael, Jessica Fassbender, Björn Picker, and Christine Zeschnigk for discussions and technical assistance. Our research was
supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG; SFB665), the Sonnenfeld Stiftung, the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Muskelerkrankungen (DGM),
and the Berlin Institute of Health (BIH).
