The autosomal recessive immunodeficiency-centromeric instability-facial anomalies syndrome (ICF) is characterized by immunodeficiency,
developmental delay, and facial anomalies. ICF2, caused by biallelic ZBTB24 gene mutations, is acknowledged primarily as an isolated B-cell
defect. Here, we extend the phenotype spectrum by describing, in particular, for the first time the development of a combined immune defect
throughout the disease course as well as putative autoimmune phenomena such as granulomatous hepatitis and nephritis. We also demonstrate
impaired cell-proliferation and increased cell death of immune and non-immune cells as well as data suggesting a chromosome separation
defect in addition to the known chromosome condensation defect. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13023-014-0116-6) contains
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. The autosomal recessive immunodeficiency-centromeric instability-facial
anomalies (ICF) syndrome is characterized by immunodeficiency, intellectual deficit, and facial dysmorphism . ICF 1 and 2 are caused by
biallelic mutations in the DNA methyltransferase 3B gene DNMT3B (MIM*602900, ) and in the zinc-finger-and BTB-domain containing 24 gene
ZBTB24 (MIM*614064, ), respectively. For ICF2, 16 patients from 13 families have been reported (Additional file 1: Table S1) . ICF is
considered primarily as a humoral immunodeficiency disease; however, this does not explain the high rate of opportunistic infections.
Recently, an additional intrinsic T-cell deficiency in ICF has been discussed and a lymphocyte proliferation defect described in individual
patients with ICF1 and ICF2 . Mechanisms underlying the neurological phenotype of ICF remain to be elucidated. Here, we report the
development of a combined immunodeficiency in a patient with ICF2 with age and demonstrate pathomechanisms that may contribute to the
immunological and non-immunological phenotype. The index patient was born hypotrophic at term without complications as the first child of
non-consanguineous healthy, Caucasian parents of German descent after an uneventful pregnancy. She showed multiple facial anomalies,
clubbing of fingers and toes, and fused teeth (Figure 1A). Language and motor development appeared initially normal, but intellectual
disability became apparent by the second year of life. Her brain morphology was normal on MRI at 4 years-of-age, apart from a pineal cyst.
Growth stagnated at 4.5 years-of-age with height, weight, and head circumference of 101 cm (-4.79 SD), 15 kg (-2.51 SD), and 50 cm (-1.2 SD)
at 9 years-of-age (Figure 1A). Bone age was delayed by 4 years at 8 years-of-age, and growth hormone levels were undetectable but could be
stimulated.Figure 1 Phenotype and genotype of index patient with ZBTB24 mutation. (A) Clinical signs at 8 years-of-age: protruding abdomen
due to organomegaly in the otherwise underweight girl of short statue, facial dysmorphism (hypertelorism, epicanthal folds, flat nasal
bridge, hypertelorism, slight ptosis, prominent forehead). Large teeth result from a fusion of first molar with the incisors. Fingers and
toes showed clubbing. Failure to thrive evident in a percentile height-weight-curve. (B) Pseudo-Pelger-Huët anomaly of neutrophils (Diff-
Quick staining, 100x, n = 400 cells, Student’s t-test, p < 0.0001). (C) Site of homozygous ZBTB24 mutation c.1222 T > G (protein domains:
BTB, bric-a-bric, tramtrack, broad complex domain; AT hook, DNA-binding domain with a preference for A/T rich regions, Zinc finger C2H2).
(D) Electropherogram traces in patient and heterozygous parents (NM_014797) indicating mutation confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Unaltered
ZBTB24 mRNA levels and product size is depicted in Additional file 8: Figure S2. (E) Highly conserved amino acids affected by the inherited
homozygous mutation (p.C408G). (F) Spontaneous undercondensation of constitutive heterochromatin of chromosomes 1q, 16q, and (to a lesser
extent) 9q. Phenotype and genotype of index patient with ZBTB24 mutation. (A) Clinical signs at 8 years-of-age: protruding abdomen due to
organomegaly in the otherwise underweight girl of short statue, facial dysmorphism (hypertelorism, epicanthal folds, flat nasal bridge,
hypertelorism, slight ptosis, prominent forehead). Large teeth result from a fusion of first molar with the incisors. Fingers and toes
showed clubbing. Failure to thrive evident in a percentile height-weight-curve. (B) Pseudo-Pelger-Huët anomaly of neutrophils (Diff-Quick
staining, 100x, n = 400 cells, Student’s t-test, p < 0.0001). (C) Site of homozygous ZBTB24 mutation c.1222 T > G (protein domains: BTB,
bric-a-bric, tramtrack, broad complex domain; AT hook, DNA-binding domain with a preference for A/T rich regions, Zinc finger C2H2). (D)
Electropherogram traces in patient and heterozygous parents (NM_014797) indicating mutation confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Unaltered ZBTB24
mRNA levels and product size is depicted in Additional file 8: Figure S2. (E) Highly conserved amino acids affected by the inherited
homozygous mutation (p.C408G). (F) Spontaneous undercondensation of constitutive heterochromatin of chromosomes 1q, 16q, and (to a lesser
extent) 9q. Signs suggestive of an immune defect were recurrent infections of the upper airways beginning at 9 months, a pneumonia at
2.5 years-of-age (Enterobacter cloacae), recurrent and protracted diarrhoea (enteropathogenic E. coli), and a prolonged skin infection
(Streptococcus pyogenes). At 3 years-of-age, a ‘common variable immunodeficiency (CVID)’ was diagnosed based on the global reduction of
immunoglobulins and the lack of antibodies against recall antigens despite regular vaccination (Additional file 2: Table S2), subcutaneous
IgG substitution was started, and the patient subsequently remained free of invasive infections. Further analysis revealed microcytic
hypochrome anemia with anisocytosis, normal global T-/B-cell counts, intermittent neutropenia, and Pseudo-Pelger-Huët anomaly of
neutrophilic granulocytes suggestive of a terminal neutrophil differentiation defect (Additional file 3: Table S3, Figure 1B). The patient
(blood group 0) lacked isohemagglutinins against blood group substances A and B. Starting at 3.5 years-of-age, CD8+ T-cells were elevated
and CD4+ T-cells dropped, leading to a profoundly reduced CD4/CD8 ratio (Additional file 3: Table S3). In parallel to the CD8+ T-cell
expansion, relative numbers of CD4 + CD45RA + naïve T-cells declined, resulting in a relative CD4 + CD45R0+ T-cell increase (Additional file
3: Table S3). The TCRVβ-repertoire was normal, and bone marrow analysis excluded myelodysplasia. Lymphocyte proliferation was strongly
reduced upon stimulation with mitogens, CD3-directed antibody, and tetanus toxoid despite appropriate tetanus vaccination (Additional file
4: Table S4). Initially normal NK-cell numbers declined gradually, and diminished NK-cell mediated lysis could be restored only partly
through IL-2 addition (Additional file 3: Table S3, Additional file 5: Table S5). Massive hepatosplenomegaly developed by 3 years that
progressed to liver cirrhosis by 9 years-of-age. Repeated liver biopsies at 4.5 and 8.5 years-of-age revealed chronically active interface
hepatitis with periportal lymphoid infiltrates and fibrosis (Additional file 6: Figure S1); no infection with hepatotopic viridae
(cytomegalovirus, Epstein Barr virus, herpes viridae (HSV1, HSV2, HHV6, HHV7), hepatitis viridae A-E, adenovirus, enterovirus, parvovirus
B19, hantavirus, and human polyoma virus BK-virus) or mycobacteriae was detected (Additional file 7: Table S6). Compensated renal
insufficiency at 4.5 years-of-age prompted a kidney biopsy that revealed interstitial granulomatous nephritis (Additional file 6: Figure
S1), but no evidence of mycobacterial infection through PCR, staining procedure, and direct culture. A four-week course of immunosuppressive
treatment with corticosteroids and azathioprine was not successful in normalizing liver enzymes or kidney function. The increase of CD8+
T-cells is likely an autoimmune phenomenon non-responsive to standard immunosuppressive treatment; however, an ongoing, non-identified
chronic infection cannot be ruled out. The increase of IgA, IgM, and IgG later in life can be an effect secondary to progressive liver
cirrhosis. The patient is still under IgG-substitution, and protein-electrophoresis revealed no indication of an increase of mono- or
oligoclonal immunoglobulins (data not shown). By whole exome sequencing, we identified the homozygous missense mutation c.1222 T > G of the
ZBTB24 gene (NM_014797) in the index patient inherited from the healthy parents (Figure 1C). This previously described mutation alters
evolutionarily conserved amino acids in a highly conserved zinc finger domain (p.C408G; Figure 1D,E, Additional file 1: Table S1). Patients
with the c.1222 T > G mutation show a variable phenotype, arguing against a clear genotype-phenotype correlation and for a residual activity
of mutant ZBTB24. In line with this, ZBTB24 mRNA levels did not differ significantly between patient and control (Additional file 8: Figure
S2). Chromosome metaphase preparations revealed increased rates of undercondensated juxta-centromeric chromosomes 1q, 16q, and less frequent
of 9q regions, characteristic for ICF2 (Figure 1F). This further increased upon exposure of cultures to 5-azacytidine (DNA methylation
interfering agent), eventually resulting in chromosome instability (data not shown). Because ZBTB24 not only impacts on immune cells, we
examined patient fibroblasts and detected significantly reduced proliferation, increased apoptosis and discrete spindle defects (broader and
unfocused microtubule poles; Figure 2A-D, Additional file 9: Figure S3). In mutant cells, centrosomal CDK5RAP2 was strongly reduced, while
centrosomal y-tubulin staining and total y-tubulin levels were normal (Figure 2E,F, Additional file 10: Figure S4). The mechanisms
underlying the reduction in CDK5RAP2, which is associated with stem cell proliferation and microcephaly with intellectual deficit , may be
involved in the pathogenesis of the neurological phenotype of ICF.Figure 2 Cellular defects in patient fibroblasts and lymphoblastoid cells,
reproduced in HEK cells through siRNA and expression of mutant ZBTB24. (A) Reduced cell viability (n = 8 per time period, Student’s t-test),
(B) reduced proliferation (n = 8, 36 h after plating, Student’s t-test), and (C) increased apoptosis of ZBTB24 mutant fibroblasts (activated
caspase 3/7 per cell viability; n = 8, Student’s t-test). (D) Abnormal spindle (α-tubulin) formation with increase of slightly broader,
unfocused microtubules poles (n = 100 metaphase LCLs, Student’s t-test, view Additional file 9: Figures S3 for further images throughout the
cell cycle and specifically in metaphase cells) and (E, F) strongly reduced fluorescence signals of centrosomal marker CDK5RAP2 (but not
γ-tubulin) in patient lyphoblastoid cells (n = 105 metaphase cells, Student’s t-test); total γ-tubulin levels were unaltered (n = 3,
Student’s t-test). Scale bar 5 μm. View Additional file 10: Figures S4 for further images throughout the cell cycle and specifically in
metaphase cells. (G) Reduced cell viability (n = 8 per time period, One-way ANOVA) and (H) mitotic spindles defect in HEK cells expressing
mutant (c.1222 T > G) ZBTB24. Abnormal spindle formation with slightly broader, unfocused microtubule poles in mutant cells. Scale bar 5 μm.
View Additional file 11: Figure S5 for further images throughout the cell cycle, qPCR and Western blot results. (I) ZBTB24 mRNA
downregulation in HEK through siRNA (qPCR, Student’s t-test) causes (J) reduced cell culture growth (n = 3 per group per time period;
Student’s t-test). ns = not significant, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. Cellular defects in patient fibroblasts and lymphoblastoid
cells, reproduced in HEK cells through siRNA and expression of mutant ZBTB24. (A) Reduced cell viability (n = 8 per time period, Student’s
t-test), (B) reduced proliferation (n = 8, 36 h after plating, Student’s t-test), and (C) increased apoptosis of ZBTB24 mutant fibroblasts
(activated caspase 3/7 per cell viability; n = 8, Student’s t-test). (D) Abnormal spindle (α-tubulin) formation with increase of slightly
broader, unfocused microtubules poles (n = 100 metaphase LCLs, Student’s t-test, view Additional file 9: Figures S3 for further images
throughout the cell cycle and specifically in metaphase cells) and (E, F) strongly reduced fluorescence signals of centrosomal marker
CDK5RAP2 (but not γ-tubulin) in patient lyphoblastoid cells (n = 105 metaphase cells, Student’s t-test); total γ-tubulin levels were
unaltered (n = 3, Student’s t-test). Scale bar 5 μm. View Additional file 10: Figures S4 for further images throughout the cell cycle and
specifically in metaphase cells. (G) Reduced cell viability (n = 8 per time period, One-way ANOVA) and (H) mitotic spindles defect in HEK
cells expressing mutant (c.1222 T > G) ZBTB24. Abnormal spindle formation with slightly broader, unfocused microtubule poles in mutant
cells. Scale bar 5 μm. View Additional file 11: Figure S5 for further images throughout the cell cycle, qPCR and Western blot results. (I)
ZBTB24 mRNA downregulation in HEK through siRNA (qPCR, Student’s t-test) causes (J) reduced cell culture growth (n = 3 per group per time
period; Student’s t-test). ns = not significant, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. We further mimicked the situation in the patient
through ZBTB24 siRNA knockdown experiments in HEK293 cells and over-expressed mutant and wild-type ZBTB24 in these cells (Figure 2G-J). Cell
culture growth was significantly reduced when mutant, but not wild-type, ZBTB24 was expressed, and both discrete spindle defects and an
abnormal centrosomal CDK5RAP2 staining were observed (Figure 2G,H, Additional file 11: Figure S5). Down-regulation of ZBTB24 through siRNA
similarly reduced cell culture growth (Figure 2 I,J). The novelty of our report lies in the description of the development of a combined
immunodeficiency (CID) with age in ICF2, a feature that may be missed if immunological work-up is only performed once at a young age. We
also highlight findings consistent with autoimmune phenomena (hepatitis, nephritis), which are commonly seen in CID but not acknowledged for
ICF . Finally, we report for the first time a defect in cell survival and proliferation in immune and non-immune cells. This may constitute
a disease mechanism common for both the non-immunological and immunological features of ICF2, the latter presenting as CID. The clinical
course of the index patient and of previously reported patients calls for consideration of early stem cell transplantation as an option in
patients with ICF. Please see Additional file 12: Materials and Methods for details on materials and methods. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient’s legal guardian for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Additional file 1: Table S1 Genotype and phenotype of all published ICF2
patients. Additional file 2: Table S2 Immunoglobulin levels and antibody titers. Additional file 3: Table S3 Blood counts and lymphocyte
subpopulations. Additional file 4: Table S4 Lymphocyte proliferation assays. Additional file 5: Table S5 NK-cell cytotoxicity assay.
Percentages of lysed K562 cells at different effector:target ratios with and without supplementation with IL-2 at the age of 4 years are
shown. Additional file 6: Figure S1 Histological biopsy results. (A) Liver biopsy at the age of 4,5 years. Portal lymphocytic infiltrates
and interface hepatitis. (B) Liver biopsy at the age of 8,5 years. Porto-portal bridging. (C) Kidney biopsy at the age of 4,5 years. Normal
glomerula. (D) Kidney biopsy at the age of 4,5 years showed multifocal inflammatory infiltrates in cortex and medulla of the tubulo-
interstitium and a multinuclear giant cell. Additional file 7: Table S6 Pathogens excluded to cause hepatitis. Additional file 8: Figure S2
ZBT24 mRNA levels in controls and fibroblasts. (A) RT-PCR of ZBTB24 in fibroblasts of controls and the patient. (B) Quantitative RT-PCR of
ZBTB24 in fibroblasts of a control cell line and the patient. Additional file 9: Figure S3 Mitotic spindles defect in ZBTB24 mutant patient
cells. Subcellular localization of the spindle marker α-tubulin (green) and the centrosome marker CDK5RAP2 (red) of immortalized lymphocytes
of (A) control and (B) ICF2 patient throughout the cell cycle. DNA was stained with DAPI (blue). Patient cells have abnormal spindle
formation with an increase of slightly broader, unfocused microtubules poles. The fluorescence signals of the centrosomal marker CDK5RAP2
are strongly reduced in patient cells when compared to control cells. Immunofluorescence, scale bar 5 μm. Additional file 10: Figure S4
Abnormal CDK5RAP2 and normal γ-tubulin staining of centrosomes in ZBTB24 mutant patient cells. (A) Subcellular localization of the
centrosome marker CDK5RAP2 (red) in the metaphase of immortalized lymphocytes of control and ICF2 patient. DNA was stained with DAPI (blue).
Centrosomal CDK5RAP2 is strongly reduced in ZBTB24 mutant lymphocytes when compared to controls. (B) Subcellular localization of the
centrosome marker γ-tubulin (green) in the metaphase of immortalized lymphocytes of control and ICF2 patient. DNA was stained with DAPI
(blue). No strong difference between the γ-tubulin immunostaining of control and ICF2 patient Immunofluorescence, scale bar 5 μm. Additional
file 11: Figure S5 Mimicking ICF2 in HEK cells. (A) ZBTB24 mRNA levels and in mock-transfected HEK cells (“control”), HEK cells transfected
with HA-tagged normal ZBTB24 or mutant c.1222 T > G ZBTB24, assessed by qPCR. (B) Western-Blot of ZBTB24 of protein extracts from similarly
transfected HEK cells using antibodies directed against HA-tag and against ZBTB24 (reference proteins GAPDH and actin). (C) Subcellular
localization of the centrosome marker γ-tubulin (green) and the centrosome marker CDK5RAP2 (red) throughout the cell cycle in mock-
transfected HEK cells (“control”) and HEK cells transfected with mutant c.1222 T > G ZBTB24. Additional file 12 Materials and Methods.
Genotype and phenotype of all published ICF2 patients. Immunoglobulin levels and antibody titers. Blood counts and lymphocyte
subpopulations. Lymphocyte proliferation assays. NK-cell cytotoxicity assay. Percentages of lysed K562 cells at different effector:target
ratios with and without supplementation with IL-2 at the age of 4 years are shown. Histological biopsy results. (A) Liver biopsy at the age
of 4,5 years. Portal lymphocytic infiltrates and interface hepatitis. (B) Liver biopsy at the age of 8,5 years. Porto-portal bridging. (C)
Kidney biopsy at the age of 4,5 years. Normal glomerula. (D) Kidney biopsy at the age of 4,5 years showed multifocal inflammatory
infiltrates in cortex and medulla of the tubulo-interstitium and a multinuclear giant cell. Pathogens excluded to cause hepatitis. ZBT24
mRNA levels in controls and fibroblasts. (A) RT-PCR of ZBTB24 in fibroblasts of controls and the patient. (B) Quantitative RT-PCR of ZBTB24
in fibroblasts of a control cell line and the patient. Mitotic spindles defect in ZBTB24 mutant patient cells. Subcellular localization of
the spindle marker α-tubulin (green) and the centrosome marker CDK5RAP2 (red) of immortalized lymphocytes of (A) control and (B) ICF2
patient throughout the cell cycle. DNA was stained with DAPI (blue). Patient cells have abnormal spindle formation with an increase of
slightly broader, unfocused microtubules poles. The fluorescence signals of the centrosomal marker CDK5RAP2 are strongly reduced in patient
cells when compared to control cells. Immunofluorescence, scale bar 5 μm. Abnormal CDK5RAP2 and normal γ-tubulin staining of centrosomes in
ZBTB24 mutant patient cells. (A) Subcellular localization of the centrosome marker CDK5RAP2 (red) in the metaphase of immortalized
lymphocytes of control and ICF2 patient. DNA was stained with DAPI (blue). Centrosomal CDK5RAP2 is strongly reduced in ZBTB24 mutant
lymphocytes when compared to controls. (B) Subcellular localization of the centrosome marker γ-tubulin (green) in the metaphase of
immortalized lymphocytes of control and ICF2 patient. DNA was stained with DAPI (blue). No strong difference between the γ-tubulin
immunostaining of control and ICF2 patient Immunofluorescence, scale bar 5 μm. Mimicking ICF2 in HEK cells. (A) ZBTB24 mRNA levels and in
mock-transfected HEK cells (“control”), HEK cells transfected with HA-tagged normal ZBTB24 or mutant c.1222 T > G ZBTB24, assessed by qPCR.
(B) Western-Blot of ZBTB24 of protein extracts from similarly transfected HEK cells using antibodies directed against HA-tag and against
ZBTB24 (reference proteins GAPDH and actin). (C) Subcellular localization of the centrosome marker γ-tubulin (green) and the centrosome
marker CDK5RAP2 (red) throughout the cell cycle in mock-transfected HEK cells (“control”) and HEK cells transfected with mutant c.1222 T > G
ZBTB24. Materials and Methods. Combined immunodeficiency DNA methyltransferase 3B gene Immunodeficiency-centromeric instability-facial
anomalies syndrome Standard deviation Zinc-finger-and BTB-domain containing 24 gene Ethiraj Ravindran and Hang Du contributed equally to
this work. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AMK, HvB, and WC were
responsible for the project conception. AMK and HvB wrote the manuscript. HvB, VW, RJ, and AMK attended the patient and provided clinical
data. ER, UK, CM, and LI performed the lymphocyte and fibroblast analyses. ER, KS, and NK performed Sanger sequencing and generated figures.
HD and ER performed the HEK cell experiments. MX performed qPCR experiments. HD performed exome sequencing data analysis. BA and AZ
performed analysis of the peripheral neutrophilic granulocytes KH performed histology of liver, kidney and bone marrow. DS and KE performed
cell cycle and chromosome condensation and breakage analyses. All authors read, revised and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank
the patient and her family for participating in this study and D. Müller, W. Luck, S. Henning, M. Becker, A.H. Lebrun, M. Bauer, N.
Unterwalder, M. Oberreit, P. Ellensohn, C. Seib, R. Zeller, J. Fassbender, M. Feldkamp, C. Langnick, C. Bassir, B. Spors, and C. Meisel for
clinical care for the patient, providing radiological images, discussions, critical reading of the manuscript and technical assistance. This
work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG, SFB665; BE3895/3-1), the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF, PID-
NET-01GM1111D TP-A5), the Helmholtz Association by the Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), the Sonnenfeld-Stiftung, the German Academic
Exchange Service (DAAD), the China Scholarship Council (CSC), the German Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), and the Senate of Berlin
by funds to the Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology (BIMSB).
