Hypercalcemia is one of the most common metabolic abnormalities encountered in any form of malignancy. Hypocalcemia, however, is a rare
manifestation, especially in cancers with bone involvement. Here we present a case of hypocalcemia in a patient with multiple myeloma that
was refractory to treatment. A 73-year-old African American woman recently diagnosed with multiple myeloma, presented with a 2-day history
of fever, vomiting and hypocalcemia. Ten days prior to admission she received zoledronic acid, Velcade® (bortezomib), Revlimid®
(lenalidomide) and dexamethasone. Treatment was started with intravenous antibiotics and calcium gluconate boluses. After 24 hours of
treatment her calcium level became undetectable (<5mg/dL). Continuous intravenous calcium gluconate infusions in addition to boluses were
started. She remained persistently hypocalcemic and eventually developed tonic–clonic seizures. Vitamin D levels were found to be low and
intravenous paricalcitol was initiated, which improved her calcium level. Underlying vitamin D deficiency can precipitate severe
hypocalcemia in patients with multiple myeloma receiving bisphosphonates. This warrants baseline screening for vitamin D deficiency in these
patients. Multiple myeloma (MM) is a malignant proliferation of plasma cells, characterized by the presence of monoclonal immunoglobulin in
serum and urine. Zoledronic acid (ZA) is a standard part of the treatment, as patients with MM usually have hypercalcemia secondary to bone
destruction. However, some cases of hypocalcemia have been reported when bisphosphonates were used in patients with vitamin D deficiency .
Our case differs in the fact that our patient with MM developed severe hypocalcemia just after receiving her first dose of ZA. A 73-year-old
African American woman with diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and recently diagnosed immunoglobulin G MM, presented with 2 days’ history of
fever, nausea, vomiting and dizziness. She was found to be obtunded in our Emergency department and was intubated for airway protection. She
was febrile (39.33°C, 102.8°F), but hemodynamically stable. She demonstrated mild respiratory distress, had rales and wheezes on
auscultation, and edema in both lower extremities. Initial laboratory results (Table 1) revealed pancytopenia, elevated creatinine and
corrected calcium of 7.3mg/dL, other electrolytes were within normal limits. A chest radiograph revealed cardiomegaly and pulmonary edema.
Ten days prior to admission she received one dose of ZA, three doses of bortezomib, and seven doses of daily lenalidomide in addition to
weekly dexamethasone. A clinical diagnosis of neutropenic fever, acute renal failure and severe hypocalcemia was made. Treatment was started
with intravenous vancomycin and cefepime. She was also given calcium gluconate boluses for her hypocalcemia. Comparison of laboratory
parameters at first chemotherapy dose, admission and hospital stay Laboratory results not done. Even after 24 hours of treatment, her mental
status did not improve. She remained febrile, her kidney functions worsened, and her calcium level became undetectable (<5mg/dL) and ionized
calcium was 0.66mmol/L (see Table 1). She was started on continuous intravenous calcium gluconate infusion in addition to boluses, which
still did not increase her calcium levels. We then tested for vitamin D levels which were found to be low (13ng/mL). The value of vitamin D
was measured on the day in which renal function was most impaired (creatinine 8mg/dL). Intravenous paricalcitol was initiated, which did
improve her calcium level, but, it did not revert to normal. Despite aggressive calcium replacement she remained persistently hypocalcemic
and eventually developed tonic–clonic seizures. An electrocardiogram revealed a QT interval of 500ms using Bazett’s formula. Her
neuroimaging, however, was normal except for several small calvarium lytic lesions (Figure 1). Her family eventually made the decision to
focus on comfort measures only, following which, she had a cardiac arrest and died on hospital day 17. Computed tomography of brain (bone
window). Computed tomography brain scan showing multiple lytic lesions in the calvarium (arrow). ZA is a long-acting bisphosphonate used for
supportive therapy in MM and bone metastasis. It has a safety profile similar to that of pamidronate, but because of ease of administration,
it is preferred over the latter. In the long run, both pamidronate and ZA have been shown to reduce skeletal related events, and decrease
need for irradiation . Bisphosphonates are generally well tolerated, although they are occasionally associated with adverse events namely
hypocalcemia, nephrotoxicity, pancytopenia and osteonecrosis . Renal dysfunction is an undesired side effect that can occur after
intravenous infusion of bisphosphonate . In this case, her kidney functions were normal before starting chemotherapy, but a week after
initiating ZA, she developed acute renal failure. This may also have been exacerbated by the MM nephropathy, but arguably her kidney
functions had remained stable from the time of the diagnosis until she got her first dose of ZA. All bisphosphonates can cause hypocalcemia,
regardless of their method of administration, although this is infrequently found to be a clinically symptomatic problem . Of note,
symptomatic hypocalcemia after ZA is rarely reported. Hypovitaminosis D and concurrent dexamethasone and ZA administration have been
identified as independent risk factors for severe hypocalcemia when metastatic tumors are treated with ZA . Corticosteroids decrease blood
calcium levels by suppression of intestinal calcium absorption, depression of vitamin D activity and reabsorption of calcium in renal
tubules. There are some case reports about patients with MM with unrecognized vitamin D deficiency, who developed hypocalcemia following ZA
that improved only after vitamin D replacement ; as can also be appreciated in this case. Some studies have reported up to 150% increase in
mortality, among critical care unit patients, with ionized calcium levels below 0.8mmol/L . Our patient had ionized calcium of 0.66mmol/L.
Unfortunately, the level of vitamin D is not part of routine screening in patients receiving bisphosphonates for cancers. This case
therefore serves to remind us that careful clinical and biochemical evaluation is required before administration of bisphosphonates in
cancers to avoid undesired side effects; and vitamin D levels should be a part of screening before administering more potent and longer
acting bisphosphonates, such as ZA. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. MM: Multiple myeloma; ZA:
Zoledronic acid. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. APNA wrote the introduction, case description, table and
corrected discussion of the manuscript, SJ wrote discussion and conclusions. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript. Jewell H
Halanych MD, MSc, participated in the correction of the manuscript.
