In 2007, we detected human herpes simplex virus type 1, which caused stomatitis, in a juvenile confiscated eastern lowland gorilla (Gorilla
beringei graueri) that had a high degree of direct contact with human caretakers. Our findings confirm that pathogens can transfer between
nonhuman primate hosts and humans. Most emerging infectious diseases of humans are of wildlife origin (1). The close genetic relatedness of
humans and nonhuman primates (NHPs) makes each uniquely susceptible to pathogens of the other (2). Spillover of NHP pathogens into humans
can lead to human disease pandemics (e.g., HIV-1 from the chimpanzee strain of simian immunodeficiency virus ), and some NHP viruses are
potentially acutely lethal to humans (e.g., herpes B virus of Asian macaques ). The opposite transmission event—human to NHP—is less
frequently reported. Although of concern from a wildlife conservation standpoint (5), human-to-NHP transmission events substantiate the fact
that pathogen sharing is bidirectional (6). To provide further evidence for the potential for disease emergence at the human–NHP interface,
we report a human herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection in an eastern lowland gorilla (Grauer’s gorilla, Gorilla beringei graueri).
A 2-year-old female Grauer’s gorilla, confiscated from poachers in Goma, Democratic Republic of the Congo, in November 2005, was group-
housed in a facility with 6 other juvenile Grauer’s gorillas and 1 juvenile mountain gorilla (G.b. beringei). All gorillas had daily direct
contact with one another and with human caretakers who provided hands-on care. In March 2007, 5 of the Grauer’s gorillas exhibited bouts of
lethargy and anorexia and oral lesions. Three of the affected gorillas, including the gorilla from Goma, were chemically immobilized for
examination. All 3 gorillas exhibited multiple clear fluid-filled vesicles up to 2 cm in diameter that affected the mucosa of the lips and
gingiva (Figure 1, panel A). Biopsy and swab samples were obtained from the lesions of the gorilla from Goma. The biopsy sample was fixed in
10% buffered formalin; the swab samples were stored frozen at –80°C, and these specimens were shipped to the United States for diagnostic
testing. Vesicular stomatitis in a wild-caught juvenile Grauer’s gorilla (Gorilla beringei graueri). Gross lesions, histopathologic
examination, transmission electron microscopy, and molecular screening confirmed human herpesvirus type 1 (HSV-1) as the etiologic agent. A)
Human HSV-1 lip lesions in a wild-caught juvenile Grauer’s gorilla. B) Section of oral mucosa adjacent to a vesiculo-ulcerative lesion
exhibits epithelial cell necrosis, cytoplasmic swelling, nuclear chromatin margination (sometimes with discrete Cowdry type A inclusions),
and multinucleated syncytia typical of herpesviral cytopathic effects (hematoxylin and eosin stain). Original magnification ×200. C)
Electron micrograph of the same lesion demonstrates intranuclear, unenveloped virions ≈100 nm in diameter that are budding through the
nuclear membrane to form enveloped virions ≈140 nm in diameter; morphologic features of both are compatible with a herpesvirus. Original
magnification ×60,000. Histologic examination of the biopsy sample showed variably thickened, ulcerated, nonkeratinizing, stratified
squamous oral mucosae. Margins of ulcers showed marked epidermal swelling (intracellular edema, ballooning degeneration) and large numbers
of epithelial syncytial cells, often with marginated chromatin and smudgy intranuclear inclusion bodies filling the nucleus (Figure 1, panel
B.). Inclusion bodies were present in individual cells in the stratum basalis and stratum spinosum adjacent to the ulcers. Using
transmission electron microscopy, we observed virions consistent with herpesvirus in shape and size within the nucleus of syncytial cells
and budding through the nuclear membrane (Figure 1, panel C.). Histopathology and transmission electron microscopy findings were essentially
identical to findings from human HSV-1 infections (7). DNA was extracted from swab samples from this animal (8) and amplified by PCR using
pan-herpesvirus–specific primers designed to the DNA polymerase gene (UL30) (9). A cloned and sequenced 731-nt amplicon (GenBank accession
no. KJ396198) showed 99% identities with the DNA and protein sequences of HSV-1 UL30, and 94% and 95% identities (DNA and protein,
respectively) to UL30 of HSV-2 (Table). Because sequences from gorilla-specific herpesviruses have not been annotated, we performed a
phylogenetic analysis of the amplicon from the gorilla swab sample using the UL30 genes from broadly representative isolates from the 3
herpesvirus subfamilies. The gorilla-derived DNA and protein (Figure 2, panels A and B) exhibited the strongest phylogenetic relationship
with HSV-1. Alignments of human and NHP alphaherpesvirus representatives show that the region amplified with the consensus herpesvirus
primers is a highly conserved region of UL30 (Technical Appendix Figure). The sequence alignments strongly suggested that the herpesvirus
DNA in the oral lesion was HSV-1, although the gorilla-derived amplicon was an outlier in comparison with other HSV-1 isolates (data not
shown). The relative divergence of the amplicon was due primarily to nucleotide changes encoding a 3-aa motif not found in any other
annotated sequence (Technical Appendix Figure). Whether adaptation of the putative HSV-1 in the gorilla host represents a compensatory
change to replication in the ectopic gorilla host is not known. *Pairwise alignment of the gorilla amplicon DNA sequence (GenBank accession
no. KJ396198) and predicted amino acid sequence of the corresponding region of HSV-1 (HHV-1; AFI98948), HSV-2 (HHV-2; AGI44412), MaHV-1
(AAT67222); PaHV-2 (YP_443877), HHV-3 (varicella zoster virus; ABF21820), HHV-4 (Epstein-Barr virus; YP_401712), HHV-5 (human
cytomegalovirus; AAP37469), HHV6 (BAF93477), HHV-8 (Kaposi sarcoma virus; ACY00400), and EHV-1 (ADI96155). DNA–DNA alignments were performed
by using the Wilbur-Lipman Method of the MegAlign (DNAStar, Madison, WI, USA) sequence alignment program (Ktuple = 3; gap penalty = 3;
window = 20). Protein–protein alignments were performed by using the Lipman-Pearson method (Ktuple = 2; gap penalty = 4; gap length
penalty = 12). EHV, equid herpesvirus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; HHV, human herpesvirus; MaHV, Macacine herpesvirus; PaHV, Papiine
herpesvirus. Phylogenetic analysis of the nucleotide sequence (A) and predicted amino acid sequence (B) from the swab sample amplicon from
the gorilla with the corresponding regions of HSV-1 (HHV-1; GenBank accession no. AFI98948); HSV-2 (HHV-2; AGI44412); MaHV-1 (AAT67222);
PaHV-2 (YP_443877); HHV-3 (varicella zoster virus; ABF21820); HHV-4 (Epstein-Barr virus; YP_401712); HHV-5 (human cytomegalovirus;
AAP37469); HHV-6 (BAF93477); HHV-8 (Kaposi sarcoma virus; ACY00400), and EHV-1 ADI96155). Sequences were aligned by the Clustal W method
(http://www.clustal.org) by using the MegAlign (DNAStar, Madison, WI, USA) sequence alignment program (multiple alignment parameters: gap
penalty = 15.00; gap length penalty = 6.66; delay divergent seqs (%) = 30; DNA transition weight = 0.50. Pairwise alignment parameters:
slow-accurate; gap penalty = 15.00; gap length = 6.66). EHV, equid herpesvirus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; HHV, human herpesvirus; MaHV,
Macacine herpesvirus; PaHV, Papiine herpesvirus. To confirm our conclusion that the lesion was associated with HSV-1 infection, we used
HSV-1–specific primers to amplify a region of UL30 (aa 134–246) outside of the amplicon defined by the pan-herpesvirus–specific primers.
Amplification was positive for the oral swab sample DNA with this second primer pair and for 3 human-isolated HSV-1 strains. Sequence
analysis of the amplicon demonstrated 100% and 89% sequence identity with HSV-1 and HSV-2, respectively (data not shown). On the basis of
the results of the histopathologic features and molecular screening of the virus, we concluded that the stomatitis in this juvenile female
Grauer’s gorilla confiscated from poachers in Goma, Democratic Republic of the Congo, was caused by HSV-1. Alphaherpesvirus exposure in wild
gorillas in this region has been reported (10), but to our knowledge, human HSV infection in wild-born captive gorillas has not been
detected with molecular techniques. Fatal HSV-1 infection in a captive-born, nursery-reared western lowland gorilla (G. gorilla gorilla)
(11) has been reported. Serologic tests for HSV-1 on samples collected before the outbreak from other gorillas in the confiscated gorilla’s
group showed that 2 clinically unaffected gorillas were seropositive for HSV-1, suggesting previous exposure to an alphaherpesvirus (12).
However, serologic tests for HSV-1 and -2 exposure in the 5 clinically affected gorillas during this outbreak, including the gorilla from
Goma, were negative, which suggests these animals were experiencing their first HSV infections, and antibodies were not yet detectable.
Although the HSV infection status of the poachers who captured and initially held the gorilla from Goma was unknown, as was the human HSV
infection status of the caretakers (from whom samples were not collected) who had daily contact with this gorilla and her captive cohort, we
can safely assume most of these persons were representative of the general human population and therefore infected because HSV-1
seropositivity has been documented at a prevalence of >90% in the region (13–15), and HSV infections are lifelong. Our findings have major
ramifications for the possible reintroduction of these confiscated gorillas into the wild (all remain in captivity) because such a
management action might introduce a novel (human) pathogen to a naïve population. Screening wild Grauer’s gorillas and other gorilla
populations for human HSV and other human pathogens will be critical to adequately assess the risk for reintroducing captive gorillas to
wild populations of these endangered great apes. From a global health standpoint, our finding of human HSV-1 in a gorilla proves once again
that pathogens transfer among human and NHP hosts. Sequence alignment of the regions of UL30 from the gorilla amplicon, herpes simplex virus
(HSV) 1, HSV-2, Macacine herpesvirus 1, Papiine herpesvirus 2, and varicella-zoster virus with a majority sequence presented representing
the amino acids found in most of the individual sequences. Suggested citation for this article: Gilardi KVK, Oxford KL, Gardner-Roberts D,
Kinani JF, Spelman L, Barry PA, et al. Human herpes simplex virus type 1 in confiscated gorilla. Emerg Infect Dis . 2014 Nov [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2011.140075 Current affiliation: ARMAC Veterinary Group, Biggar, South Lanarkshire, Scotland, UK. Current
affiliation: Rhode Island School of Design, Providence, Rhode Island, USA. Samples were imported into the United States by permission of the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species. We thank the Institut Congolais pour la Conservation de la Nature and the Rwanda
Development Board (Antoine Mudakikwa) for permission to care for confiscated Grauer’s and mountain gorillas and the Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund
for orphan gorilla management cooperation. Bob Nordhausen assisted with electron microscopy, and Christopher Polage provided human
herpesvirus isolates. This report was made possible in part by National Center for Research Resources and Office of Research Infrastructure
Programs support to the California National Primate Research Center, and by the US Agency for International Development Emerging Pandemic
Threats PREDICT project; contents do not necessarily reflect the views of USAID or the US Government. Dr Gilardi is co-director of the Karen
C. Drayer Wildlife Health Center, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis. Her research interests include NHP
medicine and conservation, zoonoses, marine wildlife and ecosystem health, and One Health.
