Sparganosis is an infection with a parasitic tapeworm larva that occurs by eating infected foods or drinking contaminated water. The larvae
can migrate to a tissue or muscle in the chest, abdominal wall, extremities, eyes, brain, urinary tract, pleura, pericardium, spinal canal,
or scrotum. Herein, we report a 5-month old infant with scrotal sparganosis who was initially suspected to have a scrotal inflammatory mass
with a history of applying raw frog meat into the umbilicus. Preoperative ultrasound examinations and computed tomography (CT) scanning
misdiagnosed the mass as a scrotal teratoma. The scrotal mass was surgically removed, and the histopathology proved it to be scrotal
sparganosis. This case displays the youngest patient ever reported with scrotal sparganosis, and the first description of CT characteristics
of scrotal sparganosis. A detailed medical history is necessary for patients with scrotal masses suspected of sparganosis. In addition,
ultrasound and CT examinations are helpful to rule out other causes of a scrotal mass. Sparganosis mansoni is a parasitic infection caused
by the plerocercoid larvae of diphyllobothroid tapeworms of the genus Spirometra . Sparganosis has been reported sporadically around the
world with a higher prevalence of the disease occurring in Eastern Asian countries that include South Korea, Japan, Thailand, and China .
The reported age at onset is commonly in older children and adults . Clinical symptoms also vary according to the location of the sparganum.
The plerocercoid larvae can migrate to almost any part of the body after invasion, and the common destinations are subcutaneous tissues of
the torso and extremities, the ocular, oral and maxillofacial region, and the viscera. Other sites, such as the scrotum are rare . Scrotal
sparganosis is generally characterized by a painless subcutaneous scrotal lump, with no specific identifying characteristics and is
difficult to diagnose preoperatively. We reviewed the literature related to scrotal sparganosis, and found that all cases were
preoperatively misdiagnosed . Although the histopathologic examination and serum detection of anti-sparganum antibody can be confirmed, they
are often made after surgery. Some authors feel that the serpiginous low attenuation structure discovered on ultrasonic images aids in the
differential diagnosis of scrotal sparganosis . However, up until now, there has been no report of CT characteristics of scrotal
sparganosis. Here, we report CT features of a case of scrotal sparganosis in a 5-month old infant in China, which was preoperatively
misdiagnosed as a scrotal teratoma. Our case illustrates that infants may also be infected with spargana, and a detailed medical history
combined with a CT scan and ultrasound examination are helpful to arrive at a correct diagnosis of scrotal sparganosis. A 5-month-old boy
was found to have an asymptomatic left scrotal mass for 3 months. The mass was soft, non-tender and without overlying scrotal skin
abnormality. Ultrasound examination identified that the left scrotal wall was thickened with a mixed-echogenicity mass measuring 11×3 mm,
which had an obscure boundary and increased blood supply on color Doppler (Fig. 1). The mass was thought to be inflammatory in origin, and
observation was recommended. However, repeat ultrasound examinations demonstrated the mass to be increasing in size. The last ultrasound
examination revealed a 19×9 mm hetero-echogenic mass with ill-defined margins. Physical examination demonstrated a flat mass of the left
scrotum measuring 20×10×3 mm, with non-homogeneous consistency, ill-defined borders and no tenderness. CT showed a mass of 12×9 mm anterior
to the left testicle, with heterogeneous density and punctate calcifications (Fig. 2A) and obvious enhancement after administration of
contrast agent (Fig. 2B), which was diagnosed as a left testicular teratoma. The complete blood count (CBC), electrolytes, and liver
function tests were all normal prior to surgery. The eosinophil differential count was 6% (normal range: 0.5 to 5%). No parasite eggs were
found on routine stool testing. The α-fetoprotein (AFP), 19.5 µg/L (normal <20 µg/L), and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), 2.01 µg/L
(normal <3.1 µg/L), were both normal. The scrotal skin was edematous and thickened at surgery. A transverse incision was made at the base of
the left scrotal mass. An oval, flat mass (15×17×3 mm) was located in the Dartos layer of the scrotum with non-homogeneous hardness and
granular nodules within it. The mass was poorly circumscribed and external to the testicle and epididymis. The excised mass with surrounding
edematous tissue was sent for pathological examinations. The left testis, epididymis, and vas deferens were normal based on direct
examinations. The pathological diagnosis was sparganosis (Fig. 3). The postoperative (2 weeks after the surgery) ELISA for anti-sparganum
antibody was positive (1:200 with the absorbance of 0.420 and the cut-off value of 0.197), while the serum antibodies of other parasites
such as cysticercosis, lung trematode, filaria, and hydatid were all negative. After definitive diagnosis, re-questioning the family
revealed that the infant was treated with topical raw frog meat to the umbilicus for 2 days at 20 days of life. No abnormalities of other
organs were identified on postoperative brain CT, chest X-ray, and abdominal ultrasound. Postoperative oral praziquantel (25 mg/kg per day)
was prescribed for 4 days to prevent residual infection. No new nodules were found in the left scrotum at the subsequent 4-month visit post
surgery, and the serum test of anti-sparganum antibody 4-months post surgery was negative (<1:100), which indicated that the infant was
successfully cured by the surgery. Sparganosis is a rare parasitic infection in humans caused by a larval cestode of the genus Spirometra.
The disease has been reported in 39 countries, mostly in Southeast Asia and occurs mainly in people who commonly eat raw snakes or frogs .
In China, the main route of infection is using unboiled frog meat as local poultice, which relates to Chinese folklore that raw frog skin or
frog meat has a healing effect on wounds . The infected infant in our report was treated with raw frog meat applied to his umbilicus for
abdominal distension 20 days after birth. After gaining entrance, spargana can reside in almost any part of the body; the destination is
commonly a muscle or subcutaneous tissue in the lower abdomen, inguinal, and femoral regions, as well as the eye, oral and maxillofacial
region, abdominal viscera, and brain, while the scrotum is rare . There have been only 10 reported cases of scrotal sparganosis in the
literature dating back to 1964 (Table 1). Human sparganosis occurs in both children and adults, but very rarely in children less than 1 year
of age . The 5-month old patient in this case is the youngest reported patient with scrotal sparganosis. The most common clinical
manifestations of scrotal sparganosis is a painless lump of the scrotal wall that was initially misdiagnosed in all patients. In the
reviewed literature, the time interval from initial presentation of a scrotal mass to resection was 3 to 24 months . This indicates that
scrotal sparganosis is difficult to diagnosis due to its rarity and non-specific clinical manifestations. Serum immunology testing with
ELISA is a very reliable method for preoperative diagnosis of sparganosis . However, given the extremely low incidence of scrotal
sparganosis, serum immunology testing is not routinely used for patients presenting with a scrotal mass. Therefore, the key to correct
preoperative diagnosis of scrotal sparganosis is radiologic examinations. Ultrasound is often used for evaluation of superficial
subcutaneous masses, including the scrotum. The ultrasound characteristic of internal serpiginous tubular structures suggests sparganosis,
but this can also be seen in radiation edema and superficial phlebitis . In this case, multiple ultrasound examinations demonstrated a
heterogeneous echogenic mass of the scrotal wall without internal anechoic serpiginous tubular structures. Therefore, ultrasound has
limitations in the differential diagnosis of scrotal sparganosis . The CT findings of scrotal sparganosis are similar to the reported triad
manifestations of cerebral sparganosis: low density mass, punctate calcifications, and nodular or irregular enhancement . The CT scan
revealed a heterogeneous density mass of the scrotal wall with punctate calcifications on plain CT in our patient (Fig. 2A) and obvious
enhancement on contrast-enhanced CT (Fig. 2B), which was misdiagnosed as a scrotal teratoma. The differential diagnosis of a scrotal wall
mass includes trauma, inflammation, and tumor . If there is no history of trauma and no evidence of inflammation, then a CT scan should be
performed to rule out a tumor. Scrotal tumors generally do not display punctate calcifications on CT imaging . Therefore, if calcifications
are identified, the diagnosis of scrotal sparganosis should be suspected. A detailed medical history is necessary, with attention to whether
the patient has a history of eating unboiled reptile meat. If so, immunologic testing should be performed. Surgical excision is the
treatment of choice for sparganosis regardless of the affected location. Excision of the entire worm, in particular the scolex, is critical
to achieve a radical cure for the patient. The 10 patients reported in the literature review were all cured by surgical removal of the
tumors and the spargana larvae . It is generally considered that there is no effective drug treatment for sparganosis. However, praziquantel
is recommended for multiple-site sparganosis of the viscera that cannot be effectively cured by surgery. Praziquantel is a broad-spectrum
drug used for resistant trematodes and tapeworms, but its efficacy for treating sparganosis remains uncertain . Since it is unknown whether
live sparganum larvae remain in this patient after complete resection of the scrotal mass, the postoperative use of oral praziquantel is
controversial. Our patient was treated with oral praziquantel for 1 cycle after surgery. In conclusion, a detailed medical history followed
by scrotal ultrasound and CT scan is necessary to establish the diagnosis of scrotal sparganosis. Serum immunology testing can then confirm
the diagnosis prior to surgical excision. We have no conflict of interest related to this study. Scrotal ultrasound showing that the left
scrotal wall is thickened and there is a hetero-echogenic mass (arrows) measuring 11×3 mm with ill-defined margins. The CT appearance of
scrotal sparganosis. (A) Focal nodule of 12×9 mm in size (arrow) was found anterior to the left testis with heterogeneous density and
punctate calcifications on non-contrast CT scan. (B) The lesion (arrow) anterior to the left testis was very prominent on contrast-enhanced
CT. The histopathologic images of scrotal sparganosis. (A) Chronic granulomas with eosinophils (black arrow), lymphocytes (white arrow), and
multinucleated giant cells (red arrow) infiltration surrounding the worm's body. H&E, ×400. (B) The central portion of the worm head is
embolic, which appears as a lip-like structure (arrow) on cross sectional image of the scolex with many small spines around it. H&E, ×200.
(C) There are many small spines around the lip-like structure (arrows). H&E, ×400. (D) Many calcareous bodies (arrows) are displayed on the
cross section of the sparganum larvae, which are round or oval neutrophilic small bodies arranged in concentric circles. H&E, ×400. Review
of scrotal sparganosis cases reported in the literature
