Inv(11)(p15q22)/NUP98-DDX10 rearrangement is a rare but recurrent chromosomal translocation associated with myeloid malignancies. Structural
chromosomal rearrangements of the nucleoporin 98 gene (NUP98) at 11p15.4 produce NUP98 fusions with the DDX10 DEAD (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp) box
polypeptide 10 (DDX10) gene on chromosome 11q22 . To date, only 15 such cases, except the present case, with de novo or therapy-related
myeloid disorders have been reported [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. Three NUP98-DDX10 fusion isoforms, types I, II, and III, have been reported.
The type I fusion, which fuses NUP98 exon 12 (NM_139131.1) with DDX10 exon 6 (NM_004398.2), has been reported in 2 adult therapy-related AML
patients [1, 8]. The type II fusion, which fuses NUP98 exon 14 with DDX10 exon 7, has been reported in 12 cases. The type III fusion, which
fuses NUP98 exon 15 and DDX10 exon 7, has been reported in 1 adult de novo AML patient with a concurrent case of type II fusion . Herein we
report a de novo childhood AML patient with inv(11)(p15q22)/NUP98-DDX10 rearrangement for the first time in Korea. A 4-yr-old boy presented
with petechiae and easy bruising. His complete blood count revealed the following: Hb, 7.7 g/dL; leukocyte count, 7.64×109/L (absolute
neutrophil count, 0.32×109/L); and platelets, 42×109/L. Additional analysis of the peripheral blood revealed 15% myeloblasts and
leukoerythroblastic features. The bone marrow (BM) study showed 55% blasts with dysplastic erythropoiesis and megakaryopoiesis, suggesting
AML with myelodysplasia-related changes. The estimated cellularity of the BM section was variable at 10-100% (overall 50%). Flow cytometry
revealed that the blasts were positive for CD13, CD33, CD64, CD11c, CD117, cMPO, HLA-DR, and CD34 (CD64 and CD34 were weakly expressed).
Chromosomal analysis performed on a short-term culture of BM cells using the Giemsa banding technique revealed that the patient's karyotype
was 46,XY,inv(11)(p15q22) (Fig. 1). FISH analysis with probes for EGR1 (5q-), D7S522 (7q-), TP53/CEP17 , and MLL (Vysis, Downers Grove, IL,
USA) showed no cytogenetic abnormalities. The HemaVision (DNA Technology, Aarhus, Denmark) screen was negative for all detectable fusion
transcripts. Mutation analyses for NPM1 and internal tandem duplications of FLT3 and CEBPA were negative. One microgram of total RNA was
reverse transcribed for reverse transcription (RT)-PCR experiments for further evaluation of cytogenetic abnormalities. The NUP98-DDX10
fusion transcript was detected by using previously described primers , and sequence analysis revealed an in-frame fusion between NUP98
nucleotide 1907 (exon 14) and DDX10 nucleotide 914 (exon 7), which presented as a type II fusion (Fig. 1). After the patient received
induction chemotherapy, follow-up BM examination and cytogenetic analyses showed no residual leukemic cells with the 46,XY karyotype . The
patient tolerated a 4-month follow-up period of consolidation chemotherapy quite well. Among the 29 NUP98 fusion partners and their fusion
transcripts, the NUP98-DDX10 rearrangement, which encodes proteins that contain a coiled-coil domain that is thought to function in the
oligomerization of proteins, has been reported to increase the proliferation and self-renewal of primary human CD34+ cells and disrupt their
erythroid and myeloid differentiation [9, 10]. Among the 16 reported NUP98-DDX10-positive cases including the present case, 8 were children
and 8 were adults. Nine of them were de novo (7 AML, 1 MDS, 1 accelerated phase of CML) and 6 were therapy-related cases (3 AML, 2 MDS, and
1 chronic myelomonocytic leukemia) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. For the remaining 1 case, the information whether the case was therapy-related or
not was not available . Male predominance was observed (12/16 cases). Although the prognostic implications of the NUP98/DDX10 rearrangement
have not been clearly identified, nucleoporin-associated malignancies tend to occur at a younger age and have a poor outcome [2, 3, 4, 6, 7,
8]. The majority of reported cases showed evidence of monocytic differentiation: AML-M4 and AML-M5, according the French-American-British
classification, and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) [1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7]. Although this patient's leukemic cells were not
morphologically monocytic, flow cytometry showed that they were positive for monocytic markers (CD64 and CD11c). Cytogenetically, the
reported NUP98-DDX10 fusions were derived from diverse rearrangements of chromosome 11 [i.e., inv(11) (14 cases), insertion (1 case), or
reciprocal translocation (1 case)]. Among the 3 NUP98-DDX10 fusion isoforms derived from alternative splicing, all reported childhood AML
patients had type II isoforms. Although alternative splicing mechanisms have been suggested to play different roles in leukemogenesis
involving other NUP98 fusions, the mechanism and impact of nonrandom breakpoint localization within NUP98 fused with DDX10 are yet to be
clarified [6, 7]. Considering its possible cryptic nature, identifying the NUP98-DDX10 rearrangement could contribute to expanding its use
as a marker for minimal residual disease and future therapeutic approaches . Here, we describe a de novo childhood AML patient with
NUP98-DDX10 rearrangement (type II fusion) and inv(11)(p15q22) as the sole karyotypic abnormality, comparable to previous studies. Due to
its possible association with adverse clinical outcomes, further studies are required to explore the implications of this karyotypic
abnormality. The authors thank Kio Lee of the Samsung Biomedical Research Institute for technical assistance. No potential conflicts of
interest relevant to this article were reported. Karyotyping, reverse transcription (RT)-PCR, and sequence analyses of the NUP98-DDX10
fusion transcripts in the present case. (A) Giemsa-band karyotype with 400-band resolution showing inv(11)(p15q22). (B) RNA samples from the
patient's leukemic cells were amplified by RT-PCR using NUP98 and DDX10 primers; molecular weight marker, 100-bp ladder (left); patient's
results showing the 874-bp NUP98-DDX10 fusion transcripts (right). (C) Direct sequencing of the RT-PCR product from the patient's leukemic
cells. Sequences adjacent to the junction are shown and exon 14 of NUP98 and exon 7 of DDX10 are indicated (type II fusion). The arrow
indicates the junction points of the 2 genes.
