Postoperative necrotizing scleritis should be considered in cases of persistent localized postoperative inflammation following all forms of
surgical trauma. We present the history, clinical findings, and follow-up data of four patients with postoperative necrotizing scleritis.
The clinical records of four patients who developed scleritis following ocular surgery were retrospectively reviewed. The first step in
managing necrotizing scleritis is to rule out infectious etiology. Surgically induced necrotizing scleritis is an immune-mediated condition
that can coexist with concomitant infectious condition, i.e. endophthalmitis, but response to immunosuppression leads to resolution of the
disease and verifies the diagnosis. Scleral inflammation and necrosis can complicate the postoperative course of ocular surgery and can lead
to sight-threatening complications.1234 Scleral inflammation and necrosis can occur at variable time intervals after different anterior and
posterior segment ocular surgeries including pterygium, cataract extraction, trabeculectomy, vitrectomy, and penetrating
keratoplasty.1234567891011 Although the exact etiology of surgically induced necrotizing scleritis (SINS) has not conclusively identified,
it has been noted that SINS usually occurs in eyes that have undergone multiple surgeries.1 Hence, some have postulated that SINS may be a
result of a hypersensitivity reaction against an antigen revealed or altered due to multiple surgeries.121314 For appropriate management of
postoperative scleritis, it is imperative to rule out infectious etiology first and immunosuppressives can be considered in non-responsive
cases where infectious etiology has been ruled out. The present case series reports the history, clinical findings, and management of four
cases of SINS at a tertiary eye care centre. The clinical records of four patients who developed scleritis following ocular surgery were
retrospectively reviewed. The details of surgery, risk factors in the previous medical history, features of the scleritis, and the treatment
were noted for the four eyes. Findings were reviewed of the slit-lamp examination and indirect ophthalmoscopy, anterior segment photographs,
and laboratory investigations, i.e., complete hematology and immunology profiles such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), antinuclear antibody
(ANA), and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) and serology testing such as venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) and
treponema pallidum hemagglutination (TPHA). In all four cases, infective scleritis was excluded by wound swabs cultured on infusion broths
and agar plates (blood, chocolate, and Sabouraud's). A 62-year-old hypertensive female presented with sudden pain and reduced vision in her
right eye four weeks after undergoing surgery for macular hole. She had undergone an uneventful phacoemulsification, intraocular lens
implantation, 23-gauge vitrectomy, internal limiting membrane peeling, and perfluoropropane (C3F8) tamponade in her right eye. There was no
wound leak or hypotony postoperatively. The best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/200, N36 and 20/40, N6 in right and left eyes,
respectively. Slit-lamp examination revealed localized episcleral congestion at the site of the infusion port along with anterior chamber
inflammation and 0.5 mm of hypopyon [Figure 1a]. Fundus examination with indirect ophthalmoscopy revealed an attached retina with
visualization out to the third order vessels. An aqueous tap was performed and patient was treated with intravitreal vancomycin (1 mg/0.1
ml) and ceftazidime (2.25 mg/0.1 ml) in the right eye. She was started on fortified vancomycin and ceftazidime eye drops along with topical
corticosteroids and mydriatics. Aqueous aspirate revealed Pseudomonas aeruginosa on culture. Subsequently, the intravitreal injections were
repeated twice over the following week. At one week follow up, the patient had improved symptomatically but the sclerotomy site showed
scleral thinning and necrosis along with deep stromal infiltration in the adjoining peri-limbal cornea. Microbiological assessment of
scleral scrapings was negative for microorganisms. At two weeks follow up, the infusion cannula site showed progressive thinning [Figure
1b]. Serum RA factor, ANA c-ANCA, and p-ANCA were negative. The patient was diagnosed with SINS and was started on oral prednisolone (1
mg/Kg) and weekly oral methotrexate (7.5 mg). After six weeks of oral immunosuppressive therapy, the vision in the right eye vision improved
to 20/120, N 8 with no pain and no sign of active scleral necrosis with corneal infiltration. (a) Localized episcleral congestion and
hypopyon in case 1, (b) Scleral thinning and necrosis at the site of sclerotomy in case 1 A 48-year-old diabetic female developed acute pain
in her left eye, seven weeks after undergoing surgery for diabetic vitreous hemorrhage. She had undergone phacoemulsification with
intraocular lens implantation along with 20-gauge vitrectomy and endolaser. BCVA was 6/12, N8 in both eyes. Slit-lamp examination revealed
scleral necrosis at the superotemporal sclerotomy site. Serum RA factor, ANA c-ANCA and p-ANCA were negative. Microbiological assessment of
scleral scrappings did not reveal any microorganisms. The patient was started on oral prednisolone (1 mg/Kg) along with topical
corticosteroids and ciprofloxacin. At one week follow up, the area of scleral necrosis was noted to have increased. The patient was started
on oral methotrexate (15 mg/week). At three weeks follow up, the patient was asymptomatic with a small patch of scleral thinning persisting
at the sclerotomy. A 55-year-old diabetic and hypertensive male presented with gradually increasing pain, redness, and swelling in his left
eye seven weeks after undergoing surgery for diabetic vitreous hemorrhage. He had undergone underwent 20-gauge vitrectomy, membrane peeling,
and endolaser. Slit-lamp examination revealed localized conjunctival congestion and whitish deposits in the subconjunctival space suggestive
of exudates at the superonasal sclerotomy site [Figure 2a]. Fundus examination with indirect ophthalmoscopy revealed an attached retina with
visualization of the third order vessels. The patient was requested to start topical steroids and topical and systemic antibiotics. At one
week follow up, his pain recurred with increasing intensity and surgery was performed to drain an abscess and to perform an antibiotic wash
in the operating room. The culture was positive for Pseudomonas species. Topical fortified vancomycin and tobramycin drops were added.
During the following two weeks, the pain and redness persisted and scleral ectasia was noticed at the site of sclerotomy along with adjacent
corneal scarring [Figure 2b]. Suspecting it to be a case of surgically induced necrotizing scleritis, the patient oral prednisolone and
cyclophosphamide (75 mg daily) therapy was initiated. Serum RA factor, ANA c-ANCA, and p-ANCA were negative. There was reduction in pain and
redness a day after starting oral steroids. Cyclophosphamide had to be stopped due to deteriorating nephropathy. Follow up could not be
completed as the patient's general condition worsened and had to be shifted to a general hospital. (a) Congestion at superonasal sclerotomy
site in case 3, (b) Scleral thinning and adjacent corneal scarring in case 3 A 61-year-old hypertensive female with advanced glaucoma in
both eyes with BCVA 20/40, N8 in right and 20/30, N12 in left was scheduled to undergo trabeculectomy with mitomycin-C in the right eye. She
was pseudophakic bilaterally and had a history of YAG peripheral iridectomy. Intraoperatively, subconjunctival hemorrhage was noted after
passing a bridle suture beneath the superior rectus muscle. Over next few minutes, a subconjunctival hematoma was noted at the 12 o'clock
limbus. Further complicated by the intraoperative rise of blood pressure, the surgery had to be cancelled. Intraoperative fundus examination
after dilatation did not reveal retinal or subretinal hemorrhage in the superior periphery. There was no hypotony. The patient was requested
to start topical antibiotics and was referred to a general physician to control hypertension. Two weeks later, the patient presented to us
with increased pain in her right eye localized subconjunctival abscess near the superior limbus. Drainage of abscess was performed and a
sample was sent for microbiological analysis. A circumscribed area of scleral necrosis was noted starting from limbus and extending beneath
the insertion of the superior rectus. Microbiological analysis did not reveal any microorganism. Patient was maintained on topical
corticosteroids and ciprofloxacin eye drops. At one week follow up, the necrotic scleral area continued to enlarge. At this point, we
suspected this was a case of SINS. The patient was prescribed oral prednisolone (1 mg/Kg) and methotrexate (15 mg/week). At next follow up
after one week, there was no increase in the size of the scleral necrosis. Over the following weeks there was reduction in pain and redness.
At two months follow up, the active inflammation reduced with formation of a localized staphyloma [Figure 3]. Her final BCVA was 20/60, N10.
Localized staphyloma at two months follow up in case 4 The current theory is that classic SINS involves a delayed hypersensitivity response
that can be precipitated by mild surgical trauma or ischemia-exposed tissue antigens resulting in sensitization of the immune system.56
Alternate theories include molecular mimicry possibly triggered by infection or generalized immune complex deposition.146 The fact that SINS
responds to and is controlled by immunosuppressive therapy supports these hyopotheses.146 The present group of cases differ from the
description of classic SINS in view of the early presentation (3-8 weeks versus 9 months).1 There was no history of previous ocular surgery
in one of the patients in whom surgery was cancelled after passing the bridle suture (patient 4). Although SINS is a noninfectious
inflammatory process, it can be preceded by an infection.15 Bacterial superinfection is also known to complicate the presentation and adds
to the diagnostic dilemma.9 The inherent limitations in the term SINS, including difficulty to determine the relative contributions of
trauma, epithelial breakdown, immune activation, and infection makes the diagnosis of SINS tenuous at best.16 One of our patients was
positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa from aqueous aspirate and another patient was positive from scleral abscess samples. However, both of
patients improved clinically only after starting immunosuppressive therapy. Therefore, exclusion of infection, and treatment of an
infection, if present, is critical prior to diagnosing SINS. The other two patients (Cases 2 and 4) had single microbial cultures which were
negative. Our series of patients were either diabetic or hypertensive, which could have contributed to the local ischemia at the site of
surgical wound. Polyglactin suture has been described to increase the local inflammation and enhance the antigen presentation in eyes
developing SINS following pars plana vitrectomy.10 This might be related to the predilection of the sclerotomy site for the development of
SINS in our series of patients. Immunosuppressive therapy in the form of oral corticosteroids, methotrexate, and cyclophosphamide are the
mainstay of treatment for SINS.139 In our series, three patients had resolution of scleritis after institution of immunosupressives. Two of
them had scleral thinning at the site of scleritis. A high index of suspicion may help in early diagnosis and treatment, thereby preventing
adverse outcomes such as the formation of staphyloma and scleral melting. Persistence of pain or sudden reappearance of pain
postoperatively, which would not improve despite adequate topical or systemic anti-inflammatory medication should lead us to consider
scleritis as one of the possibilities. While immunosuppression clearly plays a role in the management of postoperative necrosis that occurs
in the setting of systemic immune disorders and often plays a role in the absence of such underlying conditions, it is extremely important
to consider and rule out infection prior to placing patients on long-term immunosuppression therapy. Although our patients responded well to
immunosuppressives a single culture may not have been sufficient to completely rule out infection and this is a drawback of our case series.
Our case series has limited follow up and that may not be sufficient to rule out infection completely or to confirm the benefit of
immunosuppression conclusively. Treating or excluding the ocular infection and infectious scleritis prior to starting potent anti-
inflammatory medications and immunosuppressives may be the correct approach in the management of postoperative scleritis. Source of Support:
Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
