We report a case of a 52-year-old woman presented with atypical central serous chorioretinopathy (CSCR) that had been misdiagnosed as
posterior uveitis and treated with systemic corticosteroids and immunosuppressive therapy, with subsequent severe chorioretinal damage.
Diagnosis was straightened through multimodal imaging. Anatomical improvement was achieved after discontinuation of corticosteroids and
intravitreal injection of bevacizumab. However, visual acuity remained severely impaired in one eye. Failure to differentiate atypical CSCR
from inflammatory chorioretinal diseases may lead to severe and irreversible visual impairment. Multimodal imaging helps recognition of the
atypical presentations of CSCR, avoiding misdiagnosis and inappropriate management. Central serous chorioretinopathy (CSCR) is a common
disease characterized by serous detachment of the neurosensory retina and/or retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) that often involves the
macula. Atypical and chronic or recurrent forms of CSCR may be overlooked or misdiagnosed as chorioretinal inflammatory conditions, leading
to inappropriate use of corticosteroids.1 This usually results in worsening of CSCR and irreversible chorioretinal damage and visual
impairment. Various imaging modalities can be used to establish the definitive diagnosis. In this case we report the contribution of
multimodal imaging approach for the diagnosis of an atypical case of CSCR. A 52-year-old woman, with a history of well-controlled systemic
hypertension, complained of decreased vision in both eyes of 3-year-duration. A diagnosis of idiopathic bilateral posterior uveitis had been
made by her ophthalmologist based on a negative extensive comprehensive work-up for infectious and non-infectious diseases. The patient had
been treated with several courses of oral prednisone, intravenous methylprednisolone, azathioprine, and intravenous cyclophosphamide with no
improvement. The patient was referred to us to rule out a masquerade syndrome. On examination, her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was
20/400 in the right eye (RE) and 20/50 in the left eye (LE). Results of anterior segment examination were unremarkable with no features of
active or inactive anterior uveitis. Intraocular pressure was normal in both eyes. There was mild vitreous hemorrhage in the RE and normal
vitreous in the LE. Dilated fundus examination of the RE showed normal optic disc, preretinal hemorrhage, subretinal fibrotic lesion in the
macular area, epiretinal membrane (ERM), RPE changes, and a retinal detachment involving the periphery inferiorly without associated retinal
breaks [Figure 1a]. Fundus examination of the LE showed area of macular RPE atrophy and area of RPE changes with no retinal detachment or
other peripheral lesions [Figure 1b]. Fluorescein angiography (FA) revealed multifocal pinpoints, retinal neovascularization, and extensive
RPE changes in the RE [Figure 1c], and multifocal pinpoints in the LE [Figure 1d]. Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) showed dilation of
choroidal veins and multiple areas of choroidal vascular hyperpermeability in both eyes [Figures 1eâ€“h]. Optical coherence tomography (OCT)
showed serous retinal detachment (SRD), ERM, and a subretinal hyperreflective lesion in the RE corresponding the fibrotic lesion seen
clinically [Figure 1i]. B-scan ultrasonography of the RE confirmed the presence of retinal detachment without associated vitreous traction,
choroidal tumor, or infiltration. Ultrasonography results of the LE were unremarkable. Fundus photograph of the RE shows normal optic disc,
preretinal hemorrhage, subretinal fibrosis, RPE changes, and inferior retinal detachment Fundus photograph of the LE shows area of macular
RPE atrophy and RPE changes Late-phase fluorescein angiogram of the RE shows juxtapapillary retinal neovascularization, extensive RPE
changes and multifocal pinpoints. Late-phase fluorescein angiogram of the LE shows multiple pinpoints Mid-phase indocyanine green angiogram
of the RE shows dilatation of choroidal veins Mid-phase indocyanine green angiogram of the LE shows dilatation of choroidal veins Late-phase
indocyanine green angiogram of the RE shows multiple areas of choroidal vascular hyperpermeability Late-phase indocyanine green angiogram of
the LE shows multiple areas of choroidal vascular hyperpermeability OCT revealed SRD, ERM, and a subretinal hyperreflective lesion in the RE
A diagnosis of chronic CSCR exacerbated by corticosteroids and complicated by retinal neovascularization and subretinal fibrosis in the RE
was retained. Corticosteroids were gradually tapered and immunosuppressive therapy was stopped. As photodynamic therapy was not available in
our department, a single intravitreal injection of bevacizumab was performed in the RE. Three months later, BCVA remained unchanged (20/400)
in the RE and improved to 20/32 in the LE. Intravitreal and preretinal hemorrhage in the RE had resolved, and the retina had reattached.
Fluorescein and ICG angiographic features of active CSCR had resolved [Figure 2]. SRD had partially resolved in the RE on OCT. Late-phase
fluorescein angiogram 3 months later shows resolution of pinpoints in the RE Late-phase fluorescein angiogram 3 months later shows
resolution of pinpoints in the LE Atypical CSCR may be misdiagnosed as Vogt Koyanagi Harada disease, sympathetic ophthalmia, posterior
scleritis, multifocal choroiditis, serpiginous choroiditis, idiopathic posterior uveitis, or other uveitic entity that all usually require
corticosteroid treatment.1 The use of systemic corticosteroids in such cases is not only ineffective, but it usually exacerbates the
condition, leading to bilateral, severe, and chronic CSCR with multifocal RPE detachments or diffuse retinal pigment epitheliopathy. Unusual
findings can occur including acute bullous retinal detachment, subretinal fibrin, subretinal fibrosis, hard exudates, and even retinal
neovascularization.123 In our patient with CSCR exhibiting unusual and atypical findings, the use of multimodal imaging, including OCT, FA,
ICGA, and ultrasonography, provides us clues for the definitive diagnosis. These mainly included multiple pinpoint leakage on FA, multifocal
choroidal hyperpermeability on ICGA, dome-shaped pattern of SRD on OCT, and the absence of vitreoretinal traction or choroidal thickening or
infiltration associated with retinal detachment on ultrasonography. New imaging modalities including high-depth spectral domain OCT and auto
fluorescence show specific features that may help in differentiating atypical CSCR from inflammatory conditions.45 In patients with
corticosteroid-induced or worsened CSCR, discontinuation of corticosteroids should be the first management step. Many cases of CSCR actually
improved following discontinuation of corticosteroid therapy with resolution of SRD, decreasing or disappearing of visual symptoms and
improvement of VA.16 Patients with persistent SRD despite discontinuation of corticosteroids may benefit from laser photocoagulation to
active focal RPE leaks on FA, photodynamic therapy, transpupillary thermotherapy, acetalozamide, and intravitreal bevacizumab.167 In our
patient intravitreal bevacizumab helps in resolution of SRD and involution of preretinal neovascularization. However, anatomic improvement
was not associated with concomitant VA improvement due to residual changes including extensive RPE changes, subretinal fibrosis, and ERM. A
careful clinical examination and appropriate use and interpretation of multimodal imaging are mandatory to differentiate CSCR from any
chorioretinal inflammatory condition and to prevent severe and irreversible visual damage resulting from misdiagnosis and management
mistakes. Source of Support: This work has been supported by the Ministry of Higher Education and Research of Tunisia Conflict of Interest:
None declared.
