The application of systemic isotretinoin in the treatment of cutaneous photoaging has been well investigated. In addition, well-recognized
topical antiaging therapies such as superficial chemical peeling (CP) with α-hydroxy acids have been shown to be more helpful when combined
with low-dose oral isotretinoin. Even though the combination of systemic isotretinoin and medium to deep CP has been associated with serious
side effects such as delayed wound healing and enlarged incidence of scarring, to date superficial CP and concomitant systemic isotretinoin
have been considered safe. In this report, we present the case of a patient receiving low-dose oral isotretinoin therapy who developed
severe painful erythema and erosions that led to permanent hyperpigmentation and scarring of her face and neck after undergoing superficial
CP with glycolic acid. There is a potential risk of hyperpigmentation and scarring with the use of a combination of low-dose oral
isotretinoin and glycolic acid peeling. The benefit of systemic isotretinoin in the treatment of cutaneous photoaging has received
particular attention in the past decade or so . Furthermore, well-established topical antiaging therapies, such as superficial chemical
peeling (CP) with α-hydroxy acid, have been shown to be more beneficial when combined with low-dose oral isotretinoin . Although the
combination of systemic isotretinoin and medium to deep CP has been associated with severe adverse effects, including delayed wound healing
and increased incidence of scarring, to date superficial CP and concomitant systemic isotretinoin have been considered safe . In this
report, we present the case of a patient receiving low-dose oral isotretinoin therapy who developed severe, painful erythema and erosions
that led to permanent hyperpigmentation and scarring of her face and neck following superficial CP with glycolic acid. A 34-year-old woman
presented to our department with severe, painful erythema and hyperpigmentation of her face and neck (Figure 1). Her initial physical
examination revealed isolated erosions of her forehead (Figure 1B). She reported that a facial 70% glycolic acid peel had been performed
3 days prior to her examination at our clinic. According to her medical history, she had received repetitive treatments with 70% glycolic
acid without any discomfort or complications for the past several months. Prepeel preparations had been performed with 8% glycolic acid.
During the postpeel period, bland emollients as well as sunscreens had been applied. At the initial referral, persistent questioning
revealed a history of treatment with 10 mg of isotretinoin three times per week because of a coarse-pored skin for the preceding 10 weeks.
Systemic isotretinoin was discontinued 3 weeks prior to her last session of CP. It must be noted that the patient had initiated the
isotretinoin treatment on her own behalf without consulting her dermatologist. She had not used oral contraception, estrogens or other
photosensitizing agents. The patient stated that she had maintained strict avoidance of ultraviolet light exposure prior to her CP procedure
as well as in the postpeel period.Figure 1 Severe erythema and hyperpigmentation following chemical peel. (A) The patient had marked
erythema and hyperpigmentation 3 days after chemical peel treatment (70% glycolic acid) in combination with low-dose oral isotretinoin
(10 mg once daily). (B) Detail of the forehead showing isolated erosions. The arrow indicates a crusty exudate. (C) Marked erythema of the
neck. Severe erythema and hyperpigmentation following chemical peel. (A) The patient had marked erythema and hyperpigmentation 3 days after
chemical peel treatment (70% glycolic acid) in combination with low-dose oral isotretinoin (10 mg once daily). (B) Detail of the forehead
showing isolated erosions. The arrow indicates a crusty exudate. (C) Marked erythema of the neck. After her initial examination, a topical
treatment with fusidic acid in combination with methylprednisolone aceponate lotion twice per day was initiated. Subsequently, significant
reduction in exudation and improvement of erythema were observed (Figures 2A and 2C). However, late-onset adverse effects, including
postinflammatory hyperpigmentation and scarring, persisted even 2 months after chemical peel treatment (Figure 2B).Figure 2 Persistence of
long-term adverse effects 2 months post chemical peeling. (A) Persistent facial hyperpigmentation 2 months after initiation of therapy. (B)
Long-term adverse reaction, including scarring (indicated by arrow). (C) Nearly complete resolution of the hyperpigmentation on the neck
after 2 months of therapy. Persistence of long-term adverse effects 2 months post chemical peeling. (A) Persistent facial hyperpigmentation
2 months after initiation of therapy. (B) Long-term adverse reaction, including scarring (indicated by arrow). (C) Nearly complete
resolution of the hyperpigmentation on the neck after 2 months of therapy. Topical retinoids are largely used in the treatment, as well as
the prevention, of cutaneous photoaging, and their efficacy is well established . Moreover, the positive effect of systemic isotretinoin in
the treatment of cutaneous photoaging has been reported in recent years. In fact, it has been shown that oral isotretinoin improves the
appearance of the skin by reducing wrinkle depth as well as pigmented lesions . Furthermore, low-dose therapy with isotretinoin (10 to 20 mg
three times per week for 3 months) has been shown to induce a significant increase of collagen fibers and reduction of deposited elastic
material in the dermis . Glycolic acid peel is a minimally invasive cosmetic procedure commonly used for the treatment of acne, photoaging
and pigmentary disorders such as melasma. Careful patient selection, priming of the skin, standardization of peels, pre- and postpeel care
and a maintenance program are essential to achieving desirable cosmetic results. CP with glycolic acid has been associated with only minor,
transient side effects such as moderate pain, burning sensation or erythema . Furthermore, a recent study showed significant improvement in
wrinkles, skin elasticity and skin quality after glycolic or resorcinol CP and concomitant low-dose oral isotretinoin (10 to 20 mg per day,
three times per week), as compared to facial rejuvenation with CP alone . The exact mechanism of action of isotretinoin in the prevention or
treatment of photoaged skin is not completely understood. It is believed that isotretinoin improves the appearance of photoaged skin through
collagen synthesis, dermal vascularization increase, cell differentiation and extracellular matrix stabilization . Notably, isotretinoin has
been associated with increased incidence of delayed wound healing and scarring when combined with medium and deep chemical peels or
dermabrasion, whereas the combination of superficial chemical peels and isotretinoin therapy has been reported to be safe, causing
negligible or no adverse effects such as erythema during the few first days or transient, mild hyperpigmentation . The exact mechanism of
atypical reepithelization and scarring due to isotretinoin remains unclear. Some authors have discussed that oral retinoids may cause
disruption of the stratum corneum and thereby enhance the depth of penetration of the glycolic acid peel . Moreover, according to the
literature, exaggerated scarring under therapy with isotretinoin might be related to stimulation of angiogenesis or production of
collagenase inhibitors resulting in collagen accumulation . In this report, we describe the case of a patient who developed a severe adverse
reaction while receiving low-dose oral isotretinoin after undergoing superficial glycolic acid peel. Even though glycolic acid in
combination with low-dose isotretinoin has been reported to be well tolerated in the vast majority of cases, frequent postoperative visits
are necessary to detect the early onset of complications. There is a potential risk of hyperpigmentation and scarring with a combination of
low-dose oral isotretinoin and glycolic acid peeling. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Peter Arne
Gerber and Gabriela Kukova contributed equally. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions All authors drafted and helped to write the manuscript. PAG, GK and ED treated the patient and had the initial idea of writing
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank Kim and Thomas Speer for supporting our research.
