Cutaneous metastasis is an uncommon manifestation of visceral malignancy. It occurs late in the course of the disease but can be a sign of
an unknown neoplasm. A case of local cutaneous metastasis by contiguity with breast adenocarcinoma is reported. It presented as initial
manifestation and main complaint of a 68-year-old woman, with no family history and negative screening tests for the disease. Biopsies of
ulcers which do not heal, persistent hardened erythema and cutaneous nodules of unknown cause must be performed, since the evidence of
cutaneous metastasis can be of extreme importance for the diagnosis, staging and prognosis of an internal cancer. In this scenario, the
dermatologist plays a fundamental role and should be always attentive to this diagnostic possibility. Cutaneous metastasis is a relatively
uncommon manifestation of visceral malignancy.1 Most of the times it occurs late in the course of the disease, but it can be the sign of
presentation of an unknown neoplasm. It involves different dissemination ways (lymphatic, hematogenous, direct invasion of adjacent tissues
and iatrogenic implantation); it may be present in the configuration of a widely disseminated disease, or be the only sign of metastatic
involvement.2,3 A meta-analysis, which included studies of autopsies and retrospective studies, found a 5.3% global incidence of cutaneous
metastasis in visceral neoplasms.1 However, it is not clearly defined in the literature if the prognosis differs in patients with exclusive
cutaneous metastasis and in patients with visceral metastasis, with or without cutaneous involvement.3 Even though cutaneous metastases are
rare, breast cancer is common in women and its metastasis frequently involves the skin, with cutaneous involvement in about one fourth of
patients with the disease.1,4,5,6 Female patient, 68 years old, with onset of asymptomatic lesion in the intermammary region for about six
months. She denied other complaints. At the physical examination she presented an erythematous infiltrated plaque of irregular surface, with
central retraction, of hardened consistency, adhered to deep planes in the intermammary region (Figures 1 and 2). No other changes were
shown in the rest of the physical examination. Lesion in retracted hardened plaque in intermammary region Detail of intermammary lesion
evidencing erythema, infiltration and irregular surface She reported positive smoking history for 37 years. She denied comorbidities or use
of medications. Absence of mammary or lung cancer history in the family. Last preventative examination for cervical cancer and mammography
were normal, performed less than one year ago. Complete blood count and biochemistry laboratory exams, besides serum count of CA 15-3, CA
19-9, CA 125 as well as carcinoembryonic antigen were normal. Serology for HIV, viral hepatitides and syphilis were negative. Mammography
and breast ultrasound evidenced only benign alterations, with BI-RADS classification (Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System) II.
Radiography and CT SCAN of thorax did not evidence significant changes. Multi-slice CT scan of abdomen and pelvis showed only focal parietal
thickening of nonspecific aspect at the antrum/pylorus level. Thyroid and cervical region ultrasound images were normal. Histopathologic
examination of the cutaneous lesion revealed epidermis with no alterations. The dermis exhibited proliferation in blocks of atypical cells
in a solid setting, other times similar to glands, irregular, with moderate nuclear pleomorphism and intense desmoplasia, compatible with
poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma (Figures 3 and 4). Immunochemistry revealed diffuse positivity (+++) in 90% of the neoplastic cells for
estrogen receptors (ERs) and progesterone receptors (PRs), besides diffuse positivity for AE1/AE3, CK7 and mammoglobulin, focal positivity
for 34bE12 and negativity for CDX 2 and TTF-1, being this immunohistochemical profile compatible with cutaneous infiltration by primary
mammary adenocarcinoma (Figure 5). Histopathology of cutaneous lesion suggesting poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma At the greatest
magnification, HE showing blocks of atypical cells in a solid setting, at other times similar to glands, irregular, with moderate nuclear
pleomorphism and intense desmoplasia Immunohistochemist ry of cutaneous lesion showing diffuse positivity for estrogen receptors (ER),
progesterone receptors (PR), cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and Mammoglobulin (Mammo) Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) of breasts was performed, which
demonstrated a spiculated nodular lesion in the right breast, medially, at the level of the intermammary cleft, measuring around 32x30 mm,
determining adjacent cutaneous retraction and thickening, with signs of invasion of adjacent thoracic wall, classified as BI-RADS 5 (Figure
6). NMR of breasts, in T2, showing spiculated nodular lesion in the right breast. Contiguity of lesion with skin and invasion of subjacent
thoracic wall is observed She was referred to the Clinical Oncology Service for better clinical staging, prognosis, and therapeutic follow-
up. A new immunohistochemical study of the skin lesion was negative for c-erbB-2. Bone scintigraphy showed suggestive findings of secondary
bone implants secondary to the base neoplasia in several studied sites. It was decided to start the radiotherapeutic treatment and use of
tamoxifen 20mg/day. The patient is still being followed-up in conjunction with the Clinical Oncology Service. In females, the most frequent
primary site of cutaneous metastasis is, by far, the breast adenocarcinoma, mainly presenting with thorax involvement.1,4,5,7 The breast
cancer cutaneous metastasis originates from a complex interaction between the tumor and skin, and can represent the first manifestation of
the neoplasm.8 On the other hand, its detection can change the staging of the disease and, as a result, the prognosis and treatment of a
patient with an already diagnosed breast cancer.8 A case of local cutaneous metastasis by contiguity to a breast adenocarcinoma in a
68-year-old woman, with no family history and presenting negative screening tests for the disease is reported here. The primary tumor was
only revealed after a NMR of breasts. The case is even more relevant due to cutaneous metastasis being the initial sign and main complaint
regarding the unknown neoplasm. The carcinoma of breast has several distinct clinicopathological types of cutaneous involvement.6 Direct
invasion of skin by tumor is manifested mainly by ulceration or inflammation.9 The patient in the studied case presented with a hardened,
retracted and asymptomatic plaque lesion in the intermammary region. Histopathology and immunohistochemistry were essential for the
diagnosis. Histologically, the cutaneous metastasis of breast cancer must be distinguished from a numerous variety of other neoplasms.8 The
distinction between primary and metastatic adenocarcinomas of the skin is also important, due to the distinct clinical behavior of the two
entities. Regarding the finding about the cutaneous metastasis as the initial manifestation of the disease, it was verified that 6.3% of the
patients with breast cancer presented skin involvement at the time of the primary tumor diagnosis, and in 3.5% skin involvement was the sign
of the disease presentation.4 As for the prognosis, studies suggest differences in the prognosis of cutaneous metastases arising from
different internal tumors, with patients suffering from breast cancer having a relatively better prognosis in comparison with other primary
sites.3,5,10 A mean survival of 31 months after breast cancer diagnosis, with presence of cutaneous metastasis, was reported.5 Involvement
of the skin occurs in internal cancer with some regularity, but its presence at diagnosis is not frequent, and even less frequent as
representing the main complaint of the patient.4 However, surveillance must be maintained and biopsies of ulcers that do not heal, of
persistent hardened erythema and of cutaneous nodules of undetermined causes must be performed for early detection of this cutaneous
manifestation which, although uncommon, might be of extreme importance for the diagnosis, staging and prognosis of an internal cancer.4 In
this scenario, the dermatologist plays a fundamental role, and should always be prepared for this diagnostic possibility. Conflict of
Interests: none Financial Support: none How to cite this article: Siqueira VR, Frota AS, Maia IL, Queiroz HMC, Valença Júnior JT, Accioly
Filho JW. Cutaneous involvement as the initial presentation of metastatic breast adenocarcinoma: a case report. An Bras Dermatol.
2014;(6):960-3. Work performed at Hospital Universitário Walter Cantídio - Universidade Federal do Ceará (HUWC-UFC) - Fortaleza (CE),
Brazil.
