Sialolithiasis is the presence of calculus within the ductal system of a salivary gland. Among the diagnostic methods are inspection,
palpation, checking the amount of saliva secreted and the identification of a sialolith. The authors present the case of a 37-year-old
female patient with edema of the submandibular area and a bulging sublingual caruncle due to a calculus that obstructed the salivary gland
ostium. Oral Pathology, Maxillofacial and Stomatology are specialties that have as objective the prevention, diagnosis, prognosis and
treatment of mouth diseases, their adjacent structures and the face, as well as buccal manifestations of systemic illnesses.1 Sialolithiasis
is the presence of a calculus, known as sialolith, in the ductal system of a salivary gland. This my happen at any age but is more common in
young people and middle-aged adults, affecting approximately 1.2% of the population. It is related to the submandibular gland in 83%, to the
parotid gland in 10% and sublingual in 7% of cases. The main function of salivary glands is production and excretion of saliva, which plays
a lubricant, digestive and antibacterial role that may be compromised in this process.2 The main symptoms of the patient with salivary gland
calculi are decrease of saliva secretion, pain and dysphagia. The signs are increased volume of the glands involved, with or without
presence of local inflammatory and/or infectious process.2 During massage of the gland ("milking"), decreased salivary flow or purulent
exudate may be observed. The severity of symptoms depends on the degree of obstruction, as well as the calculus size and location.3,4
Clinical history and presentation are fundamental in the sialolithiasis diagnosis. Exams like radiography, computed tomography, magnetic
resonance, ultrasonography, sialoendoscopy and sialography may assist the doctor in the diagnosis and best treatment.2,3 Mucocele is a
clinical differential diagnosis and its treatment consists of electrocoagulation, surgical exeresis or marsupialization of the affected
gland, to prevent relapses.1 The differential diagnosis should also be done with obstructive sialoadenitis, epidemic parotiditis and
salivary gland tumors.5,6 The authors present the case of a female patient with increased volume of the submandibular region and tumefaction
of the area proximal to the lower lingual frenulum, resulting from a sialolith that obstructed the left submandibular salivary gland ostium.
A female patient, 37 years old, came to the dermatology outpatient clinic one hour after a meal, with increased volume of the left
submandibular region associated with the onset of a lesion described as a painless aphtha on the base of the tongue one day before. She
mentioned a sensation of having parotiditis, although she had had mumps in childhood. Upon examination, tumefaction was observed in the
proximal region of the lower lingual frenulum with presence of a yellowish spot, hard on palpation, at the center of the lesion (Figure 1).
Due to the topography and hardened consistency, it was hypothesized that a sialolith might be obstructing the left submandibular salivary
gland ostium. A massage of this salivary gland ("milking"), clamping and calculus extraction were carried (Figure 2). After the duct of the
salivary gland was unclogged, a great quantity of saliva was drained and symptoms relieved (Figure 3). Tumefaction of region proximal to
lower lingual frenulum with a sialolith obstructing the left submandibular salivary gland ostium (sublingual caruncle) Yellow - colored
sialolith measuring 4 x 2 mm Decrease of volume of lower sublingual frenulum base after the submandibular salivary gland ostium was cleared
The examination of lips, oral cavity and mucosa is part of the dermatological examination.7 There are alterations typical of the mucosae,
oral manifestations of dermatoses and mucosal manifestations of systemic disease. The histological and anatomical characteristics of the
oral mucosa impart to the lesions aspects oftentimes diverse from when the skin is affected and the dermatologist should be familiarized
with their presentation.1,7 Sialoliths are calcified structures that develop in the interior of the ductal or acini system of salivary
glands, blocking or limiting saliva flow. This pathology corresponds to around 30% of salivary alterations and is also the most common cause
of obstruction of these glands.1,8 The most frequently affected location is the ductal system of the submandibular gland, with 80 to 90% of
cases. The long, tortuous and ascending pathway of the submandibular duct as well as the thick mucosal secretion are described as
accountable factors for greater tendency to calculi formation in these glands, which may also be aggravated by tobacco use.1,5 In general,
smaller sialoliths located in the gland duct deserve a conservative approach, by means of salivary stimulation, duct manipulation and
catheterism.9 Sialolithiasis recurrence seems to be related to the individual susceptibility to these concrescences formation.2 The authors
emphasize the importance of attention to this diagnosis by the dermatologist, since the oral cavity examination should be a routine in
specialty clinical care. The obstruction of the salivary gland caused by a sialolith may result in increased volume of the parotid,
sublingual or submandibular region, in accordance with the topography of the affected gland. In the studied case, although it was not
photographed, there was increased volume of the left submandibular region, a fact that, associated with the presence of a calculus
obstructing the left submandibular salivary gland ostium, guided the correct diagnosis. The inclusion of sialolithiasis among the
differential diagnosis for tumefactions of sublingual and submandibular regions should be remembered in everyday activities of outpatient
clinics, since the clinical diagnosis may not be so evident as in this case, making it necessary to request imaging exam for diagnostic
clarification. Conflict of Interests: None Financial Support: None How to cite this article: Bernardes Filho F, Martins G, Alves AO, Costa
JRV, Azulay DR, Azulay-Abulafia L. Rigid swelling of sublingual caruncle area due to the salivary gland duct obstruction by a sialolith. An
Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(6):977-9. Work carried out at the Instituto de Dermatologia Professor Rubem David Azulay, Santa Casa da Miseric√≥rdia
do Rio de Janeiro (IDPRDA-SCMRJ) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
