It has been demonstrated that glucose transporter (GLUT1) deficiency in a mouse model causes a diminished cerebral lipid synthesis. This
deficient lipid biosynthesis could contribute to secondary CoQ deficiency. We report here, for the first time an association between GLUT1
and coenzyme Q10 deficiency in a pediatric patient. We report a 15 year-old girl with truncal ataxia, nystagmus, dysarthria and myoclonic
epilepsy as the main clinical features. Blood lactate and alanine values were increased, and coenzyme Q10 was deficient both in muscle and
fibroblasts. Coenzyme Q10 supplementation was initiated, improving ataxia and nystagmus. Since dysarthria and myoclonic epilepsy persisted,
a lumbar puncture was performed at 12 years of age disclosing diminished cerebrospinal glucose concentrations. Diagnosis of GLUT1 deficiency
was confirmed by the presence of a de novo heterozygous variant (c.18+2T>G) in the SLC2A1 gene. No mutations were found in coenzyme Q10
biosynthesis related genes. A ketogenic diet was initiated with an excellent clinical outcome. Functional studies in fibroblasts supported
the potential pathogenicity of coenzyme Q10 deficiency in GLUT1 mutant cells when compared with controls. Our results suggest that coenzyme
Q10 deficiency might be a new factor in the pathogenesis of G1D, although this deficiency needs to be confirmed in a larger group of G1D
patients as well as in animal models. Although ketogenic diet seems to correct the clinical consequences of CoQ deficiency, adjuvant
treatment with CoQ could be trialled in this condition if our findings are confirmed in further G1D patients. GLUT1 deficiency syndrome
(G1D) most often causes infantile-onset refractory epilepsy, cognitive impairment and motor abnormalities (ataxia, dystonia, chorea or
dyskinesia) . The main pathophysiological mechanism of the disease is associated with impaired glucose transport across the blood brain
barrier and through astrocyte cell membranes that are haploinsufficient in the GLUT1 glucose carrier encoded by the SLC2A1 gene . However it
is unclear how decreased glucose flux leads to the manifestations of the disorder. G1D is a partially treatable condition with ketogenic
diet (KD), which can replace glucose for acetyl-CoA generation . Energy failure has been proven in G1D astrocytes, while tricarboxilyc acid
abundance in the brain of G1D mouse model is normal. These findings support the complementary or alternative view that additional mechanisms
participate in disease pathogenesis, placing new emphasis on G1D as a glial disease . This contention is highlighted by the preliminary
therapeutic efficacy of triheptanoin, a dietary supplement with the potential to stimulate cerebral anabolism and energy delivery . Coenzyme
Q10 (CoQ) is a lipidic electron carrier in the mitochondrial respiratory chain (MRC). One of the essential substrates for CoQ generation is
acetyl-CoA . Mutations in genes involved in the CoQ biosynthesis pathway are associated with different clinical phenotypes, being cerebellar
ataxia the most common one . However, “secondary” CoQ deficiency is also characteristic of other diseases, since CoQ biosynthesis involves
an intricate, broad set of reactions that may be potentially impacted by “primary” disturbance of several biochemical processes . Our aim is
to describe, for the first time a relevant association between G1D and CoQ deficiency. Clinical, biochemical, molecular and therapeutic
observations constitute the basis of this association. The proband is a 15-years old girl with an unremarkable family history. At 18 months
old she manifested no ambulation, and by 3 years old she had developed ataxia and epilepsy with normal neuroimaging. At 5 years old clinical
examination showed axial hypotonia, truncal ataxia, limb dysmetria and hyperreflexia. Paroxysmal nystagmus, saccadization of visual pursuit
and dysarthria were observed. The patient also exhibited intellectual disability (IQ = 54). Biochemical analyses in blood disclosed elevated
lactate in 3 separate occasions and elevated alanine in 12 determinations (Table 1). Muscle and skin biopsies were analyzed at 8 years of
age to search for mitochondrial disorders. CoQ deficiency was identified both in muscle and fibroblasts (see Results). Because of this
finding, CoQ supplementation (orally administered at 30 mg/Kg/day) was initiated. Ataxia improved dramatically after 6 months of therapy,
and, upon reassessment after 4 years of CoQ treatment, ambulation remained essentially normal, with a mild residual reduction in velocity.
Her nystagmus had also disappeared and her visual pursuit had normalized . However, mild dysmetria, dysarthria, myoclonic epilepsy and
intellectual disability (perhaps refractory to CoQ), were present. During CoQ therapy, concomitant treatment with valproate and ethosuximide
was given to control myoclonic epilepsy. No noticeable side-effects were observed when antiepileptic doses were raised to maintain
therapeutic levels along the evolution of the disease due to the patient increasing weight. In order to further investigate these
manifestations, a lumbar puncture was performed at 12 years of age, revealing diminished cerebrospinal glucose concentrations (Table 1).
Plasma glucose concentration was normal. Diagnosis of GLUT1 deficiency (G1D) was established and a ketogenic diet (4:1 ratio, containing
medium chain triglyceride oil) was initiated (CoQ treatment was then discontinued).Table 1 Main biochemical findings in a case with GLUT1
and CoQ deficiency Patient Reference values Blood Lactate1.8-2.6 (2.2)0.5-1.7 mmol/LAlanine300-691 (560)150-270 μmol/LCholesterol4.0< 5.2
mmol/LCoQ (baseline)0.330.45-1.1 μmol/LCoQ (after treatment) 3.9-7.8 (5.5)0.45-1.1 μmol/L Cerebrospinal fluid Glucose1.92.2-3.4
mmol/LLactate1.071.1-2.2 mmol/L Muscle biopsy CoQ content76115-450 nmol/g proteinComplex I + III*149107-560 mU/citrate synthase UComplex II
+ III*8275-149 mU/citrate synthase U Fibroblast CoQ content (incubated with glucose)78100-150 nmol/g proteinCoQ content (incubated with
galactose)123100-150 nmol/g proteinPatient results from blood are expressed as range (median).*Complex I + III: NADH:cytochrome C
oxidoreductase. Complex II + III: succinate:cytochrome C oxidoreductase. Main biochemical findings in a case with GLUT1 and CoQ deficiency
Patient results from blood are expressed as range (median). *Complex I + III: NADH:cytochrome C oxidoreductase. Complex II + III:
succinate:cytochrome C oxidoreductase. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents. The study was approved by the Ethical
Committee of our Hospital. Muscle and skin biopsies were collected, stored and cultured following previously reported procedures . CoQ
content was analyzed by HPLC with electrochemical detection, and MRC enzyme activities by spectrophotometry as reported . Functional studies
in fibroblasts: Human Dermal Fibroblasts (HDF) were grown in Dulbecco’s modified essential medium as previously reported . Cells were grown
with 1 g/L of either glucose or galactose from plating and throughout the entire duration of the observation period. Mycoplasma testing was
negative. Also normal and G1D fibroblasts were supplemented with 30 μmol/L CoQ. Growth rate was analyzed as indicated . Molecular analysis
of genomic DNA (gDNA) isolated from blood included Sanger sequencing of 12 genes involved in CoQ biosynthesis (ADCK3, ADCK4, PDSS1, PDSS2,
COQ2, COQ3, COQ4, COQ5, COQ6, COQ9, CQ10A and COQ10B), in addition to the SLC2A1 gene, which encodes for GLUT1 transporter. In silico
mutation analysis was done by the Mutation Taster software. Total RNA was isolated from control and patient’s fibroblast cultures with
RNeasy Fibrous Tissue mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). 1 μg of RNA was retro-transcribed with GoTaq® Probe 2-Step for RT-PCR (Promega,
Wisconsin, USA) to obtain cDNA. SLC2A1 mRNA transcripts were studied on cDNA through PCR amplification with specific primers located in exon
1 (available on request), followed by direct sequencing. Muscle and fibroblasts CoQ content was decreased (Table 1). Functional studies of
cell viability in culture with either glucose or galactose are illustrated in Figure 1A. The GLUT1 mutant cell line cultured in the presence
of glucose displayed significantly decreased growth rate when compared with cultures grown in medium with galactose. Furthermore, the
control cell line growth rate was significantly greater than those observed for the GLUT1 mutant line when cultured in glucose-containing
medium. CoQ content was increased in GLUT1 mutant fibroblasts after 10 days growth in galactose (Table 1) while it remained unchanged in
fibroblasts incubated in glucose media for the same length of time. CoQ supplementation of patient’s fibroblasts for one week induced an
increase of 37% cell growth rate while the growth rate of control cells with the same treatment only increased by 15% (Figure 1B).Figure 1
Growth of GLUT1 fibroblast mutant cell line compared with control Human Dermal Fibroblasts (HDF). A). Both cells were seeded (2.000
cells/plate) and incubated with either glucose or galactose. B). Both cells were seeded (50.000 cells/plate) and grown for one week with or
without 30 μM CoQ. Growth of GLUT1 fibroblast mutant cell line compared with control Human Dermal Fibroblasts (HDF). A). Both cells were
seeded (2.000 cells/plate) and incubated with either glucose or galactose. B). Both cells were seeded (50.000 cells/plate) and grown for one
week with or without 30 μM CoQ. Sequencing of CoQ-related genes disclosed no known pathogenic variants. G1D was established after the
detection of a new heterozygous variant (c.18+2T>G) in the first intron of the SLC2A1 gene (Figure 2A). The variant was not present in 200
studied alleles of Spanish ancestry. Conservation of the nucleotide position was high according to Phylophen scores and splice prediction
software indicated a truncation of the splice site donor (data not shown). The cDNA region encompassing the genomic DNA mutation was
amplified to detect a possible altered mRNA transcript in the patient. The PCR product did not show alternate amplification bands other than
the control one (Figure 2B). Patient’s sample direct sequencing showed only the wild type transcript, lacking any hint of an aberrant
transcript consequence of the intronic mutation identified in gDNA. Concurrently, patient carried a heterozygous SNP (rs1385129) located in
exon 2, initially identified in gDNA (both alleles (T/C) were represented). We analyzed this SNP on the cDNA sequence (Figure 2C), and only
one allele was present (C), pointing out that half doses of wild type mRNA was not present. Since the variant is located in the splice donor
site and we only detected one allele of rs1385129 in the patient’s cDNA, downstream of c.18+2T>G, we hypothesize that splicing of the SLC2A1
mRNA could be altered.Figure 2 Genetic analysis. A- Electropherogram containing genomic SLC2A1 DNA mutation in a case with GLUT1 deficiency.
B- 3% agarose gel showing a 219 base pairs PCR amplification of SLC2A1 cDNA region enconmpassing the spling mutation. C (control) and P
(patient). C- Patient’s electropherograms showing a synonymous polymorphism (rs1385129, see dbSNP database) in heterozygous state in gDNA
and in hemizygous state in cDNA. Genetic analysis. A- Electropherogram containing genomic SLC2A1 DNA mutation in a case with GLUT1
deficiency. B- 3% agarose gel showing a 219 base pairs PCR amplification of SLC2A1 cDNA region enconmpassing the spling mutation. C
(control) and P (patient). C- Patient’s electropherograms showing a synonymous polymorphism (rs1385129, see dbSNP database) in heterozygous
state in gDNA and in hemizygous state in cDNA. After initiation of a ketogenic diet at 14 years old, dysarthria was controlled. At this age
and prior to KD, mioclonic jerks with absences were present and EEG disclosed slow basal rhythm (alpha: 7–8 Hz) and generalized spike-wave
discharges at 2.5 HZ, suggesting atypical absences. At that moment, patient was treated with valproate and ethosuximide. Epilepsy was
totally controlled after 3 months of KD, and EEG disclosed normal results, except for slow basal activity. Antiepileptic treatment was
progressively removed after 7 months of KD. At 15 years EEG showed a normal basal rhythm without paroxysms. Ataxia did not appear during KD
therapy. Plasma CoQ levels were normal after initiation of a KD (0.58 μmol/L; reference values shown in Table 1). We present for the first
time, the identification of CoQ deficiency in a patient with G1D. Our clinical and biochemical observations warrant further discussion
because of their potential pathophysiological and therapeutic implications. Concerning the pathophysiology of G1D, Marin-Valencia et al. ,
demonstrated in a G1D mouse model a diminished cerebral lipid synthesis. Importantly, this deficient lipid biosynthesis could contribute to
secondary CoQ deficiency. The muscle CoQ deficiency detected in our patient was mild, and this would explain that MRC enzyme activities were
low-normal. However, we interrogated mitochondrial function due to the conjunction of the clinical findings and the consistent
hyperlactacidemia and hyperalaninemia observed in our case. The experiments conducted in fibroblasts confirmed the CoQ deficiency, in
agreement with its potential role in the pathophysiology of G1D . Especially relevant were the differences of growth observed between
fibroblasts cultured with either glucose or galactose and the recovery of CoQ in galactose growth. Glucose transport was impaired in the
mutant line, but not galactose influx, which is able in turn to promote CoQ biosynthesis . The human genome encodes for fourteen GLUT
proteins that cooperate to transport different substrates other than glucose . The normalization of growth of G1D cells after the incubation
of fibroblasts with CoQ suggests the potential benefit of this coadjuvant therapy for G1D patients, which deserves further investigations.
Although the mutation detected in SLC2A1 is compatible with the common G1D phenotype, we cannot rule out the existence of mutations in other
genes involved in CoQ metabolism given the fact that the CoQ metabolic pathway is not well understood. The observed clinical improvement
after CoQ supplementation in our patient supports these statements given that the most severe cerebellar manifestations proved amenable to
CoQ therapy . The simplest interpretation of our clinical observations is provided by the notion that the cerebellum is an extremely
sensitive organ to oxidative stress and energy metabolic disorders, consistent with the near-universal demonstration of cerebellar
manifestations even in cases of mild CoQ deficiency . Once a ketogenic diet was initiated, the clinical outcome was excellent, with a
complete cessation of epilepsy and other signs. We did not simultaneously treat the patient with CoQ and the ketogenic diet in order to
separately elucidate the individual effects of both interventions. It is possible that a ketogenic diet causes a recovery in lipid
biosynthesis that favorably impacts CoQ abundance. CoQ deficiency might be a new factor in the pathogenesis of G1D, although CoQ deficiency
needs to be confirmed in a larger group of G1D patients as well as in animal models. Although KD seems to correct the clinical consequences
of CoQ deficiency, adjuvant treatment with CoQ could be trialled in this condition if our findings are confirmed in further G1D patients.
Furthermore, since molecular basis of CoQ deficiency syndrome remains elusive in most cases, the investigation of GLUT1 deficiency is
advisable in cases presenting ataxia and epilepsy. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents for publication of this
case report and any accompanying images. A copy of written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. GLUT1
deficiency syndrome Coenzyme Q10 Mitochondrial respiratory chain Genomic DNA Human Dermal Fibroblasts Ketogenic diet Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MP, PN and RA participated in the design of the study. DY, JA,
CE, PB, MR, MVC, AG, RM, CJM and AO provided all of the biochemical and molecular data. CJ did the hysthopathological investigations. MOC,
MP, EC and AA were in charge of the neurological explorations and therapeutic interventions. All authors helped in drafting the manuscript
and read and approved the final manuscript. This research was funded by grants PI11/02350, PI11/00078, PI1400028 and PI14-01962 from the
Spanish Ministry of Health (Fondo de Investigación Sanitaria, Instituto de Salud Carlos III). R. Artuch is supported by “programa de
intensificación de la actividad investigadora” and D. Yubero by “ayudas predoctorales de formación en investigación” (Ref: 12/00580) from
FIS.
