Veillonella is a nonfermentative, strictly anaerobic, Gram-negative coccus that forms part of the human gastrointestinal tract, mouth and
vaginal flora. Like other anaerobic infection, Veillonella species usually are involved in polymicrobial processes, which make it difficult
to determine their pathogenic role. Isolation of a clinically significant Veillonella species is rare and V. parvula is the most common one
reported to cause infection in humans. The most frequently reported infection caused by V. parvula is osteomyelitis, almost always in
association with bacteremia. Here, we describe a rare case of nonvertebral osteomyelitis and septicemia caused by Veillonella species in a
49-year-old Saudi man with diabetes. Initial treatment with ciprofloxacin was associated with treatment failure and poor response.
Identification of the organism was essential for the selection of appropriate treatment. There have been only seven previous reports of
Veillonella vertebral osteomyelitis and one report of V. parvula foot osteomyelitis with sepsis in the literature. This is the second case
of Veillonella nonvertebral osteomyelitis associated with septicemia reported to date. Veillonella species should be considered a true
pathogen in diabetic patients with osteomyelitis and those with underlying immune suppression, particularly if the organism is isolated from
blood. The isolation of those obligate anaerobes from blood may signal the presence of severe underlying disease and the probable need for
timely surgical intervention. Veillonella is a nonfermentative, small, nonmotile, strictly anaerobic, Gram-negative cocci that form part of
the normal flora of the oral, respiratory, intestinal, and female genital tracts . They are usually recovered as part of a polymicrobial
infection and they are often regarded as a contaminant. However, they have been isolated in pure culture from various sterile body sites
such as sinuses, lungs, liver, central nervous system, heart, and bone. Veillonella parvula is the most common clinically significant
species and is infrequently grow from blood cultures. We report here a case of Veillonella species bacteremia associated with osteomyelitis
in which pure Veillonella species was isolated from blood culture. This is the second reported case of Veillonella nonvertebral
osteomyelitis, which illustrates the pathogenic potential of this organism in causing invasive infection in diabetic patients. A 49-year-old
Saudi man, a known case of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM), hypertension and ischemic heart disease, presented to the emergency
department with a three-day history of fever, chills and ankle pain after trauma to his left foot. He reported a nonhealing ulcer on his
left heel following a hot surface injury 20 days prior to his presentation. On examination, our patient looked ill and septic, with minimal
ambulation. His temperature was 38.9°C and his blood pressure and pulse were 140/90mmHg and 108 beats/minutes respectively. A lower limb
examination revealed bilateral decrease of sensation and a foot ulcer on his left heel. Careful examination of his left foot showed a 7×5cm
deep ulcer on the lateral side that looked badly infected with change of skin color and profuse pus discharge. Our patient was seen by the
orthopedic surgeon and an urgent extensive wound debridement involving the bone was undertaken. Blood, pus and bone tissue specimens were
collected and sent to the microbiology laboratory for culture and sensitivity testing. A laboratory examination showed a white cell count
(WBC) of 29×109g/L with 90% neutrophils, hemoglobin of 6.9g/L, and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 97mm/h. His serum creatinine
was 123umol/L, and urea mmol/L 8.9. His liver function test results were within normal limits except for serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP),
which was raised (785IU/L). A left foot X-ray revealed soft tissue swelling, gas formation and fracture of the calcaneus bone. A left foot
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed a calcaneus fracture with high suspicion of calcaneus anterior fragment osteomyelitis (Figure
1). An MRI scan of his right foot revealed mild neuropathic arthropathy (Charcot joint) with no evidence of osteomyelitis. Our patient was
started empirically on intravenous ciprofloxacin 400mg twice daily, and intravenous clindamycin 600mg eight hourly. During the first three
days after starting treatment, our patient showed no clinical improvement and he continued to run a low-grade fever. A pus culture grew
Escherichia coli sensitive to ciprofloxacin, imipenem, meropenem, gentamicin and Enterococcus avium sensitive to ampicillin. A bone and
tissue biopsy grew Morganella morganii sensitive to gentamicin, imipenem and resistant to ciprofloxacin, ampicillin, amoxicillin-clavulanic
acid, piperacillin/tazobactam and cotrimoxazole. No growth occurred on the anaerobic plates despite prolonged incubation. Based on culture
results, the initial antibiotics were suspended and our patient was started on imipenem 500mg intravenously (IV) six hourly, vancomycin 1g
IV 12 hourly, and colistin 2 million units IV eight hourly. The blood culture obtained before treatment initiation, which was inoculated in
an anaerobic bottle (Bactec Lytic/10, Anaerobic/F, Beckton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) and processed by an automated blood culture
system (Bactec FX, Beckton Dickinson), grew very scanty Gram-negative cocci within 18 hours shown on Gram stain. The blood then was
subcultured on Trypticase soy agar with sheep blood (BBL Microbiology Systems, Cockeysville, MD, USA) and incubated at 35°C in 5% CO2, in an
anaerobic GasPak™ jar (BBL Microbiology Systems). After 48 hours of anaerobic incubation, the blood agar grew slow-growing tiny colonies
(Figure 2) that showed Gram-negative cocci on Gram stain (Figure 3). The organism was identified by the Vitek 2 automated system
(bioMérieux, Marcy-l'Étoile, France), as Veillonella species with a 99% probability rate. It was sensitive to imipenem (1.5μg/ml),
clindamycin (0.047μg/ml), ceftriaxone (8μg/ml) and colistin, and resistant to penicillin (>32μg/ml), vancomycin, erythromycin and
metronidazole. Further identification to species level and genotyping was unable to be performed, as the subcultured isolates failed to grow
and the significant time delay before attempting to reisolate the organisms from the blood culture bottle rendered them nonviable. Over the
subsequent five days, our patient’s condition worsened with a high temperature (38.9°C), rigors, a high WBC and ESR count. The wound was
reevaluated by the surgical team and a decision of above-knee amputation was taken. Colistin and vancomycin were discontinued and imipenem
was continued for four weeks. On follow-up, our patient showed gradual improvement of his condition and was discharged. Left foot magnetic
resonance imaging. (A) A left foot MRI scan revealed a fracture in the calcaneus. (B) The calcaneus bone is separated into two segments ((A)
and (P)) with evidence of anterior segment osteomyelitis and a deep, infected ulcer (arrows). Blood agar plate after 48 hours of anaerobic
incubation showing tiny colonies of Veillonella organism. Gram stain from anaerobic culture plate showing small Gram-negative cocci.
Veillonella species are rare causes of serious infections such as meningitis , endocarditis , obstructive pneumonitis , prosthetic joint
infection , and bacteremia . Bacteremia has been reported almost always in association with an underlying infection such as osteomyelitis.
There have been seven previous reports of vertebral osteomyelitis and one report of foot cellulitis and osteomyelitis in a middle-aged woman
associated with sepsis caused by V. parvula (Table 1). Our report is considered to be the second report of Veillonella nonvertebral
osteomyelitis associated with bacteremia. Borchardt reported the first case of nonvertebral osteomyelitis in which a 54-year-old Indian
diabetic woman developed foot cellulitis and toe osteomyelitis after attempting to shave a callus on her right foot two months before
presentation. The patient recovered completely after excision of the phalanx and metatarsal bones along with four weeks of intravenous
penicillin treatment. V parvula was isolated from the excised tissue and the blood culture. In five of the previously reported clinical
infections, the patients were previously healthy and the portal of entry was not identified. Isner-Horobeti reported on a 27-year-old man
with unknown risk factors for infection, who presented with an L4 to L5 spondylodiscitis. The patient was cured after a prolonged course (11
weeks) of intravenous followed by oral penicillin. In another report by Bongaerts V. parvula was isolated from the spine (T12 to L1) of a
previously healthy 74-year-old man who was treated with six weeks of intravenous penicillin. Similar cases were reported by Hidalgo and
Kishen et al. of Veillonella spondylodiscitis in older patients without any risk factors. The outcome of the patients was favorable after
antibiotic treatment alone or combined with surgical management. On the other hand, colonoscopy was considered by Marriott as a possible
source of entry of V. parvula causing bacteremia and lumbar discitis in a 55-year-old man who had undergone small intestinal and rectal
biopsies eight weeks prior to presentation. In another report by Barnhart , postoperative Veillonella osteomyelitis of the cervical spine
was reported from a 31-year-old man who had suffered a cervical fracture at the level of the fourth and fifth cervical vertebrae two months
before presentation. The possible source of entry of the organism was thought to be the esophageal perforation that had occurred during
surgery. Veillonella was isolated repeatedly from a retropharyngeal soft tissue abscess, which was drained followed by parenteral penicillin
administration for six weeks. The best method for identification of Veillonella strains at the species level requires direct sequencing of
the 16S rRNA gene . Conventional phenotypic and biochemical testing does not provide adequate discrimination between species. The pathogenic
role of these anaerobes has not been established. However, previously published reports demonstrated their role as a true pathogen
associated with fatal overwhelming septicemia . In our case, in which Veillonella species was isolated in pure culture from blood in a
patient with signs of severe diabetic wound infection illustrates the pathogenic role of this microorganism. The strictly anaerobic organism
failed to grow from the wound probably due to improper sample collection and transport supportive of anaerobic culture. In addition, the
presence of other rapidly growing aerobic organisms as part of the polymicrobial infection might interfere with their recovery from wound
infection. Veillonella is usually vancomycin, tetracycline, aminoglycosides, and ciprofloxacin resistant and infection typically responds
well to therapy with penicillin. Other antimicrobial agents to which the organism is usually susceptible in vitro include cephalosporins,
clindamycin, metronidazole, and chloramphenicol. There are no clear treatment recommendations in the literature due to the scarce number of
reports on Veillonella as a pathogen associated with invasive infection. However, the previous few reports showed good response to
antibiotics such as penicillin, cephalosporins, chloramphenicol, clindamycin and metronidazole . Metronidazole was suggested by Warner et
al. as an effective drug for the management of serious infections like bacteremia, brain abscess, and meningitis. The isolate from our case
showed unusual high minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) to penicillin (>32μg/ml). However, in a recent study Veillonella species isolated
from the oral cavities of humans demonstrated a high level of resistance to penicillin G (MIC, 2μg/ml) and reduced susceptibility to
ampicillin or amoxicillin. Reports on the management of infections caused by Veillonella isolates demonstrating high MIC to penicillin is
lacking due to limited published studies on the susceptibility of Veillonella species to different antimicrobial agents, particularly
penicillin, and their clinical effectiveness. Previously reported cases of osteomyelitis caused by Veillonella NR, not reported; US,
unspecified; M, male; F, female. Veillonella species should be considered a true pathogen in diabetic patients with osteomyelitis and those
with underlying immune suppression, particularly if the organism is isolated from blood. The isolation of those obligate anaerobes from
blood may signal the presence of severe underlying disease and the probable need for timely surgical intervention. Written informed consent
was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available
for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. ALP: alkaline phosphatase; ESR: erythrocyte sedimentation rate; IDDM: insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus; IV: intravenous; MIC: minimum inhibitory concentration; MRI: magnetic resonance imaging; NR: not reported; US:
unspecified; USA: United States of America; WBC: white cell count. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. FEA and MMA
were involved in collecting the data and writing and critically reviewing the manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final
manuscript. The authors would like to thank the medical report department and the library personal for their help in providing access to get
information related our case.
