The cosmopolitan beetles of the Paederus genus (potós) cause a severe dermatitis when the insect is crushed against the skin of exposed
areas (the cervical region is the most affected). Toxins (pederin and others) from the hemolymph of the insect cause plaques and/or bizarre,
linear lesions with erythema, edema, blisters, pustules, crusts and exulcerations. There may be a burning sensation and severe
conjunctivitis. Lesions disappear after 10 days and may leave hyperchromic macules. Treatment is made with topical corticosteroids and
intensive washing. Poisonous animals can provoke envenomations humans by passive release of toxins. Some beetles (Coleoptera) may produce
and/or store vesicant toxins, such as the genera Epicauta, Lytta (Spanish fly) and Paederus.1 The Paederus beetles or "potós" cause a severe
dermatitis, especially in warm climate such as the Midwest and Northeast Brazil (Figure 1).2,3 These insects are cosmopolitan and were first
associated with vesicular dermatitis by Pirajá da Silva in Brazil.4 The animal is crushed against the skin of exposed areas (the cervical
region is the most affected) and toxins (such as pederin and others), which are present in the hemolymph of the insect, cause plaques and/or
linear lesions with erythema, edema, blisters, pustules, crusts and exulcerations. There may be a burning sensation and severe
conjunctivitis. Distribution is bizarre. Lesions disappear after about 10 days and may leave hyperchromic macules. In skin folds, the "sign
of the kiss" can occur in an area of healthy skin juxtaposed to damaged skin. Vesicant lesions are reproduced due the contact with the
toxins (Figure 2). Paederus sp., the "potó". This beetle is the most common vesicant beetle around the world Vesicant lesions in an area of
healthy skin juxtaposed to damaged skin, which reproduces the lesions The "potó" dermatitis can be confused with herpes simplex, varicella-
zoster, contact dermatitis or phytophotodermatitis.1 Dermatologists should suspect the dermatitis in individuals with vesicles or pustules,
who were in hot areas near lampposts, as in this case, in which a young woman slapped her arm as she "felt an insect" crawling on it. The
treatment comprises washing with boric water, topical corticosteroids and antibiotics if bacterial infection is present.1 In severe cases
with multiple contacts, systemic corticosteroid therapy is indicated.1 Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None How to cite this
article: Haddad Jr V. "Sign of the kiss" in dermatitis caused by vesicant beetles (Paederus sp. or "potós"). An Bras Dermatol.
2014;89(6):996-7. Study conducted at the Botucatu Medical School, Sao Paulo State University Julio de Mesquita Filho (FMB-Unesp), Botucatu
(SP), Brazil.
