Castleman’s disease (CD) is a relatively rare disorder characterized by the benign proliferation of lymphoid tissue. The combination of an
occurrence of retroperitoneal pararenal CD with myasthenia gravis (MG) is extremely rare. The patient was admitted to our hospital for
investigation of a retroperitoneal pararenal tumor which had been coincidentally diagnosed at a local hospital where he was admitted because
of MG. The patient subsequently underwent an exploratory laparotomy and suffered from postoperative myasthenic crisis. Pathological
examination revealed a left retroperitoneal mass of CD (hyaline vascular type). There was no recurrence of disease found after 7 months. CD
with MG is a rare condition. Postoperative myasthenic crisis is a severe complication. The possibility of its occurrence must be in
physicians’ minds and the risk of postoperative myasthenic crisis must be carefully considered when evaluating MG patients undergoing
surgery. Castleman’s disease (CD) was first described in 1956 by Benjamin Castleman, who identified a series of patients with solitary
hyperplastic mediastinal lymph nodes containing small, hyalinized follicles and marked interfollicular vascular proliferation . The disease
is predominantly found in the mediastinum. Only 2% of CD cases have been located in the pararenal and retroperitoneal area . The combination
of an occurrence of retroperitoneal pararenal CD with myasthenia gravis (MG) is extremely rare. We report herein a rare case of CD in the
pararenal retroperitoneum associated with MG of a 29-year-old man, who suffered from postoperative myasthenic crisis. A 29-year-old man was
admitted to our hospital on February 19th, 2014, for investigation of a retroperitoneal pararenal tumor. The tumor had been coincidentally
diagnosed at a local hospital when he was admitted because of MG with a clinical manifestation of increasing upper and lower limb fatigue
over 2 months. He was treated with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (pyridostigmine at a dose of 3 × 30 mg) at the local hospital and
clinical remission was achieved. A mediastinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of local hospital did not show any evidence for thymoma. On
admission, physical examination did not reveal any aberrations. Ultrasonography (US) demonstrated a low echogenic mass measuring about of
5.4 × 5.2 cm in size (Figure 1A). Unenhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of abdomen presented a well-encapsulated mass of homogeneous
isodensity localized in the retroperitoneum (Figure 1B). CT arteriograms showed that the mass received its blood supply from abdominal
aortic (Figure 1C). T1WI of MRI showed a homogeneous low signal, while T2WI and DWI demonstrated a slightly higher signal and the center of
the mass displayed patchy low signal (Figure 1D). Electromyography exhibited that routine ulnar and median motor and sensory nerve
conduction studies were normal, with no evidence for peripheral neuropathy; repetitive stimulation was positive, which supported a diagnosis
of MG.Figure 1 Unicentric hyaline-vascular Castleman’s disease in a 29-year-old man. (A) Ultrasonography demonstrated a low echogenic mass
5.4 × 5.2 cm in size (arrow) and there was no significant relationship with the left kidney. (B) Unenhanced CT of abdomen showed a well
circumscribed, oval retroperitoneal pararenal mass (arrow) with homogeneous density. (C) Arteriograms showed arterial feeding to the mass
from the abdominal aortic. (D) T2WI showed a slightly higher signal and the center of the mass displayed patchy low signal (arrow). (E)
Photograph of a cut section of resected specimen demonstrated alternating reddish-brown and gray coloration. The reddish-brown areas
represented cell components and the gray areas (arrows) represented fibrous tissue corresponding to the MRI findings. (F) Histological
examination of the abdominal tumor (×400). Hyaline degeneration of small vessels with a wide surrounding by lymphoid follicle and
lymphocytes arranged in an onion-skin pattern, confirming a diagnosis of Castleman’s disease. Immunophenotyping was positive for CD3, CD10,
CD20, CD21, and CD23 antigens. Unicentric hyaline-vascular Castleman’s disease in a 29-year-old man. (A) Ultrasonography demonstrated a low
echogenic mass 5.4 × 5.2 cm in size (arrow) and there was no significant relationship with the left kidney. (B) Unenhanced CT of abdomen
showed a well circumscribed, oval retroperitoneal pararenal mass (arrow) with homogeneous density. (C) Arteriograms showed arterial feeding
to the mass from the abdominal aortic. (D) T2WI showed a slightly higher signal and the center of the mass displayed patchy low signal
(arrow). (E) Photograph of a cut section of resected specimen demonstrated alternating reddish-brown and gray coloration. The reddish-brown
areas represented cell components and the gray areas (arrows) represented fibrous tissue corresponding to the MRI findings. (F) Histological
examination of the abdominal tumor (×400). Hyaline degeneration of small vessels with a wide surrounding by lymphoid follicle and
lymphocytes arranged in an onion-skin pattern, confirming a diagnosis of Castleman’s disease. Immunophenotyping was positive for CD3, CD10,
CD20, CD21, and CD23 antigens. Preoperative biopsy for a definitive diagnosis was excluded in concern of the deep position and the
possibility of hemorrhea. Preoperative embolization cannot achieve an efficient therapeutic result since the mass was not a hemangioma nor
were there any vascular malformations. Although a definitive preoperative diagnosis was not possible, surgical excision was performed on
February 25th, 2014. A mid-abdominal laparotomy revealed an oval mass with diffuse and rich vascularity located close to the lateral side of
the abdominal aortic, near the anterior inferior part of the left renal. The surgical specimen was a well-circumscribed, encapsulated mass
that measured 5 × 4 cm with a cut reddish-brown surface which changed to gray in the center (Figure 1E). An R0 resection was performed with
a total blood loss of 200 mL without blood transfusion, and the operation time was 118 min. After 2 hours, the patient was sent back to the
ward. However, 30 min later, he suddenly developed dyspnea with chest discomfort. Cyanosis appeared with clammy extremities after 2 min. The
oxygen saturation dropped to 50 mmHg and cardiopulmonary resuscitation was implemented. Oxygen saturation then raised to 100 mmHg
immediately, which proved that the dyspnea was caused by weakness of the respiratory muscles. The patient was transferred to the intensive
care unit (ICU) after endotracheal intubation. A CT of the lung was performed on February 27th showing no sign of pulmonary embolism except
for pleural effusion. He was back to the ward on March 3rd and discharged after 2 days. Histological examination of the abdominal tumor
revealed angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia of the hyaline-vascular type (Figure 1F). The patient came back to our clinic after one
month and took a US which showed no recurrence of the disease. He received another US which also showed no abnormality 4 months after
discharge. Further follow-up was made after 7 months and he lived free of disease. The two clinical types (unicentric and multicentric) of
CD have been sub-classified according to its histological forms: hyaline-vascular type, plasma cell type, and mixed type. Unicentric CD
corresponds to the hyaline-vascular variant (>90%), and multicentric disease corresponds to the plasma cell variant. The unicentric type
usually occurs in young people and is asymptomatic and associated with a benign clinical course, for which surgical excision is the most
effective treatment. By contrast, multicentric CD is a systemic disease with lesions at two or more separate anatomic sites and is
associated symptoms and laboratory abnormalities, such as anemia, fever, weight loss, night sweats, hypergammaglobulinemia, hypoalbuminemia,
and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, which need systemic therapy. CD cases associated with MG were mostly of the unicentric hyaline-
vascular type, as was the case presented herein. A series of CD cases with MG have been previously reported , three of which were of the
multicentric type. Ishikawa et al. reported that seven out of eight CD cases associated with MG were of the unicentric hyaline-vascular
type, and the remaining one was of the multicentric mixed type . CD is a great mimic and known to be associated with autoimmune diseases
such as peripheral neuropathy, cytopenias, systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjogren’s syndrome, and MG. The overproduction of cytokines and
interleukin is believed to play a central role in the development of CD and it is also associated with many clinical conditions related to
immune disease . The immune activity of CD may be the promoter of the antibody-mediated process of MG . Klein et al. reported that the
immune dysregulation of IL-6 has become the leading theory explaining the connection of CD and MG . In CD, the overproduction of IL-6, a
product of activated T-lymphocytes, results in increased B-cell differentiation with the emergence of plasma cell clones and subsequent
formation of autoantibodies that initiate immunopathological reactions [10, 11]. Several studies have suggested that IL-6 is involved in MG,
which would coincide with its activity as a promoter of B-cell differentiation and proliferation and an inducer of B-cell maturation into
antibody plasma cells . Less than 10 previous cases of CD associated with MG have been reported in the world literature with no evidence of
hyperplasia or malignancy of the thymus in any of the cases. Only three of the cases have reported that the mass located in the
retroperitoneum [3, 5, 13] and myasthenic crisis occurred in two [3, 13] out of the three, which means our case is the third one to date.
The main complication of MG is myasthenic crisis, characterised by a fast, marked decrease of muscle strength and compromise of bulbar
muscles with dysphonia, dysphagia, and aspiration. The death rate following myasthenic crisis has drastically decreased after the 1950s from
80% to less than 10%, thanks to the use of early mechanical ventilation, admission to ICU, anticholinesterase drugs, steroid therapy,
immunosuppression, and plasmapheresis . Prompt treatment of myasthenic crisis leads to clinical improvement and can be life-saving. In this
case, our rapid and effective rescue contributed to the uneventful survival and recovery of the patient. CD with MG is a rare condition. CD
itself is a benign disease histologically, but postoperative myasthenic crisis is a severe complication. Therefore, the possibility of its
occurrence must be remembered. The risk of postoperative myasthenic crisis must be carefully considered when evaluating MG patients
undergoing surgery. Monitoring of post-operative vital signs can help in the early detection of complications. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for the publication of this report and any accompanying images. Castleman’s disease Computed tomography Intensive
care unit Myasthenia gravis Magnetic resonance imaging. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions WS acquired data and drafted and revised the manuscript. CS and JB were the pre- and postoperative treatment team and
revised the manuscript. CS was responsible for surgical management and revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of our corresponding auther (D. Shan-wen Chen MD) for his critical review of
this manuscript. Furthermore, we are grateful to the members of the Department of Urology for the care of this patient.
