Cat-scratch disease (CSD) is the most frequent presentation of Bartonella henselae infection. It has a worldwide distribution and is
associated with a previous history of scratch or bite from a cat or dog. CSD affects children and teenagers more often (80%) than adults,
and it usually has a self-limiting clinical course. Atypical clinical course or systemic symptoms are described in 5%–20% of patients. Among
them, hepatosplenic (HS) forms (abscess) have been described. The majority of published cases have affected children or immunosuppressed
patients. Few cases of HS forms of CSD in immunocompetent adult hosts have been reported, and data about the management of this condition
are scarce. Herein, we present 3 new cases of HS forms of CSD in immunocompetent adults and review 33 other cases retrieved from the
literature. We propose an approach to clinical diagnosis and treatment with oral azithromycin. Cat scratch disease (CSD) is the main and
most frequent clinical presentation of Bartonella henselae infection. CSD typically presents as subacute regional lymphadenopathy after a
scratch or bite from a cat. It has also been reported after contact with dogs, although it is not frequent (only 3.2% of the cases).43 CSD
affects most often children and teenagers (80%), and it usually has a self-limiting clinical course. The use of antimicrobials for its
therapeutic management is rarely necessary. Atypical clinical course or systemic involvement is described in 5%–20% of patients. Among them,
the hepatosplenic (HS) forms have been described in 2.3% of cases (data reported before 2003).1,21,28 In a previous review of this syndrome
published in 1996, half of the patients were immunocompetent children while the adults were immunosuppressed (human immunodeficiency virus ,
solid organ transplanted or neoplastic conditions).25 Lastly, a review of the clinical description and therapeutic management in children
has been published.5 To the best of our knowledge, there has been no review of CSD in the last 10 years, and no review of clinical HS-CSD
cases in immunocompetent adults. In addition, the treatment has not been well defined.31,34 Herein, we describe 3 new cases of HS-CSD and
review 33 previously reported cases with a focus on clinical descriptions, diagnosis, and therapeutic
approaches.4,6,9,10,18,23,24,26,27,29,30,33,35,36,38–42,44,45 We present 3 cases of HS-CSD in immunocompetent adults from a single hospital
in northwestern Spain from September 2008 to January 2010. A literature search was performed (MEDLINE, National Library of Medicine,
Bethesda, MD) to identify relevant studies related to this topic reported up to and including December 2013 using the keywords “Bartonella,”
“Rochalimaea,” “cat scratch disease,” “liver,” “spleen,” “spleen abscess,” “hepatitis,” “hepatosplenic,” “immunocompetent adults.” The
inclusion criteria were as follows: aged older than 20 years, immunocompetent, and meeting at least 3 of the modified Liston and Koehler
criteria25: radiographic evidence of liver and/or spleen hypodense or hypoechogenic lesion on computed tomography (CT) scan films,
ultrasonographic scan films, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); compatible gross pathology of multiple nodules; compatible histologic
findings of granulomas or bacillary peliosis, with or without necrosis; positive Warthin-Starry or Steiner silver stains; positive
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Bartonella spp.; successful culture of B. henselae; serologic increase in titers of immunoglobulin G
(IgG) antibodies against Bartonella spp.; electron microscopic findings compatible with Bartonella spp.; positive CSD skin test results; and
epidemiologic antecedent of cat or dog contact. Demographic data (sex, age, geographic localization), epidemiologic (cat or dog contact or
scratch or bite, flea contact), clinical presentation, laboratory findings (including microbiologic assays), radiologic image, surgery and
histologic findings were collected. In addition, we recorded the clinical course and treatments used. We defined “clinical resolution” as
the disappearance of clinical signs and symptoms with normal physical examination and laboratory findings, and “cure” as clinical resolution
along with the disappearance of the radiologic findings. In September 2008, a 61-year-old woman came to the emergency department of the
Hospital del Salnés presenting with cervical swelling. She had no relevant clinical history and was not taking any drugs. She described
productive cough and fever of 6 weeks’ duration, neck pain and occurrence of left cervical and supraclavicular swelling associated with
constitutional symptoms during the last 2 weeks. Her physician prescribed cefditoren which resolved the fever and cough, although the
constitutional symptoms continued. In addition, she had observed the growth of cervical and supraclavicular tumors with appearance of others
at the right side of her neck. She owned several kittens and often suffered scratches. On physical examination, she had an axillary
temperature of 36.5°C, blood pressure 112/54 mm Hg, and heart rate 85 bpm. She had bilateral cervical and supraclavicular and 1 axillary
lymphadenopathies that were elastic, mobile, and painful to palpation. She had a scar on her left thigh. The rest of the examination did not
present significant findings. Hemogram and coagulation tests were within normal limits; C-reactive protein (CRP) was 169 mg/L, gamma-
glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) was 46 U/L, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was 108 U/L. The other biochemical parameters and urine sediment
did not show abnormalities. Chest radiography was normal. A CT scan showed multiple cervical, supraclavicular and right axillary
lymphadenopathy and 1 hypodense lesion in each of liver (target aspect) and spleen. Lymphadenopathy was also observed at the level of the
gastrohepatic ligament (Figures 1 and 2). Solitary liver hypodense lesion with target aspect (arrow) of Case 1. Solitary spleen hypodense
lesion (arrow) of Case 1. With suspicion of lymphoma, a lymph node biopsy was performed and showed necrotizing granulomas without evidence
of malignancy. Periodic acid-Schiff, Ziehl-Neelsen, and Warthin-Starry staining did not reveal any organisms. Bacterial cultures of
mycobacterium and fungi were negative. Blood cultures, sputum cultures in Lowenstein medium, and Ziehl-Neelsen staining were negative.
Serologic tests against Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), syphilis, hepatitis A virus (HAV), hepatitis B virus (HBV),
hepatitis C virus (HCV), Brucella spp., Toxoplasma gondii, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and Chlamydophila pneumoniae were negative. An
immunofluorescence assay (IFA) detected the presence of IgG antibodies against B. henselae with a titer of 400 or higher. A lymph node
specimen was sent to the Special Pathogens Laboratory at the Centre for Biomedical Research in La Rioja (CIBIR) for molecular biologic
study. PCR targeting a region of the RNA polymerase beta-subunit-encoding gene (rpoB) of Bartonella species was carried out as previously
described.32 Sequencing of the amplicon and BLAST analysis revealed 100% identity with the rpoB gene of B. henselae (GenBank accession no.
AF171071). Because of suspected CSD, the patient began empirical treatment with oral azithromycin 500 mg/24 h for 5 days. After 3 weeks, the
patient was asymptomatic, and most cervical lymphadenopathies were resolved. CRP and liver enzymes were normal. A CT scan showed resolution
of the spleen lesion and the hepatic lesion was reduced in size. After 5 months the patient was completely asymptomatic, and a CT scan
showed resolution of the liver lesion. A convalescent serum sample showed IgG antibodies against B. henselae with a titer of 800. In
September 2009, a 41-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency department of the Hospital del Salnés presenting a painful right axillary
swelling of 1 week’s duration. She had no relevant medical history and was not taking drugs. Three months before she had had contact with a
cat during its parturition. She then looked after the resulting kittens. A few weeks prior to admission, a cat scratched her on the right
fifth finger. She also gave a history of flea bites during the summer. Upon presentation she had an axillary temperature of 38°C, blood
pressure 155/69 mm Hg, and heart rate of 95 bpm. She had also a painful 5 cm right axillary tumor and discomfort on palpation of the right
upper abdominal quadrant without hepatomegaly. A small scar on the fifth finger of her right hand was also observed. Hemogram and
coagulation tests were within normal limits; CRP was 86.9 mg/L, serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) was 73 IU/L, GGT was 78 IU/L,
and ALP was 131 IU/L. The remaining biochemical parameters and the urine test did not show abnormalities. The chest radiography and a
mammogram were normal. Ultrasound soft tissue examination of the armpit showed a hypoechoic 4.7 cm polylobulated lesion and another 1.2 cm
solid lesion compatible with adenitis. A CT body scan showed right supraclavicular and axillary lymphadenopathies, hepatic hilar,
peripancreatic and periportocaval lymphadenopathies, and multiple hypodense hepatic lesions (Figures 3 and 4). A lymph node biopsy was
analyzed revealing necrotizing granulomatous lymphadenitis without evidence of malignancy. Periodic acid-Schiff, Ziehl-Neelsen, and Warthin-
Starry staining were negative. Cultures of mycobacteria and fungi were negative after 8 and 1 weeks’ incubation, respectively. Blood
cultures were negative after a week of incubation. The HBV, HCV, HIV, syphilis, Brucella spp., Borrelia burgdorferi s.l. and T. gondii
serology tests were negative, whereas the EBV and CMV tests showed past infection. IFA detected the presence of phase II IgG antibodies
against Coxiella burnetii with a titer of 64, and phase I IgG antibodies were negative. Serologic tests confirmed the presence of IgG
antibodies against B. henselae (titer of 400). PCR assays of the lymph node biopsy (sent to CIBIR) did not detect the presence of Bartonella
DNA. Before the biopsy results, and with the suspicion of CSD, the patient began empirical treatment with oral azithromycin 500 mg/24 h for
5 days. The fever disappeared within 72 hours and the axillary swelling improved. A CT scan showed a significant reduction in the size of
the liver lesions and the lymphadenopathies. The patient was discharged on the 10th day with CRP of 28 mg/L and liver enzymes normalized. At
that point, the titer of IgG antibodies against B. henselae was 800. This twofold increase is not significant and may be due to the
antimicrobial treatment that the patient received. Eight months later the patient was asymptomatic and CT body scan did not show
abnormalities. Multiple hypodense liver lesions of Case 2. Multiple hypodense liver lesions of Case 2. In January 2010, an 86-year-old woman
was admitted at the emergency room at Hospital del Salnés due to fever and epigastric pain of 2 weeks’ duration. She had a hip prosthesis,
chronic atrial fibrillation, and had also been admitted in 2006 due to pneumonia with secondary sepsis. She did not take drugs. She was on
treatment with amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid because 3 days previously she had attended for a urinary tract infection. Blood and urinary
cultures from that day were negative. She lived in a rural area and consumed nonchlorinated water. She owned a dog, several cats, and
chickens. She did not recall bites or scratches from insects or pets. She had an axillary temperature of 39.4°C, blood pressure 122/70 mm
Hg, and heart rate 94 bpm. She had a nonrhythmic cardiac auscultation without murmurs, and epigastric pain upon palpation. Hemogram and
coagulation tests were in the normal range; CRP was 148 mg/L, SGOT was 51 IU/L, and serum glutamic-pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) was 46 IU/L.
The remaining biochemical parameters were in the normal range. Chest radiography showed signs of emphysema. A CT abdominal scan revealed
multiple adenopathies with HS enlargement and several hypodense lesions in the splenic area in addition to left pleural effusion (Figure 5).
A transthoracic echocardiogram did not show signs of endocarditis. Blood and urinary cultures were repeatedly negative. Serologic tests for
HAV, HBV, HCV, syphilis, Brucella spp., and C. burnetii were negative. At first, endocarditis was suspected and ceftriaxone 2 g/12 h,
gentamicin 240 mg/24 h, and vancomycin 1 g/12 h were prescribed. Four days later she was afebrile. On the 5th day, suspicion of endocarditis
was excluded after transesophageal echocardiogram examination. The treatment was changed to ceftriaxone 2 g/24 h plus metronidazole
500 mg/8 h. Three days later, the result of an IFA-IgG test against B. henselae showed a titer of 1600, and ceftriaxone plus metronidazole
were substituted with oral azithromycin (500 mg/24 h for 5 days). The patient was discharged from the hospital on the 13th day with liver
enzymes in the normal range and CRP of 21 mg/L. A new abdominal CT showed that the number and size of the spleen lesions were less than at
admission. IgG antibodies against B. henselae were detected at a titer of 3200 in the convalescent phase. Four months later a CT abdominal
scan did not show any spleen lesion. Multiple hypodense spleen lesions of Case 3. We have included a total of 36 clinical cases in this
study: 3 presented herein and 33 obtained from the literature. A summary of the cases is presented in Table 1. Clinical Data From 36
Immunocompetent Adults With Hepatosplenic Cat Scratch Disease Twenty-nine patients (81%) were reported from Europe, 4 from the United States
(11%), 2 from Japan (6%), and 1 from Israel (3%). Half of all cases were reported from France and 75% from the Mediterranean area. Seventeen
were men and 18, women. In 1 case the sex was unknown. The mean age of the patients was 45.5 years (median, 43 yr; range, 25–86 yr). Thirty
of the 33 cases recalled cat exposure, while 1 had exposure to dogs. Cat scratches or bites were recalled by 35% of patients. The frequency
of clinical signs and symptoms is shown in Table 2. The most common clinical syndromes as well as the time to diagnosis are shown in Table
3. Symptoms and Signs Exhibited by 36 Patients With Hepatosplenic Cat Scratch Disease Clinical Syndromes and Time to Diagnosis White blood
cell count was within the normal range for 73% of cases. CRP was elevated in all patients and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), in 94%.
Liver enzymes were raised in 38% of cases. These elevations were less than 5 times the normal range and always with a normal bilirubin value
(Table 4). Summary of Available Laboratory Data Nineteen percent of patients were examined by ultrasound scans, 47% by CT scan, and 25% with
both techniques. MRI and ultrasounds were used in 2 patients, and MRI and CT in 1 patient (Table 5). Discordances between radiologic
techniques were observed in 6 of 9 patients (67%). The ultrasound examinations did not detect the lesions observed in CT scans in 5 cases
(56%). In 1 patient (11%) the CT scan did not detect the findings of the ultrasound scan. Summary of Radiologic Data Most patients (81%)
showed multiple hypodense lesions except for 5 patients (14%) who had single lesions. In 2 cases the radiologic studies did not find any
lesions. A surgical inspection (laparotomy) was made in 10 patients (28%), and 3 partial liver resections, 5 splenectomies, and 2 liver
biopsies were performed. In 1 patient a partial rib resection led to the diagnosis. In 2 cases surgical inspection allowed retrospective
observation of multiple lesions in the liver or in the spleen, respectively. In another patient in whom the CT scan showed a unique spleen
lesion, surgical inspection revealed multiple lesions. In summary, the liver was affected in 24 patients and the spleen in 26 patients. The
liver alone was affected in 10 cases (28%), 8 of them had multiple lesions and 2 had a single lesion. The spleen alone was affected in 12
patients (33%), 11 of them had multiple lesions and 1 had a single lesion. Both organs were affected in 14 cases (39%), 13 of them had
multiple lesions and 1 case had a single lesion. Abdominal adenopathies were observed in 14 patients (39%), 50% of cases with liver
involvement, 42% with spleen involvement, and 29% with both of them. In 12 patients (33%) echocardiogram studies were performed, and only 1
case had concomitant endocarditis. In 3 patients gammagraphic scan images detected lumbar and rib osteomyelitis. Vertebral osteomyelitis was
diagnosed in 3 cases after MRI of spinal cord. In 1 case PET/CT was performed for high suspicion of malignancy. A total of 35 biopsy samples
were taken from 23 patients (64%). Twelve of the 15 liver biopsies exhibited necrotizing granulomatous hepatitis, and 3 showed unspecific
chronic hepatitis. Eleven biopsies were taken from adenopathies (8 peripheral and 3 abdominal). Ten out of 11 showed necrotizing
granulomatous lymphadenitis and the eleventh, sclerotic tissue. In 4 biopsies from spleen, 3 necrotizing granulomatous splenitis and 1
necrotizing splenitis without granulomas were found. Three bone biopsies (1 rib and 2 vertebral) exhibited tuberculoid granulomas in the
case of the rib, multiple foci of polymorphonuclear infiltrates in 1 of the vertebras, and no findings in the other vertebra. Bone marrow
biopsies taken from 2 patients showed nonspecific findings and no granulomas. Silver stains were made in 9 of 23 patients (in 7, Warthin-
Starry and in 2, Steiner) and were positive in 3 cases. In 3 patients, immunohistochemical staining for B. henselae showed rod-shaped
bacteria. Electron microscopy from 1 biopsy showed many bacilli. B. henselae cultures were performed in 2 cases (from a blood sample and
from pus of a spleen abscess) and both were positive. In 13/16 patients (81%), PCR assays from biopsies or blood samples detected DNA from
B. henselae (3/3 patients with spleen biopsy; 4/5 patients with liver biopsy; 2/4 patients with adenopathy biopsies; 1/1 patient with bone
biopsy; 1/1 patient with blood sample; 1/1 patient with liver biopsy and blood sample; and 1/1 patient with bone and adenopathy biopsies).
Serologic assays were performed for 32 patients (89%), and 30 of them (94%) showed an IgG titer >128 against B. henselae antigen. Cross-
reactions or concomitant or past infections with B. quintana (n = 3) or C. burnetii (n = 2) were observed. However, these bacteria were not
considered to be the agents responsible for the clinical pictures in any of the cases. In 19 of 32 patients only serologic assays were
performed, and all of these had an IgG titer >128 against B. henselae antigen. Three cases (all positive) were evaluated using only PCR
assays. Serologic and PCR assays were performed for 13 patients. Eight of these cases were positive with both techniques, 3 yielded only
positive serologic results (titer >128), and 2 were only positive by PCR. Data were obtained from 35 patients (97%) and are summarized in
Table 6. Antibiotics used were as follows: 14 (48%) macrolides (8 in monotherapy and 6 in combination); 11 (38%) tetracyclines (3 in
monotherapy and 8 in combination); 9 (31%) fluoroquinolones (2 in monotherapy and 7 in combination); 6 (21%) rifampicin (always in
combination with others). Antibiotics such as gentamicin, ceftriaxone, or amikacin were always used in combination with others. Summary of
Patient Management and Antibiotic Treatment Data about duration of antibiotic treatment were retrieved from 25 patients (86%); monotherapy
was administered in 12 cases and antibiotic combinations in 13 (see Table 6). The treatment of choice for our 3 patients was azithromycin
for 5 days. Duration of the treatment was less than 2 weeks, including empirical treatment before diagnosis. Surgical treatment included 3
partial hepatectomies (presenting single lesions with suspicion of malignancy); 5 splenectomies (2 diagnostic; 1 prophylactic procedure; 1
by spleen abscess; and 1 by spontaneous spleen rupture). Diagnostic partial rib resection was performed in 1 case. All patients were cured
without sequelae regardless of treatment. For the cases in the literature, in 71% of cases (data from 21 patients) clinical resolution was
achieved in 1–12 weeks (mean, 9.24; SD, 7.27; median, 8; range, 1–24 wk). In 78% of cases (data from 18 patients) cure was achieved in 2–5
months (mean, 3.83; SD, 2.15; median, 4; range, 0.5–9 mo). In the 3 cases presented herein, the clinical resolution was achieved in less
than 4 weeks (mean, 3.67; SD, 0.58; median, 4; range, 3–4 wk). In 2 of them, cure was achieved in less than 5 months (mean, 5.67; SD, 2.08;
median, 5; range, 4–8 mo). HS complications among immunocompetent adults with CSD are unusual. To our knowledge, this has not been
previously reviewed. Much current knowledge on this unusual form of CSD is derived from cases in children.5,21 Furthermore, treatment of
this syndrome has not been well defined.31,34 In an effort to answer these questions we have reviewed 36 cases (3 from our experience and 33
from the literature). Sixty-four percent of the clinical cases had been diagnosed during the last 10 years, probably resulting from
incorporation of serologic and molecular techniques into routine clinical laboratories. B. henselae infection and CSD are distributed
worldwide.8 However, most cases of HS-CSD have been reported in Europe, especially in the Mediterranean area and more specifically in
France. This fact could be related to different and more invasive B. henselae strains in the area11 although it most likely is due to a
higher index of suspicion by physicians in France. Men and women were similarly affected. The syndrome affected all ages (mean, 45 yr),
being more frequent in young adults. Most patients reported cat or dog exposure. Scratches were reported in only 35% of HS forms compared to
73% in CSD.28 The importance of collecting this data and looking for this important sign should be emphasized. Most patients had fever of
less than 1 month duration. Fever could be the only clinical manifestation or could be associated with other signs or symptoms. When data
from adults and children were compared, fever (86% vs 100%), abdominal pain (44% vs 68%), and weight loss (19% vs 42%) were less frequent in
adults than in children, respectively. Percentages of constitutional symptoms were similar.1,5,21,28,34 Peripheral adenopathies, which were
detected in 85%–100% of typical CSD, were only present in 33% of HS forms. This proportion was similar in children. Hepatomegaly and
splenomegaly were less frequent in adults than in children (14% vs 53%).5,21 Leukocytosis was less frequent in adults (27% vs 79%), and the
liver enzymes were raised in 38% of clinical cases herein reviewed. CRP and ESR were raised in both adults and children.1,5,21 Image studies
were needed for the diagnosis of HS-CSD. CT scans were more frequently used for adults than for children (47% vs 5%, respectively). On the
contrary, ultrasound scans were more frequent for children than for adults (68% vs 19%, respectively). Both imaging techniques were equally
used with children and adult patients, and the percentages of discordances between these techniques were similar for both groups.5
Therefore, it seems that CT scan is the radiologic image technique of choice for its greater sensitivity. Nevertheless, the low number of
patients studied by MRI does not allow making conclusions about this imaging technique. A single lesion was found in 14% of adults. To our
knowledge, this clinical sign has not been previously described in children. The simultaneous presence of abdominal adenopathies in both
liver and spleen lesions was less frequent than previously reported.1,5,19–21 According to pathologic studies, most patients presented
necrotizing granulomatous lesions (75%–91% depending on the affected organ). None of the patients showed vascular lesions suggesting
peliosis. Silver staining, considered very specific for CSD, had sensitivity similar to that published in the literature, although it was
rarely used since Bartonella infections were less frequently suspected in adults.20,21 Bartonella culture is the gold standard for diagnosis
of Bartonella. Culturing of specimens can be performed by the centrifugation-shell vial technique with human endothelial cell monolayers or
using Columbia sheep blood agar plates.8 However, it was only performed in 2 cases, both with positive results. For most patients,
microbiologic diagnosis was based on serologic assays. B. henselae IFA assays are accessible and can be performed in the majority of
hospitals. Cross-reactions with Bartonella spp. (for example, B. quintana) or with C. burnetii are very frequent problems.22 High titers or
seroconversions are needed to confirm diagnosis. Molecular tools (specifically, PCR assays) enable rapid detection and identification of
Bartonella species in blood samples and biopsy specimens and swabs of lesions, especially if sampled in patients with early stage CSD who
have not received treatment.2 Specific real-time reverse transcription-PCR assays targeting 16S-23S rRNA and pap31 genes have been
demonstrated to be very useful for Bartonella detection in patients.3 The differential diagnosis should include other infections and
neoplasia, such as lymphomas. There should be an initial effort to exclude these conditions that mimic HS-CSD. Therapeutic approaches to HS
forms of CSD are variable. No treatment was prescribed for some patients, whereas surgical procedures with or without antimicrobials were
deemed necessary in other cases. In all cases, recovery from HS-CSD was satisfactory. Considering the reviewed cases, several surgical
interventions could have been avoided if Bartonella spp. infections had been suspected. Splenectomy should only be performed in cases in
which subcapsular lesions have high risk of rupture or when there is no clinical response to medical treatment. Antibiotics (in monotherapy
or in combination) were used for 83% patients. Macrolides were the most frequently prescribed antibiotics in monotherapy, whereas
tetracyclines, fluoroquinolones, and rifampicin were used in combination. Patients were treated as immunosuppressed patients with HS-
CSD31,34 since antibiotics were used for long periods of time and often in combination. In our patients, we only prescribed azithromycin
(500 mg) every 24 hours for 5 days, as recommended by Bass et al.7 Our patients achieved clinical resolution in 4 weeks, in contrast with
the 9 weeks needed when other prolonged regimens were used. Nevertheless, the cure (radiologic resolution of the images) was slower with our
regimen (5.7 vs 3.8 mo). Nevertheless, the clinical resolution was good in all cases (in our experience and according to the
literature).5,20,37 For these reasons, we think that a short course of azithromycin is a very good choice for immunocompetent patients when
HS-CSD is not secondary to other conditions such as endocarditis and there is no other associated organ involvement (nervous system or
bone).31,34 We also recommend the use of CT scan and follow-up clinical evaluations when treatment is finished (after 4 weeks and 4 months)
to be sure of the complete disappearance of the lesions. We are grateful to Dr. Lesley Bell-Sakyi (The Pirbright Institute, UK) for
reviewing the English language of this manuscript. Abbreviations: ALP = alkaline phosphatase, CIBIR = Centre for Biomedical Research in La
Rioja, CMV = cytomegalovirus, CRP = C-reactive protein, CSD = cat-scratch disease, CT = computed tomography, EBV = Epstein-Barr virus, ESR =
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, GGT = gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, HAV = hepatitis A virus, HBV = hepatitis B virus, HCV = hepatitis C
virus, HIV = human immunodeficiency virus, HS = hepatosplenic, IFA = immunofluorescence assay, Ig = immunoglobulin, MRI = magnetic resonance
imaging, PCR = polymerase chain reaction, rpoB gene = rpoB geneRNA polymerase beta-subunit-encoding gene, SGOT = serum glutamic-oxaloacetic
transaminase, SGPT = serum glutamic-pyruvic transaminase. Financial support and conflicts of interest: The authors have no funding or
conflicts of interest to disclose.
