Rudimentary uterine horn pregnancy is rare and, to our knowledge, has not been previously reported in Cameroon. We herein report the case of
a 22 year old second gravida referred for acute abdominal pain at 17 weeks of gestation. Physical examination revealed hemoperitoneum with
hypovolemic shock. After resuscitation, an emergency exploratory laparotomy was done and we found hemoperitoneum of 3,500 milliliters, a
bicornuate uterus with a ruptured right rudimentary communicating horn containing a non viable foetus. There were no other abnormalities. We
performed an excision of the rudimentary horn with ipsilateral salpingectomy. Post-operative course was uneventful and the woman was
discharged seven days later. This case emphasizes the importance of good antenatal care to avoid complications. Bicornuate uterus is a
condition resulting from faulty unification of paramesonephric (M端llerian) ducts during intra-uterine life. It's encountered in 0.1-3% of
females . There is no causal relationship between M端llerian anomalies and infertility, but they are correlated with adverse pregnancy
outcomes [2, 3]. Several cases of ruptured rudimentary uterine horn pregnancies have been reported, but the prevalence is not known . We
present a case managed in the Gyneco-Obstetric Unit of Yaounde Central Hospital. Miss EL is a 22 year old, G2P1001 student, referred to our
emergency setting for an abdominal pain evolving since 12 hours, in a pregnancy of 17 weeks. That abdominal pain started abruptly 12 hours
prior to consultation. It was diffuse, of moderate intensity and without irradiation. This motivated an unfruitful automedication with
mebeverine. A sudden and sharp raise of intensity motivated a consultation in a health center from where she was immediately referred to out
setting. The patient had her first menses at 14 years. She bleeds for 5 days every 30 days. She has never had neither dysmenorrhoea nor
dyspareunia. She had no method of contraception. Her first pregnancy resulted in a normal delivery of a live baby boy weighing 3,450 grammes
two years earlier. The current pregnancy was 17 weeks and was poorly followed up in a health center. Her medico - surgical and social past
history was unremarkable. Clinical assessment on admission revealed a hemorrhagic shock characterized by: asthenia, vomiting, vertigo,
restlessness, anxiety, a blood pressure of 80/55 millimeters of mercury, a pulse rate of 123 pulsations /minute, a respiratory rate of 28
cycles/minutes. The temperature was 37.3 degree Celsius. Conjunctivae were pale. Chest examination revealed tachycardia and polypnea. The
abdomen was distended, symmetrical, tender and dull at the percussion. Bowel sounds were absent. Vaginal speculum revealed no abnormality.
On digital vaginal exploration, the cervix was posterior, long and closed. Posterior cervical fornix was full and painful. Cervical motion
tenderness was noted but bimanual exam was limited by pain. A paracentesis brought back 8 millimeters of non clotting blood. The working
diagnosis was a ruptured ectopic pregnancy and the differential diagnosis was ruptured ovarian cyst in pregnancy. An emergency laparotomy
was indicated and a preoperative workup done, showing a hemoglobin level of 6.4 grammes per deciliter. Resuscitation and monitoring were
immediately started with mask oxygen, intravenous fluids, blood transfusion, in-dwelling Foley's catheter and painkillers. After informed
consent, surgery was started three hours after admission. This delay was due technical (availability of blood and emergency medicines),
financial (lack of money to buy emergency drugs) and human resource (small number of anesthetists on call duty at night) constraints.
Operative findings were: a hemoperitoneum of 3,500 milliliters, a bicornuate uterus with a ruptured right rudimentary non-communicating horn
containing a non viable foetus weighing 280 grammes and macroscopically normal fallopian tubes and ovaries (Figure 1). Excision of the
rudimentary horn and ipsilateral salpingectomy were done and the patient received four pints of packed red blood cells. Uneventful post-
operative course followed and the woman was discharged seven days later. View of the operative field showing the non viable foetus and the
ruptured rudimentary uterine horn Rudimentary horn pregnancy is rare because of the rarity of the underlying mullerian malformation. It is
associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes . The prevalence of unicornuate uterus is estimated at 1/4,020 women in the general population .
To our knowledge only one case has been reported so far in Cameroon Patients with m端llerian anomalies usually present with pelvic pain,
endometriosis, hematometria, hematocolpos, recurrent pregnancy loss, and preterm delivery . They can also remain asymptomatic, till
fortuitous discovery during imaging procedures for other purposes or during surgery as it was the case in our patient [2, 10]. Since
ultrasonography highly depends on operator's skills, many cases of rudimentary uterine horn pregnancies are missed like in our case . A
skillful ultrasonography can detect some m端llerian anomalies but confirmation requires magnetic resonance imaging [7, 8]. Though neonatal
survival rate in rudimentary uterine horn is only 11%, a correct diagnosis during the first trimester ultrasound would have at least
prevented maternal morbidity in our case . Neonatal survival occurs in the following circumstances reported in literature: premature
delivery and term rudimentary horn pregnancy [4, 9]. In our case, laparotomy started three hours after it was indicated. This tremendous
delay is of course unacceptable but it is commonly noticed in our emergency unit and is attributable to institutional weaknesses. Surgical
management of ruptured rudimentary horn pregnancy involves excision of the uterine horn hosting the pregnancy and homolateral salpingectomy;
this can be done via laparotomy of laparoscopy . Before rupture, if the foetus is viable cesarean section followed by ablation of the
rudimentary horn may be indicated because induction with misoprostol carries a high risk of rupture [4, 7]. Before foetal viability, non
ruptured rudimentary horn pregnancy is best managed by surgery . Though rare, rudimentary horn pregnancy should be present in the mind of
every practitioner facing an acute surgical abdomen in pregnant woman. Good quality antenatal care in first trimester can avoid
complications like rupture. Authors declare no competing interests. Fouelifack wrote and corrected the manuscript. Messi and Kamga received,
operated and followed up the patient. Fouogue wrote and corrected the manuscript. Fouedjio and Sando corrected the manuscript and supervised
the work of all the team.
