An 18-month-old boy with dry cough and fever was brought to the emergency department. His mother reported the onset of the symptoms
approximately 3 days prior. She reported no nausea, vomiting, refusal to eat, or other symptoms. Physical examination revealed no
abnormalities. Chest X-rays demonstrated a round, opaque object lodged at the upper esophagus. The identification of a circular radiopaque
shadow with a peripheral double rim or a halo effect on an anteroposterior (AP) X-ray (Figure 1A) and a step-off on the lateral view (Figure
1B) allowed the diagnosis of button battery (BB) ingestion. Figure 1In A, an anteroposterior chest X-ray revealing a circular radiopaque
shadow with a peripheral double rim or a halo effect, and, in B, a lateral X-ray showing a step-off, which allowed the diagnosis of a button
battery lodged in the esophagus. Esophagoscopy showed a corroded 20-mm-diameter lithium BB lodged in the esophagus, with corrosive injury of
the mucosa. The foreign body was retrieved 80 h after the ingestion. CT scans showed foci of material with high density posterior to the
trachea (remains of the foreign body) and signs of esophageal perforation and mediastinitis (Figure 2). Figure 2CT scans showing upper
mediastinum widening with areas of low attenuation surrounding the trachea and supra-aortic arteries and veins, as well as extraluminal gas
and metallic fragments (remains of the foreign body), suggestive of esophageal perforation and mediastinitis. Immediate surgical
consultation was done, and conservative treatment was decided (observation, antibiotics and nasogastric tube feeding). After 30 days of
hospitalization, follow-up esophagoscopy demonstrated complete lesion closure with no sign of stenosis. A BB lodged in the esophagus can
cause severe tissue damage and delayed complications, such as esophageal perforation, tracheoesophageal fistulas, mediastinitis, and death.(
1 - 4 ) Misdiagnoses frequently occur when ingested batteries are misidentified on X-rays as other objects, particularly coins. However,
subtle differences exist in the radiographic features of BBs and coins. A halo of reduced density is present around the circumference of a
BB (double rim or halo effect) on an AP X-ray, and a step-off can be observed on the lateral view. A battery lodged in the esophagus must be
treated as a medical emergency because of its rapid corrosive action; a BB may cause serious burns in just two hours.( 1 - 4 ) Patients with
a battery in the esophagus may be asymptomatic initially. Endoscopic removal is preferred because it allows direct visualization of tissue
injury.( 1 ) Um menino de 18 meses de idade, apresentando tosse seca e febre, foi levado ao serviço de emergência. A mãe relatava início dos
sintomas há cerca de 3 dias. Negava náuseas, vômitos, recusa em comer e outros sintomas. Ao exame físico, não foi observada nenhuma
alteração. Radiografias de tórax demonstraram a presença de um objeto redondo e opaco alojado no esôfago superior. A identificação de uma
sombra radiopaca circular com dupla borda periférica ou efeito auréola na radiografia em incidência anteroposterior (AP; Figura 1A) e de uma
sombra em declive na radiografia em perfil (Figura 1B) permitiu o diagnóstico de ingestão de bateria botão (BB). Figura 1Em A, radiografia
de tórax em incidência anteroposterior revelando uma sombra radiopaca circular com dupla borda periférica ou efeito auréola, e, em B,
radiografia em perfil mostrando uma sombra em declive, o que permitiu o diagnóstico de bateria botão alojada no esôfago. A esofagoscopia
mostrou a presença de uma BB de lítio corroída de 20 mm de diâmetro alojada no esôfago, com lesão corrosiva da mucosa. O corpo estranho foi
removido 80 h após a ingestão. A TC mostrou focos de material com alta densidade localizados posteriormente à traqueia (restos de corpo
estranho) e sinais de perfuração esofágica e mediastinite (Figura 2). Figura 2TC mostrando alargamento do mediastino superior com áreas de
baixa atenuação em torno da traqueia e das artérias supra-aórticas e veias, bem como gás extraluminal e fragmentos metálicos (restos de
corpo estranho), sugestivos de perfuração esofágica e mediastinite. Realizada consulta cirúrgica imediata, decidiu-se por tratamento
conservador (observação, antibióticos e alimentação por sonda nasogástrica). Após 30 dias de internação, a esofagoscopia de controle
demonstrou fechamento completo da lesão, sem nenhum sinal de estenose. Uma BB alojada no esôfago pode causar graves danos teciduais e
complicações tardias, como perfuração esofágica, fístulas traqueoesofágicas, mediastinite e óbito.( 1 - 4 ) Diagnósticos errôneos ocorrem
com frequência quando as baterias ingeridas são erroneamente identificadas nas radiografias como sendo outros objetos, especialmente moedas.
Porém, existem diferenças sutis nas características radiográficas das BB e das moedas. Uma auréola de densidade reduzida se faz presente em
torno da circunferência de uma BB (dupla borda ou efeito auréola) na radiografia em incidência AP, e uma imagem em declive pode ser
observada na radiografia em perfil. Uma bateria alojada no esôfago deve ser tratada como emergência médica em razão de sua rápida ação
corrosiva; uma BB pode causar queimaduras graves em apenas duas horas.( 1 - 4 ) Pacientes com bateria no esôfago podem ser assintomáticos
inicialmente. Prefere-se a remoção endoscópica porque ela permite a visualização direta da lesão tecidual.( 1 )
