Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 48 Final Diagnosis: Spontaneous hemarthrosis of right knee Symptoms: A rapidly
growing knee swelling was “witnessed” associated with severe tenderness, hotness and profound agony but without color change Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: Suprapatellar arthrocentesis of the right knee joint Specialty: Cardiology Unusual clinical course Despite the
widespread use of fibrinolytic therapy and the numerous reports on its bleeding complications, spontaneous hemarthrosis following
fibrinolytic therapy is quite rare. We describe in this report a patient with no previous history of articular disease who developed a
spontaneous right knee bloody effusion following fibrinolytic therapy using rt-PA for acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Furthermore,
we provide a review of all cases of spontaneous hemarthrosis documented so far in the literature. Several pre-existing joint diseases may
predispose to hemarthrosis following fibrinolytic therapy, even in patients who deny previous or current articular disorders. Therefore,
hemorrhage should be considered in the differential diagnosis of mono-arthritis following fibrinolytic therapy for STEMI. Hemarthrosis is
almost always associated with a history of pervious trauma or joint instability. However, non-traumatic causes such as complications from
oral anticoagulant use and, less frequently, from heparin use have been reported . A 48-year-old Indian man, a previously healthy general
labor worker, presented to the emergency room (ER) of Fujairah Hospital with central chest pain of 1-h duration referred to the left
shoulder, associated with dyspnea and sweating. The patient was neither diabetic nor hypertensive, had never smoked, and had normal lipid
profile and negative family history of coronary artery disease. He was neither alcoholic nor a current drug user, with a lean body (57 Kg,
body mass index 22 Kg/ m2). There was no history of arthritis, arthralgia, joint trauma, previous joint operation, or increased tendency to
bleeding, and he was taking no regular medications. He was hemo-dynamically stable, with blood pressure of 105/73 mmHg and pulse rate of
94/min (regular and full). The electrocardiogram showed extensive anterior wall ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). Laboratory tests
showed: blood group A+ve, hemoglobin 15.7 g/dL, white blood cell count 10.4×109/L, platelet count 324×109/L, prothrombin time 11.9 s
(INR=1.07), partial thromboplastin time 29.0 s, serum creatinine 96 μmol/L, random blood glucose 8.8 mmol/L, creatine kinase 196 U/L,
lactate dehydrogenase175 IU/L, and troponin-T 0.01 μg/L. The patient was given morphine, aspirin 300 mg, sublingual nitroglycerin 0.5 mg
tablet, and oxygen, then was transferred to the care unit (CCU) of Fujairah Hospital where he was given fibrinolytic therapy (2 h after
symptoms onset) in the form of Tenecteplase (Metalyse, recombinant tissue-plasminogen activator ) 6000 units by slow intravenous
administration. Other medications included Clopidogrel 75 mg tablet daily, Atorvastatin 40 mg tablet daily, Carvedilol 3.125 mg tablets
twice daily, and Enoxaparin low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) 60 mg subcutaneous injection/12 hours. Resolution of ST segment to baseline
occurred 6 h after fibrinolytic therapy, with no reperfusion arrhythmias, and the patient was stable with normal hemodynamics. Diagnostic
coronary angiography was done via right radial artery access 30 h after fibrinolytic intake, and revealed proximal LAD 75% stenosis with
normal other coronary vessels, but percutaneous coronary intervention was not done due to patient refusal. The radial puncture site was non-
complicated, with good hand circulation on follow-up. About 8 h after coronary angiography, the patient was hemodynamically stable (blood
pressure of 110/70 mmHg and a regular pulse rate of 77/min), lying comfortably in bed, and while trying to modify his position to undergo
the night-round clinical examination, he developed a sudden severe agonizing pain in his right knee. The knee was uncovered and a rapidly
growing swelling was seen, associated with severe tenderness, heat, and profound agony, but without color change (Figure 1A). The
orthopedist on call was immediately summoned to the CCU, and within 5 min he performed suprapatellar arthrocentesis (needle aspiration) of
the right knee joint (Figure 1B). The knee swelling resolved, with a return to near-normal knee contour and marked pain relief (Figure 1C).
Finally, 125 cc of frank blood were aspirated (Figure 1D). The aspirate was sterile, did not clot, and had a xanthochromic supernatant with
absence of crystals. Aspirin, Clopidogrel, and Enoxaparin were temporarily withheld. The patient had no bleeding from any other site of his
body, and urine analysis was normal. Three days after the first arthrocentesis, light ambulation was allowed and the previously withheld
medications were resumed. Twelve hours later, final aspiration of 45 cc of frank blood was done (each joint aspiration was done under
completely aseptic precautions followed by the application of pressure bandage and dressing). X-ray of the right knee joint showed moderate
osteoarthritic changes with osteophytes. The patient was then discharged after a non-eventful hospital course. On follow-up, the patient
showed complete resolution of the right knee hemarthrosis, with stable cardiac condition. Spontaneous hemarthrosis involving the knee joint
after fibrinolytic therapy is very rare, and it has not been reported in the studies involving a great number of patients using fibrinolytic
therapy . However, we identified 4 reports of 6 patients with spontaneous knee hemarthrosis following fibrinolytic therapy . Notably, there
are 2 other reports of 2 patients with spontaneous right ankle hemarthrosis after the use of rt-PA and un-fractionated heparin (UFH) ; and
only 1 report of spontaneous right shoulder hemarthrosis after streptokinase (SK) therapy for acute STEMI . Table 1 shows a summary of all
reports of spontaneous hemarthrosis, including our current report. As shown in the table, the complication occurred due to the combined use
of a fibrinolytic (streptokinase or rt-PA) with acetylsalicylic acid and/or heparin. Notably, LMWH (as well as Clopidogrel) was used only in
our case. While it is difficult to imagine this complication occurring in a subject without any previous knee disease, it happened in 2
previously recorded similar cases with ours as the third instance (Table 1). Intensive care physicians and cardiologists must be aware of
the possibility of rare complications like serious joint bleeding, which seems to be more frequent in previously compromised joints. Thus,
caution should be observed in patients with active joint diseases or previous trauma/operations. This complication should have correct and
early diagnosis with prompt aspiration of the blood and splinting to provide early relief of discomfort and prevention of further joint
damage. Several pre-existing joint diseases may predispose to hemarthrosis following fibrinolytic therapy, even in patients who deny
previous or current history of articular disorders, as in this case. Therefore, hemorrhage should be considered in the differential
diagnosis of mono-arthritis following fibrinolytic therapy for STEMI in addition to gout and pseudogout (both of which may be triggered by
STEMI). (A) Acute spontaneous hemarthrosis of the right knee joint. (B) Suprapatellar arthrocentesis (needle aspiration) of the right knee
joint. (C) Post-aspiration, with a return to near-normal knee joint contour. (D) Frank blood (125 cc) aspirated from the right knee joint.
Summary of all reports of spontaneous hemarthrosis, including the current report. ASA – acetyl salicylic acid; FT – fibrinolytic therapy;
LMWH – low molecular-weight heparin; rt-PA – recombinant tissue-plasminogen activator; SK – streptokinase; UFH – un-fractionated heparin.
