Kabuki syndrome is a multi-system disorder with peculiar facial features, and ophthalmic abnormalities are frequently involved. This case
report of a child with Kabuki syndrome describes two new previously unreported ophthalmic conditions. A 3-year-old Taiwanese boy with Kabuki
syndrome had a short stature, spinal dysraphism, intellectual disability and typical facial features. Ophthalmic findings which have been
previously reported in the literature and in this patient, included ptosis, esotropia, coloboma of the iris, retina, choroid and optic disc,
and microcornea. The newly identified ophthalmic features in this patient included colobomatous microphthalmos and a dysplastic and elevated
disc without central cupping. The genetic analysis identified an MLL2 gene mutation. The presentations of a dysplastic disc and colobomatous
microphthalmia are rarely reported in patients with Kabuki syndrome, but these ophthalmic abnormalities may affect vision. Detailed
ophthalmic evaluations in children with Kabuki syndrome are advised. Kabuki syndrome is a rare multi-system disorder that was first
described in Japan [1, 2]. To date, approximately 350 patients have been identified . The principle diagnostic criteria for Kabuki syndrome
include a short stature, skeletal anomalies, dermatoglyphic anomalies, intellectual disability, and characteristic facial features that
resemble the make-up worn in Japanese Kabuki theatres . However, other features, such as congenital heart disease, cleft palate, deafness
and ophthalmic abnormalities, usually in the form of strabismus and ptosis, have been reported . Most cases are sporadic, but familial cases
of MLL2 gene mutations also exist . We describe a case of Kabuki syndrome with an MLL2 gene mutation and rare features of colobomatous
microphthalmos and a dysplastic optic disc. We also discuss the clinical overlap with CHARGE syndrome (coloboma, heart defects, atresia of
the choanae, growth and development delay, genital hypoplasia, and ear anomalies). A 3-year-old boy was brought to our emergency department
due to a change in consciousness following a seizure attack. A physical examination revealed a short stature, low body weight, spinal
dysraphism, and intellectual disability. He was admitted for acute and chronic subdural haemorrhage, pneumothorax and multiple rib
fractures. The boy was claimed to have suffered head trauma at home, and his mother stated that he had longstanding poor vision. An
ophthalmologist was consulted for the possibility of injury to the eyes. The child had peculiar facial features with a depressed nasal tip,
low-set deformed ears, and micrognathia. The external ophthalmic examination revealed arched eyebrows, epicanthus, ptosis, prominent
eyelashes, long palpebral fissures, and eversion of the lateral portion of the lower eyelids in both eyes. In addition, microphthalmia in
the right eye was noted (Figure 1A). The child had bilateral horizontal nystagmus and esotropia with limitation of abduction of 30 to 40% in
the left eye. The visual acuity was no light perception in the right eye and counting finger(s) in the left eye. An examination under
anaesthesia revealed a normal cornea in the left eye but a microcornea in the right eye. The anterior chamber and lens were normal in both
eyes. Iris and optic disc coloboma were discovered in the right eye (Figure 1B). In addition, retinal and choroidal coloboma in both eyes
and an elevated optic disc without central cupping in the left eye were found (Figure 1C). There was no evidence of retinal or vitreous
haemorrhage. Computed tomography of the orbit showed isodense retrobulbar bulging cystic masses in both eyes, which were likely related to
the colobomatous defect. In addition, colobomatous microphthalmia in the right eye was discovered. No orbital fracture or intraorbital
haemorrhage was found (Figure 1D). A diagnosis of shaken baby syndrome was excluded based on these findings.Figure 1 Photographs of the
3-year-old patient with Kabuki syndrome. (A) The external photograph shows arched eyebrows, epicanthus, ptosis, prominent eyelashes, long
palpebral fissures, eversion of the lateral portion of the lower eyelids in both eyes, and depressed nasal tip. (B) The fundus photograph of
the right eye shows coloboma of the retina, choroid and disc. (C) The fundus photograph of the left eye shows coloboma of the retina and
choroid and an elevated optic disc without central cupping. (D) Computed tomography of the orbit reveals microphthalmia of the right eye and
an isodense retrobulbar bulging cystic mass in both eyes. The defect is likely to be related to the colobomatous defect presented in the
fundus photograph. No orbital fractures or intraorbital haemorrhages were found. Photographs of the 3-year-old patient with Kabuki syndrome.
(A) The external photograph shows arched eyebrows, epicanthus, ptosis, prominent eyelashes, long palpebral fissures, eversion of the lateral
portion of the lower eyelids in both eyes, and depressed nasal tip. (B) The fundus photograph of the right eye shows coloboma of the retina,
choroid and disc. (C) The fundus photograph of the left eye shows coloboma of the retina and choroid and an elevated optic disc without
central cupping. (D) Computed tomography of the orbit reveals microphthalmia of the right eye and an isodense retrobulbar bulging cystic
mass in both eyes. The defect is likely to be related to the colobomatous defect presented in the fundus photograph. No orbital fractures or
intraorbital haemorrhages were found. A detailed review of the literature illustrates that various ophthalmic abnormalities have been
associated with Kabuki syndrome. In the present case, there was neither a history of consanguinity in the parents nor peculiar faces in
other family members. Further genetic study revealed that the patient had a normal 46XY chromosome pattern but an MLL2 gene mutation. The
prevalence of Kabuki syndrome is estimated to be 1 in 32,000 births in Japan . The most common ophthalmic abnormalities in Kabuki syndrome
are strabismus and ptosis, with reported incidence rates of 20.5% and 14.4%, respectively . Coloboma is a less common feature that has been
reported in 3.2% of the published cases . Other rare abnormalities, such as nystagmus, microphthalmos, microcornea, corneal opacities, blue
sclera, cataracts, nasolacrimal duct obstruction, jaw-winking type of ptosis, caruncle lipoma, corneal pannus, retinal telangiectasia, and
retinal pigmentation, have been reported in Kabuki syndrome [3, 5, 9]. However, the presentation of colobomatous microphthalmia and a
dysplastic disc is rare . Moreover, a dysplastic disc and lack of central cupping has not been reported previously to the best of our
knowledge. Kabuki syndrome shows a phenotypic overlap with CHARGE syndrome . Shared presentations include cleft palate, development delay,
genital hypoplasia, congenital heart, and ear, eye and renal abnormalities . Shared ophthalmic phenotypes include coloboma and staphyloma
[3, 14]. CHARGE syndrome was initially considered a likely diagnosis in our patient because of the features of coloboma, growth and
development delay, and ear abnormality. However, he fulfilled only two major and two minor criteria; therefore, he could not be clinically
diagnosed with CHARGE syndrome. In addition, he had typical Kabuki facial presentations. The genetic survey can assist in establishing the
diagnosis from a molecular level. The most common genotypic presentation in Kabuki syndrome is the MLL2 gene mutation , which contrasts to
the CHD7 gene mutation found in CHARGE syndrome . Our patient had an MLL2 gene mutation, which further supported the diagnosis of Kabuki
syndrome. Ophthalmic abnormalities are frequently associated with Kabuki syndrome. A dysplastic elevated disc without central cupping and
colobomatous microphthalmia are rare ophthalmic abnormalities in patients with Kabuki syndrome. Careful ophthalmic evaluations should be
performed for each patient. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents of the patients for publication of this case report and
any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authorsâ€™ contribution YHC conducted the literature search and drafted the
manuscript. MHS and WCW conceived the idea for the manuscript, conducted the literature search and critically revised the manuscript. SHH
and CCL critically revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
