Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 49 Final Diagnosis: Asystole with cardiac arrest Symptoms: — Medication: —
Clinical Procedure: Peripheral inserted central catheter • lung biopsy Specialty: Pulmonology Rare disease Solitary fibrous tumors are rare
tumors of mesenchymal origins, most commonly seen arising from the pleural lining of the lungs. These are generally benign tumors, which in
rare cases have been identified to be associated with multiple paraneoplastic syndromes. This is a case of a solitary fibrous tumor of the
pleura in a 49 year old female which was found to be associated with elevated levels of serum beta human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG). Due
to the lack of plausible causes for elevated β-hCG in the patient, immune-histochemical staining of the tumor specimen for β-hCG was
obtained. This confirmed the patient’s solitary fibrous tumor as the source of the β-hCG. The patient was also found to have a possible
paraneoplastic syndrome with irregular menstruation and hot flushes from the secreted β-hCG. This is the first reported case of solitary
fibrous tumors of the pleura producing β-hCG. Multiple types of lung tumors have been associated with production of β-subunit of human
chorionic gonadotropin. Production of βhCG by these tumors has been associated with a poor prognosis. In this case, we find an aggressive
form of solitary fibrous tumor associated with production of β-hCG and associated paraneoplastic syndrome secondary to the β-hCG. Further
study is required to identify the frequency of this phenomenon and the implications of β-hCG production in the prognosis of the solitary
fibrous tumors. Solitary fibrous tumors (SFTs) are uncommon tumors, commonly seen arising from mesenchymal cells in the areolar tissue
subjacent to the mesothelial line in the pleura . These are generally benign tumors, but in about 13–37% of cases they are found to be
malignant . SFTs are known to produce paraneoplastic syndromes like hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy and refractory hypoglycemia
secondary to the production of insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) . This paper presents a novel case of SFT associated with secretion of
β-hCG(human chorionic gonadotropin beta subunit) with a possible paraneoplastic syndrome secondary to the secreted β-hCG. Human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG) is a glycoprotein hormone produced by placental trophoblasts and is made up of two subunits α and β. The most common
causes of elevated serum β-hCG are pregnancy and trophoblastic tumors . However, some of the non-trophoblastic tumors have also been
reported to be associated with either elevated serum β-hCG and/or positive for tissue β-hCG Immunochemistry staining and paraneoplastic
syndrome secondary to β-hCG production . 49-year-old female initially presented to the hospital with shortness of breath, cough and
pleuritic chest pain worsening over 3–4 weeks. Her physical Exam was only remarkable for reduced air entry on the left side with
unremarkable cardiovascular, neurologic, musculoskeletal exam and abdominal exam with no appreciable organomegaly. Patient’s past medical
history was significant for pyschosis treated with medication. On initial investigation, chest x-ray and chest CT scan showed left sided
pleural effusion with a possible underlying mass which was considered to be arising from the lung or pleural cavity as seen in Figure 1.
Chest x-ray obtained on a prior admission to psychiatry service 10 months ago was reported normal. The patient underwent thoracentesis and
tube thoracostomy. The pleural fluid exam was consistent with exudative effusion and cell count showed predominantly atypical lymphocytes.
After the draining of pleural effusion, repeat CT scan showed a well delineated mass in the lower left hemithorax, which was 12×8 cm in
maximum diameter and heterogenous in density with multiple areas of tissue necrosis. Subsequent imaging of the mass did not show a major
change increase in the size of the mass. Multiple tissue samples were obtained from different areas of the mass. All of which showed non-
specific fibrosis with islands of spindle-like cells and areas of necrosis. However, some cells revealed increased mitotic activity. Tissue
samples underwent immunohistochemistry staining which came out to be positive for CD34, CD99, Vimentin, bcl-2 and negative for p53, TTF1,
CK5/6. The histopathologic and immunohistochemical findings were consistent with solitary fibrous tumor which was considered to be arising
from the patient’s left pleura. Patient’s initial work up showed urine positive for β-hCG, following which a serum quantitative β-hCG
measurement was done, which was 1875 mIU/ml (normal: 5–50 mIU/ml). The patient reported that she had not been sexually active for many years
and has been suffering from peri-menopausal symptoms of irregular vaginal bleeding and hot flushes for a couple of months. The patient
denied any hormone replacement therapy or oral contraceptive treatment. Subsequently, LH and FSH levels were obtained, which were
undetectable. The patient had also been evaluated by CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis, which was negative for any lesions in the uterus,
ovaries or adnexa. CT scan was also negative for any other intra-abdominal mass or lymphadenopathy. Over the course of hospitalization the
serum β-hCG trended up from 1875 mIU/ml to 2174 mIU/ml. As there was no other explanation for the positive serum β-hCG the tissue samples
were stained by β-hCG antibodies that showed the patient’s tumor as the source of the β-hCG. During hospitalization the patient was
frequently found to be hypoglycemic even when she was not on any insulin or oral hypoglycemic medications. This was treated with intravenous
dextrose 50% push on multiple occasions and subsequently was kept on intravenous maintenance fluid containing dextrose 5%. Even with
intravenous dextrose treatment, patient’s blood glucose was always found to be borderline low. The patient over the course of
hospitalization got severely deconditioned and was not considered a surgical candidate for excision of her tumor. Eventually, the patient
died during her hospitalization from cardiac arrest secondary to massive pulmonary embolism. Solitary Fibrous tumors of the pleura are rare
primary malignancies of the pleura. SFTs have been reported in all age groups with an increased occurrence in sixth and seventh decade and
no significant gender predilection . The SFTs are commonly benign but can also be malignant with recurrenc after excision . Different case
series in literature have reported different frequency of malignancy in SFTs which range from 13 to 37% . The presenting symptoms of SFTs
could be thoracic like cough, pleuritic chest pain and dyspnea or in less commonly extrathoracic like hypoglycemia also known as “Doege-
Potter Syndrome” and hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy known as “Pierre-Marrie-Bamberger syndrome” . These thoracic and extrathoracic
symptoms (paraneoplastic syndrome) of SFTs are more commonly associated with large SFTs and typically resolve after excision of the tumor.
Larger tumors are also considered to be more aggressive with the malignant SFTs being larger than the bening SFTs in general . The criteria
of differentiating malignant and aggressive tumors from benign is currently based on histopathologic evaluation of the tumor. The malignant
tumors are identified by: (1) great cellularity; (2) infiltrative growth pattern; (3) nuclear variation; (4) prominent nucleoli; (5) more
than 4 mitoses per 10 high-power fields; (6) necrosis . However, this differentiation possible only after the resection of the tumor as the
sensitivity of CT guided biopsy is very low . It is also extremely difficult to distinguish the malignant from benign tumors and establish
aggressiveness of the tumors on radiologic evaluation. However, Rosado-De-chirstino et al. proposed that the malignant tumors can be
identified by their increased heterogeneity which is due to myxoid degeneration, necrosis and cystic changes along with associated pleural
effusions . Immunohistochemistry is very important in identifying and confirming SFTs and differentiating them from mesotheliomas and other
connective tissue neoplasm of the thorax. Most importantly, STFs are positive for vimentin and negative for keratin proving their
mesenchymal origin. They are also positive for CD34, CD99, bcl-2 . In summary, due to their rarity and great variability of histopathologic
features and the clinical behavior, SFTs remain a diagnostic and treatment enigma . In the presented case, the patient most likely had an
aggressive form of SFTs. This can be deduced firstly, from rapid growth of the tumor over couple of months as a chest X-ray done 10 months
back was reported negative. Secondly the CT scan showing heterogeneous mass with areas of necrosis identified as areas of air in the mass
and associated pleural effusion as seen in Figure 1. Thirdly, histopathology showing areas of high cellularity of spindle cells and
increased mitoticaly active cells. Finally, the tumor was associated with paraneoplastic syndrome of hypoglycemia since there was no other
explanation for the frequent drop in patients’ blood sugar levels requiring intravenous dextrose replacement. The most unique feature of
this case was the production of β-hCG by the tumor and the possibility of associated paraneoplastic syndrome induced by the secreted β-hCG
producing irregular menstruation and hot flushes seen in peri-menopausal stage. This is a first reported case to the knowledge of the
authors in which an SFT was found to be associated with secretion of β-hCG which produced systemic effects. Though the patient’s irregular
menstruation and peri-menopausal symptoms can be explained by natural progression to menopause, the low FSH and LH levels and the temporal
association of the onset of the peri-menopausal symptom to the growth of the tumor support the paraneoplastic effect of the β-hCG produced
by the tumor itself. Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) is a glycoprotein hormone generally produced by placental trophoblasts. hCG belongs
to glycoprotein hormone family, which also includes luteinizing hormone(LH), follicle-stimulating hormone(FSH), and thyroid-stimulating
hormone(TSH). All of these hormones are composed of α and β subunits. The α subunit is common to all of glycoprotein hormones, but β subunit
is specific for each one and is responsible for their biologic activity . The most common cause of elevated β-hCG in the serum is pregnancy
making it the most sensitive test for pregnancy diagnosis and follow up the disorders related to pregnancy. The second most common cause for
elevated hCG is trophoblastic tumors of placental and germ cell origin . Some of the non-trophoblastic tumors like gastrointestinal cancers,
lung cancers, urinary tract cancers etc are also known to produce hCG, which in most cases is only the β subunit of hCG . In some cases with
nontrophoblastic tumors only the tissue showed positivity for βhCG on immunohistochemical stain with no detectable serum or urine β-hCG.
This has been summarized in Table 1 . The presence of serum β-hCG in non-trophoblastic tumors especially gastrointestinal cancers, urinary
tract cancer and to some extent in lung cancers has a prognostic value and higher levels of β-hCG are associate with worse prognosis . This
could be attributed to the anti-apoptotic effect of the βhCG on the cancer cells . β-hCG production in some of these non-trophoblastic
malignancies was associated with paraneoplastic syndromes like gynecomastia in men, precocious puberty in children and amenorrhea and
dysfunctional uterine bleeding in women . Unfortunately, as the frequency of elevated serum β-hCG in non-trophoblastic tumors is only about
10–30% it cannot be used as a tumor marker . From all this it can be understood that due to the versatility and variability of the SFTs it
is very difficult to identify the aggressive forms of tumors from the indolent ones without complete re-section and histopathologic
examination of the tissue specimen. However, the association of β-hCG production by SFTs could provide an alternative prognostic marker
preoperatively to identify aggressive SFTs along with other radiologic and histopathologic features. But more research is required to test
this hypothesis. This article reports a novel case of solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura secreting β-hCG and producing paraneoplastic
syndrome secondary to the β-hCG. More testing and research is needed to determine the frequency of this phenomenon and also if any other
hormones can be produced by the highly versatile SFTs. This would help in addressing the prognostic implications of association of β-hCG
productions by the SFTs. Conflict of interest All the authors of the article state that there have been no conflicts of interest among the
authors. Dr. Mark Gilbert of Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center, Department of Pathology for his guidance and opinion and his help in
obtaining immunohistochemical staining of the tissue specimen. solitary fibrous tumors; solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura; human
chorionic gonadotropin; β subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin; α subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin; computed axial tomography;
normal values; follicular stimulating hormone; luteinizing hormone Sagittal and axial CT image of the left lung showing a mass arising from
the left diaphragmatic pleura and growing towards the spleen, compressing the left lung and associated with pleural effusion. Also
noticeable is the heterogeneity of the mass and air within the mass, which represents areas of necrosis and is a sign of a rapidly growing
tumor. Non-trophoblastic tumors with serum β-hCG positivity and/or tissue positivity. Tissue β-hCG positivity identified on
immunohistochemical staining of the tissue specimen with.
