Systemic lupus erythematous (SLE) is an auto-immune disease with multiple organ involvements that occurs mainly in young women. Literature
data suggest that serositis is more frequent in late-onset SLE. However, peritoneal serositis with massive ascites is an extremely rare
manifestation. We report a case of old-onset lupus peritonitis treated successfully by Hydroxychloroquine. A 77-year-old Tunisian woman was
hospitalized because of massive painful ascites. Her family history did not include any autoimmune disease. She was explored 4 years prior
to admission for exudative pleuritis of the right lung without any established diagnosis. Physical examination showed only massive ascites.
Laboratory investigations showed leucopenia: 3100/mm3, lymphopenia: 840/mm3 and trace protein (0.03g/24h). Ascitic fluid contained 170 cells
mm3 (67% lymphocytes), 46 g/L protein, but no malignant cells. The main etiologies of exudative ascites were excluded. She had markedly
elevated anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) titer of 1/1600 and a significantly elevated titer of antibody to double-stranded DNA (83 IU/mL) with
hypo-complementemia (C3 levl was at 67 mg/dL). Antibody against the Smith antigen was also positive. Relying on these findings, the patient
was diagnosed with SLE and treated with Hydroxychloroquine 200 mg daily in combination with diuretics. One month later, there was no
detectable ascitic fluid and no pleural effusions. Five months later she remained free from symptoms while continuing to take chloroquine.
This case was characterized by old age of onset of SLE, the extremely rare initial presentation with lupus peritonitis and massive painful
ascites with dramatic response to only hydroxychloroquine treatment. Systemic lupus erythematous (SLE) is an auto-immune disease with
multiple organ involvements that occurs mainly in young women. However, the elderly onset of SLE is rarely reported. This later age at onset
has a strong modifying effect on the clinical presentation . For instance, literature data suggest that pulmonary involvement and serositis
are more frequent in late-onset SLE . However, peritoneal serositis with massive ascites (known as lupus peritonitis) is an extremely rare
manifestation . Here, we report a 77-year-old woman with SLE whose disease manifested first as massive ascites treated successfully with
Hydroxychloroquine. A 77-year-old Tunisian woman was hospitalized because of massive painful ascites. Her family history did not include any
autoimmune disease. She denied a history of hepatitis, jaundice or alcohol use. She had a history of diabetes, hypertension treated by
glinide and calcium blocker. She was explored 4 years prior to admission for exudative pleuritis of the right lung without any established
diagnosis after multiple explorations including thoracoscopy with biopsies. On admission, blood pressure was 150/70 mmHg, her rate was 80
/mn and body temperature was 37°C. The physical examination showed only abdominal distension related to the important ascites without
collateral venous circulation. She had no skin lesions, lymphadenopathy, or hepatosplenomegaly and lower extremities showed no edema.
Laboratory investigations showed: leucopenia with white blood cell count = 3100/mm3, lymphopenia = 840/mm3, hemoglobin = 10.5g/dL; low serum
albumin level = 29g/L, 47;-globulin = 19g/L. blood glucose levels = 180 mg/dl and hemoglobin A1c = 8.6%. Urine analysis showed trace protein
(0.03g/24h). Platelet count, activated partial thromboplastin time, liver function tests, blood urea nitrogen, serum creatinine, erythrocyte
sediment rate and total cholesterol were within normal limits. Tests for HBsAg and HCV were negative. Abdominal ultrasonography showed
ascitic fluid without any sign of bowel loop thickening or enteritis. Neither lymphadenopathy nor liver abnormality was present. A chest
X-ray film disclosed bilateral pleural effusion. Ascitic obtained by aspiration contained 170 cells mm3 (67% lymphocytes), 46g/L protein,
but no malignant cells. Cultures for bacteria and mycobacteria gave no growth. Tuberculosis investigation including initial tuberculin skin
test and the research of Koch bacilli in sputum and urine were negative. Echocardiogram and electrocardiogram were normal. Computed
tomographic scan showed massive ascites, no dysmorphic liver, and a mild bilateral pleural effusion. Pelvic examination was normal.
Oesogastroduodenoscopy showed hiatal hernia without oesophageal varices. An exploratory laparoscopy was performed, revealing a large amount
of ascite, a normal liver appearance, and no granulations suggesting tuberculosis or peritoneal carcinosis. Histological examination of the
peritoneum showed non specific chronic inflammation. Systemic lupus erythematosus was suspected based on pleuritis, lymphopenia and
leucopenia. An additional serologic survey revealed markedly elevated anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) titer of 1/1600 and a significantly
elevated titer of antibody to double-stranded DNA (83 IU/mL; normal < 30 IU/mL). She had also positive serum antibody against the Smith
antigen and low serum level of C3 complement component: 67 mg/dL (serum normal range: 84 – 151). Relying on these findings, the patient was
diagnosed with SLE since 4 of the 11 diagnostic criteria of the American College of Rheumatology were met. The SLEDAI score according to
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index was estimated to be 7 on admission. Hydroxychloroquine 200 mg daily in combination with
diuretics was initiated. One month later, there was no detectable ascitic fluid and no pleural effusions. Five months later she remained
free from symptoms while continuing to take Hydroxychloroquine Systemic lupus erythematosus is an autoimmune disorder characterized by
involvement of various organs. Inflammation of serous membranes including pericardium, pleura is relatively common (12%) and was admitted by
American College of Rheumatology as one of the 11 criteria of SLE . The incidences of pleuritis and pericarditis were reported to be higher
in the elderly patients with SLE compared to younger patients . Ascites may present with or without pain, and may be due to lupus
peritonitis. In post mortem study, peritoneal involvement has been found in tow thirds of patients . While, peritoneal serositis with
ascites in clinical practice is extremely rare . Diagnosing lupus peritonitis as initial symptoms of SLE remains a challenging task. Lupus
peritonitis may have similar symptoms as those of acute abdominal conditions such as acute cholecystitis, acute pancreatitis, bleeding
peptic ulcer, intestinal obstruction, peritonitis or rapid onset of massive ascites. It can also manifest in a chronic way as long lasting
painless ascites, chronic pancreatitis or mild abdominal pain . The mechanism of ascites in SLE may be multifactorial. First it's postulated
that the deposition of immune-complexes in the peritoneum and activation of complements play in important role. Second, vasculitis of
peritoneal vessels or the serous membrane of abdominal organs may be related to lupus peritonitis . Corbella et al suggested that
antiphospholipid emphasized chronic ascites in their patient . Lupus ascites should be considered an exclusion diagnosis, identifying the
nature of ascites remains a necessity as etiologies other than SLE should be ruled out, such as neoplasm: peritoneal carcinomatosis, primary
masothelioma, hepatocell carcinoma; peritoneal infection like tuberculosis and HIV-associated peritonitis; nephritic syndrome, protein
losing enteropathy, malnutrition and congestive heart failure . Peritonel histology showed chronic inflammation and small vasculitis, the
degree of inflammation in the peritoneum may be different between acute and chronic lupus . In the case reported here, the patient had a
massive painful ascites of acute–onset in a case of elderly onset lupus erythematosus. Her initial SLE manifestation may be pleuritis 4
years before. In this age, the presenting manifestations in these patients are commonly atypical and the diagnosis in this age group is
usually tardy . A literature search with Pubmed revealed only three elderly cases with lupus peritonitis were reported previously [8, 10,
11] Table 1. Proteinuria was seen in two patients, pleuretis was noted in all cases that presented chest X-ray including the present case.
Pericarditis was fond in two cases. Steroid administration was performed in all patients. Two patients died despite treatment with high dose
of prednisolone, Recently, Ito et al reported only three death from 16 cases reported, two from three death are elderly aged more than 70
years. They suggest that lupus peritonitis at elderly onset shows a poor prognosis than in the younger patients . Some data showed a greater
disease activity score and greater damage in late-onset patients, this hypothesis was supported by a higher mean of SLEDAI score and greater
mortality . More recently in updated pooled analysis data in the literature, Chen et al reported that old-onset SLE presented less skin and
renal damages as well as autoantibodies, but lung damage was more severe . The cause of death in elderly SLE patient may be multifactorial:
Comorbidities concomitant therapies, infections, cardiovascular disorders and malignancies. In our case, the activity of SLE was low, SLEDAI
was 7. The patient had a history of diabetes mellitus and her blood glucose still fluctuated. Considering her age and serious comorbidities,
we initiate hydroxychloroquine, the massive ascites responded dramatically to this therapy. In old-onset SLE, the use of antimalarial agents
such as hydroxychloroquine is an important aspect of SLE treatment when skin changes and arthritis are manifested, unless contraindicated.
Willis et al confirmed in multiethnic multi-center cohort that Hydroxychloroquine therapy resulted in significant clinical improvement in
SLE patients with reductions in IFN-a levels , Other treatments mostly include corticosteroids and immunosuppressive agents, depending on
which organs are involved. Ito and associates in a recent review of chronic lupus peritonitis, reported that all patients treated by
steroids, but only 13/16 reached remissions, In 40% additional immunosuppressant agents were associated to manage incomplete remission and
recurrence ascites . In our knowledge this the first case treated only by using hydroxychloroquine and diuretics. This suggests that
inflammation of the peritoneum may be mild in the elderly. Literature Reporting of Lupus Peritonitis in the elderly (aged more than 60
years) ANA:antinuclear antibody, ds-DNA: anti-DNA antibody, n.d.: no description. ECA: extracorporeal apheresis, HCQ: hydroxychloroquine
This case we report is one of four cases at the onset age of SLE over 60 years, which presented with lupus peritonitis as initial symptom
with a dramatic response with hydroxychloroquine. Systemic lupus erythematous rarely presents with massive ascites. Other causes of ascites
should be excluded. Treatment is based on the use of diuretics, high dose of steroids, and in non-responding cases immunosuppressive drugs.
Antimalarial agents might be effective in severe ascites if no acute life-threatening organ damage exists. The authors thank the departments
of gastroenterology and histopathology of the CHU of Monastir Tunisia for providing help in the diagnosis and management of the patient
described in the case report. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. SH carried out the literature search and drafted
the manuscript and given the final approval of the version to be published; FB collected the information regarding the case contributed to
writing the manuscript did the critical revision for important intellectual content in the manuscript; AO collected the information
regarding the case. HL collected the information regarding the case. SM co-authored the manuscript and HS was a contributor in writing the
manuscript and co-authored the manuscript. All the authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript.
