Cervical spondylosis as a cause of diaphragmatic weakness is an uncommon entity and has been reported primarily in the setting of cervical
spinal cord compression. Cervical spondylosis most often causes respiratory failure from cervical myelopathy and damage to the ventral horn
cells at spinal cord segments C3 to C5 from where the phrenic nerve arises. The manifestations are variable but there may be evidence of
upper motor neuron signs and neurological deficits in the lower extremities along with Lhermitte’s sign. Here we report a rare case of
cervical spondylosis causing phrenic nerve root compression from foraminal narrowing at C3, C4 and C5, leading to lower motor neuron
paralysis of the phrenic nerve and respiratory failure, in the absence of spinal cord involvement. An 87-year-old Caucasian man presented
with recurrent episodes of hypercapnic respiratory failure and altered mental status requiring intubation. He was noted to have neurological
deficits in his upper extremities with C5 radiculopathy deficits. An arterial blood gas showed a normal alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient
with chronic respiratory acidosis, and pulmonary function testing showed restrictive lung mechanics with weakened neuromuscular apparatus
and low maximum inspiratory and expiratory pressures. An extensive workup including electromyogram and magnetic resonance imaging showed
evidence of phrenic neuropathy secondary to C3 to C5 neural foramina compression, from cervical spondylosis. He was treated conservatively
with night-time bilevel positive airway pressure which rested his respiratory musculature with significant improvement. Cervical spondylosis
leading to phrenic nerve root compression is a rare and underreported cause of chronic respiratory acidosis and must be considered in the
differential diagnosis of chronic hypoventilation, particularly in the elderly. This case illustrates how a simple arterial blood gas and
calculation of the alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient can help in the workup of chronic respiratory acidosis by identifying causes of
hypoventilation, which are associated with a normal diffusing lung capacity and thereby a normal alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient. Cervical
spondylosis as a cause of diaphragmatic weakness is an uncommon entity and has been reported primarily in the setting of cervical spinal
cord compression. Here we describe an unusual case of recurrent hypercapnic respiratory failure from cervical spondylosis-induced nerve root
compression and diaphragmatic weakness. There was no evidence of spinal cord compression. This case illustrates how a simple arterial blood
gas (ABG) and calculation of the alveolar-arterial oxygen (A-a) gradient can help in the workup of chronic respiratory acidosis by
identifying causes of hypoventilation, which are associated with a normal diffusing lung capacity and thereby a normal A-a gradient.
Cervical radiculopathy resulting from nerve root compression is most often due to cervical spondylosis (cervical osteoarthritis).
Osteophytes, disk protrusions, and hypertrophic facet or uncovertebral joints may compress nerve roots at the intervertebral foramina and
this compression accounts for 75% of cervical radiculopathies. The underlying primary pathology is usually degenerative disease of the
intervertebral discs. This is followed by reactive hyperostosis with osteophyte formation. Ischemia of the cord or roots from compression or
distortion of small blood vessels may contribute to the neurologic deficit. It is important to remember however, that pain is notably absent
in a significant number of cases of cervical spondylosis and may delay the diagnosis as in our patient. The pain is believed to occur only
when there is dorsal root (sensory) ganglion compression . The roots most commonly affected are C7 and C6. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
is the study of choice to define the anatomic abnormalities, but plain computed tomography is adequate to assess bony spurs, foraminal
narrowing, or ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament. An 87-year-old Caucasian man was transferred from another hospital after
an episode of altered mental status secondary to hypercapnea requiring intubation. His past medical history included type 2 diabetes, stage
3 chronic kidney disease, and heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. He was a lifelong non-cigarette smoker. Per the family he was
complaining of shortness of breath, weight gain and worsening leg swelling for 3 weeks, and was progressively more somnolent over the last
week. On admission to the outside hospital the results of his laboratory tests were significant for a normal blood glucose of 176mg/dL,
normal white blood cell count at 7000 cells/mm3, creatinine of 1.6mg/dL (at his baseline), elevated brain natriuretic peptide at 778pg/mL
and negative toxicology screen. He had no history of opioid or benzodiazepine usage. His ABG showed acute on chronic hypercapnea with a pH
of 7.22, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) of 83mmHg and bicarbonate (HCO3) of 36mmol/L requiring intubation explaining his altered
mental status. He was noted to be in congestive cardiac failure and was given diuretics and eventually he was extubated. He was transferred
to our institution on nightly bilevel positive airway pressure (bipap) for his unexplained hypercapnic failure. His only complaint on
transfer was his chronic two-pillow orthopnea. On arrival he was in no acute distress with a heart rate of 74, respiratory rate of 20, blood
pressure of 107/65mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 98% on 2L nasal cannula. A cardiovascular and respiratory system examination was
unrevealing with normal jugular venous pressure and normal cardiac examination. There was paradoxical abdominal motion with the abdominal
wall moving inwards on inspiration. A neurologic examination revealed 3/5 strength in his left deltoid and decreased biceps reflexes
bilaterally. Power, tone and reflexes were normal in both his lower limbs. He also had severe osteoarthrosis of distal and proximal
interphalangeal joints bilaterally with Heberden’s nodes. His ABG on room air showed a partial pressure of oxygen of 64mmHg, pCO2 of 53mmHg,
HCO3 of 28mmol/L and a pH of 7.33 with a normal A-a gradient of 18. This was consistent with chronic respiratory acidosis secondary to
hypoventilation, given the normal A-a gradient. A chest X-ray showed elevated hemidiaphragms bilaterally (Figure 1). Pulmonary function
testing showed a restrictive pattern with a normal ratio of forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) to forced vital capacity (FVC) of
0.79 (114% predicted), with FEV1 and FVC 49 and 42% of predicted respectively. There were also significantly decreased maximum inspiratory
and maximum expiratory pressures of 27.2 and 31.4% predicted; and a decrease in FVC of 22% from the sitting to supine position suggestive of
neuromuscular weakness (>20%). The diffusing capacity was normal suggesting a chest wall or neuromuscular cause of restrictive lung
mechanics.Figure 1 Chest X-ray showing elevated hemidiaphragms bilaterally with pleural effusions, perihilar edema and cardiomegaly. Chest
X-ray showing elevated hemidiaphragms bilaterally with pleural effusions, perihilar edema and cardiomegaly. Given his abnormal neurologic
examination with left deltoid weakness and decreased biceps reflexes, our differential included respiratory neuromuscular weakness from
cervical spondylosis and phrenic nerve root compression (given the C5 neurological deficits); or possible cervical myelopathy at C5/C6. The
absent biceps reflex (C5 and C6) raised suspicion for myelopathy at the C5 to C6 level although this is typically associated with a brisk
triceps reflex (C7). The lack of neurological findings in his lower extremities also argued against myelopathy, but given the potential
variable manifestations of cervical myelopathy, an electromyogram (EMG) and nerve conduction study (NCS) were performed. The EMG and NCS
revealed decreased amplitude in the phrenic nerves bilaterally and radiculopathy in his upper limbs, suggestive of nerve root compression at
the cervical foraminal level. There was no evidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or myopathy on EMG/NCS and serum creatine phosphokinase
was normal. A cervical MRI was performed and showed severe bilateral foraminal narrowing at C3, C4 and C5 with no evidence of myelopathy,
confirming the diagnosis of phrenic nerve root compression from cervical spondylosis as the cause of hypoventilation. When he developed
pulmonary edema, the resultant decreased lung compliance placed an increased respiratory load on his weakened neuromuscular apparatus
leading to worsening hypercapnea and resultant metabolic encephalopathy with altered mental status. Carbon dioxide, being readily diffusible
across the blood–brain barrier is a well-known cause of encephalopathy in the setting of hypercapnea. He was offered surgical decompression
of cervical motor roots or possible diaphragmatic pacing. Given his age, he opted for conservative management with nightly bipap to rest his
respiratory muscles at night. He showed significant improvement with night-time bipap and felt less fatigued during the day, probably from
the rest provided to his respiratory neuromuscular apparatus. Following discharge he remained stable but gradually became less compliant
with bipap. He had four admissions in 2 years with hypercapnic respiratory failure in the setting of pulmonary edema from heart failure.
Pulmonary edema and the resultant decreased lung compliance placed an increased respiratory load on his weakened neuromuscular apparatus. As
expected he fatigued more easily with his weakened neuromusculature leading to hypoventilation and worsening hypercapnea. He required
continuous bipap while hospitalized until diuresis improved chest wall compliance and respiratory mechanics. He continued to refuse invasive
therapies and was managed conservatively with nightly bipap. He developed evidence of right ventricular failure and pulmonary hypertension
on echo from a combination of pulmonary venous hypertension from heart failure and chronic hypoxia from hypoventilation secondary to his
neuromuscular weakness. Given his recurrent episodes of respiratory failure and worsening heart failure he was eventually transitioned to
hospice care. The phrenic nerve arises from the anterior rami of C3 to C5 spinal nerves. While phrenic nerve dysfunction has been previously
reported following myelopathy and anterior horn cell damage from cervical spondylosis, our patient had no evidence of spinal cord damage and
the phrenic neuropathy was from bilateral nerve root compression at C3 to C5 [2, 3]. Bilateral phrenic neuropathy from cervical spondylosis
is a rare cause of diaphragmatic weakness and respiratory failure with only sporadic case reports . The low incidence may reflect an
underreporting of cases. Similar to cervical radiculopathy, the signs of cervical spondylotic myelopathy are variable. If present, cervical
spinal cord involvement may be indicated by weakness or stiffness in the legs, or unsteadiness of gait. Some patients may exhibit
Lhermitte’s sign which is an electrical sensation elicited by neck flexion that radiates down the spine from the neck. Bilateral
diaphragmatic paralysis can occur from motor neuron disease, myopathy, acid maltase deficiency, lupus (shrinking lung syndrome), end-stage
renal disease, hypo or hyperthyroidism and malnutrition . Diabetes by itself can cause phrenic nerve neuropathy and this has been reported
in the literature . Although our patient was diabetic, it was felt less likely that the neuropathy was related to diabetes given the neural
foraminal compression and nerve impingement noted on MRI at C3 to C5. We cannot exclude, however, that diabetic neuropathy potentially was a
contributor to some of the phrenic nerve dysfunction. But with prominent compression noted on the MRI it was felt that compression was the
major determinant of phrenic nerve dysfunction. Even after diuresis our patient had persistent orthopnea, which occurs in bilateral
paralysis because the abdominal contents displace the diaphragm into the thorax when supine, which results in a significant (>500mL)
decrease in vital capacity and oxygen saturation. Fluoroscopy is not reliable in this situation because the flaccid diaphragm may lag behind
the ribcage expansion when accessory muscles contract, thus giving the impression of diaphragmatic contraction. This limitation is not seen
in unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis, where the sniff fluoroscopy test is positive in over 90% of cases. In cervical radiculopathy many of
the accessory muscles of respiration can also become weak from cervical nerve root compression, and contribute to the already increased load
on these muscles from the diaphragmatic dysfunction. Intermittent ventilatory support can help with respiratory muscle fatigue in this
setting, and this was the rationale behind him being discharged on nocturnal bipap. Cervical spondylosis-induced phrenic nerve compression
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of respiratory failure with a normal A-a gradient, especially when there is evidence of
cervical radiculopathy on neurological examination. An ABG on room air with calculation of the A-a gradient, can help in the evaluation of
unexplained hypoxemia and hypercapnea as a measure of diffusion across the capillary membrane. This is also much more practical to perform
in patients in ventilatory failure or respiratory distress, than formal pulmonary function testing with diffusing lung capacity. The formula
for the A-a gradient = (pIO2–1.25(PaCO2))–PaO2. A normal A-a gradient implies that hypoxemia is either from hypoventilation or from
decreased atmospheric pressure (as in high altitude) with a normal diffusion membrane in the lung. However, the A-a gradient may be mildly
elevated in those patients that develop significant basal atelectasis and ventilation/perfusion mismatch and hence a high index of suspicion
is required for this rare but potentially reversible cause of respiratory failure. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Alveolar-arterial oxygen Arterial blood gas Bilevel positive airway pressure Electromyogram Forced expiratory volume in 1
second Forced vital capacity Bicarbonate Magnetic resonance imaging Nerve conduction study Partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial
blood Partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood Partial pressure of carbon dioxide Partial pressure of inspired oxygen. Competing
interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions YR and RJ both contributed equally in
preparation and review of the manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.
