Dramatic improvements in DNA-sequencing technologies and computational analyses have led to wide use of whole exome sequencing (WES) to
identify the genetic basis of Mendelian disorders. More than 180 novel rare-disease-causing genes with Mendelian inheritance patterns have
been discovered through sequencing the exomes of just a few unrelated individuals or family members. As rare/novel genetic variants continue
to be uncovered, there is a major challenge in distinguishing true pathogenic variants from rare benign mutations. We used publicly
available exome cohorts, together with the dbSNP database, to derive a list of genes (n = 100) that most frequently exhibit rare (<1%) non-
synonymous/splice-site variants in general populations. We termed these genes FLAGS for FrequentLy mutAted GeneS and analyzed their
properties. Analysis of FLAGS revealed that these genes have significantly longer protein coding sequences, a greater number of paralogs and
display less evolutionarily selective pressure than expected. FLAGS are more frequently reported in PubMed clinical literature and more
frequently associated with diseased phenotypes compared to the set of human protein-coding genes. We demonstrated an overlap between FLAGS
and the rare-disease causing genes recently discovered through WES studies (n = 10) and the need for replication studies and rigorous
statistical and biological analyses when associating FLAGS to rare disease. Finally, we showed how FLAGS are applied in disease-causing
variant prioritization approach on exome data from a family affected by an unknown rare genetic disorder. We showed that some genes are
frequently affected by rare, likely functional variants in general population, and are frequently observed in WES studies analyzing diverse
rare phenotypes. We found that the rate at which genes accumulate rare mutations is beneficial information for prioritizing candidates. We
provided a ranking system based on the mutation accumulation rates for prioritizing exome-captured human genes, and propose that clinical
reports associating any disease/phenotype to FLAGS be evaluated with extra caution. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s12920-014-0064-y) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Uncovering the genetic basis of
human disease improves care for affected patients and their families by providing a diagnosis, refining genetic counseling, informing
clinical management (incl. decision making on appropriate preventive measures and available treatments), and ultimately facilitation of
unrelated affected families as well identification of novel targets for treatment . Rare Mendelian diseases are caused by altered function
of single genes and individually have a low prevalence (fewer than 200,000 people in the United States, or fewer than 1 in 2,000 people in
Europe) but collectively these affect millions of individuals worldwide . The current best estimate on the number of rare genetic disorders
is between 6,000 to 7,000 based on the catalogue Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) , and a comprehensive reference portal for rare
diseases (Orphanet) ; however, taking into consideration that the human phenome is far from fully characterized together with higher
estimates on rare-disease-causing genes based on human mutation rate and the number of essential genes , the number of rare genetic
disorders is likely higher. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) high-throughput technologies have revolutionized the discovery of gene defects
causing rare human diseases by detecting genetic variations at base-pair resolution within an individual . NGS is widely used to sequence
either a portion of the human genome (~1%) by capturing the protein-coding sequences (known as whole exome sequencing, WES), or to sequence
the entire human genome (known as whole genome sequencing, WGS). In particular, WES technology had been widely used to identify genetic
basis of Mendelian disorders by sequencing the exomes of just a few unrelated individuals or family members, and has led to discovery of
more than 180 novel rare-disease-causing genes with Mendelian inheritance patterns, according to the review published in November 2013 (the
number continues to increase with some rapidity). Considering the estimates that genetic basis has been determined for about ~3,500 of the
rare diseases , there remain thousands of rare-disease-causing genes to be uncovered. With the increasing rate of the discovery of rare
genetic variants, WES has the potential to identify the majority of the remaining rare-disease-causing genes in the near future. A major
challenge in identification of the true pathogenic variants lies in the differentiation between a large number of non-pathogenic functional
variants and disease-causing sequence variants in a studied family (in this study, the term “functional variant” is restricted to
missense/nonsense and splice site variants). Current WES analyses of rare genetic disorders use similar approaches to filter the observed
variants to enrich for potential causal genes. Specifically, after the reads are mapped, and variants are called and annotated, the variants
are compared against internal exome databases as well as public databases, such as dbSNP , Exome Variant Server (EVS), 1000 Genomes Project
, and HapMap project to exclude variants that are likely to arise from technological causes and variants that are common (e.g. variants
observed in more than 1%) in a population. The variants are further prioritized based on their predicted effect on protein function , where
silent and non-coding variants (except for splice-site affecting variants) are typically excluded or ranked lower. The still extensive lists
of candidate disease-causing variants can be further refined based on the family history and a hypothesized model of inheritance . However,
it is well-established that a significant proportion of coding variants in each individual represent rare variants (absent from dbSNP or
observed with frequency of ≤1%) , and that genomes of healthy individuals contain an average of ~100 loss-of-function variants . The analyst
must further consider the possibility that non-coding variations (e.g. regulatory alterations) could be involved, thus the filtered results
may not contain the causal gene. Thus, for many rare disorders, it is still challenging to separate the real disease-causing variant from
the prioritized set of rare, likely functional variants that are not accountable for the investigated phenotype. There are broadly used
tools such as SIFT and PolyPhen-2 that provide an interpretation of mutation impacts. Many of these tools focus on the individual variants.
In the variant-focused studies, it has been noted that variants tend to arise more frequently in long genes (e.g. TTN and MUC16). In
considering that researchers often focus their interpretation of exome data on the genic level initially, it might be advantageous to have
methods and ranking systems that integrate the individual variants at the genic level more systematically to inform variant prioritization.
While there are long-standing methods for ranking a set of genes based on their annotations , there has been limited work on rankings based
on sequencing properties. One ranking system based on the genic level is RVIS . RVIS generates a score based on the frequencies of observed
common coding variants compared to the total number of observed variants in the same gene. To further help in identification of disease-
causing variants from families affected by rare Mendelian disorders, we expanded the current, common prioritization parameters that focus
mainly on frequency at which variants themselves are seen in normal population, to include the frequency at which genes are found to be
affected by rare, likely functional variants. Using rare variations from dbSNP and EVS, we introduced the concept of FLAGS (FLAGS for
FrequentLy mutAted GeneS). We showed that these genes possess characteristics that make them less likely to be critical for disease
development, but are more likely to be assigned causality for diseases than expected for protein-coding genes in general. We further
demonstrated FLAGS’ utility via a case study as well as literature review, and application in our in-house database. Finally, we provided a
ranking system from FLAGS to assist in the prioritization of genes from exome/whole-genome clinical studies. In this study, the term
“functional variants” refers to variants that are missense, nonsense or fall within a splice site window (see below for specifics). The
length of a gene is defined to be the longest open reading frame (ORF) of the gene, thus excluding promoters, untranslated regions and
introns. All genes are referred to by their HGNC (HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee) official gene symbol. In the following sections, we
provide detailed descriptions of how the datasets were obtained or generated. Table 1 lists the size and descriptive nature of the datasets
used in this study. Each gene list referred to in this report can be found in Additional file 1: Table S1.Table 1 Description of the
datasets used in this study Name of datasets Size Description FLAGS100The top 100 of FrequentLy mutAted GeneS with rare (<1% allelic
frequency) functional variants from dbSNPv138 and ESP6500OMIM3099The list of protein-coding genes associated with human diseases from Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man HGMD2691The list of protein-coding genes with damaging mutations (<1% allelic frequency) from Human Gene
Mutation Database .WES300Downloaded from Boycott et al. (2013) - a list of novel genes implicated in human disorders based on whole exome
sequencing studies, or novel/known pathogenic mutations discovered by whole-exome sequencing.Background18580The entire set of human protein-
coding genes that have complete start and end translation annotations with a specified dN/dS ratioFrequentLy mutAted GeneS (FLAGS)Variations
from EVS hosted on the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project (ESP6500) were downloaded on February 2014. The criteria used to generate the
variations are available online (http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/). Variations from dbSNPv138 were downloaded from the NCBI website
(version date 20130806). Genomic annotations were assigned to each variation using SNPeff v3.5g with the parameter –SpliceSiteSize 7 and
human genome version GRCh37.75. Variants were filtered for allelic frequency <1% according to dbSNP’s overall frequency and EVS’s combined
population frequency. Where a discrepancy in the reported frequency arose between the two resources, we took the higher frequency. Variants
were further filtered for “functional” coding mutations that result in a change in the amino acid sequence (i.e. missense/nonsense), or
mutations that reside within a putative splice site junction (with a window size of 7, as supplied in the parameter for SNPeff). The
remaining mutations were excluded if they were observed more than 10 times within our in-house database consisting of 150 exomes and 13
whole genomes (a list of filtered out variants are provided in Additional file 2: Table S6 as VCF). This last step was included because we
noticed it is common to see polymorphic mutations from dbSNPv138 without an allelic frequency attached; filtering against an in-house
pipeline allowed us to remove polymorphic variants that do not have an annotated frequency. Among these remaining mutations, for each gene,
we counted the number of mutations observed per gene. Only protein-coding genes with a fully annotated translation start and end, and a
valid dN/dS ratio are included for consideration (see Methodology section “Gene length and dN/dS ratio”). From this ranked list, we selected
the top 100 genes (0.5% of the 19818 genes overlapping between dbSNP and EVS) with the most observed mutations as a focus for this study.
This set will be referred throughout the manuscript as “FLAGS”. The entire ranked list is available in Additional file 3: Table S4.Disease
genes datasetsTo obtain a list of reliable disease-associated genes, we drew from multiple resources. The first list of disease-associated
genes was downloaded from OMIM website on March 2014 using the provided file “morbidmap”. This list will be referred throughout the
manuscript as “OMIM genes”. A second list contains pathogenic variations downloaded from the HGMG professional version (file date 20130927)
. To focus on likely high-penetrance pathogenic alleles, we filtered the variations in this file by the same frequency criteria as we
performed for obtaining FLAGS (see Methodology section “FrequentLy mutated GeneS”), and limited to only the mutations annotated as “DM”
(damaging mutations). The affected genes from those remaining variations are compiled, and will be referred throughout this manuscript as
“HGMD genes”. A third disease set was downloaded from the Supplemental file published by Boycott et al. (2013) , which provided a compiled
list of novel genes and/or novel phenotypes associated with known disease-genes discovered through exome sequencing. For all three disease-
associated-gene lists, we mapped the gene symbols to their official HGNC gene symbol (and discarded the ones that could not be mapped),
retained only protein-coding genes with a fully annotated translation start and end, and a valid dN/dS ratio. OMIM and HGMD (Human Gene
Mutation database) overlap with the top 100 FLAGS by 42 and 37 genes respectively (Additional file 4: Table S2A, S2B).Background datasetThe
complete list of human-coding genes was downloaded from Ensembl Biomart on March 2014 using version Ensembl Genes 75 with genome version
GRCh37.p13. Protein-coding genes without HGNC gene symbol, a proper translation start and translation end annotation according to this
genome version were discarded. Genes without a valid dN/dS ratio were removed (i.e. without any observed synonymous polymorphisms according
to dbSNPv138 and EVS). This last step was done for two reasons: 1) to ensure there is no bias when evaluating dN/dS ratio in our results, 2)
to ensure the genes selected in this study have been covered in NGS studies, since any gene without at least one observed synonymous
mutation is presumably not sufficiently captured in either exome or whole-genome studies. The Background set overlaps FLAGS completely.The
comparison analyses in the Results section are done without removing the overlap between the gene datasets. Description of the datasets used
in this study FrequentLy mutAted GeneS (FLAGS) Variations from EVS hosted on the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project (ESP6500) were downloaded on
February 2014. The criteria used to generate the variations are available online (http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/). Variations from
dbSNPv138 were downloaded from the NCBI website (version date 20130806). Genomic annotations were assigned to each variation using SNPeff
v3.5g with the parameter –SpliceSiteSize 7 and human genome version GRCh37.75. Variants were filtered for allelic frequency <1% according to
dbSNP’s overall frequency and EVS’s combined population frequency. Where a discrepancy in the reported frequency arose between the two
resources, we took the higher frequency. Variants were further filtered for “functional” coding mutations that result in a change in the
amino acid sequence (i.e. missense/nonsense), or mutations that reside within a putative splice site junction (with a window size of 7, as
supplied in the parameter for SNPeff). The remaining mutations were excluded if they were observed more than 10 times within our in-house
database consisting of 150 exomes and 13 whole genomes (a list of filtered out variants are provided in Additional file 2: Table S6 as VCF).
This last step was included because we noticed it is common to see polymorphic mutations from dbSNPv138 without an allelic frequency
attached; filtering against an in-house pipeline allowed us to remove polymorphic variants that do not have an annotated frequency. Among
these remaining mutations, for each gene, we counted the number of mutations observed per gene. Only protein-coding genes with a fully
annotated translation start and end, and a valid dN/dS ratio are included for consideration (see Methodology section “Gene length and dN/dS
ratio”). From this ranked list, we selected the top 100 genes (0.5% of the 19818 genes overlapping between dbSNP and EVS) with the most
observed mutations as a focus for this study. This set will be referred throughout the manuscript as “FLAGS”. The entire ranked list is
available in Additional file 3: Table S4. Disease genes datasets To obtain a list of reliable disease-associated genes, we drew from
multiple resources. The first list of disease-associated genes was downloaded from OMIM website on March 2014 using the provided file
“morbidmap”. This list will be referred throughout the manuscript as “OMIM genes”. A second list contains pathogenic variations downloaded
from the HGMG professional version (file date 20130927) . To focus on likely high-penetrance pathogenic alleles, we filtered the variations
in this file by the same frequency criteria as we performed for obtaining FLAGS (see Methodology section “FrequentLy mutated GeneS”), and
limited to only the mutations annotated as “DM” (damaging mutations). The affected genes from those remaining variations are compiled, and
will be referred throughout this manuscript as “HGMD genes”. A third disease set was downloaded from the Supplemental file published by
Boycott et al. (2013) , which provided a compiled list of novel genes and/or novel phenotypes associated with known disease-genes discovered
through exome sequencing. For all three disease-associated-gene lists, we mapped the gene symbols to their official HGNC gene symbol (and
discarded the ones that could not be mapped), retained only protein-coding genes with a fully annotated translation start and end, and a
valid dN/dS ratio. OMIM and HGMD (Human Gene Mutation database) overlap with the top 100 FLAGS by 42 and 37 genes respectively (Additional
file 4: Table S2A, S2B). Background dataset The complete list of human-coding genes was downloaded from Ensembl Biomart on March 2014 using
version Ensembl Genes 75 with genome version GRCh37.p13. Protein-coding genes without HGNC gene symbol, a proper translation start and
translation end annotation according to this genome version were discarded. Genes without a valid dN/dS ratio were removed (i.e. without any
observed synonymous polymorphisms according to dbSNPv138 and EVS). This last step was done for two reasons: 1) to ensure there is no bias
when evaluating dN/dS ratio in our results, 2) to ensure the genes selected in this study have been covered in NGS studies, since any gene
without at least one observed synonymous mutation is presumably not sufficiently captured in either exome or whole-genome studies. The
Background set overlaps FLAGS completely. The comparison analyses in the Results section are done without removing the overlap between the
gene datasets. We calculated the selection pressures acting on genes by comparing non-synonymous substitution per non-synonymous site (dN)
to the synonymous substitutions per synonymous site (dS). This ratio of the number of non-synonymous substitutions per non-synonymous site
to the number of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site (dN/dS) was calculated using the formula \documentclass{minimal}
\usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{mathrsfs}
\usepackage{upgreek} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document}$$ \frac{\frac{\#\ of\ observed\ non- synonymous\ substitutions}{\#\
of\ possible\ non- synonymous\ site}}{\frac{\#\ of\ observed\ synonymous\ substitutions}{\#\ of\ possible\ synonymous\ substitutions}}
$$\end{document}#ofobservednon−synonymoussubstitutions#ofpossiblenon−synonymoussite#ofobservedsynonymoussubstitutions#ofpossiblesynonymoussubstitutions
. The number of possible synonymous and non-synonymous mutations was derived by examining the longest annotated coding transcript per gene
(transcript length based upon Ensembl Biomart described above). Only transcripts with annotated start and end positions were considered. The
number of observed synonymous and non-synonymous mutations was calculated from the same dbSNPv138 and EVS datasets as described above. We
verified that our methodology provides a comparable dN/dS ratios to the ratios reported previously (Additional file 5: Table S5). Gene
length was derived by converting the same transcript that was used to calculate the dN/dS ratio into amino acid sequences. In this study,
the term “gene length” is defined to be the ORF of the gene, thus excluding promoters, untranslated regions and introns. The paralogous
relationships for human genes were derived from the Ensembl Comparative Genomics API using version Ensembl Genes 75, GRCh37.p13. A custom
Perl script was written to extract the paralogs for every gene. We used MeSHOP software to identify over-represented disease terms
associated with each gene. MeSHOP returns a list of MeSH (Medical Subject Heading) terms for each gene with a p-value for each term. Each
p-value was calculated by an over-representation (compared to control) of the MeSH terms assigned to the set of articles within PubMed that
are associated with the gene (based on relationships defined in gene2pubmed; articles considered include up to March 2013). From this
output, for each gene, the non-disease related MeSH terms were filtered out, and the remaining MeSH terms were selected for significance
(using the Bonferroni correction and a significance threshold of 0.05). To derive gene-to-disease relationships with an independent source,
we extracted phenotypic diseased terms per gene from Human Phenotype Ontology website by downloading the file “genes_to_diseases.txt”
(version April 2014). For our publication analysis on the relationship between a gene and its frequency of citation(s) within biomedical
literature, we used Gene Reference into Function (GeneRIF), a manually curated list of experimentally validated gene functions available as
part of NCBI’s EntrezGene database. Each entry in GeneRIF contains a short description of a gene function and a PubMed identifier for the
publication documenting the evidence of the described function. Therefore, we were able to count the number of papers published on a gene’s
functionality by counting the number of PubMed records associated to the gene. The following are the detailed steps of our publication
calculation. First, two flat files necessary for our analysis were downloaded via FTP from NCBI Gene on April 2014: GeneRIF (available at
ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/gene/GeneRIF/generifs_basic.gz) and EntrezGene entries for human
(ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/gene/DATA/Homo_sapiens.gene_info.gz). Second, because GeneRIF refers to each gene by its EntrezGene ID, we mapped
the gene symbol of all genes on our lists (FLAGS, OMIM, HGMD, Background) to EntrezGene ID using EntrezGene entries downloaded in the
previous step. Third, for each gene of interest, we counted the number of PubMed IDs (PMIDs) associated with its EntrezGene ID in GeneRIF.
Because GeneRIF does not guarantee one-to-one relationship between a GeneRIF entry and a PMID
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK3840/#genefaq.Why_does_the_number_of_GeneRIFs), we filtered out duplicates in the list of PMIDs linked
to a gene. Last, to filter the PMIDs by their publication date, we collected the publication date of each PMID via queries into PubMed using
the ESummary query provided within the Entrez Programming Utilities (E-utilities). Unless stated otherwise, all statistical analyses and
plots were carried out in R version 2.15.3. Non-parametric Mann–Whitney U one-tailed test was executed by wilcox.test function with
parameter exact = TRUE. Violin plots were generated with Vioplot package. The input files to the analyses are available in Additional file
6: Table S9A and 9B. A 3-year old female patient, born as an only child to non-consanguineous parents of Turkish descent after an
uncomplicated pregnancy and delivery, presented with profound early-onset developmental delay, microcephaly, seizures, dysmorphic features,
myopia, bone marrow dysplasia with lymphopenia, neutropenia, aplastic anemia and combined immunodeficiency (B and T cell) was enrolled into
the TIDEX gene discovery project, approved by the Ethics Board of the Faculty of Medicine of the University of British Columbia (H12-00067).
Extensive clinical investigations were performed according to the TIDE diagnostic protocol to determine the etiology of patient’s condition.
These included: chromosome micro array analysis for copy number variants (CNVs) (Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0); telomere
length analysis; CT and MRI scans and comprehensive metabolic testing. Genomic DNA was isolated from the peripheral blood of the patient as
well as parents using standard techniques. Whole exome sequencing was performed for the index patient and her unaffected parents using the
Ion AmpliSeq™ Exome Kit and Ion Proton™ System from Life Technologies (Next Generation Sequencing Services, UBC, Vancouver, Canada) at 120X
coverage. An in-house designed bioinformatics pipeline (Additional file 7: Text S3) was used to align the reads to the human reference
genome version hg19 and to identify and assess rare variants for their potential to disrupt protein function. The candidate variants were
further confirmed using Sanger re-sequencing in all the family members. Primer sequences and PCR conditions are available on request.
Deleteriousness of the candidate variants was assessed using Combined Annotation–Dependent Depletion (CADD) scores . It has been previously
reported that TTN and MUC16 appear in multiple exome analyses due to their length ; researchers are aware of these genes and are cautious
when encountering rare likely functional (missense, nonsense, splice site) variants in WES analyses . In a study of 53 independent families
suffering from distinct rare inborn errors of metabolism (comprising of 150 whole exomes and 13 whole genomes; http://www.tidebc.org;
Additional file 8: Text S4 and Additional file 9: Table S7), we confirmed that rare/novel, likely functional variants affecting TTN and
MUC16 repeatedly passed all the prioritization steps of our pipeline and appeared in ~5% of our candidate disease-gene lists. However, other
genes were repeatedly observed in multiple families affected with different phenotypes (e.g. DST). This motivated us to compile a set of
FLAGS (FrequentLy mutAted GeneS) to understand their properties and facilitate better interpretation of phenotypes associated with these
variants. The FLAGS list was generated by ranking genes based on number of rare (<1%) functional variants affecting these genes in general
populations (NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project (ESP6500) and dbSNPv138). As expected, TTN and MUC16 are the top two genes based on the number
of rare functional variants; however, other genes that were frequently affected by rare, likely functional variants in multiple TIDE
families with unrelated phenotypes were also observed to be frequently mutated in general population (Additional file 10: Table S8). To
explore the properties of these frequently mutated genes, we focused our analysis on the top 100 from this ranked list, which we hereafter
refer to as FLAGS (Figure 1).Figure 1 The word cloud of FLAGS. A text file was created using a custom Perl script to reflect the frequency
of mutation per gene in FLAGS. The Tagxedo (http://www.tagxedo.com/) was then used to generate the word cloud. The size of the words
reflects how frequently they are found to bear rare, likely functional variants in the general population. As expected TTN and MUC16 are the
top two genes. The word cloud of FLAGS. A text file was created using a custom Perl script to reflect the frequency of mutation per gene in
FLAGS. The Tagxedo (http://www.tagxedo.com/) was then used to generate the word cloud. The size of the words reflects how frequently they
are found to bear rare, likely functional variants in the general population. As expected TTN and MUC16 are the top two genes. In this
study, the assignment of gene length refers to the longest open reading frame. Genes with longer ORFs are expected to have more mutations
than shorter genes. To confirm this, we determined the distribution of gene lengths based on the longest annotated open reading frame for
each gene. FLAGS have an average length of 4653 ± 3605 aa (amino acids). The high variance is due to two genes (TTN andMUC16) having
extremely long lengths (35992 and 14508 aa respectively) compared to the rest of the protein coding genes. Excluding the 2 outlying genes,
the remaining FLAGS genes (n = 98) have an average ORF length of 4233 ± 1399 aa. Figure 2a shows the distribution of ORF lengths across
different evaluated datasets (with outliers removed to show the distribution clearer). The entire FLAGS have overall much higher ORF length
than HGMD, OMIM and Background (HGMD, OMIM comparisons each yield a p-value <2.2e−16, Background comparison yields a p-value of 0.00027).
This is aligned with our expectation that FLAGS are frequently mutated from exome analysis because they correspond to genes with long coding
regions.Figure 2 Properties of FLAGS. (a) Violin distribution of open reading frame lengths across the evaluated gene sets. Y-axis shows the
length defined in terms of amino acids for the longest annotated transcript per gene. Outliers are excluded from the plot. (b) Distribution
of number of paralogs per gene across the evaluated gene sets. Y-axis shows the violin distribution of paralogs based on Ensembl Compara
database. Outliers are excluded from the plot. (c) Cumulative distribution of dN/dS ratio across the evaluated gene sets. X-axis is limited
from 0 to 2, and Y-axis plots the corresponding probability according to the cumulative distribution function. Properties of FLAGS. (a)
Violin distribution of open reading frame lengths across the evaluated gene sets. Y-axis shows the length defined in terms of amino acids
for the longest annotated transcript per gene. Outliers are excluded from the plot. (b) Distribution of number of paralogs per gene across
the evaluated gene sets. Y-axis shows the violin distribution of paralogs based on Ensembl Compara database. Outliers are excluded from the
plot. (c) Cumulative distribution of dN/dS ratio across the evaluated gene sets. X-axis is limited from 0 to 2, and Y-axis plots the
corresponding probability according to the cumulative distribution function. The presence of paralogs may increase tolerance for otherwise
phenotype-inducing functional variations due to functional compensation . We calculated the number of paralogs per gene reported by the
Ensembl Compara database , and compared this property between different gene sets. FLAGS overall have an average of 4 paralogs per gene.
Figure 2b shows the distribution of the number of paralogs across the different gene sets. Aligned with our expectation, FLAGS have more
paralogs than genes from OMIM, HGMD and Background (OMIM p-value = 7.2e−05, HGMD p-value = 7.4e−05, Background p-value = 8.1e−09). While the
existence of paralogs may cause read mapping challenges that leads to an increased frequency of false variant predictions, most of these
technical errors will be eliminated by a filter for variant frequency, as they will arise recurrently. Genes which exhibit many functional
genetic variations (missense/nonsense/splice site) may have a higher tolerance for variations and thus a reduced likelihood of phenotypes
subject to negative selection. For each gene, we calculated the dN/dS ratio as a proxy indicator of the amount of selective pressure acting
on protein-coding genes. FLAGS have an average dN/dS ratio of 0.65 ± 0.18. Overall these genes have significantly higher ratio compared to
genes from HGMD, OMIM, and Background (each individual comparison yields a p-value <0.005). Figure 2c shows the relative densities from
cumulative distribution functions for each gene set. The trend indicates that frequently mutated genes have higher dN/dS ratio on average
than expected. We explored the possibility that the FLAGS genes are affected by less deleterious rare variants compared to other genes. If
the variants in FLAGS are less likely to be involved in diseases, then we would expect the variants to have lower predicted damage scores.
To calculate this, we used the Phred-scaled Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion (CADD) score developed by Kircher et al. (2014) to rank
the deleteriousness of each single nucleotide variant . The method objectively integrates diverse annotations into a single measurement for
each variant by training upon ~15 million genetic variants separating humans from chimpanzees against a simulated set of variants not
exposed to selection. This method was chosen over other variant prediction tools because of its superior performance and its ability to
quantify the severity of a variant by a ranking system. This ranking system compares the candidate variant against other possible variants
in the genome and assigns it a score based on this comparison; other variant prediction tools do not take into account other possible
mutations in the genome . Also, the CADD method includes ranking of nonsense and splice site variants, while other tools only handle
missense . For each gene, we calculated the proportion of variants with CADD Phred-scaled score <10, between 10 and 20, and above 20. We
found that FLAGS are more enriched for variants with low scores, compared to OMIM and HGMD (Figure 3a; p-values = 2.6e−11, 2.9e−12
respectively). Likewise, OMIM and HGMD are more enriched for variants with high impact score (>20) than FLAGS (Figure 3b; p-values =
2.4e−09, and 1.2e−10 respectively). These results are aligned with our expectation. We additionally analyzed the genic tolerance of FLAGS to
functional genetic variants, using residual variation intolerance score (RVIS) published by Petrovski et al. (2013) and observed trends in
the same direction (Additional file 11: Text S2).Figure 3 FLAGS genes are affected by rare variants predicted to be less deleterious than
the variants affecting known disease-genes. (a) A boxplot distribution of proportion of variants with CADD score <10. The Y-axis plots the
proportion of variants within each gene set having a Phred-scaled CADD score of <10. The proportion was calculated per individual gene. (b)
A boxplot distribution of proportion of variants with CADD score >20. The Y-axis plots the proportion of variants within each gene set
having a Phred-scaled CADD score of >20. The proportion was calculated per individual gene. FLAGS genes are affected by rare variants
predicted to be less deleterious than the variants affecting known disease-genes. (a) A boxplot distribution of proportion of variants with
CADD score <10. The Y-axis plots the proportion of variants within each gene set having a Phred-scaled CADD score of <10. The proportion was
calculated per individual gene. (b) A boxplot distribution of proportion of variants with CADD score >20. The Y-axis plots the proportion of
variants within each gene set having a Phred-scaled CADD score of >20. The proportion was calculated per individual gene. We sought to
determine if there is a publication bias for pathogenic mutations in the frequently mutated genes. For each gene, we calculated the number
of publications related to human diseases and biological functions using GeneRIF annotations (Figure 4). FLAGS have an average of 51
articles per gene, which is lower than for genes from HGMD and OMIM (OMIM p-value = 0.00087, HGMD p-value = 0.0035). However, FLAGS have
more publications than the Background set (p-value = 6.3e−12).Figure 4 Cumulative distribution of the number of publications per gene across
the evaluated gene sets. X-axis plots the number of publications from GeneRIF per gene, and Y-axis plots the corresponding probability
according to the cumulative distribution function. Cumulative distribution of the number of publications per gene across the evaluated gene
sets. X-axis plots the number of publications from GeneRIF per gene, and Y-axis plots the corresponding probability according to the
cumulative distribution function. We next considered if the frequently mutated genes are associated with greater diversity of disease
phenotypes compared to disease-associated genes. Our expectation is that if the frequently seen genes are arising as candidates in more
studies, and are less likely to be truly pathogenic, then they could be associated to a wider range of phenotypes in the literature (we
recognize the association could also be due to pleiotropy , see Limitations). To analyze if FLAGS have been frequently correlated to human
diseases, we used two different computational resources (MeSHOP , HPO ) to extract known significant relationship(s) between genes and human
disease phenotypes based on published scientific articles. Figures 5a and b show the distribution of the number of disease terms from HPO
and MeSHOP per gene within gene sets. From MeSHOP results, we see that FLAGS have slightly fewer MeSH diseased terms per gene than genes
from OMIM (mean 8.1 vs. 10.2; p-value = 0.013), and significantly fewer terms per gene than HGMD genes (mean 8.1 vs. 9.5; p-value =
2.3e−12). FLAGS have more MeSH terms than Background genes (mean 8.1 vs. 3.1; p-value = 1.3e−15). These observations are consistent with the
results based on HPO annotations, where we again see that while FLAGS have fewer disease phenotypic terms than genes from OMIM and HGMD
(mean 2.1 vs. 3.7 and 3.8 respectively; p-values <0.0001), FLAGS exhibit more terms than the Background (mean 2.1 vs. 0.6; p-value =
3.7e−14). To adjust for the potential bias that genes with more articles are likely to have more MeSH and HPO terms attached, we repeated
the analysis by normalizing the MeSH and HPO terms to the number of publications in GeneRIF. The normalized observations are consistent with
the results if no normalization was applied (Additional file 12: Text S5).Figure 5 FLAGS tend to be associated with disease phenotypes. (a)
Violin distribution of number of HPO disease terms across the evaluated gene sets. Y-axis is the violin distribution showing the number of
HPO terms per gene. Outliers are excluded from the plot. (b) Violin distribution of number of MeSH disease terms from program MeSHOP across
the evaluated gene sets. Y-axis is the violin distribution showing the number of MeSH terms per gene. Outliers are excluded from the plot.
FLAGS tend to be associated with disease phenotypes. (a) Violin distribution of number of HPO disease terms across the evaluated gene sets.
Y-axis is the violin distribution showing the number of HPO terms per gene. Outliers are excluded from the plot. (b) Violin distribution of
number of MeSH disease terms from program MeSHOP across the evaluated gene sets. Y-axis is the violin distribution showing the number of
MeSH terms per gene. Outliers are excluded from the plot. We sought to determine which FLAGS have been reported with pathogenic mutations in
NGS clinical studies. Boycott et al. (2013) provided a compilation of 178 novel genes discovered to be disease-associated through exome
sequencing , of which three overlapped with FLAGS (KMT2D/MLL2, HERC2, and DST). To explore the properties of those 3 genes, we analyzed the
ratio between number of rare variants and gene length, as well as presence of putative essential protein domains by assessing the
distribution of rare variants across the gene. We found that among the FLAGS, KMT2D and HERC2 have the lowest ratios of number of rare
variants compared to gene length, while DST is one of the three genes among the FLAGS set with significant non-uniform distribution of rare
variants across the gene (p-value = 1.2e-04; the other two are EPPK1 and HRNR; see Additional file 13: Text S1 for more details on
methodology and rationale). If we were to expand this 178 novel-rare-disease gene list from Boycott et al. (2013) to include the exome
studies reporting on already-known disease-associated genes with known/novel pathogenic mutations, then this expanded set (n = 300)
overlapped FLAGS by an additional 7 genes (TTN, RYR1, PKHD1, RP1L1, ASPM, SACS, ABCA4). In the discussion we provide our thoughts and
literature analysis on why these genes have been reported as disease-associated despite being among the frequent genes to harbor rare
functional variants. To demonstrate a disease-causing variant prioritization approach using FLAGS and whole exome sequencing data, we
selected one family from our TIDE cohort affected by an unknown rare genetic disorder. Through WES performed for the index and her
unaffected parents (Methodology - Mutation Detection using WES – a case study), rare variants were identified and assessed for their
potential to disrupt protein function. Only those variants predicted to be functional (missense, nonsense and frameshift changes, as well as
in-frame deletions and splice-site effects) were subsequently screened under a series of inheritance models. In total, we identified six
rare “functional” homozygous, and eight rare “functional” compound heterozygous candidates. Of those, only two genes affected by missense
variants were considered functional candidates:VPS13B gene (MIM 607817) had been found to bear homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations
in patients with Cohen syndrome (MIM 216550). Cohen syndrome is characterized by developmental delay/intellectual disability, facial
dysmorphism, microcephaly, neutropenia, and weak muscle tone (hypotonia). The features of Cohen syndrome vary widely in presence and
severity among affected individuals. Additional features, perhaps patient-specific, appear in the reports; myopia and small hands and feet
are observed in our patient. In our WES analysis, we identified two rare variants affecting this gene in the index, suggesting compound
heterozygous inheritance. Neither of the variants was found in more than 160 in-house exomes; one of the variants was predicted to be
deleterious using the CADD scores with a score higher than 20, while the second variant was given the score of less than 5. Sanger re-
sequencing confirmed that mother is a carrier of one variant, while the father is the carrier of the second variant and the index is
compound heterozygous making the VPS13B gene a candidate disease-gene in this family.SENP1 gene (MIM 612157) product is one of the
desumoylating enzymes which is important for proper development and survival in mice. SENP1 was found to regulate expression of GATA1 in
mice and subsequent erythropoiesis . Furthermore, SENP1 was found to be essential for the development of early T and B cells through
regulation of STAT5 activation . To date, germline mutations in SENP1 had not been described in any human diseases. Our WES analysis
identified a rare missense homozygous variant in the index. The variant was not found in more than 160 in-house exomes and was predicted to
be the most deleterious of all homozygous variants using the CADD scores . The Sanger re-sequencing of the genomic DNA confirmed that index
is homozygous for the variant, while both parents are carriers. VPS13B gene (MIM 607817) had been found to bear homozygous or compound
heterozygous mutations in patients with Cohen syndrome (MIM 216550). Cohen syndrome is characterized by developmental delay/intellectual
disability, facial dysmorphism, microcephaly, neutropenia, and weak muscle tone (hypotonia). The features of Cohen syndrome vary widely in
presence and severity among affected individuals. Additional features, perhaps patient-specific, appear in the reports; myopia and small
hands and feet are observed in our patient. In our WES analysis, we identified two rare variants affecting this gene in the index,
suggesting compound heterozygous inheritance. Neither of the variants was found in more than 160 in-house exomes; one of the variants was
predicted to be deleterious using the CADD scores with a score higher than 20, while the second variant was given the score of less than 5.
Sanger re-sequencing confirmed that mother is a carrier of one variant, while the father is the carrier of the second variant and the index
is compound heterozygous making the VPS13B gene a candidate disease-gene in this family. SENP1 gene (MIM 612157) product is one of the
desumoylating enzymes which is important for proper development and survival in mice. SENP1 was found to regulate expression of GATA1 in
mice and subsequent erythropoiesis . Furthermore, SENP1 was found to be essential for the development of early T and B cells through
regulation of STAT5 activation . To date, germline mutations in SENP1 had not been described in any human diseases. Our WES analysis
identified a rare missense homozygous variant in the index. The variant was not found in more than 160 in-house exomes and was predicted to
be the most deleterious of all homozygous variants using the CADD scores . The Sanger re-sequencing of the genomic DNA confirmed that index
is homozygous for the variant, while both parents are carriers. To further prioritize between these two genes, we consider a FLAGS-based
approach. The VPS13B gene is one of the FLAGS (top 100, rank 67) and is frequently seen to be affected by rare, likely functional variants
in general population. On the other hand, SENP1 is rarely affected by functional variants in the general population (rank 11,947). In
addition, VPS13B is a frequently seen in the TIDE cohort of patients, 22 of 160 individuals have rare, likely functional alleles in the
VPS13B gene that pass our prioritization filters. In contrast, the family reported here is the only family from the TIDEX cohort of patients
with a rare, likely functional variant affecting the SENP1. In none of the other 160 exomes did the variants in SENP1 pass our
prioritization filters for rare, likely functional variants. Together with the fact that VPS13B does not fit well to her severe hematologic
findings and bone marrow dysplasia, FLAGS helped us select SENP1 as candidate gene for our experimental validation studies. The case report
will be published separately. We further applied prioritization of FLAGS on an in-house WES/WGS database and illustrated how trio-based
exome families have Mendelian recessive and dominant candidates overlapping with the FLAGS. The FLAGS ranking can be fed into the candidate
identification process and highlight genes that should be considered as high-risk candidates for false positives [Additional file 14].
WES/WGS studies can identify hundreds to thousands of rare protein-coding mutations per individual. Genes vary in their frequency of
appearance; genes that are more likely to harbor rare-coding variants by chance are less likely to be involved in human diseases, especially
in the context of rare Mendelian disorders. Previous studies have reported that TTN and MUC16, the two longest genes in the human genome,
should be interpreted with care due to their long lengths . In this study, we compiled a list of frequently mutated genes (FLAGS) based upon
analysis of rare coding mutations from dbSNP and Exome Variant Server ESP6500. We compared the biological properties of FLAGS against genes
from disease databases (HGMD, OMIM) that represent the currently best reliable curated resources for disease-associated genes. We further
demonstrated the clinical utilities of FLAGS as a gene prioritization tool. The discussion will illustrate additional clinical benefits of
FLAGS, and conclude with ideas for future directions and project limitations. Consistent with our expectations, FLAGS have significantly
longer coding lengths, higher average dN/dS ratios, and more paralogs than genes from OMIM and HGMD. Paralogs have been cited as capable to
partially compensate for the loss of gene function , so the greater frequency of paralogs could mean that mutations are less likely to have
a critical impact on phenotype. In the examination of the research literature for FLAGS, we observed fewer disease annotations compared to
disease genes, but elevated rates compared to background genes, suggesting that FLAGS have been associated to human disease more frequently
than the rest of the protein-coding genes. Prioritizing candidates in rare disease studies is important; as it takes substantial time of
experts to review each gene , getting better specificity without loss of sensitivity has real value. We demonstrated the utility of FLAGS as
a prioritization tool by overlapping FLAGS against candidates from clinical exomes in TIDE, without loss of ultimately identified causal
genes. We further illustrated with a single clinical case how when multiple equally attractive candidates are under consideration, FLAGS
provide a way for clinicians and researchers to decide which gene to focus on first. While we are not claiming every gene in FLAGS is non-
pathogenic, we do wish to make it clear that greater biological evidence is required when interpreting the functional impacts of rare
variants in frequently mutated genes. Among the 300 genes with putative pathogenic mutations identified via exome sequencing compiled by
Boycott et al. (2013) , ten genes intersected with FLAGS. We evaluated the gene-level and variant-level evidence for causality based upon
the guideline for investigation of causality published by MacArthur et al. (2014) . We found that many results are derived based upon
single-gene sequencing, rather than taking the less biased exome or whole-genome approach . In addition, many studies reported the mutations
as pathogenic simply due to segregation pattern within the family, rare allelic frequency and bioinformatics impact predictions , thus
lacking experimental validation at both the variant and gene levels. The screen for rare alleles is further complicated when some of the
studies look at minor ethnic populations that are not well represented in the population databases . The evidence behind missense variants
is especially doubtful when many missense variants are predicted by CADD to be benign with a lower impact rank than the rare mutations
observed from dbSNP and ESP6500. Altogether, these observations could explain why these genes harbor frequent rare functional variations
despite being reported in diseases. To avoid false-positive reports of causality, especially for FLAGS, it will be very important for
reports to follow the recently published guidelines when assigning pathogenicity to new variants identified as well as additional variants
identified in genes previously linked to a particular disease. An example of a good paper would be the one where the variant is identified
in a genome-wide screening approach with statistical methods applied to compare the distribution of variants in patients against a large
matched control cohorts, where the evidence is assessed at both the candidate gene and candidate variant levels, and where the authors
recognize the importance of combining both computational comparative approaches and experimental assays for validating the impact of the
variant. Genes with frequent rare variants need to be appropriately ranked in order to reduce false associations and streamline clinical
analysis. Our current results are limited to the top 100 frequently mutated genes. While it may be insightful to study the characteristics
of the genes at the other end of the spectrum (the bottom 100 or alternatively sets of genes with low mutation rates and gene-focused
publications to exclude genes with poor coverage in exome capture kits), we perceive the greatest long-term utility to be in the
incorporation of the complete set of rankings into the exome interpretation process. To make our prioritization ranking accessible to the
broad research community, we provide the FLAGS ranking for the genes represented in both dbSNP and EVS. The novelty that we bring forth is a
ranking that utilizes public control exomes/genomes, which clinicians can readily apply to their clinical cases. As discussed above, the
ranking is correlated with gene length, evolutionary constraint, and paralogous gene counts. The high accumulation rate of mutations can be
interpreted partially as genes being under less selective constraint. A utility of the FLAGS ranking is that it provides, albeit indirectly,
a gene-level indication of the selective constraint upon a gene, while most existing metrics such as phastCons or PhyloP provide a position-
specific value. While the FLAGS ranking is not a substitute for the more direct measures, the genic level information complements them.
Current prioritization tools lack the ability to evaluate at both genic and variant level simultaneously. Ultimately, a scoring mechanism
integrating biological and technological features at both the genic and variant level should be developed. A future direction is to improve
upon methodologies like RVIS and expand beyond the rate of mutation by employing statistical machine learning techniques to incorporate the
genic and allelic features as highlighted in this study and previous works to summarize them into a single computational score. Such a new
quantitative measurement should improve the ranking of pathogenicity for each gene, and highlight skeptical candidates to accelerate the
clinical translation of genomic research findings. The mechanism itself (e.g. the weights of features) would also shed light on the exact
nature of the causes of excess mutation rates and facilitate better biological understanding. In the long-term, the accumulation of more
exomes and whole genomes will provide an increasingly rich body of data for the generation of FLAGS rankings. In the study we relied upon
manually-curated GeneRIFs to extract the publications for each gene. One could argue for more sophisticated PubMed queries in combination
with semantic rules to increase the sensitivity for assigning human-disease related publications . We also recognize that neither MeSHOP nor
HPO capture gene-to-disease terms perfectly. A possible direction is to explore other gene-disease databases such as HuGE Navigator . We
further acknowledge that the interpretation of MesHOP and HPO could be influenced by pleiotropic genes. Similarly, we used Ensembl for
extracting the paralogous relationships for each gene, but there are other available extraction algorithms and databases for inferring
paralogy . Additionally, our present study is restricted to genes with both an HGNC symbol and a fully annotated translation start and end.
We recognize that not all protein-coding genes fit these criteria, and we are excluding non-coding genes (as well as 5′ and 3′ UTRs of
coding genes) from this analysis. While most complex disorders generally can confirm the strength of their findings by comparing against a
matched background cohort, the nature of studying rare monogenic disorders mean that there is often insufficient sample size to conduct a
rigorous statistical analysis on the strength of the finding. In this study, we extracted a list of frequently mutated genes based on rare
variants from dbSNP and Exome Variant Server. Our results revealed the biological properties of these genes that could explain why they are
frequently mutated, and why extra discretion in statistical and biological interpretation needs to be taken when trying to relate these
genes to clinical phenotypes. We propose that the ranking of how frequent a gene is mutated in next-generation sequencing studies is useful
for the prioritization of candidate genes. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s guardian/parent/next of kin for the
publication of this report. Additional file 1: Table S1. This table lists the five datasets used in this study, and the genes that made up
each dataset. The first row in the table shows the names of the datasets referred throughout the manuscript, and each column contains the
list of genes, referred to by their official gene symbol. Additional file 2: Table S6. A list of variants, in variant call format (VCF),
showing the mutations that were observed more than 10 times in our in-house database consisting of 150 exomes and 13 whole genomes, after
they were filtered by allelic frequencies according to the annotations from dbSNP and Exome variant server (refer to methodology section for
more details). Additional file 3: Table S4. The entire ranked list of FLAGS, with the most frequently mutated genes at the top. Additional
file 4: Table S2. There are two lists in this table. The first is a list of genes that overlapped between FLAGS vs. OMIM (Table S2A), and
the second is a list of genes that overlapped between FLAGS vs. HGMD (Table S2B). Additional file 5: Table S5. A table showing a comparison
of dN/dS ratio between the values we reported with our calculation (see manuscript for methodology), versus a previously published result of
a gene set (refer to reference in the manuscript). The results between the two methodologies were highly consistent. Additional file 6:
Table S9. This table shows the two input files that were fed into R for statistical analyses. In the table, the attributes for each gene
used in the analysis were described (dN/dS ratio, gene length, # of MeSH terms, # of HPO terms, # of paralogs for table S9A, and # of
pathogenic mutations from HGMD for table S9B). Additional file 7: Text S3. This section contains a concise description of our in-house
bioinformatics pipeline for processing exome and whole-genome datasets. Additional file 8: Text S4. This section provides a description of
the TIDE-BC project. Additional file 9: Table S7. A summary of the families studied in TIDEX project, and the number of candidate variants
remaining after filtering against genetic and allelic frequency thresholds. The results are broken down by family structure and the types of
genetic model applied. Refer to www.tidebc.org and additional text S4 for more information on the TIDEX project, and additional text S3 for
how the variants were called and filtered. Additional file 10: Table S8. A table of number of exomes from TIDEX project that lists out the
number of rare functional variants for each protein-coding gene captured in the exome capture kits. Please refer to methodology section for
how ‘rare’ and ‘functional’ descriptors were defined. Additional file 11: Text S2. A comparison of our FLAGS gene ranking system against
another method, residual variation intolerance score (RVIS) that also built upon public genomic datasets and ranked importance of each
gene’s association to human diseases. Agreements and disagreements between the two methods are discussed. Additional file 12: Text S5. This
section describes an analysis looking at the distribution of number of MeSH and HPO terms per gene, after normalizing by the number of
biological functionally-related literature published for that gene, as reported in GeneRIF. Additional file 13: Text S1. This section
describes an analysis looking at the uniformity of distribution for rare functional variants across genes. The hypothesis was that genes of
less significance to monogenic human diseases would display more uniformity in the occurrences of benign coding mutations across the protein
sequence, whereas genes that are more linked to causing penetrating diseases would harbor regions that are more devoid of mutations due to
conservation of important protein domains. Additional file 14: The PDF outlining the supplementary information for this manuscript. This
table lists the five datasets used in this study, and the genes that made up each dataset. The first row in the table shows the names of the
datasets referred throughout the manuscript, and each column contains the list of genes, referred to by their official gene symbol. A list
of variants, in variant call format (VCF), showing the mutations that were observed more than 10 times in our in-house database consisting
of 150 exomes and 13 whole genomes, after they were filtered by allelic frequencies according to the annotations from dbSNP and Exome
variant server (refer to methodology section for more details). The entire ranked list of FLAGS, with the most frequently mutated genes at
the top. There are two lists in this table. The first is a list of genes that overlapped between FLAGS vs. OMIM (Table S2A), and the second
is a list of genes that overlapped between FLAGS vs. HGMD (Table S2B). A table showing a comparison of dN/dS ratio between the values we
reported with our calculation (see manuscript for methodology), versus a previously published result of a gene set (refer to reference in
the manuscript). The results between the two methodologies were highly consistent. This table shows the two input files that were fed into R
for statistical analyses. In the table, the attributes for each gene used in the analysis were described (dN/dS ratio, gene length, # of
MeSH terms, # of HPO terms, # of paralogs for table S9A, and # of pathogenic mutations from HGMD for table S9B). This section contains a
concise description of our in-house bioinformatics pipeline for processing exome and whole-genome datasets. This section provides a
description of the TIDE-BC project. A summary of the families studied in TIDEX project, and the number of candidate variants remaining after
filtering against genetic and allelic frequency thresholds. The results are broken down by family structure and the types of genetic model
applied. Refer to www.tidebc.org and additional text S4 for more information on the TIDEX project, and additional text S3 for how the
variants were called and filtered. A table of number of exomes from TIDEX project that lists out the number of rare functional variants for
each protein-coding gene captured in the exome capture kits. Please refer to methodology section for how ‘rare’ and ‘functional’ descriptors
were defined. A comparison of our FLAGS gene ranking system against another method, residual variation intolerance score (RVIS) that also
built upon public genomic datasets and ranked importance of each gene’s association to human diseases. Agreements and disagreements between
the two methods are discussed. This section describes an analysis looking at the distribution of number of MeSH and HPO terms per gene,
after normalizing by the number of biological functionally-related literature published for that gene, as reported in GeneRIF. This section
describes an analysis looking at the uniformity of distribution for rare functional variants across genes. The hypothesis was that genes of
less significance to monogenic human diseases would display more uniformity in the occurrences of benign coding mutations across the protein
sequence, whereas genes that are more linked to causing penetrating diseases would harbor regions that are more devoid of mutations due to
conservation of important protein domains. The PDF outlining the supplementary information for this manuscript. Casper Shyr and Maja
Tarailo-Graovac contributed equally Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions
CS, MTG, MG and JJYL generated the data. CS, MTG, MG and JJYL analyzed the data. MTG, CvK and WWW designed the study. MTG and CS wrote the
manuscript. All authors read, edited and approved the final manuscript. We are indebted to the patient and her family for participation in
this study; Drs. J. Wu, J. Rozmus, S. Vercauteren, K. Hildebrand, T. Dewan and A. Garcera for clinical evaluation and management of the
patient; Mrs. X. Han for Sanger sequencing; Mr. B. Sayson for data management; Mrs. M. Higginson for DNA extraction, sample handling and
technical data; Dr. C. Vilarino-Guell for timely whole exome sequencing; Dr. W. Cheung for MeSHOP support; Mr. D. Arenillas and Mr. M. Hatas
for systems support, and Dora Pak for research management support. This work was supported by funding from the B.C. Children’s Hospital
Foundation as “1st Collaborative Area of Innovation” (www.tidebc.org); Genome BC (SOF-195 grant); Genome BC and Genome Canada grants 174CDE
(ABC4DE Project); and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research #301221 grant. CS is funded by CIHR-CGSD, JJYL is funded by NSERC-CREATE,
and MG is funded by CIHR-Computational Biology Undergraduate Summer Student Health Research.
