Absence of the maxillary lateral incisor creates an aesthetic problem which can be managed in various ways. The condition requires careful
treatment planning and consideration of the options and outcomes following either space closure or prosthetic replacement. Recent
developments in restorative dentistry have warranted a re-evaluation of the approach to this clinical situation. Factors relating both to
the patient and the teeth, including the presentation of malocclusion and the effect on the occlusion must be considered. The objective of
this study was to describe the etiology, prevalence and alternative treatment modalities for dental agenesis and to present a clinical case
of agenesis of the maxillary lateral incisors treated by the closure of excessive spaces and canine re-anatomization. A clinical case is
presented to illustrate the interdisciplinary approach between orthodontics and restorative dentistry for improved esthetic results. In this
report, the treatment of a girl with a Class II malocclusion of molars and canines with missing maxillary lateral incisors and convex facial
profile is shown. Treatment was successfully achieved and included the space closure of the areas corresponding to the missing upper lateral
incisors, through movement of the canines and the posterior teeth to mesial by fixed appliances as well as the canines transformation in the
maxillary lateral incisors. This is a 14-year follow-up case report involving orthodontics and restorative dentistry in which pretreatment,
post-treatment, and long-term follow-up records for the patient are presented. Congenital absence of one or both of the maxillary incisors
in humans has been observed since the Paleolithic period. With the evolution of species, the face and jaws tend to decrease in the
anteroposterior direction. This trend can limit the space needed to accommodate all of the teeth and, consequently, the last tooth of each
series tends to disappear (third molars, second premolars and lateral incisors). This is a hereditary process: a generation that has an
anomalous tooth (small-sized maxillary lateral incisors/peg-shaped lateral incisors) will have descendants that no longer possess this
tooth12. Despite presenting this aspect of heredity, agenesis can also be associated with other factors such as: congenital deformities
(including ectodermal dysplasia), radiation and nutritional disorders. However, genetics probably represents the primary etiological factor
of tooth agenesis16. The prevalence of agenesis is enhanced in the families of affected patients17. In a previous study, congenital absence
of the permanent lateral incisor with a frequency of 2.2% and absence of the second premolar with a frequency of 3.4% were reported24. An
interesting study performed in twins showed a high percentage of agreement for agenesis between homozygous twins, while all heterozygous
pairs of twins showed discordance for such dental anomaly11. In the 1960s, Garn and Lewis8 observed that patients with agenesis of third
molars had a higher prevalence of agenesis of other permanent teeth. The prevalence of agenesis of permanent teeth in patients with agenesis
of third molars was found to be 13 times higher than the prevalence of agenesis in patients with third molar teeth8. Recently, a pair of
monozygotic twins with second premolar and third molar agenesis was described to show differential expression of PAX9 and MSX1 genes10.
Tooth agenesis is the most common developmental anomaly of human dentition, occurring in approximately 25% of the population1,5,7,9,12. The
third molar is the most affected tooth, showing a prevalence of 20.7%7. The prevalence of agenesis is approximately 4.3% to 7.8%, excluding
third molars5,12. The second lower premolars represent the most commonly missing teeth, followed by maxillary lateral incisors and the upper
second premolars6. In Caucasians, the occurrence of tooth agenesis could be classified as: common, if it affects the mandibular second
premolars, maxillary lateral incisors and upper second premolars; less common, which includes, in decreasing order of occurrence, lower
central incisors, lower lateral incisors and upper first premolars, upper canines and lower second molars; and rare, comprising, in
descending order of frequency, agenesis of the first and second maxillary molars, lower canines, lower first molars and upper central
incisors19. It is important to notice that there is an ethnic difference in the prevalence of tooth agenesis. Epidemiological studies show a
lower prevalence of agenesis in black patients compared to whites, while Asians tend to show an increased frequency of agenesis19. Even
among Caucasian individuals from different continents, the prevalence of agenesis may oscillate19. For example, Caucasian Europeans and
Australians have a higher prevalence of agenesis compared to Caucasian North Americans. Regarding gender, this anomaly is more frequent in
females5. The majority of the patients with agenesis (7683%) have the absence of one or two permanent teeth6,19. The tooth agenesis is
usually bilateral and of symmetrical occurrence. There is an exception in relation to the upper lateral incisors, which often are absent
unilaterally, and the left side is more affected than the right side1,26. It is important to note that when only one lateral incisor is
absent, its counterpart usually presents anomaly of form (conoid) or size (microdontia)1,5,14-16,25. Some changes in the size of mesiodistal
crown of the other permanent teeth are also observed6,7,19,24. The diagnosis of this condition consists of clinical examination associated
with radiographic examination and, more recently, cone beam computed tomography (CT) scan. Treatment of patients with unilateral or
bilateral lateral incisors agenesis must be multidisciplinary, involving Orthodontics, Restorative Dentistry, Implantology and
Prosthodontics. There are many treatment options like spaces closure, using orthodontic mechanics, or the maintenance of these spaces for
future prosthetic/ implants rehabilitation2,3, and this should be discussed with the patient and/or parents. It is always important for the
professional to explain the advantages and disadvantages of each option of treatment, as total treatment time and biological implications.
Therefore, the most important treatment decisions must be linked to the long-term outcome, since change over time is normal in biologic
systems. Obviously, issues such as molar and inter-arcs relationship, margin and gingival contour and aesthetics of the smile must be
considered in order to defne the best strategy for each patient. Conventional space closure for missing maxillary lateral incisors is a
viable and safe procedure that provides satisfactory esthetic and functional long-term results4,13,18,20-23,27. Further improvements by
orthodontists in tooth reshaping and positioning, and progress in restorative treatment with individual tooth bleaching and hybrid composite
resin buildups demonstrate that quality treatment can be obtained when space closure is combined with esthetic dentistry10,20-22,27. In this
scenario, the aim of this study is to present a clinical case of bilateral maxillary lateral incisors agenesis, with a 14-year follow-up,
treated satisfactorily with space closure involving orthodontics and esthetic dentistry procedures. A 12-year-old female patient in the late
mixed dentition stage (second transitional period) was referred for treatment at CORA - Centro Odontol√≥gico Rodrigues de Almeida with a
chief complaint of spacing between the upper anterior teeth (Figures 1A-H). Facial evaluation showed a mesofacial growth pattern,
symmetrical and proportional face without upper central incisor exposure at rest and interlabial space of 0 mm (Figures 1A, B). Analysis of
the smile showed 100% exposure of the upper incisors, generalized diastema, and midline sagittal plane coincident with the medium line of
smile (Figure 1C). The patient had a convex facial profile and thin retruded lips (Figure 1B). Intraoral examination revealed an Angle Class
II relationship of molars and canines, 1 mm overjet, normal overbite, upper and lower coincident midline in relation to the facial plane
(Figures 1D, E, F). Maxillary arch showed generalized spaces in the anterior region and missing lateral incisors (Figure 1G). In the lower
arch, complete permanent dentition was observed, as well as the parabolic shape of the arch and diastema between the incisors (Figure 1H).
The panoramic radiograph confirmed the bilateral agenesis of maxillary incisors (Figure 1I). Pretreatment facial (A-C) and intraoral (D-H)
photographs. Initial panoramic radiograph (I) According to the diagnosis, the aims of treatment of this clinical case included: space
closure (the patient's chief complaint), smile's line and gingival level improvement, canines transformation/reanatomization, lower arch
midline, overjet and overbite maintenance. The proposed treatment plan was the space closure of the areas corresponding to the missing upper
lateral incisors, through movement of the canines and the posterior teeth to mesial. Upper and lower fxed appliance was installed with an
Andrews 0.022-inch slot (3M-UNITEK, Monrovia, California, USA), Andrews prescription (Figure 2). After orthodontic correction, canines
transformation/reanatomization was performed. Treatment Progress: Intraoral (A-C) photographs showing full fixed appliances. Upper stainless
steel arch performing bends (individualized canine extrusion) to adequate placement of gingival margins Upper arch was aligning and leveling
with continuous arches using Nitinol and also stainless steel archs to perform bending and torque. Individualized canine extrusion and first
premolar intrusion during the mesial movement of these teeth were used. Finishing phase was accomplished with an stainless steel braided
0.019x0.025-inch archwire to provide intercuspation. Hawley plate was used for retention after appliance removal (Figure 3D). Post treatment
intraoral (A-E) photographs showing proper crown torque of mesially relocated canines and premolars and an optimum level for the marginal
gingival contours of the anterior teeth Lower arch was aligning and leveling with 0.014-inch, 0.016-inch, 0.016x0.022-inch and
0.019x0.025-inch Nickel titanium (NiTi). Intercuspation/finishing was achieved with stainless steel braided archwire 0.019x0.025-inch. Fixed
canine-to-canine retainer was bonded immediately after appliance removal (Figure 3E). Orthodontic treatment was conservative in this case,
without extractions in the mandibular arch, also due to the good facial profile of the patient (Figure 1C). After upper and lower fxed
appliances were placed (Figure 2A-C), the conventional mechanical technique for spaces closure was performed. This case's completion has
kept the upper molars in an Angle Class II and canines were masked cosmetically as lateral incisors with restorative dentistry procedures
(Figure 3A-C). Our decision to use the space closure treatment considered the improvement of orthodontic results by combining properly
detailed orthodontic treatment with techniques from esthetic dentistry. The detailed orthodontic mechanics included: careful correction of
the crown torque of mesially relocated canines to mirror the optimal lateral incisor crown torque, along with providing optimal torque and
rotation for the mesially moved premolars; individualized extrusion and intrusion during the mesial movement of the canine and the first
premolar, respectively, to obtain an optimum level for the marginal gingival contours of the anterior teeth. Some small esthetic repairs
were performed after 10 years of initial re-anatomization in order to improve esthetic appearance (Figure 4A-H). The panoramic radiograph
confirmed the stability of the closed spaces (Figure 4I). 14-year follow-up involving orthodontics and restorative dentistry: Facial
photographs showed a good facial profile (B) and proportional esthetic face (A). The analysis of the smile showed 100% exposure of the upper
incisors with midline sagittal plane coincident with the medium line of smile (C). Intraoral photographs revealed optimal and stable
occlusion with normal overbite and overjet (D-F) and maintenance of upper and lower arch shapes (G-H). Panoramic X-ray (I) showing ideal
dental axial inclinations, confirming the stability of the closed spaces In the present report, the case was treated successfully with
orthodontic space closure and transformation of the canines in lateral incisors. Thus, in agreement with some authors4,7,26, the treatment
of these patients represents a challenge for orthodontists and specialists in esthetic dentistry. However, we think that the best treatment
option for patients with agenesis of maxillary lateral incisor is, whenever possible, the orthodontical closing of spaces. Based on
literature20-22,27 and clinical evidence, we can highlight some advantages of this treatment option, such as better periodontal conditions
of patients treated with space closure compared to patients treated with spaces maintenance and prosthetic rehabilitation, obtaining
excellent cosmetic and functional results after transforming the canine in the lateral incisor. Robertsson and Mohlin20 (2000) pointed three
advantages of space closure orthodontic treatment. They found that (1) the space-closure patients were more satisfied with the treatment
results than the patients that had space opening for prosthetics rehabilitation, (2) there was no difference between the 2 groups in
prevalence of signs and symptoms of temporomandibular joint dysfunction, and (3) patients with prosthetic replacements had impaired
periodontal health with accumulation of plaque and gingivitis. So, they concluded that orthodontic space closure produces results that are
well accepted by patients, does not impair temporomandibular joint function, and encourages periodontal health in comparison with the
prosthetic replacements. In cases of closure of spaces the following should be considered: (1) careful correction of the crown torque of
mesially relocated canines to mirror the optimal lateral incisor crown torque, along with providing optimal torque and rotation for the
mesially moved premolars, (2) canines bleaching, as these teeth are normally more yellowish than the incisors, (3) the relationship between
space closure x treatment time, which generally can be increased, (4) the difficulty in mechanical posterior tooth rotation during the
subsequent mesial movement, uncontrolled root of the first pre-molars that have two roots, and differential bracket bonding, where the
canines receive the lateral incisor brackets. Usually there is the need for adjustments off set for the canines and first premolars, besides
the need for canines extrusion and premolars intrusion to adjust the gingival level. Regarding canines mechanics, special attention should
be given to the torque that the canines should receive, namely lingual root torque. The first premolars, in turn, will receive brackets for
canines occupying an appropriate buccolingual and mesiodistal position, as they can be intruded and torqued to increase the gingival margin,
similar to the canines. Later they must be transformed into canines with esthetic dentistry procedures. Clinical experience has shown us
that a good clinical outcome depends on various factors such as knowledge and professional skills involved in the treatment as well as the
combination of orthodontic and esthetic dentistry techniques, patient's cooperation and age. The orthodontist should move the teeth
mesially, characterizing the canine in the lateral incisor, considering torque and extrusion. Similarly, the premolar characteristics should
be transformed in a canine, increasing intrusion and torque, to raise the gingiva, as previously mentioned. The dentist who performs the re-
anatomization of the canines must pay attention to the teeth's shape and color. The possible involvement of a periodontist may be necessary
to obtain an adequate level and gingival contour (Figure 3). The occlusion of a patient with lateral incisors agenesis orthodontically
treated with posterior teeth's mesialization is satisfactory from the aesthetic and functional point of view. Long-term studies evaluated
the periodontal status and occlusal function from 2 to 25 years post-treatment18,21, concluding that there is no functional overload in the
premolar. However, in some patients, due to the discrepancy in teeth's size (Bolton), the case may be ended with a little overjet and
overbite. Regarding retention, Hawley is usually utilized for the upper arch and a 3x3 in the lower arch, for continuous use. The treatment
of patients with missing lateral incisors must be multidisciplinary. It can involve orthodontics, esthetic dentistry, implantology and
prosthodontics. The interdisciplinary approach can achieve not only an optimal occlusion, but also a well-balanced, natural smile that will
be stable over the long-term. Treatment options to close spaces orthodontically or maintain these spaces for future prosthodontics
rehabilitation should be discussed with the patient and/or parents. The orthodontist should explain all of the advantages and disadvantages
of each treatment option. Some factors such as the need for extractions, the sagittal relationship of dental arches, the occlusal
relationship of the posterior teeth, the position, shape and color of the canines, the amount of remaining space, patient age and analysis
of the standard profile as well as the patient's face must be considered in treatment planning. For all that was reported in this clinical
case with a successful long-term follow-up, it is concluded that bilateral maxillary lateral incisors agenesis can be treated satisfactorily
with space closure involving orthodontics and esthetic dentistry procedures.
