We report a case of a 33-year-old man who presented with immunoglobulin (Ig)G4-related disease (IgG4-RD) forming a pseudotumor in the left
paratesticular region during oral administration of corticosteroid for Wells syndrome, which involves cellulitis with eosinophilia. The
patient was introduced to our institution from a private hospital with a 3-month history of asymptomatic left scrotal mass. A 5-cm diameter
nodule was palpable in the left scrotum. Tumor lesion in the left paratestis involving the epididymis and spermatic cord was observed on
computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging. Blood testing showed no abnormalities other than a minimal increase in C-reactive
protein levels. Urine examination likewise revealed no significant findings. Left radical orchidectomy was performed under a diagnosis of
left paratesticular neoplasm suspected as malignant tumor. The tumor was pathologically identified as IgG4-RD of the left paratestis
involving the epididymis and spermatic cord. We present a first description of IgG4-RD in a patient with Wells syndrome and the ninth case
of IgG4-RD in a scrotal organ, and discuss this very rare entity with reference to the literature. The virtual slide(s) for this article can
be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/13000_2014_225 Immunoglobulin (Ig)G4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is a recently
defined, emerging clinical entity characterized by diffuse fibrosis or mass-forming pseudotumor with infiltration of IgG4-positive plasma
cells . IgG4-RD often produces a neoplastic entity and has been found in multiple locations throughout the body, including organs of the
genitourinary system such as the kidney and prostate. However, only 8 cases of IgG4-RD in the scrotum have been reported to date . We report
the ninth case of scrotal pseudotumor associated with IgG4-RD and discuss the clinical and histopathological characteristics of this rare
neoplastic entity. Wells syndrome is a rare dermatosis, also known as eosinophilic cellulitis, characterized by recurrent inflammatory
dermatosis with erythematous plaques . We present the first description of IgG4-RD in a patient with Wells syndrome and also discuss the
relationship between both of these hyper-immune diseases. A 33-year-old man had noticed swelling with underlying palpable mass in the left
scrotum 3 months earlier. The patient was introduced to Kochi Medical School from a private hospital on suspicion of testicular cancer. He
had taking oral corticosteroid for hyper-eosinophilia diagnosed as Wells syndrome since he was 27 years old. He had undergone incisional
drainage of a periproctal abscess at 30 years old. No history of exposure to tuberculosis was evident. Physical examination revealed a non-
tender, indurated, solid mass at the lower pole of the left epididymis, possibly also involving the testis. Scrotal ultrasound demonstrated
a solid, heterogeneous mass involving the left epididymis and extending into the testis. Levels of serum tumor markers including β-human
chorionic gonadotropin, α-fetoprotein and lactate dehydrogenase were within normal limits. C-reactive protein level was slightly elevated,
at 0.5 mg/dL (normal, <0.3 mg/dL). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the left scrotum revealed a 31 × 28-mm diameter left
epididymal mass showing irregular contrast and poorly defined margins. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left scrotum revealed a
hypointense mass in the left epididymis on T1- and T2-weighted imaging. Part of the capsule of the left testis showing as a low-intensity
layer was poorly marginated on T2 imaging. On diffusion-weighted imaging, the mass showed some high signals (Figure 1). Left radical
orchidectomy was performed under a presumed diagnosis of left paratesticular tumor. The tumor was an elastic, hard, whitish nodule. The
origin of the tumor was macroscopically speculated to be the left epididymis, and the part of tumor was unmargined the tunica albuginea and
spermatic cord of the left testis (Figure 2).Figure 1 Pre-operative diagnostic imaging. Magnetic resonance imaging of the left scrotum shows
a low-intensity mass in the paratesticular region on T1 (A) -and T2 (B) -weighted imaging, and areas of high signals on diffusion-weighted
imaging (white arrows; C). The paratesticular lesion is irregularly enhanced on CT imaging (D) . FDG-PET/CT imaging shows accumulation of
FDG in left lung (E).Figure 2 Macroscopic findings of surgical specimen. A mass is seen in the tail of the left epididymis, extending to the
tunica vaginalis and parenchyma of the left testis (black arrows). Pre-operative diagnostic imaging. Magnetic resonance imaging of the left
scrotum shows a low-intensity mass in the paratesticular region on T1 (A) -and T2 (B) -weighted imaging, and areas of high signals on
diffusion-weighted imaging (white arrows; C). The paratesticular lesion is irregularly enhanced on CT imaging (D) . FDG-PET/CT imaging shows
accumulation of FDG in left lung (E). Macroscopic findings of surgical specimen. A mass is seen in the tail of the left epididymis,
extending to the tunica vaginalis and parenchyma of the left testis (black arrows). Histopathology of the tumor demonstrated spindle-shaped
epithelial and polygonal cell proliferations with storiform fibrosis. Little atypia and few mitoses were identified among spindle-shaped
epithelial cells. Plasmacytes, lymphocytes and eosinophils had infiltrated into the tumor. Typical obstructive phlebitis was also observed.
Positive immunostaining was obtained for vimentin, α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA) and desmin (focally), but negative results were seen for
CD34, S100 protein, p53, anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), cytokeratin (CAM5.2), calretinin, Wilms’ tumor-1, thrombomodulin, epithelial
membrane antigen and lymphatic endothelial marker in the spindle cells, identifying the myofibroblastic cells. IgG4-positive cells comprised
50% among the cells staining positively for IgG, and the number of IgG4-positive plasma cells/high-power fields (HPF) were more than 10
(Figure 3). The histological finding of pseudotumor was consistent with IgG4-RD in the left epididymis.Figure 3 Microscopic findings of
surgical specimen. Hematoxylin-eosin staining of the paratesticular mass reveals widespread fibrosis and lymphocyte aggregation from the
left epididymis to the spermatic cord (×40; A). Spindle cell proliferation with chronic inflammatory cells mostly comprised plasma cells
with neither atypia nor mitosis (×200; B). Myofibroblastic cells with marked fibrosis reveals a storiform pattern (×100; C). Obliterative
phlebitis is apparent (×100; D). For immunostaining, sections were stained with anti-alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) (1A4, 1:800, DAKO,
Glostrup, Denmark) and -IgG4 (HP6025, 1:1280; ZYMED Laboratories, CA, USA) antibodies by using automated immunostainer (Ventana Benchmark,
Tucson, AZ, USA). Spindle cells are positive for α-SMA, indicating myoepithelial cells (×100; E). More than 10 IgG4-positive plasma
cells/HPF are seen on anti-IgG4 immunostaining (×400; F). Microscopic findings of surgical specimen. Hematoxylin-eosin staining of the
paratesticular mass reveals widespread fibrosis and lymphocyte aggregation from the left epididymis to the spermatic cord (×40; A). Spindle
cell proliferation with chronic inflammatory cells mostly comprised plasma cells with neither atypia nor mitosis (×200; B). Myofibroblastic
cells with marked fibrosis reveals a storiform pattern (×100; C). Obliterative phlebitis is apparent (×100; D). For immunostaining, sections
were stained with anti-alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) (1A4, 1:800, DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark) and -IgG4 (HP6025, 1:1280; ZYMED
Laboratories, CA, USA) antibodies by using automated immunostainer (Ventana Benchmark, Tucson, AZ, USA). Spindle cells are positive for
α-SMA, indicating myoepithelial cells (×100; E). More than 10 IgG4-positive plasma cells/HPF are seen on anti-IgG4 immunostaining (×400; F).
The patient displayed accumulation of 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) in the left lung on FDG-positron emission tomography/CT (FDG-PET/CT)
(Figure 1E) after the orchidectomy. The patient has since been continuously taking 1.5 mg of oral dexamethasone sodium phosphate equally to
10 mg of prednisolone and also to 37.5 mg of hydrocrtisone. The left lung lesion had disappeared on follow-up FDG-PET/CT at 24 months
postoperatively and no evidence of recurrence was seen at the site of resection. We have received a consent from the patient for publication
of the present report. IgG4-RD is a common autoimmune disease in various organs, including the submandibular gland, lung, pancreas, kidney,
retroperitoneum and prostate. IgG-RD often causes pseudotumor consisting of IgG4-positive plasma cell and intense fibrosis. Testis and
paratestis with involvement of the epididymis and spermatic cord are rare regions for IgG4-RD. Nine cases, including this case, with scrotal
lesions associated with IgG4-RD are summarized in Table 1. Median age was 33 years (range, 19–74 years). Peak age at onset might show a
biphasic pattern, in adolescence and old age. Chief complaints were mostly palpable nodule in the scrotum. Multifocal lesions including in
the pancreas, retroperitoneum, submandibular gland and prostate described in Cases 4, 5 and 8 were all in elderly patients at 73, 74 and
64 years old, respectively. IgG4-RD in adolescent patients may differ from that in the elderly. Thirty three years old at the present might
be in the elderly case, because he had multi-organ disease including lung lesion on FDG-PET/CT. All patients underwent surgical excision
with orchidectomy or local excision of nodules. Histopathological findings were myofibroblastic proliferation, infiltration of lymphocytes
and plasma cells, and a high ratio of IgG4-positive cells.Table 1 Brief summary of cases reported in the literature of scrotal IgG4 related
pseudotumor No. Reference Era Age Presentation Diagnosis and multiorgan disease Treatment Serum IgG4 value (mg/dL) Histology 1Bösmüller et
al. 201123Bilateral Palpable paratesticular multiple indolent floating masses on both sidesParatesticular fibrous pseudotumorSurgical
excision of nodulesNot describedPlasma cell infiltration, IgG4/IgG ratio 44%2Bösmüller et al. 201125Right swelling of the right testis with
painParatesticular inflammatory pseudotumorSemicastration.Not describedDense myofibroblastic proliferation with sparse mitoses, IgG4/IgG
ratio 48%3Bösmüller et al. 201152Right palpable paratesticular nodulesParatesticular fibrous pseudotumorSurgical excision of nodulesNot
describedPlasma cell infiltration, IgG4/IgG ratio 46%4Hart et al. 201273Painless right scrotal massParatesticular pseudotumor, Autoimmune
pancreatitis, Retroperitoneal fibrosisRight inguinal radical orchiectomy391Lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, storiform pattern of fibrosis,
IgG4/IgG ratio 60%5Migita et al. 201274Left paratesticular massParatesticular pseudotumor, Submandibular gland inflammation, prostatitisLeft
semicastration505Fibrosis with lymphocytic and plasmacytic infiltrations, IgG4/IgG ratio 85%6Dickmann et al. 201319Right painless
intrascrotal massSpermatic cord inflammatory pseudotumorLocal excisionNot determinedPartially storiform, spindle-like cells and
lymphofollicular infiltration, IgG4/IgG ratio 40%7Dickmann et al. 201328Right painless intrascrotal massSpermatic cord inflammatory
pseudotumorLocal excisionNot determinedAs above8de Buy Wenniger et al. 201364Bilateral scrotal painTesticular pseudotumor, Autoimmune
pancreatitis, Retroperitoneal fibrosisBilateral orchidectomyNot describedPlasma cell-rich infiltrate and myofibroblastic spindle cell
proliferation around the seminiferous tubules, IgG4/IgG ratio 50% in right testis and 80% in left testis9Our case201433Left palpable scrotal
massParatesticular pseudotumor, Lung lesionRadical orchidectomy31.8Spindle epithelial and polygonal cell proliferation with intense fibrous,
plasmacyte, lymphocyte and eosinophil infiltration, IgG4/IgG ratio 50% Brief summary of cases reported in the literature of scrotal IgG4
related pseudotumor Comprehensive diagnostic criteria for IgG4-RD were described in 2011, setting the following 3 criteria: 1) clinical
examination showing characteristic diffuse/localized swelling or masses in single or multiple organs; 2) hematological examination showing
elevated serum IgG4 concentrations (>135 mg/dl); and 3) histopathological examination showing marked lymphocyte and plasmacyte infiltration
and fibrosis, and infiltration of IgG4-positive plasma cells (ratio of IgG4-positive/IgG-positive cells >40% and >10 IgG4-positive plasma
cells/HPF) . The present case was identified as “probable”, meeting criteria 1 and 3. Serum IgG4 concentration in our patient was 31.8 mg/dl
before surgery. The patient had receiving oral administration of corticosteroid, which might have decreased serum IgG4 concentrations to
within normal limits. As the patient had a history of developing dyspnea and cyanosis due to upper airway edema when not taking
corticosteroid, the patient has continued taking corticosteroid. Various differential diagnoses show inflammation-related tumors involving
true or pseudo-neoplasia. Inflammatory pseudotumor related to microbial infection, trauma or postoperative status must be diagnosed by
excluding other possibilities. In the present case, histopathological findings of less mitotic myofibroblastic proliferation with storiform
and swirling fibrosis, lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, obliterative phlebitis and an abundance of IgG4-positive cells met the criteria
allowing final diagnosis of pseudotumor associated with IgG4-RD. Immunomarkers offered additional definitive and exclusive diagnosis of
IgG4-RD. In the present case, the differential diagnosis should have included inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT), a typical neoplastic
entity with positive immunostaining of ALK. Staining for vimentin and αSMA was diffusely positive and desmin was focally positive, but
negative results were seen for CD34, S100 protein, p53 and ALK in the present case, indicating myoepithelial cell proliferation and
excluding neoplasias such as IMT. However, consideration should be given to the fact that cases of scrotal IMT have been reported to often
show negative immunostaining for ALK . Wells syndrome is an uncommon inflammatory dermatosis, first described in 1971 by Wells. Clinical
appearance is variable, combined with the histopathological presence of eosinophilic infiltrates and flame figures in the absence of
vasculitis, and a relapsing remitting course is usually seen. The present case was diagnosed as Wells syndrome based on systemic cellulitis
combined with histopathological presence of eosinophilic infiltration of the skin 6 years earlier. A case with hypereosinophilic syndrome
was reported with overlapping IgG4-RD in 2012. The author implied that hypereosinophilic syndrome interacted with IgG4-RD . In Wells
syndrome, an eosinophilic infiltration mediated by T-helper cells 2 cytokines such as interleukin-5 and −13 is based on immune-pathogenesis
in common with IgG4-RD . Histopathological findings for the skin lesion showed features as eosinophilic infiltration common with the
paratesticular lesion, but not positive immunostaining with anti-IgG4 antibody in the present case. A common immune-etiology of Wells
syndrome and IgG4-RD were still controversial. In the literature, not all patients could be diagnosed preoperatively because of the lack of
characteristic findings for scrotal IgG4-RD. Our patient also underwent radical orchidectomy, even though CT, MRI and biological testing
were performed. Orchidectomy should be avoided for pseudotumor associated with IgG4-RD and pharmacotherapy such as corticosteroid and
immunosuppressive agents should be applied instead. The paratestis is a clinically rare region for IgG4-RD. We have reported a case of
IgG4-RD of the paratestis in a patient treated with corticosteroid for Wells syndrome, a systemic eosinophilic disease. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor of this journal. IgG4-related disease Contrast-enhanced computed tomography Magnetic resonance imaging
α-smooth muscle actin Anaplastic lymphoma kinase High-power fields 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography Inflammatory
myofibroblastic tumor Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions TK drafted the
report, contributed to concept, and cared for the patient. TS, TN, HN, SF, MK, KI and YK cared for the patient. YT, NK and TS contributed to
concept and design, and approved the final version of the manuscript. KO, HN, SS and MM made relevant corrections. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
