Current therapies for the Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome (OMIM: 300322) are off-label and experimental, often leading to inconsistent outcomes. We
here report the effects of an intrathecal baclofen therapy, carried out at the Scientific Institute Eugenio Medea (Lecco, Italy), on three
patients who no longer received benefit from previous therapies. This treatment, as expected, ameliorated the motor symptoms and,
unexpectedly, it also improved behavioural components. This result may involve a functional interaction between baclofen and dopamine,
complemented by an anxiolytic effect. Our observations provide the rationale for the use of intrathecal baclofen administration in the
therapy of the Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome. The Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome (LN) (OMIM: 300322) involves dystonia, ballism, and self-injurious and
aggressive behaviours. Although LN is severely disabling, no therapeutic standard can yet be indicated and treatment proceeds on the basis
of isolated observations. Many therapies for LN, both pharmacological (antispastic drugs, antipsychotics, anti-parkinsonian drugs, dietary
supplements) and cellular (enzyme replacement and stem cell therapies), are currently experimented, with inconsistent results . We report on
three patients with a genetic diagnosis of classical LN, who were referred to the Scientific Institute Eugenio Medea (Lecco, Italy) for
rehabilitation. They were treated with intrathecal baclofen (ITB) and showed an improvement regarding both dystonia and pathological
behaviours. Patient 1 was 19 years old at referral. During motor development, he never achieved head control, did not crawl or walk;
instead, he developed bilateral clubfoot and phasic extensor hypertonia of the upper limbs, with dystonia and ballism. His pathological
behaviour involved very severe self-injury and involuntary aggression, by punching and biting. The patient constantly wore whole-body
restraints in order to contain these exacerbations. Patient 2 was referred at 39 years of age. He never achieved head control, but crawled
and walked until 9, when severe dystonia and ballism of the limbs began. He displayed severe finger biting and required permanent finger
protection. Patient 3 was 20 years old at referral. He never achieved head control, crawled scantly and never walked. He developed strong
retropulsive reactions, with dystonia involving neck and limbs, and ballism of the arms. By punching, he injured himself and attacked
others. Patients were weaned off their previous therapies (Table 1) and subsequently implanted with the intrathecal drug delivery device
Synchromed II - 20 ml (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA). Individual ITB dosages were up titrated to achieve a satisfactory effect on
dystonia.Table 1 Patients’ previous pharmacological therapies Patient Remote therapeutic history Previous therapy before ITB placement 1
Trihexyphenidyl4 mg x3/dayStarted in 2006Discontinued in 2010S-adenosyl methionine400 mg x4/dayStarted in 2000Initial efficacy,
progressively lostDiscontinued 24/04/2013 2 Risperidone6 mg /dayStarted in 1998Discontinued in 2011Levetiracetam250 mg x3/dayStarted in
2002No efficacyWeaned from 03/01/2014, discontinued 20/02/2014Clonazepam1 mg /dayStarted in 2002Partial efficacy on spasticityWeaned from
12/02/2014, discontinued 21/02/2014Sertraline50 mg /dayStarted in 2002Scarce efficacyWeaned from 08/02/2014, discontinued
22/02/2014Zopiclone7.5 mg /dayStarted in 2002Good efficacy on sleep improvementWeaned from 12/02/2014, discontinued 21/02/2014 3 Enzyme
replacement therapyIntrathecal infusion of leukocytes (2/month)Started in 1996Discontinued in 2010Gabapentin400 mg x4/dayStarted in May,
2013No efficacyWeaned from 23/01/2014, discontinued 15/03/2014Intrathecal infusion of mesenchymal stem cellsSingle administration in 2012
Patients’ previous pharmacological therapies Dystonia was controlled with ITB dosages of 270 to 550 μg per day. ITB improved the quality of
sleep for all patients, as expected. This happened in the absence of serious adverse reactions; patient 3 only experienced mild drowsiness.
In addition, within three days after reaching the stable ITB dosage, ballism was abolished and aggression and self-injurious behaviours
ceased, thus allowing the removal of protective restraints (details in Tables 2 and 3). The beneficial effects of ITB therapy at unchanged
dosages persisted throughout the follow up period (5 to 16 months).Table 2 Patients’ symptoms before and after treatment with intrathecal
baclofen Patient 1 2 3 Before ITB Dystonia: 222338 UDRS total a Aggression YesNoYes Self-injury b : Mouth/lip biting 2-321-2 Finger biting
10203-4 Punching 1002-3 Restraint Permanent whole body restraintPermanent finger protectionNone Sleep c : Awakenings 7-85-65-6 Sleep hours
244 Date of ITB implantation and age (years) 29/04/2013 – 1928/02/2014 – 3919/03/2014 – 20 ITB dosage and follow-up duration (months) 380 μg
/day – 16270 μg /day – 6550 μg /day – 5 After ITB Dystonia: 56.511 UDRS total a Aggression NoNoNo Self-injury b : Mouth/lip biting 0-100
Finger biting 350 Punching 000 Restraint Occasional, right armNoneNone Sleep c : Awakenings 1-210 Sleep hours 565 Notes Improved verbal
communication-Persistent moderate nausea, daytime drowsinessLegend: a) Dystonia was scored using the UDRS scale . Detailed scores are
available in Table 3. b) Self-injury was scored by counting the daily episodes of different self-injurious behaviours, following interviews
with caregivers. c) Quality of sleep was scored counting the number of awakenings per night and the average hours of uninterrupted sleep,
following interviews with caregivers.Table 3 Detailed scores from patients’ UDRS scales Patient Before ITB After ITB 1 Duration factor:
3Duration factor: 0Motor severity factor: eyes and upper face: 1, lower face: 3, jaw and tongue: 2, larynx: 0, neck: 2, shoulder and
proximal arm. 2, distal arm and hand (including elbow): 3, pelvis and proximal leg: 3, distal leg and foot (including knee): 2, trunk:
1.Motor severity factor: eyes and upper face: 2, lower face: 1, jaw and tongue: 1, larynx: 0, neck: 1, shoulder and proximal arm 0, distal
arm and hand (including elbow): 0, pelvis and proximal leg: 0, distal leg and foot (including knee): 0, trunk: 0.Total = 22Total = 5 2
Duration factor: 4Duration factor: 0.5Motor severity factor: eyes and upper face: 1, lower face: 4, jaw and tongue: 3, larynx: 0, neck: 4,
shoulder and proximal arm. 4, distal arm and hand (including elbow): 4, pelvis and proximal leg: 4, distal leg and foot (including knee): 4,
trunk: 1.Motor severity factor: eyes and upper face: 1, lower face: 0, jaw and tongue: 1, larynx: 1, neck: 1, shoulder and proximal arm. 0,
distal arm and hand (including elbow): 0, pelvis and proximal leg: 1, distal leg and foot (including knee): 0, trunk:
0.Total = 23Total = 6.5 3 Duration factor: 4Duration factor: 1Motor severity factor: eyes and upper face: 1, lower face: 4, jaw and tongue:
4, larynx: 0, neck: 3, shoulder and proximal arm. 3, distal arm and hand (including elbow): 2, pelvis and proximal leg: 3, distal leg and
foot (including knee): 4, trunk: 0.Motor severity factor: eyes and upper face: 1, lower face: 1, jaw and tongue: 2, larynx: 0, neck: 1,
shoulder and proximal arm: 1, distal arm and hand (including elbow): 1, pelvis and proximal leg: 2, distal leg and foot (including knee): 1,
trunk: 0.Total = 38Total = 11 Patients’ symptoms before and after treatment with intrathecal baclofen Legend: a) Dystonia was scored using
the UDRS scale . Detailed scores are available in Table 3. b) Self-injury was scored by counting the daily episodes of different self-
injurious behaviours, following interviews with caregivers. c) Quality of sleep was scored counting the number of awakenings per night and
the average hours of uninterrupted sleep, following interviews with caregivers. Detailed scores from patients’ UDRS scales Currently,
treatment approaches for LN are experimental, as therapeutic targets are not fully elucidated . Dysregulation of dopaminergic pathways may
be the cause of self-injurious behaviours in LN patients and anatomical/physiological alterations were recently demonstrated in specific
brain regions . Impaired dopamine signalling during cerebral development could lead to the compensatory hypersensitivity of dopamine
receptors, especially of the D1 subtype: this prevents the success of either dopaminergic drugs (which increase symptoms ) and
antipsychotics (which do not target D1 receptors). The dopaminergic and GABAergic systems are connected at multiple levels and GABA has a
prominent influence on dopamine release in the mesolimbic and nigrostriatal circuits . Moreover, baclofen may serve as a functional
antagonist of dopamine: GABAB receptors are coupled to G proteins that inhibit adenylyl cyclase activity, while D1 dopamine receptors
activate it. Baclofen may also have a direct anxiolytic effect that could complement its activity on the dopaminergic balance and be useful
for behavioural improvement. The use of baclofen and ITB for LN patients is not uncommon, a population study reported on ten users of oral
baclofen and one of ITB, although it did not discuss therapeutic efficacy . Good results of ITB therapy were also previously observed in two
patients, although only little information was reported . In order to compare available data, debate should be fostered between clinicians
with different experiences on baclofen treatment in LN. Our cases further support the use of ITB in patients with LN within a multi-targeted
therapy that may ameliorate both motor and behavioural symptoms. ITB may represent a viable therapy for LN patients, especially in light of
the severity of this disease and of the lower comparative risk of severe side effects. Nevertheless, catheters for ITB administration may
become infected, leading to removal in spite of partial ITB efficacy . The risks of infection may be avoided by oral administration of
baclofen, which is in general safe, apart from rare cases of hepatic toxicity . We conclude that baclofen is potentially useful as a therapy
for LN, but that additional studies should be conducted, in order to properly assess its efficacy. Both intrathecal and oral administration
routes should be investigated, with systematic measurements and long follow-up periods. Lesch-Nyhan syndrome Intrathecal baclofen Competing
interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MP: research conception, manuscript preparation.
LP: research conception, patient management, manuscript review. MG, FM: patient management, data collection, manuscript review. SR, EC:
research conception, manuscript review. All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript. We are thankful to dr. Valeria
Padovano for language revision. This work was supported by Agenzia Italiana del Farmaco (AIFA) and by the Italian Ministry of Health
(Ricerca Corrente 2014, to EC). The funding public institutions had no role in any part of the work.
