Osteosarcoma (OS) is a prevalent primary malignant bone tumour with unknown etiology. These highly metastasizing tumours are among the most
frequent causes of cancer-related deaths. Thus, there is an urgent need for different markers, and with our study, we were aiming towards
finding novel biomarkers for OS. For that, we analysed the whole exome of the tumorous and non-tumour bone tissue from the same patient with
OS applying next-generation sequencing. For data analysis, we used several softwares and combined the exome data with RNA-seq data from our
previous study. In the tumour exome, we found wide genomic rearrangements, which should qualify as chromotripsis—we detected almost 3,000
somatic single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and small indels and more than 2,000 copy number variants (CNVs) in different chromosomes.
Furthermore, the somatic changes seem to be associated to bone tumours, whereas germline mutations to cancer in general. We confirmed the
previous findings that the most significant pathway involved in OS pathogenesis is probably the WNT/β-catenin signalling pathway. Also, the
IGF1/IGF2 and IGF1R homodimer signalling and TP53 (including downstream tumour suppressor gene EI24) pathways may have a role. Additionally,
the mucin family genes, especially MUC4 and cell cycle controlling gene CDC27 may be considered as potential biomarkers for OS. The genes,
in which the mutations were detected, may be considered as targets for finding biomarkers for OS. As the study is based on a single case and
only DNA and RNA analysis, further confirmative studies are required. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s40246-014-0020-0)
contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Osteosarcoma (OS) is a most prevalent primary malignant bone tumour
and mostly occurs in children and adolescents—75% of patients with OS are 15 to 25 years old. The etiology is unknown; however, a genetic
predisposition has been suggested . Reviewed in , these tumours have high potential to metastasize and are one of the most frequent causes
of cancer-related deaths. The survival rate increased up to 70% after chemotherapy became available . However, no further improvements have
been made in the last decades in terms of survival. Thus, the survival plateau forces scientists to look for new biomarkers (diagnostic,
disease monitoring, response, resistance markers, drug targets), which could lead to, i.e. applying new therapeutic agents. While OS is rare
and very heterogeneous (inter-patient, inter-tumour and intra-tumour heterogeneity), the clinical study progress is slow; thus, the
preclinical studies are vital. Furthermore, finding the biomarkers and detecting the potential targets for new drugs are essential to
improve the present situation. There are several next-generation sequencing (NGS) and genome-wide association studies (GWAS) about OS, which
associate different genes and pathways with pathogenesis of OS . With whole exome sequencing (WES) and whole genome sequencing (WGS)
studies, TP53, PTEN and PRB2 are found to be mutated in significant frequency . High mutation rate in TP53 has also demonstrated in OS cell
lines. Additionally, deletion of CDKN2A/B locus and amplification of MDM2 were detected . With GWAS studies, a single nucleotide variant
(SNV) in GRM4 was detected as potential biomarker for OS . Gene expression studies reveal that, i.e. WNT inhibitory factor (WIF1) has a loss
of expression in OS cell lines ; however, we found in our previous work that the expression has increased significantly . Thus, as
demonstrated, the expression pattern of WNT pathway genes in different OS cases may not be similar. When correlating the expression patterns
of miRNA/mRNA pairs, miRNAs regulating TGFBR2, IRS1, PTEN and PI3K have been detected . In addition, several serine/threonine kinases
(mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR)) or tyrosine kinases (SRC, IGF1R, PDGFR, KIT) are considered as targets in OS treatment . When
observing the related pathways, the WNT/β-catenin pathway is one of the most thoroughly studied among bone malignancies. For example, the
tumour growth is regulated through this pathway and the overexpression of BMP9 suppresses its activity . Furthermore, PI3K/AKT/mTOR
signalling pathway was brought forward as a potential target for therapy, and also, pathways associated to TP53 may be altered . Hypoxia-
HIF-1α-CXCR4 pathway plays a crucial role during the migration of human osteosarcoma cells . These are just a few examples—the network of
associated genes and pathways is complex. OS has a very unstable genome—it may contain aberrant number of chromosomes, and in most cases,
these chromosomes display major structural abnormalities including amplification, deletions and translocations. For example, several studies
have demonstrated the gain of chromosomal arms 6p, 8q and 17p in the case of OS . To be more precise, i.e. VEGFA amplification and LSAMP
deletion have been detected in OS . Thus, it is suggested that genomic instability is linked to the development of this tumour .
Furthermore, the genomic aberrations are more frequent in metastases than in primary tumours . The genes responsible for cell cycle
regulation are suggested to be associated to DNA breakage and genomic instability, i.e. CDC5L overexpression and mutations in TP53 gene are
correlated to the high genomic instability in OS .Moreover, the chromothripsis event is characteristic to OS—it generates new fusion
products. This may explain the sudden onset of OS and the complexity and heterogeneity of OS genome . All these changes make it difficult to
find biomarkers suitable for targeting OS, as there are so many different subtypes. In the present work, we analysed the whole exome of the
tumorous and non-tumour bone tissue from the same patient with osteosarcoma. We used next-generation sequencing to study how the coding
region of the tumour genome has altered. Additionally, we analysed together the WES genotyping and RNA expression data (from our previous
RNA-seq analysis). The protocols and informed consent form used in this study were approved by the Ethical Review Committee on Human
Research of the University of Tartu. The patient signed a written informed consent, which also includes the acceptance of the report to be
published. A 16-year-old Caucasian male patient with an OS diagnosis was studied. In more detail, the patient became ill with complaints of
pain in the left knee area. History of trauma was missing, and GP administered painkillers and vitamins. After 6 months, the patient
returned to GP with complaints of pain, swelling and dysfunction in the left distal femur and knee area. The swelling line was observed in
the left femoral distal region, and the area was thicker and painful to touch. No changes in skin colour were detected. The X-ray
investigation showed additional shading and structural change in the distal part of the left femur. For detailed investigation, the MRI was
performed and as a result, malignant process was suspected. Patient was hospitalized, and bone biopsy was taken for histological
investigation. The diagnosis of osteosarcoma was confirmed. Chemotherapy for osteosarcoma started by Scandinavian Sarcoma Group (SSG) XIV
treatment protocol. The patient responded well to the therapy—the histological analysis confirmed the necrotic tissue in tumour. After
3 month of chemotherapy, surgical removal of tumour (distal part of femoral bone with knee joint) and replacement of the knee and the lower
part of the femur with megaprosthesis was performed. Pathologist confirmed that resection line was without tumour cells and OS was referred
as NAS (Not Further Specified). After the patient had recovered from surgery, the SSG XIV chemotherapy treatment protocol was followed.
Materials for this study were collected from the surgically removed tissue. The genomic DNA (gDNA) was extracted from two bone samples from
different locations—one sample from tumour area and another sample from the uninvolved normal bone tissue as a control. For gDNA extraction,
the tissue was homogenized applying liquid nitrogen and a mortar, and after that, the PureLink Genomic DNA kit (Life Technologies Corp.,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) was used according to manufacturer’s protocol. The Target Seq Exome Enrichment System and SOLiD 5500 barcoded adaptors
(Life Technologies Corp., Carlsbad, CA, USA) were used to prepare the libraries. The SOLiD 5500xl platform and paired-end DNA sequencing
chemistry (75 bp forward and 35 bp reverse direction) were applied to sequence the samples. Offline cluster was used for data processing and
analysis. For bioinformatic analysis, LifeScope version 2.5 was applied. LifeScope performed colour space mapping and pairing. Tertiary
analysis consisted of SNV discovery (diBayes algorithm) and detection of small indels. Hg19 (GRCh37.p13) was used as a reference, and before
mapping, the multifasta file was verified in order to increase the mapping quality. The SNVs and small indel .gff3 files were used as input
in ANNOVAR software (AS; www.openbioinformatics.org/annovar/) and Ingenuity Variant Analysis (IVA; http://www.ingenuity.com) QIAGEN, Redwood
City, MD, USA) software. Applying refGene hg19, dbSNP135 and dbCOSMIC67 databases, AS annotated and predicted the effects of SNVs and small
indels we detected in our study samples. AS also provides other prediction tools in order to get prediction scores (PolyPhen-2, SIFT, ljb2
etc.) . Comparative distribution of SNVs and small indels between different samples was performed with Galaxy software bundle . IVA provided
tools to annotate SNVs and small indels, which may be associated to cancer. The tumour and control samples were compared, and the lists for
diseases, processes and pathways related to cancer were received as output. The .bam and .bai files were used as input in CEQer software
(CS) (www.ngsbicocca.org/html/ceqer.html), which is a tool for analysing copy number variants (CNVs) and loss of heterozygosity (LOH). About
the RNA-seq data analysis, please see our previous article, where we used the bone samples from the same patient . For comparing the tumour
tissue and non-tumour tissue (control tissue) from the same individual, different approaches were applied. After mapping the data to a
reference genome, we used several tools to perform the tertiary analysis. In the case of the tumour tissue, over 130 million (58%) mappable
reads were in target and the enrichment fold was 48%. Eighty-five percent of the detected targets were covered over 20 times, and the
average coverage was 185.5. In the case of the control tissue, over 154 million (61%) mappable reads were in target and the enrichment fold
was 51%. Eighty-three percent of the detected targets were covered over 20 times, and the average coverage was 157. Results from ANNOVAR
software Results from ANNOVAR software Using refGene hg19 database, AS was able to annotate 37,990 SNVs and 1,484 small indels. In the case
of SNVs, we considered the data reliable, if the coverage was over 20; thus, 25,914 SNVs remained. In the case of SNVs, there were 23,767
germline mutations (9,067 in homozygous form and 14,700 in heterozygous form) and 2,147 somatic mutations (in the tumour tissue—116 in
homozygous form and 2,031 in heterozygous form) (Table 1, Additional file 1). Furthermore, there were 896 germline small indels (278 in
homozygous form and 618 in heterozygous form) and 588 somatic indels (in the tumour tissue—177 in homozygous form and 411 in heterozygous
form).Table 1 The numbers of SNV and small indel findings received from data analysis with ANNOVAR software Germline mutations Somatic
mutations Homozygous: non-reference Heterozygous Homozygous in tumour Heterozygous in tumour Homozygous in tumour Heterozygous in tumour
Heterozygous in control Homozygous in control Homozygous (reference) in control Homozygous (reference) in control
SNVsAltogether9,06714,70048237681,794Exonic (includes
ncRNA)5,2448,7022110329967Nonsynounymous2,4354,035155218500Stopgain6500207Stoploss250001Splicing (includes exonic)11200002Intronic (includes
ncRNA)3,0914,84622111356815′ UTR and 3′ UTR515797319191Downstream and upstream517612113Intergenic15525912240Small
indelsAltogether278618897588336Exonic (includes ncRNA)33991411229Frameshift93044112Stopgain010000Splicing (includes exonic)4160413Intronic
(includes ncRNA)2124196451752705′ UTR and 3′ UTR2573107824Downstream and upstream120116Intergenic391114 The numbers of SNV and small indel
findings received from data analysis with ANNOVAR software Applying dbSNP135, we were able to annotate 5,281 SNVs and 239 small indels. With
dbCOSMIC67, we annotated 2,569 SNVs and 59 small indels—none of these were noted to be associated to bone cancer. Applying ljb2 database, we
found 469 SNVs to potentially cause a disease (average ljb2 score over 0.918), including 31 germline mutations and 4 somatic mutations
(ESX1: c.A578G/p.K193R; CDC27: c.A17G/p.E6G; TMEM120B: c.G274A/p.D92N; TMEM131: c.C3947T/p.P1316L) in homozygous form in the tumour
tissue.2)Results from Ingenuity Variant Analysis software Results from Ingenuity Variant Analysis software Altogether, 207 cancer driver
variants (CD-SNVs) were found in 123 genes according to IVA (Additional file 2). Fourteen CD-SNVs potentially gain and 186 lose the gene
function. Only seven SNVs may have no drastic effect on gene function in the tumour tissue. Furthermore, according to IVA, none of these 207
SNVs affect the gene functionality in the control tissue. Thirteen of the CD-SNVs were homozygous in the tumour tissue (Table 2). There were
no cancer-associated homozygous mutations present in the control tissue; thus, the homozygous CD-SNVs in the tumour tissue are all
somatic.Table 2 The somatic cancer driver SNVs and small indels found in data analysis with Ingenuity Variant Analysis software Gene symbol
Chr number Position REF/ALT Tumour zygosity Effect on function Control zygosity Effect on function dbSNP SIFT function Polyphen function
Transcript ID Nucleotide change Amino acid change Gene region Translation impact SNVsRGPD3 (includes
others)2110585652A/G1/1Loss0/0NormalDamagingBenignNM_001037866.1,c.2393A > Gp.E798GExonicMissenseNM_001123363.3,NM_005054.2,NM_032260.2PRDM9523527251C/T1/1Loss0/0NormalToleratedProbably
damagingNM_020227.2c.2054C > Tp.T685IExonicMissenseFOXK174722436A/G1/1Loss0/0NormalDamagingBenignNM_001037165.1c.497A > Gp.N166SExonicMissenseCCZ1/CCZ1B76841033T/A1/1Loss0/1NormalToleratedNM_198097.3c.1228A > Tp.M410LExonicMissensePLATa
842044965G/A1/1Normal0/0Normal2020921ToleratedBenignNM_033011.2/c.352C > T/p.R118W/ExonicMissenseNM_000930.3c.490C > Tp.R164WAGTPBP1a
988292495C/T1/1Loss0/1NormalToleratedBenignNM_015239.2c.292G > Ap.G98RExonicMissenseSARDH9136597592T/C1/1Loss0/0Normal149002589ToleratedBenignNM_001134707.1,c.463A > Gp.I155VExonicMissenseNM_007101.3FAH1580472526C/T1/1Normal0/1Normal11555096DamagingProbably
damagingNM_000137.2c.1021C > Tp.R341WExonicMissenseCDC271745266522T/C1/1Loss0/0Normal62077279DamagingProbably
damagingNM_001114091.1,c.17A > Gp.E6GExonicMissenseNM_001256.3SBF1a
2250893287T/C1/1Loss0/1Normal200488568ToleratedBenignNM_002972.2c.4768A > Gp.T1590AExonicMissenseLRRC37A3a (includes
others)1744632540T/C1/1Gain0/0Normal144051917ActivatingBenignNM_001006607.2c.4882 T > Cp.W1628RExonicMissenseARL17A1744632540T/C1/1Gain0/0Normal144051917ActivatingBenignNM_001113738.1/c.*2182A > G/-/3'UTR/NM_016632.2c.259 + 15585A > G-IntronicLILRB31954725835G/C1/1Gain0/0Normal201948566ActivatingBenignNM_001081450.1,c.523C > Gp.R175GExonicMissenseNM_006864.2Small
indelsCTCFL2056073500(N)103/T1/1Loss0/0NormalNM_001269041.1/c.*4_*105del(N)103/3′
UTR/NM_001269043.1/c.1988 + 8_1988 + 109del(N)103/Intronic/NM_001269040.1/c.*4_*105del(N)103/3′ UTR/NM_001269042.1/c.*4_*105del(N)103/3′
UTR/NM_080618.3/c.*4_*105del(N)103/3′ UTR/NM_001269046.1c.*4_*105del(N)1033′
UTRPRR23C3138763627GTGC/G1/1Loss0/1Normal63140560NM_001134657.1c.-168_-166delGCA5′
UTRCDCA7L721941867CTTAG/C1/1Loss0/0NormalNM_001127371.2/c.*69_*72delCTAA/3′ UTR/NM_001127370.2/c.*69_*72delCTAA/3′ UTR/3′
UTRNM_018719.4c.*69_*72delCTAAALK229416029G/GATTG1/1Loss0/0NormalNM_004304.4c.*60_*61insCAAT3′
UTRDSPP488537081CAGCAGCAAT/C0/1Loss0/0NormalNM_014208.3c.3268_3276delAGCAGCAATp.S1090_N1092delExonicIn-
frameRELA1165422086CTC/CTGTAGT0/1Loss0/0NormalNM_001145138.1/c.1408delGinsACTAC/p.E470fs*19Exonic/Frameshift/NM_021975.3/c.1417delGinsACTAC/Exonic/Frameshift/NM_001243984.1/c.1210delGinsACTAC/Exonic/Frameshift/NM_001243985.1c.1216-108delGinsACTACIntronic-
aThe expression pattern of these genes has changed in the tumour tissue compared to that in the control tissue. The somatic cancer driver
SNVs and small indels found in data analysis with Ingenuity Variant Analysis software aThe expression pattern of these genes has changed in
the tumour tissue compared to that in the control tissue. According to IVA, six cancer-associated small indels were found (Table 2). Four of
them are homozygous and two are heterozygous in the tumour tissue—the effect is most probably the loss of gene function. These indels are
predicted to have no effect in the control tissue. In most of the genes brought front by IVA, one CD-SNV was found in coding region in
heterozygous form. However, some of the genes have more CD-SNVs in coding regions: MUC4 had even 22, ZNF717 had 8, CTBP2 had 7 and OR4C3 had
5 CD-SNVs, whereas these were not present in the control tissue (data not shown). When observing from a slightly different angle—the gene
complexes, we can see that the mucin complex has the highest significance—three genes and 27 CD-SNVs are considered (Table 3). There are
also other gene complexes, which are potentially associated to cancer processes, and in different complexes, the CD-SNVs are either somatic
or germline (Table 3).Table 3 The gene complexes which are potentially associated to cancer processes Complex name p value Number of genes
associated Number of variances found Tumour tissue Control tissue Mucin9.54E-053: MUC2, MUC4, MUC6
2710Bcl9-Cbp/p300-Ctnnb1-Lef/Tcf2.46E-032: CREBBP, TCF3 210Sox4.55E-032: SOX7, SOX10 210Cholesterol monooxygenase (side-chain-
cleaving)1.06E-021110CYP11A1.06E-021110Sarcosine dehydrogenase1.06E-021110Ctbp1.59E-021710Cbp/p3001.59E-021110Dimethylglycine
dehydrogenase1.59E-021110DRD1/51.59E-021110MAGI2.64E-021211Magi-Pten3.68E-021211Fumarylacetoacetase1.06E-021111There are both somatic and
germline cancer driver SNVs found in the tumour and control tissues. The gene complexes which are potentially associated to cancer processes
There are both somatic and germline cancer driver SNVs found in the tumour and control tissues. In the case of cancer-associated small
indels, the statistically most significant results were with complexes related to RELA gene—NFKB1-RELA and RELA-REL complexes both had p
value 7.56E-4. IVA provided the first 100 cancer-associated processes and diseases related to CD-SNVs and small indels. Seventy-three genes
and 135 CD-SNVs were found associated to process named as “disorder of genitourinary system” (Table 4). These findings were present in both
the tumour and control tissues. There were also two processes associated to bone “myelopoiesis of bone marrow” (associated genes NPM1, RARA)
and “quantity of trabecular bone” (associated genes CREBBP, SMO)—these findings were present only in the tumour tissue. In the case of small
indels, all the findings were somatic and ALK and RELA genes were associated to “outgrowth of bone marrow cells” and “inflammatory response
of bone marrow-derived macrophages”, respectively.Table 4 The cancer-associated processes detected by IVA Process name p value Number of
genes associated Number of variances found Tumour tissue Control tissue CD-SNVsDisorder of genitourinary system9.05E-147313511Cell
biology4.08E-046913211Cell signalling3.83E-03253111Morphology of body region2.55E-03232411Abnormal morphology of cells1.73E-03181911Abnormal
morphology of body cavity6.17E-04171811Morphology of body cavity1.36E-03171811Morphology of cardiovascular system5.80E-04131411Abnormal
morphology of cardiovascular system7.22E-04121311Abnormal morphology of thoracic cavity1.22E-03111211 Myelopoiesis of bone marrow 3.64E-03
2: NPM1, RARA 2 1 0 Quantity of trabecular bone 4.08E-03 2: CREBBP, SMO 2 1 0 Small indelsTissue development1.19E-035510Developmental
process of tissue1.35E-035510Development of organ5.05E-034410Organogenesis5.32E-034410Colony formation of tumour cell
lines6.25E-053310Colony formation of cells4.44E-043310Colony formation5.46E-043310Developmental process of tumour cells3.81E-033310Colony
formation of carcinoma cell lines5.94E-052210Apoptosis of nervous tissue cell lines2.49E-042210 Outgrowth of bone marrow cells 7.56E-04 1:
ALK 1 1 0 Inflammatory response of bone marrow-derived macrophages 1.26E-03 1: RELA 1 1 0 The sorting is performed by number of genes.The
bold data reflects the processes directly associated to bone. The cancer-associated processes detected by IVA The sorting is performed by
number of genes. The bold data reflects the processes directly associated to bone. IVA found 111 genes with 202 germline CD-SNVs associated
to cancer (Table 5). Fifteen genes, which had 43 somatic CD-SNVs were associated to “bone marrow cancer and tumours”. In the case of small
indel, all six genes, with a finding, are associated to cancer and the found small indels are all somatic. The disease named as
“tumourigenesis of bone tumour” was associated to small indel in ALK gene and was present only in the tumour tissue.Table 5 The diseases
associated to CD-SNVs and small indels Disease name p value Number of genes associated Number of variances found Tumour tissue Control
tissue CD-SNVsCancer7.04E-2311120211Tumourigenesis8.21E-1611120211Cancers and tumours3.37E-1511120211Organismal injury and
abnormalities9.45E-1710519411Carcinoma3.46E-259918611Solid tumour2.64E-249918611Epithelial
neoplasia3.34E-239918611Epithelioma3.34E-239918611Breast or colorectal cancer5.45E-238316411Malignant neoplasm of abdomen6.93E-208316911
Bone marrow cancer 1.69E-03 15: CREBBP, EPHA2, FGFR2, KCNJ12, KMT2C, LILRB3, MUC17, MUC4, MYBPC3, NPM1, RARA, SMO, TCF3, TTN, TUBG1 43 1 0
Bone marrow cancer and tumours 1.69E-03 43 1 0 Small indelsCancer9.07E-036611a Hematologic cancer2.36E-044411a Hematologic cancer and
tumours2.36E-044411a Hematological neoplasia8.01E-044411a Lymphohematopoietic cancer9.12E-044411a Disease of colon7.88E-034410Hematological
disease8.15E-034411a Immunological disease1.28E-024411a Gastrointestinal tract cancer2.00E-024410Gastrointestinal tract cancer and
tumours2.02E-024410 Tumourigenesis of bone tumour 7.04E-03 1: ALK 1 1 0 aHere, only one gene PRR23C has a small indel in heterozygous form,
which most likely does not affect the gene function. See Table 2.The bold data reflects the diseases directly associated to bone. The
diseases associated to CD-SNVs and small indels aHere, only one gene PRR23C has a small indel in heterozygous form, which most likely does
not affect the gene function. See Table 2. The bold data reflects the diseases directly associated to bone. With the osteosarcoma patient’s
tumour and control tissue, WES data IVA found six pathways associated to CD-SNVs and six to cancer driver small indels (Table 6). All the
mutations considered here were somatic. In the case of CD-SNVs, the statistically most significant association was between tumour and
WNT/β-catenin signalling pathway. In the case of small indels, associations with different cytokine pathways were found. Also, a pathway
directly linked to the bone tissue—“RANK signalling in osteoclasts” was brought front.Table 6 The pathways associated to cancer Pathway name
p value Number of genes Genes Number of variants Tumour tissue Control tissue CD-SNVsWnt/β-catenin signalling7.07E-046CREBBP, RARA, SMO,
SOX10, SOX7, TCF3610Epithelial adherens junction Ssignalling1.26E-024IQGAP1, KEAP1, TCF3, TUBG1410Germ cell-sertoli cell junction
signalling2.10E-024GSN, IQGAP1, KEAP1, TUBG1510Mouse embryonic stem cell pluripotency2.59E-023CREBBP, SMO, TCF3310Regulation of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition pathway3.40E-024FGFR2, SMO, TCF3, ZEB2410Hereditary breast cancer signalling4.95E-023CREBBP, NPM1,
TUBG1310Small indelsIL-17A signalling in gastric cells8.79E-031RELA110Role of JAK1, JAK2 and TYK2 in interferon
signalling9.54E-031RELA110Interferon signalling9.79E-031RELA110IL-15 production1.00E-021RELA110TNFR2 signalling1.05E-021RELA110RANK
signalling in osteoclasts2.86E-021RELA1103)Results from CEQer software The pathways associated to cancer Results from CEQer software We
applied CS to analyse CNVs in tumour and non-tumour tissue exomes. Compared to the control tissue, in the tumour tissue, the loss of coding
sequences was found in 6 chromosomes and 183 genes and gain of coding sequences in 4 chromosomes and 65 genes (Figure 1). The loss or gain
of coding sequences was altogether in 8 chromosomes, and the most altered were chromosomes 2 and 19 (193,701 bp and 115,358 bp,
respectively; Figure 2). The loss of heterozygosity was detected altogether in 68 regions in 37 genes, located in 15 different chromosomes
(Additional file 3).Figure 1 Circos plot illustrating the CNVs and LOHs in the OS tissue compared to that in the control tissue. CNVs are
marked as lines in the centre: red—gain and green—loss. LOHs are marked as dots in the centre: black—copy neutral, green—copy gain and
red—copy loss.Figure 2 The CNVs in chromosomes 2 and 19 in the osteosarcoma tissue compared to that in the control tissue. Data analysis
performed with CEQer software. Circos plot illustrating the CNVs and LOHs in the OS tissue compared to that in the control tissue. CNVs are
marked as lines in the centre: red—gain and green—loss. LOHs are marked as dots in the centre: black—copy neutral, green—copy gain and
red—copy loss. The CNVs in chromosomes 2 and 19 in the osteosarcoma tissue compared to that in the control tissue. Data analysis performed
with CEQer software. The integrative analysis narrows down the large list of findings from NGS data. When combining the results from WES
data (AS, IVA, CS) and RNA-seq data , we found some interesting and rather logical associations, which we would like to emphasize. To reduce
down the complexity of data we received from AS, we decided to perform as follows. In the case of SNV data, we observed both somatic and
germline SNVs, which are homozygous in the tumour tissue and should have an effect on translation (nonsynonymous, stopgain, stoploss
findings). Thus, we got 527 homozygous germline SNVs (in 392 genes) and 8 homozygous somatic SNVs (in 7 genes), which are located in genes
with altered expression in the tumour tissue compared to that in the control tissue. If also considering the ljb2 database scores, seven
homozygous SNVs with high disease-causing probability remained (Table 7).Table 7 The integrative analysis—genes with altered expression
pattern and SNVs annotated with ANNOVAR software Gene name Transcript name—exon number: nucleotide change/amino acid change ljb2 score/indel
Chr number Start End REF/ALT logFC FDR Germline mutations homozygous in tumour tissueSTEAP4NM_024636—exon2:
c.G364A/p.A122T0.647Chr78791322187913221C/T3.0151.44E-19NM_001205316—exon2: c.G364A/p.A122TNM_001205315—exon3:
c.G364A/p.A122TDDX60LNM_001012967—exon18: c.T2491C/p.C831R0.711Chr4169341435169341435A/G2.3492.67E-14MT1ANM_005946—exon3:
c.A152G/p.K51R0.785Chr165667382856673828A/G−3.0940.00795ACOX1NM_004035—exon7:
c.C936G/p.I312M0.872Chr177394954073949540G/C−0.8090.01538NM_007292—exon7: c.C936G/p.I312MNM_001185039—exon7:
c.C822G/p.I274MTMC7NM_001160364—exon6: c.G431A/p.G144E0.695Chr161904159519041595G/A1.2660.01726NM_024847—exon6:
c.G761A/p.G254EMYO7ANM_001127179—exon27: c.3514_3535del/p.1172_1179delFrameshift
deletionChr117689577176895792GGAGGCGGGGACACCAGGGCCT/-1.5410.03810ATRNL1NM_001276282—exon8: c.1399_1400insTT/p.L467fsFrameshift
insertionChr10116931101116931101-/TT2.3210.04535Somatic mutations homozygous in the tumour tissueTMEM120BNM_001080825—exon3:
c.G274A/p.D92N → X → COSM15999210.981Chr12122186317122186317G/A−1.5480.00064TMEM131NM_015348—exon31:
c.C3947T/p.P1316L0.945Chr29840904698409046G/A−0.7990.01371EI24NM_001007277—exon9: c.733dupC/p.R244fsFrameshift
insertionChr11125452300125452300-/C−0.8150.01569These germline or somatic SNVs are all nonsynonymous and homozygous in the tumour tissue and
according to ljb2 database have a disease-causing effect. The integrative analysis—genes with altered expression pattern and SNVs annotated
with ANNOVAR software These germline or somatic SNVs are all nonsynonymous and homozygous in the tumour tissue and according to ljb2
database have a disease-causing effect. In the case of small indels detected with AS, we observed the somatic and germline indels, which
were homozygous in the tumour tissue. There was 52 germline and 26 somatic indels in introns of the genes, which expression pattern has also
changed (data not shown). Furthermore, there was five germline and three somatic indels in exons of the genes with altered expression. Thus,
we found altogether three frameshift small indels, which possibly have an effect on translation (frameshift insertions and deletion in
exons) (Table 7). In the case of homozygous cancer driver SNVs and small indels found with IVA (Table 2), only four genes have altered
expression pattern in the tumour tissue compared to that in the control tissue. The mRNA expression was increased in the case of PLAT (log
fold change (logFC) = 3.65, false discovery rate (FDR; corrected statistical significance) = 8.27E-27), AGTPBP1 (logFC = 0.91, FDR = 0.039)
and LRRC37A3 (logFC = 1.14, FDR = 0.0072) and decreased in the case of SFB1 (logFC = −1.33, FDR = 0.0037). When analysing the CNV results
together with RNA expression results, we found that with gained copy numbers, there were altogether 22 genes, with altered expression
profile—20 genes with increased and 2 genes with decreased mRNA expression. In the case of loss copy of number, 74 genes’ expression profile
had changed—11 genes with increased and 63 genes with decreased mRNA expression. In Table 8, the genes with the lowest FDR values for gene
expression results are presented. Here, we would emphasize that the INSR, which has copy number loss in area covering 174,552 bp has also a
remarkable decrease in mRNA expression (3.36 times; FDS = 9.67E-31). However, there are also several genes with CNVs, which could be
associated to cancer.Table 8 The integrative analysis—CNVs and RNA expression data is observed together CNVs RNA expression Gene name Chr
number Start End Area length CNV p value Copy number fold change logFC FDR
LossINSRChr1971194597294011174,5523.18E-11−6.64−3.369.67E-31NFIXChr19131065831320120494,6210−10.82−2.451.63E-17FARSAChr1913034964130445589,5940−10.82−2.621.96E-16RAD23AChr1913056627130636677,0400−10.82−2.404.46E-16GINS4Chr8413867244139941812,6948.28E-05−3.94−2.791.31E-15GADD45GIP1Chr1913064971130680503,0790−10.82−2.823.67E-15IFIH1Chr216312358816317521851,6300−10.112.203.69E-14RPL31Chr21016186901016228854,1950−9.39−2.055.08E-13PLEKHG4BChr515618518179025,6051.08E-05−4.40−2.171.58E-12ZNF358Chr19758100375811351323.18E-11−6.64−2.592.56E-11ARHGEF18Chr197459998753200472,0063.18E-11−6.64−1.961.44E-10STX10Chr19132552231326098757,640−10.82−2.551.96E-10COL5A3Chr19101026791012114718,4684.14E-04−3.53−1.925.45E-10MGAT4AChr29924218599347589105,4040−10.221.879.95E-10GainSLC40A1Chr21904283091904289516421.83E-054.282.221.05E-14KITChr4555240945560344679,3521.69E-064.792.541.17E-13PTPLAD2Chr9210080192103163523,6167.73E-147.483.024.49E-13ATP8A1Chr4425711774262912657,9491.83E-075.222.654.54E-10FOCADChr92065830820993327335,0197.73E-147.481.949.12E-08FAM200BChr415683351156920708,7193.54E-054.141.838.59E-07SLIT2Chr42025523420512189256,9554.16E-054.101.351.73E-05MLLT3Chr92035352220622514268,9927.73E-147.481.942.19E-05LCORLChr41788769018023483135,7934.16E-054.101.405.04E-05Only
the genes with lowest FDR value are presented. The integrative analysis—CNVs and RNA expression data is observed together Only the genes
with lowest FDR value are presented. Combining the LOH and mRNA expression data, we found that in the tumour tissue, the expression of four
genes with LOH has increased significantly and expression of five genes with LOH has decreased significantly (Table 9). The rest of the
genes with LOHs had no significant changes in mRNA expression level, and two genes were not detected with RNA-seq (FLJ20518, MANSC4) .Table
9 The integrative analysis - loss of heterozygosity and RNA expression data observed together Gene name Chr number LOHs RNA expression LOH
position Alleles LOH LOH p value logFC FDR
MS4A14Chr1160165358–60165379G/CCopyNeutralLOH0.0252.463.20E-08DSC2Chr1828666554–28666556A/CCopyNeutralLOH0.0251.873.82E-07RPS4XChrX71495409–71495414G/CCopyNeutralLOH0.01−1.447.25E-07RPS23Chr581571874A/CCopyNeutralLOH0.005−1.431.04E06IL7RChr535874575C/T1AlleleGain0.0251.596.69E-06PCNXL2Chr1233398713C/TCopyNeutralLOH0.011.200.00027HILPDA
(C7orf68)Chr7128098270T/GCopyNeutralLOH0.0001−1.120.00094HRNRChr1152188041C/TAllele(s)Loss0.025−3.090.00796MUC4Chr3195515594,
195516630C/GCopyNeutralLOH0.025−2.220.01230Only the genes with significant mRNA expression changes in the tumour tissue compared to that in
the control tissue are presented. The integrative analysis - loss of heterozygosity and RNA expression data observed together Only the genes
with significant mRNA expression changes in the tumour tissue compared to that in the control tissue are presented. For additional
information, please see the supplementary material as separate files for AS, IVA and CS combined with RNA-seq data. In this study, the exome
profiles of the osteosarcoma patient’s tumour and normal bone tissue were compared. Additionally, the RNA-seq data from our previous work
was used . For WES data analysis, several softwares were applied and possibly some of them are better in detecting some mutations and not so
effective in detecting others. Still, we think it is more beneficial to use different approaches and we believe it is easier to follow, if
we discuss separately the results gained from each software. The ANNOVAR software annotated a large amount of genes with SNVs and small
indels, applying refGene hg19 database. Over 2,700 somatic SNVs and small indels were detected specifically in the tumour tissue, from which
almost 300 are homozygous. These findings are located all over the exome. This demonstrates that the changes in OS genome are not
concentrated into a single or few areas but are rather distributed. When using ljb2 database, AS detected four homozygous somatic mutations
in the tumour tissue, which could potentially cause a disease. These nonsynonymous mutations were located in ESX1, CDC27, TMEM120B and
TMEM131. Additionally, in the case of TMEM120B and TMEM131, the mRNA expression has decreased substantially in the tumour tissue compared to
that in the control tissue ; however, further studies are needed to confirm the possible associations between found mutations and gene
expression level. Available data about the possible associations between OS and these genes is very limited. In TMEM120B, a gene with an
unclear function, the mutation COSM1599921 has been previously detected in glioma . The CDC27 is a gene possibly controlling the timing of
mitosis and may have an important role in tumour cell division . In addition to the somatic mutation, the CDC27 had 33 heterozygous germline
disease-causing mutations (nonsynonymous) (data not shown). In the case of breast cancer, the CDC27 has been demonstrated to be a promising
biomarker in predicting the disease progression and prognostication . Thus, these somatic mutations may have some effect on OS pathogenesis.
Especially the abundant changes in CDC27 may be important in terms of regulating OS tumour cell division. In the tumour tissue, we detected
homozygous somatic small indels causing the frameshift in five genes—EI24, ALG1L2, TIGD6, GPATCH4 and SSPO. None of these genes have
previously been associated to OS, and according to our RNA-seq data, only EI24 of these five genes has altered mRNA expression—it has
decreased in the tumour tissue , which could be due to the insertion in exon 9. The EI24 encodes a tumour suppressor and is an immediate-
early induction target of TP53-mediated apoptosis—it binds to antiapoptotic BLC2. Furthermore, the EI24 has found to be highly mutated in
the case of aggressive breast cancer and is rather associated to tumour invasiveness than development of the primary tumour . In the present
case, we found no mutations in TP53 nor was the expression altered ; thus, according to this data, we may suggest that the TP53 is
functional in the tumour tissue. However, the TP53 pathway may still be suppressed due to mutated and downregulated EI24. Moreover, the
aggressive nature of OS is correlated to this finding. Appling Ingenuity Variant Analysis software, we found over 200 cancer driver variants
and 93% of these possibly cause the loss of gene function. Thirteen homozygous somatic CD-SNVs were detected in different genes—RGPD3,
PRDM9, FOXK1, CCZ1, PLAT, AGTPBP1, SARDH, FAH, CDC27, SBF1, LRRC37A3, ARL17A and LILRB3. The mRNA expression of PLAT, AGTPBP1 and LRRC37A3
has increased and of SFB1 has decreased significantly . We found no previous data about the associations between OS and these genes, except
SBF1. With previous OS studies, another missense mutation (p.E1539K) has detected in SBF1 . SBF1 is a SET (a nuclear oncogene) binding
factor 1 and may inhibit the cell division . The decreased expression in the tumour tissue may be responsible for the increased cell
proliferation. Some other associations, which might be interesting—PLAT gene is important for cell migration and tissue remodelling and the
overexpression might cause hyperfibrinolysis , which has not previously described in the case of OS. Two mutations in ARL17A have detected
in chondrosarcoma cells . In the case of CDC27, the same mutation (p.E6G) was also brought front by AS as potentially disease causing, which
is discussed above. Thus, it is highly likely that at least some of these genes participate in some level of OS pathogenesis. Additionally,
with IVA four homozygous somatic small indels were detected in the tumour tissue. These were in noncoding regions of genes CTCFL, PRR23C,
CDCA7L and ALK; thus, the effect might be post-transcriptional. CTCFL is a genetic paralog of CTCF; latter is an important methylation
pattern regulator. In the case of CTCF, it has previously demonstrated that in the OS tissue, the changes in its methylation pattern may
also cause loss of imprinting of IGF2 and H19 genes, which further alters their expression pattern . In our OS patient’s tumour tissue, the
mRNA expression of both IGF2 and H19 has increased significantly (FDR = 3.46E-15 and FDR = 0.0015, respectively) . Thus, the association may
be valid here also. In PRR23C, one missense mutation (p.R190W) has detected previously in the OS tissue . ALK encodes a receptor tyrosine
kinase and is rearranged, mutated or amplified in several tumours. However, in the case of OS, there are only few reports about ALK . In
addition, two heterozygous somatic small indels were detected in DSPP and RELA exons; however, we found no previous data about these
findings and associations to OS. The small indels might have an effect on the expression of these genes both pre- and post-transcriptional
level; however, these suggestions need to be further studied. According to IVA, there were several genes with more than one mutation—in
MUC4, there were even 22 somatic mutations in exons and 44 in introns, although they all were heterozygous. Thus, we found MUC4 locus to be
the most altered in the tumour tissue compared to that in the control tissue. This might explain why its mRNA expression in the tumour
tissue has decreased (FDR = 0.012) . Mucin 4 is among major constituents of mucus, and it has demonstrated that primary bone tumours rarely
express MUC4 protein , which correlates to our finding. Furthermore, with IVA, we found mucin complex (MUC2, MUC4, MUC6) to have a highest
significance in OS among others. However, there are also other mucin genes (MUC16, MUC17, MUC20) with somatic heterozygous CD-SNVs. The
expression pattern of all other detected mucins has not changed significantly. Thus, mucins may have a role in OS pathogenesis, but we dear
not to make any further conclusions. With IVA, there was four bone-related processes brought front only in the case of the tumour
tissue—“myelopoiesis of bone marrow” (NPM1, RARA), “quantity of trabecular bone” (CREBBP, SMO), “outgrowth of bone marrow cells” (ALK) and
“inflammatory response of bone marrow-derived macrophages” (RELA). Furthermore, in disease list, 16 genes with over 40 somatic variations
were associated to “bone marrow cancer” and “bone tumour”; however, there were also over 200 germline CD-SNVs associated to cancer. Thus,
here, we would like to emphasize that in the case of both cancer-associated processes and diseases, the ones associated with bone are
somatic mutations; however, the findings possibly promoting cancer are germline mutations. This is one of the phenomena, which we would like
to observe in our future studies. The most significant pathway found with IVA was “WNT/β-catenin signalling pathway” (altered genes: CREBBP,
RARA, SMO, SOX10, SOX7, TCF3). Reviewed in , the pathway is required for bone development and has demonstrated to be altered in pathogenesis
of OS—overexpression of numerous WNT pathway components including WNT ligands, FZDs and LRP receptors and epigenetic silencing of the
pathway inhibiting genes, i.e. WIF1. However, in our previous study, we found WNT7B and WNT11 to be downregulated and WNT2B and WNT5B
upregulated; FZD4 and FZD8 upregulated and LRP8 and LRP12 downregulated and DVL3 downregulated and WIF1 and SOST upregulated. Additionally,
genes with CD-SNVs—RARA, SMO and SOX7 were upregulated . Thus, our results are rather controversial to several previous studies
demonstrating the WNT/β-catenin pathway to be upregulated . However, there are also studies correlating to our findings . As our study is
based on a single case, we dear not to conclude, why the WNT/β-catenin pathway is rather downregulated here, but we suggest the
controversial results may occur due to major heterogeneity of OS. Nevertheless, the present study demonstrates that in addition to altered
expression patter, the genes involved in WNT/β-catenin signalling pathway carry the CD-SNVs. In the case of small indels, the IVA brought
front the pathways associated to RELA and these are mostly cytokine signalling pathways (Table 6). Previously, it has demonstrated that
interaction of IL17A and IL17AR promotes metastasis in OS cells. Furthermore, IL17 stimulates osteoclast resorption . In our previous study,
we found IL17AR to be significantly upregulated . Osteoclasts are important in pathogenesis of OS—the more active they are, the more
aggressive the tumour is . RELA is demonstrated to enhance the osteoclast differentiation . As IVA predicts the loss of RELA functionality
(at least partially, as the small indel is heterozygous), in the present case, the OS might not have been as aggressive as it usually would.
Previously, it has demonstrated that chromothripsis event is common to early stage of OS—hundreds of genomic rearrangements will appear in a
single instability event . In the present case, the CEQer software detected nearly 2,400 gain and loss events in 8 chromosomes involved,
which should qualify as the chromothripsis. However, the initiating cause of this massive rearrangement is unknown, as there were no traumas
or other environmental causes we are aware of. In general, the gain of copy number should increase the mRNA expression and loss of copy
number should decrease the expression . In present work, this pattern was valid in the case of 86.5% of the genes with CNVs and altered
expression. One of the strongest findings here was the amount of CNVs in INSR, which expression has decreased remarkably (Table 8). The main
physiological role of the insulin receptor appears to be metabolic regulation . However, together with IGF1R it forms a hybrid receptor for
IGF1, latter together with IGF2 is thought to have a key role in driving the proliferation and survival of sarcoma cells . Furthermore, the
growth hormone and IGF1 axis controls the growth and bone modelling/remodelling . Additionally, the IRS1, which is phosphorylated by the
INSR, is important for both metabolic and mitogenic pathways . In the present case, the mRNA expression of both IGF1 and IGF2 has increased
(FDR = 4.65E-35 and FDR = 3.46E-15, respectively); however, the expression of IGF1R remained the same in the tumour tissue compared to that
in the control tissue . Furthermore, in IGF1R we found a heterozygous germline nonsynonymous mutation (p.G1117R) with AS, which according to
ljb2 database is a disease causing (data not shown). Similarly to INSR, the mRNA expression of IRS1 is decreased in the tumour tissue
compared to that in the control tissue (FDR = 2.62E-10) . Thus, in the present case it seems, the proliferation of tumour cells might be
rather supported by increased effect of IGF1, IGF2 and IGF1R homodimer associations, than IGF1, IGF2 and INSR-IGF1R heterodimer associations
or INSR effects on IRS1. The loss of heterozygosity has been reported to be extensive in OS exomes . In the present case, we did not detect
whole chromosome or gene region loss; however, we did detect the loss of heterozygosity in smaller regions. The genes with LOH findings and
increased mRNA expression—MS4A14, DSC2, IL7R and PCNXL2 have not associated to OS previously. However, in the case of DSC2, the
overexpression has demonstrated to be inversely correlated to bone metastasis-free survival . The mutations in IL7R exon 6 have been
demonstrated to be present in leukaemia patients’ bone marrow samples but not associated to other solid tumours . The five genes with LOHs
and decreased mRNA expression—RPS4X, RPS23, HILPDA (C7orf68), HRNR and MUC4 also do not have previous information associated to OS.
Nonetheless, also the LOH analysis brought forward different genes in mucin family. In addition to MUC4, there were also other genes with
LOHs but with insignificant mRNA expression changes in the tumour tissues—MUC2, MUC6 and MUC17. Thus, these results also support the idea
that mucins might have a role in pathogenesis of osteosarcoma. In summary, the present case has several characteristics previously
demonstrated in OS. The wide genomic arrangements have appeared—SNVs and small indels all over the genome and CNVs in some chromosomes; and
in several cases, these rearrangements may have an effect on gene expression. Furthermore, the germline mutations seem to be associated to
cancer in general and somatic mutations to bone tumours. The most significant pathway was the one probably most thoroughly studied in the
case of OS—the WNT/β-catenin signalling pathway. We found several genes in this pathway carrying the cancer driver variances. Additionally,
the IGF1/IGF2 and IGF1R homodimer signalling might have an essential effect on OS pathogenesis. Which also needs to be emphasized is that
according to our data (based on DNA and RNA studies), there is no evidence of a nonfunctional TP53; however, the TP53 pathway might be
suppressed in further levels—the downregulation of EI24. In addition, with this study, we found associations between different genes and OS
pathogenesis, which have not demonstrated before in earlier studies. We found the MUC4 locus to be the most altered in the tumour tissue
compared to that in the control tissue; furthermore, several other mucin genes are also possibly associated to OS. The somatic mutation in
CDC27 was brought front by two different data analysis softwares and might have a role in OS pathogenesis. All genes, in which the mutations
were detected, may be considered as potential targets for additional studies (i.e. functional, histopathological, clinical studies) for
finding OS biomarkers. The present study brought front the WNT pathway genes, IGF1/IGF2 and IGF1R homodimer signalling pathway genes, TP53
together with EI24, MUC4 together with other mucin genes and CDC27 as potential biomarkers for OS. Finally, as this study is based on a
single case and only DNA and RNA analysis, these data may not be taken as conclusive evidence and further studies are needed to confirm the
present findings. Additional file 1: ANNOVAR software. The file contains the list of SNVs (coverage at least 20 times) and small indels
detected from WES study. Additionally, the dbSNP135, dbCOSMIC67, ljb2 scores and RNA-seq information is added if available. Additional file
2: Ingenuity Variant Analysis software. The file contains the list of SNVs, which according to IVA are associated to cancer. Additionally,
the dbSNP135, SIFT and POLYPHEN functions and RNA-seq information is added if available. Additional file 3: CEQer software. The file
contains the list of genes where CNVs and LOHs were detected. Additionally, the RNA-seq information is added if available. ANNOVAR software.
The file contains the list of SNVs (coverage at least 20 times) and small indels detected from WES study. Additionally, the dbSNP135,
dbCOSMIC67, ljb2 scores and RNA-seq information is added if available. Ingenuity Variant Analysis software. The file contains the list of
SNVs, which according to IVA are associated to cancer. Additionally, the dbSNP135, SIFT and POLYPHEN functions and RNA-seq information is
added if available. CEQer software. The file contains the list of genes where CNVs and LOHs were detected. Additionally, the RNA-seq
information is added if available. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions ER
participated in the research concept and design, data analysis and interpretation, writing of the article and critical revision of the
article and performed the statistical analysis. SK involved in the research concept and design, data analysis and interpretation and
critical revision of the article. XDH contributed in the research concept and design and carried out the collection and/or assembly of data.
KM participated in the research concept and design, collection and/or assembly of data, data analysis and interpretation and critical
revision of the article. AM involved in the research concept and design, collection and/or assembly of data, data analysis and
interpretation and critical revision of the article. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported by the
institutional research funding IUT (IUT20-46) of the Estonian Ministry of Education and Research, by the Centre of Translational Genomics of
University of Tartu (SP1GVARENG) and by the European Regional Development Fund (Centre of Translational Medicine, University of Tartu).
