Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) is generally safe and well-accepted. In rare cases, it is associated with complications (intra- e
postoperative bleeding, visceral injury and surgical site infection). Splenic lesion has been reported only after direct trauma. We report
an unusual case of splenic rupture presenting after “uncomplicated” LC. A 77-year-old woman presented with distended abdomen, tenderness in
the left upper quadrant and severe anemia 12 hours after LC. Clinical examination revealed hypovolemic shock. Abdominal computed tomography
confirmed the diagnosis of splenic rupture, and the patient required an urgent splenectomy through midline incision. The post-operative
course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on 7th postoperative day. Splenic injury rarely complicates LC. We postulate that
congenital or post-traumatic adhesions of the parietal peritoneum to the spleen may have been stretched from the splenic capsule during
pneumoperitoneum establishment, resulting in subcapsular hematoma and subsequent delayed rupture. Splenic rupture is an unusual but life-
threatening complication of LC. Direct visualization of the spleen at the end of LC might be a useful procedure to aid early recognition and
management in such cases. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) is today the well defined “gold standard” treatment for gallstone disease, as it
is well-tolerated and associated with lesser postoperative pain and discomfort, improved cosmesis, reduction of recovery and subsequent
chance for early return to social activities. However, in a small percentage of patients, LC can be complicated by bleeding, infection, bile
duct injuries, retained gallstones, persistent pain, and more rarely damage to the bowel and other viscera . We report an unusual case of
urgent splenectomy for a ruptured subcapsular hematoma twelve hours after elective LC for cholelithiasis. A 77 years old woman with a recent
history of constant right upper quadrant pain radiating to the right shoulder was referred to our hospital for symptomatic gallbladder
microlithiasis. No relevant past medical history was referred and pre-operative tests did not show any pathological findings (at
ultrasonography (US), spleen diameter 101 mm). We performed a LC by 4 ports “French” technique. The pneumoperitoneum was established with
open “Hasson” technique respecting an insufflating volume of 5 l/min. We used one 10-mm trocar into umbilicus, with a 10-mm 30° laparoscope,
two 5 mm trocars, respectively on the left of the midline and in the right side, and one 10 mm epigastric trocar, setting the
pneumoperitoneum at 12 mmHg. No specific peritoneal adhesions around the gallbladder have been identified. The total operative time was
about 75 minutes, without any intraoperative complications or bleeding. The abdomen was normal without tenderness or guarding; no analgesic
was required and there was a normal intestinal function 6 hours after surgery; normal values of postoperative (6 hours after surgery) blood
tests have been found; post-operative drainage in Winslow was silent. During the first postoperative day, at about 12 hours after the
operation, she experienced self limiting lipotimic episode (pulse of 120 beats/minute, blood pressure of 80/40 mm Hg), with cold and clammy
peripheries and referred a sudden upper abdominal pain. The abdominal examination showed a distended abdomen characterized by tenderness in
the left upper quadrant, guarding, and rebound tenderness, Blumberg’s sign and shallow breathing. Immediately blood tests were performed
showing a severe anemia (hypovolemic shock): the Hemoglobin decreased from preoperative 10.4 gr/dl to 5.3 gr/dl and red blood cell from
3.6×106/μl to 1.7×106/μl. We performed an urgent computed tomography (CT) that showed severe haemoperitoneum with two major blood
collections localized respectively along the course of hepato-gastric ligament (16×5 cm) and in the left sub-phrenic space (with active
spreading of contrast medium) (Figure 1).Figure 1 CT showing severe haemoperitoneum with two major blood collections localized respectively
along the course of hepato-gastric ligament (a) and in the left sub-phrenic space (b). CT showing severe haemoperitoneum with two major
blood collections localized respectively along the course of hepato-gastric ligament (a) and in the left sub-phrenic space (b). We did not
consider the embolization of splenic artery before surgery because of the hemodynamic instability. The patient was urgently operated through
a midline laparotomy and we found a 3-cm sub-capsular splenic haematoma ruptured into the peritoneum. We then performed splenectomy, intra-
abdominal lavage (draining about 1.5 liters of blood and clots) and two drainages were placed (the first one in the splenic root and the
second one in Douglas’ root). We did not perform partial splenectomy or conservation of spleen in the suspect of more complex splenic
lesion. During the operation five blood unit transfusions, 9 plasma and 8 platelet units have been practiced. Twenty hours after the
splenectomy blood tests were performed, showing a stable Hb of 9 gr/dl. No further transfusions were needed. The histological examination
showed a subcapsular haematoma dissecting the capsula and rupted (in peritoneum), with normal surrounding splenic pulp (Figure 2). The
remote history of the patient was negative for any kind of trauma during the preceding year, or for hematologic syndrome such as
myeloproliferative or myelodisplastic disease or thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. The patient was discharged on the 7th postoperative
day in good clinical condition, after hospitalization of 4 days in intensive care unit.Figure 2 Histological examination showing subcapsular
haematoma dissecting the capsula (red circle), with normal surrounding splenic pulp. Histological examination showing subcapsular haematoma
dissecting the capsula (red circle), with normal surrounding splenic pulp. She received the standard vaccinations against encapsulated
organisms (pneumococcal, meningococcal, and haemophilus influenzae). One week after the discharge the patient performed an abdomen US scan
which was negative for any intra-abdominal fluid collection. All data reported in the manuscript have been visualized and then approved by
our University Hospital Ethics Committee and all procedures carried out on the patients were in compliance with the Helsinki Declaration.
Moreover, the patient has given written explicit, express and unequivocal consent to publish her sensible data on our manuscript. In a
recent review, it was reported that up to 40% of all splenectomies are related to a iatrogenic splenic injury. In other studies, unplanned
splenectomies range from 9% to 44% and incidental splenectomies are reported with a rate of 0.9% to 3.4% in gastric surgery, 1.2% to 8% in
operations involving the left colon, 1.4% to 24% in left nephrectomies, 0.1%to 4% in abdominal vascular surgery, with an increase to 21.3%
when manoeuvres of visceral rotation are performed and 60% in case of emergency surgery on the abdominal aorta. Among all abdominal
operations, those performed in the upper left quadrant yield a higher rate of iatrogenic lesions (0.9% to 49%), whereas appendicectomies and
cholecystectomies are the procedures with the lowest incidence of splenic injuries . The splenic capsule is more frequently injured, whereas
the rate of injury to the hylum and the short gastric branches of the splenic artery is lower . Splenic injury following LC is more rare
complication: after an extensive PubMed literature research (Search criteria: splenic, rupture, laparoscopy, lesion), we only found two
manuscripts in which the patients required a splenectomy, respectively 3 weeks and 36 hours after LC (Table 1). Moreover, we also found six
cases of splenic rupture during laparoscopic gynaecologic procedure (Table 2).Table 1 Splenic rupture after LC in literature
AuthorDiagnosisCT/USSurgeryOutcomeLeff D, JSLS 2007 Splenic rupture 3 weeks following uncomplicated LCCT: Heterogeneous poorly enhancing
soft tissue mass in the left upper quadrant inseparable from the spleen, measuring 11 x 13 cm, associated with a large volume of free
intraperitoneal fluid highly suggestive of splenic ruptureMidline laparotomy with splenectomyDischarged home one week following
splenectomyBracale U, Ann It Chir 2013 Splenic rupture 36 hours following uncomplicated LCUS: important heamoperitoneum with two major blood
collections localized respectively in the right and in the left sub-phrenic spacelaparoscopic exploration + Midline laparotomy with
splenectomyDischarged home one week following splenectomyGeraci G, 2013Splenic rupture 12 hours following uncomplicated LCCT: Severe
heamoperitoneum with two major blood collections localized respectively along the course of hepato-gastric ligament (16 x 5 cm) and in the
left sub-phrenic space (active spreading of contrast medium)Midline laparotomy with splenectomyDischarged home one week following
splenectomyTable 2 Splenic rupture after laparoscopy AuthorSurgery (patient)IntraoperativeTreatmentHypothesisPrian DV, Am J Obstet Gynaecol,
1974 Splenic rupture after pelvic laparoscopyPosterior subcapsularhaematomaMidline laparotomy with splenectomyPneumoperitoneum stretched
some adhesions between spleen, omentum and abdominal wallMakanji HH, Br J Obstet Gynaecol, 1980 Splenic rupture after pelvic
laparoscopySmall posteriorspleniclesionMidline laparotomy with splenectomyPneumoperitoneum stretched some adhesions between spleen, omentum
and abdominal wallMahlke R, Z Gastroent 1992 Splenic rupture 5 hours following uneventful diagnostic laparoscopy (female, 48 yrs)Small
posteriorspleniclesionMidline laparotomy with fibrin glue reparationThis complication must have occurred while establishing the
pneumoperitoneum: stretching of small adhesions of the spleen with the abdominal wall may have played a roleTakeuchi K, J Reprod Med 2001
Combination of laparoscopy and preoperative trauma to the left upper quadrant of the abdomenSub-capsular hematomaMidline laparotomy with
splenectomyTearing away of delicate peritoneal reflections or small adhesions on the splenic capsule due to induction of pneumoperitoneum
can result in sudden rupture and hemorrhageHabib E, HPB (Oxford) 2004 Splenic rupture 5 days after laparoscopy for duodenal perforation
closed with two sutures reinforced with fibrin glue (male, 45 yrs)Posterior sub-capsular haematoma of the spleen at the site of the adhesion
to the posterior peritoneumMidline laparotomy with splenectomyA posterior subcapsularhaematoma located at the site of the adhesion of the
spleen to the posterior peritoneum had dissected the capsule over the dome of the spleen, and had ruptured into the peritoneum (sub capsular
haematoma of the spleen that remained asymptomatic until its rupture)Huchon C, J Min Inv Gyn 2008 Splenic rupture 5 days after diagnostic
laparoscopy (female, 52 yrs with history of abdominal surgery and with acute pelvic infection)Sub-capsular hematoma, resulting in a splenic
ruptureMidline laparotomy with splenectomyProbably caused by an overlooked puncture by the Veress needle or by tension on splenic adhesions
during the adesiolysis Splenic rupture after LC in literature Splenic rupture after laparoscopy It is reasonable that our patient had some
adhesions between the splenic capsule and the parietal peritoneum. So, when the pneumoperitoneum was estabilished at the start of the LC,
stretching of the splenic capsule resulted in a small sub-capsular hematoma. This also seems to be supported by our histological findings.
In addiction, the temporal proximity between LC and splenectomy, the lacking of history of abdominal trauma and the histological absence of
splenic intrinsic pathological abnormality, confirm that splenic rupture represents a primary complication of LC . In the present case,
haemoperitoneum and bleeding shock appeared about 12 hours following LC, when the subcapsular haematoma ruptured into peritoneum. About the
use of drainage during an uncomplicated LC, we follow the recommendation of a recent Cochrane Review in which “the Authors could not find
evidence to support the use of routinary drainage after LC” . Splenic rupture is an unusual but serious complication of LC. It has to be
diagnosed and treated if possible during the laparoscopic procedure. The identification of a lesion of the anterior edge or the inferior
pole of the spleen is possible during laparoscopy if the spleen is observed at the end of the procedure, whereas the detection of a
posterior subcapsular haematoma of the spleen is impossible during laparoscopy and cannot be suspected if there is no bleeding from the
spleen at the end of the procedure. Such a haematoma is not detectable after laparoscopy if the patient remains asymptomatic, and symptoms
only occur after the haematoma ruptures. However, we suggest visualization of the spleen at the end of LC to ensure early recognition and
management of such cases. Obviously, manipulating the spleen is not necessary but we do believe it would be reasonable to wait for some
seconds and see if there is any bleeding. Imaging may be useful to diagnose such a haematoma but ultrasound and CT are unlikely to be
performed in asymptomatic patients. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions GG
conceived the study and designed either the manuscript either the review of literature; moreover, he has given final approval of the version
to be published; AP has been involved in drafting the manuscript and pictures; AA has been involved in drafting the manuscript; GM has been
involved in drafting the manuscript and revising it critically for important intellectual contents; CS and MC has been involved in drafting
the manuscript and revising it critically for important intellectual contents. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank
Dr. Chiara Sciarrino, from University of Palermo, who provided free English medical correction in August 2014.
