Phenotypic drug susceptibility testing (DST) for Mycobacterium tuberculosis takes several weeks to complete and second-line DST is often
poorly reproducible, potentially leading to compromised clinical decisions. Following a fatal case of XDR TB, we investigated the potential
benefit of using whole-genome sequencing to generate an in silico drug susceptibility profile. The clinical course of the patient was
reviewed, assessing the times at which phenotypic DST data became available and changes made to the therapeutic regimen. Whole-genome
sequencing was performed on the earliest available isolate and variants associated with drug resistance were identified. The final DST
report, including second-line drugs, was issued 10 weeks after patient presentation and 8 weeks after initial growth of M. tuberculosis. In
the interim, the patient may have received a compromised regimen that had the potential to select for further drug resistance. The in silico
susceptibility profile, extrapolated from evolving evidence in the literature, provided comparable or superior data to the DST results for
second-line drugs and could be generated in a much shorter timeframe. We propose routine whole-genome sequencing of all MDR M. tuberculosis
isolates in adequately resourced settings. This will improve individual patient care, monitor for transmission events and advance our
understanding of resistance-associated mutations. The global TB epidemic is increasingly being driven by the emergence and spread of drug-
resistant strains.1 The WHO estimates that nearly half a million (450 000; range: 300 000–600 000) people developed MDR TB (resistant to
isoniazid and rifampicin) in 2012, of whom <20% received appropriate treatment.2 The diagnosis and treatment of MDR TB present major
challenges. Dependence on traditional drug susceptibility testing (DST) incurs significant delays in diagnosis, which force clinicians to
initiate empirical treatment that may be suboptimal, leading to the multiplication of drug resistance and adverse patient outcomes.
Initiating treatment with an optimal regimen is especially important in patients with XDR TB (MDR with additional resistance to
fluoroquinolones and at least one second-line injectable drug), since therapeutic options remain limited. Approximately 10% of MDR cases are
thought to be XDR2 and its global rise is driven by treatment that is poorly aligned with local resistance patterns,3 as well as by
efficient transmission of some XDR strains.4 Given the poor treatment outcomes of XDR TB patients,5 every effort should be made to reduce
delays in case detection and characterization of susceptibility profiles. Conventional phenotypic DST requires a minimum of 2 weeks: one for
initial detection of microbial growth and another to assess critical concentrations of first-line anti-TB drugs.6 In reality, full
characterization of an XDR strain may take months, since expanded DST is usually performed sequentially and often some tests need to be
repeated. In addition, drug resistance breakpoints for most second-line drugs are poorly standardized. Genotypic tests such as the
commercial GeneXpert MTB/RIF® and GenoType MTBDRplus® (Hain Lifescience) assays offer rapid assessment of drug resistance mutations against
key first-line anti-TB drugs, with testing of second-line agents using the GenoType MTBDRsl® (Hain Lifescience) assay if required. However,
culture-based DST remains the reference standard, given the limited number of mutations evaluated by current genotypic tests and our
incomplete understanding of the mechanisms of resistance. Whole-genome sequencing has offered novel insight into the evolution and spread of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, but its application in routine patient care has been limited by the perceived lack of clinical relevance, high
cost, complexity of interpretation and slow turn-around times. Recent technological advances have made routine whole-genome sequencing of
select M. tuberculosis strains in reference laboratories in a clinically relevant timeframe technically and economically feasible. We
present a case of XDR TB diagnosed in New South Wales, Australia, and illustrate the potential clinical value of routine whole-genome
sequencing of highly resistant M. tuberculosis strains. A man in his thirties presented to hospital with cough, night sweats and weight loss
for more than 3 months. He was of East African ancestry and had spent much of his adult life as a refugee in the Horn of Africa. He first
received treatment for TB in Ethiopia in early adolescence; the basis for the diagnosis was uncertain and he discontinued treatment after 3
months due to war. A decade later in Djibouti, he was treated for sputum smear-positive TB. He received 6 months of standard first-line
therapy, comprising isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol during the 2 month intensive phase, with isoniazid/rifampicin during
the 4 month continuation phase. He was documented to be sputum smear negative after completion and declared cured. Three years later he was
diagnosed with a third episode of TB. His third treatment course (also received in Djibouti) comprised 2 months of
isoniazid/rifampicin/pyrazinamide/ethambutol and streptomycin, followed by 1 month of isoniazid/rifampicin/pyrazinamide/ethambutol and a
further 5 months of isoniazid/rifampicin/ethambutol. He was reported to be culture negative at the end of treatment. He subsequently
received approval to settle in Australia, on condition that he commit to regular TB screening. He had stable chest radiograph findings and
culture-negative sputum for 2 years after migration (Figure 1a), but was subsequently lost to follow-up until his symptomatic presentation,
5 years after migration. Figure 1.(a) Chest radiograph when asymptomatic; 3 years before presentation. (b) Chest radiograph with symptomatic
presentation. (a) Chest radiograph when asymptomatic; 3 years before presentation. (b) Chest radiograph with symptomatic presentation.
Physical examination on presentation revealed cachexia (38 kg) and finger clubbing. The chest radiograph showed bilateral cavities with
extensive fibrocalcific changes (Figure 1b). Sputum microscopy was 3+ for acid-fast bacilli and M. tuberculosis was confirmed on culture.
HIV serology was negative. Given his long disease-free interval and poor clinical condition, the patient was commenced immediately on
regular first-line therapy with daily isoniazid/rifampicin/pyrazinamide/ethambutol, pending the outcome of genotypic and phenotypic DST.
GeneXpert MTB/RIF® testing was not performed, but GenoType MTBDRplus® (Hain Lifescience) assay results suggested MDR TB. When this
information became available at week 3, amikacin and moxifloxacin were added to his regimen. Five weeks after presentation, phenotypic DST
results showed resistance to isoniazid (MIC >0.4 mg/L), rifampicin and pyrazinamide, with ethambutol susceptibility. Additional results
suggested resistance to streptomycin, amikacin, capreomycin, ciprofloxacin and ethionamide, fulfilling the WHO definition of XDR TB. All
medications were temporarily ceased until more complete second-line susceptibilities became available. The expanded DST report, issued 10
weeks after initial diagnosis, listed susceptibility to para-aminosalicylic acid, cycloserine and clofazimine. He was restarted on
moxifloxacin, high-dose ethambutol (25 mg/kg) and pyrazinamide with the addition of para-aminosalicylic acid, cycloserine, clofazimine and
amoxicillin/clavulanate. On this regimen his clinical situation improved, with no further fevers, reduction in cough, 17 kg of weight gain
and some radiological improvement. Unfortunately the patient developed major depression and cycloserine had to be discontinued; it was
replaced by trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and clarithromycin. Susceptibility testing on an isolate collected 9 months after presentation
reported intermediate-level resistance to moxifloxacin (MIC between 1.0 and 2.0 mg/L) and susceptibility to linezolid. The patient remained
in hospital in strict isolation in a negative-pressure room for 2 years, since his sputum remained culture positive for M. tuberculosis
despite smear conversion. Given his stable clinical condition, suitable accommodation was ultimately found where the infectious risk could
be minimized and directly observed therapy provided 7 days a week. However, within 4 months of discharge he was readmitted to hospital with
extensive ascites, he was culture positive for M. tuberculosis and he died following a major pulmonary haemorrhage. After the patient's
death, an early M. tuberculosis isolate was submitted for whole-genome sequencing using the Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform, producing 100 base
paired-end reads with >500-fold average depth of coverage after mapping onto the M. tuberculosis H37Rv reference genome (NCBI GenBank
NC_000962). Several genetic variants in different genes associated with drug resistance in M. tuberculosis were identified by whole-genome
sequencing, providing a plausible genetic basis for the observed phenotypic resistance to isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide, as well as
all fluoroquinolones and injectables (capreomycin and aminoglycosides).7–11 These are shown in Table 1. Although this patient's strain was
initially reported to be susceptible to ethambutol using phenotypic methods, the sequenced isolate possessed multiple mutations associated
with ethambutol resistance. Table 1.Genetic variantsa identified with potential to contribute to drug resistanceDrugGeneH37Rv
identifierVariantLikelihood of resistancebClinical relevanceIsoniazid7,11katGRv1908cS315Thighno value in
treatmentfabDRv2243S275NhighiniARv0342H481QlowRv1592cRv1592cI322VlowproARv2427cV140LlowRifampicin7,11rpoBRv0667S450Wchighno value in
treatmentPyrazinamide7,11pncARv2043cD158EAGdhighno value in treatmentT160MhighT167AlowEthambutol7,11embCRv3793T270Ipossibleno value in
treatmentN394DpossibleembARv3794V206MpossibleP913SpossibleembBRv3795D328GpossibleE378ApossibleG406ShighrmlDRv3266cS257PpossibleembRRv1267cD107NpossibleC110YpossibleiniARv0342H481QpossibleFluoroquinolones7–9,11gyrARv0006E21Qlowlimited
value, should not be counted as an ‘active drug’A90VehighD94YehighA384Vvery lowG668Dvery low26gyrBRv0005M330Ivery
lowE540Dlow27Aminoglycosides, streptomycin and capreomycin7,10rrsRvnr01A1401Ghighno value in
treatmentrpsLRv0682K43RhighgidBRv3919cS100FpossibleEthionamide7ethARv3854cC403Wpossiblelimited value, should not be counted as an ‘active
drug’aCompared with H37Rv as the reference strain.bHigh—strong evidence for a causal association with a drug-resistant phenotype;
low—conflicting evidence or evidence suggesting a weak association with a drug-resistant phenotype; possible—theoretical possibility of
causal association with a drug-resistant phenotype, but insufficient evidence.cS531W with Escherichia coli numbering.dFrameshift
mutation.eHeteroresistance—mutations detected in 63% (A90V) and 16% (D94Y) of reads. Genetic variantsa identified with potential to
contribute to drug resistance aCompared with H37Rv as the reference strain. bHigh—strong evidence for a causal association with a drug-
resistant phenotype; low—conflicting evidence or evidence suggesting a weak association with a drug-resistant phenotype;
possible—theoretical possibility of causal association with a drug-resistant phenotype, but insufficient evidence. cS531W with Escherichia
coli numbering. dFrameshift mutation. eHeteroresistance—mutations detected in 63% (A90V) and 16% (D94Y) of reads. In retrospect, this
patient's treatment might have been optimized to provide him with the best possible chance of cure if whole-genome sequencing data had been
available at the time. More importantly, in future the growing body of knowledge on molecular markers of drug resistance and the
availability of new antimycobacterial agents should provide better guidance and more treatment options to clinicians. In our case, the
sequenced isolate had genetic evidence of resistance to ethambutol, pyrazinamide and moxifloxacin, which were components of both his
expanded first-line regimen and his initial XDR regimen. When XDR TB treatment was ultimately commenced, the only drugs in the regimen with
likely activity were para-aminosalicylic acid and cycloserine, with possible contributions from clofazimine and amoxicillin/clavulanate. The
regimen was suboptimal due to delayed DST results and inadequate laboratory guidance on likely ethambutol resistance. The difficulties of
establishing ethambutol breakpoints and performing reliable phenotypic DST have been documented before.12 In addition, DST results arrived
in stages over many weeks, hampering rational treatment decision-making. This is of particular importance in TB, where three to four active
drugs are required to prevent amplification of drug resistance, and the addition of a single drug to a failing regimen is irresponsible. The
therapeutic regimen was compromised when cycloserine had to be ceased and was replaced with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, which act on the
same metabolic pathway as para-aminosalicylic acid, and clarithromycin, which has little activity against M. tuberculosis.13,14 With the
availability of genomic information, the objective of including at least four active drugs15 might have been achieved if the addition of a
carbapenem16 or linezolid17 was considered early in the treatment course. Linezolid was not included in the regimen because of its
significant side effect profile, minimal efficacy data and the belief that four active agents were available (ethambutol, PAS, cycloserine
and clofazimine). The patient did show clinical improvement on this regimen. Neither delamanid18 nor bedaquiline19 was available and there
was little evidence at that time to suggest that carbapenems were sufficiently effective to warrant inclusion. This case study emphasizes
the heavy clinical reliance on phenotypic DST, which is too slow and insufficiently validated for drugs other than isoniazid, rifampicin,
quinolones and the injectables to guide individual patient management. Our patient's treatment failed despite the anticipation of MDR TB and
the prompt addition of two extra drugs (moxifloxacin and amikacin) to his regimen following preliminary genetic testing for MDR. Given the
urgency to optimize treatment before additional drug resistance develops, every effort should be made to optimize the regimen from the very
beginning. We propose that all isolates found to be likely MDR on initial genetic testing (GeneXpert MTB/RIF® or GenoType MTBDRplus®) should
undergo expedited whole-genome sequencing. A realistic turn-around time for whole-genome sequencing is 1–2 weeks from nucleic acid
extraction and costs of US$70–250 per isolate pale in comparison with patient management costs. The estimated total cost of this patient's
care was equivalent to US$1 million, with average XDR TB treatment costs in developed countries estimated at US$483 000.20 The price and
turn-around time of whole-genome sequencing is rapidly decreasing with ongoing technological advances. Routine whole-genome sequencing would
also facilitate detailed transmission analysis, to guide targeted public health interventions and monitor infection control practices.21–25
Phenotypic testing would still be required to validate findings, comply with international recommendations and assist the elucidation of
unknown resistance mechanisms, but this may change in future with growing confidence in the genetic markers of resistance. An additional
safety advantage of whole-genome sequencing for laboratory personnel can be obtained if there are fewer manipulations of live cultures.
Routine whole-genome sequencing of all MDR M. tuberculosis isolates will assist patient management and guide public health responses, but is
currently feasible only in well-resourced settings. It is important to drive innovation and refine the clinical application of this new
technology, since widespread use is anticipated in the near future and TB patients globally stand to benefit. This study was supported by
internal funding. None to declare.
