A 26-year old man presented to the emergency department for two months of worsening right hip and thigh pain. He complained of radicular
pain from his buttocks to his calf and has difficulty bearing weight on his right leg. He denies a history of trauma, fever, prior surgery,
or arthritis. In addition, he was being evaluated by a gastroenterologist for recurrent diarrhea. In the middle of his encounter, the
radiologist called to discuss a result of his computed tomography (CT) performed three days prior. CT images showed inflamed loops of bowel
involving the distal ileum and rectum. A fistula is seen from the rectum, extending into the distal ileal loop and the posterior pelvis
(Figures 1 and 2). An abscess was found between the piriformis and gluteus medius. He was admitted for intravenous antibiotic therapy,
including a consultation with general surgery for Chrohnâ€™s Disease (CD). He responded well to antibiotics and was discharged six days later.
Extraintestinal manifestations of CD are known to occur with arthropathies occurring in twenty percent of patients.4 Common among this group
are sacroilitis, or ankylosing spondylitis. Purulent musculoskeletal complications, while rare, have been described.1 In this study, twenty-
three of 552 patients were found to have a musculoskeletal abnormality in CT scans during a 7-year period. Only four of the patients
presented with gluteal muscle abscess/fistula. However, twenty-two of these patients were known to have CD at the time of the abnormality.
Solitary involvement of the piriformis has also been identified in a patient with a known case of CD.2 Similar to the case above, this
patient developed difficulty walking and bearing weight. Purulent complications can extend further from the abdominopelvic area with fistula
communicating along fascial planes of the thigh into the knee compartment.3 Unfortunately, the patient died from complications and CD was
diagnosed post-mortem. Supervising Section Editor: Sean O. Henderson, MD Full text available through open access at
http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to
disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias.
The views expressed are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the official policy of the Department of the Navy, the Department of
Defense, or the U.S. Government. Axial computed tomography of the pelvis with oral and intravenous contrast material, at the level of the
greater sciatic foramen, demonstrating a sinus tract extending to the right piriformis (red arrow), originating from a segment of the distal
ileum (not shown). Segmental, transmural distal ileal wall thickening is also shown (blue arrows). Patient also has multiple ileocolic
fistulae (not shown). Coronal reformat better demonstrating the oblique, presacral course of the sinus tract along the piriformis (circle).
