The thymus-parathyroid unit (TPU) occurring in adults is rare. The main symptoms and important clinical findings are as follows: 2 patients
presented with neomercazole-resistant Basedow–Graves disease. A third patient presented with thyroid nodules and a fourth patient with a
neck mass after thyroid resection for medullary thyroid carcinoma. The main diagnoses were those of thyroid nodules (either in the context
of goiter, or not). In the fourth case the diagnosis was of thyroid medullary carcinoma recurrence in the neck. Thyroidectomy was performed
in the 2 cases of Basedow–Graves disease and in the third case (wherein selective neck dissection was also performed). In the fourth case, a
neck dissection was performed for a possible medullary carcinoma recurrence. A TPU was microscopically detected in 2 cases with perithyroid
location, on thyroidectomies for Basedow–Graves disease and in the 2 other cases with neck soft tissue location (associated with thyroid
papillary carcinoma and thyroid medullary carcinoma extension). Postsurgical hypocalcemia requiring treatment occurred in both patients with
Basedow–Graves disease and in the fourth patient. The presence of TPU should be acknowledged because such lesions can be misdiagnosed as
suspect lymph nodes during thyroid surgery for malignant tumors. Thymus-parathyroid unit (TPU) (parathymus) occurring in adults is rare,
reported in the perithyroid/thyroid and cervical location1–10 when extrathoracic and extrathymic. Rare cases of parathyroid adenomas, in the
context of parathyroid hyperfunction or thymic cyst, have been reported as developing in such units.1,3,7,9 In the present study, we discuss
the features observed in 2 cases where TPU was noted in the perithyroid site (diagnosed during thyroid surgery for Basedow–Graves disease),
as well as 2 cases wherein TPU was located in the neck. Two patients (a woman and a man, aged 28 and 27 years, respectively) diagnosed with
Basedow–Graves disease presented with perithyroid TPU. The Basedow–Graves disease was diagnosed at the age of 25 and 24 years, respectively;
both patients showed tachycardia, loss of body weight, and bilateral exophtalmia. For the first patient (woman), the serum anti-TSH
antibodies were 32.1 (positive, >1.5 UI/L), the antithyroperoxidase antibodies 123 UI/mL (normal, <34), and thyroid function tests showed
<0.01 mU/L; 9.93 and 59 pmol/L for TSH, T3 and T4, respectively (normal ranges, 0.27–4.20 mU/L, 3.10–6.80 and 12–22 pmol/L, respectively).
Ioduria was normal. This patient also showed persistent hypoleucocytemia with neutropenia (without positivity for HIV, viral hepatitis virus
or tuberculosis tests) as well as a history of hyperprolactinemia in relation with a hypophysal microadenoma diagnosed on magnetic-
resonance-imaging at the age of 25 and treated by cabergoline. Furthermore, ultrasound examination showed a normally sized thyroid with
heterogeneous echogenicity and with several hypoechogenic nodules (2-mm). No jugulocarotid adenopathy was detected. For the second case, the
serum levels of anti-TSH antibodies was 4.7 UI/L, of TSH were 0.04 mU/L, and of T4 were 18.7 pmol/L. The thyroid showed bilateral
homogeneous goiter-like aspects. Both patients were treated by neomercazole (and propranolol for the female patient), but the anti-TSH
antibodies remained high, although fluctuating. Both patients underwent total thyroidectomy. Macroscopic and microscopic features were
consistent with Basedow–Graves disease; the thyroid parenchyma showed dystrophic vesicles, multifocal inflammation, fibrosis, and rare
calcifications. A TPU consisting of parathyroid and thymic tissues was detected in the perithyroid fat. The parathyroid and the thymus were
focally separated from the thyroid capsule by sparse adipocytes (Figure 1). The parathyroid tissue appeared normal and showed some
adipocytes and chief cells (some with water-clear cytoplasm). The parathyroid, which was surrounded almost entirely by a capsule was focally
in contact with the thymic tissue (Figure 1). In addition, the thymic tissue, which was also almost completely surrounded by a capsule
appeared normal (with both cortical and medulla). Several Hassal corpuscles were noted, some of which were calcified. In one of the cases,
one other parathyroid, (normal), was detected in the perithyroid adipose tissue at distance from the TPU. Postoperatively, both patients
showed hypocalcemia (1.72 and 1.64 mmol/L, respectively) thereby requiring medication. In the 2 cases of perithyroid TPU (cases 1 and 2) (A,
B, C, and D, E, F, respectively), the thymic tissue was situated in the perithyroid tissue, focally separated either by parathyroid tissue
or by fibroadipose tissue (A and D, respectively). Thymic and parathyroid tissues were focally separated by an inconspicuous fibrous layer
or a calcified Hassal corpuscle (B) or adipose tissue (D and E). The thymic tissue contains several Hassal corpuscles, some of them
calcified (A, B, C, and F). The thyroid tissue showed enlarged vesicles (A, D, and E). The white asterisks indicate the parathyroid, the
black asterisks the thymic tissue. The white arrows indicate Hassal corpuscles (calcified), the black arrows uncalcified Hassal corpuscles.
Hematoxylin-and-eosin stain, original magnification×2.5 (A and D) and ×20 (B, C, E, and F). TPU = thymus-parathyroid unit. For the other 2
cases, the TPU was observed on the central neck dissection specimen, which was performed in the third case during thyroidectomy for thyroid
papillary carcinoma (woman, 42-years) and in the fourth, for thyroid medullary carcinoma extension.3 For the third case, the ultrasound-
examination showed a homogeneous right thyroid lobe and 2 adjacent hypoechogenic nodules (3 and 1.6-cm) with microcysts,
microcalcifications, and hypervascularisation. There was no jugulocarotid adenopathies. Further, in the fourth case, the follow-up positron-
emission-computed-tomography showed 3 hypermetabolic foci of paratracheal and right hilar, subcarina location. Postoperatively, hypocalcemia
occurred in case 4, requiring treatment. In both cases, the neck resection specimen did not show thyroid tissue. The parathyroid tissue,
which was situated between the thymic lobules (Figure 2), showed an incomplete capsule and comprised chief cells and focally oncocytic
cells. Sparse adipocytes were also seen. The thymic lobules showed Hassal corpuscles (some with calcifications). In addition, an epithelial
microcyst was found in the fourth case and another parathyroid.3 In the other case, parathyroid cells, some of which had clarified
cytoplasm, were focally found in direct contact with or intermingled within the thymus (Figure 2). In the 2 cases of cervical TPU (cases 3
and 4) (A, B, C and D, E, F, respectively), the parathyroid tissue was situated between thymic lobules (A–F), separated either by a thin
fibrous capsule, or at contact or intermingled with thymic tissue (B, C, E, and F). The thymic tissue contained several Hassal corpuscles (C
and D). The white asterisks indicate the parathyroid, the black asterisks the thymic tissue. The white arrows indicate Hassal corpuscles
(uncalcified), hematoxylin-and-eosin stain, original magnification×2.5 (A), ×5 (D), ×20 (B, C, and E), and ×40 (F). TPU = thymus-parathyroid
unit. Here we report the features observed for 2 cases of TPU at a perithyroid location, both of which were incidentally diagnosed upon the
inspection of thyroidectomy specimens obtained for Basedow–Graves disease. Features were similar to those previously observed in the cases
reported in 1928 and in 2001,2,10 occurring in the context of Basedow disease and lymphocytic thyroiditis with adenoma. However, in one of
the cases presented here, both parathyroid and thymic tissues were observed in direct proximity to the thyroid capsule. The 2 cases showing
perithyroid thymus were both young adults and had been diagnosed with Basedow–Graves thyroiditis. In the report of a large series of
patients with Basedow–Graves disease,11 ectopic thymus was observed in 1.8% of patients but at a cervical location. The pathogenesis of the
perithyroid thymus, is not completely elucidated. One hypothesis suggests that the incomplete migration of the thymus during embryogenesis
results in its ectopic presence within the perithyroid tissue, along with the parathyroid.2,10,12 Furthermore, the fact that the TPU may
occur in adults in the neck at a distance from the thyroid (as observed in 2 cases), in addition to the presence of intermingled parathyroid
cells in the thymic lobule, also favors the hypothesis of developmental abnormalities of the third and/or fourth pharyngeal pouches. A
direct fusion of thymus and parathyroid has been reported in 65-mm-fetus and older fetus, being known as the parathymus.13,14 Water-clear
cell buds, similar to the clear cells we observed in the cervical thymus of patient 3, were already mentioned in 1937 as rudiments present
in the embryofetal life.13 Moreover, the coexistence of thymic and parathyroid tissues has been reported in the subangulomaxillary region,4
incidentally, or in the context of hyperparathyroidism in esophageal and jaw sites, in association or not with the adenomatous
parathyroid.7,9 However, one may question whether metabolic factors related to iodine intake could also be involved in the development of
abnormal perithyroid thymus because increased iodine has been reported to result in perithyroid thymic tissue occurrence as demonstrated in
rat models wherein the perithyroid/thyroid lymphoid tissue with thymus-like CD4/CD8/Tdt immunophenotype and without Hassal corpuscles
appeared more frequently after consuming enriched-iodine than after normal-iodine or low-iodine diets.15 Iodine intake is difficult to
retrospectively evaluate. The presence of a normal ioduria in one patient, with Basedow–Graves disease, in which this analysis was
performed, does not favor the hypothesis of iodine-induced thymic tissue. However, the finding of high levels of anti-TSH antibodies in both
patients could be representative of an increased tolerance toward thyroid autoantigens, including during neomercazole treatment. Moreover,
the presence of persistent neuropenia may suggest a specific immunological profile with regard to the evolution of the disease and response
type to treatments. The clinical significance of TPU diagnosed on thyroidectomy specimens performed for a benign inflammatory, autoimmune
disease is limited except the postsurgical hypocalcemia, which may occur similarly to patients having the cervical unit and which may
require treatment. However, the differential diagnosis with perithyroid lymph node metastases of thyroid tumors, such as papillary or
medullary carcinomas may rise as thymic Hassal corpuscles may also show calcifications on imaging procedures. Although rare, the presence of
parathyroid cells intermingled with thymic tissue (as we have observed in one of the cervical units) warrants further interest because of
eventual abnormalities related to an parathyroid hormone secretion or, to a lesser extent, immunological disturbances, since in adults. The
authors thank A Desbiolles, L Djerroudi, I Alexandre, and the teams of NCA/GHU Avicenne, CDMP/APHP, and BIUM. Abbreviation: TPU = thymus-
parathyroid unit. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
