Remitting Seronegative Symmetrical Synovitis with Pitting Edema (RS3PE) is a rare clinical entity that is easily missed due to lack of
knowledge. It was formerly considered as a subset of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), but is now regarded as a distinct disease/syndrome. The
diagnosis of RS3PE is not easy, as it is always hindered by the lack of definite diagnostic criteria and presence of other much common
rheumatological disorders that mimic it. We report a series of seven cases that attended our clinic in the last year, which highlight the
salient features of the disease. The disease was found to have a heterogeneous presentation. Immunogenetic, clinical, laboratory,
radiological, and possible etiological factors and associations with the neoplasm are described, as also other peculiar presentations.
Finally, a comparison with other common rheumatological disorders is made to alert the clinician about this rare, but easily treatable
disease. In 1985, Mc Carty and coworkers described a distinct form of elderly onset of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in 10 patients,
characterized by symmetrical polyarthritis, with a dramatic onset of pitting edema over the hands, old age, male predominance, elevated
acute phase reactants, negative rheumatoid factor, and an excellent prognosis to treatment. Ever since, it has always been a matter of
debate between rheumatologists as to whether to consider it a disease or a syndrome. Various rheumatic diseases, such as rheumatoid
arthritis, polymyalgia rheumatic and spondyloarthropathies, which are much more common than RS3PE, may also present with distal extremity
pain and swelling. Also, the above criteria have been challenged by various studies and case reports and have added newer aspects to this
entity. We present in this paper, 7 cases, a synthesis and analysis of existing literature, and comparison of the clinical, laboratory, and
radiological features. A 68-year-old female, housewife by occupation, presented with chief complaints of pain in the metacarpophalangeal
joints (MCP) and wrist on the left side and swelling of the hand for last five weeks. It was acute in onset, and pain was moderate-to-severe
in intensity, to an extent that she was unable to make a fist. There was no radiation of pain. It was associated with morning stiffness
lasting for about half an hour. She denied any history of previous joint pain, fever, trauma, rash, burning micturition, urethral discharge,
or diarrhea. She consulted a private practitioner outside and was referred to the Surgery Outpatient Department (OPD), where she was
diagnosed with cellulitis and given oral linezolid and clindamycin. She did not improve and her joint pain worsened for which a medical
opinion was sought. On examination, there was marked pitting edema of the left hand extending up to the wrist joint. It was not warm but
extremely tender. There was limitation of movements of the wrist and MCP joints, but there was no neurological deficit. Her vitals were
within normal limits and in the rest of her systemic examination (including locomotor), no abnormality was detected. Laboratory
investigations revealed hemoglobin = 9.4, total count = 6500, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) = 44 mm, and C-reactive protein (CRP) =
23.8. Both RA and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptides (CCP) were negative. X-ray of the hands was normal, without any evidence of erosions or
fracture. The Color Doppler sonography of the left hand revealed extensor tenosynovitis of the hands. A diagnosis of unilateral RS3PE was
made. The patient was given oral prednisolone (15 mg/day) along with NSAIDs. The patient responded, as pain started subsiding within a week,
and all the symptoms were relieved within five weeks. Later during the follow up, she was screened for any hidden occult malignancy with a
regular physical examination, peripheral blood smear examination, chest radiography, abdominal ultrasonography, and Papanicolaou test (PAP
smear). She is in regular follow up since the last 18 months and is without any residual disability or deformity. A 60-year-old male
presented with pain in multiple joints (b/l MCP, proximal interphalangeal joints (PIP), wrist, elbow, ankle) along with swelling of the hand
up to wrist, since the last two months [Figure 1a]. History of morning stiffness was present, lasting for one hour. Examination revealed
asymmetrical pitting edema (left > right) on the back of the hands and pedal edema. His hemoglobin = 10, ESR = 37 (>10) in the first hour,
CRP = 6.1(>5), RA factor was negative, and x-rays of the hands were normal, without any evidence of erosions. Ultrasonography of the upper
limbs revealed extensor tenosynovitis. With the diagnosis of RS3PE, the patient was given prednisolone (15 mg) and the symptoms resolved
within three weeks [Figure 1b]. Remission has been maintained since the last 14 months, without any relapse. (a) Clinical photograph of the
patient showing diffuse edema over the dorsum of the hands (boxing glove appearence) (b) Clinical photograph of the patient after three
weeks of treatment, with complete resolution of the symptoms and signs A 90-year-old female presented with an abrupt onset of polyarthralgia
(b/l wrist, MCP, PIP) along with diffuse swelling of the hands since the last 45 days. History of morning stiffness was present for about an
hour. Examination revealed pitting edema restricted to the dorsum of the hands and extreme tenderness. The rest of the systemic examination
was within normal limits. Her hemoglobin = 12.8, ESR = 22 mm (>20), and CRP = 6.3 (>5). Both the rheumatoid factor and antinuclear
antibodies (ANA) were negative. The x-ray of hands did not have any evidence of erosions and the color Doppler revealed tenosynovitis of
both extensor and flexor tendons of the hands. The patient was referred to us and we diagnose it as RS3PE. The patient was given
prednisolone (15 mg) for six weeks and improved completely, without any residual disability. She was in follow up for eight weeks and was
lost to follow up after that. A 77-year-old male attended the Medicine Clinic with chief complaints of pain in multiple joints (b/l MCP,
PIP, wrist, elbows) along with swelling on the back of his hand since the last one month. Morning stiffness was denied. Examination revealed
diffuse edema at the back of the hands. ESR = 18 mm, CRP = 11 (> 5), and the RA factor was negative. On the x-ray of the hand no abnormality
was detected and a diagnosis of RS3PE was arrived at. The patient was given prednisolone (15 mg) and he improved within four weeks, without
any residual disease. At 24 months follow up, his remission is maintained. A 56-year-old female attended the Medicine OPD with complaints of
pain in b/l MCP, PIP, wrist, knee, and ankle, along with diffuse swelling, for the last three weeks. History of morning stiffness was
present, lasting for one hour. On examination, there was pitting edema present on both hands and feet. Her hemoglobin = 9-2, ESR = 54, CRP =
46, RA factor and anti-CCP were negative. X-ray of the hands were normal and USG revealed both extensor and flexor tenosynovitis of the
hands. With a diagnosis of RS3PE, she was given prednisolone 20 mg and she improved within four weeks without any residual deformity or
relapses and was subsequently lost to follow up. A 48-year-old female presented with an acute onset of polyarthralgia (b/l PIP, MCP, wrist,
elbows) for the last one along, with swelling over both hands. There was associated history of morning stiffness. On examination, pitting
edema was present over the dorsum of both hands. Her hemoglobin = 8.8, ESR = 114, CRP = 208, and RA factor was negative. Ultrasonography
(USG) of the hands showed extensor tenosynovitis. Thus, it was diagnosed as RS3PE. She was given prednisolone = 20 mg/day. All symptoms were
resolved in six weeks. The patient has maintained remission since the last 12 months. A 60-year-old male presented with pain in multiple
peripheral joints (b/l PIP, MCP, wrist, elbow) along with swelling on the back of his hands, for the last one month. There was a history of
associated morning stiffness. On examination, there was diffuse pitting edema on the dorsum of the hands. Investigations revealed hemoglobin
= 11.8, ESR = 86mm, and CRP = 48. Both RA and anti-CCP were negative. The x-ray was normal and color Doppler ultrasonography revealed flexor
tenosynovitis of the upper limbs. RS3PE was the diagnosis and he was given prednisolone = 15 mg. The patient improved within six weeks and
remission has been maintained since the last three months. Clinical and laboratory characteristics of all cases are summarized in Table 1.
Summary of the clinical and laboratory parameters of all patients M – Male; F – Female; PIP – Proximal interphalangeal joint; MCP –
Metacarpophalangeal joint; ESR – Erythrocyte sedimentation rate; CRP – C-reactive protein Since Mc Carty's original description in 1985,
over 150 cases of RS3PE have been described. Most of the cases are idiopathic and fulfill the original criteria. However, many cases do not
fit the criteria adding new dimensions to this entity. Subcutaneous pitting edema has been undoubtedly the most characteristic feature. Both
hand and feet edema has been reported. Bilaterally, symmetrical presentation had been classically described, but now unilateral RS3PE is
well-recognized. Although the disease is more prevalent in the geriatric age group, a young case has also been reported. Female cases are in
abundance to challenge the male predominance that was originally described. Even in our series there is a female predominance along with the
young (case 6) and unilateral (case 1) cases. The laboratory parameters include an elevated acute phase reactant (ESR, CRP) signifying an
underlying inflammatory process. Rheumatoid factor and anti-CCP are typically negative. Anti-nuclear antibodies are positive, rarely.
Varying degrees of anemia (particularly anemia of chronic disease) may be present. Our case also supports these parameters. Radiologically,
erosions are classically absent on X-rays. Ultrasonography/Magnetic Resonance imaging (USG/MRI) of the extremities have shown tenosynovitis
[Figure 2] as a major cause of subcutaneous edema. A study reveals that extensor tenosynovitis is more common than flexor tenosynovitis. In
our study also, extensor tenosynovitis dominates flexor tenosynovitis. USG with a color Doppler is now considered to be a reliable, easily
accessible and cost-effective modality of radiological evaluation. Ultrasonography of patients with pedal edema showing tenosynovitis around
the ankle joint The immunopathogenesis of the disease is still in dark. Various studies have established the role of the vascular
endothelium derived growth factor (VEGF) as a major contributor to polysynovitis and subcutaneous edema of the extremities, by increasing
vascular permeability. IL-6 has been found to be elevated in the synovial fluid of patients with RS3PE and has also been implicated in its
pathogenesis. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) associations of RS3PE have been established with HLA-B7 and HLA-A2. HLA-CW7 and HLA-DQW2 are
also found to be associated. However, their role in the inheritance is still dubious, as no case of familial association has been reported.
In spite of these studies, a definite triggering factor is unknown. Infectious agents such as Parvovirus, Streptobacillus moniliformis, and
Mycoplasma pneumoniae have been implicated. Studies have also described the role of Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) instillation as a
trigger. Remitting seronegative symmetrical synovitis with pitting edema responds to relatively small doses of prednisolone (5-20 mg).
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) and hydroxychloroquine may provide an added advantage. There is very little role of the
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs). This remission is usually well-sustained. On the other hand RS3PE, with an underlying
malignancy, responds poorly, and treatment of the underlying malignancy is needed as a primary step. Association of RS3PE with neoplasms has
always raised suspicion of it being a paraneoplastic syndrome. It has been described in association with lung, prostrate, ovary,
endometrium, breast, bladder, gastrointestinal, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Its association has been widely accepted with hematological
malignancies (non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, leukemia, and myelodysplastic syndrome), fibrohistiocytoma, and Kaposi's sarcoma. A higher prevalence
is suggested by both retrospective and perspective studies. One study suggests that the malignancy rate associated with RS3PE may be as high
as 54%. Thus, it is always advisable to look for malignancy in a patient with a diagnosis of RS3PE, although in our series we found none.
While Mc Carty initially described RS3PE as a distinct form of late-onset rheumatoid arthritis. Now, after 28 years, it has been found to
coexist with various rheumatic diseases, such as, Sjogren's syndrome, polyarteritisnodosa, ankylosing spondylitis, sarcoidosis, amyloidosis,
relapsing polychondritis, and bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia. On the basis of these facts RS3PE is now considered as a
distinct clinical entity. However, in a clinical setting, it is not as easy to diagnose, as the mimickers (rheumatoid arthritis,
spondyloarthropathy, polymyalgiarheumatica) are much more common. Even non-rheumatological disorders such as reflex sympathetic dystrophy
can present in a similar manner. The differential features are compared [Table 2]. Predominant clinical features of common diseases RA –
Rheumatoid arthritis; RS3PE – Remitting seronegative symmetrical synovitis with pitting edema; PMR – Polymyalgia rheumatica; RSD – Reflex
sympathetic dystrophy; SSA – Seronegativespondyloarthropathy Remitting seronegative symmetrical synovitis with pitting edema is a
disease/syndrome characterized by an acute onset of polyarthritis with pitting edema, negative rheumatoid factor, absence of joint erosions
on radiographs, synovitis suggested by USG/MRI, and an exquisite response to low-dose steroids, with a sustained long-term response. An
early prompt diagnosis is required, as proper treatment results in a dramatic relief to the patient, while misdiagnosis results in a more
intensive and expensive therapy, over a long period of time. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
