Small cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder is an extremely aggressive and rare tumor. Even though small cell carcinoma most commonly arises
from the lungs there are several reports of small cell carcinoma in extrapulmonary sites. Due to its low frequency there is no well-
established management for this disease. We report the case of a 61 year-old man with small cell carcinoma of the bladder who underwent
radical cystectomy following neoadjuvant chemotherapy. We also reviewed the literature for the optimal treatment strategy. Small cell
carcinoma of the bladder is a very rare and aggressive histological subtype, and accounts for less than 1% of all bladder tumors.(1) Its
management is challenging because it presents in the same way of other more frequent histological types, but with a high metastatic power.
The diagnosis demands that the pathologist be suspicious and accurate in the analysis of the fragments of a transurethral bladder resection
(TUR). Multimodal treatment, including radical cystectomy, chemotherapy and radiation therapy should be initiated as soon as possible for a
chance of cure and to improve survival.(2,3) This kind of carcinoma presents metastasis and has a poor prognosis. In the present article we
report a case of a male patient with small cell carcinoma of the bladder and the development of the condition, and we aim to show the most
current management of this tumor, which has no consensus for treatment in the international literature for being extremely rare. Patient
JHC, male, 61 years old, came to the medical service with a complaint of hematuria and hypogastric pain for one year. The urinary tract
ultrasound revealed an intravesical tumor, and he was submitted to bladder TUR, with a conclusive report for small cell carcinoma of the
bladder. Faced with the diagnosis, the attending team chose to perform chemotherapy (received four sessions of cisplatin, gemcitabine and
paclitaxel) (Figure 1). Figure 1Field with the presence of multiple mitoses, salt-and-pepper nuclei When referred to our service, he was
submitted to thorax and abdomen computerized tomography (CT) that showed a 6.2x6.0x5.5cm neoplasm on the left anterolateral wall of the
bladder, suggesting invasion of the prostatic urethra. No lymph nodes were affected and there were no metastatic lesions at other sites. The
patent was then submitted to radical cystectomy, with a Bricker ileal derivation procedure, performed uneventfully, lasting 5 hours, with no
need for blood transfusion. It is important to underscore that the time between the last chemotherapy and surgery was 2 months. The
pathology report of the surgical specimen proved small cell carcinoma of the bladder with extravesical extension, perineural and vascular
infiltration, and one lymph node affected (left obturator) out of 16 dissected. Free margins. Final staging T3bN1. During the post-operative
period, the patient had pneumonia, was on antibiotics and was discharged 29 days after surgery. There were no surgical events. He was
referred to oncology to discuss adjuvant therapy which was not initiated, because the patient died 4 months after surgery due to pulmonary
thromboembolism (Figure 2). Figure 2General overview of the tumor The first report of small cell carcinoma of the bladder was made in 1981
by Cramer et al. Since then, approximately 600 cases were registered in the international literature.(4) It is characterized by its high
aggressiveness and poor prognosis, and by the development of metastic disease in about 67% of patients.(3) The small cell carcinoma of the
bladder usually affects individuals of the same age, sex and presents the same symptoms and morphology of urothelial carcinoma. That is why
it is a diagnostic challenge, depending only on the skills of the pathologist to differentiate it from urothelial carcinoma, which beside
the factors already mentioned, has the same radiological aspect of small cell carcinoma of the bladder. There is no consensus as to
treatment, because it is an uncommon condition. Thus, recommendations are based on retrospective studies, reports of individual cases, and
protocols for small cell lung carcinoma. Frequently, it presents with mixed histology.(5) Molecular studies show a common origin for small
cell carcinoma of the bladder and urothelial carcinoma, when coexisting. However, management should be different, since it frequently
presents metastases and has a poor prognosis. The pathological diagnosis of this kind of tumor is challenging and requires that the
pathologist use immunohistochemical techniques for histological confirmation. As they are histologically identical, the World Health
Organization standardization for small cell lung carcinoma is used. It comprises the following criteria for diagnosis of small cell
carcinoma of the bladder: presence of group of small cells with scarce cytoplasm, few organelles, “salt and pepper” chromatin and high rate
of mitoses (>10 mitoses/10 high power fields).(4) On immunohistochemistry, these tumors express quite an amount of neurospecific enolase,
chromogranin, synaptophysin and N-CAM (CD-56). The presence of one or more markers allows to establish the diagnosis of neuroendocrine
tumor. Pathological staging is based on the consensus for urothelial carcinoma of the bladder (Figure 3).(4) Figure 3Marker CD-56 that
characterizes neuroendocrine tumors Isolated therapies – whether TUR, partial cystectomy or radiation therapy – present benefit only in
special cases of initial stage disease. Radical cystectomy is considered the best method to eliminate small cell carcinoma of the bladder
completely, but it alone is believed to only change survival in stage I and II tumors.(3,6) Cheng et al. reviewed 64 cases and concluded
that in patients submitted to radical surgery compared to those treated with combined treatment (whether only chemotherapy or radiation
therapy or both as adjuvant), there was no increase in survival.(7) In contrast, chemotherapy adjuvant to radical cystectomy resulted in a
favorable prognosis in other studies, including meta-analyses.(7,8) Another alternative is neoadjuvant chemotherapy, recommended by the MD
Anderson Cancer Center, which reported a 5-year disease free survival in 36% of the group submitted to radical cystectomy alone and of 78%
in the group submitted to chemotherapy neoadjuvant to surgery.(9) Similarly, neo adjuvant radiation therapy has also shown itself efficient.
On the other hand, a Canadian group reported ten patients with pT3-T4, N0 lesions with chemotherapy, attaining complete remission in nine of
them. The 2-year survival rate for this group was 70% and, 44% in 5 years.(10) Another similar series reported four patients treated with
chemotherapy followed by radiation therapy who survived 27 to 60 months. The advantage of this treatment is sparing the organ. Therefore, it
is a less invasive treatment when compared to radical surgery, which is related to important rates of morbidity and mortality.(11) Patients
with metastatic disease should receive systematic chemotherapy, and the most common treatment regimens are platinum-based (cisplatin and
etoposide, carboplatin, etoposide and cyclophosphamide) (Figure 2).(2) Given the extremely aggressive and rare disease, little is known
about pathogenesis and molecular biology. Data on the ideal approach for this kind of tumor are scarce, showing the importance of reporting
such cases and, in this way, defining the best diagnostic and treatment methods. O carcinoma de células pequenas da bexiga urinária é um
tumor extremamente agressivo e raro. Apesar desses tumores terem como sítio principal o pulmão, existem diversos relatos de carcinoma de
pequenas células extrapulmonares. Pela baixa frequência, ainda não existe um tratamento bem estabelecido para essa neoplasia. Relatamos o
caso de um homem de 61 anos de idade com carcinoma de células pequenas da bexiga urinária que foi submetido à quimioterapia neoadjuvante
seguida de cistectomia radical. Fazemos ainda revisão na literatura em busca dos métodos de maior sucesso para o tratamento. O carcinoma de
células pequenas da bexiga é um subtipo histológico muito raro e agressivo, correspondendo a menos de 1% de todos os tumores de
bexiga.(1)Sua abordagem torna-se desafiadora, pois se apresenta da mesma forma que outros tipos histológicos mais frequentes, porém com alto
poder metastático. O diagnóstico exige suspeição e precisão do patologista na análise dos fragmentos de ressecção transuretral (RTU) de
bexiga. O rápido tratamento multimodal, incluindo cistectomia radical, quimioterapia e radioterapia, deve ser instituído o mais precocemente
possível, para haver chance de cura e melhora da sobrevida.(2,3)Esse tipo de carcinoma apresenta metástase e tem prognóstico ruim. Neste
artigo, relatamos o caso de um paciente do sexo masculino com carcinoma de células pequenas de bexiga e sua evolução, assim como buscamos
trazer o que há de mais atual no manejo desse tumor que, por sua extrema raridade, não apresenta consenso para o tratamento na literatura
mundial. Paciente JHC, masculino, 61 anos de idade, procurou serviço médico com queixa de hematúria e dor hipogástrica há um ano.
Evidenciada tumoração intravesical em ultrassonografia do aparelho urinário, foi submetido a RTU de bexiga, cujo laudo foi conclusivo para
carcinoma de células pequenas de bexiga. Frente a esse diagnóstico, a equipe que o acompanhava optou por realizar quimioterapia (recebeu
quatro sessões de cisplatina, gencitabina e paclitaxel) (Figura 1). Figura 1Presença de múltiplas mitoses no campo, núcleos em sal e pimenta
Ao ser encaminhado ao nosso serviço, foi submetido à tomografia (TC) de tórax e abdome, a qual mostrou neoplasia de 6,2x6,0x5,5cm em parede
anterolateral esquerda da bexiga, com sugestiva invasão de uretra prostática. Acometimento linfonodal estava ausente, bem como lesões
metastáticas em outros sítios. Foi, então, submetido à cistectomia radical, com derivação ileal à Bricker, procedimento realizado sem
intercorrências, com duração total de 5 horas, sem necessidade de transfusão sanguínea. Importante ressaltar que o tempo da última
quimioterapia para a cirurgia foi de 2 meses. O laudo anatomopatológico da peça cirúrgica comprovou carcinoma de células pequenas de bexiga
com extensão extravesical, infiltração perineural e vascular presentes, comprometimento de um linfonodo (obturatório esquerdo) em 16
dissecados. Margens livres. Estadiamento final T3bN1. No pós-operatório apresentou pneumonia, sendo submetido a antibioticoterapia e
recebendo alta hospitalar 29 dias após a cirurgia. Não houve intercorrência cirúrgica. Foi encaminhado à Oncologia para discussão de
tratamento adjuvante, que não foi iniciado, pois o paciente faleceu 4 meses após a cirurgia devido a tromboembolismo pulmonar (Figura 2).
Figura 2Panorama geral do tumor O primeiro relato de carcinoma de células pequenas de bexiga foi feito em 1981 por Cramer et al. Desde
então, foram registrados aproximadamente 600 casos na literatura mundial.(4)É caracterizado por sua alta agressividade e mau prognóstico,
bem como pelo desenvolvimento de doença metastática em cerca de 67% dos pacientes.(3) O carcinoma de células pequenas da bexiga urinária
costuma atingir pessoas da mesma idade, sexo e apresentar os mesmos sintomas e morfologia do carcinoma urotelial. Por isso, é um desafio
diagnóstico, dependendo apenas da habilidade do patologista em diferenciá-lo de carcinoma urotelial, que, além dos fatores já citados,
apresenta o mesmo aspecto radiológico do carcinoma de células pequenas de bexiga. Não há consenso quanto ao tratamento, por se tratar de
patologia incomum. Assim, recomendações são baseadas em estudos retrospectivos, relatos de caso individuais e protocolos para carcinoma de
células pequenas de pulmão. Frequentemente, apresenta-se com histologia mista.(5)Estudos moleculares mostram origem comum entre o carcinoma
de células pequenas de bexiga e o carcinoma urotelial, quando coexistentes. No entanto, seu manejo deve ser diferente, pois, frequentemente,
apresenta metástases e tem prognóstico ruim. O diagnóstico anatomopatológico desse tipo de tumor é desafiador e exige do patologista o uso
de técnicas de imuno-histoquímica para a confirmação histológica. Como são histologicamente idênticos, no diagnóstico de carcinoma de
células pequenas de bexiga é utilizada a padronização da Organização Mundial da Saúde para carcinoma de células pequenas de pulmão, composta
dos seguintes critérios: presença de grupos de células pequenas com citoplasma escasso, poucas organelas, cromatina em “sal e pimenta”, e
alta taxa de mitoses (>10 mitoses/10 campos de alto poder).(4) Na imuno-histoquímica, esses tumores expressam muita enolase neuroespecífica,
cromogranina, sinaptofisina e N-CAM (CD-56). A presença de um ou mais marcadores permite estabelecer o diagnóstico de tumor neuroendócrino.
O estadiamento patológico é feito com base no consenso para carcinoma urotelial de bexiga (Figura 3).(4) Figura 3Marcador CD-56, que
caracteriza tumores neuroendócrinos Terapias isoladas − seja a RTU, a cistectomia parcial ou a radioterapia − apresentam benefício apenas em
casos especiais de doença em estágio inicial. Cistectomia radical é considerada o melhor método para remover o carcinoma de células pequenas
de bexiga completamente, mas acredita-se que ela sozinha só altera a sobrevida em tumores de estágios I e II.(3,6)Cheng et al. revisaram 64
casos e concluíram que, em pacientes submetidos à cirurgia radical comparados àqueles tratados com terapia combinada (seja apenas
quimioterapia e radioterapia ou ambas em adjuvância), não houve aumento da sobrevida.(7)Em contrapartida, quimioterapia adjuvante à
cistectomia radical resultou em prognóstico favorável em outros estudos, incluindo meta-análises.(7,8) Outra alternativa é a quimioterapia
neoadjuvante, recomendada peloMDAnderson Cancer Center, o qual relatou sobrevida de 5 anos sem doença em 36% do grupo submetido à
cistectomia radical isoladamente e de 78% no grupo submetido à quimioterapia neoadjuvante à cirurgia.(9)De maneira semelhante, a
radioterapia neoadjuvante também mostrou-se eficiente. Por outro lado, um grupo canadense tratou dez pacientes com lesões pT3-T4, N0 com
quimioradioterapia, obtendo remissão completa em nove deles. A taxa de sobrevida desse grupo no período de 2 anos foi de 70% e, em 5 anos,
de 44%.(10)Outra série na mesma linha relatou quatro pacientes tratados com quimioterapia seguida de radioterapia que sobreviveram de 27 a
60 meses. A vantagem desse tratamento é a preservação do órgão. Portanto, trata-se de terapia menos invasiva quando comparada à cirurgia
radical, a qual está relacionada a importantes taxas de morbidade e mortalidade.(11) Pacientes com doença metastática devem receber
quimioterapia sistemática, sendo os esquemas terapêuticos mais comuns os baseados em platina (cisplatina e etoposida, carboplatina,
etoposida e ciclofosfamida) (Figura 2).(2) Por se tratar de doença extremamente agressiva e rara, pouco se conhece da patogênese e da
biologia molecular. Há escassez de dados para abordagem ideal desse tipo de tumor, mostrando a importância de relatar tais casos e, desta
forma, definir melhor os métodos de diagnóstico e tratamento.
