Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) is an uncommon inflammatory ulcerative skin disease. It is characterized by painful progressive necrosis of the
wound margins. Rarely, postoperative pyoderma gangrenosum (PPG) manifests as a severe disturbance of wound healing following surgical
interventions. Only rare cases of this complication have been reported after appendectomy. We report a case of PPG in a 29-year-old female
after appendectomy. She was successfully treated with oral prednisolone. Postoperative pyoderma gangrenosum should be kept in mind in the
differential diagnosis of any postoperative delayed wound healing, because this disease is simply distinguished from a postoperative wound.
Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) is a rare inflammatory skin disease of unknown cause. Lesions typically begin as pustules, nodules, or bullae that
rapidly evolve into shallow or deep ulcers with ragged, undermined, violaceous, or gunmetal-colored borders. Clinically, the patient has
classically high fever and severe local pain. The disease may show two patterns an acute course and a slow indolent one. Postoperative
pyoderma gangrenosum (PPG) is an unusual clinical entity with rapidly progressive skin necrosis that can occur after any surgical procedure.
It is important for surgeons, internists, and dermatologists to be familiar with this entity, as a delay in diagnosis and management can be
life-threatening and lead to considerable tissue loss. We report the case of a young female in whom PG developed after an uncomplicated
appendectomy; we then discuss the nature and method of diagnosis in this case. A 29-year-old previously healthy female, presented with
fever, chills, and dehiscence of the surgical wound (a well defined lesion with raised edges and an irregular base) following an apparently
uncomplicated appendectomy. She suffered from an acute attack of appendicitis two weeks prior to presenting to us. She had no history of
previous illness such as inflammatory bowel disease, arthritis, or hematological diseases. The patient was treated with systemic
antimicrobial treatment following diagnosis of surgical wound infection. Despite the local wound care, parenteral antibiotic treatment and
repeated surgical debridement, there was no improvement and there was rapid worsening and extension of the lesion. Blood and wound cultures,
were negative for any pathogens. A skin biopsy after a dermatological referral confirmed the diagnosis [Figure 1]. It revealed the presence
of intense neutrophilic infiltrates consistent with PG without any evidence of infection [Figure 2]. Treatment with oral prednisolone (50
mg/day) was immediately initiated. She was successfully treated with this regimen and her symptoms dramatically responded after a fortnight
of steroid therapy. She was discharged on Day 14 in good general condition while tapering off the steroids, under supervision of
dermatological service, and was freed from medication after 6 weeks. The wound healed completely with a fine atrophic scarring.
Postoperative pyoderma gangrenosum. Dehiscence of the surgical wound, with erythematous raised edges at the site of recent appendectomy
Postoperative pyoderma gangrenosum. Massive neutrophilic infiltration, necrosis of the overlying epidermis. Neutrophils are around the
vessel walls, without evidence of leukocytoclasia, granuloma formation is not seen. (Hematoxylin-eosin Ã—400) Between 50% and 70% of the
cases of PG are associated with other diseases, the most frequent being inflammatory bowel disease. Other associated diseases include
arthritis and hematologic disorders. PG can appear spontaneously or as a result of the pathergy phenomenon after trauma or surgery. Many
patients can relate the development of the skin lesions to recent trauma to the affected area, a phenomenon known as pathergy. Based on
pathergy, it has been suggested that minor trauma to the skin may initiate the development of PG. Postoperative PPG represents a specific
entity; it shares some clinical aspects of PG, but has a series of its own features. The onset of PPG follows a sequence. After an
apparently normal evolution of scar formation following a surgical procedure, the scar presents with small foci of dehiscence, which will
progressively coalesce to some larger areas of wound ulceration. The delay between surgery and the beginning of symptoms is variable, from 4
days to 6 weeks. The skin ulcerations become larger, despite any local treatment or antibiotics and debridement. PG has been reported in
case reports and case series. The delay in diagnosis likely accounts for the high mortality. In the majority of cases it is misdiagnosed as
severe wound infection leading to improper debridement and thus exacerbating the problem, as was the case of our patient. Failing to
consider postoperative pathergy, which is likely to occur in previously undiagnosed cases of PG, usually leads to debridement that worsens
the lesions. Long et al. recommend subcuticular sutures in order to minimize the risk of PPG; as this method avoids puncturing the skin
surface and we recommend the same as these are inexpensive. Source of Support: Skin Diseases and leishmanias is research center, School of
Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences. Isfahan, Iran. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
