We report here a rare case of undifferentiated carcinoma of the pancreas mimicking main-duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm. In an
80-year-old woman, an approximately 8-mm papillary mass was incidentally detected at the downstream edge of a dilatated main pancreatic duct
lumen on CT and MRI. Main pancreatic duct dilatation in the pancreatic body and tail and parenchymal atrophy were observed in the upstream
of the mass. Histopathologically, the tumor protruded into the downstream edge of the dilatated main pancreatic duct lumen in the pancreatic
body. The tumor cells had highly atypical nuclei and abundant polymorphic structures, and showed positive staining for granulocyte colony-
stimulating factor, which led to the diagnosis of undifferentiated carcinoma. A total of 13 cases of undifferentiated carcinoma with
intraductal tumor growth have been reported to date. The case report by Bergmann et al. has been the smallest in histopathological specimen,
and the present case is the smallest in size detected by radiological images. Since early undifferentiated carcinoma of the pancreas can
resemble those of main-duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm in cross-sectional images, we have to consider undifferentiated
carcinoma in the differential diagnosis of the solitary and papillary mass with low contrast enhancement in early phase in the main
pancreatic duct. Undifferentiated carcinoma of the pancreas is a subtype of pancreatic ductal carcinoma . In general, the tumor size is
large at onset and many cases have wide-spread hematogenous metastasis and lymphogenous metastasis, which result in an unfavorable prognosis
. We experienced a rare case of undifferentiated carcinoma of the pancreas mimicking main-duct intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm
(IPMN), in that the tumor was small and showed intraductal growth into the main pancreatic duct on imaging. Histopathological finding of
this case was interesting in the histogenesis of undifferentiated carcinoma. Herein, we report our case with discussion about differential
diagnosis of the papillary mass in the main pancreatic duct. An 80-year-old woman underwent a medical examination for hematuria, and a left
renal pelvic tumor was detected on computed tomography (CT). Meanwhile, a mass was incidentally found in the pancreatic body, and a close
examination was conducted. Her past medical history was colon cancer (endoscopically resected), uterine leiomyoma, appendicitis, and
hypertension, but her family history was unremarkable. In the laboratory examination, the white blood cell (WBC) count and tumor markers
(carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, and pancreatic cancer-associated antigen) were within the normal limits. On CT, the
main pancreatic duct was dilatated to 12 mm in largest diameter in the pancreatic body and tail, and an approximately 8-mm papillary mass
was observed at the downstream edge of the dilatated duct lumen. The mass showed slight enhancement between the pancreatic phase and delayed
phase on dynamic CT and its border with the surrounding parenchyma was irregular. The pancreatic parenchyma in the body and tail showed
atrophy, with prolonged contrast enhancement. Main pancreatic duct dilatation was not seen in the downstream of the mass (Fig. 1). On
magnetic resonance imaging, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed main pancreatic duct dilatation in the body and tail
with a low signal intensity papillary mass in the downstream edge of the dilatated duct lumen. Main pancreatic duct dilatation in the
downstream of the mass was not observed (Fig. 2). The 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography combined with computed tomography
(18F-FDG-PET/CT) showed uptake of FDG in accord with the papillary mass in the pancreatic body. That increased in the delayed phase (maximum
standardized uptake value (SUVmax): 4.4) compared with the early phase (SUVmax: 3.2) (Fig. 3).Fig. 1 A–E Axial pre-enhanced (A) and axial
multiphase dynamic contrast-enhanced (B pancreatic phase; C portal venous phase; D equilibrium phase) and coronal contrast-enhanced (E
portal venous phase) CT images show a papillary mass at the downstream edge of the dilatated main pancreatic duct lumen (arrows). The mass
is slightly enhanced between the pancreatic phase and delayed phase on a dynamic study. The duct is dilatated in the pancreatic body and
tail, but not in the downstream of the mass. The surrounding pancreatic parenchyma in the body and tail is atrophic and its border with the
mass is irregular.Fig. 2 A, B MRCP (A original coronal 3D-MRCP; B 3D-MRCP MIP) images show a papillary mass with low signal intensity in the
pancreatic body (arrows). Main pancreatic duct dilatation is observed in the body and tail, but not in the downstream of the mass.Fig. 318-F
FDG delayed PET/CT image shows uptake of FDG in accord with the papillary mass in the pancreatic body (arrow). A–E Axial pre-enhanced (A)
and axial multiphase dynamic contrast-enhanced (B pancreatic phase; C portal venous phase; D equilibrium phase) and coronal contrast-
enhanced (E portal venous phase) CT images show a papillary mass at the downstream edge of the dilatated main pancreatic duct lumen
(arrows). The mass is slightly enhanced between the pancreatic phase and delayed phase on a dynamic study. The duct is dilatated in the
pancreatic body and tail, but not in the downstream of the mass. The surrounding pancreatic parenchyma in the body and tail is atrophic and
its border with the mass is irregular. A, B MRCP (A original coronal 3D-MRCP; B 3D-MRCP MIP) images show a papillary mass with low signal
intensity in the pancreatic body (arrows). Main pancreatic duct dilatation is observed in the body and tail, but not in the downstream of
the mass. 18-F FDG delayed PET/CT image shows uptake of FDG in accord with the papillary mass in the pancreatic body (arrow). Main-duct IPMN
with an associated invasive carcinoma was suspected on the grounds that the dilated main pancreatic duct accompanied a solidary nodule, and
distal pancreatectomy was performed. Meanwhile, left nephrectomy was performed for the left renal pelvic tumor. In the loupe findings, the
tumor protruded papillary into the downstream edge of the dilatated main pancreatic duct lumen in the pancreatic body. The maximum diameter
of the papillate region of the tumor was 8 mm and the region of interstitial infiltrate was 7 mm. The entire epithelium of the main
pancreatic duct was substituted by atypical cells. Histopathologically, the tumor cells had highly atypical nuclei and abundant scattered
polymorphic structures, and numerous multinucleated giant cells were also observed. The tumor cells showed positive staining for granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) (Fig. 4). The pathological diagnosis was undifferentiated carcinoma (pleomorphic type). The tumor slightly
invaded the surrounding parenchyma associated with conspicuous interstitial growth and inflammatory cell infiltration. The pathological
findings of IPMN were not detected. The left renal pelvic tumor was invasive urothelial carcinoma.Fig. 4 A Loupe findings show that the
tumor (arrow) protrudes into the downstream edge of the dilatated main pancreatic duct lumen in the pancreatic body (asterisk). The maximum
diameter of the papillate region of the tumor is 8 mm and the region of interstitial infiltrate is 7 mm. B H&E staining with low
magnification shows the tumor invasion to the surrounding parenchyma and conspicuous interstitial growth with inflammatory cell
infiltration. C H&E staining with high magnification shows highly atypical tumor cells with abundant scattered polymorphic structures. D The
tumor cells show positive staining for G-CSF. A Loupe findings show that the tumor (arrow) protrudes into the downstream edge of the
dilatated main pancreatic duct lumen in the pancreatic body (asterisk). The maximum diameter of the papillate region of the tumor is 8 mm
and the region of interstitial infiltrate is 7 mm. B H&E staining with low magnification shows the tumor invasion to the surrounding
parenchyma and conspicuous interstitial growth with inflammatory cell infiltration. C H&E staining with high magnification shows highly
atypical tumor cells with abundant scattered polymorphic structures. D The tumor cells show positive staining for G-CSF. Undifferentiated
carcinoma is a subtype of pancreatic ductal carcinoma that exhibits sarcomatous proliferation of severe mononuclear tumor cells and
multinuclear giant cells. It accounts for 2–7% of all pancreatic cancers and frequently occurs in older men . The favorite sites for this
tumor are the pancreatic body and tail. It is classified into giant cell, pleomorphic cell, and spindle cell types in accordance with the
cellular morphology, but they are often mixed [2, 3]. Abdominal pain, back pain, weight loss, fever, anorexia, and jaundice can be the
initial symptoms . About half of the patients show elevation of WBC count and C-reactive protein (CRP) for G-CSF production, and about 60%
of the patients show elevation of CA19-9 . Since the tumor is generally large at onset, and many cases have wide-spread hematogenous
metastasis and lymphogenous metastasis, the prognosis is extremely unfavorable. On imaging, undifferentiated carcinoma typically shows
heterogeneous and dense contrast enhancement that are superior in the peripheral zone and poor contrast enhancement in the center owing to
hemorrhage or necrosis To the best of our knowledge, 13 cases of undifferentiated carcinoma with intraductal tumor growth into the main
pancreatic duct have been reported to date . Most cases were greater in size, and mainly showed mass formation in the pancreatic parenchyma
with intraductal tumor growth into part of the main pancreatic duct . However, Tezuka et al. reported the first case of undifferentiated
carcinoma of the pancreas in situ within the main pancreatic duct and a case report by Bergmann et al. showed 8 mm in the largest diameter
pathologically . When it comes to the case with detection in cross-section images, our case is the smallest in size in undifferentiated
carcinoma with intraductal tumor growth into the main pancreatic duct. Although the debate on the histogenesis of the tumor has been
controversial, Bergmann et al. provided the evidence for a ductal origin of the tumor histopathologically . Furthermore, Tezuka et al.
reported the first case of undifferentiated carcinoma of the pancreas in situ within the main pancreatic duct, without evidence of invasion
beyond the pancreatic duct . In our case, the entire epithelium of the main pancreatic duct was substituted by atypical cells, but the
papillate region of the tumor into the main pancreatic duct and the interstitial infiltrate of the tumor were small. This finding would
support the origin of epithelial cells, not mesenchymal cells or stem cells. Additionally, some pathological reports have indicated that
undifferentiated carcinoma in the early stage shows intraductal growth into the main pancreatic duct , and our radiological images capture
the pathological features of the papillate region of the tumor in the early stage, however, the region of interstitial infiltrate cannot be
detected. IPMN and ITPN (intraductal tubulopapillary neoplasm) are categorized as intraductal pancreatic tumors, and are representative of
pancreatic tumors with intraductal tumor growth into the main pancreatic duct . Some cases of them occur multiply in the main pancreatic
duct and the dilatation of the duct is prominent and diffuse [19, 20]. On the other hand, undifferentiated carcinoma mostly occurs solitary
in the previous report and our case . Acinar cell carcinoma and neuroendocrine tumor with intraductal tumor growth are also reported as rare
cases . They typically show high contrast enhancement in early phase on dynamic study, which can differentiate from undifferentiated
carcinoma. Additionally, elevation of WBC count and CRP level can help the diagnosis of undifferentiated carcinoma . However, in the cases
with lack of these characteristics, differential diagnosis from early undifferentiated carcinoma would be difficult. Since early
undifferentiated carcinoma of the pancreas can resemble those of main-duct IPMN in cross-sectional images, we have to consider
undifferentiated carcinoma in the differential diagnosis of the solitary and papillary mass with low contrast enhancement in early phase in
the main pancreatic duct. We report a rare case of undifferentiated carcinoma of the pancreas mimicking main-duct IPMN. We have to consider
undifferentiated carcinoma in the differential diagnosis of the solitary and papillary mass with low contrast enhancement in early phase in
the main pancreatic duct.
