Angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma (AFH) is a rare, low-grade malignant soft-tissue tumor most commonly occurring in the extremities of
children and young adults and has a low potential of local recurrence and metastasis. Here, we present a case of recurrent subcutaneous
perianal AFH. After an initial diagnosis as a sebaceous cyst, we were able to use immunohistochemical findings to correctly identify the
mass as an AFH. The patient was effectively treated after 3 surgical resections. This case emphasizes the need to correctly diagnose soft-
tissue tumors using a variety of diagnostic modalities to ensure that the patient receives proper treatment. Angiomatoid fibrous
histiocytoma (AFH) is a rarely metastasizing soft-tissue tumor of low-grade malignant potential that mostly affects children and young
adults.1 The clinical presentation of affected patients is often similar to other diseases, such as perianal sebaceous cyst and lipomyoma,
and the pathological review is not always clear. Because of the potential for misdiagnosis, molecular diagnostics are increasingly being
used to detect gene fusions characteristic of AFH.2 About two-thirds of cases occur at sites with abundant lymph nodes, such as the
antecubital fossa, popliteal fossa, axilla, and inguinal and supraclavicular areas.3 AFH is often associated with systemic symptoms such as
anemia, fever, weight loss, enhanced cytokine production, polyclonal gammopathy, and a Castleman disease-like lymphadenopathy.4 Local
recurrence is more likely in deeply situated tumors and those with infiltrative margins.5 Surgical resection is the most common management
and can effectively control local recurrences and metastases. Only a few cases have been reported demonstrating AFH arising in sites other
than the deep dermis and subcutaneous tissue of the extremities, trunk, head, and neck.6 Xiang et al7 reported a case of AFH arising from
the retroperitoneum. Herein, we present a case of a 35-year-old woman suffering from AFH presenting as a recurrent perianal subcutaneous
mass, who underwent 4 surgeries. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of AFH presenting in this manner. Because the
rarity of AFH often leads to the misdiagnosis of either a reactive lesion or a benign or malignant tumor,8 we also review the latest
literature on the etiology, diagnosis, and treatment of AFH. A 35-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital complaining of a perianal
subcutaneous mass. Two years ago, we treated her for a similar mass that we surgically resected (unfortunately, the tissue was not taken to
do pathological examination). Both masses were similar in tenderness, texture, and mobility. The only difference of the current mass was in
its location, on the left side of her anus and exposed to air. During this visit, the mass was the size of a peanut. Approximately 1 month
later, however, it grew to approximately 4 × 2.5 cm (Figure 1). She frequently felt pain whenever sitting. The patient did not exhibit
fatigue, fever, chills, or pruritus and was not taking any medications. She noticed a slight weight loss despite a normal appetite. The
patient's only previous surgery was a Cesarean section in 2006. Her husband and 1 son are healthy. We did not identify any special
circumstances regarding her family history, personal history, and menstrual history related to her presentation. Upon physical examination,
she was afebrile with blood pressure of 126/77 mm Hg and a regular pulse of 89 bpm. Her abdomen was soft and without tenderness. Bowel
sounds were normal at 3 to 5/min. A well-circumscribed, tender, soft, and ovoid mass measuring 3 × 4 cm in the subcutaneous adipose tissue
was located about 2 cm from outside the anal edge at the 9-o’clock position of the knee–chest position. The digital rectal examination did
not reveal any remarkable characteristics. Blood, urine, and stool tests also did not reveal anything abnormal. A test for liver and kidney
function did not show any abnormal changes. Some serum cancer-associated biomarkers were tested, among which CA724 was much higher at
30.1 U/mL (normal level < 6 U/mL). The patient's recurrent perianal subcutaneous AFH mass. Although the mass was only approximately 2 × 1 cm
during the initial visit, it grew to approximately 4 × 2.5 cm 1 month later. AFH = angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma. A computed tomography
(CT) angiography showed no abnormalities of the abdominal arteries and revealed an abnormal soft tissue mass surrounding the anus. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) of her pelvic cavity revealed small multifocal areas on the left, right, and back side of the anus (Figure 2). These
signals were less intense on the T1-weighted image (T1WI) and slightly heterogeneous and more intense on the T2-weighted image (T2WI) with
variegated internal and nodular peripheral gadolinium enhancement. The left side of the pelvic cavity appeared larger than the right side in
these images. Together, these images are representative of the features of a perianal abscess. MRI of the patient's pelvic cavity revealed
small multifocal areas (arrows) on the left, right, and back side of the anus. These foci had a weaker intensity on the T1WIs and were more
heterogeneous with stronger intensity on the T2-weighted images. Note that the left side of the pelvic cavity (L) appears larger than the
right side (R). MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, T1WI = T1-weighted image. Given this diagnosis, we performed a retroperitoneal tumor
resection and transverse colostomy and removed a firm hemorrhagic mass measuring 8.0 × 4.0 × 3.5 cm (Figure 3). Pathological examination
revealed that the mass infiltrated the surrounding striated muscle. Furthermore, this mass showed characteristic features of AFH including
irregular aggregates of histiocyte-like cells associated with prominent stromal hemorrhaging of nonendothelial-lined cysts, a dense hyaline
fibrous pseudocapsule, peripheral lymphoplasmacytic infiltration with germinal centers, and surrounded by a chronic inflammatory response.
These cells were positive for desmin, smooth muscle actin, and a scattered distribution of CD68; negative for anaplastic lymphoma kinase;
had a proliferative index of 10% (based on Ki-67 positivity). We suspected this mass was a recurrence of the previously removed one. After
the operation, the patient's pain was relieved, and she was able to sit down comfortably. A firm hemorrhagic mass measuring
8.0 × 4.0 × 3.5 cm was removed from the patient. Four months later, the patient returned to PUMCH for stoma apothesis surgery. After an
ultrasound examination, a solid and cystic mass with an unclear border was found again on the left rear of her anus in the vicinity as the
last mass, measuring 3.7 × 1.6 × 1.5 cm. Based on her previous history, we suspected it a local recurrence of AFH. After approval from the
patient's family, we surgically resected the mass instead of treating the patient for stoma apothesis. The operation was completed without
complication. Postoperative pathology confirmed this mass was a local recurrence of AFH. After 3 months, the patient underwent a stoma
apothesis surgery after a colon patency test. Staging CT and MRI of the abdomen and pelvis showed no evidence of metastasis and recurrence.
To date, the condition of the patient is stable. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of Tumours of Soft Tissue
and Bone, AFH is described as an intermediate soft-tissue tumor that is often locally aggressive.9 Occasionally, AFH gives rise to distant
metastases.1 The risk of such metastases appears to be <2% and is not reliably predictable based on histopathological findings. AFH was
first proposed as a distinct fibrohistiocytic tumor of children and young adults simulating a vascular neoplasm according to 41 examples of
an unusual fibrohistiocytic sarcoma described by Enzinger10 in 1979 and termed as “angiomatoid malignant fibrous histiocytoma.” The tumor
was later formally renamed AFH because of its slow growth and rare metastasis according to WHO classification of soft-tissue tumors
concerted in 2002.11 Although AFH is most commonly associated with the extremities, there have been a number of reported cases of AFH
arising at additional sites such as the mediastinum, bone, intrapulmonal tissue, intracranial tissue, retroperitoneum, lung, vulva, and
ovary.6 To the best of our knowledge, our case is the first report to describe a recurrent perianal subcutaneous AFH with no usual systemic
symptoms such as anemia, fever, and so on. Despite previous studies, it is still hard to differentiate AFH from malignant fibrous
histiocytoma, sarcoma, or other tumors with imaging alone.12 On CT images, these confusable heterogeneous soft-tissue mass in the
extremities are usually isodense to muscle with high attenuating areas corresponding with hemorrhaging. MRI is superior to CT in depicting
fluid–fluid levels within the cystic component of the mass, indicative of intralesional hemorrhage. AFH lesions are often homogeneously
hypointense (isointense to muscle) on the T1WI and heterogeneously hyperintense on the T2WI.1 In our case, the mass on CT is slightly
hypodense to muscle and its MRI fit with the reported findings. AFHs have a broad range of histological features. Typical AFHs are
characterized by 3 microscopic findings: solid arrays or nests of histiocyte-like cells, hemorrhagic cyst-like spaces, and aggregates of
chronic inflammatory cells. Multifocal recent and old hemorrhages are a striking feature of this tumor. These spaces resemble vascular
spaces, but they are not lined by endothelium. Inflammatory cells present include lymphocytes and plasma cells. A thick pseudocapsule and
occasional germinal centers give this tumor a resemblance of a lymph node.13 In addition to features that have been previously described
such as nuclear pleomorphism, increased mitotic activity, atypical mitotic figures, reticular, myxoid patterns, lymphoplasmacytic
infiltration, pseudovascular spaces filled with blood, round cell morphology, and spindle cell patterns.14 Bohman et al4 reported a series
of cases with perineurioma-like areas, with eosinophils in the associated inflammatory infiltrate, and with numerous eosinophils. To clarify
the cellular differentiation features of AFH, Hasegawa et al15 once examined 4 cases of AFH by clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and
ultrastructural analyses. Seventy-five percent examined by electron microscopy had a mixture of fibrohistiocytic, myofibroblastic, and
undifferentiated cells containing cytoplasmic processes and dense core granules. The authors pointed that AFH has a variety of
immunophenotypes, including histiocytic, myofibroblastic, epithelial, and neural and may occasionally have predominantly round cell
morphology.15 The immunohistochemical features sometimes present a unique immunophenotype. For instance, approximately 50% to 60% of AFH
lesions coexpress desmin, EMA, CD68, and CD99 but are generally negative for keratins, S-100 protein, CD34, and follicular dendritic cell
markers (CD21 and CD35).2 Cytogenetic analysis of our case demonstrated positivity for desmin, CD68, and CD99. Because the role of
immunohistochemistry in establishing the diagnosis of AFH is still limited, additional markers will be important to distinguish this tumor.
Recently, the molecular pathogenesis of AFH has become clarified by the discovery of fusion genes resulting from various chromosomal
translocations, including the most prevalent EWSR1-CREB1 derived from t(2;22)(q33;q12),16 followed by EWSR1-ATF1 from t(12;22)(q13;q12),17
and the least common FUS-ATF1 from t(12;16)(q13;p11).18 Thway et al expanded the clinicopathological spectrum of AFH by characterizing 13
AFH cases by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Besides the EWSR1 gene
rearrangement detected in 4 cases by FISH, EWSR1-CREB1 fusion was confirmed in 9 cases, including a schwannoma-like AFH, and a EWSR1-ATF1
fusion was detected in a myoepithelioma-like AFH.16 These studies suggest that combinatorial FISH and RT-PCR will likely be diagnostically
powerful tools to identify AFH by evaluating EWSR1-CREEB1, EWSR1-ATF1, or FUS-ATF1 fusions.2 It is important to correctly diagnosis AFH
patients to avoid overtreatment when misinterpreted as a more aggressive tumor such as malignant fibrous histiocytoma, nodular Kaposi
sarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma. Considering its potential for recurrence and metastasis, it is also important to avoid
undertreatment by misdiagnosing it as a sebaceous cyst, perianal abscess, aneurysmal benign fibrous histiocytoma, or inflammatory
pseudotumor.19 In the currently reported case, the initial diagnosis was as a sebaceous cyst because of the resemblance in appearance. The
imaging studies we obtained were not diagnostic, but a pathological review of the immunohistochemistry confirmed our AFH diagnosis. We
report an uncommon case of AFH located around the anus without systematic symptoms. This patient suffered a frequent recurring AFH mass and
underwent 3 surgical resections. AFH is a rare disease that is often initially misdiagnosed. It is a challenge to avoid overtreatment or
undertreatment. Our case emphasizes the need to correctly diagnose soft-tissue tumors using a variety of diagnostic modalities to ensure
that the patient receives proper treatment. Abbreviations: AFH = angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma, CT = computed tomography, FISH =
fluorescence in situ hybridization, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, RT-PCR = reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, T1WI =
T1-weighted image, T2WI = T2-weighted image, WHO = World Health Organization. The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to
disclose.
