A spinal cerebrospinal fluid leak is the most common cause of spontaneous intracranial hypotension which is an uncommon but increasingly
recognized cause of headache. This article describes the first reported case of pilates being associated with a spontaneous spinal
cerebrospinal fluid leak whilst also highlighting the key information about spontaneous cerebrospinal fluid leaks that will be useful to the
general clinician. We present the case of a 42-year-old Caucasian woman who developed a low-pressure headache following a pilates class. A
computed tomography scan of her head demonstrated bilateral chronic subdural hematomas and cerebellar descent. Magnetic resonance imaging of
her spine revealed the presence of extensive extradural cerebrospinal fluid collections. She responded to conservative management and repeat
neuroimaging after symptom resolution revealed no abnormalities. Awareness and early recognition of spontaneous intracranial hypotension is
important to prevent unnecessary investigations and delay in treatment. Pilates may be a risk factor for the development of a spontaneous
cerebrospinal fluid leak. Spontaneous intracranial hypotension (SIH) is an uncommon but increasingly recognized cause of headache with an
incidence of approximately one out of 50,000 . The most common cause is a spontaneous spinal leak . This article describes a case of SIH
secondary to a spontaneous spinal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak in a patient who attended ‘pilates reformer’ classes. Given the rarity of
this condition, this article will also provide key information about SIH and spontaneous CSF leaks that will be useful to the general
clinician. A 42-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our institution with a four-week history of gradually worsening headache after she
had attended a ‘pilates reformer’ class. She described the sudden feeling of a ‘pop’ in the left side of her neck during a certain pilates
reformer maneuver but there was no head injury. Our patient developed a headache after one hour, which improved when lying flat. She
initially presented to primary care where she received treatment (opiate analgesic and muscle relaxant) for suspected trapezius muscle
injury and referred head pain. Over a four-week period, our patient underwent a series of physiotherapy sessions with intensive neck
manipulation. During this time, our patient had a number of interactions with primary care, in addition to one emergency department
attendance after two-and-a-half weeks. There was no relief with simple or opiate analgesics. The severity of the headache had a profound
impact on her ability to perform her activities of daily living. There was no prior history of migraine, head or spine trauma, recent travel
or the use of any anticoagulants. She had a history of medically refractory ulcerative colitis treated with subtotal colectomy and
subsequent ileo-anal pouch anastomosis. Our patient reported some relief of symptoms in response to a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
(NSAID) but experienced an episode of pouchitis and NSAID treatment was terminated. On admission to our institution she was afebrile with
normal blood pressure and pulse. There were no meningitic signs. An examination of the cranial nerves, peripheral nervous system and spine
was unremarkable. Basic hematological and biochemical blood tests were unremarkable. A computed tomography (CT) scan of her head
demonstrated bilateral chronic subdural hematomas and cerebellar descent (Figure 1). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her spine revealed
the presence of extensive extradural CSF collections (Figure 2) but was unable to identify the exact location of the dural tear. Initially,
we opted for conservative management with bed rest and caffeinated drinks rather than use an epidural blood patch. Our patient responded
well to the conservative management with a significant improvement in her headaches. She was discharged two weeks after admission and one
month after discharge repeat neuroimaging revealed normal intracranial appearances (Figure 3). Our patient was reviewed following this
repeat neuroimaging: she remained asymptomatic and, therefore, no further routine follow-up was arranged.Figure 1 Non-contrast computed
tomography head (axial and saggital sections) showing bilateral chronic subdural hematomas (red arrows), with cerebellar descent (blue
arrow) but with no evidence of midline shift. Figure 2 T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (saggital section) showing cerebrospinal fluid
collections anterior to the theca at L2-S2 (red arrow) and posterior to the spinal cord at the level of T1-9 and also at C1-2 (blue arrows).
There is no evidence of spinal cord compression and the spinal cord has normal signal.Figure 3 Intracranial magnetic resonance imaging
(axial: T2-weighted and saggital: T1-weighted sections) performed at one month after discharge shows normal intracranial appearances. The
bilateral extra-axial collections and cerebellar descent have resolved. Non-contrast computed tomography head (axial and saggital sections)
showing bilateral chronic subdural hematomas (red arrows), with cerebellar descent (blue arrow) but with no evidence of midline shift.
T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (saggital section) showing cerebrospinal fluid collections anterior to the theca at L2-S2 (red arrow)
and posterior to the spinal cord at the level of T1-9 and also at C1-2 (blue arrows). There is no evidence of spinal cord compression and
the spinal cord has normal signal. Intracranial magnetic resonance imaging (axial: T2-weighted and saggital: T1-weighted sections) performed
at one month after discharge shows normal intracranial appearances. The bilateral extra-axial collections and cerebellar descent have
resolved. The hallmark symptom of intracranial hypotension is an orthostatic headache that is worse when in the upright position and
resolves or improves when lying flat. Other symptoms include diplopia, hearing loss, vertigo and meningism . The most characteristic
findings on MRI of the head is pachymeningeal enhancement with downward displacement of the brain, which can be mistaken for a Chiari type I
malformation . Subdural hematomas are common in patients with SIH and are usually bilateral but without mass effect . Since the most common
cause of SIH is a spontaneous spinal CSF leak, patients should undergo spinal imaging to try and identify a dural tear. CT or MRI
myelography are the preferred spinal imaging technique as they provide accurate localization of the tear compared to MRI . Localization of
the tear is useful when considering the use of an epidural blood patch; the treatment of choice in patients who have failed conservative
management (bed rest, NSAIDs and caffeinated drinks) . Since our patient responded to conservative measures, she did not require an epidural
blood patch. There was, therefore, no requirement to determine the exact location of the dural tear using myelography. Clinical improvement
usually precedes resolution of the abnormalities documented on neuroimaging of the head although the time between symptomatic and MRI
resolution is variable . The underlying cause of spontaneous CSF leaks remains unknown but there is an association with connective tissue
disorders . Up to 20% of patients have subtle sketetal abnormalities such as those seen in Marfan syndrome (tall stature, joint
hypermobility and arachnodactyly) with no other stigmata of the disease. In some of these patients there is abnormal expression of fibrillin
metabolism . It has also been reported that in patients with an underlying dural weakness a small traumatic event may be enough to produce a
spontaneous CSF leak . In our patient, there was no evidence of a connective tissue disease and we feel that a trivial traumatic event
during her pilates class resulted in the development of a dural tear. A retrospective study of 30 patients with CSF hypovolemia describes
one case of spontaneous intracranial hypotension following a yoga class . However, there has been no previous documentation in the
literature of ‘pilates reformer’ classes being associated with a spontaneous spinal CSF leak and, to our knowledge, this is the first case.
The most common cause of SIH is a spontaneous spinal CSF leak and MRI findings in these patients include pachymeningeal enhancement,
downward displacement of the brain and subdural hematomas. This case highlights the need for increased awareness and early recognition of
SIH in order to prevent unnecessary investigations and delay in treatment. Most importantly, this case raises the possibility of pilates
being a risk factor for the development of a spontaneous CSF leak. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
cerebrospinal fluid computed tomography magnetic resonance imaging nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug spontaneous intracranial hypotension.
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions All six authors were involved in the
clinical care of this patient and in addition all authors helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
