Academic Editor: Dimosthenis Miliaras Sex cord tumor with annular tubules (SCTATs) is a relatively rare ovarian neoplasm often having a
syndromic association with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS). Other associations described with this rare neoplasm include adenoma malignum of
cervix, Turners syndrome, dysgerminoma, gonadoblastoma, endometrial carcinoma, and endometriosis of fallopian tube. We describe for the
first time to the best of our literature search the incidental detection of SCTAT coexisting with an endometriotic cyst of ovary. Meticulous
histological scanning and awareness is mandatory for detection of such unusual incidental lesions. Non-PJS SCTATs tend to be larger and
could be more prone to distant metastasis, warranting subsequent follow-up. Sex cord tumor with annular tubules (SCTATs) is a rare ovarian
tumor first described in 1970 by Scully . It accounts for only six % of sex cord stromal tumors, which in turn account for only 8% of the
overall ovarian neoplasms . Since Scully described it, numerous case reports and a few series have contributed to the better understanding
of this rare morphological entity. There is a strong association of ovarian SCTAT and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS). In a series by Young et
al., of 74 cases one third of patients with SCTAT, 27, had PJS . SCTAT has been documented to be an estrogen-progesterone-secreting tumor
with low malignant potential. Other associations reported with SCTAT include adenoma malignum of cervix, Turners syndrome, dysgerminoma,
gonadoblastoma, endometrial carcinoma, and endometriosis of fallopian tube . Present case is the first reported case of two coexisting
ovarian pathologies, namely, SCTAT and endometriotic cyst. A 22-year-old lady presented with abdominal pain and abdominal lump for the past
one year. On examination a left sided pelvic lump was palpable which was confirmed as ovarian mass on ultrasound and computed tomography (CT
scan). On CT scan a well circumscribed multiloculated fluid filled mass was identified measuring 10 × 10 cm with focal solid areas and mural
nodules. No lymph nodes or pelvic extension was noted suggestive of benign etiology. Ovarian tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic
antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, carbohydrate antigen 125, fetoprotein, and human chorionic gonadotropin, were within the normal range.
Serum estradiol levels were within normal limits. Left oophorectomy was performed, with preoperative assessment of pelvic lymph nodes and
peritoneum. Preoperatively, a cystic structure was identified with adhesions to sigmoid and posterior uterine wall. Grossly the mass
received was covered by intact pearly white capsule with areas of congestion. On cut section thick and thin walled multiloculated cysts were
identified of varying sizes along with solid areas. The cysts were filled with chocolaty fluid. No areas of necrosis/capsular infiltration
were identified. On microscopy, the cysts were lined by endometrial glands and stroma along with numerous hemosiderin laden macrophages
(Figure 1(a)). The solid areas were composed of a cellular tumor having round, complex annular tubules of various sizes. The tubules were
composed of intercommunicating rings around multiple hyaline bodies. The tumor cells were columnar with eosinophilic cytoplasm and round
nuclei and exhibited minimal atypia and no mitosis. No capsular infiltration was noted (Figure 1(b)). The cells were bright magenta pink
positive for periodic acid schiff (PAS; Figure 1(c)). A possibility of incidental sex cord stromal tumor with annular tubules (SCTATs) was
kept and confirmatory immunohistochemistry was performed with CD-10 and inhibin. Both CD-10 and inhibin showed bright cytoplasmic
positivity, thus confirming the diagnosis (Figure 1(d)). The contralateral ovary showed only mild oedema with absence of any pathology. The
patient was reexamined and reinvestigated to discard Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. General physical examination and gastrointestinal endoscopy
ruled out syndromic SCTAT. Thus a final diagnosis of unilateral sporadic sex cord stromal tumor with annular tubules with coexisting
endometriotic cyst was given. No evidence of extraovarian extension/metastasis was noted. The patient was given only symptomatic and
supportive treatment and is well and alive on six months follow-up. The sex cord tumor with annular tubules (SCTATs) is a distinctive
ovarian neoplasm, the predominant component of which has morphologic features intermediate between those of the granulosa cell tumor and
those of the Sertoli cell tumor; focal differentiation into either granulosa cell or Sertoli cell tumor may occur. Ultrastructurally,
Charcot-Bottcher filament has been noted in some tumors supporting Sertoli cell origin while being absent in some. It was then suggested
that SCTAT associated with PJS is a hamartoma while that without is granulosa cell tumor . The majority of patients reported in various
series with SCTAT have been in the reproductive age group. Rare pediatric cases have been reported . The clinical manifestations of SCTAT
are mainly due to estrogen-progesterone secretion like: menorrhagia, postmenopausal bleeding, precocious puberty, and sterility thus
detected usually earlier than ovarian epithelial neoplasms [2, 8–10]. In the present case the patient was in reproductive age group and
though did not have any clinical or biochemical features of high estrogen production; he had symptoms related to the endometriotic cyst.
SCTATs have a strong association with PJS and thus can be broadly classified as those with and those without PJS . In the present case no
features of PJS were identified. Those associated with PJS tumors are usually benign, multifocal, bilateral, very small, or even microscopic
in size and calcified . The ones without PJS are usually unilateral and larger in size [2, 8]. In PJS-associated SCTAT, the serum tumor
marker inhibin and immunohistochemical markers inhibin, estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and androgen receptor have been studied as
diagnostic tools, though morphology is the gold standard . Non-PJS-associated SCTATs also commonly secrete estrogen and progesterone,
although the sensitivity is low. In the present case inhibin was strongly positive in the tumor nests along with CD 10 (positive in stromal
tumors) positivity; serum estrogen levels were normal in our case. In addition to its association with PJS, many other coexisting conditions
have been reported, mostly with single case reports. These include adenoma malignum of cervix, Turners syndrome, dysgerminoma,
gonadoblastoma, endometrial carcinoma, and endometriosis of fallopian tube . The latter two conditions can be explained by estrogen
production by many of these tumors. Endometriotic cyst coexisting with SCTAT in the same ovary has never been reported in the literature
before. Though malignancy and distant metastasis are known to occur in 20% of non-PJS SCTAT, these tumors are considered to be a tumor with
low malignant potential. PJS-associated SCTATs are usually benign . The exact behavior and long term prognosis in these patients are almost
unknown and thus the present management guidelines are based on a scanty literature available, which suggests that surgery alone with
preservation of fertility (if possible) should be attempted in these patients. A school of thought suggests that management strategies in
these patients can be generalized as per the management of granulosa cell tumors . In the present case, only unilateral oophorectomy was
performed with examination of peritoneum and pelvic lymph nodes and was apparently well on 6 months follow-up period for after which she was
lost to follow-up. To summarize, a rare case of sporadic SCTAT with endometriotic cyst is presented and its diagnosis and management have
been highlighted. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interests regarding the publication of this paper. (a) The cysts were
lined by endometrial glands and stroma along with numerous hemosiderin laden macrophages (dotted arrow). The solid areas were composed of a
cellular tumor having round, complex annular tubules of various sizes (arrow) [HE, 100x]. (b) SCTAT having round, complex annular tubules of
various sizes and intercommunicating rings around multiple hyaline bodies [HE, 200x]. (c) Multiple hyaline bodies in the center showing
strong PAS positivity [PAS, 200x]. (d) Immunohistochemistry showing tumor cells positive for inhibin [immunohistochemistry with DAB as
chromogen, 200x].
