Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) is a rare affection in the pediatric population. It usually occurs when concurrent conditions are
present, such as nephrotic syndrome, peritoneal dialysis or liver disease. We report a case of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis due to
Kocuria marina in a 2-year-old child with no underlying risk factor. This is both the first description of an infection caused by this rare
pathogen in a child and the first reported case of primary peritonitis caused by K. marina in a patient with no predisposing condition. A
2 year-old boy presented to the Pediatric Emergency Department with clinical signs of peritonitis. Laparoscopic surgical exploration
confirmed purulent, generalized peritonitis without perforation. Culture of the peritoneal fluid revealed the presence of Kocuria marina, a
Gram-positive coccoid environmental bacteria. After peritoneal lavage and appropriate antibiotic treatment, the patient improved and was
discharged without sequel. The present report illustrates the first clinical presentation of Kocuria marina SBP in a child with no
underlying risk factor. Although never previously described in healthy patients, this pathogen may therefore be considered as a possible
cause of SBP in a child. This unusual finding extends the spectrum of infectious diseases caused by Kocuria marina beyond the scope of the
previously described susceptible population. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12879-014-0719-5) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users. Peritonitis is one of the most frequent abdominal surgical emergency, both in the
pediatric and the adult population. It is defined as spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP), or primary peritonitis, when a bacterial
infection of the peritoneal cavity is present in the absence of contiguous source of infection . It has been described that 1 to 2% of all
pediatric abdominal emergencies requiring surgical intervention are due to SBP . However, this condition rarely develops in previously
healthy children without any underlying medical condition . SBP peaks between 5 and 9 years of age, and is most often described in
susceptible patients, especially those prone to ascites (i.e. nephrotic syndrome, chronic liver disease and cardiac insufficiency) or
undergoing peritoneal dialysis. Hematogenous inoculation seems to be the main pathophysiologic mechanism, but peritoneal spread via the
lymphatics, translocation through the intestinal wall, and ascending infection from the female genital tract have also been raised . SBP in
children is mainly caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae. However, Gram-negative enteric bacteria (especially Escherichia coli and Klebsiella
pneumoniae), Staphylococcus species and Streptococcus pyogenes strains are also common isolated pathogens . Kocuria marina is an exceedingly
rare cause of SBP and it has never been encountered to be the causative agent of SBP in a previously healthy patient. Moreover, no pediatric
case of SBP due to this pathogen has ever been described. We report the first case of SBP caused by Kocuria marina in a child with no
previous risk factors. A 2.5-year-old caucasian boy presented to the Pediatric Emergency Department with a one-day history of lethargy and
two episodes of bilious vomiting during the past three hours, without any fever. The symptoms appeared two days after he had returned from a
10-day holiday in Crete (Greece), where he ate seafood and fish every day. A cefpodoxime treatment had been introduced 9 days before the
admission for an upper respiratory tract infection. His past medical history revealed mild developmental delay and poorly controlled focal
epilepsy, despite valproic acid and clobazam treatment, secondary to an ischemic episode in the neonatal period. No fever or modification of
the seizure pattern had been noted by the parents. Clinical examination revealed a 15.3 kg body weight conscious but lethargic child lying
still in a fetal position. Temperature was 37°C, heart rate 105/min, and blood pressure 135/88 mmHg. Palpation of the abdomen was tender and
bowel sounds were absent. However, no guarding or rebound tenderness was observed. Laboratory work-up showed the following results: white
blood cell count 24.8 G/L with immature neutrophils 6.2 G/L, normal CRP, procalcitonin, AST, ALT and electrolytes. Intravenous lactates were
2.3 mmol/L, and amylase and lipase were elevated (561 U/L and 1074 U/L respectively). Abdominal ultrasound showed severe thickening of the
intestinal walls in the right lower quadrant, with a large amount of multiloculated peritoneal fluid and hyperechogenic mesenteric fat. The
ileocecal valve was hypervascularized. The visualized proximal part of the appendix showed no abnormality and the pancreas also had a normal
aspect. Laparoscopy did not reveal any intra-abdominal abnormality, especially no intestinal wall perforation, but the presence of abundant
purulent abdominal fluid and fibrinous membranes in the lower abdomen, thus confirming the diagnosis of primary peritonitis. The appendix
was removed. Histology showed no sign of acute appendicitis (Figure 1). The peritoneal fluid grew for a gram-positive, coccoid, aerobic,
coagulase-negative, non-encapsulated germ, identified as a Kocuria marina. The organism was grown on BHI (brain heart infusion), a highly
nutritious growth medium for fastidious and non-fastidious microorganisms. Blood culture was negative. Unfortunately, peritoneal fluid could
not be sent for PCR. Blood PCR was negative for K. marina.Figure 1 Laparoscopy showing purulent multiloculated abdominal fluid and fibrinous
membranes but no intestinal perforation. Laparoscopy showing purulent multiloculated abdominal fluid and fibrinous membranes but no
intestinal perforation. The patient was post-operatively admitted to the intensive care unit and treated with intravenous broad spectrum
antibiotics (piperacillin and tazobactam) during 7 days. He gradually improved and was discharged on day 7, with a supplemental 7-day course
of oral ciprofloxacin. SBP is a rare presentation of peritonitis in childhood. Most cases are due to Streptococcus pneumoniae, Escherichia
coli or staphylococcal strains . However, in few cases no pathogen can be identified . To our knowledge, this is both the first description
of SBP caused by Kocuria marina in a child, and the first description of a K. marina SBP in a patient with no underlying risk factor.
Kocuria spp are members of the Micrococcaceae family. They are gram-positive, usually aerobic, coccoid, non-encapsulated bacteria. Seventeen
species have been recognized so far . They are environmental bacteria that can be encountered in mammals including humans’ skin and in the
commensal flora of the oropharynx. Certain species (but not K. marina) have been isolated from traditional Korean fermented seafood .
Kocuria-related infections are rare. Bacteremia, peritonitis, brain abscess, endocarditis, cholecystitis and UTI have been described with K.
rosea, K. kristinae, K. varians, and K. rhizophila (Table 1).Table 1 Reported cases of Kocuria spp infections in humans SpeciesClinical
presentationNumber of casesAge (yrs)Risk factorAuthors K. marina Peritonitis13NoneBrändle, 2014Peritonitis257, 73PDLee,
2009Bacteremia157Cancer, CVCLai, 2011 K. rhizophila Bacteremia13CVCMoissenet, 2012Bacteremia18Methylmalonic aciduriaBecker, 2008 K. varians
Peritonitis170PDMeletis, 2012Brain abscess152DiabetesTsai, 2010 K. rosea Endocarditis135NoneSrinivasa, 2013Bacteremia160HIVCorti,
2012Bacteremia139Hematopoietic stem cell transplantationAltuntas, 2004Peritonitis18PDDotis, 2012Peritonitis156PDKaya, 2009 K. kristinae
Bacteremia32, 37, 68Hypogammaglobulinemia, Cancer, CVCLai, 2011Endocarditis189IBD, post-operative, CVCLai, 2011UTI120Urinary catheterTewari,
2013Bacteremia7<1 yrPreterm or leukemia, all CVCChen, 2013Bacteremia168LeukemiaMartinaud, 2008Bacteremia151Ovarian cancerBasaglia,
2002Cholecystitis156NoneMa, 2005Endocarditis174DiabetesCitro, 2013Peritonitis169PDCheung, 2011Peritonitis178PDCarlini, 2011 PD peritoneal
dialysis; CVC Central venous catheter; HIV Human immunodeficiency virus; IBD Inflammatory bowel disease; UTI Urinary tract infection.
Reported cases of Kocuria spp infections in humans PD peritoneal dialysis; CVC Central venous catheter; HIV Human immunodeficiency virus;
IBD Inflammatory bowel disease; UTI Urinary tract infection. Kocuria marina has been isolated from marine sediments and first identified in
2004 . In 2009, Lee et al. described two cases of primary peritonitis caused by K. marina in adult patients undergoing peritoneal dialysis .
A small case series reported a positive K. marina blood culture in a 57 year-old oncologic patient with a central venous catheter . However,
it was considered a contaminant by the authors. We did not find any other report of K. marina infection. In our patient, the organism was
identified on peritoneal fluid samples, obtained at the time of surgery. Contamination of the fluid from the skin or from the intestinal
content seems very unlikely because of the sterile skin condition at the time of surgery and the absence of visible intestinal perforation.
The sample was seeded on the surface of a 5% sheep blood agar and incubated at 35°C in 5% CO2. After 48 h of incubation, the isolate was
identified as Kocuria marina by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry (score value = 2.014). MALDI target plates were inoculated by picking a freshly
grown overnight colony with the tip of a sterile toothpick and smearing the specimen directly onto a ground steel MALDI target plate in a
thin film. The microbial film was then overlaid with 1.5 μl of a MALDI matrix (a saturated solution of α-cyano-4-hydroxy-cinnamic acid in
50% acetonitrile–2.5% trifluoroacetic acid) and allowed to dry at room temperature. Mass spectra were acquired using the MALDI-TOF
spectrometer in a linear positive mode (Microflex; Bruker Daltonics). Measured mass spectra ranged from 2,000 to 20,000 Da. Extraction of
the peaks from the generated mass spectra and their matching against the reference spectra of the integrated database provided by the
manufacturer was performed with MALDI Biotyper software (Bruker Daltonics). Unfortunately, the peritoneal fluid could not be sent for PCR-
based confirmation of the species and antibiotic susceptibilities were not performed. According to a 2010 review which focuses on antibiotic
susceptibilities for Kocuria species, K. marina should respond to ampicillin and other betalactam-based antibiotics while showing a relative
resistance to penicillin . At the time of presentation our patient had been treated with oral cephalosporin for 9 days, which might have
covered early symptoms and might explain the acute severe clinical presentation. Another interesting finding is the description of the
presence of K. marina in seafood and marine sediments. We can assume a potential relationship between the daily fish and seafood consumption
over the 10-day period preceding the symptoms in our patient and the peritoneal infection due to this bacterium. Indeed, haematogenous
dissemination is frequently described with Kocuria species. In our patient, the pathogen might have been ingested with sea-food, then
translocated to mesenteric lymph nodes and to the peritoneal cavity. However, other pathophysiologic mechanisms are possible. Indeed,
transient bacteremia following upper respiratory tract colonisation in the context of the upper respiratory tract infection preceding the
peritonitis may also be encountered, even if less probable and not documented in this case. Direct infection through cutaneous breaches
associated with sea-bathing seems unlikely in our patient . The present report illustrates the first clinical presentation of Kocuria marina
SBP in a child with no underlying risk factor for peritonitis. Although not previously described in children, this pathogen may be
considered as a possible cause of SBP in a child. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents for publication of this case report
and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Below are the links to the
authors’ original submitted files for images.Authors’ original file for figure 1 Authors’ original file for figure 1 Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions GB and LL established the diagnosis and managed the patient in
the Pediatric Emergency Department. BW participated in the surgical management of the patient. AL, NW and AG participated to the literature
review. All the authors have contributed to the draft of the article, have read and approved the final manuscript. We would like to thank
Mr. A. Cherkaoui from the Department of Laboratory Medicine, Geneva University Hospital, for his precious help in the description of the
method used for the identification of the pathogen.
