Candida famata is a commensal yeast found in natural substrates and various types of cheese . It is a rare cause of candidiasis and has been
described in human infections, including bloodstream infections . Results of commercial microbial identification systems based on
biochemical tests, available for C. famata identification, are not accurate [3, 4]. Here, we describe three candidiasis cases that were
misidentified as C. famata by the Vitek 2 system (bioMeri√©ux, Marcyl'Etoile, France). This study was approved by our Institutional Review
Board. In case 1, an extremely low-birth-weight male infant was delivered at 23 weeks and 3 days of gestation. On postnatal day 49,
desaturations, neutropenia, and elevated C-reactive protein level were observed. Peripheral blood and central line (C-line) tip cultures
grew C. famata, with low discrimination from C. parapsilosis. The infant was treated with fluconazole, and blood cultures obtained 1 week
later were negative. In case 2, a 41-yr-old woman had T-cell lymphoma with leptomeningeal seeding. She was undergoing chemotherapy with an
Ommaya reservoir in place, and neutropenic fever developed. Meropenem, vancomycin, and caspofungin were empirically administered. Blood
cultures obtained from a C-line and peripheral blood were positive for C. lusitaniae. Five days after treatment, blood cultures were
negative; however, C. lusitaniae rebounded 2 days later and was identified in the cerebrospinal fluid. At this point, caspofungin was
replaced by liposomal amphotericin B (AmB). Owing to persistent fevers, fluconazole was added to the treatment regimen, and a subsequent
blood culture grew C. famata. Finally, owing to probable invasive pulmonary aspergillosis, voriconazole alone was administered. The patient
died 2 days after the initiation of this treatment. In case 3, a 68-yr-old woman was hospitalized for treatment of a prosthetic joint
infection following a total left knee arthroplasty in 2010. She was treated unsuccessfully with several surgical and antibiotic therapies.
In July 2013, C. parapsilosis was isolated from the joint fluid, and the patient subsequently underwent open debridement and insertion of an
antibiotic-loaded cement spacer in February 2014. Owing to ongoing pain, her joint fluid was cultured the following month, which tested
positive for C. famata, and fluconazole treatment was initiated. Because of the discrepancy within these results or low discrimination
between species, sequence analyses of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and D1/D2 regions of the rRNA gene were performed to identify C.
famata isolates . In cases 1, 2, and 3, C. parapsilosis, C. lusitaniae, and C. parapsilosis were identified, respectively (Table 1), with no
isolate being identified as C. famata. Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS)-based
identification of clinically relevant yeasts has proven to be superior to identification by phenotypic identification systems . Thus, we
subjected the isolates from cases 1 and 2 to MALDI-TOF MS (Bruker Biotyper, Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany). The results were consistent
with those obtained by sequencing; however, based on the manufacturer's breakpoints, the identification confidence score (1.70) allowed for
only a genus-level identification in both cases . In recent molecular identification studies, phenotypic methods initially identified
isolates as C. famata, including strains of C. guilliermondii, C. lusitaniae, C. parapsilosis, and C. palmioleophila [1, 3]. Moreover, the
ARTEMIS and SENTRY surveillance programs that identified 53 isolates as C. famata were disproven when sequencing analysis was performed by
Castanheira et al. , suggesting that phenotypic identification of C. famata is almost certainly incorrect. The results of these studies are
consistent with those of the three cases presented herein. Therefore, it is possible that, in the absence of confirmatory assays (e.g.,
sequencing), previous case reports may have misdiagnosed C. famata infection. To date, six such cases have been reported in Korea (Table 2),
and the data presented here suggest the possibility of misidentification. General antifungal susceptibility patterns of C. famata, C.
parapsilosis, and C. lusitaniae are different. C. famata exhibits good susceptibility to AmB but reduced susceptibility to echinocandins and
azoles. Therefore, liposomal AmB is recommended as the initial therapy . C. parapsilosis is highly susceptible to most antifungal agents,
but exhibits higher minimal inhibitory concentrations to echinocandins. C. lusitaniae is usually susceptible to azoles and echinocandins;
however, it rapidly acquires resistance to AmB in vitro. Therefore, although misidentification of C. famata in our cases did not have a
significant impact on the patients' treatment, this could have led to misinterpretation of antifungal susceptibility and incorrect selection
of the initial antifungal agent. In conclusion, it is important to be aware of the potential misidentification of C. famata by commercial
systems. For more accurate identification of these isolates, sequencing analysis of ITS and D1/D2 may be helpful. No potential conflicts of
interest relevant to this article were reported. Three cases of candidiasis misidentified as Candida famata by the Vitek2 system *Teleomorph
of Candida lusitaniae. Abbreviations: ID, identification; ELBW, extremely low birth weight; NT, not tested. Case reports of Candida famata
infections in Korea Abbreviations: ND, not described; ELBW, extremely low birth weight; OM, osteomyelitis; VLBW, very low birth weight;
ESRD, end-stage renal disease; IE, infective endocarditis; FLU, fluconazole; AmB, amphotericin B.
