Aseptic meningitis associated with herpes simplex virus type 2 often has a relapsing-remitting clinical phenotype. Factors that lead to
disease activation and reactivation are currently incompletely understood. We describe the case of a 49-year-old Caucasian man who developed
recurrent episodes of herpes simplex virus type 2-associated aseptic meningitis in the setting of heat exposure and bicycling. This case is
compelling in that substantial data were available to the examining physicians on the amount of physical exercise and heat exposure.
Strenuous physical activities or heat exposure in isolation did not cause re-occurrence of clinical signs and symptoms. This case
illustrates that the dual activation of mechanical and temperature receptors in dorsal root ganglia may lead to the recurrent reactivation
and afferent dissemination of latent herpes simplex virus type 2 in some patients. Herpes simplex viruses (HSV) are neurotropic viruses that
are frequent human pathogens . HSV are DNA viruses that are closely related and display approximately 70% genomic homology. HSV2 is
primarily associated with genital herpes, but can also be the cause of recurrent herpes labialis. In addition, HSV2 is the trigger for
recurrent aseptic meningitis, which is associated with a lymphocytic pleocytosis and occasionally with large endothelial cells termed
Mollaret cells. The first onset of disease can occur many years or decades after the initial exposure and viral latency, and relapses can
occur in intervals of weeks, months, or years. Anti-viral therapies do not affect the viral reservoir in dorsal root ganglia. The
seroprevalence for HSV2 is around 20% in the United States . Mechanisms that lead to disease activation are currently incompletely
understood. This case report illustrates a case of HSV2 activation and reactivation in the setting of physical exercise that was associated
with heat exposure. The combination of mechanical and thermal triggers may have led to activation of latent HSV2 in this patient. We report
the case of a 49-year-old Caucasian man who developed an acute severe headache centered in the vertex of his skull in April 2008. At the
time, he also felt cognitively impaired. The patient reported a fever of up to 39.7°C (103.5°F), and low back pain and hip pain upon hip
extension and flexion. Upon assessment by a neurologist, the patient revealed that he had been bicycling for approximately eight hours and
153 kilometer (95 miles) in heat that exceeded 35°C (95°F) approximately 12 hours prior to the onset of his symptoms. His bicycle computer
was interrogated to verify the environmental heat exposure. On physical examination, the patient was found to have mild neck stiffness, as
well as a positive Kernig sign and Brudzinski sign . The rest of his general and neurological examination was intact. There were no herpetic
skin lesions. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study of the brain was obtained and found to be intact. Analyses of cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) showed 128 white blood cells (WBC) per microliter (μl). A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV2) was
positive. CSF protein, glucose, red blood cell count, oligoclonal bands, IgG synthesis, IgG index, Treponema pallidum agglutination test,
Borellia burgdorferi IgM and IgG, and PCR for HSV1, human herpesvirus 6, cytomegalie virus, Epstein Barr virus, and Varizella-Zoster virus
were all normal or negative. No Mollaret cells within the CSF were reported . The patient had no history of labial or genital herpes. His
symptoms subsided within 5 days. The patient had no history of labial or genital herpes. He was started on ganciclovir 500 mg po BID for
treatment and subsequent prophylaxis of aseptic meningitis. His symptoms subsided within 5 days. He discontinued ganciclovir after two
years. Five years later, the patient developed neurological signs and symptoms similar to the ones described above. This time, however, the
patient also experienced a severe pain in his mid and lower back. The patient reported that he had just completed a three day bicycle tour,
during which he had completed approximately 100 kilometer (62 miles) per day, and had been exposed to heat of 39°C (102.2°F) for more than
three hours each day. The heat exposure was again documented by a bicycle computer and the local weather report. A CSF examination showed
298 WBC/μl, the protein was 69 milligram per deciliter, and a PCR for HSV2 was again positive. All other diagnostic tests were within normal
limits. The patient was treated with acyclovir 800 mg po q4hours for 7 days. His symptoms substantially improved after ten days. The patient
decided against prophylactic pharmacotherapy for lack of evidence . This case is compelling in that substantial data were available to the
examining physicians on the amount of physical exercise and heat exposure. It is worth noting that prior to the initial episode and in
between the two episodes of aseptic meningitis the patient participated in bicycle races that exceeded the distances that triggered the
events described above. However, there was no heat exposure above 30°C (86°F) associated with those bicycle rides. Furthermore, the patient
also took part in other strenuous physical activities, including numerous marathons during which he was exposed to heat greater than 30°C
(86°F), but suffered no ill effects. HSV2 is an ubiquitous neurotropic and neuroinvasive virus that becomes latent within dorsal root
ganglia to evade immune surveillance . Herpes virus dissemination has been observed with immunoglobulin hypoglobulinemia and dysglobulinemia
, something that was not tested in our patient. The events that specifically trigger a disease recurrence of HSV2 are incompletely
understood. The nerve endings of dorsal root ganglion neurons have sensory receptors that are activated by chemical, mechanical, and thermal
stimuli . We propose that the dual activation of mechanical and temperature receptors in dorsal root ganglia led to the recurrent
reactivation and afferent dissemination of latent HSV2 in this patient. Eventually, there may be exaggerated adaptive and innate immune
responses against HSV2 antigenic determinants. Franzen-Rohl and coworkers recently demonstrated that patients with a history of recurrent
HSV2-assoicated meningitis displayed elevated T cell proliferation and T helper cell (Th)1 and Th2 cytokine expression when challenged with
HSV antigens compared to patients with recurrent HSV2-associated genital infections . There was also an increased natural killer (NK) cell
response, an increased expression of toll-like receptor (TLR)3 and −9 by dendritic cells, and an increased TLR-induced alpha interferon
responses . This is the first case to suggest that the combination of heat exposure and bicycling may trigger recurrent episodes of aseptic
meningitis insusceptible individuals. The patient was advised to restrict his bicycling activities to days with moderate temperatures.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Cerebrospinal fluid Herpes simplex virus Magnetic resonance imaging
Natural killer Polymerase chain reaction T helper cell Toll-like receptor White blood cells Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions All authors (OS, EM, AO, MS and BCK) contributed to the design of the study, the
acquisition of data, and the interpretation of data. Furthermore, all authors participated in the drafting of the manuscript, and they gave
final approval for its publication. The authors would like to thank their patient for participation in this study. No external funding was
obtained for the work on this manuscript.
