We present illustrative images from a Mexican 58-year-old man who had the occupation of cockfighting from childhood and presented with
chronic progressive disseminated histoplasmosis with primarily cutaneous manifestations. A 58-year-old man, a native of Tamazula, Durango in
Mexico, complained of a 2-month history of odynophagia, hoarseness, non-productive cough, polyarthralgia, and weight loss. He denied fever
and chills, but a few days after initial symptoms began, he presented erythematous papules and ulcers on the body trunk that subsequently
spread to the extremities (Figure 1A and B). The patient had worked as a cockfight handler in traditional fairs during most of his life. No
comorbidities were present, and a QuantiFERON-TB Gold Test in tube was negative. Computed tomography (CT) showed a stippled calcification on
mediastinal lymph nodes (Figure 1C). It was after a second skin biopsy that the presence of yeasts consistent with histoplasmosis was
finally seen (Figure 1D Figure 1.(A) Generalized nodule-ulcerative lesions characteristic of chronic progressive disseminated
histoplasmosis. (B) On the right arm, there are multiple skin-colored umbilicated papules, hemorrhagic crusts, and ulcerated nodules. (C) CT
of the mediastinum showing pretracheal and hilar calcified lymph nodes. (D) Photomicrograph of the pathologic specimen stained with periodic
acid-Schiff shows numerous histiocytes and extracellular yeasts of H. capsulatum (magnification, ×400).). He was started on itraconazole
(400 mg/day), and 4 months later, his symptoms improved (Figure 2 Figure 2.(Left) Healed lesions are observed a few months after starting
treatment with itraconazole. (Right) Skin lesions were replaced by scars and some hyperpigmented spots.). (A) Generalized nodule-ulcerative
lesions characteristic of chronic progressive disseminated histoplasmosis. (B) On the right arm, there are multiple skin-colored umbilicated
papules, hemorrhagic crusts, and ulcerated nodules. (C) CT of the mediastinum showing pretracheal and hilar calcified lymph nodes. (D)
Photomicrograph of the pathologic specimen stained with periodic acid-Schiff shows numerous histiocytes and extracellular yeasts of H.
capsulatum (magnification, ×400). (Left) Healed lesions are observed a few months after starting treatment with itraconazole. (Right) Skin
lesions were replaced by scars and some hyperpigmented spots. Histoplasmosis is one of the most common systemic mycosis in Mexico, and
generally, it is described in epidemic outbreaks or as an occupational illness when people accidentally inhale spores of Histoplasma
capsulatum from soil, especially when enriched by bird or bat droppings. Chronic and progressive course is typical of disseminated
histoplasmosis in non-immunocompromised adults of middle age or older, and this clinical manifestation represents 1% of all symptomatic
cases.1,2 Theoretically, dissemination occurs when the fungus spreads systemically from a primary pulmonary focus during a period of months
to years. High rates (27–40%) of chronic progressive disseminated histoplasmosis have been reported in some Latin American countries,
especially in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).3 Authors' addresses: René Agustín Flores-Franco and Antonio de Jesús
Fernández-Alonso, Department of Internal Medicine, Regional General Hospital “Dr Salvador Zubirán Anchondo,” Chihuahua, México, E-mails:
rflores99@prontomail.com and mtchuy@hotmail.com. Antonio Gómez-Díaz, Department of Pathology, Regional General Hospital “Dr. Salvador
Zubirán Anchondo,” Chihuahua, México, E-mail: tgomezdiaz@yahoo.com.mx.
