Dengue viruses (DENVs) are mosquito-borne viruses which can cause disease ranging from mild fever to severe dengue infection. These viruses
are endemic in several tropical and subtropical regions. Multiple outbreaks of DENV serotypes 1, 2 and 3 (DENV-1, DENV-2 and DENV-3) have
been reported from the western region in Saudi Arabia since 1994. Strains from at least two genotypes of DENV-1 (Asia and America/Africa
genotypes) have been circulating in western Saudi Arabia until 2006. However, all previous studies reported from Saudi Arabia were based on
partial sequencing data of the envelope (E) gene without any reports of full genome sequences for any DENV serotypes circulating in Saudi
Arabia. Here, we report the isolation and the first complete genome sequence of a DENV-1 strain (DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011) isolated from a
patient from Jeddah, Saudi Arabia in 2011. Whole genome sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis showed high similarity between
DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 strain and D1/H/IMTSSA/98/606 isolate (Asian genotype) reported from Djibouti in 1998. Further analysis of the full
envelope gene revealed a close relationship between DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 strain and isolates reported between 2004–2006 from Jeddah as well
as recent isolates from Somalia, suggesting the widespread of the Asian genotype in this region. These data suggest that strains belonging
to the Asian genotype might have been introduced into Saudi Arabia long before 2004 most probably by African pilgrims and continued to
circulate in western Saudi Arabia at least until 2011. Most importantly, these results indicate that pilgrims from dengue endemic regions
can play an important role in the spread of new DENVs in Saudi Arabia and the rest of the world. Therefore, availability of complete genome
sequences would serve as a reference for future epidemiological studies of DENV-1 viruses. Dengue virus (DENV) is a positive sense single-
stranded RNA virus belonging to the Flaviviridae family. It is an endemic mosquito-borne virus affecting more than 50 million people
globally . Infection with any DENV serotype (DENV 1–4) can range from asymptomatic infection to mild dengue fever. On the other hand, re-
infection with heterologous serotypes can lead to more severe disease, i.e. dengue with warning signs or severe dengue infection . DENV
genome varies in size from 10.6 to 11 kb and encodes three structural and seven non-structural proteins . The structural proteins are
comprised of the capsid (C), membrane (M) and envelope (E) proteins, and the non-structural proteins include the NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A,
NS4B and NS5. DENV genome is flanked by 94 nucleotides (nts) at 5′ untranslated regions (UTR) and 388–462 nts at the 3′ UTR . While the four
DENV serotypes share 65–70% sequence homology, they are further clustered into different genotypes due to the high mutation rates .
Epidemiological and phylogenetic studies have shown geographical movement and divergence of DENVs . Such studies have also shown an
association between certain genotypes and disease severity. Shifts in circulating genotype or introduction of new genotypes or virulent
strains in endemic regions have been shown to be linked with increased severity and occurrence of severe dengue infection . Therefore, it is
critically important to monitor circulating DENVs in endemic countries to better understand the epidemiology of the disease and to design
and implement disease surveillance programs. Millions of Muslims, from all over the world, visit Makkah and Al-Madinah every year to perform
Hajj and Umrah. Jeddah city is the connection terminal where pilgrims gather on their way to the holy places in Makkah and Al-Madinah. Thus,
pilgrims arriving from dengue endemic countries can play a major role in the introduction of new DENVs into Saudi Arabia. The large number
of expatriates particularly from the Indian subcontinent, Southeast Asia and Africa, who work in Saudi Arabia and represent ~20% of the
population, as well as the leisure travel to dengue endemic countries in Southeast Asia, which is very common among Saudi citizens,
represent other major sources of DENV importation into Saudi Arabia. All these factors could put Saudi Arabia at the crossroads for global
spread of DENVs. Several outbreaks have been reported in Saudi Arabia and neighboring country Yemen . In 1994, DENV-1 and DENV-2 were
reported to cause major outbreaks which were followed by the emergence of DENV-3 in 1997 . Since then, all 3 serotypes (DENV 1–3) were being
reported and isolated in Saudi Arabia . Phylogenetic analysis indicate that recent isolates from both DENV-2 and DENV-3 belong to
cosmopolitan genotype and genotype III, respectively, and there has been no major genetic changes since their first detection in Saudi
Arabia . On the other hand, most recent DENV-1 isolates belong to Asia genotype which might have replaced the pre-circulating America/Africa
genotype that was first detected in 1994, although their co-circulation cannot be excluded . Nonetheless, previous studies from Saudi Arabia
have mainly focused on the analysis of small genomic sequences in the E⁄NS1 junction or the E gene of DENVs for the determination of genetic
variation and molecular characterization of isolated strains . Furthermore, while several complete genome sequences of DENV-1 were reported
for many strains around the world, no complete sequence for any DENV-1 isolated from Saudi Arabia has been reported yet. Here, we report the
first complete genome and detailed genetic analysis of DENV-1 isolate obtained from a patient in Jeddah in Saudi Arabia in 2011 which should
provide reference data for future genetic studies on DENV-1 in Saudi Arabia and the region. A 26-year-old previously healthy Saudi women
presented to the Emergency Department of King Abdulaziz University Hospital with primary dengue-like symptoms including fever, headache,
myalgia, joint pain, nausea and vomiting. Laboratory investigations of the patient revealed a low platelet count of 63 × 103 cells/mm3
(150–450 × 103 cells/mm3) and elevated liver enzymes levels; alanine amino transferase (ALT) 264 U/L (7–55 U/L), aspartate amino transferase
(AST) 326 U/L (8–48 U/L) and gamma glutaryl transferase (GGT) 240 U/L (9–48 U/L). Further analysis showed that the patient’s serum was
positive for anti-dengue IgM but not anti-dengue IgG antibodies indicating an acute primary dengue infection. Real time RT-PCR confirmed
these results and viral RNA was detected in the patient's plasma. Upon inoculation of plasma in C6/36 cells, cytopathic effect (CPE) was
observed after 5 days (Figure 1) and the cell culture supernatant tested positive for DENV RNA by real time RT-PCR.Figure 1 Dengue infected
C6/36 cells. a. Uninfected C6/36 cells. b. CPE 5 days after inoculation of C6/36 cells with patient plasma. Dengue infected C6/36 cells. a.
Uninfected C6/36 cells. b. CPE 5 days after inoculation of C6/36 cells with patient plasma. In order to characterize the
DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate, the full genome was sequenced. Assembly of all sequenced overlapping fragments obtained by RT-PCR resulted in
a genome of 10,622 nts with a complete coding region encoding for 3392 amino acids (aa) flanked by 94 and 349 nts at the 5’ UTR and 3’ UTR,
respectively. Identity matrix of nts and aa of DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate was then compared to highly similar isolates (38 DENV-1 strains)
available in GenBank. As shown in Table 1, sequence identity matrix of DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate genome ranged from 97.2-89.6% compared
to other strains. On the other hand, aa identity was higher and ranged from 99.4-96.5% (Table 1). Interestingly, the highest identity was
with AF298808-Djibouti-1998 strain (97.2% nt identity and 99.4% aa identity) followed by JN638336-Thailand-1986 strain (97.1% nt identity
and 99.2% aa identity) and AB608788-Taiwan-1994 strain (96.7% nt identity and 99% aa identity).Table 1 Nucleotide (NT) and amino acid (AA)
identity of DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 full genome compared to closely related strains Strain NT identity (%) AA identity (%)
AF298808-Djibouti-199897.299.4JN638336-Thailand-198697.199.2AB608788-Taiwan-199496.799.0AF350498-China-200196.698.1AY726555-Myanmar-199896.098.8FJ469907-Singapore-200394.898.5JN697058-Malaysia-200594.498.4JN697057-Malaysia-200594.498.3JN054255-SriLanka-201094.297.6GQ398255-Singapore-200894.298.3JN054256-SriLanka-200994.198.0KF887994-Thailand-201394.198.0AB074760-Japan-200193.997.5KC759167-China-201293.897.7JF459993-Myanmar-200293.598.2KF955446-Vietnam-200892.996.5AB074761-Japan-200191.597.6AB189121-Indonesia-199891.297.3AB189120-Indonesia-199891.297.5KF184975-Angola-201391.197.0FJ744701-Venezuela-200491.197.2GQ868602-Phillipines-200491.197.4JQ915076-French
Polynesia:Tahiti-200990.897.3JQ915074-French
Polynesia:Moorea-200890.897.3FJ850113-Nicaragua-200590.797.1JX669475-Brazil-200290.697.0JX669473-Brazil-200190.697.0FJ810415-Venezuela-200590.697.1JN903578-India-200790.697.0FJ850114-Nicaragua-200590.497.0KJ189368-Mexico-201290.296.9JN903579-India-200890.296.8KJ189369-Mexico-201190.097.1KJ189366-Peurto
Rico-201089.996.7KJ189304-Colombia-200589.997.1KJ189303-Colombia-199889.997.1KJ189367-Peurto Rico-201089.896.9KF921948-Vietnam-200889.697.6
Nucleotide (NT) and amino acid (AA) identity of DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 full genome compared to closely related strains Comparison of the
genome size of DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate (10,622 bp) with closely related isolates from other countries showed the AB608788-Taiwan-1994
strain as the closest in genome size (10693 bp) followed by AF298808-Djibouti-1998 (10721 bp) and JN638336-Thailand-1986 (10735 bp) strains.
Comparing the coding region of DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate to the closest strain, AF298808-Djibouti-1998, 159 nt mutations were found with
27 non-synonymous substitutions only. Most of the aa changes were clustered in the NS5 region of the viral protein with only 1-3
substitutions in other genes (Table 2).Table 2 Amino acid substitutions observed in the DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate compared to
AF298808-Djibouti-1998 isolate S.N Gene Position AA AA NT DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 AF298808-Djibouti-1998 1 CP 55165RT2 PreM 178534IV3 E
5931779VA46181854LS5 NS1 8382514LV68552565LF711293387SL8 NS2A 11873561VI912753825AE10 NS2B 13784134VI11 NS3
15364608KQ1215434629TS1321176351SN14 NS4A 21706510KR1521876561MV16 NS5
23507050XL1723647092TA1826287884IT1927588274AT2029418823TR2130139039DG2230359105TS2331209360LI2431339399EQ2531409420GE2632379711GE27336410092KR
Amino acid substitutions observed in the DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate compared to AF298808-Djibouti-1998 isolate Although some recombination
events might have occurred between some DENV-1 isolates (such as AB608788-Taiwan-1994 and AY726555-Myanmar-1998) as shown in Figure 2,
recombination seems to be limited in these strains as only 9 out of 39 strains (23%) showed high probability to have recombination events
(Table 3). Importantly, DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate did not show any recombination event with any of the tested strains.Figure 2
Recombination events in DENV-1 strains. Schematic representation indicates the recombination events in DENV-1 strains analyzed by RDP3
package with P-value < 0.05. Continues lines indicate no recombination possibility. Analysis was performed on all sequences included in the
phylogenetic tree in Figure 3. The following strains did not show any recombination events and are not shown in the figure; KJ189366-Peurto
Rico-2010, KJ189304-Colombia-2005, JN054256-SriLanka-2009, KF955446-Vietnam-2008, JX669473-Brazil-2001, JQ915076-French
Polynesia:Tahiti-2009, FJ850114-Nicaragua-2005, FJ810415-Venezuela-2005, JN697058-Malaysia-2005, GQ398255-Singapore-2008 and
AB074761-Japan-2001.Table 3 Recombination events positions S.N. Strain Break point position Av. P-Val with Beginning Ending RDP methods
1AB608788-Taiwan-19941054419.268 × 10-34 2JF459993-Myanmar-20029926052.655 × 10-66 3KJ189369-Mexico-201110456158.658 × 10-05
4KJ189368-Mexico-201210444118.658 × 10-05 5KF921948-Vietnam-20081028411.182 × 10-99 6KF184975-Angola-20131059816671.705 × 10-38
7AY726555-Myanmar-1998802383003.853 × 10-06 8JN903578-India-2007335543953.881 × 10-27 9JN903579-India-2008501456581.716 × 10-03
Recombination events in DENV-1 strains. Schematic representation indicates the recombination events in DENV-1 strains analyzed by RDP3
package with P-value < 0.05. Continues lines indicate no recombination possibility. Analysis was performed on all sequences included in the
phylogenetic tree in Figure 3. The following strains did not show any recombination events and are not shown in the figure; KJ189366-Peurto
Rico-2010, KJ189304-Colombia-2005, JN054256-SriLanka-2009, KF955446-Vietnam-2008, JX669473-Brazil-2001, JQ915076-French
Polynesia:Tahiti-2009, FJ850114-Nicaragua-2005, FJ810415-Venezuela-2005, JN697058-Malaysia-2005, GQ398255-Singapore-2008 and
AB074761-Japan-2001. Recombination events positions To gain further understanding of genetic relationship between DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011
isolate and other isolates, phylogenetic analysis of the whole viral genome was performed (Figure 3). As expected, DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011
isolate clustered with AF298808-Djibouti-1998, JN638336-Thailand-1986 and AB608788-Taiwan-1994 strains in addition to AY726555-Myanmar-1998
and AF350498-China-2001 strains.Figure 3 Phylogenetic analysis of the full genome. The phylogenetic tree was constructed for the full
genome, as indicated in the Materials and methods. Tree was generated from nucleotide alignments of sequences from the culture isolate
obtained from the patient in this study and highly similar DENV-1 sequences available in the GenBank database. Phylogenetic analysis of the
full genome. The phylogenetic tree was constructed for the full genome, as indicated in the Materials and methods. Tree was generated from
nucleotide alignments of sequences from the culture isolate obtained from the patient in this study and highly similar DENV-1 sequences
available in the GenBank database. Since DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate genome represents the first reported complete genome of DENV-1 viruses
from Saudi Arabia and that most available sequences in the GenBank are partial or complete coding sequences for the E protein only, we
compared the E gene from DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate to 57 selected DENV-1 isolates from various locations including isolates from Saudi
Arabia and many other Islamic countries as shown in Table 4. Comparison of nt sand aa sequences of DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate showed high
similarity to previously reported isolates from Jeddah collected between 2004–2006 (AM746212-Jeddah-2006, AM746213-Jeddah-2006,
AM746214-Jeddah-2005, AM746215-Jeddah-2005, AM746216-Jeddah-2004 and AM746217-Jeddah-2004). Interestingly, the E gene from two DENV-1
isolates from Somalia (KC848580-Somalia-2011 and KC848578-Somalia-2011) in addition to AF298808-Djibouti-1998 showed high similarity to
DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate. The lowest similarity (69.9% nt and 76.5% aa) was found with DENV-1 isolate (JN036391-Bangladesh-2006)
(Table 4). As expected, phylogenetic analysis of the complete E gene of DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate with geographically diverse DENV-1
isolates and other DENV-1 Jeddah isolates showed DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 clustering with some of the DENV-1 strains previously identified and
reported from Jeddah together with the African AF298808-Djibouti-1998 strain and very closely related to KC848580-Somalia-2011,
KC848578-Somalia-2011, AF350498-China-2011 and JN029818-China-2010 (Figure 4).Table 4 Nucleotide (NT) and amino acid (AA) identity of
DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 E gene compared to closely related isolates Strain NT identity (%) AA identity (%) AM746214-Jeddah-
SA-200599.799.8AM746213-Jeddah-SA-200699.799.8AM746216-Jeddah-SA-200499.599.6AM746215-Jeddah-SA-200599.599.6AM746212-Jeddah-
SA-200699.499.6AF298808-Djibouti-199898.799.5AM746217-Jeddah-
SA-200498.099.1JN029818-China-201097.799.3KC848580-Somalia-201197.599.1AF350498-China-200197.198.5KC848578-Somalia-201197.198.9JN415511-Malaysia-200595.698.1AB111077-Japan-200295.598.1JN415496-Cambodia-200795.497.9JN029807-China-201095.398.3JQ993203-Thailand-200695.397.7AB111076-Japan-200295.397.5JQ403519-Taiwan-200995.297.9KC861979-Vietnam-200295.298.1JQ993204-Thailand-200795.298.1JF967810-Myanmar-200895.197.5JF967952-Cambodia-201095.097.9JF967840-Myanmar-200894.997.7JN415531-Australia-200894.897.7JN415521-Singapore-200894.897.5KC861978-Vietnam-200694.797.3JQ403521-Taiwan-201094.798.1KC589009-Indonesia-201294.697.9JF967824-Singapore-200894.697.5KC589010-Indonesia-201291.796.7KF672791-Brazil-199191.597.1KC812277-Peurto
Rico-199891.396.9AF425625-Nigeria-196891.396.3KF672792-Brazil-199991.297.1KC182085-Laos-200891.192.5JN415486-India-201091.196.9AM746220-Jeddah-
SA-199491.196.7AM746219-Jeddah-SA-199491.196.7AM746218-Jeddah-SA-199491.196.7EF654110-South
Korea-200691.097.3JN036371-Bangladesh-200991.096.7JN415524-Sri
Lanka-200490.996.9JN415516-Philippines200590.996.7JN415507-India-200890.996.5JX402212-Peurto
Rico-201090.997.1JN415517-Philippines-201090.896.9JQ920432-Mexico-201090.796.7JN415513-Malaysia-201090.596.9JN415500-East
Timor-200890.597.1JQ920431-Mexico-201090.596.7JF804024-French Polynesia-200190.592.5JN415532-Australia-200990.497.1JN415502-East
Timor-201090.497.1JF800928-Nepal-201090.396.1EF654104-South
Korea-200490.396.1KC182103-Laos-200886.488.0JN036391-Bangladesh-200669.976.5Figure 4 Phylogenetic analysis of the full E gene. The
phylogenetic tree was constructed for the full E gene from DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate and E genes of other isolates from diverse regions
in the world. Nucleotide (NT) and amino acid (AA) identity of DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 E gene compared to closely related isolates Phylogenetic
analysis of the full E gene. The phylogenetic tree was constructed for the full E gene from DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate and E genes of
other isolates from diverse regions in the world. DENV-1 has been circulating in several cities in the western and southern regions of Saudi
Arabia since 1994 . Phylogenetic analysis of partial genome sequences from several DENV-1 isolates from Jeddah showed two distinct genotypes
. Early in 1994, DENV-1 isolates from Jeddah were from the America/Africa genotype. However, in 2004, circulating DENV-1 viruses were found
to be from the Asian genotype in which they clustered with the African AF298808-Djibouti-1998 strain . The later genotype continued to
circulate in Saudi Arabia until 2006 . In this study, we were interested to extend previous studies and to investigate the genetic
relationship between circulating DENV-1 viruses in Saudi Arabia and other parts of the world, with emphasis on Islamic countries due to the
religious ties between these countries and the holy places in Makkah and Al-Madinah during Hajj pilgrimage and Umrah seasons. Jeddah, being
the hub of transportation of Muslims coming in and out of the holy places in Makkah and Al-Madinah, is of particular interest since the
large influx of pilgrims going through Jeddah could be a major source of virus transportation to the western region of the country. Sequence
alignment and phylogenetic analysis of the full-length genome of DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate showed a very close relationship between this
isolate and the African AF298808-Djibouti-1998 strain in the Asian genotype, suggesting that this genotype was circulating at least until
2011 in Saudi Arabia since its introduction. The observed genetic variation in DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate compared to other related
strains, both at the nt and aa levels, as well as the deletion in the 3’-UTR are most likely due to local evolution and adaptation of this
virus. Analysis of the deduced aa sequence of the DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate compared to the most closely related strain
(AF298808-Djibouti-1998), showed that most of the aa substitution were in the NS5 protein (12/26) with only two changes in the E protein
(Table 2), suggesting that using the E gene only for phylogenetic analysis might not be the best approach to study genetic relationship
between DENVs. Nonetheless, since most of the reported DENV sequences in the Genbank, including those from Saudi Arabia, are from the E
region, comparing the E gene from DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 to these sequences should give more insight into the genetic relatedness of these
strains. Analysis of the E gene of DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate compared to other reported sequences showed high similarity and close
clustering of this strain with most recent isolates collected from Jeddah between 2004 and 2006 in addition to the African
AF298808-Djibouti-1998 strain (Figure 4). Interestingly, these viruses were closely related to two recent isolates from Somalia
(KC848580-Somalia-2011 and KC848578-Somalia-2011) and China (AF350498-China-2011 and JN029818-China-2010) (Table 4, and Figure 4). The high
similarity between DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011, the African AF298808-Djibouti-1998 and the 2004-2006 isolates from Jeddah suggest that DENV-1
strains from the Asian genotype might have been imported with African pilgrims long before 2004. Additionally, the similarity of these
strains to recent isolates from Somalia suggests the widespread of this genotype in this region most probably due to importation with Hajj
pilgrims. Interestingly, the African AF298808-Djibouti-1998 strain is more genetically related to Asian isolates than to African isolates
indicating that DENV strains can be transmitted and sustained in countries far from their geographic origin. Detection of two DENV-1
genotypes in Saudi Arabia in the past two decades as well as the several outbreaks reported in Makkah, Al-Madinah and Jeddah suggest that
pilgrims could play a major role in the introduction and distribution of DENV serotypes in Saudi Arabia especially in the two holy cities of
Makkah and Al-Madinah as well as Jeddah. While most recent DENV-1 isolates from Jeddah belong to the Asian genotype, it is not known if this
genotype completely replaced previously circulating America/Africa genotype or both genotypes are co-circulating due to the very limited
number of published studies on DENVs from Saudi Arabia. Introduction of new DENV viruses can lead to the emergence of recombinant strains
which might have a great impact on the epidemiological and clinical outcomes. Interestingly, Tolou and colleagues reported that DENV-1
Singapore S275/90 strain is a product of a recombination event between viruses from two distinct lineages in which one lineage includes an
African strain isolated in Abidjan in Ivory Coast and the other includes isolates from Djibouti (AF298808-Djibouti-1998) and the closely
related isolate from Cambodia . Identification of such events depends on the availability of full genome sequences of DENV strains from
various regions which is missing in Saudi Arabia. Phylogenetic analysis of DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate sequence, Asian genotype, did not
show any genetic relations with the other DENV-1 genotypes including the America/Africa genotype which was circulating in Jeddah area since
1994. Furthermore, recombination analysis showed no such events in the DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate. In this study, we report the first
complete genome sequence of DENV-1 isolate from Saudi Arabia which can represent a reference genome for future genetic studies of DENV-1
viruses. Sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis of this isolate suggest that the Asian genotype might have been introduced into Saudi
Arabia long before 2004 from the African continent probably through pilgrims. Pilgrims from all over the world, particularly dengue endemic
regions, travel through Jeddah to Makkah and Al-Madinah in Saudi Arabia to perform Hajj and Umrah which can lead to the introduction and
spread of new strains of DENV into Saudi Arabia as well as other geographical regions. While the high influx of pilgrims coming from DENV
endemic areas to Jeddah and the holy places warrants further studies of more samples to have a clear picture about other circulating
strains, availability of this complete genome sequence would serve as a reference for such future epidemiological, virological and genetic
studies of DENV-1 viruses. Nonetheless, measures to screen pilgrims from DENV endemic areas might be critical to reduce the spread of the
disease and the economic and healthcare burdens of the disease in Saudi Arabia and other parts of the world. Plasma and serum samples were
collected from a female patient with suspected DENV infection at King Abdulaziz University Hospital and stored at −80°C until testing.
Ethical approval was obtained from the Biomedical Research Ethical Committee at at King Abdulaziz University Hospital, King Abdulaziz
University (reference # 19-14). Serum sample was screened for anti-DENV IgM and IgG antibodies using Panbio® Dengue IgM and IgG Capture
ELISA Kits (Panbio, Australia) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Viral RNA was extracted from plasma or culture supernatant
using QIAamp viral RNA mini kit (Qiagen, Germany) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted RNA was screened for DENV-1 RNA by real
time RT-PCR using primers and probes previously described . Mosquito Aedes albopictus C6/36 cells maintained in complete Dulbecco's Modified
Eagle's Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 2% fetal bovine serum (FCS), 2 mM L-glutamine, 1.5 g/l sodium bicarbonate, 1.0 mM sodium pyruvate,
100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. Cells were incubated in a humidified atmosphere at 28°C in 5% CO2. Cells were inoculated
with 100 μL of patient plasma and examined daily for CPE. After CPE is observed, cell culture supernatants were collected and analyzed by
real time RT-PCR. DENV-1 RNA-positive culture supernatants were used for whole viral genome sequencing. Viral RNA extracted from culture
supernatant was subjected to RT-PCR amplification using primer pairs covering the whole length of the viral genome using an ABI Veriti
thermal cycler (Applied Biosystems, USA) as previously described . The RT-PCR amplified fragments (600-800 bp), which cover the whole genome
sequence and overlap in common regions, were excised from agarose gel and purified using QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen, Germany)
according to manufacturer’s instructions. The products were subjected to cycle sequencing on an ABI 3500 Automatic Sequencer (Applied
Biosystems, USA) using the Bigdye Terminator V3.1 Reaction Cycle Kit (ABI, Germany) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The complete
viral sequence was assembled and deposited in the GenBank with the following accession number (GenBank: KJ649286; DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011). The
complete genome of DENV-1-Jeddah-1-2011 isolate was initially searched for similarity using BLAST software
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/). DENV-1 sequences with high similarity were selected for further analysis. Specifically, sequences were
multiply aligned using ClustalW and nt sequences identity matrix as well as aa substitutions were analyzed. Phylogenetic analysis and
distance calculations were performed using the MEGA v.5 software with the Neighbor-Joining method of the Maximum Composite Likelihood model,
gamma-distributed rates among sites with 1,000 bootstrap replicates. Recombination analysis was conducted with RDP3 package with
P-value < 0.05 . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Authors’ contributions EIA, AA, SAE, AMMA, TAM and GJ
conceived and designed the study, EIA and SAEK oversaw the laboratory work, SAF, NAO and HGBH performed the experiments, SSS and AMH
analyzed the data, and SSS, SAEK and AMH wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported
by grants funded from the Deanship of Scientific Research (DSR), King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, under Grant no. RG/34/2
and Grant no. 543/141/1432. The authors, therefore, acknowledge and thank DSR technical and financial support.
