Patient MSV, a 61-year-old woman born in Penteado, Alagoas, Brazil and residing in São Paulo was hospitalized for decompensated heart
failure (HF). Approximately 1 year before, she experienced dyspnea with moderate effort, and there was marked worsening over the last 3
months associated with orthopnea and lower limb edema. Laboratory tests from when the patient was first seen at the InCor emergency unit (in
March 2013) revealed: 3.3 million red blood cells/mm³; hemoglobin 10.9 g/dL; hemocyte 33%; MCV (mean corpuscular volume), 100 fL;
leukocytes, 4,260/ mm³ (3,067 neutrophils, 213 eosinophils, 43 basophils, 809 lymphocytes and 128 monocytes); platelets, 146,000/mm³; CK-MB,
1.37 ng/mL; troponin I, 0.081 ng/mL; urea, 26 mg/ dL; creatinine, 0.92 mg/dL; sodium 140 mEq/L; potassium 4.9 mEq/L; magnesium, 1.5 mEq/L;
C-reactive protein, 6.31 mg/L; B-type natriuretic peptide, 282 pg/mL; PT (INR), 1.2; APTT, 0.97 ratio. Radiography (in March 2013) showed an
increase in the pulmonary vasculature and slightly increased cardiac area with middle arc rectification. (Figure 1). Patient chest X ray:
increased pulmonary vasculature and slightly increased cardiac area, with middle arc rectification. After administration of medicines, HF
improved; however, after 1 week, the symptoms worsened and the patient sought emergency medical attention and was hospitalized (on August 6,
2013). She also complained of burning precordial discomfort accompanying dyspnea on exertion. She stated that there were no palpitations,
syncope, arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or dyslipidemias. The patient reported use of anti-inflammatory drugs for treating carpal
tunnel syndrome. The physical examination (on August 6, 2013) revealed increased jugular venous pressure, heart rate of 100 bpm, and blood
pressure of 117 × 59 mmHg. Pulmonary auscultation revealed decreased vesicular breath sounds at the lung bases and sizzling rales until the
middle third; cardiac auscultation revealed no changes. The abdomen had no visceromegaly or ascites, and there was discrete edema in the
lower limbs. Chest radiography (on August 6, 2013) revealed bilateral opacification of the costophrenic sinuses, increased pulmonary
vasculature, and increased heart size (Figure 2). Chest X ray: bilateral opacification of the costophrenic sinuses, increased pulmonary
vascular markings, and increased heart area. The electrocardiogram (ECG, on August 7, 2013) showed sinus rhythm, a heart rate of 78 bpm, low
voltage QRS complexes, and diffuse ventricular repolarization (Figure 3). ECG showing sinus rhythm, a heart rate of 78 bpm, low voltage QRS
complexes, and diffuse ventricular repolarization. The following was revealed by the echocardiogram (on August 8, 2013): aortic sinus, 29
mm; left atrium, 42 mm; septal thickness, 16 mm and posterior wall thickness, 12 mm; left ventricle (diastole/systole), 42/29 mm; ejection
fraction, 57% (Figure 4). The left ventricle showed marked hypertrophy without segmental changes. The filling pattern was restrictive and
not reversible with the Valsalva maneuver (Figure 5). The right ventricle had preserved systolic function without valvular dysfunction.
There were signs of pulmonary hypertension, and pulmonary artery pressure was estimated to be at 50 mmHg. The E (mitral protodiastolic
speed)/E’ (protodiastolic velocity of the mitral annulus) ratio was 15 (normal value < 8), indicative of the left atrial pressure above 20
mmHg. Transthoracic ECHO: marked increase in the left atrium diameter. Left panel: Transthoracic ECHO M mode, mitral valve with the
Christmas tree pattern, early closure of the mitral valve, and increased end diastolic pressure in the LV. Right panel: restrictive-type
pattern ventricular filling. Laboratory tests revealed anemia, renal failure, and hypothyroidism (Table 1). Laboratory tests Diuretics and
intravenous dobutamine were administered with initial improvement in pulmonary congestion; however, congestion and oliguria worsened, with a
marked increase in urea and creatinine levels (Table 1 and Figure 6). Dialysis was indicated, during which the patient showed signs of
bacteremia, and the procedure was stopped. This was followed by worsening dyspnea and cardiac arrest by hypoxia. Resuscitation and
orotracheal intubation for respiratory support were started, but there was no response, and the patient died (at 3:45 am on August 12,
2013). Left aspect of the atrial septum. Irregular yellowish areas correspond to the amyloid deposit. The patient was a 61-year-old woman
who developed HF in March 2013, with initial improvement after introduction of a specific treatment. However, 5 months later, she was
admitted to the emergency room with decompensated underlying disease, requiring hospitalization. HF is a complex syndrome resulting from any
structural or functional damage to ventricular filling or ejection volume.1 The cardinal manifestations of HF are dyspnea and fatigue, which
in turn may cause exercise intolerance, fluid retention, and pulmonary and systemic congestion1. There is no specific diagnostic test for HF
because it is primarily a syndrome of clinical diagnosis based on the history and physical exam1. The importance of an active search for
risk factors or previous cardiovascular disease should be emphasized in determining the etiology for this syndrome. The patient returned to
the emergency room with worsening dyspnea on exertion and burning chest discomfort. The patient presented no risk factors relevant to HF,
except for the recent use of anti-inflammatory drugs, which could be a cause for decompensation of the disease. Physical examination called
attention to signs of pulmonary congestion, as well as elevated right atrial pressure, increased jugular venous pressure, and signs of
systemic congestion, observed in the edema of the lower limbs. The reduction in lower lung lobe auscultation corresponds to bilateral
pleural effusion, which can be associated with HF or possibly with the patient’s underlying disease. Considering the history and the
physical examination, we concluded that the patient had a cardiac insufficiency syndrome with the involvement of left and right cardiac
chambers. After analyzing the complementary tests, a significant worsening of renal function was noted in relation to the tests performed in
March, as well as a significant drop in hemoglobin values, indicating anemia and acute renal failure. The U/Cr ratio remained < 40, and type
I urine results revealed the presence of significant proteinuria, suggesting a parenchymatous process for renal dysfunction. Another
relevant fact is the elevation of the myocardial necrosis markers, which may be associated with coronary disease or, more likely, with the
kidney disease and decompensated HF, because the patient did not present significant risk factors for ischemic cardiovascular disease. The
intake chest X-ray confirms the findings of the physical examination, demonstrating bilateral pleural effusion and some degree of pulmonary
congestion, with cardiac area at the upper limit of normal. The ECG showed low QRS voltage, most evident in the frontal plane, late R wave
progression in the horizontal plane, and diffuse changes in ventricular repolarization. This pattern can be found in some diseases such as
decompensated hypothyroidism, pericardial effusion, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, in addition to infiltrative cardiomyopathies.
Although the thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) was elevated (17.1), the value was not high enough to justify a myxedema coma, which would
lead to the ECG changes. At this time, echocardiography would be instrumental in identifying the etiological cause of the decompensation.
This examination ruled out the presence of pericardial effusion, showing significant left ventricular hypertrophy with some degree of
asymmetry, in addition to indirect signs of restrictive cardiomyopathy2. Myocardial hypertrophy is often associated with hypertension or
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, but both involve normal or increased voltage on the ECG; and therefore, the findings of ventricular hypertrophy
associated with reduced voltage on the ECG in the absence of pericardial effusion are unique to infiltrative cardiomyopathies, a group of
cardiac diseases within the restrictive cardiomyopathies2. Among the functional categories of cardiomyopathy (dilated, hypertrophic, and
restrictive), restrictive is the least common3. It is defined as a disease of the heart muscle that negatively impacts ventricular filling,
with normal or reduced diastolic volumes or diminished in one or both ventricles. Ventricular function remains unchanged, at least early
during the condition, and ventricular wall thickness tends to be normal or increased according to the underlying disease2. The principal
pathophysiological finding in restrictive cardiomyopathies (CMP) is diastolic dysfunction. Restricted ventricular filling occurs due to
increased filling pressures and loss of ventricular compliance caused by excessive stiffening of the ventricular walls. This change is the
result of myocardial fibrosis, inflammation or scarring3. Clinical manifestations can be either right or left HF, because both ventricles
may be affected. In the right ventricular involvement, signs of right-side HF predominated with elevated jugular venous pressure, peripheral
edema, and ascites3. When the left ventricle was affected, effort dyspnea was present and chest X ray showed lung congestion. It should be
noted that the heart area was preserved in radiography, as there was no ventricular dilatation2. Atrial dilatation is very common; the
ventricular thickness may be normal or increased, diastolic volume may be normal or reduced, and myocardial relaxation is affected3. A
diagnosis of restrictive CMP should be expected when there is clinical HF syndrome associated with normal cardiac area and preserved
systolic function4. Ventricular filling basically depends on the pressure gradient between the atria and ventricle4. At the beginning of
diastole, ventricular filling depends on the atrial pressure, which is increased. In the late phase of diastole, atrial contraction and
ventricular compliance are the main determinants4. Differential diagnosis of restrictive cardiomyopathies is conducted with constrictive
pericarditis, which is considered a classic clinical challenge and one with significant implications for therapeutic conduct.3 Both
conditions lead to rapid and deep decline in ventricular pressure at the beginning of diastole, with rapid increase in early diastole until
it reaches a plateau, leading to a hemodynamic pattern known as the square root sign observed in the atrial pressure curves3. In
constrictive pericarditis, there is equalization of the diastolic pressures, whereas in restrictive cardiomyopathy, pressures may vary more
than 5 mmHg. Restrictive cardiomyopathy can result from a wide variety of systemic diseases, some rare in clinical practice and may
initially present as HF. The most common specific cause of restrictive cardiomyopathy is amyloidosis; in almost half of cases, restrictive
cardiomyopathy may be idiopathic. Amyloidosis is a generally progressive infiltrative systemic disease.3 In its cardiac form, amyloid
protein is deposited in the myocardium and can result in restrictive cardiomyopathy, systolic HF, orthostatic hypotension, or conduction
system disturbances3. The ECG is greatly valuable in confirming the diagnosis, diffusely showing low QRS voltage complexes that, along with
the thickened appearance of the ventricular walls in the echocardiogram, strongly suggest an infiltrative disease3. In cardiac amyloidosis,
in addition to the echocardiographic findings of the restrictive component, some cases may display a peculiar granular and shiny appearance,
probably as a result of the amyloid deposit. The diagnosis of amyloidosis must be confirmed by endomyocardial biopsy. In cases of systemic
amyloidosis, biopsy can be performed on other tissues such as the rectum, gums, or kidney. With respect to the treatment, measures to
control symptoms related to diastolic HF should be implemented, such as volemic control. Diuretics and vasodilators should be used with
caution because these patients' cardiac output is largely dependent on the increased venous pressures4. Digoxin and calcium channel blockers
should be avoided because they may bind to the amyloid substance and cause toxicity4. A specific treatment must be determined on the basis
of the etiology of amyloidosis. In its primary form (AL), alkylating chemotherapy can be used with or without concomitant use of autologous
bone marrow transplant. The average survival of patients with cardiac amyloidosis is estimated to be 5 months4. Heart transplant should be
considered, but with a possibility of relapse in a short time and with survival rates of 30% for 5 years3. During the patent’s
hospitalization, the patient’s hemodynamic parameters and dyspnea worsened. Dobutamine and diuretics were started without clinical
improvement, and due to progressive worsening of renal function, it was necessary to start dialysis. The patient presented progressive
hypoxemia and exhibited cardiopulmonary arrest with pulseless electrical activity. Despite CPR, the patient died. (Dr. Fabio Grunspun Pitta,
Dr. Natalia Quintella Sangiorgi Olivetti, Dr. Diego Simões Peniche and Dr. Andrea Maria Dercht) Diagnostic hypothesis. Underlying disease:
amyloidosis. We believe that the terminal event (considering that the PCR was attributed to hypoxemia) was pulmonary embolism associated
with cardiogenic shock. (Dr. Fabio Grunspun Pitta, Dr. Natalia Quintella Sangiorgi Olivetti, Dr. Diego Simões Peniche and Dr. Andrea Maria
Dercht) In the autopsy, the weight of the heart was slightly more than the normal weight (390 g; normal = 350 g), with approximately normal-
sized cavities, presenting an endocardial surface with irregular, yellowish areas. The atria had increased volume with the endocardial
surface being irregularly yellow (Figure 6). The lungs had increased weight and reddened areas. The microscopic study revealed the presence
of amyloid material in the intramyocardial coronary branches; the endocardium and myocardium; particularly, the subendocardial region, the
pulmonary artery; and in part of its intraparenchymal branches, the vessels of the renal hilum, and the glomerular capillaries, on the wall
of splenic vessels and hepatic portal spaces (Figure 7). Amyloid substance was also found in the skin, tongue, bladder, and most markedly,
in the myometrium and the muscular layer of the digestive tract (Figure 8). Photomicrographies showing amyloid deposits in the
cardiovascular system: myocardial interstitium, pulmonary and renal microcirculation. Histological slides showing amyloid deposits outside
the cardiovascular system: tongue (left panel) and skin (right panel). The bone marrow was hypercellular, with an apparent increase in the
amount of plasma cells, although it did not show frank plasmacytosis. Immunohistochemical reactions for light antibody chains (kappa and
lambda) in the amyloid deposits yielded negative results. In addition to amyloidosis, the kidneys exhibited acute tubular necrosis, and the
lungs showed areas of hemorrhage, which may have contributed to the patient's death. (Dr. Paulo Sampaio Gutierrez, Dr. Luiz Alberto
Benvenuti) Histopathological diagnosis. Main disease: Amyloidosis, predominantly vascular. Causa mortis. Heart failure with areas of intra-
alveolar bleeding. (Dr. Paulo Sampaio Gutierrez, Dr. Luiz Alberto Benvenuti) When the patient was alive, she was diagnosed with diastolic
type HF. Among other possibilities, amyloidosis was suspected, which the autopsy revealed to be the patient's main disease. Amyloidosis is a
rare disease characterized by deposits that correspond to less than 30 proteins, assuming anomalous conformation. Type AA amyloidosis
usually does not significantly compromise the heart, accompanying chronic inflammatory diseases that the patient did not have. The coloring
of the tissue deposit is sensitive to treatment with potassium permanganate, unlike what occurred in this case. Therefore, deposits
associated with transthyretin or light chains of immunoglobulins (kappa or lambda), which make up the most common – or the least rare –
proteins deposited in amyloidosis, should be considered. In this case, the protein involved and the type of amyloidosis was not fully
clarified. Immunohistochemical reactions for the immunoglobulins yielded negative results. These facts oppose the possibility of this type
of protein deposit, but do not rule it out altogether. The bone marrow was hypercellular; it was neither possible to eliminate nor
characterize the plasmacytic dyscrasia with certainty, which in any case had no direct connection with amyloidosis. As for transthyretin, we
do not have its specific antibody. There are two major subtypes of amyloidosis with this deposit: senile cardiovascular and hereditary. The
senile cardiovascular type is far more common in men, rarely appears in patients under age 65, and generally does not cause deposits outside
the heart or vessels, as observed in some organs of our patient such as the skin, bladder, uterus, and digestive tract. Still, this cannot
be totally ruled out as the patient's underlying disease. Finally, hereditary amyloidosis is rarer than those other types, and has a certain
familial nature. Although the patient's family had no history of heart disease, it is not possible to completely rule out this possibility;
additionally, there are several other proteins that can cause amyloid deposit. Currently, the most accurate methodology of characterizing
the type of deposit is the mass spectra analysis of material obtained in histological slides by laser microdissection5,6. Section editor:
Alfredo José Mansur (ajmansur@incor.usp.br) Associated editors: Desidério Favarato (dclfavarato@incor.usp.br) Vera Demarchi Aiello
(anpvera@incor.usp.br)
