Recurrent type I endometrial cancer (EC) has poor prognosis and demands novel therapeutic approaches. Bevacizumab, a VEGF-A neutralizing
monoclonal antibody, has shown clinical activity in this setting. To our knowledge, however, although some diabetic cancer patients treated
with bevacizumab may also take metformin, whether metformin modulates response to anti-VEGF therapy has not yet been investigated. Here, we
report the case of a patient with advanced EC treated, among other drugs, with bevacizumab in combination with metformin. The patient
affected by relapsed EC G3 type 1, presented in march 2010 with liver, lungs and mediastinic metastases. After six cycles of paclitaxel and
cisplatin she underwent partial response. Later on, she had disease progression notwithstanding administration of multiple lines of
chemotherapy. In march 2013, due to brain metastases with coma, she began steroid therapy with development of secondary diabetes. At this
time, administration of Bevacizumab plus Metformin improved her performance status. CT scans performed in this time window showed reduced
radiologic density of the lung and mediastinic lesions and of liver disease, suggestive of increased tumor necrosis. Strong 18F-FDG uptake
by PET imaging along with high levels of monocarboxylate transporter 4 and lack of liver kinase B1 expression in liver metastasis,
highlighted metabolic features previously associated with response to anti-VEGF therapy and phenformin in preclinical models. However,
clinical benefit was transitory and was followed by rapid and fatal disease progression. These findings—albeit limited to a single
case—suggest that tumors lacking LKB1 expression and/or endowed with an highly glycolytic phenotype might develop large necrotic areas
following combined treatment with metformin plus bevacizumab. As metformin is widely used among diabetes patients as well as in ongoing
clinical trials in cancer patients, these results deserve further clinical investigation. AMP-activated protein kinase computed tomography
endometrial cancer liver kinase B1 monocarboxylate transporter 4 overall survival progression free survival trans-catheter arterial
chemoembolization vascular endothelial growth factor A Retrospective studies suggested that metformin is associated with better survival in
patients with endometrial cancer (EC). Metformin - a biguanide widely used for the treatment of type II diabetes - is currently under
investigation for possible therapeutic applications in cancer patients in combination with chemotherapy.1 In a 10-year retrospective study,
Nevadunsky et al. reported improved overall survival (OS) in diabetic patients with non-endometrioid EC who used metformin compared with
other groups, including both diabetic patients who did not use metformin and EC in non-diabetic patients.2 On the other hand, Ko et al.
conducted a multicentric retrospective study comparing patients suffering from type 2 diabetes mellitus using or not metformin at time of
diagnosis. This study demonstrated a 1.8 times worse Recurrence-Free Survival in non-metformin users (95% CI: 1.1–2.9, p = 0.02 ) and
2.3 times worse OS (95% CI: 1.3–4.2, p = 0.005) but no significant difference in Time to Recurrence. Metformin was associated with better
survival in all-cause mortality but its impact in cancer-related outcome was unclear, as overall health status of patients and glycemic
control were not investigated.3 In any case, other studies have shown that metformin is associated with improved cancer specific survival in
some types of cancer.4 Bevacizumab, a recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody which binds and neutralizes all active isoforms of vascular
endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) is currently the leading anti-angiogenic drug for cancer patients. Based on the positive outcome of
several phase III clinical trials, in Europe bevacizumab was approved by the European Medicines Agency for 5 types of metastatic or locally
advanced cancer in combination with other drugs.5 In recurrent or persistent EC, clinical activity of bevacizumab was assessed in a phase II
trial.6 Bevacizumab was given as a single drug (15 mg/Kg every 21 days) to patients who had received one to 2 prior chemotherapic regimens;
clinical response was observed in 7 of 52 patients (13.5 %, 1 CR and 6 PR) and 40.4% patients remained progression free at least 6 months.
Progression free survival (PFS) and OS were 4.2 and 10.5 months, respectively. To our knowledge, although some diabetic cancer patients
treated with bevacizumab may also take metformin, whether metformin modulates response to anti-VEGF therapy has not yet been explored. Here,
we report the case of a patient who was diagnosed with endometrial cancer and was treated, among other drugs, with bevacizumab in
combination with metformin. As presented below, we observed an interesting serological and radiological response to single agent bevacizumab
and metformin. Notably, when metformin dosage was reduced due to gastro-enteric disturbances, rapid and fatal disease progression was
observed. In October 2008, a 63-year-old woman underwent laparoscopic hysterectomy, bilateral annessiectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy at
our center for endometrioid adenocarcinoma of the uterine body. Pathological examination reported a G3 pT1cN0M0 stage, with estrogen
receptor positivity 15% and progesterone receptor positivity 50%. Post-operative follow-up was complicated by bladder perforation. No
further medical treatment was performed until April 2010, when a planned CT (CT) scan revealed liver, lung e mediastinal metastases. Hepatic
needle biopsy showed metastasis of endometrial origin: Histologic grading 3, progesterone receptor positivity 90%, Estrogen Receptor
negative. From April to August 2010, the patient received first line chemotherapy with a platinum-based regimen (6 cycles, Cumulative Doses:
Paclitaxel 1050 mg/m2 - cisplatin (DDP) 430 mg/m2), achieving partial response according to RECIST criteria. Hormonal Therapy with
Medroxyprogesteron (320 mg/die) was prescribed after chemotherapy discontinuation. In December 2010, routine CT imaging showed marked tumor
progression in the liver. Hepatic lesions in the right lobe were promptly treated with laparoscopic wedge resection (6th-7th segment) and
micro-wave thermal ablation (3rd segment). From February to May 2011, the patient underwent 2nd line therapy with 4 cycles Pegylated
Liposomal Doxorubicin (PLD) and Carboplatin (JM8) (Cumulative Dose: PLD 140 mg/m2 – JM8 AUC5 2110 mg); follow-up CT scan in June 2011
revealed pulmonary progression, stable mediastinal lymphoadenomegaly and 4 hepatic nodules. In July 2011, the patient began bevacizumab
(7.5 mg/Kg) - increased after 3 cycles at 15 mg/kg 4 - along with Tamoxifen, which was administered until July 2012. In November 2011 - due
to rising CEA and liver progression - she underwent hepatic trans-catheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) with doxorubicin. In July 2012,
weekly Paclitaxel-Carboplatin therapy 7 was added to Bevacizumab while discontinuing Tamoxifen, due to multi-organ progression. In November
2012, following various episodes of sinus tachycardia, bevacizumab was temporary discontinued, to prevent cardiac adverse events, which were
reported by Aghajanian et al..4 Weekly Taxol-Carboplatin schedule was also stopped in January 2013, due to rising CEA titer. In February
2013 a lung CT scan showed progression of known pulmonary and mediastinic lesions and the patient was symptomatic (cough). Gemcitabine-
Carboplatin (cumulative dose: Gemcitabine 5800 mg/m2 - JM8 100 mg/m2) was given until March 2013 (2 cycles) when a brain MRI showed 2
metastatic lesions of the frontal lobe, both of them <2 cm. Bevacizumab was given in combination with steroids as salvage therapy for brain
metastasis and the patient experienced worsening of blood sugar levels. At that time (March 2013) performance status of the patient was
poor, coping with epilepsy episodes and dyspnea (3 ECOG). Moreover, CEA levels sharply increased, compared to previous measurements (Fig.
1). To control glycemia, it was initially employed insulin, replaced since March 2013 by metformin, (850 mg twice a day), along with 3
cycles of bevacizumab (7.5 mg/Kg - 15 mg/kg). While receiving bevacizumab and metformin with no other drugs that could affect cancer
progression we observed a full recovery of the Performance Status (1 ECOG). CT scans performed at the end of this window of clinical
improvement showed reduced radiologic density of the lung and mediastinic lesions, as well as of the hepatic metastasis, compared with
previous scans (Fig. 2). The volume of the lung and hepatic metastasis, however, was not reduced and new secondary lesions appeared in the
liver; moreover, a moderate increase in biomarkers of liver injury (including AST, ALT, ALP and γGT) was measured, whereas renal function
was normal. Peri-lesional brain metastases edema was reduced (not shown). Serum CEA slightly increased, compared to pre-treatment values
(Fig. 1). The patient did exceptionally well for 2 months. At the end of May 2013, however, the patient began complaining abdominal
discomfort (a known side effect of biguanides) and metformin was partially (850 × 1) replaced by insulin therapy, whereas bevacizumab was
continued. In June 2013 the patient's conditions worsened, due to epileptic seizures and rising hepatocellular injury markers. At the end of
June, she was admitted to hospital with jaundice. Abdomen US showed massive metastatic infiltration of the liver and eventually the patient
died after a short time. Figure 1.Timeline of drug administrations and CEA levels. Top panel represents the different drug combinations -
including both chemotherapy, bevacizumab and metformin - received by the patient in 2012–2013. Bottom panel shows serum CEA levels in the
same time window. Figure 2.Timeline of morphologic changes in lung and liver metastasis by CT. Representative CT scans of lung (top panels)
and liver metastasis (bottom panels) showing marked attenuation of radiologic density following combined administration of bevacizumab plus
metformin in a patient with metastatic endometrial cancer. Timeline of drug administrations and CEA levels. Top panel represents the
different drug combinations - including both chemotherapy, bevacizumab and metformin - received by the patient in 2012–2013. Bottom panel
shows serum CEA levels in the same time window. Timeline of morphologic changes in lung and liver metastasis by CT. Representative CT scans
of lung (top panels) and liver metastasis (bottom panels) showing marked attenuation of radiologic density following combined administration
of bevacizumab plus metformin in a patient with metastatic endometrial cancer. Recently, preclinical studies disclosed that anti-VEGF
therapy causes marked impairment in ATP and glucose levels into tumors, showing that highly glycolytic tumors become largely necrotic
following VEGF blockade.8 These findings suggested that certain metabolic features of tumor cells could modulate response to anti-angiogenic
therapy. To investigate the metabolic traits of the tumor of this patient, we analyzed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) expression of
monocarboxylate transporter 4 (MCT4), a lactate transporter whose expression is associated with highly glycolytic cells.9 Intriguingly, we
found strong MCT4 expression in the liver metastases (Fig. 3A), suggesting presence of highly glycolytic tumor cells. In keeping with these
findings, strong 18F-FDG uptake was observed in liver metastasis by PET imaging (Fig. 3B). Figure 3.Assessment of metabolic features of
liver metastasis. Panel A shows IHC staining of monocarboxylate transporter 4 (MCT4) and liver kinase B1 (LKB1) in the liver metastasis of
the patient. Magnifications x100 and x200 were used. This sample is strongly positive for the lactate transporter MCT4 and negative for
LKB1. Panel B: PET imaging performed in May 2012 shows strong 18F-FDG uptake in the liver metastasis. Assessment of metabolic features of
liver metastasis. Panel A shows IHC staining of monocarboxylate transporter 4 (MCT4) and liver kinase B1 (LKB1) in the liver metastasis of
the patient. Magnifications x100 and x200 were used. This sample is strongly positive for the lactate transporter MCT4 and negative for
LKB1. Panel B: PET imaging performed in May 2012 shows strong 18F-FDG uptake in the liver metastasis. Metformin, a weak inhibitor of
respiratory complex I, could also cause energy stress in tumors.1 When combined with anti-angiogenic therapy, which appears to increase
tumor hypoxia,10 metformin might further compromise mitochondrial respiration. Although clinical data are lacking, in pre-clinical models of
melanoma metformin has shown some beneficial effects when combined with anti-VEGF therapy.11 Recently, increased tumor responses to
phenformin - a biguanide related to metformin - were reported in non-small cell lung cancer models bearing genetic inactivation of liver
kinase B1 (LKB1), the major upstream kinase activating the energy-sensing kinase AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK).12 Intrigued by this
study and by our previous observation linking defects in LKB1/AMPK pathway to increased tumor necrosis following anti-VEGF therapy,8 we
investigated by IHC expression of LKB1 in liver metastasis from this patient. We found that liver metastasis of this patient lacked LKB1
expression (Fig. 3A). In contrast, LKB1 was readily expressed in control tumors that were stained in parallel (not shown). Loss of LKB1 has
also been shown to promote metabolic reprogramming in tumor cells by an HIF-1α-dependent mechanism,13 suggesting that this might in part
contribute to the highly glycolytic phenotype of liver metastasis. These findings - albeit limited to a single case - are in keeping with
results of pre-clinical studies and suggest that lack of LKB1 and an highly glycolytic phenotype might associate with induction of large
necrotic areas following combined treatment with metformin plus bevacizumab in patients. In this clinical case, simultaneous administration
of metformin and bevacizumab led to increased tumor necrosis at CT scan and improved performance status in a terminally-ill patient. As the
patient received 2 cycles of gemcitabine plus carboplatin shortly before beginning bevacizumab plus metformin, a contribution of
chemotherapy to this transient clinical benefit cannot be ruled out. Moreover, it is unclear whether subsequent tumor progression was due to
reduction of metformin dosage or was the natural course of the cancer. Despite these intrinsic limitations, this clinical observation
suggests that metformin could modulate bevacizumab activity in highly glycolytic tumors and deserves further validation in clinical studies.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal upon request. No potential conflicts of interest were
disclosed. This work was supported by grant IG14295 from AIRC to S.I.
