A premature female Dirofilaria species, subsequently identified as Dirofilaria repens by its morphological features and mitochondrial 12S
ribosomal RNA (12S rRNA) gene sequence, was removed from a subcutaneous nodule of the right temporal region of the head in a Japanese woman
2 years after she noticed swelling of her left calf following an insect sting during a tour to Europe; headache symptoms were noticed a few
months later. The sequences of the mitochondrial 12S rRNA and cytochrome c oxidase subunit I genes from the organism were almost identical
to those of sequences AM779772 (100% homology, 337/337) and AM749233 (99.8% homology, 536/537) of D. repens isolated from humans in Italy.
However, the phylogenetic position of the 18S rRNA-internal transcribed spacer 1-5.8S rRNA region was in the same cluster as that of
sequence JX290195 of Dirofilaria sp. “hongkongensis” (96.7% homology, 348/360), which was recently reported from Hong Kong as a novel
Dirofilaria species. Information on regional genetic variation in D. repens isolated from animals and humans remains scarce. We report the
detailed genetic features of this filaria as a reference isolate from a specific endemic area, to enrich the genetic database of D. repens.
Une femelle immature de Dirofilaria, par la suite identifiée comme Dirofilaria repens par ses caractéristiques morphologiques et la séquence
du gène de son ARN ribosomique mitochondrial 12S (ARNr 12S), a été retirée d’un nodule sous-cutané de la région temporale droite de la tête
d’une femme japonaise, deux ans après qu’elle ait remarqué un gonflement de son mollet gauche suite à une piqûre d’insecte lors d’un voyage
d’agrément en Europe. Des symptômes de maux de tête ont été remarqués quelques mois plus tard. Les séquences des gènes de l’ARNr
mitochondrial 12S et de la sous-unité I de la cytochrome c oxydase de l’organisme étaient presque identiques à celles des séquences AM779772
(100 % d’homologie, 337/337) et AM749233 (99,8 % d’homologie, 536/537) de D. repens, isolées chez l’homme en Italie. Cependant, la position
phylogénétique de la région intercalaire 1-5.8S de l’ARNr 18S était dans le même groupe que celui de la séquence JX290195 de Dirofilaria sp.
“hongkongensis” (96.7 % d’homologie, 348/360), qui a été récemment rapporté à Hong Kong comme une nouvelle espèce de Dirofilaria. Les
informations sur la variation génétique régionale de D. repens isolés chez les animaux et les humains restent rares. Nous rapportons les
caractéristiques génétiques détaillées de cette filaire comme isolat de référence d’une zone endémique spécifique, pour enrichir la base de
données génétique de D. repens. Dirofilaria repens Railliet & Henry, 1911 infects dogs, cats, and other carnivores in the Old World.
However, in Japan, D. repens is an uncommon parasite (no cases of infection with D. repens in domestic dogs have been reported as of 2014),
and in the majority of animal and human dirofilariasis cases, Dirofilaria immitis was identified as the etiological agent. However, although
the sources of infection are not clear, two human cases caused by domestic infection of D. repens have been reported in Japan [11, 12]. Here
we report a suspected case of imported dirofilariasis in a Japanese woman, caused by D. repens from Europe. Dirofilariasis caused by D.
repens is highly prevalent in the Mediterranean region of Southern Europe (e.g., Spain, the south of France, and Italy) . In Italy, 298
human cases have been reported, and in Bulgaria, there have been an increasing number of people infected by D. repens in recent years .
Moreover, mosquitoes that were positive for D. repens were found in northern Germany in 2011 and 2012 . However, information on the regional
genetic variation of D. repens is still scarce. In addition, as a novel Dirofilaria species, Dirofilaria sp. “hongkongensis” has been
reported from Hong Kong , based on the sequence homology of the 18S-internal transcribed spacer 1 (ITS1)-5.8S rRNA region, a reference for
the differentiation of filarial species . Creation of a complete genetic database of every Dirofilaria species, including D. repens, from
specific endemic areas is essential for the correct differentiation of Dirofilaria species, and enrichment of this database will be valuable
to facilitate the diagnosis, proper treatment, and prevention of vector-borne diseases such as dirofilariasis following a trip abroad. In
the present study, we analyzed the features of samples from Dirofilaria species (a fresh female Dirofilaria specimen in the present case,
and the present female and male D. immitis isolates preserved in 70% ethanol). Thus, we report the detailed genetic information of the 12S
rRNA, COI, and 18S rRNA genes and sequences of the ITS1 region of these two species to enrich the genetic database of Dirofilaria. The live,
premature adult female Dirofilaria isolate, subsequently identified as D. repens by its morphological features and mitochondrial 12S rRNA
gene sequence, was removed from a subcutaneous nodule on the right temporal region of the head in a Japanese woman (approximately 40 years
of age) 2 years following the appearance of swelling of her left calf and headache symptoms a few months after returning from a tour of
European countries (“Romantische Straße” of Germany, Belgium, The Netherlands, and Sardinia island in Italy) for 16 days in August, 2012.
The swelling appeared shortly after an insect sting on Sardinia island. The large central portion of the present Dirofilaria isolate was
fixed with 70% ethanol and prepared for paraffin embedding. The female and male adults of D. immitis from a Japanese dog were preserved in
70% ethanol and kindly provided by the Tokyo Metropolitan Animal Care and Consultation Center. The cross-sections were processed for
paraffin embedding by using a graded series of ethanol, xylene, and paraffin according to the conventional method. Small pieces (5–6 mm in
length) were cut from 70% ethanol-fixed specimens and placed upright by positioning them between slices of the thigh muscles of a frog
specimen preserved in 70% ethanol. The cut portions from the central part of adult females of the Dirofilaria isolate and the D. immitis
isolate preserved in 70% ethanol were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde/phosphate buffer, pH 7.2, for 1 h. The specimens were immersed in
t-butyl alcohol after dehydration in a graded series of ethanol (50–100%), attached on the specimen stub with double-sided adhesive carbon
tape, and frozen for 40 s in liquid nitrogen. The frozen samples were immediately mounted on the specimen stage of the SEM (JSM-5600LV; JEOL
Ltd.; Akishima, Tokyo, Japan) and slowly sublimated for 30 min. The freeze-dried samples were coated with Pt-Pd by using an ion sputter, and
the samples were then remounted on the specimen stage of the SEM and observed at an accelerating voltage of 4 kV. The DNA was extracted
using a QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherlands) from approximately 50 mg of the Dirofilaria isolate and of each of the D.
immitis specimens. PCR amplification of each DNA template was performed using primer sets targeting the 12S rRNA (Diro12S-F/Diro12S-R primer
set based on GQ292761), 18S rRNA (Diro18S-F1/Diro18S-R1 and Diro18S-F2/Diro18S-R2 primer sets based on AF036638), and COI (Diro-cox1-F/Diro-
cox1-R primer set based on AF271614 and NC_005305) genes, and the ITS1 (Diro18S-F3/Diro5.8S-R1 primer set based on AF217800) region in the
genus Dirofilaria (Table 1). PCR was performed in a reaction mixture (50 μL) containing 2 μL of DNA template, 1.0 U ExTaq DNA polymerase
(Takara Bio Inc.; Shiga, Japan), 0.4 μM of each primer, and 0.25 mM of deoxynucleotide triphosphates. The following cycling parameters were
used for all PCR amplifications: (1) Taq activation at 94 °C for 5 min; (2) 35 cycles of denaturation at 94 °C for 30 s, annealing at 60 °C
(18S rRNA, ITS1, and 12S rRNA) or 54 °C (COI) for 30 s, and extension at 72 °C for 1 min; and (3) final extension at 72 °C for 5 min. The
amplified ITS1 fragment was cloned using the Mighty TA-cloning Kit (Takara Bio Inc.; Shiga, Japan). The PCR products were sequenced using
the ABI Prism BigDye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit and an ABI PRISM 3500 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems Japan
Ltd.; Tokyo, Japan).Table 1.Oligonucleotide primers used for PCR assays in the present study.Primer namePrimer sequence
(5′–3′)PositionAccession no.Diro12S-F (forward)CATTTTAATTTTTAACTCTATTT22–44 GQ292761 Diro12S-R (reverse)GATGGTTTGTACCACTTTAT483–502 GQ292761
Diro18S-F (forward)CCATGCATGTCTAAGTTCAA2–21 AF036638 Diro18S-R (reverse)TCGCTACGGTCCAAGAATTT872–891 AF036638 Diro18S-F2
(forward)CTGAATACTCGTGCATGGAA755–744 AF036638 Diro18S-R2 (reverse)TTACGACTTTTGCCCGGTT1706–1724 AF036638 Diro18S-F3
(forward)AATTCCTAGTAAGTGTGAGTCATC1533–1556 AF036638 Diro5.8S-R (reverse)TAGCTGCGTTCTTCATCGAT540–559 AF217800 Diro-cox1-F
(forward)GCTTTGTCTTTTTGGTTTACTTTT1–24 AF271614 Diro-cox1-R (reverse)TCAAACCTCCAATAGTAAAAAGAA1067–1090 NC_005305 Oligonucleotide primers used
for PCR assays in the present study. Multiple alignments and phylogenetic analyses of the obtained sequences of the 12S rRNA and COI genes
and the ITS1 region of the two Dirofilaria species were performed using Clustal W and the maximum likelihood (ML) (PHYML version 2.4.5
software ) and Bayesian (MrBayes version 3.1.2) methods . The ML method and a general time-reversible (GTR) model were used to calculate
genetic distances. Statistical support was evaluated using bootstrapping of 1000 replicates for the ML method. In the Bayesian analysis, we
ran four simultaneous chains (nchain = 4) for 1,000,000 generations with an initial burn-in of 1250, at which point the likelihood values
had stabilized. The GTR model with a proportion of invariant bases and four categories of among-site rate variation were used, and trees
were sampled every 100 generations. The ML tree and Bayesian tree data files were visualized using MEGA version 4.0.2 . The GenBank
accession numbers and strain names of the reference Dirofilaria species used in these phylogenetic analyses are shown in Figure 2. New
sequences were deposited in GenBank (accession numbers AB973225–AB973231). The premature adult Dirofilaria female isolated in this case
(119 mm in length and approximately 460 μm in diameter) had been continually moving in saline for several hours after surgical removal from
the patient. The surface of the Dirofilaria isolate had a pattern indented by clear external longitudinal ridges (Figs. 1C–1E), similar to
that of premature and mature D. repens removed from human patients [5, 7, 9, 16] (Table 2). In contrast, the adult female of D. immitis
(289 mm in length and approximately 1020 μm in diameter) did not show a clearly defined ridged body pattern (Figs. 1H–1J). The pattern of
ridges of the Dirofilaria species isolated from the present case differed from the crested longitudinal ridges (~5-μm interval) of
Dirofilaria ursi from a human patient . The measured values of the external longitudinal ridges of the Dirofilaria species in the present
case were 3–4 μm in height, and they were spaced at 15–17 μm intervals and numbered 118–122. These values are generally consistent with
values reported for adult female D. repens removed from three human patients (Table 2), and their morphologies differ from those of D.
immitis , Dirofilaria tenuis , and D. ursi [2, 27, 28]. The curved line on the top of the head of the present Dirofilaria species showed a
more smoothed, obtuse angle accompanied by a continuous thick cuticular layer (Fig. 1A) than that of the D. immitis female (Fig. 1F).
Conversely, the curved line of the caudal end of this Dirofilaria species showed a more acute angle (Fig. 1B) than that of the D. immitis
specimen (Fig. 1G). The thickness of the cuticle layer of the Dirofilaria species (Fig. 1C: 27–36 μm) was greater than that of the D.
immitis specimen (Fig. 1H: 11–22 μm). The number of somatic muscles per quadrant was 15 (Table 2).Figure 1.Morphological images of female
adults of the Dirofilaria species isolated from the present case (left column, A–E) and Dirofilaria immitis (right column, F–J). A, F:
direct images of the cephalic parts under an optical microscope. B, G: direct images of the caudal parts under an optical microscope. C, H:
cross-sectional tissue sections (hematoxylin and eosin stain). D, I: low-magnification images of the body surfaces under a scanning electron
microscope (SEM). E, J: high-magnification images of the body surfaces under SEM. Scales bars: A, B, C, F, G, 100 μm; H, 200 μm. CL,
Cuticular Layer; ELR, External Longitudinal Ridge; I, Intestine; ML, Muscular Layer; U, Uterus. Table 2.Morphological aspects of female
Dirofilaria repens in infected humans.ReferencesPresent study Gardiner et al. (1978) Gutierrez et al. (1995) Otranto et al. (2011) Elsayad
et al. (2012) Length (mm)119––117120 and 110Breadth (mm)0.460.550.22–0.66017–0.530.34 and 0.29Number of somatic muscles per
quadrant1515–––Thickness of cuticular layer (μm)27–3616–25––16–48External longitudinal ridge Height (μm)3–43–4––4 Interval
(μm)15–1715–20127–1213 Number118–122–95–105 –– Morphological images of female adults of the Dirofilaria species isolated from the present
case (left column, A–E) and Dirofilaria immitis (right column, F–J). A, F: direct images of the cephalic parts under an optical microscope.
B, G: direct images of the caudal parts under an optical microscope. C, H: cross-sectional tissue sections (hematoxylin and eosin stain). D,
I: low-magnification images of the body surfaces under a scanning electron microscope (SEM). E, J: high-magnification images of the body
surfaces under SEM. Scales bars: A, B, C, F, G, 100 μm; H, 200 μm. CL, Cuticular Layer; ELR, External Longitudinal Ridge; I, Intestine; ML,
Muscular Layer; U, Uterus. Morphological aspects of female Dirofilaria repens in infected humans. The 337 bp sequence of the 12S rRNA gene
of the present Dirofilaria species (AB973228) was 100% identical with that of D. repens (AM779772) isolated from a human in Italy, and was
98.5% similar (5 bp differences in 338 bp) to that of D. repens (AB547466) isolated from a human in Vietnam. The sequence of the COI gene of
the present Dirofilaria species (AB973225) was 99.8% identical (1 bp difference in 537 bp) to that of strain AM749233 of D. repens isolated
from a human in Italy (Table 3). The phylogenetic positions of the 12S rRNA and COI genes of the Dirofilaria species were also classified
into the same cluster as AM779772 and AM749233 of D. repens (Figs. 2A and 2B).Figure 2.Phylogenetic relationships by maximum likelihood (ML)
analysis among sequences of mitochondrial 12S ribosomal RNA (A), mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (B) genes, and the internal
transcribed spacer 1-5.8S ribosomal RNA region (C). The ML tree was derived from a general time-reversible model using a discrete gamma
distribution (+G) with five rate categories and invariant sites (+I). Significant bootstrap support for the ML analysis with 1000 replicates
and Bayesian analysis (BI) are shown above the nodes in the order ML/BI. An asterisk indicates <50% support for a node. The scale bar
represents the genetic distance in single nucleotide substitutions. GenBank accession numbers are given within parentheses. Table
3.Similarities (%) in the COI gene sequences among Dirofilaria repens and Dirofilaria immitis. Dirofilaria repens in this study (AB973225)
Dirofilaria repens (AJ271614) Dirofilaria repens (AM749231) Dirofilaria sp. “hongkongensis” (JX187591) Dirofilaria immitis in this study
(AB973227) Dirofilaria repens (AB973225)–99.3% (566/570)99.8% (536/537)95.3% (306/321)89.9% (425/473) Dirofilaria repens (AJ271614)99.3%
(566/570)–99.8% (560/561)96.0% (308/321)90.3% (427/473) Dirofilaria repens (AM749231)99.8% (536/537)99.8% (560/561)–95.6% (307/321)90.1%
(426/473) Dirofilaria sp. “hongkongensis” (JX187591)95.3% (306/321)96.0% (308/321)95.6% (307/321)–89.1% (286/321) Dirofilaria immitis
(AB973227)89.9% (425/473)90.1% (426/473)90.1% (426/473)89.1% (286/321)–Parentheses under scientific name: GenBank accession numbers.
Phylogenetic relationships by maximum likelihood (ML) analysis among sequences of mitochondrial 12S ribosomal RNA (A), mitochondrial
cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (B) genes, and the internal transcribed spacer 1-5.8S ribosomal RNA region (C). The ML tree was derived from
a general time-reversible model using a discrete gamma distribution (+G) with five rate categories and invariant sites (+I). Significant
bootstrap support for the ML analysis with 1000 replicates and Bayesian analysis (BI) are shown above the nodes in the order ML/BI. An
asterisk indicates <50% support for a node. The scale bar represents the genetic distance in single nucleotide substitutions. GenBank
accession numbers are given within parentheses. Similarities (%) in the COI gene sequences among Dirofilaria repens and Dirofilaria immitis.
Parentheses under scientific name: GenBank accession numbers. However, the sequence of the ITS1 region of the present Dirofilaria species
was classified into the same cluster with strains JX290195 of Dirofilaria sp. “hongkongensis” (96.7% homology (348/360) identity with
JX290195 from a human). In addition, the sequences (AB973230 and AB973231) of the female and male adults of D. immitis, respectively,
isolated from a dog and analyzed in this study were classified near the cluster of D. repens (AY621480, AY621481, and AY621479) rather than
that of D. immitis (AF217800 and EU087700) (Fig. 2C). Since no information on 18S rRNA gene sequences of D. repens are registered in
GenBank, the sequence of the 18S rRNA gene of the present Dirofilaria species (AB973229) was compared with that of the adult female D.
immitis isolate (AB973230) from a dog and with a reference isolate (AF182647) of D. immitis from a dog. The variation of the sequence
between the present Dirofilaria species (AB973229) and the present D. immitis (AB973230) or a reference D. immitis (AF182647) was 96.6%
similar (60 bp differences in 1760 bp) and 96.4% similar (48 bp differences in 1332 bp), respectively. The sampled Dirofilaria species was
considered to be D. repens based on its morphological features and sequence identities of mitochondrial 12S rRNA and COI genes, although the
sequence of the ITS1 region was different from those of D. repens reference strains reported in GenBank (Fig. 2C), as observed by
phylogenetic analysis. The endemic area of D. repens is widespread in the Old World (Eurasia and sub-Saharan Africa), and regional genetic
diversity of D. repens has been described for the 12S rRNA [6, 20] gene, the COI gene, and the ITS1 region [13, 25] and reported in GenBank.
However, detailed information of the regional genetic variation in the prevalence of D. repens is still unclear owing to various factors –
isolates can only be obtained surgically; samples are fixed with formalin; detailed genetic analysis is costly; etc. In Japan, the total
number of cases of dirofilariasis in humans was on the rise up to 2002, which was similar to the trend observed in Bulgaria , and pulmonary
and extra-pulmonary dirofilariasis has accounted for 254 and 26 cases, respectively, since 1964 . D. immitis was reported to be the
causative agent in almost all these cases and was mostly diagnosed morphologically. However, according to a serological epidemiological
study conducted in districts in Tokyo, the recent prevalence of D. immitis among shelter dogs has decreased in recent years . Up until 2014,
only three cases of domestic dirofilariasis caused by D. repens have been reported in Japan, including the present case, and all D. repens
parasites have been isolated from humans. The present case was strongly suspected to be one of imported dirofilariasis caused by D. repens
because the sequence of the 12S rRNA gene of the present Dirofilaria species (AB973228) was 100% homologous to that of D. repens (AM779772)
isolated from a human in Italy and because the patient was stung by an insect in Sardinia island, Italy, which is an endemic area of human
dirofilariasis caused by D. repens . Misidentification of Dirofilaria species is likely among cases diagnosed only by morphology owing to
the difficulties in the identification in the immature stage of Dirofilaria parasites and because of poor sampling conditions, as described
in a review on Dirofilaria species isolates that were reported as D. immitis . In Japan, some cases of subcutaneous human dirofilariasis
that are similar to that caused by D. repens have been diagnosed as D. immitis infections based on morphological or serological analysis
without molecular identification. In the present study, identification of Dirofilaria species through both morphological and genetic
analyses proved to be extremely helpful. In our study, a sequence of the ITS1 region of the sampled Dirofilaria species was classified into
the same cluster as isolates of Dirofilaria sp. “hongkongensis”, whereas those of the present D. immitis specimens were classified close to
the cluster containing D. repens isolates. These results suggest the existence of polymorphic variation in the ITS1 sequence in Dirofilaria
species. However, the genetic database of Dirofilaria species is not yet sufficient to fully evaluate this possibility; therefore, further
enrichment of a detailed species-specific genetic database will be required. The authors thank Hiroshi Mizutani, V.M.D. of Tokyo
Metropolitan Animal Care and Consultation Center for supplying the reference isolates of the adult parasites of female and male D. immitis
parasites. Cite this article as: Suzuki J, Kobayashi S, Okata U, Matsuzaki H, Mori M, Chen KR & Iwata S: Molecular analysis of Dirofilaria
repens removed from a subcutaneous nodule in a Japanese woman after a tour to Europe. Parasite, 2015, 22, 2.
