Lumbar synovial cysts are an uncommon cause of back pain and radiculopathy, usually manifesting with gradual onset of symptoms, secondary to
involvement of the spinal canal. Rarely, intracyst hemorrhage occurs, and may acutely present as radicular - or even spinal cord -
compression syndrome. Synovial cysts are generally associated with degenerative facets, although the pathogenesis has not been entirely
established. We report a case of bleeding complication in a synovial cyst at L2-L3, adjacent to the right interfacet joint, causing acute
pain and radiculopathy in a patient on anticoagulation therapy who required surgical resection. Lumbar cysts are generally related to
degenerative changes in the facet joint , although their pathogenesis is still controversial.(1-8) They may be a cause of back pain and
radiculopathy. Although some cases in cervical and thoracic spine have been reported, most cysts are found in the lumbar region, mainly at
L4-L5, given the movement of the lumbar spine is greater and more susceptible to instability.(7,8) The hemorrhagic variant is rare. Few
cases of acute intracyst hemorrhage were described in the literature.(1,3-6) For example, a total of 254 cases of spinal synovial cysts were
reported in the English language literature, but only eight were associated with bleeding.(9) Intracyst hemorrhage is likely to lead to
pronounced compression of nerve roots, explaining the acute symptoms in patients.(4,9) We report a case in which hemorrhage of a synovial
cyst at L2-L3, adjacent to the right interfacet joint, was responsible for acute back pain and radiculopathy in a patient on anticoagulant
treatment, and who required surgical resection. A 67-year-old male patient with mild and chronic back pain, presented with worsening of
pain, with initial irradiation to the right lower limb for 2 weeks, without trauma. The patient had a celiac trunk stent placed 4 years
earlier due to an aneurysm, and was on oral anticoagulation (acetylsalicylic acid 81mg every 2 days). The physical examination revealed
uncomfortable side movements and rotational movements of the lumbar spine; there was slight hypoesthesia on the dorsal face of both feet and
of the first three toes. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine revealed a large volume intracanal synovial cyst at L2-L3
with hemorrhagic content, causing stenosis of the vertebral canal and compression of the dural sac and of the lateral recess of the right
root at L3, in addition to diffuse degenerative spondyloarthropathy (Figure 1). The cyst was not visible on the MRI six months earlier.
Surgical intervention was necessary, and a L2-L3-L4 laminectomy and cyst exeresis were performed (Figure 2). The histological study
confirmed the diagnosis of synovial cyst with hemorrhage (Figure 3). At the one-month post-operative control, the patient was asymptomatic.
Figure 1Magnetic resonance imaging showing heterogeneous intraspinal and extradural mass, contiguous to the interapophyseal joint at L2-L3,
on the right, with radicular and dural compression, with no signs of fat. Parietal enhancement after contrast Figure 2Intraoperative aspect
of extradural hemorrhagic cyst at L2-L3, compressing the dura mater, exposed by laminectomy Figure 3Microscopic view with cyst structure of
fibrous walls, lined by flat synovial epithelium without atypia, and with organizing hemorrhagic areas. No signs of malignancy Synovial and
ganglion cysts are common lesions that typically occur on limbs. On the vertebral spine, they are known as juxtafacet cysts and are
considered rare.(8) They can be defined as a mass of extradural soft tissue along the medial edge of a degenerated facet joint.(4) Synovial
cysts are filled with clear or yellowish fluid, have an epithelial lining similar to the synovia, and a demonstrable communication with the
joint capsule. If the synovial lining and the joint communication are not evident, the lesion is classified as a ganglion cyst. These cysts
are usually associated with degenerative disease of the spine, but their etiology may be trauma, inflammatory or congenital.(1,2,7,8)
Clinical presentation of any juxtafacet cyst depends on the size and location, and on the relation with adjacent structures.(3) There are
asymptomatic synovial cysts discovered by chance, as there are also symptomatic ones that cause pain and radiculopathy, generally with
chronic development, cauda equina syndrome or, less frequently compressive spinal cord syndrome.(3,6,7) Acute onset of neurological deficits
and/or symptoms of pain after hemorrhage in lumbar juxtafacet cysts have been reported.(1,3-6) Exacerbation of pain may be caused by acute
hemorrhage inside the cyst, although it has not been clearly determined if the increased pain is due to expansion of a cyst, leading to
radicular compression, or due to inflammation resulting from hemorrhage.(7,8) Ramieri et al.(1) mentioned that the expansion of the cyst,
after hemorrhage is the cause of symptoms, because this occurs even in rare cases of fast growth of the cyst without bleeding. But, in fact,
the cause of the acute onset of symptoms in the sudden intracyst hemorrhage is still under debate.(1) Some factors have been appointed as
predisposing to hemorrhage, such as anticoagulation treatment, trauma, disc herniation, vascular anomaly or still neoangiogenesis on the
walls of the cyst, secondary to inflammation.(1,3-6) The high vascularization of the cyst in the presence of micro trauma or spinal
instability alone are suggested to be sufficient to originate hemorrhage.(4) There have been reports of intracyst bleeding events with no
associated trauma or coagulopathy, suggesting that studies should be stimulated, in order to discover new risk factors involved.(1,3-5) In
our case, it was not possible to definitively correlate the presence of the hemorrhagic cyst with anticoagulation treatment, because the
patient was already on acetylsalicylic acid much before the acute onset, and there are no data that show failure in the patient´s
coagulation profile nor in platelet function. Imaging studies of synovial cysts are useful and should be performed for the differential
diagnosis with disc herniation, metastases, meningioma, schwannoma, neurofibromas with cystic degeneration, arachnoid, and perineural,
dermoid cysts.(6-8) On T1-weighted MRI sequences, the cysts present as lesions with a low to intermediate signal. At T2, they present high
signal content, generally limited by a capsule, which appears as a hypointense line. It should be underscored, however, that, according to
the composition of cysts, the intensity of the signal may be heterogeneous, due to the presence of hemorrhage, calcification and gas (vacuum
phenomenon). In cysts in which hemorrhage occurs, in the sub-acute phase, metahemoglobin leads to a high signal on all sequences, when
compared to non-hemorrhagic cysts.(7) After an intravenous injection of paramagnetic contrast, enhancement of the cyst wall and of its
content and, sometimes, enhancement of the adjacent inter-facet joint have been observed. Treatment of synovial cysts involves both
conservative measures, and surgical intervention. The natural history of synovial cysts of the spine is unknown.(4) Reduction and/or
spontaneous resolution of cysts may occur with rest and immobilization. Non-hemorrhagic synovial cysts are occasionally treated by
percutaneous suction with successful resolution of symptoms. Injection of corticoid in the facet joint may be an option. Percutaneous
interventions, including cyst suction, injection and/or rupture, are the most non-surgical treatments studied in the literature. Results
vary with success rates between 20 to 75% and, in general, approximately 50% of patients reach significant relief until surgical
treatment.(10) Surgical excision with decompression is the definite treatment for lumbar hemorrhagic synovial cysts.(4) Certain cases with
acute symptoms require emergency surgery. Even when such surgery is performed fast, some patients still remain with a neurological
deficit.(3) However, in general, the immediate diagnosis and appropriate surgical approach may attain satisfactory results.(4,6) Lyons et
al.(2) reported the results of 147 patients treated surgically for symptomatic lumbar synovial cysts, and the results at 6 or more months
after surgery were from good to excellent in 91%, with most improving motor and sensory functions. Lumbar synovial cysts are a rare, but
possible cause, of acute radicular compression, mainly, when they present hemorrhagic complication. Magnetic resonance imaging is the
imaging test of choice to diagnose them and exclude other causes. Although percutaneous intervention may be tried, the results vary much.
The immediate acknowledgement and appropriate surgical treatment provide, in general, excellent results. Cistos sinoviais da coluna lombar
são uma causa incomum de dor na coluna e radiculopatia, geralmente com evolução gradual dos sintomas, que são secundários ao comprometimento
do canal vertebral. Raramente, há hemorragia intracística, que pode se manifestar de forma aguda com síndrome compressiva radicular ou mesmo
medular. Habitualmente, os cistos sinoviais associam-se a doença degenerativa facetária, embora a patogênese não esteja completamente
estabelecida. Relatamos aqui um caso em que uma complicação hemorrágica em um cisto sinovial no nível L2-L3, adjacente à interfacetária
direita, causou dor lombar e radiculopatia em um paciente em terapia anticoagulante, sendo necessária a ressecção cirúrgica. Cistos na
coluna vertebral geralmente estão relacionados a alterações degenerativas da faceta articular, embora sua patogênese ainda seja
discutível.(1-8) Podem ser uma causa de dor lombar e radiculopatia. Embora tenham sido relatados na coluna cervical e torácica, a maioria
deles é encontrada na lombar, principalmente em L4-L5, pois a movimentação da coluna lombar é maior e mais suscetível à instabilidade.(7,8)
A variante hemorrágica é uma ocorrência rara. Poucos casos de hemorragia aguda intracística têm sido descritos na literatura.(1,3-6) Por
exemplo, um total de 254 casos de cistos sinoviais da coluna vertebral foram relatados na literatura inglesa, mas apenas oito foram
associados com hemorragia.(9) É provável que o sangramento intracístico conduza à compressão acentuada das raízes dos nervos, justificando a
sintomatologia aguda dos pacientes.(4,9) Relatamos um caso no qual a hemorragia em um cisto sinovial no nível L2-L3, adjacente à articulação
interfacetária direita, foi responsável pelo quadro agudo de lombalgia e radiculopatia num paciente em terapia anticoagulante, sendo
necessária a ressecção cirúrgica. Paciente masculino com 67 anos, com lombalgia leve e crônica, apresentou acentuação do quadro álgico, com
início de irradiação para membro inferior direito há 2 semanas, sem trauma. Portador de stent no tronco celíaco por aneurisma há 4 anos, em
uso de anticoagulação oral (ácido acetilsalicílico 81mg a cada 2 dias). Ao exame físico, observou-se desconforto aos movimentos de
lateralização e de rotação da coluna lombar; havia discreta hipoestesia na face dorsal de ambos os pés e dos três primeiros dedos.
Ressonância magnética (RM) da coluna lombar evidenciou volumoso cisto sinovial intracanal no nível de L2-L3 com conteúdo hemorrágico,
determinando estenose do canal vertebral e compressão do saco dural e da raiz direita de L3 no recesso lateral, além de espondiloartropatia
degenerativa difusa (Figura 1). Esse cisto não foi visualizado em RM de seis meses atrás. A conduta cirúrgica foi necessária, sendo
realizada laminectomia L2-L3-L4 com exérese do cisto (Figura 2). Estudo histopatológico confirmou tratar-se de cisto sinovial com hemorragia
(Figura 3). Já no controle pós-operatório de um mês, o paciente encontrava-se assintomático. Figura 1Ressonância magnética mostrando massa
heterogênea intraespinhal e extradural, contígua à articulação interapofisária de L2-L3 à direita, com compressão radicular e dural, sem
sinais de gordura. Realce parietal após contraste Figura 2Aspecto intraoperatório de cisto hemorrágico extradural em L2-L3, comprimindo a
dura-máter, exposta por laminectomia Figura 3À microscopia, estrutura cística de paredes fibrosas, revestidas por epitélio sinovial plano
sem atipias com áreas hemorrágicas em organização. Sem sinais de malignidade Cistos sinoviais e ganglionares são lesões comuns que ocorrem
tipicamente nas extremidades. Na coluna vertebral, são conhecidos como justafacetários e considerados raros.(8) Podem ser definidos como uma
massa de tecido mole em localização extradural ao longo da borda medial de uma faceta articular degenerada.(4) Cistos sinoviais são
preenchidos com líquido claro ou xantocrômico, têm um revestimento epitelial semelhante à sinóvia e uma comunicação demonstrável com a
cápsula articular. Caso o revestimento sinovial e a comunicação articular não sejam evidentes, o cisto é classificado como ganglionar. Esses
cistos são habitualmente associados à doença degenerativa da coluna, mas sua etiologia pode ser traumática, inflamatória ou
congênita.(1,2,7,8) A apresentação clínica de qualquer cisto justafacetário depende do tamanho, da localização e da relação com estruturas
adjacentes.(3) Existem cistos sinoviais assintomáticos descobertos incidentalmente, como também sintomáticos, causadores de dor e
radiculopatia, geralmente com evolução crônica, síndrome da cauda equina ou, menos frequentemente, síndrome compressiva da medula
espinhal.(3,6,7) Início agudo de défice neurológicos e/ou sintomas dolorosos após hemorragia em cistos justafacetários lombares têm sido
reportados.(1,3-6) A exacerbação da dor pode ser causada por hemorragia aguda no interior do cisto, não se determinando claramente se esse
aumento da dor é devido à expansão do cisto, levando à compressão radicular, ou à inflamação decorrente da hemorragia.(7,8) Ramieri et
al.(1) mencionaram que a expansão do cisto, após a hemorragia, é a causa dos sintomas, porque isso ocorre mesmo em casos raros de rápido
crescimento do cisto sem hemorragia. Mas, de fato, a causa do início agudo de sintomas em hemorragia súbita intracística ainda é uma questão
de debate.(1) Alguns fatores têm sido apontados como predisponentes à hemorragia, como terapia de anticoagulação, trauma, hérnia discal,
anomalia vascular ou ainda neoangiogênese nas paredes do cisto, secundária à inflamação.(1,3-6) Sugere-se que a alta vascularização do cisto
na presença de microtraumas ou apenas instabilidade vertebral seriam suficientes para originar uma hemorragia.(4) Há relatos de eventos
hemorrágicos intracísticos sem trauma ou coagulopatia associados, insinuando que estudos devem ser motivados, a fim de aventar novos fatores
de risco implicados.(1,3-5) No nosso caso, não foi possível correlacionar definitivamente a presença do cisto hemorrágico com a terapia de
anticoagulação, pois o paciente já utilizava ácido acetilsalicílico bem antes do quadro agudo, e não há dados que demonstrem descompensação
de seu coagulograma e nem função plaquetária. Os estudos de imagem são úteis no diagnóstico diferencial dos cistos sinoviais, que deve ser
feito com: hérnias discais, metástases, meningiomas, schwannomas, neurofibromas com degeneração cística, cistos de aracnoide, perineurais,
derSmoides.(6-8) Na RM, em sequencias ponderadas em T1, os cistos apresentam-se como lesões com sinal baixo a intermediário. Em T2,
apresentam conteúdo com alto sinal, geralmente delimitado por uma cápsula, que aparece como uma linha hipointensa. Deve-se ressaltar, no
entanto, que, conforme a composição dos cistos, a intensidade de sinal pode ser heterogênea, devido à presença de hemorragia, calcificação e
gás (fenômeno do vácuo). Nos cistos em que ocorre hemorragia, na fase subaguda, a meta-hemoglobina leva a um alto sinal em todas as
sequências, quando comparados a cistos não hemorrágicos.(7) Após a injeção intravenosa do contraste paramagnético, tem sido observado realce
da parede do cisto e de seu conteúdo e, eventualmente, realce da articulação interfacetária adjacente. O tratamento para cistos sinoviais
envolve tanto medidas conservadoras, quanto intervenção cirúrgica. A história natural de cistos sinoviais da coluna é desconhecida.(4) A
redução e/ou resolução espontânea dos cistos pode ocorrer com repouso e imobilização. Cistos sinoviais não hemorrágicos ocasionalmente são
tratados por aspiração percutânea com resolução bem-sucedida dos sintomas. A injeção de corticóide na articulação facetária pode ser uma
opção. Intervenções percutâneas, incluindo aspiração do cisto, injeção e/ou ruptura, são os tratamentos não cirúrgicos mais estudados na
literatura. Seus resultados são variáveis com taxas de sucesso entre 20 a 75% e, em geral, aproximadamente 50% dos pacientes alcançam um
alívio significativo até o tratamento cirúrgico.(10) Excisão cirúrgica com descompressão é o tratamento definitivo para cistos sinoviais
hemorrágicos lombares.(4) Certos casos com sintomas agudos requerem cirurgia de emergência. Mesmo quando tal cirurgia é realizada
rapidamente, alguns pacientes ainda permanecem com déficit neurológico.(3) No entanto, em geral, o diagnóstico imediato e a abordagem
cirúrgica adequada podem produzir bons resultados.(4,6) Lyons et al.(2) relataram os resultados de 147 pacientes tratados cirurgicamente
para cistos sinoviais lombares sintomáticos, e os resultados de 6 meses ou mais após a cirurgia foram de bom a excelente em 91%, com a
maioria melhorando as funções motora e sensorial. Os cistos sinoviais lombares são uma causa rara, mas possível, de compressão radicular
aguda, principalmente, quando apresentam complicação hemorrágica. A ressonância magnética é o exame de imagem de escolha para diagnosticá-
los e excluir outras causas. Embora a intervenção percutânea possa ser tentada, os resultados são bastante variáveis. O reconhecimento
imediato e o tratamento cirúrgico adequado proporcionam, em geral, um excelente resultado.
