Bladder cancer is an important health problem worldwide due to high prevalence rates and costs related to treatment. A reduction in
recurrence rates has been observed since the introduction of adjuvant intravesical immunotherapy with bacillus Calmette-Guerin. There are
mild complications that are easily solved by local measures and orientations. Bladder contracture, a rare and severe local complication, in
some cases leading to disability, is observed primarily in patients in a maintenance program. In this article we reported the case of a male
patient who underwent transurethral resection of the bladder because of a high-grade T1 urothelial carcinoma and developed this complication
during treatment with bacillus Calmette-Guerin. For this reason he was submitted to cystoprostatectomy with orthotopic ileal neobladder
reconstruction. Bladder cancer is an important health problem worldwide due to high prevalence rates and costs related to treatment.(1)
According to the Instituto Nacional de Câncer (INCA), approximately nine thousand cases were expected to occur in Brazil, in 2012. Out of
these cases, 75% to 85% comprise superficial tumors, that is, the disease is confined to the mucosa (Ta-CIS) or submucosa (T1), and these
patients are potential candidates for complementing treatment with chemotherapy or immunotherapy.(1-3) The recurrence rates have dropped
since the adjuvant intravesical immunotherapy with bacillus of Calmette-Guérin (BCG) was introduced.(3) Although the use of BCG is
considered effective, not all individuals benefit from it. Toxicity, diverse complications and no therapeutic response should be considered
when proposing this adjuvant therapy.(2) The main complications are mild and easily solved by local measures and orientations. Bladder
contracture is a rare and severe local complication that leads to disability in some cases, and is observed primarily in patients in a
maintenance program.(4) A 53-year-old male smoker patient presented macroscopic hematuria with no pain for three days, in 2009. He went to
the Emergency Department of the Irmandade da Santa Casa de Misericórdia de São Paulo, was submitted to ultrasound of the urinary tract that
revealed an intravesical mass suggesting neoplasm in the left lateral wall. Transurethral resection (TUR) of the bladder was performed and
he was diagnosed as high-grade T1 urothelial carcinoma. Eight weeks later the patient underwent another TUR but he had no recurrence or new
lesions. Biopsies of the previously resected bed showed cystitis. He started on adjuvant intravesical therapy with BCG after one month and
was treated for three years. According to the protocol of the organization, he was on induction phase for 8 weeks and on maintenance phase
for 3 years (one weekly cycle for 3 weeks, at 3 and 6 months; and then every 6 months). In both phases he received an 80-mg dose in each
session. In the second year of treatment the patient had no recurrences, and only some lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) related to
storage, suck as pollakiuria and urgency, with no leakage. However, he felt adjusted to treatment and with no significant deterioration in
quality of life. In the beginning of the third and last year of therapy, the urinary symptoms worsened and urinary frequency increased to 20
times a day, urgency with disabling incontinence and suprapubic pain with little bladder filling. In this period, it was necessary to
discontinue treatment. Urethrocystography showed a small-capacity bladder, bilateral grade I vesicoureteral reflux and considerable post-
micturition residual urine (Figure 1). The urodynamic study demonstrated very low vesical capacity (40ml) with enhanced sensitivity in this
volume, besides high detrusor pressure (Pdet=78cmH2O), confirming the finding of bladder contracture. Cystoscopy during this period showed
no neoplastic lesions. The patient underwent cystoprostatectomy due to incapacitating symptoms, with orthotopic ileal neobladder
reconstruction and lymphadenectomy. A small bladder, with no other significant features, was observed during surgery. The procedure went
uneventfully. The patient progressed with a urinary fistula in the ileal loop on the 10th postoperative day, which resolved with
conservative measures. He was discharged from hospital with no further events and followed up at the outpatient clinic for distension of the
neobladder, with no complaints (Figure 2). The pathological examination revealed only inflammatory cystitis in the surgical specimen and
absence of neoplasms. Figure 1Urethrocystography. Small capacity bladder, bilateral grade I vesicoureteral reflux and post-micturition
residual urine Figure 2Urethrocystography. Neobladder in late postoperative period BCG is a first line therapy for high-grade Ta/T1
urothelial carcinoma and carcinoma in situ after TUR, particularly as maintenance therapy. It showed to be superior to intravesical
chemotherapy in delaying tumor progression.(1-3) However, it should not be administered immediately after resection; in general, one should
wait for two weeks for local healing in order to avoid absorption and hematogenous dissemination of mycobacteria.(1) Although there is no
consensus about the ideal dose, six to eight instillations, once a week, followed by three maintenance doses every 3 to 6 months, in the
first year, and every six months as from the second year, demonstrated promising results, according to the SWOG protocol, which was used in
the present case.(1) Assuming that maintenance therapy is necessary for optimal efficacy, toxicity becomes more relevant.(2) It is
substantially greater with intensive treatment, but severe secondary effects have been observed after few instillations.(4) Storage symptoms
(dysuria, pollakiuria and hematuria) are commonly associated side effects that occur usually after the third administration; they result
from immune stimulation, with release of lymphokines as an associated inflammatory response.(1) It is recommended to delay new instillations
of BCG after several TUR and initiate anti-tuberculosis antibiotics, since they may be useful in cases of continued inflammation or
infection.(1,4) Bladder contracture is an uncommon complication but severe, and occurs in less than 1% of the patients.(1) A series updated
by Lamm et al. reported bladder contracture in only 5 (0.2%) out of of 2,602 patients evaluated.(5) Nieder et al. identified only two cases
of this complication out of 2,255 in two organizations, leading to a rate of 0.05 to 0.3%. In their study, both cases presented intravesical
therapy complication as early as in the induction phase. One of these patients had evidence of bladder contracture after the fifth dose.
There was probably leakage in the non-healed resection site, which would initiate an extensive perivesical inflammation and a fistula,
resulting in bladder contracture.(6) For this reason, such complication should be suspected in patients with intense micturition symptoms in
any phase and, primarily in the maintenance phase of BCG immunotherapy.(3,4) Some centers currently use prophylactic isoniazid in an attempt
to decrease the incidence of contracture but the results vary.(1,3) The use of associated interferon was also proposed to try to reduce the
BCG dose and intolerance, and some series of few patients presented favorable results. The study conducted by Nieder et al.(6) described the
first case of bladder contracture in a patient on this combined therapy. Conservative treatment can be initially tried with hydrodistension
and use of antimuscarinics.(3) However, surgery should be considered in patients refractory to treatment or with incapacitating symptoms.
Some options, such as bladder augmentation and cystectomy with reconstruction of the ileal conduit, might lead to tumor recurrence and
negative effects on quality of life (QoL), respectively.(6) Cystoprostatectomy with reconstruction of intestinal neobladder plays it role in
improving QoL and being safer as to possible tumor recurrences.(6) Bladder contracture is a rare complication that must be thought of in
patients with severe lower urinary tract symptoms and on Bacillus Calmette-Guérin therapy. When medical therapy is not possible, surgical
approach with cystoprostatectomy and neobladder is the best option, for being a definite treatment and providing improved quality of life. O
câncer de bexiga é um importante problema de saúde mundial, tanto pelas elevadas taxas de prevalência, quanto pelos custos relacionados ao
tratamento. Desde a introdução da imunoterapia intravesical adjuvante com bacilo Calmette-Guérin, vem sendo observada diminuição na taxa de
recorrência. As principais complicações são de pequeno porte e simples resolução a partir de medidas locais e orientações. A bexiga
contraída, uma complicação local rara e grave, mas incapacitante em alguns casos, é observada principalmente em doentes com um programa de
manutenção. Relatamos aqui o caso de um paciente masculino submetido a ressecção transuretral da bexiga por um carcinoma urotelial T1 de
alto grau, que desenvolveu tal complicação durante tratamento com bacilo Calmette-Guérin, sendo portanto submetido à cistoprostatectomia com
realização de neobexiga ortotópica ileal. O câncer de bexiga é um importante problema de saúde mundial, tanto pelas elevadas taxas de
prevalência quanto pelos custos relacionados ao tratamento.(1) Segundo o Instituto Nacional de Câncer (INCA), aproximadamente 9.000 casos
eram esperados para o ano de 2012 no Brasil. Desses casos, 75% a 85% são compostos por tumores superficiais, ou seja, doença confinada à
mucosa (Ta-CIS) ou submucosa (T1), tornando esses pacientes potenciais candidatos para realização de terapia complementar com quimioterapia
ou imunoterapia.(1-3) Desde a introdução da imunoterapia intravesical adjuvante com bacilo de Calmette-Guérin (BCG), foi observada
diminuição na taxa de recorrência.(3) Embora o uso de BCG seja considerado muito eficaz, nem todos os casos têm benefício. Toxicidade,
complicações das mais variadas e não resposta terapêutica devem ser levados em conta quando se propõe a adjuvância.(2) As principais
complicações são de pequeno porte, de resolução simples a partir de medidas locais e orientações. A bexiga contraída, uma complicação local
rara e grave, incapacitante em alguns casos, é observada principalmente em doentes com um programa de manutenção.(4) Paciente do sexo
masculino, 53 anos, tabagista, apresentou hematúria macroscópica indolor, de início há 3 dias, no ano de 2009. Procurou o Pronto-Socorro da
Irmandade da Santa Casa de Misericórdia de São Paulo, sendo submetido à ultrassonografia do aparelho urinário, a qual revelou tumoração
intravesical sugestiva de neoplasia em parede lateral esquerda. Foi realizada ressecção transuretral (RTU) da bexiga com diagnóstico de
carcinoma urotelial T1 de alto grau. Após 8 semanas, foi submetido a nova RTU, dessa vez sem recidiva ou novas lesões. Biópsias do leito
ressecado previamente revelaram cistite. Iniciou terapia adjuvante intravesical com BCG após 1 mês, com duração total de 3 anos. Conforme
protocolo do serviço, realizou fase de indução por 8 semanas e de manutenção por 3 anos (1 ciclo semanal por 3 semanas, em 3 e 6 meses; a
partir daí, a cada 6 meses), ambas com dose de 80mg em cada sessão. No segundo ano de tratamento, apresentava-se sem recidivas, com alguns
sintomas do trato urinário inferior relacionados ao armazenamento, como polaciúria e urgência miccional sem perdas. Apesar disso, estava
adaptado e sem deterioração significativa da qualidade de vida. No início do terceiro e último ano, os sintomas urinários pioraram, dessa
vez com aumento da frequência urinária em torno de 20 vezes ao dia, urgência com perdas incapacitante e dor suprapúbica ao menor enchimento
vesical. Nesse período, foi necessário interromper o tratamento. Uretrocistografia revelou bexiga de pequena capacidade, refluxo
vesicureteral bilateral grau I e resíduo pós-miccional considerável (Figura 1). Estudo urodinâmico evidenciou capacidade vesical muito baixa
(40mL) com sensibilidade muito aumentada nesse volume, além de alta pressão detrusora (Pdet=78cmH2O), confirmando o achado de bexiga
contraída. Cistoscopia desse período não evidenciou lesões neoplásicas. Devido aos sintomas incapacitantes, o paciente foi submetido à
cistoprostatectomia com realização de neobexiga ortotópica ileal e linfadenectomia. No intraoperatório, foi evidenciada bexiga de pequeno
tamanho, sem outras características. Procedimento sem intercorrências. Evoluiu com fístula urinária da alça ileal no 10º pós-operatório,
tendo resolução a partir de medidas conservadoras. Sem outras intercorrências, recebeu alta hospitalar e seguiu em acompanhamento
ambulatorial sem queixas, em programa de distensão da neobexiga (Figura 2). O anatomopatológico revelou apenas cistite inflamatória na peça
cirúrgica e ausência de neoplasia. Figura 1Uretrocistografia. Bexiga de pequena capacidade, refluxo vesicureteral bilateral grau I e resíduo
pós-miccional Figura 2Uretrocistografia. Neobexiga em pós-operatório tardio O uso da BCG é considerado de escolha para carcinoma urotelial
Ta/T1 de alto grau e carcinoma in situ após RTU, em particular a terapia de manutenção, a qual demonstrou ser superior à quimioterapia
intravesical, no que diz respeito ao retardo da progressão tumoral.(1-3) Entretanto, não deve ser administrada imediatamente após a
ressecção, esperando-se, em geral, 2 semanas para a cicatrização local e evitando-se, assim, a absorção e a disseminação hematogênica das
micobactérias.(1) Embora não seja consenso a dose ideal, seis a oito instilações, uma vez por semana, seguidas por três doses de manutenção
a cada 3/6 meses, no primeiro ano, e a cada 6 meses a partir do segundo ano, demonstraram resultados promissores, conforme o protocolo do
estudo SWOG, o qual foi utilizado no caso em questão.(1) Assumindo-se que a terapia de manutenção é necessária para eficácia ótima, a
questão da toxicidade torna-se mais relevante.(2) Esta é substancialmente maior com um tratamento intensivo, mas os efeitos secundários
graves têm sido também observados depois de poucas instilações.(4) Sintomas de armazenamento (disúria, polaciúria e hematúria) são efeitos
colaterais comumente associados, ocorrendo geralmente após a terceira aplicação; trata-se de uma consequência da estimulação imunitária, com
liberação de linfocinas como uma resposta inflamatória associada.(1) O retardo de novas instilações de BCG após várias RTU e o início de
antibióticos antituberculose é recomendado, pois podem ser úteis se inflamação contínua ou infecção estão presentes.(1,4) A bexiga
contraída, complicação incomum, porém uma das mais graves, ocorre em menos de 1% dos doentes.(1) Uma série atualizada por Lamm et al.
relatou bexigas contraídas em apenas 5 pacientes (0,2%) de 2.602 analisados.(5) No trabalho de Nieder et al., foram identificados apenas
dois casos dessa complicação num total de 2.255 em duas instituições, numa taxa de 0,05 a 0,3%. Neste estudo, ambos os casos apresentaram
complicação da terapia intravesical ainda no esquema de indução, inclusive um deles com evidência de bexiga contraída após a quinta dose.
Possivelmente, há extravasamento em um local de ressecção não cicatrizado, que iniciaria uma inflamação extensa perivesical e um trajeto
fistuloso, resultando na bexiga contraída.(6) Devido a isso, tal complicação deve ser suspeitada em pacientes com sintomas miccionais
intensos em qualquer fase e, principalmente, na manutenção da imunoterapia com BCG.(3,4) Atualmente, alguns centros utilizam isoniazida
profilática na tentativa de diminuir sua incidência, porém com resultados variáveis.(1,3) O uso de interferon associado foi proposto também
na tentativa de diminuir a dose e a intolerância da BCG, com algumas séries de poucos pacientes apresentando resultados favoráveis. No
estudo aqui citado foi descrito o primeiro caso de bexiga contraída em paciente na vigência dessa terapia combinada.(6) O tratamento inicial
pode ser tentado com medidas conservadoras, como hidrodistensão e uso de antimuscarínicos.(3) Entretanto, naqueles refratários ou com
sintomas incapacitantes, a indicação cirúrgica deve ser considerada. Opções como ampliação vesical e cistectomia com reconstrução de conduto
ileal poderiam levar ao risco de recidiva tumoral futura e a efeitos negativos na qualidade de vida (QV), respectivamente.(6) Já a
cistoprostatectomia com reconstrução de neobexiga intestinal tem seu papel com melhora da QV e segurança quanto a possíveis recidivas
tumorais.(6) A bexiga contraída é uma complicação rara mas que deve ser lembrada em pacientes com sintomas do trato urinário inferior grave
em vigência da terapia com bacilo de Calmette-Guérin. Na intratabilidade clínica, a correção cirúrgica com cistoprostatectomia e neobexiga
parece ser a melhor opção, devido ao seu tratamento definitivo e à melhora na qualidade de vida.
