Figure 1Biomicroscopy showing the corneal verticillata A 33-year-old woman who works as a yoga teacher and lived in the city of Rio de
Janeiro (RJ) - Brazil, sought ophthalmologic care at a routine examination. She did not report comorbidities and previous or regular use of
medicines of any type. At examination the patient had good corrected visual acuity of 20/20 in both eyes. Biomicroscopy showed bilateral
corneal verticillata, and in the rest of examination no other abnormalities were seen. Fabry disease is hereditary and X-chromosome linked.
This disease is caused by deficiency of the enzyme α-galactosidase A that leads to progressive accumulation of lipid substances in the
interior of the endothelium and smooth muscles of blood vessels so that affecting several organs.(1) Men are more affected by Fabry disease
because they had the X chromosome to codify the enzyme α-galactosidase. Heterozygote women are commonly the carriers of the Fabry gene (GLA
gene, the only gene identified so far), which present a random activity of the enzyme α-galactosidase A that turns its dosage less reliable
for the diagnosis. The genetic molecular test is the most reliable diagnostic method for Fabry in female carrier.(1) Angiokeratoma,
acroparesthesia, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, anhidrosis and corneal verticillata are common features of Fabry disease. The disease’s
clinical course is heterogeneous and variable especially in women.(2,3) Corneal verticillata was the most found ophthalmology change in men
an women with Fabry disease. It presents an incidence of 76.9% in men and 73.1% in women and was describe almost as pathognomonic.(2,3)
Initial lesion observed in cornea is diffuse subepithelial layer opacity that progressively adopt a verticillata appearance.(1) This
appearance could be an isolated finding without other ocular abnormalities.(2) Overall, there is no impair in vision associated with this
corneal alteration.(3) The Fabry disease along with amiodarone therapy is the most common cause of this form of corneal opacity, and the
simple history assessment of medication used by the patient helps to clarify the cause.(4) The patient blood sample was sent to a Germany
laboratory for molecular genetic test to confirm the diagnosis of Fabry disease. Our patient was probably heterozygote for Fabry disease
because, up to the time of examination, she did not have any symptom of the disease expected the corneal alteration. However, in this case,
the ophthalmologic investigation was essential to establish the diagnosis and give the patient the opportunity to understand risks and care
needed to all sufferers of this rare condition. Figura 1Córnea verticilata observada à biomicroscopia Paciente do gênero feminino, 33 anos,
professora de ioga, natural e residente da cidade do Rio de Janeiro (RJ), procurou atendimento oftalmológico para exame de rotina. Negava
comorbidades bem como uso regular prévio ou atual de qualquer medicação. Apresentava melhor acuidade visual corrigida de 20/20 em ambos os
olhos. À biomicroscopia, observava-se córnea verticilata bilateral, sem outras alterações no restante do exame. A doença de Fabry é
hereditária e está ligada ao cromossomo X. Consiste na deficiência da enzima alfa-galactosidase A, que leva ao acúmulo progressivo de
substâncias lipídicas no interior do endotélio e músculos lisos de vasos sanguíneos comprometendo, assim, vários órgãos.(1) Acomete mais
comumente homens, que só possuem um cromossomo X para codificar a enzima alfa-galactosidase. Mulheres heterozigotas são normalmente
carreadoras do gene da doença de Fabry (GLA, até então o único gene identificado), possuindo atividade variada da enzima alfa-galactosidase
A, o que torna sua dosagem pouco confiável para o diagnóstico nesses casos. O teste molecular genético é o mais confiável para o diagnóstico
de Fabry em mulheres carreadoras.(1) Angioceratoma, acroparestesias, cardiomiopatia hipertrófica, anidrose e córnea verticilata são as
típicas manifestações da doença de Fabry. Seu curso clínico é heterogêneo e variado, especialmente em mulheres.(2,3) A córnea verticilata
foi a alteração oftalmológica mais encontrada em homens e mulheres com Fabry, com incidência de 76,9% nas mulheres e de 73,1% nos homens,
sendo descrita como quase patognomônica.(2,3) A lesão inicial observada na córnea é uma opacidade difusa na camada supepitelial que,
progressivamente, adota o aspecto de verticilata.(1) Pode ser um achado isolado sem outras anormalidades oculares.(2) Normalmente, não há
baixa visual associada a essa alteração.(3) Juntamente do tratamento com amiodarona, a doença de Fabry é a causa mais comum dessa forma de
opacidade corneana, e a simples avaliação do histórico de uso de medicações ajuda a esclarecer a causa.(4) Diante da suspeita, a amostra
sanguínea da paciente foi enviada a um laboratório alemão, para teste molecular genético, para a confirmação do diagnóstico. Podemos inferir
que a paciente provavelmente é heterozigota para a doença de Fabry, já que, até então, não apresentou sintoma algum da doença, sendo apenas
observada a alteração corneana. Apesar disso, a investigação oftalmológica, neste caso, foi essencial para que o diagnóstico fosse
estabelecido e que a paciente pudesse estar ciente dos riscos e cuidados necessários a todos os portadores dessa condição rara.
