Primary hepatic carcinoid tumors are extremely rare neoplasms derived from hormone-producing neuroendocrine cells. It is difficult to make
their diagnosis before biopsy, surgical resection or necropsy. A recent publication described only 94 cases of these tumors. There is no sex
predilection and apparently it has no association with cirrhosis or preexisting hepatic disease. The most effective treatment is
hepatectomy, and resection is determined by size and location of the lesions. The liver is the organ most often affected by metastases of
neuroendocrine tumors,(1-3) but the primary hepatic carcinoid tumors are extremely rare. Only 60 cases had been described up to 2008(4) and
94 cases were reported in a recent publication. Carcinoid tumors were first reported by Lubarsch, in 1888,(5) and are functional neoplasms
that can develop in any part of the body. However, approximately 54% to 90% of the cases originate from the gastrointestinal tract,(6,7)
mainly from the appendix, small bowel and rectum. The primary hepatic carcinoid tumors are neoplasms derived from hormone-producing
neuroendocrine cells, especially serotonin. Since they are very rare, it is difficult to make their diagnosis before biopsy, surgical
resection or even necropsy.(8) There is no sex predilection and the tumors affect individuals aged between 40 and 50 years.(9) The cases
reported present large tumors in the hepatic parenchyma, with non-specific and mild symptoms. Due to fast progression of the tumor and delay
in making diagnosis, very few cases are surgically resectable.(10) The primary carcinoid tumor of the liver was first described by
Edmonsdson, in 1958, and its origin remains uncertain.(11) The mutating cells originate from the ectopic pancreatic or adrenal tissue in the
hepatic parenchyma, or from neuroendocrine cells located in the intrahepatic biliary epithelium.(12) Moreover, it was proposed that the
chronic inflammation of the bile canaliculi can cause intestinal metaplasia, which predisposes the development of neuroendocrine tumors.(12)
The primary hepatic carcinoid tumor has no association with cirrhosis or preexisting liver disease(4) and accounts to only 0.3% of the cases
of neuroendocrine tumors.(7) A 34-year-old male patient referred abdominal pain that was intermittent, progressive, related to compression
on the right flank and irradiating to the dorsum and ipsilateral shoulder, for three months. He presented postprandial fullness,
constipation and weight loss (3% of body weight). The laboratory test results showed normal complete blood count and liver function tests,
negative serology for hepatites, slight increase in canalicular enzymes and tumor markers within normalcy. Abdominal ultrasound showed a
heterogeneous mass in the right hepatic lobe measuring 12x10cm, with a solid-cystic content. Computed tomography demonstrated enlarged liver
due to the right hepatic lobe that presented an extensive infiltrating lesion with poorly-defined contours, a liquefied center and the
periphery was partially enhanced by contrast medium. There was no further involvement of other organs (Figure 1A and B). Figure 1(A) Axial
computed tomography image - portal phase - middle hepatic vein - contact with lesion. (B) Coronal computed tomography image The patient was
submitted to ultrasound-guided percutaneous liver biopsy. The pathologic report described neoplasm of undetermined histogenesis, suggesting
carcinoid tumor, and immunohistochemistry confirmed the diagnosis. The investigation was complemented with OctreoScan® that specifically
demonstrated a primary hepatic carcinoid tumor (Figure 2). Figure 2Octreotide scintigraphy shows radiomarker uptake in hepatic lesion He
underwent right hepatectomy, and an irregular extensive lesion occupying the whole right lobe was evident in the intraoperative period
(Figure 3). The patient progressed well and was discharged on postoperative day 7. The pathological examination showed a malignant neoplasm
with neuroendocrine differentiation and positive immunohistochemistry for synaptofisin, vimentin, chromogranin and KI-67, thus confirming
the diagnosis of primary hepatic carcinoid tumor (Figure 4). Figure 3Liver with extensive lesion in the right lobe Figure 4Histology –
epithelioid neoplasm, with medium-sized cells, irregular nuclei, in organoid arrangements and blocks - 8 mitosis per 10 HPF, with necrotic
foci Primary hepatic carcinoid tumor may be an incidental finding or it may present with abdominal pain, jaundice, a palpable mass in the
upper right quadrant of the abdomen, weight loss, Cushing syndrome and carcinoid syndrome.(4,13) There is usually liver metastasis when
carcinoid syndrome occurs (facial redness, abdominal pain and diarrhea). This clinical picture is very rare, and there are only two cases
described in the medical literature.(8,14) The investigation should first include an abdominal ultrasound, which often demonstrates a solid-
cystic tumor.(2) Further workup with computed tomography generally corroborates the ultrasonographic findings. It is difficult to make a
definite diagnosis primarily due to its similarity to hepatocellular carcinoma. Finally, OctreoScan® is very useful and its specificity
achieves up to 83%.(15) Histopathology reveals a malignant neoplasm, with neuroendocrine differentiation and eight mitotic figures per high-
power field, but it is not specific for diagnosis of primary hepatic carcinoid tumor, according to the literature.(2) In the present study,
immunohistochemistry correlated with the literature and showed positive chromogranin in 89.1%, and synaptofisin in 55% of the cases.(8) The
most effective treatment is hepatectomy.(4) Survival rate may increase from 29% to 78%.(5) Systemic chemotherapy or chemoembolization showed
uncertain results.(2) The indication of liver transplant remains a dilemma, and some researchers suggest this therapy for patients with
multiple lesions or in cases of disease with impaired liver function.(16) Another possible treatment is radiofrequency.(4) Recent studies
reported a five-year survival of 74-78% in patients submitted to hepatectomy, and the recurrence rate was approximately 18%.(17,18)
According to Schwartz et al.,(4) the distant metastases are not described when there is no hepatic involvement. Up to 2009, in the largest
series published in the literature, Lin et al.(8) reported 94 cases and described abdominal pain as the most frequent symptom (44% of
cases), followed by abdominal mass (14.3%) and absence of symptoms (13.1%); unilobar location (76.6%) and single lesion (62,8%). Hepatectomy
was performed in 86.8% of their patients, and overall mortality was 25.5%. Huang et al.(2) are the authors of the largest series from a
single center, describing 11 cases of primary hepatic carcinoid tumor within a 13-year period of analysis. Carcinoid tumors with liver
metastasis are relatively common. However, the primary involvement of this organ is very rare. Better diagnostic methods are required to
make a more precise preoperative differentiation between primary hepatic carcinoid tumor and hepatocellular carcinoma. Primary hepatic
carcinoid tumor should be suspected in patients with no chronic liver disease, normal alpha-fetoprotein levels and solid-cystic lesion in
imaging tests, associated with diarrhea and abdominal pain. Tumores carcinoides primários do fígado são neoplasias derivadas de células
neuroendócrinas produtoras de hormônios, extremamente raras e de difícil diagnóstico antes da biópsia, ressecção cirúrgica ou mesmo da
necrópsia. Em recente publicação, descreveram-se apenas 94 casos dessa afecção. É uma doença sem predileção por sexo e que, aparentemente,
não tem associação com cirrose, nem com doença hepática preexistente. O tratamento que se demonstra mais eficaz é a hepatectomia, cuja
extensão da ressecção é determinada pelo tamanho e pela localização das lesões. Apesar de o fígado ser o principal órgão acometido por
metástases dos tumores carcinoides,(1-3) os carcinoides primários desse órgão são extremamente raros, com descrição de apenas 60 casos até o
ano de 2008(4) e de 94 casos em publicação mais recente. Inicialmente reportado por Lubarsch em 1888,(5) os tumores carcinoides são
neoplasias funcionais que podem se desenvolver em qualquer parte do corpo. Entretanto, cerca de 54 a 90% dos casos têm sua origem no trato
gastrintestinal,(6,7) principalmente no apêndice cecal, intestino delgado e reto. Os tumores neuroendócrinos primários do fígado (TNPF) são
neoplasias derivadas de células neuroendócrinas produtoras de hormônios, notadamente a serotonina, que, principalmente por sua raridade, os
tornam de difícil diagnóstico antes da biópsia, ressecção cirúrgica ou mesmo da necropsia.(8) Não apresentam predileção por sexo e acometem
indivíduos na faixa etária entre 40 e 50 anos.(9) Os casos relatados se apresentam como tumorações de grandes dimensões no parênquima
hepático, com sintomas inespecíficos e frustos, tornando ainda mais raros os casos passíveis de ressecção cirúrgica, devido à rápida
progressão tumoral e à demora no diagnóstico.(10) O TNPF foi inicialmente descrito por Edmonsdson no ano de 1958 e sua origem ainda
permanece incerta.(11) As células mutantes originam-se de tecido ectópico pancreático ou adrenal encontrado no parênquima hepático ou,
então, de células neuroendócrinas localizadas no epitélio biliar intra-hepático.(12) Além disso, também é proposto que a inflamação crônica
dos canalículos biliares pode acarretar metaplasia intestinal, a qual predispõe ao desenvolvimento do tumor neuroendócrino.(12) O TNPF não
apresenta associação com cirrose ou doença hepática preexistente(4) e corresponde a apenas de 0,3% dos casos de tumores carcinoides.(7)
Paciente masculino de 34 anos de idade, com relato de dor abdominal há 3 meses, intermitente, progressiva, de caráter compressivo, em flanco
direito, com irradiação para o dorso e ombro ipsilateral. Apresentava plenitude pós-prandial, constipação intestinal e perda ponderal de 3%
do peso corpóreo. Possuía hemograma e exames de função hepática normais, sorologias negativas para hepatites, aumento discreto das enzimas
canaliculares e marcadores tumorais dentro da normalidade. A ultrassonografia abdominal evidenciava uma massa heterogênea em lobo hepático
direito de 12x10cm, com componente sólido-cístico, e a tomografia computadorizada, fígado com dimensões aumentadas às custas do lobo
hepático direito, apresentando extensa lesão infiltrativa com contornos mal definidos, com centro liquefeito e periferia parcialmente
realçada ao meio de contraste, além de ausência de comprometimentos de outros órgãos (Figura 1 A e B). Figura 1(A) Tomografia
computadorizada - corte axial - fase portal - veia hepática media - contato com a lesão. (B) Tomografia computadorizada - corte coronal O
paciente foi submetido à biópsia hepática percutânea guiada por ultrassonografia. O laudo histopatológico demonstrou tratar-se de neoplasia
de histogênese indeterminada, sugerindo tumor carcinoide, e a imuno-histoquímica comprovou o diagnóstico sugerido. Investigação
complementada com OctreoScan® demostrou tratar-se especificamente de um TNPF (Figura 2). Figura 2Cintilografia com ocreotide - evidenciando
captação de radiofarmaco em lesão hepática Realizada hepatectomia direita regrada, com evidência, no intraoperatório, de extensa lesão
irregular que ocupava todo lobo hepático direito (Figura 3). O paciente apresentou boa evolução e alta hospitalar no 7º dia. A
anatomopatologia demonstrou se tratar de neoplasia maligna com diferenciação neuroendócrina e imuno-histoquímica positiva para
sinaptofisina, vimentina, cromogranina e KI-67, confirmando o diagnóstico de TNPF (Figura 4). Figura 3Fígado com lesão extensa acometendo
lobo hepático direito Figura 4Histologia - neoplasia epitelióide com células de tamanho intermediário, nucleos irregulares, dispostas em
arranjos organóides e blocos - 8 mitoses por 10 cga com focos de necrose O TNPF pode ser um achado incidental ou, então, apresentar-se com
sintomas de dor abdominal, icterícia, massa palpável em quadrante superior direito do abdome, perda ponderal, síndrome de Cushing e síndrome
carcinoide.(4,13) Quando ocorre a síndrome carcinoide (rubor facial, dor abdominal e diarreia), geralmente há metástase hepática. Essa
apresentação clínica é bastante rara, com descrição de apenas dois casos na literatura.(8,14) A investigação deve se iniciar com
ultrassonografia abdominal, que demonstra, na maioria das vezes, um tumor sólido-cístico.(2) A propedêutica adicional com tomografia
computadorizada de abdome geralmente corrobora os achados ultrassonográficos. Além disso, ressalta-se a dificuldade em se estabelecer o
diagnóstico definitivo devido, principalmente, à sua similaridade com o carcinoma hepatocelular. Finalmente, o auxílio do OctreoScan® é
bastante benéfico, apresentando especificidade que chega a 83%.(15) A histopatologia revelava se tratar de neoplasia maligna, com
diferenciação neuroendócrina, com oito figuras de mitose por campo de grande aumento e, assim como dados da literatura, não é específica
para o diagnóstico de TNPF.(2) A imuno-histoquímica, no presente estudo, demonstrou correlação com a literatura, evidenciando a positividade
da cromogranina em 89,1% e sinaptofisina em 55% dos casos.(8) O tratamento mais eficaz é a hepatectomia.(4) Há possibilidade de aumento de
sobrevida de 29% para até 78%.(5) Quimioterapia sistêmica ou quimioembolização mostraram resultados incertos.(2) A indicação do transplante
hepático ainda é um dilema, sendo que algumas pesquisas sugerem essa terapia em pacientes com múltiplas lesões ou em casos de doença
hepática com função prejudicada.(16) Outra possibilidade terapêutica é a utilização de radiofrequência.(4) Recentes trabalhos demonstraram
sobrevida de 5 anos em 74 a 78% dos casos de pacientes submetidos a hepatectomia, com uma taxa de recidiva em torno de 18%.(17,18) As
metástases à distância, de acordo com Schwartz et al.,(4) não são descritas sem envolvimento hepático. Até o ano de 2009, Lin et al.,(8) na
maior casuística da literatura, reportaram 94 casos e evidenciaram dor abdominal como o sintoma mais frequente (presente em 44% dos casos),
seguido por massa abdominal (14,3%) e ausência de sintomas (13,1%); localização unilobar (76,6%) e lesão única (62,8%). A hepatectomia foi
realizada 86,8% de seus pacientes, com uma taxa de mortalidade global de 25,5%. Huang et al.(2) são os autores com a maior casuística de um
único serviço, com relato de 11 casos de TNPF em 13 anos de análise. Os tumores carcinoides metastáticos para o fígado são relativamente
comuns. Entretanto, o acometimento primário desse órgão é bastante raro. Necessita-se de melhora nos métodos diagnósticos para que haja uma
diferenciação pré-operatória mais precisa entre tumores neuroendócrinos primários do fígado e carcinoma hepatocelular. Pacientes sem um
passado de hepatopatia crônica, com níveis normais de alfafetoproteína e imagem sólido-cística nos exames de imagem, combinadas com diarreia
e dor abdominal, devem ter aventada a hipótese de um caso de tumor neuroendócrino primário do fígado.
