Conjunctival necrosis is a rare complication following periocular/intraocular triamcinolone acetonide injection and has been reported
extensively in adults. We describe a child who developed conjunctival necrosis following subconjunctival injection of triamcinolone
acetonide for severe chronic anterior uveitis. Prompt diagnosis and management of this uncommon condition is vital. Conjunctival ischemia
and necrosis following periocular/intraocular injection of methylprednisolone, triamcinolone acetonide, and betamethasone had been reported
in adult patients.12345678 Based on a PubMed search, there is one similar complication reported in the pediatric age group recently.9 We
described a child who displayed signs of conjunctival necrosis 2 weeks after a subconjunctival injection of triamcinolone acetonide for
recurrent attack of anterior uveitis. It is essential to highlight this uncommon complication of periocular corticosteroid injection in
children. A mother had noted that her daughter started to have recurrent redness, discomfort, and photophobia in both eyes since she was two
and half years of age. Six months after the onset, she was examined in a tertiary hospital and parents were informed that she had severe
anterior uveitis in both eyes that had complicated with secondary cataract. Her visual acuity was 6/60 in both eyes with evidence of
posterior subcapsular cataract bilaterally. The conjunctiva was white. The cornea was clear in both eyes with no sign of band keratopathy.
The anterior chamber appeared quiet and no iris nodules were documented. The pupil was fairly round with few sites of anterior synechiae
observed. The intraocular pressure was within normal. The fundus view was hazy in both eyes. All laboratory investigations including
antinuclear antibody and rheumatoid factor were negative. No radiological examination was performed because she was asymptomatic. The parent
consented for lens aspiration and intraocular lens implantation in her right eye and followed with the similar operation in her left eye
3-months apart. Both the operations were uneventful. Subsequently, her visual acuity deteriorated to 6/36 in the right eye and counting
fingers in the left eye. Postoperatively, there was persistent anterior uveitis, presence of dense membrane anterior to the intraocular
lenses in both eyes, formation of posterior synechiae between the iris and lens, and elevated intraocular pressure. The view of the optic
disc and retina was obscured. The B scan ultrasound revealed flat retina in both eyes. She was treated with syrup prednisolone 1 mg/kg/body
weight, gutt predforte every 2 hourly, gutt tropicamide 0.5% every 12 hourly, and gutt timolol 0.5% 12 hourly in both eyes. Her parents
agreed for synechiolysis procedure and removal of the membrane covering the pupil in her left eye under general anesthesia. The operation
was uneventful. A subconjunctiva triamcinolone acetonide 20 mg (0.5 ml) was injected at the inferonasal aspect of the conjunctiva in the
operated eye at the end of the procedure. At 1 week postoperative review, a subconjunctival hemorrhage was noted that corresponded with the
previous site of injection given. A week later, an area of conjunctival necrosis measuring about 5 Ã— 3 mm was observed at the similar site
[Figure 1]. The base showed gray-to-white scleral layer with no uveal show. There surrounding conjunctiva was mildly congested. No evidence
of scleral inflammation was noted. The patient was started on topical moxifloxacin every 6 hourly in the affected eye. Anterior segment
photograph shows conjunctival necrosis developed 2 weeks after the subconjunctival injection of triamcenolone acetonide There was a gradual
clinical improvement observed 2-weeks later. The new conjunctiva has growing with pinkish appearance. The base of the ulcer appeared clean
with evidence of scleral vascularization [Figure 2]. The conjunctival reepithelialization occurred from the edge of the surrounding healthy
conjunctiva tissue. The conjunctiva necrosis was completely healed after 10 weeks and overlying conjunctiva was fully restored [Figure 3].
Topical moxifloxacin were discontinued. She has been monitored closely for 9 months and the conjunctiva had healed completely. Clinical
improvement after 2 weeks of medical treatment A complete recovery of conjunctival necrosis Her visual acuity remained 6/60 in the right eye
and counting finger at 3 feet in the left eye. Both the intraocular lenses were covered by thick membrane that was worse in the left eye.
The retina view remained hazy in both eyes. The intraocular pressure remained controlled with gutt timolol 0.5% and trusopt every 12 hourly
in both eyes. Triamcinolone acetonide has been used widely in the treatment of pediatric eye diseases. These include triamcinolone-assisted
vitrectomy during pediatric cataract operation, intracameral injection in pediatric cataract surgery, intravitreal injection for uveitic
macular edema, periocular injection in pediatric uveitis, supratarsal injection in allergic conjunctivitis, intravitreal injections for
Coat's disease, and Best vittelliform macula dystrophy.1011121314151617 Conjunctival necrosis in children following injection of
triamcinolone acetonide is extremely rare. It was very unfortunate for our patient, a young girl who developed conjunctival necrosis
following subconjunctival injection of triamcenolone acetonide for severe anterior uveitis. Recently, Say et al. described a child who
developed perilymphatic linear subcutaneous fat atrophy and depigmentation following subtenon injection of triamcinolone acetonide.18 The
necrosis appeared localized, hypovascular, and aseptic in our patient. This is probably due to the following explanations. Firstly,
corticosteroids are known to potentiate the vasoconstrictive effect of circulating catecholamines, and this may result in an area of
localized conjunctiva ischemia.1 Secondly, conjunctival necrosis after a subconjunctival steroid injection may be due to the inactive
ingredient benzyl alcohol because of its potential toxicity. Thirdly, improper dosage and injection sites with insufficient prophylactic
antibiotic may play important roles in the pathogenesis.9 Eslampour et al. reported that deposition of steroid in the subtenon instead of
subconjunctival space may prevent conjunctival toxicity.9 Improper site of administration such as the inferonasal bulbar conjunctiva within
the interpalpebral fissure may predispose to conjunctival necrosis due to greater exposure and promixity to the lower lid margin.9 Low dose
of topical antibiotic administration despite a high dose of steroid depot may also invite infection. Lastly, fragile conjunctiva that had
been exposed to chronic usage of topical corticosteroid perhaps had facilitated the ulceration process in our patient. Table 1 summarizes
published literature on conjunctival necrosis following corticosteroid injection, i.e. triamcinolone acetate, betamethasone, and
methylprednisolone. Intensive topical antibiotic, surgical excision, debridement, and suturing have been described to treat the above
conditions.2456789 The complete healing was reported ranged from 2-6 weeks in eyes with preexisting inflammatory condition.28 Surgical
excision of the necrotic tissues had reported relatively faster recovery.4579 Published literatures on conjunctival necrosis following
corticosteroid injection Our observation is parallel with Agrawal et al. who treated their patients conservatively. Their patients showed
complete healing with combination of topical antibiotic and antifungal regime after 2-6 weeks.2 Our patient responded to a single topical
antibiotic and subsequently showed a complete recovery after 10 weeks. We monitored this patient closely for a possibility of secondary
infection. In conclusion, conjunctival necrosis following subconjunctival triamcinolone acetonide is rare in children. We believe that
chronic usage of topical and systemic corticosteroid has probably made her more susceptible to this condition. Administration of
subconjunctival triamcinolone acetonide requires proper case selection and counseling as to the potential risks and benefits. Source of
Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
