A previous healthy 7-year-old boy presenting occipital headache and constantly wake up at night with 1 week of evolution was admitted to our
emergency service. He had linear hypopigmented macules along the lines of Blaschko affecting hemithorax and left upper limbs (Figure 1). The
patient also had macrocrania, antimongoloid palpebral fissure, changes in left eye pupil contour and syndactyly. A cranial computed
tomography scan showed a hypodensity with accentuation of white matter and small cysts. Cranial resonance revealed an extensive process of
leukoencephalopathy and multiple dilatations of perivascular spaces, being such findings rarely described in clinical feature of
hypomelanosis of Ito (HI) (Figure 2). Figure 1Hypopigmented macules in the upper limb following the lines of Blaschko Figure 2Coronal T2
weighted magnetic resonance (A) and axial fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) (B). T2-weighted Hypersignal and FLAIR of white matter
on brain hemispheres with periventricular and central predominance in almost symmetric and diffuse manner. Several cysts images spread
throughout affected white matter (more linear configured at some areas), which seemed to correspond to dilatation of perivascular spaces HI
is a neurocutaneous syndrome with likelihood to multi-systemic involvement. This syndrome diagnosis presupposes hypopigmented skin lesions
in Blaschko’s lines.(1) Most frequent extracutaneous manifestation seen is of neurological origin, especially cognitive impairment and
epilepsy.(2) Some cases of minor or null neurological features can show changes in brain resonance.(3) Dilatation of perivascular spaces is
a finding of uncertain meaning that is not always associated with neurological disease, mainly in specific areas such as capsulo-lenticular
and protuberance. However, multiple perivascular spaces and at unusual locals occur, for example, in mucopolysaccharidosis and in other
situations, including in the HI.(4) Other musculoskeletal, craniofacial and ocular manifestations are found in this syndrome, including
dysmorphies that are described in our case.(2,5,6) Although a rare disorder, its diagnosis is facilitated by pigmentary mosaicism with
morphology and characteristics distribution pattern that reflect different cell lineages.(2) This disease genetic substrate is heterogeneous
being described aneuploidies, ring chromosomes, X chromosomal or autosomal inversions and translocations.(5-8) The clinical manifestation
variability, early diagnosis and counseling lead to the prognosis.(5,8) Multidisciplinary therapeutic intervention based on clinical
findings must be directed to reduce the possible associated morbidity.(5) Criança de 7 anos, do gênero masculino, previamente saudável,
recorreu ao serviço urgência por cefaleia occipital e despertar noturno com 1 semana de evolução. Apresentava manchas hipopigmentadas
lineares segundo as linhas de Blaschko no hemitórax e membro superior esquerdos (Figura 1); macrocrânia, fenda palpebral antimongoloide,
alteração do contorno pupilar no olho esquerdo e sindactilia. Sem alterações no exame neurológico. A tomografia computorizada
craniencefálica revelou acentuação da hipodensidade da substância branca e diminutas imagens quísticas. A ressonância encefálica evidenciou
extenso processo de leucoencefalopatia e dilatações múltiplas de espaços perivasculares, achados raramente descritos no contexto clínico de
hipomelanose de Ito (HI) (Figura 2). Figura 1Manchas hipopigmentadas no membro superior, segundo as linhas de Blaschko Figura 2Ressonância
magnética coronal T2 (A) e axial fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) (B). Hipersinal T2 e FLAIR da substância branca dos hemisférios
cerebrais, com predomínio periventricular e central, de forma quase simétrica e difusa. Incontáveis imagens quísticas dispersas por toda a
substância branca lesada, em algumas regiões com configuração mais linear, parecendo corresponder à dilatação de espaços perivasculares A HI
é uma síndrome neurocutânea com potencial de envolvimento multissistémico. O diagnóstico pressupõe lesões cutâneas hipopigmentadas em linhas
de Blaschko.(1) As manifestações extracutâneas mais frequentes são do foro neurológico, sobretudo défice cognitivo e epilepsia.(2) Alguns
casos com quadro neurológico minor ou nulo podem ter alterações na ressonância encefálica.(3) A dilatação de espaços perivasculares é um
achado de significado incerto, nem sempre associado a doença neurológica, principalmente quando em regiões específicas, como a
capsulolenticular e a protuberância. No entanto, espaços perivasculares múltiplos e fora das localizações habituais ocorrem, por exemplo,
nas mucopolissacaridoses e em várias outras situações, incluindo HI.(4) Dessa síndrome fazem também parte manifestações musculoesqueléticas,
craniofaciais e oculares nas quais se incluem as dismorfias descritas no caso apresentado.(2,5,6) Embora seja uma afecção rara, seu
reconhecimento é facilitado pelo mosaicismo pigmentar, com morfologia e padrão de distribuição característicos, que reflete diferentes
linhagens celulares.(2) O substrato genético é heterogêneo, encontrando-se descritas aneuploidias, cromossomos em anel, inversões e
translocações de cromossomos X ou de autossomos.(5-8) A variabilidade nas manifestações clínicas e seu diagnóstico e orientação precoces
ditam o prognóstico.(5,8) A intervenção terapêutica multidisciplinar, em função dos achados clínicos, deve ser dirigida para minimizar a
eventual morbilidade associada.(5)
