Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Conceived and designed the experiments: IP. Performed the
experiments: IP LG. Analyzed the data: IP LG. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: BB SH. Wrote the paper: IP SH. Retroperitoneal
leiomyoma is a rare type of benign smooth muscle tumor almost exclusively found in women and with histopathological features similar to
uterine leiomyomas. The pathogenesis of retroperitoneal leiomyoma is unclear and next to nothing is known about the cytogenetics and
molecular genetics of the tumor. Here we present the first cytogenetically analyzed retroperitoneal leiomyoma. It had a t(10;17)(q22;q21) as
the sole chromosomal abnormality. Using RNA-Sequencing and the ‘grep’ command to search the fastq files of the sequence data we found that
the translocation resulted in fusion of the genes KAT6B (10q22) with KANSL1 (17q21). RT-PCR together with direct (Sanger) sequencing
verified the presence of a KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion transcript. No reciprocal KANSL1-KAT6B transcript was amplified suggesting that it was either
absent or unexpressed. The KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion transcript consists of exons 1 to 3 of KAT6B and exons 11 to 15 of KANSL1, is 3667 bp long,
has a 1398 bp long open reading frame, and codes for a 466 amino acid residue protein. The corresponding KAT6B-KANSL1 protein contains the
NEMM domain (including the linker histone H1/H5, domain H15) of KAT6B and the PEHE domain of KANSL1. The function of the fusion protein
might be regulation of transcription with an affinity for chromatin (linker histone H1/H5) and interaction with the HAT domain of KAT8 (PEHE
domain). The tumor expressed HMGA2 and HMGA1 even though 12q14-15 and 6p looked normal by G-banding analysis. The tumor also expressed MED12
in the absence of exon 2 mutations. Overall, the data show that the examined retroperitoneal leiomyoma resembles a subset of uterine
leiomyomas in terms of histology and genetics. All relevant data are within the paper and its Supporting Information files. Leiomyomas are
benign tumors that display smooth muscle differentiation, the most common type being uterine leiomyoma. Extrauterine leiomyomas are rare,
may arise in any anatomic site, and may be difficult to distinguish from malignancies . Unusual growth patterns have been reported; they
include benign metastasizing leiomyoma, disseminated peritoneal leiomyomatosis, intravenous leiomyomatosis, parasitic leiomyoma, and
retroperitoneal leiomyoma . Retroperitoneal leiomyomas are almost exclusively found in women . They may enlarge considerably before they
become symptomatic and are often detected incidentally at a routine check-up or during autopsy . Common symptoms include discomfort,
fatigue, and back pain . The pathogenesis is unknown and it is not clear whether the tumors represent metastatic or primary lesions and
whether they arise from hormonally sensitive smooth muscle elements or from the embryonal remnants of Müllerian or Wolffian ducts . In terms
of histology, retroperitoneal leiomyomas resemble their uterine counterparts in often having hyaline fibrosis, alternating myxoid change or
trabecular matterns, and positivity for estrogen and progesterone receptors . They show low mitotic activity with little to no atypia, no
necrosis, and immunohistochemical features consistent with smooth muscle tumors with positive staining for desmin and smooth muscle–specific
actin (SMA) but negative staining for C-KIT and CD34; the latter finding rules out gastrointestinal stromal tumor . No information about the
cytogenetics and molecular genetics of retroperitoneal leiomyomas is given in the “Mitelman database of chromosome aberrations in cancer”
(http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/Chromosomes/Mitelman, database last updated on May 13, 2014) nor is any provided in the 2013 edition of “WHO
classification of tumours of soft tissue and bone” . Recently, however, mutations in exon 2 of the mediator complex subunit 12 (MED12) gene
were found in 10 out of 29 (34%) leiomyomas/leiomyomatoses in pelvic/retroperitoneal sites . Since mutations in exon 2 of MED12 are found
also in the majority (50–80%) of uterine leiomyomas , Schwetye et al. concluded that “smooth muscle tumors in pelvic/retroperitoneal sites
are subject to the same mutational changes as those of uterine myometrium, and these mutations may precede the gross or histological
development of a leiomyoma” . Most uterine leiomyomas are cytogenetically characterized by the presence of one or more of the following
cytogenetic aberrations: t(12;14)(q15;q23–24), del(7)(q21.2q31.2), rearrangements involving 6p21, 10q, and 1p, trisomy 12, deletions of 3q,
and changes of the X chromosome . Besides, 34 out of 495 (7%) uterine leiomyomas have aberrations involving the q arm of chromosome 10 and
in 25 of these tumors the breakpoint targets chromosome band 10q22 (http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/Chromosomes/Mitelman, Database last updated on
May 13, 2014). Moore et al. studied four uterine leiomyomas with rearrangements of 10q and 17q and found disruption of the KAT6B gene in
10q22 (also known as MORF and MYST4) in all of them. They mapped the breakpoint in 17q21 in three tumors but detected no fusion gene. The
KAT6B gene encodes a member of the MYST family of histone acetylases (histone acetyltrasferase) and was shown to be in-frame fused to CREBBP
in acute myeloid leukemia with t(10;16)(q22;p13) . Here we present the first cytogenetically analyzed retroperitoneal leiomyoma. The tumor
had a t(10;17)(q22;q21) as the sole karyotypic aberration. Using RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq) and the “grep” command we could demonstrate that
the molecular consequence of the translocation was fusion of KAT6B with the KANSL1 gene (official full name: KAT8 regulatory NSL complex
subunit 1) from 17q21. The tumor was also investigated for expression of HMGA2, HMGA1, and MED12 as well as for possible mutations in exon 2
of MED12. The study was approved by the regional ethics committee (Regional komité for medisinsk forskningsetikk Sør-Øst, Norge,
http://helseforskning.etikkom.no), and written informed consent was obtained from the patient. A 45-year-old previously healthy woman
presented with abdominal discomfort and a large retroperitoneal tumor was detected and resected. Microscopic examination showed fascicles of
long spindle cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm surrounded by a loose fibrous matrix (Fig. 1). Immunohistochemistry demonstrated positive
staining for SMA, desmin, and estrogen and progesterone receptors, but was negative for the cytokeratin cocktail AE1/AE3, CD68, CD99, CD117,
EMA, HMB-45, S-100, and Melan-A. Neither atypia nor necrosis was found. There were very few mitotic figures (0–1/10 high power fields). The
histological diagnosis was leiomyoma. After surgery the patient has had no recurrence (4 years). A) H&E-stained slide showing the tumor
spindle cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm without atypia surrounded by loose fibrous stroma. B) Immunoexpression of desmin. C)
Immunoexpression of SMA. Fresh tumor tissue was received and analyzed cytogenetically as part of our diagnostic routine. The sample was
disaggregated mechanically and enzymatically with collagenase II (Worthington, Freehold, NJ, USA). The resulting cells were cultured and
harvested using standard techniques. Chromosome preparations were G-banded with Wright stain and examined. The karyotype was written
according to The International System for Human Cytogenetic Nomenclature (ISCN) 2009 guidelines . Tumor tissue adjacent to that used for
cytogenetic analysis and histologic examination had been frozen and stored at -80°C. Total RNA was extracted using Trizol reagent according
to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen, Oslo, Norway) with a homogenizer (Omni THQ Digital Tissue Homogenizer, Kennesaw, GA, USA).
The RNA quality was evaluated using the Experion Automated Electrophoresis System (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Oslo, Norway). The RNA Quality
Indicator (RQI) was 6.7 and the electropherogram of the sample obtained by the Experion system is shown in Fig. 2. Three µg of total RNA
were sent for high-throughput paired-end RNA-sequencing at the Norwegian Sequencing Centre, Ullevål Hospital
(http://www.sequencing.uio.no/). The RNA was sequenced using an Illumina HiSeq 2000 instrument and the Illumina software pipeline was used
to process image data into raw sequencing data. The regular TruSeq library preparation protocol was used
(http://support.illumina.com/downloads/truseq_rna_sample_preparation_guide_15008136.ilmn) and the reads obtained had a length of 100 base
pairs. A total of 74 million reads were obtained. The quality of the raw sequence data was assessed using FastQC software
(http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/). The softwares FusionMap (http://www.omicsoft.com/fusionmap/) and FusionFinder
(http://bioinformatics.childhealthresearch.org.au/software/fusionfinder/) were used for the discovery of fusion transcripts. In addition,
the “grep” command (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grep) was used to search the fastq files of the sequence data
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FASTQ_format) for KAT6B sequence (NM_012330 version 3). FusionMap was run on a PC with Windows 7 Professional
as the operative system. FusionFinder and “grep” command were run on a PC with Bio-Linux 7 as the operating system . The RNA was run on the
Experion automated electrophoresis system using an Experion RNA StdSens analysis chip. The RQI value 6.7 was automatically calculated by the
Experion. Two µg of total RNA were reverse-transcribed in a 20 µL reaction volume using iScript Advanced cDNA Synthesis Kit for RT-qPCR
according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Bio-Rad Laboratories). The cDNA was diluted to 50 µL and 1 µL was used as template in
subsequent PCR assays. The 25 µL PCR volumes contained 12.5 µL of Premix Taq (Takara Bio Europe/SAS, Saint-Germain-en-Laye, France), 1 µL of
diluted cDNA, and 0.2 µM of each of the forward and reverse primers. The PCRs were run on a C-1000 Thermal cycler (Bio-Rad Laboratories).
The PCR conditions for all amplifications except HMGA1 were: an initial denaturation at 94°C for 30 sec followed by 35 cycles of 7 sec at
98°C and 2 min at 68°C, and a final extension for 5 min at 68°C. For the detection of the KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion transcript, two forward KAT6B
primers, MORF-1234F (5′-GCT TAG ATG GCA AAG GGG CAC CTC-3′) and MORF-1261F (5′-ATC CCA GTG CAT TCC CAT CCT CG-3′), and two reverse KANSL1
primers, KANSL1–2969R1 (5′-GTG GCA CAC TCG TGG TCC ACA GC-3′) and KANSL1–2900R1 (5′-AGG CTG CGT CGG ATA GGT CCT CA-3′), were used. The
following primer combinations were applied: 1) MORF-1234F together with the primer KANSL1–2969R1, 2) MORF-1234F together with the primer
KANSL1–2900R1, 3) MORF-1261F together with the primer KANSL1–2969R1, and 4) MORF-1261F together with the primer KANSL1–2900R1. For the
detection of a possible reciprocal KANSL1-KAT6B, nested PCR was used. In the first round, the KANSL1 forward primer KANSL1–2341F1 (5′-GGC
ACA AAT TGG TCA GCT CCT TCC T-3′) and the reverse KAT6B primer MORF-1591R1 (5′-GAA AGT GGT GGG TCA CAG CAT TCC A-3′) were used. One
microliter of the first PCR was used as template in the nested PCR together with primers KANSL1–2407F1 (5′-GGA CCC ACA GGC AGC ACT TAG
ACG-3′) and MORF-1483R1 (5′-CAT TCG ATG CAC TGC CAC CTT AAG G-3′). For the expression of HMGA2, two PCR amplifications were performed. The
primer set HMGA2–846F1 (5′-CCA CTT CAG CCC AGG GAC AAC CT-3′)/HMGA2–1021R (5′-CCT CTT GGC CGT TTT TCT CCA GTG-3′) was used for the
amplification of transcripts of HMGA2 exons 1–3. The primer set HMGA2–846F1/HMGA2–1112R (5′-CCT CTT CGG CAG ACT CTT GTG AGG A-3′) was used
for transcripts of HMGA2 containing exons 1–5. For the expression of HMGA1, the primers HMGA1–284F1 (5′-CAG CCA TCA CTC TTC CAC CTG C-3′)
and HMGA1–648R1 (5′-CTG TCC AGT CCC AGA AGG AAG CT-3′) were used. The PCR conditions were: an initial denaturation at 94°C for 30 sec
followed by 35 cycles of 7 sec at 98°C, 30 sec at 55°C and 1 min at 72°C, and a final extension for 5 min at 72°C. For the expression of
MED12 and the detection of possible mutation in exon 2 of MED12, the primers MED12-Ex1-F (5′-TTA CCC TCA GGA CCC CAA ACA G-3′) and
MED12-Ex3-R (5′-TGC AAT AAT GCT GCT GAA GTT GG-3′) were used. Three µL of the PCR products were stained with GelRed (Biotium), analyzed by
electrophoresis through 1.0% agarose gel, and photographed. The remaining PCR products were purified using the Qiagen PCR purification kit
(Qiagen) and direct sequencing was performed using the light run sequencing service of GATC Biotech (http://www.gatc-biotech.com/en/sanger-
services/lightrun-sequencing.html). The BLAST software (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/) was used for computer analysis of sequence data.
To detect the HMGA2 protein, immunostaining was performed as described previously . The G-banding analysis yielded a karyotype with a single
chromosome abnormality: 46,XX,t(10;17)(q22;q21) (Fig. 3A). A) Partial karyotype showing the der(10)t(10;17)(q22;q21) and
der(17)t(10;17)(q22;q21) together with the corresponding normal chromosome homologs; breakpoint positions are indicated by arrows. B) The
101 bp sequence obtained from the raw data of RNA-Seq using the command “grep”. The search term “TACCCCATGAGAAAGACCAG” is underlined. C) The
results of BLAT search genome using the 101 bp sequence (see B) on the human genome browser-hg19 assembly (http://genome-euro.ucsc.edu/cgi-
bin/hgGateway). D) Ideogram of chromosome 10 showing that nucleotides 1–43 of the 101 bp sequence (see B) are mapped on band q22.2 (red
vertical line). E) The result of BLAT search (your sequence from BLAT search) showed that nucleotides 1–43 are part of the KAT6B coding
region. F) Ideogram of chromosome 17 showing that nucleotides 41–101 of the sequence from B are mapped on band q21.3 (red vertical line). G)
The result of BLAT search (your sequence from BLAT search) shows that the nucleotides are part of the KANSL1 coding region. FusionMap and
FusionFinder identified 609 and 85 potential fusion transcripts, respectively (S1 and S2 Tables), but none of them was related to the
chromosome aberration, t(10;17)(q22;q21). Nor was KAT6B found to be a partner in any of the detected fusion transcripts (S1 and S2 Tables).
KAT6B was reported to be targeted in four uterine leiomyomas with a chromosome rearrangement involving 10q22 and 17q21–24 and the breakpoint
was mapped to the third intron of the KAT6B gene . Since the raw sequence data were in the text-based fastq format, we used the “grep”
command-line utility to search for sequences which contained part of the third exon of KAT6B (nucleotides 444–1322 in the sequence with
accession number NM_012330 version 3). The search term was “TACCCCATGAGAAAGACCAG” that corresponded to the last 20 nucleotides of exon 3 of
KAT6B (nt 1303–1322 in the sequence with accession number NM_012330 version 3). The search term extracted only the following 101 bp long
sequence: “CTCGCTCCCACCTGTCAGCCTTCTACCCCATGAGAAAGACCAGCAGCAGCCAGTAAGGAGGTGAAGGGGAGAGAGCTCATTCGATATTAACAACATTGTCA” (Fig. 3B). BLAT of this
sequence on the human genome browser-hg19 assembly (http://genome-euro.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgGateway) showed that nucleotides 1–43 mapped on
chromosome 10 at position 76603194–76603236, on 10q22.2 in a coding region of KAT6B, whereas nucleotides 41–101 mapped on chromosome 17 at
position 44111594–44111654, on 17q21.31 in coding region of KANSL1 (Fig. 3C‐G). These data were verified when we used the BLAST algorithm
(http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) to compare the 101 bp sequence with the KAT6B reference sequence NM_012330 version 3 and the
KANSL1 reference sequence NM_015443 version 3. The nucleotides “CTCGCTCCCACCTGTCAGCCTTCTACCCCATGAGAAAGACCAG” correspond to nt 1280–1322 of
the KAT6B reference sequence NM_012330 version 3 and the nucleotides “CAGCAGCCAGTAAGGAGGTGAAGGGGAGAGAGCTCATTCGATATTAACAACATTGTCA” correspond
to nt 2715–2772 of the KANSL1 reference sequence NM_015443 version 3. Thus, the 101 bp sequence which was obtained with the “grep”command
was part of a chimeric KAT6B-KANSL1 transcript which could have been generated by the chromosome abnormality t(10;17)(q22;q21) since KAT6B
is located on 10q22.2 and KANSL1 is located in 17q21.31. To verify the data obtained with the “grep” command, PCR amplifications were
performed using two forward KAT6B and two reverse KANSL1 primers corresponding to sequences located upstream and downstream of the putative
breakpoint, respectively. RT-PCR with all four primer combinations, MORF-1234F/KANSL1–2969R1, MORF-1234F/ KANSL1–2900R1,
MORF-1261F/KANSL1–2969R1, and MORF-1261F/KANSL1–2900R1, amplified cDNA fragments strongly suggesting the presence of a KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion
transcript in the examined tumor (Fig. 4A, lanes 1–4). Sequencing of the amplified cDNA fragment obtained with the MORF-1234F/KANSL1–2969R1
primer set showed that it was a KAT6B-KANSL1 chimeric cDNA fragment in which exon 3 of KAT6B (nucleotide 1322 accession number NM_012330
version 3) was in-frame fused to exon 11 of KANSL1 (nucleotide 2715 accession number NM_015443 version 3) (Fig. 4B). A reciprocal
KANSL1-KAT6B transcript was not amplified suggesting that it was absent or not expressed (data not shown). A) Gel electrophoresis of the
amplified products. Lanes 1–4: RT-PCR with primer combinations MORF-1234F/KANSL1–2969R1, MORF1234F/KANSL1–2900R1, MORF-1261F/KANSL1–2969R1,
and MORF-1261F/KANSL1–2900R1, respectively. The amplified cDNA fragments indicated the presence of a KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion transcript in the
examined tumor. Lanes 5 and 6: RT-PCR with primer combinations HMGA2–846F1/HMGA2–1021R and HMGA2–846F1/HMGA2–1112R, respectively, showed
expression of HMGA2. Lane 7: RT-PCR with primers MED12-Ex1-F/MED12-Ex3-R indicated expression of MED12. Lane 8: RT-PCR with primer set
HMGA1–284F1/HMGA1–648R indicated expression of HMGA1. B) Partial sequence chromatogram of the amplified cDNA fragment showing that exon 3 of
KAT6B is fused to exon 11 of KANSL1. C) Tumor tissue showing widespread immunohistochemical nuclear staining for the HMGA2 protein. RT-PCR
with the primer sets HMGA2–846F1/HMGA2–1021R and HMGA2–846F1/HMGA2–1112R amplified cDNA fragments from the tumor (Fig. 4A, lanes 5–6). The
results indicated that a full length HMGA2 transcript was expressed in the examined leiomyoma although no chromosome 12q rearrangements were
seen cytogenetically. Similarly, RT-PCR with the primer set HMGA1–284F1/HMGA1–648R1 amplified a HMGA1 cDNA fragment indicating that the
HMGA1 gene was expressed in the tumor (Fig. 4A, lane 8). The immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated nuclear expression of the HMGA2
protein (Fig. 4C). RT-PCR with the primers MED12-Ex1-F/MED12-Ex3-R amplified a 163 bp cDNA fragment which contained part of exon 1, the
entire exon 2, and part of exon 3 of the MED12 gene suggesting that MED12 is expressed (Fig. 4A, lane 7). Sequencing of the PCR product did
not show any mutation in the amplified cDNA fragment of MED12 (data not shown). We used RNA sequencing and the “grep” command on raw RNA
sequencing data to identify a KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion gene in a retroperitoneal leiomyoma carrying a t(10;17)(q22;q21) chromosome translocation.
The principle of this approach is based on the fact that RNA sequencing data produced on high throughput sequence platforms come as fastq
format files (filename.fastq). Fastq file is a text-based format (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FASTQ_format) and can be searched using the
“grep” command-line utility (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grep) to look for specific expressions. By default “grep” displays the lines where
matches occur. Using as “specific expression” a sequence of, for example, 20 nucleotides, the “grep” command will display all the lines
(sequence reads) which contain the 20 nucleotides of the specific expression. The sequences obtained by “grep” could be further analyzed
using BLAST (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) and BLAT (http://genome-euro.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgBlat?command=start) algorithms and
aligned against a known sequence database such as the human genomic plus transcript database. This approach was used before to detect the
fusion transcripts KAT6A-CREBBP and CIC-DUX4 as well as a novel alternative transcript of CSF1 in an acute myeloid leukemia, a small round
cell sarcoma, and tenosynovial giant cell tumors, respectively . Our hypothesis was that the translocation of the examined leiomyoma had
created a genomic breakpoint in intron 3 of KAT6B, similar to what was found in the four uterine leiomyomas reported by Moore et al. , one
of which had a balanced t(10;17)(q22;q23) as the sole chromosomal abnormality. This would enable a fusion of the first 3 exons of KAT6B with
a gene located in 17q21 to generate a chimeric transcript. Using the search term “TACCCCATGAGAAAGACCAG” which corresponds to the last 20
nucleotides of exon 3 of KAT6B (nt 1303–1322 in the sequence with accession number NM_012330 version 3), the “grep” command displayed a 101
bp chimeric KAT6B-KANSL1 sequence (Fig. 2B). Subsequent RT-PCR and Sanger sequencing of the PCR amplified fragments verified the
KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion transcript (Fig. 3A-B), whereas the reciprocal KANSL1-KAT6B fusion transcript could not be found (data not shown). The
KAT6B gene (in the original article the gene name was MORF) was identified as a KAT6A (also named MOZ)-related gene which displays 60%
identity and 66% similarity to MOZ . The KAT6B protein contains an N-terminal region referred to as the NEMM domain (N‐terminal region in
Enok, MOZ or MORF), C4HC3 PHD zinc fingers, a histone acetyltransferase (HAT) domain, an acidic region, and a C-terminal ser/met-rich
domain, as does KAT6A [25, 26]. The C-terminal part of the NEMM domain displays sequence similarity to the globular domains of linker
histones H1 and H5. These H1‐ and H5‐like regions, known as H15 domains, may mediate self‐association and interaction with core histones and
nucleosomes since the globular domains of histones H1 and H5 are known to have similar activities [27, 28]. Linker histone H1 is an
essential component of chromatin structure. H1 links nucleosomes into higher order structures. Histone H5 performs the same function as
histone H1 and replaces H1 in certain cells (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/entry/IPR005818). KAT6B was previously shown to be rearranged and
fused to CREBBP in an acute myeloid leukemia carrying a t(10;16)(q22;p13) chromosome translocation and then both KAT6B-CREBBP and CREBBP-
KAT6B chimeras were expressed . The KAT6B-CREBBP chimeric protein retains the part of KAT6B that encodes the N-terminal region NEMM domain,
the PHD zinc fingers, two nuclear localization signals, the HAT domain, and a portion of the acidic domain and the CBP protein downstream of
codon 29. In the reciprocal CREBBP-KAT6B fusion transcript, part of the acidic domain of MORF, the ser-rich region, and the highly met-
enriched C-terminal part are likely to be driven by the CREBBP promoter . Recently, constitutional mutations in KAT6B were found to cause
Genitopatellar syndrome (GPS) and the Say-Barber-Biesecker variant of Ohdo syndrome (SBBYSS) [29, 30]. Mutations leading to GPS occur in the
proximal portion of the last exon and lead to the expression of a protein without a C-terminal domain. Mutations leading to SBBYSS occur
either throughout the gene, leading to nonsense-mediated decay, or more distally in the last exon . KAT6B was also found to be disrupted in
a boy with a Noonan syndrome–like phenotype carrying a balanced constitutional de novo chromosome translocation, t(10;13)(q22.3;q34) . The
breakpoint in 10q22.3 disrupted the KAT6B gene within intron 3 after the first coding exon, i.e., the same intron in which the breakpoint
was mapped in four uterine leiomyomas with rearrangement of the KAT6B gene . A 50% reduction of mRNA expression levels of KAT6B was
confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR in the patient’s leukocytes . Haploinsufficiency of KAT6B impaired histone acetylation and was the
underlying cause of the phenotype. The MAPK signaling pathway represents a major target of KAT6B activity and KAT6B insufficiency causes
enhanced phosphorylation of several genes in this pathway . The KANSL1 gene encodes, according to the gene database, a nuclear protein that
is a subunit of two protein complexes, MLL1 and NSL1, involved in histone acetylation. The corresponding protein in Drosophila interacts
with K(lysine) acetyltransferase 8, which is also a subunit of both the MLL1 and NSL1 complexes (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/284058).
The KANSL1 protein consists of 1105 amino acid residues and contains at its C-terminal end the PEHE domain which interacts with the HAT
domain of KAT8 (also known as MOF and MYST1) [33, 34]. Recently, a study on the nonspecific lethal (NSL) complex showed that, within it,
KANSL1 acts as a scaffold protein interacting with four other subunits, including WDR5, which in turn binds KANSL2 . Mutations in KANSL1
cause the Koolen de Vries syndrome (also known as the chromosome 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome) (http://www.17q21.com/en/index.php). In
the present study, the KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion transcript, composed of exons 1 to 3 of KAT6B and exons 11 to 15 of KANSL1, is 3667 bp long, has
a 1398 bp long open reading frame, and codes for a 466 amino acid residue protein (Fig. 5). The putative KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion protein
contains the NEMM domain (including the linker histone H1/H5, domain H15) of KAT6B and the PEHE domain of KANSL1 suggesting an affinity for
chromatin (linker histone H1/H5) and interaction with the HAT domain of KAT8 (PEHE domain). The overall function might be regulation of
transcription. The junction GC is in red with yellow background and underlined. The four primers MORF-1234F, MORF-1261F, KANSL1–2900R1, and
KANSL1–2969R1 are underlined. The H15 linker histone H1/H5 globular (H15) domain profile (green) and PEHE domain (blue) are shown. At the
genomic level, KAT6B is transcribed from centromere to telomere whereas the transcription of KANSL1 proceeds in the opposite direction from
telomere to centromere. Hence, the formation of KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion is only possible if another genomic aberration, possibly an inversion,
occurs in addition to the chromosome translocation. Such an event would be analogous to the formation of EWSR1-DDIT3 in myxoid liposarcoma,
EWSR1-ERG in Ewing sarcoma, and the EPC-PHF1, JAZF1-PHF1, and MEAF6-PHF1 fusions in endometrial stromal sarcoma . No material was available
for FISH examinations to identify on which derivative chromosome the KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion was located. Presumably, though this is something
we cannot know, the KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion also existed in the four uterine leiomyomas with rearrangements of 10q and 17q and disruption of the
KAT6B previously reported by Moore et al. . The orientation of KAT6B in relation to KANSL1 may also explain the low frequency of the
t(10;17)(q22;q21). However, the frequency of KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion might be higher as it could be a pathogenetic candidate of partially
cryptic rearrangements of chromosome band 17q21 in the 34 uterine leiomyomas with cytogenetic aberrations involving the q arm of chromosome
10 (especially in the 25 such tumors with the breakpoint assigned to chromosome band 10q22) reported in the Mitelman Database of Chromosome
Aberrations and Gene Fusions in Cancer (http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/Chromosomes/Mitelman, Database last updated on May 13, 2014). Moore et al.
showed that one of their four studied uterine leiomyomas had a cryptic chromosome 17 rearrangement which could be found by interphase FISH
but not by GTG-banding. Since the three genes HMGA2, HMGA1, and MED12 are known to be frequently involved in the development of uterine
leiomyomas, we investigated them, too, in the present tumor with a t(10;17)(q22;q21). HMGA2 is overexpressed in leiomyomas both with and
without chromosome rearrangement of 12q14–15 suggesting a general role of this gene in leiomyoma development . Similarly, overexpression of
HMGA1 has been found in uterine leiomyomas both with and without microscopically visible 6p21 aberration [43, 44]. A number of recent
studies have reported mutations in exon 2 of the MED12 gene in the majority of uterine leiomyomas (50–70%) . Mutations of MED12 were found
in uterine leiomyomas with normal karyotype, deletions or rearrangements of the long arm of chromosome 7 as sole anomaly or 6p21~23
abnormalities leading to HMGA1 rearrangement/overexpression, and it was concluded that the MED12 mutations had preceded the chromosomal
aberrations . Mutations of MED12 have, on the other hand, not been detected in uterine leiomyomas with 12q14~15 rearrangements resulting in
overexpression of HMGA2 [45, 46]. According to Markowski et al. , these data “stratify two mutually exclusive pathways of leiomyomagenesis
with either rearrangements of HMGA2 reflected by clonal chromosome abnormalities affecting 12q14~15 or by mutations affecting exon 2 of
MED12”. Because uterine leiomyomas with MED12 mutations expressed significantly higher levels of the gene encoding wingless-type MMTV
integration site family, member 4 (WNT4), the authors suggested that the MED12 mutations exert their effects by activating the canonical Wnt
pathway . In a recent study, MED12 mutations were also found in 34% of leiomyoma/leiomyomatosis in pelvic/retroperitoneal sites but there
was no information about the status of HMGA2 and HMGA1 . The examined retroperitoneal leiomyoma in addition to the KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion
transcript also expressed HMGA2 and HMGA1 although there were no cytogenetically detectable aberrations of 12q14–15 (HMGA2) and 6p (HMGA1).
No evidence of mutations in exon 2 of MED12 was seen. The KAT6B-KANSL1 fusion gene might, thus, represent a third pathway of
leiomyomatogenesis involving the MLL1 and NSL1 protein complexes and histone acetylation but without chromosomal changes targeting HMGA-
genes and MED12-mutations. Obviously, additional cases must be studied before conclusions can be drawn. (XLSX) Click here for additional
data file. (XLSX) Click here for additional data file.
