Dear Editor, Recently, we experienced two cases of lacrimal sac tumors discovered in patients who presented with persistent epiphora after
receiving dacryocystorhynostomy (DCR). A 75-year-old female visited the clinic complaining persistent epiphora in the right eye for 5 years.
The patient was diagnosed with nasolacrimal duct obstruction in the right eye and received a DCR twice 2 years ago at a local hospital, but
epiphora persisted post operation. Lacrimal irrigation test revealed a reflux through contralateral puncta in the right eye. There was a
protrusion superior to medial canthus and a mass was palpable at the medial side of the right orbit. Computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed
a 3-cm-sized mass involving the right lacrimal sac and surrounding soft tissue of inferomedial orbit (Fig. 1A and 1B). An excisional biopsy
was performed and diagnosed as invasive squamous cell carcinoma from lacrimal sac. Wide resection of lacrimal sac and nasolacrimal duct via
anterior orbitotomy and medial maxillectomy via lateral rhinotomy was performed (Fig. 1C). The patient received adjuvant radiotherapy and is
under observation. The second case presents a 51-year-old female whose history included a DCR received at a local hospital for epiphora in
the left eye. She was complaining of persistent epiphora and swelling of upper and lower eyelids. The slit lamp examination and lacrimal
irrigation test was normal. Sinus endoscopy showed intact bony opening from the previous DCR. A CT scan was done and a mass occluding the
lacrimal sac and invading the inferomedial orbit was observed (Fig. 1D and 1E). An excisional biopsy was performed and the pathology report
diagnosed a papilloma with mild nuclear dysplasia, which has a risk of advancing into a squamous carcinoma. Wide resection of inferomedial
orbit including lacrimal sac and endoscopic medial maxillectomy was performed (Fig. 1F). Pathology report diagnosed a carcinoma arose from
papilloma, and the patient received adjuvant radiotherapy. This is the first case series of lacrimal sac tumors discovered in patients with
persistent epiphora after receiving DCR in Korea. A tumor originating from the lacrimal sac is a rare cause of epiphora , but a half of the
cases turn out to show malignancy with a high mortality rate, which raises a need for precaution. Tumors of lacrimal sac can be categorized
into three types. The first type is a primary tumor in the lacrimal sac, in which 72% of the cases are malignant. The second type is a tumor
invading from the nearby tissue such as eyelids, paranasal sinuses or orbits. The third type is an inflammatory tumor such as sarcoidosis or
Wegener's granulomatosis, which may require an internal medical approach to evaluate systemic symptoms. Epithelial tumor is the most common
type of primary tumor in the lacrimal sac. Benign epithelial tumors include papilloma and oncocytoma, and can be treated with surgical
resection . Malignant epithelial tumors include squamous cell carcinoma and transitional cell carcinoma, and a wide resection including
lacrimal canaliculi, sac and nasolacrimal duct with lateral rhinotomy is needed with preoperative and/or postoperative radiotherapy. If the
tumor is invasive, an orbital exenteration including wide resection, lymphadenectomy and paranasal sinus resection is required. The local
recurrence rate is 50% and the mortality rate is 50% for invasive squamous cell carcinoma and 100% for transitional cell carcinoma. Non-
epithelial tumor includes mesenchymal tumor and lymphoproliferative tumor . Because recent DCRs are performed using sinus endoscopes to
avoid scar formation, it is more difficult to find tumors than in conventional DCRs. The possibility of a tumor in the lacrimal sac must be
ruled out in the patients with a palpable mass superior to the medial canthus, a bloody reflux and/or a simultaneous exophthalmos .
Palpation around the medial canthal area and pathologic confirmation of tissue whenever discovering any sign of abnormality is important,
especially when eyelid swelling or epiphora persist after DCR. Imaging study of the lacrimal drainage system using CT scan is also a good
screening process. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Computed tomography (CT) scan and operation
images of epiphora patients diagnosed with tumor in lacrimal duct (A,B). Preoperative orbital CT images of the 75-year-old female patient
show a 3-cm mass at the right lacrimal sac. (C) An excisional biopsy was performed and a mass invading the lacrimal sac and the inferomedial
orbit was found (D) and (E). Preoperative orbital CT images of the 51-year-old female patient show a mass invading the left lacrimal sac and
the inferomedial orbit. (F) An excisional biopsy was performed and a mass invading the left lacrimal sac was observed.
