To evaluate the feasibility and security of complete remission (CR) of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) achieved with sorafenib
treatment, and investigate the previously described predictive factors in CR. The case of a patient who achieved CR of advanced HCC with
sorafenib treatment was analyzed. The case analysis was performed by a literature review of relevant reports retrieved from the PubMed
database. A 58-year-old male patient achieved CR of advanced HCC after 23 weeks of oral treatment with sorafenib alone for 41 months and
maintained CR for more than 35 months. Eleven reports worldwide have documented a total of twelve patients who achieved CR of advanced HCC,
including six with nonsurgical oral sorafenib treatment, four with surgical resection in the descent stage following oral sorafenib
treatment and two with oral sorafenib treatment for postoperative metastasis. For unresectable advanced HCC, sorafenib can significantly
improve progression-free survival and overall survival, achieving CR in some cases. In addition, surgical resection of advanced HCC in the
descent stage is possible following oral sorafenib treatment. For patients with postoperative distant metastasis of HCC, sorafenib treatment
also provides clinical benefits and can even achieve CR. Besides, long-term sorafenib administration is safe, and patients should
continually receive sorafenib to avoid recurrence after complete remission of cancer. Furthermore, early HFSR, rapid decline of AFP levels
and rapid tumor shrinking observed by imaging are known parameters describing sorafenib’s effects. Finally, it is important to assess the
gene locus of sorafenib sensitivity in HCC patients in future research. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) constitutes 90% of primary liver
cancer (PLC), which is the fifth most common malignant tumor and the third major cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. In recent years,
the global incidence of HCC has gradually increased, with more than 620,000 new patients currently diagnosed yearly. However, only 20% of
patients with HCC can receive curative local treatment such as surgical resection, liver transplantation, and radiofrequency ablation, among
others. In addition, the vast majority of patients present to the clinic with advanced stage disease; these patients typically die within
three to six months as a result of lack of effective treatment . Consequently, advanced HCC is known for its poor prognosis. Sorafenib is a
small-molecule multikinase inhibitor that mainly inhibits kinases including Raf kinase, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR),
and platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR). Two randomized, double-blinded, controlled large phase III clinical trials, the SHARP
(Sorafenib HCC Assessment Randomized Protocol trial) and the Asia-Pacific (conducted in the Asia-Pacific region) trials clearly demonstrated
that sorafenib is currently the only systemic agent, not only improving progression-free survival significantly, but also enhancing overall
survival in patients with unresectable advanced HCC . Unfortunately, a complete remission (CR) was not achieved in patients of the sorafenib
group, indicating that achieving CR is rare after sorafenib treatment. In this study, we present a case of advanced HCC associated with
portal vein tumor thrombosis; the patient was treated with sorafenib alone for 41 months and achieved CR that was maintained for more than
35 months. Only 12 advanced HCC patients were previously described who achieved CR after sorafenib administration. To the best of our
knowledge, the case reported here represents the longest documented sustained CR of primary liver lesions with sorafenib treatment; it is
also the longest administration time recorded. The 12 previous cases of CR were assessed to explore the feasibility and security of CR and
the previously described predictive factors. The patient was a 58-year-old male, who had fatigue and discomfort without obvious incentive in
1990. This patient had no other discomforts such as fever, vomiting, abdominal pain or diarrhea. Neither xanthochromia nor icteric sclera
was detected. After being admitted into a local hospital, the patient was diagnosed with a hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection following
detection of hepatitis B and elevated transaminase levels. His condition improved upon hospitalization and treatment. In 1997, the HBV
marker was negative and liver function normal. During a routine examination in 2008, this patient had an elevated alpha-fetoprotein (AFP,
which is the specific tumor marker of HCC) level of 56 IU/ml (normal level 0 to 8 IU/ml). Computed tomography (CT) scans showed the presence
of cirrhosis, splenomegaly, and a 0.9 cm × 0.8 cm small nodule of an undetermined nature in the right liver lobe. The patient was
consequently given a diagnostic intervention of a focal liver lesion under local anesthesia by transcatheter hepatic arterial
chemoembolization (TACE) on November 19, 2008 (drugs administered included: epirubicin, 20 mg; hydroxycamptothecine, 20 mg and ultra-fluid
lipiodol, 3 ml). No positive marker was detected during the surgery and anti-inflammatory, liver-protective and symptomatic treatment was
given postoperatively. Four days after the surgery, the patient’s AFP level declined to 92.64 ng/ml (normal level 0 to 20 ng/ml). On January
13, 2009, the reexamination results revealed that the AFP level had slightly increased to 224.55 ng/ml. CT scans demonstrated the presence
of a small 1.9 cm × 1.4 cm sheet-like low-density shallow in the left lobe of liver, the nature of which was yet to be determined. Contrast
ultrasonography data indicated the presence of a hypoechoic nodule in the left liver, supporting the diagnosis of a small HCC. The patient
consequently underwent radiofrequency ablation (RFA) surgery on January 19, 2009 (needle length, 4 cm; temperature, 105°C; voltage, 150 V;
treatment time, 10 min). A month later, the AFP level dropped to a normal level (15.43 ng/ml). During follow-up, the patient’s AFP level
elevated to 29.25 ng/ml on April 22, 2009. Contrast ultrasonography data showed that the arterial phase on the top right of the primary
tumor was significantly enhanced. As the disease can reoccur after the first RFA, the patient underwent a second RFA surgery on April 24,
2009 (needle length, 5 cm; temperature, 105°C; voltage, 150 V; treatment time, 10 min), followed by two TACE surgeries on May 4 and
September 14, 2009, respectively (drugs administered included: epirubicin, 40 mg; hydroxycamptothecin (HCPT), 20 mg and ultra-fluid
lipiodol, 10 ml). Postoperative follow-up data showed that the patient was disease free. On October 25, 2010, the patient was reexamined in
Sichuan Cancer Hospital. The AFP level was found to be significantly high at 51.750 ng/ml. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans showed
that the liver had multiple masses (maximal size, 5.4 cm × 7.9 cm) associated with portal vein tumor thrombosis (lesion fusion range,
7.7 cm × 7.9 cm × 6.3 cm; Figure 1a). The examination data from outpatient services showed that the patient’s physical condition was
generally good (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) score, 0), with no xanthochromia or icteric sclera, no positive signs of illness
and no ascites. The blood coagulation function was normal, and liver function was ranked to Child-Pugh A (Child-Pugh is the grading standard
of liver functional assessment, and for the choice of treatment plan provides an important reference). Accordingly, the patient was
diagnosed with advanced HCC, classified as stage C of the Barcelona clinical liver cancer staging system.Figure 1 The tumor shrank step by
step during early sorafenib treatment. (a) Before targeted therapy, tumor size was 7.7 cm × 7.9 cm × 6.3 cm; (b) week 5 of targeted therapy,
tumor size decreased by 39.8%; (c) week 15 of targeted therapy, tumor size decreased by 96.9%. The tumor shrank step by step during early
sorafenib treatment. (a) Before targeted therapy, tumor size was 7.7 cm × 7.9 cm × 6.3 cm; (b) week 5 of targeted therapy, tumor size
decreased by 39.8%; (c) week 15 of targeted therapy, tumor size decreased by 96.9%. From October 26, 2010, the patient received outpatient
treatment of daily oral sorafenib. The initial dose of oral sorafenib was 800 mg/day, twice daily (morning and night). Three days later, the
patient had a severe hand-foot skin reaction (HFSR) with persistent diarrhea (four to six times daily). As a result, the dose of oral
sorafenib was adjusted to 400 mg/day (twice daily). The HFSR symptoms were treated with urea ointment, aloe cream, and emollient cream by
local topical therapy. The diarrhea was treated by oral administration of smectite and loperamide hydrochloride The above symptoms were
gradually alleviated after appropriate symptomatic treatments. The dose of oral sorafenib was adjusted to 600 mg/day (twice daily) from week
15 and then restored to the standard dose of 800 mg/day from week 23. A follow-up was conducted by strictly following the assistance project
requirement of the China Charity Federation. The outpatient reexamination involved monthly examinations of AFP levels, liver function, and
blood coagulation function, with bimonthly examinations by MRI. Follow-up data showed that the HFSR and diarrhea were alleviated after oral
sorafenib treatment for six months and the patient engaged in daily life and work during treatment. In week 5, MRI scans showed that the
size of the tumor lesion declined by 39.8% to 7.5 cm × 5.4 cm × 5.7 cm; necrosis occurred in partial tissues of the tumor mass, as indicated
by a clearer edge (Figure 1b); and AFP levels declined by more than 50%. In week 15, MRI scans showed that the size of tumor lesion declined
by more than 96.9% to 2.8 cm × 1.7 cm × 2 cm; there was no tumor activity in the artery phase (Figure 1c); and the AFP level was close to
the normal range, 54.33 ng/ml. In week 23, MRI scans showed that the tumor mass had completely disappeared (Figure 2a), and the AFP level
had decreased to a normal level (Table 1). According the Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria, the tumor examined
by MRI had completely disappeared over four weeks, suggesting the achievement of CR.Figure 2 Follow-up after complete remission achieved,
there is no recurrence of tumor. (a) Week 23 of targeted therapy, the tumor has completely disappeared; (b) year 2 of targeted therapy, the
tumor has completely disappeared; (c) year 3 of targeted therapy, the tumor has completely disappeared.Table 1 Dynamic changes in alpha-
fetoprotein (AFP) level of the patient with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma before and after sorafenib treatment Detection time Detection
method AFP (ng/ml) Assessment 2010.10.25Chemiluminescence51750.00Normal range, 0–20 ng/ml2010.11.29Chemiluminescence21668.00Decrease by >50%
in week 52011.02.16Chemiluminescence54.33Close to normal in week 152011.04.14Chemiluminescence<10Normal in week
232011.05.18–13.11.12Chemiluminescence<10Normal for >30 months Follow-up after complete remission achieved, there is no recurrence of tumor.
(a) Week 23 of targeted therapy, the tumor has completely disappeared; (b) year 2 of targeted therapy, the tumor has completely disappeared;
(c) year 3 of targeted therapy, the tumor has completely disappeared. Dynamic changes in alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level of the patient with
advanced hepatocellular carcinoma before and after sorafenib treatment To date, MRI examination shows that the tumor had completely
disappeared in the patient over a period of 35 months. During follow-up, no radiographic evidence indicated the recurrence of HCC
(Figure 2b,c), and the AFP level remained within the normal range. The patient was engaged in normal daily life and work and achieved
sustained CR of advanced HCC. Relevant reports were searched and retrieved manually from the PubMed database. Since the availability in 2007
of sorafenib for treatment of advanced HCC, a total of 11 reports worldwide have documented 12 patients who achieved CR of advanced HCC with
this therapy (Table 2).Table 2 Case summary of complete remission (CR) of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma achieved by sorafenib treatment
Case No. Age (year), gender Metastatic sites Initial dose CR time (month) CR duration (month) Publication time Journal Reference Note 178,
maleLung4005617/10/08 Journal of Hematology & Oncology So et al. First case of CR254, maleLung40018Unknown1/9/09 American Journal of
Transplantation Yeganeh et al. Solitary pulmonary metastasis post liver transplantation359, malePortal vein40061614/3/10 Liver International
ISSN Irtan et al. Two cases reported in the same report; CR achieved by surgical resection in the descent stage following sorafenib
treatment.457, malePortal vein40061214/3/10 Liver International ISSN Irtan et al. 574, malePortal vein20081623/3/10 Targeted Oncology Wang
et al. Initial dose at a low level667, malePortal lymph node4006631/8/10 Medical Oncology Chelis et al. HIV-hepatitis B virus (HBV) co-
infected with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma756, maleThoracic diaphragm4006620/4/11 Journal of Clinical Oncology Curtit et al. CR
achieved by surgical resection in the descent stage following sorafenib treatment.884, malePortal vein4006611/4/11 BMC Gastroenterology
Sacco et al. First case of CR in hepatitis C patients in older people976, femaleLung2004822/12/11 Oncology Inuzuka et al. First female
case1060, malePortal lymph node40011 days1224/7/12 Oncology Mizukami et al. Shortest time to achieve CR1152, maleLung40064210/10/12 Journal
of Gastrointestinal Cancer Lulla et al. Longest duration of CR1266, malePortal vein4006815/2/13 World Journal of Gastrointestinal Oncology
Kim et al. Case summary of complete remission (CR) of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma achieved by sorafenib treatment Sorafenib is a
small-molecule multikinase inhibitor that primarily inhibits Raf kinase, VEGFR, and PDGFR. It is unique in targeting the Raf/Mek/Erk (MAP
Kinase) pathway , as HCC mainly involves overexpression of the RAF/MEK/ERK pathway In addition, extracellular activation of VEGFR and PDGFR
are involved in the formation of HCC and portal vein tumor thrombosis. It is assumed that sorafenib has dual activity by both inhibiting
tumor cell proliferation as well as tumor angiogenesis . Two large stage III clinical trials, the SHARP trial and the Asia Pacific trial,
reported that sorafenib administration increases the survival time of advanced HCC, however neither trial achieved CR in cases of advanced
HCC . During the literature search, only 11 reports were found worldwide that had documented 12 patients with CR of advanced HCC since the
introduction of sorafenib for the treatment of advanced HCC in 2007. The twelve cases of CR included six with nonsurgical oral sorafenib
treatment, four with surgical resection in the descent stage following oral sorafenib treatment and two with oral sorafenib treatment for
postoperative metastasis . In the present study, the case of a 58-year-old male patient who achieved CR of advanced HCC associated with
portal vein tumor thrombosis is reported. In this patient, CR was achieved after 23 weeks of oral sorafenib treatment; he was treated with
sorafenib alone for a total of 41 months and maintained CR for more than 35 months. To the best of our knowledge, it is the longest
documented sustained CR of primary liver lesions with sorafenib treatment; it is also the longest administration time recorded. The results
of this case analysis demonstrate that for unresectable advanced HCC, sorafenib treatment can significantly improve progression-free
survival and overall survival, achieving CR in some cases. In addition, sorafenib treatment enables surgical resection of the tumor lesion
in the descent stage of advanced HCC. In cases of postoperative distant metastasis of HCC, administration of sorafenib also provides
clinical benefits and can even achieve CR. In the reports reviewed in this manuscript, the cases of CR lacked definite pathological
diagnosis. Among the six patients with nonsurgical oral sorafenib treatment, only one was diagnosed as HCC by liver biopsy whilst the other
five patients had no pathological diagnosis. Of these, two were diagnosed with HCC by positron emission tomography (PET)-CT, and the
remaining three patients shared the following three common characteristics: (1) a history of hepatitis; (2) typical imaging findings of HCC;
and (3) abnormally elevated AFP, which returned to normal after treatment with sorafenib. It is known that in the Asia Pacific, the majority
of HCC patients have a background of liver cirrhosis, the specificity of typical imaging findings, combined with the criterion of AFP
>400 ng/ml resulting in HCC diagnosis of close to 100% . In the case reported in this present study (this 58-year-old male patient), both
the continuous shrinking of tumor size in the MRI scans and the rapidly decreasing AFP levels during sorafenib treatment indicate that the
CR of advanced HCC was induced by sorafenib. This case meets the diagnostic criteria for advanced HCC. For advanced HCC patients under
nonsurgical oral sorafenib treatment, MRI imaging diagnosis combined with the criterion of AFP >400 ng/ml provides an objective indicator
for HCC diagnosis and therapeutic assessment. The most common adverse reactions of sorafenib comprise rash, diarrhea, HFSR, fatigue, and
alopecia. Other adverse reactions include nausea and vomiting, anorexia, and hypertension . However, these adverse reactions can be easily
controlled, and patients seemed to well tolerate the drug in the SHARP and Asia Pacific trials . Our patient had excellent adherence to the
medication and did not terminate oral sorafenib even with severe HFSR and diarrhea. This patient continued sorafenib medication under
appropriate symptomatic treatments. This is in contrast to the patients included in the SHARP trial, where the discontinuation rate of
medication was up to 36% . Most cases of CR were discontinued from taking sorafenib because of economic reasons and/or the drug’s adverse
effects. However, it is unknown whether CR is maintained following discontinuation. The patient reported here continued sorafenib treatment
after he had achieved CR. To date (March 25, 2014), around 41 treatment months have been sustained. His quality of life has not been
affected and other indicators such as liver function are normal: he lives a normal life and works without problem. Therefore, long-term drug
use seems safe, and HCC patients should continue to receive sorafenib after CR to avoid recurrence. Studies show that early HFSR and the
rapid decline of AFP levels are indicative of the antitumor activity of sorafenib, thus supporting the good therapeutic effects of sorafenib
on HCC patients. These two parameters can therefore be used as early indicators for predicting the therapeutic effects of sorafenib
treatment, which will help to adjust the treatment plan. Our patient had severe HFSR after three days of medication; meanwhile, his AFP
level decreased rapidly to more than 50% in early treatment. These findings are supported by previous works. Not only that, MRI scans showed
rapid shrinkage of the tumor size during early sorafenib treatment (39.8% in week 5 and by 96.9% in week 15), which indicated that rapid
tumor shrinking on the imaging may be another indicator of the therapeutic effects of sorafenib. HCC has unique molecular biological
characteristics. Targets of sorafenib, including Raf kinase, VEGFR and PDGFR are not expressed on all HCC, which explains why CR of advanced
HCC is rare after treatment with sorafenib. If the gene locus of sorafenib sensitivity in HCC could be assessed in HCCs, patients might be
able to receive individualized treatments, which perhaps would lead to more individuals achieving CR. Although the lack of biopsy prevented
us from exploring the case at the molecular level, we believe this case is of great value, providing evidence of individual cancer biology,
which merits further investigation. In conclusion, for unresectable advanced HCC, sorafenib can significantly improve progression-free
survival and overall survival, achieving CR in some cases. In addition, surgical resection of advanced HCC in the descent stage is possible
following oral sorafenib treatment. For patients with postoperative distant metastasis of HCC, sorafenib treatment also provides clinical
benefits and can even achieve CR. The adverse reactions of sorafenib are predictable. Patients might get clinical benefits and even achieve
CR by adopting reasonable and accurate measures for the early sorafenib adverse reactions; this could increase patient’s willingness during
treatment to continue sorafenib medication. We consider sorafenib very safe for long-term administration, which can prevent recurrence after
CR. Furthermore, early HFSR, rapid decline of AFP levels and rapid tumor shrinking are the previously observed parameters of sorafenib’s
curative effects. Finally, future research is necessary to assess the gene locus of sorafenib sensitivity in HCC. Written informed consent
was obtained from the patient for the publication of this report and any accompanying images. Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions DL has made substantial contributions to acquisition of data, and analysis and
interpretation of data, has been involved in drafting the manuscript and revising it critically for important intellectual content. AL has
made substantial contributions to acquisition of data, and analysis and interpretation of data. JP has made substantial contributions to
conception and design, and has given final approval of the version to be published. YH and XF have made substantial contributions to
acquisition of data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information Daizhong Liu is the first authors.
