Dear Editor, Refractive surgeons have become interested in surface ablation because this procedure is free of flap complications, has less
iatrogenic ectasia and yields better visual quality. Dealing with corneal haze after surgery, a potential complication of surface ablation,
is very challenging for refractive surgeons . Phototherapeutic keratectomy (PTK) is one option that may help some patients. However, with
this procedure, postoperative vision is unpredictable because of refractive changes, usually hyperopic shifts after PTK . We report our
experience with two patients who developed subepithelial haze after surface ablation; both were successfully treated with PTK coupled with
photorefractive keratectomy (PRK) with pre-PRK planning using intraoperative skiascopy. Case 1, a 22-year-old male patient was referred to
an out-patient clinic for corneal haze after epi-laser in situ keratomileusis procedures on both eyes. The patient had been experiencing
blurred vision at one month postoperatively, and was referred to our institution at three months postoperatively with progressive, gradual
loss of visual acuity in both eyes. Vision was 20 / 200 (20 / 32 with -4.00 diopters = -1.25 Dcyl 180°) in the right eye and 20 / 200 (20 /
40 with -4.50 D = -0.75 Dcyl 180°) in the left. Ultrasonic pachymetry measurements were 574 µm in the right eye and 548 µm in the left. Slit
lamp biomicroscopy revealed dense subepithelial opacification in both eyes (Fig. 1A) with moderate obscuration (grade 3) of the iris and
lens. We planned a combined therapy of PTK-PRK-mitomycin C soaking-amniotic membrane transplantation for removal of the left eye corneal
haze. Transepithelial PTK (7.0-mm diameter, depth 82 mm) was performed using excimer laser (Z100; Bausch & Lomb Surgical, Rochester, NY,
USA) until we observed the removal of the epithelium. After PTK, intraoperative skiascopy was performed in the operating room.
Interestingly, the skiascope beam was clearly seen and the refraction was -3.00 D = -0.50 Dcyl 180°, which was different from the value
obtained before PTK. PRK (6.0-mm diameter, depth 61 mm) was performed, guided by the intraoperative skiascopy data. After PRK, a merocel
sponge soaked with mitomycin C 0.02% was placed over the cornea for 1 minute. Temporary amniotic membrane transplantation was performed.
Topical Cravit and Pred Forte were each prescribed, four times daily for a month. One month after surgery, the identical procedure was
performed on the right eye. Two months after left eye surgery, the subepithelial haze had almost disappeared and the corneal surface
appeared stable (Fig. 1B). On last follow-up, 4 years after surgery, vision was 20 / 32 (20 / 20 with plano = -0.50 Dcyl 175°) in the right
eye and 20 / 32 (20 / 20 with +0.50 D) in the left eye (Fig. 1C). Case 2, a 27-year-old female patient was referred for corneal haze after
laser-assisted subepithelial keratectomy. Three months postoperatively, subepithelial haze appeared in the right eye and became
progressively worse. One year after laser-assisted subepithelial keratectomy, vision was 20 / 200 (20 / 20 with -1.75 D = -1.00 Dcyl 10°) in
the right eye. Ultrasonic pachymetry measurement was 462 µm in the right eye. Slit lamp biomicroscopy revealed a dense region of central
subepithelial opacification in the right eye (Fig. 2A), with moderate obscuration (grade 3) of the iris and lens. The surgical procedure
described above was performed. Two months postoperatively, the cornea appeared clear and the corneal surface seemed stable (Fig. 2B). At
last follow-up 1 year after surgery, her vision was 20 / 20 (20 / 20 with -0.50 D) in the right eye (Fig. 2C). To date, the exact mechanism
of corneal haze development after surface ablation is uncertain. Regardless of the technique used, a key event after excimer photoablation
is epithelial injury, which triggers cytokine release . When basement membrane and Bowman's membrane are removed by surface ablation, the
regenerated epithelium is supposed to be hyperplastic and adhere strongly to stroma. Therefore, manual debridement in management of corneal
haze carries the risk of uneven stromal exposure. To address this problem, we conducted transepithelial PTK until the stroma was adequately
exposed. Although PTK has been reported to be effective in the management of superficial corneal haze and irregularity in many conditions,
refractive changes and irregular ablation after PTK are frequently reported . Patients who suffer complications after refractive surgery
fully expect good uncorrected vision after retreatment. It is probable that unwanted refractive errors occur after PRK, considering the
significant ablation depth of PTK. Therefore, to avoid unwanted refractive changes after PTK, intraoperative skiascopy was performed with
patients in the sitting position. We ablated the cornea with PRK; however, this procedure was guided by our measurements of adjusted
refractive errors. Though we present data from only two patients, we suggest that this approach is unique to our practice and an effective
means of both removing corneal haze and avoiding corneal irregularity and refractive error after retreatment. No potential conflict of
interest relevant to this article was reported. (A) Preoperative slit-lamp photograph demonstrating region of dense subepithelial
opacification in the corneal center. (B) Postoperative (2 months) photographs show that the subepithelial haze has largely disappeared. (C)
Slit-lamp photograph showing resolution of central subepithelial hae without reccur 4 years after surgery (left eye). (A) Preoperative slit-
lamp photograph demonstrating region of dense subepithelial opacification in thecorneal center. (B) Postoperative (2 months) photographs
show that the subepithelial haze has largely disappeared. (C) Slit-lamp photograph showing resolution of central subepithelial hazy 1 year
after surgery (right eye).
