For locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma, cisplatin-based chemotherapy is the standard regimen. Nevertheless, almost all
responding patients experience recurrence within the first year. When patients who have received prior cisplatin-based therapy become
resistant, combination therapy with gemcitabine and paclitaxel has been reported. Few published case reports have addressed the utility of
paclitaxel/cisplatin/gemcitabine combination therapy as second-line chemotherapy for advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma. This is
the first report describing paclitaxel/cisplatin/gemcitabine combination therapy for metastatic urothelial carcinoma arising in a
transplanted renal allograft and leading to a successful outcome. We present a case of metastatic urothelial carcinoma of a renal allograft
in a 32-year-old Japanese man with a history of kidney transplantation ten years prior. Because the patient’s serum creatinine increased,
hemodialysis was resumed, and the surgical allograft was removed. Multiple lung metastases were resistant to gemcitabine/cisplatin adjuvant
chemotherapy, so paclitaxel/cisplatin/gemcitabine combination chemotherapy was instituted. After paclitaxel/cisplatin/gemcitabine
chemotherapy, all pulmonary metastatic tumors disappeared. The patient has survived without disease progression for more than four years
since treatment. Paclitaxel/cisplatin/gemcitabine combination therapy may be effective and lead to a survival advantage in patients with
locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma when used as second-line chemotherapy following cisplatin-based therapy. However,
further investigations may be required to confirm and evaluate the significance of this treatment. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s13104-015-0982-6) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. For locally advanced or metastatic
urothelial carcinoma (UC), methotrexate/vinblastine/doxorubicin/cisplatin (MVAC) or gemcitabine/cisplatin (GC) combination chemotherapy
represents the standard regimen. However when patients who have received prior cisplatin-based therapy become resistant, there is no
standard regimen for second-line chemotherapy. In general, malignant tumors occur more frequently in renal transplant recipients receiving
immunosuppressive therapy. These malignancies are often more aggressive and are associated with a poor prognosis . We report a case of
metastatic UC of a renal allograft in a patient who showed long-term recurrence-free survival after being treated with a combination of
paclitaxel, cisplatin, and gemcitabine (PCG). A 32-year-old Japanese man presented with gross hematuria. He had undergone a kidney
transplant ten years earlier for end-stage kidney disease with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis at that time, he received a living kidney
allograft from his 51-year-old father. On presentation, an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a mass of approximately 4 cm in
the allograft collecting system. Chest CT showed multiple lung metastases. The results of annual screening with abdominal CT and
ultrasonography had previously been normal. The patient’s Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status was 1 at this time.
Ureteroscopic biopsy was performed, and histopathology showed a grade 3, urothelial carcinoma. The clinical diagnosis was renal pelvis
cancer of stage T2N0M1 according to the TNM classification of Malignant Tumors (7th edition). After hemodialysis was resumed, we planned GC
neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Gemcitabine (GEM) was administered at 1,000 mg/m2 on non-dialysis days 1, 8, and 15. Cisplatin (CDDP) was given
intravenously at 35 mg/m2 on dialysis day 2. This regimen was repeated every four weeks. However, the tumor showed progression following two
courses of GC treatment (Figure 1), so we decided to perform renal allograftectomy. Histopathological examination confirmed a grade 3
invasive UC with final staging of pT3 (Figure 2).Figure 1 Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan of the patient. Abdominal CT scan prior to
surgery showed a mass measuring 6.4 × 3.7 cm in the transplanted kidney. A double-J ureteral stent was placed.Figure 2 Hematoxylin & eosin
(HE) staining. Microscopic appearance showed urothelial carcinoma, grade3. Some of the nuclei were very large, irregular, and
hyperchromatic. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan of the patient. Abdominal CT scan prior to surgery showed a mass measuring
6.4 × 3.7 cm in the transplanted kidney. A double-J ureteral stent was placed. Hematoxylin & eosin (HE) staining. Microscopic appearance
showed urothelial carcinoma, grade3. Some of the nuclei were very large, irregular, and hyperchromatic. After the surgery, one course of
postoperative GC treatment was administered. Evaluation with chest CT according to RECIST guidelines (version 1.1) showed increased size of
the pulmonary metastatic tumors, judged as progressive disease (PD). As a result, paclitaxel/cisplatin/gemcitabine (PCG) combination therapy
was started. The PCG protocol consisted of GEM 1,000 mg/m2 and paclitaxel (PTX) 80 mg/m2 on non-dialysis days 1 and 8 plus CDDP 35 mg/m2 on
dialysis day 2. This course was repeated every three weeks. After two courses of PCG, pulmonary metastatic tumors showed a 45% size
reduction on chest CT, judged as a partial response (PR). After seven courses of PCG chemotherapy, CT demonstrated the disappearance of all
pulmonary metastatic tumors, judged as a complete response (CR) (Figure 3). Toxicity was evaluated using the Common Terminology Criteria for
Adverse Events (CTCAE) as a grade 2 neutropenia. There was no severe toxicity. Currently, the patient has been tumor-free for 54 months
following treatment.Figure 3 Three phases of chest CT scans showing the metastatic tumors. A, Before paclitaxel, cisplatin, and gemcitabine
(PCG) chemotherapy. B, Reduction of the tumors after two courses of PCG. C, Disappearance of all metastatic tumors after seven courses of
PCG. Three phases of chest CT scans showing the metastatic tumors. A, Before paclitaxel, cisplatin, and gemcitabine (PCG) chemotherapy. B,
Reduction of the tumors after two courses of PCG. C, Disappearance of all metastatic tumors after seven courses of PCG. The overall
incidence of de novo malignancies after renal transplantation is much higher than that in the general population because the former patients
receive immunosuppressive therapy . The risk of post-transplant UC is higher among patients with aristolochic acid nephropathy (AAN) (also
called Chinese-herb nephropathy) and those among patients with analgesic nephropathy (AN) because of prior analgesic abuse . Several cases
of UC (bladder, ureter, and renal pelvis involvement) have been reported in renal transplant patients without AAN or AN . Renal pelvis
cancer following a kidney transplantation almost occurs in the native kidney. The cause is unknown, but post-transplant UC of a renal
allograft rarely occurs in the long-term postoperative period . To detect malignancies, an intensive follow-up regimen including urine
cytology should be adopted after renal transplantation . MVAC combination chemotherapy is the standard regimen for locally advanced or
metastatic UC . A combination of gemcitabine and cisplatin (GC) has shown similar survival times compared with MVAC but with better safety .
GC is now considered to be another standard regimen for patients with locally advanced or metastatic UC. However, an effective treatment
strategy has not yet been established for patients who show resistance to initial treatment such as GC therapy. Some authors have reported
the efficacy of gemcitabine/paclitaxel (GEM/PTX) combination therapy and the PCG combination therapy that we evaluated in our study . The
overall response rate (complete or partial) with GEM/PTX treatment following initial cisplatin or carboplatin-based therapy ranges from 60
to 66.7% . With PCG therapy, an overall response rate of 77.6% and median survival time of 24 months have been reported, and 8.6% of the
patients in this study had received prior adjuvant chemotherapy . A randomized phase III study has been performed looking at the use of GC
and PCG for locally advanced or metastatic UC; the PCG response rate was 55.5%, significantly higher than the 43.6% response rate with GC
therapy . In this study, the addition of paclitaxel to the GC combination provided a 3.1-month survival benefit (15.8 months median overall
survival for PCG versus 12.7 months for GC), but this did not reach significance. Our case report shows that patients can survive for a
long-period of time after PCG treatment. Thus, PCG has potential as a novel first or second-line chemotherapy regimen for locally advanced
or metastatic UC. It is important to be able to predict which regimen is effective in patients with UC before the initiation of
chemotherapy, and we should be able to avoid ineffective treatment. The survival rate of metastatic bladder cancer patients treated with
either GC or PCG is significantly higher among patients with low ERCC1 levels . ERCC1 has been reported to be an independent prognosis
prediction factor connected with platinum-based therapy for UC . RRM1 has also been identified as a significant indicator of survival in
patients receiving GC, with low expression levels correlating with greater survival benefit . However, biomarkers indicating which regimen,
GC or PCG, was more effective were not expressed. In this way, personalized medicine based on biomarkers has not been completely established
yet, it would make a remarkable contribution to cancer therapy in the near future. For dialysis patients, although it is possible to give
GEM and PTX on non-hemodialysis days at the same dosage as in patients with normal renal function, it is necessary to reduce the dose of
cisplatin by 50% to avoid nephrotoxicity; thus, hemodialysis initiation one hour after injection is recommended . With these modifications,
the plasma level of free cisplatin available for anti-tumor activity is almost the same as in patients with normal renal function . There
have been no reports of PCG treatment for hemodialysis patients; however, PCG was safely performed in our case. The prognosis for metastatic
UC is poor, with an average survival of less than six months for untreated patients . Therefore, effective chemotherapy is needed for
advanced or metastatic UC. This is the first report describing PCG combination therapy for metastatic UC arising in a transplanted renal
allograft. PCG may have shown successful outcomes in our reported case, but further analyses on larger patient groups would be required to
provide stronger evidence to support this therapeutic intervention. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication
of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this
journal. Urothelial carcinoma Methotrexate/vinblastine/doxorubicin/cisplatin Gemcitabine/cisplatin Paclitaxel/cisplatin/gemcitabine
Paclitaxel Cisplatin Gemcitabine Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions YK
obtained consent from the patient, wrote the manuscript and made manuscript revisions. YT provided valuable help on the case report. NI, and
MO discussed the results and commented on the manuscript. ST and NN were responsible for critical revision of the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.
