The prognosis of relapsed acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in elderly patients is dismal, even if the AML exhibits a good prognostic karyotype,
such as inv(16)(p13.1q22). We present a 72-year-old female with AML with inv(16)(p13.1q22) who suffered five episodes of relapse with
temporary complete remission. Maintenance chemotherapy with oral cytarabine ocfosfate hydrate eventually produced persistent molecular
complete remission of her AML that had not been induced by conventional regimens including intensive chemotherapy and low dose cytarabine
therapy. The high level of tolerability to oral cytarabine ocfosfate hydrate may offer elderly patients with this type of AML a good chance
for a cure. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13045-014-0100-6) contains supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with inv(16)(p13.1q22) is characterized by a favorable prognosis and good response to
treatment with cytarabine . The strategy of treatment for AML with inv(16)(p13.1q22) is based on a series of intensive chemotherapy, which
is considered more curable than prolonged maintenance chemotherapy with low-dose anti-leukemic agents even in the elderly . On the other
hand, low-dose cytarabine therapy (LDAC) is recommended for elderly patients with AML who are not considered suitable for intensive
chemotherapy , but LDAC can rarely induce persistent remission . Once they relapse, their prognosis is usually dismal, even if the AML is
associated with inv(16)(p13.1q22) . In December 2006, a 72-year-old female was admitted to our hospital presenting with general malaise and
dyspnea. A physical examination revealed anemic palpebral conjunctiva and purpura of the extremities. The complete blood count indicated
severe anemia and thrombocytopenia as well as mild leukocytosis with 22.5% blast cells (Additional file 1). A bone marrow examination showed
a total nucleated cell count of 41,000/μL with 67.0% blasts (Additional file 2: Figure S1A). A cytogenetic analysis of the bone marrow cells
with G-banding showed 46,XX,inv(16)(p13.1q22) in all 20 dividing cells (Additional file 2: Figure S1B). Based on these findings, the patient
was diagnosed as having AML with inv(16)(p13.1q22). The patient achieved complete remission (CR) after one course of induction chemotherapy
comprising behenoyl cytarabine and daunorubicin according to a study protocol (Table 1). However, the AML relapsed four months after the
completion of the last cycle of consolidation therapy. Re-induction chemotherapy using the same regimen as the first induction induced a
second CR. Thereafter, the patient suffered four further episodes of relapse with temporary remission (Figure 1). The failure to achieve
durable remission even with high-dose consolidation therapy and its toxicities prompted us to select palliative care with LDAC at the third
relapse. After achieving the sixth CR, the patient declined further treatment with LDAC due to toxicity. Therefore, oral cytarabine
ocfosfate hydrate (SPAC) was started in order to maintain remission in November 2011. The SPAC therapy was not associated with any
significant toxicity. The CBFB-MYH11 fusion mRNA in the peripheral blood became negative after twelve courses of SPAC therapy, which was
terminated in October 2013. The patient has since remained in molecular remission without chemotherapy (Figure 1).Table 1 Chemotherapy
regimens and adverse events in the present case Chemotherapy No. Regimen PS BI Grade of adverse event* BW (kg) Complications Neutropenia FN
or infecton Anemia Thrombocytopenia Anorexia Weight loss Onset to 1st CRInduction1BHAC 200 mg/m2 IV day 1-8310043443144.4DNR 40 mg/m2 IV day
1-3Consolidation2BHAC 200 mg/m2 IV day 1-5210043443141.6SepsisMIT 7 mg/m2 IV day 1-33BHAC 200 mg/m2 IV day 1-5110043333140.8DNR 25 mg/m2 IV
day 1-2ETP 100 mg/m2 IV day 1-34BHAC 200 mg/m2 IV day 1-5110043222140.5ACR 10 mg/m2 IV day 1-51st relapse to 2nd CRInduction5BHAC 200 mg/m2
IV day 1-845543433239.0Osteoporotic lumbar compression fracture Pulmonary AspergillosisDNR 40mg/m2 IV day 1-3Consolidation6BHAC 200 mg/m2 IV
day 1-6210043322238.5DNR 40 mg/m2 IV day 1-37Ara-C 1 g/m2 IV x2 day 1-5110043433336.92nd relapse to 3rd CRInduction8LDAC day 1-14 with M-CSF
day 15-28310043343336.59LDAC day 1-14 with M-CSF day 1-1421004None343334.9Consolidation10Same as # 911003None333335.211Same as #
911003None333336.412Same as # 911003None433336.413Same as # 9 11002None333237.53rd relapse to 4th CRInduction14LDAC day 1-14 with M-CSF day
1-14110043343237.5VPA 600 mg/day PO15LDAC day 1-12 with M-CSF day 1-1411003None333VPA 600 mg/day POConsolidation16Same as #
1511003None333141.317LDAC day 1-10 with M-CSF day 1-14110033233239.1VPA 600 mg/day PO18Same as # 17110033233239.419Same as #
1711003None333140.64th relapse to 5th CRInduction20LDAC day 1-10 with M-CSF day 1-1439543443142.421SPAC 200 mg/day PO day
1-14195NoneNone3None2G-CSF 100 μg SC day 1-1422Same as # 211953None221141.223LDAC day 1-10 with M-CSF day 1-14210043443142.024LDAC day 1-12
with M-CSF day 1-14310043443141.625LDAC day 1-12 with G-CSF day 1-12310043443142.2ACR 14 mg/m2 IV day 1-426Same as #
25210033333141.7Consolidation27Same as # 2511003None33228Same as # 2511004None332239.629Same as # 2511004None342239.530Same as #
2511004None3425th relapse to 6th CRInduction31LDAC day 1-12 with G-CSF day 1-123543443140.8DepressionACR 14 mg/m2 IV day 1-432MTX 15 mg +
Ara-C 40mg + PSL 10mg IT day -14543444Traumatic lumbar compression fractureLDAC day 1-10 with G-CSF day 1-12ACR 14 mg/m2 IV day
1-4Consolidation33LDAC day 1-10 with G-CSF day 1-123543333ACR 14 mg/m2 IV day 1-434Same as # 331754None333None44.035Same as #
331904None343None44.6Maintenance36SPAC 300 mg/day PO day 1-7 every 4-6 weeks1100NoneNoneNoneNone2236.0SarcopeniaACR: aclarubicin
hydrochloride, Ara-C: cytarabine, BHAC; behenoyl cytarabine, BI: Barthel index, BW: body weight, DNR: daunorubicin hydrochloride, ETP:
etoposide, FN: febrile neutropenia, G-CSF: lenograstim 100 μg subcutaneously injected or lenograstim 250 μg intravenously injected, IT:
intrathecal injection, IV: intravenous injection, LDAC: cytarabine 10 mg/m2 subcutaneously injected twice a day, M-CSF: mirimostim 8 million
units intravenously injected, MIT: mitoxantrone hydrochloride, PO: per oral, PS: performance status, SC: subctaneous injection.*Adverse
events were graded according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.03 produced by the National Cancer
Institute (http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/About.html).Figure 1 Clinical course of the patient. FISH: fluorescence in situ hybridization,
(+): positive, (−): negative. *The karyotype was obtained from peripheral blood cells at that time because the patient rejected a bone
marrow aspiration procedure. Chemotherapy regimens and adverse events in the present case ACR: aclarubicin hydrochloride, Ara-C: cytarabine,
BHAC; behenoyl cytarabine, BI: Barthel index, BW: body weight, DNR: daunorubicin hydrochloride, ETP: etoposide, FN: febrile neutropenia,
G-CSF: lenograstim 100 μg subcutaneously injected or lenograstim 250 μg intravenously injected, IT: intrathecal injection, IV: intravenous
injection, LDAC: cytarabine 10 mg/m2 subcutaneously injected twice a day, M-CSF: mirimostim 8 million units intravenously injected, MIT:
mitoxantrone hydrochloride, PO: per oral, PS: performance status, SC: subctaneous injection. *Adverse events were graded according to the
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.03 produced by the National Cancer Institute
(http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/About.html). Clinical course of the patient. FISH: fluorescence in situ hybridization, (+): positive,
(−): negative. *The karyotype was obtained from peripheral blood cells at that time because the patient rejected a bone marrow aspiration
procedure. Our patient received lower doses of cytarabine and daunorubicin than the doses that are considered as standard doses for
remission induction of AML with inv(16)(p13.1q22) nowadays, and the suboptimal doses of induction chemotherapy may be the cause of her early
relapse. However, higher doses of cytarabine and daunorubicin may have put the 72-year-old woman’s life in danger due to associated
toxicities. The frail woman eventually went into deep remission after maintenance therapy with a cytarabine prodrug SPAC. SPAC has been
shown to be as effective and tolerable as LDAC in treatment of AML , though its usefulness of SPAC is not well recognized because it is not
available outside Japan. In this case, the AML cells were considered as highly sensitive to cytarabine because of repetitive achievement of
CR induced by LDAC. Besides, SPAC was associated with fewer toxicities than LDAC (Table 1). LDAC requires the use of subcutaneous injections
twice a day, but elderly patients often have difficulties visiting the hospital frequently. On the other hand, SPAC can be orally
administered at home. These advantages enabled our patient to continue the maintenance therapy for two years and contributed to her
persistent molecular remission. Thus, SPAC potentially offers a chance of cure for elderly patients with inv(16)(p13.1q22) without life
threatening toxicities. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Additional file 1: Table S1.
Laboratory data of the patient at diagnosis. ALT: alanine aminotransferase, ALP: alkaline phosphatase, APTT: activated partial
thromboplastin time, AST: aspartate aminotransferase, AT-III: antithrombin-III, CRP: C-reactive protein, γ-GTP: γ-glutamyltranspeptidase,
LDH: lactate dehydrogenase, PT-INR: international normalized ratio of the prothrombin time, T-Bil: total bilirubin, T-Cho: total
cholesterol. Additional file 2: Figure S1. Smear and karyogram of bone marrow aspirates. A: May-Giemsa-stained smear (x1,000). The blue
arrows indicate myeloblasts and monoblasts. The percentage of eosinophils was elevated up to 16.0% of all nucleated cells. The
immunophenotype of the blasts was CD2+, CD13+, CD33+, CD34+ and HLA-DR+ (data is not shown). B: Karyogram determined by G-banding. The red
arrow indicates inv(16)(p13.1;q22). Laboratory data of the patient at diagnosis. ALT: alanine aminotransferase, ALP: alkaline phosphatase,
APTT: activated partial thromboplastin time, AST: aspartate aminotransferase, AT-III: antithrombin-III, CRP: C-reactive protein, γ-GTP:
γ-glutamyltranspeptidase, LDH: lactate dehydrogenase, PT-INR: international normalized ratio of the prothrombin time, T-Bil: total
bilirubin, T-Cho: total cholesterol. Smear and karyogram of bone marrow aspirates. A: May-Giemsa-stained smear (x1,000). The blue arrows
indicate myeloblasts and monoblasts. The percentage of eosinophils was elevated up to 16.0% of all nucleated cells. The immunophenotype of
the blasts was CD2+, CD13+, CD33+, CD34+ and HLA-DR+ (data is not shown). B: Karyogram determined by G-banding. The red arrow indicates
inv(16)(p13.1;q22). Acute myeloid leukemia Complete remission Low-dose cytarabine therapy Cytarabine ocfosfate hydrate Competing interests
All the authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MA is the doctor in charge of the present case and
reviewed guidelines and studies regarding chemotherapy with low-dose agents in elderly patients with AML and wrote the manuscript. YS
assisted in preparing the manuscript. HA and SN are medical advisers of hematology and assisted in preparing the manuscript. All authors
have read and approved the final manuscript.
