Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 52 Final Diagnosis: Brain abscess Symptoms: Fever • headache • weakness,
left sided Medication: Prednisolone • Azathioprine • Rituximab Clinical Procedure: Stereotactic brain biopsy and LP Specialty: Neurology
Rare disease Immunocompromised patients are at increased risk for developing meningitis or, rarely, brain abscess with opportunistic
organisms like Listeria monocytogenes. A 52 year-old Saudi Arabian woman who was diagnosed with pemphigus vulgaris and diabetes and had been
on prednisolone and azathioprine for about 4 years. She presented with headache, low-grade fever, and left-sided weakness 2 weeks after
receiving the second dose of rituximab infusion. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed an enhanced space-occupying lesion with multiple small
cyst-like structures and vasogenic edema in the right temporoparietal area. Her blood culture was positive for Listeria monocytogenes, and a
brain biopsy showed necrotic tissues with pus and inflammatory cells. She recovered after a 6-week course of antibiotics with ampicillin and
gentamycin. Brain abscess due to Listeria monocytogenes is a risk that should be considered when adding rituximab to the regimen of a
patient who is already Immunocompromised. The gram-positive bacillus Listeria monocytogenes (LM) is an opportunistic pathogen that can
invade the central nervous system (CNS) and cause severe infections. The most common CNS manifestations of listeriosis are meningitis,
meningoencephalitis, and, rarely, brain abscess . Neonates, pregnant women, elderly, and immunocompromised individuals are particularly
vulnerable to developing CNS listeriosis . Rituximab (RTX) is a monoclonal anti-CD20 antibody that induces B cell depletion (2) and has been
widely used for the treatment of follicular non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and several autoimmune disorders, including resistant cases of pemphigus
vulgaris (PV) . To our knowledge there have been no reported cases of listerial brain abscesses in patients treated with RTX. Here, we
describe a patient with PV who developed a right temporoparietal brain abscess shortly after RTX was added to an existing regimen of
corticosteroid and azathioprine. A 52-year-old Saudi Arabian woman presented to our hospital with low-grade fever, severe headache, and
progressive left-sided weakness with numbness; she had developed these symptoms 5 days earlier following a second RTX infusion that was
initiated 2 weeks earlier to treat PV. She had underlying type II diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and hypothyroidism, which she acquired
during a course of corticosteroid therapy. She was taking prednisolone (60 mg once daily), azathioprine (250 mg once daily), simvastatin,
atenolol, and chloroquine. On examination, her temperature was 38°C, blood pressure was 146/82 mmHg, pulse rate was 105 bpm, and her
respiratory rate was 22/minute. The patient was obese, with a body mass index of 37.7, and she had a cushingoid appearance. She was
lethargic but able to follow commands. Neurological examination revealed a gaze preference to the right, spastic tone, and hyperreflexia on
her left side, with motor strength of 3/5 on the left and 5/5 on the right using the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale. Her plantar
reflexes exhibited an extensor response on the left. No neck stiffness was detected. A complete blood count showed a hemoglobin level of
11.8 g/dL with a white blood cell count (WBC) of 8.0×109/L (neutrophils 82%, lymphocytes 7%, and monocytes 11%). The test for HIV was
negative and her toxo-plasma IgM titre was 0.00 and nonreactive for IgG. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain after contrast material
administration revealed a hypodense lesion with abnormal enhancement of the right temporoparietal lobe with surrounding vasogenic brain
edema and no midline shift. She was admitted to the medical ward with a tentative diagnosis of brain abscess, and empirical intravenous
antibiotic treatment with vancomycin and meropenem was initiated. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed right temporoparietal
enhancement with a central area of restricted diffusion representing multiple tiny abscesses with vasogenic edema (Figure 1). A lumbar
puncture was performed on the same day, and her cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) contained 113 WBCs, predominantly lymphocytes, 393 red blood
cells, and a high protein level 0.66 g/L. The CSF and serum levels of glucose were 3.0 and 8.0 mmol/L, respectively. Two tubes of blood for
aerobic and nonaerobic culture were collected upon her presentation in the emergency room and before initiation of antimicrobial therapy.
Subsequently, her prednisolone dose was tapered down gradually, and her azathioprine dose was reduced to 150 mg daily. Because of the
failure to improve with empirical antibiotic therapy, on the second week of her admission she underwent a stereotactic brain biopsy. It
revealed acute inflammatory cells, necrotic tissues debris, and macrophages, which indicated an infection although the tissue culture was
negative. By that time, LM grew up on both tubes of the blood culture. According to the result of organism sensitivity, her antibiotics were
adjusted to ampicillin (2 g every 4 hours for 6 weeks), administered in combination with adjuvant intravenous gentamicin (120 mg every 8
hours for 6 weeks). Her weakness abated within 2 weeks, and she was able to walk with unilateral support. A follow-up MRI of the brain after
4 months of treatment showed nearly complete resolution of the lesion, with residual hypodensity at the site of the abscess evacuation and
no contrast enhancement of the right temporoparietal region (Figure 2). LM is a gram-positive, facultative, anaerobic, non-spore-forming
rod. The organism is widely spread throughout the environment and can be found in soil and water, as well as in plants and animals commonly
used for human consumption . The principal route of transmission in humans is through the ingestion of contaminated food. Normally, the
organism is rapidly cleared from the gastrointestinal tract. Alternatively, LM may cause illness after an incubation period of 11–71 days
(median 31 days) . LM is an uncommon cause of illness in the general population, but it can cause life-threatening infections in neonates,
pregnant women, the elderly, and immunosuppressed patients. Protection against LM is predominantly cell-mediated ; therefore, conditions
associated with impaired cellular immunity are risk factors for LM infection . Rituximab depletes B cells, but in vitro studies have
demonstrated that B cells are necessary for the induction of optimal CD4 memory . Therefore, while rituximab directly impairs humoral
immunity, it also has downstream effects on cellular immunity. Meningitis is the most common CNS infection caused by LM , and brainstem
encephalitis (rhombencephalitis) is also well recognized . Brain abscess accounts for approximately 10% of CNS with LM infections . LM brain
abscesses are usually reported as an infectious complication in immunosuppressed patients and are commonly associated with positive blood
culture in 85% of patients while concomitant meningitis in nearly 25% of patients . The high rate of positive blood culture results suggest
that the pathogenesis of Listeria brain abscess is secondary to hematogenous spread. A recent review found that 56 cases of macroscopic
brain abscesses due to L. monocytogenes have been reported between 1968 and 2011. Most patients (80%) had underlying conditions, such as a
hematological malignancy (23%), autoimmune diseases treated with prednisolone (19%), having undergone solid organ transplant (10%), diabetes
mellitus (12%), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection (7%), or others (9%). Positive blood cultures and CSF cultures were found in
79% and 23%, respectively. Ampicillin-based regimens were used in 37 patients (74%). Twenty-nine patients (51%) underwent surgery. A total
of 19 patients died, giving a mortality rate of 33%. Patients who had underlying diseases and who did not undergo surgical interventions
were more likely to die (63% and 74%, respectively) . This patient presented with headache, fever, lethargy, and left-sided weakness; a
combination of symptoms highly suggestive of CNS infection with space-occupying lesion-like pyogenic brain abscess. Infections with
mycobacterium tuberculosis and toxoplasmosis were also considered due her immunosuppressed state. Primary CNS tumors and metastasis were
also included in her differential diagnosis prior to the result of the blood culture. In our patient, there was a strong temporal
relationship between RTX treatment and the onset of neurologic symptoms, suggesting that RTX played a decisive role in the development of
this opportunistic infection. RTX is a potent immunosuppressive medication that induces rapid and long-lasting depletion of circulating B
cells. Indeed, although the patient had been using corticosteroids and azathioprine for several years, a cerebral abscess only developed
after the initiation of RTX infusions. While RTX is usually well tolerated, it poses the risk of opportunistic infections in at-risk
patients, possibly because it induces hypogammaglobulinemia and causes delayed-onset neutropenia . While Listeria abscess has not been
reported previously following rituximab therapy, other similar, infrequent opportunistic neurological complications have been documented.
Charles et al. described a right frontal brain abscess due to Legionella micdadei in a 59-year-old man with Waldenström’s macro-globulinemia
who had completed a 6-month course of chemotherapy with RTX and a DNA synthesis inhibitor (fludarabine) 6 weeks prior to his initial
presentation with recurrent falls, aphasia, confusion, and hallucinations . Enteroviral meningoencephalitis following RTX therapy was also
reported in a child with autoimmune thrombocytopenia and an adult patient with relapsed B cell lymphoma . In another report, reactivation of
cerebral toxoplasmosis after RTX therapy in a 71-year-old female with cutaneous vasculitis associated with type I cryoglobulinemia was
described . Furthermore, a recent study found 57 cases of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy associated with RTX use in HIV-negative
patients; 90% of the patients had lymphoproliferative disorders, and 4 patients with rheumatoid arthritis were described in a separate cases
series . Adding RTX to an immunosuppressive medication regimen may increase the risk of a rare brain infection like LM, which can cause
brain abscesses; therefore, close monitoring of patients who receive RTX is highly recommended. Brain MRI, next day of presentation to the
emergency room. (A) Preoperative MRI scan, T2 coronal window, showing a large abscess in the right temporal lobe surrounded by extensive
vasogenic edema. (B) MRI of the brain, T1 weighted images with gadolinium, coronal window showing multiple abscesses in the right temporal.
Brain MRI 4 months, post treatment. (A) MRI, T2 weighted image, coronal window, showing residual low signal intensity, gliosis and atrophy
on the right temporal lobe. (B) MRI, T1 coronal window post contrast, showing right temporal low signal intensity, gliosis and atrophy with
no contrast enhancement.
