Cervical spondylosis is degeneration of the cervical spine that occurs during the normal course of aging, and may progress into compression
of the spinal cord, or cervical spondylotic myelopathy (CSM), which can cause neurologic dysfunction. Cervical spondylosis can be identified
in the majority of people older than 50 years. Many people with cervical spondylosis or CSM are asymptomatic. However, patients with CSM are
at higher risk of spinal cord injury (SCI) following minor injury. A 60-year-old woman with asymptomatic cervical spondylosis underwent an
elective subtotal thyroidectomy for thyroid nodules. After the surgery, she developed tetraplegia. MRI revealed spinal cord compression and
injury. Main diagnoses, therapeutics interventions, and outcomes: Acute cervical SCI was diagnosed. After an emergency anterior cervical
corpectomy and fusion surgery, she almost completely recovered. Iatrogenic cervical SCI after nonspinal surgeries that requires neck
hyperextension is rarely reported, probably due to underdiagnosis and underreport. Among the 14 cases (including ours) published in the
literature, most patients had cervical spondylosis and were senior men. Five patients had diabetes. Four patients had long-term
hemodialysis. Seven patients had undergone coronary artery bypass surgery that requires prolonged operative time. Only 3 patients had almost
complete recovery. Most patients were disabled. Two patients required tracheostomy for long-term ventilator support. Two patients died.
These cases reiterate the potential risk of iatrogenic SCI in people with predisposing conditions such as cervical spondylosis, especially
considering the rising prevalence and severity of cervical spondylosis caused by the aging of the population and modern sedentary lifestyle.
Surgeries requiring prolonged neck hyperextension put patients with cervical spondylosis at risk for SCI. Failure to recognize the potential
occurrence of iatrogenic SCI might endanger patients’ lives. Cervical spondylosis is degeneration of the cervical spine that occurs during
the normal course of aging. This degeneration leads to herniated intervertebral discs, osteophytes, and ligament hypertrophy, which may
eventually cause compression of the nerve roots and spinal cord. Spinal cord compression, or cervical spondylotic myelopathy (CSM), can
cause symptoms including gait imbalance or ambulatory difficulty, loss of fine control of the hands, sensory disturbances, and urinary
difficulties. Many people with CSM are asymptomatic or have only mild symptoms; diagnosis frequently results from incidental findings on
x-ray or MRI. In a study of asymptomatic volunteers, cervical intervertebral disc protrusion with spinal cord compression was observed in
7.6% of people, with a higher prevalence in seniors.1 This lack of symptoms is clinically significant, as patients with CSM are at higher
risk of spinal cord injury (SCI) following minor injury.2 A 60-year-old woman visited her physician complaining of mild neck pain for the
previous 3 months. She had normal muscle strength and no neurologic symptoms. A cervical spine x-ray demonstrated degenerative spondylosis
and congenital fusion of C2 and C3 vertebrae (Figure 1A). MRI was deemed unnecessary, and she was treated with physical therapy, which eased
the pain. One month later, she was found to have asymptomatic thyroid nodules during a routine medical examination. Ultrasonography, fine
needle aspiration and CT scan could not rule out thyroid cancer. Therefore, subtotal thyroidectomy was performed under general anesthesia
and completed uneventfully in about 100 minutes. She later became incompletely paralyzed, with muscle strength of the lower and upper limbs
of grades 1/5 and 2/5, respectively, according to the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale. MRI revealed intervertebral disc herniation with
spinal cord compression and injury (Figure 1B). She was immediately transferred to our spinal surgery center, and an emergency anterior
cervical corpectomy and fusion (ACCF) was performed about 24 hours after thyroidectomy. Following surgery, the patient's motor function
improved dramatically: She regained the ability to walk 3 days later, and her muscle strength returned to grade 4/5 within 1 week and grade
5/5 within 3 months, with only slight numbness in her left index finger. One week after the spinal surgery MRI showed excellent spinal cord
decompression (Figure 1C). (A) Plain x-ray taken 1 month prior to surgery showing fusion of C2–C3, osteophyte formation, and decreased
height of the intervertebral space at C6–C7. (B) Sagittal T2-weighted MRI performed 1 day after thyroidectomy showing herniation of C5–C6
and C6–C7 intervertebral discs causing compression of the spinal cord, and increased signal intensity of the spinal cord from C4 to C7
indicating cord injury. (C) Sagittal T2-weighted MRI 1 week after spinal surgery (C5–C6, C6–C7 discectomies, C7 subtotal corpectomy and
fusion) showing excellent spinal cord decompression. In our case, a preoperative cervical spine x-ray suggested congenital fusion of C2 and
C3 vertebrae, spondylosis, and C6–C7 disc disease judging from the decreased height of the intervertebral space (Figure 1A). Congenital
fusion of 2 or more cervical vertebrae is known as Klippel–Feil syndrome (KFS), a condition with an estimated incidence of 1 in 40,000
newborns.3 Classical signs of KFS include short neck, low hairline, and decreased range of motion of the neck, but about half of patients
including ours do not have these features. Asymptomatic patients are nonetheless at higher risk of developing degenerative cervical
myelopathy or cervical SCI following a minor traumatic episode.3 In our patient, the C2–C3 fusion might have promoted the development of
chronic cervical spondylosis. The patient had a history of mild neck pain, whether she had spinal cord compression before thyroidectomy is
not known. During the thyroidectomy, the spinal canal become narrower due to neck extension.4 Moreover, neck hyperextension might squeeze
the disc posteriorly, causing compression and injury of the spinal cord. Comorbid conditions such as cervical spondylosis, tumors in the
cervical spinal canal, or atlanto-axial subluxation predispose patients to SCI by causing spinal stenosis or instability. Procedures
including thyroidectomy, parathyroidectomy, dental extraction, and coronary artery bypass require prolonged neck hyperextension, which might
cause compression of the spinal cord and anterior spinal artery by herniated discs, osteophyte, thickened ligaments, or spinal tumors (Table
1). Tetraplegia following these procedures is rarely reported, probably due to underdiagnosis and underreport. The consequences are
catastrophic, often leaving patients completely disabled (Table 1).6,12 Among the 14 cases we found in the literature and summarized in
Table 1 (2 cases had incomplete data), most patients had cervical spondylosis (9/14, 64.3%), were seniors (60 years or older, 8/12, 66.7%),
and were men (12/13, 92.3%); only our patient was woman. Five patients had diabetes (5/12, 41.7%), and 4 patients had undergone long-term
hemodialysis for end-stage renal disease (4/12, 33.3%). Long-term hemodialysis can cause extradural amyloid deposition and thickening of the
posterior longitudinal ligament, leading to cervical spondylosis and spinal cord compression.6,12 Seven patients (7/14, 50%) had undergone
coronary artery bypass surgery (CABG), which requires several hours to complete, so the prolonged operation may have contributed to their
SCI; among them, 6 patients had hypertension (6/7, 85.7%), suggesting that hypertension might also be a risk factor for post-CABG SCI. Only
3 patients had almost complete recovery (3/13, 23.1%). Most patients were disabled (10/13, 76.9%). Two patients required tracheostomy for
long-term ventilator support (2/13, 15.4%). Two patients died during short-term follow-up. In the case described by Li et al,6 a patient
with asymptomatic cervical spondylosis and renal disease requiring long-term hemodialysis developed quadriplegia after CABG, and surgeries
to decompress the spinal cord posteriorly and anteriorly performed 5 and 10 days after the iatrogenic quadriplegia, respectively, did not
lead to clinical improvement. The patient received mechanical ventilator support and eventually died of pneumonia 6 months later. In another
case, tetraplegia following thyroidectomy in a patient with spinal meningioma was not correctable by immediate decompressive laminectomy.12
Fortunately, our patient had localized injury of the spinal cord and received prompt treatment, allowing an almost complete recovery.
Summarization of Similar Cases (Iatrogenic Tetraplegia Caused by Cervical Spinal Cord Compression After Nonspinal Surgeries Requiring Neck
Hyperextension) Cervical spondylosis can be identified in the majority of seniors. In a recent study, CSM was observed in 7.6% of
asymptomatic volunteers, with a higher prevalence in seniors,1 underlining the necessity to raise awareness of this severe complication. We
believe a detailed evaluation for signs of cervical spondylosis and CSM should be mandatory for male senior patients prior to any surgery
requiring prolonged neck hyperextension especially CABG. This evaluation is especially important in patients with comorbidities including
diabetes, long-term hemodialysis, or hypertension. Preoperative cervical MRI might be justified in high-risk patients. Moreover, modifying
surgery to decrease the degree and duration of neck extension might be helpful to reduce the risk of SCI. Abbreviations: ACCF = anterior
cervical corpectomy and fusion, CABG = coronary artery bypass surgery, CSM = cervical spondylotic myelopathy, KFS = Klippel–Feil syndrome,
MRC = Medical Research Council, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, POD = postoperative day, SCI = spinal cord injury. English in this
document has been checked by at least 2 professional editors, both native speakers of English. For a certificate, please see
http://www.textcheck.com/certificate/JJZzgs. Ethical approval was obtained from the ethics committee of Tongji Hospital. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. The study was supported by National
Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81101788 to HG, 81271934 and 81472133 to FL) and Scientific Research Foundation for the Returned
Overseas Chinese Scholars, State Education Ministry (to HG). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
