Colon carcinoma is a rare disease in the pediatric population. Here is a report on a 17-year-old male adolescent with colon adenocarcinoma
who presented with recurrent epigastric colic pain for 1 month. Diagnostic laparoscopic surgery revealed a 3.2 × 3 cm tumor at the ascending
colon, with serosal involvement and peritoneal metastasis. Clinical differences of colorectal carcinoma among children and adults are
reviewed and summarized. Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) in children, although rarely discovered, comprises approximately 1% of pediatric
neoplasms. It is also the most common primary gastrointestinal malignancy in children.1 However, due to the low awareness of the disease,
diagnosis is usually delayed until the disease is in the advanced stage, causing prognosis to be extremely poor compared with that of
adults.2 The presenting symptoms are nonspecific and can mimic those of many benign gastrointestinal conditions in children. However, family
history with certain well-documented genetic mutations or inflammatory bowel disease should raise suspicion to the disease.3 Here is a
report that aims to clarify the clinical features and differences between pediatric and adult colon carcinomas. A clearer insight into the
disease may help clinicians arrive at an earlier diagnosis for children and adolescents, and consequently, improve overall survival outcome.
A 17-year-old male adolescent suffered from recurrent abdominal colic pain for 1 month. The pain was aggravated by walking and partially
relieved by bed rest. No referred pain was noted, but associated symptoms were nausea and mildly loose stool. He denied history of tarry or
bloody stool. His father had esophageal cancer. Progressive epigastric cramping pain was noted again on the day of admission. There was no
fever, vomiting, or diarrhea. Physical examination revealed a distended abdomen with epigastric tenderness. No palpable mass or peritoneal
sign was noted. Plain abdomen x-ray showed dilated bowel loops with multiple air-fluid levels (Figure 1A). Intravenous metoclopramide,
bisacodyl suppository, and glycerin enema were given but without relief of symptoms. Imaging studies of the patient. (A) Plain abdominal
x-ray at initial presentation. (B–C) Horizontal and coronal views of the tumor identified, retrospectively, which was initially masked by
the overdistended small intestines. (D–F) Upper gastrointestinal and small bowel series on the first, second, and fourth hour after contrast
ingestion, respectively. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed no specific pathologic lesion (Figure 1B–C). Paralytic ileus was the
impression. However, there was no clinical improvement even under nil per os and nasogastric decompression. Upper gastrointestinal and small
bowel series with water soluble contrast study showed retained contrast media in the small intestine (Figures 1D–F). Mechanical intestinal
obstruction was highly suspected. Thus, diagnostic laparoscopy surgery was suggested. An annular colon tumor, about 3.2 × 3 cm in size, with
serosa involvement, was found in the ascending colon (Figure 2A). Frozen biopsy revealed adenocarcinoma. Right hemicolectomy was performed.
Several small peritoneal seeding nodules up to 2 mm were also noted (Figure 2C). The final pathology results showed high-grade, poorly
differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma (Figure 3A) with the presence of signet-ring cells (Figure 3B). Lymph node (6/24) (Figure 3C) and
peritoneal metastasis were also confirmed. Final staging was pT4aN2aM1b. Laparoscopic findings during the surgery. (A) Anatomic location of
the tumor in the ascending colon (A-colon), adjacent to the transverse colon (T-colon). (B) Laparoscopic incision biopsy of the tumor. (C)
Carcinomatosis peritonei (arrow heads). (D) Macroscopic view of the excised carcinomatous colon tumor with free margins. Histologic features
of the tumor. (A) Poorly differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma (hematoxylin and eosin, ×40). (B) Presence of signet-ring cells proportion
>10% (arrow heads) (hematoxylin and eosin, ×100). (C) Lymph node metastasis (six of 24 excised lymph nodes). (D1–D5) Immunohistochemical
stains are positive for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), and DNA mismatched repair genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2 have no defects.
Immunohistochemical staining revealed overexpression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which plays an important role in colon
cancer oncogenesis and represents an important target for cancer therapy.4 However, no defects were found for the deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA) mismatch repair system, that is, the MLH1 (human mutL homolog 1), MSH2 (human mutS homolog 2), MSH6 (human mutS homolog 6), and PMS2
(human postmeiotic segregation 2) proteins (Figure 3D1–D5). Further lung and abdominal CT survey showed no distant metastasis. The patient
was then transferred to a pediatric oncology center for chemotherapy with the regimens of bevacizumab and irinotecan. He completed the
chemotherapy protocol smoothly without any major complications. After 1 year of follow-up, no tumor recurrence was noted. CRC is rare in
children, with annual incidence of about one in 10 million adolescents younger than 20 years old.5 The reported peak age is 15 years old,
while the youngest reported patient is a 9-month-old female infant.6 Despite its rarity, CRC is the most common primary solid malignancy of
the gastrointestinal tract among children.6 In contrast to the pediatric population, adult colon carcinoma is the third most common cancer
in men and the second in women.7 The incidence rate is around 43.7 per 100 000 men and women per year, with peak age of 65 years old.8
Abdominal pain and vomiting are the most common symptoms in pediatric CRC patients.1 Other reported symptoms include altered bowel habit,
weight loss, and anemia.2 However, these symptoms are nonspecific in children, which may mimic a lot of common functional gastrointestinal
disorders.9 The duration of symptoms before diagnosis is usually lengthy, ranging from 2 to 6 months, with median of 3 months.2 For elderly
patients, symptoms and signs including fecal occult blood test positive (77%), rectal bleeding (58%), anemia (57%), and abdominal pain(52%)
were most commonly recorded. The median duration for the above symptoms to diagnosis was 5 weeks (interquartile range 1–20 weeks) (Overall
median duration for any symptoms was 14 weeks [interquartile range 5–43 weeks].).10 Furthermore, as high as 30% of the adult patients have
advantage of early detection by screening.11 Other clinical features of pediatric CRC reported in previous literature are summarized in
Table 1. Clinical Characteristics of Pediatric Colorectal Carcinoma in Previous Reported Case Series The disease usually occurs
sporadically.5 Nonetheless, 10% to 30% of reported childhood CRCs have predisposing factors,1 which include familial adenomatous polyposis
(FAP), ulcerative colitis, Crohn disease, and Peutz-Jegher syndrome.3 High microsatellite instability (MSI) is one of the most important
genetic mutations in childhood CRC3 and is caused by a DNA mismatch repair system. It is the hallmark of the early-onset CRC, Lynch
syndrome, which is also known as hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer syndrome (HNPCC). Some well-known mutations in DNA mismatch
repair genes are MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2.15 On the other hand, mutational inactivation of the APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) gene
responsible for the FAP is also reported to be higher in adolescents.9 The vast majority of CRCs are adenocarcinoma. However, the proportion
of poorly differentiated to undifferentiated, mucinous type, signet-ring cell–containing carcinomas is higher in younger patients than in
adults. These tumors also behave more aggressively; not only have they a poorer response to chemotherapy, but also associated with extensive
intramural spread and peritoneal carcinomatosis.1 Moreover, statistics also show a higher incidence of unresectable, residual disease and a
higher metastasis rate in childhood CRC.2 Other clinical characteristics and differences between childhood and adult CRC are listed in Table
2. Comparison of Childhood and Adult Colon Carcinoma Surgery is the only curative modality for localized CRCs. However, for patients with
cancer staging ≥III, adjuvant chemotherapy is important to eradicate micrometastases, thereby reducing disease recurrence and increasing the
cure rate. Oxaliplatin and 5-fluorouracil–based antineoplastic agents were among the commonly used chemotherapy combinations. In the modern
era, monoclonal antibody target therapy such as bevacizumab also showed promising results for metastatic colorectal cancer. The overall
survival in many series reports depends on the complete resection of the tumor and the radical resection of sentinel lymph nodes.1
Metastasis occurred in about 18% of newly diagnosed CRCs in adults. However, it might be as high as 37% in young patients even during
initial presentation.9 The most common distant metastatic sites are liver, lung, lymph nodes, and peritoneum. Predictors of poor outcome
aside from disease stage are incomplete resection, mucinous histology, proportion of signet-ring cells >10%, and absence of an in situ
component.2,9 With the advances in diagnosis and treatments, overall 5-year survival is around 75% in adult patients but only around 51% in
pediatric population (Table 3).5 Timeline Awareness and early intervention remain the main challenges in the early diagnosis and prognosis
of CRC. Pediatricians and surgeons should have a high index of suspicion in cases of intestinal obstruction without hernia or previous
abdominal surgery. In cases of early-onset CRC, testing for high MSI for defects in DNA mismatch repair genes may be helpful for genetic
surveillance and prognostic evaluation. Abbreviations: APC = adenomatous polyposis coli, CRC = colorectal carcinoma, CT = computed
tomography, DNA = deoxyribonucleic acid, EGFR = epidermal growth factor receptor, ED = emergency department, F = female, FAP = familial
adenomatous polyposis, FH = family history, HNPCC = hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer syndrome, M = male, MLH1 = human mutL homolog
1, MSH2 = human mutS homolog 2, MSH6 = human mutS homolog 6, MSI = microsatellite instability, PMS2 = human postmeiotic segregation 2, pTMN
= pathologic classification of colorectal cancer staging system by American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC), primary tumor (T), status of
the regional nodes (N), and distant metastasis (M), UGI = upper gastrointestinal. This study was approved by the institutional review board
of Cathay General Hospital. Permission was also obtained from both the patient and his mother (legal guardian) for publication of this case
report. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
