Pregnant women are susceptible to severe pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) from influenza, which has been associated
with increased fetal loss . There is very little experience for the management of pregnant women with severe pneumonia and ARDS from avian
influenza A (H7N9) virus, especially when complicated by intrauterine fetal death (IUFD). A 28-year-old pregnant woman was admitted to the
hospital due to dyspnea, dry cough, and fever. The patient was at 26 weeks gestation. Infection with influenza A (H7N9) virus was confirmed
from a tracheal aspirate sample using polymerase chain reaction assays. The fetus was monitored daily to check the heart rate and on
admission the fetal heart rate was 140 beats/minute. The patient’s initial blood pressure was 70/45 mmHg, which was unresponsive to volume
resuscitation. Norepinephrine was administrated to rescue septic shock and was required until day 11. On day 2, the beating of the fetal
heart stopped as a result of severe, refractory hypoxemia (arterial oxygen pressure <50 mmHg, 24 hours). Echocardiography showed severe
right ventricular dysfunction and severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction with decreased ejection fraction (26%). The renal function
was slightly reduced with an elevated serum creatinine level (225 μmol/l). Despite the administration of oseltamivir, the patient’s
condition progressed quickly. Thoracic imaging showing diffuse bilateral infiltrates along with evidence of impaired gas exchange led to the
diagnosis of ARDS. Difficulties in oxygenation and a deteriorating medical condition resulted in incremental positive end-expiratory
pressure titrations to a maximal value of 18 cmH2O and plateau pressure titrations to 40 cmH2O. During this course, the right ventricular
systolic pressure was elevated to 52 mmHg on day 12. Severe pneumonia, septic shock, acute renal failure, acute heart failure, pulmonary
hypertension, and ARDS complicated with IUFD posed a complex dilemma. On day 13, application of 200 μg misoprostol in the posterior fornix
of the vagina was used to induce delivery with an induction-to-termination interval of 11.5 hours. No retained placenta or membranes were
detected. Oxytocin augmentation (intramuscular injection, 10 mg) was given to prevent bleeding. In this complicated situation, misoprostol
appears to be a safe, effective, and practical method for termination of IUFD . Moreover, the heart function, refractory hypoxemia,
pulmonary hypertension, and immunological function improved quickly on the day after the successful delivery (Table 1). Despite intensive
medical therapies, catheter-related bloodstream infection and ARDS was complicated by severe pulmonary hypertension and the patient expired
on hospital day 29.Table 1 Blood oxygenation, heart function, myocardial enzyme spectrum, and blood cell count data before and after the
fetal death delivery in a 28-year-old woman infected with influenza A (H7N9) virus Day prior to fetal death delivery Day after fetal death
delivery Oxygenation and respiratory data PaO2/FiO2 150187Positive end-expiratory pressure (mmHg)109Plateau pressure (mmHg)2825Lung
compliance (ml/cmH2O)43.461.5 Basic circulation data Heart rate (beats/minute)135114Mean arterial blood pressure (mmHg)10586Vasoactive
agentNoneNone Echocardiographic data Left ventricular ejection fraction (%)3368Right ventricular systolic pressure (mmHg)5242Left
ventricular end-diastolic diameter (mm/m2)4143Left ventricular end-systolic diameter (mm/m2)3529Left atrial diameter
(mm/m2)3627Interventricular septal thickness (mm/m2)99Left ventricular posterior wall thickness (mm/m2)87 Myocardial enzyme spectrum
Aspartate transaminase (u/l)6661Creatine kinase (U/l)377122Creatine kinase isomer-MB (u/l)2040Lactate dehydrogenase (u/l)448411Troponin
(ng/ml)0.150.12 Blood cell counts White blood cells (×109/l)26.727.4Lymphocytes (×109/l)0.71.8CD4+ T lymphocytes (%)9.042.4CD8+ T
lymphocytes (%)14.537.3CD4+/CD8+ 0.621.14CD3−/CD19+ B lymphocytes (%)7.72.3CD3−CD56+ natural killer cells (%)4.818.9The ratio of arterial
oxygen pressure (PaO2) to the fractional concentration of inspired oxygen (FiO2) (PaO2/FiO2), pulmonary dynamic compliance, heart rate, left
ventricular ejection fraction, right ventricular systolic pressure, left ventricular end-systolic diameter, creatine kinase isomer-MB,
number of lymphocyte cells, CD4+ T-lymphocyte cell count, CD8+ T-lymphocyte cell count and CD3−CD56+ natural killer cell count were
significantly improved after the fetal death delivery. Blood oxygenation, heart function, myocardial enzyme spectrum, and blood cell count
data before and after the fetal death delivery in a 28-year-old woman infected with influenza A (H7N9) virus The ratio of arterial oxygen
pressure (PaO2) to the fractional concentration of inspired oxygen (FiO2) (PaO2/FiO2), pulmonary dynamic compliance, heart rate, left
ventricular ejection fraction, right ventricular systolic pressure, left ventricular end-systolic diameter, creatine kinase isomer-MB,
number of lymphocyte cells, CD4+ T-lymphocyte cell count, CD8+ T-lymphocyte cell count and CD3−CD56+ natural killer cell count were
significantly improved after the fetal death delivery. Delivery of the fetus following IUFD using misoprostol in multiple organ failure
patients was associated with improved immunological function, oxygenation, and heart function in this patient. We cannot help but consider
that this may have provided more benefit early in the patient’s hospital course. Further studies may help identify the appropriate delivery
time point and safety of this agent in IUFD women complicated with multiple organ failure. The patient’s husband provided the written
informed consent for the publication in the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, and this would be available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief. Acute respiratory distress syndrome Intrauterine fetal death This work was supported by grants from the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (NSFC81300040), The Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20141184), and the China National Clinical
Key Subject and Application Foundation of Suzhou China (SYS201336).
