Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Case series Patient: Male, 30 • Male, 47 Final Diagnosis: Abdominal cocoon syndrome Symptoms:
Abdominal pain • nausea • vomiting Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Operation Specialty: Surgery Rare disease Abdominal cocoon syndrome is
also known in the literature as sclerosing peritonitis or sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis. It is characterized by total or partial
encapsulation of abdominal viscera by a fibrous membrane. It has been reported mainly in adolescent women and the majority of the cases are
of unknown etiology. Preoperative diagnosis is difficult and is usually established during laparotomy. We present 2 cases of acute
mechanical intestinal obstruction caused by sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis. Two male patients, ages 30 and 47, were admitted to our
emergency department for mechanical intestinal obstruction. They were treated surgically and were diagnosed with abdominal cocoon syndrome.
If abdominal cocoon syndrome is diagnosed pre-operatively and acute abdomen symptoms are not observed, surgery is unnecessary. If surgery is
inevitable, membrane resection and bridotomy must be performed, as in our 2 cases. If resection is going to be performed, primary
anastomosis is not recommended. Iatrogenic injuries that happened during the operation should not be immediately repaired, because creation
of the stoma from the proximal part of the injury is recommended. Abdominal cocoon syndrome (ACS) is described as total or partial fibrotic
capsulation of the abdominal organs. It is first described by Foo et al. in 1978 . ACS is also known as sclerosing encapsulating
peritonitis, primary sclerosing peritonitis, and idiopathic sclerosing peritonitis . It has 2 types: primary (idiopathic) and secondary. The
secondary type is seen in patients with peritoneal dialysis, peritonitis, previous abdominal surgery, sarcoidosis, and tuberculosis . The
prevalence of ACS is unknown, but among peritoneal dialysis patients the prevalence is 1.4–7.3%. We here present 2 idiopathic ACS cases
treated successfully. A 30-year-old male patient presented with nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain which started a few days before. He had
a clinical history of several attacks of abdominal pain before, but they resolved spontaneously. The patient had no history of previous
abdominal operations or medication. On clinical examination, the abdomen was tender and distended. Plain abdominal X-rays showed small bowel
type air-fluid levels and abdominal CT showed dilatation and wall thickness in the terminal ileum (Figure 1). Findings of laboratory studies
were within normal limits. Exploratory laparotomy was decided upon with a pre-operative diagnosis of ‘acute mechanical intestinal
obstruction’. At laparotomy, the internal herniated ileum was found encased in a cocoon-like fibrotic tissue with a diameter of nearly 20
cm. We cut the fibrous membrane and the small bowel loosened. Circulation of the bowel segment was intact; therefore, no resection was
needed during the operation. On the fourth post-operative day the patient was discharged. A 47-year-old male patient was admitted to our
hospital, complaining of constipation, nausea, and vomiting for the past 3 days. He had no significant medical and clinical history. The
patient had no history of previous abdominal operations or medication. Only distension of the abdomen was observed during clinical
examination. Plain abdominal X-rays showed air-fluid levels and abdominal CT showed the clustered terminal ileum and cecum, with dilatation
at the proximal parts. Findings of laboratory studies were within normal limits. Exploratory laparotomy was performed. At laparotomy, the
internal herniated ileum and cecum were found in a cocoon-like fibrotic tissue with a diameter of nearly 10 cm (Figure 2). The fibrous
membrane cut and bowel segments loosened. Circulation of the bowel segment was intact; therefore, no resection was needed during the
operation. On the fifth post-operative day the patient was discharged without any complications. ACS was first defined by Foo et al. in
1978. Despite various hypotheses, the etiology remains unknown. Abdominal cocoon is mostly seen in young girls living in tropical and
subtropical regions . However, our 2 patients were middle-aged males. ACS is a rare syndrome that mostly affects the small bowel. In this
syndrome there is intra-abdominal fibrosclerosis and peritoneal adhesions that surround the bowel, creating a sac or cocoon that causes
acute or chronic intestinal obstruction . ACS was reported in beta blockers users, peritoneal dialysis, peritoneal shunting, recurrent
peritoneal irritation and peritonitis, intraperitoneal chemotherapy, and cirrhosis, but mostly it is an idiopathic disease. The clinical
presentation of abdominal cocoon syndrome generally occurs as acute abdomen and intestinal obstruction. Preoperative diagnosis of ACS is
difficult. Radiological findings, especially CT findings, may suggest the diagnosis but final diagnosis is generally by surgery, as
confirmed by the ACS literature and summarized in Table 1. Retroperitoneal fibrosis (also known as Ormond disease) is a rare syndrome
featuring fibrosclerosis of the tissue in the retroperitoneum, often leading to encasement of the ureters, such as encasement of the
intestines in cocoon syndrome. The difference between Ormond disease and ACS is the location. Retroperitoneal fibrosis is treated with
glucocorticoids. If there is ureteral obstruction, stent or surgery is indicated . Yip and Lee suggested 4 clinical characteristics to be
aware of in preoperative diagnosis: a) Young female patients with no obvious cause of intestinal obstruction; b) Medical history of similar
episodes and spontaneously relief of symptoms; c) Presentation with symptoms of intestinal obstruction but absence of severe abdominal
distention; d) Presence of palpable, soft, non-tender abdominal mass. We saw intestinal obstruction in both cases and similar episodes in
the first case. Therefore we cannot always rely exclusively on the characteristics described by Yip and Lee. Abdominal x-ray and
ultrasonography does not help to distinguish ACS from other diseases. CT scan may be helpful in differential diagnosis. Recognition of
fibrous membrane surrounding the bowel loops is a typical radiological finding of ACS . Early preoperative diagnosis and treatment of the
syndrome is vital for the circulation of the encaged bowel segments and for preventing the risk of strangulation. Treatment options
suggested for ACS are resection of the capsule, partial membrane resection, intestinal resection and primary anastomosis (if strangulated),
and resection and creation of a stoma (if there is a perforation and fecal contamination). If the resection has to be done, a stoma is
highly recommended. Abdominal cocoon syndrome is a rare disease and is difficult to diagnose. Here, we report our experience with 2 patients
complaining of mechanical intestinal obstruction signs. Recognition of this entity and awareness of the typical radiological findings may
aid in proper management. Conflict of interest statement The authors of the article certify that they have no affiliations with or
involvement in any organization or entity with any financial interest or non-financial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed
in this manuscript. Statement Financial expenses of this study were paid by the authors. Case 1: Air-fluid levels on X-Ray showed a small
intestinal obstruction (A). Coronal sections of abdominal CT images indicate dilatation and thickening of the small intestine wall (B–D).
Case 2: Encapsulated part of the small intestine (A). Loosening of encapsulated segments (B, C). After decapsulation we see the fibrous
capsule (D). Some case reports of ACS in the literature. M – male; F – female.
