Epiretinal membranes (ERMs) in Stargardt disease have been known to undergo spontaneous separation in children. Results of surgical
intervention in adult patients with Stargardt disease have rarely been reported. A retrospective review of results of surgical intervention
for ERM causing visual impairment in two adult patients of Stargardt disease was carried out. Both patients developed ERM in one eye during
their follow-up period with the resultant drop in their preexisting visual acuity. Postsurgery, restoration of foveal contour with some
improvement in visual acuity was observed in both patients. No adverse effect of surgery was noted. Stargardt disease is an autosomal
recessive condition commonly seen in early adulthood characterized by the presence of classical yellow subretinal flecks at the posterior
pole. The macular changes can range from fine granularity to beaten bronze metal appearance to geographic atrophy. Complications such as
choroidal neovascularization and more rarely epiretinal membrane (ERM) formation are known to cause a sudden drop in vision. ERMs, rarely
reported in Stargardt disease are known to undergo spontaneous separation, avoiding the need for surgical intervention. However, in patients
where spontaneous separation does not occur, surgical intervention would eventually be needed. Literature regarding the surgical removal of
an ERM in Stargardt disease and its outcome is scarce, except for a single case report. Herein we report our experience in two patients of
Stargardt disease in whom spontaneous separation failed to occur and they underwent ERM removal, with some improvement in their visual
acuity. A 31-year-old-male, a diagnosed case of Stargardt disease [Fig. 1a and b] on follow-up since 6 years presented with gradual
diminution of vision in the right eye since 2 months. His best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) had dropped from 20/40, N6 to 20/400, N36 in
the right eye while left eye was 20/40, N6 as before. Fundus examination revealed the presence of a thick ERM with macular edema . Spectral
domain-optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) [Fig. 2a] also documented a macular thickness of 680 μ in the right eye. 1-month later macular
thickness increased to 796 μ. No obvious vascular pathology was noted that could account for increased thickness. He underwent 23 g pars
plana vitrectomy with ERM removal. Intraoperatively there was dense adhesion of the posterior hyaloid face to the macula. The rapid increase
in the thickness of the retina could have been due to an attempt at spontaneous posterior vitreous detachment which did not occur.
Postoperative period was uneventful with release of traction due to ERM [Fig. 1d] and restoration of the foveal contour on SD-OCT and
unchanged autofluorescence pattern [Fig.2c and d]. At 6 months follow-up, BCVA had improved to 20/120 N18. (a and b) Colour fundus picture
of the postpole of right and left eyes of case 1 showing numerous flecks in the perifoveal area and posterior pole (c) colour fundus picture
of the right eye 6 years later showing a thick epiretinal membrane at the macula. (d) Postoperative colour fundus picture of the right eye
showing absence of epiretinal membrane with retinal pigment epithelial atrophy at the macula (a) Preoperative Optical coherence tomography
(OCT) of case 1 showing increased macular thickness secondary to thick epiretinal membrane. (b) Postoperative OCT showing restoration of
foveal contour with RPE atrophy. (c) Preoperative autofluorescence image showing hypoautofluorescence corresponding to central area of
retinal pigment epithelial atrophy. (d) Postoperative autofluorescence image showing no change in the hypoautofluorescent area A 24-year-old
myopic male, a diagnosed case of Stargardt disease [Fig. 3a] on follow-up since 3 years with a BCVA of 20/400, N36 in both eyes, presented
with sudden onset metamorphopsia in the left eye of 1-week duration. Though, BCVA was unchanged, fundus showed an ERM causing traction on
the macula with associated edema and subretinal hemorrhage [Fig. 3b]. Choroidal neovascular membrane was ruled out on fundus fluorescein
angiography (FFA) [Fig. 4]. The ill defined leak seen on FFA could be due to traction on the capillaries, which is one of the causes for
leakage in ERMs on FFA. On review 1-month later [Fig. 3c], BCVA reduced to 20/600, < N36. SD-OCT revealed thick ERM with a taut posterior
hyaloid and increased retinal thickness of 1198 microns [Fig. 5a]. 25 g pars plana vitrectomy with ERM removal was done. With an uneventful
postoperative period, 5 months later BCVA was 20/400 N36. Restoration of foveal contour with retinal atrophy [Figs. 3d and 5b] and a slight
increase in the hypoautofluorescence due to unfolding of the retina was noted [Figs. 5c and d]. (a) Colour fundus picture of right eye of
case 2 patient at 3 years follow-up showing beaten metal appearance at the macula. (b) Colour fundus picture of the left eye showing thick
epiretinal membrane causing macular traction and associated with subretinal hemorrhage. (c) Colour fundus picture of the left eye 1-month
later showing further increase in the macular traction with resolution of subretinal hemorrhage. (d) Postoperative colour fundus picture at
5 month follow-up showing traction relief at macula with retinal pigment epithelial atrophy Colour photograph and fundus fluorescein
angiography (FFA) images of second patient showing the epiretinal membrane with traction and hemorrhage. FFA shows an ill defined leak from
distorted capillaries, temporal to the fovea and late staining in the foveal region. No choroidal neovascular membrane can be made out (a)
Preoperative optical coherence tomography picture showing increased macular thickness due to thick epiretinal membrane. (b) Postoperative
optical coherence tomography picture showing restoration of foveal contour with foveal thinning. (c) Preoperative autofluorescence image
showing an area of hypoautofluorescence corresponding to area of retinal pigment epithelium atrophy. (d) Postoperative autofluorescence
image showing an apparent increase in the hypoautofluorescence due to unfolding of the retina Vision in Stargardt disease is usually reduced
due to macular changes. A thin ERM may not cause additional visual impairment. However a thick ERM may result in further visual reduction.
Reports of spontaneous separation of idiopathic ERMs in the young as well as in a child with Stargardt disease suggest observation rather
than surgical intervention. Though a compromised retinal structure hampers the expected results of surgical intervention, some visual
improvement can be expected if the deterioration is mainly due to the ERM. As both our patients were on regular follow-up, reduction in
visual acuity corresponded to the development of a thick ERM, which further progressed during the short period of observation. Both on OCT
and intraoperatively, the ERM appeared to be part of the attached, thickened posterior hyaloid. Case 1 had always had better vision than
case 2, and this patient had a significant improvement following surgery. Subretinal fibrosis and hyperlipofuscinosis have been reported
previously in these patients following blunt ocular trauma with resultant visual loss suggesting the need for protection from even minor
ocular trauma. In our patients, there was no apparent surgical damage to the retinal pigment epithelium, which is depicted by the
preoperative and postoperative autofluorescence images. In the second patient, an apparent increase in the area of hypoautofluorescence seen
temporally could have been due to unfolding of the retina following release of traction caused by the ERM. Epiretinal membranes have been
described in Stargardt disease and observation rather than surgery has been one option in the past, with isolated reports suggesting limited
improvement after surgery. Our experience shows that visual improvement following surgery is possible in these eyes without compromise or
worsening of the preexisting pathology. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
