Severe portal vein thrombosis (PVT) is often considered a relative contraindication for living donor liver transplantation due to high
associated risks and morbidity. Meanwhile, improvement in operative techniques, resulting in higher success rates has removed PVT from the
list of contraindications in deceased donor liver transplantation (DDLT). In this report, we describe a surgical technique for DDLT using
polytetrafluoroethylene graft from the inferior mesenteric vein for portal inflow in patient with portomesenteric thrombosis. Portal vein
thrombosis (PVT) is a common complication of end-stage liver disease with an incidence of 0.6-16% in patients with well-compensated disease,
increasing up to 35% in cirrhotic patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.1 As recently as the 1990s, PVT was associated with an increased
incidence of complications and a higher mortality rate.2 Additionally, blood loss volumes in patients with complete thrombosis were reported
to be significantly higher than those in patients without PVT or with partial PVT.3 Nevertheless, the presence of PVT is no longer
considered an absolute contraindication for liver transplantation, as many improvements have been made in surgical technique and
perioperative management.2 In this report, we describe using polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) jump graft from the inferior mesenteric vein
(IMV) for portal inflow in a patient with severe portomesenteric venous thrombosis. A 64-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital
for deceased donor liver transplantation. The patient's previous medical history revealed alcoholic liver cirrhosis and diabetes mellitus.
Also, he had undergone transarterial chemoembolization with adriamycin three times in the past because of hepatocellular carcinoma in
segment 8 with minimal portal vein thrombosis, as well as balloon occluded retrograde transvenous obliteration and/or endoscopic variceal
band ligation six times, because of gastric and esophageal variceal bleeding. At the time of admission, his Child-Turcotte-Pugh score was 10
points (grade C), and his model for end-stage liver disease score was 9.0 points. Preoperative computed tomography revealed portomesenteric
thrombosis from the portal vein to the proximal superior mesenteric vein with complete luminal obstruction, and venous collateral flow was
not prominent (Fig. 1). The segment of portomesenteric thrombus was about 6.8 cm and the IMV had no thrombosis. The donor was a 56-year-old
male who had brain death due to traumatic cerebral hemorrhage. During exploration for recipient hepatectomy, portal venous flow was not
detected by intraoperative doppler ultrasound and venous collateral flow was not prominent. Mechanical thrombectomy and low dissection of
the portal vein was performed, and the portal venous inflow was improved. After the liver graft was placed in the recipient's abdomen, the
donor's inferior vena cava was anastomosed to the recipient's inferior vena cava by applying the piggy-back technique. Then, the portal vein
of the recipient was anastomosed to the graft portal vein in an end_ to_ end fashion. Although the graft was recovered from ischemia after
reperfusion, portal blood flow decreased gradually over a few minutes. Although repeated mechanical thrombectomy with portal venotomy was
executed, the portal inflow did not improve. Thus we attempted to search for other area for portal inflow along more distal regions of the
superior mesenteric vein. However, the peripancreatic area showed severe adhesion with superior mesenteric vessels. We had no choice except
to perform a bypass from the IMV to the portal vein using PTFE (diameter: 7 mm) graft since the length of the iliac vessel of the donor was
not sufficient for bypass and cryopreserved vein. After IMV was exposed below the ligament of Treitz, end_ to_ side anastomosis was
performed using polypropylene 6-0 continuous running sutures between PTFE with IMV and end_ to_ side anastomosis between PTFE and the
graft's portal vein (Fig. 2). The PTFE graft was passed through the mesentery above the pancreas, and anastomosis was performed in the same
pattern between PTFE with distal portal vein. Intraoperative Doppler assessment after bypass showed a mean portal vein velocity 48.4
cm/second. We performed gauze packing with externalization at the mesentery of the pancreatic head area because of uncontrolled oozing-like
bleeding. The weight of the graft was 1799 gram, the cold ischemic time was 318 minutes, the warm ischemic time was 40 minutes, and the
anhepatic time was 194 minutes. Intraoperative transfusions were performed with 50 packs of packed red blood cells, 20 packs of fresh frozen
plasma, and 20 packs of platelet concentrate. The total operative time was 14 hours and 5 minutes. On the first postoperative day, portal
vein Doppler ultrasound revealed normal waveform (mean flow velocity of 34.9 cm/second) without thrombus, and the vital signs and laboratory
findings were relatively stable. The patient underwent general anesthesia again on the 16th day after transplantation for perihepatic
hematoma removal, but the portal vein and the PTFE graft were intact. After the transplant operation, the amount of ascites was 500-1500
cc/day until post-transplant 3 weeks, and we compensated daily ascites by 5% albumin and Hartmann solution. The patient needed continuous
renal replacement therapy for oliguria for 3 days, and we transported the patient to a general ward at post-transplant 10 days. After
hematoma removal at post-transplant 16 days, the patient was admitted again to the surgical intensive care unit. At this time, the patient's
mental status was deep drowsy for 3 weeks, and we performed tracheostomy at post-transplant 27 days for continuous ventilation. Brain
magnetic resonance imaging revealed an acute ischemic lesion in the mid pons. At post-transplant 56 days, the patient was transported to a
general ward; however, his lower extremities revealed muscle atrophy, which required rehabilitation for about 4 months. The patient stayed
in the intensive care unit for 50 days, and the total hospital stay was 179 days. The patient was managed with prostaglandin E1 (0.01
lg/kg/h) and a protease inhibitor (mesilate gabexate; 1 mg/kg/h) for 7 days after transplantation. Immunosuppressive agents included a
triple therapy of calcineurin inhibitor (tacrolimus), mycophenolate mofetil, and steroid. Anti-platelet agent (aspirin 100 mg/day) was
prescribed at post-transplant 30 days, and is still being used. Follow-up computed tomography showed normal portal flow without thrombus on
the 7th day and 27 months after liver transplantation (Fig. 3). Now, he is healthy without transplant-related complication, although he
still sometimes reports paralytic ileus. PVT is caused by decreased portal flow from progressive liver cirrhosis and the development of
periportal lymphangitis and fibrosis.1 PVT is more frequent in patients with autoimmune, cryptogenic, and alcoholic cirrhosis than in
patients with hepatitis C.2 The pathophysiology of PVT is complex, but related to liver cirrhosis, which causes the elevation of portal
pressure in relation to endothelial injury and thrombus formation.4 Enhanced coagulability as a result of decreased levels of natural
anticoagulants, such as protein C, protein S, and antithrombin III, as well as coagulation factors are also observed in patients with PVT.1
Yerdel, et al.5 classified PVT into four grades according to its extent and the severity of luminal occlusion by the thrombus. Our case,
exhibited grade 3 PVT, showing complete thrombosis on both the PV and the proximal superior mesenteric vein (SMV). Although an optimal
technique for managing PVT during liver transplantation does not exist, the most preferred method of portal vein reconstruction is eversion
thrombectomy, especially in grade 1 or 2 PVT.1,2,5,6 Grade 2 and 3 PVT can be managed with either thrombectomy or anastomosis to the
splenomesenteric confluence with or without graft, or anastomosis onto a varix, depending on the anatomy and thrombus severity, as well as
extent in the patient.2 Llad√≥, et al. recommend a venous graft or anastomosis to a collateral vein for the patients with grade 3 thrombosis
and involvement of the SMV.2,5 Especially, a jump venous graft from the SMV is indicated only when the portal flow can be restored in cases
of extensive PVT or when there is no suitable engorged collateral coronary vein available.4 However, prosthetic vessel grafts are the only
choice if a venous conduit is not possible. The indications for prosthetic vessel grafts for the splanchnic venous system have been limited
because the blood flow in this system is relatively slow, that is, highly thrombogenic. Moreover, little clinical experience with the use of
PTFE grafts in the splanchnic venous system has been accumulated.7 PTFE seems to be a good alternative for outflow venoplasty, when
autologous or allogeneic vascular patch is not available or when in critical situations.8 The hematological condition of patients undergoing
liver transplantation is less thrombogenic than that in canine models, as shown in the impairment of coagulation profiles, such as moderate-
to-severe thrombocytopenia, the low viscosity from lowered hematocrits, and the concurrent use of antiplatelet agents.7 Luminal thrombus
formation is uncommon when a prosthetic graft is used as a conduit for large arteries, such as the inferior vena cava, or even the portal
vein. These vessels can be classified as high-flow vessels regardless of the pressure, so that there is a low risk of luminal thrombus
formation.7 Another problem with the use of PTFE is infection. Pomposelli, et al.9 reported no infection complications cases when PTFE was
used for venous reconstruction. Due to the inert nature of PTFE, the result of any infection is likely to be due to early conduit thrombosis
and eventual encapsulation of the graft. Therefore, decisions regarding the type of conduit can be made based on availability of resources
and preference of the surgeon. Moreover, one advantage of the synthetic graft material is reduced cost, which is approximately 10% less than
that of cryopreserved vessels.9 The use of a temporary porto-caval shunt is associated with better hemodynamic stability and improved renal
function, as well as decreased transfusion requirements in piggy back liver transplantation.10,11 In our case, we performed bypass from the
IMV to the graft portal vein after reperfusion of the liver graft. In fact, preoperative CT scan did not clearly show the range of
portomesenteric thrombosis. Moreover, we thought that first mechanical thrombectomy was done successfully because of sufficient portal back
flow. If the porto-caval shunt was performed before portal reconstruction and reperfusion, the patient may have shown better progression
during hospitalization. There are only a few reports associated with IMV for portal vein inflow. Kobayashi, et al. reported on IMV to the
left gonadal vein shunt for gastroesophageal varices and extrahepatic PVT after liver transplantation.12 In our case, the SMV was difficult
to use for portal vein reconstruction because of severe adhesions and friable vessel walls. After the successful portal vein reconstruction
using the IMV with PTFE, the patient had no vascular problems for 27 months. In conclusion, PTFE jump graft from the IMV to the portal vein
may be a feasible option in patients with portomesenteric thrombosis, and the IMV can be a potential source of portal inflow in liver
transplants. The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. Portal venous thrombosis is shown in preoperative computed tomography (A
and B, maximum intensity projection of serial coronal view). Thrombosis was extended to the proximal superior mesenteric vein (dot line;
length, 6.8 cm) for a Yedel classification Grade 3. PV, portal vein; PVT, portal vein thrombosis; SMV, superior mesenteric vein; SMA,
superior mesenteric artery; IMV, inferior mesenteric vein. After thrombectomy and lower dissection, portal vein anastomosis with
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE; arrow) vascular artificial graft was performed with continuous running suture using polypropylene (A). Since
massive bleeding and adhesion precluded the possibility of distal superior mesenteric vein interposition, we performed anastomosis between
the proximal inferior mesenteric vein and distal portal vein using PTFE (B; schematic representation). PV, portal vein; SMV, superior
mesenteric vein; IMV, inferior mesenteric vein. Postoperative computed tomography at post operative 7 days (A) and 27 months (B) shows that
the polytetrafluoroethylene graft has no thrombosis and no anastomotic stricture. PTFE, polytetrafluoroethylene; IMV, inferior mesenteric
vein.
