Horseshoe kidney is a type of renal fusion by the lower poles anomaly during embryogenesis. Polycystic kidney that occurs in adults is an
autosomal dominant disease due to the genetic mutations leading to the expression of the proteins polycystin 1 (ADPKD1) and polycystin 2
(ADPKD2). The two kidney diseases are common congenital disorders respectively, but it is very rare for one patient to have both anomalies
simultaneously with the incidence of 1 in 134,000–1 in 8,000,000. Bilateral nephrectomy in a horseshoe kidney patient is more complicated
than in common condition. Transection of the isthmus is a routine procedure during the operation that may cause heavy bleeding. Herein, we
describe a novel way of nephrectomy without dividing the isthmus that has not been seen in publications. A 59-year-old woman with end-stage
renal failure secondary to polycystic kidneys had been on peritoneal dialysis for 15 months. She complained of recurrent fever and hematuria
and was admitted to hospital for bilateral nephrectomy in controlling severe kidney infection and preparation for renal transplantation. She
felt recurrent attacks of bilateral loin pains without rigors and vomiting and medications did not improve the situation. Her laboratory
findings were as follows: white cell count 9.0 × 109/L, hemoglobin 69 g/L, platelets 317 × 109/L, serum urea 11.1 mmol/L, serum creatinine
694 μmol/L. Abdominal ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) scan presented enlarged bilateral polycystic kidney fusing across the
midline without stone and tumor as shown in Figure 1. The contrast CT scan needed to take a lot of contrast agent by injection that was
harmful to the renal function, so there was no three-dimensional or reconstructed picture shown here. Computed tomography scan of the
patient showing renal fusion and massive cysts. Bilateral nephrectomy was performed when the body condition was suitable. The patient was
placed in the supine position with her right arm extended. A 20 cm long midline abdominal incision was used to enter the peritoneal cavity.
Move the colon to the left side for exposing the right kidney. The volume of the right kidney was substantially enlarged, and the surface
was full of varicolored cysts. After locating the inferior vena cava, the renal hilum was identified to the right side of inferior vena
cava. The renal artery and vein were stapled and transected separately. The right kidney was isolated from the upper pole with preservation
of the adrenal gland. Right ureter was located and cut with clips to free the inferior pole including the isthmus. Same procedures were done
to the left kidney until both kidneys were entirely isolated without dividing the isthmus. The polycystic horseshoe kidney was completely
removed out of the cavity as shown in Figure 2. The length and width of the sample were 20.3 cm and 14.2 cm respectively, and the weight was
9.4 kg. Sample of the polycystic horseshoe kidney with intact isthmus removed from the patient. The total operative time was 2 hours and 24
minutes. The blood loss was 300 ml. No blood transfusion was needed. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for
ultrafiltration after operation, and back to the common ward when the vital signs were stable 2 days later. The patient had no surgical
complications and discharged from the hospital 1 week later. Horseshoe kidney is the most common type of renal fusion with the incidence of
1 in 400–1 in 800. Polycystic kidney is an important cause of renal failure. The incidence of this disease ranges from 1 in 500 to 1 in 1000
cases. However, a polycystic horseshoe kidney is an extremely rare situation with very few records reported in the literature. Pure or hand-
assisted laparoscopic nephrectomy of a polycystic horseshoe kidney by cutting the isthmus was reported, but there is no case of isthmus
undivided bilateral nephrectomy in a patient with polycystic horseshoe kidney. Usually, bilateral nephrectomy of horseshoe kidney needs to
divide the isthmus. Lumbar incision is the routine path to enter in. In our case, the patient was involved in severe infection from the
polycystic kidney, so we designed the novel procedure to remove the horseshoe kidney. In this instance, a midline abdominal incision would
be better for taking out the diseased kidneys from the only incision. Dissecting of kidney began from one side, and then move onto to the
other. For both kidneys, the lower pole and the isthmus were saved to the end after the remainder of the kidney was set free. Great
attention was paid in our procedures to prevent heavy bleeding when isolating the isthmus from the inferior vena cava abdominal aorta lying
under the isthmus. This is critical and is worth taking care of in a similar operation. There are two advantages of isthmus undivided
bilateral nephrectomy of a polycystic horseshoe kidney versus cutting isthmus. On one hand, the isthmus is usually thick with rich blood
supply, keeping the isthmus intact could dramatically reduce the risk of bleeding and save operation time. On the other hand, the cysts of
the kidney are often accompanied by infection. Our approach prevented the infected fluid entering into the peritoneal cavity, which could
cause severe infection after operation. Additionally, more CO2 would be absorbed in laparoscopic procedure that could increase the risk of
acidosis especially for the patient with end stage renal failure, maybe our method was better in this special situation. In one word, our
approach was applicable in patients with bilateral nephrectomy of a polycystic horseshoe kidney. Edited by: Yi Cui Source of Support: Nil.
Conflict of Interest: None declared.
