We report Buruli ulcer in a man in the Netherlands. Phenotyping of samples indicate the Buruli pathogen was acquired in Suriname and
activated by trauma on return to the Netherlands. Awareness of this disease by clinicians in non–Buruli ulcer–endemic areas is critical for
identification. Buruli ulcer (BU) is a potentially disabling affliction of inhabitants of tropical wetlands (1) caused by Mycobacterium
ulcerans and characterized by necrosis of skin, subcutaneous tissue, and sometimes bone. Major foci are in West and Central Africa and minor
endemic foci in Australia, Southeast Asia, Mexico, and South America. BU is rare in South America; 15 cases were reported in Peru since 1996
(1; H. Guerra, pers. comm.), and 242 cases were reported during 1969–2011 in French Guiana (2), which is bordered by Suriname to the west.
Mycobacterial ulcers have been seen in Suriname in the past (R.F.M. Lai, A. Fat, L. Sabajo, pers. comm.), but these cases were not confirmed
by laboratory tests. We report a case of BU in a patient from Suriname diagnosed in the Netherlands. In February 2013, a 70-year-old man
sought care at the University of Amsterdam Department of Dermatology for a neuropathic ulcer on his left foot. It was determined that he had
a neuropathic ulcer, a complication of nerve damage caused by leprosy, for which he was treated successfully. Data from his medical history
were recovered and reexamined at this time. He was a native of Suriname, where he lived until he moved to the Netherlands 1977. He had
multiple instances of treatment for skin infections, beginning with a diagnosis of leprosy (Hansen disease, caused by the mycobacterium M.
leprae) when he was 10 years of age. He was treated continuously with dapsone during 1952–1978. In 1977, he moved to Groningen, the
Netherlands, and clofazimine was added to his treatment for leprosy for 6 months. In February 1982, he moved to Amsterdam and sought routine
follow-up care for leprosy at the University of Amsterdam Department of Dermatology, and quiescent borderline lepromatous leprosy was
diagnosed. He was treated during February 1982–February 1983 with a triple therapy consisting of rifampin, dapsone, and clofazimine. In
1984, the man traveled to Paramaribo and Coronie in Suriname, where he stayed for 4 weeks during the spring season. During that time, he
fished in creeks. In December 1984, he sought treatment again at the University of Amsterdam Department of Dermatology for a painful red
swelling on the dorsal side of the right wrist after he had scratched it on a rough wall 5 weeks earlier, in mid-November. Beginning in
February 1985, the patient had signs of infection of the wound, including conspicuous edematous swelling of the hand. Radiographic imaging
showed no signs of osteomyelitis. The patient was treated with flucloxacillin; the symptoms subsided. However, during April 26–May 11, 1985,
the patient experienced recurrent infection with abscess formation. A biopsy was taken, and an acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smear and culture for
nontuberculous mycobacteria were done. The histopathology report indicated scarring dermis and mixed cell infiltrate, leucocytoclastic
vasculitis, fibrinoid changes, and some diffusely spread histiocytes. AFB staining was negative. On June 3, partly dry wounds, 1 deep ulcer,
fistula formation, and spontaneous drainage of another lesion were documented. The wound was cultured, and amoxicillin and clavulinic acid 4
times daily for 3 weeks was prescribed; after that time, the patient’s treatment for related conditions consisted of local wound care. After
6 weeks’ incubation, the mycobacterial culture was positive at 30°C but negative at 37°C and 45°C. In August, ulcers were still present, and
multiple nodules at the underarm and an enlarged lymph node at the elbow were palpable. Infection with M. ulcerans was suspected clinically.
On January 20, 1986, the isolate was sent to the Institute of Tropical Medicine of Antwerp and was identified as M. ulcerans ITM 842
according to phenotypic characteristics (3). The isolate was further analyzed by several genotypic methods (3–6). By April 7, 1986, the
ulcers were nearly completely closed. We describe a patient infected with M. ulcerans strain ITM 842. Phenotypic characteristics of isolates
from Suriname and French Guiana are identical, whereas isolates originating in Africa, Australia, and Asia have different phenotypic
characteristics (3). Variable-number tandem-repeat genotypic analysis had been shown to discriminate the Suriname isolate from French Guiana
isolates and from mycolactone-producing M. marinum (4,5). Results confirmed that this isolate was different from M. ulcerans isolates from
other geographic origins, albeit closely related to M. ulcerans strains from French Guiana by genetic characteristics (4,5). These results
suggest that the patient acquired his infection in Suriname. The incubation period of primary BU is estimated to be 2–3 months, but latency
of the disease can span years. Persons who were in an area to which BU is endemic months to years earlier can manifest BU in a traumatized
body site (6,7). Co-infections with leprosy and BU have been described, but rarely (8). During 1952–1977, the patient was treated with
dapsone monotherapy. Additionally, he received clofazimine for 6 months upon his arrival in the Netherlands. Subsequently, during February
1982–February 1983, he was treated with a triple therapy consisting of rifampin, dapsone, and clofazimine. Treatment of BU patients with
dapsone has not been properly evaluated in humans (9), and clofazimine is not indicated in the treatment of patients with BU (10); however,
rifampin is highly bactericidal against this organism (11). If the patient was infected with M. ulcerans before his arrival in the
Netherlands in 1977, it is unlikely that the dapsone and clofazimine that he received for treatment of leprosy could have controlled the
infection. Whether or not he had been infected with M. ulcerans when he first arrived in the Netherlands, treatment for 1 year with rifampin
and dapsone before he returned to Suriname for 4 weeks in 1984 would have been expected to have killed any M. ulcerans. Thus, the most
likely hypothesis is that he acquired BU infection during the 4 weeks he spent in Suriname in 1984, and that the scratch obtained against a
rough wall in November 1984 in the Netherlands reactivated a latent infection. It is unlikely that the rough wall was contaminated by M.
ulcerans, because BU is not considered prevalent in Europe. There are many similarities between this case and that reported by Lindo and
Daniels (7). Both patients manifested symptoms of BU after having left a disease-endemic area, and in both patients, the lesion developed at
the site of a trauma that occurred in a non–disease-endemic country. Correct laboratory confirmation remains essential to confirm the
discovery of new foci of BU, and the use of genetic mapping can provide additional information about the geographical location in which
patients were infected. The importance of laboratory confirmation of BU has been emphasized by the World Health Organization’s manual for
the laboratory diagnosis of BU (12).The study of imported cases, and in particular this case from Suriname, has enabled us to acquire more
knowledge regarding latency and reactivation of the disease, and the existence of new foci. As in the report by Meyers et al (13), this case
report emphasizes the role of trauma to the skin in the delayed manifestation of this disease caused by M. ulcerans. Reports from European
countries, Canada, America, and Australia describe travelers visiting friends or relatives in BU-endemic countries who manifested BU upon
return to a non–disease-endemic area (14,15). Thus, BU may be diagnosed in patients late, or not diagnosed, in non–disease-endemic
countries, where health care professionals are usually not familiar with the condition or its causal organism. Delayed diagnosis often leads
to severe disabilities. In countries where BU is uncommon, the clinician’s consideration of the patient’s recent travel history and
awareness of cutaneous and bone lesions of BU are needed for accurate testing, diagnosis, and treatment of the patient. Suggested citation
for this article: Faber WR, de Jong B, de Vries HJC, Zeeglaar JE, Portaels F. Buruli ulcer in traveler from Suriname, South America, to the
Netherlands. Emerg Infect Dis. 2015 Mar [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2103.141237 Funding for this work was provided by the
Stop Buruli Consortium supported by the UBS Optimus Foundation. Dr. Faber is a retired professor of Tropical Dermatology, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam. He is currently supervising dermatologist at STI Outpatient Clinic, Public Health Service of Amsterdam. His
research interests include leprosy and other mycobacterial skin diseases and tropical dermatology.
