To the Editor: Large granular lymphocytic leukemia (LGLL) is a rare chronic clonal lymphoproliferative disease characterized by a persistent
increase in large granular lymphocytes, which are large lymphocytes with a low nucleus to cytoplasm ratio and an abundant cytoplasm with
azurophilic granules. Here we report two cases diagnosed as refractory LGLL treated with porcine antihuman thymocyte immunoglobulin (ATG) in
West China Hospital. A 44-year-old woman was admitted to the outpatient department with complaint of recurrent fatigue. The initial
laboratory tests showed: Hemoglobin (Hb), 6.8 g/dl, reticulocytes (RET), 7.1 × 109/L. Bone marrow smears showed mature lymphocytes of 29.5%,
granulocytic cells 68%, erythroid cells 4% and myeloid/erythroid (M/E) ratio 27.2:1. Flow cytometry (FCM) showed CD3+, CD8+, CD57±, CD56−,
and restricted expression of T-cell receptor (TCR)-γδ3. She was diagnosed as LGLL. The patient then received the treatment of cyclosporin A
(CsA), steroid, methotrexate (MTX) and cyclophosphamide, all of which were failed. However, after porcine ATG therapy, her Hb count
increased to normal value [Figure 1a]. Then, FCM of marrow suggested that just a few clonal T-cell might be presented. 7 months later, FCM
of her peripheral blood showed nucleated cells with 38% lymphocytes, 68% of which were clonal cytotoxic T-cell. She was identified to
relapse. Trend of changes in hemoglobin (Hb) and lymphocyte ratio (L) in Case 1 (a) and Case 2 (b). The arrow indicated the initiation of
immunosuppressive therapy with antihuman thymocyte immunoglobulin. Both patients’ Hb and L% initially increased following the
immunosuppressive therapy, but later decreased in Case 1 and maintained at safe level in Case 2. A 46-year-old woman was admitted to our
department due to dizziness and fatigue. Her initial laboratory tests showed: Hb 5.5 g/dl, RET 28 × 109/L; bone marrow smear showed mature
lymphocytes of 21%, granulocytic cells 71%; erythroid cells 7% and M/E ratio 10.1:1. FCM showed nucleated cells of 82% lymphocytes with an
immunophenotype of CD2+, CD3+, CD7+, CD8+, CD57+, CD11c+, CD4−, CD5−, CD16−, CD56−, and restricted expression of TCR-γδ 7.1, suggesting
large granular lymphoproliferative disorder. CsA and steroid failed initially. After porcine ATG, her Hb count elevated obviously [Figure
1b]. Then, bone marrow smear showed mature lymphocytes of 22.5%, granulocytic cells 53.5%, erythroid cells 23% and M/E ratio 2.33:1. FCM
indicated CD8+ cells of 67%, CD4+ cells 27% and TCR-γδ−. The patient continued to take CsA and her Hb count was maintained at 11 g/dl
currently. In 1977, LGLL was first described by McKenna; in 1985, the term LGLL was first used to describe this disorder involving clonal
invasion of the blood, marrow and spleen; in 1999, the World Health Organization classification included T- and NK-cell LGLL in the mature
peripheral T-cell neoplasm subgroup. The disease mainly affects middle-aged people, with a median age of 60 years, without gender
predilection. It is asymptomatic or symptomatic with neutropenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia, recurrent infections and autoimmune conditions.
The FCM is often characterized by expression of CD3+, CD8+, and TCR-γ gene rearrangements. The first-line therapy of LGLL includes CsA,
steroid, MTX and cyclophosphamide. But some patients who do not respond well to these drugs are refractory. For these patients, Lamy and
Loughran suggested that purine analogs, such as Fludarabine or Campath, could be used or that investigational drugs should be considered.
Although ATG can bind to T-cell and relieve inhibition of red linage, few refractory patients received the treatment. We searched OVID
databases and found that patients with refractory LGLL were treated with horse ATG in 1980s; no patients have been treated by porcine ATG
before. Our two refractory patients received porcine ATG therapy and achieved remission. One of them even achieved molecular remission.
However, one patient relapsed afterwards, so long-term follow-up is also necessary to monitor the recurrence. Edited by: Li-Shao Guo Source
of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
