Microvascular free tissue transfer in head and neck reconstruction requires suitable recipient vessels, which are frequently compromised by
prior surgery, radiotherapy, or size of the tumour. A surgical description of an arterial free flap pedicle anastomosis on the reverse
internal carotid arterial flow in a vessel-depleted neck is presented. A 66-year-old male with a relapse of hypopharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma previously treated with both surgical and radiation therapy for carcinoma of the tongue and the larynx was successfully
reconstructed using a free forearm flap with reverse internal carotid arterial flow. The involvement of the carotid glomus and prior surgery
excluded the other vessels as recipients. The forearm free flap survived without any complications. This procedure can be considered an
alternative rescue technique for salvage reconstruction in a vessel-depleted neck. La ricostruzione con lembi liberi richiede la presenza di
vasi riceventi che spesso possono essere compromessi da precedenti interventi chirurgici, radioterapia o dalle dimensioni del tumore. In
questo articolo abbiamo riportato la tecnica chirurgica da noi utilizzata per la realizzazione di una microanastomosi effettuata sul
segmento distale dell'arteria carotide interna sfruttando il suo flusso retrogrado effettuata in un collo privo di altri vasi utilizzabili.
Un paziente di 66 anni con recidiva di carcinoma squamocellulare dell'ipofaringe, precedentemente trattato con chirurgia e radioterapia per
un carcinoma squamocellulare della lingua e della laringe, è stato ricostruito con successo con un lembo libero di avambraccio
rivascolarizzato con il flusso retrogrado dell'a. carotide interna. Il coinvolgimento del glomo carotideo ed il precedente trattamento
chirurgico avevano impedito l'utilizzo di altri vasi del collo. Il lembo di avambraccio non ha riportato complicanze nel post-operatorio.
Questa procedura può essere considerata un'alternativa estrema per consentire la ricostruzione nei casi in cui i vasi del collo risultino
inadeguati e/o assenti. To date, microvascular free-tissue transfer represents a reliable technique for reconstruction of defects following
surgical treatment of head and neck cancer. Free tissue transfers have a high overall success rate, ranging between 91% and 99% of cases 1,
and are generally performed with good functional and aesthetic outcomes, even considering donor-site morbidity 2 3. However, the procedure
requires specific surgical skills, especially for management of the vascular pedicle. In particular, identification and preparation of
recipient vessels and microsurgical vascular anastomoses are crucial steps in the field of reconstructive surgery 4 5. Meticulous attention
to these points should be paid to avoid dangerous and life-threatening complications, and improve the overall success rate. In fact, the
management of vascular pedicles can be a troublesome aspect, especially in pre-irradiated graft beds, on the basis of vascular fibrosis and
endothelial thickening. In addition to this, surgeons faced with free-flap reconstruction have to be trained, to modify in itiner during a
radial forearm flap set up for reconstruction following resection of a relapsing hypopharyngeal tumor in an irradiated patient. A
microvascular transfer of the radial forearm was planned to reconstruct the digestive tract in a 66-yearold man with a relapsing
hypopharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). The patient's relevant history began 14 years before when he underwent a partial glossectomy
with bilateral functional neck dissection for an undifferentiated SCC, followed by post-operative radiotherapy. In July 2010, a total
laryngectomy was performed for the development of an undifferentiated SCC in the left pyriform sinus, extending to the homolateral larynx.
The patient was also affected by arterial hypertension and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. For the tumour recurrence in the residual
hypopharyngeal lateral left wall (Fig. 1), also considering his previous irradiation history, surgery was therefore planned. An en bloc
tumour resection englobing the proximal portion of the involved common carotid artery at the level of the carotid artery bifurcation
(previously undetected to the pre-operatory radiologic assessment) was performed, and a right fascio-cutaneous radial forearm flap was set
up and tubulised for reconstructive purposes (Figs. 1, 2). Ablation. Reconstruction. T: tongue; IJV: internal jugular vein, C: carotid
artery. Due to the lack of appropriate arterial flow on the arteries tributary to both the ipsilateral and contralateral external carotid
artery, the reversed flow in the distal portion of the left internal carotid artery was used for arterial microanastomoses. Venous
microanastomosis was performed between the right tyreo-linguo-facial venous trunk and the cephalic donor vein. A left pectoral muscle flap
was then transposed to protect the residual carotid artery, and a cutaneous Tiersch graft taken from the anterolateral left thigh was used
to cover the residual donor site defect. To date, microsurgical reconstruction of the head and neck after oncological surgery based on free
flaps is, in experienced hands, an effective and successful technique 6. The most common used recipient vessels for arterial
microanastomoses are the branches of the external carotid artery, such as the facial, superior thyroid, and lingual arteries. However, it is
generally accepted that each artery having, once resected, any pulsatile and adequate flow at its distal end can be used as a recipient
vessel 7. However, in managing head and neck reconstruction, surgeons must be ready to modify in itinere their reconstructive strategy on
the basis of unexpected anatomic extension of the disease (e.g. vascular involvement) or impairment of vascular structures suitable for
microanastomoses due to unsuspected flow obstruction or reduced vascular flow (e.g. related to atheromatous disease, postattinic
atherosclerosis, or, less frequently, to intimal injury after the positioning of intra-arterial infusion catheter). In addition to these,
some technical difficulties may arise, including troublesome pedicle management due to limited pedicle length, reduced vessel caliber or
kinking of the pedicle 8 9. In order to overcome these pitfalls, some authors 10 have suggested that interposition of venous grafts can be
used to reach an adequate pedicle length. However, it must be pointed out that surgical strategies using fragile and thin-walled vessels
such as graft veins may predispose to intravascular thrombosis. Therefore, under unexpected and unfavourable conditions, aside from other
less effective reconstructive techniques such as delayed locoregional flaps 11, the use of reverse arterial flow can be considered as an
extreme surgical choice. In fact, Neligan and co-workers described 28 cases of superior thyroid and facial artery reverse flow used for free
flap revascularisation with good clinical outcomes 8. These positive results may be related to adequate arterial flow, corresponding to
57-76% of systemic arterial pressure as documented by clinical and physiopathologic studies 9. In addition to this, Batchelor 7 stated that
the distal flow of an extracranial reverse flow vessel would be enhanced by recruitment of its peripheral capillary branches resulting in
overflow leading to an adequate flap blood supply. At any rate, it may be speculated that the above mentioned conditions related to
extracranial reverse flow recipients would be valid in case of intracranial vessels, thus leading to a successful outcome such in this case.
However, to our knowledge, no previous descriptions of arterial microanastomoses performed on the reverse flow of the internal carotid
artery have been reported. With regards to the donor site, forearm free flaps should be considered as the preferred choice compared to
perforator flaps in such difficult situations, on the basis of their long and well-caliber pedicles 12 13. Indeed, in our patient, the
forearm flap allowed us to reach the distal portion of the inner carotid artery and use its reverse flow for revascularisation. Moreover,
the large size of the radial artery used achieved a good matching with the most of the secondary arterial neck branches and even with the
internal carotid artery. In addition to this, a long pedicle is useful when contralateral arterial supply management is required, as in our
report, due to impaired patency of the ipsilateral arterial. In conclusion, microvascular surgery in vessel-depleted necks is a challenge
and somewhat troublesome aspect. The case presented herein suggests the feasibility of internal carotid artery reflow for free flap
revascularisation when no other safer or easier technical options are possible.
