Infections following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction are rare, with no previous reports citing Mycobacterium abscessus as the
culprit pathogen. A 22-year-old man presented twice over three years with a painful discharging sinus over his right tibia tunnel site
necessitating repeated arthroscopy and washout, months of antibiotic therapy, and ultimately culminating in the removal of the implants. In
both instances, M. abscessus was present in the wound cultures, along with a coinfection of Staphyloccocus aureus during the second
presentation. Though rare, M. abscessus is an important pathogen to consider in postoperative wounds presenting with chronic discharging
sinuses, even in healthy non-immunocompromised patients. This case illustrates how the organism can cause an indolent infection, and how the
removal of implants can be necessary to prevent the persistence of infection. Coinfection with a second organism is not uncommon and
necessitates a timely change in treatment regime as well. The reported incidence rate of septic arthritis following anterior cruciate
ligament (ACL) reconstruction ranges from 0.4%-1.7%1) with the majority of infections caused by Staphylococcus aureus and S. epidermidis.1)
Mycobacterium infections following ACL reconstructions are rare, with only 9 reported cases in the literature.2,3) To our knowledge, there
are no previous reports citing Mycobacterium abscessus as the culprit pathogen. M. abscessus comes from the family of rapidlygrowing
Mycobacterium (RGM), which have been implicated in prosthetic joint infections postoperatively. Such infections are some of the most
challenging to treat due to their high pathogenicity and resistance to chemotherapy. The bacterium is typically found in soil, sewage and
natural water sources, and has been associated with nosocomial surgical site infections, as well as lung and soft tissue infections.4) We
describe a patient with a M. abscessus infection following ACL reconstruction. The purpose is to describe the clinical features and course
of such an infection following ACL reconstruction as well as other key learning points. We report a case of a healthy 22-year-old man who
underwent an arthroscopic right ACL reconstruction with hamstring grafts in January 2010, 6 months after his initial injury. There were no
associated injuries. The graft was fixed with an Endobutton (Smith & Nephew, Andover, MA, USA) for the femoral side, and a Biosure
bioabsorbable screw (Smith & Nephew) and metal staples (Smith & Nephew) for the tibial side. After an initial uneventful postoperative
recovery, he presented 7 weeks after surgery with right knee swelling associated with fever and chills. On examination, there was dehiscence
of the tibial tunnel wound with hemoserous discharge. The range of motion of the right knee was 5° to 100° and was limited by pain. The
C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and total white cell count were 139, 71, and 7.3, respectively. The right knee
aspiration performed revealed turbid fluid, and bacterial cultures yielded no bacterial growth. He was offered, but refused, arthroscopic
debridement of the right knee, and was given oral antibiotics with instructions to follow-up at the outpatient clinic. There was no
resolution of his wound discharge, and the patient subsequently consented to an arthroscopic washout of his right knee, synovectomy, and
debridement of the right tibial wound 3 months after his initial ACL reconstruction. Intraoperatively, there was florid synovitis but the
ACL graft was noted to be intact and healthy. There was no frank pus noted from the right tibial wound and the wound was debrided. The
bioabsorbable screw and staples were left in situ. The knee fluid was incubated at 35℃, 5% carbon dioxide levels on blood agar for five
days. It revealed scanty growth of a non-tuberculous RGM. The mycobacterium detection DNA Accuprobe identification was positive and the
organism was confirmed to be M. abscessus. Susceptibility testing using a broth microdilution method confirmed that the organism was
sensitive to amikacin, clarithromycin, and linezolid. Postoperatively, the patient was given 2 weeks of intravenous (IV) amikacin and
concurrently started on one week of IV cefoxitin and clarithromycin. There was a gradual decline in the laboratory markers of infection
(Creactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate). He was subsequently treated with 4 months of oral clarithromycin and bactrim.
Postoperatively, the wound showed progressive healing, with no further discharge noted during subsequent outpatient consultations. He was
lost to follow-up 6 months after the arthroscopic washout and 9 months after his initial ACL reconstruction. Two years later, he presented
to our outpatient clinic with right knee pain associated with discharge from the knee wound for the past six months. There was no associated
fever. There was a chronic sinus located over the anteromedial aspect of the right knee with seropurulent discharge, giving the appearance
of a chronic granuloma. There was otherwise no collections seen and the ACL graft appeared intact (Figs. 1 and 2). The patient subsequently
underwent arthroscopic washout and removal of the screws and staples of the right tibia. Intraoperatively, he was noted to have a chronic
sinus tract over the staples and tibial tunnel site. The screw was loose and fragmented, with surrounding sloughy tissue seen. The ACL was
noted to be lax on arthroscopy (Fig. 3). In view of his previous history of M. abscessus infection, the patient was started on IV amikacin,
cefoxitin, and oral clarithromycin. The initial bacterial cultures showed moderate growth of S. aureus. However, subsequent delayed cultures
at 6 weeks grew M. abcessus. The histology demonstrated inflamed granulation tissue with no granulomas seen. He received 14 days of IV
amikacin, IV cefoxitin, and oral clarithromycin for the duration of his hospitalization. He was discharged on postoperative day 17 with 6
weeks of oral clarithromycin and 2 weeks of oral cloxacillin. The patient was successfully contacted for a clinical review 14 months after
the second arthroscopic washout and implant removal from his right knee. He reported no further symptoms of infection in his right knee
since the second arthroscopic washout and had regained full premorbid function of his right knee. On examination, the wounds had since
healed, the knee was not warm, effused, or tender and there was full range of motion of the right knee. However, he demonstrated a positive
Lachman's test (Fig. 4). After its separation from the M. chelonae group in 1992, M. abscessus was recognized as the culprit pathogen for
many human infections, including skin and soft tissue infections, surgical site infections, respiratory infections, and disseminated
infections in immunocompromised individuals. Infections caused by M. abscessus are notoriously difficult to treat because the bacteria is
intrinsically resistant to most conventional anti-tuberculous drugs. Reasons for this resistance include the slow growth of the bacteria,
the presence of a waxy impermeable cell wall, which serves as both a physical (by size exclusion) and a chemical (hydrophobic) barrier,
various drug export systems, and genetic polymorphism of targeted genes.4) M. abscessus possesses the ability to form smooth biofilms.
Hence, retention of the implants can possibly lead to a failure to achieve a microbiological cure and re-infection, especially since M.
abscessus is notoriously resistant to most antibiotic regimes. There are published case reports of M. abscessus bacteremia associated with
infected indwelling vascular catheters. A case series by Chang et al.5) involving 12 patients with RGM bacteremia demonstrated that the rate
of relapsing bacteremia was significantly higher in patients with delayed catheter removal compared to patients with timely catheter
removal. In our case report, the patient's implants were initially left in situ, as it was deemed too premature to remove the implants
because the graft had not yet integrated. However, leaving the implants in place may result in the persistence of infection, as shown in the
vascular catheter case series. Thus, the first learning point is the need for full removal of implants in M. abscessus infections for source
control in persistent, recurrent infections. The literature demonstrates a lack of consensus for the treatment of septic arthritis following
ACL reconstruction. Generally, the treatment involves either arthroscopic or open debridement with or without ACL graft retention followed
by antibiotic treatment. McAllister et al.6) reported an average of 2.75 procedures (range, 2 to 4 procedures) required after the diagnosis
to eradicate the infection and restore knee motion. The scar formation resulting from repeated invasive procedures to the involved knee
joint can lead to capsular contraction, thus significantly limiting joint motion and affecting the patient's functional outcome. A recent
case report describing a M. wolinskyi infection post-total knee arthroplasty emphasizes the lack of a standardized treatment protocol in
infections caused by RGM. In the case report, the authors described the successful eradication of the infection after prolonged targeted
antibiotic therapy and surgical debridement without removal of the prosthesis.7) This suggests that the decision as to retain or remove the
implant should be taken on a case-by-case basis. There is limited literature on the incidence and management of culture-negative septic
arthritis following ACL reconstruction. However, there are publications delineating the incidence of culture-negative prosthetic joint
infections. Berbari et al.8) described 60 cases (7%) of culture-negative prosthetic joint infections out of 897 patients with prosthetic
joint infections over a 9-year period. These 60 patients were noted to have a sinus tract or purulence communicating with the prosthesis
and/or features of acute inflammation on histology. The possible reasons for culture-negative infections are prior antimicrobial therapy,
infection with fastidious organisms or unusual organisms such as fungi or mycobacterium, and biofilm formation. Our patient had a similar
presentation and his initial cultures did not yield any bacterial growth. Hence, the second important learning point is that in patients
presenting with chronic discharging sinuses over the previous surgical site with negative cultures, infection with RGMs such as M. abscessus
should be considered. There have been case reports of coinfections as well as secondary infections of prosthetic joints. The implicated
organisms include Listeria monocytogenes with S. aureus9) and Candida albicans with Methicillin-resistant S. aureus.10) Hence, a third
learning point is the need to consider the possibility of a coinfection or superinfection whenever there is an atypical organism involved,
such as M. abscessus. The presence of a secondary or coinfection in post-ACL reconstruction septic arthritis is clinically relevant, as it
significantly affects the choice of antimicrobial therapy. It should also be considered in cases of infection which do not respond to the
antimicrobial regime tailored to the initially identified organism. In our case, the chronicity of the discharge and low grade nature of the
infection suggested an atypical infection. However, the presence of a purulent component to the discharge suggested an element of
coinfection with a Staphyloccal species. In our patient, the biosure bioabsorbable screw used was made of poly-L-lactic acid and
hydroxyapatite. Polylactic acid implants are thought to be less likely to cause local inflammatory and foreign body reactions as compared to
similar implants manufactured using polyglycolic acid, due to the long degradation time of polylactic acid.3) Despite this, abscess cavities
in conjunction with the l tunnel have been reported, with negative gram stains and cultures.3) During the second debridement of our patient,
the screw in the tibial tunnel was noted to be loose and fragmented, suggesting that the local inflammatory response from osteolysis
associated with the use of a polylactic implant may provide a suitable environment for infection to occur. Our case report has demonstrated
that atypical organisms, such as M. abscessus, should be considered whenever bacterial cultures are negative in chronic lowgrade infections.
The possibility of coinfections and superinfections in such cases should also be considered. The case also suggests that removal of
orthopedic implants may be necessary for the complete eradication of this pathogen. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this
article was reported. Chronic granuloma over the anteromedial aspect of the right knee was observed at the second presentation. (A, B)
Magnetic resonance images of the right knee demonstrating edema in the superficial soft tissues surrounding the distal aspect of the tibial
tunnel (arrows). Intraoperative image of the chronic sinus tract over the anteromedial aspect of the right knee with fragmented bioscrew.
(A, B) The patient's right knee 14 months after the second arthroscopic washout was performed.
