Full lists of members and affiliations appear at the end of the paper. These authors jointly directed the work Author contributions Study
design: S.S., U.B.S.H., S.W., H.Le., J.R.L.; subject ascertainment and phenotyping: S.S., E.R., R.S.M., B.M., L.H.H., H.S.C., M.A., J.M.S.,
T.Do., H.V., G.K., M.Sy., L.S., P.E.M., T.L., A.-E.L., K.S., D.C., D.H.-Z., C.M.K., Y.G.W., M.St., S.G., A.B., M.K.B., A.M., W.K., A.P.,
A.S., P.D.J., I.H., S.B., M.W., S.M.S., S.W., H.Le., J.R.L., EuroEPINOMICS; mutation and CNV analysis: E.R., T.Dj., B.M., L.H.H., R.S.,
M.G., S.Z., A.S., P.D.J., S.B., S.M.S., S.W., H.Le., J.R.L.; statistical analysis: M.N., P.M., R.K., H.Le., J.R.L.; functional analysis:
U.B.S.H., S.Mü., H.Lö., K.D., S.Ma., H.Le.; interpretation of data: S.S., U.B.S.H., M.W., S.Ma., S.M.S., S.W., H.Le., J.R.L.; writing
manuscript: S.S., U.B.S.H., T.Dj., M.S., M.N., P.M., S.Ma., S.M.S., S.W., H.Le., J.R.L.; revising manuscript: all authors. Epileptic
encephalopathies are a phenotypically and genetically heterogeneous group of severe epilepsies accompanied by intellectual disability and
other neurodevelopmental features1-6. Using next generation sequencing, we identified four different de novo mutations in KCNA2, encoding
the potassium channel KV1.2, in six patients with epileptic encephalopathy (one mutation recurred three times independently). Four
individuals presented with febrile and multiple afebrile, often focal seizure types, multifocal epileptiform discharges strongly activated
by sleep, mild-moderate intellectual disability, delayed speech development and sometimes ataxia. Functional studies of the two mutations
associated with this phenotype revealed an almost complete loss-of-function with a dominant-negative effect. Two further individuals
presented with a different and more severe epileptic encephalopathy phenotype. They carried mutations inducing a drastic gain-of-function
effect leading to permanently open channels. These results establish KCNA2 as a novel gene involved in human neurodevelopmental disorders by
two different mechanisms, predicting either hyperexcitability or electrical silencing of KV1.2-expressing neurons. Many of the voltage-gated
potassium channels (KV1–12) are expressed in the central nervous system (CNS), playing an important role in neuronal excitability and
neurotransmitter release7. Mutations in potassium channel-encoding genes cause different neurological diseases, including benign familial
neonatal seizures (KCNQ2/KV7.2, KCNQ3/KV7.3)8-10, neonatal epileptic encephalopathy (KCNQ2)11,12, episodic ataxia type 1 (EA1)
(KCNA1/KV1.1)13, and peripheral nerve hyperexcitability (KCNA1, KCNQ2)13-15. In addition, antibodies against KV1.1 or associated proteins
like Contactin-associated protein 2 (Caspr2) or Leucine-rich, glioma-inactivated 1 protein (LGI1) cause limbic encephalitis or
neuromyotonia16. Therefore, potassium channel genes represent interesting candidates for neurodevelopmental disorders. To identify mutations
in presumed genetic forms of epilepsy, we designed a targeted re-sequencing panel17 comprising 265 known and 220 candidate genes for
epilepsy (Supplementary Table 1). Screening a pilot cohort of 33 patients, we identified mutations in known epilepsy genes in 16 cases17.
The remaining 17 cases were evaluated for mutations in candidate genes (Supplementary note), which led to the detection of a heterozygous de
novo mutation in KCNA2, c.1214C>T, p.Pro405Leu (P405L), affecting the highly-conserved pore domain of the voltage-gated potassium channel
KV1.2. This mutation is not found in control databases (1000G, EVS, dbSNP138, ExAC). The female Patient #1 carrying this mutation had
unremarkable early development until epilepsy onset at 17 months old. The phenotype included febrile and afebrile alternating hemiclonic
seizures and status epilepticus, reminiscent of Dravet syndrome. The electroencephalogram (EEG) showed multifocal spikes with marked
activation during sleep. After seizure onset, ataxia and delay of psychomotor and language development became apparent. She had postnatal
short stature, growth hormone deficiency and hypothyroidism. Seizures and ataxia responded poorly to antiepileptic drugs (topiramate,
oxcarbazepine, valproic acid, bromide), including acetazolamide (known to be effective in EA1 caused by mutations in KCNA118). At last
follow-up at eight years old, she had remained seizure-free for the past six months without previous change of medication. Further KCNA2
mutations were identified in several parallel studies (Supplementary Fig. 1). First, we performed whole exome sequencing (WES) in 86 parent-
offspring trios with epileptic encephalopathy (31 with SCN1A-negative Dravet syndrome , 39 with myoclonic-atonic epilepsy , and 16 with
electrical status epilepticus in slow-wave sleep ). Second, we performed panel sequencing (Supplemental note) in 147 adult patients with a
broad spectrum of epilepsy phenotypes associated with intellectual disability. Third, we performed WES in an adult cohort of 10 independent
trios with severe epilepsy and intellectual disability, and WES in another cohort of 12 independent, isolated index cases with early-onset
ataxia and epilepsy. We identified six additional independent cases with previously-unreported heterozygous KCNA2 variants (Table 1,
Supplementary note): Patient #2 (initially classified as MAE) carried the de novo mutation c.788T>C, p.Ile263Thr (I263T). Patient #3
(intellectual disability with neonatal-onset focal epilepsy and cerebellar hypoplasia) carried the variant c.440G>A, p.Arg147Lys (R147K), of
unknown inheritance. Since (i) it could not be confirmed as de novo, (ii) was predicted as benign from seven out of nine prediction tools,
(iii) lysine occurs naturally at that position in drosophila and zebrafish, and (iv) did not reveal functional consequences, R147K was
considered a variant of unknown significance (see Supplementary note, Supplementary Tables 1 and 2, and Supplementary Fig. 3). Patients #4
(initially classified as DS with prominent focal seizures) and #5 (intellectual disability with febrile seizures, focal seizures and status
epilepticus) also carried the de novo P405L mutation (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Fig. 2). Patients #1, #2, #4 and #5 eventually became
seizure-free between four and 15 years old, whereas intellectual disability and (in #1 and #4) mild to moderate ataxia remained unchanged.
Recurrence of P405L in three independent cases suggests a mutational hotspot: c.1214 is located in a stretch of cytosines and guanines and
the C>T mutation likely occurs due to a methylated CpG sequence, possibly bypassing the DNA repair system and so becoming prone to this
pyrimidine-pyrimidine substitution. Patient #6 carried the de novo mutation c.894G>T, p.Leu298Phe (L298F). His phenotype was different and
much more severe, presenting with severe intellectual disability with gradual loss of language and motor skills, pharmacoresistant
generalized tonic-clonic, atypical absence and myoclonic seizures, facial dysmorphism, generalized epileptic discharges and moderate ataxia
(Table 1 and Supplementary note). Similarly, patient #7 carrying the de novo mutation c.890G>A, p.Arg297Gln (R297Q) presented with a more
severe phenotype consisting of moderate intellectual disability, moderate to severe ataxia and pharmacoresistant seizures. We subsequently
screened a follow-up cohort of 99 patients, comprising 47 individuals with unresolved epileptic encephalopathy, short stature and/or ataxia
as well as 52 individuals with intellectual disability and idiopathic severe GH deficiency without detecting additional sequence alterations
by Sanger sequencing. We excluded copy number variations affecting KCNA2 in all 99 follow-up cases as well as 86 trio-WES cases using an in-
house-developed multiplex amplicon quantification technique (Online Methods and Supplementary Fig. 1). To validate our findings
statistically and corroborate KCNA2 as a new disease-predisposing gene for epileptic encephalopathy, we calculated the probability for
recurring KCNA2 mutations occurring by chance in our cohorts. Comparing the allele frequency of six (two times P405L) KCNA2 non-synonymous
variants in our validation cohorts (6/(354×2), excluding the first P405L mutation detected in the discovery cohort of 33 patients) with
those missense and nonsense variants reported in the largest available control database (ExAC, 144/122828), revealed a significant
enrichment of KCNA2 variants in our patient cohorts using Fisher’s exact test (p=2.6×10−4). Further statistical evidence is provided in the
Supplementary Note. KCNA2 had not been associated with a human disease so far. However, during the review process of this manuscript, a
single case report was published describing a 7-year-old boy with the KCNA2 de novo mutation R297Q presenting with ataxia and myoclonic
epilepsy, similar to our patient #7.19 In addition, the Pingu mouse presenting with ataxia and growth retardation carries a Kcna2 loss-of-
function mutation, p.Ile402Thr, in close proximity to P405L; Kcna2 knock-out mice present with severe seizures and premature death20,21.
KV1.2 belongs to the KV1 family (KV1.1–8), all members of which are expressed in the CNS. These channels consist of four subunits with six
transmembrane segments (S1-S6). S4 forms the voltage-sensor and S5-S6 the pore region containing a selectivity filter and gating ion flow22
(Fig. 1a). All four KCNA2 sequence alterations detected in patients #1–7 (except the one in #3) are localized in highly-conserved and
functionally-important protein regions (Fig. 1b), and were predicted as pathogenic. P405L disrupts the highly-conserved, KV-specific PVP
motif in S6, which is thought to link the gate to the voltage-sensor23,24. A PVP>AVP mutation in KV1.5 leads to a non-functional channel25.
I263T in S3 may disrupt a hydrophobic segment proposed to focus the electric field across the cell membrane, thus enabling the S4 gating
charges to translocate over a smaller distance rather than the entire depth of the membrane bilayer26. Furthermore, I263T in KV1.2
corresponds to I262T in KV1.1 causing EA1 with distal weakness.27 Finally, R297Q and L298F directly affect the S4 voltage sensor, and R297Q
has been described before to induce a negative shift of the activation curve.27,28 Functional effects of all detected sequence alterations
were examined using an automated two-microelectrode voltage-clamp oocyte testing system. We found a sigmoidal relationship between the
amount of injected wildtype (WT) cRNA and potassium current amplitude, with a strong decrease in amplitude for the 8-fold cRNA amount (Fig.
2b, Supplementary Fig. 5). This quantitative titration of protein levels by varying the amounts of injected RNA was used to determine the
amount of injected cRNA for further experiments. For P405L and I263T, we found a dramatic reduction of current amplitudes and thus a clear
loss of channel function (Figs. 2c). When either of the two mutations were co-expressed with WT KV1.2 in a 1:1, 1:2 or 1:4 ratio, with
constant amount of injected WT cRNA, current amplitudes significantly decreased (Figs. 2d) compared with similar amounts of WT alone (Fig.
2b). Hence, both P405L and I263T exert a clear dominant-negative effect on WT KV1.2 channels. Furthermore, I263T caused a depolarizing shift
of voltage-dependent activation, and slight changes in inactivation were found for P405L (Supplementary Fig. 4). In contrast to P405L and
I263T, both R297Q and L298F induced strong gain-of-function effects. Neutralization of the second arginine in the voltage sensor in
KV1.2-R297Q increased current amplitudes by 9-fold and shifted the voltage dependence of steady-state activation by −40 mV compared with WT
(Fig. 3a–c), The gain-of-function of the L298F mutation was even more pronounced with a 13-fold increase in current amplitudes and a −50 mV
shift of the activation curve (Fig. 3a–c). As a consequence of the permanently open mutant channels, resting membrane potentials of oocytes
expressing R297Q or L298F channels were about 40 mV more negative than of those expressing WT (Fig. 3d). Both mutations exerted a dominant
effect on the WT, since co-injection of either R297Q or L298F with WT in a 0.5:0.5 ratio revealed very similar alterations as with one of
the mutations (1.0) alone (Fig. 3b–d). To examine protein production and stability, we performed SDS-page analysis of total cell lysates
using a monoclonal anti-KV1.2 antibody. Representative Western blots show that all mutations generate a protein expression level similar to
the 57-kD band of the WT (Figs. 2e and 3e). A slight but reproducible shift was found for the band of P405L in both oocytes and mammalian
cells (Fig. 2e, top, middle). Steric properties of proline can disrupt secondary structure elements, which could be important for the
function of the conserved PVP motif. A leucine in this position (LVP) could induce a structural change resulting in altered gel migration28.
KV1.2 belongs to the delayed rectifier class of potassium channels enabling efficient neuronal repolarization following an action potential.
Loss-of-function mutations predict hyperexcitable neuronal membranes and repetitive neuronal firing due to impaired repolarization. This
hypothesis is corroborated by the epileptic phenotype of the Kcna2 knock-out mouse21. In stark contrast, R297Q and L298F predict permanently
open channels at physiological membrane potentials, and electrical silencing by membrane hyperpolarization (as observed in oocytes). It is
difficult to speculate about the pathophysiological consequences of a KV1.2 loss- or gain-of-function beyond the level of single neurons,
particularly since this channel has been detected in a broad range of both excitatory and inhibitory neurons29,30. Further experiments in
gene-targeted mouse models could answer these questions. In summary, we identified de novo mutations in KCNA2 causing mild to severe
epileptic encephalopathy in roughly 1.7% of cases across our different cohorts. The phenotype associated with dominant-negative loss-of-
function mutations comprised infantile/early-childhood seizure onset, frequent febrile and afebrile focal motor and dyscognitive seizures
with overlap to DS (#1, #4, #5) and MAE (#2). However, focal seizures are uncommon in these syndromes and in particular the observed
multifocal epileptiform discharges with marked activation during sleep are not described either in DS or MAE. All four patients became
seizure-free between four and 15 years old with no apparent association to a recent change of medication. Thus, this improvement might
either be due to a cumulative treatment response or simply represent a spontaneous resolution (Table 1, Supplementary note). Initially
normal psychomotor development slowed after seizure onset, resulting in mild-moderate intellectual disability associated with mild-moderate
ataxia and continuous myoclonus in some cases. By contrast, the phenotypes of patients #6 and #7, carrying mutations with dominant gain-of-
function, were more severe in terms of epilepsy, ataxia and intellectual disability, and also differed electrographically, with generalized
epileptic discharges. This may suggest that different pathomechanisms underlie distinctive clinical symptoms. Clinical-genetic studies and
correlation with functional investigations from additional patients with further mutations are needed to confirm this genotype-phenotype
relationship. High throughput sequencing has been performed as described previously by our group for whole exome analysis31 and panel
analysis17. The panel used to screen the pilot cohort of 33 patients (including the index patient) comprised 485 known and putative epilepsy
genes. (Supplementary Table 1) The candidates comprised genes that were suggestive for being involved in epileptogenesis due to several
reasons, e.g. genes belong to neurotransmitter receptor families or other ion channels, genes were discussed by different research groups as
putatively involved in epilepsy, genes are associated with seizures in animals or associated with human neurodevelopmental phenotypes, etc.
The gene panel used to screen the second cohort of 147 patients was an updated version of the initial panel. To improve sequence coverage
and adapting the panel for purely diagnostic purposes, we excluded a few metabolic and mitochondrial genes as well as most candidate genes
and added all recently published novel epileptic encephalopathy genes. This panel finally contained 280 genes including 20 candidates for
research settings (Supplementary Table 2). We performed bidirectional Sanger sequencing of all three exons of KCNA2 (ENST00000485317,
NM_004974) and its intron-exon boundaries using the BigDye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing kit on an ABI3730XL DNA Analyzer (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA; primers available upon request) in 47 patients with epileptic encephalopathy and ataxia and/or short stature as
well as 52 patients with intellectual disability and severe growth hormone deficiency. Additionally, the genomic region containing KCNA2 was
screened for CNVs by use of an in-house-developed technique for multiplex amplicon quantification (MAQ). With this MAQ technique, we
screened all 99 individuals of the Sanger sequencing cohort as well as all 86 individuals of the WES cohort (Supplementary Fig. 1). This
assay comprises a multiplex PCR amplification of fluorescently-labeled target and reference amplicons, followed by fragment analysis on the
ABI3730 DNA Analyzer32. The comparison of normalized peak areas between the test individual and the average of seven control individuals
results in the target amplicon doses indicating the copy number of the target amplicon (using the in-house developed Multiplex Amplicon
Quantification Software. The multiplex PCR reaction consists of three test amplicons located in the genomic region of KCNA2 and three
reference amplicons located on different chromosomes (primer mix is available upon request). For the prediction of the pathogenicity of
nonsynonymous variants we used the ANNOVAR33 table_annovar.pl script together with the LJB23 database (dbNSFP)34 from June 2013 comprising
prediction scores from SIFT, Polyphen2 (HDIV and HVAR), LRT, MutationTaster, MutationAssessor, FATHMM, MetaSVM and MetaLR scores. Scores
were used as given on the ANNOVAR webpage. Additional three conservation scores (GERP+, PhyloP, SiPhy) were used to determine the
conservation of a genomic position (More details in Supplementary Table 2). To test the enrichment of probably damaging nonsynonymous KCNA2
variants in our data, we used the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) database as a control dataset. It comprises data from 61,486
individuals coming from various exome sequencing projects including control cohorts data but also data from studies on neurological
disorders like schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. We extracted all 64 nonsynonymous (missense and nonsense) variants for KCNA2 from ExAC .
Some of them occurred in more than one individual yielding altogether 144 alleles with variation in KCNA2 out of a total number of 122828
alleles in the ExAC database. Significant enrichment of nonsynonymous variants was then tested determining the difference of allele counts
in our data and the ExAC dataset using Fisher’s exact test. We first obtained an estimate for the single-nucleotide mutation rate in the
KCNA2 gene. This rate equals the product of the average de novo mutation rate in humans of 1.2×10−8 per nucleotide per generation35 and the
length of the largest coding sequence of KCNA2 (coding ID in CCDS database: 827.1) of 1,500 base pairs, yielding 1.8×10−5 per generation.
The probability of observing a de novo mutation in KCNA2 in k out of n parent-offspring trios then simply follows a binomial distribution
with a success probability equaling the gene-based mutation rate, Bin(n, k, 1.8×10−5). Site-directed mutagenesis was performed to engineer
the mutations into the human KCNA2 cDNA using Quickchange™ (Agilent Technologies, USA; primers are available upon request). The mutant cDNA
was fully resequenced before being used in experiments to confirm the introduced mutation and exclude any additional sequence alterations.
cRNA was prepared using the SP6 mMessage kit from Ambion. The human KV1.2 in the pcDNA3.1 vector was kindly provided by Stephan Grissmer
(Institute of Applied Physiology, Ulm University). Xenopus laevis oocytes were obtained from the Institute of Physiology I, Tübingen.
Preparation of the oocytes was performed as described previously12. Oocytes were treated with collagenase (1 mg/ml of type CLS II
collagenase, Biochrom KG) in OR-2 solution (in mM: 82.5 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 1 MgCl2 and 5 Hepes, pH 7.5) followed by three washing steps and
storage at 16°C in Barth solution (in mM: 88 NaCl, 2.4 NaHCO3, 1 KCl, 0.33 Ca(NO3)2, 0.41 CaCl2, 0.82 MgSO4 and 5 Tris/HCl, pH 7.4 with
NaOH) supplemented with 50 μg/ml gentamicin (Biochrm KG). 50 nl of cRNA encoding wildtype (WT) or mutated KV1.2 subunits (1μg/μl) was
injected into oocytes using the Roboocyte2 (Multi Channel Systems, Reutlingen, Germany) and stored for two days (at 17°C) prior to the
experiment. Amplitudes of currents of WT and mutant channels recorded on the same day were normalized to the mean value of the 1.0 KV1.2 WT
on that day to pool the normalized data from different experiments together. Potassium currents in oocytes were recorded at room temperature
(20-22°C) using Roboocyte2 (Multi channel Systems, Reutlingen, Germany). For two-electrode voltage-clamp (TEVC) recordings, oocytes were
impaled with two glass electrodes with a resistance of 0.4 – 1 MΩ containing 1 M KCl/ 1.5 M KAc and clamped at a holding potential of −80
mV. Oocytes were perfused with a ND96 bath solution containing (in mM): 93.5 NaCl, 2 KCl, 1.8 CaCl2, 2 MgCl2, 5 HEPES (pH 7.6). Currents
were sampled at 5 kHz. The membrane was depolarized to various test potentials from a holding potential of −80 mV to record potassium
currents. The activation curve (conductance–voltage relationship) was derived from the current–voltage relationship that was obtained by
measuring the peak current at various step depolarizations from the holding potential of −80 mV (10 mV increment, depolarized to +70 mV).
The following Boltzmann function was fitted to the obtained data points: g(V)=gmax{1+exp} with g (V) = I/(V-Vrev) being the conductance, I
the recorded current amplitude at test potential V, Vrev the potassium reversal potential, gmax the maximal conductance, V1/2 the voltage of
half-maximal activation and kV a slope factor. Voltage-dependent inactivation of WT and mutated KV1.2 channels were analyzed using 25-s
conditioning pulses at potentials ranging −60 mV to 0 mV (increment 10 mV) from a holding of −80 mV, the test pulse was 30 mV. A standard
Boltzmann function was fitted to the inactivation curves: I(V)=Imax{1+exp} with I being the recorded current amplitude at the conditioning
potential V, Imax being the maximal current amplitude, V1/2 the voltage of half-maximal inactivation, and kV a slope factor. For Western
blot, injected Xenopus oocytes were lysed in a buffer containing (in mM) 20 Tris, 100 NaCl, 1 ethylenediaminetetraacid, 0.5% Triton X-100
and 10% glycerol with protease inhibitor cOmplete (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). In addition, for the P405L mutation CHO cells were
transfected with 10 μg/μl DNA using Mirus “TransIT®-LT1” reagent. CHO cells were lysed in a buffer containing (in M): 2 Tris (pH 7.5), 3
NaCl, 0.2 EDTA, 0.2 EGTA, 0.25 Napyrophosphate, 0.1 β-glycerolphosphate, 0.1 sodium-orthovanadate, 1 DTT, 0.1 1% Triton and 25x cOmplete
solution (Roche). For measuring protein concentrations (BCA systems, Thermo Fisher Scientific) 15 – 20 μg of protein was separated by sodium
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS Page) on 8% polyacrylamide gels. The proteins were transferred onto polyvinylidene
fluoride (PVDF) membranes (PALL Corporation, Port Washington, NY), and Western blotting was performed using a mouse-Anti-KV1.2 antibody
(NeuroMab clone K14/16). Water-injected oocytes, untransfected (u.t.) and water transfected (Mock) CHO cells were used as controls. Sample
size was estimated by using GraphPad StatMate Software. TEVC recordings were analyzed using Roboocyte 2+ (Multi Channel Systems, Germany)
and Clampfit (pClamp, Axon Instruments), Origin 6.1 (Origin-Lab Corp., Northampton, USA), and Excel (Microsoft, USA) software. Data were
tested for normal distribution using SigmaPlot12 (Systat Software). For statistical evaluation one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s posthoc test
(normally distributed data) or one-way ANOVA on ranks with Dunn’s posthoc test (not-normally distributed data) was used for comparing
multiple groups, with one-way ANOVA testing the overall difference between groups and posthoc tests telling the difference between specific
groups. For unpaired data sets Student’s t-test (normally distributed unpaired data sets) or Mann-Whitney rank-sum (not-normally
distributed) were used. All data are shown as mean ± SEM. For all statistical tests, significance with respect to control is indicated in
the figures using the following symbols: *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001. We thank all patients and family members for their participation in
this study, Dr. S. Grissmer for providing the human cDNA clone of KCNA2, and Dr. F. Lang and his colleagues from the Institute of Physiology
I, University of Tuebingen, for providing Xenopus laevis oocytes. J.R.L. (32EP30_136042 / 1), J.M.S. (EUI-EURC2011-4325), H.Le. (DFG
Le1030/11-1), P.D.J. (G.A.136.11.N, FWO/ESF-ECRP), and I.H. (DFG HE 5415 3-1) received financial support within the EuroEPINOMICS-RES and -
CoGIE networks (www.euroepinomics.org), a Eurocores project of the European Science Foundation. R.S. received funding from the European
Union (E-Rare JTC grant 01GM1408B and PIOF-GA-2012-326681). J.M.S. received further support from the Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad
(SAF2010-18586). H.Le., S.B., and S.Ma. received further support from the Federal Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF, program on rare
diseases, IonNeurONet: 01GM1105A). S.Z. received support from the NIH (R01NS072248). S.M.S. received support from the Wellcome Trust
(084730), NIHR UCLH Biomedical Research Centre and Epilepsy Society, UK. M.Sy. received support by the Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical
Research IZKF Tübingen (2191-0-0). A.S. received funding for a postdoctoral fellowship by the Fonds Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek. T.D. is a
PhD fellow of the Institute of Science and Technology (IWT). Competing financial interests The authors declare no competing financial
interests. Accession codes Data of the panel sequencing cohort is accessible on the GEM.app browser as “EuroEPINOMICS CH/DK cohort”. Data of
trio exome sequencing cohorts is accessible on the GEM.app browser as “RES EE trio sequencing” cohort. Rudi Balling19, Nina Barisic43,
Stéphanie Baulac44-46, Hande S Caglayan14, Dana C. Craiu26,27, Peter De Jonghe6,7,36, Christel Depienne44,46,47, Padhraig Gormley34, Renzo
Guerrini48, Ingo Helbig37,38, Helle Hjalgrim8, Dorota Hoffman-Zacharska28, Johanna Jähn37, Karl Martin Klein49, Bobby P.C. Koeleman50,
Vladimir Komarek25, Roland Krause19, Eric LeGuern44-46,51, Anna-Elina Lehesjoki22,23,24, Johannes R. Lemke1,4,40, Holger Lerche2, Carla
Marini48, Patrick May19, Rikke S. Møller8,9, Hiltrud Muhle37, Aarno Palotie33,34,35, Deb Pal52, Felix Rosenow49, Kaja Selmer53,54, José M.
Serratosa16,17, Sanjay M. Sisodiya10,11, Ulrich Stephani37, Katalin Sterbova25, Pasquale Striano55, Arvid Suls6,7, Tiina Talvik56,57, Sarah
von Spiczak37, Yvonne Weber2, Sarah Weckhuysen6,7 & Federico Zara58 43Department of Paediatrics, University of Zagreb, Medical School,
University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. 44INSERM UMR 975, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, Hôpital Pitié-
Salpêtrière, Paris, France. 45CNRS 7225, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France. 46Université Pierre et Marie Curie–Paris 6 (UPMC), UMRS
975, Paris, France. 47Institüt für Humangenetik, Universität Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. 48Pediatric Neurology Unit and Laboratories,
Children’s Hospital A. Meyer, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. 49Epilepsy Center Hessen, Department of Neurology, University
Hospitals Marburg and Philipps, University Marburg, Marburg, Germany. 50Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. 51Assistance Publique–Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique et de
Cytogénétique, Unité Fonctionnelle de Neurogénétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Paris, France. 52Department of Clinical Neuroscience,
Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London, London, UK. 53Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
54Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. 55Pediatric Neurology and Muscular Diseases Unit, Department of
Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal and Child Health, ‘G Gaslini Institute’, Genova, Italy. 56Department of
Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. 57Department of Neurology and Neurorehabilitation, Children’s Clinic, Tartu University
Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. 58Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Department of Neurosciences, Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy. dbSNP Build 138,
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP/; 1000 Genomes Project database, http://www.1000genomes.org/; Exome Variant Server,
http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/; ExAC, http://exac.broadinstitute.org/; PolyPhen-2, http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/; MutationTaster,
http://www.mutationtaster.org/; Multiplex Amplicon Quantification, http://www.multiplicom.com/multiplex-amplicon-quantification-maq;
Multiplex Amplicon Quantification Software, http://www.multiplicom.com/maq-s; ANNOVAR,
http://www.openbioinformatics.org/annovar/annovar_filter.html#ljb23; GEM.app browser, https://genomics.med.miami.edu/. Mutations in the
KV1.2 channel. (A) Structure of the voltage-gated potassium channel KV1.2 with transmembrane segments S1–S4 forming the voltage sensor
domain (light gray) and the pore region S5-S6 (in dark gray) with its pore-forming loop. Mutations are localized in highly-conserved regions
in the S3 segment (I263T, light blue), the S4 segment constituting the voltage sensor (R297Q, red; L298F, orange) and the S6 segment (P405L,
dark blue). (B) I263, R297, L298 and P405 and the respective surrounding amino acids show evolutionary conservation. (C) Pedigrees of
patients #1, #2 and #4–7. Functional effects of the KCNA2 mutations P405L and I263T. (A) Representative current traces of KV1.2 wildtype
(WT) channels recorded in a Xenopus laevis oocyte during voltage steps (from −80 mV to +70 mV). (B) Effect of increasing amounts of injected
WT-KCNA2 cRNA on current amplitude (0.25: n=13; 0.5: n=18; 1: n=22; 2: n=17; 4: n=20; 8: n=19). Shown are means ± SEM. (C) Current traces
derived from KV1.2-P405L (top) and KV1.2-I263T (bottom) channels recorded as described in (A). (D) K+-currents were reduced for mutants
P405L (top) and I263T (bottom) compared to WT-cRNA (top: P405L: n=10; WT: n=44; bottom: I263T: n=10; WT: n=34). A dominant-negative effect
of P405L and I263T mutants on KV1.2-WT channels was shown when a constant amount of WT cRNA (amount 1 in (B)) was injected with either H2O
or increasing amounts of mutant cRNA (top: P405L: ratio 1:1: n=47; ratio 1:2: n=40; ratio 1:4: n=36; bottom: I263T: ratio 1:1: n=34; ratio
1:2: n=42; ratio 1:4: n=38). Co-expression of P405L or I263T and the WT led to a significant reduction of the current amplitude compared to
the WT alone. Groups were statistically different (One-way ANOVA (p<0.001), posthoc Dunn’s method (p<0.05)). Shown are means ± SEM. (E)
Western blot analysis from lysates of Xenopus laevis oocytes injected with equal amounts of KV1.2-WT or mutant cRNA (P405L: top; I263T:
bottom) or from lysates of CHO cells transiently transfected with KV1.2-WT and P405L cDNAs (middle). For P405L-mutant channels there was a
shift from 57 kDa to ~58.5 kDa (n=3). KV1.2-WT or I263T (n=3) mutant channels revealed similar bands (57 kDa). Functional effects of the
KV1.2 mutations R297Q and L298F. (A) Representative current traces derived from KV1.2-WT (top), R297Q (middle) or L298F mutant channels
(bottom) recorded as described in Fig. 2A. (B) Mean current amplitudes of top: KV1.2-WT (1.0, n=23), WT + R297Q (0.5:0.5, n=37), R297Q (1.0,
n=35) and H2O injection (n=25); bottom: KV1.2-WT (1.0, n=13), WT + L298F (0.5:0.5, n=26), L298F (1.0, n=14), and H2O injection (n=10). Shown
are means±SEM. There was a statistical significant difference between WT and tested groups (ANOVA on ranks; p<0.001) with posthoc Dunn’s
Method (p<0.05)). (C) Mean voltage dependence of KV1.2 channel activation for WT, R297Q (red, top) or L298F channels (orange, bottom). Shown
are means ± SEM. Lines represent Boltzmann functions fit to data points. Activation curves of mutant channels were significantly shifted to
more hyperpolarized potentials (p<0.05). For details see Supplementary notes. (D) Resting membrane potentials of oocytes injected with: top:
WT (1.0, n=44), WT+R297Q (0.5:0.5, n=42), R297Q (1.0; n=38) or H2O (n=24); bottom: WT (1.0, n=30), WT+L298F (0.5:0.5, n=34), L298F (1.0;
n=28) or H2O (n=13). Shown are means ± SEM. Statistically significant differences between WT and tested groups was verified by ANOVA on
ranks (p<0.001) with posthoc Dunn’s Method (p<0.05). (E) Western blot analysis from lysates of Xenopus oocytes injected with KV1.2-WT (1.0),
KV1.2-WT (0.5) + R297Q (0.5, top), mutant R297Q (1.0, top), KV1.2-WT (0.5) + L298F (0.5, bottom) or mutant L298F (1.0, bottom) cRNA (n=3).
All channels revealed similar bands (57 kDa). Main phenotypic characteristics of patients carrying a disease-causing de novo KCNA2 mutation.
Abbreviations: F: female; FDS: focal dyscognitive seizures; FS: febrile seizures; GH: growth hormone; GTCS: generalized tonic-clonic
seizures; ID: intellectual disability; HC: head circumference; m: months; M: male; MA: myoclonic-atonic seizures; MC: myoclonic seizures;
n.a.: not available; SE: status epilepticus; y: years
