Acute lupus pneumonitis is a rare initial presentation of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). We report a 19-year-old female presenting with
fever and recurrent hemoptysis with radiological evidence of parenchymal lung involvement with mild pleural effusion. Subsequent development
of malar and discoid rash with anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) and anti-dsDNA positivity clinched the diagnosis. Her clinical signs and
symptoms resolved with a course of intravenous pulse methyl-prednisolone along with radiological resolution. Acute lupus pneumonitis (ALP)
is a rare initial presentation of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). We report a 19-year-old female presenting with fever and recurrent
hemoptysis with radiological evidence of parenchymal lung involvement with mild pleural effusion. A 19-year-old previously healthy girl
presented with high grade fever with chills and recurrent episodes of hemoptysis for the past one month along with mild dyspnea, dry cough,
pleuritic chest pain and fatigue. On physical examination, she was febrile with tachycardia, and coarse crepitations in right upper lung
zone. Day 1 blood reports revealed anemia (hemoglobin 9 gm/dL, normocytic normochromic), leukopenia (total leukocyte count 2700/mm3),
thrombocytopenia (platelet count 1 Ã— 105/mm3) and raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) with normal C-reactive protein (CRP). Serum
biochemistry, urine analysis, urine culture were unremarkable. Chest radiograph showed opacity in the right upper lobe with air
bronchograms. Ultrasonography of the abdomen was normal. Sputum culture, blood culture, sputum microscopy for acid fast bacilli, Mantoux
test and HIV serology were negative. The patient was started on intravenous antibiotics and supportive care. However, when fever persisted
beyond 96 hours, a high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan of thorax was done. It showed consolidation of the right upper and lower
lobes, left lower lobe, patchy infiltrative changes in both lungs, a mild right-sided pleural effusion with few small mediastinal lymph-
nodes in pre-tracheal and right tracheo-bronchial locations [Figure 1]. A diagnostic thoracocentesis revealed an exudative hemorrhagic fluid
with normal pleural fluid adenosine deaminase levels. The pleural fluid did not grow any bacteria and was negative for malignant cells.
Fiber-optic bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid analysis showed only pus cells and epithelial cells. Bone marrow
examination was unremarkable. On Day 6, the patient developed a fixed flat rash over the malar prominences and bridge of the nose sparing
the naso-labial folds and discoid rash on the back [Figure 2] with continuing fever. Anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) testing was done and found
to be positive (titer 1:320, homogeneous pattern), anti-ds-DNA was weakly positive, while perinuclear and cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil
cytoplasmic antibody (p-ANCA and c-ANCA, respectively) were negative. Serum C3 and C4 levels were decreased (40 mg/dl and 8 mg/dl,
respectively). Thus, a diagnosis of SLE presenting with acute pneumonitis was made. (a and b) HRCT thorax showing consolidation and patchy
infiltrative changes in both lungs (Rt. > Lt.) along with air bronchograms (a) Fixed flat rash over the malar prominences and the bridge of
the nose sparing the naso-labial folds. (b) Erythematous patches with scaling on back On Day 7, the patient was started on 1 gram
intravenous methyl prednisolone once a day for 3 days, followed by tablet hydroxycholoquine 400 mg daily and tablet prednisolone 1 mg/kg
daily for 6 weeks with gradual tapering of prednisolone to a maintenance dose of 10 mg daily. There was dramatic clinical improvement and
findings on chest radiography completely resolved on Day 15. She is currently being followed up on an outpatient basis with monitoring of
her hematologic and renal profile along with urine analysis at regular intervals. Though pleuritis is common in SLE (50-83% on autopsy),
severe parenchymal involvement is less frequently seen. ALP occurs in 1-4% patients with SLE and is one of the most dreaded life-threatening
syndromes complicating SLE, with short-term mortality of 50-90%. Acute injury to alveolar capillary unit may be the central pathology in
ALP. Clinical presentation may be non-specific and may include cough with or without expectoration, sometimes hemoptysis, pleuritic pain,
dyspnea, hypoxemia, fever, chills along with constitutional symptoms of malaise, fatigue, anorexia. Lung involvement may be unilateral or
bilateral. Physical exam may reveal crepitations, bronchial breath sounds or decreased breath sounds in the basal regions owing to effusion.
As in this case, diagnosis may be difficult in an undiagnosed patient of SLE where other organ involvement, antibodies or signs and symptoms
are either absent or still evolving. Chest radiograph may reveal patchy infiltrates, airspace opacities with or without pleural effusion
while ground glass appearance or a honeycomb appearance maybe appreciable in HRCT. It is logical to think of an infectious etiology first
and do the relevant work up; if that comes back negative a pneumonitis should be suspected. This is extremely important because the two
entities have a similar presentation but very different treatments. Also, it is critically important to differentiate ALP from diffuse
alveolar hemorrhage (DAH) which may have a very similar presentation and radiographic findings with an almost equally grave prognosis. Both
ANA and anti-dsDNA testings are commonly positive in ALP. ESR, CRP or high sensitivity-CRP (hs-CRP) may be used to support clinical
suspicion. Unlike ESR, rise of CRP (or hs-CRP) is only modest, at best in active SLE without infection while a high hs-CRP level (>5-6
mg/dL) is a strong predictor of infection. Also, ESR/CRP ratios >15 suggest lupus flare, while ratios <2 suggest infection. A lung biopsy is
helpful to differentiate between ALP and DAH, but is not recommended in these patients. The authors certify that they have obtained all
appropriate patient consent forms. In the form the patient(s) has/have given his/her/their consent for his/her/their images and other
clinical information to be reported in the journal. The patients understand that their names and initials will not be published and due
efforts will be made to conceal their identity, but anonymity cannot be guaranteed. Dr. Anup Sadhu, MD, Consultant Radiologist, Eko
diagnostics at Medical College Campus, College Street, Kolkata. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
