A 64-yr-old postmenopausal woman with high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion and atypical glandular cell of undetermined significance on
her Pap test was found to have endometrial serous carcinoma (high grade) involving a polyp in a subsequent endometrial biopsy. She underwent
hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with multiple biopsies of the peritoneum. Microscopic examination of the entirely submitted
uterus showed no residual serous carcinoma. Multiple foci of low-grade serous tumor with extensive calcifications and psammoma bodies were
identified on the surfaces of the left fallopian tube, ovaries, and biopsies of the peritoneum, consistent with peritoneal primary low-grade
serous carcinoma. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of low-grade serous carcinoma of the peritoneum with a concurrent (high-
grade) serous carcinoma of the endometrium arising from an endometrial polyp. Histogenesis of primary peritoneal serous carcinoma is not
clear and the most common theory hypothesizes that it originates from preexisting endosalpingiosis as their common origin is the Mullerian
ductal system. Recently the fallopian tube, particularly the fimbrial end, has been proposed as a potential site of origin of some ovarian
or peritoneal serous cancers. We encountered a case of low-grade serous carcinoma of the peritoneum with a concurrent (high-grade) serous
carcinoma of the endometrium arising from an endometrial polyp. To our knowledge, this association has not been reported and we hope that
this incident may shed some light on the etiology of primary peritoneal serous carcinoma. A 64-yr-old G6P5014 postmenopausal woman presented
for routine Pap test and well woman examination. Her family history was significant for endometrial cancer in her mother, endometrial cancer
in one of her sisters at the age of 52, and liver cancer in her other sister. She had no complaint of vaginal bleeding. Her last menstrual
period was in 1997. According to the patient her last Pap tests were reported normal. Her Pap test at this visit was significant for high-
grade squamous intraepithelial lesion and atypical glandular cell of undetermined significance. Her subsequent cervical biopsy and
endometrial biopsy demonstrated pleomorphic cells with high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio and hyperchromatic nuclei (Figs. 1, 2). Mitotic
figures were seen. By immunohistochemistry, the neoplastic cells were reactive for p16, ER, WT1, p53 (diffuse and strong nuclear staining),
and low-molecular cytokeratin. Vimentin, CEA, and β-catenin were negative. The patient was diagnosed with uterine serous carcinoma and
underwent hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and staging. Serous carcinoma in the endometrial polyp. Hematoxylin and eosin
stain, original magnification: ×40. High power of the tumor: malignant cells with high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, hyperchromatic nuclei,
and prominent nucleoli. Multiple mitotic figures are seen. Hematoxylin and eosin stain, original magnification: ×400. On gross examination,
the uterus was unremarkable except for a 2.2×1.4×0.9 cm leiomyoma in the posterior wall and an endometrial polyp. Bilateral ovaries and
fallopian tubes had no discrete lesions. Anterior and posterior vaginal margins, omentum, left pericolic nodules, and lymph nodes from the
pelvis, bilateral common iliacs, bilateral obturators, and para-aortic were also received. No tumor was identified in the entirely submitted
endometrium. There were multiple foci of low-grade peritoneal serous carcinoma with extensive calcifications and psammoma bodies on the
surfaces of both of the ovaries and left fallopian tube (Figs. 3–5). The tumor in the pericolic nodules and omentum (Figs. 6–8) had
identical cytomorphologic features. The same immunohistochemical stains performed on the endometrial carcinoma were performed on the
peritoneal lesion. Peritoneal lesions were focally positive with vimentin. They were strongly and diffusely positive with CAM 5.2,
low–molecular-weight cytokeratin, β-catenin, and ER (nuclear). They were negative with CEA. Low-grade peritoneal serous carcinoma.
Monomorphic cells associated with psammoma bodies are seen. Hematoxylin and eosin stain, original magnification: ×100. Low-grade peritoneal
serous carcinoma. Monomorphic cells associated with psammoma bodies are seen. Hematoxylin and eosin stain, original magnification: ×100.
Low-grade peritoneal serous carcinoma. Monomorphic cells associated with psammoma bodies are seen. Hematoxylin and eosin stain, original
magnification: ×100. The tumor in the omentum with identical cytomorphologic features; monomorphic cells with associated psammoma bodies.
Hematoxylin and eosin stain, original magnification: ×40. The tumor in the omentum with identical cytomorphologic features; monomorphic
cells with associated psammoma bodies. Hematoxylin and eosin stain, original magnification: ×40. The tumor in the omentum with identical
cytomorphologic features; monomorphic cells with associated psammoma bodies. Hematoxylin and eosin stain, original magnification: ×40. All
of the lymph nodes were negative for malignancy. A final diagnosis of primary peritoneal carcinoma, low grade, was established. The pelvic
washing had sheets of mesothelial cells and psammoma bodies with rare groups of neoplastic cells with high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio and
hyperchromatic nuclei. These cells cytomorphologically were similar to the neoplastic cells of the peritoneal low-grade serous carcinoma.
They were positive for ER and focally positive for p53. After further review of the endometrial biopsy, it was deemed that the neoplastic
cells were confined to an endometrial polyp (Figs. 9 and 10). Since the endometrium had been entirely submitted for microscopic evaluation
and no invasive carcinoma was identified, we concluded that the serous carcinoma had been limited to the polyp. Nests of malignant cells in
an endometrial polyp with fibrotic stroma and cystic change of gland. Hematoxylin and eosin stain, original magnification: ×20. Endometrial
polyp with fibrotic stroma and multiple blood vessels with a large nest of malignant cells. Hematoxylin and eosin stain, original
magnification: ×100. Endometrial and peritoneal lesions were evaluated for Kras and BRAF V600E/K/D mutations. Both lesions were negative for
these mutations. The prevalence of endometrial polyp in the general population is about 24%, although they are more common in postmenopausal
woman 1–6. The literature suggests up to 8% risk of malignant transformation of an endometrial polyp, with the risk higher in postmenopausal
women, especially if they present with bleeding and have large polyps 7–10. Interestingly, 12% to 34% of uteri containing endometrial
carcinoma also contain polyps 11,12. Many patients with adenocarcinoma in an endometrial polyp (8 of 9, 90% in 1 study) have adenocarcinoma
or complex atypical hyperplasia of the nonpolyp endometrium, indicating a need for hysterectomy in most of these cases, particularly if the
patient is postmenopausal 13,14. Although our patient had high-grade serous carcinoma in an endometrial polyp, she did not have any
malignancy in the rest of endometrium or in the second endometrial polyp. Although serous carcinoma of endometrium can metastasize
extensively, the chance of the peritoneal tumor to be metastatic from the serous carcinoma involving endometrial polyp in our patient is
unlikely, as the tumor cells on the serosal surface are low grade, whereas the endometrial carcinoma is high grade. The more typical
association of serous carcinoma in a polyp is with high-grade serous carcinoma in the peritoneum 15. Patients with primary peritoneal serous
carcinoma have a mean age of 50 to 65 yr 16–18. Abdominal pain and ascites are common presenting signs and symptoms 16. The most commonly
accepted criteria for peritoneal primary serous carcinoma are Gynecology Oncology Group criteria; which includes the following (i) the
ovaries were either absent or normal in size; (ii) the involvement of the extraovarian sites was greater than the involvement of the surface
of either ovary; (iii) an absence of a deep-seated invasive ovarian carcinoma or invasive disease in the ovarian cortical stroma with tumors
that were <5×5 mm2; (iv) the histopathologic and cytologic characteristics of the tumors were similar to that for epithelial ovarian cancer
19. On the basis of Gynecology Oncology Group criteria, as the ovaries in this patient were of normal size; the involvement of the
extraovarian sites was greater than the involvement of the surface of either ovary; absence of a deep-seated invasive ovarian carcinoma and
characteristic cytomorphology of the lesions, primary peritoneal serous carcinoma was diagnosed. Endosalpingiosis in the peritoneum is
commonly found concurrently with implants of serous borderline tumors of ovary that has metastatsized to the peritoneum 20. This finding has
sparked the theory that primary peritoneal serous carcinoma may arise from preexisting endosalpingiosis 21. However, the histogenesis of
this tumor remains undetermined. As the surface epithelium of the ovary, the peritoneum, and subjacent connective tissue all originate from
coelomic epithelium and subcoelomic mesenchyme, which are derived embryologically from the Mullerian ductal system, it could be maintained
that endosalpingiosis, serous borderline tumors, and even peritoneal serous carcinomas are derivatives of the secondary Mullerian system.
Indeed, this has been one the most accepted theories, as these tumors are derived from cells that retain a potential for Mullerian
differentiation, and could account for the simultaneous occurrence of these entities 20–24. Recently the fallopian tube, particularly the
fimbrial end, has been proposed as a potential site of origin of some ovarian or peritoneal serous cancers 25–27. It has been shown that
intraluminal shedding of tumor cells in the fallopian tubes from serous carcinoma cases are common and a likely route of abdominal spread
28. Our patient had psammoma bodies in the endothelial lining of fallopian tube, but no associated epithelial cells or mucosal dysplasia was
found. Although our patient’s uterus and adnexa were grossly normal, she had pericolic nodules described in the operative report as small (2
mm) white punctate lesions that were found to contain serous carcinoma. The differential diagnosis of primary peritoneal serous carcinoma
includes endometriosis, endosalpingiosis, adenomatoid tumor, florid mesothelial hyperplasia, papillary mesothelioma, primary ovarian
papillary serous borderline tumor with implants, and primary peritoneal serous papillary carcinoma. Although the other entities can often be
distinguished by morphology and architecture alone, immunohistochemistry may be useful in some instances. Calretinin can be used to
distinguish mesothelial lesions. Primary peritoneal serous carcinoma is currently treated similar to primary ovarian serous carcinoma with
platinum-based chemotherapy 22. Our patient underwent radiation therapy followed with combination carbo/taxol chemotherapy. We believe this
is the first reported case of synchronous primary peritoneal low-grade serous carcinoma and a (high-grade) serous carcinoma of endometrium.
Although this may be an incidental finding, it may also indicate a common histogenetic pathway for these tumors. Additional cases and
further studies are required for the evaluation of this hypothesis. The authors declare no conflict of interest.
