Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Male, 40 Final Diagnosis: Mesenteric desmoid tumor Symptoms: Abdominal mass
Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Laparotomy exploratory Specialty: Surgery Rare disease Desmoid-type fibromatosis (DF) is a rare entity
that predominantly involves the extremities, the trunk, and the abdominal cavity. It is a non-metastasizing, sporadic mesenchymal tumor with
high tendency to recurrence and often is categorized as low-grade sarcoma. We present here an extremely rare case of a mesenteric desmoid
tumor (DT). A 40-year-old man presented to our clinic with a mass in the right-lower quadrant of the abdomen, which he incidentally
palpated. A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed a mass between the loops of small intestine. The patient was treated
successfully with wide excision of involved mesentery and adjacent small intestine. Histopathology of the mass revealed DT of the mesentery.
No adjuvant treatment was applied and the patient was free of disease after a 6-month follow-up. Intra-abdominal DF is a rare pathology
which should be differentiated while exploring abdominal tumors. Surgery, when dealing with operable masses, is the appropriate treatment.
DF, also known as aggressive fibromatosis, is a rare tumor characterized by proliferation of myofibroblasts arising from the deep muscle
fascia, aponeurosis, tendons, and scar tissue . According to the WHO, desmoid tumors are defined as “clonal fibroblastic proliferations that
arise in the deep soft tissue and are characterized by infiltrative growth and tendency toward local recurrence but inability to
metastasize”. Their etiology is unknown, although often associated with endocrine factors, FAP, and trauma . DTs are often categorized as
low-grade sarcomas because of their high tendency to recur locally if excision margins are infiltrated. Two different types of DTs are
described: sporadic ones and those associated with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). This manifestation accounts for 5–10% of DF . There
is no sex predilection and the average age at disease development is 30–40 years . The extremities, trunk, and abdominal cavity are most
frequently involved. Only 5% of sporadic desmoids tumors are intra-abdominal, but 80% of patients with FAP-associated DTs develop intra-
abdominal disease . In the abdominal cavity they are mostly found as mesenteric masses. The incidence of DT is <3% of all soft-tissue
sarcomas and 0.03% of all malignancies . The natural history of DF depends on several known and unknown factors. These factors influence the
therapeutic approach to the disease and it has not yet been possible to establish an optimal therapy protocol. Nowadays, the treatment of
desmoids tumors consists of surgery, radiation therapy, and/or antiproliferative treatment in various combinations. In the past, surgery
(alone or in combination with radiotherapy ), was the first line of treatment. The avoidance of excessive morbidity with preservation of
function and improvement of the patient’s quality of life led to reassessment of overall management, giving priority to a “wait and see”
approach. However, the surgical approach remains the first-line therapy for resectable tumors. We report here a new case of DT of the
mesentery. A 40-year-old Caucasian man presented to our surgical department with a mass in the right-lower quadrant of the abdomen,
incidentally palpated by him and without any pathological signs such as abdominal pain, vomiting, or constipation. His past medical history
was free of prior abdominal trauma, surgery, or any genetic disease. The performed physical examination disclosed a painlessness abdominal
mass. The laboratory test results did not reveal any abnormalities. A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed an easily
removable mass between the loops of the small intestine. Its size was 8×8.5 cm (Figure 1). The patient underwent exploratory laparotomy,
which disclosed a “tennis ball-shaped” tumor of the mesentery close to the small intestine, 40 cm from the ileocecal valve (Figure 2). No
ascites or peritoneal or liver metastases were found. A wide excision of the involved mesentery and adjacent small intestine was performed
with a side-to-side anastomosis between the proximal and the distal end of the small intestine using stapling technique. The surgical
procedure was uneventful, without intraoperative blood loss and lasted approximately 45 min. A drain was placed in the abdominal cavity,
near to the anastomosis. The patient resumed oral intake on postoperative day (POD) 3. On POD 5, the drainage catheter was removed because
there was no significant drainage volume. Hospitalization was uneventful and the patient was discharged home on POD 7. Histopathology of the
mass revealed DT of the mesentery, which infiltrated the muscularis propria of the small bowel, provoking ulceration of the mucosa.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed diffuse cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for vimentin and nuclear expression of β-catenin (Figure 3). The
lesion was 9.8 cm in diameter and was excised with clear margins. No adjuvant treatment was applied and no local recurrence or distant
metastasis was found during 6-month follow-up. DTs are soft-tissue tumors, with poor data on their management and prognosis because of their
infrequency . In the USA the incidence is 2–4 out of 1 million people each year. Their etiology is unknown, although it they often
associated with endocrine factors, FAP, and trauma . The average age is 30–40 years regardless of sex, but they are predominantly found in
young female patients of reproductive age . Intra-abdominal DTs are often asymptomatic and the differential diagnosis includes GIST,
lymphomas, carcinoids, fibrosarcomas, and inflammatory fibroid polyps . Our patient did not mention any abdominal trauma or surgical
intervention in his medical history and the colonoscopy 2 months after surgery did not reveal polyposis. Surgery is the mainstay
therapeutical approach for patients with resectable intra-abdominal DTs, but surgery may cause significant morbidity, especially because of
excessive resection of the small intestine . Excision of adherent structures and viscera, which may be close but not invaded, may be needed
for tumors arising in the retroperitoneum or abdomen, with microscopic intralesional margins achieving local tumor control and possibly
improving survival . According to the NCCN guidelines (version 2.2014), after the performance of the biopsy, which confirms the diagnosis, a
careful “watch and wait” approach can be followed if the tumors do not provoke functional limitations. DF has an unknown natural history and
there is a possibility of aggressive progression during the observational period; therefore, patients with resectable tumors should be
treated surgically when R0 excision is feasible. In our case, surgical intervention was chosen based on the CT scan findings and the
patient’s preference; diagnostic laparoscopy and biopsy were therefore not required. Intraoperatively it was revealed that the lumen of the
small intestine was infiltrated and could have become blocked (also confirmed by histopathology). During the operation we observed that wide
excision for achieving negative margins was feasible, with no excessive morbidity produced. When the tumor is unresectable, the margins of
resection are unclear. In case of recurrence, adjuvant radiation or chemo-therapy is indicated. Desmoids respond slowly to radiation but
radiotherapy is not generally recommended for retroperitoneal or intra-abdominal DTs. Cytostatic or cytotoxic systemic therapy with
tamoxifen, interferon-alpha, imatinib, and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents have been reported to reduce the progression of the
disease. The French and the Italian sarcoma groups have recently approved a treatment algorithm, based on a front-line “wait and see”
approach and subsequent therapy in the case of progression . However, the chosen approach depends on patient preference, the presence of
pain, and the threatening of adjacent anatomical sites. Disease-free survival (DFS) is limited by the following factors: tumor size larger
than 5 cm, extra-abdominal tumor location, R1 resection status, and history of recurrence . The growth pattern of these tumors is deeply
infiltrating, and there is no tumor capsule. Because the boundaries of the tumors are difficult to distinguish intraoperatively from scars
or connective tissue, R0 excision is not always possible and leads to recurrence. A specific mutation of β-catenin (45F) in patients treated
surgically has been correlated with poor 5-year DFS. A potential value of β-catenin mutational analysis as a predictor of progression-free
survival has not yet been proven, and the benefit from adjuvant therapy in that group of patients is still under investigation . In our
case, the tumour size was 9.8×8.5 cm, the excision margins were clear, and a mutational analysis of β-catenin had not yet been performed.
Management should include multidisciplinary consultation to determine optimal therapy. Desmoid fibromatosis of the mesentery is a rare
entity. The surgical resection of DTs using wide negative margins remains the first-line treatment of resectable intra-abdominal desmoid
tumors. Adjuvant/neoadjuvant radiation therapy and chemo-therapy are contingent on an accurate histologic diagnosis and are used to shrink
or to inhibit the progression of the tumor in cases of unresectable disease if the resection margins are not clear or if there is disease
recurrence. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. The authors thank pathologist Vladika Natalia MD
for her valuable help by giving us the histological slides. desmoid-type fibromatosis; computerized tomography; postoperative day; familial
adenomatous polyposis; disease-free survival Intra-abdominal tumor (8×8.5 cm) between loops of the small intestine. A “tennis ball-shaped”
tumor of the mesentery and small intestine, which did not block the lumen. Immunostaining for β-catenin demonstrates nuclear expression
(×100).
