Rectal atresia or stenosis is an extremely rare anorectal malformation associating a normal anal canal with a stricture or a complete rectal
atresia. We describe a case of rectal atresia in a newborn female presenting with an abdominal distension and failure of passing meconium.
Rectal atresia is a rare anorectal malformationcombining a normally developed anus and an atretic rectal segment. A failure to pass meconium
in a new born with normal present anus must lead to further clinical and radiologic investigations which findings are specific (Table 1).
Summary table of rectal atresia A twenty-day-old female child was admitted with a history of chronic vomiting, not passing meconium since
birth and a progressive abdominal distension. The perineal examination objectified a normally placed anus with no perineal fistula. When
introducing a thermometerper rectum, it stops at 2 cm from the anal verge with no explosive stools. Abdominal x–raysshowed a massively
distended colon with pelvic emptiness (Figure 1). A barium enema was performed, showing an atretic inferior rectal segment with a superior
rectal pouch and no fistula (Figure 2). An end to end anastomosis after a posterior sagittal anorectoplasty was performed with a satisfying
evolution. A twenty-day-old female child with a failure to pass to meconium. Technique and findings: Abdominal x–rays shows a massively
distended colon with pelvic emptiness A twenty-day-old female child with a failure to pass to meconium. Technique and findings: Image from a
barium enema study shows an atretic inferior rectal segment (arrow) with a superior rectal pouch with no fistula Rectal atresia is a rare
anorectal anomaly combining a normally developed anus and an atretic rectal segment representing 1-2% of all anorectal anomalies. Rectal
atresia is considered separate from imperforate anus or anal atresia because, in rectal atresia, the anus is present and normal, but a
variable rectal segment is atretic. Incomplete rectal atresia refers to complete membrane or severe stenosis. An in utero ischemic accident
seems to explain the pathogenesis of this rectal malformation [1, 2]. Failure to pass meconium, progressive abdominal distention, refusal to
feed and vomiting suggest the intestinal obstruction in neonates and lead to further investigations . The clinical diagnosis is easy to
confirm. When passing per rectum a firm catheter of size 8 or 10 stops at 2-3 cm from the anal verge . After a rectal atresia is clinically
identified, radiography must be performed and usually shows a colonic obstruction. Barium enema shows the rectum with its proximal blinded
pouch and the atretic segment which may interest any part of the rectum . Perineal ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging can be
used to check preoperatively the exact relation between the anal canal and sphincters. They provide identification of both rectal pouch and
sphincteric muscles without ionizing radiation risks . The extensive list of creative operative procedures used for the rectal atresia
reflects the great difficulty faced in treating this anomaly. Optimal continence remains the crucial goal in the treatment of all forms of
anorectal anomalies including rectal atresia in which the anal canal and sphincter are normally formed. Continence should be normal after
reconstruction. Chronic constipation represents a common postoperative feature . Differential diagnoses include all conditions associated to
a low intestinal obstruction manifesting as a neonatalfailure to pass meconium: Hirschsprung's disease, meconium ileus, colonic atresia,
small left colon syndrome, megacystis-microcolon-intestinal hyperperistaltism syndrome, anal atresia and all other anorectal malformations.
Clinical and radiologic findings are specific and lead to positive diagnosis of rectal atresia . Table of differential diagnoses of rectal
atresia Rectal atresia is a rare anorectal anomaly combining a normally developed anus and an atretic rectal segment. Failure to pass
meconium suggest the intestinal obstruction in neonates. Barium enema shows the rectum with its proximal blinded pouch and the atretic
segment. The authors declare no competing interest. All authors read and agreed to the final version of this manuscript and equally
contributed to its content and to the management of the case.
