Local flaps are the standard procedure to reconstruct facial defects. As it occurs in any surgical procedure, the incision should be planned
so that scars are located in the minimum skin tension lines. We report two cases of O to Z flaps in the supra and infraciliary regions. One
of them is a hatchet flap. Supra and paraciliary regions anatomically correspond to the forehead, the temporal region and the glabella. In
its reconstruction, structures bordering the local anatomy, such as the hairline, in the upper and lateral edge, and the eyebrows, in the
lower edge, must be respected. In addition, as it occurs in any surgical procedure, scars must be located in the minimum skin tension lines.
These are transversal in these regions, that is to say, parallel to the minor axis of the face.1 To reconstruct any facial defect,
especially in these regions, local flaps are the standard procedure. As a rule, shaving the eyebrows must be avoided for two reasons: they
grow slowly and they must be visible during the surgery to act as a guiding point in the forehead. Attention must be paid to the dissection
plane in order to design these types of flaps. The dissection plane must consist of subcutaneous tissue because using a deeper plane to
increase viability would cause an irreparable damage with the motor denervation of the adjacent muscles. Two cases of O to Z flaps in supra
and infraciliary regions, one of them with the modification of axis flaps, are given as an example. Case 1. A 72-year-old man with a poorly
defined sclerodermiform cell carcinoma in the right frontal region, 2 cm in diameter. The carcinoma removal was carried out with an
intraoperative anatomopathological margin control (Figure 1A). Performing an exeresis followed by a direct closure usually causes an
unacceptable elevation of the eyebrow, so a local flap was indicated. Among the different surgical choices that can be made, simple or
double rectangular advancement flaps, their variants A to T and V to T flap closure and rotation flaps are the main ones. O to Z rotation
flaps, though in their double hatchet modification (Figure 1B) were considered as a good therapeutic choice because, among other reasons,
the oblique scar left in this anatomical subunit produces acceptable results in patients with a prominent frontal lateral curvature. Once
the flap was designed, the tumor exeresis and the flap were performed. After four months, both ciliary retraction and a correct position of
the right eyebrow were observed (Figure 1C). A. Sclerodermiform lesion with poorly defined edges in the right frontal region. B. Design of
the double rotation axis O to Z flap. C. Clinical image 4 months after the surgery. No ciliary retraction observed Case 2. A 31-year-old
woman with a verrucous epidermal nevus located in the right infraciliary region, in the superior infraorbital rim (Figure 2A). In this
particular case we decided to make an O to Z flap (Figure 2B) which, as in the previous case, showed no ciliary retraction in the post
surgical revision after 3 weeks (Figure 2C). A. Epidermal nevus localized in the right infraciliary region. B. Design of the double O to Z
flap. C. Clinical image 3 weeks after the surgery An O to Z flap consists of a double rotation flap whose pedicles split in opposite
directions to the vertical of the defect. They are marked from the upper and bottom edges of the circular defect and they need a basis that
is 1.5 times bigger than the largest diameter. It is so called because the primary defect is rounded or oval and, after the rotation of the
flaps is performed, the final suture achieves a Z appearance.2 Depending on the compliance of the anatomical region in which these flaps are
performed, a Burow's triangle can be made on both ends or, as we usually do, the discharge triangle or incision can be made along the
elliptical suture to adjust the lateral arms of the Z properly.3 This type of flap allows closing circular defects and is really useful in
convex areas. Besides, it is usually and easily performed in the upper eyelid, where the aesthetic results are outstanding. Hatchet flaps
are rotation and sliding flaps. They are so called because their design consists in using the upper edge of the circular defect in one
extreme and, in the other extreme; an incision is made in the angle to close it directly by moving forward the V to Y flap.4 Although the
principal disadvantage of this type of flap is that the rotation is made on a narrow pedicle, it does not usually cause problems in highly
vascularised areas such as the face.5 O to Z axis flaps do not show Burow's triangles, as they use the incision in the angle of the extremes
to move forward to the center of the flaps. In conclusion, making a proper reconstruction of the supra and paraciliary regions implies
keeping eyebrow symmetry and respecting the temporal and frontal hairlines. In order to achieve this, rotation flaps are excellent to
reconstruct paraciliary defects as they can even keep the bone curvature. In addition, they prevent direct closure and subsequent eyebrow
elevation (ciliary asymmetry). Therefore, when they are anatomically possible, rotation flaps are the best solution for most of the defects
located in the paraciliary region. Both O to Z rotation flaps and hatchet rotation flaps are optimal to avoid modifications and to respect
the ciliary regions.1,2 Conflict of Interests: none Financial Support: none How to cite this article: Alcántara Luna S, Mendonça FMI, Perea
Cejudo M, Camacho Martínez FM. O to Z flaps in facial reconstructions. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90(2):258-60. Work performed at the Hospital
Universitario Virgen Macarena - Sevilla, Spain.
