Tumor lysis syndrome is rare in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but it has been reported more frequently recently in response to treatments
such as transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE), radiofrequency thermal ablation (RFTA), and sorafenib. Tumor lysis syndrome induced
by low-dose steroid appears to be very unusual in HCC. We report a patient with hepatitis-C-related liver cirrhosis and HCC in whom tumor
lysis syndrome occurred due to low-dose steroid (10 mg of prednisolone). The patient was a 90-year-old male who presented at the emergency
room of our hospital with general weakness and poor oral intake. He had started to take prednisolone to treat adrenal insufficiency 2 days
previously. Laboratory results revealed hyperuricemia, hyperphosphatemia, and increased creatinine. These abnormalities fulfilled the
criteria in the Cairo-Bishop definition of tumor lysis syndrome. Although the patient received adequate hydration, severe metabolic acidosis
and acute kidney injury progressed unabated. He finally developed multiple organ failure, and died 3 days after admission. This was a case
of tumor lysis syndrome caused by administration of low-dose steroid in a patient with HCC. Tumor lysis syndrome is a potentially lethal
oncologic emergency. It can occur in patients with extensive, rapidly growing, and chemosensitive malignancies such as hematologic
malignancies.1,2 Massive lysis of tumor cells after effective treatment results in the release of intracellular substances into the
bloodstream.3,4,5 Because large amounts of intracellular substances such as potassium, phosphate, and uric acid, etc. are released, the
severe alteration of these metabolic profiles can have clinically toxic effects, including acute kidney injury, cardiac arrhythmias,
seizures, and multiorgan failure that can finally result in death.6 Although it most often happens in hematologic malignancies such as acute
lymphocytic leukemia and Burkitt's lymphoma, tumor lysis syndrome has also been reported in various solid tumors, including lung and breast
carcinomas.5,7,8,9 The syndrome is rare in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC); about 8% of the cases of tumor lysis syndrome in solid tumors
occur in HCC.5,10 Recently it has been increasingly reported after treatments such as transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE),
radiofrequency ablation, and sorafenib, etc.5,11,12,13,14 In HCC, tumor lysis syndrome induced by low dose steroid appears to be very
unusual. Here, we report a case of tumor lysis syndrome occurring after administration of low dose steroid in a patient with HCC. A 90-year-
old male who presented with symptoms of general weakness and poor oral intake visited the emergency department of our hospital. He was
diagnosed with hepatitis C-related liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in our hospital. Abdominal computed tomography had
been performed about one month previously and had revealed multiple viable HCCs in both lobes of the liver. Their largest diameter was 10.7
cm (Fig. 1). The patient's HCC was classified as stage B according to the Barcelona Clinic Cancer staging classification. He had undergone
radio frequency thermal ablation (RFTA) once and TACE six times in our hospital. Two days ago he visited our outpatient clinic with symptoms
such as general weakness, nausea, and vomiting. Because the symptoms had suggested adrenal insufficiency, he had been empirically
administered prednisolone 10mg per day by the oral route for two days. ACTH stimulation test couldn't be performed at our outpatient clinic
and the patient refused the test. Else he had been taking furosemide 20 mg, aldactone 50 mg a day. Before taking prednisolone, serum
creatinine was 1.12 mg/dL, estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 65 mL/min/1.73 m2, and his renal function had been well preserved
considering his age. The patient's vital signs were within normal limits at our emergency department. On physical examination, the abdomen
was distended, without tenderness or rebound tenderness. A complete blood cell count showed mild leukocytosis with mild anemia: leukocytes,
14.4 × 103/µL; hemoglobin, 10.8 g/dL; and platelets, 180 × 103/µL. The following additional laboratory values were found: serum sodium, 145
mEq/L; potassium, 5.4 mEq/L; chloride 110 mEg/L; bicarbonate 24.0 mEq/L; total protein, 7.1 g/dL; albumin, 3.0 g/dL calcium, 8.7 mg/dL;
inorganic phosphorus, 5.8 mg/dL. In addition, serum urea nitrogen level was 100.5 mg/dL, creatinine level was 3.00 mg/dL, eGFR was 21
mL/min/1.73 m2. AST was 310 U/L, ALT was 171 U/L, total bilirubin was 5.24 mg/dl, prothrombin time was 12.5 sec, α-fetoprotein (AFP) was
647.4 ng/mL. His Child-Turcotte-Pugh score was 9. Chest radiography revealed only an old tuberculosis lesion in the right upper lung zone.
His electrocardiogram was normal. Because he had acute kidney damage, and adequate hydration could not correct it, hepatorenal syndrome was
suspected. He was treated by intravenous hydration at first, and was also administered terlipressin and albumin. Though serum uric acid was
8.0 mg/dL about 6 months ago, the following day, serum uric acid increased to 18.3 mg/dL. Serum sodium was 146 mEq/L, potassium was 5.4
mEq/L, inorganic phosphorus was 6.2 mg/dL, calcium was 8.7 mg/dL, serum urea nitrogen level was 104.6 mg/dL, creatinine level was 2.90
mg/dL, and eGFR was 22 mL/min/1.73 m2. Though oliguria was not present, his urine output was lower than a day earlier. Hydration and
treatment for hepatorenal syndrome were maintained. In next day, he had severe metabolic acidosis and acute kidney injury. Multiple organ
failure progressed steadily, and he expired three days after admission. Although, tumor lysis syndrome is most commonly observed in
chemosensitive malignancy, such as acute lymphocytic leukemia and Burkitt's lymphoma, it is rare in solid tumors.5,7 However recently it has
been reported in various solid tumors, including lung and breast carcinomas.5,8,9 The most important risk factor for tumor lysis syndrome is
tumor burden, which can easily result in autonecrosis and the release of intracellular substances. Other important risk factors are
dehydration and preexisting renal insufficiency.15 Tumor lysis syndrome is still very rare in the treatment of HCC, and HCC contributes only
about 8% of the cases of tumor lysis syndrome in solid tumors.10 Recently it has been increasingly reported after treatments such as
transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE), radiofrequency ablation and sorafenib, etc.5,11,12,13,14,16 Since Burney et al first
observed the syndrome after TACE in two patients with HCC,17 occasional cases have been reported after TACE. Because sorafenib is now widely
used in the treatment of advanced HCC, three cases of tumor lysis syndrome caused by treatment of HCC with sorafenib were recently
reported.12,13,14 Cases have also been reported after treatments of HCC such as radiofrequency ablation, thalidomide, etc.11,18 As far as we
know, low dose steroid-induced tumor lysis syndrome has not been previously reported. The Cairo and Bishop definition of tumor lysis
syndrome was proposed in 2004.4 It can be classified as a clinical and laboratory tumor lysis syndrome (Table 1).4 In the present case, the
degree of abnormalities in his uric acid and phosphate fulfill the criteria of tumor lysis syndrome as defined by Cairo-Bishop. The criteria
of clinical tumor lysis syndrome were also satisfied by his creatinine level. Because in the present case tumor lysis syndrome was
misdiagnosed as hepatorenal syndrome, appropriate treatments such as hemodialysis and allopurinol were not performed, and only intravenous
hydration was administered. The patient unfortunately expired three days after admission. Steroid induced tumor lysis syndrome occurs mainly
in hematologic malignancies such as leukemia and lymphoma, and is rare in patients with solid tumors. Steroids are known to have lympholytic
effects and are therefore widely used as components of combination chemotherapy protocols for hematologic malignancies. They act by inducing
growth arrest and apoptosis. Although steroids are widely used, there are only a few case reports of tumor lysis syndrome in patients with
malignancies treated solely with steroids.19,20 Therefore, empirical therapy with steroids should be avoided, especially in patients
suspected of having large tumor burdens.19 The prognosis of tumor lysis syndrome caused in solid tumors is poor, with a high mortality rate.
Prevention of the syndrome by treatments such as sufficient hydration, urine alkalization, and correction of metabolic disturbance, can be
effective in patients with large solid tumor burdens or renal insufficiency.3,4,16 When steroid is administered to patients with large HCC
or who are dehydrated, proper hydration before administering steroid is vital to prevent tumor lysis syndrome. In conclusion, the
development of treatments for HCC has increased the likelihood of tumor lysis syndrome. Low dose steroid can also cause the syndrome in
patients with HCC. When administering steroid to HCC patients with large tumor burdens, or who are dehydrated, great care should be taken.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no conflicts to disclose. aspartate transaminase alanine transaminase α-fetoprotein estimated
glomerular filtration rate hepatocellular carcinoma radiofrequency thermal ablation transcatheter arterial chemoembolization TLS, tumor
lysis syndrome; ULN, upper limit of normal.
