Rheumatic valvular disease, especially mitral stenosis (MS) and atrial fibrillation (AF), are the main factors related to the formation of
left atrial (LA) thrombi1-6. Its incidence can range from 16 to 64%, and the most affected site is the left atrial appendage1,7. Systemic
embolism is responsible for 10 to 45% of the complications, being the most frequent clinical presentation1. Despite being rare, the
mechanical mitral valve obstruction caused by thrombus may be considered as potentially severe, especially among those patients with
previous MS. The clinical manifestations of this condition are variable, presenting from worsened functional class (NYHA) to cardiogenic
shock2. The left atrial thrombus related to MS, even if rarely, may present as a large and organized mass with undistinguishable
characteristics from vascularized tumors, especially the atrial myxoma. Clinical and echocardiographic aspects may not be sufficiently
specific to distinguish one from the other safely, and additional examinations are often required7. This is the case of a patient with
moderate rheumatic MS and no anticoagulation for AF, with a large thrombus organized in LA mimicking an atrial tumor, with difficult
clinical differentiation by complementary examinations. It is the case of a 57-year-old female patient, with dyspnea that progressed to
orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea and lower extremity edema for two months. She had been diagnosed with rheumatic valvulopathy for
seven years, permanent AF with no anticoagulation; she was a smoker. In the physical examination, she presented with good general status, 44
bpm heart rate, 150 x 80 mmHg blood pressure, cardiac auscultation with hyperphonetic sound, second normophonetic sound, presence of opening
snap close to second sound, rumbling 2+/6+ diastolic murmur in the mitral area and pulmonary auscultation with fine crepitation in both
bases. The electrocardiogram presented AF rhythm. The thoracic x-ray showed bilateral pulmonary congestion and increased cardiothoracic
index. The transthoracic echocardiogram showed mitral valve with commissural fusion, thickened cusps and reduced valve opening, mean LA-LV
diastolic gradient of 4 mmHg and maximum of 16 mmHg, with valve area of 1.2 cm2, which is compatible with moderate rheumatic compromise. A
51 mm LA and the presence of hyperechoic image from the left atrial roof to its lateral wall were described, measuring 65 x 54 mm (Figure 1A
and B). There was also severe pulmonary arterial hypertension (SPAP 66 mmHg) and important increase in the left chambers, eccentric
hypertrophy and left ventricular systolic dysfunction (35% ejection fraction), with diffuse hypokinesis. A) Echocardiographic image of the
apical four-chamber view demonstrating extensive mass in the LA measuring 65 x 54 mm; B) echocardiographic image of the apical four-chamber
view demonstrating extensive mass in the LA; C) Cineangiocoronariography with right anterior oblique incidence showing right coronary
circulation to the atrial mass (arrow). The patient was submitted to cardiac catheterization, which excluded obstructive coronary lesions
and showed the presence of extensive vascularization of the atrial mass, with irrigation originated from the left (Figure 1C) and right
(Figure 1D) coronaries. Cardiac nuclear magnetic resonance showed important LA increase, with thickened walls and image compatible with
large thrombus adhered to its walls (roof, floor and lateral wall), besides positive parietal diffuse enhancement, compatible with
hypertrophy and atrial fibrosis, probably associated with MS. However, in the interface between the thrombus and the lateral LA wall, there
was a positive perfusion, so it was not possible to prevent other expansive processes in the atrial wall. The late left ventricular
enhancement was negative. By considering the presence of an image in the LA in a patient with moderate MS and no anticoagulation for AF,
there was the hypothesis of a giant thrombus. Due to the progression of the symptoms, size of thrombus and risk of embolism or mechanical
obstruction of the mitral valve, the surgical treatment was chosen. The patient was submitted to surgery, therefore, the mass that presented
red coloration, with soft and friable consistency was removed, which confirmed the diagnosis of left atrial giant thrombus and impairment of
the entire LA posterior wall, weighing 80 g (Figure 2A and B). Anterior and posterior commissurotomy was conducted in the mitral valve. The
postoperative transthoracic echocardiogram showed mitral valve with mean LA-LV diastolic gradient of 4 mmHg and maximum diastolic gradient
of 12 mmHg, and also a 1.6 cm2 valvular area. There was still systolic dysfunction (EF 42%) resulting from diffuse hypokinesis. The patient
evolved well in the postoperative period and received asymptomatic hospital discharge, on warfarin anticoagulant. A) Surgical view of the
mass after opening the left atrium (arrow); B) Thrombus extracted from the let atrium weighing 80 grams. MS and its marked atrial increase
predisposes to AF in 40 to 75% of the symptomatic patients. Its occurrence increases with age and with the level of valvular
obstruction3,4,8. In this condition, blood stasis on the left atrial appendage and LA favors the formation of multiple thrombi in those
areas, therefore, it is very important to identify them due to the risk of systemic embolism and, less frequently, mechanical valve
obstruction2,8. In this case, atrial mass was related to MS with AF with no anticoagulation and to increased LA, being diagnosed as thrombus
by the echocardiogram. However, the vascularized mass in the preoperative catheterization created doubts as to the nature of the mass. The
discovery of a large mass in the LA in the echocardiogram forces the doctors to distinguish the cardiac myxoma and the thrombus, which are
the most common aspects in cases of round masses in this chamber8. The myxoma is located in the LA in 90% of the cases, and there are also
numberless reports of abnormal coronary vascularization in these tumors, thus being the main differential diagnosis4. The precise diagnosis
is important due to the different therapeutic proposals. The myxoma requires surgical resection, while the thrombus can be solved with
anticoagulation3. Nuclear magnetic resonance plays an important role in this differentiation; however, the organized thrombus may acquire
the same characteristics of the image of a myxoma4. Therefore, the presence of vascularization is not pathognomonic for atrial myxoma and
cannot be used alone to tell a thrombus from a myxoma. Giant thrombi that develop inside the atrial chamber are usually immovable, well
organized and fibrotic, with a close relation to the wall. They have an unfavorable response to thrombolytic therapy, which is not safe due
to the high risks of systemic embolism9. The rare cases described in literature suggest that surgical removal should be the treatment of
choice2,10. The mechanical obstruction of the mitral valve is rare, however, potentially severe, especially for people with previous MS. In
this case, the patient had presented symptomatic moderate MS for two months (NYHA III) and pulmonary arterial hypertension (SPAP 66 mmHg),
which were sufficient to indicate surgical treatment. Besides this indication, there was the presence of a large mass in the LA, which could
not only have contributed with the symptoms presented by the patient, but also added the risk of systemic embolism. With regard to left
ventricular dysfunction, the other etiologies were ruled out, therefore, such a dysfunction may be justified by preload reduction and by
changes in ventricular geometry caused by the calcification and immobility of the mitral valve ring11,12. In literature, angiographic
findings of neovascularization or coronary artery fistula formation for the LA have occasionally been described in association with atrial
thrombus among patients with MS3,4,9. Most of the time, the irrigation of these organized thrombi originates from the circumflex artery, so,
the double irrigation by the left and right coronaries9 is extremely rare, as observed in this case. MS and AF are the main factors related
to the formation of thrombi in the LA, and sometimes they cannot be distinguished from vascularized tumors. Even though the patient had
sufficient thrombogenic substrate, subsidiary tests brought up this diagnostic doubt, especially due to the preoperative angiographic
finding. Surgery was the best strategy both in the diagnostic and in the therapeutic approach. This case leads to the diagnosis of giant
left atrial thrombus with double coronary vascularization, thus configuring the second case in the world and the first one in Brazil. Author
contributions Conception and design of the research, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of the data, Writing of the manuscript
and Critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content: Ciambelli GS, Baptista ML, Rosa VEE, Lopes ASSA, Accorsi RAD, Tarasoutchi
F. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Sources of Funding There were no
external funding sources for this study. Study Association This study is not associated with any thesis or dissertation work.
