A 6-year-old male underwent tissue-aortic valve replacement (AVR). Postoperative, he required high inotropic support and high antibiotic
support – his heart rate (HR) was 120/min and blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg. His transesophageal echocardiography - Echo report reveals: The
patient postoperatively showed the following: Significant mitral regurgitation (MR) due to unrecognized mitral valve pathology [Figures 1
and 2] High ante grade trans-mitral velocity due to MR [Figure 3] High left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) velocity due to LVOT
obstruction precipitated by inotropes [Figure 4] Stiffened tissue aortic leaflets with high gradients [Figures 3 and 5] High cardiac output
(CO) resulting from Septicemia. Significant mitral regurgitation (MR) due to unrecognized mitral valve pathology [Figures 1 and 2] High ante
grade trans-mitral velocity due to MR [Figure 3] High left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) velocity due to LVOT obstruction precipitated by
inotropes [Figure 4] Stiffened tissue aortic leaflets with high gradients [Figures 3 and 5] High cardiac output (CO) resulting from
Septicemia. Mitral regurgitation Mitral inflow pattern High gradient across tissue aortic valve (transgastric view) Vmax: 390cm/s, VTI: 54.6
cm, MaxPG: 61 mmHg; Mean PG: 35.9 mmHg Left ventricular outflow tract gradients transgastric view Transesophageal echocardiography long axis
view showing transprosthetic flow Stroke volume (SV) = LVOT area × LVOT velocity time integral (VTI) =3.46 × 28 = 96.88 mlCO = HR × SV = 120
× 96.88 = 11.6 l/minSystemic vascular resistance (SVR) = 80 × (MAP-5)/CO = 448.3 dyne × s/cm5 Clues 1 - Why so high a cardiac output?Clues 2
- Why such a low SVR? Stroke volume (SV) = LVOT area × LVOT velocity time integral (VTI) =3.46 × 28 = 96.88 ml CO = HR × SV = 120 × 96.88 =
11.6 l/min Systemic vascular resistance (SVR) = 80 × (MAP-5)/CO = 448.3 dyne × s/cm5 Clues 1 - Why so high a cardiac output?Clues 2 - Why
such a low SVR? Clues 1 - Why so high a cardiac output? Clues 2 - Why such a low SVR? “What is the most likely explanation of high CO with
low SVR in immediate Postoperative period?” Patient did not have transprosthetic obstruction because of the VTI ratio - LVOT/AO = 28/54.6 =
0.51. Significant transprosthetic obstruction is likely only if this VTI ratio is <0.30Significant mitral pathology (either regurgitation or
obstructive) is unlikely; since high flow velocities are observed across both mitral and aortic valves. These finding can easily be
explained by high CO stateAs depicted in Figure 5 the LVOT is wide open; thus significant LVOT narrowing can be excludedTherefore, the most
logical explanation is that the patient has SEPSIS, which could be due exacerbation of preexisting and unrecognized infection or acquired
intraoperativelyThe classical hemodynamics of septicemia are high CO with low SVR and failure to maintain adequate arterial pressure without
the use of inotropesTherefore colistin 2 million units were added to the existing antibiotic regimen (meropenam and targocid) - to which
patient responded. Patient did not have transprosthetic obstruction because of the VTI ratio - LVOT/AO = 28/54.6 = 0.51. Significant
transprosthetic obstruction is likely only if this VTI ratio is <0.30 Significant mitral pathology (either regurgitation or obstructive) is
unlikely; since high flow velocities are observed across both mitral and aortic valves. These finding can easily be explained by high CO
state As depicted in Figure 5 the LVOT is wide open; thus significant LVOT narrowing can be excluded Therefore, the most logical explanation
is that the patient has SEPSIS, which could be due exacerbation of preexisting and unrecognized infection or acquired intraoperatively The
classical hemodynamics of septicemia are high CO with low SVR and failure to maintain adequate arterial pressure without the use of
inotropes Therefore colistin 2 million units were added to the existing antibiotic regimen (meropenam and targocid) - to which patient
responded. His blood reports later shows: High TLC: 18,000/dl (which later increased to 25,000). N-86 L-12 E-2. High ESR: 60 mm/h. Blood
culture – Sterile (probably due to the preoperative use of antibiotics). Patient was discharged after 2 weeks of hospital stay with normal
pressure gradients across the tissue-AVR and normal velocities across the all cardiac valves. Thus, the intelligent interpretation of
noninvasively derived hemodynamic by transesophageal echocardiography could be extremely useful in the appropriate diagnosis and management
of critically ill patients. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
