Solitary pulmonary nodules (SPNs) can be manifested in a variety of disorders including neoplasms, infection, inflammation, and vascular or
congenital abnormalities. In addition, they are often accompanied with other pulmonary pathologic lesions such as consolidations and several
pulmonary disorders present as similar pulmonary nodular lesions simultaneously. Diagnostic workup is important for these SPNs; however,
many physicians often miss the second diagnosis for multiple pulmonary lesions with SPNs due to lack of clinical suspicion that each
pulmonary nodule or pathologic lesion can have each other's diagnosis. Herein, we report 2 cases of coexistence of pulmonary chondroid
hamartoma with nontuberculous mycobacterial (NTM) infection presenting as pulmonary nodules and multiple consolidative lesions. A 60-year-
old man was admitted for the evaluation of multifocal pulmonary lesions including SPN with chronic exertional dyspnea. Multiple lung tissues
were obtained from each lesion through percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy (PTNB). At the same time, bacteriologic examination was
performed using respiratory samples obtained by bronchoscopy. Based on pathologic and microbiologic results, the patient diagnosed as
pulmonary chondroid hamartoma with pulmonary NTM infectious disease. In addition, a 56-year-old woman visited for the evaluation of a small
SPN. The SPN was resected surgically for the pathologic examination and turned out to be pulmonary chondroid hamartoma. Interestingly, the
diagnostic workup revealed that the patient had Lady Windermere syndrome which is one of features for Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC)
pulmonary disease. Both patients were treated with the standard antibiotics against MAC as recommended by the ATS/IDSA guideline. This is
the first report of 2 patients, as far as we know, that chondroid hamartoma and NTM disease develop simultaneously in the lung. This report
emphasizes that physicians should endeavor to confirm the individual diagnosis for the various pulmonary abnormal lesions detected at the
same time, if necessary through multifocal biopsies for each lesion. The majority of solitary pulmonary nodule (SPN) cases represent either
lung cancers or benign granulomas, and these conditions occur with roughly equal frequency.1 The most common cause of benign granulomas is
tuberculoma; this is particularly true in tuberculosis-endemic regions.2 Hamartoma is defined as an abnormal mixture of tissue elements or
an abnormal proportion of a single element, normally present in an organ. Pulmonary chondroid hamartoma is the most common benign neoplasm
arising in the bronchial wall and accounts for 7% to 14% of all SPNs.3 Usually they present as asymptomatic SPNs, with gradually increasing
in size. Thus, they need to be differentiated from lung malignancies. The radiographic findings of nontuberculous mycobacterial (NTM) lung
disease are variable, depending, in part, on the species. Similar to other granulomatous infections, NTM infection can occasionally result
in the formation of an SPN, in which the majority of these lesions were detected incidentally. Although NTM infections can be found as
cavitary or bronchiectatic lesions predominantly, they can present as consolidation or infiltration in the lung.4 Based on this information,
we can guess the overlap of radiologic findings among various pulmonary disorders. However, in clinical practice, physicians often miss the
coexistence of 2 diseases due to lack of clinical suspicion. In this report, we describe 2 cases of coexisting pulmonary chondroid hamartoma
with NTM. A 60-year-old man was admitted for the evaluation of a 1.5 × 1.5-cm-sized SPN on the right upper lobe and a 1.4 × 7.2-cm-sized
subpleural consolidation on the left lower lobe on a chest computed tomography (CT) (Figure 1). He was an exsmoker of 50 pack-years. He
complained mild dyspnea on exertion which had been maintained for several years. However, there was no acute clinical manifestation such as
cough, fever, night sweating, and so on. To confirm the diagnosis, we performed percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy (PTNB) for the SPN
and the linear consolidation. Interestingly, one was turned out to be pulmonary chondroid hamartoma, and the other was defined as chronic
granulomatous inflammation with necrosis (Figure 2). In addition, M. intracellulare was identified in bronchial washing fluid from left
lower lobes of the lung, suggesting that the granulomatous inflammation was associated with M. intracellulare infection. CT scan images for
a 1.5-cm-sized round, heterogeneous enhanced nodule on the right upper lobe anterior segment and 1.4 × 7.2-cm-sized linear subpleural
consolidation (arrows) on the left lower lobe posterior segment are observed (A and C, mediastinal window view, B and D, lung setting view).
CT = computed tomography. Microscopic features of chondroid hamartoma and chronic granulomatous inflammation. (A) Chronic granulomatous
inflammation, consisting of aggregation of epithelioid cells, surrounded by lymphocytes. And necrosis is also present (H&E stain, ×40). (B)
Prominent chondroid component is located underneath the respiratory epithelium (H&E stain, ×100). H&E = Hematoxylin & Eosin. The patient
received a combination therapy of rifampin (450 mg/day), ethambutol (800 mg/day), and clarithromycin (1000 mg/day) for pulmonary NTM disease
on a daily basis, and the treatment was scheduled to keep till at least 12 months after the negative conversion of NTM on microbiological
examination, as recommended by the ATS/IDSA guideline. Surgical resection was also planned for the pulmonary chondroid hamartoma on the
right upper lobe. He had no complications at 10 months follow-up. A 56-year-old woman visited our clinic due to an SPN detected incidentally
in high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) during routine medical checkup. A month ago, she had been diagnosed with pneumonia and treated
with an empirical antibiotic regimen of cefpodoxime and roxithromycin. She had completely recovered after the oral antibiotic therapy.
Later, she was notified that M. avium was identified in sputum expectorated during the diagnostic workup. At the visiting time for the
evaluation of SPN, she had no respiratory symptoms and complaints. HRCT revealed that her radiologic findings were focal bronchiectatic
change with consolidations in the right middle lobe and left lingular segment as well as an SPN in the right lower lobe (Figure 3). First of
all, to diagnose the SPN histologically, the SPN was resected surgically from the right lower lobe and the pathologic diagnosis of the SPN
was chondroid hamartoma (Figure 4), while the patient also underwent the bronchoscopy to obtain the respiratory specimens and the repeated
sputum examinations for the diagnosis of pulmonary NTM according to the ATS/IDSA guideline for NTM.5 The microbiological examination
revealed that M. avium was identified again in bronchial washing fluids obtained from the patient. Finally, the workup for her radiologic
abnormalities confirmed coexistence of pulmonary chondroid hamartoma with NTM infection. Therefore, she started to take the medication for
NTM infection with rifampin (600 mg/day), ethambutol (1000 mg/day), and clarithromycin (1000 mg/day) on a daily basis. According to the
ATS/IDSA guideline, the treatment with this regimen was planned to keep till at least 12 months after the negative conversion of NTM on
microbiological examination. She had no complications at 12 months follow-up. A 5-mm-sized SPN (arrow) is shown on the right lower lobe (A).
There are focal consolidations with bronchiectatic changes on the right middle lobe (B) and left lingular segments (C). SPN = solitary
pulmonary nodule. Microscopic features of chondroid hamartoma of the lung. (A) Tumor component is identified within the normal lung alveolar
structures (H&E stain, ×40). (B) Most of the tumor was composed of proliferating connective tissue. Mature cartilaginous tissue was also
identified (right lower side) (H&E stain, ×100). H&E = Hematoxylin & Eosin. Hamartoma is an abnormality of growth, first accurately
described by Albecht in 1904.6 Pulmonary hamartomas are the most common benign tumors of the lung, and they comprise an admixture or
overgrowth of various or single normal component(s). Depending on the predominant component, pulmonary hamartomas can be subdivided into
various subtypes: chondromatous, leiomyomatous, lymphangiomyomatous, adenofibromatous, and fibroleiomyomatous. Chondroid hamartomas are the
most common subtype and have been divided into endobronchial and intraparenchymal lesions. The onset of the tumor is in adulthood, with the
peak age incidence in the fourth to sixth decade.7 Clinically, they usually present as an asymptomatic SPN. Sometimes, multiple cystic
hamartomas are misdiagnosed as pulmonary metastasis. Pulmonary NTM infections often occur in the context of preexisting lung disease,
especially chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), bronchiectasis, pneumoconiosis, cystic fibrosis, and previous tuberculosis.5 In
particular, bronchiectasis is the most well-defined underlying structural lung disease linked to develop pulmonary NTM diseases. A recent
report has demonstrated that 20% of cystic fibrosis patients and 10% of primary ciliary dyskinesia patients have NTM recovered from
respiratory specimens.5 In addition, an NIH study has noted a higher incidence of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR)
gene mutations (36%) in patients with pulmonary NTM diseases compared with a matched control population.8 As a result, the clinical
manifestations of NTM lung disease are often similar to those of the underlying disease such as bronchiectasis. These include cough,
fatigue, malaise, fever, weight loss, dyspnea, hemoptysis, and chest discomfort. These same symptoms are also present in patients with NTM
lung disease who do not have preexisting pulmonary disease. In addition, the NTM lung disease is often diagnosed by the identification of
NTM on respiratory specimens in cases under evaluation for pulmonary tuberculosis. As for the prognosis, to date, the natural history of the
development of NTM lung disease and/or bronchiectasis remains incompletely understood.9 However, some studies have suggested that coexisting
cavitary lung disease and COPD are adverse prognostic factors for response to the treatment for NTM infection.10 The radiographic findings
of NTM lung disease are variable, depending on the mycobacterium species. Findings consistent with pulmonary NTM infection on chest
radiograph or HRCT scan include nodular or reticulonodular infiltrates, cavities, multifocal bronchiectasis, and/or multiple small nodules.
Therefore, the radiologic features are in broad spectrum which can cover the other pulmonary nodular diseases. This overlap makes us realize
the need for the differential diagnosis and the possibility for coexistence of various pulmonary disorders. However, in many cases,
physicians are apt to make a single diagnosis on the combined radiologic features such as nodules and bronchiectasis. As for the overlap of
radiologic findings between pulmonary NTM and hamartoma, since the majority of hamartomas exhibit coin lesions, that is, round nodule with
clear margin, on CT scan and chest x-ray with variable size,11 whereas pulmonary NTM has a variety of radiologic features. The radiologic
image shared by both diseases seems to be a round nodular lesion which makes the physicians confuse to diagnose them. In our cases, the case
1 patient had a linear nodular consolidation which is an uncommon presentation in NTM on the left lower lobe and underlying severe
emphysematous changes. The case 2 patient had ill-defined multiple consolidations on the right middle lobe with typical focal bronchiectatic
changes without any other underlying lung disease, so-called Lady Windermere syndrome.12 Moreover, both of them had an SPN with clear margin
and similarity to granuloma, interestingly confirmed as pulmonary hamartomas through pathologic analyses. Both pulmonary hamartoma and NTM
lung disease can manifest the same or similar radiologic findings, SPNs, however, the therapeutic approach is different; one is medical
therapy and the other is surgery. Since the majority of hamartomas exhibit the benign prognosis, it may be overlooked to distinguish them
developed simultaneously; however, we should remember the importance of correct diagnosis for persistent pathologic lesions unresolved by
treatment and the minimal potential of benign tumor to be malignant. In summary, we report 2 interesting and similar cases of coexistence of
pulmonary chondroid hamartoma with NTM infection for the first time. On the basis of our experiences with these rare conditions, we would
like to emphasize that physicians should have clinical suspicion for the radiological overlap among various pulmonary diseases and consider
multifocal biopsies or surgical resections for the differential diagnosis between single disease and coexisting diseases showing similar
radiological features. The Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Chonbuk National University Hospital has stated that it is not necessary to
achieve IRB approval for this case report and this report requires obtaining patient consent because this study is dealt with only the
patient's medical record and related images, retrospectively. Written informed consent of this case report and accompanying images was
obtained from the patient for the publication. We thank Professor Mie-Jae Im (Chonbuk National University Medical School, Jeonju, South
Korea) for critical readings of the manuscript. Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography, HRCT = high-resolution computed tomography, NTM =
nontuberculous mycobacterial, PTNB = percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy, SPNs = solitary pulmonary nodules. SRK and YCL contributed
equally to this work. This work was supported by the Korea Healthcare Technology R&D Project, Ministry for Health and Welfare, Republic of
Korea (Grant A121931), by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of
Science, ICT, and future Planning (NRF-2014R1A2A1A01002823), and by the fund of Biomedical Research Institute, Chonbuk National University
Hospital. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
