Pol III-related leukodystrophies, including 4H leukodystrophy, are recently recognized disorders that comprise hypomyelination and various
neurologic and non-neurologic clinical manifestations. We report the unique neurologic presentation of the micturition dysfunction in Pol
III-related leukodystrophy and describe the novel endocrine abnormalities in this entity. A 32-year-old Caucasian female exhibited chronic
urinary incontinence that commenced at the age of 7 years and remained the unexplained symptom more than two decades before the onset of
progressive neurologic decline. A transient growth failure and absent sexual development with hypoprolactinemia appeared in the meanwhile.
Neurologic, endocrine, neuroradiologic, and genetic evaluation performed only in the patient’s thirties, confirmed the diagnosis of 4H
leukodystrophy as the only cause of the micturition disturbance. The report shows for the first time that an unexplained chronic bladder
dysfunction should be evaluated also as a possible 4H leukodystrophy, thus alerting to the unexpected neurologic and endocrine features in
4H leukodystrophy. 4H leukodystrophy is a rare disorder that includes hypomyelination, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and dental
developmental anomalies . It belongs to a spectrum of clinically and radiologically overlapping diseases caused by recessive mutations in
either POLR3A or POLR3B, and collectively designated as “Pol III-related leukodystrophies” . Despite the diversity of neurologic
manifestations observed in these entities , little is known about sphincter dysfunctions and endocrine features . Impairment of
bladder/bowel function may be a part of the clinical picture of leukodystrophies. However, with only few exceptions among adult-onset
leukodystrophies, it is neither a prominent nor an early feature of the disease, but rather appears in the advanced stages. According to the
current knowledge on Pol III-related leukodystrophies, such evolution of the symptoms seems to be the characteristic of these rare diseases
as well. Therefore, the childhood-onset neurogenic bladder persisting for decades as the only neurologic manifestation of Pol III-related
leukodystrophy represents a noteworthy, so far unique phenomenon. The data on the accompanying endocrine features are still incomplete in a
large number of patients with Pol III-related leukodystrophy due to the deficient endocrine evaluation in this disorder. Apart from the
variable observations on the growth hormone deficiency provided in some , the main attention has been given to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
in most of these patients. The report broadens the endocrine manifestations in 4H leukodystrophy with regards to the prolactin deficiency
and suggests establishing the endocrine protocol for Pol III-related leukodystrophy. The patient was a 32-year-old Caucasian female, the
third-born to healthy non-consanguineous parents with negative family history of neurologic disorders. The pregnancy, birth and early
psychomotor development were uneventful. At the age of 7 years chronic urinary incontinence commenced and remained the unexplained clinical
abnormality for 20 years. Prompt nephrologic, gynecologic, and urologic investigations (also including voiding cystourethrogram, cystoscopy,
renal scintigraphy, ultrasonography, biochemical analyses of blood and urine) were normal, and there were no accompanying neurologic signs
in the overall clinical status. The persisting urinary disturbance brought the patient to neurologic attention only at 32 years of age when
the assessment disclosed a 5-year history of slowly progressive cerebellar ataxia followed by pyramidal signs, and then focal upper
extremity dystonia. The neuropsychological evaluation at the age of 32 years documented a mild intellectual disability for the first time
(full-scale IQ of 57; Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-IV). It was thought to be a decline compared to the patient’s historical level of
functioning: the patient had finished the compulsory education (age 7–15 years) with regular psychological assessments, was employed as a
factory worker, and was able to live independently. She stopped working at the age of 32 years during the neurologic follow-ups. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed diffuse supratentorial hypomyelination that bilaterally spread along the posterior limb of the
internal capsule affecting the pyramidal tracts, the middle and inferior cerebellar peduncles (Figure 1a, b, c). T2-weighted hypointensities
were observed in the globi pallidi, the optic radiations and the dentate nuclei (Figure 1b, d). There was a marked atrophy of the cerebellum
and corpus callosum, as well as of the pontine and midbrain tegmentum (Figure 1e). The adenohypophysis was small (Figure 1e, f). Multivoxel
MR Spectroscopy of the brain detected a markedly decreased choline/creatine ratio in the abnormal white matter (Figure 1g). Diffusion tensor
imaging of the brain showed a slightly reduced fractional anisotropy consistent with hypomyelination (Figure 1h). MRI of the brain pointed
to Pol III-related leukodystrophy . MRI of the spinal cord was normal (Figure 1i, j). Electromyoneurography was unremarkable. Urodynamic
tests (uroflow study, postvoid residual volume, filling-voiding cystometry, abdominal leak-point pressure, external sphincter
electromyography-EMG) revealed decreased bladder capacity with preserved sensation, uninhibited detrusor muscle contractions, and detrusor-
external sphincter synergy, while sphincter EMG recorded normal amplitudes and duration of muscle potentials. The urodynamic study proved
the bladder overactivity due to neurologic, suprapontine lesion . The repeated urologic, nephrologic, and metabolic investigations remained
normal. At 26 years of age the patient had no sexual development (Tanner stage 1, primary amenorrhea). Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, low
baseline prolactin level and growth hormone (GH) deficiency were confirmed (Table 1). Her height was below the 3rd percentile and she was
normosmic. The karyotype was normal. The patient received sexual hormone replacement for 3 years. At 32 years of age hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism was proven by the absence of luteinizing hormone pulsatility (Table 1). Hypoprolactinemia was confirmed by two stimulatory
tests (insulin tolerance test-ITT and thyrotropin-releasing hormone-TRH test), while growth hormone level was normal (Table 1). Other
hormonal values were normal (Table 1). Her final adult height was 155 cm (10th percentile) and Tanner stage was 4, with amenorrhea. Given
the accompanied hypoestrogenemia, gynecologic and urogynecologic examinations excluded atrophic vaginitis, vulvar structural anomalies, and
decreased strength of the pelvic floor and bladder muscles, as possible estrogen-related causes of the urinary incontinence . Dental
examination confirmed hypodontia with the lack of second and third molars. A genetic evaluation was necessitated: sequencing of the key
exons and exon-intron boundaries of POLR3A using previously reported methods , revealed two already known disease-causing mutations,
c.272C > T (p.P91L) in exon 3 and c.3014G > A (p.R1005H) in exon 23 which segregated in the parents and proved the diagnosis of 4H
leukodystrophy.Figure 1 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study in the patient with 4H leukodystrophy. (a) T1W (T1-weighted) axial scan of
the brain indicating hypomyelination; (b) T2W (T2-weighted) scan of the brain and T2W-hypointensity of the globi pallidi; (c) affection of
the middle cerebellar peduncles:T2W scan; (d) T2W-hypointensity of the nucleus dentatus; (e) atrophy of the cerebellum, brainstem, corpus
callosum and the adenohypophisis: sagittal T1W scan; (f) the small adenohypophysis: coronal T1W scan + contrast; (g) Magnetic resonance
spectroscopy: decreased choline/creatine ratio in the lesions; (h) Diffusion tensor imaging of the brain supporting hypomyelination; (i, j)
the unaffected spinal cord: T2W scans.Table 1 Endocrine evaluation in the patient with 4H leukodystrophy Analysis At age of 26 yrs At age of
32 yrs Normal range FSH (IU/L)1.11.42.5-15Peak FSH after LHRH test (IU/L)1.51.5>5LH (IU/L)a <1.01.14-20Peak LH after LHRH test
(IU/L)<1.01.3>5Estradiol (pmol/L)46.313.1105-217Prolactin (mean, daily curve, ng/mL)b 1.52.24.8-23.4Peak prolactin after ITT (ng/mL)c 4.74.5
>> > b Peak prolactin after TRH test (ng/mL)d N/A6 >> > b Thyroxine (nmol/L)134.7N/A60-170Free thyroxine (pmol/L)N/A14.17-18Triiodothyronine
(nmol/L)N/A1.40.9-2.4Free triiodothyronine (pmol/L)N/A3.82.62-5.7TSH (mIU/L)1.01.70.15-5.0Cortisol (nmol/L)332428131-642Peak cortisol after
ITT (nmol/L)c 922827>550IGF-1 (nmol/L)N/A26.515.1-40.2Growth hormone (daily curve, μg/L)e 11.5…0.1…0.11.6…0.2…0.4<0.1Peak GH after ITT
(μg/L)c 2.46.1>3 Abbreviations: FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; LHRH, luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone;
ITT, insulin tolerance test; TRH, thyrotropin-releasing hormone; IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor 1; GH, growth hormone. aLH measured every
15 minutes during 8 hours; bMean of three diurnal values measured at 08 h-11 h-13 h; cAfter insulin tolerance test; dAfter TRH test; eThree
diurnal values measured at 08 h-11 h-13 h; >> > b: Several-fold increase compared to the mean daily prolactin. Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) study in the patient with 4H leukodystrophy. (a) T1W (T1-weighted) axial scan of the brain indicating hypomyelination; (b) T2W
(T2-weighted) scan of the brain and T2W-hypointensity of the globi pallidi; (c) affection of the middle cerebellar peduncles:T2W scan; (d)
T2W-hypointensity of the nucleus dentatus; (e) atrophy of the cerebellum, brainstem, corpus callosum and the adenohypophisis: sagittal T1W
scan; (f) the small adenohypophysis: coronal T1W scan + contrast; (g) Magnetic resonance spectroscopy: decreased choline/creatine ratio in
the lesions; (h) Diffusion tensor imaging of the brain supporting hypomyelination; (i, j) the unaffected spinal cord: T2W scans. Endocrine
evaluation in the patient with 4H leukodystrophy Abbreviations: FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; LHRH, luteinizing hormone-releasing
hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; ITT, insulin tolerance test; TRH, thyrotropin-releasing hormone; IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor 1; GH,
growth hormone. aLH measured every 15 minutes during 8 hours; bMean of three diurnal values measured at 08 h-11 h-13 h; cAfter insulin
tolerance test; dAfter TRH test; eThree diurnal values measured at 08 h-11 h-13 h; >> > b: Several-fold increase compared to the mean daily
prolactin. The neurologic, endocrine, metabolic, neuroradiologic, and genetic investigations confirmed 4H leukodystrophy in the reported
patient and ruled out possibility of any neurologic comorbidity. After excluding all non-neurologic causes of the chronic urinary
incontinence and having proven the neurogenic origin of the bladder dysfunction by the urodynamic studies , we concluded that the isolated
micturition dysfunction had been the first and sole neurologic manifestation of the unrecognized 4H leukodystrophy for over two decades.
Such a long lag between the onset of the neurogenic bladder and the subsequent neurologic symptom has not been described in Pol III-related
leukodystrophy, or in any other leukodystrophies . The sites responsible for the bladder dysfunction in this report seem to be the affected
suprapontine brainstem tegmentum, basal ganglia, and cerebellum, along with their central afferent-efferent circuitry. Furthermore, the
patient presented hypogonadotropic hypogonadism which was additionally accompanied by hypoprolactinemia and transient growth hormone
deficiency. The hypoestrogenic state defined by hypogonadotropic hypogonadism was not proven to have caused urinary incontinence in this
case, but such possibility should be considered in female patients with 4H leukodystrophy. The transient GH deficiency is thought to be due
to lack of sex steroid priming of somatotrophs and is a novel variant of growth hormone deficiency reported in this disorder. Prolactin
deficiency in 4H leukodystrophy is an intriguing observation which cannot be explained by any currently known causes of hypoprolactinemia .
It has been reported only in two other patients with Pol III-related leukodystrophy: originally in our first patient in 2012 , and recently
in a Japanese patient . POLR3A mutations have been found in these three patients. The study by Wolf et al. suggested that patients with
POLR3A had, in general, more severe disease than patients with POLR3B mutations, despite the fact that disease onset was slightly earlier in
the latter group . This was reflected in both age at loss of supported walking and survival . The role of POLR3A and POLR3B in the endocrine
disturbances and the pathogenesis of these disorders still wait to be elucidated by future research . This is the first report providing the
evidence that the myelin affection in a hypomyelinating leukodystrophy may neurologically manifest as a single symptom lasting for decades
before the next neurologic decline. The fact that such a neurologic symptom can be the childhood-onset chronic urinary incontinence
represents another novelty verified in the observed hypomyelinating process. The study also illustrates the complexity of the endocrine
features and broadens the phenotype in Pol III-related leukodystrophy. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and the
parents for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor
of this journal. The study was performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Institutional Review Board
of the Medical Faculty University of Belgrade (Ethical approval number 1832–1) and the Montreal Children's Hospital Research Ethics Board
(Ethical approval number 11-105-PED). Electromyography Follicle-stimulating hormone Growth hormone Insulin-like growth factor 1 Insulin
tolerance test luteinizing hormone Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone Magnetic resonance imaging T1-weighted T2-weighted Thyrotropin-
releasing hormone Thyroid-stimulating hormone Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions AP, GB, RS, and VP participated in the study concept and design, study supervision, acquisition of data, analysis and
interpretation of data, and critical revision for important intellectual content. JO, SP, DK participated in acquisition of data, analysis
and interpretation of data and critical revision for important intellectual content. KG participated in acquisition of data, analysis and
interpretation of data. All authors were involved in drafting the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The
collection and analysis of the data in the investigation have been supported by the following non-profit organizations: the Ministry of
Science of Republic of Serbia-grant number 175033 (VP, SP), the Ministry of Science of the Republic of Serbia- grant number 175022 (DK, JO),
Provincial Secretariat of Science and Technological Development of Province of Vojvodina, Serbia- Scientific Project Grant
114-451-2255/2011(DK, JO), and Fonds de Recherche du Québec en Santé (FRQS)-Research Scholar Junior 1 (GB). The authors would like to thank
the patient and the family for participating in this study, and the McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Center for their
services.
