Headache is a potential complication of epidural injection. We report a patient who developed headache 5 days after a lumbar epidural
steroid injection, which was not related to the epidural procedure, but caused by Duloxetine induced hyponatremia. Antidepressant drug
induced headache should be considered in the differential diagnosis of post dural puncture headache. Multimodal analgesic therapy, which
includes antiepileptic and antidepressant drugs, is commonly used to control chronic low back pain. In addition, interventions, such as
lumbar epidural steroid injection (LESI) are offered to some patients. Headache after the epidural injection is a known potential
complication, which is usually due to dural tap. This headache has its characteristic symptoms related to posture. When the headache after
the epidural injection is atypical, other causes should be considered in the differential diagnosis. We present a case where the patient
developed headache after the LESI not due to the epidural injection, but due to Duloxetine induced hyponatremia. Our objective in presenting
this particular case is to highlight that antidepressant drugs should be considered in the differential diagnosis of post dural puncture
headache. A 74-year-old woman presented to the pain clinic with a history of chronic left sided sciatic pain that also restricted her
mobility. This pain was worse at night and affected her sleep. She had been treated with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, pregabalin,
tramadol, and acetaminophen without much relief. In addition, she was taking beta and angiotensin receptor blockers and aspirin. On
examination, this slim pleasant lady had limited left leg raising with tenderness in her lower back. After the death of her husband, she has
lived with her daughter, and she has a good memory. Her lumbar spine MRI revealed multilevel disc prolapse and spinal canal stenosis. The
routine laboratory results (blood cell count, urea and electrolytes, and clotting studies) were within normal limits. In the clinic, after
discussion with the patient, we decided to perform LESI the next week, and Duloxetine 60 mg/day was prescribed. Taking full aseptic
precautions, an LESI was performed using a Portex™ epidural set under C-arm fluoroscopy. The correct placement of the epidural needle was
confirmed by an epidurogram with the radio-contrast (Omnipaque™), after which 10 ml of 0.9% normal saline (NS) containing 80 mg methyl
prednisolone was injected into the epidural space. After the procedure, she was observed in the recovery room for an hour and then
discharged home and advised to continue her medication and return to the pain clinic after 4 weeks. Three days after the LESI, she was
contacted on the phone to inquire about her wellbeing, and she reported some reduction in pain and was able to sleep. Three days later, she
came to the hospital in the morning, with a 24 hour history of severe headache and being unable to sleep despite extra doses of
acetaminophen. Along with the headache, she also complained of persistent nausea and one episode of vomiting. The headache was continuous,
not throbbing in nature, felt over her occiput, both temples, vertex, and forehead and not associated with neck pain or stiffness. The pain
was relieved a bit in the sitting position. With a normal body temperature, she was alert, well orientated, a bit restless with no
neurological deficit on examination. Except for some puffiness around her eyes, her clinical examination was normal and she appeared to be
euvolemic. She denied any change in her urinary or bowel habit. A brain CT scan was unremarkable. Her blood tests revealed severe
hyponatremia (sodium 112 mmol/L, normal range: 135-145 mmol/L) with low serum osmolality of 248 mosmol/Kg (normal range 280-295). The
remaining electrolytes, urea, creatinine, and blood counts were within normal limits, and her urine osmolality was 328 mosmol/Kg. She was
diagnosed to have Duloxetine induced syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) causing severe hyponatremia (Figure
1). Her treatment started with intravenous (IV) acetaminophen 1 gm and granisetron 1 mg and IV infusion of 3% hypertonic saline commenced at
the rate of 50 ml/hour. Eight hours later, her headache was still bad but the nausea improved, and serum sodium improved to 118 mmol/L. She
then received codeine 30 mg intramuscular along with a second 1 gm dose of IV acetaminophen. One hour later she went to sleep in a semi
sitting position. Her vital signs remained normal. After 3 hours she woke up. The headache was there but better than before. Eighteen hours
after her hospital admission, the serum sodium further improved to 122 mmol/L. Hypertonic saline infusion was then replaced with NS. The
headache was mild with no nausea or vomiting. She had a bowl of soup, she took her daily medications except Duloxetine and slept for another
few hours. The next morning, 30 hours after her admission, she described her headache as heaviness instead of pain. With a serum sodium of
128 mmol/L, the IV infusion of NS was discontinued. She was kept under observations for another 36 hours, when her headache completely
resolved, and with serum sodium at 130 mmol/L, she was discharged home. Diagnostic criteria for the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic
hormone secretion (SIADH). Na - sodium Headache is high on the list of almost all informed consents taken for epidural injection.1 The most
common cause of headache after epidural injection is an inadvertent dural puncture. This headache, also called post dural puncture headache
(PDPH) is due to CSF leakage, and low intracranial pressure. This typically presents as a postural headache that is aggravated in the
sitting and standing position and relieved by lying down. A PDPH may occur up to 5 days after the procedure is performed.2 Any atypical
headache after an epidural procedure should be taken seriously and its cause should be identified (Table 1). Differential diagnosis of post
epidural injection headache. The headache in our patient presented 5 days after having an epidural injection. Clinically, this headache did
not mimic headaches that develop as a complication of the epidural injection, such as PDPH or meningitis. The only positive laboratory
finding was hyponatremia that caused low serum osmolality. The pre-procedure urea/electrolytes were within normal limits. The probable
diagnosis of SIADH was based on euvolemia, hyponatremia with low serum and high urine osmolality, and Duloxetine appeared to be the most
likely cause of SIADH in our patient. Duloxetine is a serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI), which was introduced a decade ago
in North America for the treatment of major psychiatric disorders.3 Later its indications expanded to include various painful conditions
such as neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia.3 Maramattom in 20064 reported the first case of Duloxetine induced SIADH in a woman, where the
drug was used as an antidepressant. Thereafter many cases of Duloxetine induced SIADH have been reported in the literature.5-8 Though
hyponatremia is a rare side effect of Duloxetine, elderly females with a low body weight appear to be more susceptible.7 Duloxetine is a
relatively new drug in the management of chronic pain, and appears to be a cost-effective post-first-line treatment for chronic low back
pain.9 Worldwide, the use of SNRI has increasingly become common in chronic pain patients, especially in patients with diabetes with painful
neuropathy and sciatica. Because of the risk of developing SIADH, it would be advisable to monitor serum sodium in patients who are taking
SNRIs. Fortunately, our patient, apart from headache and nausea did not have any other CNS symptoms (lethargy, disorientation, convulsion,
coma). The SIADH can cause brain edema, an increase in intra cranial pressure, and may lead to brain stem herniation.10 There was clinical
suspicion of raised intracranial pressure in our patient, because of pain relief in the sitting position and as the headache was associated
with nausea and vomiting, we decided not to perform a diagnostic lumbar puncture. Symptomatic hyponatremia is a medical emergency and we
started its treatment immediately with 3% hypertonic saline with a goal of slowly raising the serum sodium concentration, not more than 5
mmol/L per 12 hours. Rapid correction of hyponatremia may seriously harm the patient by causing demyelination of neurons. In conclusion, our
case is that of post epidural injection headache not caused by the epidural procedure per se, but coincidently caused by a Duloxetine
induced hyponatremia. We thank Dr. Taqi Khan, Kidney Transplant Surgeon at Prince Salman Armed Forces hospital, Tabuk, Saudi Arabia for his
expert advice in the preparation of this manuscript. Case reports will only be considered for unusual topics that add something new to the
literature. All Case Reports should include at least one figure. Written informed consent for publication must accompany any photograph in
which the subject can be identified. Figures should be submitted with a 300 dpi resolution when submitting electronically or printed on
high-contrast glossy paper when submitting print copies. The abstract should be unstructured, and the introductory section should always
include the objective and reason why the author is presenting this particular case. References should be up to date, preferably not
exceeding 15.
