To the editor: The macroscopic rendering of a surgical gynecologic specimen can sometimes be difficult, particularly if the medical
practitioner is faced with a rare and complex condition. In the last years the radiological imaging has made great strides in this
direction. However, these sophisticated techniques are not without risks for the patients (e.g., ionizing radiation, contrast medium) and
they cannot always be easily accessible. Under this perspective, a new generation of three-dimensional (3D) imaging softwares for the
anatomical rendering of the human body, and related surgical pathologies, are in the development phase . We have recently tested one of
these platforms with encouraging results in a 39-year-old female, affected by a high-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma, arisen in the
context of an extrapelvic endometriotic focus at the level of the right inguinal ligament. Inguinal endometriosis is a rare condition
occurring in only 0.6% of women and it is usually associated with previous pelvic surgery . Our patient in fact was submitted to the
surgical removal of an endometriotic scar of the right parametrium 9 years ago. The occurrence of an endometrial stromal sarcoma within an
endometriotic nodule is a rare, but possible, event, previously described at the level of vulva, vagina, ovary, round ligament, rectosigmoid
colon, terminal ileum, abdominal wall, and sciatic nerve . In our case, the sarcoma had grown from the right inguinal ligament until
reaching 23.5 cm of maximal diameter. It was bordered by a discontinuous pseudo-capsule and the presurgical computed tomography (CT)-scan
showed a diffuse infiltrative front of growth in the surrounding deep tissues. For this reason, the patient was promptly submitted to a
software-assisted surgery with abdominal wall reconstruction. Starting from the CT images, the software has been developed to upload them
and to assign a predefined color in relation to the signal intensity. Then, it has worked using different subtraction filters and a 3D-space
vision. More in detail, it has been possible to tip and rotate the neoplasia through 360Â°, removing anatomical layers, in order to view any
pathological structure, and making easier to explain complex surgical correlations. The subtraction filters available were: dermal
subtraction filter, superficial muscular subtraction filter, deep muscular subtraction filter, and visceral subtraction filter. The software
has been able to detect the neoplasia origin from the right inguinal ligament and to better define the infiltration front, favoring a
radical surgery (Fig. 1). It has been proved a useful tool in the surgical and pathological approach to this unique case, never reported in
literature. Its major advantages appear to be the running on portable electronic devices, such as notebook or tablet, an easy-touse
interface with intuitive functionality, and the opportunity to purchase for each unit. For the future, an implementation with
standardization of software-assisted procedures could be useful in the gynecologic management of the patients affected by uncommon
malignancies. CONFLICT OF INTEREST: No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
