Present address: Center for Epigenetics and Metabolism, Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA
Subject Categories Genetics, Gene Therapy & Genetic Disease; Neuroscience We studied two monozygotic twins, born to first cousins, affected
by a multisystem disease. At birth, they both presented with bilateral cryptorchidism and malformations. Since early adulthood, they
developed a slowly progressive neurological syndrome, with cerebellar and pyramidal signs, cognitive impairment, and depression. Dilating
cardiomyopathy is also present in both. By whole-exome sequencing, we found a homozygous nucleotide change in XRCC4 (c.673C>T), predicted to
introduce a premature stop codon (p.R225*). XRCC4 transcript levels were profoundly reduced, and the protein was undetectable in patients'
skin fibroblasts. XRCC4 plays an important role in non-homologous end joining of DNA double-strand breaks (DSB), a system that is involved
in repairing DNA damage from, for example, ionizing radiations. Gamma-irradiated mutant cells demonstrated reduction, but not abolition, of
DSB repair. In contrast with embryonic lethality of the Xrcc4 KO mouse, nonsense mutations in human XRCC4 have recently been associated with
primordial dwarfism and, in our cases, with adult-onset neurological impairment, suggesting an important role for DNA repair in the brain.
Surprisingly, neither immunodeficiency nor predisposition to malignancy was reported in these patients. See also: JP de Villartay (July
2015) DNA breaks are severe injuries for cells, potentially leading to cell cycle arrest and eventually death, accelerated aging, or
oncogenic transformation. During evolution, different DNA repair pathways have evolved in order to minimize the deleterious impact of these
lesions, affecting either single or double-strand DNA (ssDNA, dsDNA). These mechanisms include base excision repair (BER), nucleotide
excision repair (NER), and double-strand break repair (DSBR) systems. Two main DSBR pathways are known: homologous recombination (HR) (San
Filippo et al, 2008) and non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) (Lieber, 2010). While HR results in an error-free repair, NHEJ is an
intrinsically error-prone pathway. HR is a process predominantly exploited by lower organisms, whereas both HR and NHEJ concur to maintain
chromosomal integrity in eukaryotes. In mammals, particularly in human cells, the majority of DSBs are repaired by NHEJ. The preferential
involvement and efficiency of NHEJ and HR repair systems vary during the different phases of the cell cycle: NHEJ is active in all the cell
cycle phases, whereas HR is active only during the S and G2 phases. In fact, since HR relies on the availability of undamaged templates to
restore any lost sequence information, it can operate only if a sister chromatid in close contact to the damaged one is ready to be used as
a template. Hence, in cell cycle phases other than S/G2, since no sister chromatid is available, NHEJ is the only option for cells to repair
DSBs. Non-homologous end joining is carried out by two main complexes (Lieber, 2010): the DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) holoenzyme,
formed by the KU70/KU80 heterodimer bound to the DNA-PK catalytic subunit, and the DNA LIG4-XLF-XRCC4 complex; the former complex has a
major regulatory role (Meek et al, 2007), whereas the latter possesses the catalytic activity responsible for DNA rejoining. DNA ligase IV
(LIG4) is the NHEJ-specific ligase; its stability is increased by interaction with the X-ray repair cross complementing-4 (XRCC4) protein
(Bryans et al, 1999). A further component of the ligation complex is XLF/Cernunnos, although it has been reported to be dispensable for DNA
LIG4 stability (Riballo et al, 2009). Very recently an additional protein, PAXX (PAralog of XRCC4 and XLF, also called C9orf142), has been
described as a component of this machinery, with a role in binding KU70/KU80 and promoting DSBR through stabilization of NHEJ protein
assembly at DSB sites (Ochi et al, 2015). An alternative NHEJ (A-NHEJ) process has been identified that does not require the same
proteins/enzymes used by Ku-dependent C-NHEJ (classic non-homologous end joining) and that contributes to DNA rejoining in the absence of
DNA ligase IV (Wang et al, 2003; Goodarzi & Jeggo, 2013). The most severe DNA damage produced by ionizing radiation (IR) consists in double-
strand breaks. Non-homologous end joining represents the major mechanism for repairing two-ended DSBs such as those generated by IR, but HR
also plays a role, particularly in cycling cells during S/G2 phases. Using whole-exome sequencing, we identified a XRCC4 nonsense mutation,
in two identical twin brothers born to consanguineous parents. We studied two 50-year-old twin brothers (II-1 and II-2), born to first-
degree cousins. Their father, now in his seventies, is alive and well; their mother committed suicide at 55 years. No information is
available on her psychiatric status before the event. A 47-year-old sister (II-3) is alive and well (pedigree in Fig1A). Genetic and
molecular features of XRCC4-mutant patients Pedigree. Black symbols designate affected subjects. Schematic view of wild-type and mutant
(R225*) XRCC4 proteins with their main domains and phosphorylation sites. The numbering refers to amino acids of refseq: NP_071801.1. CTR:
C-terminal region. Electropherograms of the XRCC4 genomic region encompassing the nucleotide substitutions in available members of the
family. Quantitative real-time PCR of XRCC4 relative to GAPDH mRNA in affected (II-1 and II-2) and control (CT1 and CT2) fibroblasts. Each
value refers to the mean of three independent experiments performed in duplicate. Error bars indicate the standard deviation. Immunoblot
analysis of total lysates from fibroblasts (fbs) and of in vitro-synthesized proteins (i.v.p). fl: in vitro-translated full-length XRCC4
protein; ret.: reticulocyte lysate used for in vitro protein synthesis; 225*: in vitro-translated XRCC4 R225* truncated protein; Ct: lysate
of control fbs; and II-1 and II-2: lysates of fbs from patient II-1 and II-2. α-XRCC4 (Abcam, 1:1,000) and α-GAPDH antibodies were used.
Immunoblot analysis of total lysates from fibroblasts using α-LIG4 (GeneTex, 1:1,000) and α-SDHA antibodies. Ct: lysate of control fbs; II-1
and II-2: lysates of fbs from patient II-1 and II-2. The position of the molecular weight (MW) marker proteins is indicated. Pedigree. Black
symbols designate affected subjects. Schematic view of wild-type and mutant (R225*) XRCC4 proteins with their main domains and
phosphorylation sites. The numbering refers to amino acids of refseq: NP_071801.1. CTR: C-terminal region. Electropherograms of the XRCC4
genomic region encompassing the nucleotide substitutions in available members of the family. Quantitative real-time PCR of XRCC4 relative to
GAPDH mRNA in affected (II-1 and II-2) and control (CT1 and CT2) fibroblasts. Each value refers to the mean of three independent experiments
performed in duplicate. Error bars indicate the standard deviation. Immunoblot analysis of total lysates from fibroblasts (fbs) and of in
vitro-synthesized proteins (i.v.p). fl: in vitro-translated full-length XRCC4 protein; ret.: reticulocyte lysate used for in vitro protein
synthesis; 225*: in vitro-translated XRCC4 R225* truncated protein; Ct: lysate of control fbs; and II-1 and II-2: lysates of fbs from
patient II-1 and II-2. α-XRCC4 (Abcam, 1:1,000) and α-GAPDH antibodies were used. Immunoblot analysis of total lysates from fibroblasts
using α-LIG4 (GeneTex, 1:1,000) and α-SDHA antibodies. Ct: lysate of control fbs; II-1 and II-2: lysates of fbs from patient II-1 and II-2.
The position of the molecular weight (MW) marker proteins is indicated. Since birth, he presented with bilateral cryptorchidism,
hypotelorism, short limbs, pes cavus, and short stature. Alcohol addiction is reported in young adulthood. At 27 years of age, he was
diagnosed a dilated cardiomyopathy, with hypertrophy of interventricular septum and a residual ejection fraction of 25%; this condition was
attributed to his relevant alcohol intake, and treated with anti-arrhythmic, anti-aggregant, and anti-hypertensive drugs. Since 44 years of
age, he carries an ICD (implantable cardioverter defibrillator). He reported gait difficulties and motor imbalance since 30 years of age; at
46 years he experienced sudden worsening of gait described as an “impaired control” of leg movements, which became progressive over time. At
the time of our neurological assessment, subject II-1 (aged 48) showed cognitive impairment (inability to count backwards), nystagmus, and
slowing of eye pursuits, dysarthria, dysmetria, positive sensitized Romberg maneuver, and wide-based and camptocormic gait with slight
steppage and diffuse pyramidal signs, requiring a cane for deambulation. Routine blood laboratory tests did not show alterations besides
glucose intolerance (fasting blood glucose 120 mg/dl, normal values, n.v. 50–110), moderately elevated total cholesterol (238 mg/dl, n.v.
110–200), a slight increase in alpha-fetoprotein (5.65 ng/ml, n.v. 0–5) in a smoking subject, and alteration of gonadotropins (FSH:
36.8 mU/ml, n.v. 1.4–18.1; LH: 22.3 mU/mL, n.v.1.7–8.6) with low testosterone (1.13 ng/ml, n.v. 2.8–80) attributed to hypergonadotropic
hypogonadism caused by bilateral cryptorchidism. Serum lactate, pyruvate, and thyroid hormones were normal, as were urinary organic acids.
Immunologic evaluation showed only a slight reduction in lymphocytes (1.21 × 103/μl, n.v. 1.50–3.50) and neutrophils (2.31 × 103/μl, n.v.
2.50–7.50), with normal distribution of immunoglobulins IgG, IgM, and IgA. Neurophysiological studies revealed an axonal sensory neuropathy,
predominantly in the lower limbs. A brain MRI showed mild atrophy of the cerebellar vermis. A muscle CT scan showed increasing adipose
muscle substitution. A muscle needle biopsy was performed in the left quadriceps, and showed only type 2 fibers hypotrophy.
Neurophthalmological assessment showed normal fundi, but defective oculomotor control (nystagmus). Cardiac assessment confirmed a dilating
cardiomyopathy (EF = 35%). Electroencephalography (EEG) showed slow basal activity with slow left temporal theta–delta waves, but no
epileptic elements. Neuropsychological assessment confirmed multiple-domain impairment with relative sparing of language, consisting of
severe impairment of attention, visual perception, and verbal fluency by phonetic or semantic stimuli, deficient short-term verbal and
visuo-spatial memory, and constructive apraxia. II-2 showed cryptorchidism, low stature, hypotelorism, and short limbs. From 48 years of
age, he reported progressive gait impairment, episodic neck and back pain, lower limb weakness, episodes of dizziness, and depression. He
did not report speech difficulties. Multinodular thyroid hypertrophy was also present. Neurological assessment reported horizontal
nystagmus, impairment of eye pursuits, pes cavus, dysarthria, dysmetria, diffuse pyramidal signs, and ataxic and wide-based, mildly
camptocormic gait. As also seen in his twin brother, routine blood tests did not show alterations besides slightly elevated blood glucose
(114 mg/dl) and increase in total cholesterol (285 mg/dl). Blood levels of gonadotropines were elevated (FSH: 27.4 mU/ml; LH: 16.9 mU/ml),
and testosterone was low (0.84 ng/ml). Serum lactate, pyruvate, alpha-fetoprotein, and thyroid hormones were normal. The profile of urinary
organic acids was normal as well. Immunologic evaluation showed a slight reduction in total leukocytes (3.88 × 103/μl, n.v. 4.0–10.0), due
to a decrease in neutrophils (1.69 × 103/μl, n.v. 2.50–7.50); IgG, IgM, and IgA levels were normal. Neurophysiological studies revealed
axonal sensory neuropathy, with altered somatosensitive, motor, and brainstem auditory evoked potentials. Visual evoked potentials and
electroretinogram were normal. Spinal and cerebral MRI was normal, with the exception of mild atrophy of the cerebellar vermis. EEG did not
show epileptic elements. Cardiac assessment (ECG, echocardiogram and medical examination) revealed an initial left ventricular diastolic
defect (EF = 52%). A muscle needle biopsy was performed in the left quadriceps, and showed only type 2 fibers hypotrophy. Neuropsychological
assessment revealed severe attention deficit with constructive apraxia, slow visual pursuit movements, difficulties in lexical production
after phonemic stimulation, and long- and short-term visuo-spatial memory deficit. Informed consent for genetic and biochemical studies, in
agreement with the Declaration of Helsinki, was signed by the patients and healthy family members participating in this study. Karyotype and
array CGH analyses did not detect any alteration; mutations in TIM14 and FRDA were excluded by direct sequencing in II-1. The analysis by
both a forensic kit for genotyping and homozygosity mapping unequivocally showed that the two affected brothers are monozygotic twins. We
performed whole-exome sequencing on one proband (II-1) and his unaffected sister (II-3). First, we filtered out common variants, with a
frequency> 0.1% in public databases, including dbSNPs, 1,000 Genomes, and Exome Variant Server. Then, based on a hypothesized recessive
trait and on the known parental consanguinity, we selected non-synonymous variants in coding regions and splice-site junctions that were
homozygous in II-1 and absent or heterozygous in II-3. The remaining variants were prioritized according to the predicted deleterious
outcome of the corresponding amino acid substitutions (Supplementary Table S1). The most severe variant was the nucleotide change c.673C>T
in XRCC4. Two different isoforms of XRCC4, 334 and 336 amino acid (aa) long, respectively, are produced by alternative splicing of the last
exon, but the identified change is predicted to create in both a stop codon (p.R225*) with loss of one-third of the protein at the
C-terminus. This portion of the protein contains a low-complexity domain with several sites that can be phosphorylated by DNA-PK, causing
loss of DNA end bridging (Mahaney et al, 2013), whereas the head domain (aa 1–115) forming the hydrophobic core, and the stalk (aa 115–203),
a coiled-coil domain important for dimerization and interaction with LIG4, are upstream the truncating mutation (Fig1B). A form of XRCC4
truncated for most of its C-terminus (aa 1–250) was reported to be able to complement the radiosensitivity of XRCC4-deficient cells (Koch
et al, 2004). The variant was validated in affected patients (II-1 and II-2) by Sanger' sequencing and segregated within the family, being
heterozygous in both father (I-1) and healthy sister (II-3) (Fig1C). The DNA from the mother was not available. In order to evaluate the
effect of the identified variant on the XRCC4 transcript, we performed quantitative PCR on cDNA obtained from mRNA extracted from II-1,
II-2, and control fibroblasts. We found that XRCC4 transcript level was strongly reduced in mutant cells (Fig1D), probably due to nonsense-
mediated mRNA decay. Likewise, Western blot analysis showed undetectable XRCC4 protein in total lysates obtained from patients' fibroblasts
by using two different polyclonal antibodies against XRCC4 (Fig1E). One antibody (Abcam) obtained using the full-length protein as antigen
clearly recognized an in vitro-translated construct corresponding to the truncated XRCC4 protein; however, no signal was detected in
patients' samples, demonstrating undetectable levels of both wild-type (wt) and mutant protein (Fig1D, Supplementary Fig S1).
Immunofluorescence studies supported this result, showing the absence of any nuclear signal in patients' cells in contrast to the labeling
observed in control cells (Supplementary Fig S2). Notably, Western blot analysis revealed that, albeit reduced in amount (40% of control
mean), LIG4 was clearly present in lysates from patients' fibroblasts (Fig1E). To test the consequence of the XRCC4 mutation on DNA repair
efficiency, wt and mutant fibroblasts were first exposed to γ-rays (0.5 Gy), in order to induce DNA DSBs. After exposure to IR, the
extensive phosphorylation at Ser139 of histone H2AX results in the formation of discrete γ-H2AX foci, which can be identified by
immunostaining and constitute a useful tool to highlight the presence of DSBs (Fernandez-Capetillo et al, 2004; Sharma et al, 2012). Because
this phosphorylation is abundant, fast, and correlates well with each DSB, it can be used to examine the DNA damage produced by irradiation
and the subsequent repair of the DNA lesion (Svetlova et al, 2010). After irradiation, DSB rejoining was monitored for 24 h, by measuring
the formation of γ-H2AX nuclear foci, as a DNA damage index, and their disappearance, as an index of DNA repair. During the 24-h monitoring,
the decrease in foci number was significantly slower in XRCC4-mutant fibroblasts (XRCC4m/m #1, from individual II-1; XRCC4m/m #2, from
individual II-2) compared to that in wt cells, whereas at the endpoint, the differences became statistically non-significant (Fig2A). Since
the two XRCC4-mutant cell lines showed no significant differences in DSB rejoining, these data were pooled and expressed as a mean in
subsequent analyses. The kinetics of γ-H2AX foci disappearance (Fig2B) confirmed that in XRCC4-mutant cells, the DNA lesions were repaired,
although with lower efficiency than in wt cells, as the percentage of foci remaining at 24 h was 5 ± 8% in XRCC4wt cells and 19 ± 7% in
XRCC4m/m. This result suggests that undetectable levels of XRCC4 protein do not completely abolish DNA repair capability. Analysis of γ-H2AX
nuclear foci γ-H2AX nuclear foci in XRCC4wt and mutant fibroblasts (XRCC4m/m1 and XRCC4m/m2) were determined at different times after
irradiation with 0.5 Gy of γ-rays. Values, subtracted of their non-irradiated control (1.3 foci/nucleus in XRCC4wt cells and 1.4 and 0.9
foci/nucleus in XRCC4m/m1 and XRCC4m/m2 cells, respectively), are the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. Percentages of γ-H2AX foci
in XRCC4wt and XRCC4m/m fibroblasts (pooled values) remaining at the indicated time-points. Immunofluorescence micrographs of γ-H2AX foci in
XRCC4wt and XRCC4m/m fibroblasts. γ-H2AX nuclear foci in XRCC4wt and mutant fibroblasts (XRCC4m/m1 and XRCC4m/m2) were determined at
different times after irradiation with 0.5 Gy of γ-rays. Values, subtracted of their non-irradiated control (1.3 foci/nucleus in XRCC4wt
cells and 1.4 and 0.9 foci/nucleus in XRCC4m/m1 and XRCC4m/m2 cells, respectively), are the mean ± SD of three independent experiments.
Percentages of γ-H2AX foci in XRCC4wt and XRCC4m/m fibroblasts (pooled values) remaining at the indicated time-points. Immunofluorescence
micrographs of γ-H2AX foci in XRCC4wt and XRCC4m/m fibroblasts. Data information: ***P < 0.001; **P < 0.01; *P < 0.05 (XRCC4m/m vs. XRCC4wt
cells), two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni post hoc test. To analyze the contribution of the two main DSB repair systems, NHEJ and HR, during cell
cycle, we distinguished G1, S, and G2/M cells on the basis of their nuclear immunofluorescence intensity to the CENP-F protein, whose
expression and localization are cell cycle dependent. CENP-F is detectable by in situ immunofluorescence throughout late S, G2, and M phases
of the cell cycle, but it is absent in G1 (Bee et al, 2013). By staining the cells with a CENP-F antibody, we observed that in CENP-F-
negative cells (G1-phase), in which DSB rejoining is carried out by NHEJ, DNA repair proceeded significantly slower in XRCC4m/m than in
XRCC4wt cells (Fig3A), although at the 24-h endpoint, the differences became non-significant. In CENP-F-positive cells (late S and G2
phase), in which HR system is fully active, DSBs repair was similar at any time-point between wt and XRCC4-mutant cells (Fig3B). γ-H2AX
nuclear foci formation in different cell cycle phases A, B Percentages of γ-H2AX nuclear foci remaining in CENP-F-negative (A) and CENP-F-
positive (B) cells at the indicated time-points after irradiation with 0.5 Gy of γ-rays. Values, subtracted of their non-irradiated
controls, are the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. ***P < 0.001; *P < 0.05 (XRCC4m/m versus XRCC4wt cells), two-way ANOVA,
Bonferroni post hoc test. C Immunofluorescence micrographs of γ-H2AX foci in CENP-F-positive and negative fibroblasts at 2 h after
irradiation. Arrow heads indicate the CENP-F-positive cells. A, B Percentages of γ-H2AX nuclear foci remaining in CENP-F-negative (A) and
CENP-F-positive (B) cells at the indicated time-points after irradiation with 0.5 Gy of γ-rays. Values, subtracted of their non-irradiated
controls, are the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. ***P < 0.001; *P < 0.05 (XRCC4m/m versus XRCC4wt cells), two-way ANOVA,
Bonferroni post hoc test. C Immunofluorescence micrographs of γ-H2AX foci in CENP-F-positive and negative fibroblasts at 2 h after
irradiation. Arrow heads indicate the CENP-F-positive cells. Next, we compared the involvement of HR in repairing DNA DSBs of XRCC4m/m and
XRCC4wt fibroblasts, by analyzing formation and disappearance during the G2 phase of nuclear foci of RAD51, the central protein in the HR
process (Fig4). The number of RAD51 foci at 2 and 6 h in XRCC4m/m cells was significantly higher than in XRCC4wt cells. This result suggests
‘compensatory' activation of HR in mutant NHEJ-defective compared to wt cells, where, as normally observed in higher eukaryotes, NHEJ is the
main repair system active throughout the entire cell cycle. We could not reliably measure the number of RAD51 foci at 24-h post-irradiation
endpoint because by then, only very few cells were in G2 phase (Table1) and the number of RAD51 foci/nucleus was negligible. Our data show
that in XRCC4m/m cells, the recruitment of HR factors at DSB sites significantly increased compared to XRCC4wt cells, partially supplying
NHEJ impairment. Cell cycle distribution (percentage ± SD) Cell cycle analysis has been performed 24 h after irradiation (IR). P < 0.01 G2/M
percentage in mutant fibroblasts versus G2/M percentage in wt fibroblasts, two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni post hoc test. Involvement of
homologous recombinations in repairing DNA DSBs RAD51 foci in XRCC4wt and XRCC4m/m fibroblasts irradiated with 0.5 Gy of γ-rays. Values are
the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. ***P < 0.001; **P < 0.01 (XRCC4m/m versus XRCC4wt cells), two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni post hoc
test. Immunofluorescence micrographs of RAD51 foci in XRCC4wt and XRCC4m/m fibroblasts. Arrowheads indicate the CENP-F-positive cells. RAD51
foci in XRCC4wt and XRCC4m/m fibroblasts irradiated with 0.5 Gy of γ-rays. Values are the mean ± SD of three independent experiments.
***P < 0.001; **P < 0.01 (XRCC4m/m versus XRCC4wt cells), two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni post hoc test. Immunofluorescence micrographs of RAD51
foci in XRCC4wt and XRCC4m/m fibroblasts. Arrowheads indicate the CENP-F-positive cells. The fraction of cycling cells in a population of
skin fibroblasts is usually low. In our experimental conditions (Table1), most of the cells were in G1 phase, as detected by analyzing DNA
content. Before irradiation, 88.62 ± 1.86% of XRCC4wt fibroblasts was in G1 phase and 6.41 ± 0.35% in G2/M phases; 24 h after irradiation,
G2 cells increased up to 11.09 ± 0.80%, probably because of G2-checkpoint activation. In XRCC4m/m non-irradiated cells, the percentages of
G1 phase was 92.23 ± 0.43% and that of G2/M phases 5.25 ± 1.47%. At 24 h after irradiation, XRCC4m/m cells in G1 phase were 93.91 ± 0.33%
and those in G2/M were unchanged (5.44 ± 0.77%), probably because of failure of G2 checkpoint activation. Thus, the increased recruitment of
HR factors to DNA lesions detected in XRCC4m/m-mutant cells in G2 phase (RAD51 foci in Fig4), which was about 5% of the total, cannot
explain the persistence of the DNA repair level measured in our experiments. We therefore analyzed the involvement of the alternative non-
homologous end-joining (A-NHEJ) pathway in DSB repair. The nuclear enzyme PARP-1 is usually involved in SSB rejoining by BER or NER
processes, but in NHEJ-defective cells, it has been shown to participate in DSB repair, as a component of A-NHEJ (Wang et al, 2006; Mansour
et al, 2010; Mladenov & Iliakis, 2011). To calculate the residual DSB rejoining upon inhibition of the A-NHEJ system, we treated XRCC4wt and
XRCC4m/m fibroblasts with a PARP-1 inhibitor, 3′-aminobenzamide (3′-AB), 24 h before irradiation (Fig5). From 2 h after irradiation, the
number of γ-H2AX foci in 3′-AB treated XRCC4m/m cells was significantly higher than in untreated XRCC4m/m cells. Conversely, in XRCC4wt
cells, where DSB repair is performed by the classical NHEJ (C-NHEJ) pathway, 3′-AB treatment did not modify the number of γ-H2AX foci found
in untreated cells. We observed no difference in the amount of PARP-1 by Western blot analysis of XRCC4m/m vs. XRCC4wt cells, possibly
because of qualitative changes in distribution (e.g. relocation of the protein within cell compartments) rather than quantitative variations
in content. Analysis of PARP-1 inhibition on DSB repair XRCC4wt and XRCC4m/m cells irradiated with 0.5 Gy of γ-rays were exposed to the
PARP1 inhibitor 3′-AB or to solvent (DMSO). The γ-H2AX foci number is the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. *P < 0.05 (XRCC4m/m +
3′-AB versus XRCC4m/m + DMSO), ***P < 0.001 (XRCC4m/m + 3′-AB versus XRCC4wt + 3′-AB), two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni post hoc test. From the
number of γ-H2AX foci in presence or absence of PARP-1 inhibitor (Fig6), we can roughly estimate the percentage of DSBs induced by γ-ray
irradiation that were rejoined by the A-NHEJ. Quantification of alternative non-homologous end-joining (A-NHEJ) activity A, B Percentages of
DSBs repaired in increasing time intervals (0.5–2 h, 0.5–6 h, 0.5–24 h) were calculated in XRCC4wt (A) and XRCC4m/m (B) cells from the
number of γ-H2AX foci in presence or absence of a PARP-1 inhibitor, 3′-AB. **P < 0.01 (XRCC4m/m + 3′-AB versus XRCC4m/m + DMSO), two-way
ANOVA, Bonferroni post hoc test. A, B Percentages of DSBs repaired in increasing time intervals (0.5–2 h, 0.5–6 h, 0.5–24 h) were calculated
in XRCC4wt (A) and XRCC4m/m (B) cells from the number of γ-H2AX foci in presence or absence of a PARP-1 inhibitor, 3′-AB. **P < 0.01
(XRCC4m/m + 3′-AB versus XRCC4m/m + DMSO), two-way ANOVA, Bonferroni post hoc test. Albeit indirectly, our data suggested that the
involvement of A-NHEJ factors in repairing DSBs was irrelevant in XRCC4wt cells (5 ± 3% of DSBs repaired within 24 h), while it was clearly
significant in XRCC4m/m cells (19 ± 4%). The homozygous non-sense mutation in X-ray cross complementing gene 4 (XRCC4) found in our patients
is predicted to result in the premature truncation of the XRCC4 protein, which was in fact undetectable in cultured mutant fibroblasts from
both subjects. XRCC4 forms a complex with XRCC4-like factors, XLF/Cernunnos and PAXX, and DNA ligase IV (LIG4) (Critchlow et al, 1997;
Grawunder et al, 1998a,b; Ahnesorg et al, 2006; Buck et al, 2006; Ochi et al, 2015), which operates the ligation step of NHEJ. Experimental
evidence indicated that perturbations of the XRCC4–XLF interaction result in DSB repair deficits, including reduced frequency of coding end
joining during V(D)J recombination. These observations suggested that, besides their well-characterized role in ligation step, XRCC4 and XLF
may have multiple functions during NHEJ, including during early phases of the process, which may be independent from LIG4 (Roy et al, 2012).
The newly discovered component PAXX functions with XRCC4 and XLF to mediate DSBR in response to DSB-inducing agents, promoting assembly
and/or stability of the NHEJ machinery at DSB sites (Ochi et al, 2015). NHEJ is central to DNA DSB repair mechanisms but also to the
mechanism operating the clonal somatic DNA shuffling responsible for the generation of the hyper-variable regions in antibodies and T-cell
receptors (Helmink & Sleckman, 2012; Malu et al, 2012). Consequently, disruption of NHEJ proteins (Ku, DNA-PKcs, XLF, LIG4, and Artemis)
often results in defects in DSB repair, radiation sensitivity, and severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) (Li et al, 1995; Gu et al, 1997;
Moshous et al, 2003; Buck et al, 2006). For instance, the LIG4 syndrome (OMIM #606593), caused by mutations in LIG4, is characterized by
immunodeficiency, development and growth delay, unusual facial features, and microcephaly. Accordingly, cells from human patients with
hypomorphic mutations in LIG4 are radiosensitive, show impaired DSB repair, and display significantly elevated chromosomal breaks upon IR
exposures (Riballo et al, 2001). Likewise, the NHEJ1 syndrome (OMIM #611291), caused by mutation in XLF, consists of severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID), microcephaly, growth retardation, and sensitivity to IR. However, neither immunologic abnormalities nor
susceptibility to cancer were part of the clinical phenotype of our XRCC4-mutant patients. Similar observations have been performed in cells
derived from a patient with hypomorphic mutations in LIG4 that led to pronounced radiosensitivity but did not cause any major immune
dysfunction, indicating that defects of DSBs repair are not necessarily associated with immune dysfunction. (Riballo et al, 1999). A
homozygous missense variant in XRCC4 was recently identified in a Saudi patient with primordial dwarfism, but it was not possible to
establish its causative role because of the absence of any experimental validation (Shaheen et al, 2014). While this paper was under
reviewing, two publications have reported patients with proven mutations in XRCC4, associated with primordial dwarfism (Murray et al, 2015)
or early-onset metabolic syndrome (de Bruin et al, 2015). Despite the presence at birth of hypotelorism, short limbs, and short stature, our
patients were not diagnosed as having primordial dwarfism and the main clinical feature was an adult-onset progressive
encephalocardiomyopathy. They presented also cryptorchidism, suggestive of gonadal failure, which has been found in other XRCC4-mutant
patients (de Bruin et al, 2015; Murray et al, 2015). In only one patient (P2 in de Bruin et al, 2015), a malignant tumor was reported,
indicating that XRCC4 impairment is not strongly associated with predisposition to malignancy. Taken together, these reports, including our
own, are concordant in showing that, quite unexpectedly, mutations in XRCC4, a crucial component of the NHEJ machinery, are not associated
with immunodeficiency in humans. In mice, genetic knockout (KO) of XRCC4, as well as LIG4, leads to embryonic lethality in conjunction with
massive apoptotic death of neuronal cells in the nervous system (Frank et al, 1998; Gao et al, 1998; Chistiakov et al, 2009). Based on this
observation in mice, human XRCC4 mutations associated with primordial dwarfism have been deemed as hypomorphic alleles (Murray et al, 2015).
However, most of the identified XRCC4 mutations are nonsense or frameshift changes, predicting the synthesis of truncated proteins. Although
the persistence of small amounts of mutant protein retaining some residual activity cannot be excluded, neither we nor others were able to
detect any trace of truncated XRCC4 species, at least in patients' fibroblasts. This does not exclude the possibility that, in other cell
types, mRNA decay or stability of the truncated protein may be different and these cells may utilize the truncated protein more effectively.
In contrast with previous reports suggesting that LIG4 is unstable in the absence of its partner protein XRCC4 (Ghezraoui et al, 2014) and
is strongly reduced in XRCC4-mutant patients (Murray et al, 2015), we showed that LIG4 is moderately reduced in fibroblasts from our
patients; this evidence could explain their milder phenotype. In our patients, undetectable levels of XRCC4 caused neither immunologic
defects nor increased susceptibility to cancer, and were instead associated with a relatively mild syndrome, including moderately severe
congenital malformations, and a slowly progressive, adult-onset combination of cardiac failure, due to dilating cardiomyopathy, and
neurological impairment characterized by cerebellar failure, cognitive arrest/decline, and behavioral abnormalities. Both patients are now
50 years old, and, albeit under constant tutoring, they still carry on a largely autonomous daily lifestyle. Interestingly,
neurodegeneration with ataxic features has been associated with defects in factors involved in signaling of DNA DSB damage, for instance
ataxia-teleangiectasia (A-T) syndrome (OMIM #208900), a complex condition characterized by ataxia, teleangiectasiae, immunologic deficit,
and predisposition to malignancy, caused by ATM mutations; or ataxia-telangiectasia-like syndrome (OMIM #604391), a phenocopy of, but milder
than, A-T syndrome, caused by MRE11A mutations. Mutations in APTX, encoding aprataxin, cause autosomal recessive ataxia-oculomotor apraxia
syndrome (OMIM #208920). Aprataxin seems to play an ill-defined role in regulation of NHEJ and detection of ssDNA breaks, by interacting
with XRCC1, XRCC4 (Clements et al, 2004; Ahel et al, 2006), or PARP1 (Harris et al, 2009). In addition, defects in the repair of ssDNA
breaks also cause neurodegenerative diseases such as spino-cerebellar ataxia with axonal neuropathy 1, SCAN1 (OMIM #607251), caused by
mutations in tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase 1 (TDP1), and microcephaly, seizures and developmental delay, MCSZ syndrome (OMIM #613402),
caused by mutations in polynucleotide kinase phosphatase (PNKP). Notably, both SCAN1 and MCSZ show neither immunodeficiency nor cancer
susceptibility. Thus, preferential involvement of the brain, particularly the cerebellum, is an intriguing feature of many disorders caused
by defects of DNA repair pathways, including the very one presented here. Since HR is active only in proliferating cells, it is reasonable
to hypothesize that a defect in the constitutively active NHEJ pathway can preferentially reduce the efficiency of DNA DBS repair in non-
proliferating, post-mitotic, highly specialized cells, such as neurons (and cardiomyocytes). This consideration, together with evidence that
NHEJ efficiency declines with aging (Vyjayanti & Rao, 2006; Vaidya et al, 2014), may explain the predominantly neurological manifestations
of defective DNA repair disorders, including those associated with abolition of XCCR4. Our study on patient-derived XRCC4m/m fibroblasts
demonstrated that the efficiency of IR-induced DNA DSBs repair was significantly reduced, but not abolished, during a 24-h long monitoring,
and at the 24th-h endpoint, it was very similar to that of XRCC4wt cells. As increased HR activity of XRCC4m/m fibroblasts during the cell
cycle G2 phase involved a very small fraction of cell population, we hypothesized the activation of other compensatory mechanisms. An
alternative end-joining pathway is reported to become active when classical NHEJ is chemically or genetically compromised, operating as
backup, hence called “backup non-homologous end joining” (B-NHEJ) or “alternative NHEJ” (A-NHEJ) (Wang et al, 2006; Iliakis, 2009). In in
vitro studies, genetic defects of the NHEJ core component are associated with increased radiosensitivity and decreased repair efficiency of
IR-induced DSBs. Defects in DNA-PKcs, as observed in the tumor cell line M059J, which lacks the catalytic subunit of DNA-PK, impair the
efficiency of DNA repair, particularly for a decrease in DSB rejoined by fast kinetics. However, in these cells the level of residual DNA
damage measured after long repair times is reduced (by 50% or less) compared with that measured in DNA-PKcs-proficient M059K cells (DiBiase
et al, 2000; Bee et al, 2013). Similar results were obtained using mutant cells deficient in Ku, LIG4, or other components of classical NHEJ
(Kabotyanski et al, 1998). These results suggested that cells with compromised C-NHEJ are capable of rejoining DNA DSBs, albeit through a
repair pathway operating with slow kinetics, by some vicarious DSB rejoining process. Several laboratories have identified factors
participating in the alternative pathway of NHEJ: for instance, LIG3 (DNA ligase III; Simsek & Jasin, 2011), heretofore known only for its
role in BER, was considered the candidate ligase required for A-NHEJ (Wang et al, 2005); PARP1 (poly ADP-ribose polymerase 1) and XRCC1
(X-ray cross complementing gene 1), two proteins known to interact with LIG3 during BER, were subsequently found to be involved in A-NHEJ
(Audebert et al, 2004; Wang et al, 2006; Cheng et al, 2011). PARP1 is presumed to compete with Ku for binding to broken DNA ends, thereby
dictating the pathway of choice (Wang et al, 2006; Cheng et al, 2011), whereas XRCC1 appears to act as a chaperone for LIG3 (Caldecott
et al, 1994). The A-NHEJ is thought to operate with much lower fidelity than C-NHEJ and has been implicated in oncogenic genome
rearrangements, mainly chromosomal translocations, both in cancer and in cultured cells (Bétermier et al, 2014). In our experiments, we
demonstrated that the A-NHEJ is active only in XRCC4m/m cells, whereas it did not contribute to the DNA end rejoining in XRCC4wt cells.
However, in mutant fibroblasts treated with the A-NHEJ inhibitor, 3′-AB, DNA repair capability was significantly decreased but not
abolished, showing that, at least in those experimental conditions, XRCC4m/m cells still retain the capability of rejoining more than 50% of
DSBs induced by irradiation. Taken together, our findings suggest that some vicarious mechanisms, only partly relying on the activation of
the A-NHEJ pathway, make the XRCC4 protein remarkably dispensable in humans, at least to warrant immunologic proficiency and anti-cancer
surveillance. Informed consent for participation in this study was obtained from all investigated subjects, in agreement with the
Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Ethical Committee of the Foundation IRCCS (Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico)
Institute of Neurology “Carlo Besta”. Total genomic DNA was extracted by standard methods from peripheral blood lymphocytes. Total RNA was
isolated from cell pellets using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) and reverse-transcribed to GoTaq® 2-Step RT-qPCR System (Promega), following
manufacturer recommendations. XRCC4 expression in cDNA samples obtained from DNase-treated mRNA was determined using reverse transcription
quantitative PCR (qPCR) with SYBR Green chemistry and the following specific XRCC4 primers: 207F: TGGACTGGGACAGTTTCTGA, 270R:
TCAGTTCACCAACATATTTCCC; 387F: GATGTCTCATTCAGACTTGGTTCCT, 458R: AAGTTCTCTAATGACTTCAGCTGGG. 207F: TGGACTGGGACAGTTTCTGA, 270R:
TCAGTTCACCAACATATTTCCC; 387F: GATGTCTCATTCAGACTTGGTTCCT, 458R: AAGTTCTCTAATGACTTCAGCTGGG. GAPDH level was used for normalization. Whole-
exome sequencing was performed on genomic DNA from II-1 and II-3 by “BGI-Shenzhen”. The DNA sample was randomly processed in fragments
between 200 and 300 bp. In-solution targeted enrichment of exonic sequences was performed using the 64 Mb Exon Capture kit from Nimblgen.
Then, the captured library was sequenced on Hiseq2000 platform (Illumina). GeneTalk (www.gene-talk.de) and Ingenuity Variant Analysis
(www.ingenuity.com) web applications were used for variant filtering. Polyphen2, SIFT, and Mutation taster were used for pathogenicity
prediction of amino acid changes. Primary fibroblasts, obtained by standard protocols from skin biopsies from patients and control subjects,
were cultured in high glucose DMEM (Euroclone) supplemented with 10% FBS/FCS, 1% L-glutamine, HEPES 20 mM, and 1% MEM non-essential amino
acids, in a 37°C incubator with 5% CO2 and 100% humidity. All cells were tested for mycoplasma contamination. Analyses were performed at
passages 3–7. Approximately 106 cells from patients and controls were trypsinized, pelleted, and solubilized. SDS–polyacrylamide gel of
50 μg protein/lane and Western blot analysis were performed using antibodies against XRCC4 (Santa Cruz sc-8285; Abcam Ab145), PARP-1
(Roche), LIG4 (GenTex GTX108820), and GAPDH (Millipore) as loading control. Immune-visualization was carried out by chemiluminescence-based
ECL kit (GE Healthcare). 35S-radiolabeled in vitro-translated products corresponding to full length and the R225* ORFs were obtained with
TNT Quick Coupled Transcription/Translation Systems (Promega). Two twins with an adult-onset encephalocardiomyopathy were found to carry a
homozygous nonsense mutation in XRCC4. XRCC4 functions in non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) repair of double-strand DNA breaks; inactivation
of murine Xrcc4 results in a lethal phenotype with widespread neural apoptosis. XRCC4 transcript was profoundly reduced, and the protein was
undetectable in patient tissues/cells. Functional assays on mutant cells demonstrated reduction, but not abolition, of the ability to repair
double-strand DNA breaks. Accordingly, patients reached adulthood and have no sign of immunodeficiency or malignancy. These results indicate
redundant or compensatory mechanisms to the virtual absence of XRCC4 in humans. XRCC4 seems dispensable in humans, at least to warrant
immunologic proficiency and anti-cancer surveillance. Gamma irradiation was performed at the Department of Oncological and Surgical Sciences
of the University Padova Medical Center with a 137Cs source (dose rate 2.8 Gy/min). Cells (20,000/sample) were seeded on 35-mm μ-Dish thin-
bottomed Petri dishes for high-end microscopy (Ibidi) in random positions 48 h before irradiation and incubated in fresh medium for
different repair times. When indicated, PARP-1 inhibitor (10 mM 3′-aminobenzamide in DMSO, Sigma-Aldrich) or 0.1% DMSO was added 24 h before
irradiation and maintained throughout experiments. At 0.5, 2, 6 and 24 h after gamma irradiation, cells were rinsed with 1× PBS and fixed
with 4% formaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS for 15 min at 37°C. Cells were then washed twice with PBS and permeabilized with 0.2% Triton
X-100 in PBS at 37°C for 10 min. Non-specific binding sites were masked with horse serum (10% in PBS) for 1 h at room temperature. Samples
were incubated for 2 h at room temperature with anti-γ-H2AX (Ser139) (Millipore, Clone JBW301, 1:100), anti-RAD51 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
H-92: sc-8349, lot. G0811, 1:100), and anti-CENP-F (BD Bioscience, 610768, Clone 11, 1:100 or Abcam, ab5, lot. GR73067-3, 1:300) primary
antibodies followed by three washings in PBS + 0.05% Tween-20. The cells were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with Alexa Fluor 488
goat anti-mouse and Alexa Fluor 594 donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (1:250, Life Technologies), washed three times with PBS + 0.05%
Tween-20 and once with milli-Q water. Coverslips were mounted on samples with Vectashield medium (Vector Laboratories) containing 0.2 μg/ml
of DAPI. Samples were acquired by Z-plane stack scanning (500 nm thickness) using a Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems)
equipped with 40× oil immersion objective. γ-H2AX and RAD51 foci were scored by eye by two different researchers from 100 nuclei for each
time-point in at least three independent experiments. The nuclear fluorescence intensity of CENP-F protein was used to discriminate the
γ-H2AX and RAD51 foci in the S-G2 and G1 cells as previously described (Bee et al, 2013). Cell cycle distribution of irradiated and non-
irradiated control cells was assessed in three independent experiments by flow cytometry analysis of DNA content following staining with
50 μg/μl of propidium iodide (Sigma-Aldrich), as previously described (Bee et al, 2013). Data were collected from 25,000 cells/sample using
a BD FACSCanto™ II flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson) and analyzed by ModFit LT software (Verity Software House). Statistical analyses were
performed using Primer of Biostatistics software (McGraw-Hill), and figures were prepared with Corel Draw X6 (Corel corporation). The
variance, assessed by ANOVA test, was similar between the groups that were compared. We thank Mingyan Fang (BGI) for her help and logistic
support. We acknowledge the “Cell lines and DNA Bank of Paediatric Movement Disorders and Neurodegenerative Diseases” of the Telethon
Network of Genetic Biobanks (grant GTB12001J) and the EurobiobanK Network. This work was supported by the Pierfranco and Luisa Mariani
Foundation, Telethon Grant GGP11011, and ERC Advanced Grant FP7-322424. LB and FC analyzed mutant fibroblasts under the supervision of RC
and LC. AN performed genetic screening and protein characterization. AZ, CL, and MZ evaluated the patients and wrote the case report. PdA
performed haplotypes analysis. DG analyzed exome-sequencing data and monitored genetic/protein analyses. DG and MZ wrote the manuscript. LB,
AN, AZ, FC, PdA, RC, CL, LC, and MZ critically revised the manuscript for important intellectual content. The authors declare that they have
no conflict of interest. http://omim.org/entry http://www.biobanknetwork.org http://www.mrc-mbu.cam.ac.uk http://www.mitopedia.org
http://www.unipd.it/international-area/departments/departments/department-biology Supplementary Figures Supplementary Table S1 Review
Process File
