Major degloving injuries of the lower limb are daunting lesions because they are relatively rare and always produce larger soft tissue
defects than direct visual inspection that could be predicted in the emergency room. Enough body of the medical literature supports the
excision of the avulsed tissue and replaces it as a full-thickness skin graft. However, almost paradoxically, there is little support for
the use of pristine large full-thickness skin graft in the treatment of these lesions. This article focuses on the use of tangential
hydrodissection (VERSAJET Hydrosurgery System, Smith & Nephew) in preparing the avulsed wound and defatting of a large piece of full
thickness skin graft taken from the abdomen by using a standard panniculectomy excision pattern and securing survival and integration of the
graft with negative pressure wound therapy. The patient, a 60-year-old obese and diabetic woman, suffered a roadside accident producing a
degloving injury of her leg and was treated with the presented method; the final result was excellent and the reduction of the abdominal
panniculus was a bonus. Major degloving injuries of the lower limb are high-energy trauma produced by abrasion, torsion and compression .
Depending on the duration and intensity of each of the offending forces, the resulting injury consists of an open abraded wound of variable
depth and surface , an area of undermining of the soft-tissue envelope affecting a part or the full circumference of the limb in a single or
multiple plane and variable degrees of muscle crushing with or without bone fractures. The hallmark of this type of lesion is the avulsion
of the septal and muscular perforator, which devascularises an important part of the skin envelope. The typical patient is a pedestrian run
over by a heavy vehicle like a bus or a truck. The general rules of acute wound debridement applies, meaning that every bit of a tissue that
is physically disorganized or grossly impregnated with dirt or debris should be liberally excised and the wound should be copiously
irrigated. After these maneuvers are successfully performed, the surgeon is still left with one difficult decision regarding the degloved
skin-envelope, i.e. to estimate which part of this flap will survive as a randomly perfuse flap, and hence leave it alone, and which part is
going to die, and try to rescue it by defatting and reapplying it as a full thickness graft, immediately or in a delayed fashion . Because
visual inspection is very unreliable in judging the viability of the degloved flaps and intra-venous flouroscein, it may over-estimate the
line of demarcation between viable and non-viable skin , the “wait and see” policy could be a safe decision. As soon as a visible line of
demarcation is clear, the surgeon should proceed to reconstructive steps, aimed at obtaining the best possible skin graft for the best
possible wound bed. This article concentrates on achieving these goals through incorporating the technique of tangential hydrodissection in
preparing the wound and harvesting a large piece of full thickness skin graft from the abdomen and securing the survival and integration of
the graft with negative pressure wound therapy. A 60-year-old woman suffered a roadside accident. Her right leg was run over by one of the
track tires and sustained a non-circumferential multi-planar degloving injury (Fig. 1); her left foot was abraded below the medial
malleolus. The case at presentation She was admitted and underwent debridement of devitalized tissues, but because a clear hypo-perfused
area of the skin could not be documented, the leg wound was thoroughly washed, sutured and drained. The patient was obese and diabetic, so
the delayed full-thickness necrosis of skin and subcutaneous tissue affected almost the full length of the medial, posterior and lateral
areas of the right leg, fortunately spearing a narrow bridge of skin in front of the tibia. After one week, the necrotic tissue was
surgically removed and the wound responded favorably to daily changes of dressing under intravenous penicillin and gentamicin. Two weeks
later the recipient bed was clean, covered with early granulation and no clinical sign of residual necrosis or infection. The final
debridement was achieved with a method commonly referred to as tangential hydrodissection, by using the VERSAJET Hydrosurgery System (Smith
& Nephew) connected to a 45°/8 mm hand piece and power settings of 5 to 7 (Fig. 2). Intraoperative view of the wound being prepared with
VERSAJET Hydrosurgery System In the same surgical procedure, a full-thickness single piece skin graft was harvested from the lower abdomen
by using a standard panniculectomy excision pattern and the same Hydrosurgery System was used for defatting the graft. The abdominal donor
site was directly closed with a minimal undermining and without an umbilical transposition. The skin graft was tailored to the defects and
sutured in place under mild tension with very few stab incisions to allow fluid passage (Fig. 3). A full-thickness single piece skin graft
harvested from the lower abdomen was defatted with VERSAJET and sutured in place A gauze-based negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT) system
(Renasys EZ Plus, Smith & Nephew) at 90 mm Hg continuous pressure was used for graft-recipient site dressing. The initial dressing was left
undisturbed for 5 days, when the graft was uniformly pink, adherent and with a healthy capillary refill. Another 5 days of NPWT were added
and the local treatment with zinc paste bandage (Varolast, Hartmann) was continued up to 2 weeks when the patient was allowed to resume
walking. She stayed in the hospital for a total of 55 days and was discharged fully ambulatory. The patient considered the cosmetic
appearance of his lower limb excellent (Fig. 4) and the reduction of the abdominal panniculus a bonus. In the past 3 years she did not
experience any breakdown, nor did she develop contracture or suffered limitation of her range of motion. Appearance of the right leg 5
months after the accident We chose to cover the wound with a full-thickness skin graft taken from the abdomen for several reasons, the main
reason was to produce a minimum donor site morbidity, avoiding the lengthy secondary healing process of split thickens skin graft donor
areas in a diabetic patient. Beside the fact that a full-thickness skin graft will give a much better cosmetic and functional result, there
is also a much subtle difference between thick and thin skin grafts in the way the dermal surface is processed, while the universal use of
electric dermatome makes the harvest of a split skin graft an almost standardized procedure, with a sleek dermal face every time. The free
hand defatting of a large thick graft with blades and scissors is less likely to achieve the same surface quality. This most certainly
affects the early connection between graft and host vessels . To overcome this drawback we used the VERSAJET Hydrosurgery System, which is a
tangential cutting and suction instrument, which uses a high-speed jet stream of saline solution coupled with the Venturi effect . Because
all the power is generated at the tip of the hand piece, there is no effort on the part of the surgeon and, at least for large grafts, the
defatting process exceeds in speed and quality the traditional methods. The preparation of the graft-bed should be equally flawless.
Compared with the classic cold knife degranulation technique, VERSAJET-powered tangential hydrodissection offers few remarkable advantages:
in terms of ergonomics it allows the highest possible degree of flexibility and precision, it can effectively remove necrotic tissue from
dermis, subcutaneous fat, muscle fascia or bone, being able to conform to any shape of the defect and generate a smooth transition between
tissues of different resistance . The wound bed can be thoroughly cleaned, by avoiding recontamination, preserving healthy tissue and
minimizing blood loss. A gauze-based negative pressure wound therapy system was used for the final graft-recipient site dressings. Every
beneficial influence NPWT has on a regular wound, including an increasing perfusion, micro-deformation induced cellular proliferation and
maintenance of wound homeostasis is also beneficial for the graft take. For graft contouring and immobilization, fluid removal, insulation
qualities and resistance to accidental deterioration NPWT is much better than any conventional dressing. Based on the excellent result
obtained in this patient, we think that the presented method is a good alternative to delay a full-thickness auto-grafting of cryopreserved
avulsed skin or to the use of Integra in combinations with meshed split-thickness skin grafts in patients with redundant abdominal skin.
VERSAJET could be a very useful tool in obtaining a full-thickness skin preparation from the degloved skin-envelope. Conflict of Interest
None. Funding None. Ethical Approval: Not required.
