Parvovirus B19 virus commonly causes subclinical infection, but it can prove fatal to the fetus during pregnancy and cause severe anemia in
an adult with hemolytic diseases. We present the case of a woman with autoimmune hemolytic anemia who was diagnosed with parvovirus
B19-induced transient aplastic crisis during her second trimester of pregnancy and faced the high risk of both fetal and maternal
complications related to this specific viral infection. To the best of our knowledge, the experience of successful intravenous
immunoglobulin treatment for B19 virus infection during pregnancy, as in our case, is limited. A 28-year-old and 20-week pregnant Chinese
woman with genetically confirmed alpha-thalassemia trait was diagnosed with cold antibody autoimmune hemolytic anemia and suffered from
transient aplastic crisis caused by B19 virus infection. She received intravenous immunoglobulin treatment to reduce the risk of hydrops
fetalis. Her peripheral blood reticulocyte percentage recovered, but anemia persisted, so she underwent several courses of high dose
intravenous dexamethasone for controlling her underlying hemolytic problem. Finally, her hemoglobin levels remained stable with no need of
erythrocyte transfusion, and a healthy baby boy was naturally delivered. Parvovirus B19 virus infection should be considered when a sudden
exacerbation of anemia occurs in a patient with hemolytic disease, and the possible fetal complications caused by maternal B19 virus
infection during pregnancy should not be ignored. Close monitoring and adequate management can keep both mother and fetus safe. Most
parvovirus B19 virus (B19 virus for short in this report) infection causes asymptomatic or only mild illness, such as erythema infectiosum,
polyarthropathy syndrome or transient reticulocytopenia in healthy adults or children, but can sometimes be responsible for life-threatening
diseases. The cytopathic effect of B19 virus in patients with rapid erythrocytes production results in profuse extinction of
proerythroblasts. Failure of differentiation from proerythroblast into later stage erythroid precursors leads to transient aplastic crisis
(TAC) . When B19 virus infection occurs during pregnancy, transplacental transmission of B19 virus to the fetus can induce hydrops fetalis
or fetal loss due to severe anemia and cardiac failure . Here we report a rare case of severe anemic crisis due to B19 virus infection in a
20-week pregnant woman with alpha-thalassemia trait and possible pregnancy-related cold agglutinin hemolysis. This 28-year-old and 20-week
pregnant Chinese woman with genetically confirmed alpha-thalassemia trait and a current obstetric record of gravida 3, para 0, artificial
abortion 1 and ectopic pregnancy 1 (G3P0AA1E1 by Gravida/para/abortus (GPA) system) presented to our emergency unit (EU) due to headache,
chills, fever and general soreness for one day. At our EU, her physical examination revealed a fever up to 38.5°C, mild tachypnea with a
respiratory rate up to 21 breaths/min and bilateral lower back knocking pain. Her obstetric ultrasound revealed 20 weeks gestational age,
normal placenta location and a fetal heart beat between 140 and 150/min. No vaginal bleeding was noted. Her laboratory data showed pyuria
(urine white blood cell count 30 to 50/high power field) and severe peripheral blood pancytopenia: white blood cell (WBC) count 2200/mm3
with an absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of 1780/mm3, hemoglobin 5.5g/dL, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 119.4fl and platelet count
116,000/mm3. Aggregation of erythrocytes (Figure 1) and low reticulocyte percentage (0.1%) were detected in peripheral blood smear. Both
direct and indirect antiglobulin tests were strongly positive for antibodies against erythrocytes. The autoantibody was found to be of the
cold type. A subsequent laboratory investigation revealed 1:32(+) of cold hemagglutinin titer, raised lactate dehydrogenase (314U/L) and low
levels of complement 3 (55.5mg/dL) and complement 4 (10mg/dL).Figure 1 Peripheral blood smear. Aggregation of erythrocytes was noted in the
peripheral blood smear just before dexamethasone treatment. Peripheral blood smear. Aggregation of erythrocytes was noted in the peripheral
blood smear just before dexamethasone treatment. Her initial bone marrow cytology showed myeloid hyperplasia and only very few erythroid
precursors with erythroblasts in abnormal megaloblastic change (Figure 2), some of which presented with pseudopods or ‘dog ears’ (Figure 3),
and almost no erythroid maturation beyond basophilic normoblasts. Her bone marrow biopsy revealed scattered erythroblasts displaying
homogeneous ground glass intranuclear viral inclusions (Figure 4) and positive nuclear immunostaining of B19 virus (Figure 5). Polymerase
chain reaction for B19 virus DNA was positive in specimens from her bone marrow, plasma and nasal cavity. Antibodies against Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV) were not checked because she did not present with the symptoms and signs of infectious mononucleosis or lymphoproliferative
disorders present in most reported cases of EBV-associated hemolytic anemia.Figure 2 Cytology of bone marrow. The yellow arrow indicates a
giant pronormoblast in the bone marrow.Figure 3 Cytology of bone marrow. The yellow arrow indicates a giant pronormoblast with ‘dog ear’
cytoplasmic projections in the bone marrow.Figure 4 Bone marrow core biopsy. Parvovirus B19 intranuclear viral inclusions (clear area)
leading to chromatin marginalization to the vicinity of the nuclear membrane within two pronormoblasts indicated by the yellow arrows.Figure
5 Immunohistochemical staining of bone marrow core biopsy. Immunohistochemical staining for parvovirus B19 using monoclonal antibody NCL-
PARVO (NovocastraTM, Leica Microsystems, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom) specific for viral antigens VP1 and VP2 in bone marrow core
biopsy specimen. Cytology of bone marrow. The yellow arrow indicates a giant pronormoblast in the bone marrow. Cytology of bone marrow. The
yellow arrow indicates a giant pronormoblast with ‘dog ear’ cytoplasmic projections in the bone marrow. Bone marrow core biopsy. Parvovirus
B19 intranuclear viral inclusions (clear area) leading to chromatin marginalization to the vicinity of the nuclear membrane within two
pronormoblasts indicated by the yellow arrows. Immunohistochemical staining of bone marrow core biopsy. Immunohistochemical staining for
parvovirus B19 using monoclonal antibody NCL-PARVO (NovocastraTM, Leica Microsystems, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom) specific for
viral antigens VP1 and VP2 in bone marrow core biopsy specimen. TAC caused by B19 virus infection in a pregnant woman with cold antibody
autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) was diagnosed. She received intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) injection (CSL Limited, Parkville,
Australia), 0.4gm/Kg/day for five days, for eradication of viremia and prophylaxis of occurrence of hydrops fetalis. Although her peripheral
blood reticulocyte percentage increased dramatically after IVIG treatment (Figure 6), her hemolytic anemia did not improve much. In order to
control her autoimmune hemolysis, intravenous high dose dexamethasone (Astar Chem. & Pharm., Hsinchu, Taiwan), 40mg/day for four days, was
prescribed. This treatment was repeated every two weeks for four cycles and then shifted to a monthly oral schedule. She was discharged in a
stable condition after the fourth intravenous treatment and received careful follow-up study in our outpatient clinic. No more erythrocytes
were transfused after the fifth course of high dose dexamethasone (Figure 7) in spite of persistent mild anemia. During her hospitalization
and subsequent outpatient clinic visits, obstetric ultrasound did not reveal any evidence of fetal anemia and hydrops fetalis. Four months
later, a normal looking healthy baby boy (Apgar score 8 at one minute and 9 at five minutes, body weight 3240gm) was naturally delivered
with vacuum extraction aid. After delivery of the baby, her AIHA quickly resolved.Figure 6 Rapid response of intravenous human
immunoglobulin treatment. Effects of intravenous human immunoglobulin (IVIG) on reticulocytes percentage in peripheral blood during
treatment course. The blue arrow stands for day one of IVIG 0.4gm/kg/day for five constitutive days.Figure 7 Hemoglobin correction and
dexamethasone treatment. Effects of pulse high dose dexamethasone treatment on hemoglobin level. The green triangles stand for day one of
dexamethasone 40mg/day for four constitutive days. The red squares stand for erythrocytes transfusion. Rapid response of intravenous human
immunoglobulin treatment. Effects of intravenous human immunoglobulin (IVIG) on reticulocytes percentage in peripheral blood during
treatment course. The blue arrow stands for day one of IVIG 0.4gm/kg/day for five constitutive days. Hemoglobin correction and dexamethasone
treatment. Effects of pulse high dose dexamethasone treatment on hemoglobin level. The green triangles stand for day one of dexamethasone
40mg/day for four constitutive days. The red squares stand for erythrocytes transfusion. Whether our patient’s B19 virus in her second
trimester pregnancy was a new infection or a reactivation of a persisting previous infection cannot be surely answered, since the
persistence of infection in the bone marrow has been reported in immunocompetent individuals several years after primary infection . B19
virus infection causes a five to 10-day cessation of erythrocytic production, but the life span of normal erythrocytes is about 120 days, so
B19 virus infection usually is asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic with self-limited anemia in people without hemolytic diseases . In
patients with expanding erythrocyte production caused by the shortened life span of erythrocytes due to an underlying hemolytic problem,
such as spherocytosis, sickle cell anemia, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, thalassemia and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, B19
virus infection could induce TAC with severe anemia . Thrombocytopenia and neutropenia have also been reported in patients during or after
B19 virus infection . Most patients with TAC had a good prognosis after erythrocyte transfusion and adequate monitoring until their bone
marrow recovered, while IVIG is recommended for patients at risk of severe complications or with immunodeficiency . Rapid efficacious
reticulocyte recovery and hemoglobin correction after only one IVIG course has also been reported with only a few side effects . Maternally
administrated IVIG therapy during pregnancy for improving maternal and fetal outcome in severe B19 virus-induced disorders has also been
reported in two cases without obvious complications . Weekly fetal ultrasound examination including estimation of middle cerebral artery
peak systolic velocity (MCA-PSV) for timely detection of possible fetal anemia and hydrops fetalis during a post-exposure period of 12 to 20
weeks was highly recommended . In our patient, a 20-week pregnant woman with alpha-thalassemia trait and autoimmune hemolytic anemia, B19
virus infection not only caused TAC in the mother, but could also have led to severe anemia, hydrops and even death of the fetus, as
cautioned by experts when maternal infection occurred between 17 and 24 weeks of gestation . Therefore we arranged immediate IVIG treatment
in addition to erythrocyte transfusion. Our patient responded well to IVIG treatment since her reticulocyte dramatically recovered. However,
her anemia due to cold agglutinin disease persisted. So far, only corticosteroids and rituximab (both in pregnancy risk class C) were
considered eligible for treating cold agglutinin disease during the third trimester of pregnancy. Although corticosteroid treatment in the
first trimester is well-known to increase the risk of fetal orofacial clefts, and the safety of mother and fetus receiving corticosteroids
for treating idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura in the third trimester of pregnancy, even with high dose intravenous methylprednisolone,
was previously confirmed , the experience of corticosteroid pulse therapy in the second trimester was limited to the best of our knowledge.
However, long term inhibition of neonatal B-lymphocyte development caused by maternal administration of rituximab in the third trimester of
pregnancy has been reported . Even though the immune impairment was reversible and no infection-related complications took place according
to the literature, our patient refused rituximab injection for fear of damage to the baby. In spite of the generally poor effect of
corticosteroid therapy in treating cold antibody AIHA , our high dose dexamethasone policy starting in our patient’s second trimester of
pregnancy controlled her cold agglutinin disease satisfactorily, without notable side effects, in both the mother and her baby. B19 virus
infection in a pregnant woman with increased erythropoietic demand from alpha-thalassemia trait and cold AIHA resulted in a TAC in the
mother and put the fetus at risk of development of hydrops fetalis. Prompt IVIG injection eradicated the virus rapidly, resolved TAC in the
mother and prevented further dangerous fetal infection. Supportive erythrocytes transfusion and intensive high dose dexamethasone treatment
maintained hemoglobin at stable levels. Safe delivery of a healthy baby was happily achieved. Both my husband and I felt satisfactorily
about the rapid recovery of my hematopoietic function and the safe delivery of a healthy baby boy. We would like to express our great
appreciation to our doctors for their efficient and correct diagnosis and prompt management. Although the rather expensive intravenous
immunoglobulin was not reimbursed for transient aplastic crisis according to the general health insurance policy in our country and we had
to pay for it by ourselves, we thought it was worthwhile since nothing was more important than our health. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review
by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia Absolute neutrophil count Epstein-Barr virus Emergency unit
Gravida/para/abortus Intravenous immunoglobulin Middle cerebral artery peak systolic velocity Mean corpuscular volume Transient aplastic
crisis White blood cell Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions CSC was the
chief care giver and provided our patient’s obstetric examination data. WYW arranged polymerase chain reaction test for viral DNA. JSM
instructed intravenous immunoglobulin therapy and took care of the newborn baby. HFS performed the histological examination of bone marrow
biopsy. FSF reviewed the bone marrow smear, and analyzed and interpreted the patient data regarding the hematological disease. CCC did the
literature review. CCC and FSF were major contributors in writing the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Authors’ information FS Fan is a qualified hematologist and oncologist in Taiwan. Dr Fan is an associated professor of internal medicine in
National Yang Ming Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, and the chief of both the Division of Hematology/Oncology and Department of Internal
Medicine of Ministry of Health and Welfare Feng Yuan Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan, Republic of China. We thank our patient who provides us the
opportunity to report this rare and valuable medical experience.
