Periosteal chondrosarcoma (PC) is a rare low-grade malignant cartilaginous tumor originating on the bone surface. Wide surgical resection is
the recommended treatment. Prognosis is usually good if surgery is adequate. Metastasis is late and very rare. We present the clinical,
radiographic, and pathological features of a PC accompanied with fibular cortical invasion in a 30-year-old woman. Wide resection was
performed at presentation, but a whole-body positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) examination 10 months after operation
showed multiple bone metastases (MBM) especially in the spine, pelvis, bilateral femurs, and humeri without local recurrence. To the best of
our knowledge, the present report is the first concerning a PC with so extensive postoperative MBM but without local recurrence. PC is a
rare low-grade malignant cartilaginous tumor originating on the bone surface, accounting for less than 2% of all chondrosarcomas and about
0.2% of all bone tumors . Wide surgical resection is the recommended treatment. Prognosis is usually good if surgery is adequate. Metastasis
is late and very rare . We report a grade 2 PC with cortical invasion in the left proximal fibula of a 30-year-old woman. MBM happened
especially in the spine, pelvis, bilateral femurs, and humeri in the absence of local recurrence at 10 months after operation. A 30-year-old
woman presented with a 1-year history of a gradually enlarging surface lesion on the posterolateral aspect of left proximal shank. She
denied the history of infection, major traumatic injury, and familial history of cancer. Physical examination revealed a hard, painless,
motionless swelling on the posterolateral aspect of the left proximal fibula. The overlying skin and local temperature was normal. The left
lower extremity demonstrated full range of motion without neurovascular deficits. All laboratory data were within normal limits. Plain
radiograph showed a mass with ‘popcorn’ and ‘smoke ring’ pattern of calcification on the posterolateral aspect of the left proximal fibula.
The erosion of underlying cortex was not obvious (Figure 1A, B). A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the knees was done to assess the
extent and anatomical position of the mass. MRI showed a vaguely lobulated solid mass measuring 5.5 × 5.0 × 4.5 cm on the posterolateral
aspect of the left proximal fibula. The mass exhibited homogeneous low signal intense on T1-weight image (Figure 2A) and high signal intense
on T2-weight images (Figure 2B,C). Axial T1-weight MRI with fat suppression showed cortical invasion without marrow involvement (Figure 2D).
A whole-body bone scan with technetium-99 m-methylenediphosphonate (Tc-MDP) showed strong accumulation of the radiopharmaceutical agent on
the outside aspect of the left proximal fibula, without strong accumulation in other parts of the body (Figure 3A).Figure 1 Radiographs of
the patient’s left shank. A, B Anteroposterior and lateral views show a bone tumor with a ‘popcorn’ and ‘smoke ring’ pattern of
calcification on the posterolateral aspect of the left proximal fibula, respectively. C, D Postoperative radiographs show the absence of the
left proximal fibula and an anchor inserted the lateral tibial metaphysis.Figure 2 MRI of tumor. A Sagittal T1-weight image shows a
homogeneous hypo-intensity mass on the posterolateral aspect of the left proximal fibula. B, C Sagittal and axial T2-weight images show a
hyper-intensity mass (5.5 × 5.0 × 4.5 cm) with a multilobular configuration. D Axial T1-weighted MRI with fat suppression shows the contrast
enhancement around the tumor and cortical invasion (arrow).Figure 3 The whole-body bone scan of the patient. Bone scan shows strong
accumulation of the radiopharmaceutical agent on the outside aspect of the left proximal fibula preoperatively (A) and in bilateral iliac
regions postoperatively (B) without strong accumulation in other parts of the body. Radiographs of the patient’s left shank. A, B
Anteroposterior and lateral views show a bone tumor with a ‘popcorn’ and ‘smoke ring’ pattern of calcification on the posterolateral aspect
of the left proximal fibula, respectively. C, D Postoperative radiographs show the absence of the left proximal fibula and an anchor
inserted the lateral tibial metaphysis. MRI of tumor. A Sagittal T1-weight image shows a homogeneous hypo-intensity mass on the
posterolateral aspect of the left proximal fibula. B, C Sagittal and axial T2-weight images show a hyper-intensity mass (5.5 × 5.0 × 4.5 cm)
with a multilobular configuration. D Axial T1-weighted MRI with fat suppression shows the contrast enhancement around the tumor and cortical
invasion (arrow). The whole-body bone scan of the patient. Bone scan shows strong accumulation of the radiopharmaceutical agent on the
outside aspect of the left proximal fibula preoperatively (A) and in bilateral iliac regions postoperatively (B) without strong accumulation
in other parts of the body. Considering the above factors, a primary diagnosis of periosteal malignancy was made, including PC, periosteal
osteosarcoma, and parosteal osteosarcoma. Among them, the most likely diagnosis was PC. A wide resection was performed. The intraoperative
result of frozen section examination indicated a PC. According to the pathologic result, an en-bloc resection of the tumor and the left
proximal fibula was performed. The thickness of the excised normal soft tissues surrounding the tumor and the length of excised fibula was
defined 1.0 and 8.5 cm, respectively. At surgery, the common peroneal nerve was protected carefully and the lateral collateral ligament was
reattached to the lateral tibial metaphysis with an anchor. Postoperative pathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of PC.
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining indicated a vaguely lobulated neoplastic hyaline cartilage separated by fibrous bands and focal myxoid
change (Figure 4A). The tumor cells enlarged and presented moderate grade of atypia, including multiple and enlarged nuclei. Mitoses were
rare (Figure 4B). At high magnification, the tumor cells were seen in the Volkman canal (Figure 4C). The resection margins were clear.
According to the above features and the grading system used for conventional intramedullary chondrosarcomas , the histopathological
diagnosis of a PC (grade 2) with cortical invasion was rendered.Figure 4 Histological appearance of tumor (H&E). A Microscopic appearance of
the tissue specimen dissected from the fibula lesion shows a vaguely lobulated neoplastic hyaline cartilage separated by fibrous bands and
focal myxoid change (×40). B High-power photomicrograph shows the enlarged tumor cells with moderate grade of atypia and exhibits multiple,
enlarged grotesque nuclei. Mitoses can be seen (×200). C The tumor cells were seen in the Volkman canal (×200). D, E High-power
photomicrograph of the tissue specimen from the needle biopsy of ilium shows a cartilaginous lesion with hypercellularity and cytologic
atypia (×100, ×200, respectively). Histological appearance of tumor (H&E). A Microscopic appearance of the tissue specimen dissected from
the fibula lesion shows a vaguely lobulated neoplastic hyaline cartilage separated by fibrous bands and focal myxoid change (×40). B High-
power photomicrograph shows the enlarged tumor cells with moderate grade of atypia and exhibits multiple, enlarged grotesque nuclei. Mitoses
can be seen (×200). C The tumor cells were seen in the Volkman canal (×200). D, E High-power photomicrograph of the tissue specimen from the
needle biopsy of ilium shows a cartilaginous lesion with hypercellularity and cytologic atypia (×100, ×200, respectively). The patient has
been followed up for 16 months. Postoperative recovery was uneventful in the initial follow-up (Figure 1C, D). The patient, who was in a bad
physical and mental state, visited our bone tumor clinic with a pain in pelvic region at 10 months after operation. On physical examination,
no clinical results were found except the deep tenderness of sacral region and spine. A whole-body bone scan demonstrated high uptake
especially in the bilateral iliac regions (Figure 3B). In order to further define and assess the extent and anatomical position of
metastasis, PET/CT with 2-fluoro -2-deoxy-d-glucose (F-18 FDG) was recommended to be done. PET/CT showed focal F-18 FDG uptake especially in
the spine, pelvis, bilateral femurs, and humeri, with a maximum SUV of 10.8, but with no signs of local recurrence and no focal F-18 FDG
uptake in the brain, head, neck, chest, and abdomen except a small nodule in the liver which was suspected as a calcification (Figure 5).
The histopathological result of the needle biopsy of the ilium confirmed the diagnosis of MBM of chondrosarcoma, and the grade of metastatic
chondrosarcoma was similar to that of primary PC (Figure 4D, E).Figure 5 PET/CT of the patient. F-18 FDG PET/CT shows multiple bone
metastases especially and symmetrically in the axial skeleton and proximal extremities including bilateral femurs and humeri, with a maximum
SUV of 10.8, but with no signs of local recurrence and no focal F-18 FDG uptake in the brain, head, neck, chest, and abdomen except a small
nodule in the liver which was suspected as a calcification. PET/CT of the patient. F-18 FDG PET/CT shows multiple bone metastases especially
and symmetrically in the axial skeleton and proximal extremities including bilateral femurs and humeri, with a maximum SUV of 10.8, but with
no signs of local recurrence and no focal F-18 FDG uptake in the brain, head, neck, chest, and abdomen except a small nodule in the liver
which was suspected as a calcification. Over the ensuing days, the patient received only the palliative therapy such as analgesic treatment
without chemotherapy or radiotherapy. The patient died at 6 months after the definite diagnosis of MBM. The mean age of PC is about 32 years
(range, 20 to 40 years) . The location mainly exists in the limbs, including the distal femur, proximal tibia, and proximal humerus . PC of
the fibula is still rare. There have been only two case reports about PC of the fibula. Papagelopoulos et al. reported a PC (grade 2) of the
left distal fibula of a 31-year-old man measuring 2 cm in size. Robinson et al. also reported a PC of the right distal fibula and tibia
which induced the underling cortex erosion without marrow invasion of a 64-year-old woman. Lesions of PC are usually 4 to 20 cm in length ;
in most cases, they exceed 5 cm in maximum diameter . Robinson et al. concluded that periosteal chondroid lesions greater than 3 cm in
length should be considered malignant. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy are not effective treatments for PC. Wide surgical resection with a
sufficient margin remains the recommended therapy for this type of bone tumor. Prognosis is usually good if surgery is adequate . The
reported incidence of local recurrence varies from 13% to 28% and depends on the type of surgical treatment . Even when local recurrence
occur, the prognosis is still good if the wide resection can be performed again. Lung metastases, even regional lymph node metastases, have
been reported in published literatures . It is important to note that the majority of lung metastases have inadequate surgical treatment of
the primary lesion and often accompany with local recurrence. Bone metastasis is even rare. There have been few studies about bone
metastasis of chondrosarcoma. Ozaki et al. reported two cases of chondrosarcoma with bone metastasis and found only five cases of
chondrosarcoma with bony metastases by reviewing literatures. They also found all metastases mainly in the axial skeleton or proximal
extremities, and there were only three cases of chondrosarcoma with bony metastases without local recurrence. There were also some
literatures about bony metastases of extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma and clear cell chondrosarcoma . But, there have been no reports
about bony metastases of PC. The mechanism of bony metastases is not very clear. Ozaki et al. believed that the metastasis was in the lumbar
spine and may not have been associated with lung metastases because of the venous connections between the vertebral and other veins and the
absence of a basement membrane in the capillaries of bone marrow. Matsumura et al. described that PC microscopically invaded the underlying
cortex through the Volkman canal in the cortical bone. Andrew et al. reported that although a chondrosarcoma might metastasize late or not
at all, it could invade and spread through veins. Death might also result from relentless local growth and invasion of adjacent vital
structures. Therefore, considering the above literatures, we deduced that tumor cells had spread through the venules in the Volkman canal
before surgery, which could not be tested by the present medical equipments. The microscopic cortical invasion through the Volkman canal and
the spread of tumor cells through veins may be the most likely reason for bony metastases without local recurrence in the present case.
Other cancers which had not been found before and/or after surgery may be another reason. In addition, histological grading (grades 1 to 3)
for chondrosarcomas is related to clinical behavior and prognosis . Grade 1 chondrosarcomas rarely metastasize, while grade 3 chondrosarcmas
develop metastases in 70% of patients . Ozaki et al. concluded that the median interval between surgery for the primary lesion and
metastases was 10 months and the median survival time after metastasis of the patients who could not or did not undergo metastectomy was
5 months (range 0 to 10 months). On the other hand, the survival periods after metastasis of two patients who underwent metastectomy were 15
and 29 months. Papagelopoulos et al. also found patients with grade 2 PC had a worse prognosis than patients with grade 1 PC in the 5-year
metastasis-free survival (50% versus 94%). The prognosis of most PC is usually good, but regular follow-up is still important for the early
finding of local relapse or metastases. F-18 FDG PET/CT is a recommended examination for finding early metastases. Maybe, the patients with
early local metastases will have the opportunity for metastectomy. For the minority of patients with late and multiple metastases, whether
chemotherapy is applicable needs further study. New drugs and other treatments are also urgently needed. In conclusion, we reported a rare
case which has the following features: (1) the location was the proximal fibula, not the common location including distal femur, proximal
tibia, and proximal humerus; (2) ‘smoke ring’ pattern of calcification was shown on lateral roentgenogram which has been rarely reported in
published literatures; (3) cortical erosion was shown by MRI and histopathological examination which was reported only once; (4) the most
important feature is that MBM was shown by F-18 FDG PET/CT especially and symmetrically in the axial skeleton and proximal extremities
including bilateral femurs and humeri; and (5) the period from surgery to postoperative metastases and the survival span of our patient was
10 and 6 months, respectively, which was consistent with the previous reports. Finally, we hope this report will increase the understanding
of this rare bone tumor whose prognosis sometimes deviates from the good expectations. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient’s husband for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. The report was approved by the Ethics Committee of our
hospital. computed tomography 2-fluoro -2-deoxy-d-glucose hematoxylin and eosin multiple bone metastases magnetic resonance imaging
periosteal chondrosarcoma positron emission tomography technetium-99 m-methylene-diphosphonate Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions XWL, LM, SH, and CQT performed the operation. XWL, LM, GJC, SH, and CQT collected
and reviewed the case data. XWL conducted a literature search and wrote the manuscript. XWL, LM, GJC, and SH edited and revised the
manuscript. CQT was the guarantor, proofread, and critically revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We
thank Dr. Wenli Zhang, the attending doctor in Department of Orthopedics at West China Hospital, for his review over the case.
