Breast cancer metastasis to the lung is common. The resection of lung metastases in patients with breast cancer has been controversial.
Here, we present a very rare case of pulmonary and mediastinal lymph node metastases in a patient with breast cancer who had a disease-free
interval (DFI) of more than 33 years. An involved lobectomy and systematic mediastinal lymph node dissection were performed. The
histological examination confirmed pulmonary metastasis from the breast cancer associated with mediastinal lymph nodes metastasis. To our
knowledge, this is the first case reported of a patient with a 33-year DFI after a radical mastectomy for breast cancer who presented with
pulmonary metastasis with mediastinal lymph node involvement. This case indicates that a long-term follow-up of breast cancer patients is
necessary. Systematic mediastinal lymph node dissection should be considered as a prognostic study during pulmonary metastasectomy for
breast cancer. The lung is a common location for the occurrence of malignant metastases. There is a high likelihood of pulmonary metastasis
developing in patients with breast cancer . Patients with isolated lung metastases are rare; usually, local or diffuse lymphangitis with
single or multiple lung metastases are found . Metastatic breast cancer has been defined as a systemic disease and a terminal cancer. The
resection of lung metastases in patients with breast cancer has been controversial . However, discussions on the criteria for pulmonary
metastasectomy seem to have currently reached a consensus : control of the primary malignancy, complete resectability of the pulmonary
lesions, and the presence of no other - extrapulmonary - metastasis. A disease-free interval (DFI) of greater than 10 years has been
reported only occasionally . To our knowledge, the longest DFI reported previously was 27 years . Recently, we diagnosed and treated a very
rare case of pulmonary and mediastinal metastases in a patient with breast cancer who had a 33-year DFI. A 61-year-old woman was admitted to
our hospital with chest pain for 2 months. She underwent a radical mastectomy for right breast cancer 33 years earlier. Chest computed
tomography revealed an approximately 2.3 × 2.3 cm heterogeneous mass with a burr in the left upper lobe of the lung, but no obvious lymph
node swelling was observed in the mediastinum (Figure 1). A preliminary diagnosis of primary lung cancer was made, followed by plans for
surgery.Figure 1Enhancement computed tomography scan of chest reveals a 2.3 × 2.3 cm lobulated tumor in the left lung. Enhancement computed
tomography scan of chest reveals a 2.3 × 2.3 cm lobulated tumor in the left lung. A left thoracotomy was performed, and the tumor was
discovered in the upper lobe of the left lung, which appeared as a gray fish-like tissue. The hilar, mediastinal, and bronchial nodes nearby
were palpable, and there were more swollen lymph nodes. A segmentectomy of the left upper lobe of the lung was performed for tissue
confirmation. A frozen section removed from the mass revealed a malignant epithelial tumor. Then, a left upper lobectomy and systemic lymph
node dissection were performed. However, the final pathology confirmed breast ductal cancer metastasis (Figure 2). The largest diameter of
the tumor was 2 cm, and the left lower paratracheal and subaortic lymph nodes were positive (Figure 3). The immunohistochemical results were
as follows: estrogen receptor + + +, progesterone receptor +, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) + +, and Ki67 (20 to 30%).
Overexpression and amplification of HER2 were detected by FISH. Moreover, the pathological examination showed similar results to those
observed in the specimen 33 years earlier (Figure 4). As a result, a metastatic ductal carcinoma from the breast was diagnosed.
Additionally, the left lower paratracheal and subaortic lymph nodes were positive (Figure 3), but the other lymph nodes were negative.Figure
2Lung postoperative pathology (H & E staining, ×200): metastatic breast ductal carcinoma.Figure 3Mediastinal lymph node postoperative
pathology (H & E staining, ×200): metastatic breast ductal carcinoma.Figure 4Breast cancer postoperative pathology (H & E staining, ×40):
small portion of visible tumors are arranged in the duct gland (infiltrating ductal carcinoma). Lung postoperative pathology (H & E
staining, ×200): metastatic breast ductal carcinoma. Mediastinal lymph node postoperative pathology (H & E staining, ×200): metastatic
breast ductal carcinoma. Breast cancer postoperative pathology (H & E staining, ×40): small portion of visible tumors are arranged in the
duct gland (infiltrating ductal carcinoma). The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery. On the ninth postoperative day, she was
discharged and sent home with oral anastrozole 1 mg/day. The 1-year follow-up was uneventful. Breast cancer has a tendency to relapse after
a long DFI. In a literature search of English and Japanese publications, the longest DFI reported previously was 27 years . We found no case
with a DFI greater than 30 years. In this case, pulmonary and associated mediastinal lymph node metastases occurred in a patient with breast
cancer and a DFI of 33.6 years (403 months), indicating that a long-term follow-up is necessary. Advanced breast cancer often infiltrates
the lungs and pleurae by direct invasion, lymphogenic dissemination, or hematogenic dissemination . What is the mechanism by which breast
cancer cells lie dormant over very long durations in the lung? It may be related to the body’s immunity and the dormancy and activation
mechanisms of breast cancer cells. Tumor dormancy refers to the primary tumor after radical excision; microscopic tumors or trace tumor
cells exist for a certain period of time, with no proliferation or growth. However, these ‘cancer stem cells’ still have the potential for
proliferation, which can occur several years or even decades later, leading to tumor recurrence or distant metastasis . Thus, immunotherapy
or endocrinotherapy is recommended after surgery or radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Breast cancer metastasis to the lung is common.
Discussions concerning lung metastasectomy have been controversial . Today, there is a consensus on the indications for pulmonary metastatic
tumor resection : (1) the primary malignant tumor has been ‘cured,’ (2) imaging suggests that all metastases can be removed, (3) there is no
other - extrapulmonary - metastasis, (4) cardiopulmonary function and the general conditions of the patient are appropriate for pulmonary
metastatic resection, (5) the patient has no serious pleural adhesion, and the mediastinum has no obvious swelling or calcified lymph nodes,
and (6) there is no other more effective treatment. An unresectable primary tumor and predicted incomplete metastasectomy are absolute
contraindications to a lung metastasectomy . Literature reports confirm that most patients with pulmonary metastases who could not undergo a
complete resection had a poor prognosis . The general principle of surgical treatment of pulmonary metastases is complete resection of the
metastases and removal of as little healthy lung tissue as possible, which makes repeated pulmonary metastasectomies still acceptable. The
surgical options are determined by the size, position, and number of metastases . If metastases are located within a single lung segment, a
segmentectomy is appropriate. If multiple metastases are located in the same lobe, or metastases are located near the hilum or hilar lymph
nodes, patients can undergo a lobectomy. If metastases located in the hilar or metastases are larger and infringe upon two lobes, two
lobectomies or a pneumonectomy may be performed . Because pulmonary metastases tend to be located peripherally, a wedge resection is a
common procedure . However, it is difficult clinically to distinguish between primary lung cancer and pulmonary metastasis . Thus, a
lobectomy and systematic mediastinal lymph node dissection were performed in this case. However, the finally pathology confirmed ductal
breast cancer metastasis. Although many consider it unnecessary to perform systematic mediastinal lymph node dissection, its potential
therapeutic effect remains unknown. Thus, whether a systematic mediastinal lymph node dissection should be performed is an interesting
topic. In this case, systematic mediastinal lymph node dissection was performed, which was essentially ‘accidental,’ but so far the effect
has been very good. If a systematic mediastinal lymph node dissection had not been performed, which resulted in tumor residue, a
subsequently poor response to adjuvant chemotherapy and hormone therapy could indicate a poor prognosis. Thus, we suggest that systematic
mediastinal lymph node dissection be considered to determine the prognosis during solitary pulmonary metastasectomy in patients with breast
cancer. Further studies using a prospective design are warranted to evaluate the relationship between systematic mediastinal lymph node
dissection and prognosis. To our knowledge, this is the first case reported of a patient with a 33-year DFI after a radical mastectomy for
breast cancer who presented with pulmonary metastasis with mediastinal lymph node involvement. This case indicates that a long-term follow-
up of breast cancer patients is necessary. Systematic mediastinal lymph node dissection should be considered as a prognostic study during
pulmonary metastasectomy for breast cancer. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and
any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions DY acquired clinical data and performed the manuscript
preparation. YC contributed to the study design and performed operation on the patient. GZ and LZ prepared the manuscript review. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors would like to thank Dr Jinfan Li for providing pathological diagnosis and Dr
Haodong Xu for providing remote pathologic consultation. This work was supported by the important subject fund of Zhejiang Province Science
and Technology Agency, Item No:2013C03044-7.
