Corticosteroid or intravenous immunoglobulin is used in the management of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura during pregnancy. A patient
with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura had a previous history of interrupted pregnancy due to severe thrombocytopenia, and was
unresponsive to high doses of corticosteroids and intravenous immunoglobulin. Immediately following pregnancy, our patient had a marked
elevation in plasma levels of fibrinogen degradation products, D-dimer, and platelet factor 4, with a decrease in platelets, suggesting
platelet activation and thrombogenesis. Combined treatment with an anticoagulant agent could prevent exacerbation of thrombocytopenia
throughout pregnancy. Although the underlying causes leading to the series in her pregnancy course were uncertain, there were notable
serological abnormalities, such as weakly positive antinuclear antibody and anti-U1-RNP antibody. When thrombocytopenia rapidly develops in
patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura immediately following pregnancy, the possibility of a thrombogenic state and differential
diagnosis, including antiphospholipid syndrome and collagen vascular disease, should be considered. Treatment with an anticoagulant agent
might then be appropriate. Thrombocytopenia is often experienced in pregnancy, affecting up to 10% of all pregnancies . Idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is a common cause of thrombocytopenia in the first and second trimesters. The pathogenesis of ITP is related
to the production of anti-platelet antibodies, resulting in accelerated clearance and destruction of opsonized platelets by the
reticuloendothelial system. Because anti-platelet antibodies also target antigens on megakaryocytes, suppressed platelet production might be
the mechanism causing thrombocytopenia in ITP . In general, corticosteroids are the first-line treatment for pregnant women with ITP, and
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) is used to rapidly raise the platelet count . The use of rituximab and thrombopoietic agents during
pregnancy for ITP has been avoided because of limited information on their safety and clinical effects. In our ITP case, combined treatment
with an anticoagulant agent from the early weeks of pregnancy was useful for reducing the progression of thrombocytopenia. A 28-year-old
woman with ITP visited our hospital with the desire to have children. ITP had been already diagnosed by a prior history of bleeding and a
low platelet count, and other possible causes of thrombocytopenia were excluded based on physical and bone marrow examinations. Recently,
she had been hospitalized for severe thrombocytopenia. She had a platelet count of 3 × 109/L and subcutaneous bleeding immediately following
pregnancy at 6 weeks’ gestation, despite maintaining the platelet count at 30–90 × 109/L with 3–5 mg/day of prednisolone (PSL) before
pregnancy. The patient’s platelet count could not be maintained at higher than 30 × 109/L, even with two treatments of IVIG (0.4 g/kg/day
for 5 days) and intravenous pulses of methylprednisolone (0.5 g/day for 4 days) followed by oral PSL (30 mg/day). Her attending physician
decided to end her pregnancy with platelet transfusion for reasons of maternal safety at 10 weeks’ gestation. To ensure subsequent
pregnancies, we controlled the platelet count at pre-pregnancy at a set point of higher than 100 × 109/L with 17.5 mg/day of PSL. The
patient then became pregnant for the second time. Initial laboratory studies at the first visit after pregnancy showed a white blood cell
count of 4.83 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 140 g/L, mild thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 70 × 109/L, and high levels of fibrinogen
degradation products (FDP) (4.3 μg/mL; normal range, <4) and D-dimer (2.9 μg/mL; normal range, <1). The results of other blood coagulation
tests were as follows: prothrombin time/international normalized ratio of 0.96, activated partial thromboplastin time of 23.4 s, fibrinogen
level of 2.56 g/L, antithrombin III activity of 92.1%, protein C activity of 89% (normal range, 64–146%), protein C antigen level of 81%
(normal range, 70–150%), protein S activity of 52% (normal range, 60–150%), protein S antigen level of 75% (normal range, 65–135%), and
platelet factor 4 (PF-4) level of 8 ng/mL (normal range, <20 ng/mL). Immunological analysis showed a weakly positive antinuclear antibody
titer of 1:80, anti-DNA antibody was 2.0 IU/mL (normal range, <6 IU/mL), anti-U1-RNP antibody was 121 U/mL (normal range, <10 IU/mL), CH50
was 45.1 U/mL, C3 was 84 mg/dL, C4 was 24 mg/dL, and platelet-associated IgG (PA-IgG) was 59 ng/107cells (normal range, <46 ng/107cells).
Lupus anticoagulant was 1.03 (normal range, <1.3) and antiphospholipid antibodies, including anti-cardiolipin IgG antibodies,
anti-β2-glycoprotein I antibodies, and anti-prothrombin antibodies, were not detected. Immediately following pregnancy, an elevation in FDP
and D-dimer levels, with a decrease in platelets was observed (Figure 1a). Thrombocytopenia and a fibrinolytic state became significant with
the date of gestation and the level of PF-4 was increased (127 ng/mL) at 9 weeks’ gestation. This suggested that a rapid decrease in
platelet count after pregnancy might be associated with platelet activation and thrombogenesis, as well as with antibody-mediated
destruction of platelets. Our patient had no clinical evidence of arterial and venous thrombosis. No significant aberrations in platelet
aggregation tests (collagen, 67%; ristocetin, 78%; epinephrine, 68%; adenosine diphosphate, 70%), von Willebrand factor antigen level (362%;
normal range, 20–155%), von Willebrand factor activity (388%; normal range, 60–170%), ADAM13 activity (158%; normal range, 70–120%), and
factor VIII activity (200%; normal range, 62–145%) were observed. Anticoagulation therapy was performed by continuous unfractionated heparin
injection (10,000 U/day), and the dose of PSL was increased to 30 mg/day at 10 weeks’ gestation. We used additional IVIG (0.4 g/kg/day for
5 days), albeit early in the course of the disease, and also expected to minimize the dose of corticosteroids in the first trimester. The
platelet count recovered from 40 × 109 /L to 90 × 109 /L for 3 weeks. The laboratory findings in the second trimester were as follows: PA-
IgG was 32 ng/107cells, platelet antibody-secreting B cells for GPIIb/IIIa antigen by ELISPOT assay was 2.3 × 106 cells/mL (normal range,
<2.0 × 106 cells/mL), the reticuloplatelet ratio was 3.7% (normal range, 0.7–3.0%), thrombopoietin was 0.44 pg/mL (normal range,
<300 pg/mL), and PF-4 was 13 ng/mL. The dose of PSL was tapered below 15 mg daily and heparin treatment was continued throughout pregnancy.
The platelet count was maintained above 100 × 109/L (Figure 1b), and she delivered a 2500-g boy vaginally at 37 weeks’ gestation without any
hemorrhage. Infant Apgar scores were 9 and 10 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. Neonatal thrombocytopenia secondary to maternal ITP did not
occur.Figure 1 Clinical course. a Changes in platelet count and levels of FDP, D-dimer, and PF-4 before and after treatment with
unfractionated heparin (10,000 U/day). b Medications and changes in platelet count and PA-IgG values in the pregnant and puerperal periods.
Clinical course. a Changes in platelet count and levels of FDP, D-dimer, and PF-4 before and after treatment with unfractionated heparin
(10,000 U/day). b Medications and changes in platelet count and PA-IgG values in the pregnant and puerperal periods. The causes of
pregnancy-specific thrombocytopenia are gestational thrombocytopenia, pre-eclampsia, HELLP syndrome, and acute fatty liver of pregnancy .
Gestational thrombocytopenia, which is the most common cause of thrombocytopenia in pregnancy (approximately 75% of cases), may be difficult
to differentiate from ITP. However, gestational thrombocytopenia generally causes mild thrombocytopenia, usually >70 × 109/L, from the mid-
second or third trimester, and is not related to adverse events for the mother and newborn. In some cases, pregnancy might lead to worsening
of thrombocytopenia in patients with ITP . This may be caused by the effects of the hormonal milieu of pregnancy on the reticuloendothelial
system, similar to those reported in autoimmune hemolytic anemia . In our case, moderate thrombocytopenia appeared immediately following
pregnancy. Therefore, we were concerned that the patient might become seriously ill again. The differences between a typical ITP course and
that in the current patient with ITP were her laboratory findings, which were suggestive of a thrombogenic state; elevation of markers of
intravascular coagulation; and platelet activation (FDP, D-dimer, and PF-4). The patient did not have any underlying disease that could be
associated with disseminated intravascular coagulation. Overt disseminated intravascular coagulation scoring proposed by the International
Society of Thrombosis and Hemostasis was 4 points. Antiphospholipid syndrome is a disorder that occurs with exacerbation in association with
pregnancy, and is known to cause arterial and venous thrombosis, thrombocytopenia, complications in pregnancy (miscarriage, fetal loss, and
pre-eclampsia), and livedo reticularis . Antiphospholipid antibodies, especially anti-cardiolipin antibodies, anti-β2-glycoprotein I
antibodies, and lupus anticoagulant, are associated with antiphospholipid syndrome, which is often observed in patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus. In our case, antiphospholipid antibody and anti-DNA antibody were negative, but anti-U1-RNP antibody, characteristic of mixed
connective tissue disease, and weakly positive antinuclear antibody were detected. However, the patient did not have clinical findings that
suggested the presence of mixed connective tissue disease, including Raynaud phenomenon, swollen hands or puffy fingers, arthritis,
myositis, and pulmonary involvement. We consider that the cause of thrombocytopenia in this patient may have been due to antibody-mediated
destruction of platelets, as well as platelet activation and consumption following microvascular injury and thrombogenesis. In a previous
pregnancy in our patient, artificial abortion had to be chosen because of severe thrombocytopenia, despite two treatments of IVIG and high
doses of corticosteroids. Anticoagulant therapy using unfractionated heparin (10,000 U/day) helped to inhibit the progression of a decrease
in platelet count and the dose of corticosteroids was reduced during pregnancy this time. Although we considered that it was reasonable to
use aspirin as an antiplatelet agent for our patient’s clinical condition, in the event that thrombocytopenia became more severe, the
patient would be at high risk for bleeding. We found it difficult to decide how long heparin treatment should be continued during pregnancy.
The underlying causes leading to the series in our patient’s pregnancy course are uncertain. However, considering her laboratory findings,
such as rapidly developing thrombocytopenia and a fibrinolytic state in the first trimester that manifested as antiphospholipid syndrome, we
continued heparin treatment to prevent fetal loss in later pregnancy and maternal complications, such as thrombosis, preeclampsia, and HELLP
syndrome. Notably, we also observed serological abnormalities, such as weakly positive antinuclear antibody and anti-U1-RNP antibody.
Although clinical manifestations suggestive of collagen vascular disease have not appeared to date, we will continue to follow this patient.
When thrombocytopenia rapidly develops in a patient with ITP immediately following pregnancy, and microvascular injury and thrombogenesis
are suspected, markers of intravascular coagulation and platelet activation should be measured and collagen vascular disease should be
screened for. Use of an anticoagulant agent might then be appropriate. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this Case report. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura Intravenous immunoglobulin Prednisolone Fibrinogen degradation products
Platelet factor 4 Platelet-associated IgG Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions MH and KY practiced disease management in the patient and drafted the manuscript. NT practiced disease management in the
patient. HS provided prenatal care for the patient during pregnancy. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We would like to
thank Noriko Nakayama at the National Center for Child Health and Development for her kind help in completing this report.
