In order to avoid the misdiagnosis of thyroid diseases, we need to discuss the clinical features and diagnostic methods of cervical
esophageal cancer and Zenker’s diverticulum. The clinical and laboratory data of seven cases were reviewed retrospectively, and in all
cases, esophageal-related diseases were misdiagnosed as thyroid diseases preoperatively. Among them, two cases were cervical esophageal
cancer metastasized to thyroids but initially, they were misdiagnosed as thyroid cancer. The other five cases were Zenker’s diverticulum,
but were originally diagnosed as nodular goiter, and two out of the five cases were found with calcification. They were all detected by
ultrasound examination without any clinical feature of esophageal diseases. Previous literatures only reported five cases of thyroid
metastasis and three cases of Zenker’s diverticulum. In both cases where cervical esophageal cancer metastasized to thyroid, anterior
cervical neoplasm biopsy and surgical removal were performed followed by postoperative radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Both patients died
from esophageal cancers in 7 and 15 months postoperatively. All five cases of Zenker’s diverticulum received excision and repair without any
postoperative complication or recurrence in the following 2 to 7 years. Cervical esophageal cancer and Zenker’s diverticulum may be
misdiagnosed as thyroid disease. Careful and comprehensive diagnostic tests would be required to avoid misdiagnosis. Thyroid diseases are
commonly encountered endocrine disease in clinics. However, symptoms from other neck neoplasms such as esophageal diseases can mimic thyroid
diseases sometimes and lead to misdiagnosis. With rising public awareness of primary prevention, neck ultrasound has been widely used as a
routine project for thyroid abnormality . About 3,000 cases of thyroid resection were performed in oncological surgery at our hospital every
year. Among them, seven cases, collected from May 2006 to October 2014, were analyzed here, in which all esophageal-related diseases were
misdiagnosed as thyroid diseases preoperatively. The neck neoplasms in all cases moved with swallowing, and they were medium-hard texture.
No patients reported sensation of dysphagia or reflux, and no neck lymph node enlargement was appreciated. One of two patients with
metastatic cervical esophageal cancer to the thyroid had obvious hoarseness, so did one patient with Zenker’s diverticulum. The rest of
Zenker’s diverticulum all had anterior cervical pressure sensation. Thyroid hormone series and antibody were measured in seven cases. TSH,
TT3, TT4, FT3, and FT4 were all in normal range. Only one case of esophageal diverticulum had mildly elevated TgAb concentration (12.1 IU/ml
with normal value approximately 0 to 4 IU/ml) as shown in Table 1. Thyroid ultrasound (Figures 1 and 2) was performed in all seven cases in
which three cases accepted FNA, shown in Table 2. Total thyroidectomy with possible lymphadenectomy was originally planned for all seven
cases. Display of surgery (Figure 3) amazed us. However, as intraoperative frozen biopsies (Figures 4 and 5) proved accurate by
postoperative histopathological examinations in the following days altered the initial diagnosis, surgical plan was changed depending on the
individual pathological result in each case after emergent thoracic surgery consultation. Details are in Table 3.Table 1 Physical and
laboratory examinations Cases Age (years)/sex Esophageal disease Symptoms Size (cm) Location Thyroid hormone and related antibody
154/MCervical esophageal cancerNo5 × 2.3Behind the right lobeNormal250/MCervical esophageal cancerHoarseness3.4 × 2.5Behind the right
lobeNormal347/FZenker diverticulumPressure sensation2.2 × 4Behind the left lobeNormal439/FZenker diverticulumPressure
sensation3.2 × 3.6Behind the left lobeNormal554/MZenker diverticulumPressure sensation1.8 × 1Behind the left lobeNormal635/FZenker
diverticulumPressure sensation4 × 3.5Behind the left lobeNormal737/FZenker diverticulumHoarseness4 × 4Behind the left lobeTgAb↑Figure 1
Ultrasound reexamination in a week before death showed a solitary, irregular, hypoechoic mass with some hyperechoic foci. Its border was
unclear and the max diameter was 3.4 cm.Figure 2 Ultrasound examination showed a solitary, irregular, hypoechoic of mass with post acoustic
shadow. Its border was clear and smooth with a max diameter 1.8 cm.Table 2 Ultrasound and FNA Cases Ultrasound description Misdiagnosis FNA
1Solitary, hypoechoic mass with hyperechoic fociThyroid nodule TI-RADS IVc+a 2Solitary, hypoechoic mass with hyperechoic foci
(Figure 1)Thyroid nodule TI-RADS IVb+b 3Solitary, irregular hyperechoic areaNodular goiterNo4Solitary, complex hypoechoic massNodular
goiterNo5Solitary, hypoechoic of mass with post acoustic shadow (Figure 2)Nodular goiter with calcificationNo6Solitary, patchy hyperechoic
massNodular goiterNo7Solitary, nodular calcificationNodular goiter with calcification−c Figure 3 Neoplasm (arrowheads) attached to thyroid
and invaded the right recurrent laryngeal nerve. Figure 4 Pathological examination showed high differentiated squamous carcinoma. Figure 5
Pathological examination showed squamous epithelium with some small glands in lamina propria. Table 3 Intraoperative frozen biopsy and type
of surgery Cases Display of surgery Intraoperative frozen biopsies Type of surgery 1Neoplasm adhered to thyroid to form a firm mass which
also enclosed the internal jugular vein.Poorly differentiated squamous carcinomaAnterior cervical neoplasm biopsya 2Neoplasm attached to
thyroid and invaded the right recurrent laryngeal nerve. (Figure 3)Highly differentiated squamous carcinoma (Figure 4)Anterior cervical
neoplasm biopsya 3Neoplasm was cystic with integrated envelope and its central cavity communicated with esophagus.Zenker’s diverticulumb
Excision and repair4Neoplasm protruded from esophagus with food remains in it.Zenker’s diverticulumc Excision and repair5Neoplasm can be
touched from esophageal outer membrane and the texture was soft.Zenker’s diverticulumd (Figure 5)Excision and repair6Neoplasm was pouch-like
and communicated with esophageal pyriform sinus.Zenker’s diverticulume Excision and repair7Neoplasm compressed the left laryngeal recurrent
nerve.Zenker’s diverticulumf Excision and repair aBased on the consultations of thoracic surgeons and histopathological examinations, we
performed the surgery and took a little of tissue sample for biopsy in order to avoid the esophageal fistula and unnecessary damage.
Therefore, the majority of neoplasm is remaining and the size is similar with previous. bSquamous epithelium has hyperplasia with erosion
and chronic inflammatory cells invade the lamina propria. Hemangiectasis is obvious. cSquamous epithelial mucosa is chronically inflammatory
and the base layer cracks have no cell and other ingredients in it. dThe lining of cystic tissue wall is squamous epithelium with some small
glands in lamina propria. eMucosal surface concave into cavity with squamous epithelium as lining. fSquamous epithelial has significant
hyperplasia. Physical and laboratory examinations Ultrasound reexamination in a week before death showed a solitary, irregular, hypoechoic
mass with some hyperechoic foci. Its border was unclear and the max diameter was 3.4 cm. Ultrasound examination showed a solitary,
irregular, hypoechoic of mass with post acoustic shadow. Its border was clear and smooth with a max diameter 1.8 cm. Ultrasound and FNA
Neoplasm (arrowheads) attached to thyroid and invaded the right recurrent laryngeal nerve. Pathological examination showed high
differentiated squamous carcinoma. Pathological examination showed squamous epithelium with some small glands in lamina propria.
Intraoperative frozen biopsy and type of surgery aBased on the consultations of thoracic surgeons and histopathological examinations, we
performed the surgery and took a little of tissue sample for biopsy in order to avoid the esophageal fistula and unnecessary damage.
Therefore, the majority of neoplasm is remaining and the size is similar with previous. bSquamous epithelium has hyperplasia with erosion
and chronic inflammatory cells invade the lamina propria. Hemangiectasis is obvious. cSquamous epithelial mucosa is chronically inflammatory
and the base layer cracks have no cell and other ingredients in it. dThe lining of cystic tissue wall is squamous epithelium with some small
glands in lamina propria. eMucosal surface concave into cavity with squamous epithelium as lining. fSquamous epithelial has significant
hyperplasia. All the ultrasound descriptions were based on the preoperative records of the ultrasound examinations. aMany thyroid follicular
epithelial cells, several abnormal cells with intranuclear inclusions, sporadic polynuclear giant cells. bMany thyroid follicular epithelial
cells with bits of allotypic cells between focal areas of fibrous tissue. cNo obvious allotypic cells and sporadic inflammatory cells in
pectin background. Both cases of metastatic cervical esophageal cancer to thyroid received nasal feeding for 1 week postoperatively, and no
esophageal fistula occurred. Later, they accepted radiotherapy and chemotherapy according to the 2011 National Comprehensive Cancer Network
(NCCN) Esophageal Cancer Guidelines. They died from esophageal cancer in 7 and 15 months postoperatively. All five cases of Zenker’s
diverticulum had no postoperative complications or recurrence in the following 2 to 7 years and survived to the present. The incidence of
metastatic spread of gastrointestinal malignancies to the thyroid gland is relatively low, and most of them are from the colo-rectum .
Thyroid metastasis originating from the esophagus is poorly documented. We conducted a review of current English literature related to such
condition, and there have been a total of five cases reported previously . Here, we presented two additional cases of thyroid metastasis
from cervical esophageal cancer. Table 4 summarized the clinical circumstances and ultrasound results from the five cases previously
published plus our two cases of thyroid metastasis from cervical esophageal cancer. Among the seven patients, two patients were women and
five were men. Their mean age was 55 years, with a range from 32 to 74 years. The majority of patients underwent thyroidectomy. The
postoperative histopathological examination all showed squamous cell carcinoma. Most of the patients with thyroid metastasis had a poor
prognosis and died shortly after diagnosis. Details are in Table 4.Table 4 Clinical circumstances and ultrasound examinations Source
location Age (years)/sex Type of surgery (months) a Outcomes Size (cm) Ultrasound Description Case 154/MAnterior cervical75 × 2.3Solitary,
hypoechoic massRNeoplasm biopsyWith hyperechoic fociRCase 250/MAnterior cervical153.4 × 2.5Solitary, hypoechoic massNeoplasm biopsyWith
hyperechoic fociEn-dong 61/MPalliative bilateral NT + tracheostomy116.1 × 3.9Solitary mass, heterogeneous, hypoechoicLShuangshoti S et al.
1982 58/MTT + ipsilateral CL51.5 × 1.5Solitary mass, NARYamada T et al. 1999 74/FST + Bilateral CLNANAWidespread masses, calcifiedNot
specifiedBasu S et al. 2005 55/FNANA6 × 4Solitary mass, irregular, hypoechoicRCumbo-Nacheli G et al. 2007 32/MNANA2.5 × 2.8Solitary mass,
NAR aFollow-up since diagnosis of intra-thyroid metastases. NA, no data available; NT, near-total thyroidectomy; ST, subtotal thyroidectomy;
TT, total thyroidectomy; CL, cervical lymphadenectomy. Clinical circumstances and ultrasound examinations aFollow-up since diagnosis of
intra-thyroid metastases. NA, no data available; NT, near-total thyroidectomy; ST, subtotal thyroidectomy; TT, total thyroidectomy; CL,
cervical lymphadenectomy. The incidence of Zenker’s diverticulum mimic thyroid nodules is poorly documented. We conducted a review of the
English and Chinese literature related to such condition and there were three published cases . This article presents five additional case
of Zenker’s diverticulum mimic thyroid nodules. Table 5 summarizes the clinical circumstances and ultrasound examination results for the
three cases previously published plus our report of Zenker’s diverticulum mimic thyroid nodules. Of the eight patients with Zenker’s
diverticulum, seven patients were women and one was a man. Their mean age was 49 years old, with a range of 35 to 73 years. Based on the
above chief complaint, apart from some mild pressure sensation and foreign body sensation, all patients were asymptomatic and were not
experiencing dysphagia, difficulty in swallowing, or reflux. Six patients underwent excision and repair and were recovered. Our patients are
alive while there is no available follow-up data for the others. All the Zenker’s diverticulum were located in the posterior aspect of the
left thyroid lobe. Details are in Table 5.Table 5 Clinical circumstances and ultrasound examinations Source Age (years)/sex Chief complaint
Type of surgery Size (cm) ultrasound description Location Case 347/FPressure sensationExcision and repair2.2 × 4Solitary, irregular hyper
echoic areaLCase 439/FPressure sensationExcision and repair3.2 × 3.6Solitary, substantial low echoLCase 554/MPressure sensationExcision and
repair1.8 × 1Solitary, low echo of mass with post acoustic shadowLCase 635/FPressure sensationExcision and repair4 × 3.5Solitary, hyper
echoic fociLCase 737/FHoarsenessExcision and repair4 × 4Solitary, grit calcificationLBin 50/FMild pharyngeal foreign body
sensationNo1.2 × 0.6Solitary, hypo echoic, calcifiedLYong Fang et al. 2011 73/FFinding left neck massExcision and repair3 × 1.8Solitary,
cystic and solid massLBeth-Ann 54/FFinding left neck massNA2 × 1.2Solitary, heterogeneous hypo echoicLNA, no data available. Clinical
circumstances and ultrasound examinations NA, no data available. A Zenker’s diverticulum is a herniation of the mucosa and submucosa at
Killian’s triangle, a natural area of weakness at the junction of the thyropharyngeus and cricopharyngeus muscles in the posterior
hypopharynx. It is believed that these diverticula are pulsion diverticula occurring as a result of spasm of the cricopharyngeus muscle, in
coordination of the pharyngeal muscles or congenital muscle weakness. Due to the weak area is more obvious in the left side, Zenker’s
diverticula project to the left . On ultrasonography, we can examine the sonographic similarities and differences between a Zenker’s
diverticulum versus a true thyroid abnormality as the following points. First, heterogeneous internal echo with strong echogenic foci caused
by air bubbles or other particles could be regarded as micro calcifications of thyroid cancer, but there is stronger echogenicity and
irregularity of the post acoustic shadow. Second is a hypo echoic rim with or without a multilayered pattern. This finding suggests that the
digestive tract is the origin of the lesion (mucosa, submucosa, and muscular layers).Third is an irregular boundary of the posterior wall of
the lesion at the posterior portion of the thyroid gland. Fourth are the chronological changes in the internal echo which are associated
with changes in the contents of the diverticulum, such as air, water, or debris. These changes result during compression with a probe or
during the swallowing of air or water . According to our cases, some perspectives about misdiagnosis on esophageal diseases can be analyzed.
First, they were all lacking of typical clinical symptoms such as dysphagia and reflux, so it is difficult to be detected in early stage at
the most of the time . Second, neoplasms moved by swallowing were all located closely in the posterior aspect of the thyroid gland and
present as thyroid abnormality on ultrasonography. Third, because of the similar location, fine-needle aspiration inevitably brought out
bits of thyroid cells so that it is too difficult to distinguish between primary and metastatic thyroid malignancies when highly anaplastic
cells are observed microscopically . Even though in our cases, we get the misleading FNA resulted by inadequate specimen, there are still
studies to prove the false-negative rate of FNA is less than 1% and false-positive rate is only 1% to 3% in thyroid diagnosis . In addition,
according to the previous reports, FNA can improve the diagnosis of thyroid carcinoma and total diagnostic accuracy is 87.5%, diagnostic
accuracy of benign lesions is 93.8%, and the diagnostic accuracy of malignancies is 97.3% in cervical masses .Besides, FNA is also fast,
safe, and convenient which has been considered as a gold standard second to histopathological examinations. Then, what should we do to avoid
the misdiagnosis between esophageal and thyroid lesions? Take the medical histories and physical examinations carefully and especially pay
attention to the special clinical symptoms of esophageal diseases such as dysphasia or reflux .According to the 2010 National Comprehensive
Cancer Network (NCCN) Thyroid Carcinoma Guidelines, measuring TSH and accepting the ultrasonography were considered as routine projects in
thyroid diseases. To the suspected thyroid malignancies after ultrasonography, FNA is often recommended. In order to improve the diagnostic
accuracy, we can puncture and smear more to get satisfactory specimens. When it illustrates that sonographic left-sided thyroid nodules that
exhibit squamous cells, bacteria, or foreign material on FNA biopsy, we should raise the suspicion of an occult Zenker’s diverticulum. What
is more, X-ray barium meal examination, endoscopy, ECT, CT, MRI, and CNB could be applied to help to make the correct diagnosis if necessary
. Cervical esophageal cancer and Zenker’s diverticulum may be misdiagnosed as thyroid diseases. Careful and comprehensive diagnostic tests
would be required to avoid misdiagnosis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. thyroid stimulating
hormone fine-needle aspiration emission computed tomography computed tomography magnetic resonance imaging core needle biopsy Competing
interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions LYH carried out the initial conception and
design as well as collection of data and clinical records of the patient. LSX participated in its design and helped to edit the manuscript.
ZYL help to revise the manuscript. WOC and ZXH made up the surgical team involved in the most of patients. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. Authors’ information Liu Ye-huan is a graduate of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, People’s Republic of
China. Lyu Shi-xu is a surgeon of Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang,
People’s Republic of China. Zhou Yi-li is a surgeon of Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University,
Wenzhou, Zhejiang, People’s Republic of China. Wang Ou-chen is Chief Physician of Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, People’s Republic of China. Zhang Xiao-hua is Chief Physician of Department of Oncology, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, and People’s Republic of China. We thank all of the pathologists
at the First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University for their assistance with the pathologic analysis. Without their efforts,
this article would not be possible. This work was supported by Zhejiang Province Natural Science Foundations (NO.LY13H160034 and
NO.Y207526).
