Pulmonary tularaemia is a very rare disease with only a small number of cases described in the literature. So far, to our knowledge, there
exists no case report of pulmonary tularaemia where PET-CT scans and follow up CT scans are available. We present four consecutive cases of
pulmonary tularaemia. All patients suffered from non-specific symptoms. All patients were referred to our institution with strong suspicions
of malignancy, particularly lung cancer. Diagnosis of tularaemia was made by typical findings in the aspirate of EBUS guided fine needle
aspiration (necrosis, epithelioid cell aggregation) and surgical biopsy respectively, and a positive serology. In three of the four cases,
the diagnosis was confirmed by positive PCR results of the tissue. PET-CT scans obtained in all four cases were indistinguishable from
lesions typically seen in patients suffering from lung cancer. One of the four patients suffered from recurrence of the disease after
antibiotic treatment; also this patient finally recovered after initiation of a second antibiotic regimen. One case became asymptomatic
spontaneously, but this patient still received an antibiotic treatment. In one case, a follow up CT scan was unchanged compared to the
initial PET-CT scan; in all other cases, the lesions disappeared almost completely. Symptoms of patients suffering from pulmonary tularaemia
are non-specific and can be of prolonged character. PET-CT scans in these cases are indistinguishable from lung cancer. The diagnosis can be
established when typical findings in EBUS guided fine needle aspirates or surgical biopsies are found in combination with a positive
serology. In most cases the lesions disappear in follow up CT scans after clinically successful treatment. Due to their frequent occurrence,
pulmonary malignancies are sometimes considered spot diagnoses. This is particularly true when modern techniques like positron emission
tomography CT fusion scans (FDG-PET-CT-scans) are applied. Due to their high sensitivity and specificity, characteristic images and patterns
can easily mislead to premature diagnosis of malignancy. Pulmonary tularaemia on the other hand is a very rare disease with only a limited
number of case reports and case series existing in the literature. Tularaemia is a rare zoonosis caused by Francisella tularensis. Different
clinical manifestations such as oropharyngeal type, ulceroglandular type, oculoglandular type or typhoidal type have been reported.
Pulmonary involvement occurs as a distinct pattern or association with other forms of the disease. In the literature, the frequency of
pulmonary involvement varies substantially. In a review of 22 cases from Arkansas suffering from typhoidal tularaemia, 83% showed pulmonary
involvement . In a large cohort report of a tularaemia outbreak in Bulgaria, only nine (3.4%) out of 262 affected patients clinically showed
pulmonary tularaemia . Respiratory tularaemia may manifest with dry cough, chest pain, fever and dyspnea. The radiological presentation, in
addition, varies markedly in the different case series available. Whereas lobar or multi-lobar infiltrates seem to be the manifestation most
frequently reported , pleural effusions and hilar adenopathy have also been observed . To our knowledge, cases where FDG-PET-CT scans are
available have not yet been described. We present four consecutive cases with pulmonary tularaemia which have been treated at our
institution and of which PET-CT scans and follow up CT scans are presented. A 62 year old otherwise healthy pastor was referred to our
institution due to dry cough, weight loss of 7 kilograms (9% of body weight) and night sweats. He was a lifelong non-smoker. The symptoms
had lasted for about eight weeks. The chest x-ray showed an enlarged left hilus. Computed tomographic (CT) scan of the chest showed a hilar
mass of three centimeters with enlarged hilar and mediastinal lymphnodes and a pulmonary nodule of 7 millimeters in the lower left lobe. All
of these lesions were highly avid for Fludeoxyglucose in the consecutive positron emission tomography CT fusion scan (FDG-PET-CT, Figure 1)
and no other pathological findings were seen. Bronchoscopy failed to reveal any endobronchial abnormality. However, with the aid of
endobronchial ultrasonography (EBUS) we were able to identify the hilar mass and to perform EBUS guided transbronchial fine needle
aspiration (TBNA) of this lesion. The aspiration revealed normal lymphocytes, necrosis and aggregations of epitheloid cells. No malignant
cells were seen. Due to high suspicion of malignancy, thoracoscopic hilar lymphadenectomy was performed. Microscopic examination of the
biopsy specimen showed necrotic granuloma (Figure 2). Staining of the biopsy for mycobacteria was negative. In a next step, serological
testing for Bartonella henselae, Brucella and Francisella tularensis revealed a titer of 1:320 for Francisella tularensis, whereas the
others were negative. Nested PCR was performed on the biopsy specimen for Francisella tularensis and this too was positive. Although the
patient was asymptomatic at this time, we established an antibiotic treatment with doxycyclin for the duration of three weeks. After this
period, the patient returned to our outpatient clinic with fever and night sweats. This presentation was highly suggestive of a recurrence
of an infection with Francisella tularensis. After an antibiotic therapy with garamycin for one week and ciprofloxacin for additional two
weeks, the patient's condition improved rapidly. The subsequent course of the patient was uneventful for a follow up period of 27 months. A
CT scan performed after the second antibiotic treatment showed a smaller residual lesion (Table 1).Figure 1 PET-CT and CT scans,
respectively, of four patients suffering from pulmonary tularemia (initial presentation (a) and after completed antibiotic treatment (b)).
Figure 2 Hilar lymph node from patient No 1 demonstrating necrotic granuloma (hematoxylin eosin 10× (a) and 20× (b)). Table 1 Findings,
treatment and clinical course of four patients suffering from pulmonary tularemia Patient No 1 No 2 No 3 No 4 Lead symptoms Cough, weight
loss, night sweat Fatigue, head ace, fever Weight loss, head ace, fever Cough, fever Date of diagnosisJan 12Sep 12Oct 2012Oct 2012Duration
of symptoms before/after start of therapy (weeks)14/NA (spontanous recovery)12/69/122/2Agglutination titer for F.
tularensis1:3201:51201:3201:640White-cell count (per mm3)/CRP (mg/liter) at first presentation in our
institution4.2/611.4/875.1/836/<3Nested PCR tissue for F. tularensispositivepositivenot donepositiveEBUS-TBNAnecrosis, epithelioid cell
aggregationnecrosis, epithelioid cell aggregationnecrosis, epithelioid cell aggregationnormal lymphocytesSurgical biopsyyesnot donenot
doneyesProbable vectorrabbit fecestickunknownunknownTreatment1.doxycyclinciprofloxacinciprofloxacinciprofloxacin2.garamycin/cipro-
floxacinCourserecurrence after doxycyclinremissionremissionremissionLength of follow up (months)27181616Initial CT scan findingsHilar mass,
enlarged lymph nodes, pulmonary nodulePulmonary nodules, enlarged lymph nodesHilar mass, enlarged lymph nodesMass in the middle, enlarged
lymph nodesCT scan findings after completed treatmentResidual lesionSmall residual parenchymal scarunchangedSmall residual hilar scarCRP:
C-reactive protein, EBUS-TBNA: endobronchial ultrasound guided transbronchial needle aspiration, CT: computed tomography, PCR: polymerase
chain reaction; NA: not applicable. PET-CT and CT scans, respectively, of four patients suffering from pulmonary tularemia (initial
presentation (a) and after completed antibiotic treatment (b)). Hilar lymph node from patient No 1 demonstrating necrotic granuloma
(hematoxylin eosin 10× (a) and 20× (b)). Findings, treatment and clinical course of four patients suffering from pulmonary tularemia CRP:
C-reactive protein, EBUS-TBNA: endobronchial ultrasound guided transbronchial needle aspiration, CT: computed tomography, PCR: polymerase
chain reaction; NA: not applicable. A 49 year old forest official had been well until six weeks before presentation, when fever,
intermittent headache and fatigue developed. A chest x-ray and subsequent CT scan revealed multiple nodules in the lower right lobe and
enlarged hilar and mediastinal lymphnodes. The patient was referred to our institution for further diagnostic work-up. Bronchoscopy revealed
distinct signs of acute bronchitis and an EBUS guided TBNA of the enlarged subcarinal lymph node was done. The aspirate showed necrosis and
epithelioid cell aggregations. Since the intrathoracic lesions were highly suggestive of malignancy, a PET-CT scan was performed. All
visible pulmonary nodules - as well as the hilar and subcarinal lymph nodes - were highly avid for FDG. Since the aspirate of a repeated
TBNA of the subcarinal lymphnode again revealed lymphocytes and epitheloid cell aggregates, we decided to send the patient for diagnostic
mediastinoscopy. However, considering the previous experience with patient number one, we additionally sent the patient's serum to be
analyzed for Francisella agglutination titer, which was highly elevated (Table 1). Subsequently, we cancelled mediastinoscopy and sent
aspirate from the TBNA of the subcarinal lymphnode to perform nested PCR for Franzisella tularensis. This proved to be positive. Antibiotic
therapy with ciprofloxacin was established for three weeks and the patient recovered slowly over a time period of about six weeks. A follow
up CT scan of the thorax two months after termination of the antibiotic treatment, documented unremarkable findings, apart from a small scar
in the parenchyma of the lower right lobe (Figure 1). A 52 year old businessman was referred by his general practitioner due to weight loss
of about 15% of body weight, headache and fever. The patient had a 25 pack year smoking history. The symptoms started three weeks before
referral. On examination, the temperature was 39.5°C and a pleural rub was heard over the left side of the chest. A chest x-ray and a
consecutive CT scan revealed a left hilar mass with central necrosis and multiple enlarged hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes. A bronchoscopy
was performed. Apart from signs of an acute bronchitis, the investigation was macroscopically normal. EBUS guided TBNA of an enlarged left-
sided hilar lymph node was performed. The aspirate showed lymphocytes and was negative for malignant cells and for PCR for M. tuberculosis.
Blood cultures and cultures of bronchial aspiration fluid remained sterile. After bronchoscopy, the general condition of the patient
deteriorated further and empiric antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone was started. Due to a subsequent rash which developed within two days
of beginning the ceftriaxone, the antibiotic treatment was changed empirically to levofloxacin. Since the general condition of the patient
improved and the fever disappeared, the antibiotic therapy was stopped after ten days. The patient returned home and was advised to see his
general practitioner for follow-up consultations, particularly to perform an X-ray of the chest after recovery. After six weeks, the patient
was reassigned due to recurrent fever, night sweats and fatigue. Due to suspicion of lung cancer, a PET-CT scan was performed. The left
hilar mass had increased in size and the hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathies were unchanged when compared to the former CT scan. The
lesions were highly FDG avid (Figure 1). We decided to repeat EBUS guided TBNA of the left hilar lymph node and the aspirate showed necrosis
and epitheloid cell aggregations. Since PCR for M. tuberculosis and the culture results obtained from the former aspirate were negative,
tuberculosis was considered unlikely. Serum of the patient was then sent to be analyzed for Francisella agglutination titer, which was
highly elevated (Table 1). Antibiotic treatment with ciprofloxacin was established and the condition of the patient improved slowly. A CT
scan three months after stopping the antibiotic treatment was unchanged when compared to the PET-CT scan. By that time, his neutrophil count
had recovered and he was feeling well - as he was sixteen months later. A 40 years old topographer had been suffering from fever and a cough
that had lasted for two weeks, when he was treated with clarithromycin by his general practitioner. Due to persistently elevated leucocytes,
the antibiotic treatment then was changed to cefpodoxime. Although his general condition improved and the elevated leucocytes subsequently
became normal, a chest x-ray showed a right hilar mass. A CT scan revealed a 5cm mass in the middle lobe and an enlarged subcarinal lymph
node. The patient was referred for further evaluation of suspected lung cancer. EBUS guided TBNA of the enlarged subcarinal lymph node
showed normal lymphocytes. A later PET-CT scan revealed a highly FDG avid lesion of the middle lobe, as well as a highly positive subcarinal
lymph node (Figure 1). No other lesions were detectable. We decided to repeat EBUS guided TBNA of the subcarinal lymph node in addition to
an EBUS guided TBNA of the pulmonary mass. In both aspirates normal lymphocytes were found. A thoracoscopic excision of an enlarged hilar
lymph node revealed necrotizing granulomas. Polymerase chain reaction for M. tuberculosis of the tissue was negative, but Francisella
agglutination titer in the serum of the patient was markedly elevated. Later on the PCR of the lymph node for F. tularensis was positive
(Table 1). Though in the meantime the symptoms disappeared completely, we administered an antibiotic treatment with ciprofloxacin for three
weeks. The CT scan of the chest that was performed eight weeks later showed normal findings, except for a small hilar scar (Figure 1).
Francisella tularensis is a pathogenic species of Gram-negative bacteria. It is a fastidious, facultative intracellular bacterium that is
spread by aerosol with high virulence. Depending on the side of infection, tularaemia may present with several clinical manifestations, such
as oropharyngeal, ulceroglandular, occuloglandular or typhoidal type. Tularaemia is caused by contact with infected animals manly such as
rabbits and rodents. In this case series, the clinical manifestations were nonspecific and, in contrast to the majority of the reported
cases, they were remarkably long lasting, both before and after initiation of antibiotic therapy (Table 1). To the best of our knowledge,
our four cases are the first described in the literature where PET-CT-scans are available. Several findings we observed with this technique
are remarkable. Firstly, in all four cases we did not detect any other manifestation in the body except the lesions in the lung and the
hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes, respectively. In our opinion, this fact strongly argues for a primary affection of the lungs as a result
of inhalation of the bacteria. Therefore, in our cases, hematogeneic spread causing secondary pulmonary involvement seems unlikely.
Secondly, in all cases, the result of the PET-CT scan - much like the result of the CT scan - was indistinguishable from malignancy,
particularly lung cancer. The latter phenomenon has already been published in an earlier study . The impressive PET-CT findings of the
current cases underline the necessity of intransigent and rigorous work up for cancer diagnosis and cancer staging even in cases with
supposed highly typical PET-CT findings. Thirdly, in combination with EBUS guided TBNA, a PET-CT scan performed before bronchoscopy might be
helpful in defining the most promising target lesion in order to reach the highest possible diagnostic yield. We believe that representative
and typical findings in EBUS guided TBNA aspirates - in combination with positive serologic testing - are sufficient to establish the
diagnosis of pulmonary tularaemia and to start antibiotic treatment. Nevertheless, in our opinion, two to three months after finishing the
antibiotic treatment, a follow up CT scan is mandatory in this form of tularaemia in order not to miss malignancy. Considering the rarity of
pulmonary tularaemia, the severity of consequences and the paucity of scientific data, this costly approach seems justifiable. The follow up
CT scans of the current cases were interesting in several ways. In two of the four cases beside a small scar all changes disappeared
subsequently whereas in two cases the findings disappeared only partially and remained mainly unchanged, respectively. Interestingly, this
latter particular patient (No 3) suffered the longest from persistent symptoms after initiation of antibiotic treatment. Both observations
might be the consequences of persistent inflammatory reaction. We did not find a common source of infection in the four cases described
here. Written, informed consent was obtained from the four patients for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy
of the written consent is available for review by the editor of this journal. Computed tomography C-reactive protein Endobronchial
ultrasonography Fludeoxyglucose Not applicable Polymerase chain reaction Positron emission tomography computed tomography fusion scan
Transbronchial fine needle aspiration Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions
PF, GMT, FG and SI drafted the manuscript and were responsible for clinical care of the patients. RG drafted the manuscript and performed
the pathological work up. HF drafted the manuscript and provided microbiological input. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
None of the authors received any funding for this work.
