A 51-year-old previously healthy male underwent a routine medical examination. Computed tomography and ultrasonography showed an oval-shaped
mass that was about 50 × 40 mm in size in the left iliac fossa. Prior to surgery, the lesion was suspected to be a teratoma with core
calcification or stromal tumor derived from the rectosigmoid colon. During the procedure, a yellow-white, egg-shaped mass was discovered
that was completely free from the pelvic cavity in front of the rectum. The giant, peritoneal loose body was taken out through the enlarged
port site. Histological examination showed that the mass consisted of well-circumscribed, unencapsulated, paucicellular tissue, with an
obviously hyalinized fibrosclerotic center. A giant peritoneal body is extremely rare. We report such a case and review previously published
literature. Peritoneal loose bodies are rare. They are usually found at laparotomy or autopsy by accident. In most cases, these bodies are
derived from appendix epiploica. The most common size of loose bodies is about from 5 to 20 mm in diameter. Occasionally, they grow to
larger than 50 mm by absorbing protein from peritoneal serum . We report a case of a giant peritoneal loose body measuring 50 × 40 × 40 mm
in the pelvic cavity which happened in a 51-year-old man and confirmed by laparoscopic exploration. A previously healthy 51-year-old man
underwent a routine medical examination. An incidental pelvic solid mass was detected on ultrasonography (Figure 1) and computed tomography
(CT) (Figure 2). The oval-shaped mass was about 50 × 40 mm in size and showed a low-density lesion with clear boundaries, a complete
capsule, and two calcifications in the central part on the CT scan. The mass lay adjacent to the sigmoid colon in the left iliac fossa. The
patient had no complaints or significant past medical history. No abnormality was found on physical exam including digital rectal
examination. Tumor markers and other laboratory tests were within the normal range.Figure 1 Two-dimensional ultrasound imaging showed a
solid mass with clear boundary. It was hypoechoic with hyperechoic spots in the central part.Figure 2 Abdominal computed tomography
findings. (A) Axial image demonstrated a low-density lesion with complete capsule and two calcifications in the central part. (B) Sagittal
image showed the mass adjacent to the sigmoid colon in the left iliac fossa. Two-dimensional ultrasound imaging showed a solid mass with
clear boundary. It was hypoechoic with hyperechoic spots in the central part. Abdominal computed tomography findings. (A) Axial image
demonstrated a low-density lesion with complete capsule and two calcifications in the central part. (B) Sagittal image showed the mass
adjacent to the sigmoid colon in the left iliac fossa. Based on the present imaging findings, the preoperative diagnosis of teratoma with
core calcification or stromal tumor derived from the rectosigmoid colon was suspected. Accordingly, diagnostic laparoscopic surgery was
performed. A yellow-white, egg-shaped body that was completely free from the pelvic cavity was found in front of the rectum (Figure 3A).
Further laparoscopic exploration of pelvic and abdominal organs demonstrated that the liver, stomach, intestine, colon, and rectum were all
normal. Finally, the peritoneal loose body was put into an endoscopic retriever bag, taken out through the enlarged port site in the right
lower abdomen, and sent for histopathological examination (Figure 3B).Figure 3 Laparoscopic findings. (A) A yellow-white, egg-shaped body
that was completely free from the pelvic cavity was found in front of the rectum. (B) The body was put into an endoscopic retriever bag and
taken out through the port site. Laparoscopic findings. (A) A yellow-white, egg-shaped body that was completely free from the pelvic cavity
was found in front of the rectum. (B) The body was put into an endoscopic retriever bag and taken out through the port site. On gross
pathologic examination, the peritoneal loose body measured 50 × 40 × 40 mm. It was yellow-white, oval in shape, and it had a bony-hard,
smooth surface. The cross section displayed a thread-like appearance. There were two calcified cores filled with yellow cheese-like
material, and the interval distance between the two cores was about 5 mm (Figure 4). Histologically, the lesion consisted of well-
circumscribed, unencapsulated, paucicellular tissue, with an obviously hyalinized fibrosclerotic center. At the periphery, the lesion was
paucicellular, containing spindled fibroblasts embedded in a collagenous stroma (Figure 5).Figure 4 Gross pathologic examination. (A) The
peritoneal loose body was 50 × 40 × 40 mm in size, oval-shaped, and yellow-white in appearance with a bony-hard, smooth surface, but without
an obviously fibrous capsule. (B) The cross section displayed a thread-like appearance. There were two calcified cores filled with yellow
cheese-like material.Figure 5 Histologic findings. (A) The lesion consisted of well-circumscribed, unencapsulated, paucicellular tissue,
with an obviously hyalinized fibrosclerotic center [HE, ×100]. (B) At the periphery, the lesion was paucicellular, containing spindled
fibroblasts embedded in a collagenous stroma. Scattered slit-like spaces were frequent [HE, ×400]. Gross pathologic examination. (A) The
peritoneal loose body was 50 × 40 × 40 mm in size, oval-shaped, and yellow-white in appearance with a bony-hard, smooth surface, but without
an obviously fibrous capsule. (B) The cross section displayed a thread-like appearance. There were two calcified cores filled with yellow
cheese-like material. Histologic findings. (A) The lesion consisted of well-circumscribed, unencapsulated, paucicellular tissue, with an
obviously hyalinized fibrosclerotic center [HE, ×100]. (B) At the periphery, the lesion was paucicellular, containing spindled fibroblasts
embedded in a collagenous stroma. Scattered slit-like spaces were frequent [HE, ×400]. Our patient recovered well post-operatively. He was
discharged from the hospital 2 days after surgery. Peritoneal loose bodies are also called peritoneal mice. There is limited information
about the incidence of peritoneal loose bodies around the world. They are very rare and usually incidentally diagnosed during surgery or
autopsy. The characteristics of 22 cases that have been reported are shown in Table 1; we found that peritoneal loose body is more common in
males. The incidence rate ratio between males and females is 18:4. The age span of patients at the time of diagnosis ranges from 2 months to
79 years, and the majority occurs in patients between 50 and 70 years old. Most peritoneal loose bodies range from 5 to 25 mm in size and
generally do not cause any symptoms. When the maximum diameter reaches more than 50 mm, they can be called giant peritoneal loose bodies.
The largest peritoneal loose body measured 95 × 86 mm and was reported by Mohri et al. in 2007. Giant peritoneal loose bodies are not
usually associated with specific symptoms except for chronic abdominal pain in some cases . In our case, the giant peritoneal loose body was
50 × 40 × 40 mm in size and did not cause any discomfort; it was found incidentally on physical examination. Occasionally, if the peritoneal
loose bodies are large enough and in a particular location, patients may be admitted to the hospital with acute urinary retention or
intestinal obstruction due to extrinsic compression.Table 1 Summary of the information of 22 cases in the literature Author Published year
Gender Age Symptoms Size of PLB (mm) Weight of PLB (g) Surgical methods Mohri et al. 2007M73 yearsAbdominal pain95 × 75 × 66220OpenHedawoo
and Wagh 2010M65 yearsAbdominal pain95 × 86-OpenMurat and Gettman 2004M47 yearsPelvic pain35 × 28 × 25-LaparoscopyBhandarwar et al.
1996M65 yearsAcute retention of urine90 × 80210OpenShepherd 1951M79 yearsAcute retention of urine70 × 55-OpenSewkani et al.
2011M64 yearsAbdominal pain70 × 5074OpenGhosh et al. 2006M63 yearsIntestinal obstruction58 × 45 × 37 and 52 × 45 × 37-OpenKao et al.
2010F69 yearsIntestinal obstruction40 × 30 × 23-OpenKogao et al. 2010F33 yearsInfertility30 × 20-LaparoscopyGayer and Petrovitch
2011M59 yearsIncidental30-UntreatedNomura et al. 2003M63 yearsIncidental50 × 40 × 30-LaparoscopyAsabe et al. 2005F2 monthsUrinary tract
infection30-LaparoscopyKim et al. 2013M50 yearsIncidental75 × 70 × 68160LaparoscopySahadev and Nagappa 2014M52 yearsAbdominal
pain70 × 60-LaparoscopyJang et al. 2012M60 yearsIncidental45 × 40 × 30-LaparoscopyNozu and Okumuta 2012M67 yearsIncidental40-UntreatedBurns
and James 1969F33 yearsIncidental18 × 13-OpenMaekawa 2013M58 yearsIncidental20-OpenMakineni et al. 2014M52 yearsAbdominal
discomfort60-OpenAllam et al. 2013M77 yearsAbdominal pain17-UntreatedHuang et al. 2011M55 yearsIntestinal obstruction--OpenTakada et al.
1998M79 yearsIncidental70 × 60 and 70 × 6078 and 66OpenPLB, peritoneal loose body. Summary of the information of 22 cases in the literature
PLB, peritoneal loose body. Thus far, the exact pathogenesis of peritoneal loose bodies has not been clearly defined. Possible sources
include: (1) appendix epiploica, (2) omentum , (3) autoamputated adnexa , or (4) fat tissue in the pancreas . The most common source is
appendix epiploica. It is believed that the process is sequential. First, chronic torsion of the appendix epiploica occurs, and the blood
supply is shut off, followed by saponification and calcification of fat tissue. Finally, the appendix epiploica detaches from the colon due
to atrophy of the pedicle and becomes a peritoneal loose body. Many authors suggest that the body gradually absorbs protein from peritoneal
serum. The size of the peritoneal loose body increases slowly, like a snowball. However, the growth speed of the peritoneal loose body and
the factors that promote or inhibit growth are unknown. Mohri et al. discovered a peritoneal loose body in a 73-year-old man’s pelvic cavity
that grew from 73 × 70 mm to 95 × 75 mm in 5 years. In addition, there was another case of a peritoneal loose body that did not
significantly change in size or appearance in 3 years. Interestingly, Koga K et al. removed a 30 × 20 mm peritoneal loose body from a
33-year-old woman who, at 9 years of age, had adnexal torsion followed by calcification and autoamputation. The differential diagnosis
associated with peritoneal loose body include the following: (1) benign disease: leiomyoma, rhabdomyomas, teratoma, and fibroma; (2)
malignant disease: colorectal cancer, ovarian cancer, and metastases; (3) calculous disease: urinary stones, gallstones, and appendix
stones; (4) tubercular granuloma; and (5) others: calcification of lymph nodes, lymphoma, and foreign bodies. CT and MRI can be performed to
distinguish peritoneal loose bodies from other lesions. For example, leiomyoma and some tumors enhance after injection of a contrast agent,
while the appearance of peritoneal loose bodies remains unchanged. Treatment is surgical removal because it is not easy to establish
definite diagnosis preoperatively via physical examination and imaging technologies. Laparoscopic exploration is recommended . Laparoscopy
not only reduces surgical trauma but also shortens the patient’s hospitalization time. In our case, the patient was discharged from the
hospital 2 days after surgery. Moreover, the loose body can be removed through a slightly enlarged trocar incision, and patients will not
have a scar. Until now, there have been no reports about the leading cause of death or recurrence in patients with peritoneal loose body. No
harm has been shown to patients who receive active treatment. Peritoneal loose bodies are generally found incidentally. Clinically, if CT or
other imaging shows an oval-shaped mass with or without calcifications in the central region, peritoneal loose body should be considered.
Surgical removal is recommended for the patient with acute retention of urine or intestinal obstruction. Additionally, laparoscopy may be
the best choice when the preoperative diagnosis is not clear and the lesion does not cause any clinical symptoms. Written informed consent
was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available
for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions HZ and YZL were involved in drafting the manuscript. MMC and ZXX were involved in acquisition of data and preparing the
figures. YF and CSC designed and revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The study was financially
supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Liaoning Province, China (2013021098).
