Heart failure (HF) is the major cause of cardiovascular hospitalization in Brazil1. It is estimated that approximately 1%–2% of the
population present with HF and 50% of these individuals have a decreased ejection fraction2. In the last 30 years, despite the substantial
improvement in the treatment of chronic HF, the quality of life and survival rates of affected patients are limited. In addition, most of
these patients are refractory to standard treatment and hospitalization, and rates of death or rehospitalization within 6 months are
approximately 50%2. Heart transplantation (HT) is considered the standard treatment in patients with advanced or refractory HF. However,
this procedure is limited by the number of available donors and possible contraindications, such as pulmonary hypertension (PH) secondary to
HF3. Since 1994, after the approval of the use of implantable ventricular assist devices (VADs) for long-term therapy in patients with
advanced HF in the United States, there has been an increased interest in these devices. Technological improvement of VADs has resulted in
the improved survival and quality of life in patients undergoing implantation, and the limitations of HT render these devices as an
important tool for the treatment of advanced HF4,5. In Brazil, VAD therapy for patients with HF is still nascent. Here we report, to the
best of our knowledge, the first case of hospital discharge after VAD implantation and subsequent HT. A 41-year-old male patient presented
with HF symptoms and was diagnosed with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy in 2008. Even after optimization of drug therapy, HF remained as
New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class II. The patient had no other comorbidities. In 2012, the patient experienced a
progressive worsening of symptoms and signs of HF in spite of therapy with enalapril, carvedilol, spironolactone, ivabradine, digoxin, and
furosemide. After being hospitalized for cardiogenic shock, the patient was started on intravenous administration of inotropic and
vasodilator agents. This resulted in the stabilization of hemodynamic parameters, but the patient remained dependent on inotropic support
[Interagency Registry for Mechanically Circulatory Support (INTERMACS classification 3). The echocardiographic parameters at admission are
detailed in Table 1. The evaluation for HT revealed the following findings: a significant HF with pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) of 96 × 33
(56) mmHg, transpulmonary gradient of 25 mmHg, and pulmonary vascular resistance of 6.5 Wood units, with little response to systemic and
pulmonary vasodilators. Thus HT was contraindicated and the patient was then indicated for VAD therapy. Pre-VAD implantation echocardiogram
results LA: left atrium; LVDD: left ventricular diastolic diameter; LVSD: left ventricular systolic diameter; FSLV: fractional shortening of
the left ventricle; LVEF: left ventricular ejection fraction; MR: degree of mitral regurgitation; TR: degree of tricuspid regurgitation; PW:
posterior wall; SPAP: estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure; RV: right ventricle; LVDV: left ventricular diastolic volume; LVSV; left
ventricular systolic volume; TAPSE: tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion The patient had a few risk factors for right ventricular (RV)
dysfunction, one of the major early complications of VAD implantation. The central venous pressure was 15 mmHg, with mild tricuspid
insufficiency. Echocardiographic evaluation (Table 1) showed no significant RV dilation, and the main parameters used in the assessment of
RV function [tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE), fractional area change, and S’ wave] suggested a mild RV dysfunction. In
August 2012, the patient underwent implantation of continuous-flow VAD (Berlin Heart INCOR®). The flow was approximately 5 L/min and the
hemodynamic management was initially performed with inotropic agents, vasopressors, nitric oxide, and diuretics/crystalloid for adjustment
of blood volume. The patient’s hemodynamic parameters were stable postoperatively. The anticoagulation regime administered to the patient
involved unfractionated heparin and antiplatelet therapy and was initiated early on the first postoperative day. During the postoperative
period, serial computed tomography examinations revealed that the patient exhibited transient focal neurological deficit without evidence of
structural changes. In addition, the patient presented with pneumonia associated with mechanical ventilation, need for prolonged intubation,
and acute renal failure (ARF). Therefore, he was subjected to transient renal replacement therapy. These complications were fully reversed
during recovery. Subsequently, HF therapy with enalapril, beta-blockers, loop diuretics, spironolactone, and sildenafil was reintroduced.
The patient was maintained on warfarin and antiplatelet therapy with acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) and clopidogrel, and was discharged 137 days
after VAD implantation, without any functional dependence and in good clinical condition. Sequential echocardiographic evaluations after VAD
implantation showed no worsening of RV function. In addition, we observed a significant decrease in the systolic PAP during recovery (Table
2), which eliminated the contraindication for HT. Eight months after VAD implantation, the patient expressed desire to be listed for HT.
Evolution of pulmonary systolic pressure estimated by echocardiography SPAP: systolic pulmonary artery pressure. In the immunological
evaluation of the patient, the immune panel (HLA I/II using the Luminex® method) changed from 0%/0% before VAD implantation to 0%/23% after
implantation. After inclusion in the HT list, the patient developed signs of inflammation in the subxiphoid region. Because the VAD
infection did not resolve with antibiotic therapy, the patient was prioritized for HT, to avoid VAD-associated complications. Approximately
14 months after implantation, the patient underwent HT successfully without acute rejection or graft dysfunction. However, he had infectious
complications and reversible acute renal failure, and he was discharged 75 days after the procedure. At present, the patient is on
outpatient care, with a good functional status. The INTERMACS database has reported the implantation of approximately 7,000 VADs worldwide
since 2006; in addition, after 2010, the number of annual implants has increased 10 times in comparison with the first registration
years4,5. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of a patient discharge in Brazil after VAD implantation and subsequent HT.
The first case of mechanical circulatory support in Brazil was reported in 1994, when a patient with Chagas cardiomyopathy received a
ventricular assist device as a bridge to transplant6. Indwelling devices are indicated for the following situations (i) long-term strategic
planning for patients eligible for HT (bridge to transplantation), aiming at improving the functionality of VADs and the patient’s quality
of life, in comparison with those with a long waiting period in the transplantation list; (ii) in patients in whom HT benefits are uncertain
or marginal (bridge to application); (iii) as definitive therapy for those who are not candidates or in case of HT unavailability7. The
first indwelling devices introduced into clinical practice were pulsatile. The REMATCH Trial randomly selected 129 patients, with HF NYHA
class IV and ineligible for HT, to receive the HeartMate XVE™ device or remain on standard drug therapy. The implantation of the device
yielded a 48% decrease in the risk of death within 1 year after implantation8. The HeartMate II trial randomly selected 200 patients, with
advanced HF and ineligible for HT, to receive continuous flow or pulsatile flow devices. The 2-year survival rates in the pulsatile and
continuous flow groups were 24% and 58%, respectively9. At present, most VAD implants serve as a bridge to HT in patients with cardiogenic
shock who require inotropic agents and in those who are either clinically stable (INTERMACS classification 3) or have progressive clinical
worsening (INTERMACS classification 2). However, in recent years, we have observed a progressive increase in the number of implants in less-
severe patients and as definitive therapy for those ineligible for HT4. The patient described in the present case report was initially
considered as a candidate for VAD implantation because of PH and important contraindications to HT. However, after 120 days of implantation,
there was a significant decrease in PAP values, which reached levels close to normal. This decrease in pulmonary pressures in patients who
underwent VAD implantation has been previously described, and some authors advocate the use of VAD therapy to decrease the pulmonary
pressure on potential HT candidates with PH10. Despite the immunological sensitization after VAD implantation, there were no acute
rejections after HT. The transfusions of blood products after implantation may be related to the post-procedure sensitization; however, a
correlation between VAD implantation and alloimmunization may exist11. This case shows that VAD implantation is feasible in Brazilian
patients with advanced HF who are contraindicated for HT. Initial PH did not affect implantation outcomes, and the subsequent normalization
of PAP led to successful HT. In Brazil, the number of VAD implants is substantially lower than that in the United States and Europe. Despite
evidence of improved survival and quality of life in patients who underwent VAD implantation, the direct and indirect costs of this therapy
are still high and the procedure is not free of complications. Therefore, an evaluation of cost-effectiveness is necessary for the careful
selection of patients who would benefit from this therapy, considering the nascent use of VADs in Brazil. Author contributions Conception
and design of the research: Biselli B, Ayub- Ferreira SM, Avila MS, Gaiotto FA, Jatene FB, Bocchi EA; Acquisition of data: Biselli B, Ayub-
Ferreira SM, Avila MS, Gaiotto FA, Jatene FB, Bocchi EA; Analysis and interpretation of the data: Biselli B, Ayub-Ferreira SM, Avila MS,
Gaiotto FA, Jatene FB, Bocchi EA; Writing of the manuscript: Biselli B, Ayub-Ferreira SM, Bocchi EA; Critical revision of the manuscript for
intellectual content: Biselli B, Ayub-Ferreira SM, Avila MS, Gaiotto FA, Jatene FB, Bocchi EA. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential
conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Sources of Funding There were no external funding sources for this study. Study
Association This study is not associated with any thesis or dissertation work.
