Cases of primary gastric adenocarcinoma with metastasis to the breast are extremely rare. Till now, only 38 cases have been reported in
PubMed since 1908. We herein reported a race case of gastric adenocarcinoma with metastasis to the right breast. Breast biopsy showed
invasive signet-ring cell breast carcinoma in the right breast. She was given a TEC regimen (docetaxel 75 mg/m2, epirubicin 75 mg/m2, and
cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2 every 3 weeks) for one cycle but showed no objective response. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy demonstrated an
ulcerative mass in the gastric body. Biopsy demonstrated low-grade gastric adenocarcinoma with signet-ring features. In
immunohistochemistry, mammary malignant cells were positive for cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20, villin, and ErbB2/HER2, but negative for
gross cystic disease fluid protein-15, estrogen receptor, and progesterone receptor. The diagnosis of metastatic poorly differentiated
signet-ring cell adenocarcinoma of the right breast identical to gastric primary was confirmed finally. Gastric cancer with metastasis to
the breast can be diagnosed by clinical history, histological findings, and immunohistochemical markers. Gastric carcinoma with metastasis
to the breast is extremely rare. Only 38 cases have been reported in PubMed thus far. The lymph node dissemination might be the possible
mechanism of metastasis from the stomach to the breast. Sometimes, a metastatic tumor in an occult site may be difficult to be distinguished
between a synchronous or metachronous primary cancer and a metastatic disease, especially when it is asymptomatic. In this study, we
reported a case of a 48-year-old Chinese woman with a metastasis to the right breast from a gastric signet-ring cell carcinoma and reviewed
the literature. A 48-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to the Subei People’s Hospital of Jiangsu Province, China, on 29 July 2014. She
complained of a lump in the right breast. Physical examination showed an 8.0-cm × 5.0-cm mass lying in the upper inner quadrant of the right
breast with axillary lymphadenopathy on both sides. The ultrasound showed an 8.9-cm × 4.7-cm ill-defined lesion in the upper inner quadrant
of the right breast and a 1.8-cm × 1.2-cm enlarged lymph node in the right axilla (Figure 1A,B). Core needle biopsy showed invasive signet-
ring cell breast carcinoma (Figure 2A). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed that tumor cells were positive for epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) and ErbB2/HER2, but negative for estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR). Serum tumor markers including
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), cancer antigen (CA) 153, CA125, and CA199 did not elevate. A TEC regimen (docetaxel 75 mg/m2, epirubicin
75 mg/m2, and cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2 every 3 weeks) was administered as neoadjuvant chemotherapy.Figure 1 Ultrasonography of the breast.
In 30 July 2014, ultrasonography revealed an 88.7-mm × 47.0-mm ill-defined heterogeneity lesion (arrow) in the upper inner quadrant of the
right breast (A) with right enlarged axillary lymph nodes (arrow), 17.9 mm × 12.4 mm in diameter (B). In 21 August 2014, ultrasonography
revealed a 94.3-mm × 63.6-mm ill-defined heterogeneity lesion (arrow) in the upper inner quadrant of the right breast (C) with right
enlarged axillary lymph nodes (arrow), 25.9 mm × 11.4 mm in diameter (D).Figure 2 Breast and gastric biopsy and immunohistochemical
analysis. Breast biopsy showed invasive carcinoma with signet-ring cells (hematoxylin and eosin, magnification × 100) (A). Gastric biopsy
showed infiltration from a diffuse-type low-grade gastric adenocarcinoma with signet-ring features (hematoxylin and eosin,
magnification × 100) (B). Immunohistochemical analysis revealed mammary tumor cells were positive for ErbB2/HER2 (C), CK7 (D), CK20 (E), and
villin (F), but negative for ER (G), PR (H), and GCDFP-15 (I) (3,3′-diaminobenzidine, magnification × 100). Ultrasonography of the breast.
In 30 July 2014, ultrasonography revealed an 88.7-mm × 47.0-mm ill-defined heterogeneity lesion (arrow) in the upper inner quadrant of the
right breast (A) with right enlarged axillary lymph nodes (arrow), 17.9 mm × 12.4 mm in diameter (B). In 21 August 2014, ultrasonography
revealed a 94.3-mm × 63.6-mm ill-defined heterogeneity lesion (arrow) in the upper inner quadrant of the right breast (C) with right
enlarged axillary lymph nodes (arrow), 25.9 mm × 11.4 mm in diameter (D). Breast and gastric biopsy and immunohistochemical analysis. Breast
biopsy showed invasive carcinoma with signet-ring cells (hematoxylin and eosin, magnification × 100) (A). Gastric biopsy showed infiltration
from a diffuse-type low-grade gastric adenocarcinoma with signet-ring features (hematoxylin and eosin, magnification × 100) (B).
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed mammary tumor cells were positive for ErbB2/HER2 (C), CK7 (D), CK20 (E), and villin (F), but negative
for ER (G), PR (H), and GCDFP-15 (I) (3,3′-diaminobenzidine, magnification × 100). Because of less response to chemotherapy, ultrasonography
was performed and showed an increased 9.4-cm × 6.4-cm ill-defined hypoechoic mass in the upper inner quadrant as well as a 2.6-cm × 1.1-cm
enlarged lymph node in the right axilla on 21 August 2014 (Figure 1C,D). Enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a
circumferential mural thickening of the gastric body wall (Figure 3C). Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy demonstrated an ulcerative mass in
the gastric body (Figure 3A,B). Biopsy of the lesion revealed infiltration from a diffuse-type low-grade gastric adenocarcinoma with signet-
ring features (Figure 2B). Serum tumor markers including CEA, CA153, CA125, and CA199 were measured, and only CA199 was highly elevated
(more than 1000 IU/mL). Further immunohistochemistry showed the tumor was positive for cytokeratin 7 (CK7), CK20, villin, and ErbB2/HER2,
but negative for gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 (GCDFP-15), ER, and PR (Figure 2C,D,E,F,G,H,I and Table 1). These features helped to
make the diagnosis of primary gastric adenocarcinoma with metastasis to the right breast. Then, the patient was treated with SOX regimen for
four cycles (S-1 80 mg/m2, oxaliplatin 100 mg/m2). At time of submission of our manuscript, the patient responded well to the adjusted
chemotherapy and was followed for 4 months after the definite diagnosis was made.Figure 3 Gastric endoscopy and enhanced abdominal CT scan.
Gastric endoscopy showed an ulcerative mass in the gastric body (arrows) (A,B). Enhanced abdominal CT scan revealed a circumferential mural
thickening of the gastric body wall (arrows) (C).Table 1 Immunohistochemical analysis of mammary tumor cells Antibodies P/N Antibodies P/N
CK7+GST-Π++CK20+Ki-67 labeling index60%EGFR+PR−ER−P-gp−ErbB2/HER-2+TOPO-II++GCDFP-15−Villin+P/N: positive/negative; CK: cytokeratin; EGFR:
epidermal growth factor receptor; ER: estrogen receptor; ErbB2/HER-2: human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; GCDFP-15: gross cystic
disease fluid protein-15; GST-Π: glutathione S transferases Π; PR: progesterone receptor; P-gp: P-glycoprotein; TOPO-II: topoisomerase II;
−: no cells positive by IHC; ±: sometimes weak positive, sometimes negative by IHC; +: <25% of cells positive by IHC; ++: 25%–50% of cells
positive by IHC; +++: >50% of cells positive by IHC. Gastric endoscopy and enhanced abdominal CT scan. Gastric endoscopy showed an
ulcerative mass in the gastric body (arrows) (A,B). Enhanced abdominal CT scan revealed a circumferential mural thickening of the gastric
body wall (arrows) (C). Immunohistochemical analysis of mammary tumor cells P/N: positive/negative; CK: cytokeratin; EGFR: epidermal growth
factor receptor; ER: estrogen receptor; ErbB2/HER-2: human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; GCDFP-15: gross cystic disease fluid
protein-15; GST-Π: glutathione S transferases Π; PR: progesterone receptor; P-gp: P-glycoprotein; TOPO-II: topoisomerase II; −: no cells
positive by IHC; ±: sometimes weak positive, sometimes negative by IHC; +: <25% of cells positive by IHC; ++: 25%–50% of cells positive by
IHC; +++: >50% of cells positive by IHC. Metastases from extra-mammary malignant neoplasms are rare, constituting only 0.5% to 2.0% of all
mammary malignancies . Malignant melanoma, lymphoma, lung cancer, ovarian cancer, and soft tissue sarcoma have been reported as the most
common original tumor of mammary metastases. Gastrointestinal and genitourinary tumors are less common primary sites. Sporadic cases of
mammary metastasis have been reported from osteosarcoma, thyroid neoplasm, and cervical, vaginal, and endometrial carcinoma . Since primary
gastric adenocarcinoma with metastasis to the breast is extremely rare, PubMed, MEDLINE, Embase, and Google Scholar were searched till
September 2014 using the key words such as “gastric or stomach”; “tumor or cancer or carcinoma or adenocarcinoma”; “breast or mammary”; and
“metastasis.” Only 38 cases have been reported previously. We made a summary of all these 38 cases as well as the present case to highlight
their clinicopathological characteristics (Table 2). The age of these patients ranged from 23 to 70 years (mean 46.5 years; median
46 years). Among 36 cases, 22 harbored a histological feature of signet-ring cell adenocarcinoma. Moreover, multiple metastases could be
found in these cases except the breast.Table 2 Clinicopathological features of reported cases of primary gastric carcinoma with breast
metastasis Case Age Side Differentiation Interval (mo) Other metastases Follow-up (mo) Reitmann et al. 1908a 33R + LScirrhous–––Kreibich et
al. 1909a 65RScirrhous–Skin–Mourier et al. 1910a 31LMucinous–Liver and pancreas–Stahr et al. 1922a 46R + LAnaplastic–––Dawson et al. 1936a
25R + LMucinous–Ovaries–Abrams et al. 1949a ––––––Sandison et al. 1959a 56LSignet-ring cell–––59R + L–4Axillary lymphadenopathy6Hajdu et al.
1972a –LAdenocarcinoma–––Silverman et al. 1974 ––Mucin-producing0––Toombs et al. 1977a ––––––Satake et al. 1980a 39LSignet-ring cell0––Togo
et al. 1980a 70LSignet-ring cell0––Nielsen et al. 1981a 59LMucinous0––Champault et al. 1982a 65LAdenocarcinoma0––46LSignet-ring
cell0Axillary lymphadenopathy12 daysKasuga et al. 1986a 48R + LSignet-ring cell31––28R + LMucinous differentiation0Lymph nodes–31RSignet-
ring cell0Lymph nodes, ovaries–36LPoorly with signet-ring cells72Axillary lymphadenopathy3––Signet-ring cell–––Domanski et al. 1996
48LSignet-ring cell0Left supraclavicular nodes–de la Cruz Mera et al. 1998 61LSignet-ring cell13Pleura–46R + LSignet-ring cell2Bilateral
axillary nodes–41LSignet-ring cell0Ovaries–23RSignet-ring cell0Axillary nodes–Madan et al. 2002 39RSignet-ring cell3Ovaries,
peritoneum–39R + LSignet-ring cell1Ovaries, peritoneum, skin–Boutis et al. 2005 37LSignet-ring cell0Ovaries661RPoorly48Peritoneum2Makni et
al. 2007 40RSignet-ring cell4Ovaries, spleen1867LPoorly with signet-ring cells5Left axillary and supraclavicular nodes4Cil et al. 2009
63LSignet-ring cell12Left axillary nodes4Cil et al. 2009 65LSignet-ring cell24Right ovarian, liver and lung6Soler et al. 2010 37LSignet-ring
cell2Ovarian737LSignet-ring cell31--54RSignet-ring cell0Right ovarian11This case48RSignet-ring cell0Right axillary nodes2 alive aReferences
are included in . Interval: the time between the diagnosis of gastric carcinoma and the development of metastasis to the breast; mo, month;
Poorly: poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma; Signet-ring cell: signet-ring cell carcinoma. Clinicopathological features of reported cases
of primary gastric carcinoma with breast metastasis aReferences are included in . Interval: the time between the diagnosis of gastric
carcinoma and the development of metastasis to the breast; mo, month; Poorly: poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma; Signet-ring cell:
signet-ring cell carcinoma. Metastatic mammary carcinoma is usually correlated with a poor prognosis. Based on the previous reported cases,
the overall survival lasted from 12 days to 18 months. In the metastatic process, mammary involvement could either be the first station or
occur in a polymetastatic context . Although the pathway by which malignancies metastasized to the breast remains unknown, Vergier et al.
hypothesized that estrogen may play a role in promoting extra-mammary tumorigenesis. Also, abundant blood supply of the breast has been
proposed as the mechanism for the increased incidence of breast metastasis in premenopausal women. On the other hand, the metastases from
gastric carcinoma to the breast had a surprisingly unified tendency. The left breast involved accounted for 55.9% (19/34) of all cases,
while the right side accounted for 23.5% (8/34) and both sides 20.6% (7/34). Accordingly, Parrell et al. reported that breast metastases
were most commonly found in the upper outer quadrant of the left side. This phenomenon suggested the left supraclavicular lymph node might
be important in the process of metastasis from gastric carcinoma to the breast. Occult adenocarcinoma often poses a challenge to clinicians
and pathologists and may lead to an absolutely different therapeutic strategy. Histopathology is useful to differentiate mammary metastasis
from primary breast cancer . IHC remains the main choice in identifying the tumor origin. Although only few of tumor markers are very
specific with limited sensitivity, they can be used as a panel to improve the sensitivity. IHC staining for breast metastasis from gastric
cancer is usually negative for ErbB-2, ER, PR, and GCDFP-15, but positive for epithelial markers like CEA, CK7, and CK20 . A primary gastric
adenocarcinoma with metastasis to the breast is an extremely rare malignancy and is usually associated with poor prognosis. Clinical
history, histological findings, and immunohistochemical markers such as CK20, CK7, CDX-2, villin, and GCDFP-15 are helpful in distinguishing
primary breast cancer from breast metastasis of gastric cancer. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient. Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions C-LH performed the majority of this study and drafted the
manuscript. PC, B-LX, QX, and F-LC provided the collection of material from the database. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
