Spontaneous rupture of an ovarian artery aneurysm is extremely rare. Although a majority of these cases have been associated with pregnancy,
there have been recent reports and reviews of rare cases that were not directly associated with pregnancy. Transcatheter arterial
embolization is considered to be an alternative therapy to surgery. A 44-year-old Japanese woman, gravida 3 para 3, presented to our
emergency room complaining of intermittent right flank pain. She had undergone a cesarean section 2 years previously, and had no history of
abdominal trauma. On admission, her blood pressure was 115/78 mmHg, pulse 70 beats per minute, and hemoglobin concentration 9.8 g/dL.
Abdominal ultrasonography and contrast-enhanced dynamic computed tomography revealed a large retroperitoneal hematoma. Findings on three-
dimensional computed tomography angiography suggested ruptured aneurysm of her right ovarian artery. A selective right ovarian artery
angiogram revealed a tortuous aneurysm. Transcatheter arterial embolization using N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate was performed. The aneurysm was
successfully embolized, and her course after embolization was uneventful. She has remained symptom-free during 3 months of follow-up. This
was a very rare case of a patient who had a retroperitoneal hemorrhage originating from an ovarian artery aneurysm. A review of published
case reports found that contrast-enhanced computed tomography with reconstruction images is an excellent imaging tool. Diagnostic
angiography and subsequent transcatheter arterial embolization are thought to be very effective for this condition. Spontaneous rupture of
an ovarian artery aneurysm is extremely rare; only 25 cases have been reported in the English literature . Although a majority of these
cases were related to pregnancy and occurred during the peripartum or postpartum period, there have been recent reports and reviews of rare
cases that were not directly associated with pregnancy . Rupture of an ovarian artery aneurysm leads to retroperitoneal hemorrhage and can
be a life-threatening event. According to previously reported cases, life-saving treatment of a ruptured ovarian artery consists of surgery
that includes ligation of the artery proximal and distal to the site of rupture. However, since the first report by King , transcatheter
arterial embolization (TAE) has emerged as an alternative therapy for patients who are hemodynamically stable. Here, we report the case of a
patient with spontaneous retroperitoneal hemorrhage associated with rupture of an ovarian artery aneurysm who was successfully treated using
TAE only. We also review the published case reports on this rarely occurring condition. A 44-year-old Japanese woman, gravida 3 para 3, who
had undergone cesarean section 2 years previously, presented to our emergency room with a 2-day history of intermittent right flank pain.
She had no fever, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or cough. She had no history of abdominal trauma, and her past medical history and family
history were not significant. She did not have hypertension or cardiovascular disease, and had not taken any anticoagulants. Her bowel and
urinary habits were normal, and her menstrual periods were regular. Her last menstrual period had begun 2 days before the onset of right
flank pain. On admission, her blood pressure was 115/78 mmHg, pulse 70 beats per minute, body temperature 36°C, and blood oxygen saturation
100%. She was found to be somewhat anemic, with a hemoglobin concentration of 9.8 g/dL and hematocrit of 28.2%. Her white blood cell count
was elevated (13,900/mm3), and a urine pregnancy test was negative. On physical examination, her abdomen was diffusely tender without muscle
guarding. A pelvic examination revealed a small amount of menstrual discharge and a normal uterus and bilateral adnexae. Abdominal
ultrasonography demonstrated a large retroperitoneal hematoma surrounding her right kidney (Figure 1A). Emergent abdominal and pelvic
computed tomography (CT) was performed. Contrast-enhanced dynamic CT revealed a large retroperitoneal hematoma surrounding her right kidney
with an enhancing round structure in the center of the hematoma in the arterial phase (Figure 1B). Although extravasation in the venous
phase was not clear, findings on three-dimensional CT angiography were suggestive of a retroperitoneal hematoma due to rupture of an
aneurysm of her right ovarian artery (Figure 1C), and no other responsible lesion was seen. A transfemoral angiography was performed for
arterial embolization under a clinical diagnosis of bleeding from a right ovarian artery aneurysm. A selective angiogram of her right
ovarian artery revealed a tortuous aneurysm near its origin from the aorta without obvious active extravasation (Figure 2A). A 2.1-Fr
microcatheter (Tangent™; Boston Scientific, USA) was advanced into the orifice of the aneurysm, and 1mL of 16.7% N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate
(NBCA) diluted in iodized oil (Lipiodol®; Guerbet Japan, Tokyo, Japan) was manually injected beyond the distal site of the aneurysm. A
postembolization angiogram showed complete occlusion of the vessel (Figure 2B). No other aneurysm was found on three-dimensional CT and
angiography.Figure 1Imaging tests for retroperitoneal hematoma. (A) Abdominal ultrasonography demonstrated a normal right kidney (left side,
arrow) and a large hematoma in the retroperitoneum. A high-echoic lesion can be seen surrounding the right kidney (right side, arrowhead).
(B) Arterial phase contrast-enhanced computed tomography image. A bright round structure (arrow) can be seen in the right retroperitoneal
hematoma. (C) Three-dimensional computed tomography angiogram of the abdomen revealed a right ovarian artery aneurysm (arrow) overriding the
right renal artery. Abbreviations: L, left; R, right; Rt., right; H, head, F, foot.Figure 2Angiograms before and after transcatheter
arterial embolization. (A) Selective angiogram of the right ovarian artery showing several aneurysms (arrow) located near the origin from
the aorta. (B) Angiogram obtained after N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate embolization showing successful embolization of the aneurysm. Note that the
distal tortuous section of the right ovarian artery disappear (arrows). Imaging tests for retroperitoneal hematoma. (A) Abdominal
ultrasonography demonstrated a normal right kidney (left side, arrow) and a large hematoma in the retroperitoneum. A high-echoic lesion can
be seen surrounding the right kidney (right side, arrowhead). (B) Arterial phase contrast-enhanced computed tomography image. A bright round
structure (arrow) can be seen in the right retroperitoneal hematoma. (C) Three-dimensional computed tomography angiogram of the abdomen
revealed a right ovarian artery aneurysm (arrow) overriding the right renal artery. Abbreviations: L, left; R, right; Rt., right; H, head,
F, foot. Angiograms before and after transcatheter arterial embolization. (A) Selective angiogram of the right ovarian artery showing
several aneurysms (arrow) located near the origin from the aorta. (B) Angiogram obtained after N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate embolization showing
successful embolization of the aneurysm. Note that the distal tortuous section of the right ovarian artery disappear (arrows). One day after
TAE, CT was performed, which showed that the hematoma had decreased in size, and there was no sign of extravasation. In addition, her
hemoglobin and hematocrit were found to have dropped to 7.9 g/dL and 24.1%, respectively. She was administered iron for 4 days, with a
subsequent increase in hemoglobin and hematocrit to 8.9g/dL and 25.6%, respectively. No other surgical intervention was needed, and her
course after embolization was uneventful. She was discharged on the fifth hospital day, and has remained symptom-free during 3 months of
follow-up. A retroperitoneal hematoma can be a life-threatening event, as well as a surgical emergency. Abdominal trauma, including
iatrogenic injuries from surgical interventions such as inferior vena cava filter placement and arterial puncture, is the most common cause
of retroperitoneal hemorrhage. In addition, a ruptured aortic or renal artery aneurysm, retroperitoneal tumors, and clotting disorders have
been mentioned as the main causes of retroperitoneal hematoma . The most common presenting symptom of retroperitoneal hematoma is acute
abdominal or flank pain accompanied by clinical signs associated with bleeding. However, the clinical picture is often nonspecific, and the
ruling out of acute abdomen, ureteral calculus, and pyelonephritis is needed. In addition, pregnant patients in the third trimester can be
misdiagnosed with placental abruption or uterine rupture if they do not undergo an adequate imaging examination such as contrast-enhanced
CT, although pregnancy is a relative contraindication to this procedure. The most common arterial sites for ruptured aneurysm in order of
frequency during pregnancy are the aorta, cerebral arteries, splenic artery, renal artery, coronary artery, and ovarian artery . Based on a
MEDLINE search of the English language literature from 1963 to 2014, to the best of our knowledge, only 25 cases of spontaneous rupture of
an ovarian artery aneurysm have been reported . Of these reported cases, 18 cases (72%) were associated with pregnancy (Table 1), and seven
cases (28%) were not directly related to pregnancy (Table 2). The patients whose pregnancy and delivery history were available were all
multigravida. The ages of the patients with pregnancy-related ruptured ovarian aneurysm ranged from 23 to 39 years (mean 33.6 and median 35
years), and the ages of the other patients ranged from 45 to 69 years (mean 51.5 and median 49.5 years). There seemed to be no difference
regarding the side of the body where the ruptured aneurysm occurred. Among pregnancy-related patients, the aneurysm occurred on the left in
eight and right in 10 cases; and among the other patients, on the left in five and right in three cases, including the present case. The
majority of ruptures occurred during the postpartum period, which accounted for 14 out of 18 cases (78%). The onset of rupture occurred
during the third trimester in two patients, who underwent cesarean section followed by ovarian artery ligation.Table 1 Reported 18 cases of
pregnancy-related spontaneous rupture of the ovarian artery Age (years) Gravida/para Side Onset Treatment Author, year 29G4P4L2d
postpartumLaparotomyCaillouette and Owen, 1963 35G6P3L4d postpartumLaparotomyTsoutsoplides, 1967 38G6P6RDuring deliveryLaparotomyRiley, 1975
32G3P3L4d postpartumLaparotomyBurnett and Carfrae, 1976 35G3P3R4d postpartumLaparotomySame as above26G5P4R1d postpartumLaparotomyJafari and
Saleh, 1977 23N/AR1m postpartumLaparotomyMojab and Rodriguez, 1977 31G4P3R39w of gestationLaparotomy (caesarean section, ovarian artery
ligation)Høgdall et al., 1989 36G5P5R4d postpartumTAEKing, 1990 38G3P2RDuring deliveryLaparotomyBelfort et al., 1993 38G3P2R4d
postpartumTAE→ lomboscopic drainageGuillem et al., 1999 38G12P11R3d postpartumLaparotomyBlachar et al., 2000 37P4L39w of gestationLaparotomy
(caesarean section, ovarian artery ligation)Panoskaltsis et al., 2000 30G5P5L5h postpartumLaparotomyKale et al., 2005 39G5P4R5d
postpartumTAEPoilblanc et al., 2008 32P4L2d postpartumLaparotomy→TAEMohammed et al., 2011 37G4P4L4d postpartumTAEWakimoto et al., 2014
31G6P4L2d postpartumTAESakaguchi et al., 2014 Abbreviations: d, day(s); h, hour(s); L, left; m, month; N/A, not available; R, right; TAE,
transcatheter arterial embolization; w, week(s).Table 2 Present case and seven reported cases of pregnancy-unrelated spontaneous rupture of
the ovarian artery Age (years) Gravida/Para Location Onset Treatment Author, year 45G6P5LFollicular phaseLaparotomySiu et al., 1986
53G1P1LPostmenopauseLaparotomyManabe et al., 2002 55G2P2RPostmenopauseTAENakajo et al., 2005 46G3P2L2d of menstruationTAE(failed)→
LaparotomyChao and Chen, 2009 69G3P3LPostmenopauseTAEKirk et al., 2009 48G2P2L2d of menstruationTAE(failed)→ LaparotomyTsai and Lien, 2009
51G3P3RPostmenopauseLaparotomyKodaira et al., 2014 45 G3P3 R 3d of menstruation TAE Present case Abbreviations: d, day(s); L, left; R,
right; TAE, transcatheter arterial embolization. Reported 18 cases of pregnancy-related spontaneous rupture of the ovarian artery
Abbreviations: d, day(s); h, hour(s); L, left; m, month; N/A, not available; R, right; TAE, transcatheter arterial embolization; w, week(s).
Present case and seven reported cases of pregnancy-unrelated spontaneous rupture of the ovarian artery Abbreviations: d, day(s); L, left; R,
right; TAE, transcatheter arterial embolization. Because a ruptured ovarian artery aneurysm mostly occurs in women of high parity, the
repeated hemodynamic and endocrine changes during pregnancy are thought to be the cause of arterial alterations that may lead to new
aneurysm formation and/or weakening of pre-existing aneurysms . In addition to the physiologic changes of pregnancy, hypertension might be a
risk factor for rupture of ovarian artery aneurysm . In earlier reported cases, the diagnosis was always obtained by exploratory laparotomy.
Since Blachar et al. first reported on the use of contrast-enhanced CT with reconstruction images, this imaging modality has been found
highly effective for the preoperative diagnosis of ruptured ovarian artery aneurysm. Of 17 cases published in 1990 or later, TAE was
attempted as a treatment for ruptured ovarian artery aneurysm in 11 cases (64.7%), and the procedure was successful in nine cases, including
ours. Because these patients had good outcomes after a minimally invasive procedure, TAE is currently considered to be the treatment of
choice. The following embolic agents have been used in the previous reports; microcoils in five cases , gelatin sponge particles (GSPs) in
one case , a combination of microcoils and GSP in one case , and NBCA was recently used in one case . Our patient is the second case whose
ruptured ovarian artery aneurysm was successfully treated using NBCA. The mechanism of embolization by microcoil and GSP involves thrombin
formation, which requires normal clotting function. However, NBCA occludes blood vessels because it polymerizes on contact with plasma, and
therefore this method does not depend on the patient’s hemostatic capacity. Yonemitsu et al. evaluated the outcomes of TAE performed using
microcoils, GSP, and NBCA in the setting of coagulopathy. They reported that the rate of primary hemostasis was significantly higher in
patients undergoing NBCA compared to GSP, and the mean treatment time was significantly shorter for the NBCA procedure compared to the
microcoil procedure . Therefore, it is reasonable to consider NBCA as the embolic agent of choice for ruptured ovarian artery aneurysm,
especially for critical patients in shock, who tend to have clotting problems due to coagulopathy. Because most patients with ovarian artery
aneurysm are asymptomatic and rupture is an uncommon event, this condition may be underdiagnosed, and the risk factors for rupture have not
yet been studied in depth. Additional case reports may help clarify the nature of ovarian artery aneurysms. We presented a very rare case of
a patient who had a retroperitoneal hemorrhage that originated from an ovarian artery aneurysm. Contrast-enhanced CT with reconstruction
images has been found to be an excellent imaging tool. Diagnostic angiography combined with subsequent TAE during the same imaging session
is thought to be a useful and highly effective alternative therapeutic procedure for this condition. Because ovarian arteries are potential
sources of pelvic hemorrhage, these vessels should be routinely studied when imaging demonstrates the presence of a retroperitoneal
hematoma, especially in multiparous women, whether or not they are pregnant. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Computed tomography Gelatin sponge particle N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate Transcatheter arterial embolization Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MT analyzed and interpreted the patient data, drafted the
manuscript, and created the figures. TK, SI, HM, YM, TS, RM, NI, KA, YT, and HI performed the physical examinations and medical care. HR and
AS performed the TAE procedure. TK, KA, HI, HR and AS provided valuable insight during manuscript preparation. KY supervised the entire
case. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Dr Hideki Ota (Tohoku University) and Dr Tomonori Matsuura
(Tohoku University) for their critical review of the manuscript.
