Pneumopyopericardium is a rare disease with poor prognosis. The usual presentation is with fever, shortness of breath and haemodynamic
compromise. The Electrocardiogram changes associated with this disease entity would be similar to pericarditis such as concave shaped ST
elevations in all leads with PR sagging. Pneumopyopericardium mimicking an acute ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction, with regional
Electrocardiogram changes has hitherto not been described in world literature. We describe the case of a 48 year old native Sri Lankan man,
presenting with chest pain and Electrocardiogram changes compatible with an Acute ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction, subsequently found to
have Pneumopyopericardium secondary to an oesophageal tear. Retrospective history revealed repetitive vomiting due to heavy alcohol
consumption, prior to presentation. It unfortunately led to a fatal outcome. Pneumopyopericardium may mimic an acute ST elevation myocardial
infarction with associated regional Electrocardiogram changes. A high degree of suspicion should be maintained and an adequate history
should always be obtained prior to any intervention in all ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction patients. Cardiovascular disease is the
leading cause of mortality worldwide . Pericardial disease and effusions account for approximately 6-7% of cardiac disease in the adult
population of which Pneumopyopericardium is a seldom reported disease entity. It was first described by Hallin in 1863 and since then less
than 20 cases have been reported in world literature. The presentation is often preceded by a traumatic or non-traumatic ulceration of the
oesophagus or stomach. Presenting symptoms of pneumopyopericardium include but are not limited to fever, pleuritic chest pain, shortness of
breath associated with significant haemodynamic compromise . The commonest precipitating cause is a non-traumatic oesophageal ulcer or
carcinoma . Electrocardiogram (ECG) changes associated with the disease are comparable to generalized pericarditis, with concave shaped ST
elevations in all leads with PR segment sagging . A presentation mimicking an Acute ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI) with regional
electrocardiogram changes has hitherto not been described in published world literature. A 48 year old Sinhalese man from Chillaw, Sri Lanka
presented to his local hospital with a history of sudden onset retrosternal chest pain, shortness of breath and sweating. He was a heavy
alcohol abuser, consuming 10 Units of Local Arrack (Ethanol) on a daily basis with occasional use of illicit alcohol (Methanol). An ECG
taken at the local hospital is seen in Figure 1. It was suggestive of an Acute Inferior ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction. In the absence
of any known complications and as interventional facilities were not available at that centre, he was thrombolysed with IV streptokinase. As
the patient had persistent chest pain and unresolved ST segment changes, he was transferred to the National Hospital of Sri Lanka for
further management. A retrospective history revealed the patient had repetitively vomited prior to his initial presentation preceded by
heavy alcohol consumption. Examination revealed muffled heart sounds and a pericardial friction rub. An immediate bedside 2 Dimensional
Echocardiogram was performed which had poor echo windows but a moderate pericardial effusion was identified with no clear evidence of
tamponade. There was no significant regional wall motion abnormalities. A Chest X-Ray – Antero-Posterior View was performed (Figure 2) which
was followed by a Contrast Computer Tomography Chest (Figure 3). An urgent pericardial aspiration evacuated 800 millilitres of frank pus and
a diagnosis of pneumopyopericardium was made. In search of a possible aetiology, a Gastrograffin study was performed (Figure 4). An
immediate surgical referral was made which was followed by endoscopic covered stent placement. Intravenous meropenem was commenced pending
culture reports. Troponin I titres were negative. A coronary angiogram was not performed on the patient due to high risk and haemodynamic
instability. Unfortunately, two days after treatment at the coronary care unit, the patient developed a cardiac arrest and expired.Figure
1Electrocardiogram – Initial Electrocardiogram of the patient showing ST elevations in the Inferior Leads with Reciprocal ST depressions in
lateral leads.Figure 2Chest X-Ray – Chest X-Ray – Anterior-Posterior View of the patient showing air and fluid around the heart.Figure
3Contrast Computer Tomography Chest – Contrast Computed Tomography Chest showing air and fluid around the heart.Figure 4Gastrograffin Test –
Gastrograffin test showing lower oesophageal rupture and covered stent placement. Electrocardiogram – Initial Electrocardiogram of the
patient showing ST elevations in the Inferior Leads with Reciprocal ST depressions in lateral leads. Chest X-Ray – Chest X-Ray – Anterior-
Posterior View of the patient showing air and fluid around the heart. Contrast Computer Tomography Chest – Contrast Computed Tomography
Chest showing air and fluid around the heart. Gastrograffin Test – Gastrograffin test showing lower oesophageal rupture and covered stent
placement. Pneumopyopericardium is an uncommon disease entity, with less than 20 cases reported to date in world literature. Our case
provides insight in to a rare and never before described presentation mimicking an acute ST elevation myocardial infarction with regional
electrocardiogram changes. Although falsely managed as an acute coronary syndrome initially, a diagnosis of pneumopyopericardium was
retrospectively made. A focused history prior to intervention may have predicted the disease, as the patient complained of persistent
vomiting secondary to heavy alcohol abuse. Consistent with other reported cases, this patient was also found to have an oesophageal rupture.
A possible cause for acute ST segment elevations in this scenario could be a localized myopericarditis, which has been reported previously .
Regional ST segment changes are known to occur in this circumstance, contrary to the generalized ECG changes associated with a more
extensive pericarditis. A coronary angiogram was not performed on this patient to assess his coronary arteries as he was unstable
haemodynamically and carried high mortality risk. However, an acute coronary syndrome secondary to significant coronary artery disease could
be excluded by the negative Troponin titre and lack of significant regional wall motion abnormalities on 2 Dimensional echocardiography.
Although timely intervention was initiated with a covered stent placed at the ruptured part of the oesophagus by the surgical team,
overwhelming sepsis took over and the patient eventually had a fatal outcome. Poor prognosis following pneumopyopericadium is well
documented in world literature . Pneumopyopericardium may present as an acute ST elevation myocardial infarction. A high degree of suspicion
should be maintained in the correct clinical setting. The prognosis remains poor, despite maximal medical and surgical management for the
condition. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Electrocardiogram ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction
Chest X-Ray Computed tomography Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions ECR
carried out the literature search and drafted the manuscript; WSS did the critical revision for important intellectual content in the
manuscript and given the final approval of the version to be published; NL, SP, SF, NF and CP helped substantially in literature search and
drafting the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information ECR is a Senior Registrar in Cardiology at
National Hospital of Sri Lanka. NL is a Senior Registrar in Cardiology at National Hospital of Sri Lanka. SP is a Senior Registrar in
Cardiology at National Hospital of Sri Lanka. SF is a Research assistant attached to the Institute of Cardiology, National Hospital of Sri
Lanka. NF is a Consultant Neurologist and Senior Lecturer in Pharmacology at the Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Sri
Jayawardenapura, Sri Lanka. CP is a Resident Cardiologist at the National Hospital of Sri Lanka. WSS is a Consultant Cardiologist at the
National Hospital of Sri Lanka. The authors thank the departments of radiology, microbiology and surgery at the National Hospital of Sri
Lanka for providing help in diagnosing and managing the patient mentioned in the case report
