Waardenburg syndrome type I (WS1), an auditory-pigmentary genetic disorder, is caused by heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in PAX3.
Abnormal physical signs such as dystopia canthorum, patchy hypopigmentation and sensorineural hearing loss are common, but short stature is
not associated with WS1. We reported a 4-year and 6 month-old boy with a rare combination of WS1 and severe short stature (83.5 cm
(−5.8SD)). His facial features include dystopia canthorum, mild synophrys, slightly up-slanted palpebral fissure, posteriorly rotated ears,
alae nasi hypoplasia and micrognathia. No heterochromia was noticed. He had a normal intelligence quotient and hearing. Insulin-like growth
factor-1 (IGF-1) was 52.7 ng/ml, lower than the normal range (55 ~ 452 ng/ml) and the peak growth hormone level was 7.57 ng/ml at 90 minutes
after taking moderate levodopa and pyridostigmine bromide. The patient exhibited a good response to human growth hormone (rhGH) replacement
therapy, showing a 9.2 cm/year growth rate and an improvement of 1 standard deviation (SD) of height after one year treatment. CMA test of
patient’s DNA revealed a 4.46 Mb de novo deletion at 2q35-q36.2 (hg19; chr2:221,234,146-225,697,363). PAX3 haploinsufficiency is known to
cause Waardenburg syndrome. Examining overlapping deletions in patients led to the conclusion that EPHA4 is a novel short stature gene. The
finding is supported by the splotch-retarded and epha4 knockout mouse models which both showed growth retardation. We believe this rare
condition is caused by the haploinsufficiency of both PAX3 and EPH4 genes. We further reported a growth response to recombinant human growth
hormone treatment in this patient. Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is a group of auditory-pigmentary genetic disorders caused by neural crest
development defects. Mutations in PAX3, a transcription factor belonging to the family of paired-box-containing proteins, causes WS type 1
(WS1, OMIM # 193500) and type 3 (WS3, OMIM # 148820). WS1 and WS3 are characterized by dystopia canthorum, a lateral displacement of inner
canthus of the eyes. This feature is highly penetrant for WS1, can be objectively determined by measuring the W indexa . Hearing loss,
pigmentary disturbances of the iris, hair and skin are other common features of Waardenburg syndrome with variable penetrance. Clinically,
Waardenburg syndrome can be diagnosed based on the presence of two major features or one major feature plus two minor features . Major
features are sensorineural hearing loss, iris pigmentary abnormality, hair hypopigmentation, dystopia canthorum (W index > 1.95) and
affected first-degree relative. Minor features include skin hypopigmentation, synophrys, broad nasal root, hypoplastic alae nasi, and
premature graying of the hair. Short stature is not associated with WS1. WS3, sometimes called Klein-Waardenburg syndrome, includes
abnormalities of the upper limbs in addition to dystopia canthorum, hearing loss and changes in pigmentation. About 90% of pathogenic
variants in PAX3 are nucleotide level alterations detectable by sequencing, whereas an additional 10% of WS1 are caused by large deletions
involving part or the whole PAX3 gene . These variants may be detected by karyotyping , FISH and MLPA . Recently chromosomal microarray
(CMA) analysis has allowed for a more accurate delineation of the deletion interval and genes involved, allowing for better genotype-
phenotype correlation study. Here we report a 4-year and 6 month-old Chinese boy with a rare combination of Waardenburg syndrome type 1 and
severe short stature. The patient was the first child of a non-consanguineous marriage. He had severe short stature (83.5 cm (−5.8SD)) and
poor weight gain (10 kg (−4.1 SD)). Both parents had short stature but are healthy: father’s height is 153 cm (−3.2 SD) and mother’s height
is 148 cm (−2.3SD). Patient’s short stature is proportionate. His facial features included dystopia canthorum (W index = 2.31), mild
synophrys, slightly up-slanted palpebral fissure, posteriorly rotated ear, alae nasi hypoplasia and micrognathia (Figure 1a and b). He has
normal intelligence and hearing. No heterochromia or other pigmentation anomalies was noticed. Physical examination did not find any other
abnormalities. The patient met the clinical diagnostic criteria of WS1. Routine blood, urine tests as well as liver and renal function tests
were all normal. Endocrine tests for TSH, FT3, FT4, FSH, LH and insulin were normal. Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) was 52.7 ng/ml,
lower than the normal range (55 ~ 452 ng/ml). The peak growth hormone level was 7.57 ng/ml at 90 minutes after taking moderate levodopa and
pyridostigmine bromide. Brain MRI revealed a pituitary gland about 3.2 cm long without abnormal morphology. Bone age based on left hand
X-ray is 1.5 years.Figure 1Characteristic facial feature of the patient. A and B are the front and side views of the patient. Notable
features include ocular hypertelorism, dystopia canthorum, short philtrum and wide based nose root with hypoplasia alae nasi. Characteristic
facial feature of the patient. A and B are the front and side views of the patient. Notable features include ocular hypertelorism, dystopia
canthorum, short philtrum and wide based nose root with hypoplasia alae nasi. The patient underwent recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH)
replacement therapy for over a year. The daily dosage was 0.11 IU/kg. Growth velocity and side-effect profile were monitored for at regular
intervals (Table 1). The patient exhibited a good response to rhGH treatment. He showed a 9.2 cm/year growth rate and an improvement of 1 SD
of height after one year treatment (Figure 2).Table 1 Efficacy and side-effect of the rhGH treatment Course of GH treatment HT (cm) HT SDS
(SDS) Body weight (kg) Bone age (y) Drug dose (IU/kg) IGF-1 (ng/ml) Side-effect prior treatment83.5−5.8010.01.5-52.7-1 month of
therapy85.3−5.4710.0-0.1175.8N3 month of therapy87.0−5.1710.5-0.11-N6 month of therapy88.3−5.0911.02.00.1099.1N7 month of
therapy89.5−5.1311.5-0.10-N8 month of therapy89.9−5.2410.5-0.11-N11 month of therapy92.2−4.8311.5-0.12-N13 month of
therapy93.3−4.7611.02.00.12128.0N15 months of therapy94.8−4.7011.5-0.12-N9 months out of therapy98.1−4.8012.0-0.12-NFigure 2Height standard
deviation curve during replacement therapy with rhGH. Efficacy and side-effect of the rhGH treatment Height standard deviation curve during
replacement therapy with rhGH. CMA test of patient’s DNA using illumina Human SNP cyto-12 array revealed a 4.46 Mb de novo deletion at
2q35-q36.2 (chr2:221,234,146-225,697,363) (hg19, Figure 3). The deletion involved the whole PAX3 gene which is responsible for the
Waardenburg syndrome phenotype and neighboring genes including EPHA4.Figure 3Array profile of the deleted region at 2q35q36.2. The left
panel is the whole chromosome view; the right panel is a zoomed-in view of the deleted region demarcated by the two arrows and a vertical
red bar. Array profile of the deleted region at 2q35q36.2. The left panel is the whole chromosome view; the right panel is a zoomed-in view
of the deleted region demarcated by the two arrows and a vertical red bar. We evaluated previously published cases of overlapping deletions
with our case’s (Table 2 and Figure 4). We noticed that two thirds of deletion cases reported short stature or growth retardation as one of
the phenotypic features when EPHA4 gene was involved in the deletions. The remaining cases did not provide height information. The animal
model supported the notion that the EPHA4 deletion is responsible for short stature. The Spr mutant was created by X-ray mutagenesis and
characterized by a cytogenetically detectable deletion of band C4 on mouse chromosome 1. Heterozygous mice displayed white spotting of the
belly, tail and feet, equivalent pigmentary features of WS. They also had persistent growth retardation throughout their development . The
deletion is approximately syntenic to human chr2:218,449,525-232,459,056 region, both Pax3 and Epha4 were involved in the deletion. The
other Splotch mutants caused by missense mutation (Spd) or splicing mutation (Sp) in Pax3 gene do not exhibit growth retardation, suggesting
genes adjacent to Pax3 are responsible for the growth retardation phenotype. The most important evidence came from the recent epha4 knockout
mouse model. Both heterozygous and homozygous epha4 knockout mice showed significant postnatal growth retardation in a dose dependent manner
. So far only one patient has been reported to carry a deletion involving only the EPHA4 gene (DECIPHER 282314). It was a de novo deletion.
The available phenotype of this patient involves the shortening of digital bones such as short 1st metacarpal, short distal phalanx of
hallux, short distal phalanx of the 2nd finger, short distal phalanx of the thumb, short distal phalanx of toe and short first metatarsal.
All these phenotypes were absent from either of the parents. The height information was not available for this patient. Due to their close
proximity on chromosome 2, EPHA4 and PAX3 are often co-deleted as the cases shown in Figure 4. Most of them had reported short stature as a
clinical feature . In addition to EPHA4 and PAX3, there are about 10 more OMIM genes involved at the deletion interval of our patient, three
are associated with human diseases (AP1S3 is associated with the susceptibility to pustular psoriasis-15; MRPL44 is likely associated with
Combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency 16; CUL3 is associated with Pseudohypoaldosteronism, type IIE). None of these genes or the
rest of the genes at the interval are known to be associated with short stature. EPHA4 is not currently a known disease causing gene. Our
patient and other similar deletion patients, as well as the mouse model provide compelling evidence indicating EPHA4 as a novel short
stature gene.Table 2 The genomics and clinical presentations of previously reported deletion cases at 2q35-q36.2 Case ID Sex Age at exam
(yrs) Cytogenetic location of the deletion stature WS related features Developmental issues Additional features Year reported or database
Reference Case 1 M222q35-2q36.1 (221107075–222960879)NANANAAbnormal handsDECIPHER 282314
https://decipher.sanger.ac.uk/patient/282314#overview Case 2 M42q35-q36.1 (215300000–225200000)Smaller than 95% of his age-matched peersWS1
(DC, CHL, HI)MD, IDNA1993 Case 3 F?2q35-2q36.1 (219971907–224926273)Short statureWS1 (DC, HI, synophrys)IDNADECIPHER 248718
https://decipher.sanger.ac.uk/patient/248718#overview Case 4 F82q34-2q36.1 (213206475–222612545)Proportionate short statureNASLD,
IDPostnatal microcephaly, bifid uvula, heart abnormalityDECIPHER 281765 https://decipher.sanger.ac.uk/patient/281765#overview Case 5
F52q34-q36 (209000000–231,000,000)Short statureNANormal intelligenceNA1976 Case 6 M62q35-q36.2 (215300001–226100000)<5 percentileWS3 (DC,
HNA, HI, SD)Mild MD, DD, IDNormal hearing, speech and bone age1992 Case 7 M42q35-q36.2 (215300001–226100000)NAWS3 (DC, HNA, HI, HLM,
synophrys) blepharophimosis, a bulbous nose, a cupid’s bow upper lip with a short philtrum and high nasal bridgeNANA1998 Case 8 F42q35-q36.2
(215300001–226100000)NAWS3 (DC, HNA, HLM, Synophrys) a cupid’s bow upper lip, a bulbous nose and high nasal bridgeSLDMyelomeningocele; small
hands; rthrogryposis and camptodactyly partial subluxation1998 Case 9 M112q34-q36.2 (209000000–226100000)Severe growth retardationWS1 (DC,
BNR, CHL, HNA, WF)IDNA1994 Case 10 F52q35-q36 (215300001–231000000)Short statureWS3 (CHL, HH, HI, BNR, DC, HNA, synophrys)Severe DDNA1993
Case 11 F42q36 (221,500,001-231,000,000)NAWS1 (CHL, DC, HH)-Medial eyebrow flare2013 Case 12 FinfantDe novo 2q36
(221,500,001-231,000,000)IUGRHypertelorism, hypoplastic nasal bridge with prominent nasal tip and anteverted nares.DDNA1993Not available
(NA); Waardenburg syndrome (WS); dystopia canthorum (DC); congenital hearing loss (CHL), hypoplastic nasal alae (HNA); heterochromia idiris
(HI); skin depigmentation (SD); developmental delay (DD); motor delay (MD); intellectual disability (ID); broad nasal root (BNR); white
forelock (WF); intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR). HLM, HH.Figure 4Previously published cases with overlapping deletion at 2q35-q36.2.
(Each horizontal red bar represents the deletion interval of a case. The origins of these cases are listed in Table 2). The genomics and
clinical presentations of previously reported deletion cases at 2q35-q36.2 Not available (NA); Waardenburg syndrome (WS); dystopia canthorum
(DC); congenital hearing loss (CHL), hypoplastic nasal alae (HNA); heterochromia idiris (HI); skin depigmentation (SD); developmental delay
(DD); motor delay (MD); intellectual disability (ID); broad nasal root (BNR); white forelock (WF); intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR).
HLM, HH. Previously published cases with overlapping deletion at 2q35-q36.2. (Each horizontal red bar represents the deletion interval of a
case. The origins of these cases are listed in Table 2). EPHA4 is a member of the EPH family of receptor tyrosine kinases. It was
demonstrated that EPHA4 interacts directly with growth hormone receptor (GHR) and JAK2 . They form a ternary complex in human cells . It is
conceivable that EPHA4 haploinsufficiency causes short stature by impairing the growth hormone pathway that regulates down-stream effectors
such as STAT5B and IGF1. Segregation of the short stature phenotype with EPHA4 mutations will further support the causal relationship. It is
interesting to note that growth hormone injection did not improve the growth of the Epha4 homozygous knockout mouse. In our patient, growth
hormone replacement therapy resulted in significant improvement of growth velocity and height. It is not known if heterozygous knockout mice
will respond to growth hormone or not. The response we observed in our patient provided preliminary indication for rhGH treatment in
patients with EPHA4 deletion. The rare combination of Waardenburg syndrome phenotype and short stature observed in our patient can be
explained by the haploinsufficiency of both PAX3 and EPHA4 genes involved within the deletion. Our analysis indicated that EPHA4 is a novel
short stature gene. Recombinant human growth hormone treatment improved the height of the patient; suggesting that diagnosis may help in
determining utility of growth hormone in other individuals with EPHA4 associated short stature. We obtained a written consent from patient’s
parent for utilizing patient‘s clinical information, genetic details and photos in this publication. The study is approved by the internal
review board of the Guangxi Maternal and Child Health Hospital. aW index is defined as X + Y + a/b. a = inner canthal distance;
b = interpupillary distance; c = outer canthal distance. A W index result greater than 1.95 is abnormal. Paired box 3 Waardenburg syndrome
Chromosomal microarray Ephrin Receptor A type 4 Standard deviation Thyroid stimulating hormone Free triiodothyronine Free thyroxine Follicle
stimulating hormone Luteinizing hormone Insulin-like growth factor-1 Magnetic resonance imaging Recombinant human growth hormone Ephrin
Growth hormone receptor Janus kinase 2 Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions
CL, XF, JL and JQ carried out the clinical evaluation and treatment of the patient. RC, JW and BX carried out the chromosomal microarray
testing for the patient and his parents. YS and SC conceived of the study, and participated in its design and coordination. YS, SC and CL
helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors’ information YS is an ABMG-certified medical
geneticist. SC, CL, XF, JQ and JL are board-certified clinical pediatricians. RC, JW and BX are molecular laboratory medical technologist.
We would like to thank the parents of our patient for their cooperation. The study is funded by the National Science and Technology Support
Program of China for the standardization of Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment of inherited metabolic disorders (2012BAI09B04).
