Although cavernous hemangioma is one of the most frequently encountered benign hepatic neoplasms, hepatic sclerosed hemangioma is very rare.
We report a case of hepatic sclerosed hemangioma that was difficult to distinguish from an intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma by imaging
studies. A 76-year-old male patient with right hypochondralgia was referred to our hospital. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a
heterogeneously hyperechoic tumor that was 59 mm in diameter in segment 7 of the liver. Dynamic computed tomography showed a low-density
tumor with delayed ring enhancement. Gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (EOB-
MRI) demonstrated a low-signal intensity mass with ring enhancement on T1-weighted images. The mass had several high-signal intensity
lesions on T2-weighted images. EOB-MRI revealed a hypointense nodule on the hepatobiliary phase. From these imaging studies, the tumor was
diagnosed as intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, and we performed laparoscopy-assisted posterior sectionectomy of the liver with lymph node
dissection in the hepatoduodenal ligament. Histopathological examination revealed a hepatic sclerosed hemangioma with hyalinized tissue and
collagen fibers. Hepatic sclerosed hemangioma is difficult to diagnose preoperatively because of its various imaging findings. We report a
case of hepatic sclerosed hemangioma and review the literatures, especially those concerning imaging findings. The preoperative diagnosis of
hepatic sclerosed hemangioma is very difficult, even with recent developments in radiological modalities, because it is an extremely rare
benign disorder and its radiological features resemble those of hepatic malignancies such as cholangiocarcinoma and metastatic liver cancer
. We report a case of a hepatic sclerosed hemangioma, that had been preoperatively misdiagnosed as an intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and
been resected, and review the relevant literature, especially summarizing the imaging findings of hepatic sclerosed hemaigioma. A 76-year-
old male patient had consulted a doctor for upper abdominal pain 16 months before being referred to us and had been followed up. Because
plain computed tomography (CT) revealed a space-occupying lesion in the liver, he was referred to our hospital. A laboratory workup on
admission showed that total bilirubin, aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, gamma-glutamyl
transpeptidase, albumin, and creatinine were all within normal ranges. Tumor markers including alpha-fetoprotein, protein induced by vitamin
K absence or antagonist-II, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigens 19–9 were also within the normal limits (Table 1).Table 1
Review of imaging features for Hepatic Sclerosed Hamangioma Case Year Author Age Gender Location Size (mm) US Plain CT Dynamic CT MRI
(T1/T2) PET-CT Preoperative diagnosis Final diagnosis 11995Ishii81FS325LowLowRing enhancedLow/Low―Not determinedsclerosed
hemangioma21995Haratake64FS826―LowRing enhanced――Metastatic liver cancersclerosed hemangioma31996Kobayashi49FS722HighLowRing
enhancedLow/High―Not determinedsclerosed hemangioma41998Ukai66FS610LowLowRing enhancedLow/High―Hepatocellular carcinomasclerosed
hemangioma52000Yamashita67FS450LowLowRing enhancedHigh/High―Metastatic liver cancersclerosing hemangioma62001Okada77MS823HighLowNot
enhanced――Metastatic liver cancersclerosed hemangioma72001Aibe67FS440―LowNot enhancedHigh/High―Metastatic liver cancersclerosed
hemangioma82003Hayakawa70FS230LowLowRing enhancedLow/Iso-High―Not determinedsclerosed hemangioma92005Morikawa66MS850IsoLowRing
enhancedLow/HighNot accumulatedNot determinedsclerosed hemangioma102005Lee65FS653――Ring enhancedLow/High―Hepatocellular carcinomasclerosing
hemangioma112005Okamoto50FS330LowLowRing enhanced――sclerosed hemangiomasclerosed hemangioma122006Hamatsu59MS825HighLowRing
enhanced――Metastatic liver cancersclerosed hemangioma132006Hayashi82FS2/355HighLowNot enhancedLow/High―Gastric submucosal tumorsclerosed
hemangioma142006Iida77FS239HighLowRing enhancedLow/Low-HighNot accumulatedNot determinedsclerosing hemaigioma152007Sawai67FRight
robe145LowLowRing enhancedLow/High―Not determinedsclerosed hemangioma162008Kaji65FS525LowLowRing enhancedLow/Iso-
High―Cholangiocarcinomasclerosed hemangioma172008Tsumaki70FS847LowLowRing enhancedLow/High―Liver sclerosed hemangiomasclerosed
hemangioma182008Mori77FS6100HighLowNot enhancedLow/High―Cholangiocarcinomasclerosed hemangioma192010Yoshida75FS5/637HighLowRing
enhancedLow/HighNot accumulatedCholangiocarcinomasclerosing hemaigioma202010Usui57FS217LowLowRing enhancedLow/High―Metastatic liver
cancersclerosed hemangioma212010Jin52MS6/738――Ring enhancedLow/High―Hepatocellular carcinomasclerosed hemangioma222010Hida75FS5/630High―Ring
enhancedLow/High―Metastatic liver cancersclerosed hemangioma232011Miyaki60’sFS330LowLow―Low/High―Liver sclerosed hemangiomasclerosed
hemangioma242011Kitami72FS355LowLowRing enhancedLow/High―Cholangiocarcinomasclerosed hemangioma252011Tanaka71MS615HighLowRing
enhanced――Hepatocellular carcinomasclerosed hemangioma262011Mikami74FS222LowLowRing enhancedLow/HighNot accumulatedNot determinedsclerosed
hemangioma272011Shin50MRight robe100Iso-LowLowRing enhancedLow/HighNot accumulatedLiver sclerosing hemangiomasclerosing
hemangioma282012Wakasugi61FS2, S525,5Low―Ring enhancedLow/High―Metastatic liver cancersclerosed hemangioma292012Yamada75MS811―LowRing
enhancedLow/HighNot accumulatedMetastatic liver cancersclerosed hemangioma302013Song63FS2/391―LowRing enhanced――Not determinedsclerosing
hemangioma312013Shimada63MS810―LowRing enhancedLow/High―Atypical hemangiomasclerosed hemangioma322015OUR CASE76MS6/759HighLowRing
enhancedLow/High―Cholangiocarcinomasclerosed hemangioma Review of imaging features for Hepatic Sclerosed Hamangioma Abdominal
ultrasonography (US) revealed a well-defined, heterogeneously hyperechoic mass that was 59 mm in diameter in segment 7 of the liver
(Figure 1). Plain CT revealed a low-density 60-mm sized mass with an irregular margin. Dynamic CT revealed early ring enhancement in the
peripheral part on the arterial phase and internal heterogeneous enhancement on the delayed phase (Figure 2). Gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-
diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (EOB-MRI) showed that the tumor had low-signal intensity on
T1-weighted images and that the mass had some high-signal intensity foci in the tumor on T2-weighted images. EOB-MRI showed no uptake in the
corresponding area on the hepatobiliary phase and ring enhancement in the peripheral part on the arterial phase and the portal phase
(Figure 3).Figure 1Abdominal ultrasonography (US). US showed a heterogeneously hyperechoic mass in segment 7 of the liver.Figure 2Abdominal
computed tomography (CT). (a) plain, (b) arterial phase, (c) portal venous phase, and (d) delayed phase. Plain CT showed a low-density mass.
Dynamic CT showed the ring enhancement in the peripheral part on the arterial phase (arrow).Figure 3Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). (a)
T1-weighted image, (b) T2-weighted image, and (c) ethoxybenzyl (EOB)-MRI on the hepatobiliary phase. The tumor had low-signal intensity on
T1-weighted and some high-signal intensity nodules in the tumor on T2-weighted images. EOB-MRI showed no uptake in the corresponding area on
the hepatobiliary phase. Abdominal ultrasonography (US). US showed a heterogeneously hyperechoic mass in segment 7 of the liver. Abdominal
computed tomography (CT). (a) plain, (b) arterial phase, (c) portal venous phase, and (d) delayed phase. Plain CT showed a low-density mass.
Dynamic CT showed the ring enhancement in the peripheral part on the arterial phase (arrow). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). (a)
T1-weighted image, (b) T2-weighted image, and (c) ethoxybenzyl (EOB)-MRI on the hepatobiliary phase. The tumor had low-signal intensity on
T1-weighted and some high-signal intensity nodules in the tumor on T2-weighted images. EOB-MRI showed no uptake in the corresponding area on
the hepatobiliary phase. Laparoscopy-assisted posterior sectionectomy and cholecystectomy including lymph node dissection in the
hepatoduodenal ligament were performed for a preoperative diagnosis of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. The resected specimen revealed a
white solid mass, sized 61 × 46 mm. The cut surface of the tumor was elastic, soft, and homogeneous with the smooth margin including some
faint red spots up to 10 mm in size (Figure 4a).Figure 4Resected specimen. (a) Surface of slice. The cut surface of the tumor reveals a
white solid mass (61 × 46 mm in size) that was elastic, soft, and homogeneous with a smooth margin including some faint red spots, sized
1 cm. (b) Hematoxylin and eosin staining (magnification, ×100). The tumor was composed of fibrous connective tissue highlighted with
collagen fiber and various sizes of cavernous hemangioma tissue with some hyaline degeneration secondary to thrombus, necrosis, or
cicatrization. Resected specimen. (a) Surface of slice. The cut surface of the tumor reveals a white solid mass (61 × 46 mm in size) that
was elastic, soft, and homogeneous with a smooth margin including some faint red spots, sized 1 cm. (b) Hematoxylin and eosin staining
(magnification, ×100). The tumor was composed of fibrous connective tissue highlighted with collagen fiber and various sizes of cavernous
hemangioma tissue with some hyaline degeneration secondary to thrombus, necrosis, or cicatrization. Histopathological examination showed
that the tumor was composed of fibrous connective tissue highlighted with collagen fibers and various sizes of cavernous hemangioma tissue
with some hyaline degeneration secondary to thrombus, necrosis, or cicatrization, resulting in a hepatic sclerosed hemangioma (Figure 4b).
The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 6. Hepatic sclerosed hemangioma, first reported by
Ishii in 1995 , is a rare disease, detected and reported in only 2 out of 1000 cases on autopsy . We found only 9 cases in PubMed by manual
searching for the terms “hepatic, sclerosed, hemangioma” and “hepatic, sclerosing, hemangioma” from January 1983 to January 2015.
Additionally, we found 22 cases in ICHUSHI, a bibliographic database established in 1903 and being updated by the Japan Medical Abstracts
Society, contains bibliographic citations and abstracts from more than 2500 biomedical journals and other serial publications published in
Japanese. The 32 cases, including our case, are summarized in Table 1 . Hepatic sclerosed hemangioma is caused by degenerative changes such
as thrombus formation, necrosis, and scar formation of liver cavernous hemangioma, but the mechanism for degenerative changes in the hepatic
cavernous hemangioma has not been well clarified at present . Concerning the imaging studies, Doyle et al. summarized the imaging findings
of 10 hepatic sclerosed hemangioma lesions and found the characteristic features to include a geographic pattern, capsular retraction,
decrease in size over time, loss of previously seen regions of enhancement . And additional characteristic, features included the presence
of transient hepatic attenuation difference, ring enhancement, and nodular regions of intense enhancement as seen in typical hemangioma. In
our series reviewed the average size of the hepatic sclerosed hemangiomas was 42.3 mm, ranging from 10 to 145 mm. Abdominal US showed a
hyperechoic mass in 11 cases and a hypoechoic tumor in 13 cases. Plain CT was likely to show a low-density mass, and dynamic CT showed ring
enhancement, resembling metastatic liver cancer or intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, in 27 of 31 reported cases. MRI showed a low-intensity
signal in 24 of 26 reported cases on T1-weighted images and a high-intensity signal in 22 of 26 reported cases on T2-weighted images. The
radiological features revealed by dynamic CT and MRI resembled those of hepatic malignancies, leading to preoperative misdiagnosis. Whereas,
-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET), performed in just 6 cases, showed no accumulation of -FDG (Table 1). FDG-PET
could be helpful in preoperative diagnosis to distinguish benign sclerosed hemangioma from malignant tumors such as intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinomas or metastatic liver cancers. We may have had to perform FDG-PET preoperatively. Surgical resection for hepatic sclerosed
hemangioma is controversial. Most of the tumors reported were resected due to a preoperative misdiagnosis of malignancy (Table 1). To make a
definite diagnosis of such hepatic tumors, percutaneous needle biopsy is not acceptable because of the possibility of dissemination of the
cancer cells if the tumor is malignant. Therefore we would suggest that hepatic resections are chosen for the management of hepatic
sclerosed hemangioma at present. Makhlouf and Ishak compared the findings of sclerosed hemangioma and sclerosing cavernous hemangioma.
According to their theory, recent hemorrhages and hemosiderin deposits rich in mast cells are present in the sclerosing hemangioma. While,
fibrosis, increased elastic fibers, and dystrophic or psammomatous calcifications with a decreased number of mast cells can be observed in
the sclerosed hemangioma . Our case showed a fibrous connective tissue highlighted with collagen fibers and various sizes of cavernous
hemangioma tissue with some hyaline degeneration. These findings are consistent with features of hepatic sclerosed hemangioma, resulting in
the final diagnosis. We report a case with a hepatic sclerosed hemangioma. Although it is a rare disease, it is important to distinguish
hepatic sclerosed hemangioma from hepatic malignancies. However, it is extremely difficult to diagnose precisely from imaging studies. If
the possibility of a malignant tumor cannot be ruled out, hepatic resection might be selected for diagnostic therapy. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor of this journal. Gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance
imaging Computed tomography Ultrasonography -fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions The first two authors contributed equally to this work. SM drafted the paper and
collected date and reviewed the text. AO performed the operation, helped SM to draft the paper and made the final revision. YD diagnosed
this disease. MS and AN assisted the operation. HO made the expert assistance. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
