The presence of squamous epithelium in the stomach is only occasionally encountered and is associated with prolonged mucosal injury.
Squamous metaplasia in patients with cancer is relatively rare and only four cases have been reported in the stomach, all of which have been
associated with squamous cell carcinomas. We present the first case of exuberant squamous metaplasia in a patient with gastric
adenocarcinoma of the cardia. A 56-year-old woman presented with epigastric pain and weight loss. Endoscopy showed an irregular depressed
hyperemic lesion covered with a whitish plaque on the cardia. A total gastrectomy was performed and the tumor in the subcardia was found to
extend up to the proximal stomach with diffuse squamous metaplasia in the surface of the tumor and proximal gastric mucosa in contiguity
with the esophageal squamous epithelium. It is believed that the squamous extension from the esophagus to the proximal stomach and the
gastric adenocarcinoma occurred at the same time. Synchronous squamous metaplasia and underlying adenocarcinoma in the stomach is extremely
rare. Recognition of this entity would be beneficial for clinicians to avoid unnecessary treatment. The virtual slide(s) for this article
can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1035146445160150. The presence of squamous epithelium in the stomach is
only occasionally encountered and is associated with prolonged mucosal injury . However, squamous metaplasia with the coexistence of a
neoplasm is relatively rare and only 4 cases have been reported in the English literature—4 cases of squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) and 1
case of SCC in situ . However, squamous metaplasia associated with gastric adenocarcinoma has not been reported. We present the first case
of exuberant squamous metaplasia in a patient with gastric adenocarcinoma of the cardia. A 56-year-old Korean woman presenting with
epigastric pain and weight loss visited a local clinic and was transferred to our hospital for further treatment. The medical history of the
patient did not include any significant prior illness. No significant positive signs were found on physical examination. Endoscopy showed an
irregular depressed hyperemic lesion covered with a whitish plaque on the cardia (Figure 1). The lesion was approximately 4 cm in diameter
and the whitish plaque was partly contiguous with the esophageal mucosa at the gastroesophageal junction. The biopsy specimen revealed
infiltrating neoplastic single cells with benign squamous epithelium (Figure 2). Laboratory results were within normal limits, and serum
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA 19–9) levels were normal. A total gastrectomy was performed without
any surgical complications.Figure 1Endoscopic findings of the stomach. An area of white mucosa was found in the cardia contiguous to the
esophageal mucosa. On the edge of this area, an irregular and slightly depressed hyperemic lesion was observed.Figure 2The biopsy specimen
showed infiltrating neoplastic signet ring cells beneath benign squamous epithelium. Endoscopic findings of the stomach. An area of white
mucosa was found in the cardia contiguous to the esophageal mucosa. On the edge of this area, an irregular and slightly depressed hyperemic
lesion was observed. The biopsy specimen showed infiltrating neoplastic signet ring cells beneath benign squamous epithelium. On gross
examination, an irregular depressed lesion with a whitish plaque was detected in the high body (Figure 3A). Entire tumor was sampled for
histologic examinations. Histological examination revealed poorly differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma that was diffuse-type. The tumor was
centered in the subcardia extending up to the proximal stomach without involvement of the gastroesophageal junction (type III by the Siewert
classification) (Figure 3B). Diffuse squamous metaplasia was present in the surface of the tumor and the proximal gastric mucosa in
contiguity with the esophageal squamous epithelium (Figure 4). We performed EBER in situ hybridization and the entire tumor was negative.
The tumor infiltrated into the muscularis propria although none of the 54 regional lymph nodes showed metastasis (pT2N0M0, stage IB by the
7th edition of the AJCC/TNM classification). The patient is alive without recurrence 3 month after gastrectomy.Figure 3Gross and schematic
photos. (A) Grossly, an irregular depressed lesion with whitish plaque was detected. (B) Histological examination revealed a tumor (red)
that was centered in the subcardia extending up to the proximal stomach. Diffuse squamous metaplasia (blue) was present in the surface of
the tumor and proximal gastric mucosa in contiguity with the esophagus squamous epithelium (yellow).Figure 4Microscopic findings of total
gastrectomy specimen showing esophagus, gastroesophageal junction and squamous metaplasia with underlying gastric adenocarcinoma. Gross and
schematic photos. (A) Grossly, an irregular depressed lesion with whitish plaque was detected. (B) Histological examination revealed a tumor
(red) that was centered in the subcardia extending up to the proximal stomach. Diffuse squamous metaplasia (blue) was present in the surface
of the tumor and proximal gastric mucosa in contiguity with the esophagus squamous epithelium (yellow). Microscopic findings of total
gastrectomy specimen showing esophagus, gastroesophageal junction and squamous metaplasia with underlying gastric adenocarcinoma. Although
the pathophysiology of squamous metaplasia in the stomach remains obscure, prolonged injury appears to be a prerequisite for this mucosal
abnormality. The presence of squamous epithelium in the gastric mucosa has been described in patients with underlying diseases such as
peptic ulcer , tuberculosis , syphilis , corrosive gastritis , pernicious anemia , and aberrant pancreatic tissue . These cases support the
hypothesized relationship between injurious stimuli and the development of squamous metaplasia. In animal studies, gastric squamous
metaplasia has been induced by the injection of pyrogallic acid and methylcholanthere . Squamous metaplasia following chronic irritation
occurs elsewhere in the body, for example in the lower respiratory tract, bladder, salivary duct, pancreatic duct, cecum, uterus, and in the
mucosa of the prolapsed rectum. The four patients with squamous metaplasia in the stomach and concurrent carcinoma who have been recorded in
the literature are tabulated in Table 1 along with pertinent details given by the authors . The stomach from all four patients contained
areas of squamous metaplasia transitioning to SCC, corroborating the development of SCC from the squamous metaplasia. The patients in cases
1 to 3 had prior a history of prolonged gastritis provoked by sustained mucosal injuries. The gastric mucosa of the patient in case 1 was
damaged by acid and the entirety of the stomach was lined by squamous epithelium. The patient in case 2 was diagnosed with congenital
syphilis, progressed to chronic syphilitic gastritis, and had squamous metaplasia in the antrum. The stomach of the patient in case 3 showed
diffuse gastritis due to prior cytotoxic chemotherapy for malignant lymphoma .Table 1 Cases of squamous metaplasia with gastric neoplasm
reported in the literature No Age/Sex Symptom Location (T/SM) Size (T/SM) Gross findings (T/SM) Associated neoplasm Clinical information
Reference 130/MDysphagiaBody/bodyNA/NAUlcerative granular area/NASquamous cell carcinomaHistory of ingestion of corrosive acid many years
earlier249/FEpigastric painLow body of greater curvature/antrumNA/2.2 cmPolypoid mass/whitish irregular mucosal plaqueSquamous cell
carcinomaCongenital syphilis with chronic syphilitic gastritis355/MEpigastric painUpper body of lesser curvature/anterior wall of
cardia8 cm/NAPolypoidgray white, granular tumor/patch of grey-white, shiny mucosaSquamous cell carcinomaDiffuse gastritis due to prior
cytotoxic chemotherapy for lymphoma471/MNALesser curvature of Cardia/Lesser curvature of cardia0.8 cm/NAIrregular whitish depressed
lesion/NASquamous cell carcinoma in situNA569/MEpigastralgiaLesser curvature of cardia/Lesser curvature of cardia2.1 cm/NASuperficial and
protruding tumor/whitish mucosaSquamous cell carcinomaEBV infectionCase56/FEpigastric painCardia/cardia4.5 cm/2.5 cmIrregular depressed
lesion/whitish plaqueAdenocarcinomaIntestinal metaplasiaT = tumor; SM = squamous metaplasia; NA = not available. Cases of squamous
metaplasia with gastric neoplasm reported in the literature T = tumor; SM = squamous metaplasia; NA = not available. In contrast to these
previously reported cases, our case was unique in that the benign squamous epithelium covering the tumor surface was in continuity with the
esophageal epithelium without any transition area. Endoscopic and microscopic findings revealed diffuse mucosal atrophy with intestinal
metaplasia, which is considered to be a risk factor for gastric adenocarcinoma . Based on the above observations, we hypothesize that the
squamous extension from the esophagus to the proximal stomach and the adenocarcinoma occurred at the same time, which is an exceedingly rare
event. The tumor topography of the border between the esophagus and stomach affects the treatment strategy that for patients with type II
tumors by the Siewert classification, with esophagectomy offering no advantages over extended gastrectomy . The biopsy specimen in our case
showed infiltrating cancer cells beneath the benign squamous epithelium, which could be misinterpreted as adenocarcinoma at the
esophagogastric junction or invasion into the esophagus. The endoscopic findings showed gastric extension of whitish plaque in contiguity
with the esophagus. Microscopically, the proximal gastric mucosa showed diffuse squamous metaplasia with no evidence of carcinoma.
Therefore, the possibility of squamous metaplasia in the stomach should be considered to avoid unnecessary treatment such as proximal
esophagectomy. If the squamous metaplasia is too small to recognize, Lugol’s iodine solution would be helpful for staining the metaplastic
area . Synchronous squamous metaplasia and underlying adenocarcinoma in the stomach is extremely rare. Here, we describe the first case with
unique endoscopic findings. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this report and any accompanying
images. Squamous cell carcinomas Carcinoembryonic antigen Carbohydrate antigen 19–9 American Joint Committee on Cancer Tumor Squamous
metaplasia Not available Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions KEB first
identified this case and participated in providing the clinical information, KMK contributed to the concept and design and approved the
final version of the manuscript and SA wrote the manuscript and performed the literature review. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. This study was supported by a grant from the 20 by 20 project of Samsung Medical Center (GF01140111).
