Drusen are important risk factor for neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and have a dynamic nature as they can enlarge, newly
form, or disappear over time. There have been few reports on drusen regression or choroidal neovascularization (CNV) development after
macular hole surgery. We report, to our knowledge, the first case of both drusen regression and subsequent CNV development within 7 months
of successful macular hole surgery. A 73-year-old woman presented with a stage 3 full-thickness macular hole and large, confluent soft
macular drusen in the right eye and a neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD) in the fellow eye. Four months after the successful
macular hole surgery, significant regression of drusen was seen, especially in the temporal area to the fovea. Three months later, the
patient developed CNV and her best-corrected visual acuity decreased to 20/100, despite further regression of macular drusen. Macular hole
patients with macular soft drusen need to be carefully followed up after surgery for possible drusen regression and CNV development. Large,
soft drusen are associated with a greater risk for developing advanced age-related macular degeneration (AMD), including choroidal
neovascularization (CNV) and geographic atrophy . Drusen have a dynamic nature as they can enlarge, newly form, or disappear over time .
There have been case reports on drusen disappearance after macular hole surgery . Macular hole surgery has also been associated with the
development CNV . This is the first report to our knowledge in which both phenomena occurred together in the same eye. We report a patient
who showed a rapid regression of soft macular drusen and the development of CNV within 7 months of successful macular hole surgery. A
73-year-old woman presented with decreased visual acuities in her both eyes. The previous medical history was unremarkable except for
hypertension. Ophthalmological examinations including funduscopy, fluorescein/indocyanine green angiography and spectral-domain optical
coherence tomography (OCT) showed a stage 3 full-thickness macular hole and large, confluent soft drusen in the right eye and a neovascular
AMD in the left eye, for which she had undergone four sessions of intravitreal ranibizumab injections in other hospital (Figure 1A,B). Her
best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/63 in the right eye and 20/50 in the left eye. She underwent an additional intravitreal
ranibizumab injection in the left eye and the macular hole surgery including vitrectomy, internal limiting membrane (ILM) peeling using
indocyanine green dye, and 17% SF6 gas tamponade in the right eye. The fluid at the base of macular hole was not aspirated during fluid-air
exchange to avoid damage to underlying retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). After a week of prone positioning, OCT showed a closed macular
hole. Four months after the surgery, fundus showed drusen regression, especially in the temporal area to the fovea, and the BCVA improved to
20/50 (Figure 1C). However, 3 months later, the patient developed CNV and her BCVA decreased to 20/100, despite further regression of
macular drusen (Figure 1D). Her fellow eye CNV also recurred and she was treated with additional intravitreal ranibizumab injections in both
eyes.Figure 1Color fundus photography and corresponding spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) scan through the fovea A Stage 3
full-thickness macular hole with large, soft, confluent macular drusen was noted in the right eye B The left eye fundus and OCT scan show a
neovascular age-related macular degeneration with hemorrhage in the macula, for which she had undergone four sessions of intravitreal
ranibizumab injections. Note the vitreomacular adhesion at the foveal center C Macular hole was closed successfully and preexisted macular
drusen, especially in temporal area to the fovea, significantly regressed at 4 months after macular hole surgery in the right eye D Three
months later, further regression of macular drusen was noted, but choroidal neovascularization with subretinal fluid and hemorrhage
developed. Color fundus photography and corresponding spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) scan through the fovea A Stage 3
full-thickness macular hole with large, soft, confluent macular drusen was noted in the right eye B The left eye fundus and OCT scan show a
neovascular age-related macular degeneration with hemorrhage in the macula, for which she had undergone four sessions of intravitreal
ranibizumab injections. Note the vitreomacular adhesion at the foveal center C Macular hole was closed successfully and preexisted macular
drusen, especially in temporal area to the fovea, significantly regressed at 4 months after macular hole surgery in the right eye D Three
months later, further regression of macular drusen was noted, but choroidal neovascularization with subretinal fluid and hemorrhage
developed. This case illustrated the regression soft macular drusen and subsequent development of CNV after successful macular hole surgery,
which may have acted as an exogenous stimuli for the regression of drusen and the development of advanced AMD. Spontaneous regression of
drusen is well documented, but drusen regression does not necessarily indicate beneficial consequence since the development of CNV or
geographic atrophy can ensue . It only took 3 months to develop CNV after drusen regression in the present case. Although it may be possible
that drusen regression occurred spontaneously irrespective of surgery, relatively short period between surgical intervention and the onset
of drusen disappearance suggest possible causal relationship. There have been three case reports on the drusen regression following macular
hole surgery . Their association, however, is not clear as one study showed that preoperative macular drusen in three patients with macular
holes remained unchanged following surgery . The mechanism of drusen disappearance after macular hole surgery is uncertain. Holz et al.
proposed several possibilities including phagocytosis of drusen material by macrophages or multinucleated giant cells, phagocytosis by newly
proliferated RPE, and reactive RPE changes to exogenous stimuli resulting in phagocytosis of drusen material . This seems plausible since
multinucleated giant cells are in intimate association with Bruch’s membrane as their cytoplasmic extensions are on Bruch’s membrane and at
the margin of Bruch’s membrane defects . In the present case, vitrectomy, ILM peeling, and gas tamponade were performed to close macular
hole. ILM peeling may not be a significant factor associated with drusen regression; Holz et al. did not attempt to peel ILM during his
macular hole surgery, whereas Dithmar et al. did, but both noted the disappearance of drusen after surgery . Other surgical components such
as induction of posterior hyaloid detachment, vitrectomy, and gas tamponade may somehow acted as exogenous stimuli to the exposed RPE and
perhaps accelerated phagocytosis of multinucleated giant cells, resulting in degradation of drusen material around the macular hole. There
have been few case reports on CNV development after macular hole surgery . Age-related degenerative changes in Bruch’s membrane and RPE are
regarded as the major underlying factor for the development of CNV . Macular hole surgery may have caused the degenerated Bruch’s membrane
to further breakdown by mechanical effects and/or activation of multinucleated giant cells, providing an angiogenic stimulus for CNV .
However, it should be noted that our patient may have been prone to develop CNV since CNV had already developed in the fellow eye. The
unoperated fellow eye with CNV is complicated with a posterior vitreomacular adhesion (Figure 1B) that has been regarded as the risk factor
of neovascular AMD . It is interesting that the eye with macular hole still developed neovascular CNV after posterior hyaloid was removed
during vitrectomy. Careful follow-up is warranted in macular hole patients with soft drusen since drusen regression and CNV development may
occur after macular hole surgery. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Age-related macular degeneration
Choroidal neovascularization Optical coherence tomography Best-corrected visual acuity Internal limiting membrane Retinal pigment epithelium
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions JHL drafted the manuscript, collected
the data, and reviewed the literature. TL was involved in the collection of data, interpretation of the data, and review of the literature.
SCL participated in the design of the study, review of the literature, and review of the manuscript. CSL designed this study, treated the
patient, collected the data, and critically reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank
Dr. Hyesun Kim for assistance in the writing of manuscript.
