Russell’s viper (RV) envenomation causes local effects, coagulopathy, thrombosis, rhabdomyolysis, acute kidney injury, and neurological
manifestations. Although coagulopathy and endothelial destruction causing local and mucosal surface bleeding is known, isolated severe
pulmonary hemorrhage is not commonly reported. We report a previously healthy 18-year-old male who had bilateral severe pulmonary
hemorrhages, which resulted in a fatal outcome following RV bite. This diagnosis was supported by persistent alveolar shadows, with minimum
improvement despite hemodialysis without heparin, mixed acidosis and endotracheal tube bleeding. Other bleeding manifestations were absent.
Polyvalent antivenom was administered in lieu of prolonged whole blood clotting time. Thrombocytopenia and mildly deranged clotting
parameters were noted. Pulmonary hemorrhages were significant enough to require transfusion. This case highlights the importance of
suspecting pulmonary hemorrhages in patients with alveolar shadows and desaturation following RV bite despite the absence of other bleeding
manifestations in light of failure of optimum therapy including hemodialysis. Sri Lanka has one of the highest snakebite rates in the
world.1 Although there are around 100 species of snakes found in the country, the highly venomous cobra, Russel’s viper (RV), and kraits
contribute to much of the morbidity and approximately 95% of the mortality.1,2 Russell’s viper is one of the most medically important snakes
among the tropical countries due to the wide range of clinical manifestations caused by the bites, which include local envenoming,
coagulopathy, thrombotic complications, rhabdomyolysis, acute kidney injury, and neurological manifestations.3,4 We describe a case of
bilateral pulmonary hemorrhages following an RV bite. Our objective in presenting this particular case is to highlight the importance of
suspecting pulmonary hemorrhages in patients with alveolar shadows and desaturation following RV bite despite the absence of other bleeding
manifestations in light of failure of optimum therapy including hemodialysis A previously healthy 18-year-old Sri Lankan male from a rural
area in the Ratnapura District, Sri Lanka was brought to the medical ward within 2 hours after a snakebite. The dead snake was brought and
identified as an RV. He was conscious and rational on examination, and a painful fourth toe of the lower limb demonstrated fang marks. He
had features of local envenoming and bedside 20 min whole blood clotting time (WBCT) was found in a non-clotted state indicating evidence of
systemic envenoming. He was transferred to a general hospital in the area within the next 2 hours, for administration of Indian polyvalent
snake antivenom serum (AVS). His vital parameters were initially normal with pulse of 92/min and blood pressure (BP) of 120/70 mm Hg. The
baseline investigations were normal and as follows; hemoglobin (Hb) 12.5 g/dL, white blood cells 6.8 k/uL, neutrophils 50%, lymphocytes 40%,
and platelets 160 k/uL. Serum creatinine was 80 umol/L. During the first course of AVS he developed an anaphylactic reaction where his blood
pressure dropped to 70/40 mm Hg, which was managed with adrenaline, hydrocortisone, and chlorphenamine. Six hours after the initial dose of
AVS still he had prolonged WBCT and AVS was administered twice. Despite vigorous fluid resuscitation, he was oliguric, and with serum
creatinine, doubling up to 149 umol/L. On day 3, he was subsequently transferred to the National Hospital for further care. On admission he
was dyspneic with a respiratory rate of 28/min, tachycardic (pulse-112/min), and BP was 110/70 mm Hg. There were bilateral basal coarse
crepitations more on the left side, but nervous system examination was clinically normal. In the face of deteriorating saturation, he was
electively intubated. With oliguria he was found to have a serum creatinine value of 616 umol/L, with severe metabolic and respiratory
acidosis in arterial blood gas. Chest x-ray revealed bilateral alveolar shadows (Figure 1). Urgent hemodialysis, without heparin was
arranged, which only marginally alleviated the abnormalities. He developed blood stained endotracheal (ET) secretions on the same day and
his Hb dropped to 8.3 d/dL, thrombocytopenia (lowest value 84 k/uL). Blood gases showed an increasing trend of CO2 retention, with
development of combined respiratory and metabolic acidosis. Despite hemodialysis, respiratory acidosis, pulmonary shadows in the chest x-ray
and blood stained ET secretions persisted. He did not have any other systemic bleeding manifestation. A second hemodialysis followed with a
blood transfusion, and post dialysis investigation showed an international normalized ratio of 1.6, activated partial thromboplastin time of
34s and thrombocytopenia. He had elevated aspartate aminotransferase (503 IU/L) and alanine transaminase (436 IU/L) with normal bilirubin
and alkaline phosphatase. Blood film post hemodialysis showed low-grade micro angiopathic hemolytic anemia (MAHA) although it did not show
any fragmented red cells before the dialysis. A pre (A) and post (B) hemodialysis chest x-rays showing only a marginal improvement of the
alveolar shadowing, which is due to pulmonary hemorrhages (arrows). On day 4, he was dialyzed once again with fresh frozen plasma 500 ml,
and 6 units of platelet rich plasma in view of pulmonary bleeds. But he was persistently oliguric, and his Hb dropped to 8 g/dL with the
only bleeding manifestation being blood stained ET secretions. Serum creatinine improved to 617 from 305 umol/L. Despite maximum
intervention, hypoxia, acidosis, and hypercarbia continued to manifest. He received the fourth hemodialysis on day 5, which further improved
the saturation to approximately 90%, and improvement, albeit slight, in chest x-ray appearance. On day 6, he had a fever, and blood cultures
taken revealed a growth of coliforms. Ultrasound scan of the abdomen did not reveal any evidence of intraperitoneal collections. There was
no evidence of a pericardial effusion on transthoracic echocardiogram. Computed tomography showed no evidence of intracranial hemorrhage. He
was started on antibiotics according to the results of antibiotic sensitivity test. He received one further dialysis, and by this time his
liver functions have normalized. On day 9, he developed respiratory arrest and succumbed to death. Table 1 summarizes the laboratory
findings. Summary of the investigation findings, listed chronologically of a patient after an RV bite. Clinical manifestations following RV
bite depends on the severity of the envenoming; severe envenoming may lead to pain, swelling, blister formation locally at the site of the
bite. Systemic manifestations include coagulopathy, thrombotic complications, rhabdomyolysis, acute kidney injury, and neurological
complications.4 Bleeding is a major complication either from the bite site or from mucosal surfaces.5 Hemorrhagins and hemolysins act on the
vessel wall causing endothelial destruction together with coagulopathy, and can lead to bleeding, which may be severe enough to require a
transfusion as in the case of our patient.5 Early treatment with antivenom is known to control bleeding and clotting disorders, but may not
reverse complications like acute renal failure and pulmonary hemorrhages. Reported causes of death include shock, pituitary, and
intracranial hemorrhage, massive gastrointestinal hemorrhage, acute tubular necrosis, and bilateral cortical necrosis.4,6,7 Interestingly,
pericardial hemorrhage with cardiac tamponade had been reported.2 We could not source any previous reported cases of isolated bilateral
pulmonary hemorrhages with fatal outcome following RV bite. However, significant lung injury and hemorrhagic activity has been demonstrated
in animal models, especially with regards to factor phospholipase A2.1,8 We came across one case of fatal pulmonary hemorrhage immediately
following a bite of Bothrops jararacussu snake, which was proven by autopsy.9 That case was also associated with consumption coagulopathy
and disseminated intravascular coagulation. This case report shows the possibility of fatal outcome due to pulmonary hemorrhages following
RV bite. The patient also had acute renal failure, low-grade MAHA and acute respiratory disease syndrome all of which has contributed to the
mortality. He did not have any neurological manifestations or thrombotic complications. Despite repeated infusions of AVS, and normalization
of WBCT, he continued to have resistant pulmonary hemorrhages. The alternate courses for a pulmonary hemorrhage seem distant too.
Hemodialysis was carried out without heparin, and his coagulation parameters were near normal except for thrombocytopenia. We postulate the
pulmonary hemorrhages may be due to the snake venom directly damaging alveoli rather than coagulopathy. Micro angiopathic hemolytic anemia
is a well-recognized feature of RV bites.6,10 Only minimal improvement of alveolar shadows, even in the face of aggressive hemodialysis, was
further suggestive of pulmonary hemorrhages. The opinion of the chest physician and the consultant radiologist was that his clinical picture
with alveolar opacities seen, was very much suggestive of pulmonary hemorrhages. We were unable to proceed to necropsy because, on the
request of the relatives, we had to release the body after the inquest. In conclusion, life threatening pulmonary hemorrhage following RV
bite is rare. However, small and hence silent, pulmonary hemorrhages may go clinically unnoticed. We emphasize the importance of considering
the possibility of pulmonary hemorrhages in hypoxic patients with RV bites, especially if they fail to improve with hemodialysis. We
acknowledge the patients’ parents for providing written consent for publication of this article. Special thanks goes to Consultant Chest
Physician Doctor Keerthi Gunasekara and Consultant Radiologist Doctor Prasad De Silva. All manuscripts reporting the results of experimental
investigations involving human subjects should include a statement confirming that informed consent was obtained from each subject or
subject’s guardian, after receiving approval of the experimental protocol by a local human ethics committee, or institutional review board.
When reporting experiments on animals, authors should indicate whether the institutional and national guide for the care and use of
laboratory animals was followed.
