Ochoa syndrome is rare and its major clinical problems frequently unrecognized. We describe facial characteristics of six patients to help
health professional recognize the inverted smile that these patients present and refer them to proper treatment. Patients’ medical records
were reviewed and patients’ urological status clinically reassessed. At last evaluation patients’ mean age was 15.5 years, and age ranged
from 12 to 32 years. Mean follow-up was 35 months (12 to 60). Initial symptoms were urinary tract infections in four patients (67%)
associated with enuresis and incontinence in three of them (50%). One patient had only urinary tract infection and two lower urinary tract
symptoms without infections. Initial treatment consisted of clean intermittent catheterization with anticholinergics for all patients. Four
patients (67%) were submitted to bladder augmentation. Two patients had end-stage renal disease during follow-up, one received kidney
transplantation and one patient remained on the waiting list for a renal transplantation. Familial consanguinity was present in only one
case. This significant condition is rare, but it must be recognized by pediatricians, nephrologists and urologists in order to institute
early aggressive urological treatment. The Ochoa syndrome(1) is a rare condition characterized by functional obstructive uropathy and
unusual facial abnormalities with a recessive autosomal inheritance pattern. This syndrome ultimately results in upper urinary tract
deterioration and eventual renal failure if not diagnosed early.(2,3) The Ochoa syndrome is also known as urofacial syndrome that affects
both genders and occurs more likely when parents are closely related.(4) We retrospectively report on our experience with six patients
referred to our institution. Physical examination revealed peculiar facial expression in all patients (Figures 1 and 2) and facial grimace
when attempting to smile at the time when symptoms started. Figure 1Facial pictures of patients 1, 2 and 3, showing the unusual facial
expression of grimace when attempting to smile. Note that in the top pictures, patients are in a neutral facial expression while in the
bottom line they were asked to smile Figure 2Facial pictures of patients 4, 5 and 6, showing the peculiar expression. Top pictures show
patients in a neutral facial expression while in the bottom line they were asked to smile Patient 1 was a 15-year-old girl who had recurrent
urinary tract infections (UTIs) since she was 12 years old (Figure 1). She had no history of other urinary tract symptoms and no signs of
occult spinal dysraphism. Radiography of lumbosacral region was normal; ultrasound scan revealed bilateral hydronephrosis; urodynamics test
showed elevated post-void residual (PVR) urine volume and imercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA); renal scan showed severe bilateral renal scars.
Initial management consisted of clean intermittent catheterization (CIC) and use of anticholinergics. Although she lacked other UTI after
treatment, a worsening in renal function was noted in the follow-up and currently she is being prepared for renal transplantation. Table 1
summarizes the clinical information of all patients. Table 1Characteristics of six patientsPatientFollow-up (months)Age at initial
management (years)Present age at the moment of the study (years)GenderParents consanguinityInitial symptomsRenal
impairmentUTISurgery1121415FCousinsUTIYesYesWaiting for renal transplantation224432MNoUTINoYesBilateral ureterostomies Bladder
augmentation3601116MNoUTINoYesBladder augmentation Incontinence Enuresis Urgency 460813FNoUrgencyNoNo 532912MNoUTILeft kidneyYesLeft
nephrectomy + bladder augmentation IncontinenceKidney 624716MNoIncontinenceYesNoMitrofanoff Enuresis Bladder augmentation Renal transplantF:
female; UTI: urinary tract infections; M: male. F: female; UTI: urinary tract infections; M: male. Patient 2 was a 32-year-old man with
history of recurrent UTIs in childhood (Figure 1). Urinary tract investigation, while he was followed at another care center, showed
dysfunctional voiding and the initial diagnosis was non-neurogenic bladder. Despite the initial management he underwent bilateral
ureterostomies at age 4 years old, which successfully keep him free of infection. At the age 9 years old, the ureterostomies were closed and
CIC was started but bladder augmentation using a transverse colon was necessary. Patient 2 family history was negative for Ochoa syndrome
and his parents were not consanguineous. He was 32 years old at the moment we carried out this study and continued on anticholinergics
therapy and CIC every 4 hours, remaining without infection. His upper urinary tract was scar free despite the history of UTIs. Patients 3
and 4 were siblings aged 16 and 13 years old, respectively. Their parents were not consanguineous and did not have history of urofacial
syndrome on the family before. Patient 3 was a 16-year-old boy who was referred to our clinic for recurrent UTIs, dysfunctional voiding,
daytime urinary incontinence, enuresis and urgency (Figure 1). Results of ultrasound scan revealed left hydronephrosis, trabeculated bladder
and diverticula, and urodynamics test showed a poorly compliant bladder, elevated PVR volume and detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia. The patient
had a trabeculated bladder of small capacity and left high-grade vesico-ureteral reflux (VUR) in voiding cystourethrography (VCUG). Initial
management consisted of CIC and oxybutynin. Because of anticholinergic side effects, the tolterodine was introduced with partial success.
Continence interval was only 1 hour and 30 minutes. Subsequently, he had undergone bladder augmentation with ileum and continued on CIC
every 5 hours without any leakage. Patient 4 was a 13-year-old girl (Figure 2) who presented urgency and enuresis but without any episodes
of UTI. Results of ultrasound scan demonstrated a normal urinary tract, VCUG showed no reflux, normal bladder with large capacity and PVR of
80mL. In addition, urodynamics test showed a poorly compliant bladder, detrusor overactivity and dysfunctional voiding with sphincter
dyssynergia. To patient 4 an early management was proposed to avoid deterioration of upper urinary tract. She successfully underwent CIC and
anticholinergics therapy. Currently, she remained well adapted to CIC, continence interval of 6 hours and with upper urinary tract
preserved. Patient 5 was a 12-year-old boy with daytime incontinence, recurrent UTIs, lumbar pain and an episode of urinary retention
(Figure 2). At physical examination no sings of occult spinal dysraphism were found. Ultrasound scan revealed left ureterohydronephrosis and
thick-walled bladder. In addition, he had a trabeculated bladder with diverticula and left high-grade VUR found in VCUG. Urodynamics test
showed a poorly compliant bladder, detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia and elevated PVR volume. DMSA demonstrated severe scaring on left kidney.
Initial management consisted of CIC and anticholinergics but due to discomfort during urethral CIC, the treatment compliance was
compromised. The patient had febrile UTIs and worsening of left renal function. He underwent left nephrectomy and a bladder augmentation
with ileum and continued with CIC every 4 hours, no leakage was observed. Patient’s right kidney was preserved. Patient 6 was a 16 year-old
boy (Figure 2) whose 7 siblings were normal. A history of recurrent UTIs and dysfunctional voiding was noted with elevated PVR volumes.
Urodinamics test showed a poorly compliant bladder, elevated PVR volume and detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia. He was followed at another
center and had undergone an appendicovesicostomy when he was 7 years old. CIC and anticholinergics therapy were administered that decreased
episodes of UTIs. After 6 years, he had hypertension and was referred to the nephrology clinic for evaluation. He also had moderate renal
impairment with an inadequate response to antihypertensive drugs. Results of ultrasound scan revealed bilateral ureterohydronephrosis,
thick-walled bladder and a small left kidney. VCUG showed bilateral VUR and a small trabeculated bladder. DMSA demonstrated bilateral renal
scarring with severe right kidney impairment. The patient underwent a bladder augmentation with ileum and was kept under CIC. After a 3-year
follow-up he had a severe renal impairment and received a cadaver donor renal transplantation. Bernardo Ochoa described a group of children
with symptoms of neurogenic bladder (enuresis, incontinence, UTI, constipation, trabeculated bladder and vesicoureteral reflux), but with
neither apparent neurological condition nor mechanical obstructive abnormalities that could justify the urological findings.(1) These cases
would be classified as non-neurogenic neurogenic bladder as previously described by Hinman(5) if a peculiar finding on their facial
expression was not present. Ochoa noticed that children who participated in the study showed a pathognomonic inversion of the facial
expression such as facial grimace or cry when they attempted to smile. For this reason, he proposed the name “urofacial syndrome”. Recent
studies have localized the defective gene for urofacial syndrome in a region on chromosome 10q23-q24, with evidence of mutations on
Heparanase 2 (HPSE2) gene that would be responsible for this syndrome.(6-9) Although the exactly biological function has not yet been
established, complete loss of HPSE2 function in patients with urofacial syndrome suggests it may be implicated on the genesis of the
syndrome.(6) The gene seems to be transmitted in a recessive autosomal inheritance pattern. In the upper pons of the midbrain are located
the crying and laughing centers, very close to the micturition center, and this proximity could explain how a neurologic lesion may affect
both regions simultaneously,(4) but this theory has not been proved yet. Many of these patients are not diagnosed and the lack of
appropriate treatment results in upper urinary tract injury and ultimately renal failure.(3) Early diagnosis is then essential to achieve a
better prognosis. An aggressive urological management is necessary to improve bladder emptying and avoid infections. The suspicious must be
raised when observed the combination of urological problems and inverted facial expression upon attempts to smile.(10) This experience
justifies the need to communicate and educate health professions about this syndrome, the picture of patients’ smile is self-explanatory.
Pediatricians, nephrologists and urologists should be aware of the relationship between voiding symptoms and this peculiar facial sign. A
síndrome de Ochoa é rara, e seus principais problemas clínicos são frequentemente não reconhecidos. Descrevem-se aqui características
faciais de seis pacientes para auxiliar profissionais de saúde a reconhecer o sorriso invertido que eles apresentam e encaminhá-los para o
tratamento adequado. Os prontuários médicos foram revisados e a condição urológica dos pacientes foi reavaliada clinicamente. A média de
idade na última avaliação foi de 15,5 anos, variando de 12 a 32 anos. O seguimento médio foi de 35 meses (12 a 60). Os sintomas iniciais
foram infecções do trato urinário em quatro pacientes (67%) associadas com enurese e incontinência urinária em três deles (50%). Um paciente
apresentou infecções do trato urinário isoladamente e dois apresentaram sintomas do trato urinário inferior, porém sem infecções. O
tratamento inicial consistiu em cateterismo intermitente limpo, com anticolinérgicos em todos os pacientes. Reconstrução urinária foi
realizada em quatro pacientes (67%) por meio de ampliação vesical. Dois pacientes apresentaram doença renal em estágio terminal no
seguimento, um recebeu transplante renal e outro manteve-se em lista de espera para transplante renal. Consanguinidade familiar esteve
presente em apenas um caso. Essa condição significativa é rara, porém deve ser reconhecida por pediatras, nefrologistas e urologistas, a fim
de instituir tratamento urológico agressivo precoce. A síndrome de Ochoa(1) é uma condição rara caracterizada pela uropatia obstrutiva
funcional e por anormalidades faciais incomuns, com padrão de herança autossômica recessiva. Essa síndrome resulta em deterioração do trato
urinário superior e em eventual insuficiência renal, se não diagnosticada precocemente.(2, 3) A síndrome de Ochoa é também conhecida como
síndrome urofacial e afeta ambos os sexos, porém ocorre com maior frequência quando os pais são consanguíneos.(4) Relata-se
retrospectivamente experiência com seis pacientes encaminhados a nossa instituição. O exame físico revelou expressão facial peculiar em
todos os pacientes (Figuras 1 e 2) e anormalidade da mímica facial na tentativa de sorrir, no momento em que os sintomas iniciam. Figura
1Imagens dos pacientes 1, 2 e 3, mostrando expressão facial incomum de careta quando na tentativa de sorrir. Note que, nas imagens
superiores, os pacientes estão com expressão facial neutra, enquanto nas imagens inferiores foram solicitados a sorrir Figura 2Imagens de
expressão facial dos pacientes 4, 5 e 6, mostrando expressão peculiar. As imagens superiores mostram expressão facial neutra, enquanto as
imagens inferiores quando foram solicitados a sorrir Paciente 1, de 15 anos, sexo feminino, apresentava frequentes infecções do trato
urinário (ITUs) desde os 12 anos de idade (Figura 1). Além disso, não possuía histórico de outros sintomas no trato urinário e nem sinais de
disrafismo espinhal oculto. A radiografia da região lombossacral era normal; a ultrassonografia revelou hidronefrose bilateral; o exame
urodinâmico mostrou resíduo miccional elevado e ácido mercaptosuccinico (DMSA); o renograma apresentou cicatrizes renais bilaterais graves.
O tratamento inicial consistiu em cateterização intermitente limpa (CIL) e no uso de anticolinérgicos. Apesar de a paciente não apresentar
outra ITU após o tratamento, uma piora na função renal foi notada durante seguimento e, no momento deste estudo, ela se preparava para
transplante renal. A tabela 1 resume as informações clínicas de todos os pacientes. Tabela 1Características de seis
pacientesPacienteSeguimento (meses)Idade no tratamento inicial (anos)Idade no momento do estudo (anos)GêneroPais consanguíneosSintomas
iniciaisLesão renalITUCirurgia1121415FPrimosITUSimSimEspera por transplante renal224432MNãoITUNãoSimUreterostomia bilateral Aumento da
bexiga3601116MNãoITUNãoSimAumento da bexiga Incontinência Enurese Urgência 460813FNãoUrgênciaNãoNão Enurese 532912MNãoITURim
esquerdoSimNefrectomia esquerda + aumento da bexiga IncontinênciaRim 624716MNãoIncontinênciaSimNãoMitrofanoff Enurese Aumento da bexiga
Transplante renalF: feminino; ITU: infecção do trato urinário; M: masculino. F: feminino; ITU: infecção do trato urinário; M: masculino. O
paciente 2, de 32 anos, sexo masculino, tinha histórico de ITUs recorrentes na infância (Figura 1). Foi realizada investigação do trato
urinário enquanto o paciente foi assistido em outro centro, que mostrou micção disfuncional e diagnóstico inicial de bexiga não neurogênica.
Apesar da conduta inicial, o paciente foi submetido a ureterostomia bilateral aos 4 anos de idade, que o manteve sem infecção com sucesso.
Aos 9 anos de idade, as ureterostomias foram fechadas e a CIL foi iniciada, porém foi necessário o aumento da bexiga utilizando o cólon
transverso. O histórico familiar do paciente 2 foi negativo para síndrome de Ochoa, e seus pais não eram consanguíneos. Aos 32 anos, o
paciente continuava em terapia com anticolinérgicos e CIL a cada 4 horas, o que o mantém livre de infecção. Além disso, ele não possuía
cicatrizes no trato urinário superior, apesar do histórico de ITUs. Os pacientes 3 e 4 eram irmãos, com 16 e 13 anos, respectivamente. Seus
pais não eram consanguíneos e não possuíam histórico anterior de síndrome urofacial na família. Paciente 3 de 16 anos, do sexo masculino,
foi encaminhado a nossa clínica devido a ITUs recorrentes, micção disfuncional, incontinência urinária pela manhã, enurese e urgência
(Figura 1). Os resultados da ultrassonografia revelaram hidronefrose esquerda, bexiga trabeculada e divertículo. O exame urodinâmico mostrou
bexiga com baixa complacência, volume residual pós-miccional (RPM e volume miccional elevados, e dissinergia detrusor-esfincteriana. O
paciente apresentava bexiga trabeculada com pequena capacidade e refluxo vesicureteral (RVU) de alto grau em cisturetrografia miccional
(CUGM). A conduta inicial foi CIL e oxibutinina. Devido aos efeitos colaterais anticolinérgicos, a tolterodina foi introduzida com sucesso
parcial. O intervalo de continência foi de apenas 1 hora e 30 minutos. Subsequentemente, o paciente foi submetido ao aumento da bexiga com
alça ileal, e a CIL foi mantida a cada 5 horas sem extravasamento. Paciente 4, de 13 anos (Figura 2), sexo feminino, apresentava urgência e
enurese, mas com ausência de episódios de ITU. Os resultados da ultrassonografia demostraram trato urinário normal; CUGM não mostrou
refluxo, bexiga normal com grande capacidade e volume RPM de 80mL. Além disso, o exame urodinâmico mostrou bexiga com baixa complacência,
atividade excessiva do detrusor e micção disfuncional com dissinergia do esfíncter. Para essa paciente, foi proposta conduta prévia para
evitar deterioração do trato urinário superior. Ela realizou CIL com sucesso e terapia com anticolinérgicos. A paciente permaneceu bem
adaptada à CIL, apresentando intervalo de continência de 6 horas e com trato urinário superior preservado. Paciente 5, de 12 anos, sexo
masculino, apresentava incontinência urinária durante o dia, ITUs recorrentes, dor lombar e episódios de retenção urinária (Figura 2). Em
exame físico não foram encontrados sinais de disrafismo espinhal oculto. A ultrassonografia revelou sinais de ureterohidronefrose esquerda e
bexiga apresentando parede espessa. Além disso, o paciente possuía bexiga trabeculada com divertículo e RVU à esquerda de alto grau
encontrada em CUGM. O exame urodinâmico mostrou bexiga com baixa complacência, dissinergia detrusor-esfincteriana e volume de RPM elevado.
DMSA mostrou cicatrização grave no rim esquerdo. A abordagem inicial consistiu de CIL e anticolinérgicos, porém, devido ao desconforto
durante CIL uretral, a adesão ao tratamento foi comprometida. O paciente teve febre devido às ITUs e piora da função do rim esquerdo. Além
disso, realizou nefrectomia esquerda e apresentou aumento da bexiga com alça ileal; CIL continuou a cada 4 horas, sem que fosse observado
extravasamento. O rim esquerdo desse paciente estava preservado. O paciente 6, de 16 anos de idade (Figura 2), possuía 7 irmãos sadios. O
histórico de ITU recorrente e micção disfuncional foi notado com volume de RPM elevado. O exame urodinâmico mostrou bexiga com baixa
complacência, volume de RPM elevado e dissinergia detrusor-esfincteriana. O paciente foi acompanhado em outro centro e realizou
apendicovesicostomia aos 7 anos de idade. CIL e terapia com anticolinérgico foram administradas, reduzindo, assim, os episódios de ITUs.
Após 6 anos, o paciente teve hipertensão e foi encaminhado a clínica de nefrologia para avaliação. Ele também teve insuficiência renal
moderada com resposta inadequada a drogas anti-hipertensivas. Os resultados da ultrassonografia revelaram ureterohidronefrose bilateral,
espessamento da parede da bexiga e rim esquerdo reduzido. CUGM mostrou RVU e bexiga trabeculada e reduzida. O DMSA mostrou cicatrização
renal bilateral com lesão no rim direito. O paciente realizou aumento da bexiga com alça ileal e foi mantido em CIL. Após 3 anos de
seguimento, apresentou lesão renal grave e foi submetido a transplante renal de doador cadáver. Além disso, realizou aumento da bexiga com
alça ileal e foi mantido em CIL. Bernaro Ochoa descreveu um grupo de crianças com sintomas de bexiga neurogênica (enurese, incontinência,
ITUs, constipação, bexiga trabeculada e RVU), porém sem condição neurológica aparente e nem anormalidades de obstrução mecânica que poderiam
justificar o achado urológico.(1) Esses casos seriam classificados como bexiga não neurogênica como descrito anteriormente por Hinman,(5) no
caso de ausência de achado peculiar na expressão facial desses pacientes. Ochoa notou que as crianças que participaram no estudo mostraram
uma inversão patognomônica da expressão facial, tal como careta ou choro, quando tentavam sorrir. Por esse motivo, o nome “síndrome
orofacial” foi proposto. Estudos recentes têm localizado o gene defeituoso para síndrome urofacial na região no cromossomo 10q23-q24, com
evidência de mutações na Heparanase 2 (HPSE2); o gene que seria responsável por essa síndrome.(6-9) Apesar de a função biológica exata ainda
não estar estabelecida, a perda completa da função do HPSE2 em pacientes com síndrome urofacial sugere que pode implicar na gênesis da
síndrome.(6) O gene parece ser transmitido em padrão de herança autossômica recessiva. Nas protuberâncias superiores do mesencéfalo estão
localizados os centros de choro e riso, muito próximos do centro da micção. Portanto, essa proximidade pode explicar como a lesão
neurológica pode afetar ambas as regiões simultaneamente,(4) mas essa teoria ainda não foi comprovada. Muitos desses pacientes não são
diagnosticados, além da falta de resultados e tratamento apropriados na lesão do trato urinário superior e insuficiência renal.(3) O
diagnóstico precoce é essencial para atingir um melhor prognóstico. Tratamento urológico agressivo é necessário para melhorar o esvaziamento
da bexiga e evitar infecções. As suspeitas devem ser levantadas quando observada a combinação entre problemas urológicos e a expressão
facial invertida quando da tentativa de sorrir.(10) Essa experiência justifica a necessidade de informar e educar profissionais de saúde em
relação a essa síndrome. A imagem do sorriso dos pacientes é autoexplicativa. Pediatras, nefrologistas e urologistas devem conhecer o
relacionamento entre sintomas miccionais e sinal facial peculiar.
