NRS, a woman, 71-year-old, who born in São Paulo, Brazil, sought our care service complaining of progressive low visual and metamorphopsia
in the right eyes (RE) for 3 months. She had no-history of comorbidities, ophthalmologic surgeries or eye diseases. Upon examination her
best-corrected visual acuity was 20/80 in the RE and 20/20 in the left eye. Funduscopy showed vitreous condensation in fovea region of the
RE. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed vitreomacular traction due to partial posterior vitreous detachment that disorganized the
fovea structure and formed an aspect of “camel-hump” associated with the presence of high-reflectivity membrane, generating moderate
centripetal traction of the retina surface with preservation of external and internal lines of photoreceptors (Figure 1). Figure 1Camel-Hump
Sign. Optical coherence tomography of the right eye showing centripetal traction area in macule region suggesting appearance of tractional
retinal detachment A vitrectomy was done with total vitreous detachment staining with triamcinolone for removal of posterior vitreous and
macular epiretinal membrane with peeling of the limited internal membrane. An improvement in metamorphopsia was seen in the first week after
surgery. Vitrectomy can present complications such as iatrogenic retinal rupture in 1.6% of cases and development of cataract in 69% of
phakic patients within the 2 years after surgery.( 1 ) For this reason, some physicians have opted to intravitreal injection of ocriplasmin
when vitreomacular traction is associated with macular hole of diameter less than or equal to 400 microns. Vitreomacular traction syndrome
is a vitreoretinal interface alteration where presence of myofibroblast associated or not to collagen layers prevents the total detachment
between posterior vitreous and the retina.( 2 - 4 ) Ultrastructure of vitreoretinal interface present two basic standards: cellular layer
adhered to limited internal membrane, and fibrocelular proliferation separated from the limited internal membrane by collagen layer, which
is similar to idiopathic epiretinal membrane. In both groups, the predominant cellular type is miofibroblast that explain the high
prevalence of cystoid macular edema and progressive vitreomacular traction.( 3 ) Structural changes in retina because of changes observed in
OCT have complemented the diagnosis and support the management that is expected or not, to be adopted. Cases with good visual acuity and
small distortion of retinal architecture present better prognosis. Posterior vitrectomy has been proposal in the first signals of prognosis
worsening. Worsening metamorphopsia and visual acuity associated with funduscopy and tomographic images show distortions in retinal
architecture resembling “mountain range” and “camel-hump”, which suggest intervention. Anatomical improvement after surgery is not always
followed by improves in visual acuity, so that reflecting probable functional changes and retinal microstructures that cannot be
reestablished after surgery. However, after metamorphopsia an improvement is seen; which constitutes one of the main complaints of these
patients. The OCT constitutes an indispensable semiologic weapon in the diagnosis and treatment of vitreous traction syndrome. These images
help in diagnosis and follow-up of patients. NRS, feminino, 71 anos, natural de São Paulo. Procurou o serviço com queixa de baixa visual
progressiva e metamorfopsia em olho direito (OD) há 3 meses. Na história patológica pregressa não havia comorbidades, cirurgias
oftalmológicas ou doenças oculares. Ao exame, a acuidade visual com melhor correção era de 20/80 em OD e 20/20 em olho esquerdo. À
fundoscopia observou-se condensação vítrea na região foveal de OD. Foi realizada tomografia de coerência óptica (OCT, optical cocherence
tomography), que mostrou tração vitreomacular por descolamento parcial de vítreo posterior, desorganizando a estrutura da fóvea e formando
aspecto de “corcova de camelo”, associada à presença de membrana de alta refletividade, gerando moderada tração centrípeta da superfície
retiniana, com preservação da linha externa e interna dos fotorreceptores (Figura 1). Figura 1Sinal da corcova de camelo. A imagem de
tomografia de coerência óptica do olho direito mostra áreas de tração centrípeta na região macular, sugerindo o aparecimento de descolamento
tracional de retina Realizou-se vitrectomia com descolamento total do vítreo, corando com triancinolona para retirar o vítreo posterior e
remoção de membrana epirretiniana macular com peeling da membrana limitante interna. Houve melhora da metamorfopsia na primeira semana pós
operatória. A cirurgia de vitrectomia pode apresentar complicações como roturas iatrogenicas da retina em 1,6% dos casos e desenvolvimento
de catarata em pacientes fácicos em 2 anos de pós-operatório em 69%.( 1 ) Por isso alguns médicos tem optado pela injeção intravítrea de
ocriplasmina, quando a tração vítreomacular está associada ao buraco macular de diâmetro igual ou inferior a 400 microns. A síndrome de
tração macular é uma alteração na interface vítreorretiniana, onde a presença de miofibroblastos, associados ou não à camadas de colágeno,
impede o descolamento completo entre o vítreo posterior e a retina.( 2 - 4 ) A ultraestrutura da interface vítreorretiniana apresenta dois
padrões básicos: camada celular aderida à membrana limitante interna, e proliferação fibrocelular separada da membrana limitante interna por
uma camada de colágeno, semelhante às da membrana epirretiniana idiopática. Em ambos os grupos, o tipo celular predominante é o
miofibroblasto, o que explica a alta prevalência de edema macular cistóide e a progressiva tração vitreomacular.( 3 ) As alterações
estruturais retinianas decorrentes destas alterações observadas no OCT têm complementado o diagnóstico e auxiliado na conduta, expectante ou
não, a ser adotada. Casos com boa acuidade visual e pequena distorção da arquitetura retiniana apresentam melhores prognósticos. A
vitrectomia posterior tem sido aventada aos primeiros sinais de piora prognóstica. Piora da metamorfopsia e da acuidade visual, associada a
imagens fundoscópicas e tomográficas evidenciando distorções na arquitetura retiniana, como nos sinais da “cordilheira” e “corcova de
camelo”, sugerem a intervenção. A melhora anatômica pós operatória nem sempre é acompanhada de melhora na acuidade visual, refletindo
prováveis alterações funcionais e microestruturais retinianas, que podem não se restabelecer após a cirurgia. Entretanto, comumente há
melhora pós operatória da metamorfopsia, uma das principais queixas destes pacientes. O OCT é uma arma semiológica indispensável no
diagnóstico e tratamento da síndrome de tração vítreo macular. Suas imagens auxiliam no diagnóstico e acompanhamento do paciente.
