Hemangioperycytoma is a rare perivascular tumor that seldom involves the urogenital system. This tumor often appears with an unspecific
clinical picture, and sometimes is associated with hematuria or hypertension. Diagnosis is based on a combination of histological and
immunohistological findings. We report a case of a 52-year-old patient with renal hemangiopericytoma who underwent surgical treatment at our
service. This report also includes a literature review on the subject. Hemangiopericytoma (HPC) was first described in 1942. This is a rare
perivascular tumor due to uncontrolled proliferation capillary pericytes. This tumor affects mainly extremities of the body, pelvis, head
and neck, and meningitis, but hemangiopericytoma is rarely found in urogenital system. Until 2009, only 42 cases of this neoplasia involving
the kidney were reported in the world literature.( 1 ) Because of the rarity of this injury until to date, no therapeutic management and
ideal diagnosis were established as well as progress and prognosis of the disease.( 2 ) We report a case of renal HPC diagnosed and treated
at Urological Service of the Irmandade Santa Casa de Misericórdia de São Paulo. In November 2011, a 52-year-old, white and previously
healthy woman was admitted at our because of an increase in abdominal volume. She denied any other complains, including abdominal pain or
hematuria. The patient does not have a history of smoking or use of illicit substances. In March 2012, she began a follow-up at outpatient
unit dedicated to urology care. She had blood hypertension and took medicine for this affection, and also mentioned to lose 10kg in that
period. Her ultrasonography test of urinary tract showed evidence of tumors in topography of the right kidney. Laboratorial tests showed
anemia with serum hemoglobin value of 8.9g/dL. The abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a cystic-solid expansive formation,
multiloculated, heterogenous in the right kidney that replaced the parenchyma in the medial and inferior third. The formation measured
23.2x18.8x18.7cm with special emphasis of solid portions and superimposition of septal segments that dislocated superiorly the liver and
gallbladder, crossing the medium line and opposing medially to the pancreas, portal and aortic vein with signs of vascular compromising
(Figure 1). Figure 1Tomography showing abdominal tumor The patient had undergone radical nephrectomy, which is a procedure with technical
difficult because of tumor proportion, without intercurrence or necessity of blood transfusion, and even intensive care in immediate
postoperative. Patient progressed without complications, her drain presented low debt and good diuresis. She was discharged on the 3rd day
after the surgery. The anatomopathological study (Figure 2) confirmed the diagnosis of HPC, and immunohistochemical analysis showed tumoral
cells positive for BCL-2 (Figure 3), CD99 (Figure 4), vimentin (Figure 5), CD34 (Figure 6), and negative for S-100. Mitotic index score was
2 (13 mitoses per 10 high-power fields). Figure 2Histological analysis with hematoxylin-eosin Figure 3Immunohistochemical with positive CD99
staining Figure 4Immunohistochemical with positive BCL-2 staining Figure 5Immunohistochemical with positive vimentin staining Figure
6Immunohistochemical with positive CD34 staining In return visit at outpatient unit, the patient remained asymptomatic and without local or
systemic complications. We removed points of surgical incision and requested abdominal CT and control chest radiography for 4 months. During
reassessments on this period the patient was in good general status, normotensive and did not need anti-hypertensive medicine. In addition,
no other complaints were reported. Radiography exam showed changes and CT revealed only sings of previous manipulations in topography of
right kidney and mild increased paracaval lymph nodes, <1.0cm. Currently, 7th months after surgery, the patient is clinically well and
without intercurrence. HPC is classified as vascular tumor of soft tissues from the pericytes, modified cells of smooth muscle tissue that
were described by Zimmerman in 1923. Such cells are organized around capillaries and post-capillary veins, and they are responsible to
modulate blood flow and permeability of these vessels.( 3 ) Our patient was at average age of diagnosis of this neoplasia, about 40.3 years
old (16 to 68 years old), which suggest that such tumor affect more frequently in young patients than other types of renal cell cancer.( 2 ,
4 ) No significant difference is found concerning the incidence of this neoplasia between men and women, and no age variation between sexes
in the diagnosis. Clinical picture is unspecific. In 66% of cases reported in the literature, initial symptom is painless abdominal tumor,
such as reported in our case. Other symptoms already described, in order of frequency, are: hematuria, hypoglycemia and arterial
hypertension.( 2 ) A study reported that hematuria was found in six patients in which an invasion of pyelocaliceal system by tumor occured.(
1 ) Hypoglycemia is also associated to excess of glucose metabolism by the tumor. Blood hypertension, however, is believed to occur because
of the production of renin by the neoplasia and, as observed in our patient, it often disappear after surgical treatment.( 1 , 4 ) The most
common site of metastasis of renal HPC is the lung, which was described in two case and patients had a poor prognosis. Imaging exams, such
as ultrasonography, CT or magnetic resonance did not show specific finding of the tumor that were able to collaborate in the differential
diagnosis from other renal tumors.( 1 , 4 ) However, Yagmani reported that these tumors can have standard characteristic in early phase of
blood angiography – of principal arteries, presence of vessels surrounding the tumor and well-marked stain, delimiting the tumor.( 2 , 5 )
Macroscopically, most tumors are well circumscribed lesions or a thin capsule, associated to complex network of vessels and, sometimes, with
small satellite nodules around the main mass. Only the minority is adhered to neighbouring tissues. Tumor size reported in the literature
range between 2 and 25cm.( 4 ) In general, there is a cellular proliferation with small variability in cellularity, a “staghorn” vascular
pattern with packed pericytes around vascular endothelium, and minimal collagenization that can vary both in size and form. The technique
used is based on Hematoxylin and eosin stain (Figure 2) and silver associated with immunohistochemistry, using antibodies against CD31,
CD34, CD99, S-100, vimentin, citokeratin and epithelia antigen membrane (renal). Only the combination of these two is can provide the
diagnosis,( 2 , 4 ) which in our case enabled the precise diagnosis of tumoral mass. HPC diagnosis is done mainly by exclusion. The
histological pattern and immunophenotyping provide information to differential diagnosis with other vascular neoplasias and other
mesenchymal tumors. Such tumors include juxtaglomerular origin, which often is presented as blood hypertension, especially in young adults.
These tumors are considered of different origin of HPC.( 2 ) Other vascular neoplasias, histiocytosis, neural and of smooth muscle must be
excluded before the definitive diagnosis of HPC.( 4 ) The main treatment for this disease is surgery, and exeresis must be as radical as
possible in order to avoid incomplete resection and recurrence. Therefore, an appropriate surgical plan associated with a previous study of
tumor vascular architecture (CT angiography or arteriography) must be done.( 2 ) Radiotherapy, chemotherapy or adjuvant or neoadjuvant
immunotherapy seem to be inefficient to treat HPC. Although, the majority of renal HPCs are benign, outcomes cannot be precisely foreseen by
histological appearance, however, rigorous follow-up must be conducted to detect long-term recurrence.( 6 ) Main factor associated to
prognosis seems to be the histological pattern. Enzinger and Smith observed survival of 77% in 10 years in patients with 0 to 3 mitoses /10
versus 29% in those patients with 4 or more by field.( 7 ) Similarly, survival was 81% in patients with tumoral necrosis versus 29% in those
who had necrotic areas in the tumor. They also observed the importance of tumor size concerning prognosis. In tumors <6.5cm, survival in 10
years reached 95% and 63% for large tumors.( 4 ) Because HPC is rare and present a vague clinical picture associated with imaging exams that
do not indicate a specific disease, the precisely diagnosis of hemangiopericytoma is made only after surgery and with the
immunohistochemical result. Best treatment consists in complete surgical excision because complementary treatment such as chemotherapy
and/or radiotherapy is not efficient. Hemangiopericitoma é um raro tumor perivascular que raramente envolve o sistema urogenital. Esses
tumores geralmente se manifestam com quadro clínico inespecífico, por vezes associado a hematúria ou hipertensão. O diagnóstico baseia-se
numa combinação de alterações histológicas e imuno-histológica. Este artigo relatou o caso de uma paciente de 52 anos de idade com um
hemangiopericitoma renal submetida a tratamento cirúrgico em nosso serviço e incluiu uma revisão de literatura sobre o assunto. Descrito
pela primeira vez em 1942, o hemangiopericitoma (HPC) é um raro tumor perivascular resultante da proliferação descontrolada dos pericitos
capilares. Acometem principalmente extremidades, pelve, cabeça e pescoço, e meninges, sendo raramente encontrados no sistema urogenital. Até
2009, apenas 42 casos dessa neoplasia envolvendo o rim foram relatados na literatura mundial.( 1 ) Devido a raridade dessas lesões, até os
dias atuais, não estão estabelecidas condutas terapêuticas e diagnósticas ideais, nem a evolução e o prognóstico da doença.( 2 ) Relatamos
um caso de HPC renal diagnosticado e tratado no Serviço de Urologia da Irmandade Santa Casa de Misericórdia de São Paulo. Paciente de 52
anos de idade, do gênero feminino, branca, previamente hígida, apresentou, em novembro de 2011, aumento do volume abdominal. Negava qualquer
outra queixa, incluindo dor abdominal ou hematúria. Não tinha história de tabagismo ou de uso de substâncias ilícitas. Em março de 2012
começou o acompanhamento ambulatorial no serviço de urologia, hipertensa em uso de medicações e referindo perda de 10kg nesse período;
trouxe ultrassonografia das vias urinárias com evidência de tumoração em topografia do rim direito. Exames laboratoriais revelaram anemia,
com valor sérico de hemoglobina de 8,9g/dL. Tomografia computadorizada (TC) de abdome evidenciou formação expansiva sólido-cística,
multisseptada, heterogênea, com origem no rim direito, substituindo o parênquima, no terço médio e inferior, medindo 23,2x18,8x18,7cm, com
realce das porções sólidas e dos septos de permeio, deslocando superiormente o fígado e a vesícula biliar, cruzando a linha média e
rechaçando medialmente o pâncreas, veia porta e aorta, sem sinais de comprometimento vascular (Figura 1). Figura 1Tomografia evidenciando
tumoração abdominal Foi submetida a nefrectomia radical, procedimento com dificuldade técnica devido às proporções da tumoração, porém sem
intercorrências, não necessitando de transfusão sanguínea e nem de cuidados intensivos no pós-operatório imediato. A paciente evoluiu sem
complicações, dreno com baixo débito e boa diurese, tendo alta no 3o dia após a cirurgia. Estudo anatomopatológico (Figura 2) confirmou o
diagnóstico de HPC, e a análise imuno-histoquímica mostrou células tumorais positivas para BCL-2 (Figura 3), CD99 (Figura 4), vimentina
(Figura 5), CD34 (Figura 6), sendo negativo para S-100. O índice mitótico teve escore de 2 (13 mitoses por 10 campos de grande aumento).
Figura 2Análise histológica com hematoxilina-eosina Figura 3Imuno-histoquímica com marcador CD99 positivo Figura 4Imuno-histoquímica com
marcador BCL-2 positivo Figura 5Imuno-histoquímica com marcador vimentina positivo Figura 6Imuno-histoquímica com marcador CD34 positivo No
retorno ambulatorial, permanecia assintomática e sem complicações locais ou sistêmicas. Foram retirados os pontos da incisão cirúrgica e
solicitado TC abdominal e radiografia de tórax controle em 4 meses. À reavaliação nesse período, novamente encontrava-se em bom estado
geral, normotensa e sem necessidade de usar anti-hipertensivos, sem qualquer queixa. A radiografia não mostrou alterações e a TC revelou
apenas sinais de manipulação pregressa em topografia de rim direito e linfonodos pericavais discretamente aumentados, <1,0cm. Atualmente no
7o mês pós-operatório, a paciente mantém-se clinicamente bem, sem intercorrências pós-operatórias. HPC é classificado como um tumor vascular
de tecidos moles originado a partir de pericitos, células modificadas de músculo liso, descritas por Zimmerman, em 1923. Tais células se
arranjam ao redor de capilares e veias pós-capilares, sendo responsáveis por modular o fluxo sanguíneo e pela permeabilidade de tais vasos.(
3 ) A paciente relatada encontrava-se na média de idade de diagnóstico dessa neoplasia, próximo de 40,3 anos (16 a 68 anos), sugerindo que
tal tumor ocorre com maior frequência em pacientes jovens que outros tipos de carcinomas de células renal.( 2 , 4 ) Não há diferença
significativa quanto a incidência entre homens e mulheres, e nem variação de idade entre os gêneros ao diagnóstico. O quadro clínico é
inespecífico. Em 66% dos casos relatados na literatura, o sintoma inicial foi de tumoração abdominal indolor, assim como o relatado neste
caso. Outros sintomas já descritos, em ordem de frequência, são: hematúria, hipoglicemia e hipertensão arterial.( 2 ) Hematúria foi
detectada em seis pacientes, nos quais houve invasão do sistema pielo-calicinal pelo tumor.( 1 ) Hipoglicemia foi associada ao excessivo
metabolismo de glicose pelo tumor. Já a hipertensão arterial acredita-se que seja decorrente de produção de renina pela neoplasia e, assim
como evidenciado em nossa paciente, geralmente regride após o tratamento cirúrgico.( 1 , 4 ) O sítio mais frequente de metástases do HPC
renal é o pulmão, descrito em dois casos, nos quais houve pior prognóstico dos doentes. Exames de imagem, como ultrassonografia, TC ou
ressonância magnética, não demonstram achados específicos do tumor que pudessem colaborar para o diagnóstico diferencial entre outras
neoplasias renais.( 1 , 4 ) Por outro lado, Yaghmai mostrou que esses tumores podem ter um padrão característico na fase precoce da
angiografia arterial − das artérias principais, presença de grandes vasos circundando o tumor e uma mancha bem demarcada, delimitando o
tumor.( 2 , 5 ) Macroscopicamente a maioria dos tumores se manifesta como lesões bem delimitadas ou com uma fina cápsula, associada a uma
ampla rede de vasos e, por vezes, com nódulos satélites pequenos encontrados separadamente da massa. Apenas uma minoria está aderida a
tecidos vizinhos. O tamanho dos tumores relatados na literatura varia entre 2 e 25cm.( 4 ) Geralmente, há proliferação celular com pequena
variação da celularidade, com padrão vascular em “chifre de alce” com pericitos embalados em torno de endotélio vascular, e mínima
colagenização, podendo variar tanto em forma quanto em tamanho. A técnica utilizada baseia-se na coloração por hematoxilina-eosina (Figura
2) e de prata, em associação com imuno-histoquímica, utilizando anticorpos contra CD31, CD34, CD99, S-100, vimentina, citoqueratinas e
antígeno de membrana epitelial (renal). Apenas a combinação dos dois é capaz de prover o diagnóstico,( 2 , 4 ) o que permitiu o diagnóstico
de certeza da massa tumoral do caso apresentado. O diagnóstico de HPC é principalmente de exclusão. O padrão histológico e a
imunofenotipagem fornecem informação para o diagnóstico diferencial com outras neoplasias vasculares e outros tumores mesenquimais. Tais
tumores incluem os de origem justaglomerular, que geralmente apresentam-se com hipertensão arterial, especialmente em adultos jovens. Esses
tumores são considerados de origem diferente do HPC.( 2 ) Outras neoplasias vasculares, histiocitárias, neurais e do músculo liso devem ser
excluídas antes de se definir o diagnóstico de HPC.( 4 ) Cirurgia é considerada o tratamento principal para tal patologia, e a exérese deve
ser o mais radical possível, a fim de evitar ressecção incompleta e recidiva. Portanto, um apropriado plano cirúrgico, associado a um estudo
da arquitetura vascular tumoral (angio-TC ou arteriografia) prévio, deve ser realizado.( 2 ) Radioterapia, quimioterapia ou imunoterapia
adjuvantes ou neoadjuvantes não pareceram ser eficazes para o HPC. Embora a maioria dos HPC renais seja benigna, o desfecho não pode ser
precisamente previsto pela aparência histológica, mas deve ser realizado acompanhamento rigoroso para detectar recorrência a longo prazo.( 6
) O principal fator associado ao prognóstico parece ser o padrão histológico. Enzinger e Smith notaram sobrevida de 77% em 10 anos nos
pacientes com 0 a 3 mitoses/10 versus 29% naqueles pacientes com 4 ou mais por campo.( 7 ) De forma similar, a sobrevida foi de 81% nos
pacientes sem necrose tumoral versus 29% naqueles que apresentaram áreas necróticas no tumor. Foi ainda constatada importância do tamanho do
tumor em relação ao prognóstico. Em tumores <6,5cm, a sobrevida em 10 anos alcançou 95% e foi de 63% para tumores maiores.( 4 ) Por ser
patologia rara e apresentar-se com quadro clínico vago, associado a exames de imagem que não indicam uma patologia específica, o diagnóstico
exato de hemangiopericitoma dá-se apenas no pós-operatório, com o resultado imuno-histoquímico. O melhor tratamento consiste na excisão
cirúrgica completa, visto que o tratamento complementar, com quimioterapia e/ou radioterapia, não se mostrou efetivo.
