Streptococcus equi subspecies zooepidemicus (Streptococcus zooepidemicus) is a rare cause of meningitis in humans. Humans mainly get
infected by contact with an animal source or by ingestion of unpasteurized dairy products. In rare cases, bacterial meningitis can be
complicated by endogenous endophthalmitis which is frequently associated with a poor visual prognosis. A 73 year old male Caucasian patient
presented with clinical signs indicative of bacterial meningitis. Blood and cerebrospinal fluid cultures yielded beta-hemolytic, catalase-
negative cocci. The strain was identified as Streptococcus zooepidemicus. The patient was likely infected by contact with a sick horse.
Under antibiotic treatment, his general condition improved rapidly. Early after hospital admission, however, he began seeing a black spot in
his left eye’s central visual field. An ophthalmological examination revealed signs of endogenous endophthalmitis and so the patient
underwent vitrectomy. Despite treatment, the visual acuity of his left eye remained severely impaired. He showed no further neurological
deficits at hospital discharge. Meningitis caused by Streptococcus zooepidemicus is rare with only 27 previously published adult cases in
the literature. Of note, this report constitutes the third description of endogenous endophthalmitis associated with Streptococcus
zooepidemicus meningitis. Thus, endogenous endophthalmitis may represent a comparatively common complication of meningitis caused by this
microorganism. Streptococcus equi subspecies zooepidemicus (S. zooepidemicus) infections in humans are rare. Only 9 out of 308 isolates of
group C streptococci cultured from clinical specimens represented S. zooepidemicus . To date, a total of 27 adult patients have been
reported who suffered from meningitis caused by S. zooepidemicus . Most infections were linked to an animal source or inadequately
pasteurized dairy products . In addition, S. zooepidemicus can cause a wide variety of infections including sinusitis, endocarditis, septic
arthritis and osteomyelitis , pericarditis , as well as streptococcal toxic shock syndrome . A 73 year old male Caucasian patient was
admitted to the neurological intensive care unit because of fever, headache, neck stiffness, drowsiness, and general malaise. The patient
had been well until two days before admission. Relevant comorbidities included coronary artery disease and a myocardial infarction three
years ago. The patient was a retired farmer but still helped his son who had taken over the family business. Recently, he had been taking
care of a sick horse suffering from an upper respiratory tract infection with purulent nasal discharge compatible with coryza contagiosa
equorum (“strangles”). On physical examination, the patient was awake but confused and had nuchal rigidity. He had tachycardia with a heart
rate of 126/min, fever (38.8°C), and an oxygen saturation of 96% while breathing 6 liters of oxygen/min. On auscultation of the chest,
crackles were heard over both lungs. Chest radiography showed bilateral perihilar infiltrates. A systolic murmur was present at the right
sternal border. Results of routine laboratory tests showed leukocytopenia (3,580/μl; normal range 4,000-11,500/μl), thrombocytopenia
(106,000/μl; normal range 160,000-400,000/μl), elevated C-reactive protein (116.9 mg/dl; normal <5 mg/dl) and procalcitonin levels
(2.5 ng/ml; normal <0.5 ng/ml). A computed tomography scan of the head revealed no abnormalities. A lumbar puncture was performed.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis yielded an elevated leukocyte count (575/μl, normal <4/μl), an elevated protein level (6,229 mg/dl,
normal < 500 mg/dl), and an elevated lactate concentration (13.8 mmol/l, normal range 1.21-2.09 mmol/l). A CSF sample and blood cultures
were taken for microbiological examination. An antibiotic and antiviral regimen with ceftriaxone, ampicillin and aciclovir was initiated
empirically. Furthermore, as an adjunctive treatment, glucocorticoids were administered (10 mg dexamethasone intravenously, 4×/d, for a
total of 4 days). Gram staining of the CSF specimen revealed neutrophils, cell debris and Gram-positive cocci laid out in (short) chains
(Figure 1 A). Cultures yielded many large colonies of beta-hemolytic, catalase-negative cocci which were also detected in the blood cultures
(Figure 1 B). The strain expressed the group C Lancefield antigen (Streptex; bioMérieux) and was identified as S. zooepidemicus by
biochemical testing (API20 Strep, bioMérieux). The strain was sensitive to penicillin G, amoxicillin, ceftriaxone, erythromycin and
vancomycin and resistant to clindamycin. A diagnosis of S. zooepidemicus meningitis was made. Based on these findings, aciclovir and
ampicillin were discontinued and ceftriaxone was administered for a total of 21 days. After initiation of antibiotic therapy, the patient’s
body temperature returned to normal levels within 24 hours. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed severe degenerative changes of the
aortic valve with no signs suspicious of endocarditis, however. On the second day after admission, the patient reported to permanently see a
black spot in his left eye’s central visual field. His visual acuity rapidly decreased to “hand motion” vision. An ophthalmological
examination revealed signs of endophthalmitis and the patient eventually underwent vitrectomy. A vitreous specimen yielded no bacterial
growth. Thereafter, his general condition improved steadily and he was discharged after a total of 21 days to a hospital specialized in
rehabilitative care. On final examination, the only remaining neurological deficit was a markedly impaired visual acuity of his left
eye.Figure 1Gram-stain of cerebrospinal fluid specimen and colony morphology of Streptococcus zooepidemicus strain isolated from the
patient. (A) Gram-stain of cerebrospinal fluid specimen. Arrows: Gram-positive cocci ordered in short chains. Magnification, x1000. (B)
Colony morphology and appearance of Streptococcus zooepidemicus strain isolated from the patient grown on sheep blood agar plates. Gram-
stain of cerebrospinal fluid specimen and colony morphology of Streptococcus zooepidemicus strain isolated from the patient. (A) Gram-stain
of cerebrospinal fluid specimen. Arrows: Gram-positive cocci ordered in short chains. Magnification, x1000. (B) Colony morphology and
appearance of Streptococcus zooepidemicus strain isolated from the patient grown on sheep blood agar plates. In our patient, the most
probable source of infection was the close contact to an infected horse. It is likely that the streptococci primarily infested the airways
and disseminated via the bloodstream into the meninges and the left eye. In line with our report, bacteremia was described in most cases of
meningitis caused by S. zooepidemicus. This case report constitutes the third description of endogenous endophthalmitis complicating
meningitis caused by S. zooepidemicus . Overall, endogenous endophthalmitis is generally considered a very rare complication of meningitis
and bacteremia. However, it has now been reported in 10.7% of all published S. zooepidemicus meningitis cases. This may suggest it could
occur more frequently in S. zooepidemicus meningitis than in meningitis caused by other microorganisms such as Streptococcus pneumoniae or
Neisseria meningitidis . Endogenous endophthalmitis is generally associated with poor visual outcome . Early initiation of adequate therapy,
including intravitreal injection of antibiotics or even vitrectomy, may preserve visual function . Hence, watchful clinical observation of
signs indicative of endophthalmitis is especially warranted in patients suffering from proven or suspected S. zooepidemicus meningitis,
because, due to an altered mental status, these patients may not be able to verbalize physical complaints like loss of visual acuity.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Cerebrospinal fluid Streptococcus equi subspecies
zooepidemicus Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions DM and JJ wrote the
report, JJ designed the figure, DM was furthermore involved in the management of the patient; MH, SM, MR and DHL were involved in the
management of the patient, gathered patient data and revised the manuscript; SS critically revised the manuscript. All authors have read the
manuscript, agreed with the contents, and approved the final version of the manuscript. We thank Prof. Christian Bogdan, University Hospital
Erlangen, for his critical review of the manuscript.
