Our aim was to evaluate the resolution of negative dysphotopsia after supplementary implantation of a sulcus-fixated intraocular lens (IOL).
This was a retrospective case series. Patients with severe negative dysphotopsia were treated with supplementary implantation of the Rayner
Sulcoflex Aspheric (653 L) IOL. Primary outcome measurements were subjectively reported complaints of dysphotopsia, best corrected distance
visual acuity (CDVA), iris-IOL distance, anterior chamber depth (ACD) and volume (ACV), angle opening distance and trabecular-iris space
area at 500 and 750 μm. A Rayner Sulcoflex IOL was implanted in seven patients (nine eyes) with negative dysphotopsias. Symptoms resolved
completely in six eyes, partially in one eye and remained unchanged in two eyes. We did not find any significant changes in CDVA. Angle
opening distance, ACD, ACV and iris-IOL distance reduced significantly after Sulcoflex IOL implantation. Supplementary implantation of a
Sulcoflex IOL can successfully treat negative dysphotopsia. The decrease in anterior segment dimensions in combination with the displacement
of light rays by the rounded edges of a Sulcoflex IOL may contribute to the resolution of symptoms. Unwanted optical phenomena such as
negative and positive dysphotopsias are well known side effects after cataract surgery . Negative dysphotopsia is defined as the perception
of a shadow obscuring the temporal field of vision, while positive dysphotopsia is characterised by halos, arcs or streaks around point
light sources [2, 3]. In the majority of cases, dysphotopsias resolve or diminish over time. Therefore “watchful waiting” and reassurance
are reasonable initial treatment strategies. However, in 0.2 to 1 % of pseudophakic patients severe symptoms will persist [2, 4] and
additional surgery may be required. Implantation of a secondary intraocular lens (IOL) has been proposed as an option to alleviate negative
dysphotopsias [5, 6]. Partial or complete resolution of symptoms has been reported after supplementary implantation of a Sulcoflex 653 L IOL
(Rayner Intraocular Lenses Ltd, East Sussex, UK) in one eye , AQ5010V IOLs (STAAR Surgical Company, Monrovia, CA) in six eyes and a
Clariflex IOL (Abbott Medical Optics Inc., Santa Ana, CA) in one eye . In this study, we report a case series of patients with severe
negative dysphotopsias who were treated with supplementary implantation of a Sulcoflex IOL. Files of patients with negative dysphotopsias
who underwent supplementary implantation of a Sulcoflex IOL were reviewed retrospectively. In our hospital all clinical data may be used for
research, unless a patient has given a written objection. Further, local medical ethical committee requires no approval for retrospective
studies. All patients underwent uneventful phacoemulsification with IOL implantation in the capsular bag. Secondary implantations were
performed by two experienced surgeons (R.N. and H.B.) at the University Eye Clinic in Maastricht. A peripheral iridotomy was made to prevent
postoperative intraocular pressure (IOP) spikes. A Sulcoflex Aspheric (653 L) IOL with powers varying from −0.5 to 0.5D was used in all
cases and placed in the ciliary sulcus (Fig. 1). Complaints of dysphotopsia were noted before surgery and at each follow-up visit.
Evaluation included uncorrected (UDVA) and corrected (CDVA) distance visual acuity, manifest refraction, Goldman applanation tonometry,
slit-lamp examination, Scheimpflug photography (Pentacam, Oculus Optikgeräte GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) and anterior segment optical coherence
tomography (Visante, Carl Zeiss Meditec, Inc, Dublin, CA and Casia, SS-1000, Tomey Corporation, Nagoya, Japan).Fig. 1A slit-lamp photograph
of a supplementary IOL: a cross-sectional view (Case 1) A slit-lamp photograph of a supplementary IOL: a cross-sectional view (Case 1) A
Sulcoflex IOL was implanted in seven patients (nine eyes) with negative dysphotopsias (Table 1). Two patients also had positive
dysphotopsias. The mean age of the patients was 63.0 ± 6.6 years. Negative dysphotopsias resolved completely in six eyes, partially in one
eye and remained unchanged in two eyes.Table 1Preoperative characteristics and symptoms following Sulcoflex IOL implantationCaseSexAge,
yearsEyeIOLDysphotopsiaFollow-up, monthsSymptom courseFellow eye dysphotopsiaa 1 week1 monthLast visit1M69RAcrySof SN60WFNegative8The black
crescent ↓The black crescent ↓↓↓The black crescent completely resolvedLAcrysof SN60WFNegative5The black crescent completely
resolved2F67LAcrySof SN60WFNegative8The black bar is goneThe black bar recurred; however, it was smaller and was not bothersome
anymoreNo3M52LTecnis ZCB00Negative5The black bar completely resolvedNR4F61LAcrySof SN60WFNegative22The black bar completely resolvedYes,
negative5F69RTecnis ZCB00Combined8The dark crescent completely resolvedLTecnis ZCB00Negative3The dark crescent completely
resolved6F53LSensar AR40eCombined5Black bar persisted, halos and glare increasedThe Sulcoflex IOL was explanted. The symptoms returned to
the preoperative level.Yes, positive7F70RAcrysof SN60WFNegative4The black bar ↓The black bar recurred and was still bothersomeNo IOL
intraocular lens; F female; M male; L left eye; R right eye; NR not relevant since the right eye did not undergo phacoemulsification; ↓,
decreased aIOLs implanted in fellow eyes were similar to IOL type in affected eyes Preoperative characteristics and symptoms following
Sulcoflex IOL implantation IOL intraocular lens; F female; M male; L left eye; R right eye; NR not relevant since the right eye did not
undergo phacoemulsification; ↓, decreased aIOLs implanted in fellow eyes were similar to IOL type in affected eyes There was no significant
change in CDVA, spherical equivalent refraction (SE) and IOP after surgery (Table 2). Anterior chamber depth (ACD) and volume were
significantly reduced. All iridocorneal angle measurements were reduced, and this was significant for angle opening distances at 500 and
750 μm. Implantation of the supplementary IOLs caused a small posterior movement of the primary IOLs, as the distance between the posterior
corneal surface and the primary IOL increased significantly by 2 % (range 0 to 3 %).Table 2Preoperative and postoperative patient
characteristicsMean ± SDPreoperativePostoperative p-value(paired samples T-test)CDVA, log MARa −0.02 ± 0.04−0.05 ± 0.080.39SE,
D0.13 ± 0.23−0.00 ± 0.360.43IOP, mm Hg12.3 ± 1.813.3 ± 2.50.24AS-OCT (7 eyes) AOD 500, mm Nasal0.60 ± 0.200.50 ± 0.17< 0.05
Temporal0.64 ± 0.210.51 ± 0.17< 0.05 AOD 750, mm Nasal0.91 ± 0.230.77 ± 0.18< 0.01 Temporal0.97 ± 0.320.80 ± 0.25< 0.05 TISA 500, mm
Nasal0.22 ± 0.060.19 ± 0.070.07 Temporal0.22 ± 0.070.18 ± 0.070.24 TISA 750, mm Nasal0.41 ± 0.120.35 ± 0.110.07
Temporal0.42 ± 0.140.34 ± 0.120.05 Iris-IOL distance, mm0.61 ± 0.110.01 ± 0.02< 0.01 ACD, mm4.16 ± 0.363.20 ± 0.28< 0.01 Cornea-IOL
distance, mmb 0.56 ± 0.110.47 ± 0.02< 0.05Scheimpflug photography (8 eyes) ACD, mm4.37 ± 0.483.13 ± 0.23< 0.01 ACV, mm3 176 ± 28154 ± 25<
0.01 ACD anterior chamber depth; ACV anterior chamber volume; AOD angle opening distance; CDVA best corrected distance visual acuity; AS-OCT
anterior segment optical coherence tomography; D diopter; IOL intraocular lens; SE spherical equivalent (Sphere+1/2 Cylinder); SD standard
deviation; TISA trabecular iris space area aOne eye with late AMD and CDVA of 20/2000 before Sulcoflex implantation and CDVA 20/400 after
surgery was excluded from analysis bDistance between the posterior corneal surface and the primary IOL Preoperative and postoperative
patient characteristics ACD anterior chamber depth; ACV anterior chamber volume; AOD angle opening distance; CDVA best corrected distance
visual acuity; AS-OCT anterior segment optical coherence tomography; D diopter; IOL intraocular lens; SE spherical equivalent (Sphere+1/2
Cylinder); SD standard deviation; TISA trabecular iris space area aOne eye with late AMD and CDVA of 20/2000 before Sulcoflex implantation
and CDVA 20/400 after surgery was excluded from analysis bDistance between the posterior corneal surface and the primary IOL Explantation of
the Sulcoflex IOL was performed in one patient (case 6) who reported increased positive and unchanged negative dysphotopsia after surgery.
After explantation of the Sulcoflex IOL, symptoms returned to the preoperative level. In one patient (case 4), a small anterior chamber
hemorrhage occurred after peripheral iridotomy. No other complications, e.g., iris chafing, inflammation or IOP elevation occurred during
follow-up. The current treatment options for severe persistent negative dysphotopsia are IOL exchange with placement of a secondary IOL in
the bag or in the ciliary sulcus, implantation of a supplementary IOL, reverse optic capture and Nd: YAG anterior capsulectomy; however, in
some cases the symptoms may persist after treatment [2, 4–12]. We have shown that supplementary implantation of a Sulcoflex IOL can
successfully treat negative dysphotopsias. Because of the complexity of dysphotopsia pathogenesis, in several cases symptoms may persist or
only partially resolve. Negative dysphotopsia occurs with IOLs of different materials [2, 5, 10, 11] with both rounded and squared edges [2,
10, 13]. All our patients had acrylic IOLs with 6.0 mm optics and squared or frosted edges. Davison suggested that some patients might
develop an unique interaction between the optical pathways of the eye and the IOL . One possible mechanism is the reflection of light rays
between the IOL edges and the anterior capsulorhexis, which can be successfully treated with anterior Nd:YAG capsulectomy, reverse optic
capture, or by covering of the anterior capsulorhexis with a sulcus IOL [5, 8, 9]. A large distance between the anterior surface of the IOL
and the posterior iris surface may also play a role [3, 14], as the reduction of this distance by implantation of an IOL in the sulcus can
eliminate the symptoms . This distance was reduced in all our cases; however, in two cases dysphotopsia did not improve. Persistence of
dysphotopsia in cases with a shallow posterior chamber were also reported by Masket et al. . The dimensions of the anterior chamber were
reduced after secondary surgery (Fig. 2a and b). Increase in the ACD and iridocorneal angle after phacoemulsification may possibly
contribute to the development of negative dysphotopsia, and therefore reduction of these parameters by Sulcoflex IOL implantation may be a
good strategy. However, the retrospective character of our study does not allow us to establish any causal relationships.Fig. 2AS-OCT scans
with angle analysis before (a) and after (b) supplementary IOL implantation (Case 1). AOD500, angle opening distance at 500 μm; AOD750,
angle opening distance at 750 μm; AR, bottom of the angle, IC, iridocorneal angle; SS, scleral spur; TISA500, trabecular-iris space area at
500 μm; TISA750, trabecular-iris space area at 750 μm AS-OCT scans with angle analysis before (a) and after (b) supplementary IOL
implantation (Case 1). AOD500, angle opening distance at 500 μm; AOD750, angle opening distance at 750 μm; AR, bottom of the angle, IC,
iridocorneal angle; SS, scleral spur; TISA500, trabecular-iris space area at 500 μm; TISA750, trabecular-iris space area at 750 μm We have
found minor posterior movement of the primary IOL which did not cause any significant change in SE, and none of the patients lost more than
two lines of CDVA. A supplementary IOL was removed without any complications in a patient, who was dissatisfied with the outcome. In
conclusion, supplementary implantation of the Sulcoflex IOL is a safe and effective treatment of persistent negative dysphotopsia. A
Sulcoflex IOL reduces the dimensions of the anterior and posterior chambers, covers the anterior capsulorhexis, and may refract or reflect
light rays by its surfaces and rounded edges. All these mechanisms may reduce the intensity of the photic images on the retina and
contribute to the development of neuroadaptation. Rayner Intraocular Lenses Ltd., East Sussex, UK provided intraocular lenses for this
study. No author has a financial or proprietary interest in any material or method mentioned. Rudy M.M.A. Nuijts is a consultant for Alcon,
Fort Worth, TX, USA; TheaPharma, Wetteren, Belgium and ASICO, Westmont, IL, USA. He received study grants from Acufocus, Irvine, CA, USA;
Ophtec, Groningen, the Netherlands; Physiol, Liege, Belgium; Carl Zeiss Meditec Company, Hennigsdorf, Germany and Alcon. He received a
lecture fee from Alcon. Henny J.M. Beckers is a consultant for Alcon; MSD, Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA and Pfizer, New York, NY, USA. She
received study grants from Alcon and AqueSys, and lecture fees from Alcon, MSD and Pfizer.
