Heterotopic pancreas is defined as pancreatic tissue without a real anatomical or vascular connection to the pancreas. It can be found in
the stomach, duodenum, jejunum, ileum, Meckel’s diverticulum, colon gall bladder, umbilicus, fallopian tube, mediastinum, spleen and liver.
Complications of heterotopic pancreas are inflammation, bleeding, obstruction, malignant transformation, carcinoid syndrome, jejunojejunal
intussusception and ileus, but it is usually asymptomatic and diagnosed only during examinations for other diseases. An 81-year-old
Lithuanian woman was diagnosed with caecal cancer and had undergone elective surgery. A right hemicolectomy was performed and a Meckel’s
diverticulum was observed and excised. Histological results showed a poorly differentiated G3 adenocarcinoma of her large intestine and
heterotopic pancreas tissue in the Meckel’s diverticulum and mesenteric adipose tissue. Asymptomatic heterotopic pancreas is rarely
diagnosed, and usually found incidentally during surgical or diagnostic interventions. Although it has no symptoms, heterotopic pancreas
found during surgical procedures should be excised. Heterotopic pancreas (HP) is defined as pancreatic tissue without real anatomical or
vascular connection to the pancreas and was first reported by Jean-Schultz in 1729 . The incidence of HP is 0.5 to 13.0% in autopsy studies
. The most common sites of HP are the stomach, duodenum, and jejunum, but it can be also found in the ileum, Meckel’s diverticulum (MD),
colon, gall bladder, umbilicus, fallopian tube, mediastinum, spleen, and liver . HP can cause complications including inflammation,
ulceration, chemical irritation, bleeding, obstruction, malignant transformation, jejunojejunal intussusception and ileus . However, most
patients with ectopic pancreas are asymptomatic and diagnosis is usually confirmed during a radiological examination or endoscopy of the
digestive tract or during surgical explorations motivated by other diseases . On microscopic examination, ectopic pancreas is composed of
varying amounts of pancreatic ducts, acini and islets of Langerhans . Heinrich’s criteria are used to classify HP: type 1 contains cells of
exocrine glands, excretory ducts and islets of Langerhans; type 2 contains only excretory glands and excretory ducts; type 3 contains only
excretory ducts . We report an unusual case of HP found in MD. An 81-year-old Lithuanian woman was tested for faecal occult blood during
preventive colorectal cancer screening. Test results were positive and she underwent a colonoscopy. The colonoscopy revealed a tumour in her
caecum. Abdominal and thoracic computed tomography (CT) scanning revealed no metastasis. She then underwent elective surgery. During the
operation, a 6×5cm tumour was found in her caecum. Her MD was found 40cm from the hepatoduodenal ligament . A right hemicolectomy was
performed to excise the MD from her jejunal loop. After the operation, she underwent chemotherapy. There were no complications related to
the surgery. Histological results showed a poorly differentiated G3 adenocarcinoma of the caecum. In her small intestine a muscular layer of
excised MD and mesenteric adipose tissue was found, which was pancreatic tissue morphologically. Microscopic analysis revealed pancreatic
tissue without islets of Langerhans (Figure 1) in the small intestine and mesenteric adipose tissue. Moreover, in the HP tissue, dilatation
of the pancreatic ducts was observed.Figure 1Histological section (hematoxylin and eosin ×200) of the small intestine. The figure shows the
presence of pancreatic tissue (black arrow – pancreatic acini) in the small intestine and a muscular layer of Meckel’s diverticulum with
cystic dilatation of the ducts (blue arrow). Histological section (hematoxylin and eosin ×200) of the small intestine. The figure shows the
presence of pancreatic tissue (black arrow – pancreatic acini) in the small intestine and a muscular layer of Meckel’s diverticulum with
cystic dilatation of the ducts (blue arrow). The aetiology of HP, otherwise known as “aberrant”, “ectopic”, or “accessory” pancreas, is
still unclear, but it is believed to arise embryonically during rotation of the foregut and fusion of the dorsal and ventral pancreatic
buds. Some tissue separates from the pancreas and develops into HP in any portion of the alimentary system. Another best known theory is
based on the pancreatic metaplasia of endodermal tissue . Because of the proximity of the embryonic pancreatic primordial buds and the
foregut during development, it is not surprising that 70 to 90% of ectopic pancreas occurs in the upper gastrointestinal system . MD is the
second most common site of heterotopic tissue; the stomach is the most common site (50 to 60% of cases) while 5 to 16% of cases occur in the
pancreas . Surgical excision is the first and best choice of treatment because medical treatment is not effective . However, the treatment
of HP depends on the patient. Asymptomatic patients with a positive diagnosis must remain under medical supervision and be reviewed
periodically. Symptomatic patients without complications should have their lesions excised, preferably by local resection. In sites
accessible by fibrescope, endoscopic removal may be performed. HP found during surgical procedures motivated by other diseases, as in our
case, should be excised and submitted for a frozen section study whenever necessary, thus avoiding possible complications and the need for
reoperation. In cases of lesions associated with bleeding, obstruction or suspicion of malignancy, an appropriate surgical approach is
undertaken . HP can be eliminated by simple excision, as multiple lesions are unusual . The preoperative diagnosis of HP in the small
intestine is difficult. Symptoms depend on the size of lesion and involvement of mucosa. On clinical examination, significant lesions are
greater than 1.5cm . Most cases represent HP in a MD with gastrointestinal bleeding (Table 1), but in our case it was asymptomatic. Because
HP can be found submucosally and the most common submucosal tumour is gastrointestinal stroma tumour (GIST), HP can frequently be mistaken
as GIST or leiomyoma at endoscopy, ultrasonography or CT scanning . In our case, HP was mistaken for metastasis of the caecal tumour. The
definitive diagnosis is confirmed by pathological examination after the resection (Table 2). However, endoscopic ultrasound findings are
often associated with these lesions: a diameter larger than 4cm, poorly defined margins, cystic spaces and internal echogenic foci, and
adjacent lymphadenopathy and rapid growth . Although, pathological examination is the most accurate diagnostic method for diagnosis of
ectopic pancreas, most biopsies are inconclusive, because it is difficult to take adequate tissue samples. MD can be diagnosed with
99mtechnetium pertechnetate scintigraphy, which detects ectopic gastric mucosa in MD. However, the diagnostic accuracy of this method is 46%
in adults. Abdominal ultrasound, X-ray and CT usually give nonspecific findings. MD can be detected by capsule endoscopy or double-balloon
enteroscopy. The diagnosis of MD with HP is difficult . Management of incidentally found MD is controversial. Some authors suggest that
indications for diverticulectomy should be based on intraoperative findings. Wide-mouthed, thin-walled diverticula without bands could be
left undisturbed, whereas thickened, narrow-based diverticula should be resected. However, there are no definite anatomic criteria to
predict the probability of future complications. According to the literature, the benefits of incidental diverticulectomy outweigh its
attending morbidity and mortality . In our case, MD was resected because ectopy of the pancreatic tissue was considered a metastasis of the
caecal tumour.Table 1 Comparison of heterotopic pancreas found in Meckel’s diverticulum Authors and year Symptoms Complications Histological
view Treatment Yang and Guo; 2013 Bloody stools, dizziness, astheniaGastrointestinal bleedingAcini, ducts, isletsResection of
diverticulumKopáčová et al.; 2010 MelenaGastrointestinal bleedingAcini, ducts, isletsResection of diverticulum and ileumZarand et al.; 2011
Abdominal pain, nauseaInflammation of heterotopic pancreas tissueAcini, ductsResection of diverticulumXiao et al.; 2009 Bloody stools,
abdominal painGastrointestinal bleedingAcini, ductsResection of diverticulum and ileumYang et al.; 2011 Bloody stools, dizziness,
weaknessGastrointestinal bleeding Data not presented Resection of ileum with diverticulumBaysoy et al.; 2010 Haematochezia,
melenaGastrointestinal bleedingAciniResection of diverticulumTable 2 Comparison of heterotopic pancreas found in different locations Authors
and year Localisation of heterotopic pancreas Symptoms Complications Diagnostic methods Saka et al.; 2009 JejunumBloody
stoolsGastrointestinal bleeding, jejunal obstructionUpper gastrointestinal contrast, immunohistochemical, histopathological examinationYang
and Guo; 2013 Meckel’s diverticulumBloody stools, dizziness, astheniaGastrointestinal bleedingLaparotomy, histopathological
examinationKopáčová et al.; 2010 Meckel’s diverticulumMelenaGastrointestinal bleedingEnteroclysis, intraoperative enteroscopy,
histopathological examinationRana et al.; 2009 JejunumAbdominal painNo complicationsGastrointestinal endoscopy, CECT, histopathological
examinationGunjača et al.; 2010 Duodenum, stomachAbdominal painDuodenal perforation, inflammation of HP tissueUltrasonography, upper
endoscopy, CT, histopathological examinationOkamoto et al.; 2014 JejunumHearing lossNeoplasmDuring surgery, histopathological examinationLee
et al.; 2012 JejunumMelena, haematochezia, dizzinessNo complicationsCapsule endoscopy, histopathological examinationZarand et al.; 2011
Meckel’s diverticulumAbdominal pain, nauseaInflammation of HP tissueDuring surgery, histopathological examinationXiao et al.; 2009 Meckel’s
diverticulumBloody stools, abdominal painGastrointestinal bleedingCapsule endoscopy, intraoperative endoscopy, histopathological
examinationYang et al.; 2011 Meckel’s diverticulumBloody stools, dizziness, weaknessGastrointestinal bleedingCECT, laparotomy,
histopathological examinationTrifan et al.; 2012 StomachAbdominal pain, nausea, vomitingGastric outlet obstructionUpper gastrointestinal
endoscopy, abdominal ultrasound, histopathological examinationChristodoulidis et al.; 2007 StomachAbdominal pain, nausea, vomitingNo
complicationsEGD, laparotomy, histopathological examinationGuimarães et al.; 2013 StomachAbdominal painNo complicationsAbdominal CT and MRI,
histopathological examinationHirasaki et al.; 2009 JejunumAbdominal painJejunojejunal intussusception, ileusAbdominal CT, histopathological
examinationAbbreviations: CECT, contrast-enhanced computed tomography; CT, computed tomography; EGD, esophagogastroduodenoscopy; HP,
heterotopic pancreas; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. Comparison of heterotopic pancreas found in Meckel’s diverticulum Comparison of
heterotopic pancreas found in different locations Abbreviations: CECT, contrast-enhanced computed tomography; CT, computed tomography; EGD,
esophagogastroduodenoscopy; HP, heterotopic pancreas; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. If HP is asymptomatic, as in our case, diagnosis is
unlikely without surgical intervention. Surgical interventions are usually performed in other diseases. Because of its complications and
chance of malignant transformation, HP found during surgical procedure should be excised. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. Computed tomography Gastrointestinal stroma tumour Heterotopic pancreas Meckel’s diverticulum Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AK and NES performed the surgery, helped to draft the
manuscript and revised it. DD and GZ drafted the manuscript. DS did the histological analysis. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
