A knotted ureteral stent is an extremely rare condition, with fewer than 20 cases reported in the literature; however, it is difficult to
treat. We report a case in which a folded Terumo guidewire was successfully used to remove a knotted stent percutaneously without
anesthesia. We also review the current literature on predisposing factors and management strategies for knotted ureteral stents. Ureteral
stenting was first described by Zimskind et al. in 1967 and is widely used in contemporary urologic practice. Indications for ureteral
stents include the relief of ureteral obstruction with or without stone, stricture, identification of the ureter during a surgical
procedure, and protection of ureteral anastomosis in urinary diversion. However, the use of an indwelling ureteral stent can cause many
complications, ranging from mild (hematuria, irritative urinary symptom, vesico-ureteral reflex, and recurrent urinary tract infection) to
severe (stent migration, encrustation, ureteral perforation, erosion, and fistula) . One extremely rare complication is knot formation of an
indwelling stent in the ureter. To our knowledge, only 20 cases of knotted ureteral stent have been described in the literature. We present
a case in which a Terumo guidewire was successfully used to remove a knotted stent percutaneously without anesthesia. We also review the
current literature on predisposing factors and management strategies for knotted stents. A 53-year-old man with gout and chronic renal
disease was admitted to the hospital because of right flank pain, nausea, vomiting, and fever. A 2.0-cm renal stone in the lower calyx and a
0.4-cm stone in the upper ureter without hydronephrosis were identified on computed tomography images (Fig. 1). The patient was treated with
antibiotics and underwent ureteroscopic lithotripsy and stent placement to decompress the infected kidney and extracorporeal shock wave
lithotripsy (ESWL) of the renal stone (Fig. 2A, B). After the signs of infection subsided and the uropathy improved (changes in high-
sensitivity C-reactive protein from 22.2 to 2.75 mg/dL and in creatinine from 3.6 to 1.7 mg/dL), we performed several sessions of ESWL on
the right renal stone. Two months later, we found Steinstrasse around the stent (Fig. 2C). We attempted to change the stent but failed to
remove it because of resistance. We therefore checked for an encrusted stent by x-ray and computed tomography, which revealed a knotted
stent and Steinstrasse (Fig. 2D). The patient refused general or spinal anesthesia, so the stent was removed percutaneously under local
anesthesia. We inserted a 7-French angio sheath using ultrasonographic and fluoroscopic guidance and then inserted a KMP (Beacon Tip Torcon
NB advantage angiographic catheter, Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) catheter. Finally, a folded 0.018 Terumo guidewire was inserted into
the area of knot formation through the KMP catheter. The knotted stent was caught in the folded guidewire and removed percutaneously.
Subsequently, an 8.5-French pigtail catheter was inserted in the kidney (Fig. 3). After several sessions of ESWL performed within 2 weeks of
the surgical procedure, the remnant stone and Steinstrasse were completely eliminated and the pigtail catheter was removed. Formation of a
knotted ureteral stent was first described by Groeneveld in 1989 . To date, 20 such cases have been reported and several treatment methods
have been described. Our analysis of previous reports of knotted stent indicated that the male to female ratio is 3:1 and the mean age is 50
years (range, 4-86 years). The knotted stents were located in the upper ureter in 18 cases, the middle ureter in 2 cases, and the distal
ureter in 1 case (Supplementary Table 1) . The most common reasons for stent placement were ESWL of a renal stone (9 cases), treatment of
upper ureter stone or upper ureter obstruction (7 cases), to aid with anastomosis of the ureter (2 cases), periodic stent substitution (2
cases), and interoperative ureter determination (1 case) (Table 1). In the current case of a 53-year-old man, an indwelling stent was
inserted to aid in the removal of a renal stone and to relieve an upper ureteral obstruction. The results of our analysis suggest that the
excessive length of the stent and/or its coil formation facilitated the knot formation in the ureteral catheter. Ureteral catheter knots
form during implantation or removal of the catheter. Analysis of cases with and without hydronephrosis before insertion of an upper ureteral
stent paradoxically showed that knot formation occurred in 13 cases with no hydronephrosis (Table 1), which suggests that knot formation
occurs more often in cases with no hydronephrosis. Therefore, physicians should pay greater attention to insertion or removal of a ureteral
stent in patients without than in those with hydronephrosis. If possible, performing the procedure with the aid of fluoroscopic imaging may
help prevent knot formation. Various techniques have been used to assist with the removal of knotted ureteral catheters, such as gentle
traction (9 cases), percutaneous extraction (4 cases), extraction via ureteroscopy (6 cases), extraction using a guidewire (1 case), and
open ureterotomy (1 case) (Table 2). Of nine patients treated using a gentle traction method, the stent was gently extracted in five
patients and by abdominal pressure under anesthesia in one patient. In one reported case, the knotted stent was extracted by anchoring the
end of the stent at the leg. In another case, the stent was extracted after waiting for status of the percutaneous nephrostomy (PCN). In one
case, stent removal was achieved by injecting petroleum jelly in the ureterocutaneostomy . However, ureteral avulsion is a potential risk of
these techniques. Cases of ureteroscopic removal of knotted ureteral stents have also been reported. Traction using forceps or a basket was
reported in three patients, and cutting with a holmium laser was reported in another three patients (Table 2) . When a knotted stent is
removed by ureteroscopy, the patient needs to be under general or spinal anesthesia; this procedure has a risk of failure related to
ureteral stricture. Hydronephrosis that occurs because of a knotted stent should be resolved in cases of failure by inserting a
ureteroscope. Three cases of percutaneous removal of a knotted ureteral stent were reported: in 1992, 1994, and 2012. In two cases, the
knotted stent was removed via PCN . In the remaining case, a nephroscope was used to remove the knotted stent (Table 2). The exact PCN
technique used was not specified, but nephroscopy is an invasive technique, requires general anesthesia, and may result in renal injury.
Therefore, removal of knotted stents with a simple procedure under local anesthesia is an attractive alternative option. Reported techniques
for removal of a knotted ureteral stent include retrograde gentle traction, untying the knot, cutting the knot, and percutaneous removal.
Gentle traction, which is the most common method, can result in ureteral injury. Use of ureteroscopy to untie or cut a knot requires general
or spinal anesthesia and possibly a holmiun laser. Percutaneous removal of a knotted stent is a simple and effective method that does not
require general or spinal anesthesia and can be performed when the knot is located in the upper portion of the ureteral stent or when
hydronephrosis is present. This technique may be a useful treatment option in patients who have difficulties with general or spinal
anesthesia and/or in those who do not want to undergo cystoscopy for later removal of a ureteral stent. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors
have nothing to disclose. Scan this QR code to see the supplementary material, or visit http://kjurology.org/src/sm/kju-56-405-s001.pdf. HN,
hydronephrosis; ESWL, extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy. PCN, percutaneous nephrostomy; URS, ureterorenoscopy.
