Jia-Wei Liu and Nuo Si contributed equally to this work. H syndrome (OMIM 612391) is a recently described autosomal recessive genodermatosis
characterized by indurated hyperpigmented and hypertrichotic skin, as well as other systemic manifestations. Most of the cases occurred in
the Middle East areas or nearby countries such as Spain or India. The syndrome is caused by mutations in solute carrier family 29, member 3
(SLC29A3), the gene encoding equilibrative nucleoside transporter 3. The aim of this study was to identify pathogenic SLC29A3 mutations in a
Chinese patient clinically diagnosed with H syndrome. Peripheral blood samples were collected from the patient and his parents. Genomic DNA
was isolated by the standard method. All six SLC29A3 exons and their flanking intronic sequences were polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)-amplified and the PCR products were subjected to direct sequencing. The patient, an 18-year-old man born to a nonconsanguineous
Chinese couple, had more extensive cutaneous lesions, involving both buttocks and knee. In his genomic DNA, we identified a novel homozygous
insertion-deletion, c. 1269_1270delinsA, in SLC29A3. Both of his parents were carriers of the mutation. We have identified a pathogenic
mutation in a Chinese patient with H syndrome. H syndrome (OMIM 612391) is an autosomal recessive genodermatosis characterized by
progressive cutaneous hyperpigmentation, hypertrichosis, hepatosplenomegaly, heart anomalies, hypogonadism, short stature, hearing loss,
hallux valgus, camptodactyly and occasionally insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM). The genetic analysis of patients with H syndrome
revealed that homozygous mutations in the solute carrier family 29, member 3 (SLC29A3) gene on chromosome 10q22.1 are responsible for the
phenotype. SLC29A3 encodes the human equilibrative nucleoside transporter 3 (hENT3), which is highly conserved and contains 11 transmembrane
domains (TMDs). The disease was first reported by Molho-Pessach et al. in 2008. So far, 85 patients have been reported in the literature
with the clinical phenotypes characteristic of this syndrome and a total of 20 mutations have been identified in SLC29A3. The majority of
patients are of Arab origin. There are also patients who from Spain, India and Japan. Here, we report on the clinical and molecular data of
a new patient from China. Peripheral blood samples from the family members and 100 population-matched unrelated healthy control individuals
were collected following informed consent and Institute Ethics Committee approval. Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood leucocytes
according to standard techniques. All 6 exons of SLC29A3 were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) from the genomic DNA using Premix
LA Taq (Takara Biotechnology Co., Dalian, China) and previously reported primers. The amplified PCR products were directly sequenced on an
ABI Prism 3730×l Automated Sequencer, using the ABI Prism Big Dye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit (PE Applied Biosystems).
For restriction analysis, a 269-bp fragment containing exon 6 of the human SLC29A3 gene was PCR-amplified using the forward primer
5’-CAAGGGTTCGGGCTCACTG-3’ and the reverse primer 5’-TCTGCTCTCTGTCCCCAAGT-3’. The PCR products were subsequently digested with the BanII
restriction enzyme (Takara Biotechnology Co., Dalian, China) and analyzed on agarose gel. We have reported the a Chinese patient with a
clinical diagnosis of H syndrome. The patient was an 18-year-old male born to a nonconsanguineous Chinese couple. The clinical diagnosis was
made according to his typical clinical phenotype, laboratory test abnormalities, and histological changing. The cutaneous lesion presented
as symmetrical brown patches with tenderness, sclerodermoid induration and hypertrichosis on his thighs [Figure 1a], knee [Figure 1b],
buttocks [Figure 1c], back and lower abdomen. After puberty, he developed dysuria, gynecomastia, no spermatorrhea and erectile dysfunction.
At the age of 18 years, he was 145 cm tall. He also had snaggletooth, enlarged inguinal lymph nodes, hearing loss, hepatosplenomegaly, heart
anomaly, flat feet, bilateral fixed hammertoe deformity, and bilateral camptodactyly of the proximal interphalangeal joints of his second
and third toes. His intelligence was of the average level. Clinical presentation in H syndrome patient. (a) Extensive hyperpigmentation and
hypertrichosis on his trunk, extremities; subcutaneous firm masses in the scrotal sac, obscuring the penis; prominent gynecomastia; (b and
c) Indurated, hyperpigmented and hypertrichotic skin on the buttock and knee. The patient had abnormal inflammatory indicators and abnormal
hormonal levels: Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (42 mm/h), C-reactive protein (34.6 mg/L) and CH50 (68.1 U/ml); significantly
decreased level of testosterone (5.1 nmol/L) and elevated level of estradiol (270.56 pmol/L). Histopathology also showed a typical changing
of H syndrome, such as widespread fibrosis and mononuclear infiltration. We did not find Psammoma body in the patient. Prednisone and short-
acting androgen partially relieve the symptoms. After a follow-up of 5 years, the lesion became more severe than his first visit. Sequence
analysis of all exons of SLC29A3 in patient revealed a homozygous insertion-deletion (indel), c. 1269_1270delinsA, producing a frameshift
and a premature termination codon (p.Leu423Serfs*28). This indel was predicted to disrupt the 10th and delete the 11th TMD of the SLC29A3
protein. The father and mother were found to be heterozygous carriers of the indel [Figure 2a]. The indel is not reported in the public
dbSNP (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp/) and was not detected in chromosomes from 100 ethnically matched control individuals, suggesting
that c. 1269_1270delinsA (p.Leu423Serfs*28) in SLC29A3 is the pathogenic mutation underlying H syndrome in the Chinese patient.
Identification of a novel mutation in the solute carrier family 29, member 3 (SLC29A3) gene. (a) Sequence analysis in patient and his
parents; (b) Diagram of SLC29A3. The exons are represented by closed rectangles. 5’UTR and 3’UTR are represented by gray rectangles. Introns
are represented by a straight line. Mutations are marked at the corresponding locations. The mutation identified in our patient is shown in
red color. The skin lesion of H syndrome usually begins on lower limbs and generally extends to the whole body; however, knees and buttock
were reported to be spared, which is considered to be a distinguishing feature of this disease. In our case, patient has the typical
clinical and histological features. The diagnosis for H syndrome is made with certainty. The result of gene analysis further affirmed our
diagnosis. However, it is noteworthy that in our case the cutaneous lesion is more extended, involving the areas such as buttocks and knees
that were previously considered to be uninvolved. H syndrome is caused by mutations in the SLC29A3 gene, which encodes the hENT3. hENT3 is a
475 amino acid protein with 11 TMDs. hENT3 belongs to a group of SLC transporters that are widely conserved in eukaryotes, the ENT or SLC29
family. The four members of the ENT mediate passive sodium-independent transport of nucleosides and display a broad tissue distribution such
as brain compartments, spinal cord, eyes, lungs, kidneys, placenta, pancreas, stomach, and liver. Nucleoside transporters are essential for
nucleotide synthesis by salvage pathways in cells that lack de novo synthetic pathways, such as histiocytes and monocytes. hENT3 is also
expressed in the endothelium of blood and lymphatic vessels in normal human skin, as well as histiocytes that reside in the dermal sheath
around the hair follicle. Disorder mutations could impair nucleoside transport, protein localization, and stability of hENT3. SLC29A3
encodes a nucleoside transporter localized in lysosomes and is highly expressed in some white blood cells such as histiocytes and
macrophages. Mice deficient in SLC29A3 have significant lysosomal dysfunction in macrophages. It is possible that mutations in the SLC29A3
gene may induce an abnormal proliferation of histiocytes and thus lead to the immune response, resulting in skin sclerosis and
hypertrichosis. Germline mutations in SLC29A3 have been reported in rare patients with a wide range of overlapping clinical features and
inherited disorders including H syndrome, pigmented hypertrichosis with insulin-dependent diabetes (PHID), Faisalabad histiocytosis, sinus
histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy, dysosteosclerosis (DSS) and monogenic autoinflammatory syndrome. H syndrome is characterized by
skin hyperpigmentation and hypertrichosis, hepatosplenomegaly, heart anomalies, hearing loss, hypogonadism and low height. PHID is mainly
characterized by presence of IDDM and lack of sensorineural hearing loss. Faisalabad histiocytosis presents with massive but painless
lymphadenopathy. Lymph node histology reminiscent of sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy (Rosai-Dorfman disease), but the
presence of short stature, joint contractures, and sensorineural deafness distinguishes this disorder. H syndrome is reported to have
emperipolesis with sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy. DSS is the form of osteopetrosis distinguished by the presence of skin
findings such as red-violet macular atrophy, platyspondyly and metaphyseal osteosclerosis with relative radiolucency of widened diaphyses.
The first four disorders were suggested to be grouped under the term histiocytosis–lymphadenopathy plus syndrome (OMIM #602782). There is
some clinical overlap between PHID and H syndrome, Faisalabad histiocytosis and sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy, and in
some families both conditions manifest. In addition, mildly affected individuals have also been described, as well as a severe case
presenting strikingly homologous with several syndromes. Twenty mutations have been identified so far in the SLC29A3 gene in affected
individuals [Figure 2b]. However, the reasons for the pleiotropism and variability of SLC29A3-related diseases are not known. This indel (c.
1269_1270delinsA) changed leucine 423 to serine and was predicted to result in a frameshift and the generation of a stop codon at residue
451 of the protein, which will disrupt the 10th and delete 11th TMD of SLC29A3, leads to the dysfunction of the hENT3 and presents a series
of clinical disorders. This mutation also affects the glycine at position 427, which is critical for nucleoside transport activity. This may
explain the relatively extended cutaneous lesion in our case. In conclusion, the identification of the homozygous pathogenic indel confirmed
the clinical diagnosis of H syndrome in our study. This is a Chinese mutation with H syndrome, extends the known geographical mutation
distribution of the disease and expands the spectrum of SLC29A3 mutations. The remarkable buttock and knee involvement of the patient add
new features to the clinical spectrum. Knowledge of this disease is very limited, and precise pathogenesis of H syndrome has remained
largely unknown. Future studies exploring the function of hENT3 will help in elucidating the pathophysiological basis for this disorder. We
acknowledge the family members involved in this study. Edited by: Li-Shao Guo Source of Support: This work was supported by a grant from the
Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (PCSIRT) (LRT1006 to Xue Zhang). Conflict of Interest: None
declared.
