Gastric acid suppressants frequently are used in cats with acid‐related gastric disorders. However, it is not known if these drugs
effectively increase intragastric pH in cats. To examine the effects of PO administered ranitidine and omeprazole on intragastric pH in cats
and to compare the efficacy of once‐daily versus twice‐daily dosage regimens for omeprazole. Eight domestic shorthair cats. Using a
randomized 4‐way cross‐over design, cats were given enteric‐coated omeprazole granules (1.1–1.3 mg/kg q24h and q12h), ranitidine
(1.5–2.3 mg/kg q12h), and placebo. Intragastric pH was monitored continuously for 96 hours using the Bravo™ system1, starting on day 4 of
treatment, followed by a median washout period of 12 days. Mean percentage of time pH was ≥3 and ≥4 was compared among groups using repeated
measures ANOVA. Mean ± SD percentage of time intragastric pH was ≥3 and ≥4 was 67.0 ± 24.0% and 54.6 ± 26.4% for twice‐daily omeprazole,
24.4 ± 22.8% and 16.8 ± 19.3% for once‐daily omeprazole, 16.5 ± 9.0% and 9.6 ± 5.9% for ranitidine, and 9.4 ± 8.0% and 7.0 ± 6.6% for
placebo administration. Twice‐daily omeprazole treatment significantly increased intragastric pH, whereas pH after once‐daily omeprazole and
ranitidine treatments did not differ from that of placebo‐treated cats. Only twice‐daily PO administered omeprazole significantly suppressed
gastric acidity in healthy cats, whereas once‐daily omeprazole and standard dosages of ranitidine were not effective acid suppressants in
cats. The study was conducted at the Clinic for Small Animal Internal Medicine, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich, and was supported
by a grant from the Stiftung für Kleintiere, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. per os phosphate‐buffered saline
Acid‐related gastric disorders result from an imbalance between gastric acid secretion and gastric acid mucosal defense mechanisms.1 In
humans, gastric acidity plays an important role in gastric ulcer development, and numerous studies have been conducted on the efficacy of PO
administration of acid‐suppressing drugs.2 In veterinary medicine, the role of gastric acidity in the pathogenesis of gastric erosive and
ulcerative disease has received limited attention, and the most appropriate extent of gastric acid inhibition for acid‐related diseases has
yet to be determined in small animals.3 Although gastric erosive disease is commonly suspected in cats, especially in critically ill and
stressed cats, it is difficult to confirm because of the inherent invasiveness of gastric mucosal visual inspection. Instead, gastric acid
suppressants including histamine‐2 receptor antagonists, such as ranitidine or famotidine, and proton pump inhibitors, such as omeprazole,
are widely used empirically in this species. Although some information on the antisecretory effects of commonly used acid suppressants (e.g.
omeprazole, famotidine, ranitidine) is available for dogs,4, 5, 6 the clinical efficacy of antisecretory drugs in cats is largely unknown.
The Existing data on feline gastric pH, derived from studies that used the cat as a model for humans, are difficult to interpret because
gastric acid secretion was pharmacologically modified or experiments were carried out in anesthetised cats that had been vagotomized, and pH
measurements were determined for only a few hours.7, 8, 9, 10 Despite the relative paucity of studies in cats, acid suppressant medications
are commonly used in clinical practice, using dosages extrapolated from studies performed in dogs.4, 5 The recent introduction of pH
monitoring devices such as the Bravo™ system1 has allowed noninvasive, continuous assessment of intragastric pH over prolonged periods. This
technique has been evaluated for extended recordings of intragastric pH in dogs.4, 11 The effects of twice‐daily omeprazole versus standard
dosages of famotidine on intragastric pH in cats recently have been reported using this new technique. The Results of this study indicated
that omeprazole administration provided superior acid suppression compared with famotidine.12 The goals of the present study were to
determine normal gastric acid profiles in healthy cats, to investigate the effect of omeprazole and ranitidine on intragastric pH in a
placebo‐controlled study and to compare once‐daily and twice‐daily dosage regimens for omeprazole. We hypothesized that omeprazole would be
superior to ranitidine for achieving a sustained increase in gastric pH and that omeprazole administered twice daily would provide superior
gastric acid control compared with a once‐daily dosage regimen. Eight healthy European shorthair cats (2 intact females, 3 spayed females, 3
intact males), aged 5–6 years (median, 5.7 years) and weighing 4.3–6.8 kg (median, 5.3 kg) with median body condition score of 5/9, were
used. All cats were research colony cats from the Institute of Animal Nutrition of our institution. The cats had no clinical signs of
gastrointestinal disease for the past 6 months and were deemed healthy based on physical examination findings as well as the results of CBC,
serum biochemistry profile and urinalysis. The study was approved by the Cantonal Veterinary Office of Zürich and conducted in accordance
with the guidelines established by the Animal Welfare Act of Switzerland (permission no. 527/2013). Permission for the use of animals in our
study specified that cats with anorexia, vomiting persisting >24 hours, weight loss exceeding 10% of body weight, or some combination of
those would be excluded. During intragastric pH recording periods, pairs of cats were housed in 140 × 105 × 100 cm cages and had daily
physical exercise. Using a randomized cross‐over design, cats received 1 of the following treatments PO for 7 consecutive days: placebo
(empty gelatin capsule)2 q12h, ranitidine3 (1.5–2.3 mg/kg; median, 1.9 mg/kg) q12 h, omeprazole4 (1.1–1.3 mg/kg; median, 1.2 mg/kg) q24h, or
omeprazole4 (1.1–1.3 mg/kg; median, 1.2 mg/kg) q12 h. The goal of treatment was to achieve a dosage of approximately 1 mg/kg for omeprazole,
thus, 1 enteric‐coated granule containing 1.1 mg omeprazole was given per kg body weight (e.g. a 10 mg omeprazole capsule4 contained 9
enteric‐coated granules each consisting of 1.1‐mg omeprazole).5 The dosage of each drug was consistent among treatments for each cat. All
drugs were administered in hard gelatin capsules.2 To facilitate swallowing, approximately 1 teaspoon of a highly palatable feline food6 was
fed immediately after administration of the capsule. Cats were medicated daily at 6:30 am and 6:30 pm, 30 minutes before a standardized
morning and evening meal.7 The once‐daily omeprazole treatment was given in the morning. One of the authors (ŠS) stayed with the cats for a
minimum of 45 minutes after treatment to ensure that medication was not regurgitated or vomited. Each treatment period was followed by a
median washout period of 12 days (range, 7–24 days). Attitude, appetite, body weight, number of defecations, and fecal consistency were
recorded daily. Feces were graded from 1 to 7 (1, very hard; 7, watery) according to a standardized fecal scoring system.8 On day 4 of each
treatment period, cats were anesthetized after a 12‐hour fast for endoscopy‐assisted placement of a pH capsule.1 Cats were premedicated with
butorphanol9 (0.2 mg/kg IM) and medetomidine10 (5 μg/kg IM), an IV catheter was placed, and general anesthesia was induced with propofol and
maintained with isoflurane. Before the first pH capsule placement, routine gastric and duodenal endoscopic biopsy was performed. The biopsy
samples were fixed in 10% buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, cut into 2‐μm sections and stained using a routine protocol with
hematoxylin and eosin. Gastrointestinal biopsy specimens were assessed by a board‐certified pathologist (MR) according to World Small Animal
Veterinary Association guidelines.13 All pH capsules were placed under direct endoscopic guidance by the same investigator (PHK).
Immediately before placement, the capsules were calibrated with commercial buffer solutions (pH 1.07 and 7.01) according to the
manufacturer's instructions.1 A drift of 0.1 pH units was tolerated. All pH capsules were anchored in the fundic area using the supplied
delivery system that combined suction and a lock‐and‐pin mechanism. The approach for gastric capsule placement was similar to what has been
described recently in dogs,4, 11 with the exception that the external vacuum suction (510 mm Hg) applied to the capsule delivery system was
decreased from approximately 30 seconds to a median of 20 seconds during the study.11 After capsule placement, gastric pH recordings were
obtained telemetrically at 6‐second sampling intervals for 4 days (96 hours). The receiver was kept in close proximity outside of the
feline's cage. After acquisition, pH data were uploaded from the receiver to the computer using the manufacturer software.7 Percentage of
time intragastric pH was ≥3 and ≥4 and in 1 of each of 8 categories (pH 0–1, pH 1–2, up to pH 7–8) was calculated by the computer software.
Throughout the study, all cats were subjected to visual inspection 4 times daily and were allowed to play in a separate enclosure twice
daily. A chaperone (ŠS) was present during these times to entertain the cats and to ensure that the distance to the receiver was adequate.
Because all medications were administered in hard gelatin capsules2, an experiment was conducted to examine the drug release time at
different pH levels. Dissolution of gelatin capsules containing enteric‐coated omeprazole granules4 and ranitidine3 was examined visually in
transparent cups containing 35 ml of phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS) buffer solution that was warmed to body temperature (37.5 °C) and had a
pH of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7. Commercially available software8 was used for analysis. Repeated measures ANOVA was used to analyze
differences among the 4 treatment arms regarding (1) percentage of time intragastric pH was ≥3 and ≥4 during the 96‐hour period after pH
capsule placement (days 4–7 of treatment), (2) percentage of time intragastric pH was in 1 of 8 pH categories (0–1, 1–2, 2–3, 3–4, 4–5, 5–6,
6–7, 7–8) for days 4–7 of treatment; and (3) adverse effects of treatments by comparing the 7‐day mean number of defecations with fecal
scores ≥3 and ≥4. In a second analysis, the different treatment arms were assessed separately and the effect of day was evaluated with
repeated measures ANOVA. Assumption of sphericity was examined by Mauchly's test of sphericity and a Bonferroni correction was applied to
multiple comparisons. Differences were considered significant at P < 0.05. All cats were alert and active and had a normal appetite
throughout the study. A single episode of vomiting occurred 2 days after Bravo™ capsule placement in 1 of the cats in the twice‐daily
omeprazole treatment arm. The occurrence of fecal scores >3 and >4 did not differ among treatment arms. The median fecal score was 3 for the
placebo, 4 for ranitidine, 4 for once‐daily treatment with omeprazole, and 4 for twice‐daily administration of omeprazole. Overall, 32
Bravo™ capsules were successfully attached to the fundic mucosa. Total procedure times for endoscopy‐assisted capsule placement ranged from
5 to 8 minutes, with most procedures taking <5 minutes. In 1 cat, the stomach still contained food, and mucosal capsule attachment was
unsuccessful because food remnants obstructed the suction hole. Capsule placement and pH measurement were repeated at a later time point. In
4 cases, the previously attached capsule was still in place at the time of the subsequent pH measurement (Fig. 1). Because endoscopic
removal of the capsule with the help of endoscopic foreign body retrieval devices and polypectomy forceps was unsuccessful in the first
case, a new capsule was attached next to the other 1 in these 4 cats. No problems were encountered with this approach. Passing of pH
capsules through the digestive tract was verified by daily fecal examination in all cats. A total of 2,909 hours and 20 minutes of
intragastric pH recording time (equivalent to 1,745,580 pH readings) was obtained. The maximum possible data acquisition was 3,072 hours
(96 hours per cat per treatment). Therefore, the overall missing data rate was 5.3%. Missing data were caused by signal interference in the
radiotelemetric system, which occurred intermittently in all treatment groups. View of the Bravo™ capsule attached to the feline gastric
mucosa. Compared to dogs,11 comparatively large parts of the gastric mucosa became lodged in the suction well of the capsule.
Gastroduodenoscopic evaluation was normal in all cats. Histologic examination of endoscopic gastric biopsy samples showed severe
colonization of the mucosal surface with spiral‐shaped organisms interpreted as gastric Helicobacter spp. in all of the cats. There were no
concurrent lesions in the mucosa or lamina propria. The villi of the intestine were slender and had normal architecture with a
crypt‐to‐villi ratio of 1:4. The epithelium was normal but in the lamina propria, small clusters of 9–12 neutrophils per high power field
(hpf) were observed in 5 cats. The remaining 3 cats had smaller clusters of 4–5 neutrophils per hpf scattered in the lamina propria. The
final histologic diagnosis was gastric colonization by Helicobacter spp. Duodenal tissue was deemed normal. The capsules started to swell
within 2 minutes of being placed in the PBS buffer solution. Complete disintegration of the capsules and release of the contents occurred
within 5 minutes at all pH levels. With respect to percentage of time intragastric pH was ≥3 and ≥4, twice‐daily omeprazole had a
significantly greater effect than once‐daily omeprazole, ranitidine, and placebo administration. There were no significant differences among
the latter 3 treatment arms. Mean ± SD percentage of time intragastric pH was ≥3 and ≥4 was 67.0 ± 24.0% and 54.6 ± 26.4% for twice‐daily
omeprazole administration, 24.4 ± 22.8% and 16.8 ± 19.3% for once‐daily omeprazole administration, 16.5 ± 9.0% and 9.6 ± 5.9% for ranitidine
administration, and 9.4 ± 8.0 and 7.0 ± 6.6% for placebo administration (Fig. 2). Comparison of efficacy of various treatments on
intragastric pH. Box plots show variation in percentage of time intragastric pH was ≥3 (blue) and ≥4 (green) for 8 cats given placebo,
ranitidine, once‐daily omeprazole and twice‐daily omeprazole. *Results were significantly increased compared with placebo, ranitidine, and
once‐daily omeprazole (P = 0.011 for pH ≥3; P = 0.044 for pH ≥4). The treatment arms differed with respect to the distribution of
intragastric pH over pH categories 1–8 (Fig. 3). For pH category 1–2, twice‐daily omeprazole administration differed significantly from the
other treatment arms (placebo, P = 0.02; once‐daily omeprazole, P = 0.024; ranitidine, P = 0.040). For categories 3–4, 4–5, 5–6, and 6–7,
twice‐daily omeprazole differed significantly from placebo, and for pH categories 4–5, 5–6, and 6–7, ranitidine differed significantly from
placebo. To summarize, intragastric pH ranged widely across all pH categories with all treatments; but twice‐daily omeprazole resulted in
the largest amount of time intragastric pH was in categories 3–4 to 6–7. Box plots representing the intragastric pH distribution for 8 cats
receiving placebo (A), ranitidine (B), once‐daily omeprazole (C), and twice‐daily omeprazole (D). Circles represent outliers. Comparison of
treatment days within a given treatment identified a significant increase in intragastric pH between days 4 and 7 only for twice‐daily
omeprazole (P = 0.011 for pH ≥3; P = 0.044 for pH ≥4). Although more commonly encountered in dogs, gastric erosive and ulcerative disease
can exacerbate a range of gastrointestinal, metabolic, or neoplastic conditions14 or be a complication of nonsteroidal anti‐inflammatory
drug administration in cats.15 Gastric acid suppressants currently are the treatment of choice for these conditions. Because information on
the efficacy of antisecretory drugs is scarce in cats,9 , 2 the goal of the present study was to compare the effects of PO administered
gastric acid suppressants commonly used in cats. Our study clearly demonstrated that twice‐daily omeprazole administration provided superior
gastric acid suppression compared with a once‐daily dosage regimen and with standard dosages of ranitidine and placebo based on percentage
of time intragastric pH was ≥3 and ≥4. The conceptual basis for these cut‐offs has been explored by meta‐analysis of many trials in human
medicine, and these cut‐offs are now considered ideal for promoting optimal gastrointestinal ulcer healing.16, 17 Comparison of once‐daily
and twice‐daily omeprazole administration was chosen because additional drug administration could pose a substantial problem for sick cats
and would likely result in poor owner compliance. A twice‐daily dosage regimen used in small animals has been largely extrapolated from
studies of humans.18 A simplified omeprazole suspension (enteric‐coated granules suspended in 8.4% sodium bicarbonate) administered to dogs
as a bolus through a stomach tube resulted in superior gastric acid suppression over 24 hours compared with once‐daily omeprazole.5 Another
study in dogs found that the effect of once‐daily administration of reformulated omeprazole paste used in horses for gastric acid secretion
waned substantially during 24 hours after administration.4 It therefore was postulated that a twice‐daily dosage regimen was more
beneficial. It was surprising that the once‐daily dosage of omeprazole in the present study had poor results in cats because comparable
omeprazole dosages in dogs yielded a mean percentage of time with intragastric pH ≥3 of 70.2% and ≥4 of 52.3%.5 Species‐specific differences
such as increased de novo biosynthesis of proton pumps may account for this difference because restoration of acid secretion is dependent on
pump biosynthesis.18 Delayed gastric release of omeprazole from the gelatin capsule with inadequate intestinal absorption caused by
variability in the hardness of the capsule wall9 was ruled out as a cause of the unexpected low intragastric pH because the capsules were
shown to dissolve quickly at all pH levels. The effects of ranitidine and placebo on intragastric pH did not differ in the present study,
which is in contrast to a recent report that PO administered famotidine in cats had better antisecretory efficacy than placebo.2 Ranitidine
and famotidine were shown to have poor antisecretory properties in dogs.4, 5 We anticipated similar results, based on observations that
plasma gastrin concentrations did not increase in cats undergoing long‐term ranitidine treatment.9 This indicates that ranitidine has weak
antisecretory properties because gastrin release is inhibited by the presence of acid in the stomach by a negative feedback mechanism.
Nevertheless, we felt it was important to provide substantial evidence that ranitidine also is a weak acid suppressant in cats and therefore
should not be used for treatment of acid‐related gastric disorders in cats. We used enteric‐coated omeprazole granules rather than splitting
tablets because a dosage of 1 mg/kg can be more easily approximated by administering 1 granule per kg body weight (1 granule contains 1.1 mg
omeprazole),4 which is convenient in small patients. Omeprazole granules are also used in human pediatric patients and when medication must
be given through a feeding tube.19, 20, 21 Moreover, it was felt that splitting enteric‐coated omeprazole tablets may adversely affect drug
efficacy. However, results published during the course of the present investigation showed that fractionated enteric‐coated omeprazole
tablets remained effective acid suppressants in cats despite disruption of the enteric coating.12 To facilitate swallowing of the capsule, a
teaspoon of highly palatable canned feline food6 was fed immediately after pill administration. Administration of water by syringe usually
is recommended after oral drug administration in cats.22 However, the cats in our study did not tolerate syringe feeding of water, but
readily ate the small amount of food6. This procedure is likely more practical for owners who administer drugs to their cats at home, and we
do not believe that the small amount of food compromised the efficacy of the medication. The administration of omeprazole granules to
children in an acidic or alkaline solution or mixed with apple sauce resulted in acid suppression comparable with that of intact capsules in
humans.19, 23 Similarly, a study of omeprazole absorption in humans indicated that the area under the curve of omeprazole was similar, and
that the total amount of drug absorbed was not affected when the granules were given immediately before or after breakfast.24 We chose the
Bravo™ pH monitoring system1 because we found it reliable and minimally invasive for extended continuous gastric pH monitoring in dogs.11
This system allows longer measurement periods than catheter‐based pH probes.5 Compared with dogs, a shorter vacuum application time
(approximately 20 seconds) worked better for pH capsule placement in cats. In the 4 cats with pH capsules still in place at the time of
second capsule application, the vacuum was applied for ≥25 seconds, and we believe a larger part of the gastric mucosa became lodged in the
suction well of the capsule (Fig. 1) compared with what we observed in dogs.11 Inclusion of the lamina muscularis may have added to the
rigidity of the attachment. Attempts to remove the first capsule failed, and we left them in place. We were aware of a case of gastric
perforation related to endoscopic removal of a Bravo™ capsule,25 , 1 and it is possible that our attempts at removal were too conservative.
Soft feces has been associated with PO administered omeprazole treatment in humans and dogs,4, 5, 26 but how suppression of gastric acid
secretion predisposes patients to this adverse effect is not well understood. We used fecal score cut‐offs of 3 and 4 and found that the
treatments did not differ with respect to feces consistency. Histologic examination of gastric and duodenal biopsy samples was done to rule
out occult gastrointestinal disease that could have interfered with parietal cell function or duodenal drug absorption. In all cats, the
gastric mucosa was heavily colonized with Helicobacter spp., but no evidence of gastritis was observed. In humans, the relationship between
gastritis caused by H. pylori and gastric acid secretion is controversial, and normal acid secretion as well as hyper‐ and hypo‐chlorhydria
have been reported.1 Although the severity of gastritis did not seem to be correlated with gastric acid secretion, omeprazole treatment
resulted in higher gastric pH in human patients infected with H. pylori than in patients free of H. pylori.27 This effect of omeprazole is
believed to be present because of the neutralization of substances produced by H. pylori.27 We believe this scenario to be unlikely in the
cats of our study because H. pylori infection is extremely rare in cats28 and evidence of gastritis was not detected in the present study.
Given the overall high prevalence of gastric mucosal colonization with Helicobacter spp. without concurrent gastritis in cats,28 we
concluded that gastric histology results were typical of what is seen in cats. The principal goal of histologic examination was to rule out
occult gastric disease, which could have affected gastric acid secretion, and small bowel disease,29 which could have affected drug
absorption. The relationship between gastric acid secretion and Helicobacter spp. colonization in cats requires further study. A significant
increase in intragastric pH between days 4 and 7 was only recorded after twice‐daily omeprazole administration, which was similar to reports
in humans in which multiple omeprazole doses were needed for optimal effect.23, 30 True drug efficacy might be greater after multiple doses
than what we were able to document during the 96‐hour study period. Considering the strong and long‐lasting attachment of the capsule to the
gastric mucosa in cats when using a vacuum time >25 seconds, it should be possible to study the efficacy of gastric acid suppressants for
longer than 4 days. We saw considerable individual variation in response to treatment with omeprazole and much less so with ranitidine. For
example, 1 cat consistently had close to 100% acid suppression (e.g. percentage of time pH was ≥4 was 95% when treated with twice‐daily
omeprazole), whereas another had extremely poor acid suppression (percentage of time pH was ≥4 was 3% when treated with twice‐daily
omeprazole). These findings are similar to those observed in humans23, 31 and may be a consequence of genetic polymorphism in the hepatic
cytochrome P‐450 system involved in the metabolism of omeprazole, which is a well‐established explanation for people who do not respond to
gastric acid suppressants.32 In fact, recent studies on the acid suppressant effects of proton pump inhibitors in humans include analysis of
cytochrome 450 genes and report pH measurements based on results of genotyping (i.e. extensive, intermediate, and poor metabolizers).33 The
washout periods used in the present study varied slightly among treatments subject to staff availability. However, we feel that the
protocols used in our experiments precluded drug carryover effects. The minimum washout period of 7 days (n = 5) pertained to 3 examinations
preceded by placebo and 2 preceded by ranitidine. The next shortest washout period was 9 days (n = 2), pertaining to 2 examinations preceded
by once‐daily omeprazole. A minimum of 1 week washout period was chosen because full restoration of gastric acid secretion was shown 7 days
after long‐term administration of ranitidine in cats9 and 5 days after long‐term administration of omeprazole in people.34 In conclusion,
twice‐daily administration of omeprazole granules appears to be the treatment of choice for cats with acid‐related gastrointestinal disease.
Ranitidine and once‐daily omeprazole cannot be recommended as acid suppressants in cats. Bravo™ pH monitoring system, Given Imaging,
Yoqneam, Israel. Gelatin capsules size 5, Interdelta SA, 1762 Givisiez, Switzerland. Ranitidin 20 mg, Christoffel‐Apotheke, Christoffelgasse
3, 3001 Bern, Switzerland. Omezol‐Mepha MT 10, Mepha Pharma AG, 4010 Basel, Switzerland. email communication with Ms. Linda Kötter‐Spirgi
(07.24.2014), Mepha Pharma AG, 4010 Basel, Switzerland. Hill's Prescription Diet Canine/Feline a/d. Hill's Science Diet Optimal Care
Original Adult Cat Food. Faecal Scoring System, Nestle Purina PetCare Company, St Louis, MO, USA. Morphasol, Graeub AG, Rehhagstrasse 83,
3018 Bern, Switzerland Dorbene, Graeub AG, Rehhagstrasse 83, 3018 Bern, Switzerland. email communication with Dr. Katie Tolbert (21.10.2013)
Polygram Net Software, Given Imaging, Yoqneam, Israel. SPSS, version 11, SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, USA. https://www.edqm.eu/en/european-
pharmacopoeia-8th-edition-1563.html Conflict of Interest Declaration: Authors disclose no conflict of interest. Off‐label Antimicrobial
Declaration: Authors declare no off‐label use of antimicrobials.
