The incidence of primary central nervous system (CNS) melanocytic neoplasms is relatively low comparing to systemic ones. The performance of
the tumor is variable. With poor clinical experience, the diagnosis and treatment of such tumors present to be a challenge. Amelanotic
melanoma is an especially rare subtype. Only several cases have been reported. We report a case of intracranial amelanotic melanoma.
Preoperative assessment revealed progressive right frontal mass. The patient underwent tumor resection. The pathologic analysis reported
amelanotic melanoma of intermediate grade. The further examination of the whole brain and body was negative. The familial history was also
negative. The patient recovered uneventfully and went on for radiotherapy and chemotherapy. After a follow-up period of 5 months, the
patient was tumor-free. This is the second report about primary CNS amelanotic melanoma. We summarized characteristics of the primary CNS
melanocytic lesions and amelanotic melanoma with review of the literature and review of cases of our department. Primary melanocytic
neoplasms of the central nervous system (CNS) belong to the tumors of the meninges. The incidence is less than 0.1%. Some may relate to
certain neurocutaneous syndrome. The tumor can affect the entire CNS, with miscellaneous performances. The diagnosis is always difficult
before the pathology result is available. And due to the potential of malignant transformation and dissemination, the identification of the
original loci is even harder. So the clinical diagnosis and treatment must base on an overall evaluation of a patient. Primary amelanotic
melanoma is a special subtype of the melanocytic neoplasm, which is especially rare. We want to share our experiences of primary CNS
melanocytic neoplasms and amelanotic melanoma through our cases with review of the literature. A 64-year-old man presented to our department
in December 2013 for progressive right frontal mass with dull aching for 9 months. His medical history was unremarkable except for 2 years
of hypertension. The familial history was negative, with no neurocutaneous system disorders of the first grade relatives. The vital signs
were stable. A mass at the right frontal region could be palpated, about 5 cm in diameter, hard, fixed, with no obviously red, swollen, or
tender of the superficial scalp. Cranial CT scan showed an mixed iso-/hyperdensity mass in the right frontal cranial bone, about 60 to 198
Hu, measuring 34 × 21 mm, with clear margin. The peripheral bone appeared destructive absorption. The MR was contraindicated for metal
implant (Figure 1).Figure 1Preoperative CT scan of the patient. The lesion locates in the right frontal bone, isointense on CT scan, with
prominent bone destruction. (a) CT scan of the soft tissue. (b) CT scan of the cranial bone. Preoperative CT scan of the patient. The lesion
locates in the right frontal bone, isointense on CT scan, with prominent bone destruction. (a) CT scan of the soft tissue. (b) CT scan of
the cranial bone. The patient underwent total tumor resection through right frontal approach on 24 December, 2013. The tumor eroded both the
external and internal lamina of the cranial bone. The tumor was solid, soft, tender, pale white, rich blood supplied, and was adhesive to
the underlying dura mater. The dura mater was yet intact, sparing the parenchyma of the cortex. The intraoperative rapid frost pathologic
examination revealed malignant changes, and so after tumor resection, the adjacent dura mater was removed as well which was reconstructed
with self aponeurosis. The peripheral bone was resected to the negative zone. The excision margin was about 2 cm. The pathologic examination
reported amelanotic melanoma of intermediate grade, with positive of HMB45, MelanA (sparsely), S-100, Vimentin, CD99, SMA (sparsely), and
CD34, and negative of CK, EMA, CEA, CK5/6, CK8/18, TTF-1, SYN, CD56, CgA, Desmin, MyoD1, TFE3, PAS, and PR. The Ki-67 was 20% to 30% (±)
(Figure 2).Figure 2Pathologic results. (a) Pathology slice (hematoxylin-eosin stain, original magnification ×100) of the tumor. Nests of
intermediate-grade tumor cells with intervening stroma can be seen. The tumor cells show clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm, with no obvious
pigment. (b) Higher magnification (hematoxylin-eosin stain, original magnification ×400) of the tumor, showing prominent nuclear mitosis and
atypia. (c) Higher magnification (original magnification ×400) of the tumor, showing HMB45 positive. (d) Higher magnification (original
magnification ×400) of the tumor, showing S-100 positive. (e) Higher magnification (original magnification ×400) of the tumor, showing
Vimentin-positive. (f) Higher magnification (original magnification ×400) of the tumor, showing Ki-67 index, was 20% to 30%. Pathologic
results. (a) Pathology slice (hematoxylin-eosin stain, original magnification ×100) of the tumor. Nests of intermediate-grade tumor cells
with intervening stroma can be seen. The tumor cells show clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm, with no obvious pigment. (b) Higher magnification
(hematoxylin-eosin stain, original magnification ×400) of the tumor, showing prominent nuclear mitosis and atypia. (c) Higher magnification
(original magnification ×400) of the tumor, showing HMB45 positive. (d) Higher magnification (original magnification ×400) of the tumor,
showing S-100 positive. (e) Higher magnification (original magnification ×400) of the tumor, showing Vimentin-positive. (f) Higher
magnification (original magnification ×400) of the tumor, showing Ki-67 index, was 20% to 30%. The further examination includes CT scan of
the chest, abdominal, and the pelvic region and the PET scan of the whole brain and body, which were all negative. The patient was
discharged 3 days after the operation with no complications and went on for adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy (concomitant stereotactic
radiosurgery + ipilimumab). For more than 5 months of follow-up, the patient recovers well with no recurrence or related sequelae. We
summarized the CNS melanocytic lesions of our neurosurgery department since 2008. Then we used the search engine of PubMed with keywords of
melanoma or melanomatosis or melanocytoma or melanocytosis, and CNS and primary and further searched with keywords of CNS or brain or
cranial or spinal, and amelanotic. Thirty-two cases of CNS melanocytic lesions of our department were defined since 2008. Forty-three
English reports of CNS melanocytic lesions and 14 reports about CNS amelanotic melanoma were searched. The details were summarized in the
tables (Tables 1, 2, and 3).Table 1 Summary of CNS melanocytic lesions of our neurosurgery department since 2008 Case Gender Age (yr.)
Location Pathology diagnosis Preoperative differentiation a 1M46Left temporalIntermediate-grade melanocytic tumor-2M11Right
temporalMalignant melanoma-3M45Right frontalMalignant melanomaMetastasis? Lymphoma?4F26Right parasellarMalignant melanomaSchwannoma?5F52Left
frontalMetastatic melanoma-6M43Right temporalMeningeal melanomatosisMetastasis? Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma?7M47Right CPAMeningeal
melanomatosisEpidermoid cyst? Cavernous hemangioma?8M24Right lateral ventricleAmelanotic melanoma?-9F19Left
parietalMelanocytomaMeningioma?10F21Right frontal, para-falxRecurrent melanocytoma, with subarachnoid disseminationRecurrent
melanocytoma11M38Right petrosalMeningeal melanomatosisSchwannoma?12M61MultipleMelanocytoma with meningeal melanomatosisMelanoma?
Metastasis?13M20Left temporalMalignant melanoma-14M24Right cerebellarMalignant melanomaCyst?15M47Foreman magnumMalignant melanoma, with bone
invasionMeningioma? Melanoma?16M47Left middle fossaMalignant melanomaHemangiopericytoma? Meningioma? Melanoma?17M45Intradural
extramedullary, C2-T1MelanocytomaMelanoma? Meningioma?18M31Right cavernous sinusMelanocytomaMelanoma? Cavernous hemangioma?
Aneurysm?19M46Right middle fossaMalignant melanoma, with bone and dura invasionMeningioma?20M20Left ponsMalignant melanomaGlioma?
Meningioma?21F41Multiple, T6-L1MelanocytomaNeurofibrosis?22F28Right parietal occipitalMalignant melanoma, with subarachnoid
dissemination-23F66Left frontalMalignant melanoma-24M27Right interspinous foramen, C6MelanocytomaMelanoma?25M39Foramen magnum -
C2MelanocytomaLipoma?26M36Right frontalMelanocytoma, with subarachnoid dissemination and parenchyma invasionMelanoma? Lymphoma?27M49Right
cerebellar tentoriumMeningeal melanomatosisMeningioma?28M17Left parasallar - CPAMelanocytomaEpidermoid cyst?29M26MedullaIntermediate grade
melanocytic tumor-30M13Right cerebellar tentoriumMalignant melanomaMeningioma? Hemangiopericytoma?31M47Left temporalMalignant
melanoma-32M64Right frontal boneAmelanotic melanoma, with bone invasionEosinophilic granuloma? Giant cell osteoma? Metastasis?M, male; F,
female, yr., years old. aWith no clear preoperative diagnosis.Table 2 Review of the English literature of CNS melanocytic lesions Author
Year Nb Primary/metastatic a Diagnosis Other Foit et al.20131PrimaryMelanocytoma-Lee et al.20131PrimaryMeningeal melanomatosis-Schneider et
al.20131PrimaryMalignant melanoma-Reddy et al.20121-Melanocytoma-Sutton et al.20111-Leptomeningeal melanocytosisThe patient was suspected to
represent a case of former fruste neurocutaneous melanosis.Brunsvig et al.1-Meningeal melanocytosis-Vij et al.20101PrimaryMelanoma-Perrini
et al.20101PrimaryMalignant melanoma-Zadro et al.20101PrimaryDiffuse meningeal melanomatosis-Nishihara et al.20091PrimaryMalignant melanoma-
Navas et al.20091-Meningeal melanocytomaAssociated with a congenital nevus of OtaHolfort et al.200916MetastaticMelanomaOut of review of
primary uveal melanoma 2365 patientsMathai et al.20081-Intermediate grade meningeal melanocytoma-Tandon et al.20081PrimaryMelanocytoma-
Levidou et al.20072Unknown primary siteLeptomeningeal melanoma-Cajaiba et al.20082PrimaryNeurocutaneous melanosis with CNS
melanocytomaDisseminated to the peritoneal surface by ventriculo-peritoneal (V-P) shunt systemMekni et al.20075PrimaryMalignant melanoma-
Denaro et al.20071PrimaryMelanoma-Bookland et al.20071PrimaryMalignant melanoma-Kiecker et al.20071PrimaryNeurocutaneous melanosis with
meningeal melanoma-Oluigbo et al.20061PrimaryMalignant melanoma-Chen20031-Meningeal melanocytoma-Classen et al.20021-Melanocytoma-Rivers et
al.20011PrimaryDural melanomaIn association with ocular melanosis and multiple cutaneous blue neviGreco Crasto et al.20011PrimaryMelanoma-
Whinney et al.20011PrimaryMalignant melanoma-Kobayashi et al.20011-Malignant melanoma-Fathallah-Shaykh et al.19961PrimaryLeptomeningeal
melanoma-Eaves et al.19951PrimaryMelanoma without diffuse leptomeningeal involvementA variant of neurocutaneous melanosisRubino et
al.19931PrimaryMelanoma-Drake et al.19938PrimaryMalignant melanoma of the leptomeninges-Singhal et al.19911PrimaryMelanoma-Fish et
al.19901PrimaryMelanoma-Salisbury et al.19891PrimaryMalignant melanomaIn association with a giant congenital melanocytic naevus of ‘bathing
trunk’ distributionMacfarlane et al.19891PrimaryMalignant melanoma of the dura mater-Iglesias-Rozas et al.19891-Disseminated melanomatosis
of the CNS and other organs-Larson et al.19875PrimaryMelanoma-Tamura et al.19811PrimaryLeptomeningeal malignant melanomaOriginated from the
basal aspect of the brain. The tumor showed not only spinal meningeal dissemination but also infiltration into the petrous bone and along
the trigeminal nerve till it reached the submucosal tissue of epipharynx.Pasquier et al.19781primaryMelanomaWith multiple metastases in the
liverHayward19762720 Metastatic, 6 PrimaryMalignant melanoma-Kaplan et al.19751PrimaryNeurocutaneous melanosis with malignant leptomeningeal
melanoma-Enriquez et al.19731PrimaryMalignant melanomaPineal involvement in a patient with nevus of ota and multiple pigmented skin
nevi.Bergdahl et al.197210PrimaryMalignant melanoma-CNS, central nervous system, the involved cases are all of the CNS, either intracranial
or intraspinal; Nb, number of reported cases. aSome cases have no clear evidence to be defined as primary or metastatic tumor.Table 3 Review
of the literature of CNS amelanotic melanoma Author Year Nb Primary/metastatic a Diagnosis Other b Schulz et al. 20121PrimaryMalignant
amelanotic melanomas(in German)Combined multiple intracranial and intraspinal primary malignant amelanotic melanomasCemil et al.
20081MetastaticAmelanotic melanoma-Karakis et al. 20071MetastaticAmelanotic melanoma-Jacob et al. 20061-Amelanotic melanoma?-Li et al.
20041-Amelanotic melanoma?(in Chinese)Ogawa et al. 20031MetastaticAmelanotic melanoma-Shields et al. 20021MetastaticAmelanotic melanoma-
Isiklar et al. 199516MetastaticAmelanotic melanoma-Schadendorf et al. 19931-Amelanotic malignant melanoma-Takahashi et al.
19901MetastaticAmelanotic melanoma(in Japanase)Krüger et al. 19871MetastaticAmelanotic melanomaAssociated with a congenital nevus of
OtaSunada et al. 19861Unknown originAmelanotic melanoma(in Japanase)Out of review of primary uveal melanoma 2365 patientsWagner et al.
19811-Amelanotic melanomaAmelanotic melanoma of the lung and brainSchuknecht et al. 19902PrimaryMeningeal amelanotic malignant melanoma-CNS,
central nervous system, the involved cases are all of the CNS, either intracranial or intraspinal; Nb, number of reported cases. aSome cases
have no clear evidence to be defined as primary or metastatic tumor; bliterature in languages other than English is noted. Summary of CNS
melanocytic lesions of our neurosurgery department since 2008 M, male; F, female, yr., years old. aWith no clear preoperative diagnosis.
Review of the English literature of CNS melanocytic lesions CNS, central nervous system, the involved cases are all of the CNS, either
intracranial or intraspinal; Nb, number of reported cases. aSome cases have no clear evidence to be defined as primary or metastatic tumor.
Review of the literature of CNS amelanotic melanoma CNS, central nervous system, the involved cases are all of the CNS, either intracranial
or intraspinal; Nb, number of reported cases. aSome cases have no clear evidence to be defined as primary or metastatic tumor; bliterature
in languages other than English is noted. Primary melanocytic neoplasms of the CNS belong to the tumors of the meninges, further classified
as diffuse melanocytosis, melanocytoma, malignant melanoma, and meningeal melanomatosis. The incidence is 0.06% to 0.1% of melanocytoma and
0.005/100,000 of melanoma. Other subtypes are rare. There is a slight female predisposition, with the ratio of F:M = 1.5:1. The age range of
melanocytoma is 9 to 73 years, most frequently from 45 to 50 years, and of the primary nodular melanoma is 15 to 71 years, averaging 43
years. The symptoms and signs are secondary to either the local effects on the CNS parenchyma or the accompanying hydrocephalus. The rapid
progress with increasing ICP resulting in irritability, vomiting, lethargy, seizures, and so on may suggest malignant transformation. The
diagnosis of melanocytic lesions relies on the histopathological examination. Most benign and malignant melanocytic lesions display melanin
pigment distributed within tumor cells, tumor stroma, and the cytoplasm of tumoral macrophages (melanophages). Tumor with CNS invasion or
elevated mitotic activity is classified as intermediate grade melanocytic neoplasms. Malignant melanoma is more pleomorphic, has more
anaplastic nuclei, higher cell density, and unequivocal invasion or coagulative necrosis. Rare melanocytomas and occasional primary
melanomas will not demonstrate melanin pigment, complying with ‘amelanotic’ Amelanotic melanoma may arise from normal melanoma with
amelanotic transformation or detergent of the tumor cell. Histopathological and immunohistochemistry examinations are highly sensitive to
amelanotic melanoma. The neuroimaging performance depends on the content of melanin. Isiklar et al. classified the MR performance into four
groups: a) The melanotic group, with hyperintense on T1 and hypointense on T2. b) The amelanotic group, with iso-/hypointense on T1 and
iso-/hyperintense on T2. c) The mixed group, suiting neither the two criteria. d) The hemorrhagic group, with characteristics of
intra-/peri-tumoral hemorrhage. Gaviani et al. reported that the T1 signal has positive correlation with the content of melanin, while T2
signal has no such correlation but is more sensitive to tiny loci. Early in 1980s, Willis et al. pointed out that the diagnosis of ‘primary’
has to meet three critical conditions: a) The skin or eyeballs are negative of melanoma. b) The skin or eyeballs have no history of melanoma
resection. c) The internal organs are negative of metastasis of melanoma. Savitz thought that the systemic melanocytic lesions are very
likely to metastases to CNS while the primary loci are quite indolent. Winkelman et al. reported that 44% of all melanocytic lesions have
CNS metastasis at autopsy, so that the ‘primary’ can only be confirmed after autopsy. So every melanocytic neoplasm may be a systemic
disease, and the ‘primary CNS melanocytic lesion’ is just a subtype with CNS as the single manifestation clinically. There are approximately
more than 60 papers describing primary CNS melanocytic lesions, with about 40 are in English, dated from 1972 to 2013. The number of cases
ranged from one to ten. The symptoms are various according to the location of the tumor and so are the neuroimaging performance relating to
the content of the melanin, as mentioned before. About 14 papers referred to CNS amelanotic melanoma, from 1981 to 2012. Most are case
reports, including two primary intraspinal and two primary meningeal amelanotic melanoma, 22 intracerebral metastasis, one intraventricular
metastasis, and three cases with no details. Schuknecht et al. reported two primary meningeal amelanotic melanoma in 1990, serving as the
only paper describing primary CNS amelanotic melanoma. There are totally 32 primary or metastatic CNS melanocytic lesions of our department
since 2008. The cases diagnosed earlier are not included because of the controversial diagnosis criterion before the 2007 WHO classification
which are widely adopted. The location involves all the CNS, from supratentorial to intraspinal region. Due to the unspecific resemblance,
there were only few cases which were diagnosed before surgery, and the differentiations were quite variable. The most common
differentiations are tumors of the meninges, which belong to the same group of the melanocytic lesions, such as meningioma and the
mesenchymal tumors. The hematopoietic neoplasms, cavernous hemangioma, and even the cystic lesions are also involved especially when there
are hemorrhage, cystic changes, or necrosis, and so on. One of them was suspected as amelanotic melanoma. Our case is the second one with
definite diagnosis of amelanotic melanoma. The clinical characteristics of amelanotic melanoma are similar to other melanocytic lesions,
with the neuroimaging performance as the major difference. Also, during the operation, the amelanotic melanoma appears more pale white, and
the microscopic examination reviews the lacking of melanin. As the overall examinations were all negative, the primary intracranial
amelanotic melanoma was confirmed. The prognosis of amelanotic melanoma is not quite different from other CNS melanoma. Melanocytoma lacks
anaplastic features, but a few undergo local recurrences. Intermediate grade melanocytic tumors typically invade the CNS. A rare example of
malignant transformation of a melanocytoma has been reported. Malignant melanoma is highly aggressive and radioresistant, has poor
prognosis, and prone to metastasize. The prognosis of diffuse melanosis is poor even in the absence of histologic malignancy. The prognosis
of the primary CNS melanocytic lesions appears to be better than metastatic examples. For our case of primary intracranial amelanotic
melanoma, total resection was achieved as well as excessive removal of invaded cranial bone and adjacent meninges. The experience of
postoperative adjuvant therapy is quite poor. We adopted the radiotherapy and chemotherapy regimen of concomitant stereotactic radiosurgery
+ ipilimumab, referring to the NCCN guidelines for melanoma (2.2015 version). With adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the patient is
tumor-free 5 months later and is still under follow-up. CNS amelanotic melanoma is quite rare. The clinical characteristics are similar to
other melanocytic lesions, with the neuroimaging performance as the major difference. The prognosis of amelanotic melanoma is not quite
different from other CNS melanoma and appears to be better than the metastatic cases, particularly if localized and complete resection is
possible. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case presentation and accompanying images. A
copy of the written consent is available for the review by the Editor of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions Professors SW and ZZ were in charge of the treatment of the patient and performed the
operation. JM and SL took part in the treatment, assembled related information, and drafted the article. XC contributed a lot in some
critical work, including pathology analysis. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported by the Vascular and
Gerontic Tumor Group of the Neurosurgery Department, the Radioimaging Department, and the Neuro-pathology Department of Beijing Tiantan
Hospital.
