Human infection with avian influenza A (H7N9) virus was first reported on March, 2013 in the Yangtze River Delta region of China. The
majority of human cases were detected in mainland China; other regions out of mainland China reported imported human cases, including Hong
Kong SAR, Taiwan (the Republic of China) and Malaysia, due to human transportation. Here, we report the first human case of H7N9 infection
imported into Guizhou Province during the Spring Festival travel season in January 2014. In early January 2014, a 38-year-old healthy
Chinese man, a migrant worker returning from previously H7N9-affected Zhejiang Province, was identified as the first human case of infection
with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in Guizhou Province. He developed fever in Zhejiang at the beginning of January 2014, and returned to
Guizhou for the Chinese New Year the next day. He went to seek medical care, but deteriorated rapidly and died on day 8 after his illness
onset. The influenza virus A/Guizhou/01502/2014 isolated from the patient had 99% identity with viruses circulating in the Yangtze River
Delta region. Selected amino acids substitutions, well-known to be associated with mammalian adaptation, viral replication and drug
resistance were similar to other H7N9 viruses circulating in humans. Epidemiology investigation and laboratory results confirmed it was the
first imported case of H7N9 infection in Guizhou Province. This finding further indicated that more human H7N9 cases may be detected in
other regions due to frequent travel both domestically and internationally. The first wave of human infections with avian influenza A(H7N9)
virus began in spring and subsided by summer 2013 in China , and it has re-emerged since October 2013 . As of March 10, 2014, a total of 379
cases and 135 deaths were reported in mainland China . However, human cases were also detected in Hong Kong SAR, Taiwan (the Republic of
China) and recently the Malaysian Ministry of Health announced the first imported case outside of China on February 12, 2014 . It indicated
that human cases could be exported to other regions by frequent travel both domestically and internationally. Each year, billions of people
migrate for the Spring Festival in China, therefore increasing the risk of infectious diseases spreading. Here we report the first human
case of H7N9 infection imported to Guizhou Province from the epidemic region during the period of the so-called largest annual human
migration. The patient was a 38-year-old healthy Chinese man, a migrant worker who worked in Zhejiang Province. As shown in Figure 1, he
developed influenza-like illness (ILI) symptoms, including headache and 40°C fever at the beginning of January 2014, and sought medical
attention in a village clinic and received infusion therapy. He went back to his hometown in Guizhou Province for the coming Spring Festival
by taking a long-distance bus from Zhejiang Province one day after he developed fever. He then sought medical care in a village clinic and a
township hospital when he arrived at his hometown. His chest radiograph showed pneumonia in the lower lobe of his left lung (the CT value
ranged from −12 to approximately −19) and he was hospitalized in a township hospital on day 5 after his illness onset. He experienced high
fever and rapid progression, and was transferred to a provincial general hospital in Zunyi city. He was diagnosed as severe pneumonia,
deteriorated rapidly and died on day 8 after his illness onset. He had received symptomatic treatment during the clinical treatment and all
drugs that had been used in the township hospital and the general hospital in Zunyi city are listed in Table 1. No antiviral drugs were
administrated during the clinical treatment. The case was reported through the Chinese surveillance system for pneumonia with unknown
etiology and confirmed as human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus by means of RT-PCR, virus isolation and full genome sequencing
at the Chinese National Influenza Center (CNIC). Since the patient had died, written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s next-
of-kin for publication of this case report.Figure 1Timeline of potential exposure and medical consultation of a laboratory-confirmed
imported influenza A(H7N9) case, Guizhou Province, China, January 2014.Table 1 Drugs used during clinical treatment in hospital Days after
illness onset Treatment Day 5Antibiotic treatment with vancomycin+ceftazidime+aminoglycosideUse of omeprazole to prevent stress ulcerUse of
dexamethasone to reduce inflammatory exudationDay 7MeropenemCompound aminopyrine and acetaminophenCeftriaxone, bromhexine, doxofylline and
coenzyme complex Timeline of potential exposure and medical consultation of a laboratory-confirmed imported influenza A(H7N9) case, Guizhou
Province, China, January 2014. Drugs used during clinical treatment in hospital Sixty-one close contacts were identified by epidemiological
survey, including 36 health-care personnel, eight medical escorts and 17 households and family contacts. As a public health response,
written informed consents from contacts can be waived according to Chinese law. The close contacts were medically monitored for seven
consecutive days; no ILI symptoms were observed in all contacts except for the patient’s family members. One family member appeared with a
sore throat and developed a 38°C fever five to seven days after the patient’s illness onset, and another developed a sore throat without
fever seven days after the patient’s illness onset. Continuous throat swabs were collected from them; all the samples were negative for H7N9
influenza virus. Antibody response to H7N9 virus was not detected from the paired sera of all contacts. The influenza virus
A/Guizhou/01502/2014 was isolated from the patient. The PB2 gene had a high degree of similarity (99%) to viruses isolated from human in
Zhejiang Province. Another seven segments showed the highest identity with viruses isolated from birds in the Yangtze River Delta region,
where Zhejiang Province is located (Table 2). The phylogenetic analysis further demonstrated all eight gene segments were clustered with
viruses that circulated in this region (Figures 2 and 3). A/Shanghai/1/2013 (SH1, the first H7N9 virus isolate), A/Anhui/1/2013 (AH1, the
vaccine strain recommended by the World Health Organization) and those six virus isolates with highest identity with A/Guizhou/01502/2014
mentioned in Table 2 were selected for characteristic comparison of the critical amino acids residues (Table 3). Similar to those viruses,
the mammalian-adaptive mutations such as G186V and Q226L in the HA gene that were previously reported were found in this virus. It remained
R in the position 292 of the NA gene and suggested the effectiveness of oseltamivir antiviral treatment. The virus possessed a 627K mutation
in the PB2 gene, which was proposed to be associated with high polymerase activity and increased the virulence in mice . The PB1 L368V
mutation was found in this virus, which increased transmission in ferret . The signature amino acids of the human influenza virus in the PA
gene were detected, including V100A, K356R and S409N ; however, a unique mutation L336M in the PA gene that had only been reported in a Hong
Kong isolate was not detected.Table 2 The highest homology of the virus isolated from the patient with other H7N9 viruses Segment Strain
Identity PB2A/Zhejiang/LS01/2014 (H7N9)2272/2280 (99%)PB1A/chicken/Suzhou/040201H/2013 (H7N9)2265/2274 (99%)PAA/duck/Sunan/040802G/2013
(H7N9)2145/2151 (99%)HAA/chicken/Suzhou/097-1/2013 (H7N9)1668/1683 (99%)NPA/tree_sparrow/Shanghai/01/2013 (H7N9)1493/1497
(99%)NAA/chicken/Suzhou/040201H/2013 (H7N9)1389/1398 (99%)MPA/chicken/Suzhou/097-1/2013 (H7N9)981/982 (99%)NSA/pigeon/Wuxi/0405007G/2013
(H7N9)836/838 (99%)Figure 2Phylogenetic tree of HA and NA gene segments of the Guizhou isolate. The H7N9 viruses that were most like the
Guizhou isolate were analyzed for the two surface genes, HA (A) and NA (B). The Guizhou isolate was marked with a black square and the most
likely virus was marked with a black triangle. The bootstrap values ≥0.6 are shown at the major nodes of the phylogenetic trees.Figure
3Phylogenetic tree of six internal gene segments of the Guizhou isolate. The H7N9 viruses that were most like the Guizhou isolate were
analyzed for six internal genes, PB2 (A), PB1 (B), PA (C), NP (D), MP (E), NS (F). The Guizhou isolate was marked with a black square and
the most likely virus was marked with a black triangle. The bootstrap values ≥0.6 are shown at the major nodes of the phylogenetic
trees.Table 3 Comparison of selected molecular markers between A/Guizhou/01502/2014 and representative H7N9 viruses Protein Phenotypic
consequences a Amino acid position/motif b GZ 01502 SH1 AH1 ZJLS01 SZ040201H SN040802G CK/SZ097-1 tree_sparrow/SH1 pigeon/WX/0405007G
HAIncreased virus binding to human-type receptors (α2-6)G186V V G V V V V V V V Q226L L Q L L L Q L L QNAEnhanced virulence in mice/adaption
and transmission in domestic poultry69-73 amino acids deletionYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesRelated to drug resistanceR292KR K R K
RRRRRPB2Increased virulence in miceE627K K K K K EEE K EEnhanced virulence and transmission in guinea pigsD701NDDDDDDDDDPB1Increased
transmission in ferretI368V V I V V V V V V V Increased replication in mammalian cellsL598PLMLLLLLLLPB1-F2Increased pathogenicity in
mice87-90 amino acids in length909090909090259090PAIncreased polymerase activityL336MLLLLLLLLLSpecies-associated signature positionsV100A A
A A A A A A A A K356R R R R R R R R R R S409N N N N N N N N N N aThe mutation to the right of the amino acid position confers the phenotype
described below. bThe HA gene was under the H3 numbering system. The NA gene was under the N2 numbering system. Other internal genes were
numbered from the start codon (Met).All letters in italics represent mutations detected at the relative position. The highest homology of
the virus isolated from the patient with other H7N9 viruses Phylogenetic tree of HA and NA gene segments of the Guizhou isolate. The H7N9
viruses that were most like the Guizhou isolate were analyzed for the two surface genes, HA (A) and NA (B). The Guizhou isolate was marked
with a black square and the most likely virus was marked with a black triangle. The bootstrap values ≥0.6 are shown at the major nodes of
the phylogenetic trees. Phylogenetic tree of six internal gene segments of the Guizhou isolate. The H7N9 viruses that were most like the
Guizhou isolate were analyzed for six internal genes, PB2 (A), PB1 (B), PA (C), NP (D), MP (E), NS (F). The Guizhou isolate was marked with
a black square and the most likely virus was marked with a black triangle. The bootstrap values ≥0.6 are shown at the major nodes of the
phylogenetic trees. Comparison of selected molecular markers between A/Guizhou/01502/2014 and representative H7N9 viruses aThe mutation to
the right of the amino acid position confers the phenotype described below. bThe HA gene was under the H3 numbering system. The NA gene was
under the N2 numbering system. Other internal genes were numbered from the start codon (Met). All letters in italics represent mutations
detected at the relative position. This is the first imported human H7N9 case of a migrant worker moving from epidemic areas to unaffected
regions during the Spring Festival migration, which is a period of travel in China with an extremely high traffic load around the time of
the Chinese New Year. Unlike most previously reported fatal cases of patients who were older and/or who had underlying medical conditions ,
this patient was young and reported without any underlying medical conditions. No mutations associated with antiviral resistance were
detected; one possibility for the rapid deterioration and death of the patient may be due to the fact antiviral drugs were not used during
his treatment. The virus isolated from the patient showed a high identity with viruses circulating in the Yangtze River Delta region and he
developed respiratory syndromes before his arrival in Guizhou Province. He visited a neighborhood live poultry market before his illness
onset, which indicated the potential infection source was likely to be the infected poultry in the market, as previously reported elsewhere
. Further, the H7N9 virus was not detected in Guizhou based on the results of poultry-related environmental surveillance since 2009 (data
not shown). These data concluded that the case had been introduced from an affected region by the movement of people. Imported human cases
of the H7N9 virus travelling from affected areas to non-endemic areas domestically and internationally have been reported in Hong Kong SAR,
Taiwan (the Republic of China) and Malaysia during the first and second wave of H7N9 infections . In each year, millions of migrant workers
from rural areas of Guizhou Province go to work in the Yangtze River Delta and the Pearl River Delta and return home for a reunion with
their family. With the increasingly frequent movement of people, it is foreseen that more human H7N9 cases may be detected in other regions
due to frequent travel both domestically and internationally. Considering the rapidly progressive pneumonia, acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS), the high rates of ICU admission and death, early detection and antiviral drug therapy of suspected cases imported from
affected areas are essential to reduce the case fatality rate of H7N9 virus infection. The undetected H7N9 virus of the respiratory
specimens and the negative antibody response to H7N9 in his family members who presented clinical syndromes indicated that the transmission
from the patient to his family members could be ruled out. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s next-of-kin for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions DMW carried out the
field investigation, participated in laboratory testing, and drafted the manuscript. GPT, YH, CY, NSL and LY participated in the field
investigation. SJL interpreted and analyzed the surveillance and RT-PCR testing. LZ, LF, SPW, XYL and YL participated in sequencing and
virus isolation. YL participated in the sequence alignment, and analyzed the laboratory data. TB was a major contributor in writing the
manuscript. YLS conceived and coordinated the study. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank our other colleagues who
participated in the field investigation for the epidemiology survey. This study was supported by the China National Mega-projects for
Infectious Diseases (2014ZX10004002).
