Sinus arrest, atrio-ventricular block, supraventricular, and ventricular arrhythmias have been reported in patients with sleep apnea
syndrome. The arrhythmias usually occur during sleep and contribute to the cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, and the treatment of
sleep apnea usually results in the resolution of the brady- arrhythmias. Weight loss, continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), oral
appliances, and upper airway surgery are the recommended treatments, however, compliance and efficacy are issues. A 58-year-old Arab man
presented with recurrent presyncope. He was subsequently diagnosed with sleep apnea associated with frequent and significant sinus pauses.
He presented a treatment challenge because he refused continuous positive airway pressure and pacemaker, however, he was successfully
treated with theophylline. Frequent and significant sinus pause associated with sleep apnea was successfully treated with theophylline in
our patient when the standard treatment of care was refused. Sleep apnea-associated bradyarrhythmias contribute to the cardiovascular
mortality and morbidity of sleep apnea and treatment of sleep apnea usually results in resolution of bradyarrhythmias . To date, weight
loss, continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), oral appliances, and upper airway surgery are the recommended treatments; however,
compliance and efficacy are issues . Our patient presented a treatment challenge because he had significant sinus pauses associated with
sleep apnea, but he refused recommended treatment. Theophylline, used to treat brady-arrhythmia in different settings, was introduced as an
alternative treatment option and was successful in treating our patient. A 58-year-old Arab man was referred to our electrophysiology clinic
with monthly episodes of presyncope for the last 3 months. Despite two episodes of presyncope per year for 3 years, he had not sought
medical advice. He had multiple comorbidities including coronary artery disease status post coronary artery bypass surgery (CABG), type 2
diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, and class III obesity (body mass index 41) with a neck circumference of 45cm and modified Mallampati score
of 4. After his CABG, aspirin, atorvastatin, and metformin were restarted, with the addition of metoprolol tartrate 25mg twice daily. More
frequent episodes of presyncope occurred. An electrocardiogram revealed normal sinus rhythm with normal PR, QRS and QTc intervals.
Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated a normal left ventricular systolic function and 24-hour ambulatory Holter monitoring recorded
multiple sinus pauses occurring from 11:22 p.m. until 11:46 a.m. with a maximum pause of 22 seconds occurring at 11:45:33 a.m. (see
Figure 1). During this observation, there were no episodes of presyncope.Figure 1Holter recording displaying a prolonged sinus pause. A
sample from the Holter recording displaying a non-conducted P-wave (small black arrow) preceded by a sinus pause of 2.7 seconds (large black
arrow) and followed by sinus arrest of 22 seconds with junctional escape beats (between the horizontal start and end arrows). The gray
arrows point to sinus bradycardia and black arrowhead points to the first P-wave, after the return of sinus rhythm. Holter revealing a non-
conducted P-wave (small black arrow) followed by sinus arrest (horizontal arrows). Holter recording displaying a prolonged sinus pause. A
sample from the Holter recording displaying a non-conducted P-wave (small black arrow) preceded by a sinus pause of 2.7 seconds (large black
arrow) and followed by sinus arrest of 22 seconds with junctional escape beats (between the horizontal start and end arrows). The gray
arrows point to sinus bradycardia and black arrowhead points to the first P-wave, after the return of sinus rhythm. Holter revealing a non-
conducted P-wave (small black arrow) followed by sinus arrest (horizontal arrows). He was admitted to our hospital for further workup.
Despite discontinuation of metoprolol for 1 week, his telemetry revealed multiple episodes of sinus pause, observed during daytime
sleepiness or snoring episodes. Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) was suspected and a sleep study demonstrated both central and OSA: Epworth
score 7, sleep latency of 17 minutes, Apnea–Hypopnea Index (AHI) of 98/hour, arousal index of 49/hour and lowest oxygen saturation at 78% on
room air (Table 1).Table 1 Symptoms reported, Holter monitor, theophylline levels and polysomnography results at presentation and during
follow up Symptoms Weight (kg) 24-hour Holter monitor Theophylline level * Polysomnography Max sinus pause (seconds) Total number of sinus
pauses Min/max/Average HR (beats/minute) Prior to presentation (2008 until 2011)Presyncope twice a year for 3 years115–––Not on treatment–At
presentation (September 2011)Presyncope once a month for 3 months119227149/119/85Not on treatmentEpworth score 7Sleep latency of 17
minutesAHI of 98/hourArousal index of 49/hourLowest oxygen saturation at 78% on room air5-month follow upNone12061861/125/9311.11Not
done6-month follow upNone1225568/124/9413.0Not done7-month follow upNone126NoneNone71/128/9214.4Epworth score of 11Sleep latency of 28
minutesAHI of 96/hourArousal index of 43/hourLowest oxygen saturation at 78% on room air14-month follow upNone123NoneNone69/123/9011.4Not
done19-month follow upNone1292.9367/115/8214.6Epworth score of 11Sleep latency of 48.5 minutesAHI of 83/hourArousal index of 42.8/hourLowest
oxygen saturation at 75% on room air29-month follow upNone130NoneNone65/110/81Not doneNot doneAHI = Apnea–Hypopnea Index; HR = Heart rate;
Max = Maximum; Min = Minimum. *Therapeutic level is between 10 and 20mcg/mL in plasma . Symptoms reported, Holter monitor, theophylline
levels and polysomnography results at presentation and during follow up AHI = Apnea–Hypopnea Index; HR = Heart rate; Max = Maximum; Min =
Minimum. *Therapeutic level is between 10 and 20mcg/mL in plasma . Overnight CPAP was started and the telemetry showed sinus bradycardia
with a minimum heart rate of 30 beats per minute with infrequent pauses of less than 3 seconds. However he refused to continue to use the
CPAP upon discharge. In addition, he was offered a pacemaker and he refused. A trial of theophylline 200mg twice daily was initiated and he
was discharged from our hospital and encouraged to initiate a weight reduction program. At follow up, he had no further episode of
presyncope with infrequent short or no pauses at therapeutic theophylline levels (Table 1). A follow-up sleep study revealed improvement in
the central element of his sleep apnea, however, his AHI did not significantly improve; such results are expected with theophylline therapy
(Table 1). Sleep apnea syndrome has been associated with cardiovascular complications including hypertension , heart failure and cardiac
arrhythmia . Observational studies have shown that treating sleep apnea syndrome can decrease blood pressure , reduce cardiac arrhythmia and
decrease cardiovascular mortality . Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation effectively decreases the incidence of sleep apnea-associated
arrhythmia ; however, not all patients can tolerate it and compliance is an issue . We report the case of a patient who presented with
presyncope most likely secondary to sleep apnea-induced brady-arrhythmia. He was started on beta-blockers after his CABG, which could have
made his brady-arrhythmia worse and contributed to increasing presyncope. However, while he was an in-patient and off his metoprolol he
continued to have significant sinus pause. He did not tolerate CPAP and refused a pacemaker so, as a last resort, theophylline treatment was
started and he reported complete resolution of his symptoms. A Holter monitor documented a decrease in both the frequency and duration of
sinus pauses. We initiated theophylline based on its effectiveness in treating brady-arrhythmia in the setting of post-cardiac transplant
and spinal cord injury . The mechanism of brady-arrhythmia in sleep apnea syndrome is hypothesized to be due to the activation of the diving
reflex by hypoxemia and apnea, with reflex activation of the cardiac vagal nerve. This induces severe nocturnal bradyarrhythmias, especially
during rapid eye movement sleep . Theophylline is a nonselective phosphodiesterase inhibitor that also competitively blocks adenosine
receptors resulting in central nervous system and cardiovascular stimulation. Theophylline also increases the respiratory drive and it has
been used in patients with central sleep apnea due to left ventricular dysfunction before CPAP and is still recommended in patients who
cannot tolerate CPAP . For OSA, theophylline has been shown to mildly reduce obstructive events but is associated with sleep disruption and
therefore it is not recommended . The limitations and side effects of theophylline result from its narrow therapeutic index, traditionally
between 10 and 20mcg/mL in plasma. Theophylline is metabolized in the liver through the cytochrome P450 system and consequently is
implicated in several drug interactions with commonly prescribed drugs, which may increase serum concentrations of theophylline . We report
a case of treating sleep apnea-induced brady-arrhythmia with theophylline when standard treatment of care was refused. Further studies are
needed to determine the safety and efficacy of theophylline for treating sleep apnea-induced bradyarrhythmias to ensure the benefits
outweigh the risks. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.
A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Apnea–Hypopnea Index Coronary artery bypass
surgery Continuous positive airway pressure Obstructive sleep apnea Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Authors’ contributions AD was the major contributor and provided care to the patient. AD also conceived the case report,
collected information and wrote the manuscript. SO, SMAF AAAA and AL contributed in writing the manuscript and developing the table and
figure. WA assisted with data collection. FA contributed in the preparation, editing and revision of the manuscript. All authors have read
and approved the final manuscript. The lead author would like to acknowledge Dr. James Stewart and Dr. Ciaran M. Dixon for their assistance
in proofreading the manuscript. The work was conducted in the Section of Adult Cardiology, Cardiovascular Department, King Faisal Specialist
Hospital & Research Center-Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
