Brain nocardiosis is a serious opportunistic infection with high mortality. It exists more common in the immunocompromised hosts than the
immunocompetent patients. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ) has been mostly considered as the choice of the medical treatment.
Linezolid is also newly found to be effective to avoid the invasive surgery. The authors reported a case of patient with multifoci nocardial
brain abscesses who failed with the combination of linezolid and TMP-SMZ alone but recovered with the surgery intervention and sequential
antibiotics for 2 years. The patient lived a high quality life without recurrence and complications during the 30 months follow-up. Through
the literature review, we recommend earlier stereotactic aspiration for diagnosis, combination with surgery intervention and prolonged anti-
infection therapy would improve the prognosis. Nocardiosis is a rare opportunistic disease that mainly affects the patients with deficient
cell-mediated immunity, including organ transplants, leukemia, diabetes mellitus, alcoholism, underlying malignancy, human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV), long-term use of steroid, and autoimmune disease.1–3 Immunocompromised patients had high morbidity of brain involvement with
high mortality.4 The successful management of nocardial brain abscess remains ununified. Here, we reported an immunocompromised patient with
multifoci nocardial brain abscesses, who was successfully treated with the combination of surgery intervention and systemic sequential
antibiotics with 30 months follow-up. A 42-year-old man was admitted in our hospital due to a productive cough for 3 months, dizziness, and
seizures for 10 days. It was diagnosed with the atypical pneumonia 2 months before the admission, and he was commenced with antibiotics and
methylprednisolone. Physical examination showed crackles in the lower field of right lung during the chest auscultation without fever and
other physical and neurological abnormality. Laboratory test showed the white blood cell count was 7600 per milliliter. The percentage of
neutrophils, lymphocytes, and monocytes were 86.8%, 9.8%, and 3.4%, respectively. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 38 mm/hour. Skin
test for tuberculosis was negative. HIV antibody, hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), and hepatitis C antibody (anti-HCV) were all
negative. Serum tumor markers spectrums were normal. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed no obvious abnormality. The pulmonary CT
showed consolidation and infection in the middle lobe of right lung. Bronchoendoscopy, sputum cytology, sputum cultures, and bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid showed no evidence of tumor or pathogen. Lung biopsy suggested chronic inflammation of mucosa with interstitial fibrosis. Brain
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple lesions in the left frontal and bilateral parietal lobes with the possibility of
granulomatous lesions mimicking metastatic tumors (Figure 1). The diagnosis was pulmonary infection with brain mass. He was commenced on
ceftriaxone (2 g every 12 hour, iv) for pulmonary infections and mannitol (25 g every 8 hour, iv) and sodium valproate (Depakote ER, 500 mg
twice a day, oral) for improving the neurological symptoms. Eleven days after admission, the symptoms of pneumonia improved, but the
neurological symptoms deteriorated with frequent seizures and persistent headaches. Thus, an image-directed stereotactic aspiration of the
left parietal lesion was performed. The aspirated fluid revealed pus and the positive culture showed Nocardia. We revised the diagnosis and
choose the combined treatment of ceftriaxone (2 g, every 12 hour, iv) and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ 2#, every 8 hour, oral)
(SMZ 0.8 g, TMP 0.16 g). Two weeks later, the repeated MRI showed the size of lesions which undergone stereotactic aspiration was obviously
shrunk, but other lesions enlarged (Figure 2A). The antibiotics changed to the combination of TMP-SMZ and linezolid. Four weeks later, the
follow-up MRI showed the sizes of lesions slightly shrunk (Figure 2B) but the seizures still persist. Thus, the patient underwent excision
of remain abscesses at craniotomy. Postoperatively antibiotic therapy was changed to cefoperazone/sulbactam sodium (2 g, every 8 hour, iv)
and TMP-SMZ (2# every 8 hour, oral) because of the shortage of the supply of linezolid. The seizure was controlled and the patient
discharged 4 weeks after operation with TMP-SMZ oral. The 6-month follow-up brain MRI showed 2 residual lesions (Figure 2C), the 12-month
follow-up brain MRI showed the lesion on the left frontal lobe disappear, the other lesion lightly shrunk (Figure 2D). So, we prolonged the
course of TMP-SMZ to 2 years. There was no recurrence of the abscess in the imaging at 30-month follow-up (Figure 2E, F), and the patient
lived well without complications. MRI found multifoci nocardial brain abscesses. (A) Axial T1-weighted image showed multiple low signal
intensity lesions. (B) T2 weighting showed significant edema around the lesions. (C, D) T1-weighted contrast-enhanced image showed
multifoci, ring-enhancing abscesses. (A) T1-weighted contrast-enhanced image showed the lesion where stereotactic aspiration was done was
obviously shrunk (arrow), other lesions were enlarged; (B) 4 weeks after linezolid used, the follow-up image showed the multifoci abscesses
slightly shrunk; (C) 6-month follow-up image showed residual lesions on left frontal and right parietal lobe. (D) 12-month follow-up image
showed a minor residual lesion on right parietal lobe. (E, F) Axial and coronal 30-month follow-up image did not demonstrate any enhancement
of a residual mass. Nocardia species are gram-positive, aerobic, branching filamentous bacteria belonging to Actinomycetales, which can be
found in the soil and dust throughout the world.5 Three main species cause humans infection, including N asteroides, N brasiliensis, and N
caviae. N asteroides is the most commonly isolated. Nocardia infection commonly arise in the immunocompromised states including organ
transplants, leukemia, HIV, steroid abuse, and autoimmune disease.6 The most common predisposing factors are corticosteroid use (54% of
patients) such as in this case and organ transplantation (25%).7 The pathogen can spread to the central nervous system hematogenously or
through inhalation. The involvement of the central nervous system was found in nearly half of all disseminated nocardial infections in the
literature.8,9 Nocardial brain abscesses is a very severe infection that carries the highest mortality rate among all bacterial cerebral
abscesses10 According to Mamelak study, the mortality rate in immunocompromised patients was 55%, whereas that overall mortality in
immunocompetent patients was 20%.11 Because Nocardia can typically function as a parenchymal abscess in any part of the brain, the clinical
presentations of nocardial brain abscesses are controversial, and there are no specific signs or symptoms to confirm the diagnosis. Seizures
and focal neurological deficits are the commonest clinical manifestations observed in patients with nocardial brain abscess. The brain
imaging mostly manifested as ring-enhancing lesions presumed to be cerebral abscesses. And meningeal involvement, cystic lesions, and
subdural hematoma can also be found. Nocardial brain abscesses were often misdiagnosed as malignant brain tumors.12 In this case, it was
special that brain MRI showed the lesion mimicked the tumor mass, which may cause our delay for the diagnosis. Diagnosis was mostly
confirmed by the evidence of the pathogen. It was reported 82% of patients confirming the diagnosis by culture of aspirates from the site of
infection, including 43% of patients with subsequent culture of cerebral abscess aspirates, 31% with culture of the biopsy specimen, and
8.3% with central system fluid (CSF) culture.7 So earlier aspiration or biopsy of lesions to get evidence was very essential. In this case,
we did not make a definite diagnosis through the clinical manifestation and imaging until we got the evidence of Nocardia species infection
from the culture of brain tissue. Like many other authors, we believe the antibiotic therapy of choice for nocardial brain abscess is the
synergistic combination of TMP-SMZ.3,4,7,8 In this case, the use of TMP-SMZ and ceftriaxone did not improve symptoms. As linezolid showed
good permeability in the tissues and sensibility of nocardiosis in vitro in many researches,13–15 it appeared to be an effective alternative
for the treatment of nocardiosis while avoiding the surgery intervention.14–17 Kaswan et al13 reported a case of lumbar epidural and
multiple brain nocardial abscesses. The patient recovered with 2-week treatment combining linezolid and cotrimoxazol, and discharged from
hospital. In our case, we also commence the medical therapy but failed. Surgical management is necessary in most cases. Mamelak et al11
reviewed cases previously reported and suggested that if the patient's condition deteriorates or if the abscess does not decrease in size
within 4 weeks, stereotactic aspiration should be performed to confirm the diagnosis and to decompress the lesion. And if any abscess
enlarges after 2 weeks of antibiotic therapy or fails to shrink after 4 weeks of therapy, a craniotomy should be performed to excise the
abscess. If the abscess is surgically inaccessible, aspiration/drainage may be repeated, although the likelihood of success is reduced. In
this case, the abscesses enlarged after 2 weeks of combined antibiotic therapy, and 4 weeks later, the abscesses failed to obviously shrink
although linezolid commenced which was not as effective as reported in that literature.14,15 The reason may be the sensibility of the
bacteria to linezolid in vivo. The craniotomy was performed to excise abscesses immediately as recommended in the literature. We continued
SMZ-TMP for 6 months which was reported that sequential targeted antimicrobial medications longer than 6 months lower the mortality and
relapse.7 In the 6 and 12-month follow-up after discharge, brain MRI showed residual lesion. So we extended the course to 2 years. There was
no report with the treatment longer than 12 months. At 30 months follow-up, MRI revealed no abscess in the brain. In previous case reports,
some patients were alive with complications like motor deficits and hearing impairment.11 However, this patient lived well without obvious
complications. In summary, Nocardial brain abscesses are a rare but very severe infection that carries the high mortality rate, especially
in immunocompromised patients. Through earlier stereotactic aspiration for diagnosis, craniotomy to excise abscesses combined prolonged
sequential targeted antimicrobial therapy can successfully shorten the hospitalized time and improve the prognosis. Abbreviations: CT =
computed tomography, HIV = human immunodeficiency virus, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, TMP-SMZ = trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. QX and
RZ contributed equally to this work. C-JJ was the guarantor of integrity of the entire study, who participated in the design of the study,
and performed the manuscript editing and review. X-QS and Z-RY, both the first authors, participated in the data acquisition and analysis,
and carried out the literature research and the manuscript preparation. F-YP participated in the imaging data acquisition and analysis. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. This report was supported by Scientific Research Fund of Zhejiang Provincial Education
Department (No. N20130382). The authors report no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. The authors have no conflict of interest to
disclose.
