Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None Patient: Female, 30 Final Diagnosis: Leiomyomatosis Symptoms: Abnormal finding in abdominal-pelvic CT
scan Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Surgical tumorectomy Specialty: Oncology Rare disease Leiomyomatosis peritonealis disseminata (LPD)
is a rare condition that occurs in reproductive-age women. The pathogenesis of LPD is considered to be related to female sex hormones. A
30-year-old woman who had undergone an ovariectomy due to calcified thecoma at 24 years of age and had delivered a baby boy at 29 years of
age showed abnormal abdominal-pelvic masses in a computed tomography scan. The peritoneal nodules were resected and histologically diagnosed
as LPD. Smooth muscle cells in LPD lesions expressed progesterone receptor, while estrogen receptor and luteinizing hormone/chorionic
gonadotropin receptor were negative. LPD should be considered when multiple nodules mimicking dissemination of malignancies are found in the
abdominal cavity. In the present case, progesterone may have been involved in the pathogenesis of LPD. Leiomyomatosis peritonealis
disseminata (LPD) is a rare condition that is characterized by multiple intra-abdominal nodules composed of the proliferation of smooth
muscle cells. LPD was first described by Willson and Peale in 1952 , and less than 140 cases have been described in the English medical
literature . Most LPD cases arise in women of reproductive age, but a few cases occur in postmenopausal women and in men . The majority of
cases are clinically benign. LPD results in multicentric nodules in the abdominal cavity that frequently exhibit clinical and radiological
symptoms mimicking malignant neoplasms . We herein describe a case of LPD arising in a young parous woman who had a history of laparotomy
due to ovarian calcified thecoma. A 24-year-old Japanese nulliparous woman who had experienced secondary amenorrhea for 4 years and breast
tenderness for 6 months consulted the gynecologic outpatient clinic at Kansai Medical University Hospital. Her menarche was at 19 years of
age, and she had never used oral contraceptives. No family history of disease was reported. At consultation, a hard solid mass was palpated
during the gynecologic examination, and pelvic computed tomography (CT) revealed a severely calcified mass measuring 6.6 cm in diameter at
the right side of her uterus. Laboratory examination showed no abnormalities in blood count, renal function, or liver function. The
patient’s serum estradiol was within normal levels (44.6 pg/ml; normal range, 25 to 411 pg/ml), and the serum progesterone level was not
measured. She was admitted to the gynecology unit at Kansai Medical University Hospital, and an abdominal ovariectomy was performed. The
right ovary was enlarged and weighed 158 g. Normal ovarian tissue was replaced by a widely and severely calcified lesion mixed with focal
soft and fatty yellowish areas (Figure 1A). Macroscopically, the patient’s uterus and other intraabdominal organs showed no abnormalities.
Histologically, the resected ovarian tumor was composed of spindle-to-oval cells with a small number of clearly vacuolated cells (Figure
1B). These spindle cells moved into highly calcified lesions. Sudan III staining revealed fatty droplets in the cytoplasm of clearly
vacuolated cells (Figure 1C). The ovarian tumor was histologically diagnosed as a calcified thecoma. After the surgery, the patient’s
menstrual cycle normalized, and she delivered a healthy boy 5 years later. One year after the delivery, the patient detected a small nodule
in her neck, and the nodule was histologically diagnosed as a leiomyoma. Although she noticed no particular symptoms, a CT scan revealed
multiple solid masses in the abdomen and pelvic region. The largest nodule was located in the mesentery of the transverse mesocolon and
measured 5.5 cm in diameter (Figure 2). The patient was re-admitted to Kansai Medical University Hospital for the surgical removal of
abdominal nodules. According to the operative report, laparotomy revealed multiple coalescent nodules of varying sizes between a few
millimeters to 2 or 3 cm. The largest nodule, located in the transverse mesocolon, was removed surgically (Figure 3A), but complete
resection of all nodules was impossible because the number of nodules was beyond the resection capacity. The largest nodule that was
resected from the mesocolon and the other resected nodules were histologically evaluated. Macroscopically, resected nodules showed no
necrosis or hemorrhage. Light microscopy revealed that all nodules were composed of bundles of monomorphic spindle cells. These spindle
cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm showed no cytological atypia, and mitotic figures were not detected (Figure 3B). Immunohistochemically,
tumor cells were positive for alpha-smooth muscle actin and desmin (Figure 3C) and negative for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, EMA, CD118, and S-100
protein; this staining pattern is typical for smooth muscle tumors . In a few spindle cells, nuclear staining for progesterone receptor was
detected (Figure 3D), while estrogen receptor and luteinizing hormone/chorionic gonadotropin receptor were negative (data not shown). Based
on these results, the peritoneal nodules were histologically diagnosed as LPD. The patient’s post-operative course was uneventful. After her
second laparotomy, the patient remained well and did not report any clinical symptoms. She did not receive any anti-estrogenic compounds. A
follow-up pelvic CT scan taken 2 months after the surgery revealed no re-growth of the residual peritoneal nodules. LPD is a rare benign
tumor that usually occurs in women of reproductive age. Malignant transformation of LPD has been reported in a few cases . LPD occurs
sporadically; however, 1 family cluster with inherited autosomal dominant inheritance has been reported . In a report of 20 women with LPD,
10 patients were pregnant or immediately postpartum, and the other 7 patients used oral contraceptives . LPD has been unexpectedly detected
during cesarean section . In addition, there have been 3 reports of LPD in association with steroid hormone – secreting ovarian tumors ; 2
tumors were granulosa cell tumors, and 1 tumor was a fibrothecoma, which resembles our present case. In the previously reported fibrothecoma
case, the serum estrogen level was elevated (156 pmol/L), and the gonadotropin levels were suppressed. Although our patient showed no
abnormalities in pre-surgical serum estrogen levels, her menstrual cycles normalized after the ovariectomy, which indicates that her
resected thecoma was a functioning tumor. In our patient, while LPD cells expressed progesterone receptor, the serum progesterone levels
were not measured. However, the development of LPD may be associated with progesterone secretion from the calcified thecoma and/or from the
patient’s recent pregnancy, which created a high-progesterone environment. Female sex hormones are recognized as an initiator or promoter in
the majority of LPD cases. It is generally accepted that under the influence of endogenous or exogenous female sex hormones, pluripotent
mesenchymal stem cells in the peritoneum are capable of metaplastic change into myocytes . These hormonal theories are supported by an
experimental study; histologically similar subperitoneal nodules could be reproduced in female guinea pigs by prolonged exposure to estrogen
or by combined estrogen and progesterone . However, to date, the pathological spectrum of these peritoneal mesenchymal stem cells has not
been determined. Reports in the literature show that LPD cells frequently express estrogen receptor and/or progesterone receptors ;
progesterone receptor expression is uniform and consistent in LPD cases . Also, luteinizing hormone receptor was detected in LPD cells from
a post-menopausal woman who had received tamoxifen therapy for 2 years before the onset of LPD . Particular hormones may bind to their
receptors and promote LPD growth. In our case, spindle cell nuclei focally expressed progesterone receptor, while estrogen and luteinizing
hormone/chorionic gonadotropin receptors were negative. A few LPD cases are diagnosed in men , and some cases do not express hormone
receptors. Therefore, factors other than hormones may contribute to the pathogenesis of LPD. In this context, association with endometriosis
or iatrogenic causes such as a previous laparoscopic myomectomy or hysterectomy may be included in the etiology. However, the precise
etiology and the pathogenesis of LPD are still controversial. In the present case, the LPD nodules consisted of spindle cells with no
cytological atypia, no mitosis, and no necrosis. The LPD cells expressed smooth muscle actin and desmin, which are features of benign smooth
muscle cells . To date, clinical consensus in the management of LPD has not been established because of its rarity. One recommended
treatment of LPD is surgical tumorectomy if the clinical symptoms such as abdominal distention or discomfort are prominent. Hormone
therapies, including ovariectomy and the use of gonadotropin-releasing analogs and aromatase inhibitors, may be effective . Although our
patient did not receive hormone therapy, her residual peritoneal nodules did not progress in size, and she did not experience discomfort
from the disease. The pathogenesis of LPD is considered to be related to female sex hormones; the hormonal stimulations target mesenchymal
cells in the peritoneum to develop into multiple leiomyoma nodules. Because progesterone receptor was expressed in tumor cells, resected
calcified thecoma cells and the previous pregnancy might have elevated the serum progesterone levels, which caused LPD. In female sex
hormone receptor – positive cases, hormone therapy may be helpful. (A) Cut surface of calcified thecoma. (B) Calcified thecoma. Hematoxylin
and eosin (20×). (C) Calcified thecoma. Fatty droplets were seen in vacuolated cells. Sudan III (40×). Abdominal CT scan showing
intraperitoneal nodules. Arrow in the picture indicates the largest mass in the mesentery of transverse colon. Macroscopic, histologic and
immunohistochemical findings of leiomyomatosis peritonealis disseminata (LPD). (A) Cut surface of the largest nodule seen in transverse
mesocolon. (B) LPD is composed of monomorphic spindle cells. Hematoxylin and eosin (20×). (C) Spindle cells are positive for desmin (20×).
(D) Spindle cells are focally positive for progesterone receptor (20×).
