A 6-year-old patient was referred to our ophthalmology service because of an ocular deviation (esotropia) on the right eye for 3 years.
Best-corrected visual acuity in right eye and 20/20 in left eye. According to the Krimsky test, the patient showed 15 prism dioptres
esotropia in right eye. No changes were observed in biomicroscopy of both eyes and funduscopy of left eye was normal. An optical disc of
increased size was seen in right eye, covered by glial tissue, rectified retinal vessels and with radial distribution. To confirm the
diagnosis, we conducted an echography that showed typical sclerotic defect of Morning Glory syndrome, which is an increase of optic disc
excavation and peripapilar retina (Figures 1 and 2). Figure 1Optical nerve in fundus oculis Figure 2Ultrasonography confirming the diagnosis
The Morning Glory syndrome is a rare sporadic congenital anomaly, which is often unilateral.( 1 , 2 ) Bilateral cases are even rarer and can
be hereditary.( 2 ) This syndrome was described by Kindler in 1970. The anomaly was termed Morning Glory syndrome because of its similarity
to the tropical flower. This anomaly is characterized by increase in optical disk size with poor defined wedges and involved by pigmented
ring, deep excavation, presence of glial tissue filling the optical disc and radial disposition of retinal vessels.( 3 ) Morning Glory
syndrome increases the risk of serous retinal detachment and, in the first months/years of life can cause leucocoria. Morning Glory syndrome
can be associated to strabismus, cataract, nystagmus, coloboma of the crystalline and optic nerve drusen,( 4 , 5 ) as well as to anomalies
of central nervous system, endocrine system, renal system and respiratory system. This syndrome rarely appears in black people, is twice
more common in women than in men and no family heterogeneity is associated to it.( 6 ) Visual acuity is not always altered, and can be
normal or compromised in different forms. Complications can appear such as serous retinal detachment (30% of cases) and, more rarely,
choroidal neovascularization. The syndrome is rarely associated with neurofibromatosis type 2.( 3 ) The coloboma of optic disk, which is a
differential diagnosis, is characterized as excavation, normally in inferior part, without glial tissue typically present in Morning Glory
syndrome.( 7 ) Paciente de 6 anos trazida para atendimento oftalmológico por desvio ocular (esotropia) somente em olho direito há 3 anos.
Melhor acuidade visual corrigida de vultos no olho direito e 20/20 no esquerdo. Pelo método de Krimsky, apresentava esotropia de 15
dioptrias prismáticas em olho direito. Não havia alterações na biomicroscopia de ambos olhos e a fundoscopia apresentava-se normal no olho
esquerdo. No olho direito, observou-se disco óptico de tamanho aumentado, recoberto por tecido glial, vasos da retina retificados e com
distribuição radial. Para confirmar o diagnóstico, realizamos ecografia, que demonstrou defeito na esclera posterior típico da síndrome de
Morning Glory, que consiste em aumento da escavação do disco óptico e da retina peripapilar (Figuras 1 e 2). Figura 1Nervo óptico no fundo
de olho Figura 2Ultrassonografia confirmando o diagnóstico A síndrome de Morning Glory é uma rara anomalia congênita esporádica, normalmente
unilateral.( 1 , 2 ) Os casos bilaterais são ainda mais raros e podem ser hereditários.( 2 ) Descrita por Kindler, em 1970, que lhe deu esse
nome devido à semelhança com uma flor denominada Morning Glory. Caracteriza-se por um disco óptico de tamanho aumentado com bordas mal
definidas e envoltas por anel pigmentado, escavação profunda, presença de tecido glial ocupando o disco óptico e disposição radial da
vascularização retiniana.( 3 ) Há aumento do risco de descolamento seroso de retina e, nos primeiros meses/anos de vida, pode ser causa de
leucocória. Essa síndrome pode se associar a estrabismo, catarata, nistagmo, coloboma de cristalino e drusa de nervo óptico,( 4 , 5 ) assim
como anomalias do sistema nervoso central, endócrinas, renais e respiratórias. É rara em negros e duas vezes mais comum em mulheres, sem um
padrão familiar de malformações associado.( 6 ) A acuidade visual nem sempre é alterada, podendo estar normal ou comprometida de forma
variável. Podem surgir complicações, como descolamento seroso de retina (30% dos casos) e, mais raramente, neovascularização de coroide.
Raramente se associa à neurofibromatose tipo 2.( 3 ) O coloboma de disco óptico, que é um diagnóstico diferencial, manifesta-se como uma
escavação, normalmente na parte inferior, sem a presença do tecido glial típica da síndrome de Morning Glory.( 7 )
