Storiform collagenoma is a rare tumor, which originates from the proliferation of fibroblasts that show increased production of type-I
collagen. It is usually found in the face, neck and extremities, but it can also appear in the trunk, scalp and, less frequently, in the
oral mucosa and the nail bed. It affects both sexes, with a slight female predominance. It may be solitary or multiple, the latter being an
important marker for Cowden syndrome. It presents as a painless, solid nodular tumor that is slow-growing. It must be considered in the
differential diagnosis of other well-circumscribed skin lesions, such as dermatofibroma, pleomorphic fibroma, sclerotic lipoma, fibrolipoma,
giant cell collagenoma, benign fibrous histiocytoma, intradermal Spitz nevus and giant cell angiohistiocytoma. Storiform collagenoma or
sclerotic fibroma is a rare benign skin tumor that usually affects young adults and middle-age individuals of both sexes. This tumor is
slightly predominant in women. Storiform collagenoma appears as a small papule or solid fibrous nodule. It is well-circumscribed, pink,
whitish or skin color, painless and of slow-growing. This tumor is often found in face and limbs, but it can also appears in the chest,
scalp and, rarely, in oral mucosa and nail bed. Storiform collagenoma often appears as single tumor, and the occurrence of multiple tumors
is an important indication of Cowden syndrome, which is a heritage genodermatosis of autosomal dominant condition.(1-4) Storiform
collagenoma has as differential diagnosis other well-circumscribed skin tumors such as dermatofibroma, pleomorphic fibroma, sclerotic
lipoma, fibrolipoma, giant cell collagenoma, benign fibrous histiocytoma, intradermal Spitz nevus and giant cell angiohistiocytoma.(5-8) We
report a case of a 36-year-old man, white, who was a cleaning assistant, born in Aracajú (SE) and lived in São Paulo (SP) for 15 years. He
complained of mass appearance on his right shoulder, at least 2 years ago, with slow-growing, painless and without sings of inflammation or
secretion exit. The patient denied previous trauma where the mass was located, appearance of other masses, comorbidities, personal or family
previous history of diseases, alcohol abuse, smoking and use of illegal drugs. At physical examination, he had nodular injury in
suprascapular region, well-delimited, pink measuring 1.5cm in diameter, fibrotic consistency and non-painful on palpation (Figure 1). Figure
1Aspect of the injury before surgery The patient underwent skin fuse exeresis containing an injury under local anesthesia with lidocaine,
followed by primary simple suture using black Nylon 4.0mm and bandage with sterile gauze and microporous tape. Histopathological study of
injury was done. The patient was advised to clean the surgical wound daily using aqueous chlorhexidine and change bandage every day. After
14 days, stitches were removed and the scar evolved satisfactory after the surgery (Figure 2). Figure 2Aspect of operated site (2 months)
after surgery Histopathological exam of injury revealed a well-defined nodule formation characterized by hypocellular collagen proliferation
with irregularly arranged collagen fibrous. Presence of cells with poor-defined cytoplasm and both oval and elongated nuclei. Nodule was
surrounded by preserved dermis and epidermis without significant histological changes. The injury was totally removed and no histological
signs of malignancy were found. Microscopy findings indicated the diagnosis of storiform collagenoma. Storiform collagenoma is a benign
tumor that was first described by Weary et al.,(9) in the tongue of a patient with Cowden syndrome, a heritage genodermatosis of autosomal
dominant condition that is associated with mucocutaneous injuries such as multiple facial trichilemmoma, verrucous papule in oral mucous,
keratosis papule in digital pulps and increase the development of breast cancer and thyroid cancer. After the original description, other
authors described the occurrence of storiform collagenoma on the face, palm and plantar region of patients with Cowden syndrome.(10,11)
Whether this tumor is hamartoma or truly fibrocystic neoplasm stills unknown.(12,13) Rapini e Golitz(1) were the first authors to described
the isolated injury without associated it to a syndrome. Their study included 11 patients with solitary storiform collagenoma in several
parts of the body and who did not present any sings of Cowden syndrome. Requena et al.(4) reviewed the literature and concluded that the
presence of multiple storiform collagenoma constitutes a skin marker of Cowden syndrome and such indication can help early diagnosis of
genodermatosis. The presence of solitary tumor does not guarantee the diagnosis of Cowden syndrome. However, according to Al-Daraji et
al.(14) even the finding of isolated storiform collagenoma must provide detailed clinical investigation of the patient in order to find
others sings that may indicate the presence of Cowden syndrome, particularly because storiform collagenoma can be first clinical evidence of
genodermatosis. From histopathological point of view, the injury is typical and consists of fibroma primary formed by thick collagen fibers
and scarcity of fibroblasts. Collagen fibers are irregular or “onion rings” like arranged.(5) Immunohistochemistry shows that storiform
collagenoma usually present positivity for CD34 and vimentin, but negativity for neurofilaments, S-100, neuron-specific enolase,
carcinoembryonic antigen, epithelial membrane antigen, high molecular weight keratin and cytokeratin. Staining of 13a factor is positive for
sparse dendritic cells, which can be useful in dermatofibroma differential diagnosis that shows diffuse positivity along the injury.(15)
Diagnosis suggested was fibrocystic cancer with abnormal regulation of production and process of type I collagen.(16) Storiform collagenoma
is a rare, benign tumor that can be found in any part of the body and oral mucous. Standard treatment is recession of the free margins. This
tumor solitary occurrence is more frequent and, once the histopathological diagnosis is confirmed, no treatment or further investigation is
generally required. However, the finding of multiple storiform collagenoma in a patient requires further investigation due to the likelihood
of Cowden syndrome diagnosis, both in the patient and his/her family because this is a genetic syndrome. Despite the low incidence of
storiform collagenoma due to its clinical presentation, it must be considered in the differential diagnosis of well-delimited tumors such as
dermatofibroma, pleomorphic fibroma, sclerotic lipoma, fibrolipoma, giant cell collagenoma, benign fibrous histiocytoma, intradermal Spitz
nevus and giant cell angiohistiocytoma. O colagenoma estoriforme é um tumor raro originado a partir da proliferação de fibroblastos com
produção aumentada de colágeno tipo I. É encontrado mais frequentemente na face, pescoço e extremidades, podendo aparecer no tronco, couro
cabeludo e, raramente, na mucosa oral e leito subungueal. Afeta ambos os gêneros, com discreta predominância em mulheres. Pode ser solitário
ou múltiplo, sendo que, neste caso, é um importante indicador da presença de síndrome de Cowden. Apresenta-se como tumor sólido, nodular, de
crescimento lento e indolor. Deve constar como diagnóstico diferencial de tumores cutâneos bem delimitados, como dermatofibroma, fibroma
pleomórfico, lipoma esclerótico, fibrolipoma, colagenoma de células gigantes, histiocitoma fibroso benigno, nevo de Spitz intradérmico e
angioistiocitoma de células gigantes. O colagenoma estoriforme, ou fibroma esclerótico, é um tumor cutâneo benigno raro, que afeta mais
comumente adultos jovens e de meia idade de ambos os gêneros, com discreto predomínio em mulheres. Apresenta-se como pequena pápula ou
nódulo de consistência fibrótica, é bem circunscrito, róseo, esbranquiçado ou de coloração da pele, e tem crescimento lento e indolor. É
mais frequentemente encontrado na face e nas extremidades, podendo aparecer em tronco, couro cabeludo e, mais raramente, leito subungueal e
mucosa oral. Geralmente, aparece como tumor solitário, sendo a apresentação múltipla um importante indicador da presença da síndrome de
Cowden, uma genodermatose de herança autossômica dominante.(1-4) Tem como diagnósticos diferenciais outros tumores cutâneos bem delimitados,
como dermatofibroma, fibroma pleomórfico, lipoma esclerótico, fibrolipoma, colagenoma de células gigantes, histiocitoma fibroso benigno,
nevo de Spitz intradérmico e angioistiocitoma de células gigantes.(5-8) Paciente do gênero masculino, 36 anos, branco, auxiliar de limpeza,
natural de Aracajú (SE), morando em São Paulo (SP) há 15 anos. Queixava-se de surgimento de massa em ombro direito há 2 anos, de crescimento
lento, indolor, sem sinais inflamatórios ou saída de secreções. Negava trauma prévio no local da massa. Negava surgimento de outras massas,
comorbidades, antecedentes pessoais patológicos ou familiares, etilismo, tabagismo e uso de drogas ilegais. Ao exame físico, apresentava
lesão nodular em região supraescapular direita, bem delimitada, de coloração rósea, com 1,5cm de diâmetro, consistência fibrótica, indolor à
palpação (Figura 1). Figura 1Aspecto pré-operatório da lesão O paciente foi submetido a exérese de fuso cutâneo, contendo a lesão sob
anestesia local com lidocaína, seguida de fechamento primário com sutura simples de Nylon 4.0mm preto e curativo com gaze estéril e fita
microporosa. A lesão foi submetida a estudo histopatológico. O paciente foi orientado a realizar limpeza local da ferida operatória
diariamente com clorexidina aquosa e manter troca diária de curativos. Após 14 dias, os pontos de sutura foram removidos, havendo evolução
satisfatória de cicatriz no local da ferida operatória (Figura 2). Figura 2Aspecto pós-operatório (2 meses) do sítio de exérese da lesão O
exame histopatológico da lesão revelou formação nodular bem delimitada, caracterizada por proliferação colagênica hipocelular, com fibras
colágenas dispostas em arranjo estoriforme. Presença de células com citoplasma mal definido e núcleos ora ovalados, ora alongados. O nódulo
encontrava-se circundado por derme preservada e epiderme sem alterações histológicas dignas de nota. A lesão foi totalmente removida, e não
havia sinais histológicos de malignidade. Pelos achados da microscopia, permitiu-se concluir pelo diagnóstico de colagenoma estoriforme. O
colagenoma estoriforme é um tumor benigno descrito primeiramente por Weary et al.,(9) na língua de um paciente com síndrome de Cowden, uma
genodermatose de herança autossômica dominante que associa lesões mucocutâneas como tricolemomas faciais múltiplos, pápulas verrucosas em
mucosa oral, pápulas queratósicas translúcidas em polpas digitais e desenvolvimento aumentado de carcinomas em mamas e tireoide. Após a
descrição original, outros autores descreveram a ocorrência do colagenoma estoriforme em face, palmas e plantas de pacientes portadores de
síndrome de Cowden.(10,11) Não está totalmente esclarecido se o tumor é um hamartoma ou uma neoplasia fibrocística verdadeira.(12,13) Os
primeiros autores a descreverem a lesão isolada, sem associação com a síndrome, foram Rapini e Golitz,(1) em uma série de casos de 11
pacientes portadores de colagenoma estoriforme solitário em diversas localizações da superfície corpórea, e que não apresentavam quaisquer
sinais de síndrome de Cowden. Requena et al.(4) revisaram a literatura pertinente e chegaram à conclusão de que a presença de colagenomas
estoriformes múltiplos constituía um marcador cutâneo da síndrome de Cowden, que pode auxiliar no diagnóstico precoce dessa genodermatose. A
presença solitária do tumor não indica, por si só, a ocorrência da síndrome. Entretanto, conforme apontado por Al-Daraji et al.(14), mesmo o
achado da presença de um colagenoma estoriforme isolado deve propiciar investigação clínica detalhada do paciente à procura de outros sinais
que possam apontar para a presença de síndrome de Cowden, posto que esse tumor pode ser a primeira manifestação clínica evidente da
genodermatose. Do ponto de vista histopatológico, a lesão é bastante característica. Consiste em um fibroma majoritariamente constituído por
fibras espessas de colágeno e presença escassa de fibroblastos. As fibras de colágeno se dispõem em arranjo estoriforme ou em “anéis de
cebola”.(5) A imuno-histoquímica demonstra que o colagenoma estoriforme apresenta, usualmente, coloração positiva para vimentina e CD34, mas
negativa para neurofilamentos, S-100, enolase neurônio-específica, antígeno carcinoembriogênico, antígeno de membrana embrionária, queratina
de alto peso molecular e citoqueratina. A coloração de fator 13a é positiva para células dendríticas esparsas, o que pode ser útil no
diagnóstico diferencial de dermatofibroma, o qual exibe positividade difusa em toda a lesão.(15) Foi sugerido que a lesão é uma neoplasia
fibrocística com regulação anormal de produção e processamento de colágeno tipo I.(16) O colagenoma estorifome é um tumor benigno raro que
pode ser encontrado em qualquer área da superfície corpórea e mucosa oral, e cujo tratamento-padrão é a excisão com margens livres. A
ocorrência solitária é a mais frequente e, uma vez confirmado o diagnóstico histopatológico, nenhum tratamento ou investigação adicionais
costumam ser necessários. Porém, o achado de múltiplos colagenomas estoriformes em um paciente deve apontar para uma investigação mais
detalhada sobre a provável presença de síndrome de Cowden, tanto no paciente como em seus familiares, em virtude da origem genética da
síndrome. Apesar da baixa incidência, o colagenoma estoriforme, por sua apresentação clínica, deve ser lembrado no diagnóstico diferencial
de tumores cutâneos bem delimitados, como dermatofibroma, fibroma pleomórfico, lipoma esclerótico, fibrolipoma, colagenoma de células
gigantes, histiocitoma fibroso benigno, nevo de Spitz intradérmico e angioistiocitoma de células gigantes.
