Adenosine is a short-acting coronary vasodilator, and it is widely used during pharmacological stress myocardial perfusion imaging. It has a
well-established safety profile, and most of its side effects are known to be mild and transient. Until now, coronary vasospasm has been
rarely reported as a side effect of adenosine during or after adenosine stress test. This study reports a case of coronary vasospasm which
was documented on stress myocardial perfusion CT imaging during adenosine stress test. Adenosine is a direct coronary vasodilator that is
widely used as a pharmacologic stress agent during myocardial perfusion imaging (1). Until now, a few cases of coronary vasospasm during or
after completion of adenosine stress test have been reported (2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7). To the best of our knowledge, there is no reported case in
which coronary vasospasm was directly depicted on myocardial perfusion CT imaging during adenosine stress test. Herein, we report such a
case. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board. A 73-year-old man visited the cardiovascular outpatient clinic for
exertional substernal pain since 2 years, lasting three to four minutes. He had past medical history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension,
and no history of coronary artery disease. His heart rate, blood pressure, and electrocardiography (ECG) were normal at rest. Initial serum
creatine kinase-MB and Troponin-T concentrations were also within the normal range. Coronary CT angiography (CTA) and adenosine-stress
myocardial perfusion CT were performed to identify coronary artery disease and presence of myocardial ischemia. The patient underwent
cardiac CT using a 128-slice dual-source CT scanner (SOMATOM Definition Flash, Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany). The myocardial
perfusion CT scan was performed using retrospective ECG-gated imaging with ECG-based tube current modulation and the MinDose technique
(Siemens Healthcare). Maximum tube current was only applied during 30-80% of the R-R interval, and a tube current reduction of 4% was
applied in the remaining heart phases. Scan parameters for stress myocardial perfusion CT were as follows: 2 × 128 × 0.6 mm detector
collimation; 280 ms gantry rotation time; 100 kV tube voltage; and 280 mAs with the automatic tube current modulation technique. The
adenosine-stress myocardial perfusion CT scan was performed while adenosine (0.14 mg/kg/min) was being infused into the antecubital vein.
Three minutes after the initiation of adenosine infusion, iodine-based contrast was also injected with 70 mL of contrast medium (iomeprol;
Iomeron 400 mg I/mL; Bracco, Milan, Italy) at 4 mL/sec, followed by 40 mL of saline injection at the same rate. Immediately after stress
myocardial perfusion CT, adenosine infusion was discontinued. After a rest period of 10 minutes and identification of the return of the
patient's heart rate to baseline, a rest myocardial perfusion CT scan was obtained 1 minute after sublingual administration of 0.6 mg
nitroglycerin. Scan parameters for rest myocardial perfusion CT were the same as those for stress myocardial perfusion CT. In our patient,
adenosine-stress myocardial perfusion CT showed mild to moderate decrease in perfusion of the subendocardial region in the mid to basal
inferior and inferoseptal walls of the left ventricle (Fig. 1A). Coronary CTA revealed tight stenosis of the distal right coronary artery
(RCA) (Fig. 1C) and no significant stenosis of the distal left circumflex artery (LCX) (Fig. 1D). There was no regional wall motion
abnormality in the left ventricle. The extent of myocardial perfusion defect on the rest myocardial perfusion CT, when compared with that on
the stress myocardial perfusion CT, was paradoxically increased in mid to basal inferior, inferoseptal, and inferolateral walls (Fig. 1B).
Coronary CTA at rest showed increased extent of short segmental occlusion of the distal RCA (Fig. 1E), and newly developed segmental
occlusion of the distal LCX (Fig. 1F). On the cine loop display, there was new development of mild hypokinesia in the RCA and LCX
territories. The patient complained of chest discomfort during rest myocardial perfusion CT. However, his symptom disappeared quickly. Mean
dose-length product for cardiac CT was 433 mGy cm and the effective dose was 6.0 mSv. Conventional coronary angiography, which was performed
on the following day, showed tight stenosis in the distal RCA, comparable to that on CTA performed during stress myocardial perfusion CT
(Fig. 1G). Mild stenosis in the distal LCX was demonstrated (Fig. 1H). A coronary stent was implanted in the distal RCA. Adenosine is a
direct coronary vasodilator that is widely used as a pharmacologic stress agent during myocardial perfusion imaging. Its safety profile is
well established and most of its side effects are known to be mild and transient (8, 9). However, coronary vasospasm, as a rare side effect
of adenosine stress test, is an important cause of chest pain syndromes that can lead to myocardial infarction (10). In the present case,
the extent of myocardial perfusion defect on myocardial perfusion CT during the rest phase was paradoxically increased in the RCA territory,
and CTA revealed segmental occlusion of the RCA. Moreover, there was new development of perfusion defect in the LCX territory on rest
myocardial perfusion CT and segmental occlusion of the LCX on rest CTA, which were not depicted on stress myocardial perfusion CT.
Subsequent conventional coronary angiography was negative for significant coronary artery disease in the LCX. Therefore, we think that
coronary vasospasm, as a serious side effect of adenosine, could be the cause of this phenomenon. The first choice of stress method during
myocardial perfusion imaging is exercise, but in patients who cannot undergo the exercise stress, adenosine is a widely used alternative
pharmaceutical stress method (11). The adenosine-stress myocardial perfusion CT has been recently introduced and has been combined with CTA,
leading to improvement in the accuracy of cardiac CT for diagnosing coronary artery disease (12). Coronary vasospasm has been reported
rarely as a side effect of adenosine during or after adenosine stress perfusion test (2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7). In the previous studies, patients
developed chest pain with or without ECG abnormalities. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report in which coronary vasospasm
was directly depicted on coronary CTA and myocardial perfusion CT imaging during adenosine stress test. It is not well understood how
adenosine causes coronary vasospasm. One possible mechanism may be activation of the adenosine A1 receptor that could cause contraction of
the vascular smooth muscle, which has been confirmed in in vitro trials (10, 13). Another possible mechanism may be that discontinuation of
a beta-blocker and calcium blocker may lead to elevated sympathetic tone (7). However, the exact mechanism of coronary vasospasm during or
after adenosine stress test remains unclear. In our patient, coronary vasospasm could not be reversed immediately, regardless of
administration of sublingual nitroglycerin. Coronary vasospasm is not always responsive to sublingual nitroglycerin, and drug-refractory
coronary vasospasm is noted in approximately 20% of patients with coronary vasospasm (14). In conclusion, although adenosine is a safe
pharmacologic myocardial stress agent and adenosine-stress myocardial perfusion CT is helpful in the diagnosis of myocardial ischemia, the
practitioner should be aware of this rare but possible complication, and hence close patient monitoring and careful assessment of all
clinical symptoms and signs during and after the adenosine stress test are necessary. Stress and rest myocardial perfusion CT images. A.
Stress perfusion CT images in short-axis view showed mild to moderate subendocardial perfusion defect in mid to basal inferior and
inferoseptal walls of left ventricle (arrows). B. Rest perfusion CT images in short-axis view showed increased extent of myocardial
perfusion defect in mid to basal inferior, inferoseptal, and inferolateral walls of left ventricle (arrows). Stress CT angiography. Curved
multiplanar reformatted images of RCA (C) and LCX (D) during stress showed tight stenosis of distal RCA (arrow in C) and no significant
stenosis of distal LCX. Note stepping artifact in LCX (arrow in D). Rest CT angiography. Curved multiplanar reformatted images of RCA (E)
and LCX (F) at rest demonstrated increased extent of segmental occlusion of distal RCA (arrows in E), and newly developed segmental
occlusion of distal LCX (arrows in F). LCX = left circumflex artery, RCA = right coronary artery Conventional coronary angiography showed
focal tight stenosis (arrow) in distal RCA (G) and mild stenosis in distal LCX (H). LCX = left circumflex artery, RCA = right coronary
artery
