The temporoparietal fascia flap has been extensively used in craniofacial reconstructions. However, its use for eyebrow reconstruction has
been sporadically reported. We describe a successfully repaired hair-bearing temporoparietal fascia flap after traumatic avulsion of
eyebrow. Temporoparietal fascia flap is a versatile tool and should be considered as a therapeutic option by all plastic surgeons. Eyebrow
defects secondary to trauma, burn injuries, or ablative surgeries require challenging reconstructive procedures.(1-3) Different eyebrow
reconstruction techniques have been described worldwide such as cosmetic tattoo, composite hair graft (micro-grafts, strip grafts, and punch
graft), subcutaneous pedicle island flap, temporoparietal fascia flap (TPF), and interpolation scalp flap in two stages.(1-5) Hair graft is
the most widely used technique;(5) however, because of the influence of circulatory condition of the recipient bed, its use on extensive
scar areas becomes impaired.(1,2) Scalp flaps are also used, however they require staging procedures. Hair-bearing TPF flap has been used by
a single surgical procedure as an alternative for reconstruction of regions with low vascularization.(1,2) This study reported a case of a
patient with a posttraumatic left eyebrow defect associated with a large area of scarred tissue that was successfully reconstructed with a
hair-bearing TPF flap. A 27-year-old woman with complete soft tissue avulsion of her left forehead was referred to our service 2 years after
a severe motor vehicle crash. She underwent in another hospital 17 months before a delayed scalp flap for 30 days to promote granulation
subsequently followed by full thickness skin graft over frontal bone. In addition, no attempt to reconstruct the eyebrow was previously
performed. At physical examination we noticed absence of frontalis muscle in the implanted region, lack of functioning of the upper eyelid
elevator muscle and complete left eyelid ptosis. The patient also had absence of left eyebrow and an extensive scar tissue on the site
(Figure 1A). Further evaluations revealed she had traumatic superior orbital fissure syndrome; characterized by ophthalmoplegia, ptosis,
proptosis, and hypesthesia in the forehead and upper eyelid regions.(6) Her vision was impaired due to non-treatment of the syndrome in the
other hospital. An electromyography showed inactivity of left upper eyelid elevator muscle. Figure 1(A) Preoperative appearance of the
patient’s periorbital region. Absence of left eyebrow and mismatching skin color over forehead due to the full thickness skin graft. (B)
Appearance of the left eyebrow with a satisfactory hair growth 2 years after surgery We planned a composite TPF flap with a longitudinal
island of scalp (Figure 2) as follows. A coronal incision was carefully marked away from the path of the superficial temporal artery (STA)
identified using a Doppler device. The distance between the rotation axis of the flap and the eyebrow defect was marked with a blue marking
ink and transferred to the scalp, showing the length of the TPF flap to be harvested. The dimension of the contralateral eyebrow was also
transferred to the scalp, showing the region of the scalp, simulating the ipsilateral eyebrow, and an initial incision was carried out at
the distal parietal portion of the coronal marking. Figure 2(A) Absence of left eyebrow. (B) Schematic representation of eyebrow
reconstruction with hair-bearing temporoparietal fascia flap. The temporoparietal fascia flap was planned in such way that the skin island
was left on the flap of the posterior branch of the superficial temporal artery. (C) Rotation of the hair-bearing temporoparietal fascia
flap to the eyebrow defect, before making the subcutaneous tunnel The island of hair-bearing scalp flap was incised up to the left ear,
however, preserving the STA. After wide elevation of the scalp flap at the subcutaneous plane, the STA trajectory was fully visualized and
the distal parietal portion of this vessel was ligated distally from hair-bearing island scalp flap. The thin STA, including the hair-
bearing island scalp flap, was carefully elevated toward its axis of rotation. An incision was performed on the left eyebrow region and the
TPF flap rotated to this area through a subcutaneous tunnel between the base of the pedicle and the eyebrow defect. We adapted the hair-
bearing island scalp flap into the incised space of the eyebrow region (when the contralateral eyebrow design was used as a template) and
sutured it using nylon threads (Johnson & Johnson, São José dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil). The scalp donor site was closed directly. A
vacuum drain was placed for 24 hours. Concurrent with the TPF flap the patient underwent left frontal bone reconstruction using calvarial
grafts. The patient was also submitted other surgical procedures, one to reconstruct her left nasal wing with an expanded two-stage forehead
flap and another to remove the full thickness skin graft over her forehead with an expanded temporal skin flap. No procedure to restore the
upper eyelid functioning was performed because of the severity of the soft tissue damage in patient’s upper third of the face (absence of
the frontalis muscle and impaired function of upper eyelid elevator muscle). The postoperative was uneventful with minor morbidity in donor
site. During the 24-month follow-up period, no complication was seen and a satisfactory aesthetic result was achieved (Figure 1B). No
improvement in symptoms related to superior orbital fissure syndrome was seen. Given the clinical situation reported here, the ideal would
be first restore the functioning of her left upper eyelid. However, it was impossible because of the absence of frontalis muscle and
complete denervation of upper eyelid elevator muscle. Because the patient complained about the absence of eyebrow, we decided to reconstruct
it with a composite TPF flap. The choice of a particular technique for the eyebrow reconstruction should be individualized.(4) Grafts are
more suitable for women while flaps seem to be the best options for men.(4) However, as grafts have inadequate density(2,3) and inserting
them may be difficult because of thin, scar, or previously grafted recipient area,(2) we and others surgeons(2) favor the use of flap. The
TPF flap has been used in head and neck surgery, skull base reconstruction and pediatric plastic surgery.(7-9) This flap role on eyebrow
reconstruction after burn injuries and tumor resection has been acknowledged by many surgeons;(1-4,10,11) however, experience remains
limited on its use for posttraumatic eyebrow reconstruction.(2) Since the first description of posttraumatic eyebrow reconstruction with
island TPF flap,(12) this technique did not gain popularity among plastic and reconstructive surgeons. We performed a comprehensive
literature review of manuscripts published in English indexed in PubMed/MEDLINE and Embase using the keywords “temporoparietal fascia flap”
and “superficial temporal artery” combined with “eyebrow”, “eyebrow defect” and “posttraumatic eyebrow defect”. This review revealed that
aforementioned pioneer study(12) was the one using TPF flap for posttraumatic eyebrow reconstruction. Perhaps, the complex anatomy of the
temporal superficial fascia and its vascularization may inhibit the widespread use of this flap by plastic and reconstructive surgeons.
However, significant advantages, as those previously described by Raffaini and Costa,(12) showed that ultra-thin fascia can be rotated to
the area of the defect without bringing additional volume to the region. The vascularized area of hair-bearing scalp works perfectly well
for areas without sufficient vascularization and previous scarring tissue, in which hair follicles grafts may not work. The anatomy and
trajectory of the STA should be identified to avoid an accidental injury to this vessel. The minor injury to STA during coronal incision
jeopardizes the TPF flap and its subsequent use either to reconstruct the eyebrow or to coverage grafts as additional blood supply. Thus,
any coronal incision used to injured bone reconstruction should always be carefully planned. Some critics against the use of the TPF flap
for eyebrow reconstruction are the unnatural hair-growth direction, complexity and time-consuming procedure and the significant time needed
to surgeons gain expertise.(3) However, several features make this flap particularly useful to reconstruct posttraumatic eyebrow defect
associated with extensive scar area specially because it presents scaffold reliability, pliable contour, wide arc of pedicle rotation,
highly vascular, excellent color and texture match, possibility to be used as a composite flap with hair-bearing skin, anatomical proximity
with the eyebrows and minimal donor site morbidity.(2,7,11,12) Despite the long learning curve,(3) variations and applications this flap
should be part of therapeutic options to all plastic surgeons. The hair-bearing TPF flap represents a useful technique and an alternative
for reconstruction using grafts. This technique was adequate for reconstruction of the complete traumatic avulsion of eyebrow associated
with scar tissue in a female patient. O retalho de fáscia temporoparietal tem sido usado em inúmeras reconstruções craniofaciais. No
entanto, sua utilização para a reconstrução de sobrancelha tem sido relatada esporadicamente. Descreve-se aqui o reparo com retalho de
fáscia temporoparietal associado à ilha para a reconstrução de sobrancelha, após avulsão traumática, realizado com sucesso. O retalho de
fáscia temporoparietal é uma ferramenta versátil e deveria ser considerada no arsenal terapêutico de todos os cirurgiões plásticos. Defeitos
na sobrancelha por trauma, queimadura ou cirurgias ablativas exigem procedimento desafiadores de reconstrução.(1-3) Diferentes técnicas de
reconstrução de sobrancelha em dois estágios têm sido descritas mundialmente, como tatuagem cosmética, enxerto capilar (microenxertos,
enxerto por pinçamento e enxerto por punch), retalho em ilha de pedículo subcutâneo e retalho de fáscia temporoparietal (FTP).(1-5) O
enxerto capilar é a técnica mais utilizada;(5) contudo, devido à sua influência por condições circulatórias do local de doação, seu uso em
áreas com cicatrizes extensas tornou-se deficiente.(1,2) Os retalhos de couro cabeludo também são utilizados, porém requerem procedimento em
etapas. De modo alternativo, o retalho de FTP, associado à ilha de pele de couro cabeludo, tem sido adotado em procedimento cirúrgico único
para reconstrução de regiões pouco vascularizadas.(1,2) Relata-se aqui o caso de um paciente com defeito na sobrancelha esquerda associada à
área com cicatriz extensa. A reconstrução foi bem-sucedida com uso de retalho de FTP associado à ilha de pele de couro cabeludo. Paciente do
sexo feminino, 27 anos, que apresentava avulsão completa de tecido mole do lado esquerdo da fronte causada por acidente por motocicleta
ocorrido há 2 anos. A paciente realizou implante tardio de retalho de couro cabeludo por 30 dias, para promover granulação, seguida de
enxerto de pele em osso frontal em outro serviço hospitalar 17 meses anteriores à procura do nosso serviço. Não houve tentativa anterior de
reconstrução da sobrancelha. O exame físico mostrou ausência de músculos frontais na região enxertada, falta de funcionamento do músculo
elevador da pálpebra superior e ptose completa da pálpebra esquerda. Além disso, a paciente apresentou ausência da sobrancelha esquerda e
tecido cicatricial extenso no local do implante (Figura 1A). Outras avaliações relevaram síndrome da fissura orbitária superior
(caracterizada por oftalmoplegia, ptose, proptose e hipoestesia da região frontal e regiões da pálpebra superior).(6) A visão da paciente
estava comprometida, como consequência do não tratamento da síndrome no outro serviço hospitalar. A eletromiografia mostrou inatividade do
músculo elevador da pálpebra superior. Figura 1(A) Aparência pré-operatória da região periorbital. Ausência de sobrancelha esquerda e
coloração disforme da pele da fronte devido ao enxerto de pele. (B) Aparência da sobrancelha esquerda com crescimento capilar satisfatório 2
anos após a cirurgia Um retalho de FTP com ilha longitudinal de couro cabeludo foi planejado da seguinte forma (Figure 2). Realizou-se
incisão coronal marcada cuidadosamente distante da artéria temporal superficial (ATS) identificada por meio de dispositivo Doppler. A
distância entre o eixo de rotação do retalho e o defeito da sobrancelha foi marcado com cor azul e transferida para o couro cabeludo,
revelando a extensão do retalho FTP a ser cultivado. A dimensão da sobrancelha contralateral foi também transferida para o couro cabeludo,
simulando a região da sobrancelha ipsilateral, e uma incisão inicial foi realizada na porção parietal distal da marcação coronal. Figura
2(A) Ausência de sobrancelha. (B) Representação esquemática de reconstrução de sobrancelha com retalho de fáscia temporoparietal associado à
ilha de pele de couro cabeludo. Retalho de fáscia temporoparietal planejado de forma que a ilha da pele fosse posicionada à esquerda do
retalho do ramo posterior da artéria temporal superficial. (C) Rotação de retalho de fáscia temporoparietal ao defeito na sobrancelha,
anterior à criação de túnel subcutâneo Após, conduziu-se uma incisão no retalho de couro cabeludo contínua até a orelha esquerda, porém
preservando a ATS. Após elevação do retalho do couro cabeludo do plano subcutâneo, a trajetória da ATS estava completamente visível e a
porção parietal distal desses vasos foi ligada distalmente, a partir de retalho da FTP. A superfície fina da fáscia temporal, incluindo o
retalho de fáscia têmporo associado à ilha de couro cabeludo, foi cuidadosamente elevada em direção ao seu eixo da rotação. Uma incisão na
região da sobrancelha esquerda foi conduzida, e o retalho da FTP, contornado em direção à área, por meio de túnel subcutâneo, entre a base
do pedículo e o defeito na sobrancelha. O retalho de FTP, associado ao couro cabeludo, foi, então, adaptado ao espaço criado na incisão da
região da sobrancelha (quando a estrutura da sobrancelha contralateral foi utilizada como modelo) e suturado com fios de nylon (Johnson &
Johnson, São José dos Campos, São Paulo, Brasil). O local de onde o retalho do couro cabeludo foi removido foi suturado diretamente.
Utilizou-se dreno a vácuo por 24 horas. Juntamente do retalho de FTP, submeteu-se a paciente à reconstrução do osso frontal esquerdo,
utilizando calota craniana. Além disso, foram realizados outros procedimentos cirúrgicos, sendo um para reconstruir a asa nasal esquerda com
retalho frontal expandido em dois estágios e outro para remover o implante de pele da fronte com retalho de pele temporal expandida. Não se
conduziu procedimento para restaurar o funcionamento da pálpebra superior, devido ao grave comprometimento dos tecidos moles da terceira
porção superior da face (ausência de músculos frontais e funcionamento deficiente do músculo elevador da pálpebra superior). Não existiram
intercorrências no pós-operatório, e a morbidade no local de onde se removeram os retalhos foi mínima. O seguimento de 24 meses transcorreu
sem complicações, e se alcançou resultado estético satisfatório (Figura 1B). Todavia, não se notou melhora nos sintomas relacionados à
síndrome da fissura orbitária superior. Devido à situação clínica relatada, o ideal seria primeiramente restaurar a função da pálpebra
superior esquerda da paciente. Porém, isso não foi possível, pela ausência dos músculos frontais e desnervação completa do músculo elevador
da pálpebra superior. Como a paciente queixou-se da ausência de sobrancelha, decidiu-se reconstruí-la com retalho de FTP. Em geral, a
escolha da técnica específica para reconstrução da sobrancelha deve ser individualizada.(4) Os enxertos são mais adequados para mulheres,
enquanto os retalhos parecem ser a melhor opção para homens.(4) Todavia, os enxertos não têm densidade adequada(2,3) e implantar enxertos
pode ser difícil por sua espessura fina, cicatrização, ou área anteriormente enxertada.(2) Os autores deste estudo e outros cirurgiões(2)
favorecem o uso de retalho. O retalho de FTP tem sido adotado para reconstruções na cabeça e pescoço, base do crânio e cirurgias plásticas
pediátrica.(7-9) Muitos cirurgiões têm reconhecido o papel do retalho de FTP na reconstrução da sobrancelha por lesão por queimadura e
ressecção tumoral;(1-4,10,11) porém a experiência com seu uso para reconstrução de sobrancelha pós-traumática mantém-se limitada.(2) Desde a
primeira descrição de reconstrução de sobrancelha pós-traumática com retalho de FTP associado à ilha,(12) essa técnica não ganhou
popularidade entre os cirurgiões plásticos. Conduziu-se revisão compreensiva da literatura de publicações em língua inglesa indexadas no
PubMed/MEDLINE e Embase utilizando os descritores “temporopariental fascia flap” and “superficial temporal artery” combined with “ eyebrow”,
“eyebrow defect” and “posttraumatic eyebrow defect”. Essa revisão revelou que estudo pioneiro nesse campo(12) foi o que utilizou retalho de
FTP para reconstrução de sobrancelha após trauma. Talvez a complexa anatomia da fáscia temporal superficial e sua vascularização inibe a
difusão do uso desse retalho entre os cirurgiões plásticos. Porém, vantagens significantes, como aquelas descritas previamente por Raffaini
e Costa,(12) mostraram que a fáscia ultrafina pode ser rodada para a área do defeito, sem causar volume adicional à região. A área
vascularizada do retalho de FTP funciona perfeitamente bem para áreas sem vascularização suficiente e tecido anteriormente cicatrizado, nas
quais enxertos de folículos capilares podem não funcionar. A anatomia e o trajeto da ATS devem ser identificados para evitar lesão acidental
ao vaso. Uma lesão mínima a ATS durante uma incisão coronal prejudica o retalho de FTP e seu uso subsequente, tanto para reconstrução da
sobrancelha como para revestimento com enxerto como suprimento sanguíneo adicional. Portanto, qualquer incisão coronal para reconstrução de
lesão óssea deve ser sempre planejada cuidadosamente. Algumas críticas em relação ao uso de retalho de FTP para reconstrução de sobrancelha
são o crescimento do cabelo em direção inatural, a complexidade e morosidade do procedimento, e a necessidade de longo período de
treinamento para cirurgiões adquirirem a habilidade para conduzir a técnica.(3) O retalho de FTP constitui-se em opção particularmente útil
para reconstrução de defeito na sobrancelha após trauma associado com região cicatricial extensa, principalmente por apresentar
confidencialidade estrutural, flexibilidade no contorno, arco largo de rotação do pedículo, alta vascularização, excelente combinação de cor
e textura, possibilidade de utilizar como composto a retalho temporoparietal, proximidade anatômica com as sobrancelhas e mínima morbidade
do local doador.(2,7,11,12) Apesar da longa curva de aprendizado,(3) variações e aplicações o retalho de fáscia temporal devem fazer parte
das opções de tratamento de todos cirurgiões plásticos. O retalho de fáscia temporoparietal associado à ilha de pele de couro cabeludo
representa técnica útil e uma alternativa para reconstrução com enxertos, sendo que se mostrou adequada para reconstrução de avulsão
traumática completa de sobrancelha, associada com cicatriz em paciente do sexo feminino.
