Cystic fibrosis is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene. This
disorder produces a variable phenotype including lung disease, pancreatic insufficiency, and meconium ileus plus bilateral agenesis of the
vas deferens causing obstructive azoospermia and male infertility. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis is an alternative that allows
identification of embryos affected by this or other genetic diseases. We report a case of couple with cystic fibrosis; the woman had the
I148 T mutation and the man had the Delta F508 gene mutation. The couple underwent in vitro fertilization, associated with preimplantation
genetic diagnosis, and with subsequent selection of healthy embryos for uterine transfer. The result was an uneventful pregnancy and
delivery of a healthy male baby. Assisted reproductive techniques progress each day as a result of improvements in laboratory technology,
gametes and embryos culture. The introduction of new drugs to induce ovulation and the enhancement of cryopreservation techniques of gametes
and embryos are part of this development. These advances may benefit cystic fibrosis carrier couples or those with previous genetic disease
with in vitro fertilization (IVF) associated to preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD), enabling the selection of healthy embryos before
intrauterine transference.(1) The PGD was developed with the aim to provide alternatives for prenatal diagnosis in couples with risk to
transmit genetic disease to their offspring. This procedure can be useful in cases of disease associated to sex, chromosome anomalies and
disorders involving a single gene.(1) During PGD, couples must undergone IVF, even in cases without indication to conduct this technique
(Figure 1). To reduce risks of contamination by parental cells during IVF, it is recommended to use intracytoplasmic sperm injection
(ICSI).(2) In the event of fertilization, embryos remain in culture until that one or more cells can be removal and submitted for genetic
diagnosis.(1) Figure 1Preimplantation genetic diagnosis For PGD, we used techniques based on the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
molecular cytogenetics. After long-term use, the technique of fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) has been substituted by array-
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH),(3,4) which analysis specific amplifications and deletions of the genome. This latter enables the
detection of gains and losses of genetic material in specific high resolution regions of genome (10 to 100 times higher than traditional
techniques),(5) depending on the analysis platform used. In addition, aCGH provide a more accurate assessment of chromosomal anomalies and
gene deletions or rearrangements than FISH. Embryo biopsy involves removal of one or more cells from the early preimplantation embryo for
subsequent genetic investigation. The first case of PGD in human was reported by Handyside et al.(6) After ICSI of oocytes, embryos are
cultured for 3rd days, or may be cultured until the blastocyst stage (5th/6th day of culture) to be, after that, submitted to biopsy,
without negatively affecting implementation or gestational development.(6) The biopsy is often done on the 3rd day of embryonic development
(staging six to eight cells) by the removal of one or two blastomeres from each embryo(7) (Figure 2). One of the advantages of postponing
biopsy of embryos until the blastocyst stage, is the possibility of obtaining the larger number of cells (trophoderm) for genetic analysis,
therefore, increasing the DNA copy number to improve accuracy of diagnosis.(8) Figure 2Biopsy Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive
disorder caused by mutations in cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene that affects 1 of each 2,500 newborns.(9)
This gene codifies a protein expressed in apical membrane of exocrine epithelia cells.(10) Mutations in CFTR gene produce an variable
phenotype, including pulmonary disease, pancreatic disease, meconium ileus(11) and they are also involved in bilateral agenesis of the vas
deferens, causing obstructive azoospermia and male infertility(12) (Figure 3). Figure 3Cystic fibrosis We report a case of 33-year-old woman
who did not have children and was first evaluated in March 25, 2004 due to difficulties in becoming pregnant for 2 years. She reported
menarche at 11 years of age, regular menstrual cycle and a previous maternal history of breast cancer. Her transvaginal ultrasonography,
showed a left paratubal cyst and suggestive imaging of right dermoid cyst measuring 16.0 x 12.0mm, which were stable for 12 months.
Laboratorial exams and investigations for fungi and bacterial in vaginal secretions were normal. The patient had the I148 mutation in CF.
The patient was married for 12 years. Her husband was 33-years-old and had severe oligospermia and varicocele. After he underwent surgical
correction, he progressed with improvement of seminal parameters, which sperm concentration increased from 0.75million/mL to 5.48million/mL.
In addition, he had Delta F508 mutation in CF. In September 2004, the patient underwent IVF/ICSI and seven embryos were obtained. Of these,
three were transferred to the patient and four were frozen. Her pregnancy test was positive in October 22, 2004 and the transvaginal
ultrasonography showed one gestational sac compatible at 5 weeks of gestation. In December 10, at 11 weeks of gestation, the patient
underwent a chorionic villus biopsy that confirmed a male fetus. To assess the Delta F508 mutation, we used the PCR and 12% polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis. The I148T mutation was investigated using PCR with primers involving exon 4. Subsequently, we conduct an enzymatic
digestion with Bsrl enzyme. These tests showed that the embryo had the CF mutation. Later, the patient progressed to miscarriage and
underwent a uterine curettage in May 2005. After that, she was not followed-up for 5 months. We observed that the couple had TUB18 and KM19
polymorphisms, which enabled the identification of mutant alleles in future gestations, thereby increasing the possibility of detecting an
affected embryo. In April 2006, the patient underwent a hysteroscopy for uterine septum resection, secondary to previous curettage. The use
of GnRH analogs, antibiotics and polivitaminic was reinstated in May 2006. However, there was a poor response to hypothalamic/hypophysary
inhibitory factor. In the next stage, we opted use her natural cycle by detecting follicles of 19.0mm of diameter in the right ovary and
trilaminar endometrium with 10.0mm in thickeness detected by transvaginal ultrasonography. This was done August 31, 2006. Four embryos
previously frozen were biopsied using a laser guided technique for opening of zona pellucida, and the blastomeres were genetically assessed.
There was no amplifications of primers in the first embryo, which prevented investigation for mutations. The second embryo blastomere had
both mutations and, was therefore, a CF carrier. The third embryo blastomere had only the I148T mutation and in the fourth embryo there were
no mutations found. The third and fourth embryos were transferred to the patients uterus on September 5, 2006. An echography done in
November 6, 2006 showed a gestation compatible with 11 weeks and 5 days by biometry. The fetus presented nuchal translucency within normal
ranges. In May 10 2007, the patient underwent cesarean section and gave birth to a male baby weighing 3,320g and with an Apgar score of 8/10
without intercurrences. She breastfed her baby for 2 months and returned to clinic visit 11 months after delivery. The child’s laboratorial
exams showed polyglobulie and eosinophilia without other changes or complaints. In recessive autosomal diseases, each parent of the child
affected has one copy of a mutated allele. In each pregnancy, the possibility of the child born with the disease is 25%. Those with the
disease are asymptomatic and couples become aware of the problem only when they experience this in their children, on his/her family or
during previous investigations.(13) For this reason, the PGD associated with IVF/ICSI in a risk situation, seems to be the only way to avoid
recurrence.(14) Taylor et al. concluded that laser did not influence biopsy and nor affected the development of the embryo.(15) A study by
Keymolen et al. conducted for 11 years at a Medical Genetic Center in Belgium, reported PGD in embryos from 47 couples; CF was the most
common indication of these procedures (55% of cases). In their study 461 embryos were submitted to biopsy and among 25 newborns, no child
was diagnosed with CF.(16) We report a case of PGD that resulted in the birth of healthy child whose parents had a risk of transmiting CF.
The mother had the I148T mutation in CF and the father had the Delta F508 mutation for the same disease. The couple underwent IVF/ICSI
procedures, vitrification and devistrification of embryos, PGD and embryo transfer. The pregnancy was confirmed without intercurrences, and
male baby was delivery by cesarean section. The use of PGD was efficient in detecting CF in the embryos assessed. This was a positive
experience and encourages a more frequent use of this technique. In addition, our findings may stimulate the development of PGD protocols
for several other genetic disorders. A fibrose cística é uma doença autossômica recessiva causada por mutações no gene regulador de
condutância transmembrana na fibrose cística. Produz fenótipo variável, incluindo doença pulmonar, insuficiência pancreática, íleo meconial,
além de agenesia bilateral dos ductos deferentes, causando azoospermia obstrutiva e infertilidade masculina. O diagnóstico genético pré-
implantacional é uma alternativa diagnóstica, que permite identificar embriões portadores de fibrose cística e outras doenças genéticas.
Relatamos o caso de um casal portador de fibrose cística, sendo a mulher portadora da mutação I148 T e o homem da mutação gênica Delta F508.
O casal foi submetido a técnicas de fertilização in vitro associadas ao diagnóstico genético pré-implantacional, com consequente seleção de
embriões saudáveis, que foram transferidos para o útero, resultando em gravidez sem intercorrências e com feto saudável, do sexo masculino.
As técnicas de reprodução assistida evoluem a cada dia, graças à melhoria nos equipamentos laboratoriais e dos meios para cultivo de gametas
e embriões. A introdução de novas drogas utilizadas na indução da ovulação, e o aperfeiçoamento de técnicas de criopreservação de gametas e
embriões são parte desse desenvolvimento. Com esses avanços, casais portadores ou com antecedente de doenças genéticas podem ser
beneficiados com a fertilização in vitro (FIV) associada ao diagnóstico genético pré-implantacional (PGD, preimplantation genetic
diagnosis), permitindo a seleção de embriões saudáveis previamente à transferência intrauterina.(1) O PGD foi desenvolvido com o intuito de
fornecer alternativas para o diagnóstico pré-natal em casais com risco de transmissão de doenças genéticas à prole. Esse procedimento pode
ser útil nos casos de doenças ligadas ao sexo, anomalias cromossômicas e defeitos envolvendo um único gene.(1) Na realização do PGD, os
casais devem ser submetidos à FIV, mesmo na ausência da indicação dessa técnica (Figura 1). Para minimizar os riscos de contaminação por
células parentais, durante a FIV, recomenda-se o uso da técnica de injeção intracitoplasmática de espermatozoides (ICSI, intra-citoplasmic
sperm injection).(2) Havendo fertilização, os embriões permanecem em cultivo, até que uma ou mais células possam ser retiradas e submetidas
ao diagnóstico genético.(1) Figura 1Diagnóstico genético pré-implantacional Para o PGD, utilizam-se técnicas baseadas na reação em cadeia da
polimerase (PCR) e na citogenética molecular. Por muito tempo utilizada, a técnica de hibridização in situ fluorescente (FISH) vem sendo
substituída pela hibridização comparativa do genoma em arrays (aCGH, Array-Comparative Genomic Hybridization),(3,4) que analisa
amplificações e deleções específicas do genoma, permitindo detectar ganhos e perdas de material genético em regiões específicas do genoma
com alta resolução (dez a cem vezes maior que as técnicas tradicionais),(5) dependendo da plataforma de análise utilizada. Além disso, aCGH
permite um estudo mais acurado das anomalias cromossômicas e deleções ou rearranjos genéticos do que o FISH. A biópsia de embrião consiste
na remoção de uma ou mais células do embrião pré-implantação para subsequente estudo genético. O primeiro caso de PGD em humanos foi
relatado por Handyside et al.(6) Após técnica de ICSI, os embriões são cultivados até o 3º dia de clivagem, podendo o cultivo se prolongar
até a fase de blastocisto (5º/6º dia de cultivo) para, então, serem submetidos à biópsia, sem que haja prejuízo à implantação ou ao
desenvolvimento gestacional.(6) A biópsia é mais frequentemente realizada no 3º dia de desenvolvimento embrionário (estágio de seis a oito
células), sendo que um ou dois blastômeros é retirado de cada embrião(7)(Figura 2). Uma das vantagens ao postergar a biopsia de embriões até
o estágio de blastocisto é a possibilidade de obtenção de maior número de células (trofoderma) para a realização da análise genética,
aumentado o número de cópias de DNA e a acurácia no diagnostico.(8) Figura 2Biópsia A fibrose cística (FC) é uma doença autossômica
recessiva causada por mutações no gene regulador de condutância transmembrana na fibrose cística (CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator) e afeta 1 a cada 2.500 recém-nascidos.(9) Esse gene codifica uma proteína expressa na membrana apical das células
epiteliais exócrinas.(10) Mutações no gene CFTR produzem um fenótipo variável, incluindo doença pulmonar, insuficiência pancreática, íleo
mecônio(11) e também estão envolvidas na agenesia bilateral dos ductos deferentes, causando azoospermia obstrutiva e infertilidade
masculina(12) (Figura 3). Figura 3Fibrose cística Relatamos aqui o caso de paciente do gênero feminino, 33 anos, sem filhos, inicialmente
avaliada em 25 de março de 2004, com dificuldade para engravidar havia 2 anos. Referia menarca aos 11 anos, ciclo menstrual regular e
antecedente materno de neoplasia maligna de mama. Apresentava, à ultrassonografia transvaginal, cisto simples paratubário à esquerda e
imagem sugestiva de cisto dermoide à direita (16,0 x 12,0mm de diâmetro), estáveis havia 12 meses. Os exames laboratoriais e as pesquisas
para fungo e bactérias, na secreção vaginal, foram normais. A paciente era sabidamente portadora da mutação I148 T para FC. A paciente era
casada há 12 anos. Seu parceiro de 33 anos apresentava acentuada oligospermia e diagnóstico de varicocele. Após correção cirúrgica, evoluiu
com melhora dos parâmetros seminais, cuja concentração aumentou de 0,75 milhões/mL para 5,48 milhões/mL. O paciente era portador da mutação
gênica Delta F508 para FC. A paciente foi submetida à FIV/ICSI em setembro de 2004, com obtenção de sete embriões, dos quais três foram
transferidos para o útero da paciente e quatro congelados. O teste de gravidez foi positivo em 22 de outubro de 2004, e a ultrassonografia
transvaginal evidenciou um saco gestacional compatível com gestação de 5 semanas. Em 10 de dezembro, com 11ª semanas de gestação, foi
submetida à biópsia de vilo corial confirmando sexo masculino. Para avaliação da mutação Delta F508, foi realizada PCR e eletroforese em gel
de poliacrilamida a 12%. Para pesquisa da mutação I148 T, foi realizada PCR com primers envolvendo o éxon 4. Em seguida, procedeu-se à
digestão enzimática com enzima Bsrl. Dessa forma, ficou comprovado tratar-se de embrião portador de FC. A paciente evoluiu para abortamento
e foi submetida à curetagem uterina em maio de 2005. Logo após, perdeu seguimento por 5 meses. Observou-se que o casal apresentava os
polimorfismos TUB18 e KM19, os quais possibilitariam a identificação de alelos mutantes em gestações futuras, aumentando, assim, o poder de
detecção do embrião afetado. Em abril de 2006, a paciente foi submetida à histeroscopia para ressecção de septo uterino secundário à
curetagem prévia. Reiniciou o uso de análogo do GnRH em maio de 2006, além de antibiótico e polivitamínico. Entretanto, teve má resposta ao
bloqueio do eixo hipotálamo-hipofisário. Na etapa seguinte, optou-se por ciclo natural, com obtenção de folículo de 19,0mm de diâmetro em
ovário direito e endométrio trilaminar, com 10,0mm de espessura à ultrassonografia transvaginal, realizada em 31 de agosto de 2006. Os
quatro embriões previamente congelados foram biopsiados, utilizando-se a técnica de laser para perfuração da zona pelúcida, e, então, os
blastômeros foram submetidos à avaliação genética. Não houve amplificação de primers no primeiro embrião, não sendo possível a pesquisa das
mutações. O segundo blastômero era portador de ambas as mutações e, desse modo, portador de FC. O terceiro apresentou apenas a mutação I148
T e o quarto blastômero não apresentou nenhuma das mutações estudadas. O terceiro e o quarto embriões foram, então, transferidos no dia 5 de
setembro de 2006. Ecografia realizada em 6 de novembro de 2006 evidenciou gestação compatível com 11 semanas e 5 dias pela biometria e feto
com translucência nucal dentro da normalidade. Em 10 de maio de 2007, a paciente foi submetida à cesariana, dando à luz um recém-nascido do
sexo masculino, com 3.320g e Apgar 8/10, sem intercorrências. Amamentou durante 2 meses e retornou à clínica 11 meses após o parto. À
ocasião, a criança apresentava poliglobulia e eosinofilia aos exames laboratoriais, sem quaisquer outras alterações ou queixas. Nas doenças
autossômicas recessivas, cada um dos pais da criança afetada é portador de uma única cópia do alelo mutado. Em cada concepção, a
possibilidade da criança nascer com a doença é 25%. Os portadores são assintomáticos e os casais somente têm consciência do problema quando
já tiverem filhos afetados, algum parente acometido pela doença ou se houve investigação prévia do casal.(13) Por essa razão, o PGD,
associado à FIV/ICSI, parece ser a única maneira de evitar a recorrência.(14) Taylor et al. concluíram que o laser não influenciou o
procedimento de biópsia e nem afetou o desenvolvimento embrionário.(15) Keymolen et al., em estudo realizado ao longo de 11 anos no Centro
de Genética Médica, na Bélgica, relataram PGD em embriões de 47 casais, sendo a FC a indicação mais frequente desses procedimentos (55% dos
casos). No total, 461 embriões foram submetidos à biópsia e, ao final do estudo, dentre os 25 recém-nascidos, não houve nenhum diagnóstico
de FC.(16) Neste relato, descrevemos o caso de PGD com nascimento de bebê saudável cujo casal apresentava risco de transmissão hereditária
de FC. A esposa era portadora da mutação I148 T para FC e seu marido era portador da mutação gênica Delta F508 para a mesma doença. O casal
foi submetido a procedimento de FVI/ICSI, vitrificação e desvitrificação de embriões, PGD e transferência embrionária. Houve confirmação de
gravidez, que ocorreu sem intercorrências, com nascimento de um menino por parto cesárea. Em conclusão, o uso do PGD foi eficiente para a
detecção de FC nos embriões avaliados. Essa experiência positiva serve de incentivo para o uso mais frequente dessa técnica e, também,
estimula o desenvolvimento de protocolos de PGD para muitas outras doenças genéticas.
