Dissecting aneurysms of the cerebral arteries are uncommon vascular malformations. Neurosurgical treatment remains critical in the
management of patients with such vascular pathologies. A 20-year-old Caucasian woman presented with a sudden onset of severe headache and
loss of consciousness. Computed tomography revealed diffuse subarachnoid hemorrhage, while a computed tomography disclosed a dissecting
aneurysm of the precommunicating segment of the right anterior cerebral artery. Cerebral carotid angiography confirmed the presence of the
dissecting aneurysm. Due to the peculiar anatomic configuration, endovascular treatment was excluded and surgery was selected. As the left
circulation perfused both postcommunicating segments of the anterior cerebral artery and the distal right precommunicating segment was
hypoplastic, direct clipping of the right precommunicating segment, close to its origin from the internal carotid artery, was carried out.
She recovered after surgery and a late angiography showed the correct positioning of the clip, with regular perfusion of both right and left
postcommunicating segments. The management of dissecting aneurysms of the cerebral arteries is still controversial. With this report we
highlight a possible neurosurgical option among therapeutic strategies for these uncommon vascular lesions. Dissecting aneurysms of the
cerebral arteries are infrequent pathological conditions. Most dissecting aneurysms occur in the extracranial vessels and are most commonly
due to traumatic events . Nowadays, despite their relatively rare occurrence, intracranial aneurysmal dissections are more frequently
diagnosed due to better awareness and increased availability of modern imaging techniques; particular attention has been paid to their
pathogenesis, natural history, and optimal management . The etiology and pathogenesis of most dissections involving intracranial vessels are
still unclear. Regarding the specific origin site, dissecting aneurysms of the cerebral arteries tend to occur most commonly in the internal
carotid artery (ICA) , the middle cerebral artery , and the vertebrobasilar system . The anterior cerebral artery (ACA) is usually involved
in association with dissection in other locations, such as in an ICA dissecting aneurysm, but a lesion confined to the ACA, especially in
the precommunicating segment, is an extremely rare event (Table 1) .Table 1 Clinical characteristics of 13 patients with dissecting
aneurysms involving the precommunicating segment of the anterior cerebral artery Authors and Reference number Age (years)/Sex Dissecting
aneurysm location Clinical evidence Treatment Complications Outcome Gherardi and Lee 26/FNASubarachnoid hemorrhage, headache,
comaNA–DeathNelson 5/MNAHeadache, right hemiparesis, aphasiaNA–DeathPilz 22/FNAIncidentalNA–DeathYamashita et al. 16/FRight A1
segmentConfusion, left hemiparesis, left homonymous hemianopsiaMedical therapy (dexamethasone and tranexamic acid)–DeathHonda et al.
48/FNAHeadache, right hemiparesisNANAGood recoveryHirao et al. 58/FLeft A1 segmentHeadache, loss of consciousness, aphasia, involuntary
movementsTrapping and clippingLow perfusion area of the medial and inferior part of the left frontal lobeGood recovery39/FLeft A1
segmentHeadache, aphasia, right hemiparesis and facial nerve paresis, confusionConservative treatmentNAGood recoveryLeach et al. 39/FRight
A1 segmentConfusion, loss of consciousnessSurgical trapping with two straight clipsIschemia of the right caudate nucleus headGood
recoveryHasegawa et al. 23/MRight A1 segmentHeadacheTrapping and resection of the aneurysmNAGood recoveryIwashita et al. 53/FRight A1
segmentLeft hemiparesis and alien hand syndromeTrapping of the proximal and distal site of the aneurysmLv et al. 43/MLeft A1 segmentLoss of
consciousnessEndovascular stenting and, 3 months later, complete endovascular occlusion of the left A1 portion of the anterior cerebral
arteryRegrowth of the aneurysmGood recoveryWu and Chiu NAA1 segmentVisual field defectSurgical treatmentNAGood recoveryde Divitiis et al.
(present study) 28/FRight A1 segmentHeadache, loss of consciousnessSurgical clipping of the right anterior cerebral arteryIschemia of the
right caudate nucleus headGood recovery Abbreviations: A 1, precommunicating segment of the anterior cerebral artery; F, female; M, male;
NA, not available. Clinical characteristics of 13 patients with dissecting aneurysms involving the precommunicating segment of the anterior
cerebral artery Abbreviations: A 1, precommunicating segment of the anterior cerebral artery; F, female; M, male; NA, not available.
Regarding the neuroimaging, the ACA aneurysmal dissection is more difficult to identify than the vertebrobasilar because of narrower vessel
calibers and more curved features. However, key signs include a double lumen, stenosis and dilatation (“pearl and string sign”), stenosis
alone (“string sign”) or occlusion. Because of the rarity of ACA dissecting aneurysms, there are no standardized treatments described in the
pertinent literature. However, conservative, endovascular, and surgical approaches can be taken into account as possible strategies for the
management of those rare vascular pathologies. We here report a case of dissecting aneurysm of the A1 segment of the ACA which was treated
via a direct surgical clipping of the homolateral ACA. A 20-year-old previously healthy Caucasian woman was admitted to a local hospital
because of the sudden onset of severe headache and loss of consciousness. Computed tomography (CT) revealed diffuse subarachnoid hemorrhage
(SAH) involving the basal cisterns and the anterior part of the interhemispheric fissure. The SAH was classified as group 3 according to the
Fisher’s scale . She was then referred to our hospital and, upon admission, a neurological examination showed severe headache and nuchal
rigidity (Grade II of the Hunt and Hess scale). Neuroradiological investigation by means of computed tomography angiography (CTA) disclosed
a dissecting aneurysm of the A1 segment of the right ACA (Figure 1A-C). Digital subtraction angiography confirmed the presence of the
dissecting aneurysm of the A1 segment of the right ACA originating from the parent vessel with a very acute angle (Figure 1D). No
perforating arteries were clearly detected. Moreover, hypoplasia of the distal part of the right A1 segment (that is, close to the anterior
communicating artery) was highlighted. Both right and left postcommunicating segments (A2) were perfused from the left ACA, and a balloon
occlusion test of the right ICA was performed in order to validate this condition (Figure 1E).Figure 1Axial (A), coronal (B) and sagittal
(C) computed tomography angiography scans showing a dilated precommunicating segment of the right anterior cerebral artery. An angiogram of
the right internal carotid artery (D) showing a false lumen at the level of the precommunicating segment of the right anterior cerebral
artery suspected to be a dissecting aneurysm. An angiogram of the left internal carotid artery (E) demonstrating that both right and left
postcommunicating segments of the anterior cerebral artery are perfused from the left anterior cerebral artery. An angiogram of the right
internal carotid artery (F) showing the impossibility of accessing the aneurysm via an endovascular route due to its characteristic features
and the vasospasm. Axial (A), coronal (B) and sagittal (C) computed tomography angiography scans showing a dilated precommunicating segment
of the right anterior cerebral artery. An angiogram of the right internal carotid artery (D) showing a false lumen at the level of the
precommunicating segment of the right anterior cerebral artery suspected to be a dissecting aneurysm. An angiogram of the left internal
carotid artery (E) demonstrating that both right and left postcommunicating segments of the anterior cerebral artery are perfused from the
left anterior cerebral artery. An angiogram of the right internal carotid artery (F) showing the impossibility of accessing the aneurysm via
an endovascular route due to its characteristic features and the vasospasm. Because of the characteristic angulation of the aneurysm and the
non-accessibility from the opposite site through the anterior communicating artery – due to the hypoplasia of the distal part of the A1
segment of the right ACA and to the vasospasm – it was not possible to perform an endovascular treatment (Figure 1F). Accordingly, surgery
was chosen by means of clipping the right ACA through a right standard pterional craniotomy (Figure 2) . Using a microsurgical technique the
dura mater was opened and reflected anteriorly. Afterwards, with sharp arachnoid dissection the sylvian fissure was opened in a distal-to-
proximal direction in order to achieve cerebrospinal fluid release and brain relaxation; these maneuvers allowed us to reduce brain
retraction and to visualize the right ICA, with its bifurcation, and the homolateral optic nerve. Finally, a vascular clip was positioned at
the origin of the right ACA.Figure 2Artist’s drawing describing the surgical clipping of the right precommunicating segment dissecting
aneurysm. Abbreviations: A, dissecting aneurysm; A1L, precommunicating segment of the left anterior cerebral artery; AcoA, anterior
communicating artery; ICAL, left internal carotid artery; ICAR, right internal carotid artery; *, hypoplasia of the distal part of the
precommunicating segment of the right anterior cerebral artery; arrow, surgical clip at the origin of the right precommunicating segment
tract. Artist’s drawing describing the surgical clipping of the right precommunicating segment dissecting aneurysm. Abbreviations: A,
dissecting aneurysm; A1L, precommunicating segment of the left anterior cerebral artery; AcoA, anterior communicating artery; ICAL, left
internal carotid artery; ICAR, right internal carotid artery; *, hypoplasia of the distal part of the precommunicating segment of the right
anterior cerebral artery; arrow, surgical clip at the origin of the right precommunicating segment tract. Postoperatively, her headache
progressively diminished and left-side weakness initially presented (Grade 3 of the Medical Research Council scale); her left-side weakness
was relieved by medical therapy with dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker (nimodipine) and corticosteroids. No other medications were
used. CT scans, performed at postoperative days (PODs) 3 and 7, showed a right frontobasal hypodensity area – as per subacute ischemic
stroke – and progressive resorption of the SAH (Figure 3A-B). Early postoperative CTA- magnetic resonance imaging scans (1 month) confirmed
and characterized the right frontobasal subacute ischemia with regular flow of the anterior cerebral circulation (Figure 3C).Figure
3Computed tomography scans postoperative day 3 (A) showing the presence of the surgical clip at the level of the right anterior cerebral
artery. Computed tomography scans postoperative day 7 (B) demonstrating right frontobasal hypodensity area – as per subacute ischemic stroke
– and progressive resorption of the subarachnoid hemorrhage. Magnetic resonance angiography 1-month follow up (C) showing the regular
perfusion of the areas normally supplied by the Circle of Willis. Three-months angiogram (D) highlighting the correct positioning of the
clip, with regular perfusion of both right and left anterior postcommunicating cerebral arteries by the left carotid circulation. Computed
tomography scans postoperative day 3 (A) showing the presence of the surgical clip at the level of the right anterior cerebral artery.
Computed tomography scans postoperative day 7 (B) demonstrating right frontobasal hypodensity area – as per subacute ischemic stroke – and
progressive resorption of the subarachnoid hemorrhage. Magnetic resonance angiography 1-month follow up (C) showing the regular perfusion of
the areas normally supplied by the Circle of Willis. Three-months angiogram (D) highlighting the correct positioning of the clip, with
regular perfusion of both right and left anterior postcommunicating cerebral arteries by the left carotid circulation. Neurologic
examination remained otherwise unchanged and she was discharged on POD 24 without any new neurological defect. A late postoperative
angiography (3 months) showed the correct positioning of the clip, with regular perfusion of both right and left anterior postcommunicating
cerebral arteries (Figure 3D). Six months after surgical treatment she showed no clinical and/or neurological defects of new onset and
resumed her ordinary life. The appropriate management of anterior circulation dissecting aneurysms remains controversial. Conservative
treatment could be effective with a good outcome and a low rate of second rupture but, if there is a high risk of rebleeding (growing
dissecting aneurysm, giant dissecting aneurysm or dissection associated with uncontrolled hypertension), and/or severe clinical conditions
arise, direct treatment of the dissecting aneurysm should be proposed. Nowadays, multimodal treatment for complex cerebral aneurysms
includes two major options: endovascular procedures (that is, coiling, stent-assisted coiling, and flow diversion stents) and direct
neurosurgical approach (that is, clipping with or without extra-intracranial bypass). During the last decade, the management of ruptured and
unruptured intracranial aneurysms is moving from neurosurgical clipping to endovascular embolization as the preferred, safe and effective
treatment modality. In our case, endovascular access was unfeasible due to the extremely small size of the parent vessel and the acute angle
of origin of the aneurysm. Furthermore, the particular anatomical condition of the right A2, perfused by the opposite side, determined the
choice of a direct surgical approach by means of a right pterional craniotomy and clipping at the origin of the right A1 tract. It should be
also stressed that other surgical options can be considered. For example, wrapping, that is, wrap the aneurysm with materials (muscle,
Teflon®) to promote scarring or trapping, that is, both distal and proximal arterial interruption with direct surgery (ligation or occlusion
with a clip) or bypass surgery were not considered. Indeed, in the present case, the left anterior circulation perfused both A2 segments and
the distal part of the right A1 segment was hypoplastic. This paper is intended to highlight that vascular neurosurgeons and interventional
radiologists must consider a multitude of factors when developing the best treatment option for an individual patient. Optimal management
requires a thorough understanding of the anatomy and natural history of such aneurysms as well as risks and benefits related to the
different treatment modalities. The management of cerebral dissecting aneurysms is still controversial. With this report we highlight a
possible neurosurgical option among therapeutic strategies for these uncommon vascular lesions. Written informed consent was obtained from
the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. The authors have no
personal, financial, or institutional interest in any of the drugs, materials, or devices described in this article. Authors’ contributions
As per the manuscript submission requirements, the statement of authorship and notifications of conflicts of interest follow. OdD, ADS, TS
and MM contributed to: the conception and design of the work; the acquisition, analysis, and interpretation of data; drafting the work,
revising it critically for important intellectual content; final approval of the version to be published; and agreement to be accountable
for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately
investigated and resolved. LMC, FB and PC were involved in: revising the article critically for important intellectual content; final
approval of the version to be published; and agreement to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to
the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved.
