B. Boisson and E. Laplantine contributed equally to this paper. W. Al-Herz, J.-L. Casanova, A. Israel, and L.D. Notarangelo contributed
equally to this paper. Boisson et al. report a human homozygous mutation of HOIP, the gene encoding the catalytic component of the linear
ubiquitination chain assembly complex, LUBAC. The missense alleles impair the expression of HOIP, destabilizing the LUBAC complex and
resulting in immune cell dysfunction leading to multiorgan inflammation, combined immunodeficiency, subclinical amylopectinosis, and
systemic lymphangiectactasia. Inherited, complete deficiency of human HOIL-1, a component of the linear ubiquitination chain assembly
complex (LUBAC), underlies autoinflammation, infections, and amylopectinosis. We report the clinical description and molecular analysis of a
novel inherited disorder of the human LUBAC complex. A patient with multiorgan autoinflammation, combined immunodeficiency, subclinical
amylopectinosis, and systemic lymphangiectasia, is homozygous for a mutation in HOIP, the gene encoding the catalytic component of LUBAC.
The missense allele (L72P, in the PUB domain) is at least severely hypomorphic, as it impairs HOIP expression and destabilizes the whole
LUBAC complex. Linear ubiquitination and NF-κB activation are impaired in the patient’s fibroblasts stimulated by IL-1β or TNF. In contrast,
the patient’s monocytes respond to IL-1β more vigorously than control monocytes. However, the activation and differentiation of the
patient’s B cells are impaired in response to CD40 engagement. These cellular and clinical phenotypes largely overlap those of
HOIL-1-deficient patients. Clinical differences between HOIL-1- and HOIP-mutated patients may result from differences between the mutations,
the loci, or other factors. Our findings show that human HOIP is essential for the assembly and function of LUBAC and for various processes
governing inflammation and immunity in both hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic cells. The description and analysis of inborn errors of human
NF-κB–mediated immunity began in 2001 with the discovery of X-linked recessive anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency (EDA-
ID) caused by hypomorphic mutations in NEMO (encoding NF-κB essential modulator; Döffinger et al., 2001), followed by the description of
autosomal dominant EDA-ID caused by hypermorphic mutations of the NFKBIA gene (encoding IκBα) in 2003 (Courtois et al., 2003). These defects
lead to a broad range of infections, caused by impaired signaling by various membrane receptors involved in innate and adaptive immunity,
including TLR/IL1R and TNFRs (Puel et al., 2004; Casanova et al., 2011; Picard et al., 2011; Boisson et al., 2015). Gain-of-function
mutations of IκBα are also associated with a profound T cell deficiency (Courtois et al., 2003). Other global defects of NF-κB activation
were later discovered, including autosomal recessive IKKβ deficiency (Pannicke et al., 2013; Mousallem et al., 2014; Nielsen et al., 2014)
in the canonical pathway and autosomal-dominant NFKB2 deficiency (Lee et al., 2014; Lindsley et al., 2014) and autosomal recessive NIK
deficiency (Willmann et al., 2014) in the alternative pathway. There are many more inborn errors of specific pathways involving NF-κB caused
by mutations in receptors or their ligands, such as CD40 (Ferrari et al., 2001) and CD40L (Allen et al., 1993; DiSanto et al., 1993)
deficiency. Mutations may also affect cytosolic components, as illustrated by defects of TLR/IL-1-dependent NF-κB–mediated immunity in
patients with autosomal recessive IRAK-4 and MyD88 deficiencies (Picard et al., 2003; von Bernuth et al., 2008; Picard et al., 2010;
Casanova et al., 2011; Alsina et al., 2014). Patients with these two deficiencies are prone to life-threatening pyogenic bacterial diseases
(Picard et al., 2010). In these inborn errors of immunity, signs of inflammation during infection are either absent or delayed (Picard et
al., 2011). Collectively, these experiments of nature highlight the diversity of cells and receptors that engage NF-κB activation. They
provide some explanation for some of the clinical phenotypes seen in patients with inborn errors of core NF-κB components. However, most of
these receptors can normally also engage other signaling pathways, somewhat blurring some of the latter clinical phenotypes. Surprisingly,
bi-allelic mutations of HOIL1, encoding one of the three proteins of the linear ubiquitination chain assembly complex (LUBAC), a component
of the NF-κB cascade involved in IKK complex activation (Iwai and Tokunaga, 2009; Tokunaga et al., 2009; Fujita et al., 2014; Popovic et
al., 2014), were recently shown to underlie autoinflammation, immunodeficiency, and amylopectinosis (Boisson et al., 2012). The assembly of
LUBAC was impaired but its function was not tested. The fibroblasts of HOIL-1–deficient patients display impaired responses to TLR agonists,
IL-1β, and TNF, and their B cells display an impaired response to CD40L. In contrast, monocytes from these patients respond more strongly
than control monocytes to IL-1β (Boisson et al., 2012). Similar findings were recently documented in a mouse model (MacDuff et al., 2015).
We report here a patient with diffuse autoinflammation, combined immunodeficiency, infections, subclinical amylopectinosis, and systemic
lymphangiectasia due to a homozygous missense mutation of HOIP (RNF31), encoding the catalytic component of LUBAC. We investigated a patient
born to consanguineous parents of Kuwaiti descent, who presented with multiorgan autoinflammation, systemic lymphangiectasia, weakness at
lower extremities, subclinical amylopectinosis, and a combined immunodeficiency manifesting as chronic diarrhea and recurrent viral and
bacterial infections, associated with lymphopenia, antibody deficiency and an impaired distribution and function of T lymphocytes (see case
report and Table S1). Periodic Acid-Schiff staining of sternocleidomastoid muscular biopsy showed patches of granular or subsarcolemmal PAS-
positive material that was resistant to treatment with diastase, consistent with amylopectinosis, but there were no clinical,
electrographic, or echographic signs of skeletal myopathy or cardiomyopathy (Fig. 1 A). We set out to decipher the underlying genetic defect
by genome-wide linkage (GWL) and whole-exome sequencing (WES; Bolze et al., 2010; Byun et al., 2010; Itan et al., 2013; Casanova et al.,
2014; Conley and Casanova, 2014). We did not find rare variants in known autoinflammation and immunodeficiency genes (Al-Herz et al., 2014;
Conley and Casanova, 2014) and in known lymphangiectasia-causing genes (CCBE1, FOXC2, VEGFR3, SOX18, and GJC2; Alitalo, 2011). We
hypothesized that this novel, rare condition would follow an autosomal recessive inheritance. We therefore filtered out all heterozygous and
common variant. We found 38 homozygous rare variants in as many genes (minor allele frequency ≤1%; Table S2). GWL by homozygosity mapping
with a model of complete penetrance further reduced the list of variations to 15 candidate genes (Table S2). These variants included a
homozygous T-to-C substitution at position 215 (c.215T>C) in exon 2 of HOIP (also known as RNF31), which was identified in the patient and
confirmed by Sanger sequencing (Fig. 1, B and C). This missense substitution results in the replacement of a leucine residue by a proline
residue at the start of the PUB (PNGase [peptide N-glycosidase]/ubiquitin-associated) domain of HOIP (Fig. 1 D). Both parents and the
healthy sibling of the patient were heterozygous for the mutation (Fig. 1, B and C). The HOIP L72P variant was not found in public databases
(NCBI, UCSC, 1000 genomes, or ExAC, reaching a total of up to 60,706 individuals) or in our own WES database (2,212 individuals). Possibly
relevant to the patient’s clinical phenotype, HOIP encodes HOIL-1–interacting protein, the catalytic components of LUBAC, an E3 ligase
complex (Fig. 1 D) responsible for adding head-to-tail linear polyubiquitin chains to substrate proteins, including NEMO (Kirisako et al.,
2006; Iwai and Tokunaga, 2009; Tokunaga et al., 2009; Smit et al., 2012; Sasaki et al., 2013), RIP1 (Gerlach et al., 2011), and ASC (Boisson
and Casanova, 2014; Rodgers et al., 2014). No rare mutations were found in HOIL-1 and SHARPIN. The HOIP missense mutation affects the
conserved PUB domain of HOIP (Fig. 1 E), which has recently been shown to be important for the interaction of HOIP with OTULIN and CYLD, two
deubiquitinases (Elliott et al., 2014; Fujita et al., 2014; Schaeffer et al., 2014). SIFT and Polyphen algorithms predicted a deleterious
impact of this mutation on the function of the N-terminal domain (Table S2). Finally, the combined annotation dependent depletion score, a
method for integrating many diverse annotations into a single measure (Kircher et al., 2014), predicted a deleterious impact of the L72P
missense mutation (score of 22.2). Moreover, the HOIP gene does not harbor overtly deleterious mutations (nonsense, indels, essential splice
mutations) at MAF higher than 1/100,000 in public and in-house databases, further suggesting that homozygosity for the L72P HOIP mutation
could be disease-causing in the patient. A patient with a homozygous germline HOIP mutation. (A) Amylopectin accumulation in bowel tissue
from HOIP-deficient patient. Patient sternocleidomastoid muscular biopsy was stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), or with periodic
acid-Schiff stain (PAS) after diastase pretreatment (PASD). A patchy accumulation of PAS+diastase-resistant material in a scattered muscle
fibers is shown in patient’ biopsy. Bar, 50 µm. (B) Pedigree of the kindred, showing segregation of the L72P missense mutation. (C) HOIP DNA
sequence electropherograms, for controls, the patient and her family. (D) Schematic diagram of the LUBAC complex. The domains identified are
depicted as boxes: PNGase/UBA or UBX (PUB), ubiquitin-like (UBL), novel zinc-finger (NZF), really interesting new gene (RING) domain, in-
between RING (IBR) domain, zinc finger (ZF). The red star indicates the position of the L72P mutation. Double arrows indicate the domain
involved in the interaction between subunits. (E) Amino acid sequences alignment of the PUB domain of HOIP orthologues. The L72 residue is
highlighted in red. The hashtags indicate the amino acids conserved in all proteins containing a PUB domain. We first assessed the impact of
the mutation by analyzing HOIP mRNA levels by reverse transcription-quantitative PCR in SV40-transformed fibroblasts from patients and
controls. The patient’s cells contained ∼50% less HOIP mRNA than control cells (Fig. 2 A). This mutation is located close to the acceptor
splicing site of exon 2 (+6). We therefore also amplified and sequenced the full-length cDNA, but no splicing defect was detected
(unpublished data). Examination of HOIP protein levels by immunoblotting revealed that no mutant protein was detected (Fig. 2 B) in
patient’s fibroblasts and EBV-B–transformed cells. We failed to restore the expression of the HOIP L72P protein in the patient’s fibroblasts
by inhibiting proteasome-, lysosome-, or autophagy-mediated protein clearance with MG-132, leupeptin, or 3-Methyladenine, respectively
(unpublished data). This suggests that translation of HOIP L72P mRNAs, or stability of nascent L72P proteins, or both, is impaired. LUBAC
contains three subunits: HOIP, HOIL-1, and the SHANK-associated RH domain-interacting protein (SHARPIN; Kirisako et al., 2006; Iwai and
Tokunaga, 2009; Gerlach et al., 2011; Ikeda et al., 2011; Tokunaga et al., 2011; Stieglitz et al., 2013). We assessed the abundance of the
other two components of LUBAC in control and patient’s fibroblasts and EBV-B cells. SHARPIN and HOIL-1 protein levels were lower in the
cells from the patient than in control cells (Fig. 2 B). We investigated the composition of LUBAC in the patient’s cells further by
performing immunoprecipitation experiments with antibodies against HOIP and SHARPIN, and monitoring the levels of the other two components
of the complex. Only trace amounts of HOIP were detected in the patient’s fibroblasts and EBV-B cells (Fig. 2 C). However, HOIL-1 and
SHARPIN were still found to be associated as previously shown (Ikeda et al., 2011). Interestingly, although HOIL-1 was detected as a doublet
in SDS-PAGE gels for control cells, only the lower MW product was associated with SHARPIN in the patient’s cells (Fig. 2 B). Thus, the L72P
mutation destabilizes the HOIP protein and, consequently, the overall LUBAC complex. These findings suggest that the L72P allele of HOIP is
almost loss-of-expression. HOIP deficiency. (A) Relative HOIP mRNA levels in SV40-immortalized fibroblasts from controls, the HOIP-deficient
patient (Patient), and HOIL-1–deficient patients (two independent experiments). (B) Expression of LUBAC subunits in control, HOIP-, and
HOIL-1–deficient fibroblasts (left) and control and HOIP-deficient EBV-B cells (right) by immunoblotting total cell extracts with the
indicated antibodies (two independent experiments). (C) Immunoblot of immunoprecipitated extracts from control, HOIP-, and HOIL-1–deficient
fibroblasts (left) and control and HOIP-deficient EBV-B cells (right) with antibodies directed against HOIP (IP-HOIP) or SHARPIN (IP-
SHARPIN) and detected with HOIL-1, HOIP, or SHARPIN antibodies (two independent experiments). LUBAC regulates activation of the canonical
NF-κB pathway, which plays a key role in inflammatory and immune responses (Tokunaga et al., 2009; Gerlach et al., 2011). We therefore
assessed the functionality of the canonical NF-κB pathway in patient-derived SV40-transformed fibroblasts. Cells from a HOIL-1–deficient
patient were also included in this study (Boisson et al., 2012). The HOIP-mutated patient’s fibroblasts displayed impaired IKK
phosphorylation and delayed IκBα degradation in response to TNF or IL-1β, as observed for HOIL-1–deficient fibroblasts (Fig. 3 A). These
cells also displayed a marked impairment of IL-6 production after stimulation with TNF and IL-1β, as shown by ELISA (Fig. 3 B). Again, these
findings were similar to those for HOIL-1–deficient cells. Using confocal microscopy, we recently showed that, in response to cytokine
stimulation, the IKK complex is rapidly and transiently relocalized and activated into supramolecular complexes (Tarantino et al., 2014),
which act as a marker of the early steps of NF-κB activation. As already reported for HOIL-1–deficient fibroblasts (Tarantino et al., 2014),
we found that the IL-1 β–induced formation of NEMO-containing structures was almost entirely abolished in HOIP L72P-expressing fibroblasts
(Fig. 3 C), whereas NEMO-containing complexes formed normally in the same cells treated with TNF. Finally, we examined the formation of
linear polyubiquitin chains in control and HOIP-deficient fibroblasts treated with cytokines. Using an antibody that specifically recognizes
linear polyubiquitin linkages (Matsumoto et al., 2012), we detected linear polyubiquitin aggregates in TNF- and IL-1β–treated control cells,
but almost none in the patient’s cells (Fig. 3 D). Overall, these data indicate that linear ubiquitination and NF-κB activation by IL-1β and
TNF is impaired in fibroblasts from the patient with the HOIP mutation. Moreover, the IL-1β response is more severely affected than the TNF
response, as previously shown for HOIL-1 deficiency (Boisson et al., 2012). Overall, these findings show that the fibroblastic phenotype of
HOIP-mutated patients is as severe as that of HOIL-1–deficient patients, suggesting that the HOIP allele is at least strongly hypomorphic
and perhaps completely loss-of-function. Impaired TNF- and IL-1β-induced NF-κB activation in the HOIP-deficient patient. (A) Time-course of
IL-1β–stimulated (left) or TNF-stimulated (right) SV40-immortalized fibroblasts from control, HOIP-, and HOIL-1–deficient patients, with
immunoblotting for phospho-IKK (p-IKK), IKKβ, IκBα, NEMO, and β-tubulin. (B) IL-6 production upon stimulation with TNF and IL-1β in SV-40
fibroblasts from two controls, HOIP- (Patient), HOIL-1–, and NEMO-deficient patients (errors bars indicate the SEM; 3 independent
experiments). Unpaired Student’s t tests were performed for the statistical analysis (**, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001). (C) Impaired
recruitment of NEMO to punctate structures in the patient’s fibroblasts. TNF- or IL-1β–stimulated cells were permeabilized with saponin
before fixation, and immunolocalization with anti-NEMO antibody (white) was performed. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Bar, 10 µm. (D)
Absence of linear polyubiquitination in the patients’ fibroblasts upon TNF or IL-1β stimulation. Immunolocalization with anti-linear
ubiquitin chains antibody (red) was performed as in C. Nuclei were stained with DAPI. Bars, 10 µm. The L72P missense mutation is responsible
for the destabilization of HOIP and, consequently, of the other two LUBAC subunits and the whole LUBAC complex, impairing NF-κB responses.
In an attempt to rescue the biochemical and cellular phenotype, we reintroduced WT HOIP (N-terminally tagged), by retroviral transduction,
into control, HOIP-, and HOIL-1–deficient fibroblasts. This genetic complementation led to the reappearance of the higher molecular weight
HOIL-1 protein species on immunoblots (Fig. 4 A). It also led to the stabilization of SHARPIN not only in patient cells, but also in
HOIL-1−/− cells. Moreover, it led to an increase in the phosphorylation of IKK kinases and faster IκBα degradation, similar to that reported
for control cells stimulated with TNF or IL-1β (Fig. 4 B). Finally, cells from the patient complemented with the WT HOIP allele produced
similar amounts of IL-6 to control cells in response to stimulation with TNF or IL-1β (Fig. 4 C). In contrast, the introduction of WT HOIP
into HOIL-1–deficient cells did not restore the production of IL-6 in response to stimulation with TNF or IL-1β, highlighting the
nonredundant role of HOIL-1 and HOIP in NF-κB activation (Fig. 4 C). Overall, these data confirm that the missense L72P mutation of HOIP is
responsible for both the destabilization of LUBAC and the impairment of NF-κB activation in fibroblasts. Complementation of impaired NF-κB
activation by reintroduction of the WT HOIP allele. (A) Immunoblot of the three LUBAC subunits in SV-40–immortalized fibroblasts from
control, HOIP-deficient (Patient), and HOIL-1–deficient cells expressing empty vector (-) or WT-V5 HOIP constructs (+). (B) Time course of
IL-1β−stimulated (top) or TNF-stimulated (bottom) SV-40–immortalized fibroblasts from control, HOIP-deficient (Patient-empty), and HOIP-
deficient cells complemented with WT HOIP (Patient-HOIP), with immunoblotting for p-IKK, IKKβ, IκBα, and GAPDH. (C) IL-6 production in SV-40
fibroblasts from control, HOIP- (Patient), or HOIL-1–deficient patients without (-) and with (+) WT HOIP complementation, after stimulation
with TNF or IL-1β. Errors bars represent the SEM (five independent experiments). Unpaired Student’s t tests were used for the statistical
analysis (**, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ns, not significant). The HOIP-deficient patient has hypogammaglobulinemia and nonprotective
antibody responses to Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae. LUBAC has been shown to be important for the activation of B
cells via the CD40 pathway in mice (Hostager et al., 2010, 2011; Sasaki et al., 2013) and in humans (Boisson et al., 2012). We therefore
investigated the possible impairment of CD40 signaling in primary B cells from the HOIP-deficient patient. The stimulation of control B
cells with CD40L plus IL-21 or CD40L plus IL-4 led to an increase in CD80 expression, as previously reported (Kennedy et al., 1994). In
contrast, a marked impairment of CD80 up-regulation was observed with B cells from the patient (Fig. 5 A). Nevertheless, they were able to
respond to BCR stimulation (anti-IgM plus CpG ± BAFF), suggesting that BCR activation is only partially dependent on LUBAC (Fig. 5 A).
Stimulation of PBMCs with CD40L plus IL-21 is also known to induce differentiation of primary naive B cells to plasmablasts (Recher et al.,
2011). We therefore explored plasmablast generation after stimulation of control and patient PBMCs with CD40L plus IL-21. After 7 d, the
proportion of CD19+ B cells that were also CD27hi CD38hi (identifying plasmablasts) was markedly lower for the patient than for the control
(Fig. 5 B). We further tested the activation of the canonical NF-κB pathway upon stimulation by CD40L in EBV-B cells from the patient. We
found reduced IκBα degradation and impaired phosphorylation of IKKs in HOIP-mutated cells, when compared with abolished signalization in
CD40-deficient cells and normal signalization in control cells (Fig. 5 C). HOIP is thus essential for CD40 activation in human B cells,
perhaps accounting at least in part for the patient’s hypogammaglobulinemia and nonprotective antibody responses to S. pneumoniae and H.
influenzae. Impaired B cell activation in the HOIP-deficient patient. (A) Flow cytometry analysis of CD80 expression from stimulated PBMCs.
PBMCs left unstimulated or stimulated for 3 d as indicated were stained for CD19 and with either an isotype control (red histograms) or an
antibody directed against CD80 (blue histograms). CD80 expression values (CD80 median, isotype median) are indicated under the histograms
(one experiment). (B) Flow cytometry analysis of CD27/CD38 expression on gated CD19+ cells, upon stimulation of PBMCs for 7 d with
CD40L+IL-21 or with medium alone. The gated populations in the figure correspond to CD38hi and CD27hi plasmablasts (one experiment). (C)
Time course of CD40L-stimulated EBV-immortalized B cells from control, HOIP- (patient), and CD40-deficient (CD40−/−) patients, followed by
immunoblotting for p-IKK, IKKβ, IκBα, and GAPDH (two independent experiments). We then investigated the cellular basis for the inflammatory
phenotype observed in the HOIP-deficient patient (see case report in Discussion). Upon stimulation in vitro with IL-1β for 48 h, the
patient’s PBMCs produced similar amounts of IL-6 and IL-10 than controls (Fig. 6 A). In contrast, the patient’s cells failed to produce
IL-10 in response to TNF (Fig. 6 A). Monocytes from HOIL-1–deficient patients have been reported to be hyperresponsive to IL-1β, probably
accounting for the clinical autoinflammation observed in these patients (Boisson et al., 2012). We thus investigated the response of various
leukocyte subsets from the HOIP-deficient patient, healthy controls, and IRAK4-deficient patients to in vitro stimulation with TNF, IL-1β,
LPS, or a combination of PMA, ionomycin, and CpG-B. The various PBMC subsets were identified on the basis of cell surface expression of the
following markers: CD3 (T cells), CD19 (B cells), CD56 (NK cells), and CD14 (monocytes). The production of IL-6, IL-8, MIP-1α, MIP-1β,
IL-1β, and IFN-γ was assessed by intracellular staining and flow cytometry. Upon IL-1β stimulation, the proportion of monocytes producing
IL-6 and IL-1β was higher in the patient than in healthy controls (13.1 ± 4% vs. 4.4 ± 1.0%, and 29.7 ± 8% vs. 13.8 ± 1.8%, respectively),
whereas IRAK-4–deficient monocytes were unresponsive (Fig. 6 B). Moreover, the patient’s monocytes produced IL-8 and MIP-1β in amounts
similar to those for the control (Fig. 6 B). In conclusion, whole blood and PBMCs from the HOIP-deficient patient appear to respond strongly
to IL-1β, like HOIL-1–deficient cells, potentially accounting for the clinical autoinflammation observed in this patient. Hyperproduction of
IL-6 upon IL-1β stimulation in HOIP-deficient monocytes. (A) Production of IL-6 and IL-10 by whole blood cells after 48 h of stimulation
with TNF, IL-1β, LPS, and PMA/ionomycin in 32 controls (left), 2 travel controls (middle), and the HOIP-deficient patient (right, in red, 1
experiment). (B) Cytokine production in CD14+ cell subsets, as determined by intracellular FACS staining of stimulated PBMCs. PBMCs from 12
healthy controls (black), the HOIP-deficient patient (red), an HOIL-1–deficient patient (blue), and an IRAK-4–deficient patient (gray) were
stimulated with TNF, IL-1β, or LPS. The secretory pathways were concomitantly blocked with monensin and Brefeldin A. 12 h after stimulation,
the cells were immunolabeled with antibodies against CD14 and then permeabilized to assess the production of IL-6, IL-1β, IL-8, and MIP-1β
by intracellular immunostaining. Labeled cells were analyzed by flow cytometry (3 independent experiments; **, P < 0.01). We have identified
the first case of autosomal recessive HOIP deficiency in a patient with systemic autoinflammation, combined immunodeficiency, systemic
lymphangiectasia, and mild amylopectinosis. Our study fulfills the criteria for genetic studies in single patients (Casanova et al., 2014).
HOIP, HOIL-1, and SHARPIN are the three components of LUBAC, the E3-ligase complex responsible for linear ubiquitination (Iwai and Tokunaga,
2009; Gerlach et al., 2011; Ikeda et al., 2011; Tokunaga et al., 2011). We found that L72P mutation destabilized HOIP and, consequently,
SHARPIN and HOIL-1. This situation is reminiscent of humans with inherited HOIL-1 deficiency (Boisson et al., 2012). In Hoil1 (Tokunaga et
al., 2009), Sharpin (Gerlach et al., 2011), and Hoip (Peltzer et al., 2014) knockout mice, and in B cell-specific conditional Hoip knockout
mice (Sasaki et al., 2013), the absence of one subunit of LUBAC impairs the expression of the other two subunits, suggesting that LUBAC is a
ternary complex in both mice and humans. LUBAC is involved in the NF-κB pathway, in which it conjugates linear polyubiquitin chains to
specific Lys residues of NEMO (Tokunaga et al., 2009) and RIP1 (Gerlach et al., 2011). This activity is essential for full NF-κB activation
in mice (Tokunaga et al., 2009; Ikeda et al., 2011; Zak et al., 2011). We showed in human HOIP-deficient fibroblasts that LUBAC expression
and TNF- and IL-1β-driven NF-κB activation are impaired, as in HOIL-1–deficient patients. We also showed that linear ubiquitination is
actually abolished in HOIP-deficient fibroblasts, which we had shown only recently for HOIL-1 deficiency (Boisson et al., 2012; Tarantino et
al., 2014), connecting this biological activity with NF-κB activation in humans. Overall, our results demonstrate that human HOIP and HOIL-1
are both essential for LUBAC activity and for TNF-, IL-1β–, and CD40L-induced NF-κB responses, at least in fibroblasts and B cells. This
HOIP-deficient patient displayed autoinflammation, like three patients with HOIL-1 deficiency (Boisson et al., 2012). The apparent lack of
autoinflammation (and immunodeficiency) in most of the other patients carrying bi-allelic mutations in HOIL-1 (Nilsson et al., 2013; Wang et
al., 2013) may result from insufficient clinical characterization from at least one mutant allele being hypomorphic, from the impact of
genetic modifiers, or from differences in the exposure to microbial infections (MacDuff et al., 2015). At any rate, the unusual association
of IL-1β hyporesponsiveness in fibroblasts and hyperresponsiveness in monocytes from HOIP- or HOIL-1–deficient patients may be responsible
for autoinflammation. In particular, we confirmed that the absence of LUBAC (or its presence in only very small amounts) leads to the
overexpression of inflammatory genes and IL-1β hyperresponsiveness in mononuclear leukocytes, including monocytes in particular. Hoip−/−
mice die during embryonic development (Sasaki et al., 2013; Peltzer et al., 2014), unlike Hoil1−/− and Sharpin−/− mice (HogenEsch et al.,
1993; Tokunaga et al., 2009). The HOIP-deficient patient has several features in common with Hoil1−/− (MacDuff et al., 2015) and Sharpin−/−
mice (HogenEsch et al., 1999, 2001; Seymour et al., 2007; Gerlach et al., 2011; Ikeda et al., 2011; Liang et al., 2011; Tokunaga et al.,
2011), which display chronic severe eosinophilic inflammation. The production of proinflammatory cytokines upon IL-1β stimulation was not
investigated in monocytes from Sharpin knockout mice, but the inflammatory phenotype of these mice was partially rescued by Il1rap (Liang et
al., 2011) or Tnf (Gerlach et al., 2011) inactivation, or treatment with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib, which inhibits NF-κB
activation (Liang et al., 2011). The autoinflammation associated with LUBAC deficiency may be caused by NF-κB over-activation in response to
certain stimuli in some cell types. These data provide interesting possibilities for therapeutic intervention. Both HOIL-1– and HOIP-
deficient patients had neonatal bacterial infections and impaired antibody response to S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae (Boisson et al.,
2012). The HOIP-deficient patient also presented a broad impairment of antibody production not seen in HOIL-1–deficient patients, a slight
excess of naive and transitional B cells and distinctive defects of CD40-dependent B cell activation and plasmablast differentiation.
Interestingly, B cell-specific Hoip knockout mice have low levels of peritoneal B1 cells and markedly decreased serum levels of all
immunoglobulin isotypes, probably due to a defect of the CD40 pathway (Sasaki et al., 2013). Moreover, the HOIP-deficient patient had severe
T cell lymphopenia, affecting the naive compartment in particular, accompanied by an increase in the proportions of effector memory CD4+ and
TEMRA CD8+ cells. These abnormalities have not been observed in patients with HOIL-1 deficiency. However, in the Jurkat T cell line, HOIP
knockdown impairs NF-κB activation upon TCR activation (Dubois et al., 2014). Moreover, human inborn defects of NF-κB signaling can lead to
T cell defects, as seen with IκBα gain-of-function (Courtois et al., 2003) or IKKβ loss-of-function mutations (Pannicke et al., 2013;
Mousallem et al., 2014; Nielsen et al., 2014). Overt T cell deficiency is more rarely seen in patients with hypomorphic mutations in NEMO
(Döffinger et al., 2001; Casanova et al., 2011). Overall, inborn errors of LUBAC, like inborn errors of NF-κB, may underlie T cell
deficiencies, a feature that apparently depends on the nature of the disease-causing gene. Systemic lymphangiectasia may have also
contributed to T cell lymphopenia in this patient, by lymphatic leak (Fuss et al., 1998). Lymphangiectasia has not been observed in
HOIL-1–deficient patients (Boisson et al., 2012; Nilsson et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2013) and in Hoil−/− mice (Tokunaga et al., 2009).
Although lymphangiectasia has not been reported in Sharpin−/− mice, they display dilation of the dermal, mouth, esophagus, and stomach
capillaries (HogenEsch et al., 1993), similar to this patient’s intestinal capillaries (see Case report). Moreover, Hoip−/− mice die in
utero due to disrupted vasculature caused by TNFR1-mediated endothelial cell death (Peltzer et al., 2014). Conditional endothelial cell IKKβ
KO mice also exhibit increased vasculature permeability (Ashida et al., 2011). Improper TNFR1 signaling seems to activate aberrant
responses, in particular the formation of cytoplasmic complex II, triggering cell death. Overall, the circulatory and lymph vessel
phenotypes of Hoip-deficient mice and HOIP-deficient patients suggest that HOIP, alone or less likely as a subunit of LUBAC, may regulate
these systems. Finally, the HOIP-deficient patient displayed patches of cellular amylopectinosis, with muscular weakness at the lower
extremities, but normal electromyography, and without clinical or echographic signs of cardiomyopathy. This contrasts with HOIL-1–deficient
patients, whose amylopectinosis was an early onset, severe, and consistent manifestation, even in patients whose mutations were not proven
to be loss-of-function (Boisson et al., 2012; Nilsson et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2013). The milder amylopectinosis in the HOIP-deficient
patient suggests that amylopectinosis may be more dependent on HOIL-1 than HOIP, LUBAC, and NF-κB. Alternatively, the HOIP L72P mutation may
not be completely loss-of-function. The patient, a 19-yr-old woman of Kuwaiti origin, was born at term, after a twin pregnancy. Her parents
are first cousins and her twin brother is healthy. During the neonatal period, she presented omphalitis, requiring antibiotic treatment, and
splenomegaly. After discharge, she had recurrent episodes of fever and persistent splenomegaly, associated with mild liver enlargement. At
the age of 2 yr, familial Mediterranean fever was suspected, leading to the treatment of the patient for 3 yr with colchicine, with no
clinical benefit. From early childhood, the growth of the patient was stunted. At the age of 4 yr, she developed generalized lymphadenopathy
after immunization with BCG. 1 yr later, she presented severe respiratory distress, requiring mechanical ventilation. Treatment with
rifampicin was initiated for possible mycobacterial disease. At the age of 7 yr, the patient began to suffer from recurrent episodes of
fatty diarrhea, associated with fever and oral ulcers. Immunological investigations were performed for the first time at the age of 9 yr and
showed T cell lymphopenia (CD3+: 776 cells/µl), an impaired proliferative response to anti-CD3 (cpm: 1,106 vs. 35,216 in a normal control),
and hypogammaglobulinemia (IgG: 315 mg/dl), associated with nonprotective antibody responses to S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae, but with a
good antibody response to tetanus toxoid. Prophylaxis with cotrimoxazole was initiated. Additional abnormalities identified in laboratory
tests included hypoalbuminemia (2.6 g/dl), hypocalcemia (8.2 mg/dl), anemia (Hb, 8.1 g/dl), iron deficiency (3.7 µmol/l), vitamin 25-OH D3
deficiency (7 nmol/l; n.v., 75–125 nmol/l), and an elevated ESR (97 mm/h) and high C-reactive protein (CRP) serum level (8.06 mg/dl).
Endoscopies of the upper and lower gastrointestinal tract were unremarkable. The poor growth of the patient led to treatment with human
recombinant growth hormone (hrGR). However, this treatment was complicated by femur fractures, leading to its cessation. At 15 yr of age,
the patient complained of severe pain in the hips, knees, and ankles. Treatment with a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (naproxen) led to
clinical improvement, but was complicated by gastrointestinal bleeding. Recurrent episodes of diarrhea and edema, requiring frequent
infusions of albumin and furosemide, led to additional investigations. Negative results were repeatedly obtained for endoscopy, but
videocapsule endoscopy, at the age of 16 yr, showed patchy areas of white-tipped thickened villi throughout most of the small bowel,
consistent with intestinal lymphangiectasia. Further evidence of lymph vessel abnormalities was provided by a lymphangiogram (showing
abnormal filling of the thoracic duct), high α-1-antitrypsin antibody, and triglyceride concentrations. The patient was placed on a low-fat,
high-protein diet, with some improvement, but she continued to suffer from fatty diarrhea, with poor weight gain and impaired linear growth.
She also developed persistent warts. A chest CT scan at the age of 17 yr demonstrated mild bronchiectasis in the right middle and lower
lobes. Laboratory examinations at 18 yr of age confirmed the T and B cell abnormalities (Table S2), associated with elevated fluctuating but
consistently high ESR (between 26 and 119 mm/h), increased CRP concentration (between 1.22 and 12.68 mg/dl; normal values: ≤0.5 mg/dl), and
haptoglobin concentration (275 mg/dl; normal range: 33–183 mg/dl). Treatment with intravenous immunoglobulins was initiated, leading to an
improvement in IgG trough levels. However, the episodes of systemic edema persisted, although at a lower frequency. The most recent follow-
up visit showed a worsening of intestinal lymphangiectasia. An endoscopy with biopsies showed dilated lymphatic space in duodenal, small
intestinal, and colonic mucosa. Moreover, the patient was suffering from muscular weakness, especially in the lower extremities. An MRI of
the pelvis demonstrated diffuse muscular atrophy, with fatty infiltration of the gluteal musculature and the abductors. However, motor and
sensory conduction and needle electromyography were normal, and there was no evidence of cardiomyopathy at heart ultrasound. Creatine
phosphokinase (CK) and LDH levels are within the normal limits. Pulmonary function tests have shown reduced forced expiratory volume (78% of
predicted), but to a lower extent than has been reported in HOIL-1 deficient patients. The patient is still on antibiotic prophylaxis, a
low-fat and high-protein diet, iron and vitamin D supplementation, and immunoglobulin replacement therapy, and has started treatment with
octreotide. This study was conducted in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration, with informed consent obtained from the patient and her
family. The study was approved by the local ethics committee of Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital (Paris, France); Boston Children Hospital
(Boston, MA); and The Rockefeller University Hospital (New York, NY). For WES massively parallel sequencing, genomic DNA extracted from the
patient’s peripheral blood cells was sheared with a Covaris S2 Ultrasonicator. An adapter-ligated library was prepared with the Paired-End
Sample Prep kit V1 (Illumina). Exome capture was performed with the SureSelect Human All Exon kit (Agilent Technologies). Paired-end
sequencing was performed on a HiSeq 2500, generating 100-base reads. For sequence alignment, variant calling and annotation, we used BWA
aligner (Li and Durbin, 2009) to align sequences with the human genome reference sequence (hg19 build). Downstream processing was performed
with the Genome analysis toolkit (GATK; McKenna et al., 2010), SAMtools (Li et al., 2009), and Picard Tools. Substitution and indel calls
were identified with a GATK Unified Genotyper and a GATK Indel GenotyperV2, respectively. All calls with a read coverage ≤2x and a Phred-
scaled SNP quality of ≤20 were filtered out. All the variants were annotated with the GATK Genomic Annotator. For genotyping and linkage
analysis, the patient, her parents, and her unaffected brother were genotyped with the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Mapping 250K array.
Genotype calling was achieved with Power Tools (Affymetrix). We discarded monomorphic single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), SNPs with a
call rate <100%, and SNPs presenting more than one Mendelian inconsistency within the family. SNPs were further filtered based on
population-based filters, using HapMap CEU trios. Multipoint linkage analysis, assuming autosomal recessive inheritance with complete
penetrance (homozygosity mapping), was performed using Merlin software (Abecasis et al., 2002) on 84,954 high-quality SNPs. Marker–marker
linkage disequilibrium was modeled by creating clusters including SNPs for which pairwise r2 was greater than 0.4 and all intervening SNPs
(Abecasis and Wigginton, 2005).The HapMap CEU trios were used to estimate pairwise r2 and haplotype frequencies of the clusters. We used
different genomic database: Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC), 1000 Genome Project, and dbSNP all accessed in February 2015. CADD score
for variation was calculated using the University of Washington’s CADD website. Control and patient-derived fibroblasts were immortalized by
transfection with a plasmid encoding the SV40 large-T antigen. Transformed cell lines were grown in DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10%
fetal calf serum (Invitrogen). The human NEMO−/− fibroblasts were provided by A. Smahi (Imagine Institute, Paris, France; Smahi et al.,
2000). The HOIP-V5 open-reading frame was amplified from a plasmid provided by Henning Walczak and inserted into the retroviral vector pMSCV
(Life Science). Infectious viral particles were produced by cotransfecting GP2-293 packaging cells with pVSV-G and pMSCV-HOIP or an empty
vector (Life Science). Viral particles were collected 48–72 h after transfection and used to infect SV40-transformed fibroblasts. Infected
cells were selected with 0.4 µg/ml puromycin (Invitrogen). B lymphocyte cell lines from the patient and a healthy donor have been
immortalized with Epstein-Barr virus and grown in RPMI 1640 (Gibco) supplemented with 15% fetal calf serum (Invitrogen). The antibodies used
for detection on immunoblots were anti-HOIL-1 N-ter, provided by H. Walczak (University College London, London, England, UK; Haas et al.,
2009), anti-HOIL-1 C-ter provided by K. Iwai (Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan; Kirisako et al., 2006), anti-HOIP
(PAB6229; Abnova), and anti-linear polyubiquitin chains 1F113F5/Y102L provided by Genentech (Matsumoto et al., 2012), anti-NEMO (sc-8330;
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.; #611306; BD), anti-SHARPIN (14626–1-AP; ProteinTech), anti-IκBα (#610690; BD), anti-phospho-IKKα-β
(ser176/180; 16A6; Cell Signaling Technology), anti-IKKβ (AM8109a, Abgent), anti-β-tubulin (T4026; Sigma-Aldrich), and anti-GAPDH
(sc-365062; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.) antibodies. Species-specific secondary antibodies coupled to horseradish peroxidase were
obtained from Vector Laboratories or Amersham-Pharmacia. Periodic acid-Shift (PAS) staining was done using a standard clinical
histopathology laboratory procedure. Sections of frozen tissue or formalin fixed from a sternocleidomastoid muscle biopsy were
deparaffinized and rehydrated, then either rinsed in water or incubated with 1% diastase (Sigma-Aldrich) in distilled water for 60 min at
60°C, followed by rinsing in water for 2 min. Slides were then incubated with 0.5% periodic acid (Poly-Scientific R&D) for 5 min, rinsed
four times in distilled water, placed in Schiff’s solution (Poly-Scientific R&D) for 15 min, rinsed in tap water for 10 min, counterstained
with Harris hematoxylin (Poly-Scientific R&D) for 5 min, and rinsed in water again for 5 min. After quick dipping in 0.5% acid alcohol,
slides were extensively rinsed in water before dehydration, clearing, and mounting in permanent mounting media. The presence of
amylopectinosis was documented by persistence of PAS-positive material in diastase-treated sections. Images have been captured with an BX43
microscope and DP25 digital camera (both from Olympus). Cells were lysed in a buffer containing 30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 120 mM NaCl, 2 mM
KCl, 1% Triton X-100, and 2 mM EDTA supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Complete and PhoStop; Roche). For
immunoprecipitation, antibodies (5 µg) were added to 1 mg of total protein extract and incubated overnight at 4°C. Protein A– or protein
G–coupled agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich) were added to the samples, which were then incubated for 1 h at 4°C. Beads were washed three times
in lysis buffer and resuspended in Laemmli buffer. For immunofluorescence, cells cultured on glass coverslips were treated twice with ice-
cold saponin extraction buffer (80 mM Pipes, pH 6.8, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, and 0.1% saponin) for 2 min and 4 min on ice as previously
described (Tarantino et al., 2014). Cells were then washed twice with PBS before fixation in 100% methanol. The cells were progressively
rehydrated by successive washes with 85, 70, and 50% ethanol in water and two final washes with PBS. After blocking by incubation with 1%
BSA in PBS, the slides were incubated with rabbit anti-NEMO antibodies or with human anti-linear polyubiquitin, washed with PBS and
incubated either with anti–rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 or anti–human Alexa Fluor 546 secondary antibodies (Life Technologies). The slides were
then washed again and incubated with DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich) to stain the nuclei. The coverslips were mounted in Mowiol supplemented with an
anti-fading agent (AF100; Biovalley). Specimens were examined with an ApoTome imaging system (Imager Z1; Carl Zeiss) equipped with a 63×/1.4
oil DIC objective (Carl Zeiss). RNA was extracted from SV40-transformed fibroblasts with TRIzol (Invitrogen) and reverse-transcribed (2 µg)
with the SuperScript III first-strand synthesis kit (Invitrogen). HOIP expression was quantified by RT-qPCR in a TaqMan Gene Expression
Assay (Hs00215938_m1, Hs01047328_g1; Life Technologies), with normalization against GUS probes. For whole blood activation, fresh blood was
first mixed with an equal volume of RPMI-1640 (Invitrogen), left untreated, or treated with agonists for 48 h. Levels of IL-6 and IL-10
secretion were determined with ELISA kits (M9316 and M1910; Sanquin). For B cell activation, PBMCs were purified by Ficoll gradient
centrifugation, and 106 cells were cultured in 24-well plates within 1 ml RPMI medium per well supplemented with 10% FBS and 50 U/ml
penicillin (Invitrogen) and 50 µg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen). The cells were stimulated for 3 d with CD40L+IL-21, CD40L+IL-4, anti-
IgM+CpG, or anti-IgM+Cpg+BAFF (5 µg/ml CD40L, 200 ng/ml IL-21-Fc, BAFF, anti-IgM [1 µg/ml; Southern Biotech], CpG [500 nM; Invivogen], and
IL-4 [1 ng/ml; R&D Systems]). PBMCs were harvested, blocked by incubation for 10 min in PBS+10% human serum, and stained by incubation for
30 min on ice, for CD19 (BioLegend), an isotype control or CD80 (eBioscience). Flow cytometry analyses were performed on a BD LSRFortessa
flow cytometer (BD). Cells were gated on CD19+ and CD80 expression was then analyzed with FlowJo software (Tree Star). For plasmablast
assay, PBMCs were cultured in RPMI supplemented with 10% FBS, 0.025% Hepes, 0.01% PenStrep, 0.01% sodium pyruvate, 0.005% NEAA, 0.005%
l-glutamine, and 0.0013% β-mercaptoethanol) alone (unstimulated cells) or with 200 ng/ml IL-21-Fc and 5 µg/ml CD40 ligand for a total of 7
d. Cells were stained with CD19-PECy5 (BioLegend; clone HIB19), CD27-APC (eBioscience; clone O323), or CD38-PECy7 (BioLegend; clone HIT2)
antibodies, and analyzed by flow cytometry on an LSR II machine (BD) with FlowJo software (Tree Star). For leukocyte activation, frozen
PBMCs were washed twice with FCS-containing medium and used to seed 48-well plates (106 cells/well). They were cultured for 4–6 h, and then
stimulated with TNF (20 ng/ml; R&D Systems) IL-1β (10 ng/ml; R&D Systems), LPS (10 ng/ml; Sigma-Aldrich), or PMA+ionomycin+CpGB (Sigma-
Aldrich; 10−9 M + 10−7 M + 100 µg/ml). During stimulation, protein transport was blocked with GolgiStop and GolgiPlug (BD). Cells were
stained with anti-CD3 (BD; #560366), anti-CD19 (BD; #340951), anti-CD14 (BD; #557742), and anti-CD56 (BioLegend; #318331) antibodies for
cellular phenotyping and with Aqua Live/Dead (Invitrogen) to exclude dead cells. After fixation and permeabilization (BD; #554722), the
cells were stained with antibodies against IL-6 (BD; #561441), MIP-1β (BD; #554730), MIP-1β (BD; #560565), IL-1β (BD; #340515), IL-8 (BD;
#511410), and IFN-γ (BD; #559326). Stained PBMCs were captured by flow cytometry with a LSRII flow cytometer (BD) and FACSDiva software
(BD). The data were analyzed with FlowJo software (Tree Star). GraphPad Prism software was used to conduct unpaired, two-tailed Student’s t
tests for sample analysis or one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test. Values of P < 0.05 were considered significant.
Table S1, available as an Excel file, shows the immunological profile of the patient. Table S2, available as an Excel file, shows whole-
exome sequencing data for the patient. Online supplemental material is available at http://www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20141130/DC1. We
thank the child and her family for participating, and Drs. C. Hug, A. Taghinia, and L. Zimmerman for taking care of them. We particularly
thank Drs H. Walczak, K. Iwai, and A. Smahi for kindly providing antibodies, recombinant proteins, and cells. We also thank Lacey Cardillo,
Benjamin Ferland, Tatiana Kochetkov, and Adeline Crinier for technical assistance, and Jill de Jong and Mary Ellen Conley for scientific
discussion. We finally thank Yelena Nemirovskaya, Eric Anderson, and Martine Courat for administrative assistance. This work was partly
funded by NCRR and NCATS, National Institutes of Health (8UL1TR000043), St. Giles Foundation, The Rockefeller University, Institut National
de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Paris Descartes University, NIH (5P01AI061093; J.-L. Casanova), Canceropole Ile de France (2007; A.
Israel), the “Fondation ARC pour la Recherche sur le Cancer” (SFI20121205641) and the “Ligue Contre le Cancer” (E. Laplantine), NIH
(5P01AI076210; L.D. Notarangelo), NIH (5R01AI100887), the Manton Foundation (L.D. Notarangelo), the Dubai Harvard Foundation for Medical
Research (W. Al-Herz and L.D. Notarangelo), and the Kuwait Foundation for the Advancement of Sciences (grant 2010-1302-05; W. Al-Herz). The
authors declare no competing financial interests. Author contributions: B. Boisson, E. Laplantine, K. Dobbs, N. Tarantino, E. Tsitsikov, M.
Chrabieh, C. Picard, L. Du, and G. Hopkins performed the experiments;. M. Hazen, W. Al-Herz, and L.D. Notarangelo took care of the patient.
A. Cobat, A. Belkadi, Y. Itan, and L. Abel performed and analyzed the SNP arrays. H.G.W. Lidov and J.-C. Fournet supervised and analyzed the
histology. B. Boisson, E. Laplantine, and S.-Y. Pai supervised experiments. L.D. Notarangelo identified and took care of the patient, and
also planned and supervised experiments. E. Laplantine, J.-L. Casanova, A. Israel, and L.D. Notarangelo contributed to the writing of the
manuscript. B. Boisson coordinated the study and wrote the manuscript. All authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.
Abbreviations used: EDA-ID ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency LUBAC linear ubiquitination chain assembly complex SNP single-
nucleotide polymorphism ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency linear ubiquitination chain assembly complex single-nucleotide
polymorphism
