Pneumomediastinum in full-term newborn is associated with meconium aspiration syndrome, hyaline membrane disease, mechanical ventilation or
traumas related with labor. The spontaneous neonatal pneunomediastinum is rare. We present imaging exams crucial for the diagnosis of a
clinical case of pneumomediastinum in a newborn.(1,2) This is a radiology exam of a newborn whose mother pregnancy was monitored and
occurred without intercurrences. The infant born at 38 weeks of gestation by vacuum assisted delivery, immediate crying and Apgar score of
9/10. The diagnosis of subcutaneous emphysema in anterosuperior portion of the thorax occurred in the infant first day of life. Chest
radiography showed subcutaneous cervical emphysema and Spinnaker-Sail sign (wedge-shaped opacity extending to superior mediastinum,
inferiorly delimited by a hyper-transparent area) (Figure 1). Newborn’s computed tomography showed subcutaneous emphysema and extensive
pneumomediastinum, mild septation and unchanged lung parenchyma (Figures 2 and 3). In addition, the baby was always stable and had good
clinical progress. Figure 1Chest radiography showing Spinnaker-Sail sign (wedge-shaped opacity extending to superior mediastinum, inferiorly
delimited by a hyper-transparent area) Figure 2Computed tomography showing an extensive pneumomediastinum with mild septation, unchanged
lung parenchyma (cross-sectional cut) Figure 3Computed tomography showing subcutaneous enphysema and extensive pneumomediastinum with mild
septation, unchanged lung parenchyma (sagittal cut) This clinical report highlights the important role of chest radiography in the diagnosis
of most of pneumomediastinum cases. The Spinnaker-Sail sign (an image resembling the headsail of a boat, translating the lateral
displacement of thymus in relation to pericardium caused by the air) is a pathognomonic sign of pneumomediastinum.(1,3,4) It is important to
emphasize that the image of “headsail of a boat” in radiography cannot be totally well-defined and other congenital pathologies can be
assumed. Anatomical characteristics of newborns’ thymus must be considered when pneumomediastinum is suspected, particularly because such
characteristics can pose difficulties to interpret the exam. Hence, chest computed tomography is crucial for the adequate diagnosis.(1-4) O
pneumomediastino num recém-nascido de termo é associado a aspiração meconial, pneumonia, doença das membranas hialinas, ventilação mecânica
ou a traumatismos relacionados com o parto. O pneumomediastino espontâneo em recém-nascido é raro. A seguir, apresentamos os exames
imagiológicos fundamentais para o diagnóstico num caso clínico de pneumomediastino em recém-nascido.(1,2) O exame radiológico apresentado
pertence a um recém-nascido cuja gravidez foi vigiada e decorreu sem intercorrências. Nasceu por ventosa com 38 semanas, com choro imediato
e índice de Apgar 9/10. Foi diagnosticado, no primeiro dia de vida, com enfisema subcutâneo na face anterossuperior do tórax. Efetuou uma
radiografia de tórax que mostrou enfisema subcutâneo cervical e sinal de “vela de Spinnaker” (cunha hipotransparente estendendo-se até ao
mediastino superior delimitada inferiormente por zona hipertransparente) (Figura 1). Fez tomografia computorizada, que mostrou enfisema
subcutâneo e extenso pneumomediastino, com discreta septação e sem alterações do parênquima pulmonar (Figuras 2 e 3). O recém-nascido esteve
sempre estável e apresentando boa evolução clínica. Controle radiológico no sétimo dia de vida sem alterações. Figura 1Radiografia de tórax
mostrando o sinal de “vela de Spinnaker” (cunha hipotransparente que se estende até ao mediastino superior, delimitada inferiormente por
zona hipertransparente) Figura 2Tomografia computorizada que mostra extenso pneumomediastino com discreta septação, sem alterações do
parênquima pulmonar (corte transversal) Figura 3Tomografia computorizada que mostra enfisema subcutâneo e extenso pneumomediastino com
discreta septação, sem alterações do parênquima pulmonar (corte sagital) Discute-se, neste caso clínico, o papel preponderante da
radiografia de tórax no diagnóstico da maioria dos casos de pneumomediastino. O sinal da “vela de Spinnaker” (imagem semelhante à vela de um
barco, traduzindo a dissecção lateral do timo em relação ao pericárdio pelo ar) é patognomônico de pneumomediastino.(1,3,4) Realça-se que,
conforme é visível na radiografia apresentada, a imagem da “vela do barco” pode não ser totalmente bem definida e suscitar dúvidas
relativamente à possibilidade de outras patologias congênitas. As características anatômicas do timo neonatal devem ser tidas em linha de
conta, face à suspeita de clínica de pneumomediastino, uma vez que este pode dificultar a interpretação do exame. Nessas circunstâncias, a
realização da tomografia computorizada torácica é fundamental para estabelecer o diagnóstico.(1-4)
