Figure 1Significant corneal thinning A 39-year-old man, MAFS, was admitted to ophthalmology emergency service of the Universidade Federal de
São Paulo reporting low vision and ocular hyperemia with purulent discharge for 12 days in the left eye, but without complaints in the right
eye. The patient administered ciprofloxacin drop every 3 hours. Upon examination, he had diffuse ocular hyperemia, chemosis, and extensive
area of corneal thinning in nasal region, which had purulent discharge. The visual acuity in the affected eye was 20/80. Bacterioscopy
revealed gram-negative diplococcic and the culture confirmed the presence of gonococcus. The patient was referred to the urologist for
assessment of other sexual transmissible disease. After examination, he was diagnosed with HIV infection. The treatment comprised of
azithromycin 1g orally and ceftriaxone intravenously for 3 days. After, the patient was submitted to tectonic corneal transplantation to
reestablish eye integrality that was threatened by thinning of the area, which probably would have had a perforation if the patient did not
undergo the early transplantation. Eye infection may occur with or without urogenital infection. In this report no infection was detected by
the urologist.(1,2) For eye infection, topic antibiotics reach the infected tissues in higher concentration than systemic treatment,
however, in case of gonococcal eye infection the systemic treatment is also needed, which is prolonged for 3 days when cornea is
affected.(3) Gonococcal infection, as the cause of conjunctivitis, may generate several corneal complications such as the one presented in
this case. Gonococcal conjunctivitis must be treated immediately by the ophthalmologist in order to preserve patient’s vision and ocular
integrity. Figura 1Afinamento corneal importante MAFS, masculino, 39 anos, chegou ao pronto-socorro de oftalmologia da Universidade Federal
de São Paulo relatando baixa visão e hiperemia ocular com secreção purulenta há 12 dias em olho esquerdo, sem queixas sobre o olho direito.
Estava em uso de ciprofloxacina colírio a cada 3 horas. Ao exame, apresentava hiperemia ocular difusa, quemose, extensa área de afinamento
corneano na região nasal e secreção purulenta. A acuidade visual era de 20/80 no olho acometido. O exame de bacterioscopia revelou
diplococos Gram-negativos, sendo confirmada a presença de gonococos na cultura. O paciente foi encaminhado ao urologista para avaliação de
outras doenças sexualmente transmissíveis, sendo diagnosticado com sorologia positiva para HIV. O tratamento consistiu de azitromicina 1g
via oral e ceftriaxone intravenoso por 3 dias. Posteriormente, foi submetido a transplante corneano tectônico para restabelecer a
integridade ocular ameaçada pela área de afinamento, que provavelmente teria perfurado, caso não fosse submetido ao transplante precoce. A
infecção ocular pode ocorrer acompanhada ou não de infecção urogenital, que, neste caso, não foi detectada pelo urologista.(1,2) Para
infecções oculares, antibióticos tópicos atingem, em tecidos infectados, concentrações superiores ao tratamento sistêmico, porém, no caso da
infecção ocular gonocócica, é necessário também tratamento sistêmico, que prolonga-se por 3 dias quando há acometimento corneano.(3) A
infecção gonocócica como causa de conjuntivite pode gerar severas complicações corneanas, como a presente neste caso. Essa afecção deve ser
tratada brevemente pelo oftalmologista, com o objetivo de preservar a visão do paciente, bem como a integridade ocular.
