The coumadin-induced skin necrosis is rare and occurs more frequently in the breasts, thighs and buttocks. We describe the first case of
coumadin necrosis of the breast in Brazil in a 62-year-old patient. Anticoagulant therapy is commonly prescribed in the medical practice and
one of the most used is sodium warfarin. Skin and subcutaneous tissue necrosis is an extremely rare complication, and its incidence ranges
from 0.01% to 0.1%. The most common affected sites by this necrosis are breast, buttocks and thighs.(1) The first case of skin necrosis
affecting the breast was reported by Flood et al. in 1943.(2) Since then, almost 200 cases of skin necrosis have been reported so far, but
less than 40 cases involved the breast tissue.(3) This event has an irreversible course of action, and early diagnosis and surgical
debridement are recommended to prevent significant morbidity and mortality.(4) A 62-year-old patient was admitted to the Hospital das
Clínicas, in São Paulo (SP), because of pain in her right breast, swelling and darkening which had commenced 3 days before. The symptoms
started on the nipple and spread to the whole right breast. Six days before the onset of the complaints, she started to take sodium warfarin
2.5mg/day, for treatment of deep vein thrombosis on her left leg, however, she did not receive heparin simultaneously. The thrombosis
occurred due to complications of a first brachytherapy session to treat an advanced cervical cancer. The patient was also taking
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (captopril 150mg/day) for arterial hypertension and phenobarbital 50mg/day for epilepsy. She denied
regular alcohol intake or smoking. Upon admission, she was in regular general condition, without fever, and blood pressure of 130x90mmHg.
Her body mass index was 32. The abdominal, pulmonary and cardiologic tests were normal. Her left breast was normal while right breast was
swollen and had a large ulceration with a necrotic basis involving the nipple and the central area (Figure 1). Figure 1Coumadin necrosis of
the right breast Laboratory tests showed hematocrit of 29%, hemoglobin of 9.8mg/dL, white cells count of 6,450 and a platelet count of
142,000/mL. Prothrombin time was 14.7 seconds (normal: 11 seconds) with an international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.3 and normal partial
thromboplastin time. Her fibrinogen was normal and fibrin-split products were high (578μg/mL). The diagnostic hypothesis was necrosis due to
warfarin use on the right breast. After diagnosis, the patients initiated treatment with high doses of heparin and vitamin K. After four
days of treatment no improvements were seen and the patient was submitted to simple mastectomy. No intercurrence was observed and heparin
administration was re-initiated 12 hours after the surgery. The patient did well postoperatively and was discharged. An adequate
anticoagulant therapy with a warfarin dose of 2.5mg/day was established, without further complications. Skin necrosis is an unusual
complication of anticoagulant therapy, and the breast involvement occurs only 10 to 15% of cases.(3) The majority of necrotic lesions
appears in areas of excessive subcutaneous tissue. Such lesions often affect breasts, thighs, arms, buttocks, hands, digits, legs, feet,
nose, face, abdomen, back and penis.(5) Women are much more affected than men. Currently, multiple lesions have been reported in 35% of the
cases, sometimes symmetrically.(3,5) A literature review of reports in English language including 25 papers described 38 reports of breast
necrosis after the use of warfarin. In these reports, patients’ age ranged 16 to 93 years old.(3,5) No significant difference between the
involvement of right and left breasts was reported, being bilateral necrosis also observed.(5,6) Typically, this condition is seen in
middle-aged obese women who are receiving warfarin therapy for deep venous thrombosis or other thromboembolic diseases, such as the case we
report here.(1,2) The initial lesion is a well-defined erythematous and painful area, which appears in 3 to 6 days after the beginning of
anticoagulation.(6,7) This area may develop a peau d’orange aspect.(5) The area evolves into a black ecchymosed area, which progresses to
dry gangrene.(5,6) Histology shows cutaneous infarcts, haemorrhages, breakdown of precapillary arterioles, fibrin deposits and no evidence
of vascular or perivascular inflammation.(1,6,7) Some advanced cases can mimic inflammatory carcinoma, and that is why early biopsy helps in
the differential diagnosis.(1) The exact etiology and the reason for its predilection for fat tissue remain unclear, but many authors
believe that it is a multifactorial condition, which can include trauma, inadequate blood perfusion and variation of temperature.(1,5,7) The
probable mechanism unleashing this complication is a small cutaneous vessels thrombosis due to the inhibition of proteins C and S, and
vitamin K-dependent endogenous anticoagulants. Such situation occurs before the inhibition of other factors and leads to thrombotic tendency
among people who have homozigotic, heterozigotic or acquired protein C or S deficiencies.(8,9) For this reason, many authors recommend the
concomitant administration of heparin in the first days of the anticoagulant therapy.(9) Once diagnosed, high doses of heparin should be
administered, besides administration of vitamin K in order to restore proteins C and S levels.(1,6) The treatment includes the
discontinuation of warfarin treatment, but this approach has not been shown to change the outcome. Success has been reported in careful
recommencement of warfarin therapy, which in the beginning should be always associated to parenteral anticoagulation.(6) Significant
morbidity and several deaths have been also reported.(1,6,10) Despite that conservative treatment should be considered and half of cases
requires surgical debridement,(1,2,7) eventually mastectomy is needed.(1,7) No evidence was found regarding risk of skin necrosis by
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors as well as by phenobarbital. Moreover, antiepileptic drugs tend to reduce anticoagulants action.(8)
The usual characteristics founded in this case report corroborate with literature. In spite of complications presented: woman, 62-years-old,
obese, necrosis occurrence on 6th day after introduction of oral anticoagulants for venous thrombosis. Despite the reduced dose and
suspension of drug after the diagnosis, a simple mastectomy was necessary, because of the rapid evolution to the skin necrosis. A necrose
cutânea induzida por cumarínicos é um evento raro e ocorre com maior frequência nas mamas, coxas e nádegas. Descrevemos o primeiro caso de
necrose cumarínica das mamas no Brasil em paciente de 62 anos. A terapia anticoagulante é frequentemente prescrita na prática médica, sendo
que uma das mais utilizadas é a varfarina sódica. Uma complicação extremamente rara é a necrose de pele e subcutânea, com incidência
variando de 0,01% a 0,1%. As áreas mais afetas são as mamas, nádegas e coxas.(1) O primeiro caso de necrose de pele afetando a mama foi
relatado por Flood et al. em 1943.(2) Desde então, quase 200 casos de necrose de pele foram relatados, porém menos de 40 envolveram o tecido
mamário.(3) Tal ocorrência tem curso de ação irreversível, e o diagnóstico precoce e desbridamento cirúrgico são recomendados para prevenir
morbidade significativa e mortalidade.(4) Paciente de 62 anos internada no Hospital das Clínicas, em São Paulo (SP), devido à dor na mama
direita, inchaço e escurecimento iniciados 3 dias antes da internação. Os sintomas iniciaram no mamilo e se espalharam ao longo da mama
direita. Seis dias antes das queixas, a paciente iniciou tratamento com varfarina sódica 2,5mg/dia para trombose venosa profunda da perna
esquerda, porém sem uso simultâneo de heparina. A trombose ocorreu em razão de complicação na primeira sessão de braquiterapia para
tratamento de câncer cervical avançado. A paciente também recebia inibidores da enzima de conversão de angiotensina (captopril 150mg/dia)
para hipertensão arterial e fenobarbital 50mg/dia para epilepsia. Ela negou consumo regular de álcool ou tabagismo. Na internação, o estado
geral da paciente era regular, com ausência de febre, pressão sanguínea de 130x90mmHg e índice de massa corporal de 32. Os exames
abdominais, pulmonares e cardiológicos estavam normais. A mama esquerda estava normal, porém a direita apresentava inchaço e ulceração
extensa com base necrótica envolvendo a área do mamilo e central (Figura 1). Figura 1Necrose da mama direita induzida por cumarínicos Os
testes laboratoriais revelaram hematócrito de 29%, hemoglobina de 9,8mg/dL, contagem de glóbulos brancos de 6.450 e contagem de plaquetas de
142.000/mL. O tempo de protrombina foi de 14,7 segundos (normal: 11 segundos) com taxa internacional normalizada (INR) de 1,3 e tempo
tromboplástico parcial normal. A fibrinogenemia também foi normal, e os produtos de desintegração de fibrina estavam altos (578μg/mL). A
hipótese do diagnóstico foi necrose da mama direita induzida pelo uso da varfarina. Administraram-se altas doses de heparina e vitamina K.
Após 4 dias, como não houve curso favorável, a paciente foi submetida a mastectomia simples. Não foi observada intercorrência, e a
administração de heparina foi reiniciada 12 horas após a cirurgia. A paciente teve boa evolução pós-operatória e recebeu alta. A dose de
terapia anticoagulante de 2,5mg/dia de varfarina foi readequada, sem o aparecimento de outras complicações. A necrose de pele é uma
complicação incomum da terapia anticoagulante, e o envolvimento da mama ocorre em apenas 10 a 15% de casos.(3) A maioria das lesões
necróticas aparece em áreas com excesso de tecido subcutâneo. Essas lesões geralmente afetam mamas, coxas, braços, nádegas, mãos, pontas dos
dedos, pernas, pés, nariz, face, abdômen, costas e pênis.(5) As mulheres são mais afetadas do que os homens. Lesões múltiplas têm sido
relatadas em 35% dos casos, algumas vezes simetricamente.(3,5) Uma revisão da literatura de artigos publicados em língua inglesa incluindo
25 manuscritos localizou 38 relatos de necrose de mama após uso de varfarina. A média de idade relatada nesses estudos foi de 16 a 93
anos.(3,5) Não houve diferença significativa entre o envolvimento da mama direita ou esquerda, sendo que necrose bilateral também foi
relatada.(5,6) Geralmente, essa condição é observada em mulheres obesas de meia idade e que recebem terapia com varfarina para trombose
venosa profunda ou outras doenças tromboembólicas, tal como ocorreu com a paciente deste relato de caso.(1,2) A lesão inicial consiste em
eritematosa bem demarcada e área dolorosa, que aparece entre 3 e 6 dias após o início da anticoagulação.(6,7) Essa área pode desenvolver
aspecto em peau d’orange (“casca de laranja”).(5) A área afetada evolui para equimose escura, progredindo para tecido necrótico.(5,6) A
histologia mostra infartos cutâneos, hemorragias, obstrução das arteríolas pré-capilares e depósitos fibrinosos, e não evidencia inflamação
vascular ou perivascular.(1,6,7) Alguns casos avançados podem imitar carcinoma inflamatório e, portanto, a realização de biópsia
precocemente ajuda no diagnóstico diferencial.(1) A etiologia exata e o motivo para sua predileção para tecido adiposo permanecem incertos,
mas muitos autores acreditam que é uma condição multifatorial, que pode incluir trauma, perfusão sanguínea inadequada e variação de
temperatura.(1,5,7) O provável mecanismo que desencadeia tal complicação é a pequena trombose das veias cutâneas, devido à inibição da
proteína C e S, e da vitamina K-dependente de anticoagulante endovenosos. Tal situação ocorre antes da inibição de outros fatores e leva à
tendência trombolítica entre indivíduos que apresentam deficiências homozigota, heterozigota ou de absorção de proteínas C e S.(8,9) Por
esta razão, muitos autores recomendam administração concomitante de heparina nos primeiros dias de terapia anticoagulante.(9) Uma vez
diagnosticado, a administração de alta dose de heparina deve ser iniciada, além de vitamina K para restauração dos níveis de proteínas C e
S.(1,6) O tratamento inclui a suspensão da varfarina, porém tal questão não tem demonstrado alteração no resultado. Sucesso tem sido
relatado no reinício cauteloso da terapia com varfarina, cujo início deve ser sempre associado à anticoagulação parenteral.(6) Morbidade
significativa e diversas mortes têm sido relatadas.(1,6,10) Todavia, o tratamento conservador deve ser considerado. Embora o tratamento
conservador deva ser considerado e metade dos casos demande o desbridamento,(1,2,7) a mastectomia eventualmente é necessária.(1,7) Não foi
observado risco de necrose cutânea induzida por inibidores da enzima de conversão de angiotensina, assim como como por fenobarbital. Além
disso, os medicamentos antiepilépticos tendem a reduzir a ação anticoagulante.(8) O caso descrito neste relato corrobora as características
comuns descritas na literatura, apesar da complicação específica deste caso: mulher, 62 anos, obesa, com ocorrência de necrose no 6 dia após
introdução de anticoagulante oral para trombose venosa. Apesar de a medicação ter sido reduzida e suspensa no diagnóstico, foi necessário
realizar mastectomia simples, em razão da rápida evolução da necrose da pele.
