Coexistence of breast cancer and tuberculosis is rare. In most cases, involvement by tuberculosis occurs in axillary lymph nodes. We report
a case of a 43-years-old patient who had undergone adenomastectomy and left sentinel lymph node biopsy due to a triple negative ductal
carcinoma. At the end of adjuvant treatment, the patient had an atypical lymph node in the left axilla. Lymph node was excised, and after
laboratory analysis, the diagnosis was ganglion tuberculosis. The patient underwent treatment for primary tuberculosis. The development of
these two pathologies can lead to problems in diagnosis and treatment. An accurate diagnosis is important to avoid unnecessary surgical
procedures. Breast tuberculosis was first described by Astley Cooper in 1829 who called it scrofulous swelling of the bosom. The coexistence
of primary tuberculosis and breast cancer was reported only in 1897 by Pilliet and Piatot, and the tuberculosis of axillary lymph nodes was
reported by Warthin in 1899.(1) The coexistence of these two morbidities is extremely rare and ranges between 0.1 to 4.9%. Most of reports
are related with compromised axillary lymph nodes due to tuberculosis injury, which might coexist or not along with neoplastic injury.(2)
The diagnosis of compromised ganglion by tuberculosis is difficult because of its rare clinical manifestation. In general, this disease
manifests with isolated lymphadenomegaly or associated with few and unspecific symptoms such as high fever and weight loss. These symptoms
can also be seen in cases of advanced breast cancer or locoregional recurrence of breast cancer.(3) During the treatment for breast cancer,
the ganglion tuberculosis is normally associated with immunosuppression status, which is eventually correlated with the chemotherapy
treatment applied to control neoplastic disease.(4,5) We report a case of patient with breast cancer who developed tuberculosis in
ipsilateral axillary lymphadenomegaly and who had undergone adjuvant treatment. A diagnosis dilemma occurred due to the possible
locoregional recurrence of breast cancer. A 43-years-old white woman RAS was admitted with palpable nodules in the left breast for at least
6 months. She denied other complaints, history or previous contact with bacillus of tuberculosis. Her only history was treatment for
catscratch disease in left side of the body 9 years ago. Physical examination showed hardening nodules of 15mm wide in the junction of
lateral quadrants (JLQ) in left breast. Bilateral axillary was palpable. A digital bilateral mammogram was conducted showing only irregular
nodules of 14mm wide in the JLQ toward the left side. The magnetic nuclear resonance identified irregular nodules of 18mm wide in the JLQ
toward the left side, close to the chest muscle and 6cm away from papillae with heterogeneous enhancement and type 2 curve. In addition, we
observed ipsilateral axillary lymphadenomegaly. A biopsy was conducted using an ultrasound guided thick-needle showing invasive ductal
cancer of histologic and nuclear grade 3, triple negative. The patient underwent adenomastectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy in left
side, associated with immediate breast reconstruction using abdominal muscle flap and breast prosthesis. The anatomopathological result was
invasive ductal carcinoma, measuring 17mm wide, triple negative and without compromised lymph node. Final staging: T1cN0. During systemic
staging, thoracic-abdominal tomography and bone scintigraphy were normal. Subsequently, the adjuvant systemic treatment for 12 weeks was
initiated with four cycles of doxorubicin 60mg/m2 and 600mg/m2 cyclophosphamide, followed by 80mg/m2 paclitaxel. After chemotherapy
treatment, the patient showed fibroblastic nodule of 3cm wide, palpable and pain in the left axillary line anterior. The axillary
ultrasonography showed irregular nodule calcifications in between, measuring 3.1cm wide. The computed tomography revealed enlarged left
axillary lymph node containing calcifications (Figure 1). Nuclear resonance showed the same nodule with globose morphology, and area of
liquefaction and post-contrast heterogeneous enhancement, measuring 3cm wide (Figura 2). A puncture was done using a fine needle and
suspected result was reactive lymphadenopathy with fat replacement. Figure 1Computed tomography imaging of augmented left axillary lymph
node with calcifications Figure 2Magnetic nuclear resonance imaging of suspected enhancement of left axillary lymph node Because a different
result was found in puncture and imaging exams, we conducted exeresis of lymph node and anatomopathologic test. The result was chronic
inflammatory process associated with granuloma formation and central necrosis (Figures 3 and 4). We also conducted an investigation for
Bartonella immunoglobulin due to patient’s previous catscratch disease, and the result was negative. In addition, an investigation of
tuberculosis complex based on quantitation of interferon gamma was done. The result was positive and suggested the diagnosis of tuberculosis
of axillary adenopathy. After assessment by an infectologist and positive culture for tuberculosis, the treatment for primary tuberculosis
was initiated and the patient remained asymptomatic. Figure 3Surgical piece of axillary lymph node Figure 4Anatopathological slides with
specific staining Tuberculosis constitutes a public health problem in several countries. It is estimated that one fifth of the world
population has tuberculosis and every year 3 million people die due to tuberculosis. And, even with all diagnostic technology and new
treatments available, this number can still increase each year.(6) The association of tuberculosis with breast cancer is rare, ranging
between 0.1 to 4.9%. The great percentage of this incidence is because of compromised ganglion in tuberculosis. To diagnose compromised
ganglion in clinical practice, we opted for imaging exams (mammography, ultrasonography and nuclear magnetic resonance), fine-needle
aspiration scintigraphy and exeresis of the lesion. Accuracy of these procedures is 14%, 12% and 60%, respectively. To increase diagnosis
rate, we used immunology and molecular biology tests that included the use of marked antibodies, immunoenzimatyc assays and polymerase chain
reaction.(7) Imaging exams do not enable a distinction between benign and malignant process in such cases, however, images indicating
calcifications and liquenification process can lead to suspicion of tuberculosis. Histologically, the granulomatous inflammatory process and
necrosis focus require investigation for tuberculosis independently of the technique used.(8) The treatment of ganglion tuberculosis
comprises in the administration of antituberculin drugs (riphampicin, isoniazid, pirazinamid and ethambutol).(3) The appropriate diagnosis
of compromised ganglion in tuberculosis coexisting with breast cancer is extremely important to avoid incorrect staging of breast cancer as
locally advanced and, in this way, to avoid aggressive surgical axillary treatment for these patients. Therefore, special attention must be
given to histopathological investigation of uncommon axillary lymph nodes before definitive surgical treatment. In addition, in situations
where granulomas with caseous necrosis are found in axillary lymph nodes, tuberculosis must be excluded as the main diagnosis. In such
cases, an investigation must be done even in asymptomatic patients or those who do not have contact with smear-positive patients, especially
because this disease is frequent and histopathological findings resemble tuberculosis. A coexistência de câncer de mama e tuberculose é
rara. Na maioria das vezes, o acometimento pela tuberculose ocorre nos linfonodos axilares. Relatamos caso clínico de paciente de 43 anos
submetida à adenomastectomia e à biópsia de linfonodo sentinela à esquerda devido a um carcinoma ductal triplo negativo. Ao final do
tratamento adjuvante, a paciente apresentou linfonodomegalia atípica em axila esquerda. Foi realizado exérese do linfonodo e, após análises
laboratoriais, diagnosticou-se tuberculose ganglionar. A paciente foi submetida a tratamento para tuberculose primária. O desenvolvimento
dessas duas patologias pode acarretar problemas quanto ao diagnóstico e ao tratamento. O diagnóstico acurado é importante para evitar
procedimentos cirúrgicos desnecessários. A tuberculose mamária foi primeiramente descrita por Astley Cooper em 1829, com a denominação de
edema escrofuloso da mama. A concomitância de tuberculose primária e câncer de mama foi relatada apenas em 1897 por Pilliet e Piatot, e o
acometimento específico de linfonodos axilares pela tuberculose foi registrado em 1899 por Warthin.(1) Esse quadro de coexistência das duas
morbidades é extremamente raro, variando entre 0,1 a 4,9%. Grande parte dos relatos refere-se a comprometimento linfonodal axilar por lesão
tuberculosa, podendo ou não coexistir nesse sítio com lesão neoplásica.(2) O diagnóstico de acometimento ganglionar pela tuberculose é muito
difícil devido à sua escassa manifestação clínica. Normalmente, a doença se manifesta com linfadenomegalia isolada ou associada com sintomas
menores e inespecíficos, como febre baixa e perda de peso, que podem também estar presentes em casos de carcinoma mamário avançado ou
recidiva locorregional do mesmo.(3) A tuberculose ganglionar, no curso do tratamento para o câncer de mama, geralmente está associada a
estados de imunossupressão, eventualmente correlacionados ao tratamento quimioterápico empregado para controle de doença neoplásica.(4,5)
Relatamos o caso clínico de uma paciente com carcinoma mamário que desenvolveu linfadenomegalia axilar ipsilateral por tuberculose em pleno
tratamento adjuvante. Houve um dilema diagnóstico em razão de possível recidiva locorregional. A paciente RAS, 43 anos, sexo feminino, raça
branca, apresentou nódulo palpável em mama esquerda há cerca de 6 meses. Negava outras queixas e antecedente pessoal ou de contato com o
bacilo da tuberculose. Constava apenas tratamento prévio para doença de arranhadura do gato no lado esquerdo há 9 anos. Ao exame físico,
verificava-se nódulo endurecido de 15mm em junção dos quadrantes laterais (JQL) da mama esquerda. Axila normopalpável bilateralmente. Foram
realizadas mamografia digital bilateral e ultrassonografia mamária, que identificaram apenas um nódulo irregular de 14mm em JQL à esquerda.
Na ressonância nuclear magnética, identificou-se o nódulo irregular de 18mm em JQL à esquerda, próximo ao músculo peitoral e a 6cm da
papila, com realce heterogêneo e curva tipo 2, além de linfonodos axilares habituais ipsilateralmente. Realizada biópsia por agulha grossa
guiada pela ultrassonografia, que mostrou se tratar de um carcinoma ductal invasivo, grau histológico e nuclear 3, triplo negativo. A
paciente foi submetida à adenomastectomia e à biópsia de linfonodo sentinela à esquerda, associadas com reconstrução mamária imediata com
retalho muscular abdominal e prótese mamária. O resultado anatomopatológico foi de carcinoma ductal invasivo, medindo 17mm, triplo negativo
e sem acometimento linfonodal. Estadiamento final: T1cN0. No estadiamento sistêmico, obtiveram-se tomografia toracoabdominal e cintilografia
óssea sem anormalidades. Iniciado, então, tratamento adjuvante sistêmico, com quatro ciclos de doxorrubicina 60mg/m2 e ciclofosfamida
600mg/m2, seguidos por paclitaxel 80mg/m2 por 12 semanas. Ao final do tratamento quimioterápico, a paciente apresentou nódulo fibroelástico
de 3cm, palpável e doloroso em linha axilar anterior à esquerda. À ultrassonografia axilar, encontrou-se um nódulo irregular com
calcificações de permeio, medindo 3,1cm. Por meio da tomografia computadorizada, encontramos um linfonodo axilar esquerdo aumentado e
contendo calcificações em seu interior (Figura 1). Na ressonância nuclear, o mesmo nódulo mostrava-se com morfologia globosa, e área de
liquefação e realce heterogêneo pós-contraste, medindo 3cm (Figura 2). Foi realizada punção por agulha fina, que resultou sugestiva de
linfadenopatia reacional com substituição adiposa. Figura 1Imagem obtida por tomografia computadorizada de linfonodo axilar esquerdo de
tamanho aumentado e contendo calcificação em seu interior Figura 2Realce suspeito por ressonância nuclear magnética de linfonodo axilar
esquerdo Diante do resultado discordante da punção com os exames de imagem, realizou-se exérese cirúrgica do linfonodo, e o resultado
anatomopatológico foi de processo inflamatório crônico com formação de granuloma e necrose central (Figuras 3 e 4). Devido ao antecedente de
doença de arranhadura do gato, foi realizada pesquisa de imunoglobulinas para Bartonella, que resultou negativa. Realizada também pesquisa
do complexo de tuberculose por quantificação de interferon gama, que resultou positiva, sugerindo o diagnóstico de adenopatia axilar por
tuberculose. Após avaliação do infectologista e cultura para tuberculose positiva, foi iniciado o tratamento para tuberculose primária e a
paciente permaneceu assintomática. Figura 3Peça cirúrgica de linfonodo axilar esquerdo suspeito Figura 4Lâminas de anatomopatológico com
coloração específicas A tuberculose é um problema de saúde pública em diversos países. É estimado que um quinto da população mundial seja
infectado por tuberculose e que 3 milhões de pessoas morram todo ano por causa dessa doença. Mesmo com toda tecnologia diagnóstica e novos
tratamentos, esse número ainda pode se elevar ano a ano.(6) A associação de tuberculose com câncer de mama é rara, variando entre 0,1 a
4,9%. A grande porcentagem dessa incidência deve-se ao acometimento ganglionar da tuberculose. Para o diagnóstico do acometimento ganglionar
na prática clínica, optamos por exames de imagem (mamografia, ultrassonografia e ressonância nuclear magnética), citologia aspirativa por
agulha fina e exérese cirúrgica da lesão. As acurárias dessas técnicas são, respectivamente, 14%, 12% e 60%. Para o aumento da taxa de
diagnóstico, recorremos aos testes de imunologia e de biologia molecular, que incluem o uso de anticorpos marcados, provas de
imunoenzimático e reação em cadeia de polimerase.(7) Os exames de imagem não permitem a distinção entre processos benignos e malignos nestes
casos; porém imagens que indicam calcificações e processos de liquenificação podem levar a suspeita de tuberculose. Histologicamente,
processo inflamatório granulomatoso e focos de necrose caseosa requerem pesquisa para tuberculose, independentemente da técnica
utilizada.(8) O tratamento da tuberculose ganglionar consiste na administração de drogas antituberculínicas (rifampicina, isoniazida,
pirazinamida e etambutol).(3) O diagnóstico adequado do acometimento ganglionar pela tuberculose em coexistência com câncer de mama é muito
importante para evitarmos o estadiamento incorreto do câncer de mama como localmente avançado e, dessa forma, evitarmos um tratamento
cirúrgico agressivo da axila nessas pacientes. Assim, deve-se dar especial atenção à investigação histopatológica de linfonodos axilares não
habituais, antes do tratamento cirúrgico definitivo. Além disso, em situações em que encontramos granulomas com necrose caseosa em
linfonodos axilares, deve ser realizada a exclusão da tuberculose como diagnóstico principal. Nesses casos, a investigação diagnóstica deve
ser realizada mesmo em pacientes assintomáticos ou que não apresentaram contato com pacientes bacilíferos, já que a doença é muito frequente
e que o achado histopatológico é típico da mesma.
