We describe a case of malignant perivascular epithelial cell tumor (PEComa) arising primarily in the distal left femur of a 47-year-old
male. The patient presented with pain accompanied by progressive swelling of his left thigh. Computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an osteolytic lesion. Curettage of the lesion was reported as a clear cell tumor with recommendation for
exclusion of a metastatic clear cell carcinoma. However, thorough examinations did not find any primary site elsewhere, apart from the
presence of bilateral pulmonary metastases. Evaluation of the submitted H & E slides identified a malignant PEComa which was further
confirmed by subsequent immunohistochemical study. The occurrence of PEComa as a primary bone lesion is extremely rare. We present here a
malignant PEComa of the distal left femur, and summarize the clinicopathological characteristics of this rare entity with literature review.
The virtual slide (s) for this article can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/5729035221600545. The online version
of this article (doi:10.1186/s13000-015-0292-2) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Perivascular
epithelioid cell tumor (PEComa) represents a family of closely related entities showing both melanocytic and myoid differentiation,
including angiomyolipoma, lymphangioleiomyomatosis, clear-cell ‘sugar’ tumor of the lung, and neoplasms arising in a wide variety of
locations including skin, soft tissue and visceral organs called PEComa not otherwise specified (PEComa-NOS) . PEComa manifesting as a
primary bone lesion is extremely rare. To date, only 10 convincing cases of primary bone origin have been reported in the English literature
. Although the majority of PEComas behave in a benign or indolent fashion, a minority of tumors exhibit aggressive behavior. The malignant
variant may cause diagnostic pitfalls, particularly in interpretation of biopsy specimens. In this report, we describe a case of malignant
PEComa arising primarily in the femur to broaden the anatomic spectrum of primary bone PEComas. A 47-year-old male presented with a 2-year
history of pain and progressive swelling of his left thigh. Computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left
lower limb revealed an osteolytic lesion in the distal femur (Figs. 1a and b), measuring 5.2 × 3.2 × 2.6 cm in size. The lesion showed
destruction of the cortex with extension into the surrounding skeletal muscle. Curettage of the lesion was performed which was initially
reported as a clear cell tumor with recommendation for the exclusion of a metastatic clear cell carcinoma. No evidence of a primary tumor in
any site elsewhere was identified by subsequent systematic examinations. However, CT scan of the chest revealed multiple nodules in
bilateral lungs which were confirmed as metastatic by CT-guided core needle biopsy (Figs. 1c and d). The patient was treated with
conservative palliative radiotherapy and systemic chemotherapy. He was alive with the disease at 3.5 year follow up.Fig. 1Radiology.
Magnetic resonance imaging scan shows an osteolytic lesion in the distal femur (a). CT scan demonstrates cortical destruction and extension
into adjacent soft tissue (b). Chest CT shows metastatic disease in bilateral lungs (c,d) Radiology. Magnetic resonance imaging scan shows
an osteolytic lesion in the distal femur (a). CT scan demonstrates cortical destruction and extension into adjacent soft tissue (b). Chest
CT shows metastatic disease in bilateral lungs (c,d) Histologically, the tumor was composed of plump polygonal cells with abundant clear to
palely eosinophilic or granular cytoplasm arranged in nests that were separated by a delicate aborizing or sinusoidal-type vasculature
(Figs. 2a and b). The tumor cells showed a moderate to high degree of hypercellularity and nuclear atypia (Fig. 2c). A few multinucleated
giant cells were also observed. Mitotic figures were readily encountered (5/50HPF). Occasional atypical mitotic figures were present. Areas
of coagulative tumor necrosis were obvious within the tumor (Fig. 2d). Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were strongly positive for
HMB45 (Fig. 3a), PNL2, TFE3 and vimentin. Most tumor cells were also positive for alpha smooth muscle actin (Fig. 3b). There was weak
staining of CD10 and CD117. CD34 staining clearly delineated the rich vascular network, highlighting the organoid or sinusoidal
architecture. The tumor cells were negative for Melan-A, AE1/AE3, EMA, desmin and S100 protein.Fig. 2Histology. Epithelioid cells arranged
in nested pattern with delicate arborizing vasculature (×100, a). Sinusoidal-type vasculature in PEComa (×200, b). Nuclear pleomorphism with
multinucleate tumor cells and mitotic activity (×200, c). Area of necrosis present within the tumor (×100, d)Fig. 3Immunohistochemistry.
HMB45 (EnVision × 100, a). Alpha smooth muscle actin (EnVision × 100, b) Histology. Epithelioid cells arranged in nested pattern with
delicate arborizing vasculature (×100, a). Sinusoidal-type vasculature in PEComa (×200, b). Nuclear pleomorphism with multinucleate tumor
cells and mitotic activity (×200, c). Area of necrosis present within the tumor (×100, d) Immunohistochemistry. HMB45 (EnVision × 100, a).
Alpha smooth muscle actin (EnVision × 100, b) The first case of primary bone PEComa was described by Insabato et al. in 2002 which occurred
in the tibia of a 30-year-old male . The presentation of PEComa as a primary bone lesion is extremely rare. Taking the current case into
account, there are only 11 cases of primary bone origin. The clinical features of these 11 primary bone PEComas are summarized in Table 1.
The site of involvement includes right tibia in 3 cases [2, 6], right fibula in 3 cases [3, 4, 8], vertebral column in 2 cases (7th thoracic
and 5th lumbar respectively) [6, 7], the sixth right rib , left acetabulum , and left femur (current case) in 1 case each. Like PEComas
arising in other sites, primary bone PEComas also occurred in middle-aged adults with a mean age of 47 years and median age of 39 years
(range, 26 to 93 years) respectively. Unlike PEComas of other sites which tended to have a female predilection, primary bone PEComas were
distributed approximately equally in both sexes. This disparity is possibly due to the limited number of bone PEComas being reported thus
far. In accordance with the very low frequency of TSC-associated PEComas, none of the patients with bone PEComas had association with
TSC.Table 1Clinical features of 11 cases of primary bone PEComaAuthor/ReferenceAge (y)/SexSiteSize (cm)PresentationRadiologic
featuresTreatmentFollow-upInsabato et al. 30/MRight proximal tibia2PainOsteolytic with cortical destructionLocal resectionANED, 12moTorri et
al. 28/MRight 6th rib2PainOsteolyticComplete resectionANED, not reportedRighi et al. 92/FRight fibulaNANANALocal resectionNALian et al.
52/FRight mid-shaft fibula6.3Progressive swellingExtension through the cortex forming a soft-tissue massWide excisionANED, 3moYamashita et
al. , case 135/M7th thoracic vertebra1.8Bilateral leg weakness, back painOsteolytic, destructive enhancing lesion (MRI)CRTPelvic bone
metastases, AWD,12moYamashita et al. , case 239/FRight tibia6.5PainEnhancing mass with areas of breakthrough of the cortex forming a soft-
tissue massRT + ExcisionANED,34moYamashita et al. , case 348/FRight distal tibiaVery smallPainPermeable destructive lesion with soft tissue
extension (recurrent lesion)Excisional biopsy, amputationRecurred 3 times in 3 y, ANED, 3yKazzaz et al. 26/M5th lumbar vertebraLargeLower
back pain, left leg weaknessDestructive lesion with extra-osseous massConservativeLung metastases, ANED, not reportedDesy et al. , case
193/FRight distal fibulaNAProgressive pain, swellingExpansile lytic lesionLocal resectionANED,2yDesy et al. , case 229/MLeft
acetabulum5Progressive hip painExtensive lytic with soft tissue expansionLeft hemipelvectomy + temsirolimusLung metastases, DOD, 8moLao et
al. (our case)47/MLeft femur5.2Pain, progressive swellingOsteolytic mass, destruction of cortex forming a soft-tissue
massCurettage + CRTLung metastases, AWD, 3.5y ANED indicates alive with no evidence of disease, AWD alive with disease, CRT chemo-
radiotherapy, RT, radiotherapy, DOD died of disease, mo month, NA, not available y year Clinical features of 11 cases of primary bone PEComa
ANED indicates alive with no evidence of disease, AWD alive with disease, CRT chemo-radiotherapy, RT, radiotherapy, DOD died of disease, mo
month, NA, not available y year Clinically, patients with bone PEComas typically presented with pain. Three patients were accompanied with
swelling [3, 8], one of whom had a pathologic fracture of the distal fibula . One patient was accompanied with bilateral leg weakness
because of cord compression . Radiologically, primary PEComas of bone frequently appeared as osteolytic lesions. In more aggressive cases,
destruction of cortex with forming of soft tissue mass could be noted [2, 6–8]. On MR imaging, the tumor was usually hypointense on
T1-weighted imaging and hyperintense on T2-weighted images [6, 8]. In a biopsy-proven malignant PEComa, F-18 FDG PET demonstrated intense
hypermetabolism . Of note, FDG PET scans were often negative in patients with benign PEComas and positive in malgiant PEComas . However, a
benign PEComa of the lungs with extensive FDG uptake has also been described . Histologically, most bone PEComas were composed of
epithelioid perivascular cells that exhibited characteristic nesting or organoid arrangement. Two case were composed of both epithelioid and
spindle cells . Of 11 cases, 3 were considered to be benign which were also supported by the clinical outcome [2, 4, 6, 8]. One case was
supposed to have malignant potential based on the invasion into the surrounding connective tissues and overexpression of cyclinD1 . The
remaining 7 cases were recognized histologically as fully malignant. Besides permeative growth pattern, marked nuclear atypia was present in
all 7 cases, necrosis was seen in 2 cases (including the current case) , and mitotic activity was noted in 6 cases, ranging from 5/50HPF to
36/50HPF . Vascular invasion was identified in 2 cases [3, 6]. It is worthy to note that although most cases of malignant PEComa fulfilled
the morphological criteria for malignancy proposed by Folpe et al. , rare example existed which was not clearly malignant on histological
ground, especially on biopsy specimens . In such instance, the malignancy was usually betrayed by its aggressive clinical behaviour. The
major differential diagnosis in the current case includes metastatic clear cell carcinoma, especially of renal origin. However,
immunohistochemical study ruled out this possibility as the tumor cells failed to express epithelial markers. Alveolar soft part sarcoma
(ASPS), a sarcoma characterized by organoid pattern and sinusoidal-type vasculature, may cause confusion with PEComa. In particular, both
tumors can express TFE3 [4, 12]. The absence of melanocytic differentiation in ASPS is helpful in the separation of these two entities. The
other lesions that may enter the differential diagnoses are metastatic malignant melanoma and clear cell sarcoma. In addition to
morphological differences, strong S100 protein and negative staining of myogenic markers in most melanomas and clear cell sarcomas (CCS),
the presence of specific EWSR1 ATF1 fusion transcripts resulting from t (12:22) (q13; q12) in CCS are helpful features to distinguish the
lesions from PEComa. It seems that malignant PEComa of bone has a tendency to develop metastatic disease. Of 7 malignant bone PEComas, four
developed metastatic disease, including pelvic bone metastases in one case , and lung metastases in other 3 cases (including the current
case) [7, 8]. At present, the optimal therapy for malignant PEComa remains a challenging practice. The activation of the mTOR signaling
pathway was thought mechanistically to be linked to the development of both TSC-associated and non-TSC-associated PEComa . Based on this
pathologic mechanism, mTOR inhibitors (sirolimus/rapamycin) was applied in small number of cases and considered to be a rational molecular
target for therapy in malignant PEComa . One patient with a malignant PEComa of the left acetabulum tried five cycles of temsirolimus with a
favorable response of the suspected pulmonary metastases. However, the patient passed away eight months postoperatively despite several
months of additional treatment . We have described the clinicopathological and immunohistochemical features of a malignant PEComa arising
primarily in the femur of an adult male. Although very rare, PEComa can present as a primary bone lesion. Clinical and pathological
correlation is mandatory in arriving at the correct diagnosis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. Competing
interests The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with publication of this case report. Authors’ contributions IWL drafted
the report, contributed to concept. LY and JW contributed to concept and design. All authors approved the final version of the manuscript.
