Hepatitis B virus (HBV) reactivation (so-called reverse seroconversion) is a rare but known complication of hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation, immunosuppressive therapy, or high-dose chemotherapy plus rituximab. This event is linked to a treatment-related fall in
titers of antibodies to hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAb) below the protective threshold level. A 77-year-old Korean man diagnosed with
primary amyloidosis was started on melphalan/dexamethasone combination therapy. During treatment, laboratory indices of hepatic function
suddenly deteriorated, and he developed acute hepatitis through reverse HBV seroconversion, becoming positive for hepatitis B surface
antigen (HBsAg) and negative for HBsAb. HBV DNA was also detectable in serum to a profound extent. Normal liver function was gradually
restored during the course of antiviral therapy (entecavir). HBV reactivation may lead to fatal liver disease in a significant percentage of
patients. As a result, physicians often screen for HBsAg and HBsAb prior to initiating chemotherapy, advising antiviral treatment in
patients seropositive for HBsAg, even in the absence of hepatitis B e antigen. Here, a case of HBV reactivation is described, involving a
patient given relatively low-dose chemotherapy (melphalan/dexamethasone) for primary amyloidosis. Instances of hepatitis B virus (HBV)
reactivation (so-called reverse seroconversion) have been reported after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation or high-dose chemotherapy
plus rituximab and are seldom-observed consequences of multiple myeloma. However, there are no known published accounts of HBV reactivation
following melphalan/dexamethasone treatment of primary amyloidosis . A 77-year-old Korean man presented to our hospital with an axillary
mass. The presence of amyloid in the subsequent excisional biopsy prompted a bone marrow biopsy, related laboratory tests, and pertinent
imaging studies, including computed tomography (CT). Ultimately, a diagnosis of primary amyloidosis was rendered. Despite the patient’s
advanced age, melphalan/dexamethasone combination therapy was elected. After three cycles of this regimen, detectable masses grew smaller
and his serum kappa/lambda ratio normalized, so treatment continued. However, serum levels of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) rose precipitously after six cycles of therapy. Our patient denied use of other medications (including herbal or
dietary supplements), smoking, or consumption of alcohol, and there was no history of blood transfusion. On physical examination, he was
alert, with normal blood pressure, pulse, and respiratory rate. No direct or rebound tenderness of the abdomen was evident. Laboratory tests
yielded the following values: white blood cell count, 2,720/mm3 (40.1% neutrophils, 43.5% lymphocytes, 1.4% eosinophils); hematocrit,
10.6g/dL; platelet count, 111,000/mm3; prothrombin time, 11.8 seconds; AST level, 454.1IU/L; ALT level, 496.3IU/L; total bilirubin,
1.34mg/dL; direct bilirubin, 1.04mg/dL; albumin, 3.11g/d; alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 142U/L; gamma-glutamyl transferase (rGTP), 126U/L;
blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 17.2mg/dL; and creatinine (Cr), 1.28mg/dL. Prior to initiating chemotherapy, our patient had been screened twice
for hepatitis, testing negative for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg, 0.41S/Co) and positive for antibodies to HBsAg (HBsAb, 55.0mIU/mL).
No further serologic testing was pursued at this juncture, but after receiving chemotherapy, HBsAg seroconversion (5,592S/Co) and loss of
HBsAb (0.62mIU/mL) were documented. Repeat testing generated the same results, so screening was expanded to include hepatitis B envelope
antigen (HBeAg, negative (0.27S/Co)), antibodies to HBeAg (HBeAb, positive (0.02S/Co)), and antibodies to hepatitis B core antigen
(immunoglobulin M (IgM) HBcAb, negative (0.27S/Co); immunoglobulin M (IgG) HBcAb, positive (2.2S/Co)). A massive HBV DNA burden (67,322,328
copies/mL) was also determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Given a lack of HBV vaccination by history, the patient’s
baseline HBsAb positivity was attributed to innate (naturally acquired) immunity. Hence, this acute bout of hepatitis was considered HBV
reactivation. Entecavir antiviral treatment was then administered, gradually restoring normal liver function within three weeks. Five months
later, AST and ALT levels were 40IU/L and 12IU/L, respectively. At this point, he also tested negative for HBsAg and positive for HBsAb,
with PCR-determined HBV DNA level at 3,600 copies/mL (Figure 1, Table 1). Continued chemotherapy for primary amyloidosis was declined, and
he died unexpectedly seven months later.Figure 1Changes of values of liver function tests and viral indicators.Table 1 Values of viral
indicators HBsAg (S/Co) HBsAb (mIU/mL) HBeAg (S/Co) HBeAb (mIU/mL) IgM-HBcAb (S/Co) IgG-HBcAb (S/Co) HBV DNA PCR (copies/mL) Before CTx (—)
0.40(+) 85.2(—) 0.41(+) 55.0 Mel/Dex#6 (+) 5,592(—) 0.62(+) 5,667(—) 0.09(—) 0.27(+) 0.02(—) 0.27(+) 12.267,422,428 After antiviral agent
3,600CTx, chemotherapy; Dex, dexamethasone; HBcAb, hepatitis B core antigen; HBeAb, antibodies to HBeAg; HBeAg, hepatitis B envelope
antigen; HBsAb, antibodies to HBsAg; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus; Mel, melphalan; PCR, polymerase chain
reaction. Changes of values of liver function tests and viral indicators. Values of viral indicators CTx, chemotherapy; Dex, dexamethasone;
HBcAb, hepatitis B core antigen; HBeAb, antibodies to HBeAg; HBeAg, hepatitis B envelope antigen; HBsAb, antibodies to HBsAg; HBsAg,
hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus; Mel, melphalan; PCR, polymerase chain reaction. HBV infection remains a major cause of
acute and chronic liver disease. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), 350 to 400 million people worldwide suffer from chronic
HBV infection , with relatively greater prevalence in Korea (2 to 10%) . Presence of HBsAb and HBcAb is equated with resolution of infection
and HBV clearance. In addition to enabling viral clearance during acute infection, immune reactivity to HBV antigens is also responsible for
disease pathogenesis . Innate immunity is important in controlling HBV infection immediately after onset, generally limiting the spread of
infection and instigating an efficient adaptive immune response. Organism-specific structures (for example, double-stranded RNA and
bacterial wall components) of pathogens trigger pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) to activate innate immunity. The most important PRRs in
viral infections are Toll-like receptors (TLRs), RNA helicases (such as retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation-
associated gene 5 (MDA5)), and double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) . Adaptive immunity is responsible for immunity to HBV
infection conferred by vaccine administration. Routine HBV vaccination at birth is recommended for a number of reasons. Approximately 90% of
infants born to HBV-infected mothers will acquire the infection at birth; and 30 to 50% of infected youths <5 years of age become chronic
HBV carriers, compared with only 6 to 10% of newly infected adults . The series of immunizations constituting recombinant HBV vaccines are
95% effective at inducing seroimmunity. Although in use for only 20 years, their duration is likely lifelong . Reverse seroconversion of HBV
due to medical treatments, such as hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and high-dose chemotherapy plus rituximab, is an uncommon event
that seldom occurs with multiple myeloma as well. During chemotherapy, amplified viral replication increases DNA polymerase activity,
thereby boosting serum levels of HBV DNA, HBeAb, and HBsAg; reversing HBsAb titers; and enabling the spread of liver infection . The
immunologic reconstruction that follows cytotoxic treatments is marked by massive and rapid immune-mediated destruction of infected
hepatocytes, reflected clinically in rising AST and ALT levels. Such scenarios may culminate in serious and even fatal liver disease for a
significant percentage of patients . Prior to initiating any cytotoxic or immunosuppressive therapy, patients should be adequately screened
for HBV infection. Antiviral treatment is advised for HBsAg-positive states (even if negative for HbeAg) . As seen here, HBV reactivation
may result from relatively low-dose chemotherapy (melphalan/dexamethasone), calling for expanded testing in similar circumstances. This
patient (HBsAg-negative/HBsAb-positive status at baseline) illustrates that HBV reactivation (that is reverse HBV seroconversion) may
develop as an exceedingly rare consequence of melphalan/dexamethasone therapy for primary amyloidosis. Comprehensive HBV screening,
including HBcAg, HBcAb, and HBV DNA serologic testing, is clearly needed in this setting. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient and the patient’s legal guardians for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. alkaline phosphatase alanine aminotransferase aspartate aminotransferase blood
urea nitrogen creatinine computed tomography hepatitis B core antigen antibodies to HBeAg hepatitis B envelope antigen antibodies to HBsAg
hepatitis B surface antigen hepatitis B virus immunoglobulin G immunoglobulin M melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 RNA-dependent
protein kinase pattern-recognition receptors gamma-glutamyl transferase retinoic acid-inducible gene I polymerase chain reaction Toll-like
receptors World Health Organization Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions
MWR was the major contributor in writing the manuscript. KJA, MDS, YYM, CBS, and CCH were involved in drafting, writing and editing the
manuscript. PSG was involved in drafting, writing and editing the manuscript, and reviewed the manuscript as corresponding author. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. This study was supported by research funds from Chosun University Hospital 2014.
