Optic disc pit (ODP) is small, gray-white, oval depression found at the optic nerve head. It is a congenital defect that occurs due to
imperfect closure of superior edge of the embryonic fissure. Cleft lip and palate are also congenital midline abnormalities occurring due to
defect in the fusion of frontonasal prominence, maxillary prominence and mandibular prominence. There is only one case report describing the
occurrence of ODP in a young patient with cleft lip and palate who also had basal encephalocele. We describe a 52-year-old patient with
congenital cleft lip and palate with bilateral ODP with maculopathy but without any other midline abnormality. Optic disc pit (ODP) is
small, gray-white, oval depression found at the optic nerve head. It was first described by Wiethe in 1882. It is considered as a type of
optic nerve head coloboma. Histologically, it is described as a small congenital defect in the cribriform plate where a herniation of the
dysplastic retina extends to the subarachnoid space in the optic nerve, which is surrounded by a layer of collagen-rich tissue. Cleft lip
and palate are also congenital midline abnormalities occurring due to defect in the fusion of frontonasal prominence, maxillary prominence
and mandibular prominence. There is only one case report describing the occurrence of ODP in a young patient with cleft lip and palate who
also had basal encephalocele. We describe a 52-year-old patient with congenital cleft lip and palate without any other midline abnormality
with bilateral ODP with maculopathy. A 52-year-old man presented to our hospital with complaint of painless, progressive decrease in vision
in both eyes for 6 months. There was no history of trauma, recurrent redness or any ocular surgery. The patient was born with a bilateral
cleft lip and cleft palate, for which surgical repair was done in childhood and he was prescribed an obturator for the small residual cleft
in the palate [Fig. 1]. On examination, the best corrected visual acuity was 20/100 in both eyes. The anterior segment was unremarkable in
both eyes. The patient was orthophoric, all ocular movements were full and free, and pupillary reactions were also normal. The applanation
tonometry by Golmann applanation tonometer revealed an intraocular pressure of 18 mm in both eyes. The fundus examination revealed bilateral
ODP inferotemporally with maculopathy with hyperpigmentation at the macula [Fig. 2]. Refraction under cycloplegia did not reveal any
significant refractive error. Telecanthus and hypertelorism were ruled out by measuring inner canthal distance, outer canthal distance and
interpupillary distance. Showing repaired bilateral cleft lip (blue arrow) and palate with residual fistula (red arrow) Fundus of both eyes
showing optic disc pit inferotemporally with maculopathy The fundus flourescein angiography showed a normal arterio-venous filling with
window defects at the macula but no leakage [Fig. 3]. The Spectral domain optical coherence tomography of the right eye revealed an ODP with
maculoschisis with thinning of the retinal layers, with a neurosensory detachment not communicating with the pit in the right eye while the
left eye showed an ODP with maculoschisis with thinning of the retinal layers. There was also hyper-reflectivity of retinal pigment
epithelium-choriocapillaries complex in both eyes [Fig. 4]. The general physical examination of the patient was unremarkable. The magnetic
resonance imaging of the brain and spine done to rule out any other midline or neurological anomalies were within normal limits.
Ultrasonography of the abdomen and pelvis was also done to rule out any renal abnormality and was unremarkable. Fluorescein angiography of
both eyes showing window defects at macula, but no leakage Spectral domain optical coherence tomography of right eye showing schisis and
neurosensory detachment (a) and of left eye showing only maculoschisis (b) The patient was not advised surgery in view of poor visual
prognosis due to retinal thinning and pigmentary changes at macula. He was also referred to the Department of Plastic Surgery, where he was
advised to continue using the obturator. The optic disc pit is small, gray-white, oval depression found at the optic nerve head. It is a
congenital defect that occurs due to imperfect closure of superior edge of the embryonic fissure. It appears as a crater like indentation on
the surface of optic nerve head usually with a steep temporal wall. It usually occurs as an isolated anomaly. However, variants of optic
disc colobomas especially morning glory syndrome have been associated with the papillorenal syndrome and basal encephaloceles. Papillorenal
syndrome, also known as Renal-coloboma syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder consisting of bilateral optic disc anomalies associated
with hypoplastic kidneys, implicating PAX2 and PAX6 at chromosome 10 as the causative genes. These genes play an important role in the
normal development of kidney, mid-brain, hind-brain, ears and eyes. Developmental anomalies of the optic disc have also been seen in
patients with basal encephalocele associated with cleft lip and palate. These include the morning glory syndrome, pale discs, coloboma of
the optic nerve head, megalopapilla, optic nerve dysplasia, peripapillary staphyloma and ODP. The occurrence of basal encephalocele with
mid-facial clefting is known as frontonasal dysplasia. It has a wide clinical spectrum consisting of hypertelorism, primary telecanthus, a
broad nasal tip which is frequently cleft, median cleft upper lip and premaxilla, median cleft palate, anterior or basal encephalocele, and
agenesis of the corpus callosum. The pathogenesis is unknown, but a nonseparation theory, which assumes that during closure of the neural
tube, the ectodermal elements fail to separate, has been implicated. The cleft lip and palate occurs due to nonfusion of frontonasal,
maxillary and mandibular prominences. However, the presence of optic nerve anomalies is not explained by these theories. Itakura et al.,
have suggested that if the sphenoid encephalocele prevents fusion of the palate, which precedes formation of the optic nerve, then the later
development of the optic nerve could be abnormal. The co-existence of cleft lip and palate with ODP in the absence of basal encephalocele
cannot be explained by the above-mentioned theory, and the only common pathway in the pathogenesis of these two independent disorders is the
gestational age of 6â€“8 weeks, at which the frontonasal, maxillary and mandibular processes fuse and the embryonic fissure in the primitive
eye closes. Hence, it may be hypothesized that an insult at this time may have caused these two anomalies to co-occur. To the best of our
knowledge, there is only one case of ODP with maculopathy, with cleft lip-palate with basal encephalocele reported in the literature. This
is the first case report of ODP with maculopathy with cleft lip and palate without a basal encephalocele found incidentally in the same
patient or there might be a possible unexplained association. Thus, a possibility of ODP should be kept in mind, in a patient of cleft lip
and palate with visual complaints, irrespective of the presence or absence of basal encephalocele. The various options for management of
maculopathy associated with ODP include gas tamponade with or without laser barrage and surgically with pars plana vitrectomy with or
without internal limiting membrane peeling with or without gas tamponade. It has been seen that multilayer schisis pattern of maculopathy
has poorer visual prognosis and may require multiple surgeries as compared with serous detachment pattern. Our patient also had multilayer
schisis at the macula along with retinal layers thinning. Hence, no surgery was undertaken for this patient. Source of Support: Nil.
Conflict of Interest: None declared.
