Chronic refractory hypotension is a rare but significant mortality risk in renal failure patients. Such aberrant physiology usually deems
patient unfit for renal transplant surgery. Exercise stimulates the mechano-chemoreceptors in the skeletal muscle thereby modulating the
sympathetic effects on blood pressure regulation. The haemodynamic response to dynamic exercise in such patients has not been previously
investigated. We present a case with severe chronic hypotension who underwent exercise testing before and after renal transplantation, with
marked differences in blood pressure response to exercise. A 40-year old haemodialysis-dependent patient with a 2 year history of refractory
hypotension (≤80/50 mmHg) was referred for living donor renal transplantation at our tertiary centre. Each dialysis session was often less
than 2 h and 30 min due to symptomatic hypotension. As part of the cardiovascular assessment, she underwent haemodynamic evaluation with
cardiopulmonary exercise testing. Blood pressure normalized during unloaded pedalling but was exaggerated at maximal workload whereby it
rose from 82/50 mmHg to a peak of 201/120 mmHg. Transthoracic echocardiography, tonometric measure of central vascular compliance and
myocardial perfusion scan were normal. She subsequently underwent an antibody-incompatible renal transplantation and was vasopressor reliant
for 14 days during the post-operative period. Eight weeks following transplant, resting blood pressure was normal and a physiological
exercise-haemodynamic response was observed during a repeat cardiopulmonary exercise testing. This case highlights the potential therapeutic
role of unloaded leg cycling exercise during dialysis session to correct chronic hypotension, allowing patients to have greater tolerance to
fluid shift. It also adds to existing evidence that sympathetic dysfunction is reversible with renal transplant. Furthermore chronic
hypotension with preserved exercise-haemodynamic response and cardiovascular reserve should not preclude these patients from renal
transplant surgery. Chronic refractory hypotension (inter-dialytic systolic blood pressure, SBP <100 mmHg) in long-term dialysis patients is
a rare but serious problem. Sustained hypotension between dialysis sessions occurs in 5–10 % and is associated with poor outcomes, including
increased mortality . These patients are often deemed unfit for surgery including renal transplant. Proposed mechanisms focus on inadequate
cardiovascular response because of autonomic dysfunction and reduced vascular response to vasopressors [2, 3]. These patients have high
levels of circulating noradrenaline but reduced alpha-adrenoreceptor density, which is associated with a blunted pressor response . Reduced
sympathetic nerve discharge due to the loss of renal afferent nerve endings is a major causative factor for persistent hypotension in
anephric patients . Post-dialysis reduced plasma concentrations of chromogranin A (a protein co-released with cathecholamines) are seen
compared to normotensive patients, consistent with blunted sympathetic response . Interleukin-6 and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels have
been shown to correlate with mean arterial pressure in hypotensive patients during haemodialysis suggesting an inflammatory role . Current
treatment strategies rely on intravascular volume monitoring, alterations in dialysate composition and vasoconstricting drugs [3, 7].
However, there is no definitive management presently. Midodrine and vasopressin therapy have been shown to be effective only in some
patients . The most promising technologies are those capable of real-time monitoring of dialysis composition, ultrafiltration rate and
temperature and adjust accordingly minute by minute . The levels of sodium, potassium, calcium, bicarbonate and magnesium have all been
shown to alter the risk of hypotension during dialysis . Sodium levels appear to have the most significant effect; dialysates with higher
sodium concentrations may reduce rates of hypotension during dialysis . Ultrafiltration is associated with a rise in core body temperature
secondary to complex autonomic mechanisms; the central response to this is vasodilation. Thus, cooling dialysate from 37 °C to 35° has been
shown to maintain intra-dialytic blood pressure (BP) in a number of patients . Although the proposed mechanisms above highlight the
hyporesponsiveness of the efferent or afferent sympathetic receptors in causing refractory hypotension, it remains uncertain if stimulation
of the skeletal chemosensitive or mechano-receptors through dynamic exercise could modulate haemodynamics in these patients. We present a
case of severe chronic hypotension who underwent dynamic exercise testing before and after renal transplantation, with marked differences in
blood pressure response to exercise. A 40-year old female haemodialysis-dependent patient had a 2 year history of chronic refractory severe
hypotension (≤80/50 mmHg). Previous treatment with α1-adrenergic agonist, mineralocorticoid analog and optimization of dialysate composition
with sodium concentration >140 mmol/L and use of bicarbonate buffers had been non-effective. Aetiology of renal failure was reflux
nephropathy. She had right native nephrectomy and left native pyeloplasty performed 21 years previously. She received a cadaveric renal
graft 13 years ago which failed 9 years later because of chronic allograft nephropathy. The failed graft was removed 3 years previously due
to recurrent sepsis. She had been anuric for the last 4 years. There was no history of diabetes, heart failure or ischemic heart disease.
She had been on hemodialysis for 6 years following failed peritoneal dialysis. Dialysis adequacy during the 6 months prior to transplant was
recorded with urea reduction rate of 75 % and Kt/V (measure of clearance per dialysis factored for patient size) of 1.6. Computed tomography
scan revealed a grossly atrophic native left kidney. Transthoracic echocardiography showed normal valves, pericardium and ejection fraction
was 62 %. Measures of central vascular stiffness were normal with carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity (PWV) of 5.9 m/s (reference range:
4.5–9.6 m/s) and augmentation index corrected to heart rate (AIx75) of 21 % (reference range: 19–24 %). Myocardial perfusion scan was
normal. On maximal cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) , oxygen consumption at peak exercise (VO2peak) was 18 ml/min/kg (73 % of
predicted VO2peak) (Table 1). Following 3 min rest, pedaling without load (freewheel stage of exercise) produced a 50 % increment in BP from
baseline. An exaggerated rise in SBP and diastolic BP (DBP) was recorded at maximal work load, whereby BP rose from 82/50 mmHg to a peak of
201/120 mmHg (ΔSBP/ΔDBP = 119/70 mmHg). At this point, the patient abruptly ceased pedaling and a rapid decline in BP to baseline level was
documented (Fig. 1).Table 1Characteristics before and after kidney transplantVariablesBaseline8 week post-transplantReferenceClinicalBody
mass index, kg/m2 25.629.1-Resting SBP, mm Hg82124-Resting DBP, mm Hg5082-EchocardiographyLV ejection fraction, %62.363.3≥50E/mean
e'8.09.9≤10VascularAortic PWV (m/s)5.96.44.5–9.6AIx75 (%)212819–24BiochemicalCreatinine, μmol/l44613950–90eGFR, ml/min/1.73 m3
-39>60Hemoglobin, g/dl13.29.112–15Albumin, g/l444435–50Cortisol, nmol/l433356150–720Aldosterone, pmol/lPre-exercise51537228–445Post-
exercise1342-28–445Renin, mU/lPre-exercise<9.09.09.8–23.8Post-exercise<9.0-9.8–23.8Cardiopulmonary exercise testFEV1/FVC, %787775–80VO2peak,
% predicted7373-VO2AT, % of VO2peak predicted4148-Oxygen pulse, ml O2/min9.49.3Maximal work load, Watt8899-Endurance time, min10.411.3-RER
at peak exercise1.41.3-HR at rest, beat/min8273-HR at peak exercise, beat/min141142- LV left ventricular, E/mean e' ratio of early
transmitral flow velocity to annular mitral velocity (averaged of septal and lateral), PWV pulse wave velocity, AIx 75 augmentation index
corrected to heart rate, FEV 1 /FVC, ratio of forced expiratory volume in 1 s to full vital capacity, VO 2 peak oxygen consumption at peak
exercise, VO 2 AT oxygen consumption at the point of anaerobic threshold, RER respiratory exchange ratio of CO2 production to O2
consumption, HR heart rateFig. 1Haemodynamic profile (a) during a typical haemodialysis session lasting ≤ 2 h and (b) with cardiopulmonary
exercise before renal transplant (dotted line) and 8 weeks following transplant (grey line). SBP, systolic blood pressure; DBP, diastolic
blood pressure; HR, heart rate Characteristics before and after kidney transplant LV left ventricular, E/mean e' ratio of early transmitral
flow velocity to annular mitral velocity (averaged of septal and lateral), PWV pulse wave velocity, AIx 75 augmentation index corrected to
heart rate, FEV 1 /FVC, ratio of forced expiratory volume in 1 s to full vital capacity, VO 2 peak oxygen consumption at peak exercise, VO 2
AT oxygen consumption at the point of anaerobic threshold, RER respiratory exchange ratio of CO2 production to O2 consumption, HR heart rate
Haemodynamic profile (a) during a typical haemodialysis session lasting ≤ 2 h and (b) with cardiopulmonary exercise before renal transplant
(dotted line) and 8 weeks following transplant (grey line). SBP, systolic blood pressure; DBP, diastolic blood pressure; HR, heart rate The
patient proceeded to have an HLA antibody-incompatible kidney transplant. Immunosuppression consisted of mycophenolate mofetil, tacrolimus
and prednisolone. A single dose of 500 mg methylprednisolone intra-operatively and basiliximab 20 mg were given at days 0 and 4. Pre-
operatively she underwent seven sessions of HLA antibody removal therapy [11, 12] with cryofiltration, with a further two sessions (day 1
and 2) following surgery and one session of double filtration plasmapheresis on day 3. During the intraoperative period, her BP was
supported by infusion of metaraminol. Post-operatively, she was vasopressor reliant for 14 days at which point the creatinine was 133 μmol/l
(eGFR 41 ml/min/1.73 m2). Eight weeks following transplantation, her resting BP without anti-hypertensive agent was 124/82 mmHg. Graft
function was moderate with eGFR 39 ml/min/1.73 m2. On repeat CPET, SBP rose uniformly but DBP did not rise from baseline
(ΔSBP/ΔDBP = 19/-13 mmHg) (Fig. 1). VO2peak was comparable to the pre-transplant measure but there was improvement in the anaerobic
threshold following transplant (VO2AT, 48 vs. 41 % of predicted VO2peak). Cortisol, renin and aldosterone levels at rest were (pre- vs.
post-transplant) 433 vs. 356 nmol/l, <9 vs. 9 mU/l and 515 vs. 372 pmol/l, respectively (Table 1). To our knowledge this is the first human
case study demonstrating an exaggerated BP response to dynamic exercise using CPET in a patient with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and
refractory chronic hypotension. Exercise increases sympathetic and reduces parasympathetic activity resulting in augmented cardiac
contractility, stoke volume, heart rate and blood pressure . This adaptive response known as the exercise pressor reflex (EPR) is regulated
by mechano- and chemoreceptors in the skeletal muscle . Despite the chronicity of profound hypotension, the patient developed augmentation
of BP and tachycardia during the warm-up unloaded phase of exercise. Furthermore, following an abrupt discontinuation of pedaling at maximal
stress, a rapid decline in BP was documented. Thus, EPR in the absence of work load appears to be driven by stimulation of the muscle
stretch receptors that creates an afferent sympathetic stimulus . In healthy individuals, a regulated increase in cardiac output and a
reduction in peripheral vascular resistance (PVR) during exercise produce a rise in SBP while keeping the DBP stable , similar to the
haemodynamic profile observed at post-transplant in our case. Skeletal muscle PVR is tightly regulated between vasoconstricting and dilating
signals to produce a precise functional response from the vascular endothelium allowing maximal muscular work . The exaggerated SBP and DBP
at maximal workload but low BP during non-pedaling rest documented prior to transplant could be generated by over-compensatory
mechanoreceptor activation in response to hyporesponsive chemoreceptors in the skeletal muscle beds . The latter has been observed in ESRD
patients whereby uraemia and inflammatory cytokines are thought to downregulate or cause altered signal transduction in the receptors [1,
17]. Additionally, the absence of renin in our patient prior to transplant suggested not only loss of crucial haemodynamic regulatory renal-
derived hormones (eg. renalase and adrenomedullin) but also renal afferent signaling. This along with an inflated sympathetic response from
the enhanced activity of the skeletal mechanoreceptors further impedes the ability of skeletal vasodilatation during exercise. When cardiac
output is not balanced by increased compliance from peripheral vasculature, the result is sharp rise in BP . ESRD patients are known to have
profound exercise intolerance due to abnormal haemodynamic and autonomic responses impairing oxygen delivery to skeletal muscle . Following
transplantation, exercise tolerance of the patient improved as demonstrated by the increased endurance time, maximal workload and anaerobic
threshold. This suggests restored autonomic function and improved oxygen delivery to muscles due to regulated vasodilatation in exercising
skeletal muscle capillary beds. Normalization of BP with transplant was also associated with presence of plasma renin and a reduction in
pre-exercise levels of stress hormones (aldosterone and cortisol). Unfortunately a post-exercise aldosterone level was not obtained due to
an analysis problem but we propose this level would have been much lower than that seen before transplant. Therefore, restitution of renal-
derived regulatory hormones and renal afferent nerves with a transplant were the likely explanation for the correction of chronic
hypotension and EPR. Data on muscle mass or strength were not collected in this study. However, exercise measurements of gases indicated the
lack of major skeletal pathology. Despite being hypotensive at rest, this patient was able to complete a maximal exercise testing beyond the
point of anaerobic metabolism, achieving an endurance time of 10.4 min (if less than 8 min, muscular deconditioning could play a role).
Also, at peak exercise, the objective measure of volitional fatigue determined by the respiratory exchange ratio (RER = ratio of CO2 output
to O2 uptake) was 1.4 whereby a sustained RER of 1.1 is a minimum target level for a maximal test. Although the health related quality of
life data was not available, we recognized that the physiological BP response, dialysis independence and increased exercise capacity
following transplant could all lead to an improved overall quality of life. Our findings suggest there may be a therapeutic role of dynamic
exercise in ESRD to correct chronic hypotension, at least temporarily. Unloaded cycling exercise during dialysis sessions may allow these
patients to have greater tolerance to fluid shift. Our results add to existing evidence that sympathetic dysfunction is reversible with
renal transplant . Furthermore chronic hypotension with preserved exercise-haemodynamic response and cardiovascular reserve should not
preclude these patients from transplant surgery. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient who was assessed in a clinical study
that was approved by the Black Country Research Ethics Committee (REC:09/H1202/113). A copy of the written consent is available for review
by the Editor of this journal. Systolic blood pressure Diastolic blood pressure Peripheral vascular resistance Estimated glomerular
filtration rate Measure of clearance per dialysis factored for patient size) End stage renal disease Exercise pressor reflex Cardiopulmonary
exercise testing Peak (maximal) oxygen uptake Oxygen uptake at anaerobic threshold Pulse wave velocity Augmentation index corrected to heart
rate 75 beats/min Stephen M.S. Ting and Daniel Zehnder contributed equally to this work. Competing interests The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AR performed the literature search and wrote the article. ST, DZ, RH and NK designed the
study that generated the case report, collected the data and contributed to the writing of the article. GM carried out the CPET testing and
contributed to the paper. CW provided haemodynamic and haemodialysis data prior to renal transplant and contributed to the paper. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank Mr. Nicolas Aldridge and Mrs. Susan Hewins (Research Nurses) for providing
assistance in the administrative work. We thank the British Heart Foundation for providing a grant (PG/11/66/28982) to our clinical study
from which we have obtained data for this case report. We would also thank the Reading family and University Hospital Coventry and
Warwickshire NHS Trust Charity for funding the CPET machine used in this study.
