Diffuse systemic sclerosis is associated with high mortality; however, the pathogenesis of cardiac death in these patients is not clear. A
56-year-old Caucasian female patient presented with dyspnea and requested to donate her body to science in order to improve understanding of
diffuse systemic sclerosis pathogenesis. She had extensive testing for dyspnea including pulmonary function tests, an echocardiogram,
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, and right heart catheterization to characterize her condition. Her case highlights the morbidity seen in
this disease, including the presence of extensive skin thickening, digital ulcerations, and scleroderma renal crisis. In this case report,
we present the finding of cardiac tissue metabolomics, which may indicate a problem with vasodilation as a contributor to cardiac death in
diffuse systemic sclerosis. The use of autopsy and tissue metabolomics in rare disease may help clarify disease pathogenesis. Diffuse
systemic sclerosis (SSc) is associated with a high morbidity and mortality, and collaborative efforts are needed to understand its
pathogenesis . The Prospective Registry of Early Systemic Sclerosis (PRESS), a multicenter incident cohort study of patients with early
diffuse cutaneous SSc, has the goal of advancing the understanding of disease pathogenesis and identifying novel biomarkers . The PRESS
investigators elected to study patients with recently diagnosed diffuse SSc initiated on appropriate treatment to examine predictors of
these patients’ morbidity and mortality. We present a case report of a PRESS patient who requested to donate her body to science to
highlight the importance of using autopsy to better understand mortality in this rare disease. This is the first case report of using
cardiac tissue metabolomics in diffuse SSc to better understand disease pathogenesis. A 56-year-old Caucasian woman with a 20-year history
of type II diabetes mellitus presented with increased fatigue, bilateral lower extremity edema, and tightness of her skin in her lower
extremities in 2012. Her primary care physician evaluated her cellular blood counts, chemistries, and thyroid-stimulating hormone, and
obtained an echocardiogram. All of these studies were normal. A sleep study revealed mild obstructive sleep apnea, which was treated. Within
six months, in addition to lower extremity skin thickening, she developed dyspnea, Raynaud’s phenomenon, and digital ulcerations. She was
referred to a rheumatologist at that time and found to be positive for anti-nuclear antibodies, at 1:640 in a nucleolar pattern, and RNA
polymerase III antibody. Tests for other SSc antibodies, including anti-centromere, anti-fibrillin, anti-topoisomerase, and anti-Th/To, were
negative. Her blood pressure and creatinine were noted to be normal. Her hemoglobin A1c was 7.6%. She was not on an angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I). At a rheumatology appointment six months after her initial symptoms started, pulmonary function tests demonstrated
an isolated decrease in diffusing capacity (38% predicted). A repeat echocardiogram suggested the interim development of moderate pulmonary
hypertension with an estimated right ventricular systolic pressure of 45mmHg and an impaired relaxation pattern of left ventricular filling.
A computed tomography scan of her chest did not reveal the presence of a pulmonary embolism, and there was no evidence of interstitial lung
disease. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not show any delayed enhancement that would suggest prior myocardial injury or
infarction. The images revealed that she had normal stress and resting perfusion, as well as hyperdynamic left ventricular function with an
ejection fraction of 77% and no wall motion abnormalities. However, there was mild bi-atrial enlargement and her right ventricle was dilated
with normal right ventricular systolic function. A right heart catheterization established the diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension, with
right atrial pressure of 12mmHg, right ventricular pressure of 53/17mmHg, pulmonary arterial (PA) pressure of 45/16mmHg (mean, 33mmHg),
wedge pressure of 20mmHg, cardiac output of 7L/min, cardiac index of 3.5L/min, and peripheral vascular resistance of 2 Wood units. She was
noted to be anemic with a hemoglobin level of 7.4g/dL. Based on her cardiac catheterization results, she was treated with diuresis and a
phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitor. At her one-month follow-up visit after the cardiac catheterization, her digital ulcerations were healing and
lower extremity edema was improved, but her modified Rodnan skin score had worsened by six points (27 to 33). Methotrexate was prescribed,
but our patient reported intolerable nausea after two doses. Owing to the anemia, she had an upper endoscopy. This led to a diagnosis of
gastric antral vascular ectasia that was treated with argon plasma coagulation. Our patient was hesitant to continue methotrexate, thus
mycophenolate mofetil was prescribed. Our patient did not receive any steroid therapy. One year after her initial symptom of SSc, she had a
scleroderma renal crisis (SRC), with a presenting blood pressure of 178/76mmHg and creatinine level of 1.77mg/dL. Microangiopathic hemolytic
anemia was not present. Our patient was hospitalized and her blood pressure was controlled with an ACE-I. Our patient attended follow-up
visits every other month for the next four months. Despite well-controlled blood pressure; echocardiogram improvement (normal ejection
fraction); resolution of anemia following treatment for gastric antral vascular ectasia; creatinine stabilization (1.44mg/dL); and modified
Rodnan skin score stabilization (maximum 38), our patient reported progressive fatigue and weakness. An electromyogram, nerve conduction
studies, and levels of muscle enzymes were normal, and physical therapy was prescribed. She reported mild improvement in all symptoms at a
follow-up visit two months later. One year after her diagnosis of SSc and two months after her last clinic appointment, our patient was
hospitalized for acute onset left-sided heart failure, with an ejection fraction of 20% documented by echocardiogram. An ECG revealed that
her sinus rhythm and cardiac enzyme levels were normal. A repeat right and left heart catheterization showed a right atrial pressure of
19mmHg, right ventricular pressure of 64/7mmHg, PA pressure of 69/27mmHg (mean, 39mmHg), wedge pressure of 19mmHg, cardiac output of
6.8L/min, cardiac index of 3.3L/min, and only mild luminal abnormalities in her right coronary and left circumflex arteries. During this
hospitalization, our patient stated that if she were to die, she wished to donate her body to science to help further physician
understanding of SSc. One day after making this statement, she died of pulseless electrical activity, despite being followed closely at a
clinic dedicated to SSc care and having no limitations to access. An autopsy was immediately performed. She had cardiac enlargement, right
and left ventricular chamber dilatation, pleural effusions, hepatosplenomegaly, and ascites indicative of heart failure. Atherosclerosis of
her right coronary artery with 20% occlusion of the lumen was identified. Sections of her right and left ventricles, and septum showed focal
interstitial fibrosis (Figure 1). There was mild perivascular fibrosis in her left ventricle. Trichrome staining confirmed the presence of
collagen; there were no other microvascular changes. There was myocyte hypertrophy, but no signs of inflammation. Her lungs showed moderate
interstitial fibrosis, septal thickening, and large arteries with intima fibrosis. Segments of her esophagus, stomach, small bowel, and
large bowel showed marked collagen deposition in the lamina propria. There was moderate autolysis without significant inflammation. Sections
of her kidney showed several globally sclerotic glomeruli, moderate fibrous arterial intimal thickening, and interstitial fibrosis. There
were no inflammatory infiltrates, casts, or crystals. There was glomerular enlargement, nodular increases in mesangial matrix, and capillary
wall thickening consistent with nodular diabetic glomerulosclerosis. No thrombotic microangiopathy of the small vessels was noted. Her bone
marrow was hypercellular for age but showed trilineage hematopoiesis with an approximately normal ratio of myeloid to erythroid precursors.
No other significant abnormalities were reported. The pathologist reported her likely cause of death as a fatal dysrhythmia due to
myocardial fibrosis and atherosclerosis.Figure 1 (A) Hematoxylin and eosin-stained section shows myocardial tissue with interstitial
fibrosis. There is focal myocyte hypertrophy. Inflammation is not identified. Small artery (arrow) does not show abnormalities. (B) On
trichrome stain, the interstitial fibrosis is highlighted in blue and myofibrillar loss (arrows) is also seen. (A) Hematoxylin and eosin-
stained section shows myocardial tissue with interstitial fibrosis. There is focal myocyte hypertrophy. Inflammation is not identified.
Small artery (arrow) does not show abnormalities. (B) On trichrome stain, the interstitial fibrosis is highlighted in blue and myofibrillar
loss (arrows) is also seen. Metabolomics were used to investigate which metabolism and signaling pathways played a key role in her heart
failure. For this investigation, the heart was immediately placed in a −80°C freezer. Subsequent quantitative analysis of a large number of
small metabolites (<1000Da) within a cell or tissue and principle component analysis allow maximum variation in the data to be described,
providing a fingerprint of physiological and pathophysiological status. In our study, the comparative analyses of metabolomes were performed
by a combined approach of gas chromatography–mass spectrometry spectroscopic techniques with subsequent computer analysis of the data
generated. Our patient’s tissue was compared to averages of 79 metabolites in 16 other patients who suffered cardiac death. In our patient,
the essential amino acids (2-aminoadipic acid, lysine, valine, leucine, alanine, glutamic acid, proline, aspartic acid, asparagine,
methionine, cysteine, tyrosine, and histidine) were the most elevated metabolic class. Our patient’s lipid, peptide, and carbohydrate
metabolites were similar to those in the other 16 patients tested. Of interest, despite her history of SRC, our patient’s creatinine level
was lower than any of the other samples tested. The index case presented here is of a PRESS patient at high risk for morbidity and
mortality, who stated a desire to donate her body to science. As per this patient’s desire, the PRESS investigators acknowledge that a more
objective and precise system to identify specific cause of death is needed in rare diseases to better understand their pathogenesis. This
patient was followed closely at a dedicated SSc clinic, thus her care was guideline based . Nonetheless, the outcome was poor and, despite
appropriate therapeutics, she died suddenly. In SSc patients, myocardial fibrosis, conduction system disease, and autonomic neuropathy are
substrates predisposing to supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias, which in some individuals can cause sudden death. The use of
electroanatomical mapping may have a role in these patients to reveal possible arrhythmogenic foci . While there are contradictory reports
regarding the prevalence of atherosclerosis in SSc, it is possible that, in our patient, her longstanding diabetes contributed to her
adverse cardiac outcome . Once cardiac dysfunction becomes apparent in patients with SSc it can severely increase morbidity and rapidly lead
to death, such as seen in this case. The etiology of cardiac fibrosis may be repeat ischemia and reperfusion injury . The prevalence of
primary cardiac involvement in SSc may be difficult to determine owing to the numerous possible cardiac manifestations in a phenotypically
diverse patient population. Histologic studies, which reveal the presence of myocardial involvement, often disagree with clinical studies .
In our patient, we determined that metabolomics may provide further information on her presumed cardiac death. Metabolomics is a powerful
tool to map perturbations in the metabolic system and enables simultaneous quantification of several metabolites that might provide insights
into disease pathogenesis . We used metabolomics to provide a systematic study of the polar metabolites (metabolome) present in the
cardiomyocyte at the time of her death. There are reported end-point metabolites of biological events after cardiac arrest and resuscitation
. In this pilot study, the metabolomics approach offered insight into the cardiac molecule regulation and signaling at the time of our
patient’s presumed cardiac death. The metabolome represents the complete set of low molecular weight (typically <1500Da) metabolites
produced by an organism, which are the end products of gene expression, and reflects the physiological state of a biological system .
Because untargeted metabolomics essentially provides a snapshot of the genome in its interaction with the environment, it is useful in
biomarker discovery, diagnostics, and may reveal specific metabolic patterns of disease . In our patient with diffuse SSc, the primary
finding was that her levels of essential amino acids were elevated. While no statistical significance could be assigned to these results
because they were from one biological replicate, it is an interesting finding nonetheless. The dibasic amino acids share plasma membrane
transporters with arginine, a rate-limiting substrate for nitric oxide synthase, which is a critical mediator of vasodilation . Our
patient’s profile was different from the metabolomic network of seven metabolites reported to be associated with death (gamma-
glutamylphenylalanine, gamma-glutamyltyrosine, 1-arachidonoyl GPC(20:4), taurochenodeoxycholate, 3-(4-hydroxyphenyl) lactate, sucrose,
kynurenine) in patients studied in an intensive care unit with systemic inflammatory response criteria . Historically, autopsy analysis was
instrumental for understanding SSc pathogenesis . Previous autopsy series of cardiac involvement in SSc describe hypertrophy and/or fibrosis
primarily of the myocardium; however, fibrosis of the endocardium, pericardium, and epicardium has been reported . These autopsy studies
suggest that cardiac fibrosis represents a late feature of disease; however, cardiac remodeling, characterized by myocardial fibrosis,
particularly within the interstitium in patients with SSc, can be identified on endomyocardial biopsy before any signs or symptoms of heart
failure appear . Thus, another important aspect of this early diffuse SSc case is that left ventricle changes were comparable to the right
ventricle changes at autopsy. This finding highlights that patients with diffuse SSc may have distinct changes in both the right and left
ventricles, independent of the presence of PAH or heart failure. In fact, the use of cardiac MRI in SSc, which can show delayed enhancement
consistent with fibrosis, demonstrates that cardiac involvement is likely more common than previously recognized on echocardiogram . The
importance of a better understanding of low-grade endocardial and myocardial inflammation and fibrosis in patients with diffuse SSc is
paramount for guiding therapy and predicting outcomes . In particular, the role of ACE-I in diffuse SSc must be clarified because it may
mask SRC , yet, as highlighted by this case, may have a role in cardiac care. Furthermore, this case highlights a need for renewed attention
on the utility of autopsy to enhance our understanding of diffuse SSc pathogenesis on a molecular level. A delayed-enhancement cardiac MRI
failed to identify myocardial fibrosis that was present on a histological assessment of the myocardium following autopsy. Thus, post-mortem
studies may enhance our knowledge of visceral involvement in diffuse SSc. This case highlights the importance of autopsy. Our patient
suffered from the many effects of SSc and requested that her body be donated to science to help further an understanding of the pathogenesis
of SSc. It is likely that the pace of discovery will dramatically accelerate in SSc research as increasingly comprehensive screening of the
genome, transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome are applied. To optimize these new technologies, however, it is critical that autopsy is
considered in patients with SSc to allow tissues for research to be methodically collected and processed. The PRESS investigators
acknowledge that autopsy holds immense potential for understanding mechanisms of disease and facilitating the development of diagnostics,
and perhaps personalized therapeutic strategies, in SSc. This patient consented to participate in the PRESS registry and its publications.
She was committed to the discovery of pathogenesis in SSc. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient's next-of-kin for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions TF, AS, JG, RD, FH, VS,
SA, MH, VS, DK, and EB designed the PRESS registry, autopsy collection variables, and prepared the manuscript. TF, SD, and JR cared for the
patient, collected the case report variables, and prepared the manuscript. MR and NL performed the autopsy. JC performed the metabolomics
and provided interpretation of the data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. TMF was supported by the National Center for
Research Resources and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health (NIH), through Grant
8UL1TR000105 (formerly UL1RR025764). AAS was supported by award number K23 AR061439. RTD was supported by NIH NIAMS K23 AR057845. SA was
supported by K23 AR061436. VKS was supported by award numbers KL2RR031974 and UL1RR031975 from the National Center for Research Resources
and award R01NR013888 from the National Institute of Nursing Research. DK was supported by NIH/NIAMS K24 AR063120. The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Center for Research Resources or the
NIH. SD was supported by the Doris Duke Foundation Clinical Scientist Grant 2013108, Deseret Foundation #00571 and the National Institutes
of Health National Center for Research Resources grant that supports the Center Clinical Translational Sciences UL1-RR025764/ C06-RR11234.
