Most biliary stone diseases need to be treated surgically. However, in special cases that traditional biliary tract endoscopic access is not
allowed, a multidisciplinary approach using hybrid technique with urologic instrumental constitute a treatment option. We report a case of a
patient with complex intrahepatic stones who previously underwent unsuccessful conventional approaches, and who symptoms resolved after
treatment with hybrid technique using an endourologic technology. We conducted an extensive literature review until October 2012 of
manuscripts indexed in PubMed on the treatment of complex gallstones with hybrid technique. The multidisciplinary approach with hybrid
technique using endourologic instrumental represents a safe and effective treatment option for patients with complex biliary stone who
cannot conduct treatment with conventional methods. Most of biliary stone diseases need some type of surgical intervention. In the current
scenario, the conventional treatments for this disease counts with the support of videolaparoscopy, endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC), and open surgery.(1) The method to chosen depends on
patient’s clinical conditions, morphological characteristics of the calculus, and specific local of the calculus in the biliary tree.
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is established as the standard treatment for cholecystectomy. However, management of calculus in biliary tract
still a challenge, mainly in complex cases and when conventional methods fail.(2) Currently, most of calculus in the extrahepatic biliary
tract are treated concomitantly with cholecystectomy by the anterograde exploration of common and choledochal bile ducts by the use of
choledocoscopy or radiologic techniques.(3,4) ERCP with papillotomy is considered gold standard for choledocolitiasis,(5) particularly for
its success rate of 90%.(6) However, this treatment is not applicable to all cases. Some factors can limit the conduction and success of the
procedure, such as large calculi, unusual localization, anatomical change of duodenal large papilla, condition after liver transplantation
or previous surgeries involving the stomach with the need of Roux-en-Y derivation. For this reason, the development of alternative methods
is required. Despite the high rates of resolution, open surgery constitutes a difficult technique and presents high morbidity.(7) These
factors prevent this technique use in several cases. In the beginning of 1980, because of the appearance and improvement of endoscopic
materials, percutaneous nephrolithotomy and the ureteroscopy became an important alternative for treatment of renal and ureteral calculi.
Because of technical progress and enhancements achieved by surgeons and interventionists to perform the procedure, the multidisciplinary
approach of patients enabled a widely use of these modalities of treatment in different medical situations, such as in cases of biliary
stone diseases.(1) The technological development in the last years enabled the appearance of flexible and fine-gauge devices and new sources
of energy for fragmentation of these calculi that, associated with knowledge of urological endoscopy and interventional radiology, is
presented as a prominent alternative in the attempt to solve complex causes of biliary stone or also in cases that conventional methods have
failed.(2,8-13) Despite applying urologic endoscopy techniques for treatment of biliary calculus,(14-19) its indications remain
controversial. We report the case of a patient with complex biliary stone who underwent hybrid treatment at Hospital Israelita Albert
Einstein (SP), Brazil, associated with the use of flexible ureteroscopy, holmium: yttrium aluminumgarnet laser (Ho:YAG) and techniques of
interventional radiology for removal of calculus. We report a case of 47-year-old men in post-operative period of right hepatectomy
conducted 6 years ago in consequence of hydatid cyst of 22cm diameter that involved large proportion of his right lobe of liver and did not
respond adequately to clinical treatment. After 2 years of the procedure, the patient began to show intermittent episodes of cholangitis and
consecutive stenosis of common liver duct. A retograde cholangioplasty endoscopy was conducted with implant of transpapillary biliary
prostheses without success to solve the mentioned stenosis. After new recurrences of cholangitis episodes due to the use of biliary
prosthesis, the patient was submitted two years ago to biliodigestive in Roux-en-Y derivation with anastomosis in hilar plate region of left
lobe of the liver. In the follow-up, he progressed with new stenosis, bibliodigestive anastomosis and posterior formation of intra-hepatic
calculi. One year before the patient had undergone subxiphoid transparietal puncture on the left biliary tract followed by transparietal
cholangiography that confirmed stenosis of biliodisgestive anastomosis and diagnosed the presence of diverticulum in left biliary ducts,
which presented a biliary calculus measuring approximately 1cm diameter in its interior. We conducted a transparietal cholangioplasty of
biliodisgetive anastomosis with cutting-balloon 7x20mm and repetitive attempts, without success, for removal of the biliary calculus using
radioscopy with support of balloon catheter, guide wires and Basket catheter. We opted to implant the 8.5F internal/external transparietal
biliary drainage to discuss later on the definitive management. After 4 weeks, the previous implanted drainage was removed and the sheath 8F
was implanted for the flexible ureteroscopy access. The procedure was done under general anesthesia at a hybrid room with access to
fluoroscopy. An urologist along with interventionist radiologists conducted the procedure. After initial dilation, the sheath of ureteral
access sheat was positioned under radioscopic control up to the point of interest (Figure 1). Biliary tract was accessed using a flexible
ureteroscopy (Storz Flex-X2 KARL STORZ®) ureteroscopy until the direct visualization of the calculus. We used 0.9% sodium chloride solution
for irrigation. For fragmentation of biliary calculus we used 200μm laser fiber with 0.7J/pulse of potency and 7Hz of frequency, and
posteriorly fragments was removal with nitinol basket (DIMENSION® Bard®) (Figure 1). Control cholangiography showed the treatment of lesion
and lack of fragments of intra-hepatic biliary calculi. The procedure was done without intercurrences and the patient was discharged in the
second day after surgery. Figure 1Radioscopic imaging by the flexible ureteroscopy Technology and technical improvements in the treatment of
kidney stone has been used as an increment in management of biliary tract stone in complex cases when traditional procedures have failed.
The PTC can be done by radiologic exploration of the biliary tracts (REBT) with the removal of calculus with basket under fluoroscopy
guidance, or by exploration with direct visualization using coledoscopy, ureteroscopy or nephroscopy. The REBT, in addition of not enabling
direct visualization of the calculus, cannot access calculus using unusual topographies so that increasing the chance of treatment failure.
The cholangioscopy conducted with choledoscopy presents some limitations, such as fragility, canal to access of fine gauge and little
curvature, which unable its use in some cases. Hence, the use of urological technology becomes a prominent alternative in complex cases,
enabling better visualization, fragmentation and removal of calculi. Some authors have reported in the literature this approach for the
treatment of complex biliary stone with high rates of success and low morbidity (Chart 1). Chart 1Medical literature reports of percutaneous
treatment of complex biliary stone using urologic techniques and equipmentAuthorYearnTreated diseaseIndicationEquipment usedEnergy
sourceSuccessComplicationsHoang et al.(20) 20072Biliodisgetive anastomosis stenosis with calculusFailure in access ERCPSemi-rigid
ureteroscopyNot described100%-Di Pisa et al.(21) 20081Stenosis at the choledochodocus (after liver transplantation) with calculusFailure in
ERCPRigid nephroscopyBallistic lithotripter100%-Ray et al.(7) 200919Intrahepatic biliary calculusFailure in ERCP (n=17) Contraindication of
general anestesia (n=2)Rigid and flexible nephroscopylaser and pneumatic lithotripsy76% (disobstruction in 94%)Prolonged drainage (n=1) AMI
(n=1)Healy et al.(2) 20099Intrahepatic biiary stone, Stenosis at the choledochodocus (after liver transplantation), residual calculus VLPS
post-cholecystectomy, Pos-Whipple, Cholangite sclérosanteFailure in ERCPFlexible cystoscope and ureteroscopeLaser100%Prolonged drainage
(n=1)Khan et al.(22) 201080biliary calculuscholecystectomy during VLPSRigid nephroscopyVariable99.5%Conversion for open surgery (n=1)Rimon
et al.(23) 201122Intrahepatic biliary stoneFailure in ERCP (n=13) Fail in access ERCP (n=9)Flexible ureteroscopyLaser82%-ERCP: endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography; VLPS: videolaparoscopic surgery. AMI: Acute myocardial infarction. ERCP: endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography; VLPS: videolaparoscopic surgery. AMI: Acute myocardial infarction. Few centers still doing hybrid treatment and
few studies on this regard have been published in the literature so far, as described in chart 1. Perhaps the greatest limitation of this
technique is the need of having an experienced and well-trained multidisciplinary team, and also the high cost that this technology entails.
However, in special and well indicated cases, this technique seems to be the cheapest option compared with conventional procedures
considering length of hospital stay and possible complications. However, no studies have evaluated such costs so far. An crucial point for
the analysis of these published studies is that percutaneous access of biliary tracts was conducted in different ways, based on topography
of the pathology described (for example: transparieto-hepatic, transparieto jejunal) and, in some cases, the procedure can be concluded
successfully by using semi-rigid instrument that technically facilitates and reduces treatment cost. In our case, the use of flexible
ureteroscopy was technically easy and effective. One of the main difficulties we had was the multiplicity of biliary tree, which difficult
spatial localization. The principles used both in flexible ureteroscopy and interventional radiology, such as the use of intraoperative
cholangiography and fluoroscopy imaging, applied simultaneously to aid direct visualization, facilitated to overcome these barriers. The
high cost and extremely fragility of these devices are important limitations to consider in relation the availability and access to this
technology. The multidisciplinary approach associated with urologic technology is a possible and efficient method. This approach can be
considered as a treatment option for specific cases of complex biliary tract stone disease. A maioria das doenças litiásicas das vias
biliares necessita de tratamento cirúrgico. No entanto, em casos especiais, que não permitem o acesso tradicional das vias biliares por via
endoscópica, a abordagem multidisciplinar com técnica híbrida, que utiliza instrumentais endourológicos, apresenta-se como uma opção no
tratamento. Relatamos aqui o caso de um paciente com litíase de via biliar complexa com múltiplas abordagens prévias, sem sucesso no
tratamento com métodos convencionais, resolvido com abordagem híbrida com tecnologia endourológica. Realizamos uma extensa busca na
literatura de artigos relacionados ao tratamento de litíase biliar complexa com técnica híbrida publicados no PubMed até outubro de 2012. A
abordagem multidisciplinar com técnica híbrida, utilizando instrumental endourológico, representa uma opção segura e eficaz no tratamento de
pacientes com litíase complexa de via biliar com impossibilidade de tratamento com métodos convencionais. A maioria das doenças litiásicas
das vias biliares necessita de algum tipo de intervenção cirúrgica para seu tratamento. No cenário atual, o arsenal terapêutico convencional
para essa doença conta com o auxílio de videolaparoscopia, colangiopancreatografia retrógrada endoscópica (CPRE), colangiografia trans-
hepática percutânea (CTP) e cirurgia aberta (CA).(1) A escolha do método a ser utilizado depende das condições clínicas do paciente, das
características morfológicas do cálculo e da localização da árvore biliar em que ele se encontra. A colecistectomia laparoscópica está
consagrada como tratamento padrão da colelitíase. No entanto, o manejo de cálculos em vias biliares ainda consiste em um desafio,
principalmente em casos complexos e na falha dos métodos convencionais.(2) Atualmente, a maior parte dos cálculos situados nas vias biliares
extra-hepáticas são tratados concomitantes à colecistectomia, por meio da exploração anterógrada do ducto hepático comum e colédoco, com
auxílio do coledocoscópio ou técnicas radiológicas.(3, 4) A CPRE com papilotomia é considerada o tratamento de primeira linha para
coledocolitíase,(5) já que possui taxa de sucesso de 90%.(6) No entanto, não é possível de ser realizada em todos os casos. Fatores como
cálculos volumosos, localização atípica, alteração anatômica da papila de duodenal maior, presença de divertículo duodenal, condições pós-
transplante hepático ou cirurgias prévias que envolvam o estômago, com necessidade de derivação em Y de Roux, são limitantes para a
realização e o sucesso desse procedimento, daí a necessidade de desenvolvimento de métodos alternativos. A CA, apesar dos altos índices de
resolução, é acompanhada de grande dificuldade técnica e morbidade.(7) Isso inviabiliza, em muitos casos, seu uso. No início da década de
1980, com o surgimento e o aperfeiçoamento de materiais endoscópicos, a nefrolitotripsia percutânea e a ureteroscopia surgiram como uma
importante alternativa para o tratamento do cálculo renal e ureteral. Em consonância com essa evolução e com o aprimoramento técnico dos
cirurgiões e intervencionistas, a abordagem multidisciplinar dos pacientes possibilitou que essas modalidades de tratamento fossem
amplamente utilizadas e aplicadas em situações médicas distintas, como nos casos de litíase das vias biliares.(1) Nos últimos anos, o
desenvolvimento tecnológico proporcionou o surgimento de aparelhos de fino calibre, flexíveis e de novas fontes de energia para a
fragmentação desses cálculos que, associados aos conhecimentos da endoscopia urológica e da radiologia intervencionista, apresentam-se como
alternativas promissoras na tentativa de solucionar casos complexos de litíase biliar ou, também, na falha ou na impossibilidade da
realização dos métodos convencionais.(2,8-13) Embora seja factível o emprego de técnicas da endoscopia urológica para tratamento de cálculo
em vias biliares,(14-19) suas indicações ainda não estão bem definidas. Este relato de caso teve como objetivo descrever um tratamento
híbrido realizado no Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, localizado na cidade de São Paulo (SP), Brasil, de um paciente com colédoco litíase
complexa, que associou o uso do ureteroscópio flexível, holmium: yttrium aluminumgarnet laser (Ho:YAG) e técnicas de radiologia
intervencionista para remoção do cálculo. Paciente de 47 anos, sexo masculino, em pós-operatório de hepatectomia direita realizada havia 6
anos devido cisto hidático de 22cm de diâmetro, que ocupava grandes proporções do lobo hepático direito e não respondera ao tratamento
clínico adequado. Evoluiu, após 2 anos do procedimento, com episódios intermitentes de colangite e consecutiva estenose do ducto hepático
comum. Foi realizada colangioplastia endoscópica retrógrada com implante de próteses biliares transpapilares, sem sucesso na resolução da
estenose referida. Havia 2 anos, após novas recidivas de episódios de colangite, a despeito do uso das próteses biliares, fora submetido à
derivação biliodigestiva em Y de Roux, com anastomose na região da placa hilar do lobo hepático esquerdo. No seguimento, evoluiu com nova
estenose, agora da anastomose biliodigestiva e posterior formação de cálculos intra-hepáticos. Havia 1 ano, fora realizada punção
transparietal subxifoídea da via biliar esquerda, seguida de colangiografia transparietal, que confirmou a estenose da anastomose
biliodigestiva e diagnosticou a presença de divertículo em ducto biliar esquerdo, o qual abrigava cálculo biliar de aproximadamente 1cm de
diâmetro em seu interior. Realizada colangioplastia trasparietal da anastomose biliodigestiva com Cutting-Balloon 7x20mm e tentativas
repetidas, sem sucesso, de exérese do cálculo biliar por meio de radioscopia com o auxílio de cateteres-balão, fios-guia e cateteres do tipo
Basket. Foi feita opção pelo implante de dreno biliar transparietal interno/externo 8,5F, para posterior discussão da conduta definitiva.
Após 4 semanas, foi retirado o dreno previamente implantado e realizado implante de introdutor 8F para acesso do ureteroscópio flexível. O
procedimento foi realizado sob anestesia geral, em sala híbrida, com acesso à fluoroscopia, por médico urologista, em conjunto com
radiologistas intervencionistas. Após dilatação inicial, foi locada a bainha de acesso ureteral sob controle radioscópico até o ponto de
interesse (Figura 1). A via biliar foi acessada com ureteroscópio flexível (Storz Flex-X2 KARL STORZ®), até a visualização direta do
cálculo, sendo utilizada solução de cloreto de sódio 0,9% para irrigação. Foi realizada a utilização de fibra laser 200μm, com potência de
0,7J/pulso e frequência de 7Hz, para fragmentação do cálculo biliar e posterior retirada dos fragmentos com basket de nitinol (DIMENSION®
Bard®) (Figura 1). A colangiografia de controle mostrou o tratamento da lesão e a ausência de fragmentos de cálculos biliares intra-
hepáticos. O procedimento transcorreu sem intercorrências e o paciente recebeu alta no segundo dia pós-operatório. Figura 1Imagem
radioscópica do procedimento com o auxílio do ureteroscópio flexível A tecnologia e o aprimoramento técnico oriundos do tratamento de
litíase urinária têm sido utilizados como incremento no tratamento de litíase de vias biliares em casos complexos, na falha ou
impossibilidade de realização dos procedimentos tradicionais. O tratamento TPH pode se dar pela exploração radiológica das vias biliares
(ERVB), com retirada do cálculo com basket guiado por fluoroscopia, ou por meio de exploração com visualização direta com utilização de
coledoscópio, ureteroscópio ou nefroscópio. A ERVB, além de não permitir visualização direta do cálculo, não consegue acessar cálculos em
topografias não habituais, aumentando, assim, a chance de falha no tratamento. A colangioscopia realizada com coledocoscópio apresenta
algumas limitações, como fragilidade, canal de trabalho de fino calibre e pouca curvatura, inviabilizando seu uso em alguns casos. Assim, o
uso de tecnologia urológica passa a ser uma alternativa promissora em casos complexos, permitindo melhor visualização, fragmentação e
retirada dos cálculos. Dessa forma, alguns autores têm reportado, na literatura, essa forma de abordagem para o tratamento de casos
complexos de litíase biliar, com altos índices de sucesso associados à baixa morbidade (Quadro 1). Quadro 1Relatos na literatura médica de
tratamento percutâneo de litíase biliar complexa utilizando técnicas e equipamentos urológicosAutorAnonPatologia tratadaIndicaçãoEquipamento
utilizadoFonte de energiaSucessoComplicaçõesHoang et al.(20) 20072Estenose de anastomose biliodigestiva com cálculoFalha de acesso para
CPREUreteroscópio semirrígidoNão descrita100%-Di Pisa et al.(21) 20081Estenose de anastomose colédoco-colédoco (pós-transplante hepático)
com cálculoFalha da CPRENefroscópio rígidoLitotritor balístico100%-Ray et al.(7) 200919Cálculo via biliar intra-hepaticaFalha da CPRE (n=17)
Contraindicação de anestesia geral (n=2)Nefroscópio rígido e flexívelLitotridor pneumático e laser76% (desobstrução em 94%)Drenagem
prolongada (n=1) IAM (n=1)Healy et al.(2) 20099Litíase via biliar intra-hepática, estenose da anastomose colédoco-colédoco pós-transpalnte
hepático, cálculo residual pós-colecistectomia VLP, pós-Whipple, colangite esclerosanteFalha da CPRECistoscópio e ureteroscópio
flexívelLaser100%Drenagem prolongada (n=1)Khan et al.(22) 201080Cálculo via biliarColedocolitiase durante VLPNefroscópio
rígidoVariada99,5%Conversão para cirurgia aberta (n=1)Rimon et al.(23) 201122Litíase biliar intra-hepáticaFalha da CPRE (n=13) Falha de
acesso para CPRE (n=9)Ureteroscópio flexívelLaser82%-CPRE: colangiopancreatografia retrógrada endoscópica; VLP: videolaparoscopia; IAM:
infarto aguda do miocárdio. CPRE: colangiopancreatografia retrógrada endoscópica; VLP: videolaparoscopia; IAM: infarto aguda do miocárdio.
Como visto no quadro 1 , ainda são poucos os centros que realizam o tratamento híbrido e existem poucos estudos publicados na literatura.
Talvez o grande limitante dessa técnica seja a necessidade de ter uma equipe multidisciplinar experiente e bem treinada, além do custo que
essa tecnologia demanda. No entanto, em casos especiais e bem indicados, parece ser uma opção ainda mais barata que os procedimentos
convencionais, quando coloca-se em questão o tempo de internação e as complicações. No entanto, ainda não há estudos que avaliem esses
custos. Um ponto importante na análise dos estudos da literatura é que o acesso percutâneo das vias biliares foi realizado de diferentes
formas, de acordo com a topografia da patologia em questão (por exemplo: transparieto-hepática, transparieto jejunal), e, em alguns casos, o
procedimento pode ser concluído com sucesso com utilização de instrumental semirrígido, o que facilita tecnicamente e diminui o custo do
tratamento. No presente caso, a utilização do ureteroscópio flexível mostrou-se tecnicamente fácil e efetiva. Uma das principais
dificuldades encontradas foi a multiplicidade da árvore biliar, o que dificultou a localização espacial. Contudo, princípios utilizados
tanto em ureteroscopia flexível como na radiologia intervencionista, tais como a utilização de colangiografia intraoperatória e a imagem
fluoroscópica, simultâneas à visualização direta, facilitaram a superação desses obstáculos. Adicionalmente, o elevado custo e a fragilidade
extrema desses aparelhos são limitantes importantes da disponibilidade e do acesso a essa tecnologia. A abordagem multidisciplinar com
utilização de tecnologia urológica é um método factível e eficaz, podendo ser considerada uma opção para tratamento de casos específicos de
litíase de vias biliares complexa.
