This is the case of a male newborn whose mother during pregnancy was treated with chloropromazine, topiramate and diazepam, but without any
other relevant family history, especially related with congenital malformation. At 34 weeks of gestation, the fetus was diagnosed with
transposition of the great arteries (TGA). He born at 37 weeks of gestation, his birth weight was 3,229g and Apgar score 1/7/8. After
delivery the he was maintained on invasive ventilation. The postnatal confirmation of TGA was carried out with restrictive foramen ovale
throughout Rashkind septostomy done within the 2 hours after birth, under E1 prostaglandin therapy. At 13 days after birth, arterial switch
operation was performed without significant intercurrences. At birth we observed hypoplasia of right-sided hemifacial, microtia, absence of
zigomatic arcade, mandible and maxillary hypoplasia (Figure 1). Ophthalmology assessment highlighted slight ocular asymmetry. The chest
radiography showed malformation of dorsal spine with hemivertebrae and fusion of ribs (Figure 2). His renal echography did not reveal
malformations. Based on these findings the diagnosis was hemifacial microsomia. We conducted a pluridisciplinary follow-up for surveillance
of complications, early intervention and schedule of correction of facial malformation. Figure 1Hypoplasia of right-sided hemifacial,
microtia, absence of zigomatic arcade, mandible and maxillary hypoplasia Figure 2Radiographic image showing cardiomegaly, dorsal
hemivertebra, fusions to level of first sixth right arches and apparent malformation of right mandible The hemifacial microssomia also known
as oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum or Goldenhar syndrome is a result of a change in the development of first and second branchial arches,
which is a possible consequence of vascular lesion at an early phase of pregnancy.(1,2) Most of situations are sporadic and family cases are
also described in the literature.(3) This syndrome is characterized by combination of auricle malformation and hypoplasia of facial bones. A
great phenotypic variability is show and it can be associated to anomalies of the spine, central nervous system, kidneys and heart.(1,2)
Heart disease are described in 5-58% of the patients, being the most frequent the atrial and septal defects or ventricular and ventricular
outflow tract.(4) With this case, we emphasize the prenatal diagnosis of a TGA that occurred in a sporadic situation of hemifacial
microsomia. Recém-nascido do gênero masculino, com antecedentes maternos de terapêutica com cloropromazina, topiramato e diazepam durante a
gravidez; sem outros antecedentes familiares relevantes, nomeadamente de malformações congênitas. Diagnóstico de transposição dos grandes
vasos (TGV) às 34 semanas de gestação. Parto às 37 semanas, peso ao nascer de 3.229g, índice de Apgar 1/7/8, ficando em ventilação invasiva
desde o nascimento. Confirmação pós-natal da TGV com foramen ovale restritivo, tendo realizado septostomia de Rashkind às 2 horas de vida,
sob terapêutica com prostaglandina E1; aos 13 dias de vida, foi realizada cirurgia de switch arterial, sem intercorrências significativas.
Ao nascimento, foi também objetivada hipoplasia da hemiface direita, com microtia, ausência de arcada zigomática, hipoplasia mandibular e
maxilar (Figura 1); da avaliação oftalmológica, salientava-se assimetria ocular ligeira; a radiografia de tórax mostrou malformação da
coluna dorsal, com hemivertebras e fusão de arcos costais (Figura 2); a ecografia renal não revelou malformações. Com base nesses achados,
admitiu-se o diagnóstico de microssomia hemifacial. Manteve seguimento pluridisciplinar para vigilância de complicações, intervenção precoce
e programação da correção das malformações faciais. Figura 1Hipoplasia da hemiface direita, com microtia, ausência de arcada zigomática,
hipoplasia mandibular e maxilar Figura 2Radiografia mostrando cardiomegalia, hemivertebras dorsais, fusões ao nível dos primeiros seis arcos
costais direitos e aparente malformação mandibular direita A microssomia hemifacial, também conhecida como espectro óculo-aurículo-vertebral
ou síndrome de Goldenhar, resulta de uma alteração no desenvolvimento do primeiro e segundo arcos branquiais, possivelmente consequência de
lesão vascular numa fase precoce da gravidez.(1,2) A maioria das situações é esporádica, estando descritos casos familiares.(3) A síndrome
caracteriza-se pela combinação de malformações auriculares e hipoplasia das estruturas ósseas da face. Exibe uma grande variabilidade
fenotípica, podendo associar-se a anomalias da coluna vertebral, do sistema nervoso central, renais e cardíacas.(1,2) Essas últimas estão
descritas em 5 a 58% dos casos, sendo as malformações do septo atrial ou ventricular e do trato de saída dos ventrículos as mais
frequentes.(4) Com esse caso, pretendemos salientar o diagnóstico pré-natal de uma TGV que se veio a contextualizar numa situação esporádica
de microssomia hemifacial.
