Most bone tumors that occur in the clavicle are malignant. A few giant cell tumors (GCTs) of the clavicle have been reported; however, the
most appropriate operative method for this tumor has never been discussed. A 54-year-old man noticed enlargement of the proximal aspect of
the right clavicle. A plain X-ray revealed lytic change and ballooning of the proximal end of the right clavicle. The tumor was isointense
on T1-weighted magnetic resonance images and showed a mixture of low- and high-intensity areas on T2-weighted images without extension to
the surrounding soft tissues. Bone scintigraphy showed strong accumulation (normal/tumor ratio, 2.31), and positron emission tomography
revealed strong uptake of fluorine-18-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (SUVmax, 6.0) in the proximal part of the right clavicle. Because we could
not completely exclude malignancy, an open biopsy was performed. Pathologically, the tumor comprised mononuclear stromal cells and
multinuclear giant cells, resulting in a diagnosis of a GCT of the bone. Although curettage may be considered for such lesions (Campanacci
grade II), we chose resection to minimize the chance of recurrence. The tumor was resected en-bloc with the proximal half of the clavicle.
No postoperative shoulder disproportion was observed, and full range of motion of the right shoulder was maintained. The patient was
satisfied with the surgical outcome (Musculoskeletal Tumor Society score of 96 %). He returned to his original job as a land and house
investigator without any signs of recurrence for 1 year after surgery. Although GCT of the bone rarely occurs in the clavicle, the typical
X-ray findings demonstrated in the present case are helpful for a correct diagnosis. Although en-bloc resection without reconstruction is
appropriate for GCTs in expendable bones, there has been much discussion about shoulder function after total claviculectomy. Considering the
importance of the function of the clavicle, which is to support the scapula through the acromioclavicular joint, we preserved the muscle
attachments of the deltoid, trapezius, and pectoralis major. Because both the oncological and functional outcomes were satisfactory, we
recommend preservation of as much of the clavicle as possible in patients with clavicular bone tumors. Giant cell tumors (GCTs) are
aggressive bone tumors comprising osteoclast-like multinuclear cells and hyperplastic mononuclear interstitial cells. In the latest
classification of bone tumors by the World Health Organization, GCTs are classified as “intermediate locally aggressive, rarely
metastasizing” tumors . Because GCTs show clinically “uncertain behavior” and have a relatively high recurrence rate, the surgical method
should be carefully chosen based on the radiographic classification proposed by Campanacci et al. . Sites often affected by GCTs are the
distal femur, proximal tibia, and distal radius; GCTs rarely occur in the clavicle . Errani et al. found no GCTs arising in the clavicula
among 349 GCTs of bone. However, the national bone tumor registry in Japan reported two cases of GCTs in the clavicula (1.1 %) from 2006 to
2012 . Although bone tumors rarely occur in the clavicle, a high proportion of those that develop at this site are malignant [6, 7].
Therefore, establishing a list of preoperative differential diagnoses of bone tumors involving the clavicles is often difficult. Because the
clavicle is a non-weight-bearing bone and is functionally expendable, the optimal surgical resection method for GCTs in this area is
controversial. We herein present a case of a GCT in the proximal clavicle. Biopsy was performed to reach a pathological diagnosis after
performance of imaging studies, including radionuclide scanning. Functional evaluation after proximal partial claviculectomy demonstrated
satisfactory results. This case has been reported in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration. This retrospective case report is an
exemption by the ethics committee of Kagoshima University. A 54-year-old man noticed enlargement of the proximal aspect of the right
clavicle. He made an appointment to undergo positron-emission tomography (PET)-based cancer screening 1 month later, which revealed a lesion
with abnormal accumulation in the right clavicle. He was referred to our department for further examination. Plain X-ray revealed lytic
change and ballooning of the proximal end of the right clavicle (Fig. 1a). Computed tomography (CT) showed an expanded medullary cavity and
thinning of the cortex without periosteal reaction (Fig. 1b). No lung metastasis was demonstrated by thin-slice chest CT. The tumor was
isointense on T1-weighted magnetic resonance images and showed a mixture of low- and high-intensity areas on T2-weighted images. However,
the tumor did not extend to the surrounding soft tissues (Fig. 1c–e). Bone scintigraphy showed uptake of 99mTc-methylene diphosphonate in
the proximal clavicle (Fig. 2a), and thallium-201 scintigraphy showed strong accumulation (normal/tumor ratio, 2.31), suggesting an abundant
blood supply to the tumor (Fig. 2b). PET revealed strong accumulation of fluorine-18-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (SUVmax, 6.0) in the
proximal part of the right clavicle, but no other primary cancer or metastases were demonstrated in other sites of the body (Fig. 2c). All
hematological tumor markers (CA19-9, CEA, AFP, NSE, IL-2R, urinary Bence-Jones protein, and serum M-protein) were negative.Fig. 1Plain
X-ray, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging of the right clavicle. (a) Plain X-ray showed lytic change and ballooning of the
proximal end of the right clavicle. (b) Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated an expanded medullary cavity and thinning of the cortex
without periosteal reaction. (c, d) 3D-CT angiography images demonstrated proximity of the subclavian artery (arrow) and the tumor. The
tumor showed (e) isointensity on T1-weighted images and (f) a mixture of low- and high-intensity areas on T2-weighted images. (g) The tumor
tissue was significantly enhanced by gadolinium; however, the tumor did not extend to the surrounding soft tissuesFig. 2Radionuclear
medicine. (a) Bone scintigraphy showed marked uptake in the proximal clavicle, and (b) thallium-201 scintigraphy showed strong accumulation
(normal/tumor ratio, 2.31), suggesting an abundant blood supply to the tumor. (c) Positron-emission tomography demonstrated strong
accumulation of fluorine-18-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (SUVmax, 6.0) in the proximal part of the right clavicle, but there were no primary
tumors or metastases in other body sites Plain X-ray, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging of the right clavicle. (a) Plain
X-ray showed lytic change and ballooning of the proximal end of the right clavicle. (b) Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated an expanded
medullary cavity and thinning of the cortex without periosteal reaction. (c, d) 3D-CT angiography images demonstrated proximity of the
subclavian artery (arrow) and the tumor. The tumor showed (e) isointensity on T1-weighted images and (f) a mixture of low- and high-
intensity areas on T2-weighted images. (g) The tumor tissue was significantly enhanced by gadolinium; however, the tumor did not extend to
the surrounding soft tissues Radionuclear medicine. (a) Bone scintigraphy showed marked uptake in the proximal clavicle, and (b)
thallium-201 scintigraphy showed strong accumulation (normal/tumor ratio, 2.31), suggesting an abundant blood supply to the tumor. (c)
Positron-emission tomography demonstrated strong accumulation of fluorine-18-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (SUVmax, 6.0) in the proximal part
of the right clavicle, but there were no primary tumors or metastases in other body sites Based on the characteristic roentgenographic and
CT imaging findings with ballooning of the affected bone, the primary differential diagnosis was a GCT. However, we could not completely
exclude malignancy because of the affected site, patient age, and degree of accumulation on PET. We thus performed an open biopsy of the
tumor. Preoperative angiography was performed to prevent dissemination due to massive perioperative bleeding; however, large nutrient
vessels requiring embolization were not demonstrated. Fragile, yellowish-brown tumor tissue was obtained by the biopsy (Fig. 3a).
Pathologically, the tumor comprised mononuclear stromal cells and multinuclear giant cells (Fig. 3b). The stromal cells showed oval nuclei
with fine, uniform chromatin, and nucleoli were frequently found (Fig. 3c). Many multinucleated giant cells resembling osteoclasts were
surrounded by mononuclear cells (Fig. 3c). The case was pathologically diagnosed as a GCT of bone, and surgical treatment was planned.Fig.
3Macroscopic and microscopic biopsy findings. (a) Fragile, yellowish-brown tumor tissue was obtained by the biopsy. (b) Pathologically, the
tumor comprised mononuclear stromal cells and multinuclear giant cells (original magnification, ×100). (c) The stromal cells showed oval
nuclei with fine, uniform chromatin, and nucleoli were frequently found (original magnification, ×200). Many multinucleated giant cells
resembling osteoclasts were surrounded by mononuclear cells (arrows) Macroscopic and microscopic biopsy findings. (a) Fragile, yellowish-
brown tumor tissue was obtained by the biopsy. (b) Pathologically, the tumor comprised mononuclear stromal cells and multinuclear giant
cells (original magnification, ×100). (c) The stromal cells showed oval nuclei with fine, uniform chromatin, and nucleoli were frequently
found (original magnification, ×200). Many multinucleated giant cells resembling osteoclasts were surrounded by mononuclear cells (arrows)
Because this was determined to be a grade II tumor (cortical erosion, deformity, and expansion of bone) according to the Campanacci
classification , curettage was considered initially. However, we chose resection to minimize the chance of recurrence because adhesion
between the clavicle and major vessels was anticipated, which would make reoperation very difficult. Additionally, the clavicle does not
necessarily require reconstruction after resection, and this patient was not engaged in physical work. An osteotomy was performed 8 cm from
the proximal edge of the clavicle (Fig. 4b), and the sternoclavicular joint was then disarticulated (Fig. 4c). The tumor was resected en-
bloc with half of the clavicle. It contained a thin, fragile cortex, but extension to the surrounding soft tissue was absent (Fig. 4d). The
residual clavicular length was 7.5 cm on postoperative roentgenography (Fig. 4e), and no displacement of the resection edge of the clavicle
was observed (Fig. 4f).Fig. 4Intraoperative findings. (a) In the supine position with the right arm abducted, the right clavicle was
carefully exposed without damaging the tumor capsule. (b) An osteotomy was made 8 cm from the proximal edge of the clavicle (arrows). (c)
Disarticulation of the sternoclavicular joint was then performed. (d) The tumor, resected en-bloc with half of the clavicle, had a thin,
fragile cortex, but no extension to the soft tissue. (e) The residual clavicular length was 7.5 cm on postoperative roentgenography. (f) No
displacement of the resection edge of the clavicle was observed Intraoperative findings. (a) In the supine position with the right arm
abducted, the right clavicle was carefully exposed without damaging the tumor capsule. (b) An osteotomy was made 8 cm from the proximal edge
of the clavicle (arrows). (c) Disarticulation of the sternoclavicular joint was then performed. (d) The tumor, resected en-bloc with half of
the clavicle, had a thin, fragile cortex, but no extension to the soft tissue. (e) The residual clavicular length was 7.5 cm on
postoperative roentgenography. (f) No displacement of the resection edge of the clavicle was observed No shoulder disproportion was observed
postoperatively (Fig. 5a). The range of motion of the right shoulder was normal (Fig. 5b), and the Japanese Orthopaedic Association shoulder
score (JOA score) was 99 points. The patient was satisfied with the surgical outcome, and the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society score was 96 %.
He returned to his original job as a land and house investigator without any signs of recurrence for 1 year after surgery.Fig.
5Postoperative appearance and range of motion. (a) Disproportion of the shoulder was not observed. (b) The range of motion of the right
shoulder was normal Postoperative appearance and range of motion. (a) Disproportion of the shoulder was not observed. (b) The range of
motion of the right shoulder was normal Dahlin et al. reported that in their study, more than 90 % of bone tumors that occurred in the
clavicle were malignant. Other authors have reported high malignancy rates of 51 to 66 % [10, 11], suggesting that physicians should
consider the presence of malignancy when a bone tumor is suspected in the clavicle. In a recent large-scale report by Ren et al. , the
benign/malignant ratio was 1.34 among 206 clavicle-origin bone tumors. In the current case, characteristic roentgen imaging findings were
suggestive of a GCT; however, the possibility of malignancy could not be completely excluded because of the imaging findings, including PET,
and the rare site of origin. It is known that malignant bone tumors show a high SUVmax in PET. Aoki et al. reported an average SUVmax of
2.2 ± 1.5 and 4.3 ± 3.2 in benign and malignant bone tumors, respectively. GCT of bone, a relatively aggressive bone tumor, shows a high
SUV. The average SUV of GCT (4.6 ± 1.1) is reportedly not significantly different from that of osteosarcoma (3.1 ± 1.0) . Preoperative
chemotherapy should be considered for malignant bone tumors, including osteosarcoma, Ewing’s sarcoma, and plasmacytoma, and we believe that
biopsy should be considered in cases characterized by aggressive behavior. Although the present patient first underwent PET/CT examination
by his own choice, this is not a recommended diagnostic procedure for bone tumors in the clavicula. As Rossi et al. described in their
recent review of six cases of clavicular bone tumors, plain X-rays, MRI, and total body CT scans are crucial for the diagnosis and staging
of clavicular tumors. A principal surgical treatment method for GCTs, which are benign bone tumors, is curettage. However, the relatively
high local recurrence rate (>20 %) is a problem [3, 14, 15]. Various adjuvant treatments, such as liquid nitrogen, ethanol, phenol, and
hydrogen peroxide, have been used to reduce the recurrence rate [3, 15]. However, recurrence cannot be completely suppressed, even with the
use of adjuvant therapy. Rather, complete removal of the tumor tissue is important. It should also be kept in mind that GCT is associated
with a risk of lung metastasis (2 %) [3, 15], and this risk may increase with local recurrence . Most surgeons, including us, mainly perform
extensive curettage using a high-speed burr or argon beam coagulator followed by polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) cementing. The advantages of
PMMA cementing are reconstruction of the defect, which allows for immediate weight-bearing, and the ease of identifying recurrence because
of the clear border between the PMMA and host bone [3, 15]. In contrast, en-bloc resection should be considered in grade III cases
characterized by cortical bone destruction and a soft tissue mass. However, subsequent reconstruction, which sometimes requires a bulky
tumor prosthesis, is often problematic . In contrast, en-bloc resection without any reconstruction is performed for GCTs in expendable bones
such as the distal ulna, proximal fibula, or iliac wing. Because there are only a few reports of clavicular GCTs , the optimal surgical
method has not reached consensus. However, it seems that claviculectomy, either partial or total, might be a good option for clavicular
GCTs. Although partial claviculectomy was chosen in the present case, extensive curettage and PMMA cementing may be considered for younger
patients with higher physical activity. Whether a clavicular bone tumor is malignant or benign is key to selecting the most appropriate
surgical method. Obviously, total claviculectomy will be performed for malignant bone tumors [11, 20]. However, postoperative functional
loss and risk of recurrence associated with resection should be taken into consideration when selecting the operative method for benign
tumors, whether GCTs or other bone tumors. There has been much discussion about shoulder function after total clavicle resection. Krishnan
et al. reported that the postoperative function of the affected limb was normal and that only mild pain was present after total
claviculectomy. In contrast, Rockwood and Wirth reported unsatisfactory outcomes in most cases (85 %) because of pain, loss of muscle
strength, and dropping of the shoulder with or without neurovascular compression or shoulder joint instability; they therefore recommended
that surgeons preserve as much of the clavicle as possible. An important function of the clavicle is support of the scapula through the
acromioclavicular joint. Muscles such as the deltoid, trapezius, and pectoralis major also attach in this region and serve as a site of
action. We resected the proximal clavicle with a margin of 2 cm from the tumor edge, preserving 7.5 cm of the distal clavicle, and were able
to maintain a portion of its normal function as described above. Therefore, surgeons should consider how much of the distal part of the
clavicle they can preserve to avoid its proximal displacement, which may induce pain or cosmetic issues. In conclusion, GCT should be
considered when the typical X-ray appearance is observed in a patient with an aggressive clavicular bone tumor. If partial resection of the
clavicle is necessary, we recommend preservation of as much of the clavicle as possible because no asymmetry, pain, or shoulder imbalance
occurred in the present case. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Series Editor of this journal. Giant cell tumor Positron
emission tomography Standard uptake value Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions SaN, TT, MY, and HS participated in the surgical treatment and follow-up of the patient. SaN, TS, YI, and SK drafted and
finalized the manuscript. ShN, HS, and TY performed the pathological examination and prepared the figures. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. We thank Takako Yoshioka, Akihide Tanimoto, Yuko Goto and Michiyo Higashi for performing pathological analysis. We thank
Edanz Group Japan for providing medical writing services.
