Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a medical emergency that threatens life. To this day, ARDS is very rarely reported by iodine
contrast media, and there is no reported case of ARDS induced by gadolinium contrast media. Here, we present a case with ARDS after the use
of gadobutrol (Gadovist) as a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast medium. A 26 years old female without any medical history, including
allergic diseases and without current use of drugs, visited the emergency room for abdominal pain. Her abdominopelvic computed tomography
with iodine contrast media showed a right ovarian cyst and possible infective colitis. Eighty-three hours later, she underwent pelvis MRI
after injection of 7.5 mL (0.1 mL/kg body weight) of gadobutrol (Gadovist) to evaluate the ovarian cyst. She soon presented respiratory
difficulty, edema of the lips, nausea, and vomiting, and we could hear wheezing upon auscultation. She was treated with dexamethasone,
epinephrine, and norepinephrine. Her chest X-ray showed bilateral central bat-wing consolidative appearance. Managed with mechanical
ventilation, she was extubated 3 days later and discharged without complications. Gadolinium-based contrast media have been used since 25
years ago because of their safety and low rates of side effects. Gadobutrol is a second-generation extracellular non-ionic macrocyclic
gadolinium based contrast agents with high thermostability. Its gadolinium ion concentration is twice as high as other gadolinium agents,
effectively resulting in high-quality images with low amount.1 Adverse reactions due to radiologic contrast media are not rare, but those
accompanied with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) by contrast media are extremely rare. To our best knowledge, only two cases of
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema induced by ionic computed tomography (CT) contrast media, such as diatrizoate and iothalamatemeglumine, have
so far been reported.23 Also, no case of ARDS induced by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) gadolinium contrast media has been reported yet.
Here, we present a young woman who developed ARDS after the use of gadobutrol. A 26 years old female without allergic diseases or history of
taking medical image studies by using contrast media visited the emergency room for abdominal pain. Her abdominopelvic CT with contrast
media showed a right ovarian cyst and possible infective colitis. Her chest X-ray and blood tests on the day of admission did not show
anything significant. To evaluate the ovarian cyst, she underwent pelvis MRI after injection of 7.5 mL (0.1 mL/kg body weight) of gadobutrol
(Gadovist, Bayer Inc., Toronto, Canada) 83 hours after the CT examination. Fifty minutes after the injection of gadobutrol, she presented
respiratory difficulty, edema of the lips, nausea, vomiting, and wheezing upon auscultation. Her blood pressure (124/75 mm Hg) and body
temperature (37.2â„ƒ) were normal, but she had tachycardia (pulse rate 109/minute) and tachypnea (respiratory rate 32/minute). Under the
impression of anaphylaxis, she was given 0.5 mg of epinephrine 1:1000 intramuscularly and 5 mg of dexamethasone twice intravenously. While
applying 15 L/min of oxygen via mask, arterial blood gas analysis showed pO2 of 50.8 mm Hg and PaO2/FiO2 ratio of 63.5, and the chest X-ray
showed bilateral central bat-wing consolidation (Fig. 1A). She rapidly developed acute respiratory failure that required mechanical
ventilation (Fig. 1B). Three hours after the injection, she had hypotension (blood pressure 59/39 mm Hg) and tachycardia (pulse rate
112/min). Blood pressure did not recover after administration of 2 L of crystalloid and norepinephrine (10 mcg per minute). Six hours after
the infusion, ARDS was improved on the X-ray, and transthoracic echocardiogram showed good left ventricular contractility with left
ventricular ejection fraction of 60%. The ratio of mitral peak velocity of early filling to early diastolic mitral annular velocity was 9.
Norepinephrine was stopped 16 hours after intubation, and the patient was extubated 3 days later and discharged without complications (Fig.
1C). She was diagnosed with endometriotic cyst and underwent laparoscopic right ovarian cyst enucleation. A recent study shows that
gadobutrol is highly safe, with 0.55% of adverse drug reaction and less than 0.01% of serious adverse drug reaction requiring admission such
as anaphylaxis.4 Besides minor adverse effects such as feeling of warmth and taste alteration, MRI contrasts could rarely induce nephrogenic
systemic fibrosis.5 However, we could not find direct association between MRI contrasts and the lung adverse reactions, and this case has a
meaningful value as the first reported case of ARDS after the use of gadobutrol. Drug-induced ARDS is a progressive clinical condition when
a drug causes alveolar degradation and flooding with protein-rich material and cellular debris with subsequent increases in pulmonary
vascular resistance. A complex array of endothelial injury, epithelial injury, neutrophil-mediated damage, cytokine-mediated inflammation
and injury, oxidant-mediated injury, ventilator-induced lung injury, and dysregulation of coagulation and fibrinolytic pathways are all
implicated in the development.6 Risk of adverse reactions by MR contrast media have been reported to be lower than those of CT contrast
media, and cross-reactivity between MR and CT contrast media has not yet been reported. Therefore, MR contrast study has been recognized as
the safe alternative for iodide contrast media allergy patients.7 However, our patient did not show adverse reaction to CT contrast agent,
suggesting the possibility of using CT contrast media as a safe alternative for MR contrast allergy patients. We diagnosed our patient with
ARDS. She showed some clinical symptoms of anaphylaxis such as dyspnea and wheezing, but these can be explained by ARDS. Her clinical
manifestations were not compatible to anaphylaxis; she developed the symptoms 50 minutes after the injection of gadobutrol, and the blood
pressure was normal at the early phase of the event and then dropped 3 hours after the administration. Most cases of anaphylaxis after the
use of contrast media occur within 15 minutes, and a study on gadobustrol states that 82.4% of the side effects occur within 5 minutes after
the injection and 95.7% in 10 minutes.8 The hypotension episode was not corrected despite epinephrine and massive administration of
crystalloid fluid. The clinical feature of this patient was quite similar to the previously reported anaphylactoid pulmonary edema induced
by ionic iodide contrast media.23 Intradermal skin test and the measurement of serum tryptase at the time of the episode might have helped
the differentiation of the diagnosis, but they were not done. Some investigators suggest the usefulness of 1:10 diluted intradermal skin
test for IgE mediated gadolinium contrast media allergy,9 but IgE mediated mechanism may not be critical for the development of ARDS.
Furthermore, positive and negative predictive values of skin test for the diagnosis of IgE mediated gadolinium allergic diseases are yet
unknown. Besides gadobutrol, the MRI contrast media which our patient used, there are other gadolinium-based contrast media such as
gadoteric acid, gadobenate, and gadodiamide. Controversy exists whether the allergic reactions of gadolinium contrast media are structure
dependent. Several investigators have reported higher rate of allergic reaction by gadomenate dimeglumine than other MR contrast media,10
suggesting the presence of specificities of gadolinium contrast media for provoking adverse reactions. Recently, increased need for health
check-ups led to increased use of MRI with contrast media as well. Doctors and other practitioners should always keep in mind the risk of
ARDS after the use of gadolinium contrast media and consider the possibility of using CT contrast media as a safe alternative. This research
was supported by a grant from Ministry of Food and Drug Safety to operation of the regional pharmacovigilance center in 2015. The authors
have no financial conflicts of interest.
