Acute limb ischemia can be potentially harmful to the limb and life threatening. Renal failure is a possible outcome associated with release
of products of ischemic limb reperfusion. Some authors reported the benefit of performing angiography after embolectomy, even though iodine
contrast is also nephrotoxic. We report a case of embolectomy on a patient with renal insufficiency in whom carbon dioxide was used as a
substitute for iodine contrast. Acute embolic limb ischemia is an urgent clinical condition in which sudden decrease or worsening in limb
perfusion causes a potential threat to extremity viability and to life. Treatment consists of prompt revascularization with an embolectomy
catheter. Thorough removal of all occlusive emboli in the arterial tree results in the best outcomes; hence, some authors favored
arteriography after embolectomy for lower limbs.(1) Angiography is traditionally performed with iodinated contrast material, but carbon
dioxide (CO2) has been studied as an alternative intravascular contrast agent(2) for patients with iodine allergy or renal function
impairment. Since it is not nephrotoxic, it was considered reasonable to utilize this contrast in a patient with borderline renal function
who would be submitted to the noxious stimuli of the reperfused limb after revascularization.(3) To the best of our knowledge, this was the
first case assessing the intraoperative use of CO2 as a substitute for iodine contrast in a patient with known chronic kidney disease and an
acute ischemic limb. A 79-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with acute limb ischemia in her left leg with a 2-hour
history. Past medical history was positive for hypertension, atrial fibrillation and non-dialysis-dependent chronic renal failure. Two years
before, she had been operated on for acute aortic embolic occlusion, with bilateral femoral catheter embolectomy. She started oral
anticoagulation (warfarin) after this episode. Upon discharge she presented pedal pulses, but no posterior tibial pulses on either limb.
Medication use was irregular, and her international normalized ratio (INR) of prothrombin time upon admission was 1.1. Her pulse was
arrhythmic; she was hypertensive (160x110mmHg) and presented with normal femoral, popliteal and pedal pulses on her right leg. On palpation
in the left lower limb only a weak femoral pulse was observed; there were no distal pulses. The patient had pain and motor deficit. She was
classified as grade IIb limb ischemia (immediately threatened) and was immediately referred for surgery. Preoperative exams revealed a
diminished creatinine clearance (Cockroft-Gault of 12mL/min). General anesthesia was undertaken. Femoral access was performed on the scar
tissue of the previous left femoral incision. Common, superficial and deep femoral arteries were dissected and clamped. Arteriotomy was
performed and a 4-Fr embolectomy catheter was utilized (Edwards Lifesciences Corp, Irvine, California, USA). Thrombi were retrieved from
both deep and superficial femoral arteries. The catheter progressed more than 60cm on the superficial artery, but could not be felt neither
on pedal artery topography nor on posterior tibial artery topography. Back bleeding was not significant, and a decision was made to perform
an angiography to better assess the infra-popliteal arterial tree. CO2 was chosen as a substitute for iodine contrast for the angiography. A
homemade water seal CO2 delivery system was used, similar to another previously described,(4) but with one modification to prevent room-air
contamination.(5) Injection was performed through a KMP 4Fr catheter (Cook, Inc. Bloomington, Indianopolis, USA) inserted in the arteriotomy
while the arteries were clamped. Figure 1 shows a patent popliteal artery, a patent fibular artery and an occlusion on the mid-third of the
anterior tibial artery. We hypothesized that the embolectomy catheter reached the fibular artery on the first attempt, and thus could not be
felt on physical exam. Figure 1Carbon dioxide arteriography. Patent popliteal and fibular arteries, occlusion in the mid-third of the
anterior tibial artery A new embolectomy was then performed. The catheter progressed to the foot, on the topography of the pedal artery
(i.e., the catheter could be felt on the projection of the artery), and more thrombi were retrieved. Control angiography (Figure 2) showed
complete resolution of the anterior tibial artery occlusion, with contrast up to the foot (Figure 3). A total of 28mL of CO2 was used, and
no iodine contrast was needed. Figure 2Carbon dioxide arteriography. Complete resolution of the anterior tibial artery occlusion Figure
3Carbon dioxide arteriography. Anterior tibial artery contrast perfusion to the foot Arteriorraphy was performed. The arteries were
unclamped, and the popliteal and pedal pulses were noted to be present on the limb. Ischemia signs (e.g., pallor, hypothermia) were promptly
resolved after arterial flow release. No compartment syndrome signs developed. The patient remained in the intensive care unit (ICU) until
the 11th postoperative day. During this period, the patient did not receive any nephrotoxic agent, such as vancomycin or vasoactive drugs.
She maintained diuresis stimulated by furosemide. After ICU discharge she developed a urinary tract infection, as well as deteriorating
renal function and uremia. Dialysis was started on the 18th postoperative day. The patient developed pneumonia, which progressed to septic
shock on the 36th day of her admission. She required vasoactive drugs for 2 days at the ICU and, unfortunately, her renal function was never
fully recovered. She was discharged from hospital to a hospice care facility with a pedal pulse and no deficit on her limb, though requiring
chronic dialysis. Treatment of embolic arterial occlusion with severe limb ischemia is well defined and involves the use of an embolectomy
catheter as the best alternative.(6) CO2 has been used electively in both diagnostic(7) and therapeutic(8) procedures in the femoropopliteal
tree, and is reported to be safe(9) and non-nephrotoxic.(10) Intraoperative angiography was beneficial because it allowed the diagnosis of
the arterial tree occlusion after the initial embolectomy. Additional removal of clots was performed and the result was documented as
complete patency of the anterior tibial artery to the foot. Our goal, when using CO2, was to decrease the need for postoperative dialysis.
Probably, in this case, the deleterious stimuli (surgical stress, urinary tract infection and septic shock due to pneumonia) contributed to
renal failure and subsequent need for dialysis. The countermeasure (such as the use of non-nephrotoxic contrast) could have prevented renal
failure if it were a single condition. If we had used the iodinated medium, we might wonder if something could have been done differently to
avoid dialysis. We consider CO2 to be an alternative to iodine contrast when the decision to perform angiography is made in the acutely
ischemic limb. To the best of our knowledge, this agent has never been described in this clinical setting; it presents good quality imaging,
is not nephrotoxic and does not increase the risk for the limb or the patient in acute arterial occlusions. This approach may prove to be
fruitful in patients with borderline renal function, thereby reducing the risk of short or long-term need for dialysis. A isquemia aguda de
membro pode ser danosa para o membro e para a vida. A insuficiência renal é um desfecho possível associado à liberação dos produtos da
reperfusão do membro isquêmico. Alguns autores relatam o benefício de realização de angiografia após embolectomia, apesar do contraste
iodado também ser nefrotóxico. Relatamos um caso de embolectomia em uma paciente com insuficiência renal, em que o dióxido de carbono foi
utilizado como substituto para o contraste iodado. A isquemia aguda de membro de origem embólica é uma situação clínica de caráter urgente,
em que ocorre uma diminuição ou piora súbita na perfusão de um membro, e configura um risco à viabilidade da extremidade e à vida. O
tratamento consiste em revascularização imediata com um cateter de embolectomia. A remoção completa de todos os êmbolos oclusivos na árvore
arterial leva aos melhores desfechos; por isso, alguns autores defendem a arteriografia após a embolectomia, para os membros inferiores.(1)
A angiografia é tradicionalmente realizada com contraste iodado, mas o dióxido de carbono (CO2) foi estudado como um agente de contraste
intravascular alternativo(2) para pacientes com alergia a iodo ou alteração na função renal. Como o CO2 não é nefrotóxico, julgou-se
razoável utilizar esse contraste em uma paciente com função renal limítrofe (borderline) que seria submetida aos estímulos nocivos de
reperfusão do membro, após a revascularização.(3) Em nosso entender, este foi o primeiro caso que avalia o uso intraoperatório de CO2 como
um substituto de contraste iodado em um paciente com doença renal crônica conhecida e isquemia aguda de membro. Paciente do sexo feminino,
79 anos, chegou ao pronto-socorro com isquemia aguda no membro inferior esquerdo, com duração de 2 horas. Como antecedentes, apresentava
hipertensão, fibrilação atrial e insuficiência renal crônica, não dependente de diálise. A paciente tinha sido operada 2 anos antes, por
oclusão aórtica aguda de origem embólica, quando foi realizada embolectomia femoral bilateral com cateter. Iniciou o uso de anticoagulante
oral (varfarina) após esse episódio. À alta, os pulsos pediosos eram palpáveis, mas os tibiais posteriores eram ausentes, bilateralmente. A
paciente fazia uso irregular dos medicamentos, e o tempo de protrombina (INR, sigla do inglês International Normalized Ratio) era de 1,1. O
pulso estava arrítmico; era hipertensa (160x110mmHg) e apresentava pulsos femoral, poplíteo e distal normais, na perna direita. À palpação
do membro inferior esquerdo, havia apenas um pulso femoral fraco; os pulsos distais estavam ausentes. A paciente apresentava dor e défice
motor. Ela foi considerada como portadora de isquemia de membro grau IIb (risco eminente) e foi encaminhada imediatamente para cirurgia. O
clearance de creatinina estava diminuído nos exames pré-operatórios (Cockroft-Gault de 12mL/min). Sob anestesia geral, foi realizado acesso
femoral na cicatriz da incisão anterior do membro inferior esquerdo. As artérias femorais comum, superficial e profunda foram dissecadas e
clampeadas. Foi feita arteriotomia e uso de cateter de embolectomia de 4Fr (Edwards Lifesciences Corp, Irvine, Califórnia, Estados Unidos).
Os trombos foram removidos das artérias femorais superficial e profunda. O cateter avançou mais de 60cm na artéria femoral superficial, mas
não pôde ser palpado. O fluxo retrógrado não foi significativo e decidiu-se realizar uma angiografia para avaliar melhor a árvore arterial
infrapoplítea. Foi escolhido o CO2 como substituto ao contraste iodado para a angiografia. Utilizou-se um sistema home-made com fornecimento
de CO2 em selo d´água, semelhante a outro descrito anteriormente,(4) mas com uma modificação para evitar a contaminação do ar ambiente.(5)
Foi injetado através de cateter KMP 4Fr (Cook, Inc. Bloomington, Indianápolis, Estados Unidos) inserido na arteriotomia, quando as artérias
foram pinçadas. A figura 1 mostra uma artéria poplítea e uma fibular pérvias, e uma oclusão no terço médio da artéria tibial anterior.
Levantamos a hipótese de o cateter de embolectomia ter alcançado a artéria fibular na primeira tentativa, e por isso não ter sido palpável
ao exame físico. Figura 1Arteriografia com dióxido de carbono. Artérias poplítea e fibular pérvias, oclusão no terço médio da artéria tibial
anterior Realizou-se, então, nova embolectomia. O cateter avançou até o pé, na topografia da artéria pediosa (isto é, o cateter pôde ser
palpado na projeção da artéria) e mais trombos foram removidos. A angiografia de controle (Figura 2) mostrou resolução completa da oclusão
da artéria tibial anterior, com contraste fluindo até o pé (Figura 3). Foram usados 28mL de CO2, e não foi necessário aplicar o contraste
iodado. Figura 2Arteriografia com dióxido de carbono. Resolução completa da oclusão da artéria tibial anterior Figura 3Arteriografia com
dióxido de carbono. Chegada de contraste na artéria tibial anterior até o pé Foi realizada a arteriorrafia. As artérias foram desclampeadas,
e os pulsos poplíteo e distal estavam presentes no membro. Os sinais de isquemia (palidez e hipotermia) foram imediatamente resolvidos após
a liberação do fluxo arterial. A paciente não desenvolveu sinais de síndrome compartimental. A paciente permaneceu na unidade de terapia
intensiva (UTI) até o 11º dia pós-operatório. Durante esse período, não recebeu nenhum agente nefrotóxico, como vancomicina ou drogas
vasoativas. Manteve diurese com estímulo de furosemida. Após a alta da UTI, desenvolveu infecção urinária, piora da função renal e uremia.
Iniciou diálise no 18º dia pós-operatório. A paciente teve pneumonia, que evoluiu para choque séptico no 36º dia de internação. Necessitou
de drogas vasoativas por 2 dias na UTI e, infelizmente, nunca mais recuperou a função renal. Teve alta hospitalar e foi para instituição de
cuidados terminais, com pulso distal sem défice no membro inferior, mas em diálise crônica. O tratamento da oclusão arterial embólica com
isquemia grave de membro está bem definido, sendo o uso de cateter de embolectomia a melhor alternativa.(6) O CO2 tem sido empregado de
forma eletiva tanto nos procedimentos diagnósticos(7) como nos terapêuticos(8) na árvore fêmoro-poplítea, sendo descrito como seguro(9) e
não nefrotóxico.(10) A angiografia intraoperatória foi benéfica, já que permitiu o diagnóstico de oclusão da árvore arterial após a primeira
embolectomia. Mais coágulos foram removidos, e o resultado documentado foi a permeabilidade completa da artéria tibial anterior até o pé.
Nosso objetivo, ao utilizar CO2, foi o de diminuir a necessidade de diálise no pós-operatório. Neste caso, provavelmente, os estímulos
prejudiciais (estresse cirúrgico, infecção do trato urinário e choque séptico por pneumonia) contribuíram para a insuficiência renal e para
consequente necessidade de diálise. A contramedida (como o uso de contraste não nefrotóxico) poderia ter prevenido a insuficiência renal, se
fosse esta uma situação única. Se tivéssemos usado o contraste iodado, pensaríamos se algo diferente poderia ter sido feito para evitar
diálise. Consideramos o CO2 como uma alternativa ao contraste iodado quando é necessária a angiografia para isquemia aguda de membro. Em
nosso entender, esse agente nunca foi descrito nessa situação clínica, proporcionando boa qualidade de imagem, não sendo nefrotóxico, nem
aumentado o risco do membro ou do paciente, em casos de oclusões arteriais agudas. Essa abordagem pode se mostrar útil em pacientes com
função renal limítrofe (borderline), reduzindo, assim, o risco de precisar de diálise a curto ou longo prazo.
