Bartonella henselae, a flea-transmitted bacterium, causes chronic, zoonotic, blood stream infections in immunocompetent and
immunocompromised patients throughout the world. As an intra-erythrocytic and endotheliotropic bacterium, B. henselae causes a spectrum of
symptomatology ranging from asymptomatic bacteremia to fever, endocarditis and death. Veterinary workers are at occupational risk for
acquiring bartonellosis. As an emerging, and incompletely understood, stealth bacterial pathogen, B. henselae may or may not have been
responsible for the deaths of two veterinarians; however, recent evidence indicates that this genus is of much greater medical importance
than is currently appreciated by the majority of the biomedical community. The question “Did Bartonella henselae contribute to the deaths of
two veterinarians?” will never be definitively answered; however, after months of asking myself this question, I decided to comment on the
possibility that a recently discovered stealth bacteria may have played a role in their deaths. If one were to organize a
physician/scientist review of each patient’s medical record, examining the voluminous doctors’, nurses’, consultants’ notes and hundreds of
laboratory results; if this team were to visit with wives, family, and friends left behind, and had access to the test results generated by
our research group (see acknowledgements) prior to and after their respective deaths, I am of the opinion that this question could never be
accurately or adequately answered. Perhaps questions for which there are not definitive answers should never be asked, but if true, there
would be no need for biomedical research. Unfortunately, many questions remain unanswered, a fact that is very hard for patients, family
members, doctors, and diagnosticians to accept. Medicine remains “a practice,” based upon the best available science, the art of patient
care, and a clinician’s attempts to manage symptoms and disease processes for which causation is elusive. Because of circumstances beyond
everyone’s control, involvement of my research laboratory team was less than optimal due to the timing of specimen collection and type of
samples available for Bartonella testing. Voltaire, (1694 to 1778), stated: “Doctors put drugs of which they know little, into our bodies of
which they know less, to treat diseases of which they know nothing at all.” Clearly, medical science and 21st century patient care have
advanced tremendously since Voltaire’s time; however, there are still major gaps in scientific knowledge that negatively impact patient
outcomes. Specifically, our collective lack of “knowledge” negatively impacts directed therapy and effective management of the patient’s
illness and deficiencies in medical knowledge related to the genus Bartonella continue to compromise patient care throughout the world. It
is my hope that this commentary will benefit future patients, particularly veterinary workers, who have been or will become infected with
the emerging and incompletely understood, stealth bacterial pathogen; Bartonella henselae. The term “emerging infectious disease” has been
abused and to an extent overused in recent years, often in association with efforts to influence the appropriation of research funding.
During the past two decades, bartonellosis has clearly earned the designation “an emerging infectious disease.” The genus Bartonella has
expanded from two known species prior to 1992 to at least 34 Bartonella species in 2015. Medically, fifteen Bartonella species have been
associated with a spectrum of human illnesses; therefore, incompletely understood is another way to accurately describe this genus. The
fascinating history of Bartonella has been summarized in recent reviews ; whereas the contemporary history of this genus is being written
and rewritten as new knowledge is generated around the world. The past and more recent history of bartonellosis is beyond the scope of this
commentary. However, a brief historical perspective is necessary to put the lives and deaths of these veterinarians into context. Prior to
the recognition that bacillary angiomatosis and peliosis hepatis were caused by Bartonella quintana or B. henselae in AIDS patients [5, 6],
bartonellosis was not a differential diagnosis for sick humans or other animals throughout most of the world [1, 3]. Prior to the AIDS
epidemic, indigenous infection with a Bartonella sp. had never been diagnosed by a physician or veterinarian in North America. Not
surprisingly, clinicians cannot diagnose an as yet “unknown or undiscovered” infectious agent. Importantly, the history of Bartonella spp.
infections substantially pre-dates AIDS. Bartonella bacilliformis, transmitted by sandflies, caused Oroya Fever and verruga peruana in
indigenous Peruvian Indians hundreds of years ago; infected Spanish conquistadors, and caused highly fatal illness in immigrant workers
building the Trans Peruvian railroad . Purportedly, one worker died of hemolytic anemia (Oroya Fever) for each railroad tie that was laid. A
second Bartonella species, B. quintana, transmitted by the human body louse, was a major cause of morbidity and mortality during the World
Wars , and continues to cause human suffering and death among a spectrum of people (urban trench fever), particularly individuals
experiencing human body louse exposure in association with wars and famine, or those living in poverty and abusing drugs in modern day
cities. Since the “rediscovery” of Bartonella species infections in AIDS patients, numerous new species have been implicated as a cause of
illnesses in immunocompromised and immunocompetent patients [2, 7, 8]. Despite a dramatic expansion of medical and microbiological knowledge
related to the genus Bartonella [1, 3, 6], there are still major knowledge gaps involving clinically relevant questions. Due to their
lengthy illnesses, frequent medical evaluations, and involvement of numerous medical specialists and medical centers throughout the United
States, only a brief, superficial overview of each veterinarian’s illness is possible. As an example of the medical complexity, veterinarian
#1 was transferred among six different hospitals during the last 5 months of his life (October 2012 through February 2012). Selected
historical and demographic information is summarized (Table 1). When I entered the University of Georgia, College of Veterinary Medicine in
1970, Veterinarian #1 was a professor. I will always remember him as a caring, enthusiastic, outgoing and intelligent teacher. Before I
graduated, he left the University and started a companion animal veterinary practice, where he worked for the remainder of his career. On
April 11th, 2011, I received this email communication from him: “Ed. 15 years ago, my cardiologist told me I was in an "elite group" of
individuals as pertaining to cardiovascular fitness. Last week, we discovered I need a mitral, aortic and tricuspid valve replacement to be
done this Friday. Remembering some of your articles, I believe you stated that the number 1 cause of culture-negative endocarditis in humans
was bartonellosis. I have been hospitalized twice in the last 2 years for severe pneumonia. Do you think that is something I should check on
and if so, what samples could I send to you to attempt culture or PCR. I hate to impose on you like this, but my cardiologist does not give
it much weight nor does my family practitioner. Hope all is well with you and family.”Table 1Historical and demographic findings extracted
from the study questionnaire provided by the two veterinarians infected with Bartonella henselae ParameterVeterinarian #1Veterinarian
#2Age6763SexMaleMaleEthnicityCaucasianCaucasianResidenceSuburbanSuburbanNumber of childrenDaughter2 SonsEmployment StatusFull-time
employedFull-time employedOccupationVeterinarianVeterinarianLength of time at current position44 years37 yearsMedical coverageYesYesHave you
been diagnosed with infectious diseaseYes- pneumoniaYes - childhood diseases, influenzaHave you been diagnosed with a chronic illnessYes-
approximately 2 years durationYes – mild colitis, gastric refluxAllergiesYes – EnvironmentalYes – mild seasonal rhinitisHas experienced
persistent illnessYesNoSelf-described healthInfrequently illHealthy History of symptoms:FatigueYesNoDifficulty rememberingYesNoDisoriented
(confused by time or place)YesNoEye PainYesNoDifficulty sleeping (insomnia)YesNoChronic fatigueYesNoBladder dysfunctionYesNoFeverYesNoMental
confusion (disordered thoughts)YesNoBlurred visionYesNoBalance problemsYesNoShortness of breathYesNoMuscle weaknessLoss of sensation or
numbness in legsLegs – weak left lower leg since ICE chemotherapy – symptoms almost goneAbility to perform the same activities of daily
living prior to illness?NoYes, until medical leave began July 2012Ability to perform same employment/school activities prior to
illness?NoYes, until medical leave began July 2012Self-reported signs of symptomsWaxing/waningImproving – with current cancer treatment
History of Physician evaluations:General PractitionerYesYesPulmonologistYesNoOrthopedistYesYesUrologistYesNoInternal
MedicineYesYesInfectious
DiseaseYesYesGastroenterologistYesYesChiropractorYesYesOphthalmologistYesYesDermatologistYesYesDentistYesYesCardiologistYesYesNeurologistYesNoPsychiatrist/PsychologistYesNoPhysical
TherapistYesNoPodiatristYesNoAllergistYesYesAcupuncturistNoYesEar/Nose/ThroatNoYesOncologistNoYes Family Medical History Heart
DiseaseSelf + 2 BrothersFatherCancerSister – Mammary, Brother – Squamous Cell CarcinomaMother – Colon CancerHypertensionSelf + 2
BrothersFather + MotherAsthmaSelf + BrotherStrokeFatherMotherSubstance AbuseBrotherAllergiesSelf + MotherSelfDiabetesFather Animal
contact:DogYes – Indoor/OutdoorYes – Indoor/OutdoorCatYes – Indoor/OutdoorYes – Indoor/OutdoorBirdYes – IndoorYes – IndoorHorseYesYes –
OutdoorRodentYesYes, Hampster – IndoorReptileNoYes – IndoorFishNoYesFerretNoYesAge of Exposure0-60+0-60+Allow pets to sleep in same bed as
ownerYesYes – cats onlyAllow pets to lick hands, face, feet, etc.YesYesFrequent exposure (>1 time per month) to other animalsYes – Dog,
CatYes – Dog, Cats for 29 years.Length of exposure to other animals>10 yearsNoExposure to production animalsNoFirst 8 years post-graduation,
treated farm animals Animal bites or scratches DogYes – since 1960NoCatYes – since 1970Yes – since 1975BirdNoYes – 1980HorseNoYes –
1975ReptileNoYes – 1980RabbitNoYes – 1975RodentNoYes – 1980 Outdoor exposure at least once a year Wildlife rescue/rehabilitation,
GardeningHiking, Hunting, Gardening, Cycling, Outdoor water sports Antibiotics last
12 months:CiprofloxacinCurrentNoDoxycyclineCurrentCurrent *Rigors & fevers stopped with start of
DoxycyclinecefiximeJune-2011NoFluoroquinolonesYesYesCephalosporinsNoYes Corticosteroids in past 12 months:YesYesMedrol
Pak12/11/2011-12/26/2011NoFlonase6/2011-currentNoOral PrednisoneNoYesIV PrednisoneNoYesIV DexamethasoneNoYes Other medications in past
12 months:Quinapril2000-currentNoQmlodipine2000-currentNoEscitalopram1980-currentNoPrimidone2007-currentNoCoumadin2011-currentNoAspirin
81 mg1990-currentNoModafinil2010-currentNoEnaliprilNoYesRosuvastatin calciumNoYesOral AntiviralNoYesOral AntifungalNoYes Insect
Exposure:FleasYesYesTicksYesYesBiting FliesYesYesMosquitoesYesYesSpidersYesYesScabiesYesYes Travel outside of state of residence Northwest
USYesYesNortheast USYesYesSouthwest USYesYesSoutheast USYesYes Animal Contact during Travel Within US Northwest USYesNoNortheast
USYesNoSouthwest USYesYesSoutheast USYesNo Non continental US & International Travel AlaskaYesYesMexicoYesYesCentral
AmericaYesYesCarribeanYesYesCanadaYesYesAustralia/New Zealand/FijiNoYesEuropeNoYes Animal Contact during Travel Outside Non continental US
AlaskaYesNoMexicoNoNoCentral AmericaYesNoCarribeanYesNoCanadaNoNoPet TravelNoNo Specialist Doctor Visits:Chronic mild colitisNoYesT Cell
LymphomaNoYesHyperlipidemiaNoDuration 15 years – under control with statin Historical and demographic findings extracted from the study
questionnaire provided by the two veterinarians infected with Bartonella henselae Although our paths had crossed occasionally during the
ensuing 38 years, this email request initiated his entry into our Institutional Review Board approved research study (North Carolina State
University, 164-08-05). This man was in good health until June 2010, when he lost consciousness, fell and was diagnosed with pneumonia. In
April 2011, he had mitral valve replacement surgery, closure of a patent foramen ovale, 2-vessel bypass, bilateral maze procedure, radio
frequency ablation, ligation of the left atrial appendage and pacemaker placement. Based upon self-reporting in a standardized questionnaire
completed by all participants in our IRB-approved study, progressive symptoms including fatigue, disorientation, blurred vision, balance
problems, difficulty remembering, eye pain, insomnia, muscle weakness, loss of sensation or numbness in the legs, and shortness of breath
developed postoperatively in 2011. These non-specific symptoms are often reported by veterinary workers infected with one or co-infected
with more than one Bartonella sp. . Veterinarians, veterinary technicians, animal handlers, and groomers appear to be occupationally at risk
groups for Bartonella spp. infections [9, 10]. Because of their frequent exposure to arthropod-infested, Bartonella spp. bacteremic animals,
we have suggested that veterinary workers represent a sentinel, research study population for clarifying the medical importance of the genus
Bartonella [15, 16]. From the context of research priorities and research funding, this suggestion has been ignored by policy makers and
governmental agencies in the United States. Relapsing fever of unknown origin (FUO) with temperatures as high as 104 °F, developed in
October 2011 (6 months after surgery). Despite various antibiotic therapies, febrile episodes, accompanied by periodic dizziness and
increasingly severe muscle weakness, continued until his death on February 24, 2013. Bartonella spp. are a cause of FUO and culture-negative
endocarditis . As reviewed by Chomel, et al. , the first description of human Bartonella endocarditis was published in 1993. Subsequently,
Bartonella endocarditis was reported in cats, cows, dogs and sea otters . Microbiological improvements in Bartonella sp. isolation methods
and PCR amplification of organism-specific DNA sequences from surgically removed or autopsy obtained heart valves have resulted in the
identification of Bartonella endocarditis cases throughout the world [17, 18]. Between January 23rd and January 30th, 2012, multiple blood
cultures were obtained after consultation with an infectious diseases physician, of which a subset was sent to our laboratory for Bartonella
testing. FUO had persisted despite prior treatment with cefixime and concurrent administration of doxycycline and ciprofloxacin. When
Mycobacterium interjectum grew in one blood culture processed by a commercial laboratory, the patient was treated with doxycycline and
clarithromycin beginning in March 2012, followed by clofazimine and clarithromycin. Mycobacterium interjectum, a slow growing mycobacteria
most often associated with immunosuppression, generally responds to antibiotic treatment. Bartonella henselae (SA2 genotype) was amplified
and sequenced from one of three blood specimens submitted to our laboratory (Table 2). In September 2012, the patient’s fever pattern
worsened with temperatures spiking to 105 °F, 2-3 times/week. Due to the poor response to antibiotics, an extensive workup was performed.
Bone marrow and liver biopsies contained granulomatous inflammation, which occurs in association with Bartonella, Mycobacterium and other
intracellular pathogens. Bronchoscopic lavage culture grew M. interjectum and Eikenella corrodens, after which treatment consisted of
tigecycline and prednisolone (60 mg daily), which he had been taking for most of the previous year for potential sarcoidosis. In January
2013, the patient was admitted to National Jewish Health, for evaluation of severe muscular weakness, dyspnea on exertion, memory loss and
fever of unknown origin. During the diagnostic evaluations the patient’s condition deteriorated resulting in transfer to the University of
Colorado in Denver. After flying home to Florida, the patient was hospitalized at Bayfront Medical Center, after which he was transferred to
Shands Hospital, University of Florida. On February 13th, 2013, after 13 hours of surgery for vegetative valvular endocarditis, valve
replacement surgery, splenectomy, and pacemaker removal the patient never regained consciousness. The death certificate listed multi-organ
failure, sepsis, and mycobacterial endocarditis as the cause of death. Nearly two years after his death, B. henselae with sequence identity
of 527/527 bp with B. henselae Fizz, (Gen Bank accession number AF369526) was amplified and sequenced from a paraffin-embedded bone marrow
specimen obtained in January 2012. The same B. henselae Fizz genotype (identity 527/527 bp) was independently amplified and sequenced from
the mitral valve prosthesis removed February 13, 2013, just prior to his death. Based upon blood and tissue PCR amplification and DNA
sequencing results, this veterinarian was infected with two B. henselae genotypes in January 2012 and the Fizz genotype persisted at the
time of his death. When and how these infections were acquired, how long the infections persisted, and if B. henselae contributed to his
illness, FUO and ultimately his death will never be known.Table 2 Bartonella spp. serology and PCR results from blood, serum, BAPGM
enrichment blood culture and subculture agar plate swab or tissues from each of the two veterinariansBartonella IFA reciprocal
titersVeterinarianCollection DateSamplePCR original samplePCR cultureSubculture isolate Bvb I Bvb II Bvb III BhHI BhSA2 Bk #1 1/9/2012FFPE
Bone Marrow Bh FizzN/AN/A1/23/2012SerumNeg<16<16<16<16<16<16BloodNegNeg 7, 14Neg1/28/2012Serum Bh SA2BloodNegNeg 7,
14Neg1/30/2012SerumNegBloodNegNeg 7, 14Neg4/11/2012SerumNeg<16<16<16<16<16<16BloodNegNeg 14Neg4/13/2012SerumNegBloodNegNeg
14Neg4/16/2012SerumNegBloodNegNeg 142/13/2013FFPE Mitral Valve Prosthesis Bh FizzN/AN/A#2 2/24/2011FFPE (LN
supraclavicular)NegN/AN/A7/25/2012FFPE (cervical LN) Bh SA2N/AN/A4/5/2013SerumNegN/AN/ABloodNegNeg 7,
14Neg<16<16<16<16<16<164/6/2013SerumNegBloodNegNeg 7, 14Neg4/6/2013SerumNegBloodNegNeg 7, 14Neg4/8/2013SerumNegBloodNegNeg 7,
14NegunknownFFPE bone marrowNegN/AN/AN/A- Test not applicable for the sample testedFFPE- Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded Bh- Bartonella
henselae, genotypes SA2 or Fizz Bartonella spp. serology and PCR results from blood, serum, BAPGM enrichment blood culture and subculture
agar plate swab or tissues from each of the two veterinarians N/A- Test not applicable for the sample tested FFPE- Formalin-fixed paraffin-
embedded Bh- Bartonella henselae, genotypes SA2 or Fizz I have been a veterinary internist at North Carolina State University, College of
Veterinary Medicine since 1982. As such, I consult with regional veterinarians on a near daily basis. Despite the fact that Veterinarian #2
practiced medicine in North Carolina for 37 years, I did not know him personally; however, as fate would have it, he lived in a house along
the North Carolina coast adjacent to a close friend who was familiar with our Bartonella research. Thus, it was a mutual friend who
suggested Bartonella testing. Veterinarian #2 developed lymphadenopathy involving the neck, axillary lymph node (2 cm), and root of the
mesentery (radiographically a 4 cm lymph node). On February 24th, 2012, the left supraclavicular lymph node was surgically excised at
Carolina East Medical Center. Histologically, the lymph node contained a mixed population of small and large lymphocytes, plasma cells, and
scattered neutrophils, without evidence of necrosis, granulomatous inflammation, or abscess formation. There were no Reed-Sternberg cells
indicative of Hodgkin’s disease. Preliminary pathological diagnosis was lymphadenitis of uncertain etiology. Fungal, bacterial and
mycobacterial cultures were negative. Immunophenotypic studies, performed at Johns Hopkins Hospital as part of the standard lymphoma
protocol, supported a diagnosis of angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphoma (AILT), with no specific morphologic or immunophenotpic
characteristics to allow subclassification. In situ hybridization for Epstein Barr Virus (EBER) identified scattered positive cells. An
addendum report from The Johns Hopkins Hospital contained the following statement: “Careful correlation with history is recommended to rule
out immunodeficiency. The morphologic features coupled with a high proliferation rate and numerous mitoses are not seen in typical AILT
cases; however, additional studies and clinical correlation are needed to exclude this possibility.” March 15th, 2012, the patient was
referred to Duke University Medical Center where the pathologist concurred with the diagnosis of AILT, however, the attending lymphoma
oncology specialist suggested the possibility of self-limiting lymphadenitis. July 17th, 2012, a pathologist at MD Anderson Medical Center
concurred with the AILT diagnosis. A cervical lymph node, biopsied July 25th, had effacement of normal nodal architecture by atypical
lymphoid infiltrates, accompanied by mild vascular endothelial proliferation, and scattered eosinophils and plasma cells. Angioimmunoblastic
features were less prominent and features of lymphoma were more prominent than the previous biopsy. EBER staining was negative. Immuno-
histochemical staining again supported a diagnosis of AILT. The cancer was PCR positive for clonal T-cell receptor gamma gene rearrangement
and negative for clonal B-cell immunoglobulin gene rearrangement. 1 Chemotherapy consisted of oral prednisone and five cycles of CHOP
(cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone) therapy. Beginning five months after initiating CHOP chemotherapy, the patient
began experiencing frequent rigors, night sweats, and was ultimately diagnosed with FUO, which at various time points was treated with
intravenous and orally administered fluoroquinolones, cephalosporins, antivirals, antifungals, intravenous dexamethasone and oral
prednisone, all of which failed to induce sustained resolution in the FUO. As described for Veterinarian #1, infection with Bartonella
henselae can cause FUO [18, 19]. By September 2012, Veterinarian #2 was referred to MD Anderson Center. He was anemic (HB 8.2 mg/dl,
thrombocytopenic [89,000 platelets/ul]), and had a lymphocytosis (12,500/ul). A core bone marrow biopsy contained multiple, atypical,
lymphohistiocytic aggregates, with a prominent epithelioid component. Immunophenotyping supported AILT with marrow involvement. In October
2012, Veterinarian #2 requested Bartonella testing. Because of the historical administration of several antibiotics, BAPGM enrichment blood
culture/PCR was likely to be diagnostically less sensitive; therefore, paraffin-embedded lymph node biopsies obtained in February and July
2012 were tested by conventional PCR. Bartonella henselae (SA2 genotype) was successfully amplified and sequenced from the July lymph node
specimen. Shortly thereafter, treatment with doxycycline as the sole therapy was instituted for bartonellosis and the rigors and fevers
temporarily resolved. In completing the study questionnaire, this veterinarian reported being healthy prior to the development of
lymphadenopathy in February 2012, and with the exception of FUO accompanied by rigors and night sweats, CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
vincristine, prednisone) chemotherapy had been well tolerated. When the B. henselae lymph node PCR result became available, I related our
experience with doxycycline therapy in experimentally and naturally infected cats , and naturally-infected dogs to the patient’s infectious
disease physicians. Doxycycline as a sole antibiotic would suppress Bartonella sp. bacteremia, but rarely, if ever, cured the infection. In
humans, doxycycline treatments as long as 3 months in duration have resulted in symptomatic and hematological improvement, but sequential
blood culture/PCR indicated B. henselae infections persisted [13, 23]. Due to the progressive nature of the AILT, a decision was made to
treat the patient with allogeneic bone marrow stem cell transplantation; however, this therapy was repeatedly delayed between October 2012
and April 2013 due to recurrent bouts of FUO, which were temporally followed administration of chemotherapy. B. henselae infection was not
detected by BAPGM enrichment blood culture/PCR in April 2013 (Table 2), shortly before his death on April 21st, 2013. The planned allogeneic
bone marrow stem cell transplantation was never performed. In asking the question: “Did B. henselae contribute to the deaths of these two
veterinarians?”; we would first have to ask, does B. henselae cause FUO and endocarditis? The answer is yes. A second important question is:
“What microbiological evidence supports B. henselae infection?” For Veterinarian #1, B. henselae DNA was amplified and sequenced from three
diagnostic specimens (bone marrow, blood and mitral valve prosthesis) collected at three different time points between January 2012 and
February 2013. For Veterinarian #2, B. henselae DNA was amplified and sequenced from a paraffin-embedded lymph node obtained surgically,
four months prior to PCR testing in our laboratory. Subsequently, despite ongoing febrile illness, serology and BAPGM enrichment blood
culture testing failed to identify B. henselae DNA or antibodies. As summarized in a recent review , our research laboratory has substantial
experience with paraffin embedded tissue PCR [26, 27]. We have also previously described precautions in processing tissues to avoid DNA
carryover . Our laboratory protocols describe, and we routinely enforce, rigid work flow patterns to avoid carryover or DNA contamination
with amplified products. Also, negative DNA extraction, PCR amplification, and BAPGM enrichment blood culture controls are used routinely to
assess Bartonella spp. DNA contamination with every sample set processed within the laboratory. DNA carryover and amplicon contamination are
considered an unlikely source for the microbiological findings in these two veterinarians. Although isolation is the microbiological “gold
standard” for documenting a bacterial infection, PCR amplification of organism-specific DNA sequences is being used to document the presence
of fastidious , stealth or “unculturable” bacteria from patient samples . PCR amplification of organism-specific DNA sequences does not
confirm that the bacteria is viable or that the organism is responsible for the patient’s symptoms or pathology. However, the molecular
microbiological evidence supported B. henselae infection in both veterinarians. Another important microbiological question; “Was there
serological evidence to support exposure to B. henselae?” For reasons that remain unclear, a substantial (50-75 %) subset of Bartonella spp.
bacteremic patients do not have detectable IFA antibodies [9, 31]. With chronic, asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic Bartonella
bacteremia, a seronegative status may be the norm, rather than the exception; thus, serology is not a diagnostically or epidemiologically
sensitive modality. Often after weeks or months of prior antibiotic therapy, many veterinary workers are tested for Bartonella infection as
an afterthought or as a “test of last resort.” Using currently available diagnostic techniques, these bacteria are difficult to enrich, to
isolate or to PCR amplify from tissues under optimal testing conditions. Long delays before obtaining or processing patient specimens,
concurrent or recent antibiotic administration, and the number of blood or tissue samples tested influence the sensitivity of the BAPGM
enrichment blood culture/PCR platform. [24, 32] For biopsy specimens, the tissue sample size, the duration of formalin fixation prior to
paraffin embedding, and the severity and type of inflammatory response [26, 27] are important factors that determine diagnostic PCR
sensitivity. Collectively, these factors influence whether a diagnosis is confirmed or the infection is missed in a given patient. Timelier
collection of optimal specimens from these two veterinarians may have resulted in different and diagnostically more beneficial Bartonella
microbiological findings, than we reported above. Assuming the possibility that both veterinarians were infected with viable bacteria at the
onset of illness and/or when tested, the next question becomes: “Did the bacterium play a role in the initiation or progression of each
patient’s illness?” For Veterinarian #1, the approximate two-year history of non-specific, waxing and waning symptoms is consistent with the
questionnaire responses reported by other Bartonella bacteremic veterinary workers . Establishing causation for non-specific symptoms that
accompany infectious and non-infectious disease processes is difficult, particularly due to co-morbidities. However, documenting persistent
Bartonella sp. bacteremia in “non-immunocompromised” individuals is not impossible, as we have repeatedly demonstrated [9–14, 23].
Persistent occult blood stream infection may predispose patients to ongoing microvascular injury, bacterial localization within various
tissues including the vascular endothelium and heart valves, and the development of non-specific symptoms. One could hypothesize that
Veterinarian #1 progressed from non-specific symptoms to culture-negative endocarditis, to FUO, to infection of the mitral valve prosthesis
over a three-year timeframe. Currently, physicians are taught that B. henselae infection in immunocompetent people is synonymous with cat
scratch disease (CSD), which is considered a self-limiting infection. Although CSD is most often self-limiting, this does not appear to be
uniformly true . Performing a sequential, long-term cohort study of CSD patients in the United States, as reported from Israel , might
identify a subset of persistently B. henselae bacteremic patients with associated symptomatology and allow for the documentation of
progression of rheumatologic and/or neurologic disease . A biologically more complex question is: “Did B. henselae infection predispose to
the development of lymphoma?” Bartonella spp. can invade numerous host cells, within which the bacteria modify cellular functions by
injecting peptides and potentially transporting bacterial DNA into the cell [1, 4, 6, 34]. B. henselae contains bacteriophages that might
also facilitate DNA translocation events. Bartonella spp. appear to play causative or cofactor roles in the development of vasoproliferative
tumors in animals and immunocompetent as well as immunocompromised people . Comparative studies of naturally-occurring lymphoma involving
animals and humans are warranted to potentially generate evidence that supports comparative infectious disease causation . Although not well
studied in human patients, dogs experimentally-infected with Bartonella vinsonii subsp. berkhoffii became immunosuppressed . Infection-
induced immune suppression, as suggested by the pathologist reviewing the original lymph node biopsy from Veterinarian #2, has been
suggested to occur in association with human bartonellosis, caused by B. bacilliformis [1, 4]. Potentially, DNA translocation events in
conjunction with persistent infection-induced immune suppression could predispose a patient to develop lymphoma. Did B. henselae play a role
in the deaths of two veterinarians? Perhaps yes and perhaps no. For both veterinarians, it seems likely that B. henselae was responsible for
FUO. During their illnesses, and after their respective deaths, I communicated with both wives. Based upon their comments during these
challenging conversations, it is their hope that some good may come from their husband’s deaths. Both men were outstanding fathers,
husbands, veterinarians and community servants, each participating in a large number of volunteer activities. From my perspective, it is
time for a “Bartonella tipping point,” whereby this emerging pathogen is accorded a higher national (United States) and international
research priorities. Fever of unknown origin Epstein Barr Virus Angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphoma Cat Scratch Disease NeoGenomics
Laboratories, Irvine, Ca. Competing interests In conjunction with Dr. Sushama Sontakke and North Carolina State University, Dr.
Breitschwerdt holds U.S. Patent No. 7,115,385; Media and Methods for cultivation of microorganisms, which was issued October 3, 2006. He is
the chief scientific officer for Galaxy Diagnostics, a company that provides advanced diagnostic testing for the detection of Bartonella
species and other vector borne pathogens in animals and humans. Authors’ contributions EBB coordinated communications and generated the
manuscript. Others are acknowledged for their respective contributions. Authors’ information Dr. Breitschwerdt is a professor of medicine
and director of the Intracellular Pathogens Research Laboratory, Center for Comparative Medicine and Translational Research, College of
Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC. His research interests include diagnosis, treatment and prevention of
vector-borne intracellular pathogens. The author thanks Bayer Health Care-Animal Health Division for kindly supporting the publication of
this manuscript in the framework of the 10th CVBD World Forum symposium. The author also thanks Jessica Wong for technical assistance, Julie
Bradley and Barbara Hegarty for serological testing, Drs. Nandhakumar Balakrishnan, Ricardo Maggi and Patricia Mascarelli for performing
BAPGM enrichment blood culture/PCR and tissue PCR testing, and Tonya Lee for editorial assistance. My deepest sympathy and thanks to the
wives of these veterinarians for providing medical histories and other details included in this commentary.
