Since 1980, about 100 types of congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) have been reported representing an expanding group of inherited
disorders. ALG8-CDG (= CDG-Ih) is one of the less frequently reported types of CDG, maybe due to its severe multi-organ involvement with
coagulation disturbances, edema, massive gastrointestinal protein loosing enteropathy, cataracts, and often early death. We report three
additional patients, provide an update on two previously reported, and summarize features of ten patients reported in literature. Of 15
ALG8-CDG patients, three were homozygous and 12 compound heterozygous. There were multiple prenatal abnormalities in 6/12 patients. In
13/15, there were symptoms at birth, 9/15 died within 12 months. Birth weight was appropriate in 11/12, only one was small for gestational
age. Prematurity was reported in 7/12. Hydrops fetalis was noticed in 3, edemas in 11/13; gastrointestinal symptoms in 9/14; structural
brain pathology, psychomental retardation, seizures, ataxia in 12/13, muscle hypotonia in 13/14. Common dysmorphic signs were: low set ears,
macroglossia, hypertelorism, pes equinovarus, campto- and brachydactyly (13/15). In 10/11, there was coagulopathy, in 8/11 elevated
transaminases; thrombocytopenia was present in 9/9. Eye involvement was reported in 9/14. CDG typical skin involvement was reported in 8/13.
In ALG8-CDG, isoelectric focusing of transferrin in serum or plasma shows an abnormal sialotransferrin pattern. The diagnosis is confirmed
by mutation analysis in ALG8; all patients reported so far had point mutations or small deletions. The prognosis is generally poor. Thus, a
timely and correct diagnosis is important for counselling. Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) involve a rapidly growing group of
metabolic diseases that are caused by genetic defects in the synthesis of glycoproteins . The first two patients were diagnosed in 1980 by
the Belgian pediatrician Jaak Jaeken . To date, some 100 CDG have been identified [1, 3] (with over 700 patients reported worldwide), and
about 50 of these can be identified via isoelectric focusing of transferrin [1, 3–5]. CDG have been divided in four groups: (1) disorders of
protein N-glycosylation, (2) disorders of protein O-glycosylation, (3) disorders of lipid and GPI (glycosylphosphatidylinositol) anchor
glycosylation, and (4) disorders of multiple glycosylation pathways [5, 6]. Defects in protein N-glycosylation are divided into two
subgroups: CDG-I disorders comprise defects in the glycan synthesis (cytosol and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)), and CDG-II disorders defects
in glycan processing (Golgi apparatus) . In 2008, Jaeken et al. proposed a nomenclature that refers to the gene name under the umbrella name
of CDG, e.g. PMM2-CDG, ALG8-CDG, etc. . CDG affect multiple organ systems, the severity of symptoms is highly variable and it shows a broad
clinical spectrum with considerable overlap [1, 3]. ALG8-CDG (OMIM #608104) is due to inactivating mutations in the ALG8 gene encoding
dolichyl-phosphate-glucose 1-mannose 9-N-acetylglucosamine (Dol-P-Glc:Glc(2)Man (9)GlcNAc(2)-PP-Dol-alpha-2) glucosyltransferase (=
glucosyltransferase 2) in the ER, an enzyme that attaches the second glucose residue to dolichol-PP-glycans in the ER . ALG8-CDG is a CDG
form with dysmorphism (retrognathia, low-set ears, pes equinovarus), muscular hypotonia, hepatomegaly, coagulopathy (thrombocytopenia),
edema and ascites (including fetal hydrops), cardiorespiratory problems, and protein-losing enteropathy (watery diarrhea) . Cataracts
(ocular findings) have only been reported in ALG8-CDG, ALG12-CDG (CDG-Ig), other subtypes in early LLO (lipid-linked oligosaccharides)
synthesis (like SRD5A3-CDG) and some unclassified CDG [9, 10]. Here, we describe three severely affected neonates from two families with
ALG8-CDG with congenital cataracts, and provide an update on two previously reported children with congenital cataracts , where ALG8-CDG was
confirmed recently. In addition, we summarize the clinical and biochemical characteristics of these five patients, further ten published
patient reports and present a review of the literature. The first child of healthy, non-consanguineous, Caucasian parents, was born in the
34th gestational week after oligohydramnios in pregnancy. 15 min after birth, the boy died of severe respiratory failure due to pulmonary
hypoplasia with alveolar dysgenesis. Clinical examination showed low-set ears, macroglossia, bilateral pes equinovarus, hypoplastic thorax,
generalized edema, and a pale gray mottled skin. Bilateral cataracts were noted. Autopsy showed renal tubular dysgenesis, cerebral edema and
ascites. The second boy, brother of Patient 1, was born at 35 weeks of gestation by Caesarean section because of a pathological
cardiotocogram (CTG). Pregnancy was complicated by intrauterine hydrops fetalis with pericardial effusion and ascites as well as
oligohydramnios. Birth weight was 2700 g (50th centile), head circumference 34.5 cm (75th centile) and length 48 cm (75th centile). The
Apgar scores were 3/7/8 and umbilical cord pH was 7.36. Because of respiratory insufficiency, the boy was mechanically ventilated for four
days. Dysmorphism (wide-open fontanel, incomplete bilateral cataract, low-set ears, hypertelorism, macroglossia, retrognathia), generalized
edema, a pale mottled skin as well as pronounced muscular hypotonia were present. Laboratory investigation showed thrombocytopenia (lowest
value 19,000/μL, decreased prothrombin time (PT)(40 %; nl 74–108) and increased partial thromboplastin time (PTT)(>200 s.; nl 28–49)). After
initial stabilization the patient’s general condition worsened in the third week of life. He developed watery diarrhoea and vomiting, and
subsequently acute renal failure with anuria and ascites. His condition deteriorated and at 34 days of life he died due to cardiocirculatory
failure. In 1996, our group reported the first, albeit at that time unclassified, ALG8-CDG patient (Table 1) . The girl was the second child
of healthy, unrelated, Caucasian parents and died at the age of 30 months. She presented with severe psychomotor disability, microphthalmy,
cataract, brachydactyly, cortical atrophy, slight elevation of serum transaminases and blood coagulation abnormalities.Table 1Findings in 15
patients with ALG8 deficiencySkladal Charlwood Chantret Schollen Eklund Vesela Stölting Sorte Funke Kouwenberg Patients 1, 2,
5SexFMMFFMMFMFFMMMF Prenatal Data IUGR//Yes/YesNoNoNoNoNoYesNoNoNoNoOligohydramnios//Yes/YesNoNoYesNoNoNoNoYesYesNoHydrops
fetalis//ND////YesNoNo/NoYesYesNo Neonatal data Weeks of gestation/36 w (CS)35 w (CS)//35 w37 w29 w (CS)At termAt term39 w (CS)35 w34 w
(CS)35 w (CS)37 w (CS)Birth weight/2,590 g2,280 g//2,920 g3,070 g1,420 g3,980 g3,680 g2,210 g2,920 g2,570 g2,700 g3,080 g Clinical symptoms
Ascites/edemas/YesYesYesYesYesYesNoNoYesYesYesYesYesOnset of first symptomsFrom birthFrom birth4 monthsFrom birth8 weeksFrom birthFrom
birthFrom birthFrom birthFrom birthFrom birthFrom birthFrom birthFrom
birthDysmorphismYesYesNoYesYesYesNoYesYesYesYesYesYesYesGastrointestinal symptoms/YesYesNoYesYesYesNoNoYesYesNoYesYesBrain
involvementYesYesNo/YesYesYesYesYesYesYes/YesYesHypotonia/YesNoYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesYesSkin
involvement/YesNo/YesNoNoYesYesYesYesNoNoYesEye symptomsCataractNoRetinopathy/NoCataractOptic atrophyNoNoNystagmusNoCataractCataractCataract
Laboratory data
Thrombocytopenia/Yes/YesYesYesYes//YesYes/YesYesCoagulopathyYesYesYesYesNDYesYes//YesYes/YesNoHyponatremia/Yes/YesYesYes////YesYesYesYesIncreased
transaminasesYesYesNo/YesYesNo//YesYes/YesNo Survival 30 months4 years3 months>3 years3 days3 months16 months2 months>6 years>7 years8,5
months3 months15 min34 days39 days ALG8 mutations /HomozygousComp. het.Comp. het.Comp. het.Comp. het.HomozygousComp. het.Comp. het.Comp.
het.Comp. het.Comp. het./Comp. het.Comp. het.Mutation 1
(genomic)c.139A>Cc.139A>Cc.413delCc.139A>Cc.673+4A>Gc.139A>Cc.139A>Cc.845C>Tc.845C>Tc.799T>Cc.673+4A>Gc.139A>Cc.139A>CMutation 1
(functional)p.T47Pp.T47Pp.T138Kfs*19p.T47PSplice mutationp.T47Pp.T47Pp.A282Vp.A282Vp.S267PSplice mutationp.T47Pp.T47PMutation 2
(genomic)c.139A>Cc.96-2A>Gc.396insAc.96-2A>Gc.824G>Ac.139A>Cc.1090C>Tc.1436delCc.1436delCc.808T>Cc.824G>Ac.1090C>Tc.1219_1220delCTMutation 2
(functional)p.T47PSplice mutationp.V133Sfs*3Splice mutationp.G275Dp.T47Pp.R364*p.P479Lfs*6p.P479Lfs*6p.F270Lp.G275Dp.A364*p.L407Dfs*23 CS
Cesarean section; ND not described or no information available; dysmorphism such as low-set ears, macroglossia, pes equinovarus, campto- and
brachydactyly; gastrointestinal symptoms include diarrhea, vomiting, protein-losing enteropathy; CNS defects include structural brain
abnormalities, mental or psychomotor retardation, seizures; hypotonia presenting as floppy infant; skin involvement is abnormal fat
distribution, wrinkly skin, cutis laxa, inverted nipples; electrolyte disturbances refers to hyponatremia; exitus, death, when written as >
years it means age at last follow-up, no further information on outcome, comp. het., compound heterozygous Findings in 15 patients with ALG8
deficiency CS Cesarean section; ND not described or no information available; dysmorphism such as low-set ears, macroglossia, pes
equinovarus, campto- and brachydactyly; gastrointestinal symptoms include diarrhea, vomiting, protein-losing enteropathy; CNS defects
include structural brain abnormalities, mental or psychomotor retardation, seizures; hypotonia presenting as floppy infant; skin involvement
is abnormal fat distribution, wrinkly skin, cutis laxa, inverted nipples; electrolyte disturbances refers to hyponatremia; exitus, death,
when written as > years it means age at last follow-up, no further information on outcome, comp. het., compound heterozygous Six years
later, a brother of Patient 3 (Fig. 1a,b) was born after an uneventful pregnancy by Caesaran section in the 36th gestational week because of
breech presentation. Birth weight was 2590 g, length 48 cm and head circumference 33 cm (all 25th centile). The boy presented as a floppy
infant, with bilateral congenital cataracts and multiple dysmorphic features such as a prominent forehead, a wide fontanelle, macroglossia,
dysplastic ears, a high-arched palate, inverted nipples, peculiar fat pads of the buttocks, and short fingers and toes. Cyanotic apnoeas
were repeatedly present from the 4th day of life. Laboratory tests showed slight elevation of transaminases and transient hypoalbuminaemia,
as well as pathological coagulation (with prolonged PTT (partial thromboplastin time), low antithrombin III, and several reduced coagulation
factors). He suffered from vitreous bleeding during cataract operation and died at the age of four years from cardiac dysrhythmia.Fig. 1 a,b
Patient 4 at the age of 10 months - floppy infant, with multiple dysmorphic features such as a prominent forehead, wide fontanelle,
macroglossia, dysplastic ears, high palate, inverted nipples, short fingers and toes and a pale mottled skin, “fat pads” on arms and thighs
a,b Patient 4 at the age of 10 months - floppy infant, with multiple dysmorphic features such as a prominent forehead, wide fontanelle,
macroglossia, dysplastic ears, high palate, inverted nipples, short fingers and toes and a pale mottled skin, “fat pads” on arms and thighs
This girl (Fig. 2a), sister of a healthy four year old girl, was born in the 37th gestational week after an uneventful pregnancy. Labour was
induced because of a pathological CTG. Birth weight was 3080 g (50th centile), length 47 cm (10th centile) and head circumference 33 cm
(25th centile), the Apgar scores were 8/9/10 and arterial umbilical cord pH was 7.36. She was hospitalized due to fluctuations of
saturation, tachypnea and increased inflammation parameters as well as thrombocytopenia (lowest platelet count was 49 G/l; normal range:
223–510 G/l), and was treated with antibiotics. During the first days, she vomited repeatedly. She showed mild microcephaly, facial
dysmorphism (bilateral cataract, low-set ears, relative macroglossia), fat pads on the arms (Fig. 2b) and thighs, hypotonia with dystonic
posturing, hepatosplenomegaly, and persisting primary vitreous artery (Fig. 3). Routine laboratory parameters (including coagulation
parameters and thyroid function tests) were normal. Over the next weeks, the girl deteriorated progressively with recurrent episodes of
apneas often combined with bradycardia. Electroencephalogram (EEG) showed a pathological brain wave pattern with decreased brain activity.
On day 38 of life, a pale skin and apneas were noted, with ventricular tachycardia. The girl died from cardiovascular arrest.Fig. 2 a,b
Patient 5 at the age of 20 days - floppy infant, with intermittent dystonic posturing, and multiple dysmorphic features such as an abnormal
fat distribution on arms and thighs, macroglossia, low-set ears, additionally, cataracts and persisting primary vitreous artery were
presentFig. 3Ocular sonography of Patient 5 at the age of 10 days - Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous artery. A thin y-shaped
membrane extends from the optic disc to the posterior aspect of the opacified lens representing a remnant of the hyaloid vasculary system
a,b Patient 5 at the age of 20 days - floppy infant, with intermittent dystonic posturing, and multiple dysmorphic features such as an
abnormal fat distribution on arms and thighs, macroglossia, low-set ears, additionally, cataracts and persisting primary vitreous artery
were present Ocular sonography of Patient 5 at the age of 10 days - Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous artery. A thin y-shaped
membrane extends from the optic disc to the posterior aspect of the opacified lens representing a remnant of the hyaloid vasculary system
Serum transferrin isoelectrofocusing was performed as reported . Mutation analysis of the PMM2 and ALG8 genes was performed according to
standard methods [1, 13]. In CDG, enzyme analyses are not available for all types of defects in the pathway. When enzymatic analysis lacks,
lipid-linked oligosaccharides (LLO) in fibroblasts can show characteristic profiles , narrowing down the diagnosis of CDG. For confirmation
of the diagnosis, molecular genetic testing is necessary. Standard Sanger sequencing was performed in all five patients. In the future, with
a better availability, exome or whole genome sequencing methods might be helpful as well. In all our 5 patients, the plasma isoelectric
focusing of transferrin showed a type 1 pattern (CDG-I) and confirmed the clinical suspicion of an underlying CDG. In Patient 4,
sialotransferrins showed a type 1 pattern (CDG-Ix). However, PMM activity in fibroblasts was normal. Through enrollment in the Euroglycanet
network, ALG8-CDG was diagnosed in 2011 (homozygous c.139A>C p.Thr47Pro). The parents are heterozygous. In Patient 2 with prenatal hydrops,
edema and cataract, the serum transferrin type 1 pattern prompted us to investigate ALG8 gene as a candidate. A founder mutation was
suspected as the family originated from the same Tyrolean region where we previously had diagnosed another pair of siblings (Patient 3 and
4) with type 1 pattern and cataract . Two heterozygous mutations in the ALG8 gene were found in DNA extracted from fibroblasts of Patient 2
(c.139A>C in exon 2, p.Thr47Pro, and c.1090C>T in exon 10, p.Arg364Ter), confirming the diagnosis of ALG8-CDG. The clinical similarity and
plasma transferring type I pattern prompted analysis of ALG8 gene in Patient 5. This showed compound heterozygosity for the known ALG8
mutation in exon 2, c.139A>C, p.Thr47Pro and a newly described one in exon 11, c.1219_1220delCT, p.Leu407Aspfs*23. Both the c.139A>C and
c.1090C>T mutations are known disease causing mutations described previously, c.1219_1220delCT is a frame shift mutation with subsequent
premature stop codon formation. Of the 15 patients summarized here (3 newly described, 12 reported in literature [8, 9, 14–20] – including 2
published by our group ), three are homozygous (including one pair of siblings) and 12 compound heterozygous (including three pairs of
siblings). Of the 26 allels detected, 9 (35 %) are c.139A>C (Table 1). If we add the analyses of the deceased siblings (Patient 1 and
Patient 3), there would be 30 alleles in total, and 12 (40 %) c.139A>C. In summary, Table 1 shows features of 15 ALG8-CDG patients in total.
There are multiple prenatal abnormalities in 6/12 patients: 3 had intrauterine growth retardation, 5 oligohydramnios and 3 hydrops fetalis.
In 13/15 patients symptoms were recorded at birth and 9/15 died within the first year of life, showing the severity of ALG8 deficiency.
Birth weight was appropriate for gestational age in 11/12 patients and only one patient was small for gestational age (birth weight <10th
centile). Prematurity (<37 weeks) was reported in 7/12 patients. Hydrops fetalis was noticed only in three patients, whereas edema was
present in 11/13. Common dysmorphic signs were: low set ears, macroglossia, hypertelorism, pes equinovarus, campto- and brachydactyly
(13/15). Gastrointestinal symptoms included diarrhea, vomiting, feeding problems with failure to thrive, protein-losing enteropathy (9/14
patients). Brain involvement included psychomotor disability, seizures, ataxia, and structural abnormalities (dilatation of ventricles,
corpus callosum hypoplasia, leukoencephalopathy/leukodystrophy, cortical/cerebral atrophy) in 12/13 patients. Hypotonia/‘floppy infant’ was
present in 13/14 patients. Thrombocytopenia was present in 9/9 patients. Most patients had liver pathology: elevated serum transaminases in
8/11 and abnormal clotting factors in 8/11. Eye involvement (especially cataracts) was reported in 9/14 patients and skin involvement like
fat pads, wrinkly skin, cutis laxa and inverted nipples was reported in 8/13 patients. ALG8-CDG is one of the less frequently reported CDG
syndromes. It affects an early step of protein glycosylation and in general has a poor prognosis. It was first reported by Chantret et al.
in 2003 . There are twelve patients described to date (Skladal et al. (n = 2), Charlwood et al. (n = 1), Chantret et al. (n = 1), Schollen
et al. (n = 2), Eklund et al. (n = 1), Vesela et al. (n = 1), Stölting et al. (n = 2), Sorte et al. (n = 1), and one patient reported by
both Funke et al. and Kouwenberg et al. (Table 1). In the majority of patients (13/15), the disease had a neonatal onset and rapid
progression. In 9/15 patients, the outcome was fatal within the first year of life (Table 1). So far, no adult patients (>18 years of age)
affected with this subtype have been reported . We reviewed the most common clinical, laboratory and genetic findings in the twelve
previously reported patients diagnosed with ALG8-CDG (Table 1), add here the data of three additional patients with ALG8-CDG (Patient 1,2
and 5), and provide an update on two previously reported patients (Patient 3 and 4). For the two patients reported by Charlwood et al. and
the two reported by Skladal et al. (Patient 3 and 4) , the diagnosis of ALG8-CDG was provided years later. In the series of 15 patients
summarized in this paper, there are four pairs of siblings (Schollen plus the patient reported by Charlwood et al , Stölting , Patient 1/2,
and Patient 3/4 in this paper) (Table 1), reflecting an ascertainment bias for firstborns deceased without diagnosis being established
before a second affected child was born. Hydrops fetalis has also been described in PMM2-CDG and ALG1-CDG . In the patients described here,
it was present in the two brothers (Patient 1 and 2) and in 1/12 additional patient reported in the literature (Table 1). Hyponatremia
reported in eight patients is probably secondary to ascites/edema (11 patients). Unlike other CDG types, cataracts (ocular findings) have
only been reported in ALG8-CDG, ALG12-CDG, other subtypes in early LLO synthesis (like SRD5A3-CDG) and some unclassified CDG [9, 10]. CDG
are a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disorders. Patients with ALG8-CDG show very similar clinical features with neonatal
onset and fatal outcome within the first year of life. We believe that this CDG disorder might be underdiagnosed. Early discriminative
symptoms in ALG8-CDG patients are multisystem involvement with dysmorphism, neurological symptoms and cataracts in about 50 % of cases.
Therefore, we suggest screening for CDG sialotransferrins in serum or plasma in all infants with early multi-organ involvement (such as
cataracts, non-immune hydrops, coagulopathy). Confirmation of diagnosis requires molecular genetic testing. The diagnosis of CDG is
frequently delayed due to the highly variable phenotype, with some cases showing single organ involvement and others mimicking syndromes,
like skeletal dysplasia, cutis laxa syndrome, or congenital muscle dystrophy. In MPI-CDG (=CDG-Ib) (phosphomannose isomerase deficiency),
the protein-losing enteropathy and hypoglycaemia can be treated with an oral uptake of mannose , in SLC35C1-CDG (=CDG-IIc), the leukocyte
adhesion deficiency can be treated with oral fucose , and in PGM1 (Phosphoglucomutase 1 deficiency), treatment with galactose leads to
improved indexes of glycosylation . For ALG8-CDG, there is currently no curative treatment available. However, establishing a molecular
diagnosis is important for family counselling and prenatal diagnosis . All procedures were in accordance with ethical standards of the
Helsinki Declaration. Written informed consent for the case reports and images was obtained from all parents of the five patients reported.
Alpha-1,3-Glucosyltransferase CDG Congenital disorder of glycosylation Intrauterine growth restriction Appropriate for gestational age/small
for gestational age Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions MH, KW, ER, UK,
KP, DK treated Patient 1, 2, and 5 on the neonatal intensive care unit and the pediatric ward. DK, SSB provided expertise for metabolic
diagnostic work-up; together with MH drafted the manuscript, collected data on the patients, and reviewed the literature for data on other
known ALG8-CDG patients. CF and ES provided the dysmorphological description of patients. CF, ES, DL, GM, LK, JZ provided information and
details on biochemical and molecular genetic analyses. KM performed the eye ultrasound, as well as other radiological examinations, and
provided Fig. 3. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank the patients and their families for their kind
cooperation and sincerely regret the children’s adverse outcome.
