in memorian Female patient, 42-years-old, complaining of difficulty in urinating and swelling in the vulvar area for one year. Her
gynecological examination showed extensive injury in the vulvar region and the biopsy done was inconclusive. The removal of the lesion was
conducted. After the procedure, the patient remains free of recurrence for 15 months. This case highlights the need to consider angiomyxoma
in the differential diagnosis for tumors of unknown cause in the vulvar region. Aggressive angiomyxoma (AA) is a rare tumor with higher risk
of infiltration and recurrence.(1) This tumor pathogenesis is unclear.(2) It occurs predominantly in vulvo-vaginal, perineal and groin
region, and the diagnosis is made by histopathology examination. Treatment must be exeresis of the tumor such as GnRH agonists used with
adjunct therapy.(3,4) The AA was first described by Steeper and Rosai in 1983.(4) In 2009, less than 250 cases of angiomyxoma was described,
which highlights the rarity of this disease.(3) Most of cases reported have been in women at reproductive age and those in fourth decade of
life. The AA can affect women and men in a proportion of 6:1.(4,5) We report a rare disease. From the best of our knowledge only 74 cases of
AA were reported in the literature so far. A 42-year-old woman (G3P3(v)A0) sought the gynecology outpatient unit of the Hospital Getúlio
Vargas de Teresina in Piaui, Brazil, complaining of difficult to void and tumor in vulvar region for one year. Gynecological examination
showed a large mass located in the groin and vulvar region that caused a decrease of vaginal cavity and bulging on its posterior wall
(Figure 1). Figure 1Pre-operative appearance. Large mass located in perineal and vulvar region A biopsy of the lesion was done and showed
proliferation of fibroblast and myofibroblast cells without atypia on abundant collagenous matrix with blood vessels in between. Absence of
mitotic activity and/or necrosis. Computed tomography of groin region showed expansive pelvic lesion with hemorrhagic necrosis area in
between, well-delimited, and with extension to vaginal route and presacral region, which determined bulging of circumscribed structures
without signals of invasion to myoadipose plans. A complete exeresis of the lesion was conducted (30x20x10cm) located in vulvoperineal
region that extended to posterior vaginal wall and to anterior wall of rectus (Figure 2). The synthesis of the surgical defect was done with
approximation of deep plans and suture of vulvoperineal region. A suction drain was used and it was removed on fifth day after the surgery.
The patient was treated with metronidazol and ciprofloxacine for 14 days and evolved without any intercurrences. Figure 2Macroscopic
appearance of tumors, which measured 18x11x13cm with undulating external surface and grayish-white, and lobulated cut surface, brilliant and
grayish-white with myxoid areas The histopathological exam of the specimen showed deep angiomyxoma (Figure 3). Figure 3Microscopic
appearance of the tumor. Vessels of medium size and thickened wall, involved by stromal cell layer of myxoid apperance. Hematoxylin and
eosin 200X Currently, the patient remains asymptomatic without evidence of disease for 15 months after the surgery. The AA is wrongly
diagnosed in 80% of cases. Classic presentation is a mass of slowing growth, painless, located in vulva, perineum and buttock. Patients
often report that the mass is asymptomatic. The pathogenesis of vulvar AA is poorly extended, however, genetic changes in short arm of the
chromosome 12(12q) has been implicated as the cause.(6) The histopathology exam is the gold standard diagnosis and, often, shows vessels of
medium size and thickness wall, rounded by layer of stromal cells of myxoid appearance.(4) Histologically this tumor is hypo-or moderately
cellular being fusiform or stellar cells in between the myxoid matrix of mucopolysaccharides, involving a number of vessels of small and
medium size – being this latter, sometimes, of thickness and hyalinized wall.(7) In our case, the surgical specimen consisted of a tumor
weighting 1,326g and measuring 18x11x13cm with undulating external surface, brilliant and grayish-white with myxoid areas. Under microscope
middle size vessels were seen and a thickened wall, involved by stromal cells of myxoid appearance. Immunohistochemically, tumoral cells
show immunoreactivity, at least focally, for specific vimentin and muscle-specific actin. The desmin-positivity is controversial. There are
immunonegativity for carcino-embrio antigen, cytokeratin, VIII factor and S100 protein.(7) Several modalities of imaging exams have been
used to identify and describe AA. The ultrasonography usually reveals a cystic and hypoechoic mass. In general, computed tomography reveals
a tumor with well-defined borders with low attenuation than muscles, probably due to loose myxoid stroma and high aqueous content of such
tumor. In relation to muscles sings in magnetic resonance, the AA show a isointense signal in T1 and hyperintense in T2 weighted image.(6)
Imaging studies are important in pre-operative evaluation since the tumor extension is frequently underestimated by physical examination.
The early detection of recurrences can also be increased by inclusion of imaging studies in the follow-up protocol.(1) Multiple modalities
of treatment have been described, however, the complete surgical exeresis, when requested, must be considered. Partial exeresis can be
justified when a high surgical morbidity is anticipated. Unfortunately, recurrences can occur, even with negative surgical margins. Several
surgical or clinical approach can be used to treat this disease recurrence. The exeresis is still the best treatment, but gonadotropin-
releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonist has been described to prevent recurrence in isolated cases.(4) Most of angiomyxomas show positivity to
receptors of estrogen and progesterone, being probably hormone-dependent. For this reason, hormonal manipulation is believed to be a viable
option for treatment. Analogs of GnRH have been used in some few cases of premenopausal women, but this tumor can regrowth once the therapy
is discontinued. The pre-operative reduction of tumors using analogs of GnRH can increase the chances of complete excision and reduce the
radicality of the surgical procedure.(3) Adjuvant hormonal treatment has been also described with tamoxifen and raloxifene with several
degrees of success – from no response to complete remission of primary or recurrence of AA. Radiotherapy and chemotherapy have been used as
adjuvant therapies, but it is less likely that they are useful, because the AA has low mitotic activity. The arterial embolization has been
also reported, but, generally, it is not conducted, once these tumors are fed by several vessels. Because of its rarity, the role of biopsy
of sentinel lymph nodes and lymphadenectomy in AA is still unclear. Although the great availability of a number of treatment, the recurrence
of AA is higher than 72%.(6) No guidelines exist on the postoperative management of vulvar AA. However, because of high rate of recurrence
and potential morbidity associated with non-diagnosed recurrences, several authors have recommend periodic evaluations with physical exam
and magnetic resonance for up to 15 years after the treatment.(6) Angiomyxoma must be always considered in differential diagnosis of mass in
the vulva, perineum and buttocks. The histopathological exam is the best way to conduct the definitive diagnosis. Treatment must be exeresis
of the tumor with agonists of GnRH with adjunct therapy.(4) in memorian Paciente do gênero feminino, 42 anos, com queixas de dificuldade ao
urinar e aumento de volume na região vulvar há 1 ano. Ao exame ginecológico, apresentava extensa lesão na região vulvar. Biópsia da lesão
foi inconclusiva. Realizou-se a exérese da lesão. A paciente permanece livre de recorrências há 15 meses. Este caso destaca a necessidade de
considerar o angiomixoma no diagnóstico diferencial de massas de causa desconhecida na região vulvar. Angiomixoma agressivo (AA) é um tumor
raro, com elevado risco de infiltração e recorrência local.(1) Sua patogenia não é clara.(2) Ocorre predominantemente em região
vulvovaginal, perineal e pélvica, e o diagnóstico é dado por meio de exame histopatológico. O tratamento deve ser a exérese do tumor, com a
opção de agonistas do GnRH usados com terapia adjunta.(3,4) O AA foi primeiro descrito por Steeper e Rosai, em 1983.(4) Em 2009, existiam
menos de 250 casos de angiomixoma descritos, o que destaca a raridade da doença.(3) A maioria dos casos relatados tem sido em mulheres na
idade reprodutiva na quarta década de vida. Os AA podem acometer mulheres e homens numa proporção de 6:1.(4,5) Essa é uma doença rara e no
melhor do nosso conhecimento existem apenas 74 casos de AA da vulva publicados na literatura. Mulher, 42 anos (G3P3(v)A0) procurou o
ambulatório de ginecologia do Hospital Getúlio Vargas de Teresina, no Piauí, com queixa de dificuldade ao urinar e tumoração na região
vulvar há um ano. Ao exame ginecológico constatou-se volumosa massa localizada na região perineal e vulvar, determinando diminuição da
cavidade vaginal e abaulando sua parede posterior (Figura 1). Figura 1Aparência pré-operatória. Volumosa massa localizada na região perineal
e vulvar Realizou-se biópsia da lesão, que mostrou proliferação de células fibroblásticas e miofibroblásticas, sem atipias, em meio à
abundante matriz colagenizada com vasos sanguíneos de permeio. Ausência de atividade mitótica e/ou necrose. Tomografia computadorizada da
pelve mostrou lesão pélvica expansiva, com área de necrose hemorrágica de permeio, bem delimitada, com extensão ao canal vaginal e região
pressacral, determinando abaulamento das estruturas circunjacentes, sem sinais de invasão dos planos mioadiposos. Realizou-se a exérese
completa da lesão (30x20x10cm) localizada na região vulvoperineal, que se estendia para a parede vaginal posterior e para parede anterior do
reto (Figura 2). A síntese do defeito cirúrgico foi realizada com aproximação dos planos profundos e sutura da região vulvoperineal. Deixou-
se um dreno de sucção, que foi retirado no quinto dia de pós-operatório. A paciente fez uso de metronidazol e ciprofloxacino por 14 dias e
evoluiu sem intercorrências. Figura 2Aparência macroscópica do tumor, cujas dimensões eram 18x11x13cm, com superfície externa ondulada e
branco-acinzentada, e superfície de corte lobulada, brilhante e branco-acizentada com áreas mixoides O histopatológico da peça constatou
angiomixoma profundo (Figura 3). Figura 3Aparência microscópica do tumor. Vasos de tamanho médio e parede espessada, circundados por uma
camada de células estromais de aparência mixoide. Hematoxilina e eosina 200X A paciente encontrava assintomática e sem evidências de doença
em atividade 15 meses após a operação. A doença é diagnosticada erroneamente em 80% dos casos. A apresentação clássica é de uma massa de
crescimento lento, indolor, localizada na região da vulva, períneo ou glúteo. As pacientes frequentemente relatam que a massa é
assintomática. A patogênese do AA vulvar é pobremente entendida, entretanto alterações genéticas no braço curto do cromossomo 12 (12q) têm
sido implicadas.(6) O histopatológico é o padrão-ouro para o diagnóstico e, geralmente, mostra vasos de tamanho médio e parede espessada,
circundados por uma camada de células estromais de aparência mixoide.(4) Histologicamente, esse tumor é hipo ou moderadamente celular,
estando as células fusiformes ou estelares no meio de uma matriz mixoide de mucopolissacarídeos, englobando numerosos vasos de pequeno e
médio calibres − estes últimos, por vezes, de parede espessa e hialinizada.(7) No presente caso, a peça cirúrgica consistia de um tumor
pesando 1.326g com dimensões de 18x11x13cm, com superfície externa ondulada e branco-acinzentada, e superfície de corte lobulada, brilhante
e branco-acinzentada, com áreas mixoides. Ao microscópio, mostrava vasos de tamanho médio e parede espessada, circundados por uma camada de
células estromais de aparência mixoide. Imunoistoquimicamente, as células tumorais mostram imunorreatividade, pelo menos focalmente, para a
vimentina e actina específica de músculo. A positividade para desmina é controversa. Há imunonegatividade para antígeno carcinoembrionário,
citoqueratina, fator VIII e proteína S100.(7) Muitas modalidades de exames de imagem têm sido utilizadas na identificação e na descrição de
AA. A ultrassonografia usualmente revela uma massa cística ou hipoecoica. A tomografia computadorizada tipicamente revela um tumor com
margens bem definidas, com atenuação menor que a de músculos, provavelmente devido ao estroma mixoide frouxo e ao alto conteúdo aquoso desse
tumor. Em relação aos sinais musculares na ressonância magnética, AA mostra um sinal isointenso, nas imagens ponderadas em T1, e
hiperintenso, nas imagens ponderadas em T2.(6) Estudos de imagem são importantes na avaliação pré-operatória, desde que a extensão do tumor
é frequentemente subestimada pelo exame físico. A detecção precoce de recorrências pode também ser aumentada pela inclusão de estudos de
imagem no protocolo de seguimento.(1) Múltiplas modalidades de tratamento têm sido descritas, entretanto, a exérese cirúrgica completa –
quando possível – deve ser tentada. Exérese parcial pode ser justificada quando uma alta morbidade operatória é antecipada. Infelizmente,
recorrências podem ocorrer, mesmo com margens cirúrgicas negativas. Muitas abordagens cirúrgicas ou clínicas podem ser usadas para tratar a
doença recorrente. A exérese é ainda o melhor tratamento, mas agonistas do hormônio liberador da gonadotrofina (GnRH) têm sido descritos
para prevenir a recorrência em casos isolados.(4) A maioria dos angiomixomas mostra positividade para os receptores de estrogênio e de
progesterona, sendo provavelmente hormônio-dependentes. Assim, pensa-se que a manipulação hormonal é uma opção viável de tratamento.
Análogos do GnRH têm sido usados em alguns poucos casos de mulheres na pré-menopausa, mas o tumor pode voltar a crescer, uma vez que a
terapia é descontinuada. O encolhimento pré-operatório de tumores usando análogos do GnRH pode aumentar as chances de excisão completa e
minimizar a radicalidade do procedimento cirúrgico.(3) O tratamento hormonal adjuvante também tem sido descrito com tamoxifeno e raloxifeno,
com variados graus de sucesso − indo de nenhuma resposta à remissão completa do AA primário ou recorrente. Radioterapia e quimioterapia têm
sido usadas como terapias adjuvantes, mas é pouco provável que sejam úteis, visto que AA tem baixa atividade mitótica. A embolização
arterial tem sido relatada, mas, geralmente, não é realizada, uma vez que esses tumores são alimentados por muitos vasos. Devido à sua
raridade, o papel da biópsia do linfonodo sentinela e da linfadenectomia em AA está ainda por ser determinado. Apesar dessa ampla gama de
tratamentos, a recorrência de AA é reportada ser tão alta quanto 72%.(6) Não existem guidelines sobre o manejo pós-operatório do AA vulvar.
No entanto, devido à alta taxa de recorrência e à potencial morbidade associada com recorrências não diagnosticadas, muitos autores têm
recomendado avaliações periódicas, com exame físico e ressonância magnética, por até 15 anos após o tratamento.(6) O angiomixoma deve sempre
ser considerado no diagnóstico diferencial de massas nas regiões vulvar, perineal e glútea. O histopatológico é o único modo de fazer o
diagnóstico definitivo. O tratamento deve ser a exérese do tumor, com a opção de agonistas do GnRH usados com terapia adjunta.(4)
