A patient with a complete right ureteral triplication presented with recurrent pyelonephritis and flank pain that was refractory to medical
management. Evaluation showed that the atrophic upper-most renal moiety had been chronically obstructed and was associated with a dilated
ureter. Intraureteral and intravenous indocyanine green (ICG) were used as real-time contrast agents intraoperatively to facilitate right
robotic partial nephroureterectomy of the diseased system. Intraureteral ICG was used to accurately distinguish the pathologic ureter and
associated renal pelvis from its normal counterparts. Intravenous ICG was used to assess perfusion in the right kidney and delineate the
margins of diseased renal parenchyma. Complete ureteral triplication , the presence of three individual ureters originating from the kidney
and draining into three separate orifices, is a rare congenital anomaly. Patients with such anatomy may be predisposed to recurrent
infections, renal colic, and incontinence secondary to associated obstruction and reflux . When patients with complete ureteral triplication
require surgical management, the surgeon must evaluate the degree of renal compromise attributable to the pathologic portions of the urinary
tract, and correctly distinguish the diseased portions of the urinary tract from its healthy counterparts. It is for this reason that the
role of perioperative imaging to guide operative treatment cannot be overemphasized. Indocyanine green (ICG), a fluorescent dye that can be
visualized under near-infrared fluorescence (NIRF), has been utilized intraoperatively during robotic urologic procedures to highlight
relevant anatomy and assess perfusion . ICG may be visualized using the FIREFLY system, which is integrated into the da Vinci Si robot
(Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Herein, we describe a case in which both intraureteral and intravenous ICG was used to facilitate
a complex robotic partial nephroureterectomy in a patient with complete ureteral triplication. A 31-year-old female with a congenital right
ureteral triplication presented with recurrent right-sided pyelonephritis and persistent right-sided flank pain refractory to medical
management. Delayed phase computed tomography (CT) scan with intravenous contrast clearly showed that each of the three right-sided ureters
was associated with its own collecting system, and emptied separately into the bladder. The uppermost moiety showed sequelae of chronic
obstruction: significant parenchymal thinning, delayed contrast excretion, and dilated ureter. The two inferior collecting systems and their
associated ureters appeared to be emptying normally (Fig. 1). Mercaptuacetyltriglycine (MAG3) study showed symmetrical renal function with
no evidence of obstructive uropathy bilaterally. The uppermost moiety was not well delineated on the MAG3 study. The patient elected for
robotic right uppermost pole moiety nephroureterectomy. The patient consented to off-labeled use of ICG after a complete discussion of its
risks and benefits. We used cystoscopy and retrograde pyelography to show that the three separate right ureteral orifices were consistent
with Weigert-Meyer law, and identify the ureter of interest (Fig. 2). After preparing the IC-Green (Akorn Inc., Lake Forest, IL, USA) by
mixing 25-mg sterile ICG in 10-mL distilled water, we used a 6-Fr ureteral catheter to inject a 5-mL solution of ICG retrograde into the
lumen of the diseased ureter. The ureteral catheter was then clamped to maximize ICG retention in the ureter. A 16-Fr Foley catheter was
then inserted and secured to the ureteral catheter. The patient was placed in right-side-up flank position with the table in full flexion.
We used our standard robotic port placement strategy for robotic nephroureterectomy that was previously described at our center . After
mobilizing the right colon, we turned on the FIREFLY modality to locate the diseased ureter. Under NIRF, the diseased ureter fluoresced
green while the other two healthy ureters did not fluoresce (Fig. 3). The diseased, fluorescent ureter was circumferentially dissected
distally. Two Weck Hem-o-lok clips (Teleflex, Morrisville, NC, USA) were secured on the ureter at its junction with the bladder prior to
transecting the ureter. The diseased ureter was then dissected proximally to its associated renal pelvis. During our dissection of the
uppermost pole renal pelvis, we encountered a significant amount of fibrotic tissue, likely attributable to the patient's history of
recurrent pyelonephritis. By toggling the NIRF on and off, we were able to clearly distinguish between the green fluorescing renal pelvis
and ureter, from the nonfluorescing fibrotic tissue. After identifying the arterial and venous branches of the main renal artery and vein
supplying the uppermost pole, we clipped the proximal and distal ends using two Weck Hem-o-lok clips and transected the vessels. We then
injected 2-mg ICG intravenously to visualize perfusion to the kidney. Under NIRF, there was a perfusion defect in the uppermost pole moiety
of the kidney where we had removed its blood supply; the remainder of the kidney was well-perfused and fluoresced green (Fig. 4). Utilizing
NIRF to delineate our margins, we excised the diseased collecting system and its blood supply en bloc. Operative time was 157 minutes.
Ureteral triplication is a rare congenital anomaly; only approximately 100 cases have been described in the literature . Smith classified
ureteral triplication into four major variants : Type 1, complete ureteral triplication (35%)-three ureters originating from the kidney and
emptying into three orifices; type 2, incomplete triplication (21%)-three ureters originating from the kidney, with two of these ureters
joining to empty into two orifices; type 3, trifid ureter (31%)-three separate ureters originating from the kidney, with all three ureters
joining to empty into a single orifice; type 4, double ureter, one bifurcated (9%)-two separate ureters originating from the kidney, with
one ureter birfuricating into an "inverse Y" to empty into three orifices. Our case was a type 1, complete ureteral triplication with all
three ureters associated with its own renal collecting system and emptying into three separate bladder orifices. Surgical management of
patients with ureteral triplication, which may involve simultaneous treatment of the upper and lower urinary tracts, is most often indicated
when there is a risk of renal compromise as in cases of veiscoureteral reflux, obstruction, ureteral ectopy, and recurrent infections. Given
the variations in anatomy and increased predisposition for pathology, prudent use of perioperative imaging to guide surgical management of
ureteral triplications is essential. Patel et al. described the role of various preoperative imaging modalities on assessing anatomy and
function in a patient with a type 2 ureteral triplication with ectopia. A dimercaptosuccinic acid renal scan showed decreased perfusion and
uptake by the right upper pole, suggesting a duplicated anomaly and ectopic ureter. Cystoscopy and retrograde pyelography demonstrated that
there were two ureters originating from the right kidney that joined intramurally to form a single bladder orifice. Intravenous urography
and CT scan revealed the ectopic third ureter, which was dilated and associated with the upper pole. Flechsig et al. described using dynamic
magnetic resonance nephrography to concomitantly assess anatomic and functional characteristics in a 5-year-old girl with a type 1 left
ureteral triplication. Initial evaluation with a MAG3 renal scan suggested poor renal excretion in the left lower pole, but the authors
noted that precise localization of the impaired region was difficult due to limited resolution. However, a dynamic magnetic resonance
nephrography allowed for a detailed region-of-interest evaluation that showed 45%, 46%, and 9% function in the upper, middle and lower pole,
respectively. Furthermore, the authors noted that the correlation between preoperative imaging and intraoperative findings assisted in
performing laparoscopic partial nephroureterectomy. An intraoperative imaging modality that assists in correctly identifying the pathologic
ureter and associated renal pelvis, and in precisely determining the margin between compromised versus healthy renal parenchyma would
facilitate surgical management of patients with ureteral triplication. Such an imaging modality would be particularly helpful during robotic
surgery, as the surgeon relies solely on visual cues to guide dissection due to the lack of tactile feedback. Despite this, a means to
intraoperatively image relevant anatomy and evaluate function in real-time during robotic surgical management of ureteral triplications has
yet to be described. ICG has recently been increasingly utilized in urologic procedures as an intraoperative contrast agent to highlight
relevant anatomy. It is particularly helpful for intraoperative use as it has a low toxicity, high signal-to-noise ratio, and penetrates
tissue . Tobis et al. first detailed the use of intravenous ICG during robotic partial nephrectomy to differentiate normal renal parenchyma
(bright green fluorescence) from tumors, cysts, and areas of fat necrosis (decreased/no fluorescence). Bjurlin et al. noted that intravenous
ICG may also be used to assess tissue perfusion during surgical management of the upper urinary tract. Poorly perfused fibrotic scar tissue
appeared dark while well perfused renal pelvis and ureter appeared green. We have found the use of intraureteral ICG to assist in robotic
ureteral reconstructions, which was first described at our center, to be particularly helpful in localizing the ureter despite severe
periureteral inflammation and in determining margins of ureteral strictures . In our case, we utilized both intraureteral and intravenous
ICG intraoperatively to highlight relevant anatomy during robotic right uppermost pole nephroureterectomy in a patient with type 1 ureteral
triplication. Intraureteral ICG aided in accurately identifying the pathologic ureter and associated renal pelvis in real-time; the system
of interest fluoresced green while the other two systems did not fluoresce. This aided our ability to focus our dissection to the ureter of
interest without risking devascularization to the healthy ureters. Intravenous ICG aided in assessing perfusion to the right kidney and
delineating the margins of defective renal parenchyma in real-time; the well-perfused middle and lower collecting systems fluoresced bright
green, while the upper-most collecting system did not fluoresce as brightly. The use of intraureteral and intravenous ICG to highlight
relevant anatomy intraoperatively may be of particular benefit in patients with complex urinary tract anatomy, especially in cases
necessitating concomitant operative management of upper and lower tracts. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: Matthew Lee and Ziho Lee have no conflicts
of interest or financial ties to disclose. Daniel Eun is a proctor, case observer, and lecturer for Intuitive Surgical, and a lecturer for
Covidien and Sony Medical.
