To the Editor: Papular elastorrhexis (PE) is a rare disorder of elastic tissue that is infrequently reported in the literature. We present a
case of a 29-year old Asian woman who presented with a 2-month history of an eruption of asymptomatic flesh-colored papules on her posterior
neck and upper back. Her medical history included eczema and seasonal allergies, and she denied a history of acne, trauma, or similar
lesions in family members. Physical examination showed flesh-colored, 2–4 mm diameter nonfollicular papules scattered diffusely on her
shoulders, upper back, and midback (Figs. 1A, B). No surrounding erythema, pustules, plaques, or scales were seen. Eruptive collagenomas,
acne scars, and anetoderma were the initial differential diagnoses. A 4-mm punch biopsy was performed, and histopathologic evaluation
revealed an essentially normal epidermis. Focally in the mid and reticular dermis, the collagen bundles were miniaturized, appearing both
shorter and thinner than adjacent fibers and arranged in a more compact fashion. A Verhoeff-Van Geison stain showed fragmented elastic
fibers amidst the miniaturized collagen (Figs. 2A, B). Colloidal iron stain was negative for the presence of mucin. Screening radiographs of
hands and knees were performed and yielded no evidence of osteopoikilosis, sclerosis, or striated epiphyses, all findings would suggest an
association with Buschke–Ollendorff syndrome. Complete blood count and chemistry panels were normal, as well as liver enzymes, antinuclear
antibody and antiphospholipid antibodies. The patient was prescribed tretinoin 0.04% micro-gel for daily use over the affected areas. She
has had no response to treatment and no progression of disease to date. A, Photograph of hypopigmented papules distributed across the upper
back. B, Inset of a close-up view of papules. A, A ×4 view (hematoxylin and eosin) of the skin biopsy showing localized collagen
miniaturization and loss of elastic fibers. B, A high-power view (×40, Verhoeff-Van Geison stain) showing transition point between normal
collagen and elastic fibers peripherally and closely spaced miniaturized collagen fibers with elastorrhexis. Our case is histologically and
clinically most consistent with the diagnosis of PE with a unique feature of collagen miniaturization that has never before been reported.
The diagnosis of PE can be challenging because of the heterogeneous group of elastic tissue disorders and connective tissue nevi.
Additionally, although PE can be observed secondary to inflammatory acne scarring,1 our patient denied a history of acne and had no evidence
of acne on examination. Knowledge of the existence of this entity is relevant to avoid unnecessary workups and counseling for systemic
disease and genetic disorders, which are not associated with PE. Treatment is lacking regarding this condition, and currently intralesional
kenalog and tretinoin have showed little efficacy.2 Our patient declined the offer to pursue laser therapy with the ablative CO2 fractional
laser; however, this may be an option for future studies because of its favorable record of restoring collagen and elastic tissue
architecture when treating hypertrophic scars.3 The diagnosis of PE should initiate counseling regarding the lack of treatment response to
topical agents and the non-self limiting nature of the disease. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The views expressed in this
article are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the Department of the Navy, Department of
Defense, or the United States Government. I am a military service member. This work was prepared as part of my official duties. Title 17,
USC, § 105 provides that “Copyright protection under this title is not available for any work of the United States Government.” Title 17,
USC, § 101 defines a US Government work as a work prepared by a military service member or employee of the US Government as part of that
person's official duties.
