Congenital duodenal diverticula are a rare anomaly. The discovery of one in association with an ingested foreign body has only been reported
on one previous occasion. In this challenging presentation, the presence of the coin led to the correct diagnosis. Patients with congenital
duodenal anomalies may present a number of associated abnormalities. Interestingly, after the discovery of his intraluminal duodenal
diverticulum, we searched and found that our patient presented a number of associated pathologies, as described in the literature. Our
patient was a 36-year-old man, Caucasian, a kidney transplant recipient who presented with abdominal pain, vomiting and fever after an
episode of pancreatitis. Because of a history of behavioral problems associated with intellectual impairment, including a compulsion to
swallow coins during childhood, an abdominal radiograph was performed. Surprisingly, the radiograph revealed a radiopaque shadow in the
central abdominal area. The findings of the ultrasound examination and computed tomography scan were suggestive of dilated biliary and
pancreatic ducts. We performed an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, which led to confirmation of the suspected coin above an
obstructing intraluminal duodenal diverticulum with associated biliary ductal dilation. Upon retrieval of the coin, it was found to be a
1975 copper two-cent piece out of circulation in Australia for a large number of years. Foreign body retention in the gastrointestinal tract
in an adult could be a sign of underlying mechanical pathology. Intraluminal duodenal diverticulitis can have a varied presentation,
including life-threatening complications. Awareness should be raised of the conditions associated with congenital duodenal anomalies in
adults, including renal, hepatobiliary and cardiac defects, many of which were present in our case. Diverticula, sac-like protrusions of the
intestinal wall, occur throughout the small and large intestines. The presence of these lesions should be considered in patients with
unexplained gastrointestinal bleeding, intestinal obstruction, acute abdomen, chronic abdominal pain, anemia, or malabsorption . The most
frequent location of diverticula in the small intestine is the duodenum. Congenital duodenal diverticula are rare anomalies that usually
remain asymptomatic. However, patients can present duodenal obstruction with post-cibal fullness or pain relieved by vomiting as the first
manifestation of a duodenal diverticulum. Pancreatitis was the presenting manifestation of intraluminal duodenal diverticulum in 20% of the
reported cases . The pathogenesis of pancreatitis is also unclear in patients with intraluminal duodenal diverticulum. However, reflux of
duodenal contents through the papilla of Vater is the most widely accepted cause . Occlusion of the biliary or pancreatic duct from an
enlarging diverticulum pouch has also been reported. We believe the former as the main cause of pancreatitis in our patient owing to the
tight duodenal stenosis from the obstructing intraluminal diverticula with the entrapped coin that promoted duodenal content/bile reflux
into the more patent pancreaticobiliary system. As far as we know, the discovery of a duodenal diverticulum in an adult patient in
association with an ingested coin has only been reported once . A 36-year-old Caucasian man with a past history of intellectual impairment,
epilepsy and end-stage kidney disease diagnosed in childhood, leading to kidney transplantation at age 14, presented to our hospital. He had
high-grade fever, abdominal pain, and had been vomiting for a week. While obtaining the medical history from his mother, she described a
propensity to swallow coins related to childhood behavioral difficulties. Despite her suggestion that he had not done so since the age of
12, an abdominal radiograph was performed. Surprisingly, it revealed a periumbilical, circular, radiopaque density, thought to be a coin
(Figure 1). However, the double-bubble sign or halo sign was absent. There were no clinical features of gastric outlet syndrome to suggest
duodenal stenosis leading up to the presentation. A computed tomography scan with contrast localized the coin in the second part of the
duodenum, revealing the suspected diverticula, and common bile duct and pancreatic duct dilatation (Figure 2). Blood laboratory tests
suggested pancreatitis: bilirubin 14umol/L (<20), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 132U/L (53 to 128), gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) 269U/L
(<55), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 29U/L (<45), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 11U/L (<35), and lipase –580U/L (<60).Figure 1Plain
abdominal radiographs showing the radiopaque coin at presentation.Figure 2Computerised tomography scans with contrast at presentation. (A)
Showing the coin (arrow). (B) Dilated common bile duct (arrow). Plain abdominal radiographs showing the radiopaque coin at presentation.
Computerised tomography scans with contrast at presentation. (A) Showing the coin (arrow). (B) Dilated common bile duct (arrow). After
broadening the antibiotic coverage due to concerns regarding ascending cholangitis, our patient underwent an emergency endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography, which confirmed not only the nature of the foreign body but also the underlying anatomical abnormality causing the
duodenal and pancreaticobiliary dilatation. Both common bile duct and common hepatic duct were moderately dilated up to 15mm with no
intrahepatic ductal dilatation. Even though no purulent bile was seen, due to concerns of ascending cholangitis, a common bile duct stent
was inserted during the procedure following removal of the coin. When retrieved, the coin was found to be a 1975, copper two-cent piece
(Figure 3). Such coins have been out of circulation in Australia since 1994, suggesting that the coin may have been swallowed and lodged in
the duodenal diverticulum at least 14 years earlier, a hypothesis consistent with the collateral history obtained from the patient’s
mother.Figure 3The coin is seen with a pigtail catheter in this image taken during the endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography to
investigate suspected cholangitis. The coin is seen with a pigtail catheter in this image taken during the endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography to investigate suspected cholangitis. The differential diagnosis of duodenal stenosis could be broadly classified
into congenital and acquired causes. Congenital obstruction is caused by either an intrinsic or extrinsic anomaly. Intraluminal duodenal
diverticulum and duodenal atresia comprise intrinsic stenoses. Annular pancreas, choledochal cyst, and malrotation account for most
extrinsic obstructions . All of these differential diagnoses were effectively excluded by the investigations instituted. Our patient
underwent an elective reconstruction of the obstructed duodenum by Roux-en-Y. During surgery, we confirmed the tight stricture at D2 distal
to the pancreas with proximal dilatation of the duodenum and significantly dilated bile duct. Small bowel diverticula occur most frequently
in the duodenum. Intraluminal diverticula are usually congenital, whereas the acquired diverticula are mostly extraluminal. Cases of
acquired diverticula account for the vast majority of duodenal diverticula. These acquired diverticula should be distinguished from
congenital intraluminal duodenal diverticula, which are often associated with other abdominal abnormalities, especially affecting the
pancreatic and biliary anatomy . In fact, more than 50% of the affected patients have associated congenital anomalies, including pancreatic
anomalies, intestinal malrotation, esophageal atresia, Meckel’s diverticulum, variants of imperforate anus, congenital heart disease,
central nervous system lesion, renal anomalies and rarely, biliary tract anomalies . Moreover, the association of congenital intraluminal
duodenal diverticula with Down’s syndrome is well documented . In our patient, it was interesting to note the previously existing renal
failure and intellectual impairment, in addition to the diagnosis of ascending aortic aneurysm many months after this presentation. Apart
from pancreatitis, serious complications may include hemorrhage from ulceration within the diverticula and cholangitis . Foreign body
ingestion is a common problem presenting at the emergency departments. The majority of the ingested foreign bodies pass through the
gastrointestinal tract spontaneously. More than 90% of the impacted foreign bodies are amenable to endoscopic retrieval. Ninety percent of
the foreign bodies that reach the stomach will undergo passage. After the initial suspicion of a more sinister pathology such as malignancy
in our patient, it was a relief to find that the culprit was a coin. In fact, it was a 1975 two-cent coin. Whether the coin contributed to
our patient’s clinical presentation is unclear, but it was certainly helpful for establishing the diagnosis in this challenging
presentation. The Australian two-cent coin was introduced in 1966, and it was withdrawn from circulation in 1994. We hypothesize that the
coin lodging in the duodenal diverticulum led to progressive duodenal stenosis over a long period of time, although we concede that this is
difficult to prove. Neither our patient nor his mother were collectors of old coins and they denied having recent access to them, which
supports the theory of the remote swallowing. It is possible that the duodenal stenosis developed independently of the presence of the coin,
but it is unusual that it could have been asymptomatic for a long period of time and not lead to an earlier presentation. Foreign body
retention in the gastrointestinal tract in adults could be a sign of underlying mechanical pathology as illustrated above. To our knowledge,
this is the first case to describe a duodenal diverticulum associated with an entrapped coin presenting with pancreatitis. Additionally,
this case should raise awareness of the conditions associated with congenital duodenal anomalies in adults, including renal, hepatobiliary
and cardiac defects that could be life-threatening for these patients. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s guardian for
publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. alkaline phosphatase alanine aminotransferase aspartate aminotransferase gamma glutamyl transferase Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions II analyzed and interpreted the patient data and wrote the
manuscript. DM revised the manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript. We would like to thank the patient and guardian
for giving permission to submit this case report, which will undoubtedly further our understanding of this rare condition.
