Scabies is a common parasitic infection caused by the mite Sarcoptes Scabiei. About 300 million cases of scabies are reported annually.
Scabies usually presents clinically with an erythematous excoriated papulovesicular rash, burrows, nodules and hyperkeratotic lesions in
specific body areas. A rare presentation of scabies is the bullous pemphigoid-like bullous scabies. So far, to the best of our knowledge,
only 32 cases of bullous scabies have been reported in medical literature, of which only 11 were under 60 years of age at the time of
initial presentation. This is the first case of bullous scabies being reported from Pakistan. Herein we discuss, with reference to the
existing literature, the case of a 23-year-old Punjabi male who presented with a 3 day history of a tense, non-erythematous, non-tender
bulla measuring approximately 0.5 cm x 0.8 cm on the right foot near the interdigital cleft. He was diagnosed to have bullous scabies. The
diagnosis of scabies should be considered in all patients who present with tense bullous lesions accompanied by pruritus and a maculopapular
rash. This is particularly relevant if these lesions do not resolve with steroid treatment. In such patients, in order to prevent a
misdiagnosis of bullous pemphigoid, scrapings for Sarcoptes Scabiei mites and eggs should be taken. Scabies is a common parasitic infection
caused by the mite Sarcoptes Scabiei . It spreads through human contact; there are over 300 million cases of scabies reported annually . In
adults, scabies presents as a small papulovesicular rash with a clinical picture comprising of pruritus, papules and nodules associated with
inflammation . Subcutaneous burrows are pathognomonic of the disease and can have a widespread distribution including the flexor surfaces of
the wrists, lateral aspects of fingers, elbows, anterior part of the axillary folds, the interdigital web spaces, the belt line, the scrotum
in males and the areolar area of the breast in female patients . The most commonly affected areas in order of incidence are the hands
(86 %), wrist (82 %), genitalia of male patients (64.5 %), abdomen (56 %) and nipple area in females (28 %) . Patients with scabies can
develop various secondary lesions, such as folliculitis, eczema, pseudolymphoma and impetigo. Atypical presentations of scabies include
urticarial rash, dermatitis herpetiformis and Darier’s disease . A rare subtype of scabies is bullous scabies which occurs concurrently
with, or after, the appearance of scabietic lesions. It presents as bullous pemphigoid-like bullae, and at times can even induce the
formation of true bullous pemphigoid lesions . The first case of bullous scabies was reported in 1974 by Bean et al. and to the best of our
knowledge only 32 cases of bullous scabies have been reported in medical literature so far . Out of these, only 11 were under the age of
60 years at the time of initial presentation . Herein we report the case of a 23-year-old male who presented with a bullous lesion on the
right foot. He was diagnosed to have bullous scabies. A 23-year-old male belonging to the Punjabi ethnic group presented with a 3 day
history of a large, tense, non-erythematous, non-tender blister on the right foot. The patient also complained of lesions on the hands for
the preceding week. The lesions were pruritic (more so at night) and there was no history of fever, trauma or burns. The patient denied any
history of unprotected sexual contact. His past medical and surgical history was unremarkable, as was his drug history. Family history was
positive for diabetes mellitus and asthma. He had no known allergies, was a nonsmoker and did not have any addictions. Review of systems was
also unremarkable. On examination, the patient was hemodynamically stable. Cutaneous examination revealed erythematous, excoriated
maculopapular lesions and burrows on the wrists and the interdigital areas of both the hands. A tense bulla measuring approximately 0.5 cm x
0.8 cm was noted on the plantar surface of the right foot near the interdigital cleft (Figs. 1 and 2). It was filled with clear fluid and
was negative for Nikolsky sign. There were no mucosal lesions. Systemic examination was otherwise unremarkable.Fig. 1The figure shows a
large, tense, non-erythematous bullous lesion, measuring approximately 0.5 cm × 0.8 cm, seen on the planter surface of the right foot near
the interdigital cleftFig. 2Shows another view of the same bulla The figure shows a large, tense, non-erythematous bullous lesion, measuring
approximately 0.5 cm × 0.8 cm, seen on the planter surface of the right foot near the interdigital cleft Shows another view of the same
bulla The differential diagnosis based on this initial encounter included bullous scabies, bullous impetigo, frictional bulla and bullous
pemphigoid. Scrapings were taken from the maculopapular lesions on the hands and the bulla on the foot; direct microscopy, prepared from
10 % potassium hydroxide (KOH), revealed mites and eggs of Sarcoptes Scabiei in scrapings from both the points. Direct swabs from the hand
lesions and the bulla did not show any bacterial or fungal growth upon culture. Based on the history, examination and investigations’
findings, the final diagnosis of bullous scabies was made. The patient was treated with whole body applications of 5 % topical permethrin
and local application of anti-histamine lotion. Complete remission of the lesions was noted after 3 weeks. The patient remained disease free
for upto 18 months of follow-up. Bullous scabies usually occurs in the elderly population. The cases that we came across during our review
had a predominantly male predilection (21 out of 30 were males). Out of the 32 cases reviewed, most (21 out of 32) of the patients were
older than 60 years. It usually presents as intensely pruritic bullae, which may be tense or flaccid and at times may have associated
hemorrhage. They are usually present in scabies prone areas and may or may not have associated classic scabietic lesions . The pathogenesis
of bullae formation in scabies is not entirely clear and a number of theories have been proposed to explain their pathogenesis.
Staphylococcus Aureus superinfection of mite lesions is one mechanism that can result in vesicle formation; this is similar to the bullae
formation in bullous impetigo . The second mechanism that has been proposed is autoantibody mediated immune damage leading to bulla
formation. Various mechanisms have been proposed for the production of these antibodies. According to one hypothesis, antibodies could be
produced due to lytic destruction of the basement membrane by mites’ enzymes (leading to antigenic changes) . The result of these changes is
the production of BP-like antigens. These antigens will elicit BP antibodies that activate the compliment cascade, and attract eosinophils
and lymphocytes; subsequent secretion of protease enzymes leads to dermoepidermal separation . The presence of mites within the
intraepidermal blisters further strengthens the theory that mite enzymes have a role in the pathogenesis of bullae formation . Another
theory suggests that the mite may elicit antibodies that cross-react with the basement membrane zone (BMZ) antigens (antigen mimicry) ;
these antibodies (BP antibodies) act like those present in true autoimmune diseases, resulting in autoimmune damage . We therefore have
reason to expect antibodies to the BP antigens to be positive, as demonstrated in some cases in the literature; in one previous Western blot
study, circulating antibodies against BP180 and/or BP 230 were found in the sera of two scabetic patients with bullous eruptions . It also
shows that at least some bullous eruptions in scabies patients are true bullous pemphigoid lesions. There are various possibilities in such
cases; while the two diseases may occur simultaneously in a patient independently from each other, oftentimes the scabies is thought to
trigger the characteristic bullous eruptions of bullous pemphigoid via a Koebner phenomenon. This is especially of relevance in those cases
where the bullae are located exclusively on the body sites where there are scabietic lesions present as well. Moreover, in these patients
where bullae appear solely on the sites affected by scabies, a possible explanation for the bullous eruptions can also be a Type 1 immune
response to an antigen from the saliva of Sarcoptes Scabiei; it has been reported that the occurrence of bullous allergic hypersensitivity
reactions to bug bites mediated by immunoglobulin E against compounds in the saliva of the biting insect is possible . Our patient did not
have any circulating antibody test, so we cannot comment regarding this aspect–pathogenesis–of bullous scabies in relation to our patient.
On direct immunofluorescence, complement component 3 (C3) and Immunoglobulin G deposition is often seen in bullous scabies. Out of the 25
cases in which direct immunoflouresence was performed, 9 had IgG deposition and C3 deposition was present in 13 cases. The pattern of IgG
deposition was linear in 8 cases and granular in 3; the 2 cases reported by Brawan, et al. showed both granular as well as linear IgG
deposition in the basement membrane zone. The various signs that have been used to confirm the diagnosis of bullous scabies include bullous
eruptions over sites of the body that are usually prone to scabies, involvement of genital organs, nocturnal itch, improvement after
application of antiscabietic medications and detection of the scabies mite on histopathology sections of lesions . Bullous scabies is
usually treated in the same way as the classical form of scabies . According to The Loss Angeles County Department of Public Health Acute
Communicable Disease Program, the recommended medications for scabies are 5 % permethrin cream, 10 % crotamiton lotion/cream and ivermectin
. Other antiscabietic agents that are employed are benzyl benzoate, malathion, and 6 % sulfur ointment . In some cases of bullous scabies, a
short course of oral steroids may also be required . In more serious cases or in cases of steroid intolerance, other immunosuppressive
agents, such as methotrexate, azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil and cyclosporine, can be employed . These may also be used as adjunct
therapy. Although the mechanism of formation of bullae in bullous scabies is immune mediated, it is hard to explain why cases have been
reported in which bullous scabies failed to respond to glucocorticoid, immunoglobulin and cyclophosphamide therapy . Out of the 32 cases
reported so far, 8 patients were treated with gamma benzene hexachloride, 7 with benzyl benzoate, 5 with permethrin, and 3 with oral
ivermectin; combinations of permethrin with oral ivermectin, oral and topical steroids, gamma benzene hexachloride or sulfur were also used
in some cases . It is suggested that the diagnosis of scabies be considered in all patients who present with tense bullous lesions
accompanied by pruritis and a papular rash. This is particularly relevant if these lesions do not resolve with steroid treatment. Suspecting
scabies in such patients is therefore of paramount importance, as it may not only co-exist with bullous pemphigoid, but is also an important
possible precipitant for this condition. In such patients, consequently, it is important to test the lesions for Sarcoptes Scabiei mites and
eggs. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Basement membrane zone Immunoglobulin G (Complement)
Component 3 Bullous pemphigoid (antigen) Potassium hydroxide Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions All the authors contributed to the intellectual content of this article, including the concept, literature search,
interpretation of current available data on the subject and derivation of a meaningful conclusion. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. The authors would like to acknowledge (anonymously) the subject of this case report, for cooperation and consent to report this
case.
