The novel avian influenza H7N9 virus has caused severe diseases in humans in eastern China since the spring of 2013. On January 18th 2014, a
doctor working in the emergency department of a hospital in Shanghai died of H7N9 virus infection. To understand possible reasons to explain
this world’s first fatal H7N9 case of a health care worker (HCW), we summarize the clinical presentation, epidemiological investigations,
laboratory results, and prevention and control policies and make important recommendations to hospital-related workers. The patient was a
31-year-old male Chinese surgeon who was obese and had a five-year history of hypertension and suspected diabetes. On January 11th 2014, he
showed symptoms of an influenza-like illness. Four days later, his illness rapidly progressed with bilateral pulmonary infiltration, hypoxia
and lymphopenia. On January 17th, the case had a high fever, productive cough, chest tightness and shortness of breath, so that he was
administered with oseltamivir, glucocorticoid, immunoglobulin, and broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. The case died in the early morning of
next day after invasive ventilation. He had no contact with poultry nor had he visited live-poultry markets (LPMs), where positive rates of
H7N9 were 14.6 % and 18.5 %. Before his illness, he cared for three febrile patients and had indirect contact with one severe pneumonia
patient. Follow-up with 35 close contacts identified two HCWs who had worked also in emergency department but had not worn masks were
anti-H7N9-positive. Viral sequence identity percentages between the patient and two LPM-H7N9 isolates were fewer than between the patient
and another human case in shanghai in January of 2014. Important reasons for the patient’s death might include late treatment with
oseltamivir, and the infected H7N9 virus carrying both mammalian-adapted signature (HA-Q226L) and aerosol transmissibility (PB2-D701N). The
LPM he passed every day was an unlikely source of his infection, but a contaminated environment, or an unidentified mild/asymptomatic H7N9
carrier were more probable. We advocate rigorous standard operating procedures for infection control practices in hospital settings and
evaluations thereafter. The first human avian influenza H7N9 case was reported in Shanghai in February 2013 . By the end of 2013, Shanghai
had 33 laboratory-confirmed human H7N9 cases, with a higher case fatality rate (CFR) than observed nationally [54.6 % (18/33) versus 32.6 %,
(47/144)]. As of September 27th 2014, Shanghai had an additional 8 cases with 7 fatalities [CFR in 2014: 87.5 % (7/8) versus 42.2 %,
(125/296)]. Two family clusters were noted in Shanghai, indicating limited person-to-person transmission . On January 18th 2014, the first
HCW succumbed to H7N9. In this report, we summarize the clinical presentation, epidemiological investigations, laboratory results, and
prevention and control policies and make recommendations. The case under consideration in this article is a 31-year-old male surgeon working
in the emergency department (ED) of a Pudong hospital in Shanghai (SH-PDH), China. He was obese (BMI: 29.39, ≥28 in China ), with a five-
year history of hypertension and suspected diabetes, and was a non-smoker. There was no history of previous drug or food allergies or blood
transfusions. On January 11th 2014, the patient showed symptoms of an influenza-like illness (ILI) (fever, cough, sore throat, dizziness,
headache and myalgia) and self-treated with Analginum (Fig. 1). Four days later, the surgeon sought medical care and took mezlocillin only.
From January 11th to January 16th, he continued working (~8 hours a day) at the hospital until he developed dyspnea. He was not treated with
oseltamivir prior to his admission into SH-PDH intensive-care-unit (ICU) on January 17th. His illness rapidly progressed with bilateral
pulmonary infiltration, hypoxia and lymphopenia. Oxygen therapy and mechanical ventilation were started. Additionally, oseltamivir (75 mg
orally and 150 mg intra-gastrically), glucocorticoid, immunoglobulin and broad-spectrum antibiotics therapy (imipenem and vancomycin, 1 g
intravenously every 12 hours) were administered. At 8:00 AM on January 17th, he had a fever (39 °C), productive cough, chest tightness and
shortness of breath. The white blood cell count was 6.20 × 109/L with 83.4 % neutrophils and 14.5 % lymphocytes (Table 1). A computed
tomography chest scan showed consolidation in both lungs (Fig. 2). At 8:47 AM, the patient was given non-invasive ventilation but he
continued to suffer from hypoxaemia. As his condition worsened, he was started on invasive ventilation with positive end-expiratory pressure
at 11:28 AM. The patient died of acute respiratory distress syndrome, severe pneumonia, and type I respiratory failure at 4:59 AM on January
18th.Fig. 1Timeline of the H7N9 patient’s illness, treatment, death and his close contacts. PPE: personal protective equipmentTable
1Clinical characteristics of the 31-year-old-caseCharacteristicsPatient (at 3:00 AM on January 17th)Normal value Clinical symptoms/signs
Fever39.0 °C- CoughYes- ExpectorationYes- Cough with blood tinged sputumNo- Sore throatYes- DizzinessYes- HeadacheYes- MyalgiaYes- Shortness
of breathYes- DyspneaNo (at 3:00 AM) but Yes (at 8:00 AM) on January 17th - Chest painNo- Abdominal
painNo- DiarrheaNo- NauseaNo- VomitingNo- Skin ecchymosisNo- ComaYes- Blood cell count White blood cell6.2 × 109/L3.5-9.5 x109
cells/L Neutrophils83.4 %50.0 %-70.0 % Lymphocytes14.5 %20.0 %-40.0 % Blood gas analysis PH7.47.4-7.5 PO2 42.9 mmHg83.0-108.0 mmHg PCO2
31.7 mmHg22.0-29.0 mmHg SPO2 83.7 %95.0-98.0 % Chest findings Chest computed tomography on 17 JanuaryConsolidation- Complications Septic
shockNo- Respiratory failureYes- Acute respiratory distress syndromeYes- Acute renal damageNo- EncephalopathyNo- Multiple organ
failureNo- Diffuse intravascular coagulationNo- Secondary infectionsNo- Treatment Oxygen therapyYes- Extracorporeal membrane
oxygenationNo- Continuous renal replacement therapyNo- Antibiotic therapyMezlocillin, imipenem and vancomycin- Antiviral
agentOseltamivir- Glucocorticoid therapyMethylprednisolone- Intravenous immunoglobulin therapyYes- Mechanical ventilationPositive end
expiratory pressure-Fig. 2Representative radiographic findings of the laboratory-confirmed 31-year-old Shanghai surgeon infected with H7N9
influenza. Chest radiograph of this patient was taken at 7 days after onset of symptoms, showing bilateral pulmonary infiltrates of airspace
consolidation and severe consolidation in the left lobe Timeline of the H7N9 patient’s illness, treatment, death and his close contacts.
PPE: personal protective equipment Clinical characteristics of the 31-year-old-case Representative radiographic findings of the laboratory-
confirmed 31-year-old Shanghai surgeon infected with H7N9 influenza. Chest radiograph of this patient was taken at 7 days after onset of
symptoms, showing bilateral pulmonary infiltrates of airspace consolidation and severe consolidation in the left lobe Retrospective
investigation showed that X lived with his six family members (including his 7-month-pregnant wife) in a 112-m2-sized house without birds or
other animals. Although he had not visited LPMs, he usually rode a bicycle to work and passed by the LPM -A where bird feces were spread on
the road near the market gate. His mother-in-law did grocery shopping at the LPM-B which is 2.5 miles from X’s home almost every day. One of
his neighbors owned about 14 pigeons. On January 19th-20th, 2014, six pigeon-related samples (2 poultry feces, 1 throat swab, 1 drinking
water, 1 polluted water, and 1 swab of cage) from X’s neighbor and 68 LPM-associated samples collected from LPM-related samples [including
throat/anal swabs, and feces of poultry and environmental specimens (chicken cages, cutting boards, water from washing poultry flowing on
the floor)] were tested by real-time reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain-reaction (rRT-PCR) . The results showed that the positive rates
of H7N9 were 14.6 % (6/41), 18.5 % (5/27), and 0 % (0/6) from LPM-B-, LPM-A- and pigeon-related specimens, respectively. Ten days before the
onset of X’s illness, all six family members were asymptomatic and no guests had visited. At the hospital (SH-PDH), the ED is a 400-m2
U-shaped emergency room, including six 10-m2-sized neighboring rooms, where neither windows nor systematic regular ventilation system were
installed. The ER-A and ER-C (Fig. 3) consultation rooms were used by the Departments of Surgery and Internal Medicine, respectively. In the
10 days before disease onset, X took care of 187 surgical patients in ER-A1. Three of X’s patients who developed febrile illness and
recovered completely were migrants lost to follow-up. Further investigations revealed that two other patients who had sought medical care in
ER-C during January 1st-10th 2014 had also died. One was a ninety-seven-year-old man with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD-1) who
arrived at ER-C on January 7th, talked with an ED-internist (Dr.-A1), was immediately hospitalized [cared for by 3 doctors (Drs.-A2, A3, and
A4) and one nurse (N-A1)], and died the next day. The other was an eighty-eight-year-old woman with severe pneumonia (SP-1) who went to ER-C
on January 5th, consulted an ED-internist Dr.-B1, was subsequently hospitalized (cared for by Drs.-B2, B3, and B4, and N-B1), and died on
January 8th from an infection that was not identified. Specimens from 10 persons [COPD-1, SP-1, 8 HCWs except Dr.-A1 andDr.-B1] were not
available for H7N9 tests. Follow-up of all 10 HCWs who had direct contact with COPD-1 and SP-1 showed that none of them became ill (no
fever/cough/pneumonia) between January 10th 2014 and January 20th 2014. In addition, both the throat and blood specimens collected on
January 20th from Dr.-A1 and Dr.-B1 in ER-C, who shared the same space or air with X in ER-A1, were H7N9-negative.Fig. 3Spatial distribution
of the six consultation rooms in the emergency department of the Pudong Hospital. ””: door of consultation room; ER: emergency room;
H7N9-(+) patient X and his close contact Y worked in ER-A1. In addition, X and another close contact Z worked in ER-C1. The COPD-1 visited
ER-C on January 7 and SP-1 visited ER-C on January 5. ER-B1 is used for emergency handling and case management of the patients from ER-A and
ER-C, shared by the two departments of Surgery and Internal Medicine. ER-B2 was used for cleaning trauma by ED-surgeons. Surgeons in ER-A
generally did not wear oral masks Spatial distribution of the six consultation rooms in the emergency department of the Pudong Hospital. ””:
door of consultation room; ER: emergency room; H7N9-(+) patient X and his close contact Y worked in ER-A1. In addition, X and another close
contact Z worked in ER-C1. The COPD-1 visited ER-C on January 7 and SP-1 visited ER-C on January 5. ER-B1 is used for emergency handling and
case management of the patients from ER-A and ER-C, shared by the two departments of Surgery and Internal Medicine. ER-B2 was used for
cleaning trauma by ED-surgeons. Surgeons in ER-A generally did not wear oral masks In our investigation of human-to-human transmission, we
defined close contacts of X as those who had direct contact but without taking any personal protective equipment (PPE) between January 11th
and January 18th. In total, 35 close contacts of X were identified for daily monitoring, including 9 family members (3 visited him at the
hospital but lived separately) and 26 HCWs [11, 10, 2, and 3 from ED, ICU, radiology, and supporting staff, respectively]. None had
respiratory or other H7N9-related symptoms within 10 days of their last exposure to X. On January 20th, we collected throat swabs for rRT-
PCR, and all samples were H7N9-negative. Since serological surveillance provides more information on total infection, we then tested serum
samples collected from all 35 close contacts by haemagglutination inhibition (HAI) assay , using influenza A/Anhui/1/2013 (H7N9) virus as a
viral antigen and horse red blood cells. Furthermore, the two anti-H7N9-positive HCWs were investigated in detail. The HCW with a serotiter
of 1:40 against the H7N9 virus was a 37-year-old male ED surgeon (Y), and the other one with a serotiter of 1:20 was a 30-year-old male ED
internist (Z). These three HCWs (X, Y, and Z) did not care for the same patient from January 1st to January 17th. They had never worked in
the ICU and did not have any overlapping encounters with patients of COPD-1 and SP-1. X and Y had worked together but had not worn masks in
ER-A1 for two days (8 hours/day) on January 3rd and 15th January (4 days after the onset of X’s illness). In addition, X talked with Z in
ER-B1 (for emergency handling of patients) for 10 minutes without their masks at 3:00 AM on January 17th before being admitted to the ICU.
Sixteen environmental samples were collected from ER-A1 (the surface of telephone receiver, printer, work table, and medical waste), ER-B2
(rails of hospital beds, oxygen humidifier, sputum aspirator surface, ECG monitor wall, outer surface of IV stand), and ICU (ECG monitor
wall, surface of blood pressure meter, outer surface of sputum aspirator, Infusion pump surface, stethoscope surface and rails of hospital
beds). They were H7N9-negative by rRT-PCR. On January 18th 2014, the throat swab of X collected on the day of death was sent to Shanghai
Municipal Center for Disease Control and Prevention, and confirmed as H7N9 by rRT-PCR on January 19th. Phylogenetic analysis for all eight
H7N9 viral genomic segments was performed by both neighbour-joining (NJ) and maximum-likelihood (ML) methods with MEGA version 5.10. The
reliability of the unrooted tree was assessed by bootstrap with 1000 replications. Bootstrap values greater than 60 % are shown for selected
nodes. All the nucleotide sequences of the eight viral gene segments of X’s H7N9 virus (A/Shanghai/PD-02/2014, PD-2) are available at
GenBank with the following accession numbers: KJ549801 (PB2), KJ549802 (PB1), KJ549803 (PA), KJ195797 (HA), KJ195798 (NP), KJ195799 (NA),
KJ195800 (M), KJ195801 (NS). The eight viral genes shared between X’s H7N9 virus (A/Shanghai/PD-02/2014, PD-2) and the avian-origin H7N9
virus isolates from the two LPMs in this study (A/Chicken/Shanghai/PD-CN-02/2014, CN-2 and A/Environment/Shanghai/PD-JZ-01/2014, JZ-1)
revealed nucleic acid sequence identity percentages ranging from 97.8 % to 99.5 % (Table 2), in which the percentages of the PA gene ranked
lowest (97.9 %, 97.8 %). However, the overall viral sequence identity was higher (ranging 98.1 % ~ 99.7 %) between the two Shanghai human
cases, PD-2 and PD-1 (A/Shanghai/PD-01/2014, PD-1), while PD-1 was another non-epidemiologically linked H7N9 human case that was also
confirmed in January in SH-PD. Similarly, viral sequence patterns for all the eight individual genes were also closer between PD-2 and PD-1
than those between PD-2 and CN-2 or JZ-1. GenBank accession numbers of PD-2, JZ-1, and CN-2 are as follows: PB2 (KJ549799, KJ549791,
KJ549783), PB1 (KJ195791, KJ549792, KJ549784), PA (KJ549800, KJ549793, KJ549785), HA (KJ195792, KJ549794, KJ549786), NP (KJ195793, KJ549795,
KJ549787), NA (KJ195794, KJ549796, KJ549788), M (KJ195795, KJ549797, KJ549789), NS (KJ195796, KJ549798, KJ549790).Table 2The nucleic acid
identity percentages among four H7N9 isolatesSegment of H7N9Identity with CN-2 (from LPM-A)Identity with JZ-1 (from LPM-B )Identity with
PD-1Identity with
PD-2PB297.998.999.1referencePB199.499.099.7PA97.997.898.1HA99.199.499.5NP99.599.199.7NA98.898.699.3M98.398.498.4NS99.299.299.4PD-2: the
surgeon’s H7N9 isolate; PD-1: another human case in the same district of Pudong as the PD-2 case; CN-2 and JZ-1: the two environmental H7N9
isolates obtained from the two live-bird markets. LPM-A is located at 200 meters from his hospital. LPM-B is the market (2.5 miles from his
home) that the surgeon’s mother-in-law visited almost every day. The nucleic acid identity percentages among four H7N9 isolates PD-2: the
surgeon’s H7N9 isolate; PD-1: another human case in the same district of Pudong as the PD-2 case; CN-2 and JZ-1: the two environmental H7N9
isolates obtained from the two live-bird markets. LPM-A is located at 200 meters from his hospital. LPM-B is the market (2.5 miles from his
home) that the surgeon’s mother-in-law visited almost every day. The phylogenetic tree topology was the same, using ML and NJ methods; hence
the results of MJ tree are displayed in Fig. 4. The results showed that all the four genes (HA, NA, M and NS) of PD-2 clustered with PD-1
(i.e. the same sub-lineage) whereas the two LPM-derived H7N9 isolates belonged to another sub-lineage. HA, PA, PB2, and NP of JZ-1 are at
the same branch as those of PD-2. The PD-2 had more amino acid changes from avian to human signatures, with markers of mammalian-host
adaptation , such as HA-Q226L HA-G228S (H3 numbering), and PB2-E627K. In contrast, CN-2 and JZ-1 isolates kept one avian-associated
molecular signature with no change at PB2-E627 among these three amino acids. For clinical concern, the PD-2 virus was still oseltamivir-
sensitive (NA-E119 , R292 , and N294 ) but Amantadine-resistant (M2-S31N) [1, 7]. Most importantly, of these four SH-H7N9 viruses, only the
PD-2 possessed PB2-D701N (aerosol transmissibility in ferrets) [8, 9], which has public health significance.Fig. 4Phylogenetic relationships
of the eight full-length genes of A/Shanghai/PD-02/2014. Horizontal distances are proportional to the genetic distance. Three colors
represent the three different types of the sources of H7N9 viruses: (1) the A/Shanghai/PD-02/2014 (H7N9) virus was isolated from this young
surgeon (X) is shown in red, (2) the A/Shanghai/PD-01/2014 (H7N9) virus was isolated from another PD patient in January without
epidemiological linkage is shown in green, and (3) H7N9 viruses from the two LPMs are shown in blue. A/Chicken/Shanghai/PD-CN-02/2014 virus
was isolated from the LPM-A near H7N9-(+) patient X’s hospital. A/Environment/ Shanghai/ PD-JZ-01/2014) was isolated from the LPM-B closer
to H7N9-(+) patient X’s home Phylogenetic relationships of the eight full-length genes of A/Shanghai/PD-02/2014. Horizontal distances are
proportional to the genetic distance. Three colors represent the three different types of the sources of H7N9 viruses: (1) the
A/Shanghai/PD-02/2014 (H7N9) virus was isolated from this young surgeon (X) is shown in red, (2) the A/Shanghai/PD-01/2014 (H7N9) virus was
isolated from another PD patient in January without epidemiological linkage is shown in green, and (3) H7N9 viruses from the two LPMs are
shown in blue. A/Chicken/Shanghai/PD-CN-02/2014 virus was isolated from the LPM-A near H7N9-(+) patient X’s hospital. A/Environment/
Shanghai/ PD-JZ-01/2014) was isolated from the LPM-B closer to H7N9-(+) patient X’s home The study was approved by the Ethical Committee of
the Shanghai Municipal Center for Disease Control and Prevention. We describe the world’s first case of a health care worker who died of
H7N9 at the age of 31. This is much younger than the median age of 64 in 172 fatal H7N9 cases in China. Undoubtedly, the death of this young
doctor could have several explanations. These include the fact that he suffered from hypertension, diabetes, and obesity. As of September
27th 2014, these three underlying conditions were also present in 27.3 %, 11.1 %, and 10.7 % of 172 fatal H7N9 cases (131 with BMI data) in
China, respectively. Obesity was also a risk factor contributing to the severity of the 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic cases in China and
other areas . Perhaps more importantly, the patient was late to seek treatment (4 days after disease onset) since he was unaware of his
infection with H7N9. As a result, treatment with oseltamivir was not begun until 6 days after the onset of illness, a time when the drug
would be ineffective . Additionally, of critical importance, the patient was infected with a H7N9 virus that contained a mammalian-adapted
signature (HA-Q226L), a mutation at PB2-D701N which facilitated its aerosol transmission as well as virulence markers (PB2-627 K and
HA-G228S) [1, 14]. Taken together, along with the fact that the doctor had been working a seven-day shift with little rest since the onset
of his disease, his lymphopenia indicating abnormal immunity [13, 15], and possibly unidentified accumulated exposures, these factors could
explain the fatality at such a young age. Identifying the source of infection is important to understand how the case may have acquired his
H7N9 infection. The high positive rates of H7N9 at the two LPMs (14.6 % and 18.5 %) suggest that the H7N9 virus might be contaminating the
markets and surrounding areas, providing potential for spread of the virus to the LPMs workers and/or shoppers. However, phylogenetic
results did not indicate an LPM-A-oriented infection source; even X passed the entrance of LPM-A every day. Because four genes (HA, PA, PB2,
NP) of JZ-1 clustered with PD-2, X’s infection might originate from LPM-B; but X wasn’t exposed directly to the environment and poultry from
PLM-B. X’s mother in law might carry H7N9 virus to X’s home through the contaminated water in LPM-B. Finally, there is still some
uncertainty about avian-origin since LPM-related specimens were taken after, rather than before, his death. On the hospital side,
environmental specimens were taken after thorough clean-up. Unfortunately, specimens from the three febrile patients cared for by X and the
two fatal cases (COPD-1 and SP-1) were not available. Most importantly, the positive anti-H7N9 HCWs (Y and Z) from the serological
surveillance demonstrated that contaminated environment-to-human or human-to-human transmission in a hospital setting is likely if HCWs did
not have appropriate PPE while caring for infected patients. The low HAI serotiter of Z might be due to a shorter exposure. None of the six
family members of X (including his 7-month-pregnant wife) were infected, showing that the person-to-person transmissibility within this
family setting was still limited. The source of infection was not identified. The LPM-A was an unlikely source, but a contaminated
environment, or an unidentified mild/asymptomatic H7N9 carrier were more probable. To minimize the health threat to citizens , the Shanghai
Government announced the closure of LPMs from January 31st to April 30th 2014. There have been no H7N9 cases in Shanghai since February.
Based on our experience, we recommend: (1) during epidemics of H7N9, those HCWs who might be exposed to H7N9 cases are advised to take
oseltamivir or other available drugs against H7N9 viruses in advance; (2) implementing rigorous standard operating procedures for infection
control practices, including PPE, traffic control , and evaluations thereafter; (3) enhancing surveillance by reporting of any HCWs who
develop ILI; (4) avoiding possible cross-transmission among HCWs, patients, and visitors, particularly the immunocompromised and/or those
with other co-morbidities [18, 19]; and (5) during H7N9 epidemics, H7N9 tests need to be performed on all severe cases of respiratory
infection, severe pneumonia cases in particular, even these cases have no obvious epidemiologic exposures. All those discussed individuals
provided written consents for the publication of this information and any accompanying images. live-poultry market healthcare worker case
fatality rate emergency department a Pudong hospital in Shanghai influenza-like illness intensive care unit real time reverse-transcriptase-
polymerase-chain-reaction chronic obstructive pulmonary disease severe pneumonia haemoagglutination inhibition neighbour-joining maximum-
likelihood A/Shanghai/PD-01/2014 A/Shanghai/PD-02/2014 A/Environment/Shanghai/PD-JZ-01/2014 A/Chicken/Shanghai/PD-CN-02/2014
* Correspondence: chwanchuen@gmail.com; wufan@scdc.sh.cn Hao Pan, Xi Zhang, Jiayu Hu, Jian Chen contributed equally to this work. Competing
interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions FW designed the study with help of CK. HP, JH,
JC and QP designed the protocol of investigation, set up the field epidemiology, and conducted clinical investigation, respectively; XZ and
ZT were responsible for experimental design, virus isolation, HAIs and rRT-PCR testing, and data analysis. All other co-authors participated
in collection and management of data. HP wrote the manuscript. CK and FW helped in manuscript revision. Authors’ information Fan Wu is the
correspondence author of this article; Chwan-Chuen King is theco-correspondence author of this article. We would like to sincerely thank
public health professionals at Pudong District CDC, Shanghai, China for their assistance in epidemiological investigation. The discussion
inputs from Dr. Jonathan Gubbay from Public Health of Ontario, Canada, Dr. Yipu Lin from MRC National Institute for Medical Research, U.K.,
Dr. Barry T. Rouse from the University of Tennessee, U.S.A., Dr. Shelan Liu from Zhejiang-CDC in China, Dr. Muh-Yong Yen from National Yang-
Ming University, Taipei, and Dr. Cheng-Chung Fang from National Taiwan University (NTU) Hospital, Dr. Hsin-Fu Liu from Mackay Memorial
Hospital, Taipei, and Dr. Chang-Chun David Lee from NTU College of Public Health, are highly appreciated. We also like to express our
sincere gratitude to Mr. Johnathan Kao, Ms. Mr. Elias F. Onyoh and Mr. Kent M. Suárez for their English editing. The work was supported by
grants from the Shanghai Municipal Commission of Health & Family Planning: Shanghai Public Health Professional Overseas Training Grant (No.
GWHW2012105) and Key Discipline: Epidemiology (No. 12GWZX0101) and 2013QLG001 and the Ministry of Science & Technology of China
(KJYJ-2013-01-01-01 and KJYJ-2013-01-05).
