Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is a nonatheromatous, noninflammatory arterial disorder of unknown etiology resulting in vessel stenosis
and/or aneurysm formation. The renal and cephalocervical (mainly carotid arteries) arterial beds are classically involved; involvement of
visceral arteries is rare. Mesenteric panniculitis (MP) is an inflammatory process of mesenteric fat considered to be of unknown etiology.
The majority of cases involve the small bowel mesentery; colorectal MP is rare. To our knowledge, no example of MP due to FMD has been
described. A 52 year old man presented with steadily worsening lower abdominal pain. Investigation revealed ischemic rectosigmoid mucosa
associated with a large mesenteric mass of unknown nature. Angiography showed the disease was limited to the distribution of the inferior
mesenteric artery. Subsequent symptoms of large bowel obstruction necessitated a left hemicolectomy. Pathologic examination showed bowel
wall necrosis and massive panniculitis of the rectosigmoid due to FMD. Subsequent angiographic imaging of other vascular beds was negative.
Several features of this case are noteworthy: FMD limited to the inferior mesenteric artery has not been previously reported, FMD has not
previously been implicated as a cause of MP, and the massive extent of panniculitis. An accompanying literature review of cases of visceral
FMD, traditionally believed to almost exclusively affect females, highlights a greater than anticipated number of males (33 %), and a gender
difference regarding concomitant involvement of cephalocervical and/or renal vascular beds (32 % in males versus 80 % in females). The
latter observation may have implications regarding the value of radiologic screening of other vascular beds, particularly in asymptomatic
males, in patients presenting with visceral artery FMD. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12876-015-0303-5) contains
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is a nonatheromatous, noninflammatory arterial
disorder of unknown etiology resulting in vessel stenosis and/or aneurysm formation . The renal and cephalocervical arterial beds are
classically involved. Involvement of visceral arteries is rare. Mesenteric panniculitis (MP) is an inflammatory process of mesenteric fat,
also considered to be of unknown etiology . The small intestinal mesentery is by far the most common site; the colorectal mesentery is less
commonly involved . This case describes massive colorectal MP due to FMD of the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA), representing a unique
association of two rare entities (Additional file 1). A 52-year old man came to the emergency department after ten days of steadily
worsening crampy pain in the left flank and iliac fossa. His medical history was unremarkable. He had stopped smoking ten years previously
(15 pack-years). The temperature was 38.8 C. Physical examination of the lower abdomen elicited some guarding, but the abdomen was otherwise
supple with no palpable mass. The leucocyte count was normal. He was admitted to hospital. An abdominal CT scan showed features compatible
with colitis, probably ischemic, extending from the splenic angle to the rectum. The bowel wall was thickened with “infiltration” of the
surrounding fat. A 3 cm left renal mass was also noted. Although colonoscopy showed colitis of irregular distribution, perhaps infectious, a
biopsy specimen revealed normal colonic mucosa. The patient was discharged with a prescription for an antibiotic. Four days later he
returned to the emergency department with pain similar to that at his first admission. He was admitted to hospital. A CT scan was performed
(Fig. 1) which showed a markedly thickened mesentery and a thickened, non-enhancing left colonic wall. The inferior mesenteric artery was
irregular, tortuous and stenosed; there was no intravascular thrombosis. Based on these findings, vasculitis was initially considered.
Colonoscopy showed marked edema of the mucosa. A biopsy specimen showed ischemic changes.Fig. 1Computerized tomography images in arterial
phase acquisition: a) Axial (1 mm slice thickness) showing fat stranding (black arrows) and thickened sigmoid wall (short thick arrows). b
Coronal reconstruction (maximal intensity projection slice thickness 7 mm) showing thickened recto-sigmoid wall (short thick arrow), and
abnormal irregular and dilated distal vessels arising from the inferior mesenteric artery (thin arrow). c Sagittal reconstruction (MIP slice
thickness 5 mm) showing multiple tortuous vessels (thin arrows) and hyperemic thickened mesocolon (arrow heads) Computerized tomography
images in arterial phase acquisition: a) Axial (1 mm slice thickness) showing fat stranding (black arrows) and thickened sigmoid wall (short
thick arrows). b Coronal reconstruction (maximal intensity projection slice thickness 7 mm) showing thickened recto-sigmoid wall (short
thick arrow), and abnormal irregular and dilated distal vessels arising from the inferior mesenteric artery (thin arrow). c Sagittal
reconstruction (MIP slice thickness 5 mm) showing multiple tortuous vessels (thin arrows) and hyperemic thickened mesocolon (arrow heads)
Three weeks later a diagnostic laparoscopy was performed which found ascites and multiple whitish epiploic appendices, one of which was
biopsied with a subsequent microscopic diagnosis of fat necrosis. A loop colostomy was performed. Six weeks later symptoms of large bowel
obstruction developed; a left hemicolectomy with transverse colostomy was therefore performed. During the same intervention a left partial
nephrectomy was carried out. The rectal stump was left open with a drain. The renal mass showed microscopic features characteristic of an
oncocytoma. Macroscopic examination of the recto-sigmoid resection specimen (Fig. 2) showed diffuse hemorrhagic necrosis of the mucosa and
marked bowel wall thickening with massive mesenteric necrosis. Necrotic fat encased the whole length of the resected bowel.Fig. 2Macroscopy
of the resected recto-sigmoid colon: a) Longitudinal view. The necrotic mucosa is covered by an extensive inflammatory pseudo-membrane. The
mesentery shows diffuse fat necrosis (panniculitis). b and c Cross sectional views. The colonic wall is thickened and edematous. There is
extensive mesenteric fat necrosis. Normal fat is seen at right Macroscopy of the resected recto-sigmoid colon: a) Longitudinal view. The
necrotic mucosa is covered by an extensive inflammatory pseudo-membrane. The mesentery shows diffuse fat necrosis (panniculitis). b and c
Cross sectional views. The colonic wall is thickened and edematous. There is extensive mesenteric fat necrosis. Normal fat is seen at right
Microscopic examination (Fig. 3) confirmed marked ischemia and ulceration of the colonic mucosa. The mesentery showed findings typical of
fat necrosis. Numerous arteries and arterioles within the necrotic fat were obstructed to varying degrees, often completely, by fibrosis of
the intima; the media of these vessels was normal. Atheromata, thrombosis, and inflammation were absent. The changes were considered
diagnostic of fibromuscular dysplasia, intimal-type.Fig. 3Histology of the resected recto-sigmoid colon: a) Scanning power view of the
ulcerated mucosa with adjacent normal colonic epithelium. b and c Scanning power views of the extensively necrotic mesentery. Viable (b) and
ulcerated (c) colonic mucosa are seen respectively (arrows). d Medium power view of colonic epithelium showing acute ischemia characterized
by epithelial loss with fibrosis and multiple micro-thromboemboli within the lamina propria. e Medium power view of necrotic mesentery with
numerous foamy macrophages. Fibrosis is absent. A medium-size vessel shows nearly complete fibrous obliteration of the lumens. f, g, h, i, j
High power views of medium size mesenteric arteries with fibrous intimal proliferation leading to near-complete luminal occlusion:
hemotoxylin-phloxin-saffrin (f, g) and Verhoff Von Geason (h, i, j), the latter highlighting arterial internal elastic lamina Histology of
the resected recto-sigmoid colon: a) Scanning power view of the ulcerated mucosa with adjacent normal colonic epithelium. b and c Scanning
power views of the extensively necrotic mesentery. Viable (b) and ulcerated (c) colonic mucosa are seen respectively (arrows). d Medium
power view of colonic epithelium showing acute ischemia characterized by epithelial loss with fibrosis and multiple micro-thromboemboli
within the lamina propria. e Medium power view of necrotic mesentery with numerous foamy macrophages. Fibrosis is absent. A medium-size
vessel shows nearly complete fibrous obliteration of the lumens. f, g, h, i, j High power views of medium size mesenteric arteries with
fibrous intimal proliferation leading to near-complete luminal occlusion: hemotoxylin-phloxin-saffrin (f, g) and Verhoff Von Geason (h, i,
j), the latter highlighting arterial internal elastic lamina The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged home.
Ten months later, he is asymptomatic and he is due to have his colostomy reversed. Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) involving visceral arteries
in adults is rare (or rarely reported), with only 75 well-documented cases published since 1963 (Table 1). This is the first documented case
of mesenteric panniculitis (MP) of the rectosigmoid colon due to visceral artery FMD. Two features are notable: limitation of involvement to
the distribution of the inferior mesenteric artery, and the “massive” extent of the panniculitis.Table 1Reported cases of adult (greater
to/equal 18 y of age) visceral artery fibromuscular dysplasiaReferenceAge/SexVisceral artery(s) involvedaExtra-visceral artery(s)
involvedHistologic confirmation/artery layerAboumrad 1963 62, MCeliac, SMA, IMARenalIntimaPalubinskas 1964 36, FCeliacNoYes: mediaRipley
1966 30, FCeliacNoNoRipley 1966 50, FSMARenal, common external iliacNoRipley 1966 45, FSMARenalNoWylie 1966 37, FCeliac, SMARenalNoWylie
1966 42, FSMARenalNoWylie 1966 47, FCeliac, SMA,RenalYes: mediaWylie 1966 50, FCeliacRenalNoWylie 1966 59, FCeliacRenalNoWylie 1966 59,
MSplenicRenalNoWylie 1966 68, FSplenicRenalNoWylie 1966 35, FCeliacCarotidNoWylie 1966 52, FCeliacNoNoWylie 1966 73, FCeliac,
SMAIliacNoPatchefsky 1967 63, FHepaticRenalYes: intima and mediaClaiborne 1970 41, FSMAInternal carotid, renal, iliacYes: mediaMenanteau
1971 35, MJejunalNoNoAndré 1973 46, MSMAInternal carotid,vertebralNoAndré 1973 30, FJejunalRenalNoStanley 1974 Ten patients, all FCeliac
(4), SMA (8)Renal (eight patients)NoPinkerton 1976 52, MHepaticNoYes: mediaLie 1977 64, FSMACircle of Willis (?)Yes: mediaStauber 1979 65,
MMiddle colicNoYes: intimade Mendonca 1981 47, MCeliacSubclavian, renalYes: mediaRybka 1983 20, FSMA, IMACommon carotid, renalYes:
intimaRybka 1983 21, MCeliac, SMACommon carotid, internal carotid, renalYes: intimaFoissy 1984 55, MSMANoYes: intimaQuirke 1984 71,
FSuperior rectalNoYes: adventitiaKyzer 1985 33, MSplenicNoYes: mediaHey 1987 38, FCeliacRenal, common iliacYes: media, adventitiaMeacham
1987 38, FCeliacNoNoden Butter 1988 44, FCeliac, SMAAorta, renal, iliacYes: intima and mediaSalmon 1988 58, FCeliac, SMA, IMACarotid,
renalNoInsall 1992 31, FHepaticRenalNoInsall 1992 46, FCeliac, SMARenalYes: mediaCase Records…1995 60, MSMANoYes: intima and mediaStokes
1996 54, FSMACoronary, renalYes: intimaYamaguchi 1996 39, MJejunal, sigmoidNoYes: adventitiaJones 1998 58, FHepaticNoNoLee 1998 23, MCeliac,
SMAExternal carotid, vertebral, opthalmic, superficial temporal, renal, iliac, lumbar, intercostalYes: mediaSafioleas 2001 33, MSMANoYes:
mediaHorie 2002 78, FSMACoronary circumflex, renalYes: media and adventitiaKojima 2002 43, MSMAInternal iliacYes: mediaFelton 2003 48,
FSMARenalNoGuill 2004 57, FCeliac, SMA, IMANoYes: mediaMertens 2005 48, FCeliac, SMA, IMANoYes: intimaTsokos 2005 33, MSplenicNoYes:
mediaRodriguez Urrego 2007 38, MSMA, IMANoYes: intimaChaturvedi 2008 Not provided, not providedSMA (presumed)NoYes: adventitiaKinoshita 2008
32, MSplenicNoYes: intimaMalago 2007 43, FSMARenalNoPeynircioglu 2008 40, FCommon hepatic, splenic, (ileocolic ?)RenalNoShussman 2008 47,
FHepaticRenal, iliacNoAzghari 2009 23, MHepaticNoNoVeraldi 2009 38, MCeliac, SMA, IMARenalYes: intima and mediaWatada 2009 64,
MSplenicNoYes: mediaKimura 2010 43, FSMARenalYes: intima and mediaSenadhi 2010 44, FSMANoNoSugiura 2011 30, MCeliac, SMARenal, external
iliacYes: mediade Gama 2012 46, MCeliacNoYes:?Dolak 2012 47, F“All abdominal arteries”AortaYes: intima and mediaPatel 2012 47, FCeliac,
SMANoNoCunha 2013 27, MCeliacNoYes: ?Sekar 2013 19, FSMARenalYes: not specifiedÜnlü 2014 60, FCeliacRenal, external iliacYes: mediaPresent
case52, MIMANoYes: intimaaSmaller arteries are specified only in the absence of Celiac, SMA and IMA trunk involvementSMA superior mesenteric
artery, IMA inferior mesenteric artery Reported cases of adult (greater to/equal 18 y of age) visceral artery fibromuscular dysplasia
aSmaller arteries are specified only in the absence of Celiac, SMA and IMA trunk involvement SMA superior mesenteric artery, IMA inferior
mesenteric artery Mesenteric panniculitis (MP) is a rare inflammatory disorder leading to “tumorlike” enlargement of the mesentery, the vast
majority of cases involving the small bowel [2, 3]. It is characterized by variable degrees of fat necrosis, chronic inflammation and
fibrosis. This histologic variability has resulted in other terms which reflect the dominant morphologic finding, including sclerosing
mesenteritis and mesenteric lipodystrophy . Numerous clinical associations have been noted and there are many theories regarding etiology .
No unifying pathophysiologic mechanism has been elucidated, likely because it is the result of a number of disease processes. FMD is defined
as a “nonatheroscleotic, noninflammatory vascular disease that may result in arterial stenosis, occlusion, aneurysm, or dissection ”. The
renal and cervicocranial (CC) vascular beds are classically involved . A landmark consensus histologic classification of renal artery FMD
was published in 1971, emphasizing the vessel layer involved : 1) intimal fibroplasia (1-2 % of cases), 2) medial, of which there are four
subtypes: medial dysplasia with mural aneurysm (60-70 %), medial hyperplasia (5-15 %), perimedial fibroplasia (15-25 %), medial dissection
(5-10 %), and 3) periarterial fibroplasia (less than 1 %). Subsequent experience has shown that intimal FMD is more common than was
appreciated in 1971, and that there are reliable angiographic correlates to these histologic subtypes . It is noteworthy that the
opportunity for microscopic examination of involved vessels in suspected FMD is now exceptional: in a recent review of 447 patients, tissue
for pathologic analysis was available in only 3.3 % of cases (from all vascular beds). The diagnosis is now established in essentially all
cases by angiographic and noninvasive imaging . The angiographic appearance of medial FMD is classically described as “string-of-beads”
(typical FMD) and is secondary to medial thickening causing luminal stenosis, alternating with zones of mural thinning and dilatation
(aneurysms), the latter associated with loss of the internal elastic lamina [1, 4, 5]. In certain vascular beds, and, of note, the
mesenteric vessels, the string-of-beads change is less frequent. Rather, the angiographic appearance is one of tubular constriction
(atypical FMD) [1, 5], which correlates with intimal involvement, such as was present here. Thus, absence of the string-of-beads sign should
not reflexively rule out a diagnosis of FMD. A 2014 consensus document recommends, when either renal or cervicocranial FMD is discovered,
screening of the “other” vascular bed provided identification of any new lesion will modify the patient’s management. The authors extend
this recommendation to screening of “less often involved vascular beds” only when there are suggestive symptoms or a suggestive medical
history. Angiographic imaging had revealed no involvement of the renal arteries in our patient. In light of the diagnosis of FMD of a major
visceral artery, angiographic study of the CC vessels was subsequently performed which revealed no abnormality. In retrospect, this might
have been expected as our summary of the reported cases of FMD of visceral arterial beds (Table 2) shows that only 12 % of males with
visceral FMD had CC involvement.Table 2Summary of reported cases of visceral fibromuscular dysplasiaMaleFemaleNumber of
casesa2550Artery Celiac39 SMA512 IMA1- Any combination of Celiac, SMA, IMA621 Otherb Hepatic24 Splenic51 Hepatic and
splenic-1 Jejunal11 Jejeunal and sigmoid1- Middle colic1- Superior rectal-1Cephalocervical/renal
involvement None1710Cephalocervical12 Renal536 Both22Vessel layer Intima73 Media97 Intima and media24 Media and
adventitia-2 Adventitia11 Not specified/not stated633aChaturvedi (2008) , and Cormier (2005) bSmaller arteries are specified only in the
absence of Celiac, SMA and IMA trunk involvementSMA superior mesenteric artery, IMA inferior mesenteric artery Summary of reported cases of
visceral fibromuscular dysplasia aChaturvedi (2008) , and Cormier (2005) bSmaller arteries are specified only in the absence of Celiac, SMA
and IMA trunk involvement SMA superior mesenteric artery, IMA inferior mesenteric artery Table 2 also highlights that, although the earliest
reports show an overwhelming majority of cases occurring in females, later cases document many more males with visceral FMD, such that men
now represent one third of cases. There is also a gender difference regarding associated CC and renal artery involvement: concomitant CC
and/or renal artery disease was present in 80 % of females, whereas these vessels were involved individually or together in 32 % of men.
Involvement of the IMA is highly unusual; indeed, we describe the first case in which disease is limited to this artery. Of note, regarding
the reported cases of visceral FMD, we must mention an extraordinary publication from 2005 which tallies 30 cases of FMD of the SMA from one
Parisian clinic alone, which would thus account for more than one third of all the reported cases retrieved through the PubMed database. As
this uniquely vast experience does not sufficiently detail individual patients and includes presentations not described elsewhere (e.g. SMA
dissection in eight patients), we have chosen to exclude it from the table. In conclusion, we describe FMD as the etiology of a case of
massive colorectal MP. FMD of visceral arteries may have “atypical” clinical and radiologic features, and, although a rare entity, should be
considered when MP is diagnosed. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Additional file 1: CARE
Checklist (2013) of information to include when writing a case report. CARE Checklist (2013) of information to include when writing a case
report. Cephalocervical Fibromuscular dysplasia Mesenteric panniculitis Superior mesenteric artery Inferior mesenteric artery Competing
interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AM drafted the manuscript and prepared the
pathologic images. VC provided the radiologic images and associated discussion, and reviewed the manuscript. YB provided the clinical
details and reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
