Adrenal cortical tumors are rare in children. Secondary tumors associated with untreated congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) have also been
reported in pediatric population. It is difficult for pediatricians to differentiate these 2 lesions. We described a 4.5-year-old girl who
presented with symptoms and signs of virilization. Bone age was 9.5 years. Genetic analysis of CYP21A2 and CYP11B1 revealed a heterozygous
mutation of CYP11B1 at c.1157C>T (A386V). No germline p53 gene mutation including R337H was detected. The patient was first misdiagnosed as
CAH and treated with hydrocortisone for 3 months. Diagnosis of an adrenal cortical tumor was confirmed by laboratory data and abdominal
computed tomography. After resection of the tumor, serum steroids normalized and clinical signs receded. The child received no additional
treatment and remains disease free after 12 months of close observation. Histological examination showed neoplasia cells with predominantly
eosinophilic cytoplasm and few atypical mitotic figures. The proliferation-associated Ki-67 index was <1% detected by immunohistochemistry.
Neoplasm is a rare but significant cause of precocious puberty (PP). The possibility of neoplasms should always be considered early to avoid
delayed cancer diagnosis and treatment in cases of PP. The mean prevalence of adrenal incidentalomas from the literature is 2.3% (range,
1%–8.7%) at autopsy and 0.64% (range, 0.35%–1.9%) at computed tomography (CT) scan.1 However, adrenocortical tumors (ACTs) are rare in
children, comprising <0.2% of all childhood neoplasms. The most frequent clinical presentation is virilization, alone or in combination with
hypercortisolism.2,3 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) may also present with peripheral precocious puberty (PP). And secondary tumors
associated with untreated or inadequately treated CAH have been reported in both adult and pediatric population.4,5 Therefore, it is not
easy for pediatricians to differentiate the above 2 conditions. Herein, we reported a 4.5-year-old girl with a virilizing adrenal cortical
adenoma whose steroid studies and genetic analysis supporting the diagnosis of CAH, but after complete removal of the tumor, the hormonal
abnormalities normalized and clinical signs receded. Ethical approval was obtained from the Ethics Board of the Children's Hospital of
Shanghai, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient's parents on behalf of the child. A
4.5-year-old girl was referred with a 10-month history of pubic hair and a deep voice. Retrospectively, accelerated growth rate was
diagnosed (growth velocity 12 cm/y). The girl's height was 114.5 cm (97th percentile) with a weight of 24.5 kg (>99th percentile). On
physical examination (Figure 1), she was found to have pubic hair, clitoral hypertrophy (measuring 1.8 cm), deepening of the voice. There
was no acne, no axillary hair, no breast development, no vaginal discharge, and no labial fusion. Bone age was 9.5 years. Blood pressure was
90/55 mm Hg. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes using a commercial kit (Blood & Cell Culture DNA Mini Kit, Catalog
No.: 13323, QIAGEN GmbH, Germany). Mutation analysis of CYP21A2 and CYP11B1 by sequencing the polymerase chain reaction amplification
products of exons revealed a heterozygous mutation of CYP11B1 at c.1157C>T (A386V, the alanine at position 386 was substituted by a valine,
Figure 2). Procedures (DNA isolation, amplification, purification, and sequencing) were performed according to the instructions described in
the manufacturer's protocol. Initial serum steroid measurement (Table 1) and genetic study suggested the diagnosis of CAH. The girl was
treated with hydrocortisone (20 mg/d) for 3 months. Because the elevated level of 17-hydroxy-progestrone, testosterone, and
dehydroepiandrosterone was not suppressed, the treatment was discontinued. Clinical photography of the 4.5-year-old girl showing pubic hair
and clitoromegaly. Direct sequencing of CYP11B1 showing the heterozygous A386V mutation (arrow, nucleotide substitution GCG-GTG). Serum
Steroid Profiles Before and After Surgery The diagnosis was reevaluated in September 2013. Abdominal CT scan showed an adrenal tumor on the
left side with a size of 6.2 cm (Figure 3). The well-defined tumor has a regular margin, calcification, mixed signal intensity, and
inhomogenous enhancement after intravenous contrast. No distant metastasis (lung, liver) was noted. A left adrenalectomy was performed and
an encaspsulated mass weighing 95 g (6.5 × 6.0 × 7.0 cm) was completely removed. Histological examination revealed neoplasia cells with
predominantly eosinophilic cytoplasm, slightly irregular small size nuclei (nuclear grade 2), and few atypical mitotic figures (Figure 4).
No tumor necrosis, vascular or capsular invasion was found. Adrenal cortical adenoma was diagnosed according to the criteria of Weiss et
al.6 The proliferation-associated Ki-67 index (the percentage of Ki-67 positive cells) was <1% detected by immunohistochemistry (Figure 4).
The procedures of immunostaining were performed as we previously described.7 No germline p53 gene mutation including R337H (chromosomal
locus 17p13) was observed using DNA sequencing. The postoperative course was uneventful. After surgery (1 month) the serum steroids
normalized and clinical signs receded. There was no evidence of recurrence within a follow-up of 12 months. CT scan showing an ovoid tumor
(arrow) with mixed signal intensity, calcification, and inhomogenous enhancement. Axial view (A) and intravenous contrast-enhanced axial
(B), sagittal (C), and coronal (D) views. CT = computed tomography. (A) Histopathological examination demonstrating adrenal cortical tumor
cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and slightly irregular nuclei (H&E, original magnification × 200). (B) Immunohistochemical
staining showing extremely low level of Ki-67 expression (original magnification ×200). H&E = hematoxylin and eosin. The underlying cause of
peripheral PP (independent of gonadotropin and maturation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis) in girls is usually benign or unclear.
Kaplowitz8 reported that the 2 most common conditions were premature adrenarche and premature thelarche. Assessment of PP is complex, and
cancer is often underestimated. Primary organ lesions included brain tumor (pineal or optic pathway/hypothalamic tumor), ACT (adenoma or
carcinoma), and hepatoblastoma, ovarian tumor (granulosa-theca cell tumor, Sertoli-stromal cell tumor, teratoma, etc.).9,10 Another serious
cause of PP in early childhood is late presentation of CAH (21-hydroxylase or 11β-hydroxylase deficiency). A small group of patients with
ACTs might be misdiagnosed as CAH because the size of tumor was small in early stage and serum hormonal studies were misleading. It is
crucial to differentiate whether the adrenal cortical tumor is primary or secondary to untreated CAH as a consequence of adrenocorticotropic
hormone over-secretion. The latter always shows satisfactory regression after steroid therapy and needs no surgery. Therefore, it may be
necessary to repeat abdominal imaging study when ACTs are suspected especially in developing countries where children often receive
appropriate medical treatment late in the course of disease. Unfortunately, histopathological distinction between benign and malignant
lesions remains difficult. The Weiss scoring system might be of some value in predicting malignant behavior.6,11 The Ki-67 index can help
differentiate adenomas from carcinomas. Although high frequency of p53 mutation (especially R337H) has been reported in southern Brazil,3,12
this is not the case in our study. Radical removal of the complete tumor by open or laparoscopic surgery is the mainstay of treatment. No
adjuvant therapy was administrated due to the unavailability of mitotane in China. The overall prognosis of adrenal adenoma is excellent, in
contrast to adrenal cortical carcinoma (especially stages III and IV).3,11,13,14 There is always a delay between the onset of symptoms and
accurate diagnosis in children with PP. So, the possibility of neoplasm should be considered early to avoid delayed cancer diagnosis and
treatment. In summary, we described an adrenal cortical adenoma mimicking CAH in a young girl. Neoplasm is a rare but significant cause of
PP. ACTs might be misinterpreted as CAH. Although the girl in the present study seems to have been cured, long-term follow-up is warranted.
Abbreviations: ACT = adrenocortical tumor, CAH = congenital adrenal hyperplasia, CT = computed tomography, PP = precocious puberty. The
authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
