A 20-year-old male presented with painless swelling in the left lower anterior aspect of neck of one year duration Figure 1A. The swelling
was well-defined, unmovable, size 8×6 cm, smooth surface, normal temperature, and firm in consistency. The swelling was not moving with
deglutition and there was no pressure effect on surrounding structures. Routine biochemical and hematological tests including hemogram with
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, total leucocyte count, and differential leucocyte counts were normal. Plain radiograph, MRI, contrast
enhanced (CE) CT scan of the cervical spine (Figure 1B) revealed a lesion arising from the left anterior part of the C7 vertebral body with
evidence of multiple foci of calcification. Clinical photograph of tumor situated in the: A) lower third of the left side of neck; B)
contrast enhanced CT scan of the cervical spine showing evidence of a well defined lesion with irregular lobulated margins and areas of
chondroid calcification seen in axial bone window image; C) gross surgical specimen after excision and photomicrograph; and D) shows a cap
of normal hyaline cartilage with lacunar cells bearing eosinophilic inclusions in the cytoplasm. What is the diagnosis?What is the
management? What is the diagnosis? What is the management? On the basis of plain radiograph, CECT, and MRI, a provisional diagnosis of
benign cartilaginous neoplasm was made. The fine needle aspiration cytology and trucut biopsy from the lesion revealed it to be a
cartilaginous tumor, which was further confirmed after surgical removal of tumor mass (Figure 1C) and histopathological examination (Figure
1D).A complete surgical excision of the tumor was planned. He was placed supine; we approached the tumor through an anterior approach
retracting the sternocleidomastoid and carotid sheath laterally, and the esophagus and trachea medially. The deep cervical fascia was
divided, and the longus colli muscles were reflected subperiosteally. The tumor was excised completely, and adjacent structures were found
free from any infiltration. The wound was closed after achieving hemostasis. He was completely free from disease after one year of follow
up. On the basis of plain radiograph, CECT, and MRI, a provisional diagnosis of benign cartilaginous neoplasm was made. The fine needle
aspiration cytology and trucut biopsy from the lesion revealed it to be a cartilaginous tumor, which was further confirmed after surgical
removal of tumor mass (Figure 1C) and histopathological examination (Figure 1D). A complete surgical excision of the tumor was planned. He
was placed supine; we approached the tumor through an anterior approach retracting the sternocleidomastoid and carotid sheath laterally, and
the esophagus and trachea medially. The deep cervical fascia was divided, and the longus colli muscles were reflected subperiosteally. The
tumor was excised completely, and adjacent structures were found free from any infiltration. The wound was closed after achieving
hemostasis. He was completely free from disease after one year of follow up. Chondroma is a benign cartilaginous neoplasm.1 Small bones of
the hands and feet are most commonly involved, sometimes it may also occur in the ribs and pelvis, and rarely in the intracranial bones.2
Enchondromas are rarely present in the spine, comprising 2% of all chondromas.3 An enchondroma may occur as a single tumor or many tumors
together. Chondromas are usually asymptomatic. However, proper diagnosis and total removal of the tumor are important because benign
chondromas can transform into malignancy. Benign chondrogenic tumors can be classified into 4 types as proposed by Lichtenstein.3 The 4
histological types in this classification are; osteochondromas, enchondromas, chondroblastoma, and chondromyxoid fibroma. Different types
have their own location of occurrence and frequency. Chondroma is the most common chondrogenic tumor, and it accounts for 2.4% of all
osteocartilaginous tumors.4 Chondromas of the spinal column comprise <5% of primary spinal tumors.5 In particular, symptomatic chondromas of
the cervical spine are rare, and based on a PubMed literature reviews, only 19 cases have been reported so far. Chondromas are usually found
in the 20-40 years age group.1 Symptoms are usually swelling and pain at the lesion site. Many authors have reported enchondroma of the
lumbar spine presenting with sciatica.1 However, in this case, the patient presented with swelling and mild pain around the lower neck.
Chondromas can be classified into 2 types according to their site of origin: the medullary cavity (enchondroma) and the surface of the
periosteum (periosteal chondroma).1 In our case, the type was periosteal chondroma. The periosteal chondromas usually do not infiltrate the
adjacent soft tissue even with increase in size. Chondroma can arise from any part of the vertebra including body, lamina, pedicle, and
spinous process. Plain films of x-rays show smooth erosions of the bone structure, which are sometimes radiolucent or sometimes calcified.
The CT shows a soft tissue mass with stippled calcifications. The MRI demonstrates a subperiosteal lobulated mass at the bone surface with
peripheral rim enhancement on T1WI.1 Nevertheless, MRI is also important for differential diagnosis because tumor size, location, pattern,
and relation of surrounding structures can also be identified. It is often difficult to differentiate chondromas from other cartilaginous
tumors on the radiologic finding alone. Hence, biopsy is needed for proper diagnosis. Chondromas, which are also known as enchondromas,
consist of benign hyaline cartilage, tissues of chondrocytes and cancellous bone tissue. Enchondromas are cartilage-capped bony projections
that grow from heterotopic cartilaginous cell rests of the medullary cavity of bone. These cartilaginous rests are cells that are somehow
displaced from the growth plate.3 Complete involvement of the cortex and soft tissue is highly suggestive of malignancy. The most common
malignant transformation of chondromas is chondrosarcoma.3 Histologically, the cells of enchondromas resemble cells of normal hyaline
cartilage. Cells with large nuclei are suggestive of malignancy. The treatment of choice for chondroma is complete surgical excision.2
Although recurrence of chondroma is rare, it can recur with incomplete removal. Nearly 10% of solitary chondromas undergo malignant
transformation that requires radiation therapy.1 The malignant transformation rate is very slow, but is more than 50% as a part of Ollier’s
and Maffucci’s syndromes.1 In conclusion, chondromas are rare cartilaginous neoplasms affecting the cervical spine. Meticulous preoperative
and histopathological evaluation is important because these pathologies possess potential for malignant transformation. The author would
like to thank Dr. Mehtab Ahmad, Assistant Professor, for reporting the radiology films. Notice: Authors are encouraged to submit quizzes for
possible publication in the Journal. These may be in any specialty, and should approximately follow the format used here (maximum of 2
figures). Please address any submissions to: Editor, Saudi Medical Journal, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, PO Box 7897, Riyadh 11159,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Tel. +966 (11) 4777714 Ext. 42846. We invite students from a variety of medical disciplines to submit original
contributions based on their supervised research. The Student Corner of Saudi Med J aims to help students explore research opportunities and
network with other peers and mentors in the same field. Submitted Abstracts should include the following: Title should be
descriptiveAuthor’s names and affiliation(specify college level/year, academic degree of Senior Author)Abstract must be structured and not
more than 300 wordsThe following are the typical headings: Objectives (background, why the study was done, specific aims)Methods (setting,
date of study, design, subjects, intervention and analysis)Results (findings, data and statistical tests) andConclusion (general
interpretation of results) Title should be descriptive Author’s names and affiliation(specify college level/year, academic degree of Senior
Author) Abstract must be structured and not more than 300 words The following are the typical headings: Objectives (background, why the
study was done, specific aims)Methods (setting, date of study, design, subjects, intervention and analysis)Results (findings, data and
statistical tests) andConclusion (general interpretation of results) Objectives (background, why the study was done, specific aims) Methods
(setting, date of study, design, subjects, intervention and analysis) Results (findings, data and statistical tests) and Conclusion (general
interpretation of results) Submitted Abstracts should be co-authored by a Senior Supervisor Abstracts will be reviewed by Student’s Corner
Section Editor There is no fee to submit an Abstract Ethical Approval should be provided
