Listeria monocytogenes is a facultative intracellular parasitic bacterium that is Gram positive, catalase positive, oxidase negative, and a
facultative anaerobe. It is known to infect humans through food. It is a bacillus with low virulence, but can cause meningitis and sepsis in
infants and immunocompromised patients. A case of 75-year-old Japanese female with small cell carcinoma of the thymus and pleural
dissemination is described. She was treated with carboplatin and etoposide and showed a partial response. However, the tumor recurred
6 months later. Therefore, we again administered carboplatin and etoposide. Though peritoneal dissemination was suspected based on abdominal
computed tomography findings after two courses, the assessment was stable disease. She was occasionally treated for constipation. She
developed chills, rigor, and diarrhea, necessitating admission on the 7th day of the third course of chemotherapy. We suspected intestinal
infection, and cefepime was thus administered. However, her blood pressure dropped and neutropenia manifested on the 4th day of admission.
We therefore switched the antibiotic from cefepime to meropenem and also administered granulocyte-colony stimulating factor. Listeria
monocytogenes was detected by two blood cultures, and the antimicrobial medication was thus switched to ampicillin, in consideration of
sensitivity. Her general condition improved and she was able to leave the hospital on the 19th day after admission. During chemotherapy,
factors such as impaired bowel movements, malnutrition, and myeloablation can contribute to the development of severe infections. It is
necessary to comprehensively assess a patient’s state and treat all aspects of illness. Listeria monocytogenes (L. monocytogenes) is a
facultative intracellular bacterium that is Gram positive, catalase positive, oxidase negative, and a facultative anaerobe. L. monocytogenes
is known to infect humans through food including cheese and fresh vegetables . It is a bacillus with low virulence, and this infection is
rare in adults without underlying diseases, but it can cause meningitis and sepsis in infants and the elderly, as well as in
immunocompromised patients . There are some reports of Listeriosis in Japan, in the compromised host during chemotherapy and after surgery
[4, 5]. In a Japanese review of listeriosis cases over for 23 years, it was reported that 76.4% of deaths in adult cases had underlying
conditions . We experienced a case of sepsis caused by L. monocytogenes during chemotherapy for small cell carcinoma of the thymus. This
case is reported with a discussion of the relevant literature. The patient was a 75-year-old Japanese female who presented with chief
complaints of fever and diarrhea. The past history, family history, and personal/occupational history were unremarkable. A diagnosis of
small cell carcinoma of the thymus (cT4N2M1 stage IV) was made on January 19, 2010. Chemotherapy was started with carboplatin
(CBDCA) + etoposide (VP-16) (Chemotherapy for small cell carcinoma of the thymus has not established. We performed the chemotherapy for
small cell of the thymus using the regimen for small cell lung carcinoma as reference.) on the same day, and a total of four courses were
administered. The tumor decreased in size following this treatment and the response was assessed as partial response (PR). Relapse of the
tumor was detected in July, and chemotherapy with CBDCA + VP-16 was resumed due to sensitive relapse. Findings on chest-abdominal computed
tomography (CT) performed for evaluation on October 12 after two courses of treatment suggested the possibility of peritoneal dissemination.
However, the tumor response was assessed as stable disease (SD), and the treatment was continued. While receiving this treatment, the
patient complained of constipation, which was dealt with symptomatically. On December 21 (the 7th day of the third course of chemotherapy),
the patient developed chills, fever, and diarrhea, and was admitted on December 22 with a diagnosis of severe infection as an adverse event
during chemotherapy. Vital signs were normal, except for a body temperature of 38.7°C. Chest auscultation revealed no abnormal findings.
Examination of the abdomen also revealed no abnormalities, except for slight generalized tenderness. Laboratory examination revealed the
following: hematology: pancytopenia (WBC 2,900/μL, RBC 335 × 104/μL, Hb 10.2 g/dL, Plt 10.1 × 104/μL); blood biochemistry: slight
deterioration of liver function and electrolyte abnormalities (AST 37 U/L, ALT 30 U/L, LDH 250 U/L, ALP 454 U/L, γ-GTP 214 U/L, Na
132 mmol/L, Cl 95 mmol/L), and significant increase in serum CRP (CRP 32.76 mg/dL); blood coagulation profile: elevation of serum levels of
FDP (FDP 22.5 μg/mL); serum tumor marker levels: within normal range. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed evidence of respiratory alkalosis
(pH 7.532, pCO2 28.5 Torr, pO2 70.4 Torr, HCO3 23.8 mmol/L). Although Enterococcus faecalis was detected in the urine, urine microscopy
revealed only 5-9 WBC/HPF, not suggestive of urinary tract infection (Table 1). Influenza test was negative. A chest X-ray revealed no
abnormal findings (Figure 1). Chest CT showed an increase in the size of the small cell carcinoma tumor arising from the thymus in the
anterior mediastinum (Figure 2a). Abdominal CT revealed mild ascites and prominent irregular granular shadows of the greater omentum and the
mesentery (Figure 2b), suggestive of peritoneal dissemination.Table 1Laboratory data at initial visitationCBCBlood chemistryTumor
marker WBC2900/μL AST37 IU/L NSE8.4 ng/mL Neutro92.5 % ALT30 IU/L ProGRP43.7 pg/mL
Mono0.3 % Y-GTP214 IU/LUrinalysis RBC335 × 104/μL LDH250 IU/L WBC5–9/HPF Hb10.2 g/dL ALP454 IU/L E. faecalis 1 × 107
Pit10.1 × 104/μL TP6.7 g/dLArterial blood gas analysis (room air)Coagulation Alb3.4 g/dL PH7.532 PT-INR1.15 CK21 IU/L pCO2
28.5 Torr APTT33.4 s BUN18 mg/dL pO2 70.4 Torr Fibrinogen352 mg/dL Cre0.66 mg/dL HCO3 23.8 mmol/L FDP22.5 μg/mL Na132 mmol/L SaO2 95.5 % AT-
III85% K4.1 mmol/LBacteriological examination CI95 mmol/L Blood L. monocytogenes (+) Ca8.3 mmol/L CRP32.76 mg/dLFigure 1Chest X-ray showed
no abnormal findings.Figure 2 a Chest computed tomography showed an increase in the size of the small cell carcinoma tumor arising from the
thymus (red circle). b Abdominal computed tomography showed mild ascites (red arrow) and prominent irregular granular shadows of the greater
omentum and the mesentery (red circle). Laboratory data at initial visitation Chest X-ray showed no abnormal findings. a Chest computed
tomography showed an increase in the size of the small cell carcinoma tumor arising from the thymus (red circle). b Abdominal computed
tomography showed mild ascites (red arrow) and prominent irregular granular shadows of the greater omentum and the mesentery (red circle).
The focus of the infection was unclear, but since the patient was a compromised host, enteric bacterial infection was assumed and treatment
was started empirically with cefepime (CFPM) 3 g/day. Samples were collected for two sets of blood culture at the time of admission. Because
of a fall in blood pressure and neutropenia on December 25, the antimicrobial drug was switched to meropenem (MEPM) 1.5 g/day, and
administration of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) was started. On December 26, L. monocytogenes was identified in both sets of
blood culture bottle, in BacT/ALERT blood cultures by direct inoculation into the Vitek 2 system (This serotype is not known.). On December
28, with recovery of the neutrophil count, the antibiotic was again changed to ampicillin (ABPC) 4 g/day in consideration of the bacterial
sensitivity. The patient then recovered gradually and was discharged on January 10, 2011. L. monocytogenes is widely distributed throughout
the environment including soil, water, and decaying vegetation. L. monocytogenes exists in the feces of animals and putrescent tissues,
showing a high osmotic pressure tolerance and the ability to proliferate in temperatures ranging from 1 to 45°C . The gastrointestinal
mucous membrane is considered to be the most common source of infection . L. monocytogenes has the ability to pass the intestinal barrier.
The primary method of entry into endothelial cells is believed to be via a zipper-like mechanism . Invasion proteins on the surface of the
bacteria, like Internalin A, Internalin B, and P60, help the bacterium bind to host surface receptors . This ability is thought to trigger
bacterial translocation (BT). BT is considered to be the mechanism underlying sepsis due to L. monocytogenes. The phenomenon of enteral
bacteria moving outside of the intestinal tract was described a century ago in animal experiments . BT was defined as “the passage of viable
bacteria from the gastrointestinal tract through the epithelial mucosa into the lamina propria and then to the mesenteric lymph nodes and
possibly other organs” . The intestinal tract then came to be thought of as a new source of infection. At present, microbial translocation,
i.e., the concept of BT, is recognized as involving not only live bacteria but also components of dead bacteria and bacterial factors such
as endotoxin . L. monocytogenes is thought to invade intestinal epithelial cells and the mucous membrane lamina propria via various routes
and to become an internalization of macrophages and lymphocytes, subsequently migrating to remote organs through lymphatic vessels . The
mechanisms of BT are considered to be (1) a change in enterobacterial flora, (2) failure of the intestinal tract barrier, and (3) diminished
host immunity. The enterobacterial flora maintains an equilibrium allowing fungi and bacteria to coexist. When this enterobacterial flora
balance is compromised by antimicrobials, antacids, ileus, or fecal impaction, pathogenic microbes and toxins proliferate abnormally in the
intestinal tract, and this leads to contact with intestinal epithelia. The intestinal tract barrier is an epithelial structure that
functions as a mechanical barrier and also provides a mucous membrane layer to protect the organism from excessive intestinal tract
peristalsis and digestive juices such as gastric acid and bile acid. With the atrophy of intestinal tract disuse, ischemia may occur due to
shock, malnutrition, hepatic cirrhosis, arterial clotting, inflammatory bowel disease, or radiation exposure, leading to barrier function
failure, and pathogenic microbes can then come into contact with the intestinal mucosa. The intestinal mucosa then becomes hyper-permeable,
facilitating invasion by pathogenic microbes. The intestinal tract has an immunologic barrier function and harbors local immune factors
including neutrophils, macrophages, and gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) of the terminal ileum. GALT is the most immunologically active
tissue in the human body. Decreasing immune cells in GALT, due to nutritional management designed to avoid the gastrointestinal tract,
reduces local immunity by causing IgA secretion disorders in the intestinal epithelia, compromised host immunity, and diminished host
immuno-responsiveness to invasive pathogens from the intestinal tract. These alterations can all promote invasion by pathogens. It is
thought that myeloablation with chemotherapy and the associated reduction in host immunity, direct damage to the intestinal mucosa by
chemotherapy, intestinal tract obstruction by tumors with peritoneal dissemination, and constipation due to impaired bowel movements
associated with disease states or treatment can lead to BT. Normalization of the aforementioned processes is necessary for the prevention
and treatment of BT. In other words, for prevention of BT it is necessary to (1) control the enterobacterial flora, (2) maintain the
intestinal tract barrier, (3) control immuno-responsiveness, and (4) maintain the intestinal tract blood supply. To achieve the prevention
and treatment of BT, attention is being paid to the administration of probiotics and prebiotics [12, 13], glutamine , polyethylene glycol ,
and dobutamine . In addition, to control immuno-responsiveness, endotoxin adsorption with blood adsorption therapy using a polymyxin B
column was reported to be useful [17, 18]. As in our case, with the source of infection being unclear, the sepsis often progresses. BT is
potentially involved in the infectious process by various mechanisms and must, in the intestinal tract, be regarded as an important source
of infection. Thus, it is necessary to prevent BT as well as to implement infection control procedures. We encountered a case with sepsis
caused by L. monocytogenes during chemotherapy for small cell carcinoma of the thymus. We often experience unidentified sepsis during
chemotherapy. Impaired bowel movements, malnutrition, and myeloablation by chemotherapy can easily cause bacterial translocation. We must
not forget the possibility of serious sepsis caused by L. monocytogenes through bacterial translocation during chemotherapy. It is necessary
to comprehensively assess a patient’s state and treat all aspects of illness. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. ampicillin bacterial translocation carboplatin cefepime computed tomography gut-associated lymphoid tissue granulocyte-colony
stimulating factor Listeria monocytogenes meropenem partial response stable disease etoposide MI, YA, TM, KT, KN, YT, HT, ST, and KO treated
the patient. ST, HK, and KO helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. There is no source of
funding for all authors. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
