Spontaneous ruptures of the quadriceps tendon are infrequent injuries, it is seen primarily in patients with predisposing diseases such as
gout, rheumatoid arthritis and chronic renal failure. A 32-year-old man had a history of end stage renal disease and received regular
hemodialysis treatment for more than 5 years. He was admitted in our service for total functional impotence of the right lower limb with
knee pain after a common fall two months ago. The radiogram showed a ‘'patella baja” with suprapatellar calcifications. The ultrasound and
MRI showed an aspect of rupture of the quadriceps tendon in its proximal end with retraction of 3 cm. Quadriceps tendon repair was performed
with a lengthening plasty, and the result was satisfactory after a serial rehabilitation program. The diagnosis of quadriceps tendon
ruptures needs more attention in patients with predisposing diseases. They should not be unknown because the treatment of neglected lesions
is more difficult. We insist on the early surgical repair associated with early rehabilitation that can guarantee recovery of good active
extension. Ruptures of the extensor mechanism of the knee joint are defined by the existence of a solution of continuity on the chain bone
muscle tendon which provides the extension of the leg on the thighs: patellar tendon, quadriceps tendon and muscle, anterior tibial
tuberosity and patella. Spontaneous ruptures of the quadriceps tendon are infrequent injuries; it is seen primarily in patients with
predisposing disease such as gout, rheumatoid arthritis and chronic renal failure. Several factors probably combine to weaken the tendon,
including a loss of local vascular supply, repeated microtrauma and osteodystrophy secondary to hyperparathyroidism Through one case of
spontaneous rupture of the quadriceps tendon occurred in a patient with chronic renal failure we stressed the difficulty of therapeutic
management in this patient and the benefit of early rehabilitation. Our patient, a 32 year old man, employee, without any sport practice,
had a chronic renal failure, with hemodialysis dependence for 5 years, was admitted in our service for total functional impotence of the
right lower limb with knee pain after a common fall two months ago. Clinical examination revealed an inability to walk, a loss of active
extension of the knee joint and palpable tendinous suprapatellar defect (Figure 1). Radiographic investigations showed a distally displaced
patella “patella baja”with suprapatellar calcifications (Figure 2). The ultrasound showed an aspect of rupture of the quadriceps tendon in
its proximal end with the presence of calcifications (Figure 3). Suprapatellar defect on the right knee Lateral radiographs showing
suprapatellar calcifications Ultrasound showing rupture of the quadriceps tendon with calcifications MRI confirmed the diagnosis of rupture
of the quadriceps tendons and eliminates injuries of the cruciate ligament, the menisci, collateral ligaments and patellar tendon (Figure
4). Surgical exploration revealed complete rupture of the quadriceps tendon at the osteo-tendinous junction with retraction of three cm. The
surgical repair consisted in tendon suture with biodegradable polyglycolic acid sutures with a lengthening plasty according to the V/Y of
CODIVILLA's technique (Figure 5). MRI confirmed the rupture of quadriceps tendon Operative view of V/Y CODIVILLA plasty Post-operatively,
the knee was immobilized with a removable knee splint for a period of six weeks. A week after, the patient was then put on program of
rehabilitation based primarily on isometric contractions of the quadriceps and passive mobilization of the knee One month later, an active
mobilization was initiated. The recovery of walking was allowed after 6 weeks with protection of external support (crutches). The patient
was clinically evaluated each week for a month and every month. After three years of patient follow-up, the results were graded good, based
on the range of motion of the knee, the strength of the quadriceps muscle and the ability of the patient to walk with one crutch. The joint
assessment found a patella mobile with active extension and flexion. Quadriceps tendon ruptures are uncommon injuries. They most often occur
on road accident in the population under 40 years . The spontaneous rupture, secondary to a predisposing disease are not common several
hypotheses are made concerning the spontaneous tendon ruptures, in the first place the vascular hypothesis where the age or diseases
predisposing to rupture causing a decrease blood flow in the tendon leading to tissue degeneration which causes a spontaneous rupture in the
absence of trauma . Chronic renal failure can cause several complications related to the process of dialysis as amyloidosis (dialysis
related amyloidosis DRA) in which there is abnormal production of beta 2 microglobulin. This molecule normally metabolized by the kidney is
accumulated in chronic hemodialysis patients with rates above 30 to 40 times normal, it tends to accumulate in specific structures such as
bone and tendon reducing its elasticity and predisposes to ruptures after minimal efforts [3, 4]. Besides amyloidosis, secondary
hyperparathyroidism in chronic renal failure leads to dystrophic calcification and resorption of subperiostal bone causing fragility of the
bone tendon junction . This last complication is the main cause of tendon rupture. The injury mechanism is essentially indirect muscle
contraction during an extension movement of the thigh on the leg or during a forced flexion above 45° where the balance of forces between
the quadriceps tendon and patellar tendon is reversed The diagnosis of tendon rupture is easy in the acute phase with the existence of a
suprapatellar depression and pain on palpation a patella in the low position relative to the opposite side and inability of active extension
of the knee. In the neglected forms clinical diagnosis is more difficult, the defect may not be evident because of scar-tissue formation,
and the signs are present at lower levels which give more importance to the complementary examinations. The lateral view radiograph of the
knee shows a patella baja and suprapatellar calcifications Ultrasonography of the soft tissues shows in case of total rupture, a complete
interruption of tendon fibers separated by a hypoechogenous track (hematoma), but it remains operator-dependent examination . In case of
partial rupture it reveals a partial rupture of the tendon in the transverse plane or dissection of the fibers in the longitudinal plane.
Finally MRI shows high signal on T2 signing hemorrhage or edema. She finds its indications in the neglected forms if the clinical
examination and ultrasonography cannot conclude. The treatment of a complete rupture of the quadriceps tendon is surgical but it is not
always easy. The techniques are quite diverse because of the variety of lesions encountered, recent or old, and evolution of the conception
of surgical techniques. According to various authors, the repair of the neglected forms after the sixth week remains difficult because of
the tendinous retraction requiring a lengthening plasty. In these cases it is recommended to use Scuderi repair and Codivilla V/Y plasty and
when the retraction of the quadriceps is very important it may be necessary to do a release using the technique of Judet . In chronic forms,
we can also see a patella baja with patellar retinaculum retraction witch must be cut on both sides of the patella during surgery . Closure
is done with a closed-suction drainage knee flexed for a good approximation of the wound edges. The postoperative immobilization pedal for
about 6 weeks, time of healing, is recommended this immobilisation must be made with 15° on flexion to avoid the creation or perpetuation of
a patella baja. Rehabilitation is conducted by early passive mobilization of the knee on the first day after surgery, taking into
consideration the stability and solidity of surgical repair. This work will be replaced by an active rehabilitation witch it is essentially
based on the stretch of the quadriceps, the gradual increase in quadriceps muscle strength and the change in execution speed of movement
with the aim of this work is to reinforce the tendon. The spontaneous quadriceps tendon ruptures are uncommon. They should not be unknown
because the treatment of a neglected lesion is more difficult. The large number of plasties described in the literature shows the absence of
codification of this surgery. We insist on the early surgical repair associated with early rehabilitation that can guarantee recovery of
good active extension. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Zouhir Ameziane Hassani and Moncef Boufettal were the
major contributors in writing the manuscript. Moustapha Mahfoud and Moradh Yaacoubi are the senior authors who performed the surgery,
contributed and supervised the writing of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
