Intravascular NK-cell lymphoma (IVNKL) is an extremely rare variant of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. To our knowledge, there are only a few cases
reported in the English literature. Here, a case of a 29-year-old male with IVNKL involving the skin of the trunk and 4 extremities and
liver is presented. A comprehensive literature review is undertaken to summarize the clinical and pathological features of this disorder. In
our case, large neoplastic lymphoid cells are restricted to the lumen of small vessels and exhibit the phenotype of a true NK cell. The
morphology and immunophenotype, positivity of EBER and NK-cell origin are similar to other IVNKL cases. In addition, some cases including
ours carry a poor prognosis as multiple systems or vital organs are involved. In summary, we report a case of an unusual intravascular
lymphoma of NK-cell lineage that displays both clinical and pathological features and compare it with other differential diagnoses. It is
important to recognize this rare entity to make an appropriate diagnosis and achieve a better understanding regarding the treatment and
prognosis. Intravascular NK-cell lymphoma (IVNKL) was first reported by Santucci et al. in 2003 and is revealed as an infiltration of large
cells with an NK/T-cell phenotype (CD3ε+, CD56+, and markers for cytotoxicity +) that is localized strictly intravascularly. Most of these
cases are Epstein-Barr virus nucleic acid EBER (Epstein-Barr virus-encoded small RNA) positive and T-cell receptor (TCR) gene rearrangement
negative. Multiple organs may be involved, resulting in a variety of clinical presentations; however, the most common locations that are
involved are the skin and the central nervous system (CNS). IVNKL is an aggressive lymphoma with a variable but mostly limited response to
chemotherapy and an overall poor prognosis, especially for those patients with multi-system involvement. Intravascular lymphoma (IVL) is a
rare entity. This disorder was first described as angioendotheliomatosis proliferans systemisata by Pfleger and Tappeiner in 1959. The
neoplastic cells were initially believed to be of endothelial origin; however, subsequent immunohistochemical and molecular studies
demonstrated the lymphoid nature of the neoplastic cells . Most cases constitute a variant of an extranodal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma,
and only approximately 10 % of the published cases are of T-cell or histiocytic origin . To date, relatively few cases with an NK-cell
lineage have been reported in the English literature (Table 1) [1, 5–12].Table 1Characters of reported cases of IVNKLCase
number/caseAge/genderInvolved organ(s)Treatment and follow up1. Santucci et al. 54/MSkin, CNSChemotherapy, died 17 months after diagnosis2.
Wu et al. 41/MSkinChemotherapy, alive and event free at 12 months3. Wu et al. 47/FCNS, bone marrow, kidneys, ovaries, cervixTreatment
unclear, died half a month after diagnosis4. Kuo et al.71/FSkinAlive 5 months after diagnosis without treatment5. Song et al.
40/FSkinChemotherapy, alive and event free at 7 months6. Nakamichi et al.23/FSkinChemotherapy and stem cell transplantation, died of acute
GVHD 9 months after diagnosis7. Cerroni et al. 63/MSkinChemotherapy, died 6 months after diagnosis8. Liao et al. 42/FSkinChemotherapy and
radiotherapy, alive with disease 14 months after diagnosis9. Gebauer et al.72/MSkin, bone marrow, CNSChemotherapy, died 7 months after
diagnosis10. Liu et al. 37/FSkin, CNSChemotherapy, died 13 months after diagnosis11.our case29/MSkin, liverChemotherapy, died 3 months after
diagnosisCase number/caseImmunophenotypesPCR-TCRCD3CD4CD5CD8CD20CD30CD56Cytotoxic markersEBER1. Santucci et al. +-NA--++++ND2. Wu et al.
+-----+++P3. Wu et al. +----NA++-P4. Kuo et al. +-----+++P5. Song et al. +-NA--NA+++P6. Nakamichi et al.+NANANA-NA+++ND7. Cerroni et al.
+-NA--NA+++P8. Liao et al.+-----+++ND9. Gebauer et al.+-NA---+++P10. Liu et al. +-----+++ND11.our case+----++++P M, male; F, female GVHD,
graft-versus-host disease NA, not availablecytotoxic markers, TIA-1 and/or granzyme B and/or perforin PCR-TCR, polymerase chain reaction
analysis of the T-cell receptor g gene P, polyclonal smear Characters of reported cases of IVNKL M, male; F, female GVHD, graft-versus-host
disease NA, not available cytotoxic markers, TIA-1 and/or granzyme B and/or perforin PCR-TCR, polymerase chain reaction analysis of the
T-cell receptor g gene P, polyclonal smear Here, we report on a 29-year-old male patient with IVNKL of the skin with secondary involvement
of the liver and provide a brief literature review, aiming to (i) emphasize the diagnostic histopathologic features of this disease, (ii)
avoid the trap of misdiagnosis of malignant or benign diseases, and (iii) achieve a better understanding of the character and treatment of
this disease. A 29-year-old man presented with erythematous plaques on the thighs and trunk, low fever, intermittent headaches, weight loss
and leukopenia. His family history was significant, as his only sister had acute myeloid leukemia (M3) several years previously and was
cured by chemotherapy. Physical examination revealed painful, subtle, ill-defined, irregular, blanching erythematous patches on the lower
and upper extremities and trunk (Fig. 1a and b) and slight hepatosplenomegaly.Fig. 1 a and b Red-violaceous ill-defined and irregular
plaques on the lower extremities and trunk a and b Red-violaceous ill-defined and irregular plaques on the lower extremities and trunk A
biopsy of the erythematous plaques on the right thigh was performed. The specimen consisted of skin and subcutaneous tissue and measured
1.2 × 0.9 × 0.5 cm. The sample was fixed in 10 % buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. Four-micron sections were cut and stained with
hematoxylin and eosin. The cutaneous lesions contained clusters of atypical lymphoid intravascular cells that were occluding and expanding
the lumina of the dilated vessels throughout the subcutaneous tissue (Fig. 2a and b). Reactive lymphocytes were observed and were aggregated
around the vessels. The tumor cells were discohensive, large, and pleomorphic and had irregular enlarged nuclei with scanty cytoplasms.
Mitotic figures and tumor cell necrosis were obvious.Fig. 2 a and b Intravascular large pleomorphic tumor cells with irregular nuclei and
scanty cytoplasm (hematoxylin and eosin stain ×10 and ×100) a and b Intravascular large pleomorphic tumor cells with irregular nuclei and
scanty cytoplasm (hematoxylin and eosin stain ×10 and ×100) Based on immunohistochemical staining, the phenotype of the tumor cells was
CD3+, CD43+, CD56+, TIA-1+, CD30+, CD4-, CD5-, CD7-, CD8-, CD20- and CD79a-. Approximately 90 % of the tumor cell nuclei were Ki-67
positive. The vascular endothelial cells were positive for CD31 and CD34, which demonstrated the intravascular nature of the neoplastic
cells (Fig. 3a, b, c and d). In situ hybridization for EBER revealed positive signals in virtually all tumor cell nuclei (Fig. 4). DNA
extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples was analyzed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The molecular study demonstrated a
germline configuration of TCR genes without rearrangements (Fig. 5).Fig. 3 a, b and c, Immunohistochemical staining for CD3, CD56 and TIA-1,
respectively, showing positive staining in the tumor cells (×100). d Blood vessel endothelial cells surrounding the tumor cells identified
by positive staining of CD34 (×40)Fig. 4In situ hybridization for EBER showing strong signals in the tumor cells (×100)Fig. 5Molecular
studies revealed a germline configuration for the T-cell receptor that is consistent with the possibility of an NK-cell origin. (L = Control
Size Ladder for samples of unknown quantity and quality, M = DNA ladder marker, TB (A,B,C), TD and TG (A,B) represent 6 tubes of master
mixes for targeting different regions of TCR genes) a, b and c, Immunohistochemical staining for CD3, CD56 and TIA-1, respectively, showing
positive staining in the tumor cells (×100). d Blood vessel endothelial cells surrounding the tumor cells identified by positive staining of
CD34 (×40) In situ hybridization for EBER showing strong signals in the tumor cells (×100) Molecular studies revealed a germline
configuration for the T-cell receptor that is consistent with the possibility of an NK-cell origin. (L = Control Size Ladder for samples of
unknown quantity and quality, M = DNA ladder marker, TB (A,B,C), TD and TG (A,B) represent 6 tubes of master mixes for targeting different
regions of TCR genes) Further hematologic analysis demonstrated a normal peripheral blood count (White blood cell count, 5.66x109/L, Red
blood cell count, 4.20×1012/L, Platelet count, 205×109/L) and a deterioration of liver function. A bone marrow biopsy and cytological
examination of cerebrospinal fluid revealed no evidence of tumor involvement. A diagnosis of IVL of the natural killer cell type was
established 6 months after the appearance of initial skin lesions. The patient received 2 cycles of combination chemotherapy
(cyclophosphamide, Vincristine, Doxorubicin, Dexamethasone; Hyper CVAD). However, clinical and computed tomography scans revealed multiple
low-density hepatic masses, indicating liver involvement (Fig. 6a and b). The status of the patient deteriorated rapidly and he had a fever
of 38.5°-39 °C. He died of multi-organ failure 3 months after diagnosis.Fig. 6Pre-contrast CT images showing multiple low-density hepatic
masses with hepatosplenomegaly and bilateral pleural effusion (a). Post-contrast CT images showing contrast enhancement in the portal venous
phase (b) Pre-contrast CT images showing multiple low-density hepatic masses with hepatosplenomegaly and bilateral pleural effusion (a).
Post-contrast CT images showing contrast enhancement in the portal venous phase (b) Among the 11 reported cases of IVNKL, including the
cases originally published in English and ours, six (54.5 %) were reported from Asia (2 from China, 2 from Taiwan, 1 from Japan and 1 from
Korea), which is consistent with the distribution characteristics of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type, which has a higher incidence
in East Asia and Latin America, with EBV infection occurring in some cases . Of the 11 patients, six were female and five were male. The
ages ranged from 23 to 72 years (median, 47 years). Dermatological manifestations were observed in 10 (91 %) cases. Multisystem involvement
occurred in 5 patients, and 4 of 5 were CNS involvement. After a follow-up that ranged from half a month to 17 months, 7 of 11 patients
died, and only 4 of 11 experienced temporary remission. In the 11 cases in which the morphology of the IVNKL was described, the tumor cells
were all confined within the vessels and had large cell sizes with pale or eosinophilic cytoplasms and irregular hyperchromatic nuclei.
Mitotic figures and necrosis were routinely observed. In all 11 cases, typical NK cell immunophenotypes were observed: CD3+; CD56+; TIA-1+;
granzyme B+; perforin+; CD4-; CD5-; CD8- and CD20-. EBER detection was performed in 11 cases and was positive in 10 of the 11 cases,
indicating Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. T-cell gene rearrangement analysis was performed in 7 of the 11 cases and was negative,
confirming an NK-cell origin. For diagnosis, large neoplastic lymphoid cells of IVNKL are restricted to the lumen of small vessels and
exhibit the phenotype of a true NK cell, characterized by tumor cells with a CD2+, cytoplasmic CD3ε + and CD56+ immunophenotype and germline
configuration of the TCR gene . Tumor cells also expressed cytotoxic granules, including TIA-1, granzyme B and perforin, and were often EBV
positive. Thus, the similar morphology and immunophenotype of other cases, positivity of EBER and NK-cell origin help to confirm the
diagnosis of our case as IVNKL. As so far, IVNKL is not classified within the World Health Organization classification subtypes . However,
in view of the unique characteristics of this disease, the diagnosis should be independent to collect more data to help with further study
of this disease. Because of the similar morphology and immunophenotypes, TCR rearrangement results, and EBV infection status of
intravascular NK-cell lymphoma, extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma, nasal type (ENKTCL) and aggressive NK-cell leukemia [16, 17], we suggest that
IVNKL should be distinguished from the other two subtypes. Patients with IVNKL had no nasal symptoms and obvious abnormalities in the
peripheral blood but had the hallmark of intravascular dissemination of tumor cells. In ENKTCL and aggressive NK-cell leukemia, tumor cells
were distributed in tissues rather than deposited in blood vessels. The other differential diagnoses of IVNKL include IVL of other lineages
(in which the tumor cells have typical immunophenotypes, such as being positive for B or T-cell markers), metastatic neoplasms (for example
melanoma or breast cancer, which are validated by medical history and immunochemical staining), and numerous inflammatory processes,
including drug reactions and insect bites, showing atypical intravascular CD30+ T-cell proliferation mimicking intravascular lymphoma (which
includes variable numbers of intravascular CD30-positive cells, but the extent of the intravascular proliferation is much less florid, and
the cells show a mixture of CD4 and CD8 positivity without a monoclonal T-cell population by molecular testing) . Regarding etiological
hypotheses, we believe that not only EBV infection but also genetic inheritance is somehow involved in the pathogenesis of this rare
lymphoma because of this patient’s remarkable family history. IVNKL treatments are ineffective and include chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and
even stem cell transplantation, which cannot change the poor prognosis. Because patients with clinical presentation confined to skin have a
better prognosis, the poor outcome may be due to multisystem or vital organ involvement. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient’s parents prior to publication of this case report and the accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Intravascular NK-cell lymphoma Epstein-Barr virus-encoded small RNA T-cell receptor Central
nervous system Intravascular lymphoma Deoxyribonucleic acid Polymerase chain reaction Epstein-Barr virus Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions YLB and ZH were the main authors of the paper, and they equally worked
the case and drafted the manuscript. ZYL and YXM participated in the design of the study. CWJ and XHS were responsible for the clinical
data. LS participated in the radiological analysis. YFL conducted the immunohistochemical study. QL conducted the molecular study. THL was
the primary pathologist involved in the case, made the final diagnosis, and was the main editor of the body of the text. All of the authors
read and approved the final manuscript. We thank James B. who provided medical writing services on behalf of American Journal Experts, LLC.
