Perioperative management of a patient with Dandy–Walker malformation (DWM) with tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), patent ductus arteriosus, and
pulmonary artery stenosis is a great challenge to the anesthesiologist. Anesthetic management in such patients can trigger tet spells that
might rapidly increase intracranial pressure (ICP), conning and even death. The increase in ICP can precipitate tet spells and further brain
hypoxia. To avoid an increase in ICP during TOF corrective surgery ventriculo-peritoneal (VP) shunt should be performed before cardiac
surgery. We present the first case report of a 11-month-old male baby afflicted with DWM and TOF who underwent successful TOF total
corrective surgery and fresh autologous pericardial pulmonary valve conduit implantation under cardiopulmonary bypass after 1 week of VP
shunt insertion. The etiopathology of Dandy–Walker malformation (DWM) consists of the developmental failure of the roof of the fourth
ventricle during embryogenesis that results in the cystic expansion of the fourth ventricle in the posterior fossa. It presents early in
life, 80–90% within 1st year with features of raised intracranial pressure (ICP). It is well-established that Dandy-Walker syndrome (DWS) is
frequently associated with other systemic anomalies including cardiovascular malformation. Rarely, it has been associated with tetralogy of
Fallot (TOF). Anesthetic management in such a case is highly challenging in order to prevent two major life-threatening events, that is,
raised ICP and tet spells caused by DWM and TOF respectively, as both of them can precipitate each other. To the best of our knowledge, it
is the first case report on perioperative anesthetic management for total correction using cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) in a patient with
this extremely rare combination of DWM with TOF, pulmonary artery (PA) atresia, and patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). The management was based
on the pathophysiology of the DWM with TOF and clinical experience. An 11-month-old, male baby, weighing 5.5 kg, presented with cyanosis,
failure to thrive and episodes of unconsciousness for the past 3 months. Recently, the mother also noticed increased respiratory rate and
sweating during breastfeeding. On evaluation, child was tachypneic and had a heart murmur. Chest X-ray showed a boot-shaped heart with
pulmonary oligemia. Two-dimensional echocardiography revealed a sub-aortic ventricular septal defect (VSD) with 50% aortic override, severe
right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) obstruction with a gradient (Gr) of 62 mmHg, a large PDA and a stenosed left PA. Computed tomography-
pulmonary angiography confirmed the diagnosis of TOF with pulmonary atresia and PDA [Figure 1]. In view of episodes of unconsciousness and
delayed milestones, magnetic resonance imaging brain was performed which revealed enlarged posterior fossa with cystic dilatation of fourth
ventricle, hydrocephalus and elevated tentorium with cerebellar and vermian hypoplasia consistent with a diagnosis of DWM [Figure 2]. Other
hematological and biochemical values were within normal limits. In view of increased neurological complications in such a patient following
CPB, it was decided to perform ventriculo-peritoneal (VP) shunt before TOF corrective surgery. VP shunt surgery was performed under balanced
general anesthesia technique, including thiopentone, fentanyl, midazolam, vecuronium bromide, and isoflurane. However, during intraoperative
period patient developed two episodes of tet spells (SpO2 < 40%), which were managed with isolyte – P infusion, metoprolol (0.25 mg),
noradrenaline (5 μg), FiO2-1 and folding of legs on chest. Patient was extubated on table in the operating room, and the postoperative
course was uneventful. Computed tomography angiography shows tetralogy of Fallot with sub aortic ventricular septal defect. IVS:
Interventricular septum, RV: Right ventricle, LV: Left ventricle Magnetic resonance imaging brain shows enlarged posterior fossa with cystic
dilatation of fourth ventricle, elevated tentorium with cerebellar hypoplasia. This image is suggestive of a possibility of aqueductal
stenosis After 1-week, an intra-cardiac repair via a midline sternotomy, consisting of PDA ligation, VSD closure and RVOT to main PA valved-
conduit placement was planned. As an intravenous line was already in-situ, intravenous induction was employed using fentanyl (45 μg),
thiopentone (5 mg), and vecuronium (1 mg). Trachea was intubated with cuffed endotracheal tube 3.5 mm ID. A 22G laedercath was inserted in
left femoral artery. In view of the VP shunt crossing the right side of the neck, left internal jugular vein was cannulated using 5.5 Fr
triple lumen catheter. Anesthesia was maintained with intermittent fentanyl, midazolam, sevoflurane (0.5–2%), vecuronium, and oxygen in air
(FiO2 0.5–1). Standard American Society of Anesthesiologists monitoring consisting of electrocardiogram, SPO2, invasive arterial pressure,
central venous pressure (CVP), serial arterial blood gas analyses, temperature, serum electrolytes, and urine output was performed. During
sternal retraction, the surgeon was advised to be gentle as too much pressure could have compressed the VP shunt passing subcutaneously,
resulting in increased ICP and thus compromising cerebral blood flow. After full heparinization (ACT >480 s), the intracardiac repair was
performed under standard CPB technique. Perfusion pressure of 35–50 mmHg and hematocrit of about 30% were maintained during CPB, and
modified ultrafiltration was also utilized. Methylprednisolone (180 mg) and epsilon aminocaproic acid (550 mg) were added to the pump prime.
The patient was weaned off CPB using milrinone (0.5 μg/kg/min), dobutamine (5 μg/kg/min), nitroglycerin (1 μg/kg/min), and adrenaline (0.025
μg/kg/min) infusions. Total CPB time and aortic cross-clamp time were 225 and 153 min, respectively, and total urine output was 400 ml. Due
to edema of cardiac structures and use of valved-conduit across RVOT, sternal closure was not possible and the overlying skin was closed,
and the patient was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) for elective ventilation. Patient maintained stable hemodynamics
postoperatively and was ventilated for 48 h, after which sternal closure could be performed successfully. The patient was weaned and
extubated after another 48 h. Dandy–Walker syndrome is characterized by various neuropathological features like, cystic dilatation of fourth
ventricle, hypoplasia of cerebellar vermis, hydrocephalus, elevation of tentorium and or transverse sinus, enlargement of posterior fossa,
lack of patency of foramen of luschka and/or magendie. The incidence of DWM is 1:25,000–30,000 of live births and signs and symptoms of
hydrocephalus and raised ICP appear within the 1st year of life in 2–4% of patients. Cardiac anomalies are said to be present in 18% of
cases, and it is rarely associated with TOF. TOF is a cyanotic congenital heart defect comprising of RVOT obstruction, large malaligned
subaortic VSD, overriding of aorta and right ventricular hypertrophy and with right to left shunt and the patients are prone to tet spells.
About 48% patients of DWS can also be associated with other congenital anomalies such as macrocephaly, micrognathia, cleft lip and palate,
lower cranial nerve palsies which may cause airway difficulties, aspiration pneumonia and prolonged postoperative ventilation. In addition,
associated cerebral anomalies like agenesis of corpus callosum, pontine lesions, and interference with medullary control of respiration can
precipitate frequent episodes of apnea, apneustic breathing, and respiratory failure. These respiratory abnormalities along with the
decreased intravascular volume status due to persistent nausea and vomiting with raised ICP may precipitate tet spells. Tet spells exhibit
increased oxygen demand, progressive hypoxia, metabolic acidosis, and hypercarbia. The occurrence of tet spells in a patient associated with
DWS can cause a rise in ICP, conning, and death. Thus, the raised ICP can precipitate tet spells and tet spells can lead to increased ICP,
and this poses anesthetic challenges. Usually, a moderate pressure (12–15 cm H2O) VP shunt is inserted to maintain normal ICP in DWM with
hydrocephalus. It helps maintaining a normal ICP by draining cerebrospinal fluid during adverse circumstances (if any) under anesthesia or
CPB that may lead to transient increases in ICP. The management of tet spells necessitates the general measures to decrease infundibular
spasm, right to left shunt and improve oxygenation and cardiac output by administration of beta blockers (metoprolol 0.1 mg/kg), fluid
boluses (10–20 ml/kg), and folding of limbs over chest, phenylephrine (5–20 μg/kg) and noradrenaline infusion (0.1 μg/kg/min) and deepening
of level of anesthesia (fentanyl 5–10 μg/kg). In refractory cases, elective ventilation and palliative shunts like modified Blalock-Taussig
shunt to increase pulmonary blood flow or even total correction of TOF are mandatory. Care of VP shunt to prevent damage, obstruction, and
infection should also be considered. Opioids per se have minimal effects on cerebral blood flow, and by obtunding sympathetic stimulation of
laryngoscopy prevent an increase in ICP. The anesthetic induction should be performed without increasing cerebral blood flow and cerebral
metabolic rate and maintaining normocapnea, normotension, euglycemia may help reducing the ICP. Thiopentone or propofol reduces ICP but also
decreases the systemic vascular resistance (SVR) so should be used in titrated doses. Among the inhalational agents, halothane particularly
and sevoflurane maintain the hemodynamics and arterial oxygen saturation. These agents decrease myocardial contractility, infundibular
spasm, and cause less reduction in SVR, so decrease R-L shunt. However, halothane as compared to sevoflurane causes more increase in
cerebral blood flow and raised ICP, so sevoflurane was used in the present patient. In order to break the vicious cycle of tet spell
precipitating raised ICP and vice versa, VP shunt was performed before cardiac surgery and to avoid damage to the shunt, right internal
jugular vein cannulation was avoided. Thus, the main goal of anesthetic management was to prevent a tet spell. This was especially so, as
the patient had a history of tet spells and even during the surgery for VP shunt, he had tet spells. We employed high dose opioids and high
FiO2 along with maintenance of adequate preload, low heart rate in sinus rhythm, high SVR, and hematocrit of >30%. Postoperative course may
be complicated by RV dysfunction, residual VSD (PA saturation >80%), residual RVOT obstruction (Gr >30 mmHg), high RV to systemic pressure
ratio (>0.6), arrhythmias like complete heart block or junctional ectopic tachycardia and present with hypotension and raised CVP. In the
present patient, epinephrine, milrinone, and dobutamine were used for weaning. Patient maintained stable hemodynamics with sinus rhythm. In
case of difficulty, reinstitution of CPB to correct the residual defect, optimization of right ventricular filling, inotropic support
(dobutamine, milrinone), maintenance of atrioventricular synchrony by pacing, and special ventilator maneuvers to reduce pulmonary vascular
resistance and to reduce the RV after load may be necessary. As return of spontaneous respiration may be delayed in DWS due to abnormalities
of medullary control of respiration prolonged postoperative ventilator support may be required. Furthermore, high chances of recurrent apnea
warrants close observation in ICU after extubation. In patients with DWM with hydrocephalus and TOF, the performance of VP shunt surgery
before the elective total correction can be a useful procedure to prevent a rise in ICP, conning, and death. Total correction can be
performed safely under moderate to high dose narcotic-based anesthesia technique. However, patients with TOF and DWM can develop tet spells
while undergoing VP shunt or noncardiac surgery or elective correction of TOF with DWM. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None
declared.
