Cervical adenitis >1.5cm in diameter is the less frequently observed criteria in patients with Kawasaki disease and it is usually found in
association with other symptoms during the acute phase. Moreover, the finding of fever and lymphadenitis with intense local signs of
inflammation and phlegmon is rarely seen as the initial manifestation of Kawasaki disease. We report the case of a 7-year-old boy who had
cervical lymphadenitis with adjacent cellulitis and phlegmon mimicking bacterial adenitis as the first presentation of Kawasaki disease. The
patient had fever, cervical lymphadenitis with adjacent cellulitis, and severe headache. Cefadroxil was prescribed based on the clinical
diagnosis of bacterial adenitis. Because he remained febrile and phlogistic signs worsened, after 1 day of hospitalization, antibiotics were
administrated intravenously (ceftriaxone and oxacillin). The computed tomography of the neck showed primary infectious/inflammatory process.
On the fourth day, the patient had dry and scaly lips, and treatment with oxacillin was replaced by clindamycin because the patient was
still febrile. On the ninth day, he presented non-exudative bilateral conjunctival injection. On the tenth day of febrile disease, a rash
appeared on his trunk, hands and feet. Patient’s symptoms resolved after intravenous administration of immunoglobulin (2g/kg/dose), and he
was discharged 2 days later. On the 14th day, the patient had lamellar desquamation of fingers. Kawasaki disease should be considered as a
differential diagnosis in children with febrile cervical lymphadenitis unresponsive to empiric antibiotics even if they have adjacent
cellulitis and phlegmon. Kawasaki disease (KD) is a multisystemic severe vasculitis of medium- and small-sized vessels. This acute febrile
illness might have several inflammatory manifestations, such as cervical adenitis.( 1 ) Of note, unilateral cervical adenitis measuring
>1.5cm in diameter is the less frequently observed criteria in KD patients and it is usually presented in association with other symptoms at
disease onset.( 2 ) The finding of fever and lymphadenitis with intense local signs of inflammation and phlegmon formation is rarely
described as the initial manifestation of KD,( 3 ) and it was previously misdiagnosed as bacterial adenitis (BA).( 4 ) We report a case of a
7-year-old boy who had cervical lymphadenitis with adjacent cellulitis and phlegmon mimicking BA as the first presentation of KD. A
previously healthy 7-year-old Caucasian boy was admitted to our service with fever (39 to 40°C), cervical lymphadenitis with adjacent
cellulitis (Figure 1) and severe headache. Cefadroxil was prescribed because of the clinical diagnosis of BA. The next day, he was admitted
to Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein to receive intravenous antibiotics (oxacillin and ceftriaxone) in consequence of the persistent fever
with worsening of the surrounding pain and inflammation. Laboratory findings showed hemoglobin (Hb) 10.2g/dL, white blood cell count (WBC)
11,640/mm3 (77% neutrophils, 12% lymphocytes, 9% monocytes, 1% eosinophils, and 1% basophils), platelets 301,000/mm3, C-reactive protein
(CRP) 217.4mg/dL (normal 0-0.3), aspartate aminotransferase 28U/L (normal 15-40U/L), alanine aminotransferase 20U/L (normal 10-35U/L),
amylase 58U/L (normal 0-110U/L) and antistreptolysin O 143IU/mL (normal 0-200IU/mL). Serological tests for cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis,
mononucleosis and bartonellosis were negative. Cervical computed tomography (CT) revealed right cervical lymph nodes increased in number and
size, measuring up to 2.1cm, without signs of liquefaction, besides densification and thickening of the regional soft tissues on the face
and neck, strongly suggestive of extensive cellulitis and phlegmon. Cervical collections were not observed. On the fourth day, he had dry
and scaly lips (Figure 2), and oxacillin was replaced by clindamycin since the patient was still febrile with persistent inflammatory signs.
On the ninth day, he presented non-exudative bilateral conjunctival injection (Figure 3). The ophthalmic examination revealed bilateral
anterior uveitis and echocardiography was normal. After 10 days of febrile disease, a discrete maculopapular rash appeared on patient’s
trunk, hands and feet, which fulfilled criteria for KD.( 1 , 5 ) We administrated intravenous immunoglobulin (2mg/kg) and an improvement of
the inflammatory manifestations was seen. Two days later, he was discharged, and we prescribed oral cefuroxime and aspirin (3.7mg/kg/day),
corticosteroid and mydriatic eye drops. On the 14th day, he had lamellar desquamation of the fingers, which lasted for 10 days (Figure 4).
At that moment, laboratory tests revealed: Hb 11.5g/dL, WBC 5,400cells/mm3 (51% neutrophils, 34% lymphocytes, 11% monocytes, 3% eosinophils,
and 1% basophils), platelets 280.000/mm3 and CRP 1.7mg/dL. Echocardiogram remained normal between 10 and 45 days of follow-up after symptoms
resolution. Figure 1Cervical lymphadenitis with adjacent cellulitis initially seen in the described Kawasaki disease patient Figure 2Dry and
injected lips Figure 3Non-exudative bilateral conjunctival injection Figure 4Lamellar desquamation of the fingers To our knowledge, only one
case of cervical adenitis with phlegmon formation, as the first manifestation of KD, has been described.( 3 ) We are reporting the second
case in the medical literature. KD is slightly more common in boys than in girls (male-to-female ratio of 1.5-1.8:1) and the majority of the
affected patients are aged 6 months to 5 years old.( 1 ) Only about 15% of the patients are older than 5 years,( 6 ) such as the present
case. Moreover, incomplete KD has been more frequently reported in patients older than 5 years or younger than 12 months old. The subsequent
delay to begin proper treatment in these cases increases the risk of coronary involvement, since its efficacy is higher when used within the
first 10 days of illness.( 7 ) Regarding ethnicity, although KD is remarkably more frequent in Asian descent, which suggest the existence of
a genetic predisposition, this disease is found worldwide in a small but rising incidence.( 7 ) The diagnosis of KD is based on clinical
features, and there is no clinical or laboratory pathognomonic findings.( 1 ) Cervical lymphadenopathy is considered the less common
criteria found in patients with KD, which is described in about 50% of cases, while others signs such as non exudative conjunctival
injection, oropharynx mucosa abnormalities, polymorphous rash and extremities changes occur in approximately 90% of classic KD.( 4 )
Furthermore, cervical adenitis is normally seen associated with other acute phase symptoms. In a recent review of the literature, isolated
cervical adenitis and fever were reported in 57 patients as the first finding of KD.( 3 ) Except for transient nonspecific lip dryness, our
patient had persistent febrile adenitis as the only involvement of KD up to the ninth day of disease. In addition, the presence of adjacent
cellulitis in the neck reinforced the importance of disregard the possibility of infectious causes, such as bacterial and viral illnesses,
toxoplasmosis and cat scratch disease. The presence of phlegmon is quite rare in KD and was found only in one patient among the cases
described by Kanegaye et al.( 3 ) An interesting point was the severe headache presented by our patient. Despite headache be a common
finding during febrile episodes in children, especially with higher temperatures, in our case this symptom might have been due to aseptic
meningitis, what is seen in approximately one-third of KD patients. In children, it usually manifests as irritability.( 8 ) A question that
could be raised is whether the lymphadenitis seen at presentation of this case was in fact a BA acting as a trigger of KD. Reports in the
literature describe that up to 33% of KD patients have at least one concurrent infection at disease onset, which could be considered as an
environmental trigger of the illness.( 7 , 9 ) The similarities in clinical and biochemical presentation of both KD, staphylococcal and
streptococcal toxin mediated illnesses suggest the possibility of bacterial involvement in the disease etiology in genetic susceptible
subjects.( 9 ) Radiographic studies might be of utmost importance to differentiate KD versus BA. A previous study performed cervical CT in
11 of 57 KD patients with lymphadenopathy as first presentation versus 39 of 78 patients with BA. Solid nodes were found in 91% of the
former group, whereas this finding was showed in only 28% of the second group (p=0.003).( 3 ) In contrast, when the authors investigated the
existence of phlegmon, this inflammation was present in 14 BA subjects, but in only one KD patient.( 3 ) In our case, the same rare
characteristic was confirmed in the cervical CT performed. The presence of cervical adenitis without abscess formation unresponsive to a
broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy alerts the need of seeking differential diagnoses. In our patient the diagnosis of KD was confirmed by
further fulfillment of KD’s criteria. In fact, the majority of previous studies with KD patients with lymphadenitis reported as their
initial presentation the administration of antibacterial agents as the first line treatment, but with poor response.( 3 , 4 ) In our case
the cellulitis was completely resolved just after the infusion of intravenous immunoglobulin, which is considered the recommended treatment
for primary KD.( 10 , 11 ) Kawasaki disease should be considered as the differential diagnosis for febrile cervical lymphadenitis in
children who are unresponsive to initial empiric antibiotics, even if they have adjacent cellulitis and phlegmon. Adenite cervical >1,5cm é
o critério menos frequentemente observado em pacientes com doença de Kawasaki e manifesta-se habitualmente em associação com os demais
sintomas da fase aguda. Entretanto, linfadenite febril isolada com intensos sinais flogísticos e flegmão é raramente observada como primeira
manifestação da doença de Kawasaki. Assim, relatou-se aqui um caso de uma criança que apresentou linfadenite cervical com celulite adjacente
e flegmão mimetizando adenite bacteriana como primeira manifestação da doença de Kawasaki. Paciente previamente hígido, 7 anos, masculino,
iniciou quadro de febre, adenite cervical com celulite adjacente e cefaleia intensa, sendo prescrita cefadroxila devido ao diagnóstico
clínico de linfadenite bacteriana. Por se manter febril e com piora dos sinais flogísticos, após 1 dia foi internado para receber
antibioticoterapia endovenosa (oxacilina e ceftriaxona). Tomografia computadorizada da região cervical mostrou processo
infeccioso/inflamatório primário. No quarto dia, apresentou lábios ressecados e descamativos, sendo a oxacilina substituída por clindamicina
devido à persistência da febre e sinais flogísticos. No nono dia, iniciou hiperemia ocular não exsudativa. No décimo dia de febre,
apresentou exantema em tronco, membros, mãos e pés. Recebeu gamaglobulina endovenosa (2g/kg/dose), evoluiu com resolução dos sintomas e,
após 2 dias, recebeu alta hospitalar. No 14o dia, apresentou descamação lamelar dos dedos das mãos. Portanto, doença de Kawasaki deve ser
considerada no diagnóstico diferencial das linfadenites cervicais febris na infância não responsivas à antibioticoterapia empírica, mesmo
que esteja presentes celulite adjacente e flegmão. A doença de Kawasaki (DK) é uma vasculite grave multissistêmica dos vasos médios e
pequenos. Essa doença aguda febril pode ter diversas manifestações inflamatórias, como adenite cervical.(1) É importante mencionar que
adenite cervical unilateral >1,5cm é frequentemente menos observada em pacientes com DK e geralmente apresenta-se em associação com outros
sintomas no início da doença.(2) O achado de febre e linfadenite com sinais de inflamação intensa no local e formação de flegmão é raramente
descrito como sinal inicial da manifestação da DK,(3) e foi previamente diagnosticado incorretamente como adenite bacteriana (AB).(4)
Relatamos caso de garoto de 7 anos de idade que apresentou linfadenite cervical com celulite adjacente e flegmão mimetizando AB como
primeira apresentação da DK. Paciente caucasiano, anteriormente saudável, 7 anos de idade, foi admitido em nosso serviço com febre (39 a
40°C), linfadenite cervical com celulite adjacente (Figura 1) e cefaleia grave. Decidiu-se prescrever cefadroxila devido ao diagnóstico de
AB. No dia seguinte, o paciente foi internado no Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein para administração de antibióticos intravenosos
(oxacilina e ceftriaxona), devido à febre persistente, com piora da dor nas áreas subjacentes e inflamação. Os exames laboratoriais
mostraram hemoglobina (Hb) 10,2g/dL, contagem de leucócitos (CL) 11.640/mm3 (77% de neutrófilos, 12% de linfócitos, 9% de monócitos, 1% de
eosinófilos e 1% de basófilos), plaquetas 301.000/mm3, proteína C-reativa (PCR) 217,4mg/dL (normal 0-0,3mg/dL), aspartato aminotransferase
28U/L (normal 15-40U/L), alanina aminotransferase 20U/L (normal 10-35U/L), amilase 58U/L (norma l0-110U/L) e antiestreptolisina O 143IU/mL
(normal 0-200IU/mL). Os testes serológicos foram negativos para citomegalovírus, toxoplasmose, mononucleose e bartonelose. A tomografia
computadorizada (TC) da coluna cervical relevou linfonodos cervicais direitos aumentados e em maior número, medindo até 2,1cm, sem sinais de
liquefação, além de densificação e engrossamento dos tecidos moles regionais na face e pescoço, altamente sugestiva de celulite extensiva e
flegmão. Não foram observadas coleções cervicais. No quarto dia, o paciente apresentou lábios ressecados e descamados (Figura 2). A
administração de oxacilina foi substituída por clindamicina, já que o paciente permanecia febril com sinais inflamatórios persistentes. No
nono dia, o paciente apresentava congestão ocular bilateral não exsudativa (Figura 3). O exame oftalmológico revelou uveíte bilateral
anterior. O exame ecocardiográfico estava normal. Após 10 dias de doença febril, notou-se exantema maculopapular discreto no tronco, mãos e
pés do paciente, portanto preenchendo os critérios para DK.(1,5) A imunoglobulina intravenosa (2mg/kg) foi administrada com melhora das
manifestações inflamatórias. Após 2 dias, o paciente recebeu alta hospitalar com prescrição de cefuroxima e aspirina por via oral
(3,7mg/kg/dia), juntamente de corticoides e colírio midriático. No 14º dia, o paciente apresentava descamação lamelar dos dedos, que durou
10 dias (Figura 4). Novos exames laboratoriais revelaram: Hb 11,5g/dL, CL 5,400celulás/mm3 (51% neutrófilos, 34% leucócitos, 11 monócitos,
3% eosinófilos e 1 basófilos), plaquetas 280.000/mm3 e PCR 1,7mg/dL. O ecocardiograma permaneceu normal entre 10 e 45 dias de acompanhamento
após a resolução dos sintomas. Figura 1Linfadenite cervical com celulite adjacente inicialmente observada no paciente com doença de Kawasaki
Figura 2Lábios ressecados e descamados Figura 3Congestão ocular bilateral não exsudativa Figura 4Descamação lamelar dos dedos das mãos De
nosso conhecimento, apenas um caso de adenite cervical com formação de flegmão como primeira manifestação de DK foi descrito.(3) Portanto,
relatou-se aqui o segundo caso na literatura médica. A DK tem prevalência um pouco maior em garotos do que em garotas (razão
masculino/feminino de 1,5-1,8:1); além disso, a maioria dos pacientes acometidos tem idade entre 6 meses e 5 anos.(1) Cerca de 15% dos
pacientes tem mais do que 5 anos,(6) assim como o paciente deste relato. A DK incompleta tem sido mais frequentemente relatada em pacientes
com mais de 5 anos ou menores que 1 ano. Uma demora subsequente para iniciar o tratamento adequado nesses casos aumenta o risco de
envolvimento coronário, já que sua eficácia é alta quando utilizada no 10 primeiros dias da doença.(7) Em relação à etnia, apesar de a DK
ser muito mais frequente em descentes asiáticos, sugerindo a existência de predisposição genética, ela é encontrada em todo o mundo em
pequena, porém crescente, incidência.(7) O diagnóstico da DK é realizado baseado nas características clínicas e não em achados clínicos e
laboratoriais patognomônicos.(1) A linfadenopatia cervical é considerado um critério menos comum em pacientes com DK, sendo descrito em
cerca de 50% dos casos, enquanto outros sinais, como congestão ocular bilateral não exsudativa, anormalidades na mucosa orofaríngea, rash
polimorfo e alterações nas extremidades ocorrem em aproximadamente 90% dos casos de DK clássica.(4) Além disso, a adenite cervical é
normalmente observada juntamente de outros sintomas das fases agudas. Em revisão recente da literatura, a adenite cervical isolada e a febre
foram relatadas em 57 pacientes como o primeiro achado de DK.(3) Com exceção do ressecamento labial não específico e transiente, nosso
paciente persistiu com febre até o nono dia da doença com adenite febril e o único envolvimento foi de DK. Além disso, a presença de
celulite adjacente à região cervical reitera a importância de desconsiderar a possibilidade de causas infeciosas, como afecções bacterianas
ou virais – toxoplasmoses e doença de arranhadura de gato. A presença de flegmão é bem rara em DK e foi encontrada somente em um paciente
entre os casos descritos por Kanegaye et al.(3) Um ponto interessante foi a presença de cefaleia grave relatada por nosso paciente, apesar
de a cefaleia se trata de um achado incomum durante os episódios febris em crianças, especialmente com altas temperaturas. Nesse relato,
esse sintoma pode ser devido à meningite asséptica, o que é visto em aproximadamente um terço dos pacientes com DK. Em crianças, geralmente,
a cefaleia se manifesta como irritabilidade.(8) Uma questão que pode ser levantada é se a linfadenite observada na apresentação deste caso
foi, na verdade, uma ação de AB como desencadeadora da DK. Estudos descrevem que até 33% dos pacientes com DK têm pelo menos uma infecção
concorrente no início da doença, que pode ser considerada a desencadeadora da doença.(7,9) As similaridades na apresentação clínica e
bioquímica de ambos, DK e doenças mediadas pela toxina staphylococcus e streptococcal, sugerem possibilidade de envolvimento bacteriano na
etiologia da doença em indivíduos geneticamente suscetíveis.(9) Estudos radiográficos podem ser de grande importância para diferenciar DK
versus AB. Um estudo anterior conduziu tomografia computadorizada cervical em 11 de 57 pacientes com DK e linfadenopatia como primeira
apresentação versus 39 de 78 pacientes com AB. Nódulos sólidos foram encontrados em 91% do grupo principal, enquanto esse achado foi
mostrado em apenas 28% do segundo grupo (p=0,003).(3) Em contrapartida, quando os autores pesquisaram a existência de flegmão, este estava
presente em 14 dos indivíduos com AB, porém em apenas um paciente com DK.(3) De modo similar, neste caso, a mesma característica rara foi
confirmada na tomografia computadorizada cervical conduzida. É importante ressaltar que a presença de adenite cervical sem formação de
abcesso e sem resposta a terapia com antibióticos de amplo espectro alerta a necessidade de diagnóstico diferencial. No paciente descrito, o
diagnóstico de DK foi confirmado devido ao preenchimento dos critérios do quadro de DK. Na verdade, a maioria dos casos de DK relatados
anteriormente, que apresentou linfadenite como sua manifestação inicial, recebeu agentes antibacterianos como tratamento de primeira linha,
porém revelando resposta inadequada.(3,4) Em nosso caso, a celulite foi completamente resolvida logo após a infusão de imunoglobulina
intravenosa, que é considerado o tratamento recomendado para DK primária.(10,11) A doença de Kawasaki deve ser considerada diagnóstico
diferencial para linfadenite cervical febril em crianças que não respondem ao tratamento empírico com antibióticos, mesmo se apresentarem
celulite adjacente e flegmão.
