The Editor, A 55-year-old, American Society of Anesthesiologist I male patient underwent completion colectomy and small bowel resection
anastomosis for cancer colon. He was operated for left hemicolectomy 2 months back. He was in postoperative intensive care unit after
surgery. On postoperative day 2, central venous cannulation was done in right internal jugular vein (IJV) under full aseptic precautions for
total parenteral nutrition. Puncture of the IJV and confirmation of guidewire position in IJV was done under ultrasound guidance. After
catheter placement, chest X-ray was done to confirm the position of the catheter, it was found to be in ipsilateral external jugular vein
(confirmed by radiologist) and made a “figure of 8” on chest X-ray [Figure 1a]. Again under the full aseptic precautions and ultrasound
guidance, it was removed half and again guidewire was placed and repositioned. Chest X-ray postrepositioning showed a normally placed
catheter [Figure 1b]. (a) Chest X-ray showing malpositioning of right internal jugular central venous catheter into right external jugular
vein forming “figure of 8”, (b) Chest X-ray after correcting the position of central venous catheter The most common indications for the
central venous catheter (CVC) placements are central venous pressure monitoring, infusion of vasoactive agents and total parenteral
nutrition. Insertion of the CVC has some complications that are mostly arterial puncture, pneumothorax and hematoma that are presented
mostly during insertion of a catheter. The incidence of malpositioning of CVC placement varies in different routes of CVC placement. Pikwer
et al., reported the total 3.3% (confidence interval 25% to 4.3%) incidence of catheter tip malpositioning on radiography. Right subclavian
vein had the highest risk (9.1%) of malposition as compared with the right IJV (1.4%). Ruesch et al., in a systematic review reported that
the catheter malposition rates were 9.3% and 5.3% for subclavian vein and IJV catheterization, respectively. Bankier et al., in a study of
1,287 examinations and 3,441 follow-up examinations of chest X-ray after CVC placement reported that left-sided CVC placement have
significantly high chances of azygos arch cannulation than right side CVC (P = 0.001). Turi et al., reported the anterior mediastinal
positioning of right subclavian CVC and subsequent perforation of vena cava. Other rare malformations reported are, deviation of right IJV
catheter into the left and projected over the aortic knuckle, malpositioning of left IJV catheter into right internal mammary artery and
also report of left external jugular catheter malpositioning into the left IJV. In our case, the right IJV catheter, turn toward the
ipsilateral subclavian and entered into the ipsilateral external jugular vein. External jugular vein traverses the deep fascia of subclavian
triangle and ends in the subclavian vein, lateral or anterior to scalenus anterior. It has valves at its entrance into the subclavian vein
and about 4 cm above the clavicle. Possible complications of such malpositioning may be the perforation of the vein if the caliber is so
small and also injury due to the presence of valves. If the catheter takes “U” turn and enters into the same vein (right IJV in our case),
and knot formation occurs, it can be a more dangerous complication requiring surgical intervention. Real-time ultrasound is recommended now
a day for puncture of vein and confirmation of correct placement of guidewire into the vein after puncture and it is good for IJV puncture
and confirmation of guidewire in vein but studies failed to prove benefits of ultrasound for subclavian vein cannulation. Chest X-ray is
still mandatory to rule out the catheter malposition.
