A 53-year-old man presented to us with complaints of breathlessness and chest pain on exertion since last 6 months. Risk factors for
coronary artery disease included diabetes mellitus (5 years) and hypertension (12 years). Transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal left
ventricle systolic function without any wall motion abnormalities. Coronary angiogram revealed significant three-vessel coronary artery
disease. Biochemistry and hematology were within normal limits. He was taken up for coronary artery bypass surgery. Intraoperative
monitoring apart from American Society of Anesthesiologists standards included Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) (multiplane 5 MHz
transesophageal probe GE Vingmed Ultrasound, Horten, Norway). After uneventful induction of anesthesia, a TEE was performed. The aortic arch
was visualized after withdrawing the probe from descending aortic short axis view. On following aortic arch branches we found no flow in one
of the arch vessels, while following this vessel up we confirmed that this is a left subclavian artery (LSCA) goes away from the probe while
left common carotid artery remains parallel to the probe [Video 1]. Following this vessel down we found occlusion was extending till origin
of LSCA [Video 2]. A pulse wave Doppler placed in distal LSCA revealed flow was toward the probe, which in the normal vessel should have
been away from the probe [Figures 1 and 2]. Origin of the left common carotid artery and innominate artery were patent. This was immediately
notified to the surgeon, and we used right internal mammary artery for grafting thus avoided coronary-subclavian steal syndrome. Off-pump
coronary artery bypass was completed uneventfully. The postoperative course was free of any events and patient was discharged on 5th
postoperative day in a hemodynamically stable condition. Color Doppler in left subclavian artery (LSCA) showing occluded proximal LSCA Pulse
wave sample volume in distal left subclavian artery (confirming retrograde flow) Visualization of aortic arch vessels with TEE is no longer
considered a blind zone. TEE is a well-accepted modality for visualizing the aortic arch and its branches. There are the various method
described in the literature to identify each aortic arch vessel according to size and flow characteristic. The carotid flow was identified
on pulsed-wave Doppler echocardiography by a low-resistance flow velocity pattern characteristic of cerebral blood flow (higher systolic and
lower diastolic antegrade flow velocity). The left subclavian pulsed-wave Doppler was differentiated from carotid flow by its high-
resistance flow velocity pattern characteristic of peripheral arteries (systolic antegrade flow with short early diastolic reversal and
lower [usually no] antegrade diastolic flow velocity). Usage of the left internal thoracic artery (LITA) for coronary artery bypass graft
(CABG) is the norm in current era due to improved patency rates on a longer run. However, this can be a tricky one, especially in cases of
occluded LSCA. Using LITA in cases of occluded LSCA will lead to coronary-subclavian steal syndrome. In coronary-subclavian steal syndrome
blood flow is diverted from the coronary artery to a subclavian artery due to significant occlusion of LSCA. The prevalence of significant
LSCA stenosis is around 0.2â€“6.8% in a patient referred for CABG. This will lead to coronary subclavian steal syndrome provided LITA is used
for grafting. There is an increase in the incidence of coronary-subclavian steal syndrome recently. LSCA occlusion is easily diagnosed on
computed tomography angiogram or magnetic resonance angiogram. However, these tests are not done routinely preoperatively. One can pick up
occluded LSCA by TEE which is being routinely used in cardiac surgery. Nil. There are no conflict of interest.
