Nasal chondromesenchymal hamartoma (NCMH) is a very rare, benign tumour of the sinonasal tract usually presenting in infants. We present a
systematic review of NCMH cases alongside a case report of an adult with asymptomatic NCMH. A systematic review was conducted in accordance
with PRISMA guidelines. A PubMed, EMBASE and manual search through references of relevant publications was used to identify all published
case-reports of NCMH. Data was collected from each case-report on: patient demographics, laterality, size and location of NCMH,
presentation, co-morbidities, investigations, treatment and follow-up. The systematic review identified 48 patients (including ours): 33
male, 15 female. Mean age was 9.6 years (range: 1 day–69 years) with the majority aged 1 year or younger at presentation (n = 18).
Presentations included: nasal congestion (n = 17), nasal mass (n = 15) and eye signs (n = 12). NCMH also involved the paranasal sinuses
(n = 26), orbit (n = 16) and skull-base (n = 14). All patients underwent operative resection of NCMH. A small 2014 case-series found DICER1
mutations in 6 NCMH patients, establishing a link to the DICER1 tumour spectrum. NCMH is a rare cause of nasal masses in young children and
adults. In light of the newly established link between NCMH and DICER1 mutations surgeons should be vigilant for associated DICER1 tumours,
as NCMH may be the ‘herald tumour’ of this disease spectrum. Nasal chondromesenchymal hamartoma (NCMH) is a very rare, benign tumour of the
sinonasal tract. Forty-seven cases have been reported in the English literature and the vast majority of these presentations are in infants
and young children often below the age of one. NCMHs have a mixed morphological structure comprised of predominantly mesenchymal and
cartilaginous components. NCMH patients present with symptoms that are dependent on the location of the tumour in the nasal cavity or
paranasal sinuses and their compression of local structures. These symptoms range from nasal obstruction to visual impairment and facial and
dental pain. To date there have only been 6 cases of adult presentation of NCMH. Here we present the first systematic review of NCMH cases
published in the literature to assess the patient demographics, presentation, management and prognosis of NCMH alongside a new and unusual
case in an adult. A 49-year-old man was referred to our outpatient clinic presenting with a small mass in his right nasal cavity. The lump,
which the patient first noticed 5 years ago, had been growing insidiously over time and by the time of presentation had become visible at
the right anterior naris. The patient did not complain of any symptoms but sought consultation as his wife was concerned by the cosmetic
appearance of the mass. Examination revealed a large firm mass arising from the right side of the anterior nasal septum with approximately
0.5 cm attachment to the anterior cartilage of the septum. The left and right nasal cavities were otherwise unremarkable. Clinically, the
mass had the appearance of a papilloma confined to the nasal cavity with an attachment to the septum only and therefore further imaging was
not undertaken. The differential diagnoses considered at the time of presentation were: nasal polyp, squamous papilloma or inverted
papilloma. The patient subsequently underwent excisional biopsy of the right nostril mass under general anaesthetic using a circumferential
subperichondrial incision with a small margin. Intraoperatively, the mass had the macroscopic appearance of a 0.5 cm × 2 cm × 2 cm calcified
nodule. Due to a small 0.5 cm base, subsequent healing was achieved by secondary intention aided by the routine application of topical
antibacterial cream. Histopathological analysis showed the nodule to contain cartilage and aneurysmal bone covered in stratified squamous
epithelium with keratinisation (Figs. 1 and 2). Histopathological diagnosis was made using a haematoxylin & eosin stain. These findings were
consistent with a diagnosis of a nasal chondromesenchymal hamartoma.Fig. 1Nodule containing cartilage and aneurysmal bone and covered by
stratified squamous epithelium with keratinisation (magnification ×25, haematoxylin & eosin stain)Fig. 2Areas of osteoid formation
(magnification ×200, haematoxylin & eosin stain) Nodule containing cartilage and aneurysmal bone and covered by stratified squamous
epithelium with keratinisation (magnification ×25, haematoxylin & eosin stain) Areas of osteoid formation (magnification ×200, haematoxylin
& eosin stain) The patient was followed up in clinic and was discharged after 2 years having shown no signs of recurrence. Furthermore, a
telephone interview was conducted 4 years post operation and the patient reported no recurrence of the nasal mass. He confirmed that he had
no post-operative complications and was happy with the outcome of the operation. A systematic review was undertaken in accordance with
PRISMA guidelines . No systematic review protocol was used, however our systematic review methodology is described below and a four-phase
flow diagram is represented in Fig. 3. All published case-reports of NCMH were included in the review. A PubMed search (MEDLINE) (1975 to
May Week 2, 2015) was carried out using the following terms [(chondromesenchymal hamartoma) AND (nasal OR sinus OR maxillary OR ethmoid OR
sphenoid OR frontal OR orbit OR cranial)]. An EMBASE search (1975 to May Week 2, 2015) was carried out using a best sensitivity-combination
strategy. The PubMed search resulted in 32 citations of which 24 were relevant, 6 were not NCMH case-reports, one was a Chinese language
case-report, and one case was a duplicate case-report publication . An EMBASE search and a manual search through references of relevant
publications yielded 11 further relevant citations. Of these only 6 were included in the analysis; one case was found to have been a
duplicate case report [3, 4] and four other possible cases of NCMH were found through publication citation search, but were labelled as
“Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma” “nasal hamartoma” , “nasopharyngeal hamartoma” , and “congenital mesenchymoma” , and were therefore not
included. Thirty-one publications that report 47 cases of NCMH were included in this systematic review. Data was collected on patient
demographics (age, gender), laterality, size and site of NCMH, presentation, co-morbidities, investigations, treatment and follow-up. These
were also the principle summary measures. Two authors performed the database search, the manual search through references of relevant
publications, and extracted the relevant data from the case-reports. Data was entered into an Excel 2013 Microsoft Office™ database which
was used to carry out basic statistical analysis.Fig. 3Four-phase flow diagram of systematic review in accordance with PRISMA guidelines *
Two individual publications of single case-reports were excluded from analysis as these had previously been published, Schultz et al. and
Kang et al. .** See Table 1 Four-phase flow diagram of systematic review in accordance with PRISMA guidelines * Two individual publications
of single case-reports were excluded from analysis as these had previously been published, Schultz et al. and Kang et al. .** See Table 1
Forty-Eight NCMH patients (including our case) have been reported in the English literature (Fig. 3). Most cases presented in males; 33 male
and 15 female, with a male to female ratio of 2.2:1 ratio. The mean age was 9.6 years (range: 1 day–69 years). A large proportion of these
patients were aged 1 year or younger at presentation (n = 18) and only 8 adult patients (including our case) have been described. Site of
pathology was limited to the nasal cavity only in 10 patients, and involved the paranasal sinuses (maxillary, ethmoid, sphenoid) in 26
patients, the orbit in 16 patients, extending to the skull base in 14 patients, had intracranial extension in 8 cases, involved the
nasopharynx in 3 patients and the oropharynx in 2 patients (see Table 1).Table 1Summary table of systematic review of NCMH cases reported in
the literatureAuthor, Publication dateCase NoAge D/M/YSexSide & SizeSiteSymptomsCo-morbidityInvestigationsTreatmentFollow Up/(1) McDermot,
1998 USA15 DMND1. Nasal cavity1. Nasal MassNDCTSurgical excisionNo recurrence at2 years2. Respiratory Difficulties23 MFND1. Nasal cavity1.
Nasal MassNDMRISurgical excisionNo recurrence at 2 years2. Ethmoid Sinus2. Otitis Media3. Intracranial extension33 MMND1. Nasal cavity1.
Choanal MassNDNDBiopsy then surgical excision Subsequent chemotherapyNo recurrence at 4 years2. Respiratory distress42 MMND1. Nasal cavity1.
Nasal MassNDNDSurgical excisionNo recurrence at 18 months2. Intracranial extension512 DFND1. Nasal cavity1. Nasal MassNDCTSurgical excision
& further re-excision after 16 monthsUnchanged persistent tumour in superior nasal cavity at 12 months2. Intracranial extension614 DMND1.
Nasal cavity1. Nasal MassNDCTSurgical excision VP shunt for hydrocephalusResidual tumour in anterior cranial fossa at 9 months2. Ethmoid
sinus2. Hydrocephalus & agenesis of corpus callosum3. Intracranial extension77 YMND1. Nasal cavity1. Nasal MassPPBNDSurgical excisionNo
recurrence at 2 months NB later reported by Priest et al. 2010 - showed with multiple recurrences in first 3 years2. Sphenoid sinus2. Nasal
Congestion(2) Chae 1999 Korea *abstract only, Korean paper83 MFRight Size: 3.5 × 7.5 × 2.5 cm1. Nasal cavity1. EpistaxisNDCTSurgical
excisionND2. Ethmoid sinus2. Obstruction3. Cribriform plate(3) Kim D 1999 USA93 MFRight Size: ND1. Nasal cavity1. Nasal massNone statedCT
MRISurgical excision with mid-facial de-gloving and bi-frontal craniotomyNo recurrence at 18 months2. Intracranial extension2. Otitis
media3. Ethmoid sinus(4) Kato, 1999 Japan104 MMLeft Size: ND1. Nasal cavity1. Nasal MassNone statedCTTwo stage surgical excision 1st
intracranial/sinus lesion, 2nd intranasal lesionNo recurrence at 13 years2. Intracranial extension2. Respiratory distress with cyanosis when
feeding3. Extension to left orbit3. Opthalmoplegia left eyeRadiotherapy post op(5) Hsueh 2001 Taiwan (2 cases)110 DMLeft Size: ND1. Nasal
cavity1. Left facial swellingNone statedCT MRIExcision biopsy then subsequent surgical excision with lateral rhinotomy and craniofacial
approachRecurrence after excision biopsy No recurrence at 5 years after second surgery1. Sphenoid sinus2. Left nasal mass3. Ethmoid sinus3.
Respiratory distress & cyanosis when feeding4. Compression of left orbit4. Proptosis on recurrence129 MMRight ND1. Nasal cavity1. Asymmetric
faceNone statedCT MRISurgical resectionNo recurrence at 9 months2. Maxillary sinus2. Right opthalmoplegia, enopthalmos and hypotropia(6)
Alrawi 2003 Ireland1316 YMLeft 1.5 × 1.5 cm1. Nasal cavity1. Nasal swellingNone statedCT MRISurgical resection with delayed reconstruction
with forehead flapNo recurrence at 8 months(7) Shet, 2004 India141 YMLeft Size: ND1. Nasal cavity1. Proptosis of left eyeNon
statedCTChemotherapy (VID) as biopsy suggested spindle cell sarcoma- 30 % reduction in tumour size Then Left maxillectomy and surgical
excisionResidual tumour at 1.5 years near eye but no further re-growth & stable2. Extension into left orbit2. Left facial swelling3. Ethmoid
sinus4. Sphenoid sinus(8) Kim B, 2004 Korea155 MMLeft Size: ND1. Nasal cavity1. Left eye ptosisNone statedCTFrontal craniotomy & trans-nasal
surgical resectionND2. Compression of left orbit3. Defect left ethmoidal bone4. Defects anterior cranial fossa(9) Norman, 2004 USA1611
YMLeft Size: ND1. Nasal cavity1. Headaches left sidedNone statedCTEndoscopic biopsy and anterior craniofacial resectionND2. Displacement
left orbital wall(10) Ozolek, 2005 USA (4 cases)1711 YMLeft Size: ND1. Nasal cavity1. Nasal massNone statedNDSurgery and care undertaken in
another hospitalND Surgery and care undertaken in another hospital2. Ethmoid sinus3. Extension into left orbit1817 YFND Size: ND1. Nasal
cavity1. Nasal obstructionNone statedNDSurgical excisionND2. Facial pain1925 YMBilateral 8 × 5 × 3.5 cm1. Nasal cavity1. Respiratory
distress from obstructing oropharyngeal tumour requiring emergency tracheostomy1. Multiple Intracranial vascular aneurysms 2. Longstanding
nasopharyngeal tumour- biopsy aged 13 ‘chronic inflamed polyp’CTMultiple surgical resections within one year including, tracheostomy and
initial surgical resection, further surgical resection of bulbar mass and nasal tumour, then Le-Fort osteotomy and further surgical
resectionND2. Maxillary sinus3. Nasopharynx2. Oropharynx2. Chronic sinusitis2069 YFRight Size: ND1. Nasal cavityNDNone statedNDSurgical
excisionND2. Ethmoid sinus(11) Low 2006 UK2111 YMRight Size: ND1. Nasal cavity1. Nasal ObstructionNone statedCTSurgical excisionNo
recurrence at 2 months2. Epistaxis(12) Johnson, 2007 USA2215 YFBilateral Size: ND1. Nasal cavity1. Nasal obstruction1. PPBCTEndoscopic
surgical excisionNo recurrence at 6 months2. Nasopharynx2. Chronic sinusitis2. Sertoli-Leydig cell Ovarian Tumour3. Congenital phthisi
bulbi(13) Silkiss, 2007 USA237 MMRight 3.2 × 1.4 cm1. Nasal cavity1. PtosisNone statedCT MRISurgical resection- right lateral rhinotomyNo
recurrence at 18 months2. Erosion of cribriform plate2. Extropia3. Compression of right orbit3. Strabismus 4. Stertor(14) Nakagawa 2008
Japan2412 YMLeft 1.5 cm1. Nasal cavity1. Nasal obstructionNone statedCTEndoscopic surgical resection and further endoscopic surgical
resection after recurrenceRecurrence at 2 months No recurrence at 5 months post second surgery2. Sphenoid sinus3. Ethmoid sinus4. Maxillary
sinus(15) Finitsis, 2009 Greece2512 MMLeft 4 cm × 4.2 cm1. Nasal cavity1. Respiratory distressNone statedCT MRIPre-operative embolization
Then Surgical resection with midface de-glovingND2. Compression of left orbit3. Maxillary sinus compression4. Nasopharynx(16) Kim J, 2009
Korea2619 MMLeft 2.7 × 3.5 cm1. Nasal cavity1. Watery rhinorrhoeaNone statedCT MRIEndoscopic surgical resection ×2Recurrence at one year;
2nd surgery. No recurrence 10 months after second surgery2. Orbital extension2. Nasal Obstruction3. Intracranial extension(17) Priest, 2010
USA *case previously reported by McDermot et al. 1998 **case previously reported by Johnson et al. 2007 (2 new cases)-7 Y *MInitially
unilateral, then bilateral1. Sphenoid sinus1. Nasal Congestion1. PPB type II–IIIFour resections over 3 yearsFollowed up for 13 years with
multiple recurrences in first 3 years2. Left Nasal cavity2. Nasal mass2. Lung cysts-15 Y **FBilateral1. Bilateral nasal cavities1. Chronic
Sinusitis1. PPB Type IISurgical resectionNo recurrence at 51 months2. Bony erosion of posterior septum2. Facial Pain2. Sertoli-Leydig Cell
Ovarian Tumour2. Extending into nasopharynx3. Nasal Congestion3. Congenital phthisi bulbi Stickler syndrome4. Nasal obstruction2710
YFBilateral Size: ND1. Bilateral nasal cavities1. Nasal obstruction1. PPB Type IIICTSurgical resectionNo recurrence at 21 months2811 YMRight
Size: ND1. Nasal cavity1. Nasal obstruction1. PPB Type IIINDSurgical resectionNo recurrence at 4 months2. Extension to anterior skull
base(18) Sarin, 2010 India292.5 YMRight Size: ND1. Nasal cavity1. Right eye oculomotor impairmentNDMRIBiopsy and then lateral rhinotomy for
excisionND2. Maxillary, ethmoid and sphenoid sinus3. Erosion of middle wall of orbit(19) Eloy 2011 Belgium3018 M*MRight 0.5 × 0.4 cm1. Nasal
cavity1. Nasal obstructionNone statedCT MRIEndoscopic surgical resectionND2. Ethmoid sinus2. Nasal mass3. Extension into right orbit3.
Hypertelorism, proptosis, diplopia4. Intracranial extension4. Nasal swelling *symptoms 1st noticed at 2 months- delayed referral from
Algeria to Brussels(20) Jeyakumar 2011 USA317 DFRight Size: ND1. Nasal cavity1. Nasal MassNone statedCT MRIEndoscopic surgical excisionND2.
Stertor3. Proptosis right eye(21) Mattos 2011 USA323 YMLeft Size : ND1. Nasal cavity1. Eye infectionsNone statedCT MRIEndoscopic excision
the further surgical excisionRecurrence at 21 months required further resection2. Ethmoid sinus2. Eye congestion3. Extension into right
orbit3. Nasal obstruction4. Left maxilla4. Cheek fullness5. Intermitted left eye/face pain(22) Behery, 2012 USA3311 YMNDNDNasal
Obstruction1. PPBSurgical resectionND(23) Uzomefuna, 2012 Ireland348 YMND1. Sphenoid sinus1. Frontal HeadacheNDCT MRIEndoscopic surgical
resectionNo recurrence at 6 months2. Ethmoid sinus(24) Cho, 2013 Korea3514 YMLeft 5 cm × 5.3 cm × 4 cm1. Nasal cavity1. Swelling and pain to
left faceNone statedCTSubtotal maxillectomy, removal or orbital floor, removal of medial nasal mucous membrane. Reconstruction with iliac
crest bone blockNo recurrence at 4 years2. Maxillary sinus2. Tooth mobility3. Intraoral4. Orbital floor destruction(25) Li Y, 2013 China3640
YFBilateral Size: ND1. Nasal Cavity1. Nasal ObstructionNone statedCT MRIComplete radical resectionRecurrence at 3 months *Malignant
transformation seen on histology2. Maxillary sinus2. Bloody rhinorrhoea3. Ethmoid sinus(26) Li GY 2013 China3723 YMLeft 3.2 × 2.5 cm1. Naval
cavity1. Left Lacrimal SacNone statedNDEndoscopic surgical excisionNo recurrence at 3 months follow up2. Extension to lacrimal sac & left
orbit2. Proptosis3. Ethmoid sinus3. Lateral displacement of globe(27) Moon, 2014 Korea389 MFRight Size: ND1. Nasal cavity1. Incomitant
esotropia of right eye (inability to abduct right eye) No nasal symptomsNone statedCT MRISurgery and care undertaken in another hospitalND
Surgery and care undertaken in another hospital2. Maxillary sinus3. Erosion of orbital wall4. Erosion of cribriform plate(28) Wang T, 2014
China (2 cases)395 YMRight 2.5 × 3.6 × 4.3 cm1. Nasal cavity1. Recurrent sinusitisNone statedCT MRISurgical resectionNo recurrence at
3 years2. Ethmoid sinus2. Nasal Obstruction3. Intracranial extension406 WFLeft 2.6 × 3.4 × 3.9 cm1. Nasal cavity1. Nasal obstructionNone
statedCT MRISurgical resectionNo recurrence at 10 months2. Pressure remodelling of adjacent bones2. Watery rhinorrhoea(29) Obidan, 2014
Saudi Arabia4114 Y Size: NDMBilateral1. Bilateral nasal cavities1. Nasal Obstruction1. PPBCTSurgical endoscopic resectionND2. Decreased
sense of smell(30) Stewart, 2014 USA **4 patients previously reported by Priest et al. 2010 (4 new cases)-7 Y**MInitially unilateral, then
bilateralND1. Nasal Congestion1. PPBSurgical resectionMultiple recurrences2. Lung cysts-15 Y**FBilateralND1. Chronic Sinusitis1. PPBSurgical
resectionNo recurrence2. Facial Pain2. Sertoli-Leydig Cell Ovarian Tumour3. Nasal Congestion-10 Y**FBilateralND1. Nasal congestion1.
PPBSurgical resectionNo recurrence-11 Y**MRightND1. Nasal Congestion1. PPBSurgical resectionNo recurrence428 YMND Size: NDND1. ND1.
PPBNDSurgical resectionNo recurrence2. Pulmonary cysts in utero3. Jejunal Polyps4313 YFBilateral Size: NDND1. ND1. PPBNDSurgical resectionNo
recurrence2. Thyroid Papillary carcinoma3. Sertoli-Leydig tumour448 YMBilateral Size: NDND1. Chronic Sinusitis1. PPBNDSurgical resectionNo
recurrence456 YFND Size: NDNDND1. PPBNDSurgical resectionNo recurrence2. Left cystic nephroma3. Small bowel loop4621 YFRight Size: NDND1.
Nasal Congestion1. PPBNDSurgical resectionRecurrence at 4 years2. Septal deviation2. Sertoli-Leydig Tumour3. Nasal Obstruction (at
recurrence)3. Multi-nodular goitre(31) Chandra 2014 India4712 YMRight Size: ND1. Nasal cavity1. Nasal ObstructionNone statedCT MRISurgical
excisionNo recurrence at 5 months2. Ethmoid sinus2. Proptosis3. Extension into right orbit3. Right facial pain(32) Mason 2015 UK4849 YMRight
0.5 × 2 × 2 cm1. Nasal cavity1. Nasal massNone statedNoneSurgical excisionNo recurrence at 4 years Y Years, M Months, D Days, M Male, F
Female, ND not documented, PPB Pleuropulmonary blastoma, CT Computed Tomography, MRI Magnetic Resonance Imaging Summary table of systematic
review of NCMH cases reported in the literature Y Years, M Months, D Days, M Male, F Female, ND not documented, PPB Pleuropulmonary
blastoma, CT Computed Tomography, MRI Magnetic Resonance Imaging Clinical presentations of NCMH patients included: nasal congestion or
obstruction (n = 17), nasal mass (n = 15), eye signs (proptosis, hypotropia, enopthalmos, strabismus, exotropia etc.) (n = 12), facial
swelling (n = 8), headaches or facial pain (n = 6), stertor or respiratory distress (n = 8), ophthalmoplegia (n = 4), recurrent sinusitis
(n = 4), rhinorrhoea (n = 3), otitis media (n = 2), epistaxis (n = 2), toothache (n = 1), hyposmia (n = 1), hydrocephalus (n = 1) and 4
patients were asymptomatic or had no signs and symptoms documented (see Table 1). All patients underwent operative resection of NCMH and the
surgical approach was dependent on disease location. One patient had pre-operative chemotherapy due to initial misdiagnosis on biopsy as
spindle cell sarcoma. One patient had pre-operative embolization to reduce operative blood loss. Follow up times were included for 24
patients, mean time for follow-up was 24 months, (range 2–156 months). Eleven patients were found to have persistent disease or disease
recurrence on follow up, seven required further surgery, three patients were described as stable, and no further information was given on
the other patient. Li et al. described the first and only reported case of malignant transformation of NCMH . Thirty-six patients had no
documented past medical problems. One adult patient had a history of multiple vascular aneurysms. Eleven of the patients had been diagnosed
with pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB) prior to NCMH detection. Of these 11 patients, 5 had other co-morbidities including three with Sertoli-
Lleydig cell ovarian tumours, two with pulmonary cysts, one jejunal polyps, one papillary thyroid carcinoma, one cystic nephroma and one
multinodular goitre. A potential weakness of this systematic review is the possibility of reporting bias through publication bias both
within individual case reports and across the review. This reporting bias is three-fold: firstly in the incomplete publication of all the
clinical aspects of the case-reports by the original authors, for example not reporting follow-up times or co-morbidities etc. Secondly it
is possible that there have been cases of NCMH that have not been reported in the literature and can therefore not be included in the
systematic review. Thirdly the exclusion of case-reports of “Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma” “nasal hamartoma” , “nasopharyngeal hamartoma” ,
and “congenital mesenchymoma” alongside others, which are published prior to the first description of NCMH by McDermot et al. in 1998, may
have resulted in an underreporting of true NCMH cases. However without being able to retrospectively assess and re-classify the histology of
these cases we feel it is appropriate to have excluded them from our analysis and conclusions. These sources of reporting biases could
potentially reduce the validity of conclusions drawn in terms of not fully representing or capturing all possible cases of NCMH. NCMHs are
predominantly benign lesions that are locally destructive and because of their aggressive appearance can be mistaken for a malignant tumour.
However NCMHs can be slow growing and therefore have a delayed presentation. Histopathologically these lesions are analogous to other
mesenchymal hamartomas, and consist of islands of chondroid tissue such as hyaline cartilage, areas of calcification, and mesenchymal
cellular elements such as spindle cells and myxoid stroma. McDermott et al. were the first to recognise NCMH as a distinct clinic-
pathological entity in 1998 when they described a case series of seven patients with a tumefactive process of the nasal passages and
contiguous paranasal sinuses with a detectable mass in the nose . In this case series, six of the seven patients were infants under the age
of 3 months. As our systematic review demonstrates NCMH predominantly presents in young children and infants under the age of one, but there
have now been seven case reports, including ours, of adults with NCMH up to the age of 69 [9, 11–14]. In 2013 the first and only reported
case of malignant transformation of an NCMH was described in the literature . In our case, the NCMH was initially thought to be a papilloma
confined to the nasal septal wall and therefore further imaging was not undertaken prior to resection. However pre-operative imaging of
these lesions provides valuable information regarding involvement of adjacent structures such as the paranasal sinuses, orbit and
intracranial cavity. On computed tomography (CT) imaging, NCMH are typically seen as non-encapsulated, poorly defined masses often with
cystic components . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of NCMH demonstrates a heterogeneous mass on T1 weighted images and T2 weighted images
show the presence of cystic components. MRI also has the advantage of superior tissue characterisation and delineation of invasion of
adjacent structures in comparison to CT . Due to rarity of NCMH, even after thorough clinical and radiographic examination NCMH can be
misdiagnosed, and differential diagnoses include: inverted papilloma, aneurysmal bone cysts or ossifying fibromas, nasoethmoidal
encephalocoele, chondrosarcoma, nasal lymphoma, nasal glioma and rhabdomyosarcoma. Histopathological analysis following surgical resection
is therefore needed for accurate diagnosis. Patients with NCMH most commonly present with symptoms of nasal obstruction, nasal mass, or eye
signs, which reflects the involvement of NCMH in the nasal passages and orbit. Ophthalmic signs include signs of globe displacement such as
strabismus, extropia, hypertelorism, proptosis, enophthalmus and ophthlmoplegia, direct results of the intra-ocular extension of NCMH or
ocular compression by NCMH . There has also been a report of a patient presenting with intra-oral symptoms due to involvement of the oral
cavity . Patients can therefore present to otolaryngology, ophthalmology or maxillo-facial departments and doctors in these specialties
should be aware of this rare pathology. In our case, the patient did not complain of any cranial, ophthalmic or nasal symptoms but was aware
of a slowly enlarging nasal mass. This is most likely due to the relatively small size of the tumour at the anterior nasal septum which did
not obstruct the nasal passage. The aetiology of NCMH is thought to be due to an underlying genetic predisposition therefore accounting for
the early presentation in the majority of cases. Priest et al. and Stewart et al. investigated patients with both NCMH and the rare
paediatric dysembryonic sarcoma of the lung and pleura: pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB) [13, 27]. In patients with NCMH and PPB Stewart et
al. found germline DICER1 mutations in 6 out of 8 evaluated patients, and somatic DICER1 mutations in 2 out of those 6 patients with
germline mutations . This recent finding has established genetic proof of NCMH tumour association with DICER1 mutations and Stewart et al.
therefore feel that NCMH should be considered part of the DICER1 tumour spectrum. The DICER1 familial tumour susceptibility syndrome confers
an increased risk most commonly for pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB) but also ovarian sex cord-stromal tumours; Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor ,
juvenile granulosa cell tumour and gynandroblastomas. Less commonly the DICER1 tumour spectrum includes: cystic nephroma (CN), and thyroid
gland neoplasia, multinodular goitres , adenomas, or differentiated thyroid cancers. The rarest observed tumours in this spectrum, alongside
NCMHs, are ciliary body medulloepithelioma (CBME), botryoid-type embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS) of the cervix or other sites, renal
sarcomas, pituitary blastomas, and pineoblastomas . Eleven patients in our systematic review had previous PPB and five of these also had
other DIECR1 tumours. Surgeons and physicians should therefore be aware of these disease associations and should be vigilant of a diagnosis
of NCMH in patients presenting with sino-nasal or orbital symptoms who have a history of any of these tumours. Johnson et al. importantly
also point out that due to its location, NCMH is more likely to present early in life than the other DICER1 tumours . Surgeons and
physicians should therefore either offer DICER1 mutation analysis if available, or ensure long-term follow up of these patients and be
vigilant for associated tumours, as NCMH may be the ‘herald tumour’ of this disease spectrum. There are also cases in the literature of
children, adolescents and adults with NCMH who have had an asymptomatic infancy [9, 11, 12, 14]. This may imply that there are non-genetic
components to NCMH pathogenesis. Alternatively it may simply reflect the insidious growth of the tumour or that some NCMH patients may only
exhibit the phenotype later in life. However as this is an extremely rare pathology with only very recent formal association with the DICER1
mutation, the majority of the 42 reported cases have not had formal DICER1 mutation analysis. Therefore an association or lack thereof in
the non-tested cases cannot be inferred. Successful management of NCMH entails complete resection in order to prevent recurrence. A complete
excision however is not always technically feasible, especially in cases of intracranial extension of NCMH. An incomplete resection poses
the risk of recurrence as well as the possibility of continued tumour growth and progressive symptoms. Nine patients in this systematic
review were found to have disease recurrence, most likely from incomplete surgical excision. We present an unusual case of NCMH in an adult
without nasal obstructive symptoms due to the anatomical location of the NCMH attached to the nasal septum. A systematic review of the
literature has highlighted that presentation is mostly related to tumour location, with nasal mass, nasal obstruction and ophthalmic signs
being the most common forms of presentation. The majority of patients presenting with NCMH are children and infants below the age of one,
but there have now been a few adult cases of presentation. Surgical resection is the treatment of choice with low recurrence rates in the
majority of cases. There has only been one reported case of malignant transformation and NCMH is still considered a benign tumour. NCMH’s
association with the DIECR1 mutation has very recently been established and therefore in light of this any patient with a DICER1-related
tumour spectrum and new nasal or orbital symptoms should raise the suspicion of NCMH. Furthermore surgeons should subsequently be vigilant
for associated DICER1 related tumours, as due to their location NCMHs may be the ‘herald tumour’ for this disease spectrum. This case and
systematic review highlights the fact that NCMH can mimic other benign and malignant lesions and that surgeons and physicians should be
aware of rare pathologies accounting for nasal masses. Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the editor-in-chief of this journal. Nasal chondromesenchymal
hamartoma Excerpta medica database Computed tomography Magnetic resonance imaging Pleuropulmonary blastoma Sertoli-leydig cell tumour
Juvenile granulosa cell tumour Cystic nephroma Multinodular goitres Ciliary body medulloepithelioma Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma is not an
abbreviation, but the name of gene located on chromosome 14 at position q32.13 Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions Contribution to conception and design: KM, AN, PC. Contribution to acquisition of data, analysis
and interpretation: KM, AN, ET. Involved in drafting the manuscript & revising it critically: KM, AN, ET, PC. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript. Authors’ information KM is a clinical teaching fellow with Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry. ET
is a clinical teaching fellow with Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry AN is a junior registrar in ENT surgery in the
London Deanery. PC is a locum consultant at a regional teaching hospital where the case was encountered. Thanks to Dr Ian Seddon (Consultant
Histopathologist, Colchester Hospital University NHS Foundation Trust) for providing the histopathology images.
