Anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (anti-MMDAR) encephalitis is an immune-mediated encephalitis mainly affecting young women. We describe
the case of a 21-year-old woman who developed a classical form of anti-NMDAR encephalitis during the 10th week of gestation. The patient had
been treated with methylpredinsolone and intravenous immunoglobulins. Birth history of the child was normal, with normal APGAR score. The
clinical symptoms of the patient have improved after a few months. This rare occurrence during pregnancy (only 9 other cases described)
presents an opportunity to highlight the importance of making the earliest possible diagnosis of this treatable and potentially reversible
encephalitis, and to educate gynecologists, psychiatrists, anesthetists, and neurologists on this potential cause of psychiatric and
neurological manifestations during pregnancy. In 2005, Vitaliani et al1 reported 4 young women who developed acute psychiatric symptoms,
seizures, memory deficits, and decreased level of consciousness (often requiring ventilator support), associated with ovarian teratoma. In
2007, Dalmau et al2 described 8 additional patients with the same symptoms; these authors finally confirmed the presence of NMDAR (N-methyl-
D-aspartate receptor) antibodies in all the 12 young women. Anti-NMDAR encephalitis was initially classified as a paraneoplastic syndrome
(up to 60% of them are associated with a teratoma or other tumor type), but it is now classified more as an immune-mediated encephalitis.3,4
Moreover, since the first clinical descriptions, other cases have been reported in women without teratoma, but also in males and children.5
Only a few cases of anti-NMDAR encephalitis were reported to have occurred during pregnancy or postpartum. We report a case diagnosed in the
first trimester of pregnancy. This 21-year-old Caucasian woman developed behavioral changes during the 10th week of pregnancy. She had no
medical past history and was first admitted to the Department of Psychiatry for a presumptive depression, she was treated with fluoxetine
(and tiapride for agitation), without any improvement. After a few days, because of a worsening of her mental status and then muteness, she
was finally admitted to the Department of Neurology where she presented a first generalized seizure. At that time, the clinical examination
showed orofacial and limb dyskinesia, but no pyramidal sign, no motor weakness, no sensory disturbance, no autonomic disturbance, and no
abnormality of the cranial nerves; deep tendon reflexes were normal; the body temperature was normal (37.2°C) as well, and we observed no
neck stiffness. The first brain MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) was unremarkable. The electroencephalogram showed a generalized slow theta
activity without epileptic discharges; anticonvulsivant treatments (clonazepam and lamotrigine) were begun. Results of the cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) analysis showed a lymphocytic pleiocytosis (120 white cells/mm3), a moderate increase of the protein level (67 mg/dL; normal
value < 45 mg/dL), and a normal glucose level (59 mg/dL). A treatment with acyclovir was started for a presumptive viral encephalitis (also
with ampicillin for a few days) but was finally stopped because of the negativity of the polymerase chain reaction herpes simplex and
varicella-zoster viruses in the CSF (and the absence of other germs). Other serologies (Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, human
immunodeficiency virus, Borrelia burgdorferi, Leptospira, Coxiella burneti, and Mycoplasma pneumonia) were negative. Other ancillary tests,
comprising immunological tests (antinuclear and anti-desoxyribonucleic acid antibodies), were unremarkable; finally, NMDAR antibodies were
identified in the CSF 20 days after the first neurological symptoms. An MRI of the abdomen and the pelvis was performed but showed no
teratoma or other lesion. She was treated with methylpredinsolone (3 days, 250 mg/day), without improvement; then, a first course of
intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIg) was performed during 5 days (20 g/day), but the patient still presented behavioral disturbances
(alternating episodes of catatonia and agitation) and visual hallucinations. One week later, because of a recurrence of seizures, she was
admitted in the intensive care unit where she developed a status epilepticus, she gradually lost consciousness, experienced respiratory
failure, and was intubated; the symptoms where difficult to control despite treatment with phenytoine, fosphenytoine, and propofol. A second
brain MRI showed a diffuse meningeal enhancement (gadolinium) without other lesion, but it was performed only 24 hours after a second lumbar
puncture. Two weeks after the first course of IVIg, she received a second course of IVIg (at the same dose). We progressively observed a
gradual improvement for the next weeks, but with sequelae: 24 weeks after the onset of the disease, she still presented apathy and episodes
of pathological laughing. She gave birth to a healthy girl (weight was 3360 g; APGAR score was 10) who did not present any neurological
symptom at 6 months. Nine months after the onset of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis, cognitive functions of the patient were normal (except
for some slight memory disturbance), and anti-NMDA antibodies were negative in her serum. The lifetime prevalence of mood disorders in women
is approximately twice that of men, but this discrepancy (probably in part due to the neuroendocrine events related to female reproduction)
is not well understood.6 Pregnancy is a time of psychological change and challenge: during the first trimester of pregnancy, a woman may
experience increased emotional lability; later, mood disorders (due to bodily changes, alterations in sexual interest, and anxieties about
delivery) may appear; late pregnancy may be associated with social withdrawal and increased absorption and preoccupation with preparations
for delivery and caring of the baby, sometimes with obsessive thoughts focusing on the health of the baby.7,8 Pregnancy and the postpartum
period are known to influence the onset and course of various psychiatric disorders: 10% of gravid women meet criteria for major depression,
and up to 18% of women show elevated depressive symptomatology during gestation; postpartum depression is also a common disorder occurring
in 15% of deliveries.9 However, during pregnancy, neurological disorders, such as “encephalopathy,” may also represent a potential cause of
psychiatric troubles. Anti-NMDAR encephalitis is a rare and severe immune-mediated disease usually affecting young female of reproductive
age with ovarian tumors (teratoma); however, it was also observed in female of all ages (with or without neoplasm), male, and children
(children under 12 and male patients rarely having a tumor).5 Only 10 cases,10–17 comprising our case (the case of Ito et al was reported in
the series of 3 cases of Kumar et al), have been reported in young women during pregnancy (Table 1 ); one of these patients presented a
concomitant autoimmune Graves’ hyperthyroidism and anti-NMDAR encephalitis.16 Two other cases were reported during the postpartum
period,18,19 and 1 other paper described a woman with known anti-NMDAR encephalitis (5 years before) who become pregnant.20 The clinical
presentation of anti-NMDAR encephalitis is usually complex: one of its characteristics is the presence of psychiatric manifestations that
meet criteria for the diagnosis of delirium due to a general medical condition (GMC), psychotic disorder due to a GMC and catatonic disorder
due to a GMC (where GMC is NMDAR encephalitis), which is a reason why some of these patients are first admitted in a Department of
Psychiatry.21 In order to make the earliest possible diagnosis, it is crucial to seek the other signs of this immune-mediated encephalitis.
Main Clinical, Biological, and Radiological Data of Patients With Anti-NMDA Receptor Encephalitis During Pregnancy Main Clinical,
Biological, and Radiological Data of Patients With Anti-NMDA Receptor Encephalitis During Pregnancy Main Clinical, Biological, and
Radiological Data of Patients With Anti-NMDA Receptor Encephalitis During Pregnancy In 70% of patients, the clinical course begins with
viral prodromes (headache, fever, malaise, inability to concentrate, nausea, diarrhea, and vomiting) lasting 5 to 14 days, followed by a
seizure and/or psychotic phase characterized by emotional and behavioral disturbances such as apathy, fear, depression, decreased cognitive
skills, and psychosis (delusions and hallucinations); sometimes, choreiform movements and ataxia are observed. Patients then present an
unresponsive phase (sometimes with muteness and akinesia) and a hyperkinetic phase comprising dyskinesias (and other stereotyped motor
automatisms) and autonomic instability (cardiac arrhythmia, hypotension, hypertension, hyperthermia, hypothermia, and hypoventilation)
usually requiring intensive care unit-level.21 About half of the patients show MRI irregularities, commonly T2 or FLAIR hyperintensities in
cortical and subcortical brain region (sometimes with mild or transient contrast enhancement).22 In most cases, electroencephalography is
abnormal with slow and disorganized activity in the delta/theta range (sometimes with superimposed electrographic seizures).22 CSF findings
include moderate lymphocytic pleiocytosis, elevated protein level, and oligoclonal bands in 60% of cases.23 Final diagnosis is based on the
presence of IgG antibodies in the GluN1 (NR1) subunit of the NMDAR in the serum or CSF.3 The use of early and aggressive immunosuppressive
treatment (corticosteroids, IVIg, and plasma exchange), along with removal of tumor (if present), leads to positive outcome in 80% of
patients (returning to nearly basal level of function),5 mortality is estimated to be 4%.24 Because anti-NMDAR encephalitis is a treatable
and potentially reversible encephalopathy, some authors suggest systematically considering this quite novel diagnosis in patients with
“encephalitis of unknown origin,” “drug-induced psychosis,” and “new onset epilepsy.”25 Among the 10 women who have presented an anti-NMDAR
encephalitis during pregnancy, 2 pregnancies were terminated during the first trimester; among the 8 other cases, only 4 newborns were
tested for the antibodies in the umbilical cord blood, serum, or CSF: 2 were negative,12,17 but the titer of NMDAR antibodies was at the
same level as the mother's at birth for the 2 others (then declined and was negative).10,15 In one of these cases of maternal transfer of
NMDAR antibodies, the baby presented cortical dysplasia and developmental delay (3 years of follow-up), but without confirmation of a link
between NMDAR antibodies and the brain abnormalities,10 the authors having used a variant of the test that is not specific, as suggested in
a recent report by the same group (showing lack of specificity for anti-NMDAR encephalitis in 23.2% of the patients).26 All the other babies
(as in our observation) were reported to be normal, but with a maximal follow-up of 6 months. This question of a transplantal transfer of
NMDAR antibodies from mother to child appears to be crucial because of the ability of NMDAR antibodies to alter the density and synaptic
localization of NMDAR in animal models.27 The NMDA receptors also have an important role in the brain development, and a glutamatergic
dysfunction (particularly with involvement of NMDAR) plays an important role in the genesis of schizophrenia.5 Long-term follow-up of the
children with mothers who developed NMDAR antibodies during pregnancy should give us more certainty. Behavioral changes occurring during
pregnancy may be the consequence of neurologic diseases such as anti-NMDAR encephalitis. It is of the utmost importance for gynecologists,
psychiatrists, anesthetists, and neurologists to be aware of this treatable and potentially reversible immune-mediated disorder, and to
provide an early diagnosis and prompt treatment. Abbreviations: CSF = cerebrospinal fluid, GMC = general medical condition, IVIg =
intravenous immunoglobulins, MRI = magnetic resonance imaging, NMDAR = N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. The authors have no conflicts of interest.
