Giant prostatic hyperplasia is a rare condition characterized by very high volume benign prostatic enlargement (>500g). Few cases have been
reported so far and most of them are associated with severe lower urinary symptoms. We report the first case of asymptomatic giant prostatic
hyperplasia in an elderly man who had a 720g prostate adenoma, sudden gross hematuria and hypovolemic shock. The patient was successfully
treated with open transvesical prostatectomy and had an uneventful postoperative recovery. Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a common
condition that affects many aging men and it may be associated with significant quality of life issues. “Giant prostatic hyperplasia” (GPH)
is a term that describes rare cases of extremely enlarged prostate glands, weighing greater than 500g.( 1 ) Typically, patients with GPH
have severe symptoms and seek medical care to treat their voiding complaints. We report the first case, to our knowledge, of a man with GPH
and without voiding symptoms, who presented sudden gross hematuria and hypovolemic shock. An afro-descendent, 82-year-old man was admitted
to the emergency room with painless macroscopic hematuria for 5 days without clots. The patient denied any prior episodes of hematuria and
did not complain of voiding symptoms. There was no history of smoking, alcohol abuse, severe comorbidities (the patient was treated with
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor to control mild arterial hypertension), or use of anti-coagulants or blood thinners. On physical
examination the patient was dehydrated and with pale mucosa. Upon admission his heart rate was 112bpm and blood pressure was 90/70mmHg.
Abdominal palpation did not reveal any evident masses. The digital rectal examination revealed a large prostate with an estimated volume
significantly greater than 100g, but with benign consistency and without nodules. The individual underwent prompt bladder catheterization
(with large catheter) and vesical irrigation with saline solution. He also had acute renal insufficiency, with creatinine and urea levels of
1.9mg/dL and 64.0mg/dL, respectively. The patient underwent immediate volume resuscitation with saline and blood transfusion. An abdominal
ultrasound was performed when the patient was hospitalized in the emergency room, which demonstrated moderate bilateral hydronephrosis and a
pelvic mass measuring 15x16x16cm. The computerized tomography (CT) scan had confirmed the evidence of urinary obstruction and a large pelvic
mass representing the prostate (Figure 1). Figure 1Computerized tomography scan showing urinary obstruction (hydronephrosis) and a large
pelvic mass representing the prostate Prostatic specific antigen (PSA) levels measured after lower urinary tract manipulation were as high
as 122.0ng/mL. Therefore, prostate trans-rectal ultrasound guided biopsies were performed to assess the possibility of a prostate
adenocarcinoma or sarcoma. No evidence of malignancy was identified in the biopsy specimens. Subsequently, the patient underwent an
uneventful open trans-vesical prostatectomy (TVP). The procedure time was about 100 minutes and the no further blood transfusions were
required. The prostatic adenoma, extirpated as a single piece, measured 17x16x13.5cm and weighed 720g (Figure 2). Figure 2The prostatic
adenoma, extirpated as a single piece, measuring 17.0x16.0x13.5cm and weighing 720g Final pathological analysis revealed a whitish, firm and
multinodular surface with cysts and diffuse hemorrhagic areas compatible with prostatic nodular hyperplasia with multiple anemic infarction
foci and glandular squamous metaplasia. At 1 year of follow-up, the patient returned to clinic with normal renal function, satisfactory
urinary flow, and complete continence, although currently he is on treatment with anti-muscarinic medications due to urinary urgency. The
term “giant prostatic hyperplasia” was defined by Fishman and Merrill as glands exceeding 500g.( 1 ) In our case, the preoperative CT showed
a large pelvic mass representing the prostate and, after surgery, the specimen weight was 720g. It is well-known that anatomic measurements
of the prostate do not adequately distinguish patients who seek medical care from those who do not.( 2 ) Prostatic volume measured either by
trans-rectal ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging is poorly correlated with frequency, quality of life, urinary flow rate, residual
urine, and pressure-flow parameters. However, it is unexpected for a man with such a large gland to remain asymptomatic prior to admission
to the emergency room with hematuria and class III hemorrhagic, and hypovolemic shock, which require urgent blood transfusion. Gross
hematuria is an uncommon complaint in men with enlarged prostate, which is rarely seen as an initial presentation. Prior series report an
prevalence rate of approximately 2.5% of macroscopic hematuria in men with BPH.( 3 ) The exact etiology of bleeding in men with enlarged
prostate is unclear but may be attributable to increased microvessel density level( 4 ) and vascular endothelial growth factors over-
expression.( 5 ) In addition, in these patients hypertension has been associated as a risk factor for hematuria.( 6 ) Biopsies to ensure
malignancy status prior to initiate definitive treatment are of utmost importance given its potential impact on therapeutic choice. Prostate
adenocarcinoma was one of the main concern in our patient given his age and elevated PSA (over 100ng/mL). Because of the size of the
prostate, the sarcoma was another possibility that needed to be excluded,( 7 ) although such affection rarely induces PSA elevation. Upper
urinary tract deterioration and gross hematuria leading to hypovolemic shock are well-known indications for BPH surgical treatment. Although
minimally invasive approaches such as robot-assisted simple prostatectomy( 8 ) can be used for the treatment of BPH, the open surgery
remains the gold standard procedure for benign, large volume, prostatic hyperplasia.( 9 ) Sutherland et al. reported unsuccessful robot-
assisted simple prostatectomy for a man with severe prostatomegaly (260g).( 10 ) Hence, the analysis of a contemporary series of patients
revealed that trans-vesical prostatectomy is associated with significant improvement in symptom score scales, post-void residual urine
volume, and maximal flow rate, along with a low incidence of long-term complications and need of re-operation as well as a durable
therapeutic effect.( 11 ) Similar to others,( 12 ) we consider simple prostatectomy as the primary recommended treatment option for GPH. For
this reason, a suprapubic open trans-vesical prostatectomy was performed. Operation time was short and no major complications occurred. GPH
is an extremely rare condition. A MEDLINE/PubMed search revealed no more than 20 reports of prostates weighing greater than 500.( 13 , 14 )
The above reported case is among the five greatest prostate glands ever described,( 14 ) and it is the first one with such unusual
presentation, characterized by a complete absence of voiding symptoms followed by sudden gross hematuria that resulted in hypovolemic shock.
A hiperplasia prostática gigante é uma condição rara caracterizada por aumento benigno prostático significativo, com volume maior que 500g.
Existem poucos casos relatados e, em sua maioria deles está associada a sintomas graves do trato urinário inferior. Relatamos aqui o
primeiro caso de hiperplasia prostática benigna assintomática em paciente idoso com próstata de 720g, hematúria macroscópica de início
súbito e choque hipovolêmico. O paciente foi submetido com sucesso à prostatectomia suprapúbica, sem intercorrências no intra e pós-
operatório. A hiperplasia prostática benigna (HPB) é uma condição comum que afeta muitos homens idosos e pode ser associada com questões
significantes na qualidade de vida desses indivíduos. “Hiperplasia prostática gigante” (HPG) é um termo que descreve casos raros de
glândulas prostáticas extremamente volumosas, pesando mais de 500g.( 1 ) Em geral, os pacientes com HPG apresentam sintomas graves e
procuram assistência médica para tratar disfunções miccionais. Relatamos o primeiro caso, até onde os autores deste artigo conhecem, de
paciente com HPG sem sintomas miccionais e com hematúria macroscópica súbita e choque hipovolêmico. Paciente negro, do sexo masculino, 82
anos, admitido no serviço de emergência com queixa de hematúria macroscópica indolor há 5 dias e ausência de coágulos. O paciente negava
qualquer episódio anterior de hematúria e não se queixava de sintomas miccionais. Sem história de tabagismo, abuso de álcool, comodidades
graves (histórico de hipertensão arterial leve controlada pelo uso de inibidores da enzima de conversão da angiotensina) e uso de
anticoagulantes ou diluentes de sangue. Ao exame físico, o paciente estava desidratado e com mucosa pálida. Na internação, apresentou
frequência cardíaca de 112bpm e pressão arterial de 90/70mmHg. Palpação abdominal não revelou qualquer massa evidente. O toque retal revelou
próstata aumentada com volume estimado significativamente maior que 100g, porém com consistência benigna e sem nódulos. O paciente foi
prontamente submetido à cateterização da bexiga (com cateter calibroso) e irrigação vesical com soro fisiológico. O paciente também
apresentava insuficiência renal aguda, com níveis de creatinina e de ureia de 1,9mg/dL e 64,0mg/dL, respectivamente. O paciente foi
submetido à ressuscitação volêmica imediata com soro fisiológico e transfusão sanguínea. Realizou-se, no serviço de emergência, ultrassom
abdominal, que mostrou hidronefrose bilateral moderada e massa pélvica medindo 15x16x16cm. A tomografia computadorizada (TC) confirmou
evidência de obstrução urinária e massa pélvica volumosa, representando a próstata (Figura 1). Figura 1Tomografia computadorizada mostrando
obstrução urinária (hidronefrose) e massa volumosa representado a próstata Níveis antígeno prostático específico (PSA, prostatic specific
antigen) medidos após manipulação do trato urinário inferior foram de 122,0ng/mL. Realizaram-se, então, ultrassons transretais da próstata
guiado por biópsias para avaliar a possibilidade de adenocarcinoma da próstata ou sarcoma. Não foi encontrada evidência de malignidade nos
espécimes de biópsia. Em seguida, o paciente realizou prostatectomia transvesical aberta (PTA). O tempo do procedimento foi de
aproximadamente 100 minutos e o paciente não necessitou de transfusão sanguínea adicional. O adenoma prostático foi extirpado como uma
espécime única, medindo 17x16x13,5cm e pesando 720g (Figura 2). Figura 2Adenoma prostático, removido com peça única, medindo
17,0x16,0x13,5cm e pesando 720g A análise patológica revelou superfície multinodular, firme e esbranquiçada, com cistos e áreas hemorrágicas
difusas compatíveis com hiperplasia nodular prostática com múltiplos focos de infarto anêmico e metaplasia escamosa glandular. Em seguimento
de 1 ano, o paciente retornou à clínica com função renal normal, fluxo urinário satisfatório e continência completa, apesar de atualmente
estar em tratamento com medicação antimuscarínica, devido à urgência urinária. O termo “hiperplasia prostática gigante” foi definido por
Fishman e Merril como glândulas excedendo 500g.( 1 ) No nosso caso, o TC pré-operatório mostrou massa pélvica volumosa representando a
próstata e, após cirurgia, o peso do espécime foi de 720g. É conhecido que não há distinção das medidas anatômicas da próstata de homens que
procuram cuidados médicos daqueles que não procuram.( 2 ) Volume prostático medido tanto por ultrassom transretal como por ressonância
magnética correlaciona-se fracamente com: frequência, qualidade de vida, taxa de fluxo miccional, urina residual e parâmetros de fluxo de
pressão. Porém, não é esperado que homens com grande volume da glândula prostática mantenham-se assintomáticos antes da admissão no serviço
de emergência, com hematúria e hemorragia classe III, além de choque hipovolêmico, necessitando transfusão sanguínea urgente. A hematúria
macroscópica é um queixa incomum para homens com próstatas aumentadas e raramente observada como sinal inicial. Séries anteriores relatam
uma taxa de prevalência de aproximadamente 2,5% de hematúria macroscópica em homens com HPG.( 3 ) A etiologia exata de sangramento em homens
com próstatas aumentadas é indefinida, porém pode ser atribuída ao nível da densidade de microveias( 4 ) e a fatores de crescimento do
endotélio vascular supraexpressado.( 5 ) Além disso, nesses pacientes, a hipertensão tem sido associada como fator de risco para hematúria.(
6 ) Biópsias para assegurar o status de malignidade anterior ao início do tratamento definitivo são de grande importância, em razão do
potencial do impacto na escolha terapêutica. O adenocarcinoma de próstata foi um das grandes preocupações em relação ao nosso paciente
devido à sua idade avançada e ao PSA elevado (acima de 100ng/mL). Devido ao tamanho da próstata, o sarcoma foi outra possibilidade que
precisou ser excluída,( 7 ) apesar de raramente induzir a elevação de PSA. A deterioração do trato urinário superior e a hematúria
macroscópica levando ao choque hipovolêmico são indicadores bem conhecidos no tratamento cirúrgico de HPB. Apesar de abordagens minimamente
invasivas, como prostatectomia( 8 ) robótica-assistida, poderem ser utilizadas para o tratamento de HPB, a cirurgia aberta permanece o
procedimento padrão-ouro para HPB de grande volume.( 9 ) Sutherland et al. relataram impossibilidade de realizar com sucesso a
prostatectomia simples robótica-assistida em paciente com prostatomegalia grave (260g).( 10 ) Contudo, a análise de séries contemporânea de
pacientes revelou que a prostatectomia é associada com melhora significativa dos sintomas na escala de escore, volume residual pós-miccional
e melhora relevante dos sintomas, além da baixa incidência de complicações ao longo prazo e da necessidade para reoperação também como
efeito terapêutico durável.( 11 ) Tal qual a literatura,( 12 ) consideramos que a prostatectomia simples é opção de tratamento para HPG.
Portanto, foi realizada a PTA suprapúbica. O tempo de cirurgia foi curto e sem ocorrência de grandes complicações. A HPG é uma condição
extremamente rara. Um levantamento no PubMed/MEDLINE resgatou não mais que 20 relatos de próstatas pesando mais do que 500g.( 13 , 14 ) Este
relato de caso apresentou uma das cinco maiores glândulas prostáticas já descritas,( 14 ) e a primeira com apresentação incomum,
caracterizada por inexistência de sintomas de micção seguida por hematúria macroscópica de início súbito, que resultou em choque
hipovolêmico.
