Anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis is a severe autoimmune disorder characterized by severe psychiatric symptoms, seizures,
decreased consciousness, autonomic dysregulation, and dyskinesias. Multifocal subcortical white matter lesions on fluid-attenuated inversion
recovery and diffuse weighted images have rarely been reported in previous literature, and serial magnetic resonance imaging changes after
plasma exchange have not been presented before. A previously healthy 24-year-old Chinese woman presented with acute psychiatric symptoms
characterized by fear and agitation followed by decreased consciousness, dyskinesias, and seizures. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed
hyperintense lesions on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery and diffuse weighted images in bilateral subcortical white matter. Cerebrospinal
fluid analysis revealed a mild pleocytosis with lymphocytic predominance. Protein and glucose levels were normal. Aquaporin-4 antibodies in
serum and cerebrospinal fluid were negative. Identification of anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antibodies in serum and cerebrospinal
fluid confirmed the diagnosis of anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis. She was initially treated with combined intravenous
immunoglobulin and methylprednisolone without improvement. Plasma exchange was then initiated with good response; the patient made a full
recovery after several cycles of plasma exchange. Repeat magnetic resonance imaging performed 1 month after plasma exchange showed partial
resolution of the hyperintense lesions in bilateral subcortical white matter, and follow-up magnetic resonance imaging 2 months after plasma
exchange showed complete resolution. Anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis may be concomitant with multifocal subcortical white
matter lesions. Such lesions may resolve after appropriate immunotherapy. Anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor encephalitis is a severe
autoimmune disorder first described by Dalmau and his colleagues in 2007 . Patients with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis usually have an
acute onset. The typical clinical features include severe psychiatric symptoms, memory loss, seizures, decreased consciousness, autonomic
dysregulation, and dyskinesias . Here, we describe a case of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis with multifocal subcortical white matter
lesions on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and diffuse weighted images (DWI). This patient responded well to plasma exchange
treatment. Serial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) changes after this treatment are presented. To our knowledge, multifocal subcortical
white matter lesions on FLAIR and DWI have rarely been described in previous literature, and serial MRI changes after plasma exchange have
not been presented before. A 24-year-old Chinese woman presented with acute psychiatric symptoms characterized by fear and agitation. Two
days after symptom onset, she was admitted to a psychiatric hospital, and her symptoms were temporarily controlled. Seven days after symptom
onset, she developed a low-grade fever and decreased consciousness, at which point she was transferred to our hospital. Her past medical
history was unremarkable. On examination, she was non-responsive to verbal or painful stimulation. Her vital signs indicated slightly
elevated heart rate and body temperature and normal blood pressure and respiratory rate. The pupils were normal in size and reactive to
light. Spontaneous eye movements were absent. The oculocephalic responses were present. Babinski’s sign was negative bilaterally, and both
Kernig’s and Brudzinski’s signs were negative. Routine blood test and chemistry analysis including liver, renal, and thyroid function were
unremarkable. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was normal. Autoimmune markers including antinuclear antibodies, anti-double-stranded DNA
(anti-dsDNA) antibodies, rheumatoid factor, and antineutrophilcytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were negative. Serum anti-thyroglobulin (anti-
TG) antibodies (38.4U/ml, normal range 0–60 U/ml, radioimmunoassay) and anti-thyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO) antibodies (28 U/ml, normal range
0–60 U/ml, radioimmunoassay) were unremarkable. Brain computed tomography (CT) was normal. MRI revealed FLAIR and DWI hyperintense lesions
in bilateral subcortical white matter (Fig. 1a,b). Electroencephalography (EEG) showed diffuse slow-waves. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
analysis revealed a mild pleocytosis (24 × 106/L) with lymphocytic predominance. Protein and glucose levels were normal. Aquaporin-4
antibodies in serum and CSF were negative. Serological and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) investigation in serum and CSF were negative for
infectious etiologies including varicella zoster virus, enterovirus, herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, and Epstein-Barr virus.
Bacterial cultures of the CSF were negative. Anti-NMDA receptor antibodies were identified both in serum (titers 1:100) and CSF (titers
1:16).Fig. 1Serial MRI findings: hyperintense lesions on FLAIR and DWI in bilateral subcortical white matter before plasma exchange (a, b);
partial resolution of the lesions on FLAIR and DWI 1 month after plasma exchange (c, d); full resolution of the lesions on FLAIR and DWI 2
months after plasma exchange (e, f) Serial MRI findings: hyperintense lesions on FLAIR and DWI in bilateral subcortical white matter before
plasma exchange (a, b); partial resolution of the lesions on FLAIR and DWI 1 month after plasma exchange (c, d); full resolution of the
lesions on FLAIR and DWI 2 months after plasma exchange (e, f) The diagnosis of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis was established. Thorough
evaluation, including ovarian ultrasound and high resolution computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, did not reveal an
ovarian teratoma or other tumors. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg, 0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days) combined with high dose methylprednisolone
(1g/day for 5 days) was initiated on day 18 after symptom onset. Despite IVIg and steroid therapy, the patient’s level of consciousness did
not improve. She developed dyskinesias with mouth chewing, tongue thrusting, and twisting of the upper limbs. Episodes of generalized tonic-
clonic convulsions were also seen. Repeat EEG again revealed diffuse slow-waves. At this point, the patient was intubated and mechanically
ventilated. Valproic acid and intermittent intravenous diazepam was administered to control the seizures. On day 35, plasma exchange therapy
was initiated; the patient regained consciousness after two cycles of plasma exchange, and seizures and dyskinesias were controlled after
three cycles of this treatment. An additional four cycles of plasma exchange were given to reinforce the efficacy. Repeat MRI performed 1
month after plasma exchange showed partial resolution of the hyperintense lesions in bilateral subcortical white matter on FLAIR and DWI
(Fig. 1c,d). MRI performed 2 months after plasma exchange showed complete resolution (Fig. 1e,f). Repeat CSF analysis revealed normal
leucocytes (2 × 106/L), as well as normal protein and glucose levels. Anti-NMDA receptor antibodies were undetectable in serum and CSF. At
12-months follow-up, the patient remained well and has had no relapse of seizures and dyskinesias. Our patient presented with acute
psychiatric symptoms, followed by low-grade fever, decreased consciousness, dyskinesias, and seizures. This case demonstrates the classic
clinical presentation of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis. Identification of anti-NMDA receptor antibodies in serum and CSF confirmed the
diagnosis. In recent years, autoimmune etiologies of encephalitis are increasingly being recognized. Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis has
been regarded as the second most common immune-mediated cause, after acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, and is more prevalent than all
antibody-associated encephalitis. This disease is a highly characteristic and recognizable neuropsychiatric syndrome, although atypical
cases may exist . It is most common in young women and children. Over half of the patients have an associated tumor, most commonly an
ovarian teratoma . Brain MRI in patients with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis may be either normal or abnormal. The frequency of abnormal
brain MRI is not as common as in infectious encephalitis such as herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE). It has previously been described that
more than 90% of patients with HSE have MRI abnormalities, usually in the temporal lobe, frontobasal, and insular regions . In a clinical-
radiological comparison between herpetic encephalitis and limbic encephalitis of autoimmune etiologies (including anti-NMDA receptor
encephalitis), MRI was abnormal in all cases of the former, but only in 60% of the latter . In a cohort of 100 patients with anti-NMDA
receptor encephalitis, brain MRI was unremarkable in 45 patients; in the other patients, T2 or FLAIR signal hyperintensity was seen in the
hippocampi, cerebellar or cerebral cortex, frontobasal and insular regions, basal ganglia, and brainstem . In another cohort of 44 patients,
only 4 patients had abnormalities in the hippocampi, and 6 patients had abnormalities within white matter regions on T2/FLAIR . The initial
MRI of our case showed hyperintense lesions in bilateral subcortical white matter on FLAIR and DWI. FLAIR combined with DWI is more
sensitive in detecting abnormalities than conventional MRI sequences. DWI has long been established as a routine imaging procedure in acute
ischemic stroke. It is exquisitely sensitive in demonstrating even minute acute ischemic lesions . It is now also used to diagnose other
disorders including limbic system encephalitis. To our knowledge, multifocal subcortical white matter lesions on FLAIR and DWI have rarely
been reported in previous literature, and serial MRI changes after plasma exchange have not been presented before. The clinical presentation
of our patient, however, seemed unrelated to the lesions seen on FLAIR and DWI. Such abnormalities on MRI resemble that of demyelinating
diseases such as acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, neuromyelitis optica, or multiple sclerosis. This may reflect autoimmune-mediated
white matter disease. Literature suggests that anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis may have overlapping characteristics with other autoimmune
diseases. For example, Zoccarato et al. described a case of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis followed by neuromyelitis optica . The
coexistence of multiple autoimmune diseases is increasingly recognized among autoantibody-associated neurological syndromes . The treatment
of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis includes immunotherapy and tumor removal, if applicable. As of yet, no randomized trials have been
performed to evaluate the efficacy of immunotherapy. In a cohort of 577 patients (501 assessable), 472 underwent first-line immunotherapy
(steroids, IVIg, or plasma exchange) or tumor removal, resulting in improvement within 4 weeks in 251 patients. Of the 221 patients who did
not improve with first-line treatment, 125 received second-line immunotherapy (rituximab or cyclophosphamide), which resulted in a better
outcome. Predictors of good outcome were early treatment and no admission to an intensive care unit . For immunotherapy of anti-NMDA
receptor encephalitis, Dalmau et al. prefer concurrent IVIg and methylprednisolone to plasma exchange because plasma exchange is more
difficult to do in children, poorly cooperative patients, or patients with autonomic instability. If no response is seen after 10 days,
second-line therapy should be initiated . Other methods of immunotherapy have also been reported on rare occasions. Liba et al. described an
8-year old girl with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis who had no response to sequential IVIg, plasma exchange and high-dose corticosteroids,
rituximab, and cyclophosphamide treatment, but responded well to alemtuzumab, an anti-CD52 monoclonal antibody that affects memory B cells
and T cells . Our patient was initially treated with combined IVIg and methylprednisolone without demonstrable improvement. However, she
responded well after plasma exchange was initiated. After several cycles of plasma exchange, she made a full recovery. Repeat detection of
anti-NMDA receptor antibodies in serum and CSF were negative, and repeat MRI performed 1 month and 2 months after plasma exchange showed
gradual resolution of the lesions. We describe a case of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis concomitant with multifocal subcortical white
matter lesions on FLAIR and DWI. This patient responded well to plasma exchange treatment, after which the lesions resolved. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and the accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the editor of this journal. Anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis Cerebrospinal fluid Magnetic
resonance imaging Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery Diffuse weighted images Anti-double-stranded DNA Antineutrophilcytoplasmic antibodies
Anti-thyroglobulin antibodies Anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies Computed tomography Electroencephalography Polymerase chain reaction
Intravenous immunoglobulin Herpes simplex encephalitis Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions RJW contributed to data collection and draft of the manuscript. DQ contributed to data collection and patient follow-
up. BDC contributed to collection and analysis of MRI data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Dr. Hong-
Yan Bi, Department of Neurology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, People’s Republic of China, for her
helpful suggestions to the manuscript.
