Clostridium difficile is the major etiological agent of pseudomembranous colitis and is found in up to 20% of adult inpatients. The
recommended treatment is antibiotic therapy with metronidazole and/or vancomycin. However, the recurrence rate may reach up to 25% and it
increases in each episode. The newest alternative to treat diarrhea due to recurrent Clostridium difficile is fecal microbiota
transplantation. The procedure was performed in 12 patients, with a 6-month follow-up on 10 of them. Of the ten cases, bacterial recurrence
was diagnosed in only one patient, after a course of antibiotic to treat urinary tract infection, without presenting with diarrhea. The
particularity of our study, besides being an unprecedented event in South America, is the way to perform the infusion of fecal microbiota by
enteroscopy. Clostridium difficile, the main etiological agent of pseudomembranous colitis, is an anaerobic, sporeforming, Gram-positive
bacillus present in the intestinal flora of up to 20% of hospitalized adults. Of these patients, only 1 to 5% develop diarrhea and the rest
remains asymptomatic. The risk of contracting the infection seems to be directly proportional to the length of stay, and is related to the
use of antibiotics. However, the incidence, intensity and recurrence rate of this disease have been increasing. Furthermore, the
introduction of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique to screen for Clostridium difficile made the detection of this organism
significantly more effective, which may explain the striking increase in incidence of this infection.(1) The clinical picture resulting from
this infection ranges from asymptomatic cases, to diarrhea that improves by simply discontinuing antibiotics and applying clinical support
measures, or event to cases of uncontrollable diarrhea, with subsequent sepsis and toxic megacolon. The mortality rate can be as high as 58%
in the latter cases.(2) The treatment currently recommended is antibiotic therapy with metronidazole and/or vancomycin. The response to
antibiotics may be poor, and the recurrence rate can reach up to 25%. After the first relapse, the risk of a second one rises to 40%, and
for multiple recurrences, the risk exceeds 50%.(3) Recently, fidaxomicin emerged as an alternative for cases of resistant Clostridium
difficile. Though more efficient than traditional antibiotics, this drug is not yet available in Brazil, and its efficacy has not been
definitively assessed. The most recent alternative for the treatment of diarrhea caused by recurrent Clostridium difficile is fecal
microbiota transplantation. The concept is not new and the first publications date back to 1958.(4) However, for many reasons, either
cultural or due to disbelief among the scientific community, it took more than five decades for this line of thought to be resumed. In the
beginning of the decade, several articles described the use of fecal microbiota transplantation in patients with recurrent Clostridium
difficile infection. However, the medical community remained incredulous. It was only last year -after a publication in The New England
Journal of Medicine (NEJM) - that the medical community realized how promising this technique could be. The most impressive about the
article published in the NEJM was the striking difference between the groups treated with antibiotics or fecal microbiota transplantation.
The latter was so superior that the study was interrupted by the Institutional Review Board of the organization.(3) In previous
publications, the infusion of fecal microbiota was performed using enemas, colonoscopies or slow infusion by nasogastric tube, with the
patient awake.(1–4) The donor is usually a family member of the patient who meets certain criteria, such as not having used antibiotics in
the previous six months, being immunocompromised, and having no history of illicit drug use, tumors or inflammatory bowel disease. Some
tests are performed for screening: serology for hepatitis A, B and C, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), fecal parasitology, fecal test for
Clostridium difficile, and fecal culture. After donor selection, the fecal material is collected and processed in the laboratory by dilution
with 0.9% saline, resulting in the solution to be infused into the recipient. We recently had the opportunity to discuss an unprecedented
case of an 82-year-old patient with chronic renal failure and Clostridium difficile diarrhea for over 4 months. The patient was treated with
metronidazole and vancomycin several times with numerous relapses. He was offered the option to receive a fecal microbiota transplantation.
His only condition was that he did not witness the nasoenteral infusion. For this reason, we chose to perform the fecal microbiota
transplantation endoscopically, under sedation, infusing the microbiota through the working channel in the proximal jejunum. The procedure
was uneventful and, to our surprise, the diarrhea stopped within 24 hours. Patient has been followed-up for about 12 months with no clinical
relapse. Since then, we have carried out another 12 cases, 10 of which over 6 months ago. In only one of these 10 cases did the bacterial
infection relapse, after a new cycle of antibiotic therapy to treat an urinary tract infection, without diarrhea. In addition to its being
an unprecedented case in South America, another particularity of our case series was the method for the fecal microbiota infusion. To date,
there are no reports in the literature of fecal microbiota transplantations performed by oral push enteroscopy. We believe this is a good
alternative for not requiring the patient to be subjected to colonoscopy, or exposed to the physical and moral discomfort of receiving a
nasoenteral infusion of fecal material. O Clostridium difficile é o principal agente etiológico da colite pseudomembranosa e está presente
em até 20% dos adultos hospitalizados. O tratamento recomendado é a antibioticoterapia com metronidazol e/ou vancomicina. No entanto, a taxa
de recidiva chega a 25% e aumenta conforme a recorrência. A mais recente alternativa para o tratamento da diarreia por Clostridium difficile
recorrente é o transplante de microbiota fecal. Realizamos 12 casos, tendo 10 deles ocorridos há mais de 6 meses. Desses dez casos, houve
recidiva bacteriana em apenas um deles, após novo ciclo de antibiótico para tratamento de infecção do trato urinário, sem a presença de
diarreia. A particularidade da nossa casuística, além de ser um fato inédito na América do Sul, deveu-se à maneira de realizar a infusão da
microbiota fecal, que foi por via enteroscópica. O Clostridium difficile, principal agente etiológico da colite pseudomembranosa, é um
bacilo Gram-positivo, anaeróbio e esporulado presente na flora intestinal de até 20% dos adultos hospitalizados. Destes, somente 1 a 5%
desenvolvem diarreia, e o restante permanece assintomático. O risco de contrair a infecção parece ser diretamente proporcional ao tempo de
internação e está relacionado ao uso de antibióticos. No entanto, incidência, intensidade e taxa de recorrência dessa afecção vêm
aumentando. Além disso, a introdução da técnica de reação em cadeia da polimerase (PCR) para a pesquisa de Clostridium difficile aumentou
significativamente a eficácia da detecção da bactéria, o que talvez explique o incrível aumento da incidência dessa infecção.(1) O quadro
clínico decorrente dessa infecção varia desde quadros assintomáticos, diarreia que melhora com a simples a descontinuação do antibiótico e
medidas de suporte clínico, até quadros de diarreia incoercível, com consequente sepse e megacólon tóxico. A taxa mortalidade pode chegar a
58% nesses quadros.(2) Atualmente, o tratamento recomendado é a antibioticoterapia com metronidazol e/ou vancomicina. A resposta à
antibioticoterapia pode ser precária, e a taxa de recorrência chega a 25%. Após a primeira recorrência, o risco de apresentar uma segunda
recorrência aumenta para 40% e, para múltiplas recorrências, o risco ultrapassa 50%.(3) Recentemente, a fidaxomicina surgiu como uma
alternativa para os casos de Clostridium difficile resistentes. Apesar de mais eficiente que os antibióticos tradicionais, essa medicação
ainda não está disponível no nosso meio, e sua eficácia não está definitivamente avaliada. A mais recente alternativa para o tratamento da
diarreia por Clostridium difficile recorrente é o transplante de microbiota fecal. O conceito não é novo e as primeiras publicações a
respeito datam de 1958.(4) Porém, por vários motivos, desde culturais até a descrença do meio científico, passaram-se mais de cinco décadas
até que essa linha de raciocínio fosse retomada. No início dessa década, foram publicados vários artigos segundo os quais utilizou-se o
transplante de microbiota fecal para pacientes com recorrência da infecção por Clostridium difficile. Mesmo assim, o meio médico manteve-se
incrédulo. Foi somente no ano passado, com uma publicação no The New England Journal of Medicine (NEJM), que a comunidade médica percebeu o
quão promissora pode ser essa técnica. O mais impressionante do trabalho publicado no NEJM foi a discrepância dos resultados apresentados
entre o grupo tratado com antibióticos e o tratado com transplante de microbiota fecal. Este último foi tão superior que o estudo foi
interrompido pelo Comitê de Ética Médica da instituição.(3) Nas publicações anteriores, a infusão da microbiota fecal foi realizada por meio
de enemas, colonoscopias ou infusões lentas por sonda nasoenteral, com o paciente acordado.(1–4) O indivíduo doador é geralmente um membro
da família do paciente e que se enquadra em alguns critérios, como não ter feito uso de antibiótico nos últimos 6 meses, ser
imunocomprometido, e não ter antecedente de uso de drogas ilícitas, tumor ou doença inflamatória intestinal. São feitos alguns exames para
triagem: sorologia para hepatites A, B e C, vírus da imunodeficiência humana (HIV), protoparasitológico de fezes, pesquisa de Clostridium
difficile nas fezes, além de cultura fecal. Uma vez selecionado o doador, o material fecal é colhido e processado em laboratório, de modo
que fique diluído com soro fisiológico a 0,9%, formando a solução a ser infundida no indivíduo receptor. Recentemente, tivemos a
oportunidade de tratar, de forma inédita no nosso meio, um caso de um paciente de 82 anos com insuficiência renal crônica e diarreia por
Clostridium difficile há mais de 4 meses. O paciente foi tratado com metronidazol e vancomicina por várias vezes, sempre com recidiva do
quadro. A ele foi oferecida a opção do tratamento com transplante de microbiota fecal. A única condição imposta por ele foi de que não
presenciasse a infusão por via nasoentérica. Por esse motivo, optamos pela realização do transplante de microbiota fecal por via
endoscópica, sob sedação, com a microbiota sendo infundida por meio do canal de trabalho no jejuno proximal. O procedimento transcorreu sem
intercorrências e, para a nossa surpresa, a diarreia cessou em 24 horas. O paciente permanece em acompanhamento há cerca de 12 meses, sem
recidiva clínica do quadro. Desde então, já realizamos 12 casos, sendo 10 deles há mais de 6 meses. Destes dez casos, houve recidiva
bacteriana em um deles, após novo ciclo de antibiótico para tratamento de infecção do trato urinário, sem a presença de diarreia. A
particularidade da nossa casuística, além de ser um fato inédito na América do Sul, deveu-se à maneira de realizar a infusão da microbiota
fecal. Até o presente momento, não há relatos na literatura de transplante de microbiota fecal por meio de enteroscopia, por via oral.
Acreditamos que essa seja uma boa alternativa para tal, uma vez que o paciente não precisa se submeter a uma colonoscopia para a infusão do
material, nem ficar exposto ao desconforto físico e moral da infusão por via nasoenteral do material fecal.
