There has been reported increased incidence of ovarian tuberculosis in the tropics since the advent of HIV/AIDS disease. We report a case of
bilateral ovarian tuberculosis associated with a single right kidney of uncertain origin in an immunocompetent 15-year-old generally
healthy-looking girl. Abdominopelvic scan was equivocal about the diagnosis of the lesion as it failed to differentiate it from malignancy.
Tuberculin and histopathology were necessary to confirm the diagnosis of ovarian tuberculosis. Antituberculous medical therapy successfully
resolved the disease. Tuberculosis is a deficiency that is increasing since the advent of HIV/AIDS with 9 million new cases and 3 million
deaths in the world per year. Its extra-pulmonary aspect is more and more dealt with. Of these extra-pulmonary forms, the pelvic location
precisely the genital has an imprecise incidence up to now. We report a rare case of bilateral ovarian tuberculosis associated with the
right single kidney by insisting on our diagnostic difficulties of which the anatomopathological examination is the key. A 15 years teenager
girl presented with 3 months intermittent generalised abdominal pain, fever, anorexia, progressively increasing abdominal mass and
constipation but with no associated diarrhoea or vomiting. She had a history of contact with a person with chronic cough. Clinical
examination showed a firm, mobile left iliac fossa mass with an ill-defined edge, extending to the periumbilical region. Digital rectal
examination showed an anterior rectal mass associated with a retro rectal nodule. Abdominopelvic ultrasonography and scandemonstrated a huge
multi compartmentalised cystic mass with imprecise site of origin, minimal intraperitoneal fluid collection, multiple deep lymph node
enlargement and absence of the right kidney [Figures 1 and 2]. The mass encroached on the left kidney. Sputum examination did not show any
acid-fast bacteria. Tuberculin test was positive at 16 mm. Alpha-fetoprotein and beta human chorionic gonadotrophin levels were normal.
Haemoglobin level was 8.6 g/dL, but there was no leucocytosis. She was nonreactive to HIV screening. Scanning of the pelvic region with
injection of product of contrast on the axial section. Right single kidney and left ovarian multi compartmentalised mass Scanning of the
abdominopelvic in the front section: Front and profile view of the ovarian tumor Operative findings were a left necrotic polycystic ovarian
mass, dilated ipsilateral fallopian tube, multiple nodes and a minimal peritoneal reaction. The contralateral ovary was polycystic and
nodular with a normal fallopian tube. Oophorectomy was performed with a left adnexectomy and resection of the cystic pockets of the
contralateral ovary. Histological examination of the specimen performed showed the presence of epithelial giant cellular follicles and
caseous necrosis [Figure 3], consistent with the diagnosis of caseofollicular tuberculosis of the ovaries. Histopathology: Caseo follicular
tuberculosis Two years after a 6 months treatment for tuberculosis, patient was in good general condition with a radiological evidence of
disappearance of the tumour in the contralateral ovary [Figures 4 and 5]. Control scan after antibacillary treatment: Axial section Control
scan after antibacillary treatment: Frontal section The incidence of tuberculosis is rising as a result of HIV/AIDS infection with 9 million
of new cases and 3 million of deaths in the world per year. The extra-pulmonary form is in the order of 15-30% of cases. The pelvic form
represents 6-10% of the cases, involving the fallopian tubes, the cervical and endometrial region in that order of frequency. Ovarian
involvement is rarer. The tumour form of genital tuberculosis can be found at any age, predominance in young women aged 20-30 years. The
ovarian tuberculosis shared clinical, radiologic and biologic features with a malignant tumour of the ovary in many cases, especially in the
absence of abundant ascites and positivity of the tumour markers. Diagnosis in the absence of histological examination is almost impossible.
The laparoscopic instead of the open surgery biopsy determines the diagnosis in more than 97% of the cases. Although the treatment is
medical with a good prognosis, the future fertility in this young patient may be compromised. Pelvic tuberculosis is responsible for tubo-
ovarian infertility in more than 39% of cases. The uniqueness of the index case is its association with a single kidney. The occurrence of a
single kidney is rare, with a reported incidence of 1/1000 birth. The absence of the kidney is probably of genetic origin (agenesis). The
risk in this patient is the localisation of the tubercular mass on the “precious” kidney. This pseudo-tumour could cause diagnostic
confusion because it could be confused with a malignant renal tumour, compound treatment decision-making in a single kidney. Source of
Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
