To the Editor: I want to introduce to you a very unusual case today. A 24-year-old man consulted us because of a 2-year history of
palpitations and shortness of breath after physical exertion. Physical examination revealed a heart rate of 80 beats/min and blood pressure
of 150/70 mmHg. Heart auscultation revealed diastolic and systolic (class VI) murmurs between the 3rd and 4th ribs at the left sternal
border. His New York Heart Association functional class was III. Echocardiography showed a slightly enlarged left ventricle (57 mm) with
significant widening of the aortic root, a thin right coronary sinus with extension into the distal right ventricular outflow tract, and a
1.4 cm diameter defect in the upper part of the outflow tract. Transesophageal echocardiography showed the aortic root diameter was 46.2 cm.
There was mild aortic regurgitation with an aortic valve area of 2.24 cm2. Doppler ultrasonography showed continuous diastolic and systolic
blood flow from the defect in the right ventricular outflow tract, with a flow rate of 4.49 m/s and a pressure difference of 80 mmHg; and
increased blood flow velocity at the pulmonary valve orifice. The patient was diagnosed with a ruptured sinus of the valsalva aneurysm
(RSVA). As the patient urged to take the minimally invasive treatment, we chose transcatheter closure. Moreover, the patient signed a
consent form for the use of a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) occluder. For aortic root angiography, the patient was placed horizontally, and
1% lidocaine was infiltrated for local anesthesia. The right femoral vein and femoral artery were punctured, and a 6 Fr sheath was placed in
each vessel. A 6 Fr pigtail catheter was advanced via the femoral artery to the aortic root. Multi-angle angiography was performed. The 45°
right anterior oblique view clearly showed an RSVA. The base of the defect was 14 mm in diameter and irregular, and extended into the right
ventricular outflow tract [Figure 1]. The distance between the ostium of the right coronary artery and the neck of the defect was 20 mm.
Moreover, the distance between the aortic annulus and the defect was 18 mm. A 12 Fr PDA delivery sheath was advanced via the femoral vein to
the aorta, and the defect was occluded with an 18–20 mm PDA occluder (Xin Jian, China). Angiography showed a small amount of residual shunt
[Figure 2]. Coronary angiography showed device had no effect on the coronary artery. The patient was asked to take aspirin for 6 months. (a
and b) The angiography before closure. (a-c) The angiography after closure. After the procedure, the New York Heart Association functional
class was II. Echocardiography showed mild enlargement of the left ventricle (58 mm). Doppler ultrasonography showed a 3.75 cm2 area of
blood flow from the aortic valve orifice to the left ventricular outflow tract during diastole. Transesophageal echocardiography showed the
aortic root diameter was 40 cm. There was aortic regurgitation with an aortic valve area of 2.27 cm2. The patient was discharged after his
symptoms improved. Six months after the procedure, auscultation revealed a diastolic murmur between the 3rd and 4th ribs at the left sternal
border. Echocardiography showed a left ventricular size of 52 mm, and an increased area of aortic regurgitation (4.9 cm2). One year after
the procedure, the patient experienced recurrence of palpitations and shortness of breath during physical exertion. Echocardiography showed
mild prolapse of the right coronary cusp of the aortic valve, and an eccentric 5.5 cm2 area of blood flow from the aortic valve orifice to
the left ventricular outflow tract during diastole. Blood flow was observed at the lower edge of the occluder, measuring 0.23 cm in width
with a flow velocity of 5.35 m/s. The patient underwent surgical repair 1 month later. Successful transcatheter closure of RSVAs has been
reported with increasing frequency since 1994. Kerkar et al. reported 20 patients who underwent transcatheter closure of an RSVA (median
defect size 9 mm, range: 4–11 mm). In our patient, the heart murmur disappeared, and the cardiac chambers reduced in size for a short time
after the procedure. The residual shunt disappeared because the edge of the defect was occluded by local thrombosis. The main reasons for
the poor long-term outcome in this case are as follows. First, the aortic sinus aneurysm caused a large defect (14 mm diameter), and some of
the adjacent tissues were fragile and weak. Second, the defect was closed using an 18–20 mm PDA occluder. The weight of this large occluder
caused deformation of the aortic annulus, resulting in increased aortic regurgitation and enlargement of the left ventricle. There are
currently no dedicated occluders for the treatment of RSVA, and PDA occluders are commonly used for this condition. In a reported case of
RSVA with two defects, two occluders were used. Successful closure of an RSVA with a modified double-disk ventricular occluder (Shanghai
Shape Memory Alloy Ltd., China) has also been reported. Rittger et al. successfully used an Amplatzer Vascular Plug II to close an RSVA.
Considering our patient's large defect, the domestic thin-waist-big-side type ventricular septal defect occluder might have been a better
choice, as it weighs less than the PDA occluder and would have caused less traction on the aortic annulus. In conclusion, interventional
treatment failed in this case because of the large size of the defect and generally low success rate of such procedures. Use of a relatively
large occluder caused traction on the aortic annulus, resulting in increased aortic regurgitation. If the diameter of the RSVA defect
exceeds 10 mm, we recommend surgical treatment rather than transcatheter closure. Development of dedicated occluders for the treatment of
RSVA is urgently needed. Edited by: Xiu-Yuan Hao Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
