We report a case of transient biventricular dysfunction post therapeutic pericardiocentesis, with classic features of stress cardiomyopathy
(SCM). In our patient, the clinical and echocardiographic features were more in keeping with Takotsubo-type SCM than pericardial
decompression syndrome (PDS). Our case is instructive in challenging our understanding of the aetiology of LV dysfunction complicating
pericardiocentesis, and in highlighting the importance of careful clinical evaluation (altered heart rate and dyspnoea) in suspecting acute
LV dysfunction after initial clinical improvement with pericardial aspiration. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s12947-015-0026-3) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. We report a case of reversible
biventricular dysfunction following successful pericardiocentesis with classic features of stress or “Takotsubo” cardiomyopathy (SCM).
Reports of SCM after pericardiocentesis are rare , as distinct from so-called pericardial decompression syndrome (PDS) which encompasses a
spectrum of features of cardiac decompensation after large volume pericardiocentesis, including pulmonary oedema, adult respiratory distress
syndrome, severe bi-ventricular failure and cardiogenic shock . Our case is instructive in challenging our understanding of the aetiology of
LV dysfunction complicating pericardiocentesis, and in highlighting the importance of careful clinical observations (heart rate and
dyspnoea) in suspecting acute LV dysfunction after initial clinical improvement with pericardiocentesis. A 62-year-old male presented with
progressive dyspnoea for 10 days. He had a background of stage IV metastatic non-small lung carcinoma treated for 6 months with non-
cardiotoxic chemotherapy (carboplatin and gemcitabine), and recently commenced on target therapy (Erlotinib). Clinical examination revealed
signs consistent with cardiac tamponade, including significant pulsus paradoxus, tachycardia (heart rate 101), tachypnea (respiratory rate
25), elevated jugular venous pressure and muffled heart sounds. He was normotensive at 130/90mmHg. The patient was extremely anxious and
spontaneously expressed concern about his imminent death. His electrocardiogram (ECG) (Fig. 1) demonstrated electrical alternans and bedside
transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a large pericardial effusion with features of cardiac tamponade, including diastolic
compression of both right atrium and ventricle (Fig. 2, Additional file 1: Video 1 and Additional file 2: Video 2) and large mitral inflow
variation (Fig. 3). Urgent pericardiocentesis was performed with a restricted aspiration of only 600 ml drained initially over the first
hour, and a total drainage of 1.8 l of heavily blood-stained pericardial fluid over 36 h. During initial aspiration of pericardial fluid
there was immediate symptomatic relief and haemodynamic improvement (heart rate decreased to 80/min, respiratory rate decreased to 15
breaths/min and BP increased to 150/70 mmHg).Fig. 1ECG on first presentation with tamponade demonstrating reduced voltage and electrical
alternansFig. 2Apical four chamber view on initial presenation demonstating large pericardial effusion with tamponade causing compression of
right heart chambers (red arrows). LV function was normal prior to pericardiocentesisFig. 3Transmitral inflow traces showing signicicant
respiratory phase variation, consistant with tamponade on first presentation ECG on first presentation with tamponade demonstrating reduced
voltage and electrical alternans Apical four chamber view on initial presenation demonstating large pericardial effusion with tamponade
causing compression of right heart chambers (red arrows). LV function was normal prior to pericardiocentesis Transmitral inflow traces
showing signicicant respiratory phase variation, consistant with tamponade on first presentation Overnight (9 h post procedure) the patient
developed chest discomfort, dyspnea, tachycardia (HR 110) and tachypnoea (RR 24). TTE the next morning showed no re-accumulation of
pericardial fluid, but detected new severe impairment in function of both ventricles, with akinesis of the apex and peri-apical region
(Figs. 4 and 5, Additional file 3: Video 3 and Additional file 4: Video 4). Biomarkers demonstrated a rise in highly sensitive troponin from
8 to 224ng/L, but creatinine kinase did not rise significantly (107 to 116U/L). ECG after chest pain demonstrated resolution of the
electrical alternans, with new loss of R waves in the anterior leads (Fig. 6).Fig. 4Parasternal long view post pericardiocentesis
demonstrating apical ballooning (red arrows) as a result of apical and peri-apical akinesisFig. 5Apical four chamber view post
pericardiocentesis demonstrating apical ballooning (red arrows) as a result of apical and peri-apical akinesisFig. 6ECG after the chest
discomfort following pericardiocentesis showing resolution of electrical alternans, and loss of R waves in V1 and V2 Parasternal long view
post pericardiocentesis demonstrating apical ballooning (red arrows) as a result of apical and peri-apical akinesis Apical four chamber view
post pericardiocentesis demonstrating apical ballooning (red arrows) as a result of apical and peri-apical akinesis ECG after the chest
discomfort following pericardiocentesis showing resolution of electrical alternans, and loss of R waves in V1 and V2 Based on a presumptive
diagnosis of SCM, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor and long acting beta-blocker were commenced, chemotherapy withheld and the patient
discharged for early clinical and echocardiographic review. Serial follow up TTEs showed normalization of bi-ventricular function after two
weeks (Figs. 7 and 8, Additional file 5: Video 5 and Additional file 6: Video 6), and restoration of R waves on subsequent ECGs (Fig. 9).
Subsequent computed tomography examination showed normal coronary arteries with a calcium score of zero and no evidence of LAD laceration or
dissection.Fig. 7Is an apical four chamber view 2 weeks post pericardiocentesis and development of LV dysfunction showing resolution of the
apical ballooning in systole with normal LV systolic functionFig. 8Parasternal long view in systole (2 weeks post pericardiocentesis and
development of LV dysfunction), showing resolution of both akinesis in the mid septum and apical ballooning (apex not well visulised
here)Fig. 9ECG 2 months post event demonstrating resolution of ischemic changes in ECG in Figure 6 Is an apical four chamber view 2 weeks
post pericardiocentesis and development of LV dysfunction showing resolution of the apical ballooning in systole with normal LV systolic
function Parasternal long view in systole (2 weeks post pericardiocentesis and development of LV dysfunction), showing resolution of both
akinesis in the mid septum and apical ballooning (apex not well visulised here) ECG 2 months post event demonstrating resolution of ischemic
changes in ECG in Figure 6 The patient presented three months later with re-accumulation of pericardial effusion and tamponade. Therapeutic
pericardiocentesis was performed with 500 ml of blood stained pericardial fluid drained immediately, with 1.9 L in total over 36 h. On this
presentation he was relaxed and well adjusted in regards to his diagnosis. No LV dysfunction was detected on serial follow-up
echocardiograms after the second pericardiocentesis (Fig. 10)Fig. 10Time line of clinical events. Time line of clinical events Our patient
developed biventricular apical dysfunction following successful and judicious pericardiocentesis, with features typical of stress or
“Takotsubo cardiomyopathy”. The case is instructive for its comparison with PDS and the clinical pattern of initial improvement followed by
deterioration respectively due to pericardial aspiration and myocardial pathology. In light of the timing of onset of biventricular
impairment immediately post procedure PDS is an important differential diagnosis. Other differentials such as laceration to the ventricle or
left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery were clinically unlikely. The former was excluded by the absence of new pericardial bleed
post procedure. Laceration of the LAD was also clinically unlikely given relatively small rise in cardiac enzymes and absence of large
infarct, the presence of concurrent RV dysfunction, spontaneous recovery of ventricular function in a short period of time; additionally CT
scan showed no evidence of haematoma or injury to the LAD. Accordingly, we reviewed the literature describing SCM and PDS. Whereas SCM has
been rarely reported after pericardiocentesis, much has been published on PDS. The incidence of PDS or new left or right systolic
dysfunction has been reported to range from 5 % to 36 % of patients post pericardiocentesis [3, 4], especially after malignant pericardial
effusions. Although the first case report of PDS in 1983 noted APO with preserved LV function , most subsequent reports describe severe
impairment of left, right or bi- ventricular function, which may be segmental or global (Tables 1 and 2).Table 1Summary of reported cases of
LVF post pericardiocentesis: Clinical characteristicsReportAge/GenderClinical ScenarioChronicity of effusionType of pericardi-
ocentesisNature of pericardial fluidFluid drainedTime to onset of symptomsSymptomSignsVanDyke (1983) 42 MUnwell for 10 daysDaysPExudate
(malignant)680 mlsMinutesDyspnoeaLVFShenoy (1984) 57 MRecent myocardial infarctionDaysPTransudate1000 mlsMinutesDyspnoeaLVFGlasser (1988) 33
MRespiratory tract infection 3 months prior, history of Down’s and Ventricular Septal DefectWeeksSTransudate2000 mlsMinutesDyspnoeaLVFDowney
(1991) 50 MTraumatic (3 weeks post motor vehicle accident)WeeksPNot specified450 mls then 1500 mlsMinutesDyspnoeaLVFWolfe (1993) 46 F2
weeks, history of breast cancer priorWeeksPExudate650 mlsWeeksDyspnoeaLVFWolfe (1993) 50 F2 weeks, history of breast cancer
priorWeeksPExudate650 mlsWeeksDyspnoeaLVFHamaya (1993) 16 FUnwell, lymphoma with pericardial effusion for 3 yearsMonthsPNot specified700
mlsWeeksDyspnoeaCS, and no APOBraverman (1994) 27 FUnwell for 3 weeks (Atrial Septal Defect closure 13 years prior)WeeksP then
STransudate500 mls then 100 mlsDaysDyspnoea, pleuritic chest painLVF, RVF, CSAnguera (1996) 68 FHistory of bowel cancer, anorexia and
dyspnoea for 1 monthWeeksPMalignant800 mlsMinutes-CSSunday (1999) 60 F3 days of dyspnoea, lung cancer with pericardial
involvementDaysSExudate700 mlsMinutesDyspnoeaCS, LVFChamoun (2003) 36 F2 months post Mitral valve replacement and Tricuspid
repairDaysPExudate1070 mlsHoursDyspnoeaCS, LVFChamoun (2003) 46 FMetastatic cancerWeeksPExudate1000 mlsHoursDyspnoeaCS, LVFGeffroy (2004) 53
M1 month post chemotherapy for cancerWeeksSExudate1500 mlsNot specifiedDyspnoea, hypoxiaCS, LVF, RVFLigero (2006) 41 FLung cancer with
hepatic metastasesDaysPExudate1000 mlsHoursDyspnoeaLVF, RHFBernal (2007) 45 FAcute myeloid leukemiaDaysPExudate500 mlsHoursDyspnoeaCS,
LVFDosios (2007) 66 FHematoma, 10 day history of dyspnoeaDaysSExudate500 mls initiallyHours-CSSevimli (2008) 42 FInfective - tuberculous
pericarditisDaysSExudate500 mlsHoursDyspnoeaCS and LVFKhalili (2008) 32 F2 months post aortic and mitral valve replacement
surgeryWeeksPTransudate1000 mlsHoursDyspnoeaCSFlores (2009) 80 MUnwell for weeks, multiple myeloma, stent 2 weeks
priorWeeksPTransudate1200mlsDaysDyspnoeaCS and LVFKaramichalis (2009) 19 F2 months post motor vehicle accidentWeeksPExudate1600
mlsHoursDyspnoeaLVFLee (2010) 14 MInfective – tuberculous pericarditisDaysPExudateNot specifiedHoursDyspnoeaCS, LVFLim (2011) 44
FHypothyroidism related heart failure. Dyspnoea and fatigue for 4 monthsWeeksSExudate1.3L9 h-CSAbdelsalam (2012) 65 FStage IV Non small cell
lung cancer for 6 months, 1 week of dyspnoeaWeeksSMalignantComplete drainage of pericardial effusion intraoperativelySecondsAsystole during
surgeryCSWeijers (2013) 69 FWeight loss and dyspnoea-P-800 mls6 h-LVFLiang (2014) 56 FPolymyositis. Progressive dyspnoea on exertion-P-275
mls initially, with ongoing drainSeveral hoursPleuritic chest painNilVersaci (2015) 78 F3 months post mitral valve repairDaysPPossibly
transudate500 mlsHoursDyspnoeaLVF Abbreviations: P percutaneous, S surgical, CS cardiogenic shock (hypotension, tachycardia), LVF Left heart
failure, RVF right heart failureTable 2Summary of reported cases of LVF post pericardiocentesis: Electrocardiographic, biochemical,
echocardiographic and outcome parametersReportLV function pre tapLV function post tapRV function post tapRegional wall motion abnormalityBio
markerECGCoronary artery imagingInotrope, IABP or IntubationDeathLV recoveryVanDyke (1983) NormalNormal (EF 67%)-NilNormalNormal-
IntubationNoNormal LVShenoy (1984) -Mild LV impairmentNormalSeptal hypokinesisNormalT wave abnormality and ST elevation V5-6--NoNormalised
few days laterGlasser (1987) -Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure normalNormal (RVP increased)----IntubationNoClinical improvementDowney
(1991) -Inferred to be normalNormal--Normal-NoNoNormal LVWolfe (1993) Normal, EF > 50%EF 30%-Severe global hypokinesis of LV----NoNormalised
after 7 daysWolfe (1993) Normal, EF > 50%EF 25%-Antero-apical akinesis and apical dyskinesis-----Normalised after 2 weeksHamaya (1993)
Normal--Not providedNormalST elevation-Inotropes and intubationNo-Braverman (1994) EF 20%EF 20%EF <15%Not provided-----EF 45% in 9 days then
normalised after a few weeksAnguera (1996) -Mildly impaired. Normal capillary wedge pressureSeverely dilated and severely impaired
contractility, EF <15%Paradoxical septal motion--Normal coronary arteriesInotropesNoComplete recovery of biventricular fn after 10
daysSunday (1999) EF 65%EF 30%Severely impaired contractilityGlobal hypokinesis---IntubationYesNoChamoun (2003) Normal, EF > 50%EF
20%-Regional wall motion abnormality-SRNormal coronary arteriesInotropes and IABPNoNormalised 2 weeks laterChamoun (2003) Normal, EF > 50%EF
20%-Akinesis of mid anterior wall and septum /dilatation of LV-SR-NoNoNormalised 2 weeks laterGeffroy (2004) Normal, EF > 50%EF >50%EF
<15%Akinetic and dilated RVElevatedOld RBBBNormal coronary arteriesInotropes and intubationYes-Ligero (2006) Normal, EF 75%EF 25%Severe
impairmentAkinesis of anterior, septum and apexNormal CKNormalNormal coronary arteriesInotropesNoNormalised 10 days laterBernal (2007)
Normal, EF 60-65%EF 30%-Akinesis of mid anterior wall, anteroseptal akinesis with apical sparingElevatedSinus tachycardiaCMR: no myocardial
infarctionInotropes and intubationNoNormalised 1 weeks laterDosios (2007) Normal LV fnEF 25%Moderately dilated, impairedGlobal
hypokinesisElevated--Inotropes and intubationYes-Sevimli (2008) Normal, EF > 50%EF 20%-Akinesis in the left ventricular apex, and severe
hypokinesis in the septum-Precordial TWI, normalised laterNormal coronary arteriesNoNoNormalised 10 days laterKhalili (2008) EF 35%<10%EF
<15%Global hypokinesis-Widening of QRS-Inotropes and IABP-Yes-Flores (2009) EF 60%13%-Global hypokinesisNormalNormalOld RCA Branch
lesionInotropesNoNormalised 10 days laterKaramichalis (2009) ----Bradycardia-Inotropes and tracheostomyYes-Lee (2010) -EF 20 -30%-Typical
features of Takotsubo’s (diagnosed as such)-Precordial TWI, normalised laterNormal coronary arteriesNoYesNoLim (2011) EF normal, 73%EF
46%-Segmental wall motion abnormality---Inotropes and IABPYes-Abdelsalam (2012) VigorousEF 10-15%Dilated and impaired fnTakotsubo pattern of
akinesia-ST elevation-Inotropes and IABPYes-Weijers (2013) NormalPoor LV fn-General hypokinesia and anterior and septal akinesiaNormalTWI
and Q waves in anterolateral lead--NoComplete recovery of LV fn several months laterLiang (2014) Normal, EF 69%EF 39% (on MRI)ImpairedSevere
mid and apical hypokinesis of both Ventricles (diagnosis : Takotsubo’s cardiomyopathy)--Normal coronary arteries-NoLV normalised 1 week
laterVersaci (2015) Normal, EF >50%EF 28%-LV ballooning, typical feature of Takotsubo’s cardiomyopathyElevatedQS wave in V1–V4 with negative
T wave and ST elevation in V5–V6Normal coronary arteriesNoNoNormalised after 10 days LV Left ventricle, RV Right ventricle, fn function, EF
Ejection fraction, IABP Intra-aortic balloon pump, RVP right ventricular pressure Summary of reported cases of LVF post pericardiocentesis:
Clinical characteristics Abbreviations: P percutaneous, S surgical, CS cardiogenic shock (hypotension, tachycardia), LVF Left heart failure,
RVF right heart failure Summary of reported cases of LVF post pericardiocentesis: Electrocardiographic, biochemical, echocardiographic and
outcome parameters LV Left ventricle, RV Right ventricle, fn function, EF Ejection fraction, IABP Intra-aortic balloon pump, RVP right
ventricular pressure A number of mechanisms have been proposed to explain the pathogenesis of LV systolic dysfunction in PDS. Acute
withdrawal of exaggerated sympathetic drive during relief of tamponade may trigger paradoxical haemodynamic instability . Mechanical, inter-
ventricular volume mismatch may also contribute, with sudden relief of pericardial constraint leading to abrupt, disproportionate increase
in RV volume and a paradoxical rise in pulmonary artery pressure, resulting in raised LV end diastolic pressure and transient left heart
failure . Others have proposed myocardial stunning from coronary perfusion mismatch with acute distension of cardiac chambers after
decompression [6, 10, 11]. Taken together, it is likely that a combination of hormonal and mechanical pathophysiologic mechanisms contribute
to LV dysfunction and the final clinical sequelae in PDS. The classic echocardiographic feature in SCM is transient LV apical ballooning,
although other segmental patterns have been described [12, 13]. A stressor leading to sympathetic overdrive and excessive catecholamine
release is the currently accepted trigger in the development of SCM . The catecholamine surge precipitates 1) ‘peripheral arterial vasospasm
leading to increased afterload and transient increase in LV end-systolic pressure’, 2) ‘acute multiple coronary artery vasospasm leading to
myocardial ischaemia’, and 3) direct catecholamine- β-adrenoceptor - mediated myocardial stunning in the apex . These three pathophysiologic
pathways are thought to contribute to the ischaemia, morphologic features and potential haemodynamic sequelae that can be seen in SCM. More
recent case reports have made reference to LV apical ballooning related to PDS as similar to SCM [10, 11, 15–17], and have postulated the
physiological stressor being cardiac tamponade along with emotional stress . It is therefore possible that the transient ventricular
systolic dysfunction in PDS is actually a variant form of stress cardiomyopathy. We carefully reviewed 25 cases of heart failure post
pericardiocentesis in the literature (Tables 1 and 2), and we believe that seven cases (two considered to be SCM [1, 18] by the authors and
five classified as PDS [10, 16, 17, 19, 20]) could be considered to have echocardiographic features of SCM. SCM has relatively
characteristic clinical presentation, with rise of cardiac enzymes , and often associated with ischaemic ECG changes (up to 44 % of those
with SCM have T-wave inversion and 41 % ST elevation [13, 21]). The clinical manifestations in PDS are more variable, ranging from
asymptomatic in some to severe low cardiac output states in others. The primary clinical symptom in PDS has been reported as dyspnoea
(Table 1). This is in contrast to chest pain being predominant in SCM (69-83 % of presentations) [13, 21]. In the majority of cases of PDS
in the literature (Table 2) there was no cardiac enzyme rise, and ischaemic type changes on ECG were seen in a minority (seven of twenty
five cases). In all the cases where ischaemic ECG changes where present except for one, there was concomitant apical and peri-apical
regional wall motion abnormality, which could be classified as SCM also. Generally SCM has a benign course, with recovery of LV function and
good prognosis , whilst PDS has poorer outcomes and increased mortality . Reports of PDS suggested normalization of LV dysfunction in 12 of
25 cases classified as PDS. Of the 12 cases that did recover LV function, four had LV impairment with classic SCM pattern of LV impairment
on echocardiogram [16, 17, 19, 20]. The normalisation of LV function in our patient 2 weeks subsequently is more in keeping with SCM.
Current literature has not specifically addressed risk factors for the development of ventricular dysfunction after pericardiocentesis. In
our patient, the malignant nature of the effusion, the presence of tamponade and larger size of pericardial effusion , may have increased
his predisposition to develop ventricular dysfunction. Amount and rate of fluid removed on initial decompression are also associated with
development PDS [4, 5], however there are no guidelines regarding the maximum amount of pericardial fluid that can be drained immediately.
There is consensus to stop initial drainage with improvement of symptoms or hemodynamic parameters, followed by gradual decompression
through indwelling catheter . Our patient’s apical systolic dysfunction post pericardiocentesis was associated with chest discomfort,
transient loss of R waves and rise in cardiac enzymes are typical of classic SCM. The clinical sequence of HR and RR improving immediately
post decompression and then increasing again hours after the procedure, was a useful clinical marker of myocardial dysfunction, prompting
investigation which identified new ventricular impairment. It is likely that the frequency of transient LV dysfunction is underestimated in
these patients. We report a case of transient biventricular dysfunction post pericardiocentesis, with classic features of SCM. LV
dysfunction post pericardiocentesis and in PDS is more prevalent than previously thought, and some previous reports of PDS may also be
potentially considered as SCM complicating pericardiocentesis. In addition to judicious and gradual decompression to avoid ventricular
dysfunction or PDS, patients undergoing therapeutic pericardiocentesis should have careful haemodynamic monitoring, as changes in parameters
such as heart rate and respiratory rate can raise suspicion of acute LV impairment. Written informed consent was unable to be obtained from
the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images, as he has passed away. His next of kin are not contactable
after their subsequent return to their home country of China. Professor L. Kritharides, Head of Department, approves the publication of this
report, with all patient identifiers kept confidential and material presented solely for educational purposes arising from the clinical
encounter. Additional file 1: Video 1. Apical four chamber view demonstrating large pericardial effusion on presentation, with tamponade and
diastolic compression of right heart chambers. Note the LV function is normal. Additional file 2: Video 2. Parasternal long view
demonstrating large pericardial effusion on presentation, with tamponade and diastolic compression of right heart chambers. Note the LV
function is normal. Additional file 3: Video 3. Apical four chamber view performed on the following morning after the patient experienced
chest discomfort. The main finding is severe biventricular impairment, with akinesis of the apex and periapical areas. There is small
residual pericardial effusion. Additional file 4: Video 4. Parasternal long view performed on the following morning after the patient
experienced chest discomfort. The main finding is severe biventricular impairment, with akinesis of the apex and periapical areas. There is
small residual pericardial effusion. Additional file 5: Video 5. Apical four chamber view performed nearly 2 weeks after the
pericardiocentesis and subsequent stress cardiomyopathy. They show normalisation of both left and right ventricular function. Additional
file 6: Video 6. Parasternal long view performed nearly 2 weeks after the pericardiocentesis and subsequent stress cardiomyopathy. They show
normalisation of both left and right ventricular function. Apical four chamber view demonstrating large pericardial effusion on
presentation, with tamponade and diastolic compression of right heart chambers. Note the LV function is normal. Parasternal long view
demonstrating large pericardial effusion on presentation, with tamponade and diastolic compression of right heart chambers. Note the LV
function is normal. Apical four chamber view performed on the following morning after the patient experienced chest discomfort. The main
finding is severe biventricular impairment, with akinesis of the apex and periapical areas. There is small residual pericardial effusion.
Parasternal long view performed on the following morning after the patient experienced chest discomfort. The main finding is severe
biventricular impairment, with akinesis of the apex and periapical areas. There is small residual pericardial effusion. Apical four chamber
view performed nearly 2 weeks after the pericardiocentesis and subsequent stress cardiomyopathy. They show normalisation of both left and
right ventricular function. Parasternal long view performed nearly 2 weeks after the pericardiocentesis and subsequent stress
cardiomyopathy. They show normalisation of both left and right ventricular function. Stress Cardiomyopathy Left ventricle Right ventricle
Pericardial decompression syndrome Acute pulmonary oedema Electrocardiogram Transthoracic echocardiography Beats per minute Heart rate
Respiratory rate Chadi Ayoub and Michael Chang contributed equally to this work. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Authors’ contributions All authors have approved the final article, contributed to conception, literature review,
analysis and interpretation of the material, to the drafting of the manuscript and its critical revision; All authors agree to be
accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are
appropriately investigated and resolved.
