Figure 1.A, CT scan of the chest showing an intracavitary mass suggestive of fungus ball. In B, right upper lobe orifice showing destruction
of the architecture of the apical segment. In C and D, a whitish intracavitary mass with areas of necrosis and an endoscopic appearance
suggestive of fungal infection. A 49-year-old female patient presented with a diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma that had been made in 2007.
She underwent surgical treatment and chemotherapy. Five years later, the patient developed cough and fever. A CT scan of the chest revealed
a thin-walled cavitary lesion in the right upper lobe. Bronchoscopy with transbronchial biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of pulmonary
metastasis. After radioablation therapy, the patient developed cavitary sequelae that were followed up radiologically. A follow-up CT scan
of the chest obtained in 2013 revealed an increase in the size of the cavitary lesion, thickening of its walls, and an intracavitary image
suggestive of fungus ball. The patient underwent a second bronchoscopy, which showed structural change in the apical segment of the right
upper lobe, with a large cavity containing an extensive, whitish, exophytic, irregular mass. Biopsies and bronchoalveolar lavage were
performed that confirmed the diagnosis of infection with Aspergillus fumigatus. The patient was started on oral antifungal treatment and
began outpatient follow-up treatment. Aspergillosis is a multifaceted disease whose clinical manifestations (allergic, saprophytic, and
invasive forms) are determined by the host immune response. Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis has emerged as an infectious disease of high
morbidity and mortality in immunocompromised patients and should be treated early. Voriconazole is recommended as the treatment of choice.
In some cases, there can be extensive destruction of the parenchymal architecture, allowing communication with the central airway and
enabling endoscopic intracavitary visualization. However, this is an extremely rare finding. In the literature, case reports are limited to
patients with endobronchial aspergilloma. Endoscopically, whitish necrotic masses suggest fungal infection. However, the diagnosis should be
confirmed via histopathological documentation and positive culture. Figura 1.Em A, TC de tórax com massa intracavitária sugestiva de fungus
ball. Em B, óstio do lobo superior direito com destruição da arquitetura do segmento apical. Em C e D, massa esbranquiçada intracavitária
com áreas necróticas e aspecto endoscópico sugestivo de infecção fúngica. Paciente do sexo feminino, 49 anos, com diagnóstico de carcinoma
de paratireoide desde 2007. Realizou tratamento cirúrgico e quimioterápico. Após cinco anos, evoluiu com tosse e febre. Em TC de tórax foi
observada lesão escavada de paredes finas no lobo superior direito. A broncoscopia com biópsia transbrônquica confirmou o diagnóstico de
metástase pulmonar. Após tratamento com radioablação, manteve lesão escavada sequelar acompanhada radiologicamente. Em TC de tórax de
controle no ano de 2013, observou-se um aumento da lesão escavada, espessamento de suas paredes e imagem intracavitária sugestiva de bola
fúngica. A paciente foi submetida à nova broncoscopia, sendo visualizada alteração estrutural do segmento apical do lobo superior direito,
com grande cavidade contendo em seu interior massa extensa, irregular, vegetante, de coloração esbranquiçada. Foram realizadas biópsias e
lavado broncoalveolar que confirmaram o diagnóstico de infecção por Aspergillus fumigatus. A paciente iniciou tratamento com antifúngico via
oral e seguimento ambulatorial. A aspergilose é uma doença multifacetada, cujas manifestações clínicas são determinadas pela resposta imune
do hospedeiro; podem se apresentar de forma alérgica, saprofítica ou invasiva. A aspergilose pulmonar invasiva emergiu como uma doença
infecciosa de alta morbidade e mortalidade em imunodeprimidos e deve ser tratada precocemente. O voriconazol é indicado como tratamento de
primeira escolha. Em alguns casos pode ocorrer destruição parenquimatosa arquitetural extensa, permitindo a comunicação com a via aérea
central e possibilitando a visualização endoscópica intracavitária; no entanto, esse é um achado raríssimo. Na literatura, os relatos de
caso são limitados e citam os aspergilomas endobrônquicos. Endoscopicamente, massas esbranquiçadas de aspecto necrótico sugerem infecção
fúngica.No entanto, o diagnóstico deve ser confirmado por documentação histopatológica e cultura positiva de material.
