Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is a rare disease that is currently considered a low-grade neoplasm with metastatic potential and variable
progression. Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors, such as sirolimus and everolimus, have recently become a treatment option for
LAM patients, especially those with extrapulmonary manifestations. The objective of the present study was to describe a case series of four
patients with LAM in Brazil who showed significant improvement, particularly in their extrapulmonary manifestations, after treatment with
sirolimus (at 1-4 mg/day). We describe four cases of LAM patients with different extrapulmonary manifestations who were treated with
sirolimus. After treatment with sirolimus for 12 months, one patient presented resolution of severe chylothorax; one had a significant
reduction in renal angiomyolipoma volume; and one showed significant regression of retroperitoneal lymphangioleiomyomas and abdominal lymph
node enlargement. After treatment with sirolimus for 6 months, the remaining patient had a significant reduction in the volume of a massive
retroperitoneal lymphangioleiomyoma. Our findings confirm that mTOR inhibitors are beneficial for patients with LAM, especially those with
extrapulmonary manifestations, such as renal angiomyolipoma, lymphangioleiomyomas, and chylous effusions. However, certain aspects, such as
the optimal dose, duration of treatment, and long-term adverse effects, have yet to be sufficiently clarified for mTOR inhibitors to be
incorporated into LAM management protocols. Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is a rare disease of unknown etiology. It primarily affects women
of childbearing age, and the prevalence of LAM is approximately 1/1,000,000 population. It can occur in isolation or in association with
tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC).( 1 - 3 ) The disease is characterized by proliferation of atypical cells (LAM cells) with characteristics
of low-grade neoplasm and metastatic potential, leading to vascular and bronchial obstruction and cyst formation.( 4 - 8 ) Major clinical
manifestations of LAM include progressive dyspnea on exertion, dry cough, recurrent spontaneous pneumothorax, chylothorax, and hemoptysis.(
1 , 3 , 9 ) Renal angiomyolipomas and lymphangioleiomyomas can occur. A CT scan of the chest typically shows the presence of diffuse, well-
defined, thin-walled lung cysts. Although pulmonary function test results can be normal, variable and progressive lung function decline can
occur over time. Reduced DLCO is the most common change, and spirometry most commonly reveals airflow obstruction and air trapping;
bronchodilator test results can be positive in up to 25% of cases.( 10 - 12 ) A definitive diagnosis of LAM is based on the following( 3 , 6
): typical chest HRCT findings, i.e., diffuse, well-defined lung cysts, in association with renal angiomyolipoma, pleural effusion/chylous
ascites, lymphangioleiomyoma/lymph node involvement, or a definite or probable diagnosis of TSCpresence of lung cysts consistent with LAM on
chest HRCT scans and pathological findings of LAM in a lung tissue sample preferably obtained by surgical biopsy typical chest HRCT
findings, i.e., diffuse, well-defined lung cysts, in association with renal angiomyolipoma, pleural effusion/chylous ascites,
lymphangioleiomyoma/lymph node involvement, or a definite or probable diagnosis of TSC presence of lung cysts consistent with LAM on chest
HRCT scans and pathological findings of LAM in a lung tissue sample preferably obtained by surgical biopsy Determination of serum levels of
VEGF-D, which is a marker of lymphangiogenesis, has been increasingly used in order to aid in the diagnosis of LAM and to evaluate disease
progression. Chest CT findings consistent with LAM associated with elevated VEGF-D levels are currently considered to be sufficient for the
diagnosis of LAM.( 13 , 14 ) The progression of LAM is highly variable, ranging from asymptomatic patients to patients with progressive
respiratory failure requiring lung transplantation. Survival has been shown to be better in recent studies than in previous studies; a
recent study conducted in Brazil showed a five-year survival of 90%.( 15 ) Various drugs have been used in an attempt to control LAM. Matrix
metalloproteinase inhibitors, such as doxycycline, and hormonal blockade have yielded controversial results and are not recommended for the
treatment of LAM.( 16 - 19 ) Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors, such as sirolimus and everolimus, are promising in the
treatment of LAM, particularly in improving extrapulmonary manifestations and stabilizing or even improving lung function.( 20 , 21 ) The
objective of the present study was to describe a case series of patients with LAM in Brazil treated with sirolimus, which had positive
effects, particularly on extrapulmonary manifestations. Of a total of 10 patients with LAM treated with sirolimus at our center during the
study period, we describe four cases of patients in whom the drug was primarily used because of extrapulmonary involvement. A 48-year-old
smoker (with a smoking history of 15 pack-years) was admitted with a two-year history of dyspnea, which had worsened one week prior. She
reported no other diseases. The patient reported that she had undergone oophorectomy nine years prior because of a benign tumor and right
nephrectomy six months prior because of renal angiomyolipoma. She had no relevant exposure history. Physical examination revealed that the
patient had lost weight, breath sounds being absent in the right hemithorax and her SpO2 being 92% on room air. A chest X-ray showed a large
right pleural effusion (Figure 1). The patient underwent thoracentesis, and a diagnosis of chylothorax was established. A pulmonary function
test performed after chest tube drainage showed an FVC of 3.12 L (100% of predicted), an FEV1 of 1.95 L (75% of predicted), an FEV1/FVC
ratio of 0.62, a TLC of 5.27 L (92% of predicted), and a DLCO of 15.41 mL/min/mmHg (65% of predicted; Table 1). A chest CT scan showed
diffuse, well-defined lung cysts. Her dyspnea worsened, and she presented with difficult-to-manage chylothorax, with a high output from the
chest tube despite treatment with total parenteral nutrition. A decision was made to treat her with sirolimus (at 1 mg/day). Resolution of
the chylothorax and functional stability were observed after 12 months of treatment (Figure 1 and Table 1). Figure 1.Chest X-rays taken
before treatment with sirolimus (in A) and after 12 months of treatment with the drug (in B), showing resolution of chylothorax. Table
1.Pulmonary function test results before and after treatment with sirolimus.aCaseFVCFEV1 DLCOpre-treatmentpost-treatmentpre-treatmentpost-
treatmentpre-treatmentpost-treatment13.12 (100)3.22 (103)1.95 (75)2.0 (77)15.41 (65)b 17.54 (74)b 32.36 (61)3.53 (91)1.49 (46)2.02
(62)--43.96 (90)3.92 (89)3.37 (89)3.4 (90)20.12 (98)b 20.4 (99)b aValues expressed as L (% of predicted), except where otherwise indicated.
bValues expressed as mL/min/mmHg (% of predicted). aValues expressed as L (% of predicted), except where otherwise indicated. bValues
expressed as mL/min/mmHg (% of predicted). A 25-year-old patient diagnosed with LAM and TSC presented with a two-year history of recurrent
pneumothorax and pleurodesis. She reported no smoking and had no relevant exposure history. Because of the neurological impairment
associated with TSC, the patient had frequent convulsive seizures and a cognitive deficit. She also had large bilateral renal
angiomyolipomas and had previously undergone a right partial nephrectomy because of hemorrhage. She had been using goserelin and doxycycline
since 2010, and the renal tumor had progressively increased in the last two years. A decision was made to treat her with sirolimus,
initially at 6 mg/day and subsequently at 2 mg/day because of nausea and vomiting. After 12 months of treatment, there was a significant
reduction in the size of the angiomyolipoma (from approximately 20 cm, with confluent masses, to approximately 3 cm; Figure 2). Because of
her cognitive deficit, the patient did not undergo pulmonary function testing. Figure 2.Abdominal CT scans taken before treatment with
sirolimus (in A) and after 12 months of treatment with the drug (in B), showing a reduction in bilateral renal angiomyolipoma volume. A
26-year-old nonsmoker with a three-year history of dyspnea on exertion presented with acute worsening of dyspnea. Although a large
chylothorax was identified in 2011, it was not investigated at the time. One year later, the patient was admitted for investigation. Chest
and abdominal CT scans showed diffuse cysts in the lung parenchyma, as well as large retroperitoneal lymphangioleiomyomas and abdominal
lymph node enlargement. A diagnosis of LAM was established, and initial pulmonary function test results were as follows: FVC, 2.36 L (61% of
predicted); FEV1, 1.49 L (46% of predicted); and FEV1/FVC, 0.63. The patient was started on sirolimus (at 2 mg/day) and after 12 months of
treatment with the drug showed significant regression of the retroperitoneal and abdominal masses (Figure 3), as well as improved lung
function (Table 1). Figure 3.Abdominal CT scans taken before treatment with sirolimus (in A) and after 12 months of treatment with the drug
(in B), showing a significant reduction in retroperitoneal lymphangioleiomyoma volume (white arrow). A 37-year-old nonsmoker presented with
diffuse abdominal pain. The patient had no respiratory symptoms, relevant exposure history, or associated diseases. During the
investigation, a large, heterogeneous retroperitoneal mass of approximately 18 cm in size was identified. A biopsy was performed, and the
mass was diagnosed as a lymphangioleiomyoma. A chest CT scan showed diffuse cysts in the lung parenchyma, whereas pulmonary function test
results, including DLCO, were normal (Table 1). The patient was started on sirolimus (at 2 mg/day) because of the size of the mass, which
was symptomatic and posed a risk of hemorrhage. After 6 months of treatment with the drug, there was a significant reduction in
lymphangioleiomyoma volume (Figure 4). Figure 4.Abdominal CT scans taken before treatment with sirolimus (in A) and after 6 months of
treatment with the drug (in B), showing resolution of an abdominal lymphangioleiomyoma (white arrow). In the four cases of patients with LAM
described above, the use of sirolimus (at 1-6 mg/day) had positive effects, particularly on extrapulmonary manifestations, including a
reduction in renal angiomyolipoma volume, abdominal mass volume, and retroperitoneal mass volume, as well as resolution of chylothorax. On
the basis of the various mechanisms involved in the pathophysiology of LAM, several drugs have been used in an attempt to control the
disease. Although doxycycline blocks metalloproteinases, it is currently not recommended, because a recent randomized study showed that it
had no effect on lung function.( 16 , 17 ) Hormonal blockade with the use of progesterone and gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogs has
yielded controversial results and is currently not recommended.( 18 , 19 ) Mutations in the TSC1 and TSC2 genes, which can be found in
patients with LAM, are associated with deregulation and hyperactivation of the mTOR pathway, which controls protein synthesis and cell
growth. Inhibitors of mTOR inhibit T-lymphocyte activation and proliferation in response to antigenic and cytokine stimulation, binding to
the FKBP-12 protein to form an immunosuppressive complex. This complex binds to mTOR, an important regulatory kinase, inhibiting its
activity and ultimately blocking cell proliferation. Recent evidence has shown that mTOR inhibitors are promising options for patients with
LAM and can be used in cases of large renal angiomyolipomas and lymphangioleiomyomas, as well as in the control of chylothorax and chylous
ascites; in addition, mTOR inhibitors have beneficial effects on lung function, particularly in patients with a rapid decline in respiratory
capacity and mild to moderate airflow limitation,( 20 , 22 ) as observed in our case series. Although the use of sirolimus in patients with
LAM is promising, certain issues have yet to be clarified, including the need for determining serum levels of the drug (as is done in kidney
or lung transplant recipients, for example), treatment duration, and long-term treatment safety. Recent studies have shown that it is
possible to use sirolimus at lower doses in order to reduce adverse effects without compromising treatment efficacy. ( 23 ) Doses of 1-2
mg/day are habitually used; however, in cases of large renal angiomyolipomas, higher initial doses can be used. A study by Yao et al. showed
that the favorable effects of sirolimus on lung function remained after long-term treatment (approximately three and a half years) and that
although adverse effects are common, including hypercholesterolemia, increased respiratory tract infections, diarrhea, and stomatitis, as
well as acne and other skin disorders, they are usually mild and do not result in treatment discontinuation.( 24 ) However, the risk of
recurrence after treatment discontinuation has yet to be determined. Inhibitors of mTOR have become an important treatment option for
selected cases of patients with LAM, especially those with significant extrapulmonary manifestations, such as renal angiomyolipomas,
lymphangioleiomyomas, and chylous effusions. However, certain issues (such as the optimal dose and duration of treatment) have yet to be
investigated in prospective studies for mTOR inhibitors to be permanently incorporated into LAM management protocols. Study carried out in
the Department of Pulmonology, Instituto do Coração - InCor, Heart Institute - University of São Paulo School of Medicine Hospital das
Clínicas, São Paulo, Brazil. Financial support: None. A linfangioleiomiomatose (LAM) é uma doença rara que é atualmente considerada uma
neoplasia de baixo grau com potencial metastático e evolução variável. Os inibidores de mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), como o
sirolimo e o everolimo, recentemente se tornaram uma opção para o tratamento de pacientes com LAM, especialmente daqueles com manifestações
extrapulmonares. O objetivo deste estudo foi descrever quatro casos de pacientes com LAM no Brasil que apresentaram melhora, especialmente
das manifestações extrapulmonares, após tratamento com sirolimo (em doses de 1-4 mg/dia). Descrevemos quatro casos de pacientes com LAM e
diferentes manifestações extrapulmonares tratados com sirolimo. Após o tratamento com sirolimo por 12 meses, um paciente apresentou
resolução do quilotórax de difícil manejo, um paciente teve redução significativa do volume do angiomiolipoma renal, e uma paciente
apresentou regressão importante de linfangioleiomiomas retroperitoneais e linfonodomegalias abdominais. Após tratamento com sirolimo por 6
meses, um paciente apresentou redução significativa de volumoso linfangioleiomioma retroperitoneal. Nossos achados confirmam que os
inibidores de mTOR são benéficos para pacientes com LAM, especialmente para aqueles com manifestações extrapulmonares, tais como
angiomiolipomas renais, linfangioleiomiomas e derrames de origem quilosa. Entretanto, alguns pontos, tais como a dose ideal, a duração do
tratamento e os efeitos adversos em longo prazo, ainda precisam ser esclarecidos para que os inibidores de mTOR possam ser incorporados na
abordagem da LAM. A linfangioleiomiomatose (LAM) é uma doença rara de etiologia indeterminada; acomete principalmente mulheres em idade
reprodutiva, e sua prevalência é de cerca de 1/1.000.000 habitantes. A LAM pode ocorrer isoladamente ou com o complexo de esclerose tuberosa
(CET). ( 1 - 3 ) A doença é caracterizada por proliferação de células atípicas (células de LAM) que exibem características de neoplasia de
baixo grau, com potencial metastático, levando a obstrução vascular e brônquica e formação de cistos.( 4 - 8 ) As principais manifestações
clínicas da LAM são dispneia progressiva aos esforços, tosse seca, pneumotórax espontâneo recorrente, quilotórax e hemoptise.( 1 , 3 , 9 )
Podem surgir angiomiolipomas renais e linfangioleiomiomas. Na TC de tórax, o achado característico é a presença de cistos pulmonares difusos
com paredes regulares e finas. Embora os testes de função pulmonar possam ser normais, pode ocorrer declínio progressivo e variável da
função pulmonar ao longo do tempo. Redução da DLCO é a alteração mais frequente e, na espirometria, mais comumente se observa padrão de
obstrução ao fluxo aéreo, além de aprisionamento aéreo, inclusive com possibilidade de resposta positiva ao teste de broncodilatação em até
25% dos casos.( 10 - 12 ) O diagnóstico definitivo de LAM baseia-se no seguinte( 3 , 6 ): • achados característicos na TCAR de tórax, ou
seja, cistos pulmonares difusos e com paredes regulares, associados a angiomiolipoma renal, derrame pleural/ascite quilosa,
linfangioleiomioma/envolvimento ganglionar ou diagnóstico definitivo ou provável de CET • presença de cistos pulmonares compatíveis com LAM
na TCAR de tórax e achados patológicos de LAM em amostra de tecido pulmonar obtida preferencialmente por meio de biópsia cirúrgica • achados
característicos na TCAR de tórax, ou seja, cistos pulmonares difusos e com paredes regulares, associados a angiomiolipoma renal, derrame
pleural/ascite quilosa, linfangioleiomioma/envolvimento ganglionar ou diagnóstico definitivo ou provável de CET • presença de cistos
pulmonares compatíveis com LAM na TCAR de tórax e achados patológicos de LAM em amostra de tecido pulmonar obtida preferencialmente por meio
de biópsia cirúrgica A dosagem sérica de VEGF-D, um marcador de linfangiogênese, tem ganhado espaço no auxílio ao diagnóstico, bem como na
avaliação da progressão da doença. Atualmente, considera-se que achados de TC de tórax compatíveis com LAM associados à elevação do VEGF-D
são suficientes para o diagnóstico da doença.( 13 , 14 ) A evolução da LAM é bastante variável, indo desde pacientes assintomáticas até
pacientes com insuficiência respiratória progressiva com necessidade de transplante pulmonar. A sobrevida em estudos recentes tem se
mostrado melhor que a descrita previamente; um estudo recente conduzido em nosso meio demonstrou que ela chega a 90% em cinco anos.( 15 )
Diversos medicamentos já foram utilizados na tentativa de controlar a LAM. Os inibidores de metaloproteinases de matriz, tais como a
doxiciclina, e o bloqueio hormonal apresentaram resultados controversos e não são recomendados para o tratamento da LAM.( 16 - 19 )
Atualmente, os inibidores de mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR, alvo da rapamicina em mamíferos), como o sirolimo e o everolimo, são
promissores no tratamento da LAM, especialmente na melhora das manifestações extrapulmonares e na estabilização ou eventualmente na melhora
da função pulmonar. ( 20 , 21 ) O objetivo do presente estudo foi descrever uma série de casos de pacientes com LAM no Brasil que utilizaram
sirolimo, com efeitos positivos especialmente nas manifestações extrapulmonares. De um total de 10 pacientes com LAM em uso de sirolimo em
nosso centro durante o estudo, descrevemos quatro casos de pacientes nos quais o medicamento foi utilizado fundamentalmente em virtude do
acometimento extrapulmonar. Uma paciente de 48 anos, tabagista (com carga tabágica de 15 anos-maço) foi internada com história de dispneia
havia dois anos, com piora havia uma semana. Negava outras doenças. A paciente relatou que fora submetida a ooforectomia havia nove anos em
virtude de um tumor benigno e a nefrectomia direita havia 6 meses em virtude de angiomiolipoma renal. Não apresentava história de exposição
relevante. O exame físico revelou que a paciente estava emagrecida, com murmúrio vesicular abolido em todo o hemitórax direito e SpO2 de 92%
em ar ambiente. A radiografia de tórax revelou derrame pleural volumoso à direita (Figura 1). A paciente foi submetida a toracocentese,
confirmando-se o diagnóstico de quilotórax. A prova de função pulmonar realizada após a drenagem revelou CVF de 3,12 l (100% do previsto),
VEF1 de 1,95 l (75% do previsto), VEF1/CVF de 0,62, CPT de 5,27 l (92% do previsto) e DLCO de 15,41 ml/min/mmHg (65% do previsto; Tabela 1).
A TC de tórax revelou cistos pulmonares difusos com paredes regulares. A paciente apresentou piora da dispneia e quilotórax de difícil
manejo, mantendo-se um alto débito de drenagem a despeito do tratamento com nutrição parenteral total. Optou-se por iniciar tratamento com
sirolimo (1 mg/dia). Observou-se resolução do quilotórax e estabilidade funcional após 12 meses de tratamento (Figura 1 e Tabela 1). Figura
1.Radiografia de tórax antes do tratamento com sirolimo (em A) e após 12 meses de tratamento com o medicamento (em B), mostrando a resolução
do quilotórax. Tabela 1.Resultados da prova de função pulmonar antes e depois do tratamento com sirolimo.aCasoCVFVEF1 DLCOpré-tratamentopós-
tratamentopré-tratamentopós-tratamentopré-tratamentopós-tratamento13,12 (100)3,22 (103)1,95 (75)2,0 (77)15,41 (65)b 17,54 (74)b 32,36
(61)3,53 (91)1,49 (46)2,02 (62)--43,96 (90)3,92 (89)3,37 (89)3,4 (90)20,12 (98)b 20,4 (99)b aValores expressos em l (% do previsto), exceto
onde indicado. bValores expressos em ml/min/mmHg (% do previsto). aValores expressos em l (% do previsto), exceto onde indicado. bValores
expressos em ml/min/mmHg (% do previsto). Uma paciente de 25 anos, com diagnóstico de LAM associada a CET, apresentava história de
pneumotórax de repetição e pleurodese havia dois anos. Negava tabagismo e não apresentava história de exposição relevante. Em virtude do
acometimento neurológico associado ao CET, a paciente apresentava crises convulsivas frequentes e déficit cognitivo. Apresentava ainda
angiomiolipoma renal bilateral de grande volume, além de ter sido anteriormente submetida a nefrectomia parcial direita em virtude de
hemorragia. A paciente usava goserelina e doxiciclina desde 2010 e apresentou aumento progressivo do tumor renal nos últimos dois anos.
Optou-se por iniciar tratamento com sirolimo, inicialmente na dose de 6 mg/dia, com posterior redução para 2 mg/dia em virtude de náuseas e
vômitos. Após 12 meses, observou-se redução significativa do tamanho do angiomiolipoma (de cerca de 20 cm, com massas confluentes, para
cerca de 3 cm; Figura 2). Em virtude do déficit cognitivo, a paciente não foi submetida a avaliação funcional pulmonar. Figura 2.TC de
abdome antes do tratamento com sirolimo (em A) e após 12 meses de tratamento com o medicamento (em B), mostrando diminuição do volume dos
angiomiolipomas renais bilaterais. Uma paciente de 26 anos, não tabagista, com dispneia aos esforços havia três anos, apresentou piora aguda
do quadro. Em 2011, foi identificado quilotórax volumoso, que não foi investigado na época. Após um ano, a paciente foi internada para
investigação. As TCs de tórax e de abdome evidenciaram cistos difusos no parênquima pulmonar, além de volumosos linfangioleiomiomas
retroperitoneais e linfonodomegalias abdominais. Confirmou-se o diagnóstico de LAM, e a prova de função pulmonar inicial apresentou os
seguintes resultados: CVF de 2,36 l (61% do previsto), VEF1 de 1,49 l (46% do previsto) e VEF1/CVF de 0,63. Foi iniciado o tratamento com
sirolimo (2 mg/dia) e, após 12 meses de tratamento, a paciente apresentou regressão significativa das massas retroperitoneais e abdominais
(Figura 3), além de melhora da função pulmonar (Tabela 1). Figura 3.TC de abdome antes do tratamento com sirolimo (em A) e após 12 meses de
tratamento com o medicamento (em B), mostrando diminuição importante do volume dos linfangioleiomiomas retroperitoneais (seta branca). Uma
paciente de 37 anos, não tabagista, apresentava dor abdominal difusa. A paciente não apresentava sintomas respiratórios, história de
exposição relevante ou doenças associadas. Durante a investigação, foi identificada uma massa retroperitoneal volumosa e heterogênea, de
aproximadamente 18 cm de extensão. Realizou-se biópsia da massa abdominal, confirmando-se o diagnóstico de linfangioleiomioma. A TC de tórax
evidenciou cistos esparsos no parênquima pulmonar, ao passo que os resultados da prova de função pulmonar, incluindo a DLCO, foram normais
(Tabela 1). Foi iniciado o tratamento com sirolimo (2 mg/dia) devido à extensão da massa abdominal, com sintomas e risco de hemorragia. Após
6 meses de uso do medicamento, houve diminuição significativa do volume do linfangioleiomioma (Figura 4). Figura 4.TC de abdome antes do
tratamento com sirolimo (em A) e após 6 meses de tratamento com o medicamento (em B), mostrando resolução de linfangioleiomioma abdominal
(seta branca). Nos quatro casos de pacientes com LAM descritos acima, o uso de sirolimo (1-6 mg/dia) teve efeitos positivos, especialmente
nas manifestações extrapulmonares, incluindo redução do volume de angiomiolipomas renais, de massas abdominais e de massas retroperitoneais,
além de resolução do quilotórax. Vários medicamentos já foram utilizados na tentativa de controlar a LAM, baseando-se nos diversos
mecanismos envolvidos em sua fisiopatologia. A doxiciclina, apesar de sua ação no bloqueio de metaloproteinases, não é recomendada no
momento, pois um estudo randomizado recente demonstrou ausência de efeito na função pulmonar.( 16 , 17 ) O bloqueio hormonal, com a
utilização de progesterona e análogos de hormônio liberador de gonadotrofina, apresentou resultados controversos e também não é indicado no
momento.( 18 , 19 ) A mutação dos genes TSC1 e TSC2, observada na LAM, está associada a desregulação e hiperativação da via do mTOR, que
atua no controle da síntese proteica e do crescimento celular. Os inibidores de mTOR inibem a ativação e a proliferação de linfócitos T, que
ocorrem em resposta ao estímulo de antígenos e de citocinas, ligando-se à proteína FKBP-12 para formar um complexo imunossupressor. Esse
complexo liga-se ao mTOR, uma quinase regulatória importante, inibindo sua atividade, o que, em última análise, bloqueia a proliferação
celular. Evidências recentes têm demonstrado que os inibidores de mTOR são opções promissoras para pacientes com LAM e podem ser utilizados
em casos de angiomiolipomas renais e linfangioleiomiomas de grande volume, bem como no controle do quilotórax e da ascite quilosa, além de
serem benéficos para a função pulmonar, principalmente em pacientes com rápido declínio da capacidade respiratória e com limitação do fluxo
aéreo não grave,( 20 , 22 ) como observado em nossa série de casos. Embora o uso de sirolimo em pacientes com LAM seja promissor, algumas
questões ainda não estão plenamente definidas, tais como a necessidade de dosagem sérica da medicação (como ocorre em pacientes que
receberam transplante renal ou pulmonar, por exemplo), o tempo de tratamento e sua segurança em longo prazo. Estudos recentes demonstraram
que é possível usar a droga em doses mais baixas, a fim de reduzir os efeitos adversos, sem comprometer a resposta favorável.( 23 )
Habitualmente, utilizam-se doses de 1 a 2 mg/dia; porém, em casos de angiomiolipomas renais volumosos, podem ser utilizadas doses iniciais
maiores. Um estudo realizado por Yao et al. demonstrou que os efeitos favoráveis do sirolimo na função pulmonar mantiveram-se após um
período prolongado de tratamento (cerca de três anos e meio) e que, embora sejam comuns os efeitos adversos, tais como hipercolesterolemia,
aumento de infecções do trato respiratório, diarreia, estomatite, acne e outras alterações cutâneas, eles geralmente são de leve intensidade
e não determinam a interrupção do tratamento.( 24 ) Entretanto, ainda não está completamente estabelecido o risco de recidiva da doença após
a suspensão da medicação. Os inibidores de mTOR tornaram-se uma opção terapêutica importante em casos selecionados de LAM, especialmente em
pacientes com manifestações extrapulmonares significativas, como angiomiolipomas renais, linfangioleiomiomas e derrames de origem quilosa.
Entretanto, alguns pontos (tais como a dose ideal e a duração do tratamento) ainda precisam ser esclarecidos em estudos prospectivos futuros
para que os inibidores de mTOR sejam definitivamente incorporados na abordagem da LAM. Trabalho realizado na Divisão de Pneumologia,
Instituto do Coração - InCor - Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP) Brasil. Apoio
financeiro: Nenhum.
