Primary hyperparathyroidism is an endocrinopathic condition characterized by hypersecretion of parathyroid hormone. Excess parathyroid
hormone results in an altered state of osseous metabolism involving bone resorption and tissue change known as osteitis fibrosa cystica,
which is the end stage of primary hyperparathyroidism. Osteitis fibrosa cystica is associated with the development of brown tumors, which
are rare because hyperparathyroidism is now usually diagnosed and treated before symptoms develop. Brown tumors are rarely the first symptom
of hyperparathyroidism and can occasionally be mistaken for malignancy. We herein report three cases of primary hyperparathyroidism with an
unusual presentation of brown tumors. All three patients were Asian. In the first case, a 42-year-old man was admitted with a mass mimicking
a malignant bone neoplasm in the right mandible as the first manifestation of primary hyperparathyroidism. The second case involved a
25-year-old man admitted with a fracture of his right femur. The third case involved a 43-year-old man with multiple brown tumors in both
lower limbs. All three patients underwent successful parathyroidectomy for parathyroid adenomas; one case was complicated by a papillary
thyroid carcinoma. Complete evaluation of the medical history and biochemical and radiographic findings is necessary to achieve a correct
diagnosis and avoid unnecessary bone resections in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism. The parathyroid glands secrete parathyroid
hormone (PTH), which is involved in regulating the metabolism of calcium and phosphorus. PTH plays an important role in tooth development
and bone mineralization and increases bone resorption. Excessive secretion of PTH is termed hyperparathyroidism (HPT), which is an endocrine
condition categorized as primary, secondary, or tertiary. Primary HPT (PHPT) is an endocrinopathic condition characterized by hypersecretion
of PTH, which may be caused by an adenoma (solitary or multiple), idiopathic hyperplasia, or a parathyroid carcinoma. Secondary HPT is
caused by hypocalcaemia or vitamin D deficiency acting as a stimulus of excessive PTH production. Chronic renal failure is the main cause of
secondary HPT. Tertiary HPT is caused by the development of autonomous parathyroid hyperplasia after long-standing secondary HPT, most often
in patients with renal failure . Most cases of PHPT (80 %–85 %) are caused by a solitary adenoma, 15 % to 20 % are due to parathyroid gland
hyperplasia, and <0.5 % are caused by parathyroid carcinoma [2, 3]. Renal calculi have been reported in 10 % to 25 % of cases, and the
frequency of bone disease among patients with PHPT is 10 % to 20 % . Skeletal involvement in classic PHPT is characterized by a strikingly
high rate of osteoclastic bone resorption and is accompanied by a cellular repair process that results in the accumulation of fibrous stroma
and connective tissue cells along with multinucleated giant cells. Thus, brown tumors have been described as resulting from an imbalance
between osteoclastic and osteoblastic activity, resultant resorption with fibrous replacement of the bone, and eventual osteitis fibrosa
cystica (OFC). Brown tumors are reactive lesions and do not represent true neoplasms. They may be difficult to diagnose because they present
clinically and radiologically as other diseases such as giant cell tumors, multiple bone metastases, or multiple myeloma [5, 6]. Moreover,
from a histological perspective, differential diagnosis among brown tumors, giant cell granulomas, and giant cell bone tumors may be very
difficult without an accurate and complete preoperative clinical evaluation. Brown tumors involving the jaw bones as the first manifestation
of PHPT and pathological fractures that lead to a diagnosis of PHPT are not commonly described . We herein report three Asian patients with
PHPT with an unusual first manifestation of brown tumors. A 42-year-old man with no known disease history noticed a mass on the right side
of his face, which gradually generalized. One month later, he presented to our hospital for an examination. He had no other associated
complaints or any significant family history. Intraoral examination revealed a reddish, nontender, hard, ill-defined sessile swelling in the
right side of the mandible. Panoramic radiography revealed a well-defined, osteolytic lesion measuring 40 × 30 mm in the right
mandible (Fig. 1a, b). Computed tomography (CT) revealed an expansionary cystic bone lesion that penetrated the cortex, forming a peripheral
soft tissue mass (Fig. 1c). The bone mass was suspected to be a malignant neoplastic lesion. m99Tc bone scintigraphy revealed multiple
hypermetabolic foci in the right acromion, left maxilla, and bilateral mandibular bone. Urinary tract ultrasonography revealed multiple
nephroliths on the left side and mild hydronephrosis caused by lower ureteral calculi on the right side. Biopsy of the right mandibular mass
revealed spindle-shaped mesenchymal cells with a large number of multinucleated giant cells throughout the lesion. The benign lesion was
identified as a giant cell granuloma. The mandibular lesion was removed before performing magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the thyroid
gland and neck.Fig. 1(a, b) Panoramic radiograph revealing a well-defined osteolytic lesion in the right mandible. (c) Axial CT scan showing
an expansionary cystic bone lesion of the right mandible, penetrating the cortex and forming a peripheral soft tissue mass. (d) Enhanced MRI
of the neck showing a 2.5-cm enhancing nodular mass on the right parathyroid (a, b) Panoramic radiograph revealing a well-defined osteolytic
lesion in the right mandible. (c) Axial CT scan showing an expansionary cystic bone lesion of the right mandible, penetrating the cortex and
forming a peripheral soft tissue mass. (d) Enhanced MRI of the neck showing a 2.5-cm enhancing nodular mass on the right parathyroid
Laboratory data are shown in Table 1 and included a PTH level of 939.8 pg/ml (reference range, 15–88 pg/ml), serum calcium level of
2.93 mmol/L (reference range, 2.08–2.80 mmol/L), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) level of 422 U/L (reference range, 45–125 U/L) before
parathyroidectomy. Urine testing was positive for calcium oxalate crystals. Glucose, bilirubin, uric acid, protein, albumin, and globulin
levels were all normal. Serum immunoelectrophoresis findings were also normal. The concentrations of IgG, IgA, IgM, C3, C4, and C-reactive
protein were within the normal range.Table 1Laboratory data before and after parathyroidectomy in the three patientsPTH, parathyroid
hormone; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; Ca, calcium; −, not availableReference range, adultsAdmissionBefore parathyroidectomyAfter
parathyroidectomyPTH level (pg/ml)15–88Case 1: −Case 1: 939.80Case 1: 66.40Case 2: −Case 2: 1399.80Case 2: 65.40Case 3: −Case 3: 1084.45Case
3: 80.20Ca level (mmol/L)2.08–2.80Case 1: 3.18Case 1: 2.93Case 1: 2.13Case 2: 3.59Case 2: 3.37Case 2: 2.56Case 3: 2.91Case 3: 3.53Case 3:
2.24Phosphorus level (mmol/L)0.80–1.50Case 1: −Case 1: −Case 1: 0.75Case 2: 0.78Case 2: −Case 2: 0.52Case 3: −Case 3: −Case 3: −ALP
(U/L)45–125Case 1: 422Case 1: −Case 1: −Case 2: 1367Case 2: −Case 2: −Case 3: 1154Case 3: 387Case 3: −Creatine (μmol/L)45–133Case 1: 131Case
1: −Case 1: −Case 2: 94Case 2: 108Case 2: 217Case 3: 51Case 3: 60Case 3: 66 Laboratory data before and after parathyroidectomy in the three
patientsPTH, parathyroid hormone; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; Ca, calcium; −, not available These findings suggested that PHPT initially
manifested as a brown tumor of the jaw. Contrast MRI of the neck confirmed the existence of a 2.5-cm nodular mass on the lower right
parathyroid (Fig. 1d). Mini-invasive parathyroidectomy was performed. Histopathology confirmed that the resected lesion was a parathyroid
adenoma. The patient recovered well postoperatively, and his serum calcium (2.13 mmol/L) and PTH (66.40 pg/ml) levels normalized within
1 week. Detailed biochemical data observed before and after parathyroidectomy are shown in Table 1. The patient was lost to long-term
follow-up after clinical improvement. A 25-year-old man developed swelling and pain of the right shoulder after tripping on a step and
falling onto his right side. Two weeks later, he was hospitalized with swelling and deformity of the right thigh when crossing the legs.
Radiography confirmed a comminuted fracture of the femur secondary to a lytic bone lesion (Fig. 2b). Chest radiography showed extensive
osteolysis of the thoracic bones and several old fractures (Fig. 2a). His calcium level was 3.59 mmol/L (reference range, 2.08–2.80 mmol/L)
and creatinine level was 94 μmol/L (reference range, 45–133 μmol/L). Serum immunoelectrophoresis findings were normal. The levels of IgG,
IgA, IgM, alpha-fetoprotein, and carcinoembryonic antigen 2 were normal. The circulating level of PTH was 1399.80 pg/ml (reference range,
15–88 pg/ml), and the diagnosis of PHPT was confirmed. CT of the neck revealed a nodular mass measuring 3.5 × 2.5 × 2.0 cm in the lower
right parathyroid gland (Fig. 2c).Fig. 2(b) Radiographs of a pathological fracture of the right femur. (a) Chest radiograph showing
extensive osteolysis of the thoracic bones and several old fractures on the right scapula and ribs (arrow). (c) CT scan of the neck (axial
view) showing a 3.5 × 2.5 × 2.0cm nodular mass on the right parathyroid (b) Radiographs of a pathological fracture of the right femur. (a)
Chest radiograph showing extensive osteolysis of the thoracic bones and several old fractures on the right scapula and ribs (arrow). (c) CT
scan of the neck (axial view) showing a 3.5 × 2.5 × 2.0cm nodular mass on the right parathyroid Parathyroidectomy was performed, and the
lesion was histologically confirmed to be a benign parathyroid adenoma. The patient recovered well postoperatively, and his serum calcium
(2.08 mmol/L) and PTH (65.40 pg/ml) levels normalized within 2 weeks. The patient’s biochemical data before and after parathyroidectomy are
shown in Table 1. Surgical intervention for the pathologic fracture was contraindicated because of serious osteoporosis. Thus, conservative
treatment involving fracture reduction and splint fixation was performed. This patient was still being followed up at the time of this
writing. A 43-year-old man presented with a 1-month history of left foot swelling with no other associated complaints or significant medical
history. The swelling was mildly tender in the left fifth metatarsal bone with no reddish color or throbbing sensation. Radiography revealed
multiple mild but expansive lytic bone lesions in the bilateral distal tibia and left fifth metatarsal bone (Fig. 3a–c). Biopsy of the left
fifth metatarsal bone and left distal tibia lesions revealed numerous osteoclast-like giant plurinuclear cells without necrosis, mitoses, or
histological signs of malignancy; these findings were compatible with a giant cell tumor of the bone. The patient underwent excision of the
left fifth metatarsal bone and curettage of the lesion in the left distal tibia. Three weeks after surgery, the first medical and laboratory
follow-up examinations revealed a serum calcium level of 2.91 mmol/L (reference range, 2.08–2.80 mmol/L), ALP level of 1154 U/L (reference
range, 45–132 U/L), and PTH level of 1084.45 pg/ml (reference range, 15–88 pg/ml). A review of the patient’s medical records revealed
hypercalcemia, which had been underestimated at the first examination. The patient had no family history of parathyroid disease. The
creatinine level was 51 μmol/L (reference range, 45–133 μmol/L).Fig. 3(a-c) Radiographs showing multiple mild but expansive osteolytic
lesions in the bilateral distal tibia and left fifth metatarsal bone. (d) Axial CT scan of the neck showing a mass lesion measuring
2.7 × 1.4 cm on the left parathyroid (arrow) and a round lesion measuring 1.5 × 1.0 cm in the left thyroid lobe (dotted arrow) (a-c)
Radiographs showing multiple mild but expansive osteolytic lesions in the bilateral distal tibia and left fifth metatarsal bone. (d) Axial
CT scan of the neck showing a mass lesion measuring 2.7 × 1.4 cm on the left parathyroid (arrow) and a round lesion measuring 1.5 × 1.0 cm
in the left thyroid lobe (dotted arrow) PHPT was suspected. Enhancement CT of the neck revealed a round mass measuring 2.7 × 1.4 cm behind
and below the left thyroid lobe and a round lesion measuring 1.5 × 1.0 cm located in the left thyroid lobe (Fig. 3d). Parathyroidectomy was
performed. Histological examination confirmed the diagnosis of adenoma of the left parathyroid gland and papillary thyroid carcinoma of the
left thyroid lobe. Biochemical data observed before and after parathyroidectomy are shown in Table 1. After a review of bone slices, the
final diagnosis was a brown tumor probably due to long-standing underestimated PHPT. The incidence of PHPT is difficult to assess and may
vary widely from 0.4 to 21.6 cases per 100,000 person-years [12, 13]. Additionally, racial or regional differences in the incidence and
prevalence of PHPT may exist . The incidence of PHPT is nearly two or three times more common in women than in men [6, 14, 15]. In most
patients with PHPT (80 %–85 %), the disease develops due to a parathyroid adenoma, in 15 % to 20 % due to parathyroid gland hyperplasia, and
in <0.5 % due to parathyroid carcinoma [2, 3]. Before the 1970s, PHPT was a disease caused by recurrent kidney stones, brown tumors,
neuromuscular dysfunction, and symptomatic hypercalcemia [16, 17]; today, it can be diagnosed in the early and asymptomatic period because
of advances in blood analysis and a growing awareness of this disease . However, normocalcemic HPT may be an early form of the disease [8,
22]. Although many systems are affected in patients with PHPT, the most pronounced alternations are observed in the bone. Classic skeletal
lesions are bone resorption, OFC, and brown tumors. With the recent development of imaging and laboratory screening methods, however,
hypercalcemia due to primary or secondary HPT can often be detected early, with a decrease in frequency of OFC and brown tumors. A brown
tumor is the localized form of OFC . It is more common in people aged >50 than <50 years and three times more common in women than in men;
the preferential locations are the facial skeleton (particularly the mandible) and the ends of long bones and ribs . The incidence of brown
tumors in patients with PHPT is 1.5 % to 1.7 % , and these tumors rarely present as the first manifestation of PHPT, as in our cases. The
term “brown tumor” is derived from the characteristic appearance of a brown-colored material within the cystic lesion, which is caused by
high vascularity, hemorrhage, and hemosiderin deposits . Brown tumors are not true neoplasms, but they can be locally aggressive and mimic
malignancies. In some cases, they may lead primarily to the differential diagnosis of other giant cell lesions (reparative giant cell
granuloma, cherubism, aneurysmal bone cyst, or true giant cell tumor) or a metastatic lesion because of the rarity of multiple lesions of
this type [5, 27, 28]. This was demonstrated in our first patient, in whom medical imaging findings suggested a malignant bone neoplasm. On
radiography and CT, brown tumors are seen as lytic lesions or sclerotic lesions with regular borders and no cortical disruption, periosteal
reaction, or inflammatory signs . MRI shows variable intensities on T2-weighted images and intense enhancement on T1-weighted contrast
images [9, 30]. The appearance on radiographs and CT is variable and not always specific and can mimic a malignant tumor [4, 5, 31]. In our
first patient, the expansionary cystic bone lesion in the right mandible penetrated the cortex and formed a peripheral soft tissue mass,
mimicking a malignant neoplastic lesion and thus confusing clinicians regarding the correct diagnosis and therapeutic management. Some large
bone defects increase the risk of spontaneous fracture, a rare complication of PHPT. The reported crude fracture rate in patients with PHPT
has been documented as 15 per 1000 person-years (compared with 8 per 1000 in controls) . However, PHPT revealed by pathological fracture, as
in our third patient, is extremely rare [24, 32]. Brown tumors exhibit no pathognomonic histological changes and are characterized by
numerous giant cells, diffused or arranged in clusters, in a background of mononuclear oval-to-spindle stromal cells . These giant cells are
similar to those in other giant cell lesions such as reparative giant cell granulomas, cherubism, and aneurysmal bone cysts. Therefore,
distinguishing a brown tumor from other giant cell lesions on the basis of histological examination may be difficult [33, 34]. A definitive
diagnosis is only possible by comparing the clinical manifestations and radiological and laboratory test results that differentiate the
lesions. The treatment of choice for PHPT is parathyroidectomy, and the best treatment of brown tumors is cure of the underlying PHPT [3,
17, 18]. However, the fracture should undergo curettage, associated enucleation, and stabilization in patients with large lesions or lesions
that persistently grow despite treatment, persist for more than 6 months, disrupt the function of the affected organ, or are associated with
previous fracture fragility . Extensive bone resection was not performed for our third patient because he had serious osteoporosis, making
surgical intervention a high-risk procedure. In some cases, resection is performed only to achieve a definitive diagnosis [5, 28, 38]. In
summary, PHPT is now usually detected in the early and asymptomatic phase because of recent improvements in analytical techniques. A brown
tumor is a benign clinical entity appearing as an extremely rare manifestation of HPT and an uncommon cause of pathological fractures, which
can be difficult to distinguish from other tumors, tumor-like lesions, and metastatic disease. When a patient, especially a middle-aged
patient, presents with unexplained lytic bone lesions or pathological fractures, surgeons, endocrinologists, and especially radiologists
should be reminded of this unusual presentation of PHPT to avoid unnecessary surgical removal. Our cases highlight the importance of a
thorough diagnostic work-up for PHPT. A definitive diagnosis is only possible upon completion of clinical, radiological, and biochemical
analysis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication of these case reports and any accompanying images. A copy
of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. This study was approved by the ethics committee of the First
Affiliated Hospital of Shantou University Medical College. Authors’ contributions RBH, RYZ, and YL contributed to all aspects of the
manuscript. TTL and JXH participated in literature review and were responsible for the pathological diagnoses. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. The authors gratefully acknowledge the
assistance provided by Laura Smales for the revision of this manuscript.
