Accidental hypothermia is a condition associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Hypothermia has been reported to affect left
ventricular systolic and diastolic function. However, most of the data come from animal experimental studies. The purpose of the present
study was to assess the impact of severe accidental hypothermia on systolic and diastolic ventricular function in patients treated using
veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). We prospectively assessed nine hypothermic patients (8 male, age 25–78 years) who
were transferred to the Severe Accidental Hypothermia Center and treated with ECMO. Transthoracic echocardiography was performed on
admission (in patients without cardiac arrest) and on discharge from ICU after achieving cardiovascular stability. Cardiorespiratory
stability and full neurologic recovery was achieved in all patients. Biomarkers of myocardial damage (CK, CKMB, hsTnT) were significantly
elevated in all study patients. Admission echocardiography performed in patients in sinus rhythm, revealed moderate-severe bi-ventricular
systolic dysfunction and moderate bi-ventricular diastolic dysfunction. Discharge echocardiography showed persistent mild bi-ventricular
diastolic dysfunction, although systolic function of both ventricles returned to normal. Discharge echocardiography in patients admitted
with cardiac arrest showed normal (5 patients) or moderately impaired (1 patient) global LV systolic function on discharge. However, mild or
moderate LV diastolic dysfunction was observed in all 6 patients. Discharge RV systolic function was normal, whereas mild RV diastolic
dysfunction was present in these patients. After severe accidental hypothermia bi-ventricular diastolic dysfunction persists despite
systolic function recovery in survivors treated with ECMO. Accidental hypothermia is a condition associated with significant morbidity and
mortality . In the years 2009–2012 the Polish National Statistics Department reported 1836 deaths due to exposure to excessive natural cold
. In July 2013 the Severe Accidental Hypothermia Center was founded in the John Paul II Hospital in Cracow . The Center is dedicated to
invasive treatment patients from the Lesser Poland (Małopolska) province (area of 15 100 square km, population of 3.3 million) . There are
several reports describing the effects of mild therapeutic hypothermia on the circulatory system [4, 5] and only a few reports concerning
severe hypothermia . Hypothermia has been reported to affect left ventricular systolic and diastolic function [5, 7–9]. However, most of the
data are derived from animal experimental studies . To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to describe the effects of severe
accidental hypothermia and invasive ECMO rewarming on ventricular function in survivors. The purpose of the present study was to assess the
impact of severe accidental hypothermia on systolic and diastolic ventricular function in patients treated by means of veno-arterial
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). The observational case-series study was approved by the Local Ethical Committee of the John Paul
II Hospital in Cracow. After full recovery, all the study subjects gave informed consent to the use of their medical data. We prospectively
assessed 9 patients (8 male, age 25–78 years) who were reported to the Severe Accidental Hypothermia Center due to severe accidental
hypothermia (core esophageal temperature 16.9-29 °C). All patients fulfilled the extracorporeal rewarming criteria and were admitted to our
hospital for the implementation of invasive rewarming procedures. A standard 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed within 5 min
after their admission to the Emergency Room in patients without cardiac arrest. Blood samples were collected for the plasma levels of
biomarkers for myocardial damage: creatine kinase (CK), cardiac isoenzyme of creatine kinase (CKMB) and high sensitivity troponin T (hsTnT)
at the time of admission and after 6 h. Blood tests were assayed by routine automated laboratory techniques (Cobas System 600, Roche
Diagnostics GmbH, Manheim, Germany). All biochemical analyses were performed in the central hospital laboratory, certified with a cardiac
and clinical chemistry program by RIQAS (Randox Quality Assessment Scheme, UK). Transthoracic echocardiography was performed on admission
(in patients without cardiac arrest) and on discharge from the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) after achieving cardiovascular stability (in all
patients). The examinations were conducted by means of a portable ultrasound system equipped with a 1–5 MHz transthoracic phased-array
transducer (CX 50, Philips, Eindhoven, Netherlands). Comprehensive echocardiographic examination was performed by experienced cardiologists-
echocardiographers. All the studies were recorded as digital 10-s video clips and independently analyzed by 2 echocardiographers. In each
case a consensus was achieved, no ambiguous echocardiographic examinations were recorded and all results were clearly stated in a dichotomic
manner. The left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was measured with the bi-plane Simpson method. Tricuspid annular plane systolic
excursion (TAPSE) by M-mode was used to assess the global right ventricular systolic function. Pulsed-wave (PW) Doppler was performed in the
apical 4-chamber view to obtain mitral and tricuspid inflow velocities. A sample volume was placed between the mitral or tricuspid leaflet
tips during diastole. Spectral mitral and tricuspid velocity recordings were obtained at a sweep speed of 50 mm/s. PW tissue Doppler imaging
(TDI) was performed in the apical views to acquire mitral and tricuspid annular velocities. The sample volume was positioned 1 cm within the
septal and lateral insertion sites of the mitral leaflets and 1 cm within the lateral insertion site of the tricuspid leaflet. Spectral
recordings were obtained at a sweep speed of 50 mm/s at end-expiration. Measurements obtained at 3 consecutive cardiac cycles were averaged
[12, 13]. The following spectral Doppler (both mitral and tricuspid) parameters were taken into final analysis of left and right ventricular
function: peak early filling (E-wave) velocity, late diastolic filling (A-wave) velocity, the E/A ratio, deceleration time (DT), early
diastolic annular velocity (e’), the E/e’ ratio. Left ventricular (LV) diastolic dysfunction was diagnosed by the following TDI mitral
parameters: septal e’ < 8 and lateral e’ < 10 cm/s . In patients with mild diastolic dysfunction (grade 1), the mitral E/A ratio was 0.8,
DT > 200 ms and average E/e’ ratio was < 8 . Patients with moderate (grade 2) diastolic dysfunction had the following values: mitral E/A
ratio 0.8-1.5, DT 160–200 ms, average E/e’ ratio 9-12 . The following parameters indicated severe LV diastolic dysfunction: mitral E/A
ratio ≥ 2, DT < 160 ms, average E/e’ > 13 . Right ventricular (RV) diastolic dysfunction was graded according to the following guidelines:
grade 1 (impaired relaxation) tricuspid E/A ratio < 0.8, grade 2 (pseudonormal filling) E/A ratio 0.8-2.1 and E/e’ ratio > 6, grade 3
(restrictive filling) E/A ratio > 2.1 with tricuspid DT < 120 ms . The study population consisted of nine patients (eight male, age 25–78
years, average 51.3 ± 16.2 years), admitted to our hospital in severe accidental hypothermia (core temperature measured oesophagally
16.9-29 °C, average 23.6 ± 3.3 °C). Six patients were admitted in hypothermic cardiac arrest (4 with ventricular fibrillation, 2 with
asystole) whereas 3 patients were in cardiogenic shock and their sinus rhythm was observed. Demographic and clinical data are presented in
Table 1. All the patients fulfilled the extracorporeal rewarming criteria and in all of them veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation (ECMO) was implanted. The duration of ECMO support was between 8 and 144 h (average 43.7 h, median 24 h). Cardiorespiratory
stability and full neurologic recovery was achieved in all the patients (Glasgow Coma Scale 15, Cerebral Performance Category 1).Table
1Demographic and clinical characteristics of the study populationNrSex/age (yrs)Type of accidentAdmission ECGCore esophageal temperature
(°C)Hemodynamic statusPre-rewarming catecholamine supportDuration of ECMO (h)ICU duration (days)Clinical status at discharge from
ICU1M/29AlpineAsystole22.3Cardiac arrestAccording to ERC 2010 resuscitation guidelines328Fully recovered2M/52UrbanVF22.2Cardiac
arrest2211Fully recovered3M/78UrbanVF24Cardiac arrest2717Fully recovered4M/55UrbanAsystole24.1Cardiac arrest2315Fully
recovered5F/25AlpineVF16.9Cardiac arrest9130Fully recovered6M/60UrbanVF24Cardiac arrest812Fully recovered7M/48UrbanSinus rhythm
60 bpm24Cardiogenic shockNorepinephrine continuous infusion 5 ug/kg/h2254Fully recovered8M/60UrbanSinus rhythm 60 bpm, atrio-ventricular
block 1st degree26.2Cardiogenic shockDopamine continuous infusion 0.6 mg/kg/h243Fully recoveredNorepinephrine continuous infusion 7.5
ug/kg/h9M/55UrbanSinus rhythm 60 bpm29Cardiogenic shockDobutamine continuous infusion 0.5 mg/kg/h14416Fully recoveredNorepinephrine
continuous infusion 5 ug/kg/h Demographic and clinical characteristics of the study population Biomarkers of myocardial damage (CK, CKMB,
hsTnT) were significantly elevated in all the study patients (Table 2).Table 2Levels of biomarkers for myocardial damage measured on
admission and after 6 hNrOn admission6 h after
admissionCKCKMBhsTnTCKCKMBhsTnT(U/L)(U/L)(ng/ml)(U/L)(U/L)(ng/ml)187,1915640.671103,8125580.48923291130.2046071080.575310111260.03916031250.616412461750.03073442540.816522354610.11541381642.51651942590.24125,40925910.77723971150.02720221050.018887944410.02963152620.036944,6787540.03849,6807580.054Normal
values: CK 0–190 U/L, CKMB 0–24 U/L, hsTnT < 0.014 ng/ml CK creatine kinase, CKMB cardiac isoensyme of creatine kinase, hsTnT high
sensitivity troponin T Levels of biomarkers for myocardial damage measured on admission and after 6 h Normal values: CK 0–190 U/L, CKMB 0–24
U/L, hsTnT < 0.014 ng/ml CK creatine kinase, CKMB cardiac isoensyme of creatine kinase, hsTnT high sensitivity troponin T Admission
echocardiography performed in patients in sinus rhythm, revealed moderate-severe bi-ventricular systolic dysfunction and moderate bi-
ventricular diastolic dysfunction (Table 3). Discharge echocardiography in these 3 patients (nr 7–9) showed persistent mild bi-ventricular
diastolic dysfunction although systolic function of both ventricles returned to normal (LVEF 50-65 %, TAPSE 20–23 mm).Table 3Baseline
echocardiographic parameters in patients without cardiac arrest on admissionNrLVEF (%)Mitral E/AMitral DT (ms)LV E/e’LV diastolic
dysfunctionTAPSE (mm)Tricuspid E/ATricuspid DT (ms)RV E/e’RV diastolic dysfunction7400.911911Grade 2140.913213.3Grade 28300.817213Grade
2100.914412.7Grade 29300.820210Grade 261.121612Grade 2 Baseline echocardiographic parameters in patients without cardiac arrest on admission
Five patients admitted with cardiac arrest had normal global LV systolic function on discharge. One patient (M/78 years) had moderately
depressed LV systolic function (LVEF 40 %). All the patients had mild (50 % of patients) or moderate LV diastolic dysfunction. Discharge RV
systolic function was normal, whereas mild RV diastolic dysfunction was present in all the six patients from this group (Table 4).Table
4Discharge echocardiographic parameters in all patientsNrLVEF (%)Mitral E/AMitral DT (ms)LV E/e’LV diastolic dysfunctionTAPSE (mm)Tricuspid
E/ATricuspid DT (ms)RV E/e’RV diastolic dysfunction1651.31629Grade 2220.72215.5Grade 12400.71937.2Grade 1200.81504.8Grade 13600.91649Grade
2210.61724.3Grade 14550.721111Grade 1250.71123.2Grade 15601.31269Grade 2200.71662.5Grade 16600.71756.2Grade 1300.62614.5Grade
17500.61215.8Grade 1200.81172.9Grade 18600.71987.2Grade 1220.62023Grade 19650.62006.2Grade 1230.72503.6Grade 1 Discharge echocardiographic
parameters in all patients Accidental hypothermia is defined as an unintentional drop in core temperature below 35 °C [1, 14]. Recent
guidelines use a standard classification of hypothermia based on a core temperature and vital signs (Swiss staging system) [1, 14]. Severe
hypothermia, defined as a core temperature of less than 28 °C, causes significant neurologic and circulatory disturbances . There are
several non-invasive and invasive rewarming techniques. However, choosing the appropriate rewarming method determines the long-term outcome
. Meta-analyses and long-term follow-up of severe hypothermia survivors validate the usefulness of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) in stages III and IV . Early rewarming with ECMO has many advantages as compared with other rewarming methods . That is why it is
recommended by the European Resuscitation Council as the method of choice in rewarming from severe accidental hypothermia with cardiac
instability or circulatory arrest . All the patients in our study group fulfilled the extracorporeal rewarming criteria and in all of them
arterio-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was implanted. Numerous animal studies have shown significant cardiac dysfunction
caused by cooling and rewarming the intact heart in a non-arrested state [4–6, 8–11]. In the animal model, severity of hypothermia-induced
cardiac dysfunction is dependent on the duration and depth of cooling . The results of animal studies also suggest that hypothermia-induced
cardiac dysfunction may be a decisive factor in the outcome from hypothermia and rewarming. Many researchers have tested the influence of
hypothermia on mammalian heart tissue both in vitro and in vivo [4, 10, 11]. However, there are only several case reports regarding heart
function during hypothermia in people . Additionally, the long-term effects of hypothermia and rewarming on cardiac function have not yet
been established. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to describe the effects of severe accidental hypothermia and
invasive ECMO rewarming on the ventricular function in survivors. Significantly elevated cardiac necrotic markers (CK, CKMB, TnT) were
observed in all patients both on admission and 6 h later, indicating severe myocardial damage. Baseline echocardiography (prior to ECMO
implantation) was conducted in 3 patients in sinus rhythm on admission. The examination revealed moderate-severe bi-ventricular systolic
dysfunction requiring inotropic support and moderate bi-ventricular diastolic dysfunction in these patients. Systolic LV and RV function
returned to normal, whereas mild bi-ventricular diastolic dysfunction was still present on discharge. Discharge echocardiography in patients
admitted with cardiac arrest showed normal (5 patients) or moderately impaired (1 patient) global LV systolic function. However, in all the
6 patients mild or moderate LV diastolic dysfunction was observed. Discharge RV systolic function was normal, whereas mild RV diastolic
dysfunction was present in these patients. There is no pre-hypothermia echocardiographic data to compare, because none of our patients had
an echocardiographic study conducted before the incident. The follow-up period covered only ICU stay. However, despite these doubtless
limitations, the data obtained allow the diagnosis of bi-ventricular diastolic cardiomyopathy in hypothermia survivors after ECMO rewarming
persistent on discharge from the ICU. Mild LV diastolic dysfunction was present on discharge in six patients. Moderate LV diastolic
dysfunction was observed in 3 patients: a 29-year-old male, a 25-year-old female and a 78-year-old male. Since age is a primary
consideration when defining normal values of mitral inflow , all LV Doppler-derived parameters (mitral E/A, e’ and LV E/e’) were compared to
normal values as specified by the guidelines. In all the patients LV diastolic echocardiographic parameters were reduced even when age-
related changes were taken into account. Additionally, mild RV diastolic dysfunction was observed in the all patients on discharge.
Transient cardiac systolic and diastolic dysfunction was observed in subjects with mild therapeutic hypothermia and in patients undergoing
cardiac surgery with moderately hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass . Numerous animal experiments have investigated possible
pathophysiological substrate of hypothermia-induced heart failure . Studies in vitro indicated that calcium homeostasis and myofilament
properties are affected by temperature, mostly via increasing the content of global cellular Ca2+ (caused by cold-induced alkalosis and
inhibition of Na+/Ca2+ exchange) . Tveita et al. [9, 11] reported a six to sevenfold increase in the calcium content in the hearts of re-
warmed rats after 4 h of severe hypothermia. Wold et al. found severe heart failure and significantly elevated cardiac Ca2+ after 4-h
hypothermia in an animal model. Schwarzl et al. concluded that mild hypothermia altered the diastolic function by inducing prolonged and
incomplete LV relaxation despite spontaneous bradycardia in anesthetized pigs. However, the available experimental data do not fully explain
the pathophysiological basis of post-hypothermic cardiomyopathy. Bi-ventricular diastolic dysfunction after severe accidental hypothermia
persists despite the recovery of systolic function in survivors after ECMO rewarming. Severe accidental hypothermia causes significant bi-
ventricular systolic and diastolic dysfunction. Ventricular systolic function returns to normal after ECMO rewarming. Bi-ventricular
diastolic dysfunction after severe accidental hypothermia persists despite the recovery of systolic function after ECMO rewarming. Severe
accidental hypothermia causes significant bi-ventricular systolic and diastolic dysfunction. Ventricular systolic function returns to normal
after ECMO rewarming. Bi-ventricular diastolic dysfunction after severe accidental hypothermia persists despite the recovery of systolic
function after ECMO rewarming. Cardiac isoenzyme of creatine kinase Creatine kinase Deceleration time Electrocardiogram Arterio-venous
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation High sensitivity troponin T Intensive care unit Left ventricle; left ventricular Left ventricular
ejection fraction Pulsed-wave Right ventricle; right ventricular Tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion Tissue doppler imaging Competing
interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions TD: designed the study, supervised data
collection, took part in manuscript preparation, contributed substantially to the revision of the manuscript, takes responsibility for the
paper as a whole. DS: supervised data collection, performed echocardiography exams, performed the echocardiographic analysis, drafted the
manuscript, contributed substantially to the revision of the manuscript. SK: participated in the study design, contributed substantially to
the revision of the manuscript. AJ: participated in the study design, helped to revise the manuscript. RG: participated in the study design,
helped to revise the manuscript. KN: performed the echocardiographic analysis, provided statistical advise on study design and analyzed the
data. RD: provided advise on study design, contributed to the revision of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication of their individual details in this manuscript. The
consent form is held by the authors and is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief. There are no pre-hypothermia echocardiographic data
that can be used for comparison for any of the patients. However, all the LV Doppler-derived parameters were reduced compared to normal
values for the appropriate age group. The follow-up period covered only ICU stay (median 15 days).
