Pulmonary involvement is one of the extra-articular manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis and can be due to the disease itself or secondary
to the medications used in order to treat it. We report the case of a 60-year-old woman who had been diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis and
developed multiple pulmonary nodules during treatment with leflunomide. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease of unknown
etiology that is characterized by symmetric polyarthritis and can lead to joint deformity and destruction.( 1 , 2 ) When RA involves other
organs besides the joints, there is an increase in morbidity and severity, and life expectancy can be reduced by 5 to 10 years.( 1 )
Pulmonary involvement in RA was first described by Ellman and Ball,( 3 ) who reported diffuse pulmonary fibrosis in three patients with RA.
Since then, the association between pulmonary involvement and RA has been described by several authors. The risk factors for pulmonary
involvement include middle age, male gender, severe erosive arthritis, high titers of rheumatoid factor, subcutaneous nodules, smoking,
genetic predisposition (HLA-DRB1), and other extra-articular manifestations of RA.( 4 , 5 ) Pulmonary involvement is a severe complication
of RA and can manifest as upper airway disease, interstitial lung disease, pleural effusion, bronchiolitis obliterans, fibrosing alveolitis,
pulmonary rheumatoid nodules, bronchiectasis, Caplan syndrome, pulmonary hemorrhage, organizing pneumonia, vasculitis, and pulmonary
infections.( 6 - 9 ) A 60-year-old White female librarian, who had been born and raised in the city of Belém, Brazil, presented with an
approximately 10-year-history of RA, as defined on the basis of the 2010 American College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism
classification criteria for RA. At the time of diagnosis, she was started on methotrexate, the dose of which was progressively increased to
15 mg/week. Subsequently, methotrexate was discontinued because of gastrointestinal intolerance, and, at that time, it was decided to start
the patient on leflunomide (20 mg/day) and deflazacort (12 mg/day). During the treatment period, the patient had joint improvement and, on
her own initiative, reduced her leflunomide dose from 20 mg/day to 20 mg/every other day. A chest X-ray performed 8 years previously to
screen the patient for fractures after chest trauma had shown a pulmonary nodule in the right lung base. A chest X-ray performed before the
patient was started on leflunomide had been normal. On that basis, the patient sought a pulmonologist, who requested further investigation.
The results of the ancillary tests were as follows: blood workup, no changes; ESR, 65 mm/h; levels of transaminase and nitrogenous
compounds, normal; antinuclear factor, negative; PCR, 6.2 mg/L; serology for viral hepatitis, negative; rheumatoid factor, positive (443
IU/mL); perinuclear and cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (p-ANCA and c-ANCA), negative on several occasions; bronchoscopy
results, normal; BAL microscopy, negative for bacteria; BAL cultures, negative; and BAL cytology, low cellularity and autolytic pattern. A
CT scan of the chest showed multiple cavitary pulmonary nodules predominantly in the left lung base (Figure 1). A biopsy of a peripheral
nodule revealed an acute suppurative inflammatory process with necrosis. At the time, it was decided that the patient should undergo
clinical and radiological follow-up. Figure 1.CT scan of the chest showing cavitary nodular opacities. After a five-month follow-up of the
pulmonary nodules, the patient developed dyspnea on exertion accompanied by dry cough, but no fever. Another bronchoscopy revealed
laryngitis and a nodule on the right vocal fold. The tracheobronchial tree was endoscopically normal; BAL was negative for AFB, BAL
microscopy revealed gram-negative bacilli (Klebsiella pneumoniae and Pseudomonas fluorescens were isolated by using an automated culture
system), BAL cultures for mycobacteria and fungi were negative, and BAL cytology revealed no neoplastic cells. At that time, the patient was
started on antibiotic therapy with clindamycin and fluconazole. After bronchoscopy showed negative BAL fluid cultures, prednisone (40
mg/day) was commenced in an attempt to stabilize her condition. However, despite the therapeutic approach used, another CT scan of the chest
revealed increased pulmonary nodules (Figure 2). At that point, the patient was referred to the city of São Paulo, Brazil, for evaluation. A
lung biopsy (Figure 3) by video-assisted thoracoscopy showed a chronic inflammatory lesion, with an exudative center, adjacent to the lung
parenchyma (disrupted by lymphocytic vasculitis), as well as a central cavitation filled with fibrinoleukocytic exudate and a lymphocytic
infiltrate surrounded by granulation tissue. The results of AFB and fungal testing were negative, as was the result of neoplastic cell
testing. In view of this result, which ruled out neoplastic and infectious disease, it was decided to discontinue leflunomide. Systemic
corticosteroid therapy was continued, and azathioprine (1 mg/kg/day) was commenced. Six months after leflunomide was discontinued, the
pulmonary nodules disappeared. At this writing, the patient was free of disease activity, was taking abatacept (500 mg/month), and had been
off systemic corticosteroid therapy for over a year. Figure 2.CT scan of the chest showing a nodular opacity adjacent to the pleural
surface, located in the right lower lobe. Figure 3.Lung biopsy. In A, fibrin and collagen deposition (red arrow) surrounded by cell debris
(dark arrow), with an area of necrosis. In B, inflammatory infiltrate with multinucleated cells (dark arrow) and central necrosis. Pulmonary
rheumatoid nodules are extra-articular manifestations of RA.( 2 , 4 ) The prevalence of these nodules is variable: they are detected on
chest X-ray in only 1% of RA patients, whereas they are identified on chest HRCT in up to 20-22% and are detected by open lung biopsy in
32%.( 7 , 10 - 12 ) Pulmonary rheumatoid nodules can be single or multiple and range from a few millimeters to 7 cm in diameter. They are
mostly asymptomatic or produce few symptoms, although they can cause cough and bloodstained sputum, and tend to involve both lungs. They
occur at the periphery of the lung, just beneath the pleura, and can cavitate in approximately one third of cases, causing hemoptysis,
bronchopleural fistula, spontaneous pneumothorax, secondary infection, and abscess.( 4 , 10 , 13 ) The appearance of pulmonary nodules in RA
patients is a diagnostic problem, and the possibilities of malignancy and tuberculosis should be ruled out.( 10 , 13 ) Nodules due to lung
cancer are characteristically greater than 10 mm in diameter and have irregular borders. Metastases can also appear as multiple nodules in
the lungs; however, no primary cancer was found in the case reported here.( 11 , 12 , 14 ) Other diagnostic possibilities include
mycobacterial and fungal infections, which can manifest as nodules; however, the absence of systemic symptoms is rare.( 11 ) A relevant
aspect in the case reported here is that the pulmonary nodules were likely related to the use of leflunomide, since there are several
arguments in favor of this hypothesis: the patient in question had a long-term history of RA and had shown no signs of pulmonary involvement
prior to treatment with leflunomide; pulmonary rheumatoid nodules can appear during treatment with leflunomide; and there have been reports
of peripheral and/or pulmonary rheumatoid nodules in patients undergoing treatment with leflunomide.( 8 , 15 , 16 ) Study carried out at the
Federal University of Pará, Belém, Brazil. Financial support: None. O comprometimento pulmonar é uma das manifestações extra-articulares da
artrite reumatóide e pode ser devido à própria doença ou secundário às medicações utilizadas para seu tratamento. Este trabalho relata um
caso de uma paciente de 60 anos de idade com diagnóstico de artrite reumatoide que evoluiu com múltiplos nódulos pulmonares durante o
tratamento com leflunomida. A artrite reumatoide (AR) é uma doença autoimune de etiologia desconhecida, caracterizada por poliartrite
simétrica, podendo evoluir com deformidade e destruição das articulações.( 1 , 2 ) Quando compromete outros órgãos, a morbidade e a
gravidade da doença são maiores, podendo diminuir a expectativa de vida em 5 a 10 anos.( 1 ) As primeiras manifestações pulmonares foram
descritas por Ellman e Ball,( 3 ) que descreveram fibrose pulmonar difusa em três pacientes com AR. Desde então, vários autores têm descrito
a associação entre as manifestações pulmonares e a AR. Os fatores de risco para envolvimento pulmonar são: meia-idade, sexo masculino,
artrite erosiva grave, títulos elevados de fator reumatóide, presença de nódulos subcutâneos, tabagismo, predisposição genética (HLA-DRB1) e
outras manifestações extra-articulares da AR.( 4 , 5 ) O envolvimento pulmonar é uma complicação grave da AR e pode se manifestar como uma
doença das vias aéreas superiores, doença intersticial pulmonar, derrame pleural, bronquiolite obliterante, alveolite fibrosante, nódulos
reumatoides pulmonares, bronquiectasia, síndrome de Caplan, hemorragia pulmonar, pneumonia em organização, vasculites e infecções
pulmonares.( 6 - 9 ) Paciente branca, feminina, 60 anos, bibliotecária, natural e procedente de Belém (PA) com AR há aproximadamente 10
anos, de acordo com os critérios do American College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism de 2010 para AR. Na ocasião do
diagnóstico foi introduzido metotrexato, com aumento progressivo da dose até 15 mg/semana. Posteriormente, foi suspenso por intolerância
gastrintestinal e, naquela ocasião, optou-se pela introdução da leflunomida (20 mg/dia) e deflazacorte (12 mg/dia). Durante esse período,
evoluiu com melhora do quadro articular e, por conta própria, reduziu a leflunomida para 20 mg em dias alternados. Há 8 anos, após trauma em
região torácica, foi realizada radiografia de tórax como screening para suspeita de fratura, sendo observado um nódulo pulmonar localizado
na base pulmonar direita. A radiografia de tórax antes da introdução da leflunomida era normal. Baseando-se nesse achado, a paciente
procurou um pneumologista, que prosseguiu na investigação. Os exames complementares revelavam: hemograma sem alteração; VHS de 65 mm/h;
transaminases e escórias nitrogenadas normais; fator antinuclear negativo; PCR de 6,2 mg/l; sorologias para hepatites virais negativas;
fator reumatoide positivo (443 UI/ml); anticorpo anticitoplasma de neutrófilos perinuclear e citoplasmático (p-ANCA e c-ANCA, do inglês
perinuclear e cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody) negativos em várias ocasiões; broncoscopia normal com lavado broncoalveolar
com ausência de bactérias pela bacterioscopia, culturas negativas e citologia oncótica com celularidade escassa e material com aspecto de
autólise. A TC de tórax mostrou múltiplos nódulos pulmonares cavitados predominando em base pulmonar esquerda (Figura 1). A biópsia de um
nódulo periférico evidenciou a presença de processo inflamatório agudo necrótico e supurativo. Nessa ocasião, optou-se pelo acompanhamento
clínico e radiológico do caso. Figura 1.TC de tórax mostrando opacidades nodulares cavitadas. Após cinco meses de acompanhamento dos nódulos
pulmonares, a paciente evoluiu com dispneia aos grandes esforços acompanhada de tosse seca, sem febre. Uma nova broncoscopia evidenciou
laringite e um nódulo na prega vocal direita. O aspecto endoscópico da árvore traqueobrônquica era normal; o lavado broncoalveolar
apresentou pesquisa de BAAR negativa, bacterioscopia com frequentes bacilos gram-negativos (a cultura automatizada isolou Klebsiella
pneumoniae e Pseudomonas fluorescens), as culturas para micobactérias e fungos foram negativas, e a citologia oncótica indicou ausência de
células neoplásicas. Naquela ocasião, foi instituída antibioticoterapia com clindamicina e fluconazol. Após broncoscopia com culturas
negativas, introduziu-se prednisona (40 mg/dia) na tentativa de estabilizar o quadro. Entretanto, apesar da terapêutica instituída, nova TC
de tórax evidenciou aumento dos nódulos pulmonares (Figura 2). Nesse momento, a paciente foi encaminhada para São Paulo para avaliação. Foi
repetida a biópsia pulmonar (Figura 3) por videotoracoscopia, que demonstrou lesão inflamatória crônica, com centro exsudativo, em
continuidade ao parênquima pulmonar (modificado por vasculite linfocitária), assim como cavitação central preenchida por exsudato
fibrinoleucocitário e infiltrado linfocitário com tecido de granulação ao redor. As pesquisas de BAAR e de fungos foram negativas; a
pesquisa de células neoplásicas foi negativa. Diante desse resultado, que afastou as hipóteses de doença neoplásica e infecciosa, optou-se
pela suspensão da leflunomida. A corticoterapia sistêmica foi mantida, e introduziu-se azatioprina (1 mg/kg/dia). Após seis meses da
suspensão da leflunomida, os nódulos pulmonares desapareceram. Até o momento, a paciente encontra-se fora de atividade de doença, em uso de
abatacepte (500 mg/mês) e sem corticoterapia sistêmica há mais de um ano. Figura 2.TC de tórax mostrando opacidade nodular adjacente à
superfície pleural, localizada no lobo inferior direito. Figura 3.Biópsia pulmonar. Em A, presença de fibrina e colágeno (seta vermelha),
circundados por restos celulares (seta escura), com área de necrose. Em B, presença de infiltrado inflamatório, com células multinucleadas
(seta escura) e presença de necrose central. Os nódulos reumatoides pulmonares são manifestações extra-articulares da AR.( 2 , 4 ) A
prevalência dos nódulos pulmonares varia: são detectados pela radiografia de tórax em apenas 1% dos pacientes com AR, enquanto na TCAR de
tórax são identificados em até 20-22% e na biópsia pulmonar a céu aberto, em 32%.( 7 , 10 - 12 ) Eles podem ser únicos ou múltiplos e variam
de poucos milímetros até 7 cm de diâmetro. Na maioria das vezes, são assintomáticos ou produzem poucos sintomas pulmonares, embora possam
causar tosse e escarros hemoptoicos, e tendem a comprometer ambos os pulmões. Localizam-se perifericamente, abaixo da pleura e podem escavar
em aproximadamente um terço dos casos, causando hemoptises, fístulas broncopleurais, pneumotórax espontâneo, infecção secundária e
abscesso.( 4 , 10 , 13 ) O aparecimento de nódulos pulmonares em pacientes com AR é um problema diagnóstico, e as possibilidades de
neoplasia maligna e tuberculose devem ser afastadas.( 10 , 13 ) Caracteristicamente, os nódulos que são decorrentes de neoplasia pulmonar
são maiores que 10 mm de diâmetro e apresentam margens irregulares. Metástases também podem aparecer como múltiplos nódulos nos pulmões;
porém, não foi observada nenhuma neoplasia primária no caso relatado.( 11 , 12 , 14 ) Outras possibilidades diagnósticas são as infecções
por micobactérias e fungos, que podem se manifestar como nódulos; contudo, a ausência de sintomas sistêmicos raramente é observada.( 11 ) Um
aspecto relevante no caso relatado é que os nódulos pulmonares, provavelmente, estavam relacionados ao uso da leflunomida, pois existem
vários argumentos a favor dessa hipótese: a paciente em questão tinha história de AR de longa data, sem comprometimento pulmonar antes do
tratamento com leflunomida; nódulos reumatoides pulmonares são menos frequentes em mulheres que em homens; nódulos pulmonares isolados podem
aparecer durante o tratamento com leflunomida; e existem relatos de nódulos reumatoides periféricos e/ou pulmonares em pacientes em
tratamento com leflunomida.( 8 , 15 , 16 ) Trabalho realizado na Universidade Federal do Pará, Belém (PA) Brasil. Apoio financeiro: Nenhum.
