A 35-year-old rural worker presented with a 15-day history of progressive dyspnea, which, for the last 5 days, had been accompanied by dry
cough, myalgia, asthenia, and fever. The patient also mentioned that he had swum in natural waters within the last 20 days. Physical
examination showed mild painful hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. Chest X-rays showed bilateral reticulonodular infiltrates. An HRCT scan
revealed patchy areas of ground-glass attenuation, irregular interlobular septal thickening, intralobular interstitial thickening, and small
confluent nodules. Nodular reversed halos (focal, rounded areas of ground-glass opacity surrounded by more or less complete rings of
consolidation) were also observed in the lower lobes of the lungs (Figure 1). Figure 1.HRCT scans showing patchy areas of ground-glass
attenuation, small nodules, and nodular reversed halo signs in both lower lobes of the lungs. Blood tests showed leukocytosis with
eosinophilia. Bronchoalveolar lavage findings were negative. The patient underwent open lung biopsy. Histological examination of the biopsy
sample demonstrated areas of parenchymal granulomatous inflammation, with clusters of epithelioid histiocytes, giant cells, and some
eosinophils. In addition, those areas were surrounded by chronic inflammatory cell infiltrate and numerous schistosome ova (Figure 2). The
final diagnosis was acute schistosomiasis. Figure 2.Histological sections: in A, areas of granulomatous inflammation and inflammatory
infiltration of the alveolar septa (H&E staining; magnification, ×40); in B, schistosome ova (arrows) inside a granuloma. (H&E staining;
magnification, ×100). The patient was treated with thiabendazole and oxamniquine, showing improvement of the clinical and imaging findings
over the following days. Another HRCT scan, obtained four months after treatment, showed no abnormalities. Schistosomiasis is a major
helminthic infection in tropical and subtropical regions; it has affected an estimated 200 million people, resulting in considerable
morbidity and occasional mortality.( 1 - 3 ) In such regions, native populations and travelers are at risk of infection with Schistosoma
spp.( 2 ) The infection is acquired through direct contact with contaminated freshwater.(2) The spread of infection requires an intermediate
host-freshwater snails specific to each Schistosoma species-whose geographic distribution limits the distribution of the parasite.(3) Humans
are colonized by three major species of the parasite( 1 ): S. mansoni, common in Africa, the Middle East, and South America; S. haematobium,
common in Africa and the Middle East; and S. japonicum, common in Japan and China. Schistosomiasis progresses through three phases, as
defined by the migration of the helminth: allergic (cercarial) dermatitis, which occurs during the penetration of cercariae into the skin;
acute schistosomiasis, which occurs during the oviposition phase; and chronic schistosomiasis, caused by the formation of granulomas and
fibrosis around the helminth eggs retained in the pulmonary vasculature, which can result in arteriolitis obliterans, pulmonary
hypertension, and cor pulmonale.(1) Although the clinical presentation of acute schistosomiasis varies widely, most individuals are
asymptomatic. Symptoms and signs can include fever, chills, weakness, weight loss, headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, hepatomegaly, and
splenomegaly. The disease is usually self-limited, but severe cases can result in death.(2,3) Marked eosinophilia can be present.( 1 - 3 )
The diagnosis of schistosomiasis is based on clinical findings, the identification of exposure to contaminated water in endemic areas, the
documentation of eggs in stool samples, or serological positivity for Schistosoma sp.( 4 ) Early diagnosis and treatment of the disease are
important to prevent severe late complications, such as pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale, and pulmonary arteriovenous fistulas.( 1 )
The most common CT finding in patients with acute pulmonary schistosomiasis is that of small (2- to 15-mm) pulmonary nodules. Larger nodules
are typically surrounded by halo signs. A pattern of bilateral diffuse ground-glass opacity with ill-defined nodules has also been reported.
Significant lymphadenopathy and pleural effusion are very rare findings.( 1 - 3 ) Although organizing pneumonia is considered to be the most
frequent cause of the reversed halo sign, morphological aspects of the halo, particularly the presence of small nodules in the wall or
inside the reversed halo, strongly suggest a diagnosis of active granulomatous disease, especially pulmonary tuberculosis or pulmonary
sarcoidosis. Histopathological analysis has revealed the presence of granulomas within the ring portion of or within the reversed halo
sign.( 4 - 6 ) In the present case, the reversed halo sign was observed in a patient with acute schistosomiasis. In conclusion,
schistosomiasis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of nodular reversed halo sign, particularly in patients with an
epidemiological history suggestive of the disease. In the case presented here, the analysis of histological sections demonstrated that the
nodules were related to the presence of granulomas. Um trabalhador rural de 35 anos de idade apresentava dispneia progressiva havia 15 dias.
Nos últimos 5 dias, a dispneia havia sido acompanhada de tosse seca, mialgia, astenia e febre. O paciente também mencionou que havia nadado
em águas naturais nos últimos 20 dias. O exame físico revelou hepatomegalia dolorosa leve e esplenomegalia. A radiografia de tórax mostrou
infiltrados reticulonodulares bilaterais. A TCAR revelou áreas desiguais de atenuação em vidro fosco, espessamento irregular dos septos
interlobulares, espessamento do interstício intralobular e pequenos nódulos confluentes. Halos invertidos nodulares (áreas arredondadas
focais de opacidade em vidro fosco cercadas de anéis de consolidação mais ou menos completos) foram também observados nos lobos inferiores
dos pulmões (Figura 1). Figura 1.TCAR mostrando áreas desiguais de atenuação em vidro fosco, pequenos nódulos e halos invertidos nodulares
em ambos os lobos inferiores dos pulmões Exames de sangue revelaram leucocitose com eosinofilia. Os resultados do lavado broncoalveolar
foram negativos. O paciente foi submetido a biópsia pulmonar a céu aberto. O exame histológico da amostra obtida por meio da biópsia revelou
áreas de inflamação granulomatosa parenquimatosa, com aglomerados de histiócitos epitelioides, células gigantes e alguns eosinófilos. Além
disso, essas áreas estavam cercadas de infiltrado crônico de células inflamatórias e numerosos ovos de esquistossomo (Figura 2). O
diagnóstico final foi de esquistossomose aguda. Figura 2.Cortes histológicos: em A, áreas de inflamação granulomatosa e infiltração
inflamatória dos septos alveolares (H & E; aumento: 40×); em B, ovos de esquistossomo (setas) dentro de um granuloma (H & E; aumento: 100×).
O paciente foi tratado com tiabendazol e oxamniquina, com melhora dos achados clínicos e de imagem ao longo dos dias seguintes. A TCAR
realizada quatro meses após o tratamento não revelou alterações. A esquistossomose é uma infecção helmíntica importante em regiões tropicais
e subtropicais; estima-se que já tenha afetado 200 milhões de pessoas, com morbidade considerável e mortalidade ocasional.( 1 - 3 ) Nessas
regiões, tanto as populações nativas como os viajantes correm risco de infecção por Schistosoma spp.( 2 ) A infecção é adquirida por meio de
contato direto com água doce contaminada.( 2 ) A propagação da infecção exige um hospedeiro intermediário - caracóis de água doce
específicos para cada espécie de Schistosoma - cuja distribuição geográfica limita a distribuição do parasita.( 3 ) Os seres humanos são
colonizados por três grandes espécies do parasita( 1 ): S. mansoni, comum na África, no Oriente Médio e na América do Sul; S. haematobium,
comum na África e no Oriente Médio; e S. japonicum, comum no Japão e na China. A progressão da esquistossomose se dá em três fases,
definidas pela migração do helminto: dermatite alérgica (cercariana), que ocorre durante a penetração de cercárias na pele; esquistossomose
aguda, que ocorre durante a fase de oviposição; e esquistossomose crônica, causada pela formação de granulomas e fibrose ao redor dos ovos
do helminto retidos na vasculatura pulmonar, o que pode resultar em arteriolite obliterante, hipertensão pulmonar e cor pulmonale.( 1 )
Embora a apresentação clínica da esquistossomose aguda varie muito, a maioria dos indivíduos é assintomática. Os sintomas e sinais podem
incluir febre, calafrios, fraqueza, perda de peso, cefaleia, náusea, vômito, diarreia, hepatomegalia e esplenomegalia. A doença é geralmente
autolimitada, mas casos graves podem resultar em morte.( 2 , 3 ) Pode haver eosinofilia pronunciada.( 1 - 3 ) O diagnóstico de
esquistossomose baseia-se em achados clínicos, na identificação de exposição a água contaminada em áreas endêmicas, na documentação de ovos
nas fezes ou na sorologia positiva para Schistosoma sp.(4) O diagnóstico e tratamento precoce da doença são importantes para evitar
complicações tardias graves, tais como hipertensão pulmonar, cor pulmonale e fístulas arteriovenosas pulmonares.( 1 ) O achado tomográfico
mais comum em pacientes com esquistossomose pulmonar aguda é o de nódulos pulmonares pequenos (de 2 a 15 mm). Nódulos maiores são
tipicamente cercados de sinais do halo. Também foram relatadas opacidades difusas, bilaterais, em vidro fosco com nódulos mal definidos.
Linfonodopatia significativa e derrame pleural são achados muito raros.( 1 - 3 ) Embora a pneumonia em organização seja considerada a causa
mais frequente do sinal do halo invertido, aspectos morfológicos do halo, particularmente a presença de pequenos nódulos na parede ou no
interior do halo invertido, são fortes indícios de um diagnóstico de doença granulomatosa ativa, especialmente tuberculose pulmonar ou
sarcoidose pulmonar. A análise histopatológica já revelou a presença de granulomas na porção anelar do halo invertido ou dentro do halo.( 4
- 6 ) No presente caso, o sinal do halo invertido foi observado em um paciente com esquistossomose aguda. Em suma, a esquistossomose deve
ser levada em conta no diagnóstico diferencial de sinal do halo invertido nodular, particularmente em pacientes com história epidemiológica
que sugira a presença da doença. No caso aqui apresentado, a análise de cortes histológicos mostrou que os nódulos estavam relacionados com
a presença de granulomas.
