A 45-year-old male patient presented to our outpatient clinic with a three-week history of low-grade fever, mildly productive cough,
headache, and asthenia. He had lost 5 kg in the last four months. The patient reported that he had a brother who had been diagnosed with
pulmonary tuberculosis and had been receiving treatment for it for two months. He also reported that he habitually spent his weekends on a
grange in a rural area. A HRCT scan of the chest showed small disseminated nodules (Figure 1). Figure 1.Small nodules evenly distributed
throughout the lungs, no particular lung compartment being predominantly affected. Note that some of the nodules touch the pleural surface,
whereas others are in contact with the fissures. Multiple, small interstitial nodules constituted the only abnormal HRCT finding in our
patient. Lung nodules appear as multiple round opacities that have soft tissue density and are smaller than 3 cm. Small nodules (or
micronodules) are those of less than 1 cm in diameter. On the basis of their distribution throughout the lung parenchyma, they can be
classified as perilymphatic, centrilobular, or random. Perilymphatic nodules are small nodules located predominantly in the
peribronchovascular interstitium, interlobular septa, and subpleural regions (which contain the pulmonary lymphatic system). They are
commonly found in cases of sarcoidosis, silicosis, and lymphangitic carcinomatosis. A centrilobular distribution is characterized by nodules
that are located within a few millimeters of the pleural surface and fissures but do not touch them. Centrilobular nodules can be found in
cases of hypersensitivity pneumonitis, silicosis, and infectious bronchiolitis, for example. A random distribution is characterized by small
nodules randomly distributed in the secondary lobule and uniformly disseminated throughout the lungs. This distribution pattern is
consistent with nodular disease that is disseminated through the blood, including metastasis and miliary granulomatous disease, particularly
tuberculosis and histoplasmosis. In the case reported here, the nodules were evenly distributed throughout the lungs, displaying a random
pattern of distribution. This distribution pattern is consistent with miliary tuberculosis, histoplasmosis, and hematogenous metastasis.
Metastatic nodules tend to predominate in the lower lung fields, whereas, in miliary tuberculosis, they tend to predominate in the upper
lung fields. In addition, nodules commonly vary in size in cases of metastasis, whereas, in cases of miliary infection, they do not tend to.
There are no CT criteria to aid in differentiating between miliary tuberculosis and histoplasmosis. Our patient tested positive for HIV, his
CD4 count was 140 cells/µL, and radial immunodiffusion was positive for histoplasmosis. In the case reported here, a final diagnosis of
histoplasmosis was established on the basis of the clinical picture, the epidemiological history, serology results, and CT findings. Homem,
45 anos, procurou o ambulatório com queixas de febre baixa, tosse pouco produtiva, cefaleia e astenia há três semanas, assim como
emagrecimento de 5 kg nos últimos quatro meses. O paciente relatara ter um irmão com diagnóstico de tuberculose pulmonar há dois meses em
tratamento, assim como costumar passar finais de semana em um sítio em zona rural. A TCAR mostrou pequenos nódulos disseminados (Figura 1).
Figura 1.Pequenos nódulos distribuídos homogeneamente pelos pulmões, sem predominar em nenhum compartimento específico. Observar que alguns
deles tocam a superfície pleural e que outros se encontram em contato com as cissuras. O paciente apresenta na TCAR basicamente pequenos
nódulos intersticiais múltiplos. O padrão nodular se refere à presença de múltiplas opacidades pulmonares arredondadas, com densidade de
partes moles, menores que 3 cm. Pequenos nódulos (ou micronódulos) são aqueles com diâmetro menor que 1 cm. Eles podem ser classificados,
quanto a sua distribuição pelo parênquima pulmonar, em perilinfáticos, centrolobulares ou randômicos. O padrão perilinfático caracteriza-se
por pequenos nódulos que se localizam preferencialmente no interstício peribroncovascular, nos septos interlobulares e nas regiões
subpleurais (regiões que contêm o sistema linfático pulmonar). Esse padrão de distribuição é encontrado frequentemente na sarcoidose, na
silicose e na linfangite carcinomatosa. A distribuição centrolobular caracteriza-se pela presença de nódulos a poucos milímetros da
superfície pleural e das cissuras, sem, no entanto, tocá-las. Pneumonite por hipersensibilidade, silicose e bronquiolites infecciosas são
exemplos de doenças que podem cursar com esse padrão. O padrão randômico caracteriza-se pela presença de pequenos nódulos distribuídos
aleatoriamente em relação ao lóbulo secundário e uniformemente disseminados pelos pulmões. Doenças nodulares que se disseminam por via
hematogênica apresentam padrão randômico de distribuição. Exemplos: metástases e doenças granulomatosas miliares, principalmente tuberculose
e histoplasmose. Os nódulos do paciente em questão estão homogeneamente distribuídos pelos pulmões, caracterizando a distribuição randômica.
As principais doenças que podem se apresentar com esse padrão são a tuberculose miliar, a histoplasmose e alguns tipos de metástases
hematogênicas. Os nódulos metastáticos tendem a predominar nos campos pulmonares inferiores, enquanto, na tuberculose miliar, eles tendem a
predominar nos campos superiores. Além disso, muitas vezes eles têm tamanhos diferentes nas metástases, enquanto que nas infecções miliares,
eles tendem a manter as mesmas dimensões. Não há critério tomográfico que auxilie na diferenciação entre tuberculose miliar e histoplasmose.
O anti-HIV foi positivo, a dosagem de CD4 foi de 140 células\µL, e a imunodifusão radial para fungos foi positiva para histoplasmose. No
caso desse paciente, levando-se em conta o quadro clínico, a história epidemiológica, o resultado da sorologia e o exame tomográfico, o
diagnóstico final foi de histoplasmose.
