We report a case of esophageal extranasal NK/T cell lymphoma with biphasic morphologic features revealed by a deep large piecemeal biopsy. A
40-year-old man present with pharyngalgia, dysphagia, recurrent fever, and 5-kg weight loss for 8 months. Endoscopy demonstrated progressing
longitudinal ulcers and mucosal bridges along the esophagus. The first and second biopsies obtained superficial mucosa with scattered bland-
looking small lymphocytes. A subsequent large piecemeal snare abscission for biopsy showed atypical lymphoid cells infiltrating into the
deep lamina propria and muscularis mucosae, whereas the superficial lamina propria was highly edematous with scant small lymphocytes.
Immunohistochemical studies confirmed that both underlying atypical cells and superficial small lymphocytes were neoplastic, sharing an
identical immunophenotype: positive for CD2, CD3, CD43, CD8, CD56, TIA-1 and granzyme B. Epstein-Barr virus–encoded small RNAs were found in
both cells. The histologic findings were diagnostic of primary esophageal extranasal NK/T cell lymphoma. However, the patient developed bone
marrow depression during chemotherapy and died of massive cerebral hemorrhage after the first cycle of chemotherapy. Primary esophageal
extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma nasal type is extremely rare. We show the biphasic morphology of this disease, which highlights the importance
of deep biopsy for accurate diagnosis. Primary esophageal lymphoma is rare, accounting for <1% cases of gastrointestinal lymphomas. B cell
lymphomas are the most common histological subtype.1,2 Our review of the medical literature revealed only 3 cases of primary esophageal
extranasal NK/T cell lymphoma published so far.3,4 Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma is characterized by diffuse infiltration of atypical
lymphoid cells, angiocentric and angiodestructive growth pattern, coagulative necrosis, and admixed apoptotic bodies.5 Here, we report a
case of primary esophageal extranasal NK/T cell lymphoma showing biphasic morphology and highlight the importance of deep biopsy for
accurate diagnosis of tumor arising from the deep layer of esophageal wall. A 40-year-old man was admitted for gradually aggravated
pharyngalgia and dysphagia for 8 months in addition to recurrent fever and 5-kg weight loss. Results of physical examination were
unremarkable, with no palpable lymphadenopathy, ascites, or organomegaly. A complete blood count showed a white blood cell count of
6.67 × 109 cells/L, a red blood cell count of 5.47 × 1012 cells/L, a hemoglobin level of 100 g/L, and a platelet level of 216 × 109 cells/L.
The serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was 226 U/L (normal range 114–240 U/L), the total serum protein level was 69 g/L (normal range
64–87 g/L), and the serum albumin level was 35 g/L (normal range 35–50 g/L). Other laboratory values were within normal limits. Endoscopy
demonstrated multiple esophageal ulcers, well-demarcated, with the largest measuring approximately 2.0 × 0.6 cm in cross-section. A biopsy
was taken for pathologic examination and a diagnosis of chronic esophagitis was made. However, this patient showed no response to
antibiotics administration. Three months later, he was admitted again for recurrent pharyngalgia, sharpened retrosternal pain, and
continuous fever. Laboratory tests, including blood counts and hepatic and renal function tests, remained stable. Chest computer tomography
(CT) scan showed that the esophagus wall was rigid and incrassated. The inner wall was rough and uneven on the surface. After contrast
administration, the CT scan showed multiple mucosal interruptions with enhancement occupying more than half of the esophageal wall (Figure
1). No enlarged lymph nodes were detected. CT scans of the head, neck, abdomen, and pelvis did not detect enlarged lymph nodes. The liver
and spleen were of normal size and shape. Endoscopy revealed multiple deep ulcers along middle and distal portion of esophagus, with 3 deep
longitudinal ulcers measuring 2 × 10 cm. A biopsy was taken and the pathologic diagnosis was chronic nonspecific esophagitis. No lesions
appeared in the nasal cavities on nasal endoscopic examination. Computed tomography (CT) scan of an esophageal lesion. CT showed the
esophagus wall was rigid and demonstrated rugosity (arrows) in the sagittal view (A) and transverse section (B). The patient had severe
worsening of his original symptoms, and decreasing ability to swallow in the following 2 months. Of note, he had lost 7 kg since the first
admission. Blood test showed his red blood cell count and hemoglobin level dropped to 3.50 × 1012 cells/L and 75 g/L, respectively. His LDH
level was elevated to 370 U/L (normal range 114–240 U/L), his total serum protein level was decreased to 38.2 g/L (normal range 64–87 g/L),
and his serum albumin level was 20.8 g/L (normal range 35–50 g/L). Repeated endoscopy showed mucosal erosion along the esophagus,
approximately 17 to 40 cm from incisors. There were multiple polypoid lesions and longitudinal mucosal bridges with ulcers. A shallow
longitudinal ulcer in the posterior wall was observed (Figure 2A–C). Following a large piecemeal snare abscission, a large portion of tissue
was obtained for biopsy (Figure 2D). The final diagnosis was primary esophageal extranasal NK/T cell lymphoma. A bone marrow biopsy was
subsequently performed and was negative for tumor involvement. In accordance with the Ann Arbor classification system, this case was
classified as a stage IE disease. Endoscopy examination of esophageal lesion. Endoscopy demonstrated longitudinal ulcer (A), polypoid
lesions (B), and longitudinal mucosal bridges (C). A large piecemeal snare abscission was performed to obtain sufficient tissue for
diagnosis (D). One month after diagnosis, this patient was treated with chemotherapy using CHOP regimen (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
vincristine, and prednisone). However, he developed bone marrow depression with fever and interspersed cutaneous petechia on the 10th day of
the first cycle of chemotherapy. Consistently, blood tests showed a WBC count of 0.5 × 109 cells/L, a neutrophil count of 0.2 × 109 cells/L,
a hemoglobin level of 90 g/L, and a platelet level of 15 × 109 cells/L. Three days later, he died of massive cerebral hemorrhage suddenly.
The specimen was fixed in a 10% neutral formalin solution and embedded in paraffin. Four-micromoles per liter sections were prepared for
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining or immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. An Envision 2-step assay was used for the IHC staining. Primary
antibodies CD20, CD79a, CD2, CD3ε, CD5, CD4, CD8, CD43, CD56, TIA-1, Granzyme B, Ki-67, and horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary
antibodies were obtained from DAKO Inc, Glostrup, Copenhagen, Denmark. In situ hybridization (ISH) was performed to test for the presence of
Epstein-Barr virus–encoded small RNA (EBER) in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections using a hybridization kit (DAKO). For cytogenetic
analysis, the paraffin tissue DNA was prepared with a tissue DNA extraction and purification kit (Dneasy TM Tissue Kit, Qiagene, CA). T-cell
receptor rearrangement studies were performed. This study was approved by the Human Ethics Committee of The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun
Yat-sen University. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient's direct relative for publication of this Case Report and any
accompanying images. The first biopsy obtained showed only ulceration with an inflammatory exudate and fragments of squamous epithelium
(Figure 3A). Pathologic diagnosis was rendered as chronic nonspecific esophagitis without performance of IHC. Pathological features of the
first (A, B, C) and second (D, E, F) biopsies. The first biopsy obtained demonstrated ulceration with inflammatory exudate (A, H&E).
Immmunohistochemical (IHC) staining (B) and in situ hybridization (ISH) for EBER (C) highlighted scattered positive lymphocytes. The second
biopsy obtained fragments of squamous epithelium and superficial lamina propria with scattered small lymphocytes (D, H&E), which were
positive for CD3 (E) and EBER by ISH (F). The second biopsy obtained fragments of squamous epithelium and superficial lamina propria with
ulceration. Scattered small lymphocytes without atypical features were found in lamina propria (Figure 3D). IHC staining was not performed.
The working pathologic diagnosis remained as chronic nonspecific esophagitis. The last biopsy was taken with a large piecemeal snare
abscission. Therefore, a large fragment of tissue was obtained. Histopathologic examination showed a biphasic population of lymphocytes in
the superficial and deep lamina propria. The superficial lamina propria was highly edematous with scant small lymphocytes. These lymphocytes
showed round condensed nuclei and rare mitotic figures were noted, practically identical to the lymphoid cells seen in the previous biopsies
(Figure 4A, B). Focal ulceration was observed. However, numerous atypical lymphoid cells diffusely infiltrated into the deep lamina propria
and muscularis mucosae, dispersing muscular bundles. The cells were small to medium-sized, with round hyperchromatic nuclei with
inconspicuous nucleoli (Figure 4C, D). Neither an angiocentric infiltration pattern and nor an angiodestructive growth pattern was
identified in the biopsy. Coagulative necrosis and admixed apoptotic bodies were not seen either. Immunohistochemical staining indicated
tumor cells were positive for CD2, CD3 (Figure 4E), CD43, CD8, CD56 (Figure 4F), granzyme B (Figure 4G), and TIA-1(Figure 4H). A small
portion of cells were positive for CD5. The proliferation index was approximately 60% as assessed by Ki-67 staining (Figure 4I). ISH for
EBER showed strong positive signals in tumor cells (Figure 4J). The superficial small lymphocytes without atypical morphology were confirmed
to be neoplastic because they also showed positive staining for EBER and shared the same immunophenotype with the atypical lymphoid cells
beneath. No clonal rearrangement of T cell receptor genes was found by polymerase chain reaction heteroduplex analysis and polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis. Pathological features of the third biopsy. The superficial lamina propria was highly edematous with scant small
lymphoid cells (A and B, H&E). Atypical lymphoid cells infiltrated the muscularis mucosae (C and D, H&E). Tumor cells were positive for CD3
(E), CD56 (F), Granzyme B (G), TIA-1 (H), Ki67 (I), and Epstein-Barr virus–encoded small RNAs (J). After the diagnosis of primary esophageal
extranasal NK/T cell lymphoma based on the third biopsy, supplemental immunohistochemical staining and EBER ISH have been performed on
tissues of the first 2 biopsies. Scattered lymphocytes were positive for CD2, CD3 (Figure 1B, E), TIA1, and EBER ISH (Figure 1C, F),
suggesting the bland appearing lymphocytes, which were originally interpreted as benign were in fact neoplastic. Primary esophageal lymphoma
is very rare, with only 40 cases reported in the English literature. The diagnosis of primary esophageal lymphoma should meet the following
5 criteria: no concomitant palpable superficial lymph nodes, no mediastinal lymphadenopathy, normal white blood cell count, no hepatic or
splenic involvement, and the presence of an esophageal lesion.6 The most common subtypes of primary esophageal lymphomas reported are
extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT lymphoma)1,7–11 and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.12–14 Aside
from B cell lymphomas, there were also 10 cases of T or NK-cell lymphoma15–18 and 3 cases of Hodgkin lymphoma19,20 reported. Most primary
esophageal lymphomas arose in patients older than 50 years. The present symptoms, such as dysphagia epigastric pain and weight loss, were
nonspecific. Endoscopic findings were variable and included submucosal tumor infiltration, polypoid growth, and ulceration. MALT lymphomas
commonly presented as submucosal tumors with stage I disease. The most common treatment was endoscopic mucosal resection or endoscopic
submucosal dissection with or without chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Most patients showed no evidence of recurrence on follow-up (1–3
years). Aggressive lymphomas, such as T-cell lymphomas and diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, commonly presented as tumor masses with
obstruction and ulceration on endoscopy. Treatment included chemotherapy, with or without surgery, and radiotherapy. Prognosis is variable
and advanced stage disease shows a poor outcome. Primary esophageal NK/T cell lymphoma is extremely rare, with only 3 cases reported
previously (Table 1).3,4 The present case is the fourth primary esophageal NK/T cell lymphoma reported so far. The age range of the reported
cases was 40 to 54 years. Endoscopy showed ulceration with or without masses. Initial treatments were chemotherapy with or without
radiotherapy. All the patients died within 2 to 32 months. The previous reports simply focused on endoscopy appearance. In the present case,
we highlighted the biphasic histopathologic features of the tumor with emphasis on the bland morphologic characteristic of tumor cells,
which may be seen in superficial mucosal biopsies. We emphasized the necessity of obtaining deep mucosal tissue for biopsy to avoid a benign
misclassification in these cases. Clinical Profile of Reported Cases of Primary Esophageal Extranodal NK/T Cell Lymphoma, Nasal Type
Extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma is much more prevalent in the Asian population as compared with the overall population.21 Nasal NK/T-cell
lymphoma, referring to cases with primary tumor sites locating in the upper airway regions, including the nasal cavity, nasopharynx,
paranasal sinuses, tonsils, hypopharynx, and larynx, has been reported to account for 60% to 90% of all extranodal NK/T-cell lymphomas.22,22
Extranasal NK/T-cell lymphoma is defined as the presence of primary tumor at all other sites in the absence of nasal disease, most often
arising from the gastrointestinal tract, skin, lungs, or liver.23 Patients with extranasal NK/T-cell lymphoma had more adverse clinical
features (eg, a higher stage, elevated LDH, more bulky disease, and poor performance status) and poorer survival rate compared with nasal
cases, even in cases with apparently localized disease.23–25 However, there are no significant differences in the immunophenotypic or
genotypic profiles between the nasal and extranasal cases.26 The most common feature of extranasal NK/T-cell lymphoma of gastrointestinal
tract detected with endoscopy is an ulceroinfiltrative lesion. However, there are no pathognomonic signs to distinguish lymphoma from other
malignancies or benign lesions, including Behçet disease or inflammatory bowel disease. Primary endoscopy detects malignant lesions in
approximately 65% of gastrointestinal (GI) tract lymphomas later confirmed by biopsy.26 Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) has proven to be
much more effective than general endoscopy in detecting GI lymphomas. This method is superior because of its high resolution and its ability
to provide more accurate information as to the involvement of the deeper layers of the esophageal wall.27 Lymphomas arising from deep lamina
propria or submucosa are beyond the reach of usual endoscopic biopsy, and may lead to misdiagnosis. EUS help reveal the exact location of
tumor and guide precise biopsy. If EUS had been performed in this case prior to the first biopsy, it might have helped reveal that the main
lesion present deep within the esophageal well and provided guidance to obtain a deeper and larger portion of tissue for biopsy. This may
have avoided the initial pathologic misdiagnosis and the necessity for subsequent multiple biopsies. In addition, new endoscopic
instruments, including magnifying endoscopy with narrow band images, autofluorescence imaging, and confocal laser endomicroscopy, will help
increase diagnostic accuracy in the future.28,29 For those cases with masses arising from the superficial mucosa, general endoscopy is
usually able to obtain diagnostic tissue with rare complications. However, for those tumors arising more deeply, general endoscopy biopsy
may fail to get sufficient diagnostic tissue, which may lead to delayed treatment or misdiagnosis. In that case, a repeated biopsy for a
deeper and larger portion of tissue is needed to reach an accurate diagnosis. Nevertheless, clinicians may be concerned with performing a
deeper biopsy because deeper biopsies increase the risk for hemorrhage or perforation. As a result, a balance between obtaining sufficient
tissue for diagnosis while minimizing the risk of iatrogenic complications should be achieved. Gastroenterologists should try to obtain a
deeper and larger portion of tissue for accurate diagnosis while attempting to reduce the incidence of complications with close patient
monitoring. For these purposes, EUS can aid during the procedure to avoid large blood vessels and damage to serosa during the biopsy
procedure. There are no significant differences in histopathologic features between nasal NK/T-cell lymphoma and extranasal NK/T-cell
lymphoma. Medium to large-size atypical lymphoid cells diffusely infiltrate the tissue and usually demonstrate irregular hyperchromatic
nuclei. Angiocentric and angiodestructive growth pattern, coagulative necrosis, and admixed apoptotic bodies are characteristic but not
universal features.5 For example, the absence of an angiocentric or angiodestructive pattern is found in approximately 30% cases.25 In
addition, the presence of angiocentric/angioinvasive pattern may be dependent on the size of biopsy specimen, with larger specimens more
likely to show these findings. In the present case, biphasic morphology was seen in the esophageal biopsy. Scattered bland-appearing
neoplastic cells resembling small lymphocytes infiltrated into superficial lamina propria with edema and were not recognizable as tumor
cells by H&E staining alone. Immunohistochemical staining and EBER ISH were necessary to highlight the small tumor cells.25 Tumor cells with
obviously atypical features were diffusely infiltrated into the deep lamina propria and muscularis mucosae, which were not seen on the
initial biopsy. In these circumstances, superficial biopsies may lead to misdiagnosis as chronic inflammation. Diagnosis of esophageal
extranasal NK/T-cell lymphoma will be difficult in some cases without a larger and deeper biopsy than that normally taken in routine
endoscopy procedures. The clinical differential diagnosis for esophageal extranasal NK/T-cell lymphoma includes Behçet disease, Crohn
disease, and tuberculosis (TB). Behçet disease is characterized by the triple-symptom complex of recurrent oral aphthous ulcers, genital
ulcers, and uveitis. It also involves visceral organs such as the gastrointestinal tract, lung, cardiovascular, and neurological systems.
Esophageal involvement was found in 4.7% of cases.30 Endoscopy shows single or multiple punched-out ulcers with well-demarcated edges and
relatively flat bottoms. Microscopic features include chronic active inflammation with ulceration.31 Although vasculitis had been listed as
one of the diagnostic features, it is rarely found on biopsy. Crohn disease is a chronic relapsing and remitting inflammatory disease with
multifocal involvement along the gastrointestinal tract. Esophageal involvement accounts for 6% of Crohn disease,32 characterized by
aphthous ulcers, longitudinal ulcers, and strictures. Morphologic features include focal or patchy chronic inflammation and noncaseating
granulomas. Esophageal TB is the most common secondary site of TB developed in the lymph node or lung, but it is a rare primary site for TB.
Endoscopy of esophageal TB often shows ulceration or infiltrative growth in the lumen.33 However, microscopic features of TB include
multiple granulomas, often characterized by their large-sized and coalescent architectural pattern. Caseation necrosis can be found in the
center of large granulomas. Mycobacterial organisms can be identified with acid-fast stains. The strategy for management of extranodal
NK/T-cell lymphoma remains controversial. The current suggestion for management of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma is systemic chemotherapy
and radiotherapy targeting the involved field if applicable.34 For patients with clinically localized nasal disease, radiotherapy has been
regarded of paramount importance because about 70% of patients achieve complete remission after treatment.35–37 However, extranasal disease
appears to be less amenable to conventional radiotherapy. Currently, chemotherapy is the primary treatment for patients with systemic
disseminated disease. In this regard, CHOP is a very common regimen, but the prognosis is far from satisfactory.38 The 5-year overall
survival was around 40% following CHOP regimen in combination with radiotherapy. Moreover, anthracycline-containing chemotherapy has a poor
response in extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma. One study showed 71% of patients with extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma failed to achieve remission
with CHOP therapy.39 Other nonanthracycline drugs (eg, methotrexate, L-asparaginase) have shown some promising effects on treating relapsed
or refractory patients.40,41 Autologous or allogeneic stem cell therapy may provide a survival benefit for patients with extranasal or
advance nasal diseases.42,43 Primary esophageal extranasal NK/T cell lymphoma is extremely rare. We reported a case with unique biphasic
morphology. The neoplastic cells present within the superficial mucosa had a bland morphological appearance and resembled small lymphocytes,
which in these cases may easily be misdiagnosed as benign. A deeper biopsy is often necessary to reveal the underlying diagnostic
morphologic features of this entity. None. Abbreviations: CT = computerized tomography, EUS = endoscopic ultrasonography, GI =
gastrointestinal, ISH = in situ hybridization, LDH = lactate dehydrogenase, TB = tuberclosis. Z-YY, Q-HC, and FL contributed equally to this
study and they are co-first authors. The authors report no conflicts of interest.
