Echinococcosis is produced by the larval stage of Echinococcus granulosus; it is a parasitic disease which is seen rarely in humans and has
adverse outcomes. We report a case of advanced pelvic hydatid bone disease with successful limb salvage surgery. Our patient had a 5-year
follow-up without recurrence which is a rarity as per the literature. Early diagnosis and prompt medical therapy are necessary for effective
management whereas delayed diagnosis is always fraught with the risk of recurrence and sepsis. In 2009, a 30-year-old woman, native of
Karachi (Sindhi ethnicity), presented at our clinic with history of a pathological fracture 11 years earlier. Her fracture was initially
misdiagnosed and fixed. Subsequently she had persistent disease that progressed with time. Following this she underwent multiple surgeries
and the diagnosis of hydatid disease was made but despite multiple debridements and medical therapy she was not cured and finally she was
offered a hemipelvectomy (limb sacrifice). On presentation to our hospital she was counseled regarding options of hemipelvectomy versus a
limb salvage form of modified internal hemipelvectomy and wide margin resection. She opted for limb salvage. She underwent internal
hemipelvectomy with wide margin resection of soft tissue and proximal femur along with postoperative albendazole therapy. She was able to
walk again after a very long period. Currently she is 5-years postreconstructive surgery. She is infection free and ambulant without
support. Hydatid bone disease is a rare entity in our part of the world but a careful history and thorough look at the initial images of our
patient would have led to the suspicion of pathologic fracture and subsequent early diagnosis of this difficult problem. A second important
learning point in this case was the lack of early referral to a center where this difficult problem could have been handled effectively.
This could have minimized the physical, mental and financial stress to the patient and her family. Hydatid cyst disease is a parasitic
disease caused by a cestode known as echinococcus. The genus Echinococcus includes three species of which Echinococcus granulosus is the
most common cause of hydatid disease in humans . The tapeworm resides in the small bowel of the hosts and infected ova are shed in the
feces. When ingested by intermediate hosts such as humans, sheep, or cattle, the larvae enter the portal circulation. The larvae eventually
reach the liver; where most of them are trapped. Sometimes, larvae reach the lungs and other areas of the body and form cysts. The strong
structure of osseous tissue limits the growth of the hydatid cyst, which spreads along medullar and trabecular channels . The disease
affects the long bones, vertebral column, pelvis, and costae in order from least to most affected region [1, 5]. Hydatid bone disease is
rare, approximately 0.5 to 2.5% of all human hydatidosis . Although long-term survival is possible, the disease is not easy to eradicate and
may be impossible to cure . Hydatid bone disease is essentially the disease of the young. Early diagnosis is primarily based on X-ray
findings which are not specific to the disease. Patients usually present at an advanced stage of the disease and, therefore, treatment is
difficult and recurrence is common. It is a serious disease which is difficult to eradicate because of complex and difficult resection. We
present a patient who was initially misdiagnosed and underwent multiple surgeries. She is in our follow-up (more than 5 years now) and until
now she is infection and disease free. In 2009, a 30-year-old woman, native of Karachi (Sindhi ethnicity), presented at our clinic with a
3-year history of discharging sinus of her right hip and inability to ambulate. She had a history of right proximal femur fracture secondary
to a trivial trauma 11 years earlier (Figure 1). She initially remained under treatment of bone setters for 3 months and then she underwent
fixation (in 1998) with dynamic hip screw (Figure 2) in a tertiary hospital without a biopsy being done although history and X-rays were
suggestive of pathologic fracture. She remained symptomatic postoperatively and gradually the implant cut through the femoral head
(Figures 3 and 4). In 2007 the implant was removed (Figure 5) in another tertiary hospital and tissue was sent for histopathology which
showed hydatid disease. Postoperatively she developed discharging sinus for which she underwent multiple debridements along with prolonged
courses of albendazole but her condition did not improve.Figure 1Initial X-ray of the patient before surgical intervention in 1998. There is
proximal femur fracture along with radiolucencies present in proximal femur including the femoral head.Figure 2Initial fixation with dynamic
hip screw done in 1998.Figure 3Further progression of radiolucencies in proximal femur along with lag screw cutting through the femoral
head. Year 2000.Figure 4Further progression of disease involving acetabulum as well. Year 2007.Figure 5Implant removal done in year 2007.
Initial X-ray of the patient before surgical intervention in 1998. There is proximal femur fracture along with radiolucencies present in
proximal femur including the femoral head. Initial fixation with dynamic hip screw done in 1998. Further progression of radiolucencies in
proximal femur along with lag screw cutting through the femoral head. Year 2000. Further progression of disease involving acetabulum as
well. Year 2007. Implant removal done in year 2007. In 2009, she was offered a hemipelvectomy after which she visited our hospital. On
examination she was unable to bear weight on her right leg. Her right leg was shortened by 4cm; the girth of her right thigh was increased
by 8cm. There were multiple discharging sinuses over her right thigh and right hip with seropurulent discharge. There were multiple scars
over the lateral aspect of her right proximal thigh with limited, painful range of motion of her right hip. Distal neurovascular status was
intact. X-rays were performed that showed grossly extensive involvement of her proximal femur and acetabulum (Figures 6A, 6B and 6C).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her pelvis was done which showed erosions and altered signals in right proximal femur, acetabuli,
ischium pubic rami and right ilium (Figures 7, 8 and 9). There was atrophy of her hip muscles, scarring and lymphatics obstruction. Her
uterus, ovaries and opposite hip were unremarkable. An ultrasound of her abdomen was unremarkable. Options of hemipelvectomy versus a limb
salvage form of modified internal hemipelvectomy and wide margin resection were explained to her. The second option had a risk of recurrence
and infection but she opted for the same.Figure 6X-ray pelvis (Figure 6A) and femur (Figure 6B and 6C) on presentation at our institute in
2009. There is bone loss in proximal femur with extensive involvement of proximal femur shaft and presence of radiolucencies in acetabulum
as well.Figure 7Coronal and axial magnetic resonance images of pelvis show heterogeneous signals on short-tau inversion recovery,
predominantly high signals on T2-weighted image (fat saturation) and low signals on T1-weighted image.Figure 8Postgadolinium images showing
significant heterogeneous enhancement.Figure 9No diffusion restriction on diffusion-weighted imaging and signal drop out on apparent
diffusion coefficient mapping. X-ray pelvis (Figure 6A) and femur (Figure 6B and 6C) on presentation at our institute in 2009. There is bone
loss in proximal femur with extensive involvement of proximal femur shaft and presence of radiolucencies in acetabulum as well. Coronal and
axial magnetic resonance images of pelvis show heterogeneous signals on short-tau inversion recovery, predominantly high signals on
T2-weighted image (fat saturation) and low signals on T1-weighted image. Postgadolinium images showing significant heterogeneous
enhancement. No diffusion restriction on diffusion-weighted imaging and signal drop out on apparent diffusion coefficient mapping. In March
2009, an internal hemipelvectomy with wide margin resection of soft tissue and proximal femur was done (Figures 10A and 10B).
Perioperatively frozen sections were sent from resected margins that were reported as disease free (no cyst wall, no scolices).
Postoperatively she remained on skeletal traction and received albendazole therapy for more than 3 months. As her wound and infection
parameters gradually improved she underwent reconstruction with free vascularized fibular graft along with locking compression plate (LCP)
in August 2009 (Figures 11A and 11B). Postoperatively a hip spica was applied. Follow-up imaging was done to assess union (Figures 12A and
12B; Figures 13A, 13B and 13C). Gradually her ambulation progressed and she was able to ambulate without support after a long time.Figure
10X-ray pelvis (Figure 10 A) and lower limb scanogram (Figure 10 B) showing internal hemipelvectomy with resection of proximal femur. March
2009.Figure 11X-ray pelvis (Figure 11 A) and femur (Figure 11 B) showing reconstruction with free vascularized fibular graft along with LCP
(Locking Compression Plate). August 2009.Figure 124 month follow-up showing scanogram of lower limbs (Figure 12 A) and X-ray pelvis (Figure
12 B).Figure 13One year follow-up x-rays of pelvis (Figure 13 A) and femur (Figure 13 B and 13 C). X-ray pelvis (Figure 10 A) and lower limb
scanogram (Figure 10 B) showing internal hemipelvectomy with resection of proximal femur. March 2009. X-ray pelvis (Figure 11 A) and femur
(Figure 11 B) showing reconstruction with free vascularized fibular graft along with LCP (Locking Compression Plate). August 2009. 4 month
follow-up showing scanogram of lower limbs (Figure 12 A) and X-ray pelvis (Figure 12 B). One year follow-up x-rays of pelvis (Figure 13 A)
and femur (Figure 13 B and 13 C). She remained ambulant ‘as tolerated’ until February 2013 when she had a fall at home and sustained right
patella fracture for which tension band wiring was done (Figures 14A to 14E). Her postoperative recovery remains smooth and now, in August
2014, 60 months (5 years) postoperative from her reconstructive surgery she is ambulant without any support. At present she is infection and
disease free.Figure 14Follow-up X rays of femur (Figure 14 A and Figure 14 B), knee (Figure 14 C and Figure 14 D) and lateral view of hip
(Figure 14 E), at 42 months following surgery, showing good consolidation of union and hypertrophy of the fibula. Also note fixation of
patella (Figure 14 C and Figure 14 D). Follow-up X rays of femur (Figure 14 A and Figure 14 B), knee (Figure 14 C and Figure 14 D) and
lateral view of hip (Figure 14 E), at 42 months following surgery, showing good consolidation of union and hypertrophy of the fibula. Also
note fixation of patella (Figure 14 C and Figure 14 D). Hydatid pelvic disease of the bone is considered to be the disease of the young.
Diagnosis is primarily based on the findings of X-rays and computed tomography (CT) scans . Hydatid bone disease should be considered in any
differential diagnosis of osteolytic lesions, especially in endemic regions. The location is mostly hepatic (75%) and pulmonary (15%), and
only 10% occur in the rest of the body. Primary skeletal involvement seldom occurs. Bone involvement is seen in only 1 to 2.5% of cases of
hydatidosis and surprisingly musculoskeletal lesions of cystic echinococcosis usually occur as isolated findings and without concomitant
hepatic or pulmonary involvement [12, 13]. Nevertheless, the involvement of other organs should be ruled out in any patient with bone
hydatidosis. The spine is the most common location for about 50% of osseous hydatidosis, followed by pelvis and hip, the femur, the tibia,
the ribs and the scapula . Hydatid disease of bone usually remains asymptomatic over a long period, and it is usually detected after a
pathological fracture or secondary infection or the onset of compressive symptoms on adjacent soft tissues. The clinical manifestation may
take 10 to 20 years to become obvious, since the cyst grows very slowly. The most common radiological manifestation of skeletal hydatid
disease is of a lucent expansile lesion with cortical thinning . The CT appearance of a bone lesion is a well-defined, typically
multiloculated osteolytic lesion sometimes with coarse trabeculae within it, giving a honeycomb appearance, which is accompanied by
expansion of the bone and thinning of its cortex . The MRI signal intensity pattern of the daughter cysts reflects their contents and may
vary in cysts that are dead or alive. The production of hydatid fluid stops when they disintegrate at death . MRI is also helpful in
delineating the soft tissue extent of the disease. Immunodiagnosis is useful not only in primary diagnosis but also for follow-up of
patients after surgical or pharmacological treatment . Detection of circulating Echinococcus granulosus antigens in serum is less sensitive
than antibody detection, which remains the method of choice . Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, indirect hemagglutination antibody assay,
latex agglutination test, and immunoblot test are the most commonly used immunological methods. Theoretically, surgery with a broad safety
margin is the best treatment for bone hydatidosis ; however, most times this recommendation is impossible. For example, in most common sites
of hydatid disease of bone, spine and pelvis, radical resection of the lesion is practically impossible . Comparable data have been
collected on the outcome of chemotherapy with benzimidazole carbamate (albendazole) that show encouraging results . Albendazole sulfoxide is
better absorbed with higher levels of active metabolite in the cysts compared with other benzimidazoles . Treatment with albendazole is
effective, but at least one cycle should be given before operation and six or more courses afterwards . In our study, our patient underwent
multiple surgeries before presenting to our institute, which reflects the importance of diagnosing the disease early because delay in
diagnosis and inadequate management, as happened in this case, leads to further advancement of disease and psychological stress to the
patient and his or her family. The natural course of the hydatid disease was explained to our patient including the chances of recurrence of
infection. She underwent wide margin excision and stabilization of proximal femur defect with free vascularized fibula along with LCP. She
had a follow-up of 60 months and is infection and disease free until now. Hydatid bone disease is a rare entity in our part of the world but
a careful history and thorough look at the initial images of our patient would have led to the suspicion of pathologic fracture and
subsequently early diagnosis of this difficult problem. A second important learning point in this case was the lack of early referral to a
center where this difficult problem could have been handled effectively. This could have minimized the physical, mental and financial stress
to the patient and her family. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Muhammad Shahid Khan:
former resident, Department of Surgery, Section of Orthopaedics, Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan. Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions PMH is the surgeon who operated and followed the case. MSK
drafted the manuscript along with literature review under the supervision of PMH. DK is the radiologist who helped us to draft the
radiological reports of the patient’s images. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
