Nodular fasciitis most often occurs within subcutaneous tissues, but may also arise within skeletal muscle, dermis, vessels, peripheral
nerves and, although rarely, within joints. Knowledge regarding the cause of aneurysmal bone cysts, its natural history, and the results of
treatment is limited. Secondary aneurysmal bone cysts are associated with other neoplastic processes. Intra-articular nodular fasciitis in
the elbow joint has not been reported previously, nor has the development of aneurysmal bone cyst secondary to intra-articular nodular
fasciitis in the elbow joint. We report an unusual case of a Japanese 13-year-old boy who presented with a 1-year history of right elbow
pain. The onset of pain was insidious, without antecedent trauma. On physical examination, the range of motion of the elbow was limited.
Grip strength was reduced in the affected extremity. Incisional biopsy was performed and histologic findings revealed nodular fasciitis in
the elbow joint. After tumor excision, a secondary aneurysmal bone cyst in the distal humerus developed. Endoscopy-assisted curettage and
artificial bone grafting were performed. One year after surgery, a plain radiography showed no recurrence, and the patient returned to his
daily activities without any symptoms. An aneurysmal bone cyst in the distal humerus developed after excision of intra-articular nodular
fasciitis arising in the elbow. The secondary aneurysmal bone cyst successfully healed after endoscopy-assisted curettage and artificial
bone grafting. The findings of this case suggest that these two tumors reside in the same biologic spectrum defined as USP6-induced tumors.
Nodular fasciitis is a benign, self-limiting proliferation of fibroblasts with a preference for the upper extremities, trunk, and head and
neck of young adults. Konwaler et al. first reported this disease as subcutaneous pseudosarcomatous fibromatosis in 1955 . Nodular fasciitis
most often occurs within subcutaneous tissues, but may also arise within skeletal muscle, dermis, vessels, and peripheral nerves, and rarely
within joints . Aneurysmal bone cysts are also benign, locally aggressive bony lesions that were first commented on by Jaffe and
Lichtenstein in 1942 . Primary aneurysmal bone cysts comprise approximately 70% of all aneurysmal bone cyst diagnoses. Secondary aneurysmal
bone cysts can develop in association with other neoplastic processes . An aneurysmal bone cyst is the result of a specific pathophysiologic
change which is probably the consequence of either trauma or a tumor-induced anomalous vascular process . Recently, Oliveira and Chou
suggested that aneurismal bone cysts and nodular fasciitis reside in the same biologic spectrum as USP6-induced tumors . Herein, we present
a case of secondary aneurysmal bone cyst in the distal humerus after resection of intra-articular nodular fasciitis within the elbow joint.
A Japanese 13-year-old boy presented with a 1-year history of right elbow pain. The onset of pain was insidious, without antecedent trauma.
He reported pain on both flexion and extension of the elbow. He had no medical history of disease, and his family had no history of
musculoskeletal disease. On physical examination, flexion and extension of the elbow was limited to a range of 116°–30°. Grip strength was
reduced in the affected extremity to 16 kg, compared to 21 kg on the left. Neurovascular examination showed normal results, with no
lymphadenopathy or other enlargements. Plain radiography and computed tomography (CT) of the right elbow showed scalloping of the anterior
portion of the distal humerus (Figure 1a–c). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple soft masses measuring 3 × 2 × 2 cm in the
anterior portion within the elbow joint. The lesion was isointense with muscle on T1-weighted MRI (Figure 2a), and predominantly
hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging with fluid effusion in the posterior elbow joint (Figure 2b). Post-gadolinium sequences showed thick,
peripheral, and septal enhancement that was evident for not only the masses, but also the whole elbow joint (Figure 2c). Pigmented
villonodular synovitis, localized nodular synovitis, and complex ganglion were suggested as possible differential diagnoses. However, the
possibility of soft tissue sarcoma could not be excluded. Incisional biopsy was performed under local anesthesia and histologic findings
revealed nodular fasciitis in the elbow joint.Figure 1Plain radiography and computed tomography (CT) findings on admission. Plain
radiography (a), axial CT (b) and sagittal CT (c) of the right elbow shows scalloping (yellow arrow) of the anterior portion of the distal
humerus.Figure 2Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings on admission. MRI shows multiple soft masses measuring a total of 3 × 2 × 2 cm in
the anterior portion within the elbow joint (yellow arrow). The lesion is isointense with muscle on T1-weighted MRI (a), and predominantly
hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging with fluid effusion in the posterior elbow joint (b). Post-gadolinium sequences show no foci of blooming
that would suggest hemosiderin deposition. Thick, peripheral and septal enhancement is seen of not only the masses, but also the whole elbow
joint (c). Plain radiography and computed tomography (CT) findings on admission. Plain radiography (a), axial CT (b) and sagittal CT (c) of
the right elbow shows scalloping (yellow arrow) of the anterior portion of the distal humerus. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings on
admission. MRI shows multiple soft masses measuring a total of 3 × 2 × 2 cm in the anterior portion within the elbow joint (yellow arrow).
The lesion is isointense with muscle on T1-weighted MRI (a), and predominantly hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging with fluid effusion in
the posterior elbow joint (b). Post-gadolinium sequences show no foci of blooming that would suggest hemosiderin deposition. Thick,
peripheral and septal enhancement is seen of not only the masses, but also the whole elbow joint (c). We performed excisional biopsy under
general anesthesia. After incision of the lateral capsule of the elbow, the encapsulated mass was exposed and excised (Figure 3a). Part of
the tumor existed within the distal humerus, so curettage was also performed. The lateral collateral ligament complex was repaired with
nylon 4-0 suture. After surgery, a compression bandage was applied to the elbow for 2 weeks, and then active and passive range of motion
exercises commenced under the supervision of hand therapists. Pathological examination proved typical histological features of nodular
fasciitis, comprising cytologically bland, uniform plump spindle cells arranged in short, intersecting bundles within a collagenous stroma
(Figure 3b). Immunohistochemistry showed that the sample was diffusely positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA) (Figure 3c), but negative for
S-100, desmin, CD34, anti-cytokeratin (CAM5.2), pan-cytokeratin antibody (AE1/AE3), and anaplastic lymphoma kinase. Symptoms of the elbow
gradually resolved and the patient returned to normal activities after excisional biopsy.Figure 3Surgical, pathological, and
immunohistochemistry findings. After incision of the lateral capsule of the elbow, the encapsulated mass (yellow arrow) was exposed and
excised (a). Pathological examination revealed typical histological features of nodular fasciitis, comprising cytologically bland, uniform
plump spindle cells arranged in short intersecting bundles within a collagenous stroma (b). Immunohistochemistry shows diffuse positivity
for smooth muscle actin (c). Surgical, pathological, and immunohistochemistry findings. After incision of the lateral capsule of the elbow,
the encapsulated mass (yellow arrow) was exposed and excised (a). Pathological examination revealed typical histological features of nodular
fasciitis, comprising cytologically bland, uniform plump spindle cells arranged in short intersecting bundles within a collagenous stroma
(b). Immunohistochemistry shows diffuse positivity for smooth muscle actin (c). At 1 year postoperatively, plain radiography and CT revealed
a large bone cyst in the distal humeral epiphysis (Figure 4a, b). The lesion was hypointense to muscle on T1-weighted imaging (Figure 5a),
and predominantly hyperintense on T2-weighted fat-saturated sequences (Figure 5b). Post-gadolinium sequences showed peripheral enhancement
of the cyst (Figure 5c). MRI revealed either a simple bone cyst or an aneurysmal bone cyst in the distal humeral epiphysis. Endoscopy-
assisted curettage and artificial bone grafting (OSferion; Olympus Terumo Biomaterials, Tokyo, Japan) were performed under general
anesthesia. Figure 6a, b shows the views from the endoscopy of the bone cyst. Pathological examination of the curettage sample showed an
aneurysmal bone cyst. The blood-filled chamber was irregular in structure, with islands of bone and fibrous tissues. Immature bone
formations were identified along with the fibrous septa (Figure 7). One year after curettage and artificial bone grafting, plain radiography
showed no recurrence (Figure 8a, b). On physical examination, flexion and extension of the elbow was recovered to a range of 134°–0°. Grip
strength was also recovered in the affected extremity to 31 kg, compared to 30 kg on the healthy side. The patient returned to his daily
activities without any symptoms.Figure 4Follow-up plain radiography and computed tomography (CT) findings. At 1 year after excisional
biopsy, plain radiography (a) and CT (b) show a large bone cyst in the distal humeral epiphysis (yellow arrow).Figure 5Follow-up magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) findings. The lesion appears hypointense to muscle on T1-weighted MRI (a), and predominantly hyperintense on
T2-weighted fat-saturated sequences (b). Post-gadolinium sequences show peripheral enhancement of the cyst (c). MRI reveals simple bone cyst
or aneurysmal bone cyst in the distal humerus (yellow arrow).Figure 6Views from the endoscopy of the bone cyst. The structure within the
cyst is shown before curettage (a) and after curettage (b).Figure 7Pathological examination of the curettage sample. Pathological
examination of the specimen obtained by curettage shows aneurysmal bone cyst. The blood-filled chamber is irregular in structure, with
islands of bone and fibrous tissues.Figure 8Plain radiography findings 1 year after curettage and artificial bone grafting. One year after
curettage and artificial bone grafting, plain radiography of antero-posterior (a) and lateral (b) views show no recurrence. The patient
returned to daily activities without any symptoms. Follow-up plain radiography and computed tomography (CT) findings. At 1 year after
excisional biopsy, plain radiography (a) and CT (b) show a large bone cyst in the distal humeral epiphysis (yellow arrow). Follow-up
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings. The lesion appears hypointense to muscle on T1-weighted MRI (a), and predominantly hyperintense
on T2-weighted fat-saturated sequences (b). Post-gadolinium sequences show peripheral enhancement of the cyst (c). MRI reveals simple bone
cyst or aneurysmal bone cyst in the distal humerus (yellow arrow). Views from the endoscopy of the bone cyst. The structure within the cyst
is shown before curettage (a) and after curettage (b). Pathological examination of the curettage sample. Pathological examination of the
specimen obtained by curettage shows aneurysmal bone cyst. The blood-filled chamber is irregular in structure, with islands of bone and
fibrous tissues. Plain radiography findings 1 year after curettage and artificial bone grafting. One year after curettage and artificial
bone grafting, plain radiography of antero-posterior (a) and lateral (b) views show no recurrence. The patient returned to daily activities
without any symptoms. Intra-articular nodular fasciitis is a rare pathology. Only one case of nodular fasciitis of the elbow has been
described previously, but no tumor was present within the elbow joint . Hornick et al. reported 10 cases of intra-articular nodular
fasciitis, with seven lesions arising in the knee, two in the hand, and one in the ankle. On immunohistochemical examination, all cases
appeared diffusely positive for SMA. The histological features are basically the same as nodular fasciitis, except for the relatively
frequent presence of extensive stromal hyalinization and other degenerative changes . Knowledge regarding the cause of aneurysmal bone cyst,
its natural history, and the results of treatment is limited. In prior studies, findings have suggested the possibility that aneurysmal cyst
is actually a result of hemorrhagic degradative events occurring in patients with other lesions including giant cell tumor, hemangioma,
chondroblastoma, osteoblastoma, non-ossifying fibroma, fibrous dysplasia, chondromyxoid fibroma, eosinophilic granuloma, and other tumors
[6, 7]. The association of not only neoplasm, but also trauma was noted by both Jaffe and Lichtenstein [11, 12]. According to Mirra et al.,
the so-called aneurysmal bone cyst is neither a cyst nor a neoplasm; rather, it is probably a periosteal to intraosseous arteriovenous
malformation, not uncommonly seen in association with other well-known benign and even malignant lesions . Recently, the biological spectrum
of aneurysmal bone cyst and nodular fasciitis was reported. Aneurismal bone cyst and nodular fasciitis are characterized by structurally
similar USP6 fusion genes. USP6 is a ubiquitin-specific protease that was identified as an oncogene in transfection experiments with Ewing
sarcoma DNA two decades ago. The identification of structurally similar USP6 fusion genes in both the aneurismal bone cyst and nodular
fasciitis suggested that these are clonal neoplastic disorders that may belong to the same biologic spectrum . In the present case, two
mechanisms for the development of secondary aneurismal bone cyst formation are considered. One is that the periosteal to intraosseous
arteriovenous malformation might have developed after excision of the intra-articular nodular fasciitis and curettage of the distal humeral
lesion. Then, a secondary aneurysmal bone cyst of the distal humeral epiphysis may have developed in the remodeling process after surgery.
The other pathomechanism involves the similar USP6 fusion genes. The site of nodular fasciitis was mainly in the radial side. However, the
aneurismal bone cyst was present only in the ulnar side of the distal humerus. We cannot explain the pathogenesis only by the remodeling
process after surgical intervention. Although we did not perform the molecular diagnosis, this case strongly suggests that these two tumors
reside in the same biologic spectrum defined as USP6-induced tumors. Mankin et al. reviewed 150 patients with aneurysmal bone cyst. The
recurrence rate after various treatments including curettage and insertion of bone graft or polymethylmethacrylate was 20% . In another
series of 96 cases, the overall rate of recurrence of aneurysmal bone cyst after surgery including curettage and adjuvant treatment was
11.5%. The rate of recurrence was 20.6% after curettage and high-speed-burr treatment alone and 7.5% after curettage and high-speed-burr
treatment added to argon beam coagulation . In this case, endoscopy-assisted curettage was successfully performed. One year after curettage
and artificial bone grafting, plain radiography showed no recurrence. We have reported an unusual case of intra-articular nodular fasciitis
arising in the elbow and developing to aneurysmal bone cyst after tumor excision. Endoscopy-assisted curettage was successfully performed.
The site of nodular fasciitis was mainly in the radial side, while the aneurismal bone cyst was present only in the ulnar side of the distal
humerus. The pathogenesis cannot be explained only by the remodeling process after surgery. Although the molecular diagnosis was not
performed, the findings of present case suggest that these two tumors reside in the same biologic spectrum defined as USP6-induced tumors.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and his father for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A
copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. computed tomography magnetic resonance imaging
smooth muscle actin HH and YN are the guarantors of integrity of the entire clinical study; HU was in charge of the collection of the study
data; MY was in charge of the study concept, design, manuscript preparation, and editing. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. We thank Shigeru Kurimoto M.D., Ph.D. and Tomonori Nakano M.D. of the Department of Hand Surgery at Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine for their contribution to the surgery. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
