Renal squamous cell carcinoma is a rare neoplasm with poor prognosis. Chronic irritation from nephrolithiasis and/or pyelonephritis is the
leading cause. We described a 51-year-old male patient who was admitted because of left flank pain. Ultrasonography showed a renal cyst
containing calculus. However, contrast-enhanced ultrasonography and CT scan revealed an irregular-shaped mass derived from a calculi-
containing cyst. Ultrasound guided biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of renal squamous cell carcinoma. The patient refused any further
therapeutic management and died six months later. Our present case emphasizes that the careful diagnostic work-up and use of multiple
imaging modalities in cases of unusual renal calculi is quite necessary, since they may carry the risk of co-existing hidden malignancy.
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the renal pelvis is a rare neoplasm, accounting only 0.5 to 0.8 % of malignant renal tumors . The
predisposing factors leading to development of SCC of the renal pelvis include renal calculi, infections, endogenous and exogenous
chemicals, vitamin A deficiency, hormonal imbalance and radiotherapy . We reported a case of primary SCC of the renal pelvis, which was
unsuspected before biopsy, and the most recent related literatures were reviewed as well. An otherwise healthy 51-year-old male suffering
from persist left flank pain for one week and was referred to the urology department. Physical examination revealed mild left costovertebral
angle tenderness but was otherwise normal. Routine diagnostic work-up including chest X-ray and laboratory investigations were all within
the normal range, but ultrasonography revealed a renal cyst containing calculus. Further computed tomography (CT) of the kidneys revealed an
irregular-shaped homogeneous mass derived from the cyst was found. The mass enveloped the renal pedicle, aorta and inferior vena cava
(Fig. 1). The mass was biopsied percutaneously under ultrasonographic guidance. The histological examination revealed squamous cell
carcinoma (Fig. 2). Considering that the mass was un-resectable, the patient refused any other treatment. He returned to home hospice and
unfortunately died six months later.Fig 1CT showed an irregular-shaped homogeneous mass (arrow) derived from the cyst and enveloped the
renal pedicleFig 2Biopsy pathology showing a high power view of squamous cell carcinoma (H&E x200) CT showed an irregular-shaped homogeneous
mass (arrow) derived from the cyst and enveloped the renal pedicle Biopsy pathology showing a high power view of squamous cell carcinoma
(H&E x200) The kidney is an unusual site for SCC. Renal SCC, most of which is known to arise from collecting system, is a rare clinical
entity representing only 0.5 to 0.8 % of malignant renal tumors . It usually occurs in late adulthood and is reported of an equal incidence
in men and women . However, according to the recent literatures (Table 1), men bear a higher incidence of renal SCC, probably because of
higher incidence of nephrolithiasis in men [2, 6–20]. Long-standing nephrolithiasis and/or chronic pyelonephritis are the most common causes
for renal SCC. Other potential etiology have been described in the literatures, including exogenous and endogenous chemicals (e.g. arsenic),
vitamin A deficiency, and prior surgery for renal stones, analgesic abuse, radiotherapy or chronic rejection in a transplant kidney .
Chronic irritation can cause squamous metaplasia of the renal collecting system, which may subsequently progress to leukoplakia and
neoplasia of the urothelium, resulting in SCC of the renal pelvis. In our case, we speculated that the tumor has arisen in a chronically
inflamed hydronephrotic calyx or a calyceal diverticulum with long term irritation by calculi.Table 1Characteristics of the reported cases
from recent 5 yearsAuthorSexAgePresentationUltrasonographic/radiological featureTreatmentPrognosisBandyopadhyay et al. M58Heaviness and
swelling in the left upper abdomenHydronephrosisNephrectomyN/Aa Imriaco et al. M69Left flank abdominal painA solid mass within the left side
of a horseshoe kidney, with associated large renal stonesPartial left nephrectomyN/AMathur et al. M52Heaviness and swelling in the left
upper abdomenNon-functional kidney with dilation of renal calycesNephrectomyN/AJain et al. M50Right flank painStaghorn calculi with right
renal hydronephrosisNephrectomyN/AM87Left lower abdomen painLeft nephrolithiasis with staghorn calculi and hydronephrosisNephrectomyDie in
hospital because of coronary complicationF50Left flank painLeft renal and ureteric calculi with absence of corticomedullary
distinctionNephrectomy + cisplatin-based chemotherapyAlive at 3 months after surgeryM53Bilateral flank painRight renal calculi with
hydronephrosisNephrectomy + cisplatin-based chemotherapyAlive at 5 months after surgeryPaonessa et al. F70Vague abdominal painMultiple
calcified areas within superior pole of the left kidneyNephrectomyN/ABaseskioğlu et al. M56Left flank pain and feverHydronephrosis, staghorn
calculiNephrectomy + radiationLocal recurrence, died 3 years laterVerma et al. M62Intermittent colicky pain at the right lumbar regionRight
pyonephrosis with nephrolithiasisPyelithotomy (Palliative) + chemotherapyN/AHam et al. M69Swelling and pain of right upper abdomenSevere
hydronephrosis with calyceal stonesNephrectomy + ChemoDied 7 months laterBhaijee F77Weight loss and severe anemiaLeft upper pole renal mass,
staghorn calculus and renal vein thrombusNephrectomyAsymptomatic with no evidence of recurrent or metastatic disease 6 months after
surgeryKalayci et al. M6310 kg weight lossBig, non-functioning right kidney with staghorn calculi and a hypodense mass within the renal
parenchyma extending to the upper pole of the right kidneyNephrectomyN/APalmer et al. F46Incidental findingLarge Coarse calculi with dilated
renal collecting systemsNehprectomyDied on postoperative day 8Wu et al. M66Intermittent melena, nausea, malaise, and abdominal
painHeterogeneous renal mass containing a staghorn stoneExploratory operation + biopsyDied less than 5 monthsLin et al. M56HematuriaRight
renal staghorn calculiDebulking surgeryAsymptomatic with no evidence of recurrent or metastatic disease 6 months after surgeryHameed et al.
F41Chronic backache in the right gluteal regionComplete staghorn calculus with sacral bone metastasisChemotherapyDied 2 weeks after the 3rd
cycle of chemotherapy aN/A = Not Available Characteristics of the reported cases from recent 5 years aN/A = Not Available Patients with
renal SCC may present with flank or abdominal pain, microscopic or gross hematuria, fever, weight loss or a palpable abdominal mass
(Table 1). It could also be the incidental finding on radiographic imaging for other reasons. Establishing the diagnosis of renal SCC by
imaging techniques before biopsy or surgery is a clinical dilemma. Conventional ultrasonography is the choice of imaging modality for renal
diseases evaluation, but renal SCC lacks specific echoic pattern in ultrasonography. Real-time CEUS was supposed to provide additional
information for improving the diagnosis . CT may play a crucial role in diagnosis and staging of the tumor. The radiologic evidences of
renal SCC are diverse and may appear as a solid mass with irregular shape, hydronephrosis, calcifications, or as a renal pelvic infiltrative
lesion without evidence of a distinct mass. The most helpful feature in CT of renal SCC is presence of enhancing extra-luminal and exophytic
mass in some cases, with an intra-luminal component . Lack of specific clinical and radiologic features in renal SCC would result in
diagnostic confusion. Thus, the precise histological diagnosis was usually established after nephrectomy. For the un-resectable cases, both
endoscopic and percutaneous biopsy could be applied to obtain the specimen. In our case, we chose ultrasound-guided biopsy because the CT
scan presented the feature of extensive peritumoral vascular invasion, which indicated that the tumor was un-resectable. Surgical resection
is regarded as the mainstay of treatment for renal SCC . However, the renal SCC is aggressive in nature and concealed. Most cases usually
present at an advanced stage-pT3 or higher . Therefore, for the treatment of advanced disease, a multidisciplinary approach comprising of
surgical treatment and adjuvant chemoradiotherapy should be applied. Still, the prognosis of renal SCC is generally poor. According to the
literatures, the outcome of renal SCC is dismal with a median survival of only several months postoperatively. Holmäng et al. reported that
the prognosis of renal SCC is usually poor with a mean survival period of 7 months . The 5-year survival rate is reported less than 10 % .
Thus, early diagnosis, monitoring of patients with long-standing nephrolithiasis, and new treatment modalities are urgently needed to
improve patients’ outcomes. For patient with unusual renal calculi, the careful diagnostic work-up with multiple imaging modalities should
be applied to exclude the co-existing hidden malignancy. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report and any accompanying images. Squamous cell carcinoma Contrast-enhanced ultrasonography Computed tomography Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions PJ and JJX drafted the manuscript. JJX provided imaging
description and figures. CJW, SWC and JL assisted with manuscript preparation and literatures collection. LPX revised the manuscript. All
authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
