Recently, we encountered a biopsy of epithelioid rabdomyosarcoma with lymph node metastasis. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed number
of swollen lymph nodes in the left neck and a huge abdominal mass occupying the right kidney. In the lymph node biopsy, tumor cells showed
diffuse sheet-like growth reminiscent of carcinoma and melanoma cells with extensive distribution of coagulation necrosis. Tumor cells had
abundant amphophilic cytoplasm and clear large nuclei. Most tumor cells showed severe cytologic atypia manifested in prominent nucleoli and
pleomorphic nuclei. Tumor cells were focally positive for desmin. Most tumor cells showed expressons for vimentin, BAF47 (INI-1), and
myogenin. On reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis, tumor cells lacked Myo D1 and PAX3/7-FKHR transcripts and
showed myogenin transcripts. On cytogenetic (karyotypic) analysis, tumor cells showed highly complex karyotypes. The patient received
various regimens of chemotherapy, but 6 months after the biopsy she died with progression of the tumor. Since consent was not obtained, an
autopsy was not performed. The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s13000-015-0349-2) contains supplementary material, which is
available to authorized users. Rhabdomyosarcoma(RMS) is classified by the current World Health Organization (WHO) into four major subtypes,
embryonal RMS (ERMS), alveolar RMS (ARMS), pleomorphic RMS (PRMS), and spindle cell/sclerosing RMS (SRMS) . Recently, a part of RMS
demonstrated epithelioid morphorogy reminiscent of poorly differentiated carcinoma or melanoma and caused difficulty in diagnosis. Previous
reports had identified these cases as epithelioid RMS (epiRMS) .Fig. 1Clinical images: Computed tomography (CT), obtained before the biopsy,
showing the swollen lymph nodes in the left neck (a, white arrow head) and a huge abdominal mass occupying the right kidney (b, white arrow
head) as low-density massesFig. 2Microscopic images: (a) Tumor cells showing diffuse sheet-like growth with extensive distribution of
coagulation necrosis. b Tumor cells with abundant amphophilic cytoplasm and clear large nucleus with severe cytological atypia in the form
of prominent nucleoli and pleomorphic nucleiFig. 3Immunohistochemical images: Tumor cells stained weakly positive for vimentin (a) and
negative for cytokeratin (b). Tumor cells stained focally positive for desmin (c) and diffusely positive for myogenin (d) Clinical images:
Computed tomography (CT), obtained before the biopsy, showing the swollen lymph nodes in the left neck (a, white arrow head) and a huge
abdominal mass occupying the right kidney (b, white arrow head) as low-density masses Microscopic images: (a) Tumor cells showing diffuse
sheet-like growth with extensive distribution of coagulation necrosis. b Tumor cells with abundant amphophilic cytoplasm and clear large
nucleus with severe cytological atypia in the form of prominent nucleoli and pleomorphic nuclei Immunohistochemical images: Tumor cells
stained weakly positive for vimentin (a) and negative for cytokeratin (b). Tumor cells stained focally positive for desmin (c) and diffusely
positive for myogenin (d) We encountered a case of epiRMS with nodal metastasis, for which an extensive immunohistochemical and molecular
study was performed. A 65-year-old female patient visited our clinic, complaining of low back pain, general fatigue and cervical masses.
Computed tomography (CT) detected number of swollen lymph nodes in the left neck and a huge abdominal mass occupying the right kidney. Tumor
growth had spread to retroperitoneal, regional and para aortic lymph nodes, and the aorta. CT showed no finding that tumor had been
originated from a large nerve (Fig. 1). There was no significant difference in the CT value between abdominal primary tumor and metastatic
cervical lymph nodes (70–90 Huns Hounsfield Unit (HU) and 60–90 HU). Both lesions were suggested to be constructed from substantially the
same components. For histological diagnosis, cervical lymph node biopsy was performed. Microscopically, tumor cells showed diffuse sheet-
like growth reminiscent of carcinoma and melanoma cells with extensive distribution of coagulation necrosis. Tumor cells had abundant
amphophilic cytoplasm and a clear large nucleus. Most tumor cells showed severe cytologic atypia manifested in the form of prominent
nucleoli and pleomorphic nuclei. Tumor cells with bizarre nucleus were not found. No cross striations were observed (Fig. 2).
Immunohistochemistry for cytokeratin, LCA, S-100, Sox10, Melan A, smooth muscle actin, h-Caldesmon, MDM2, CDK4, p16 and Myo D1 was negative
for all tumor cells. Tumor cells were focally positive for desmin. Most tumor cell showed weak expression for vimentin and diffuse
expression for BAF47(INI-1), and myogenin (Fig. 3). On reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis, tumor cells lacked
Myo D1, PAX3/7-FKHR transcripts and showed myogenin transcripts. On cytogenetic (karyotypic) analysis, tumor cells showed highly complex
karyotypes with triploidy and structural rearrangements (Additional file 1: Figures S1-3 and Tables S1-3). The final diagnosis was
metastatic rhabdomyosarcoma with epithelioid morphology that originated from the right kidney or retroperitoneum. From morphological,
immunohistochemical, cytogenetical and molecular analyses, we diagnosed the tumor to be a epiRMS. The patient received various regimen of
chemotherapy, but 6 months after the biopsy she died with progression of the tumor. Since consent was not obtained, an autopsy was not
performed. Epithelioid RMS was recently reported as a distinct morphological variant of RMS. RMS is classified by the current WHO into four
major subtypes, ERMS, ARMS, PRMS, and SRMS. In previous reports with regard to other types of RMS, ERMS was characterized by primitive
mesenchymal cells showing various stage of myogenesis and exhibited complex karyotypes with numerical and structural rearrangements,
including polysomies of chromosomes 2, 8, 11, 12, and 13 [3, 4]. ARMS was typically characterized by primitive round cells surrounded by
fibrovascular stroma and exhibited recurrent translocations, t(2; 13)(q35; q14)(PAX3-FKHR) and t(1; 13)(q35; q14)(PAX7-FKHR) in
approximately 85% of cases. PAX3/7-FKHR fusion is specific to ARMS [5, 6]. PRMS was characterized by nuclear pleomorphism and bizarre
polygonal eosinophilic cells and exhibited an extremely complex karyotype with numeric and structural rearrangements without specific
genetic abnormality [7, 8]. SRMS was characterized by spindle cells and various degree of stromal hyalinization and exhibited aneuploidy
without specific genetic abnormality in only few reports . Histologically, epiRMS showed diffuse sheet-like growth of uniformly sized
epithelioid cells with abundant amphophilic to eosinophilic cytoplasm, large vesicular nuclei, and frequent prominent nucleoli, reminiscent
of poorly differentiated carcinoma or melanoma. Consequently, its morphology caused difficulty in diagnosis . Tumor cells showed skeletal
muscle differentiation on immunohistochemical analysis, such as Myo D1 and/or myogenin. One of the differential diagnoses includes PRMS.
However epiRMS lacks the obvious nuclear pleomorphism and bizarre polygonal eosinophilic cells that are characteristic of PRMS. Although
most reports of epiRMS were of late elderly onset in the elderly, cases in children and young people have also been reported [2, 13–18]. In
our case, the diagnosis of epiRMS was extremely difficult. The differential diagnosis for epiRMS includes poorly differentiated carcinoma,
malignant melanoma, and epithelioid sarcoma. Morphologically, diffuse sheet-like growth pattern and severe cytologic atypia in the form of
prominent nucleoli initially suggested carcinoma and melanoma cells. However, this was dismissed by immunohistochemical analysis that showed
negative staining for cytokeratin, Melan A and S-100. Diffuse sheet-like epithelioid growth pattern with extensive distribution of necrosis
and positive staining for vimentin suggested epithelioid sarcoma. However, this was rejected because immunohistochemistry showed positive
staining for BAF47 (INI-1). In our case, since biopsy specimen only was evaluated, it might be part of tumor with rahbdomyosarcoma
component, for example, dedifferentiated liposarcoma, Triton tumor, Rhabdoid tumor and carcinosarcoma. The differential diagnosis for
dedifferentiated liposarcoma and Rhabdoid tumor were dismissed by immunohistochemical analysis that showed negative staining for MDM2, CDK4,
p16 and positive staining for BAF47(INI1). The differential diagnosis for Triton tumor was dismissed by immunohistochemical analysis that
showed negative staining for Sox10, S-100 and findings of abdominal CT. PRMS-like morphology, a sheets of large and atypical polygonal
eosinophilic cells or of undifferentiated round to spindle cells with various degree of cross-striation, is more seen as a heterologous
component in carcinosarcoma and dedeifferentiated liposarcoma, among others . Furthermore from findings of abdominal CT, it was unlikely
that tumor had heterogeneous components. In our case, the expression of myogenin confirmed by immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR analysis led
to the diagnosis of epiRMS. Twenty-four cases of epiRMS have been reported [2, 13–18]. In most cases, tumor cells showed diffuse and strong
positive staining for desmin, which would be suggested a myogenic tumor. In our case, tumor cells showed only focal positive staining for
desmin, which made it difficult for a correct diagnosis. In our case, the PAX3/7-FKHR fusion genes were subjected to RT-PCR and karyotype-
analysis. The PAX3/7-FKHR fusion gene is specific to ARMS. The presence of the fusion gene was not confirmed in our case as in past epiRMS
cases [2, 14, 16]. On cytogenetic (karyotypic) analysis, tumor cells showed highly complex karyotypes with triploidy and structural
rearrangements. There was no description of cytogenetic analysis in the past epiRMS cases. As Jo et al. described, our case showed diffuse
sheet-like growth with abundant amphophilic cytoplasm and a clear large nucleus in the deep soft tissues of elderly patient and exhibited an
aggressive clinical course . The expression of myogenin confirmed by immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR analysis. In past cases, tumor cells
showed diffuse and strong positive staining for desmin [2, 13–18]. In our case, however, tumor cells showed focal positive staining for
desmin and was not comfirmed the expression of desmin by RT-PCR analysis. The reason there is no expression of desmin is unclear. From the
cytogenetical point of view, ARMS is an independent variant because of the recurrent translocations. ERMS, PRMS and SRMS exhibit complex
karyotype with numeric and structural rearrangements. PRMS and SRMS occur mainly in elderly adults, while ERMS can also occur in elderly
adults. Non-specific complex karyotypes with numeric and structural rearrangements may be common findings in adult RMS, apart from their
morphological diversity. EpiRMS may also share a common finding in karyotypic analysis. Stock et al. argued that adult-type RMS is a single
entity with wide morphological variety . EpiRMS may also be one of the morphological diverse types in adult-type RMS. In conclusion, a case
of epiRMS occurring in an adult is reported. The differential diagnosis for epiRMS includes poorly differentiated carcinoma, malignant
melanoma, and epithelioid sarcoma. It is difficult to distinguish epiRMS only by morphological analysis from other tumors that showed
epithelioid morphology. Immunohistochemical and/or molecular analyses are needed to make the correct diagnosis. It is not clear whether
epiRMS is an independent entity in RMS. Although it is difficult to properly treat adult RMS including epiRMS because of the aggressive
clinical course, the correct diagnosis is needed for the discovery and improvement of future therapy. A larger-scale, multi-institute study
is needed to provide more insight into epiRMS. Written informed consent was obtained from the next of kin of the patient for publication of
this Case Report and any accompanying images. Additional file 1: Figure S1. RT-PCR analysis. Figure S2. Karyotypic analysis of tumor cells.
Figure S3. Additional immunohistochemical images. Table S1. Details of used antibodies. Table S2. The details of karyotype. Table S3. Primer
sequences for the detection of Myo D1, Myogenin and PAX3/7-FKHR fusion gene. RT-PCR analysis. Figure S2. Karyotypic analysis of tumor cells.
Figure S3. Additional immunohistochemical images. Table S1. Details of used antibodies. Table S2. The details of karyotype. Table S3. Primer
sequences for the detection of Myo D1, Myogenin and PAX3/7-FKHR fusion gene. Rhabdomyosarcoma World Health Organization Embryonal
rhabdomyosarcoma Alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma Pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcoma Spindle cell/sclerosing rhabdomyosarcoma Epithelioid
rhabdomyosarcoma Computed tomography Huns Hounsfield unit Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions JI, MT participated in the concept of the case report, interpreted the
H&E slides and immunochemical, molecular and karyotypic studies; RJ was responsible for the interpreting H&E slides and immunochemical,
molecular and karyotypic studies, review of the literature, writing the manuscript and processing digital images; EM was responsible for
writing the manuscript and conclusions. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors thank Mr. Masaharu Kohara,
Department of Pathology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, for technical assistance. This work was supported in part by grants
from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan (#T264604700).
