An 84-year-old female presented with a 2-day history of abdominal pain, vomiting, and constipation/obstipation. She had a prior history of
abdomino-perineal resection for carcinoma of rectum 15 years ago. On examination, the abdomen was distended with increased bowel sounds.
There was increased tenderness in the medial aspect of the thigh, no palpable inguinal mass, or any evidence of hernia. Clinical diagnosis
of bowel obstruction, likely secondary to recurrence of carcinoma rectum or from adhesions due to prior surgery was considered. Further
evaluation with plain radiograph and CT scan was requested to determine the cause of small bowel obstruction. What is the likely
diagnosis?What are the findings on abdominal radiograph and CT scan?What is the management? What is the likely diagnosis? What are the
findings on abdominal radiograph and CT scan? What is the management? Small obstruction due to right obturator hernia.The radiograph of
abdomen in sitting anteroposterior (AP) position showed air-fluid levels suggestive of small bowel obstruction (Figure 1). The intravenous
contrast enhanced CT scan of the abdomen (Figure 2) demonstrated a distal ileal bowel loop between the right pectineus and obturator
externus muscle in the region of obturator canal with transition point, suggestive of small obstruction due to obturator hernia. No CT
evidence of small bowel incarceration was present. Figure 1Plain radiograph of abdomen in sitting AP position. There is suggestion of air-
fluid levels suggestive of bowel obstruction (arrow). Figure 2Intravenous contrast enhanced A) axial and B) coronal and C) CT scan of the
abdomen. The CT scan shows a small ileal bowel loop between the right pectineus and obturator externus muscle in the region of obturator
canal (long arrow) suggestive of obturator hernia. The transition point (short arrow) of the small bowel obstruction was in the region of
obturator foramen containing ileal loop Emergency open laparotomy was performed that revealed a dilated small bowel with an obvious
transition point at the distal ileum caught within the right obturator canal. The small bowel was viable and reduced from the hernia sac.
The hernial defect was subsequently closed by sutures. Small obstruction due to right obturator hernia. The radiograph of abdomen in sitting
anteroposterior (AP) position showed air-fluid levels suggestive of small bowel obstruction (Figure 1). The intravenous contrast enhanced CT
scan of the abdomen (Figure 2) demonstrated a distal ileal bowel loop between the right pectineus and obturator externus muscle in the
region of obturator canal with transition point, suggestive of small obstruction due to obturator hernia. No CT evidence of small bowel
incarceration was present. Figure 1Plain radiograph of abdomen in sitting AP position. There is suggestion of air-fluid levels suggestive of
bowel obstruction (arrow). Figure 2Intravenous contrast enhanced A) axial and B) coronal and C) CT scan of the abdomen. The CT scan shows a
small ileal bowel loop between the right pectineus and obturator externus muscle in the region of obturator canal (long arrow) suggestive of
obturator hernia. The transition point (short arrow) of the small bowel obstruction was in the region of obturator foramen containing ileal
loop Plain radiograph of abdomen in sitting AP position. There is suggestion of air-fluid levels suggestive of bowel obstruction (arrow).
Intravenous contrast enhanced A) axial and B) coronal and C) CT scan of the abdomen. The CT scan shows a small ileal bowel loop between the
right pectineus and obturator externus muscle in the region of obturator canal (long arrow) suggestive of obturator hernia. The transition
point (short arrow) of the small bowel obstruction was in the region of obturator foramen containing ileal loop Emergency open laparotomy
was performed that revealed a dilated small bowel with an obvious transition point at the distal ileum caught within the right obturator
canal. The small bowel was viable and reduced from the hernia sac. The hernial defect was subsequently closed by sutures. An obturator
hernia is a rare intra-abdominal hernia representing around 1% of all hernias, and 1.6% of small bowel obstructions.1 According to Bjork et
al,2 the incidence was approximately 0.1% of all hernias repaired at the Mayo Clinic. They have the highest mortality rate of all abdominal
wall hernias at between 13-40%. They are more common on the right side, approximately 3 times more than the left due to sigmoid colon
overlying the obturator foramen on the left side. The obturator foramen is one of the strongest foramen in the body. It is most commonly
seen in elderly women known as “Little old ladies hernia” (female:male ratio was 6:1). It occurs in multiparous, frail, and older women who
have wider pelvis and large obturator canal diameter. Other risk factors include chronic constipation, ascites, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, and sudden weight loss with a decrease in the amount of fat around the foramen.3 The obturator canal is a 2-3cm long
tunnel, which begins in the pelvis and ends at the obturator foramen bounded superiorly and laterally by the pubic bone, and inferiorly by
the obturator membrane and muscles. It is a fat filled canal containing the obturator nerve, artery, and vein. The clinical diagnosis of
obturator hernia is very difficult. The hernia is not easily visible on inspection or clinically palpable. The bowel loop with the obturator
canal can compress the nerve resulting in pain and tenderness along the medial thigh. Approximately 15-50% of patients may show positive
Howship-Romberg sign, which represents ipsilateral medial thigh pain increased by adduction of the hip. This is due to compression of the
obturator nerve within the hernial sac.4 The most common content of the obturator hernial sac is the ileum with most belonging to Richter’s
type. There are 3 types of obturator hernias, between the pectineus and obturator externus muscles, which is the most common (as seen in our
case), hernia between the superior and middle fasciculi of obturator externus muscle, and hernia between the external and internal obturator
membranes. The obturator hernia is definitely diagnosed on CT scan, which demonstrates the bowel loop within the obturator canal. Narrowing
of the bowel segments at the hernial orifice identifies the transition point on CT scan. Signs of strangulation including intramural air,
fluid within the hernial sac, lack of bowel wall enhancement are easily identified on CT, which prompts early surgical intervention.
Uncomplicated hernias without signs of incarceration can be treated with minimally invasive laparoscopy assisted repair while exploratory
laparotomy is indicated in complicated hernias. It can be repaired either by closing the defect by mesh, sutures, and patch or reducing the
hernia without closing the defect. However, it is currently recommended to close the defect.5 Emergency physicians and surgeons should be
aware of this rare condition, as a delay in diagnosis and surgical treatment will increase morbidity and mortality in elderly patients.
Although clinically occult, radiological diagnosis by CT scan is relatively easy. Complications including incarceration are identified on
CT, helping in surgical planning. Notice: Authors are encouraged to submit quizzes for possible publication in the Journal. These may be in
any specialty, and should approximately follow the format used here (maximum of 2 figures). Please address any submissions to: Editor, Saudi
Medical Journal, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, PO Box 7897, Riyadh 11159, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Tel. +966 (11) 4777714 Ext. 42846.
We invite students from a variety of medical disciplines to submit original contributions based on their supervised research. The Student
Corner of Saudi Med J aims to help students explore research opportunities and network with other peers and mentors in the same field.
Submitted Abstracts should include the following: Title should be descriptiveAuthor’s names and affiliation(specify college level/year,
academic degree of Senior Author)Abstract must be structured and not more than 300 wordsThe following are the typical headings: Objectives
(background, why the study was done, specific aims)Methods (setting, date of study, design, subjects, intervention and analysis)Results
(findings, data and statistical tests) andConclusion (general interpretation of results) Title should be descriptive Author’s names and
affiliation(specify college level/year, academic degree of Senior Author) Abstract must be structured and not more than 300 words The
following are the typical headings: Objectives (background, why the study was done, specific aims)Methods (setting, date of study, design,
subjects, intervention and analysis)Results (findings, data and statistical tests) andConclusion (general interpretation of results)
Objectives (background, why the study was done, specific aims) Methods (setting, date of study, design, subjects, intervention and analysis)
Results (findings, data and statistical tests) and Conclusion (general interpretation of results) Submitted Abstracts should be co-authored
by a Senior Supervisor Abstracts will be reviewed by Student’s Corner Section Editor There is no fee to submit an Abstract Ethical Approval
should be provided
