We report on a Saudi infant with Holt-Oram syndrome caused by a de novo missense mutation of the TBX5 gene. The mutation (Thr72Lys) is novel
and has not been previously reported. The cardiac and limb defects in our patient were both severe, and the infant also had micrognathia and
cleft palate. Previously reported cases of the Holt-Oram syndrome caused by missense mutations were reviewed and their phenotypes were
compared with the phenotype of our patient. Holt-Oram syndrome (MIM 142900) is a rare syndrome and is characterized by congenital heart
defects and radial ray deficiency in the upper limbs. The syndrome is caused by mutations of the TBX5 gene.1 Most of the reported mutations
in the TBX5 gene are nonsense, frameshift or splice-site mutations, which lead to non-functional protein due to non-sense mediated decay.1
As expected, these mutations will result in severe cardiac and limb phenotypes.1 In contrast, missense mutations of the TBX5 gene are
uncommon and the result is a full (non-truncated) protein with a single amino acid substitution.2-15 The phenotypes in patients with
missense mutations tend to be of variable severity and frequently include non-classic features. Certain amino acid substitutions affect
critical TBX5 protein interactions leading to severe phenotypes.15 Basson et al2 reviewed the phenotypes of several missense mutations of
the TBX5 gene and hypothesized that the encoded TBX5 proteins will function differently in the development of the heart and the upper limb.
Hence, the hypothesis of Basson et al2 stated that missense mutations of the TBX5 gene will tend to cause a severe cardiac and a concurrent
mild limb phenotype or vice versa. However, recent literature3-9 disputed this hypothesis and it is now well established that such a
genotype-phenotype relationship does not exist. In this paper, we report on a Saudi infant with Holt-Oram syndrome caused by a missense
mutation of the TBX5 gene (c.215C>A, p. Thr72Lys). We believe that our case is important for 3 main reasons. Firstly, the mutation is novel
and has not been previously reported. Secondly, our patient had severe cardiac and limb defects and such a combined severe phenotype
supports the dispute raised regarding the hypothesis of Basson et al.2 Finally, our case also had micrognathia and cleft palate, which are
not known to be among the classic features of Holt- Oram syndrome. The objective of this study is to describe a novel mutation of the TBX5
gene in a Saudi infant with Holt-Oram syndrome and to compare the phenotype to previously reported cases. A 4-month-old female infant
presented to us for the treatment of bilateral radial ray deficiency. The infant had a history of complex cardiac anomaly (multiple
ventricular septal defects, failure of incorporation of the pulmonary veins, and tricuspid valve insufficiency), which required cardiac
surgery soon after birth. Clinical examination and electro-cardiogram showed no evidence of any conduction abnormalities. The bilateral
radial ray deficiencies were also severe and were manifested as bilateral short radii with radial deviation of the wrists as well as
complete absence of both thumbs (Figures 1A & 1B). The infant also had micrognathia and clefting of the soft palate. Ultrasound of the
abdomen did not reveal any renal abnormalities. The parents were normal and unrelated. There was no family history of congenital anomalies
of the heart or limbs. X ray of the A) left upper limb (volar view) and B) the right upper limb (dorsal view) showing a short radius (arrow)
and an absent thumb. After informed consent, genomic DNA from the parents and infant was polymerase chain reaction-amplified for analysis of
the complete coding region of the TBX5 gene and their flanking splice sites. The infant was found to have a novel missense mutation of the
TBX5 gene: c.215C>A, p.Thr72Lys (heterozygous). Both biological parents tested negative indicating that the mutation has arisen de novo. The
TBX5 mutation of our patient (Thr72Lys) is novel and has not been previously reported. Although we did not perform functional analysis of
the interactions of the mutant protein, this new mutation is believed to be pathogenic for several reasons. Firstly, the Thr72Lys mutation
was not observed in over 6000 samples from normal subjects (NHLBI GO Exome Sequencing Project, Seattle, WA;
http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/). Secondly, the Thr72Lys change occurs at a highly conserved position within the DNA-binding domain of the
TBX5 protein. Thirdly, missense mutations at nearby positions (Met74Ile and Gly80Arg) have been reported in association with Holt-Oram
syndrome.2,5,6 Lastly, multiple in-silico analysis models predict that Thr72Lys is damaging to the TBX5 protein (as per Gene Dx,
Gaithersburg, MD 20877, USA). The cardiac and limbs phenotypes were both severe. The literature2 defines the mild cardiac phenotype in Holt-
Oram syndrome as an isolated septal defect, an isolated conduction defect, or an isolated valve defect. Combined defects and more complex
anomalies are considered severe as seen in our patient. Similarly, the literature2 also defines completely absent thumbs (seen in our
patient) as severe limb defects. The phenotype in our patient included micrognathia and clefting of the soft palate and these are not known
to be among the classic features of Holt-Oram syndrome. We reviewed the literature for all reported missense mutations of the TBX5 gene, and
we found 23 mutations.1-14 Two mutations (Gly125Arg and Ser372Leu) were gain-of-function mutations.10,14 The phenotype of the Gly125Arg
mutation was unique and almost all affected family members had radial head dislocation and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.10 This indicated
that this gain-of-function of TBX5 activity may lead to specific cardiac and limb phenotypes.10 The second gain-of-function mutation
(Ser372Leu) was maternally inherited and both mother and child had cardiac defects with normal upper limbs.14 The remaining 21 mutations
were loss-of-function mutations and these are shown in Table 1. Table 1 shows that the cardiac/limb phenotypes in our patient as well as the
phenotypes of several other missense mutations do not support the hypothesis of Basson et al.2 In fact, several mutations have resulted in
phenotypes of variable severity in different members of the same family. Another observation from Table 1 is the absence of cardiac or limb
defects in several missense mutations. This is important to note because it means that screening for TBX5 mutations may be indicated in
families with isolated cardiac defects or isolated radial ray deficiency. Finally, our literature review revealed that the Ser261Cys
mutation reported by Brassington et al9 was the only mutation that was associated with micrognathia and cleft palate. The phenotype in our
case also included micrognathia and cleft palate indicating that these defects may be considered as part of the spectrum of the clinical
features of Holt-Oram syndrome. However, our case and the case of Brassington et al9 were not subjected to other tests (such as array
comparative genomic hybridization analysis and screening of known genes causing isolated cleft palate). Hence, it remains a possibility that
a separate second hit is responsible for the micrognathia/cleft palate phenotype. Loss-of-function missense mutations of the TBX5 gene among
21 mutations. In conclusion, missense mutations of the TBX5 gene are uncommon and we add a novel mutation (c.215C>A, p. Thr72Lys) to the
literature. After reviewing the phenotype in our patient and other cases in the literature, we also conclude that micrognathia and cleft
palate may be features of the Holt-Oram phenotype. Disclosure. Authors have no conflict of interests, and the work was not supported or
funded by any drug company. The work was funded by the College of Medicine Research Center, Deanship of Scientific Research, King Saud
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (Grant # CMRC 16-15). Disclosure. Authors have no conflict of interests, and the work was not supported or
funded by any drug company. The work was funded by the College of Medicine Research Center, Deanship of Scientific Research, King Saud
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (Grant # CMRC 16-15).
