The authors report a case of an 11-year-old boy that presented with headache and vomiting that was present for several months. CT and MR
imaging revealed a large prepontine mass and an obstructive hydrocephalus. A ventriculoperitoneal shunt was inserted, and in a second
operation, a radiologically proven total resection was performed, using a left frontotemporal transsylvian approach. The tumour showed no
involvement of the dura or clivus. Histological examination showed the characteristics of a chordoma. No further adjuvant treatment was
given. The patient remained disease or tumour free after a 6-year follow-up. Intradural chordomas are extremely rare tumours that originate
from notochordal remnants. Only three other cases have been reported in the paediatric population. Ecchordosis physaliphora (EP) is an
ectopic notochordal remnant that has a similar biological behaviour and is difficult to distinguish from intradural chordomas. They might
exist in a continuum from benign notochordal tumour to malignant chordoma. A surgical resection without adjuvant radiation therapy is
suggested to be the treatment of choice in the paediatric population. The authors describe a rare case of an intradural prepontine chordoma
in an 11-year-old boy that stayed disease free after a 6-year follow-up. Chordomas are rare, slow-growing tumours accounting for 1–4 % of
all primary malignant bone tumours . They usually occur in adults with a peak incidence between 50 and 60 years of age . The incidence in
children and adolescents is less than 5 % of the total incidence . Chordomas are thought to arise from notochordal remnants throughout the
axial skeleton and are most commonly located in the skull base, mobile spine and sacrum at an almost equal distribution . Although
intradural localization of chordomas is rare, several cases have been reported in the literature. However, most of the reported cases have
occurred in adults and only three cases of a pure intradural chordoma in a paediatric patient have been reported [5, 9, 27]. In this report,
we present a case of an intradural prepontine chordoma in an 11-year-old boy with a 6-year follow-up and an update of the literature. An
11-year-old boy presented with a history of headaches and vomiting that had been present for several months. Physical examination showed
papilledema without the presence of any other neurological deficits. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a large prepontine mass with
dorsal displacement of the brainstem and a secondary obstructive hydrocephalus due to compression of the aqueduct. The lesion had an
inhomogeneous hypointense aspect on the T1-weighted image (T1WI) and an inhomogeneous hyperintense aspect on the T2-weighted image (T2WI).
After administration of IV gadolinium, there was some inhomogeneous enhancement (Fig. 1). Computed tomography (CT) imaging showed no bone
involvement.Fig. 1Preoperative MR images. a, b Axial and parasagittal T2-weighted MRI scans showing an inhomogeneous hyperintense prepontine
lesion with a mass effect on the brainstem. c, d Axial and parasagittal T1-weighted MRI scan after administration of gadolinium contrast
show inhomogeneous enhancement. e Axial T1-weighted MRI scan shows an inhomogeneous hypointense prepontine lesion. f Parasagittal
constructive interference steady state (CISS) MRI scan shows an inhomogeneous hyperintense prepontine lesion Preoperative MR images. a, b
Axial and parasagittal T2-weighted MRI scans showing an inhomogeneous hyperintense prepontine lesion with a mass effect on the brainstem. c,
d Axial and parasagittal T1-weighted MRI scan after administration of gadolinium contrast show inhomogeneous enhancement. e Axial
T1-weighted MRI scan shows an inhomogeneous hypointense prepontine lesion. f Parasagittal constructive interference steady state (CISS) MRI
scan shows an inhomogeneous hyperintense prepontine lesion During the first operation, a ventriculoperitoneal shunt was inserted into the
right lateral ventricle to treat the hydrocephalus. A careful study of the MRI suggested that this infra- and supratentorially located
tumour might be resected through a single approach. A left frontotemporal transsylvian approach was performed to gain access to the tumour.
The tumour had well-defined margins and was entirely located in the intradural plane. There were no attachments to the cranial nerves or
brainstem. A macroscopic complete resection was performed. Postoperatively, the patient had developed a left oculomotor nerve palsy, which
completely recovered within the next 4 weeks. The postoperative MRI showed a complete removal of the tumour (Fig. 2). After careful
consideration by a multidisciplinary team, we decided that there was no indication for postoperative radiation therapy. At follow-up one and
a half years later, the patient was found to have remained asymptomatic. There were no signs of tumour recurrence on the MRI scan. At a
follow-up of more than 6 years after treatment, there were still no signs of tumour recurrence on the MRI scan.Fig. 2Postoperative MR
images. A complete tumour removal is shown on the a parasagittal T1-weighted sequence, b axial T2-weighted sequence and c axial T1-weighted
sequence after administration of gadolinium contrast Postoperative MR images. A complete tumour removal is shown on the a parasagittal
T1-weighted sequence, b axial T2-weighted sequence and c axial T1-weighted sequence after administration of gadolinium contrast Histological
examination showed a slightly lobulated tumour consisting of a chondromyxoid matrix. The tumour cells showed a vacuolated and pale
cytoplasm. Moderate nuclear polymorphism was observed but no obvious mitotic activity (Fig. 3). Some calcifications were seen. The tumour
cells stained positive for pan-keratin, S-100 and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). These findings suggest a histopathological diagnosis of
chordoma.Fig. 3Histopathological imaging. The lesion shows vacuolated tumour cells with a pale cytoplasm and moderate nuclear polymorphism
in a chondromyxoid matrix. These findings are a characteristic of chordoma Histopathological imaging. The lesion shows vacuolated tumour
cells with a pale cytoplasm and moderate nuclear polymorphism in a chondromyxoid matrix. These findings are a characteristic of chordoma
Chordomas are rare primary bone tumours. Despite their low-grade histological characteristics, chordomas often show a malignant disease
course [2, 21, 23]. Symptoms usually develop gradually, related to the relatively slow-growing tumour compressing the surrounding
structures. However, chordomas can present with acute and progressive clinical symptoms due to intratumoral haemorrhage as well . The extent
of initial surgical resection has been shown to be the most important predictor of local tumour recurrence and long-term survival [6, 10,
14, 23]. Chordomas are most commonly located in the extradural space, with possible transdural progression. Purely intradurally localised
chordomas are extremely rare with an incidence of 3.8 % of all chordoma cases. Nevertheless, several cases and even small case series have
been reported in the literature [3, 20, 24]. To our knowledge, only three other cases of intradural chordoma have been reported in the
paediatric population (Table 1).Table 1Reported cases of intradural chordomas in the paediatric populationReferenceAge
(years)SexLocationResectionRTxFollow-upRecurrenceDow et al. (2003) 9FRight cerebellar hemisphereCompleteNo14 monthsNoChang et al. (2008)
9MRight prepontine cisternCompleteNo12 monthsNoZhang et al. (2010) 8NDNDNDNDNDNDThis case11MPrepontineCompleteNo6 yearsNo RTx radiotherapy,
ND no data available Reported cases of intradural chordomas in the paediatric population RTx radiotherapy, ND no data available Intradural
chordomas tend to show different biological behaviour compared to classic chordomas. In contrast to classic chordomas, purely intradural
chordomas seem to have well-defined tumour margins, do not show bone invasion and are less adhesive to the surrounding structures all of
which improves the resectability . This is likely to be a reason for the lower recurrence rate compared to typical chordomas. In the
literature, several cases of intradural chordomas are reported in children and adults (for review, see Dow et al. and Masui et al. ). None
of the reported cases showed tumour recurrence after surgery, even in cases of subtotal resection. In contrast, typical chordomas often show
recurrence, metastatic features and progression to death despite adequate surgical resection, which is sometimes followed by adjuvant
radiation therapy or chemotherapy . However, AlOtaibi et al. suggest in a recent systematic review that in the adult population, intradural
chordomas show a comparable biological behaviour to typical cranial base chordomas. Chordomas are thought to originate from remnants of the
embryological notochord throughout the axial skeleton. Whereas typical chordomas are localised extradurally with possible transdural
progression, this pathophysiologic mechanism does not explain a purely intradural localisation of chordomas. Ecchordosis physaliphora (EP)
are ectopic notochordal remnants that are usually asymptomatic. An incidence of 1.5–2 % in autopsy studies and approximately 1.7 % in MRI
studies has been found [8, 17, 19]. EPs are typically found in the prepontine cistern, attached to the dorsal clivus with a small pedicle
[13, 25]. Other distinctive features are that EPs generally occur in younger people compared to intradural chordomas and that EPs show no
enhancement after gadolinium administration on MR imaging, whereas intradural chordomas show a variable enhancement [7, 17]. Although
differentiating between symptomatic EPs and intradural chordomas based on histology is difficult and debated, Yamaguchi et al. suggested
some histological differentiating features. Symptomatic EPs and intradural chordomas tend to show a similar benign behaviour with a very low
risk of tumour recurrence after surgical resection . Chang et al. suggest that EPs and intradural chordomas exist in a continuum from benign
hamartomas to aggressive typical chordomas. Treatment of a classic chordoma involves extensive surgery, sometimes combined with adjuvant
radiation therapy . There is not enough data available to postulate an evidence-based treatment for intradural chordomas in the paediatric
population. One should consider that all of the reported cases (Table 1) were treated with a complete surgical resection without any
adjuvant treatment, and none of these tumours did reoccur. Even cases in adults treated with a subtotal resection without adjuvant therapy
did not show tumour recurrence after a 5-year follow-up . Therefore, the role of adjuvant radiation therapy for intradural chordomas is
debated. Considering the potential deleterious effect on the paediatric brain, radiation therapy should be avoided in the paediatric
population. The authors postulate that a complete surgical resection without adjuvant radiation therapy should be the treatment of choice.
Although extremely rare, an intradural chordoma should be considered in the differential diagnosis of intradural prepontine lesions. The
authors postulate that a complete surgical resection without adjuvant radiation therapy is the treatment of choice and that adjuvant
radiation therapy should be avoided in the paediatric population. Additional studies are required to improve our knowledge about intradural
chordomas and their treatment. The authors report no conflicts of interest.
