Denosumab and abiraterone were approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration in 2011 for the treatment of metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer. Neither denosumab nor abiraterone is known to cause rhabdomyolysis. A 76-year-old Caucasian man with
metastatic prostate cancer presented with non-oliguric severe acute kidney injury (AKI) 3 weeks after receiving simultaneous therapy with
denosumab and abiraterone. The patient had been on statin therapy for more than 1 year with no recent dose adjustments. His physical exam
was unremarkable. Blood work on admission revealed hyperkalemia, mild metabolic acidosis, hypocalcemia, and elevated creatine kinase (CK) at
44,476 IU/L. Kidney biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis-induced AKI. The patient responded well to intravenous isotonic fluids
and discontinuation of denosumab, abiraterone, and rosuvastatin, with normalization of CK and recovery of kidney function. We report the
first case of biopsy-proven rhabdomyolysis-induced AKI in a cancer patient acutely exposed to denosumab and abiraterone. Whether one of
these drugs individually, or the combination, was the bona fide culprit of muscle breakdown is unknown. Nonetheless, our report is
hypothesis-generating for further investigations on the effect of these drugs on muscle cells. Rhabdomyolysis is characterized by muscle
breakdown leading to leakage of sarcoplasmic proteins, electrolytes, and myoglobin into the circulation . Several provoking factors
(Table 1) can trigger muscle cell death through direct sarcolemmic injury or depletion of adenosine triphosphate within the myocyte . The
final common pathway is an increase in intracellular calcium and consequent protease activation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and production
of reactive oxygen species that precipitate muscle cell death [3, 4].Table 1Identifiable risk factors for rhabdomyolysisAdvanced agea Female
genderChronic kidney diseasea Diabetes mellitusa Hypothyroidisma Inflammatory or metabolic myopathiesTrauma or crush
injuriesHyperthermiaSeizures or muscle tremorsSevere exertionProlonged surgical interventions or immobilizationComaSickle cell
traitHypokalemiaHypophosphatemiaSevere dehydrationRecreational drugs such as alcohol, cocaine, amphetamines, heroin, phencyclidinePrescribed
drugs such as statinsa, colchicine, antipsychotics, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitorsAcute viral infections such as Influenza,
Coxsackie, EBV, HSV, HIV aApplies to the patient’s case Identifiable risk factors for rhabdomyolysis aApplies to the patient’s case One of
the common complications of rhabdomyolysis is acute kidney injury (AKI). In the US, rhabdomyolysis is the cause of up to 10 % of all cases
of AKI and the mortality rate associated with rhabdomyolysis-induced AKI can be as high as 30 %, depending on subjects’ comorbidities . The
occurrence of AKI in rhabdomyolysis is likely from a combination of risk factors that include volume depletion, intrarenal vasoconstriction,
direct and ischemic proximal tubular injury (myoglobin-driven), and tubular obstruction . The latter mainly occurs in the distal tubules
where myoglobin interacts with Tamm–Horsfall protein, particularly in acidic urine [1, 7]. Pharmacologic agents constitute important causes
of non-exertional and non-traumatic rhabdomyolysis [6, 8]. Several drugs such as antipsychotics, statins, and selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors have been identified as common culprits of rhabdomyolysis [6, 9], particularly in combination with other patient-specific risk
factors. In 2011, denosumab and abiraterone were approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer. We present the case of a 76-year-old Caucasian man with a history of metastatic prostate cancer who
developed rhabdomyolysis-induced AKI after acute exposure to denosumab and abiraterone. A 76-year-old Caucasian man with a history of type 2
diabetes, chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage 3A, essential hypertension, hypothyroidism, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, prior
cerebellar strokes, and prostate cancer (Gleason 10) with widespread metastasis to the bone presented with non-oliguric severe AKI 3 weeks
after receiving simultaneous therapy with denosumab (120 mg subcutaneous injection once) and abiraterone (1 g per day orally). The patient
had failed prior antineoplastic therapy with leuprolide acetate, bicalutamide, and nilutamide. On admission, his serum creatinine (SCr) was
elevated at 5.7 mg/dL from a baseline of 1.2 mg/dL (Fig. 1). His active outpatient medications consisted of rosuvastatin (40 mg daily),
benazepril, metoprolol tartrate, metformin, warfarin, low-dose prednisone (started concomitantly with abiraterone), and levothyroxine. The
patient had been on statin therapy for more than 1 year and the dose had not been recently modified. The patient denied prior episodes of
myopathies, rhabdomyolysis, or AKI. His physical exam was unremarkable. Further blood work showed hyperkalemia, mild metabolic acidosis,
hypocalcemia, mild transaminemia (predominantly AST), and creatine kinase (CK) of 44,476 IU/L (Table 2). Urine studies revealed dipstick
proteinuria (100 mg/dL), large dipstick blood, only a few normomorphic erythrocytes, and negative culture. All serologic work-up (ANA, PR3-
and MPO-ANCA, anti-GBM antibodies, ENA panel, C3, C4, RF) and viral studies (HBV, HCV, CMV, EBV, Influenza A/B, Parainfluenza, Adenovirus,
RSV) were negative or normal. Thyroid function tests were normal. Kidney sonogram and Doppler studies were negative for hydronephrosis and
renal vein thrombosis, respectively. On admission, abiraterone therapy was discontinued and no further doses of denosumab were administered.
Subsequently, the patient underwent kidney biopsy that was consistent with severe acute tubular injury with presence of myoglobin casts,
confirming the diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis-induced AKI (Figs. 2 and 3). The patient responded well to intravenous isotonic fluids and
discontinuation of denosumab, abiraterone, and rosuvastatin. CK levels normalized by day 25 of hospitalization and the SCr at the time of
hospital discharge was 3.1 mg/dL (Fig. 1). After hospital discharge, the patient resumed all prior medications, including rosuvastatin,
except for denosumab and abiraterone. His successive antineoplastic therapy consisted of enzalutamide. Kidney function returned to baseline
12 months after discharge and he had no recurrent episodes of rhabdomyolysis.Fig. 1Time-related serum creatinine (SCr) and creatine kinase
(CK) changes in relation to denosumab and abiraterone exposure (D −21), hospital admission (D1), and hospital discharge (D45). Gray
arrow = denosumab 120 mg subcutaneous injection (single shot) and abiraterone started at 1 g orally per day. Black arrow = admission to the
hospital, abiraterone stopped. Blue arrow = hospital dischargeTable 2Urinary and blood biochemical profiles at baseline, time of hospital
admission, and at the time of peak creatine kinase (CK)Baseline (before admission)At the time of admissionAt the time of peak CK Blood
studies Sodium, mmol/L135137134 (L)Potassium, mmol/L4.6 6.2 (H)3.7Phosphorus, mg/dL2.9 2.42.5Calcium, mg/dL10 8.6 (L)5.7 (L)Ionized calcium,
mg/dL-- --3.4 (L)Bicarbonate, mmol/L29 21 (L)13 (L)Aspartate aminotransferase, U/L29 354 (H)1423 (H)Alanine aminotransferase, U/L19 125
(H)330 (H)Creatine kinase, IU/L-- 44,476 (H)105,120 (H)Lactate dehydrogenase, U/L-- 943 (H)1135 (H)Creatinine, mg/dL1.2 5.7 (H)5.2 (H)eGFR,
mL/min/1.73 m2a 5910 (L)11 (L) Urine studies pH-- 66Dipstick blood-- LargeLargeDipstick protein, mg/dL-- 100100Specific gravity--
1.0181.013Red blood cells/HPF-- 1535White blood cells/HPF-- <15Squamous epithelial cells/HPF-- 10<1Leukocyte esterase-- = laboratory
reference values; (H) = above laboratory reference value; (L) = below laboratory reference value; --= not measured; aeGFR = estimated
glomerular filtration rate by MDRD study equationFig. 2Kidney biopsy light microscopy. a Hematoxylin & eosin (X200) showing dark pink,
filamentous tubular casts (yellow arrow); b) Jones’ silver stain (X400) showing dark pink, coarsely granular and filamentous tubular casts
(yellow arrow)Fig. 3Kidney biopsy light microscopy showing tubular casts staining positively for myoglobin by immunohistochemistry (anti-
myoglobin) (yellow arrow), (X400) Time-related serum creatinine (SCr) and creatine kinase (CK) changes in relation to denosumab and
abiraterone exposure (D −21), hospital admission (D1), and hospital discharge (D45). Gray arrow = denosumab 120 mg subcutaneous injection
(single shot) and abiraterone started at 1 g orally per day. Black arrow = admission to the hospital, abiraterone stopped. Blue
arrow = hospital discharge Urinary and blood biochemical profiles at baseline, time of hospital admission, and at the time of peak creatine
kinase (CK) [] = laboratory reference values; (H) = above laboratory reference value; (L) = below laboratory reference value; --= not
measured; aeGFR = estimated glomerular filtration rate by MDRD study equation Kidney biopsy light microscopy. a Hematoxylin & eosin (X200)
showing dark pink, filamentous tubular casts (yellow arrow); b) Jones’ silver stain (X400) showing dark pink, coarsely granular and
filamentous tubular casts (yellow arrow) Kidney biopsy light microscopy showing tubular casts staining positively for myoglobin by
immunohistochemistry (anti-myoglobin) (yellow arrow), (X400) We present a case of a patient with biopsy-proven AKI caused by rhabdomyolysis
3 weeks after starting simultaneous treatment with denosumab and abiraterone. The patient was also taking rosuvastatin, a drug known to
cause rhabdomyolysis . However, his statin exposure was chronic and without reported recent dose adjustments. Most importantly, no other
identifiable patient-specific triggers for statin-related rhabdomyolysis (e.g., decompensated hypothyroidism, liver disease, strenuous
exercise, or recreational drug use) were identified upon interrogation and examination. In addition, his statin therapy was resumed after
discharge with good tolerability thereafter. Nonetheless, it is not known if drug-drug interactions between the statin and denosumab or
abiraterone could augment the risk for rhabdomyolysis in humans. Denosumab is a human monoclonal antibody that neutralizes the receptor
activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL), inhibiting osteoclast-mediated bone resorption . It is used to prevent bone metastasis
and skeletal-related events in metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer [12, 13]. Some of the common side effects of denosumab
include back pain, cystitis, and upper respiratory tract infections. Serious adverse events such as osteonecrosis of the jaw have been
reported in only 2 % of patients [14, 15]. Abiraterone is a CYP17A1 inhibitor that blocks the synthesis of androgens in prostate tumor
cells, the testes, and adrenal glands. Its side effects are related to 17-alpha hydroxylase inhibition leading to a decrease in cortisol
production and consequent increase in ACTH release, mineralocorticoid production, and ensuing hypokalemia, which itself is a risk factor for
rhabdomyolysis [16, 17]. Prior to the development of abiraterone and its approval as an adrenal androgen synthesis inhibitor, ketoconazole
was the only CYP17 inhibitor that was used to treat metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer . However, due to its actions on CYP3A
and CYP24A1 and therefore the potential for drug-drug interactions, its use was limited to low-risk clinical scenarios . A few cases of
rhabdomyolysis with the concomitant use of ketoconazole and statin have been reported in the literature . In this context, the risk of
rhabdomyolysis is thought to be related to the inhibition of CYP3A by ketoconazole, precipitating a significant increase in the plasma
concentration of statin. In contrast, abiraterone is known to act only on CYP17, with no apparent interference with statin metabolism.
According to the product information, abiraterone metabolites inhibit the hepatic uptake transporter OATP1B1 in vitro, which may
theoretically affect OATP1B1-mediated uptake of rosuvastatin, increase its levels, and therefore predispose to toxicity . To our knowledge,
there are no reported cases of rhabdomyolysis with either acute or chronic exposure to abiraterone, alone or in conjunction with
rosuvastatin. Over the past few years, genetic experiments have unveiled numerous functions of the RANKL/RANK system . The best-known role
of RANKL/RANK signaling is in bone. Genetic ablation of RANKL or RANK in mice results in a complete lack of osteoclasts, with consequent
osteopetrosis and defective tooth eruption . Indeed, inhibition of RANKL/RANK function in osteoclast formation, survival, and function
underlies the therapeutic efficacy of denosumab in the treatment of osteoporosis . RANKL also participates in the complex interplay of
cancer cells with bone during bone metastasis, by promoting osteoclast formation and thus providing for establishment and growth of bone
metastases . These actions of RANKL underlie the efficacy of denosumab in ameliorating skeletal complications in metastatic cancer [12, 13].
However, animal studies have also revealed roles of this signaling pathway in extraskeletal tissues, such as in lymph node and immune cell
development, and in mammary gland development and progestin-driven breast cancer . Hypothalamic RANKL/RANK signaling also plays a key role
in thermoregulation and fever . Thus, roles for RANKL/RANK signaling have been found in bone, mammary tissue, the immune system, and CNS,
suggesting pleiotropic effects on numerous cell and tissue types. RANKL mRNA and protein are found in skeletal muscle . However, its
function in skeletal muscle is currently unknown, and awaits further studies with tissue-specific knockouts. Therefore, the possible effects
of denosumab on skeletal muscle resulting in rhabdomyolysis remain speculative at this time. Possible mechanisms include a direct myopathic
effect or alterations in calcium dynamics in the muscle cell, leading to an increase in intracellular calcium concentration and consequent
rhabdomyolysis. We report the first case of rhabdomyolysis leading to severe AKI in association with acute exposure to denosumab and
abiraterone. From our case we are unable to determine whether rhabdomyolysis was caused by one of these two drugs, their mutual interaction,
or their interaction with another commonly used drug, rosuvastatin. Nonetheless, this case exposes the need to carefully monitor patients
exposed to denosumab and abiraterone to recognize potential severe adverse effects associated with these novel therapies. In addition, our
report is hypothesis-generating to further investigate the effect of these drugs on muscle cells. In conclusion, we recommend monitoring for
early signs of rhabdomyolysis in high-risk patients exposed to either denosumab or abiraterone, particularly if other identifiable risk
factors are present (Table 1), such as in the case of our patient (e.g., advanced age, CKD, type 2 diabetes, hypothyroidism, and statin
use). The patient was deceased at the time of preparation of this manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from his next-of-kin for
publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. Adrenocorticotropic hormone Acute kidney injury Antinuclear antibody Aspartate
aminotransferase Creatine kinase Chronic kidney disease Cytomegalovirus Central nervous system Cytochrome Epstein-Barr virus Hepatitis B
virus Hepatitis C virus Messenger RNA Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand Respiratory syncytial virus Serum creatinine
Competing interests A.R.R. has received a speaker’s fee from Eli Lilly that was not related to this case report. The remaining authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions Analysis of patient’s clinical course and outcomes: JAN, NDAR, OUV,
and ARR; drafting of the manuscript: JAN, NDAR, and RB; critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: JAN and ARR;
critical revision of kidney biopsy results and images: ARH. Administrative, technical, and material support: JAN, NDAR, ARH, and ARR. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. J.A.N. is supported by the Ben J. Lipps Research Fellowship Program of American Society of
Nephrology Foundation for Kidney Research and the Truelson Fellowship Fund at UT Southwestern Charles and Jane Pak Center of Mineral
Metabolism and Clinical Research. A.R.R. is supported by the NIDDK (DK091316) and the American Society of Nephrology Gottschalk Award. The
authors would like to thank TJ Martin for thoughtful comments on the manuscript.
