Solitary metastases to the pancreas are rare. Therefore the value of resection in curative intention remains unclear. In the literature
there are several promising reports about resection of solitary metastasis to the pancreas mainly of renal origin. Here we report for the
first time on the surgical therapy of a 1.5 cm solitary pancreatic metastasis of an adrenocortical carcinoma. The metastasis occurred almost
6 years after resection of the primary tumor. A partial pancreatoduodenectomy was performed and postoperatively adjuvant mitotane treatment
was initiated. During the follow-up of 3 years after surgery no evidence of tumor recurrence occurred. Resection of pancreatic tumors should
be considered, even if the mass is suspicious for metastatic disease including recurrence of adrenocortical cancer. Adrenocortical carcinoma
(ACC) is a rare malignant tumor with an estimated incidence of 1 to 2 cases per million population . The occurrence has a first peak in
childhood and a second in the fourth and fifth decade of life. The majority of ACC are sporadic. But in some cases ACC is part of hereditary
syndromes like Li-Fraumeni syndrome, Beckwith-Wiedeman syndrome, multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 1, congenital adrenal hyperplasia or
familial polyposis coli . Therapy and prognosis strongly depend on the European Network for the Study of Adrenal Tumours (ENSAT)
classification . In localized disease, surgery is treatment of choice , whereas in advanced disease mitotane alone or in combination with
cytotoxic drugs is standard of care . According to the German ACC register, 5-year-survival rates are 84 %, 63 %, 51 % and 15 % for Stage I,
II, III and IV respectively . Management of recurrent disease is not standardized , but recent retrospective studies suggest that surgery is
of benefit in selected cases . Metastatic involvement of pancreas due to any primary malignant tumor is rare and represents about 2 % of all
pancreatic tumors. Most of these patients show diffuse distant metastases of their primary tumor with no opportunity of surgical treatment.
Here, we present a case of recurrent ACC with a solitary pancreatic metastasis 6 years after resection of the primary tumor. A 45-year-old
woman was first diagnosed in 2006 with ACC showing typical signs of Cushing’s syndrome with consecutive increase of weight and body hair,
acne, therapy-refractory arterial hypertension and decrease of physical working capacity. Hormonal work-up revealed elevated cortisol levels
basal and after dexamethasone suppression, as well as elevated dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEA-S) and androgen levels. CT scan showed
a 4.7 × 5.2 × 4.5 cm sized mass of the left adrenal gland with venous contrast enhancement suspicious for adrenocortical carcinoma
(Fig. 1).Fig. 1Imaging of the primary adrenocortical carcinoma (a) and the solitary metachronous metastasis inside the pancreatic head (b)
by MRT and FDG-PET/CT, respectively Imaging of the primary adrenocortical carcinoma (a) and the solitary metachronous metastasis inside the
pancreatic head (b) by MRT and FDG-PET/CT, respectively The patient underwent conventional resection of the left adrenal gland and
lymphadenectomy. Pathological study of the resected tissue was performed by two independent pathologists. The tumor presented a solid growth
pattern with some fibrous bands and small areas of necrosis. Tumor cells appeared monomorphic with small nuclei and condensated chromatin.
The rate of mitosis was under 1 in 10 high power fields. Interestingly there were large amounts of myelolipomatosis metaplastic areas. All
three classic scoring systems showed results still within the value range for benign lesions. However, a high Ki-67 expression of 20 % led
to the diagnosis of an adrenocortical carcinoma (ENSAT stage II). Due to a good differentiation, no adjuvant mitotane therapy has been
performed. Though the patient underwent follow-up examinations periodically, including hormonal work-up and CT or MR imaging performed
initially every 3 months and eventually every 6 months after a 2-year-recurrence-free survival. Sixty-six months after surgical treatment MR
imaging showed a new hyperperfused mass in the head of the pancreas with progression of size in the following studies as well as a high FDG-
uptake in positron emission tomography (Fig. 1). Thus, the mass was highly suspicious of malignancy and resection was recommended by
interdisciplinary consensus. The patient underwent pylorus preserving partial pancreaticoduodenectomy. Postoperatively the patient developed
a pancreatic fistula with an intraabdominal abscess formation, which had to be drained interventionally on day 10 after surgery. The drain
could be removed on day 24 after surgery. Histological and immunohistochemical examination of the resected tissue showed a 1.5 cm sized well
differentiated tumor with solid growth pattern (Fig. 2a). Tumor cells presented monomorphic with eosinophilic cytoplasm and unremarkable
nuclei. The metastasis stained positive for synapthophysin, Melan A and steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) in consistency with the diagnosis as a
metastasis of the adrenocortical carcinoma (Fig. 2b) with a Ki-67 expression in 10 % of tumor cells. There where no signs of a primary
pancreatic carcinoma as the tumor cells stained negative for pan cytokeratine (pan-ck) (Fig. 2c). In addition, pathological examination by
the reference pathologist of the German ACC study group was performed and confirmed the correlation between the ACC primary tumor and the
unusual site of metastasis.Fig. 2Histology of pancreatic mass (a) metastasis with adjacent pancreatic tissue (*) (HE stain, 20x) (b) ACC
metastasis with nuclear positive staining pattern for SF-1 (SF1, 40x) (c) ACC metastasis with positive cytoplasmic staining for
Synaptophysin (d) ACC metastasis with positive cytoplasmic staining for Inhibin ACC metastasis is negative for pan-ck (AE1/3, 20x), the
pancreatic acini stain positive for pan-ck Histology of pancreatic mass (a) metastasis with adjacent pancreatic tissue (*) (HE stain, 20x)
(b) ACC metastasis with nuclear positive staining pattern for SF-1 (SF1, 40x) (c) ACC metastasis with positive cytoplasmic staining for
Synaptophysin (d) ACC metastasis with positive cytoplasmic staining for Inhibin ACC metastasis is negative for pan-ck (AE1/3, 20x), the
pancreatic acini stain positive for pan-ck According to interdisciplinary consensus an adjuvant mitotane therapy was initiated after the
tumor resection and is still ongoing. During follow-up, including endocrine and imaging work-up every 3 months now for more than 3 years,
there is no evidence of recurrence (Time axis see Table 1).Table 1Time axis2006Conventional left-side Adrenalectomie of an Adrenocortical
Carcinoma (stadium II, diameter 7 cm)2006 - 2012Unsuspicious follow-up in periodically performed cross-sectional studies02/2012Detection of
a pancreatic mass suspicious for malignancy in PET03/2012Pylorus preserving partial pancreaticoduodenectomy Histological and
immunhistochemic examination showed a 1.5 cm sized well differentiated metastasis of the adrenocortical carcinomaTill present dateMitotane
Therapy, unsuspicious follow-up in periodically performed cross-sectional studies and hormonal work-up Time axis A literature review has
been performed to identify the distribution of different tumor entities of solitary metastases inside the pancreas. A PubMed search for
studies or case reports dealing with “metastases to pancreas” was performed. Articles were included in this review if 10 or more patients
were investigated retrospectively or prospectively, patients suffered of metastases to pancreas (no infiltrative involvement) and only the
pancreas was affected by metastases, patients received resection of pancreas metastases in curative intension and different tumor entities
were included in each study. Four retrospective studies summerized in Table 2 met the inclusion criteria with a total of 92 patients. Median
age of patients ranged from 59 to 64 years. Most frequent origin of pancreatic metastases was the kidney in 46 % of the cases followed by
melanoma in about 10 % of the cases. Rectal and Colon carcinomas were involved in only 5 cases. One “non-pancreatic endocrine tumor” was
reported but not specified in more detail . Here, the distribution of metastatic origin is different to other literature reviews, where the
proportion of renal cell carcinomas range between 60 and 70 % . This is caused by the exclusion of studies intending to investigate a single
tumor entity metastatic to the pancreas (mostly renal cell carcinomas). Median survival after curative resection of pancreatic metastases
was 2.2 to 4.3 years. 5-year-survival ranged between 36 % and 61 %.Table 2Literature reviewAuthor (Year)Years observedNo. of patientsMedian
ageMedian survival (y)5-year- survival (y)RCCMelanomaGall bladderSarcomaColonOvarLungBreastOthersa Reddy el al. (2008)
1970–200749603.736 %21 (42.9)3(6.1)6 (12.2)4 (8.2)2 (4.1)4(8.1)4 (8.2)1 (2.0)4(8.1)Bahra ct al. (2008) 1989–20072062not reached61 %9 (45.0)1
(5.0)1 (5.0)2 (10 .0)1 (5.0)---6(12.2)Eidt ct al. (2007) 1993–200512644.3not reported7(58.3)4(33.1)--1 (8.3)----Crippa ct al. (2006)
1994–200511592.248 %5 (45.5)1(9.1)--1 (9.1)1(9.1)-3 (27.3)-9242(45.7)9.(9.8)7(7.6)6(6.5)5(5.4)4(4.3)4(4.3)10(10.9) RCC Renal cell careinoma
aSchwannoma (reported twice); Seminoma, Teratocarcinoma, Hepatocellular Carcinoma, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, esophagus, mesechymal
gastric tumor, non-pancreatic endocrine tumor (not specified), GIST (each one case reported) Literature review RCC Renal cell careinoma
aSchwannoma (reported twice); Seminoma, Teratocarcinoma, Hepatocellular Carcinoma, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, esophagus, mesechymal
gastric tumor, non-pancreatic endocrine tumor (not specified), GIST (each one case reported) Solitary metastases to the pancreas are rare.
Only 1.3 % of patients undergoing pancreatic resection present a solitary metastasis of a primary solid tumor . In our literature review
singular metastasis to the pancreas was most frequent of renal origin (46 % of cases). The value of resection in curative intention remains
unclear. As our literature review revealed, 5-year-survival may range between 36 % and 61 % if different tumor entities are taken together.
Certain metastatic tumor entities even show better survival rates after curative resection compared to primary pancreatic carcinomas. In
case of a singular pancreatic metastasis of renal cell carcinoma a 5-year-survival between 66 % and 79 % can be achieved by curative
resection of pancreatic metastasis [8, 13]. Here we report for the first time a case of a solitary pancreatic metastasis of an
adrenocortical carcinoma. ACC is one of the most aggressive endocrine tumors known so far. Resection of recurrent tumor is recommended in
selected case (e.g. when the disease-free interval exceeds 12 months and complete resection seems to be feasible) . In our case, the
metastasis occurred almost 6 years after resection of a very well differentiated primary tumor and a R0 resection could be performed.
Although known to improve recurrence-free survival after resection of primary tumor , it remains unclear if adjuvant mitotane therapy would
have prevented recurrence of ACC. However, the patient would have suffered from mitotane side effects like adrenocortical insufficiency. As
the patient is now again free of disease for more than 3 years, surgical approach to treat solitary pancreatic ACC metastasis was most
likely of great benefit to her. In conclusion, resection of pancreatic tumors should be considered, even if the mass is suspicious for
metastatic disease including recurrence of adrenocortical cancer. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal.
Adrenocortical carcinoma European Network of the Study of Adrenal Tumours Dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate Steroidogenic factor 1 Pancreatic
cytoceratine Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions JB was involved in
postoperative care of the patient after pancreatic resection, wrote the case report, made literature review and drafted the manuscript. US
and CB were the main persons involved in preoperative detection of pancreatic mass and revised the manuscript. MF and AP were involved in
diagnosis, adjuvant treatment and follow-up before and after resection of primary tumor and metastasis to the pancreas. Both revised the
paper. VW performed conventional and immunohistochemical staining of pancreatic ACC metastasis and revised the manuscript. US performed
pancreatic resection, was involved in postoperative care of the patient and revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. This publication was funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) and the University of Wuerzburg in the funding program Open
Access Publishing.
