Spina bifida is associated with foot deformities, which may lead to foot ulcers, osteomyelitis, and limb amputation. Calcanectomy and Symes
amputations have been reported successful in spina bifida. There is lack of evidence for transtibial amputations. This case describes a
27-yr-old woman with L4 level spina bifida who underwent bilateral transtibial amputations. She ambulated with bilateral ankle foot orthoses
and canes until age 22. At age 22, she had bilateral foot reconstructive surgeries complicated by nonunion, ulcerations, and osteomyelitis.
She was using a wheelchair by age 25. She had elective bilateral transtibial amputations at age 27 for progressive osteomyelitis. Four weeks
after amputations, she was fit with bilateral prostheses. On completion of 2 mos of rehabilitation, she ambulated with a cane. This case
demonstrates good functional outcomes after transtibial amputations in a young spina bifida patient. Prosthetic fitting should be considered
for similar, previously high functioning spina bifida patients with transtibial amputation(s). Spina bifida is a congenital spinal defect
associated with lower-extremity motor and sensory loss.1 In lumbar level spina bifida, congenital foot deformities are almost always
present.1–3 Foot deformities may progress secondary to muscle imbalances, insensate feet, and tethered cord syndrome.1–3 Patients often
require multiple surgical procedures to maintain a plantigrade foot for ambulation.2–4 Patients with significant foot deformities often have
difficulty ambulating despite good lower-extremity muscle strength.3–5 In childhood and adolescence, gait aids and braces are typically
required for ambulation.5,6 Because of musculoskeletal complications and obesity, the majority of adults use a wheelchair part-time or full-
time for ambulation.3,5,6 With foot deformities and insensate feet, spina bifida patients are at risk of foot skin breakdown, pressure
ulcers, and osteomyelitis.2–5 Rarely, pressure ulcers progress to squamous cell carcinoma.7 Spina bifida patients may require limb
amputation for osteomyelitis, foot ulcers, and/or squamous cell carcinoma.2–5 There is concern that transtibial amputations would have poor
functional outcomes in spina bifida patients because of lower-extremity weakness.8 However, there is no available literature on transtibial
amputation outcomes in this population. More distal calcanectomy and Symes amputations have been successful in restoring ambulation in
lower-level spina bifida patients.3,8 The purpose of this study was to demonstrate good functional outcomes after transtibial amputations in
a lower-level spina bifida patient. A 27-yr-old woman presented with L4 level spina bifida with history of congenital bilateral clubfeet.
She had a neurogenic bowel and neurogenic bladder, requiring self-catheterization. She was a smoker. On presentation, she had a body mass
index of 28.9, with a weight of 65 kg and a height of 150 cm. She had a high school education with some college level courses. She was on
long-term disability. As a young child, she underwent multiple castings and surgeries to correct foot alignment. At age 10, she had tethered
cord syndrome with release surgery. During adolescence, her foot deformities worsened with progressive foot supination and lateral foot
weight bearing (Fig. 1). She developed severe subtalar arthritis with pain and stiffness. Patient’s foot deformity before amputation. The
patient was a full-time community ambulator with bilateral ankle foot orthoses and two single point canes until age 22. At age 22, she had
bilateral triple hindfoot arthrodesis to regain plantigrade feet, relieve pain, and maintain ambulation. Weight bearing was restricted
postoperatively and ambulation ability declined. By age 25, she used a wheelchair and motorized scooter full-time. Because of constant pain
and immobility, the patient stopped working as a customer service representative. Both foot fusions were not successful, with hindfoot
nonunion. The patient developed bilateral infected foot ulcers from postoperative casting and bracing. She had recurrent lower leg
cellulitis (Fig. 2). Multiple emergency department visits and hospitalizations for pain management, antibiotics, and irrigation/debridement
procedures were required. The patient became narcotic dependent and was prescribed methadone. Patient’s lower-extremity cellulitis before
amputation. At age 27, extensive osteomyelitis of the bilateral tibiotalar joints with talar and midfoot destruction was diagnosed on
contrast computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging scans. The patient’s orthopedic surgeon offered repeat foot surgeries with poor
prognosis for healing. Frustrated by her lack of mobility, chronic pain, and infections, the patient declined further limb salvage
procedures. She underwent elective transtibial amputations. Transtibial levels were chosen by her orthopedic surgeon because of the extent
of osteomyelitis into her tibiotalar joint, active lower leg cellulitis, and poor foot skin quality. One week postoperatively, the patient
was admitted to a specialized amputee rehabilitation inpatient unit. Her inpatient rehabilitation admission Functional Independence Measure
score was 101. On the Medical Research Council scale for testing muscle strength, she had grade 5/5 hip flexion, 4/5 hip abduction, 4/5 hip
extension, 4/5 knee flexion, and 5/5 knee extension bilaterally. Sensation was intact in her residual limbs. Amputation wound healing was
uncomplicated and her residual limbs healed well (Fig. 3). In inpatient rehabilitation, she received 1 hr each of physiotherapy and
occupational therapy daily. The patient was fit with bilateral transtibial prosthesis with a silicone gel liner and Vari-Flex feet. The
silicone gel liner was prescribed for improved socket comfort and skin protection. The patient had goals of community ambulation involving
uneven terrain; thus, the dynamic Vari-Flex feet were chosen. Patient’s healed residual limbs after amputation. After 4 wks of inpatient
rehabilitation, she was independently ambulating with a single point cane (Fig. 4). She was discharged home to live independently in a
single-floor apartment. The patient felt that her quality-of-life was better after amputations. She attended 1 mo of outpatient
physiotherapy consisting of 1-hr sessions, three times a week. Her rehabilitation course was 2 mos in total (4 wks inpatient and 4 wks
outpatient). Patient using her bilateral transtibial prostheses and her single point cane. To evaluate physical function, several validated
outcome measures of clinical mobility were used. The 2-min walk test measures the distance walked in 2 mins and is predictive of the 6-min
walk test.9 The Houghton scale evaluates prosthetic use with respect to daily wear time, gait aids, and ambulation in the community and on
various terrain.10 The Houghton scale is scored out of 12, with higher scores indicating greater prosthetic performance and comfort.10 The
L-test of mobility consists of two transfers and four turns and is predictive of functional household transfers and mobility.11 Deathe and
Miller11 report that the average time for unilateral lower-extremity amputees to complete the L-test for the first time is 32.6 secs. No
L-test data have been reported for bilateral transtibial amputees. The Functional Independence Measure score at discharge was compared with
the patient’s score before prosthetic fitting. A timeline of the patient’s functional abilities is presented in Table 1. Upon completion of
rehabilitation, the patient’s 2-min walk test was 98 m with a single point cane. Her inpatient discharge Functional Independence Measure
score was 113, an improvement of 12 points. She had no history of falls. Her Houghton score was 10 out of 12 with no feelings of
instability. She completed the L-test of functional mobility in 27 secs. Timeline of patient’s changes in function before and after
amputation Four months after amputation, the patient had acute pain, redness, and swelling in her left distal residual limb. She was found
to have heterotopic ossification on a triple-phase bone scan. She was treated with 3 mos of the bisphosphonate etidronate, dosed 10 mg/kg of
body weight. She required a new prosthetic socket. Her pain symptoms resolved within 3 mos. She was left with a bony prominence at the
lateral distal end of her left residual tibia. In a 6-mo follow-up appointment after discharge from rehabilitation, her 2-min walk test was
100 m. She still ambulated with a single point cane. She volunteered at a local hospital as a patient advocate for persons with physical
disabilities. Within the first year of getting her prostheses, the patient returned to work after being on long-term disability for more
than 5 yrs. She has gained employment in a tattoo parlor as an apprentice. She wears her prostheses full-time. She does a flight of stairs
at work, without issues, several times during the day. The patient was pleased with her improvement in function. This young, nonobese
patient had an improvement in function and ambulatory ability restored with bilateral transtibial amputations. Before amputation, she had a
5-yr history of primarily using a wheelchair. Despite a prolonged period of wheelchair mobility before amputation, she was able to achieve
independent ambulation after a 2-mo course of intensive rehabilitation. Transtibial amputations should be considered for spina bifida
patients with chronic foot and/or ankle osteomyelitis despite previous reports of poor outcomes. Transtibial amputations with shorter
residual limb length may result in poorer prosthetic control, less energy efficient gait, and slower walking speed than calcanectomy and
Symes.12,13 Calcanectomy and Symes amputations are advantageous in allowing distal weight bearing and decrease the risk of bony
overgrowth.13 However, there are advantages of transtibial amputation including improved dynamic prosthetic foot options and no risk of heel
fat pad migration.13 Patients with spina bifida may be at increased risk for heterotopic ossification after amputation.14 Symptoms of acute
residual limb pain, swelling, redness, and/or bony deformity should be investigated for heterotopic ossification. Socket modification and
prompt treatment of heterotopic ossification are advised to maintain prosthetic use and ambulation. Not all spina bifida patients may be
prosthetic candidates after transtibial amputation. Criteria for prosthetic candidacy should include a healthy body weight, good proximal
lower-extremity muscle strength, and good cognitive function. Careful evaluation of the patient’s goals and environment should be done
before prosthetic componentry selection. The patient should have access to intensive rehabilitation and prosthetic follow-up. Financial
disclosure statements have been obtained, and no conflicts of interest have been reported by the authors or by any individuals in control of
the content of this article.
