Renal vein thrombosis (RVT) in neonates is a rare condition of low mortality but significant morbidity due to renal impairment. We report
the case of a male term newborn with left RVT and elevated serum factor VIII (FVIII). The main symptoms of the patient and the important
clinical findings: prompt diagnosis of RVT was possible because the classic clinical presentation of macroscopic hematuria,
thrombocytopenia, and palpable flank mass were present in this newborn infant. The main diagnoses: finally, the reason of RVT was
established when the infant was 3 months of age: the increased level of FVIII was confirmed. We discuss the diagnosis, therapy, and outcome
of the patient and compare with the literature. Therapeutics interventions: however, despite anticoagulant therapy the left kidney developed
areas of scarring and then atrophy. Conclusions and outcomes: Prothrombotic defects should be considered in all patients with perinatal RVT.
Elevated factor VIII as a reason of RVT in neonatal period is particularly rare. Given a poor renal outcome in children associated with
elevated levels of factor VIII, consideration could be given to more aggressive antithrombotic therapy in such cases. Renal vein thrombosis
(RVT) is the most prevalent noncatheter-related thromboembolism in the neonatal period of life. The incidence of RVT is estimated at 2.2 per
100,000 lives or 0.5 per 1000 neonatal admissions to neonatal intensive care units (NICU). Newborn infants are predisposed to having
thrombotic complications because of physiological properties of neonatal hemostasis due to decreased levels of natural anticoagulants such
as antithrombin, protein C, protein S, and low levels of other components. Moreover, the susceptibility of neonatal kidney is the effect of
low renal perfusion pressure and double intracapillary network in the kidney. Risk factors for the development of RVT include the following:
maternal diabetes mellitus, history of perinatal asphyxia, prematurity, infection, polycythemia, and cyanotic congenital heart disease.1
Inherited prothrombotic abnormalities haven been described in cases reported of RVT.2 We report the case of a male newborn with elevated
serum factor VIII (FVIII) and RVT. A 1-day-old male infant was transferred to the neonatology department because of RVT suspicion. He was
born at 39 gestation by a primigravida via emergent cesarean section for cross-birth and uterine fibroids, with 2930 g. Apgar scores were
9/9 points at 1 and 5 minutes. Prophylactic vitamin K was administered intramuscularly. The examination of the newborn infant after birth
revealed a palpable left flank mass and gross hematuria elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) (the highest value 166.71 mg/dL) and procalcitonin
(PCT) (8.40 ng/mL). Intravenous antibiotic therapy was started. An abdominal ultrasound Doppler flow study revealed sonographic features of
renal venous thrombosis in the left kidney: reversed end-diastolic flow in the main renal artery and significantly reduced flow in the renal
vein. Factors predisposing this neonate to RVT include maternal diabetes, early onset infection, and complicated labor. The neonate was with
no family history of thrombotic disorders or fetal losses. We observed clinical deterioration during the first days of the infant's life:
delayed capillary refill, mottling, paleness, hypotension, abdominal distension, feeding intolerance, and heart murmur. Abdominal ultrasound
showed an enlarged left kidney (length 6.4 cm) and evidence of swelling as well as the loss of cortico-medullary differentiation (Figures 1
and 2). In differential diagnosis RVT infiltrative kidney tumor was taken into consideration. The computer tomography scan (CT-scan) of the
abdomen was performed revealing left adrenal hemorrhage and massive left renal swelling (kidney size 6.3 cm × 3.3 cm). Cranial ultrasound
revealed left-sided IVH II° (intraventricular hemorrhages). Initial treatment included a broad spectrum of antibiotics and anticoagulant
therapy, with careful attention to fluid balance and nutrition.3 Initial dose was 30 U/kg/h of intravenous unfractionated heparin (UFH) and
then subsequent doses 30 U/kg/h aiming for an activated partial prothrombin time ratio of 1.5–2.5. However, despite the increase in dose to
45 U/kg/h, the desired prolongation of clotting time was not achieved (International Normalized Ratio, INR 0.79–0.9). After kidney perfusion
had been reestablished, the patient received 100 U/kg subcutaneous low molecular mass heparin (LMWH) twice a day. Laboratory tests of kidney
function showed a transient rise in serum creatinine and urea (maximum value to 1.59 and 60 mg/dL, respectively), proteinuria, and
hematuria. Inflammatory parameters gradually normalized; however, some of them never reached normal level till discharged, suggesting an
ongoing inflammation. Protein C (63%), antithrombin III (50.13%) activity, and homocysteine concentration were normal for the age. The blood
culture was negative. FIGURE 1Upper abdominal CT scan after intravenous contrast medium administration. An enlarged left kidney with lack of
contrast enhancement was observed. Upper abdominal CT scan after intravenous contrast medium administration. An enlarged left kidney with
lack of contrast enhancement was observed. FIGURE 2Upper abdominal CT scan after intravenous contrast medium administration. An enlarged
left kidney with lack of contrast enhancement was observed. Upper abdominal CT scan after intravenous contrast medium administration. An
enlarged left kidney with lack of contrast enhancement was observed. Since therapy monitoring required frequent blood draws, red cells
transfusion was recommended. During hospitalization the boy was consulted by a pediatric nephrologist and hematologist. The patient was
discharged from hospital in good overall condition, on the 22nd day of life, with the recommendation for the continuation of subcutaneous
heparin supply and multiprofessional care. So far, testing for heritable thrombophilic defects in the Department of Pediatric Hematology
showed elevated plasma levels of factor VIII (150% of the normal level) in the third month of age. The boy remains under the control of
nephrology. Ultrasound at 3 months of life showed the left kidney was (4 cm × 2 cm) smaller than the right (5.7 cm × 2.4 cm) with loss of
cortico-medullary differentiation. Renal scintigraphy revealed trace secretion by the left kidney (5%). Blood pressure was normal, serum
creatinine and urea were within the normal range. After a 6-month follow-up, serum parameters of renal function and blood pressure
maintained within the normal range. Ultrasound showed the right kidney 6.5 cm × 2.7 cm and the lack of left kidney (Figures 1 and 2). IVH II
was every 2 weeks ultrasound controlled and the regression of changes has been observed. Prompt diagnosis of the patient was possible
because the classic clinical presentation of macroscopic hematuria, thrombocytopenia, and palpable flank mass were present in this newborn
infant. The classic triad of symptoms combined with early manifestation suggests the RVT beginning in prenatal or perinatal period.1,4,5 Our
patient was a male infant born on term. Males are more commonly affected than females, representing about 67% of cases. It was hypothesized
that males have a greater risk of congenital renal malformations, which may predispose them to a higher risk of neonatal renal vein
thrombosis.6 The majority of neonatal RVT is unilateral with a left-sided predominance (63.6%). It was also the case in our patient.
Susceptibility of the neonatal kidney to develop thrombosis may be secondary to its low renal perfusion.7 When newborn infants have a
central venous catheter inserted, up to 80% of the affected neonates with RVT had coexisting risk factors. Approximately 30% of these
neonates were born prematurely and with signs of perinatal asphyxia or with signs of infection. Congenital heart disease had also been
reported in some patients.1,2 Our patient's mother had prenatally gestational diabetes maternal type 1 (GDM1), but polycythemia as a risk of
thrombosis was not observed. Finally, the reason of RVT was confirmed after 3 months: the increased level of FVIII. Only 1 report had
demonstrated abnormal serum FVIII level in 2 cases with RVT in that period of life.8 It is known that 25% of patients with venous thrombosis
have FVIII levels greater than 150 U/dL. To minimalize the confounding influence of any postthrombotic acute phase response FVIII levels
should be measured 3–6 months following the acute venous thromboembolism.9 Current data suggest that the high FVIII levels do not simply
reflect a postthrombotic acute phase response, which can contribute to the elevation of fibrinogen, CRP, and FVIII. However, plasma CRP and
fibrinogen levels had both corrected to normal range by 3 months in the majority of patients and FVIII levels remained persistently elevated
in 72% subjects for at least 6 months.6 The elevated level of FVIII may be familiar and result from endothelial hyperactivity in response to
vascular damage. This mechanism is not based on acute phase response.9 Additionally, plasma levels of FVII-VWF (complex factor VIII with
factor von Willenbranda) complex are markedly influenced by ABO blood groups. Normal individuals with blood group 0 have plasma FVIII levels
25–30% lower as compared with non-0 individuals. Among the non-0 groups, AB individuals had the highest levels, followed by group B and then
group A.3 Our patient has blood group B. So he should be in the group of medium risk of elevated levels of FVIII. Poor prognosis in RVT
results from the damage to the organ affected by thrombosis, which unfortunately was observed in our case. Accurate and early diagnosis
could be an important tool for guiding clinicians in helping treatment decisions that are still controversial with different regimes used,
including thrombolysis and heparin therapy as well as supportive therapy. Sonography might help in the management of RVT in neonates and
also predict renal outcome.10 Winyard et al10 documented that larger perinatal kidneys had reduced long-term function. The kidneys larger
than 6 cm at presentation never had a normal outcome. The first ultrasound in our boy showed the length of the affected kidney at 6.4 cm.
Harris et al6 demonstrated that if the initial perfusion is poor, the kidney is not likely to recover completely. The presented case
confirmed that the left kidney developed areas of scarring and then atrophy. Elevated factor VIII can be recognized as the next predictor of
poor outcome, especially in adults.8 Our report has some limitations mostly related toThe radiologists highly suspected a renal tumor in our
patient, so abdominal CT was performed, which radically lengthened the process of diagnosing RVT.Although there was no consensus on the
management of neonatal RVT, a multidisciplinary team has been involved.As the therapeutic level of INR was not achieved, higher doses of
LMWH could have been administered. Heparin therapy with unfractionated or with LMWH has been proposed for neonates with RVT. However, the
renal outcomes seem not to be importantly influenced by anticoagulant treatment, as 62.5% of the affected kidneys became atrophic in
neonates who were managed with LMWH.11 RVT in neonates often leads to irreversible damage.During the unfractionated heparin therapy the
anti-factor Xa levels could have been monitored. Therapeutic level is 0.35–0.7 U/mL. Anti-factor Xa should be measured 4–6 hours after
administering the first dose. If within the therapeutic range, it should be checked weekly. If out of the therapeutic range, the dose should
be readjusted and another check should be performed after 4–6 hours.3 The anti-Xa assay has been proposed by some as a better assay for
heparin monitoring. Consequently, a number of medical centers have switched to the anti-Xa assay for unfractionated heparin therapy
monitoring. Although anti-Xa testing offers the advantages of not being affected by coagulation factor deficiencies other than antithrombin,
limited published studies document the effectiveness of anti-Xa assays for monitoring heparyn therapy. Moreover, there is some uncertainty
about what constitutes the ideal approach to measuring anti-Xa levels.12The ultrasound of abdomen with the measurement of the flow in the
vessels of the kidney should be made in every patient with risk factors and thrombophilia screen performed. Thus, pregnant women with risk
factors should be closely monitored and in case of any doubts prenatally, they should be directed to and remain under the care of clinic
until delivery. Risk factors are sepsis, maternal diabetes, polycythaemia, dehydration, and prothrombotic mutations. Early postnatal
diagnosis can prevent neonates at risk from developing the kidney disease in the future. The radiologists highly suspected a renal tumor in
our patient, so abdominal CT was performed, which radically lengthened the process of diagnosing RVT. Although there was no consensus on the
management of neonatal RVT, a multidisciplinary team has been involved. As the therapeutic level of INR was not achieved, higher doses of
LMWH could have been administered. Heparin therapy with unfractionated or with LMWH has been proposed for neonates with RVT. However, the
renal outcomes seem not to be importantly influenced by anticoagulant treatment, as 62.5% of the affected kidneys became atrophic in
neonates who were managed with LMWH.11 RVT in neonates often leads to irreversible damage. During the unfractionated heparin therapy the
anti-factor Xa levels could have been monitored. Therapeutic level is 0.35–0.7 U/mL. Anti-factor Xa should be measured 4–6 hours after
administering the first dose. If within the therapeutic range, it should be checked weekly. If out of the therapeutic range, the dose should
be readjusted and another check should be performed after 4–6 hours.3 The anti-Xa assay has been proposed by some as a better assay for
heparin monitoring. Consequently, a number of medical centers have switched to the anti-Xa assay for unfractionated heparin therapy
monitoring. Although anti-Xa testing offers the advantages of not being affected by coagulation factor deficiencies other than antithrombin,
limited published studies document the effectiveness of anti-Xa assays for monitoring heparyn therapy. Moreover, there is some uncertainty
about what constitutes the ideal approach to measuring anti-Xa levels.12 The ultrasound of abdomen with the measurement of the flow in the
vessels of the kidney should be made in every patient with risk factors and thrombophilia screen performed. Thus, pregnant women with risk
factors should be closely monitored and in case of any doubts prenatally, they should be directed to and remain under the care of clinic
until delivery. Risk factors are sepsis, maternal diabetes, polycythaemia, dehydration, and prothrombotic mutations. Early postnatal
diagnosis can prevent neonates at risk from developing the kidney disease in the future. Very few published studies have evaluated risk
factors for recurrent thrombosis in children.8,9 Elevated factor VIII levels are familiar or result from endothelial hyperactivity in
response to vascular damage. Given a poor outcome in children associated with elevated levels of factor VIII, D-dimer, or both (>150 IU/dL
and 500 ng/mL, respectively) at the time of diagnosis of thrombosis, consideration could be given to more aggressive antithrombotic therapy
in such cases. Many authors have underlined that anticoagulant therapy might not have an impact on gaining the lost renal function; however,
early supportive management could be beneficial in preventing severe kidney damage. Prof. Marek Sasiadek, Head of Department of General
Radiology, Interventional Radiology and Neuroradiology for sharing of CT-scans. Abbreviations: CRP = C-reactive protein, CT = computer
tomography, FVIII = factor VIII, FVII-VWF = complex factor VIII with factor von Willenbranda, GDM1 = gestational diabetes maternal type 1,
INR = International Normalized Ratio, IVH = intraventricular hemorrhages, LMWH = low molecular mass heparin, NICU = neonatal intensive care
unit, PCT = procalcitonin, RVT = renal vein thrombosis, UFH = unfractionated heparin. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
