Relevant conflicts of interest/financial disclosures: Nothing to report. Full financial disclosures and author roles may be found in the
online version of this article. Mitochondrial dysfunction is an important cause of neurological disease. Mitochondrial disease can present
at any age, and the clinical features are extremely varied. The mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) m.8993T>C mutation is usually encountered either
in association with Leigh syndrome1 or the syndrome of neuropathy, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP).2 We describe severe, late‐onset
myoclonus ataxia related to the m.8993T>C mutation. A 74‐year‐old man presented with a 3‐year history of progressive hand clumsiness and
poor balance. He was now wheelchair‐bound and needed assistance in dressing, feeding, and washing. There was no history of seizures. He had
a sister with diabetes mellitus and coeliac disease, but otherwise well. Family history was unremarkable for movement disorders and other
neurological conditions. Both the patient and his sister had no children, and their mother who was deceased was an only child. Clinical
examination revealed bilateral, irregular, and multifocal myoclonus in both upper limbs, considerably aggravated by active movement. No
pigmentary retinopathy was detected. Up‐gaze was limited, but with intact smooth pursuit. Cognition was normal. Proximal (MRC 4/5) and
distal (MRC 4+/5) muscle weakness was evident. Lower‐limb reflexes were absent. Severe myoclonus ataxia rendered him unable to walk or stand
independently. Urea, liver function tests, creatinine kinase, serum lactate, vitamin E, blood copper, and coeruloplasmin levels were
unremarkable. Testing for anti‐gliadin and anti‐endomysial antibodies was negative. Brain MRI revealed global cortical and cerebellar
atrophy. Nerve conduction studies revealed a predominantly sensory axonal neuropathy. EEG did not reveal any epileptiform features. Photic
stimulation evoked further myoclonic jerks associated with muscle activity artefact. Fragile X–associated tremor ataxia syndrome and
spinocerebellar ataxia types 1 to 3, 6, 7, and 17 were excluded; SGCE gene analysis was normal. Given that clinical features were suggestive
of a mitochondrial disorder rather than other causes of myoclonus ataxia, common POLG mutations (p.Ala467Thr, p.Trp748Ser, and p.Gly848Ser)
and mtDNA point mutations associated with MERRF (myoclonic epilepsy with ragged‐red fibers) syndrome (m.8344A>G, m.8356T>C, and m.8363G>A)
were excluded. Pyrosequencing of the MTATP6 and MTATP8 genes (methodology as described by Alston et al.3) revealed the m.8993T>C mutation in
MTATP6 at 95% heteroplasmy in the patient's blood and urine. The m.8993T>C mutation was undetectable in the respective samples from his
sister, suggesting a sporadic mutation, although a maternal sample was not available to confirm this. Myoclonus linked with ataxia is a
common feature of the m.8344A>G MERRF mutation,4 and it has been reported with POLG mutations.5 Adult‐onset ataxia and axonal neuropathy
owing to the m.8993T>C mutation has been reported in a Finnish family,2 but severe myoclonus ataxia in association with the m.8993T>C
mutation has not been previously reported. The patient's late symptom onset is remarkable. Clinical clues suggesting a possible late‐onset
mitochondrial disorder were the multisystem nature of the disorder and a phenotype characterized by myoclonus ataxia, neuropathy, and the
mild up‐gaze limitation. Cerebellar pathology and ataxia are common features of mitochondrial disease. Recently, the cerebellum has been
implicated in the pathogenesis of cortical myoclonus.6 Apart from mitochondrial disease, myoclonus ataxia can be associated with many other
conditions, such as coeliac disease, and various rare metabolic or genetic disorders.7 Mitochondrial disease related to the m.8993T>C
mutation should be considered among adult patients who present with nondominant myoclonus ataxia, irrespective of age. Video 1. This video
was taken at the age of 73 years. The sensitivity of the myoclonic jerks to photic stimulation is demonstrated during the EEG recording.
Video 2. This video was taken at the age of 74 years. The severe myoclonus ataxia is demonstrated during the finger‐to‐finger test and when
trying to pick up a pen. On examination of the eye movements, smooth pursuit is intact, but there is evidence of marked upward gaze
restriction. The head drop is owing to neck extensor weakness (MRC 4/5) rather than dystonia. Mika H. Martikainen, MD, PhD,1 Grainne S.
Gorman, MRCP, FRCP,1 Paul Goldsmith, MRCP,2 David J. Burn, FRCP,2 Doug M. Turnbull, FRCP,1 and Andrew M. Schaefer, MRCP1 1Wellcome Trust
Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom 2Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom (1) Research Project: A. Conception, B. Organization, C. Execution; (2) Statistical
Analysis: A. Design, B. Execution, C. Review and Critique; (3) Manuscript Preparation: A. Writing of the First Draft, B. Review and
Critique. M.H.M.: 1A, 1C, 3A, 3B G.S.G.: 1A, 1C, 3B P.G.: 1C, 3B D.J.B.: 3B D.M.T.: 3B A.M.S.: 1C, 3B M.H.M. is funded by the Sigrid
Jusélius Foundation. G.S.G. is funded by the UK National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). D.J.B. is funded by Parkinson's UK, the
Michael J. Fox Foundation, the NIHR, and the Wellcome Trust. D.M.T. is funded by the Wellcome Trust. Additional Supporting Information may
be found in the online version of this article Supporting Information Video 1 Click here for additional data file. Supporting Information
Video 2 Click here for additional data file.
