Nevus of Ota is a hamartoma of dermal melanocytes presenting as blue hyperpigmented patches on the face usually within the distribution of
ophthalmic and maxillary branches of the trigeminal nerve. A case of giant nevus of Ota involving all three branches of the trigeminal nerve
is presented. An 18-year-old girl presented with skin hyperpigmentation over the left side of the face since childhood. External examination
revealed bluish hyperpigmented patch involving the forehead, periorbital area, temple, cheek and mandibular area [Fig. 1]. Examination of
the left eye showed conjunctival melanocytosis, anterior and intercalary staphyloma, leucomatous corneal opacity and pseudoproptosis [Fig.
2]. The right eye was essentially normal. Visual acuity was nil perception of light in the left eye and 20/20 in the right eye. Left eye
ultrasound ruled out intraocular mass and showed optic nerve head cupping; the axial length was 31 mm [Fig. 3]. Magnetic resonance imaging
of brain done elsewhere (images not available) was reported normal. She underwent enucleation of the left eye. Histopathological examination
of enucleated eye revealed melanocytic proliferation in the conjunctiva, iris, cilary body, choroid and sclera [Fig. 4]. External photograph
reveals blue-grey skin pigmentation over left face involving forehead, periorbital area, temple, cheek and eyelids. Hemifacial involvement
is typical while the involvement of mandibular area is atypical. Left eye (left image in panel) shows pseudo-proptosis caused by increased
axial length due to secondary glaucoma Right eye is normal (left). Left eye has ocular melanocytosis involving eyelids, conjunctiva, sclera,
cornea and uvea. Anterior and intercalary staphyloma, leucomatous corneal opacity and buphthalmos are due to long-standing secondary
glaucoma Ultrasound shows vitreous detachment; axial length is 31.5 mm. In the presence of media opacity, ultrasound helps rule out
intraocular mass lesion Histopathologic examination of enucleated eye reveals extensive melanin infiltration in the uveal tissue (H and E,
Ã—40) Nevus of Ota usually appears at birth and has a female preponderance (4.8:1). It may be associated with nevus of Ito, ocular melanoma
(1 in 400) and glaucoma (10.3%). Hence, the need for detailed ophthalmic and systemic examination. Histologically it is classified into five
types, which are superficial, superficial dominant, diffuse, deep dominant, and deep. The more superficial lesions tend to be located on the
cheeks while deeper lesions occur on periorbital areas, temple, and forehead. This classification bears significance in making a therapeutic
prognosis of the disease. A lifelong follow-up with dermatologist and ophthalmologist is required given the increased incidence of malignant
melanoma. Dr. Jyotirmay Biswas for his help with histopathological slides. Source of Support: Nil. Conflicts of Interest: None declared.
