Descriptive case report. To report a case of a diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) patient with both massive ossification of the
anterior longitudinal ligament (OALL) leading to severe dysphagia as well as ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL)
causing mild cervical myelopathy, warranting not only an anterior approach but also a posterior one. Although DISH can cause massive OALL in
the cervical spine, severe dysphagia resulting from DISH is a rare occurrence. OALLs are frequently associated with OPLL. Treatment for a
DISH patient with OPLL in setting of OALL-caused dysphagia is largely unknown. A 70-year-old man presented with severe dysphagia with mild
cervical myelopathy. Neurological examination showed mild spastic paralysis and hyper reflex in his lower extremities. Plane radiographs and
computed tomography of the cervical spine revealed a discontinuous massive OALL at C4-5 and continuous type OPLL at C2-6. Magnetic resonance
imaging revealed pronounced spinal cord compression due to OPLL at C4-5. Esophagram demonstrated extrinsic compression secondary to OALL at
C4-5. We performed posterior decompressive laminectomy with posterior lateral mass screw fixation, as well as both resection of OALL and
interbody fusion at C4-5 by the anterior approach. We performed posterior decompressive laminectomy with posterior lateral mass screw
fixation, as well as both resection of OALL and interbody fusion at C4-5 by the anterior approach. Severe dysphagia markedly improved
without any complications. We considered that this patient not only required osteophytectomy and fusion by the anterior approach but also
required decompression and spinal fusion by the posterior approach to prevent both deterioration of cervical myelopathy and recurrence of
OALL after surgery. In 1950, Forestier described a peculiar pattern of axial new bone formation characterized by flowing ossification along
the anterior aspect of the vertebral column, which they termed ankylosing hyperostosis of the spine (also known as Forestier disease).1 In
1976, Resnick et al2 described diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH) as a common disease that leads to ossification of ligaments
and enthuses of the spine as well as peripheral skeleton. The spinal form of DISH is characterized by ossification of the anterior
longitudinal ligament (OALL) with involvement of the cervical spine in approximately 76% of patients.3,4 It occurs primarily in the elderly
and predominantly in men.5 Some authors have reported that dysphagia resulting from DISH of the cervical spine is a rare occurrence, because
it is estimated that 3% of individuals >40 years of age have DISH and, of these, only 0.1% to 6% will develop dysphagia.6–9 Surgical
resection of OALL has been reported to be an effective treatment for cases of severe dysphagia.10–15 In general, OALLs are frequently
associated with ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL).16–19 However, clinical features of patients complaining
dysphasia complicated with these combined morbidities (OALL and OPLL) have been only sporadically reported in literatures, and its optimal
treatment option has not been clarified. We present a case of a patient with DISH with both massive OALL leading to severe dysphagia and
OPLL causing mild cervical myelopathy, necessitating not only an anterior approach but also a posterior one. The review board of our
institute approved this study, and an appropriate written informed consent was obtained from the patient. The study was authorized by the
local ethical committee and was performed in accordance with the Ethical standards of the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki as revised in 2000. A
70-year-old man presented with severe dysphagia with mild cervical myelopathy. His past medical history showed atrial fibrillation. The
dysphagia gradually deteriorated in the past 6 months, and he had difficulty in swallowing solid food. Pharyngeal neoplasm was excluded by
pharyngoscopy (Figure 1). Neurological examination revealed mild spastic paralysis and hyper reflex in his lower and upper extremities,
though he could still walk without a cane. Babinski's reflex was not observed. Plane radiographs revealed extensive ossification ventral to
the cervical spine (Figure 2). Computed tomography (CT) of the cervical spine demonstrated a discontinuous massive OALL at C4-5 and
continuous type OPLL at C2-6. Axial CT image at C4-5 level presented protrusion of osteophyte compressing esophagus (Figure 3). The
thickness of OALL at C4-5 was 18 mm. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed pronounced spinal cord compression due to OPLL at C4-5
(Figure 4). His esophagram revealed extrinsic compression secondary to OALL at C4-5 (Figure 5). Because 6-month medications failed and his
dysphagia caused gradual weight loss, we considered surgical intervention. Under general endotracheal anesthesia, we firstly performed
posterior decompressive laminectomy with posterior lateral mass screw fixation. Immediately after this procedure, both OALL and the disc at
C4-5 were removed by the anterior approach. Subsequent interbody fusion with a polyetheretherketone cage was performed (Figure 6). These
procedures were performed as 1 stage operation. The patient was mobilized using a semi-rigid collar after surgery. The dysphagia
considerably improved without any complications. No deterioration of myelopathy or recurrence of dysphagia was detected at the 1 year
follow-up, and a postoperative MRI and CT at this time showed adequate decompression with solid fusion at C4-5 (Figures 7 and 8).
Preoperative endoscope showed stagnation of the saliva in piriform recess (arrow head) and protrusion of the posterior wall of the pharynx
(arrow) without other abnormalities. A lateral preoperative radiograph reveals massive anterior cervical osteophyte at C4-5. Preoperative
computed tomography (CT). (A) CT of the cervical spine on the sagittal plane shows the discontinuous massive OALL at C4-5 and continuous
type OPLL at C2-6. (B) CT of the cervical spine on the axial plane shows OALL compressing the esophagus and OPLL occupying the spinal canal
at C4-5. OPLL = ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament. OALL = ossification of the anterior longitudinal ligament Preoperative
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI of the cervical spine on the sagittal plane and the axial plane shows pronounced spinal cord
compression due to ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament at C4-5. Preoperative esophagram revealed extrinsic compression
secondary to ossification of the anterior longitudinal ligament at C4-5. Postoperative radiograph of the cervical spine from the
anteroposterior (left) and lateral (right) views. Postoperative magnetic resonance imaging of the cervical spine on the sagittal plane
(left) and the axial plane at C4-5. Postoperative computed tomography of the cervical spine on the sagittal plane (left) and the axial plane
at C4-5. We successfully treated a patient with DISH with OPLL who underwent combined surgery for decompression and stabilization of both
OALL and OPLL. Because of the frequent association of OALL with OPLL in general, the same mechanism may enhance ossification of these spinal
ligaments. Song et al18 reported that OPLL coexisted with OALL in 11 of 17 patients (65%); however, most patients showed asymptomatic OALL.
The case in the present report who not only had myelopathy due to OPLL but also had dysphagia due to OALL is rare because till date, only 2
cases presenting with cervical myelopathy due to OPLL with symptomatic OALL have been reported.18 Epstein17 described staged surgeries in
which a cervical laminectomy without fusion for OPLL was performed by the anterior approach for the excision of OALL. Chacko and Daniel19
reported that the oblique corpectomy by the anterior approach is a technique for patients with asymptomatic OALL in the setting of cervical
myelopathy due to OPLL. Therefore, different surgical procedures were employed in previously reported cases, and the treatment strategy for
patients who complain dysphagia caused by symptomatic OALL/DISH complicated with myelopathy due to OPLL is still unclear. In the present
case, the thickness of OALL on CT was an important contributing factor to dysphagia. Song et al18 demonstrated the mean thickness was
13.5 mm for patients with symptomatic OALL and 6.5 mm for those with asymptomatic OALL. In the present case, the thickness of OALL was
18 mm, and it caused severe dysphagia. Carlson et al9 hypothesized direct compression of the aerodigestive tract and associated nerves, as
well as local inflammation that leads to mucosal edema, adhesion formation, fibrosis, and cricopharyngeus muscle spasm-induced dysphagia and
respiratory complaints. In particular, adhesion or fibrosis of the esophagus due to chronic inflammation must be considered in the treatment
of patients with OALL. The initial treatment of patients with symptomatic OALL should be conservative therapy, which includes anti-
inflammatory medication, steroids, muscle relaxants, and postural changes when swallowing. Dysphagia, which is severe or resistant to
conservative therapy, should be considered during surgical treatment. Resection of symptomatic OALL alone by the anterior approach is
commonly performed, and many reports have shown that dysphagia resolved well after surgery.10–15 However, some reports have described
patients with recurrence OALL associated with dysphagia. Miyamoto et al11 reported that the postsurgical recurrence of OALL-caused dysphagia
in patients with DISH was at an average rate of approximately 1 mm/year and that the incidence of recurrence in segments with mobility was
significantly than that in segments without mobility. In the present case, because preoperative CT revealed discontinuous OALL at C4-5,
postoperative recurrence caused by instability at C4-5 was thought to be a possible sequel after resection of OALL alone. Hwang et al20
suggested considering a surgical strategy using a solid fusion procedure after osteophytectomy in order to prevent segmental instability and
recurrence. In the present case, preoperative CT and MRI revealed not only OALL at C4-5 but also a continuous type OPLL at C2-6 with
apparent spinal cord compression at C4-5 that caused mild cervical myelopathy. Simple resection of OALL by the anterior approach may lead to
deterioration of cervical myelopathy due to subsequent segmental instability. In general, the corpectomy by the anterior approach is
recommended for segmental type OPLL, but it has limited indication for continuous OPLL. Although anterior spinal fusion by plate system is
one of the surgical options, the cervical alignment change during surgery may increase spinal cord compression at C4-5. Moreover, mechanical
irritation by an implant may cause chronic inflammation leading to perforation of the inherently fragile esophagus wall. Therefore, we
believe that the patient reported here required not only osteophytectomy and fusion by the anterior approach but also decompression and
spinal fusion by the posterior approach to prevent both deterioration of cervical myelopathy and recurrence of OALL after surgery. Following
the surgery, dysphagia considerably improved. Although 1-year follow-up period is relatively short, we predict that clinical condition at 1
year should be stable thereafter based on the clinical course and image findings showing solid fusion at the fusion site. In conclusion, the
simultaneous occurrence of DISH, OALL, and OPLL has been reported previously; however, a DISH patient who had cervical myelopathy due to
OPLL that coexisted with a symptomatic OALL is uncommon. Therefore, planning of surgical treatment should be made based on all pathologies
of DISH, OALL, and OPLL. Abbreviations: CT = computed tomography, DISH = diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis, MRI = magnetic resonance
imaging, OALL = ossification of the anterior longitudinal ligament, OPLL = ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament. The authors
have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
