Crystal-induced arthritis of the lateral atlantoaxial joint may be intimately involved in acute neck pain in the elderly. Patients typically
have a good prognosis, and symptoms usually subside within a few weeks. On the other hand, septic arthritis of the lateral atlantoaxial
joint requires early diagnosis and antibiotic treatment. Diagnostic delay is a risk factor for an unfavorable outcome of vertebral
osteomyelitis. Even though septic arthritis of the lateral atlantoaxial joint is a very rare clinical entity, it is important to
differentiate septic arthritis from crystal-induced arthritis. A 53-year-old Japanese man presented with neck pain, stiffness, and loss of
power of his left upper extremity which started 20 days before his visit to our hospital. A physical examination revealed a limited range of
motion of his neck, with rotation being especially very restricted. Atlantoaxial subluxation was seen on plain radiography of his cervical
spine. During puncture of the lateral atlantoaxial joint, clear yellow fluid was collected. Cultures later grew methicillin-sensitive
Staphylococcus aureus. He was diagnosed with septic arthritis of the lateral atlantoaxial joint with atlantoaxial subluxation. After
diagnosis, intravenous administration of antibiotics was begun. The atlantoaxial region was stabilized with the Brooks procedure. Plain
radiography showed complete bone union 8 months after operation. At a follow-up evaluation 7 years after initial onset, he had complete
relief of neck pain, and there were no neurological abnormalities. A patient with septic arthritis of the lateral atlantoaxial joint with
subluxation presenting with acute neck pain was successfully treated with antibiotics and fusion surgery. In patients with persistent neck
pain, septic arthritis of the lateral atlantoaxial joint should be considered and further examinations performed. Crystal-induced arthritis
of the lateral atlantoaxial joint may be intimately involved in acute neck pain in the elderly . Patients typically have a good prognosis,
and symptoms usually subside within a few weeks. On the other hand, septic arthritis of the lateral atlantoaxial joint requires early
diagnosis and antibiotic treatment . Diagnostic delay is a risk factor for an unfavorable outcome of vertebral osteomyelitis . Even though
septic arthritis of the lateral atlantoaxial joint is a very rare clinical entity, it is important to differentiate septic arthritis from
crystal-induced arthritis. Atlantoaxial subluxation associated with infection at the pharynx and its surrounding tissues is called Grisel’s
syndrome . Grisel’s syndrome has also been described in association with postoperative inflammation in surgical conditions such as
tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy, in which a clear infective factor is not always proved [8, 9]. The majority of reported cases occurred in
patients under 21 years of age ; it is rare in adults . The purpose of this paper is to report an extremely uncommon case of septic
arthritis of the lateral atlantoaxial joint with subluxation, along with its clinical and imaging features. A 53-year-old Japanese man
presented with neck pain, stiffness, and discomfort of his left upper extremity which started 20 days before his visit to our hospital. He
was referred to our department for detailed examination of prolonged neck pain. At initial onset of his neck pain he had high fever. He had
not been exposed to tuberculosis and had no history of recent head or neck injuries or diabetes mellitus. A physical examination revealed a
limited range of motion of his neck, with rotation being especially very restricted. His motor strength and sensory functioning of upper and
lower extremities were unremarkable, but he had hyperreflexia of biceps tendon reflex, triceps tendon reflex, patellar tendon reflex and
Achilles tendon reflex. Atlantoaxial subluxation was seen on plain radiography of his cervical spine (Fig. 1). Computed tomography (CT)
showed erosive changes of the bilateral lateral masses of the atlas (Fig. 2). Sagittal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies showed cord
compression due to a mass around the dens (Fig. 3a, b). Axial MRI studies showed heterogeneously low signal intensity around the left
lateral atlantoaxial joint on T1-weighted imaging (Fig. 3c) and high signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging (Fig. 3d).Fig. 1Plain lateral
radiograph on admission. The atlantoaxial distance is 7mm (bidirectional arrow)Fig. 2Computed tomography on admission. Erosive changes of
the bilateral lateral masses of the atlas (open arrows) are visibleFig. 3Magnetic resonance imaging on admission. Sagittal imaging (a, b)
shows cord compression due to a pseudotumor around the dens (open arrow). Axial imaging shows heterogeneously low signal intensity around
the left lateral atlantoaxial joint on T1-weighted imaging (c, arrows) and high signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging (d, arrows) Plain
lateral radiograph on admission. The atlantoaxial distance is 7mm (bidirectional arrow) Computed tomography on admission. Erosive changes of
the bilateral lateral masses of the atlas (open arrows) are visible Magnetic resonance imaging on admission. Sagittal imaging (a, b) shows
cord compression due to a pseudotumor around the dens (open arrow). Axial imaging shows heterogeneously low signal intensity around the left
lateral atlantoaxial joint on T1-weighted imaging (c, arrows) and high signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging (d, arrows) He was admitted
to our hospital 6 weeks after onset of symptoms because his severe neck pain continued. Laboratory examinations at admission showed a white
blood cell count of 8200 per mm3 (normal range, 3500 to 9300 per mm3), C-reactive protein of 2.0mg/dL (normal range, 0 to 0.3mg/dL), and an
erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 42mm/hour (normal range, 2 to 10mm/hour). Inflammatory disease such as rheumatoid arthritis or crowned
dens syndrome (CDS) was considered, and atlantoaxial arthrography was performed. His lateral atlantoaxial joint was punctured under X-ray
fluoroscopy. He was placed in a prone position on a fluoroscopic table. Using a block needle, the anterior third of the lateral atlantoaxial
joint was punctured. During puncture of the lateral atlantoaxial joint, clear yellow fluid was collected. Radiopaque contrast did not go
around the dens (Fig. 4). Cultures later grew methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA). Histological findings showed no crystals,
including calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate. He was finally diagnosed with septic arthritis of the lateral atlantoaxial joint with
atlantoaxial subluxation.Fig. 4Anterior-posterior (a) and lateral (b) radiography after radiopaque contrast is injected to lateral
atlantoaxial joint. Radiopaque contrast did not go around the dens Anterior-posterior (a) and lateral (b) radiography after radiopaque
contrast is injected to lateral atlantoaxial joint. Radiopaque contrast did not go around the dens After diagnosis, intravenous
administration of cefazolin sodium hydrate was begun. Although laboratory data improved 1 week after intravenous administration of
antibiotics, his neck pain and stiffness continued. The atlantoaxial region was stabilized with the Brooks procedure , including fusion with
a bone transplant from his left pelvis, together with wire fixation of the dorsal parts of C1 and C2. Intravenous administration of
cefazolin sodium hydrate continued for 3 weeks, followed by oral antibiotics of cefditoren pivoxil for another 3 weeks. His postoperative
course was unremarkable. His neck pain decreased and laboratory data normalized 3 weeks after operation. Plain radiography showed complete
bone union 8 months after the operation. At a follow-up evaluation 7 years after initial onset, he had complete relief of neck pain, and
there were no neurological abnormalities. Plain radiography revealed complete bone union (Fig. 5).Fig. 5Plain radiography 7 years after
operation. Plain lateral radiography shows complete bone union (arrows) Plain radiography 7 years after operation. Plain lateral radiography
shows complete bone union (arrows) Pyogenic infection of the cervical spine has been reported to account for 3 to 20% of all spinal
infections . Many cases of upper cervical osteomyelitis are associated with osteomyelitis of the odontoid process . To the best of our
knowledge, only four cases of septic arthritis of the C1–C2 lateral atlantoaxial joint have been reported in the English literature .
Atlantoaxial subluxation associated with infection at the pharynx and its surrounding tissues is called Grisel’s syndrome . Grisel’s
syndrome has also been described in association with postoperative inflammation in surgical conditions such as tonsillectomy and
adenoidectomy, in which a clear infective factor is not always proved [8, 9]. The majority of reported cases occurred in patients under 21
years of age ; it is rare in adults . The pathogenetic features are still unclear. Decalcification of the vertebra and loosening of the
atlantoaxial ligament caused by local infection-related hyperemia are suspected to lead to atlantoaxial subluxation . Septic arthritis of
the atlantoaxial joint may cause decalcification of the vertebra and loosening of the atlantoaxial ligament. This is the first report of
atlantoaxial subluxation associated with infection at the atlantoaxial joint. Acute neck pain is often caused by crystal-induced arthritis
of the lateral atlantoaxial joint or CDS in the elderly. Vertebral osteomyelitis of the upper cervical spine is very important in the
differential diagnosis of crystal-induced arthritis, because early diagnosis is needed for an optimal outcome of vertebral osteomyelitis.
Diagnostic delay is an independent risk factor for an unfavorable outcome . In both crystal-induced arthritis and septic arthritis, patients
complain of neck stiffness and pain. Patients with crystal-induced arthritis of the lateral atlantoaxial joint typically have a self-limited
course, and symptoms usually subside within a few weeks without any aggressive treatment. The time required for the resolution of symptoms
in CDS is within 9 days . In septic arthritis, on the other hand, symptoms continue for several months and worsen without appropriate
treatment . If severe neck pain continues, osteomyelitis of the cervical region should be considered in the differential diagnosis. On CT,
bone destruction was seen in the present patient with septic arthritis, while calcification around the dens is seen in most cases of
crystal-induced arthritis of the lateral atlantoaxial joint . MRI is the preferred imaging method because of the excellent soft tissue
contrast that is achievable. A lateral atlantoaxial joint effusion was visible in the present patient with septic arthritis, but soft tissue
swelling or joint effusion is not seen in crystal-induced arthritis of the lateral atlantoaxial joint (Table 1) .Table 1Comparison of
crystal-induced arthritis and septic arthritis of the lateral atlantoaxial jointCrystal-induced arthritisSeptic arthritisNeck
painSevereSevereSymptom duration from onsetResolves within 9 daysPersists for several months without appropriate treatmentComputed
tomographyCalcification around the densBone destruction of C1 and/or C2Magnetic resonance imagingNo marked changesJoint
effusionPrognosisGoodPoor without appropriate treatment Comparison of crystal-induced arthritis and septic arthritis of the lateral
atlantoaxial joint Puncture of the lateral atlantoaxial joint is the most effective diagnostic method, although it is thought to be
dangerous . In this case, a lateral approach was used, and the fluid collected showed MSSA infection on culture. Surgery is needed if
instability remains . It is possible that this case might have been treated without surgery because cord compression was not very severe.
However, stabilization with instrumentation is a safe and effective treatment for pyogenic osteomyelitis [25, 32–34]. In this case,
immobilization surgery was chosen because symptoms remained after conservative treatment, and hyperreflexia developed. There are several
methods to stabilize the atlantoaxial joint [12, 35–37]. Posterior wiring fixation techniques are not as rigid as posterior atlantoaxial
transarticular screw fixation technique or C1-lateral mass screws combined with C2-pedicle screws technique . The use of spinal
instrumentation in the infection site has been controversial. In the present case, posterior wiring fixation techniques were considered safe
because the wires were placed far from the infected lateral atlantoaxial joint. Posterior atlantoaxial transarticular screw fixation
technique or C1-lateral mass screws combined with C2-pedicle screws technique have a risk of penetrating the lateral atlantoaxial joint.
This case was successfully treated with posterior wiring fixation techniques and antibiotics. Complete bone fusion was achieved after 8
months, and there was no recurrence for 7 years. A patient with septic arthritis of the lateral atlantoaxial joint with subluxation
presenting with acute neck pain was successfully treated with antibiotics and fusion surgery. If neck pain continues, septic arthritis of
the lateral atlantoaxial joint should be considered, and further examinations are needed. Written, informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. Crowned dens syndrome Computed tomography Magnetic resonance imaging Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus
Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions TK was the major contributor in
writing the manuscript. NM, EA, TA, KK, and YS supervised the whole work. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors
wish to thank Mamiko Kondo and Sachie Miura for their valuable assistance with the editing of this manuscript.
