Whipple’s disease is a rare, often multisystemic chronic infectious disease caused by the rod-shaped bacterium Tropheryma whipplei. Very
rarely the heart is involved in the process of the disease, leading to culture-negative infective endocarditis. Up to 20 % of all infective
endocarditis are blood culture-negative and therefore a diagnostic challenge. We present two unusual cases of culture-negative infective
endocarditis encountered in two different patients with prior history of arthralgia. A history of rheumatic arthritis or even a transient
arthralgia should put Tropheryma whipplei on the top of differentials in patients of this age group presenting with culture-negative
infective endocarditis, especially in cases of therapy resistance to antirheumatic agents. The first patient was a 55 year-old Caucasian
male with culture-negative Whipple-related adhesive pericarditis and endocarditis of the aortic valve. Importantly, the patient reported a
15-year history of therapy resistant sero-negative migratory polyarthritis. Aortic valve endocarditis developed during treatment with
tocilizumab. The second patient was a 65-year-old male patient with no prior history of the classic Whipple’s disease who presented with a
culture-negative aortic valve endocarditis. His past medical history revealed episodes of transient arthralgia, which he was not treated for
however, due to the self-limiting nature of the symptoms. Both patients underwent aortic valve replacement surgery. During surgery,
pericardectomy was necessary in the first patient due to adhesive pericarditis. Post surgery both patients were started on long-term
treatment with trimetoprim-sulfamethoxazol. At 1-year follow-up of both patients, echocardiographic and clinical assessment revealed no
signs of persistent infection. Both men reported negative history of arthralgia during the one year period post surgery. Tropheryma whipplei
culture negative-infective endocarditis is an emerging clinical entity, predominantly found in middle-aged and older men with a history of
arthralgia. These data highlight the need for ruling out Whipple’s disease in patients with a history of arthralgia prior to initiation of
biological agents in treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. There is also a need to assess for Tropheryma whipplei in all patients with culture-
negative infective endocarditis. Whipple’s disease is a rare, often multisystemic chronic infectious disease caused by the rod-shaped
bacterium Tropheryma whipplei . A symptomatic disease only develops in patients with partially defined immunologic defects, i.e.,
Th1/Th2-imbalances . The disease classically manifests with diarrhea, weight-loss and arthropathy. Cardiac involvement is rarely part of the
primary syndrome . Blood cultures may be negative in Whipple’s endocarditis . Other manifestations of Whipple’s disease are frequently
absent in patients with Whipple’s endocarditis . However, with the availability of molecular diagnostic tools such as polymerase chain
reaction (PCR), more cases are increasingly recognized [5, 6]. The increased recognition rate led to the insight that Whipple’s endocarditis
can occur without other classical manifestations of Whipple’s disease . In Germany, the reported incidence rate for T. whipplei endocarditis
is about 6 % of all infectious cases: T. whipplei was the fourth most frequent pathogen found among 255 cases of endocarditis with an
etiologic diagnosis and was the most common pathogen associated with blood culture–negative endocarditis . A 55-year old Caucasian male
presented with progressive muscle weakness, unintended weight-loss over a period of 6 months, malaise and exercise dependent dyspnea over a
period of 4 weeks. He denied fever or chills but reported episodic light-headedness and shortness of breath. Holter ECG revealed
intermittent second and third degree atrio ventricular block. Significant in his past medical history was a 15-year intermittent joint
swelling and early morning stiffness, affecting predominantly both ankle joints and the wrists, which led to the diagnosis of sero-negative
rheumatoid arthritis. Therapeutic trials with different antirheumatic agents including Methotrexate, Adalimumab, Cyclosporin A, Etanercept
and lastly Tocilizumab did not lead to any sustainable remission. Prior to diagnosis of aortic valve endocarditis he was receiving 10 mg
prednisolon orally daily, with moderate success. A positive quantiferon-TB test was reported 1 year prior to current admission. At that
time, despite lacking clinical signs of active tuberculosis, Isoniazid and Rifampicin therapy was initiated, but stopped shortly thereafter
due to severe adverse effects on the patient. Until the current admission, he remained without obvious clinical signs of active
tuberculosis. Complete laboratory panels on admission revealed C-reactive protein 90 mg/l, leucocytes count 13 × 10 9/l and procalcitonin
0.11 g/l. No anemia or elevated markers of myocardial ischemia and liver pathology were apparent. On physical examination, a 3/6 early
diastolic decrescendo murmur best heard at the left intercostal space was appreciated. A chest radiograph showed mild cardiomegaly and
pulmonary edema. Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiograms demonstrated 13 × 10 mm mobile aortic valve vegetations on the
ventricular surface of the aortic valve and severe aortic regurgitation (Fig. 1a). Because of six negative blood cultures, a presumptive
diagnosis of culture-negative aortic and mitral valve endocarditis was made and empiric antibiotic therapy with ampicillin/sulbactam and
gentamycin was started. Expedited indication for aortic valve replacement surgery was made and the patient was transferred to the heart
surgery unit for operation, which was carried out 2 days later.Fig. 1 a–d: Whipple endocarditis and pericarditis in a 55-year old patient.
a. TEE showing a severe degenerative aortic valve and aortic valve vegetations with aortic regurgitation III°. b. Severely degenerative and
calcific aortic disease with chronic ulcerations (Pas, 2x, inset: hematoxillin&eosin, 2x). *labels the area visualized in 1C. c.
Demonstration of Pas-reactive foamy macrophages, which contained T. whipplei particles. Note: the macrophages are seen in relation to
capillaries (Pas, 100x, inset: Pas, 10x). d. Pericardium with extensive sclerosis and calcification (hematoxillin&eosin, 2x) a–d: Whipple
endocarditis and pericarditis in a 55-year old patient. a. TEE showing a severe degenerative aortic valve and aortic valve vegetations with
aortic regurgitation III°. b. Severely degenerative and calcific aortic disease with chronic ulcerations (Pas, 2x, inset:
hematoxillin&eosin, 2x). *labels the area visualized in 1C. c. Demonstration of Pas-reactive foamy macrophages, which contained T. whipplei
particles. Note: the macrophages are seen in relation to capillaries (Pas, 100x, inset: Pas, 10x). d. Pericardium with extensive sclerosis
and calcification (hematoxillin&eosin, 2x) He underwent tissue aortic valve replacement and intrasurgical transaortic direct visualization
of the mitral valve. The mitral valve was merely mildly degenerative but competent and without evidence of endocarditis. After sternotomy,
the pericardial tissue was found to be predominantly adherent to the epicard, requiring extensive adhesiolysis before installation of the
heart lung machine. The aortic valve was severely degenerated and calcified. At first, no macroscopic evidence of endocarditis was noticed.
However, free floating vegetation was visualized on the subvalvular surface of the aortic valve attached between the left and right
commissural junction. Specimens from both the aortic valve and pericardium were taken for microbiological and histopathological analysis.
Otherwise, surgery progressed without complications and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for overnight monitoring. The
antibiotic treatment regimen was complemented with vancomycin and rifampicin prior to surgery and was continued until the fourth post
surgical day. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) results revealed Tropheryma whipplei as the causative agent. This was confirmed by
histopathological visualization of PAS and CD-68 positive macrophages on both aortic and pericardial tissues (Fig. 1b–d). A diagnosis-
adapted scheme of the antibiotic regimen was immediately installed, comprising ceftriaxon (4 weeks), meropenem (14 days), and
Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazol, which was to be continued for 1–2 years depending on clinical and paraclinical response to this therapy
regimen. In-hospital stay was prolonged due to persistent grade III° atrial ventricular block necessitating transvenous implantation of a
DDD-pacemaker on the 7th post-surgical day. Then, the patient was transferred to a neighboring primary care center for further intravenous
antibiotic treatment and monitoring before starting three weeks of rehabilitation. At one-year follow-up, prednisolon dosage has been
tapered and therapy terminated, without current clinical evidence of active arthritis. Regular echocardiographic and clinical evaluation
remained stable and positive except for a persistent CRP values ranging between 10 and 25 mg/l but normal leucocytes. Gastroenteroscopic
biopsy analysis revealed no evidence of persistent Whipple’s disease. Continued regular echocardiographic and clinical check-ups remain
imperative for this patient. Histologic examination of the resected aortic valve showed a severely degenerative calcific valvular disease
with a chronic resorptive inflammation and superficial chronic erosions and ulcerations (Fig. 1b). With PAS reagent, foamy macrophages with
granular intracellular PAS positive material, characteristic of T. whipplei infection, were demonstrated (Fig. 1c). Separately submitted
pericardial tissue showed a severely sclerosed pericardium with multiple calcifications (Fig. 1d). There was only a mild chronic
inflammation present, but foamy macrophages with typical PAS-positive inclusions indicating the presence of T. whipplei could also be
demonstrated. Processing of blood cultures followed the established standards of the German Society for Hygiene and Microbiology (DGHM). The
microbiology laboratory of the Rostock University Medicine is accredited according to DIN EN ISO 15183 for these tests as well as for the
subsequently described PCR examinations. DNA extraction was performed with the Qiagen DNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) according to
the manufacturer’s protocol. Nucleic acid concentration was measured using a biophotometer (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). For 16S rDNA PCR
primers 16S8_27 and 16S_907 and polymerase moltaq (molzym) was utilized [7, 8]. The following reaction conditions were chosen: (i) 15 min at
94 °C; (ii) 30x [1 min at 94 °C, 1 min at 50 °C, 1 min at 72 °C]; (iii) 5 min at 72 °C [7, 8]. PCR products were determined by gel
electrophoresis, purified with the NAT CLEAN-UP/NUCLEOSPIN® EXTRACT II (Machery-Nagel, Düren, Germany) and subsequently sent to Microsynth
Sequencing Device (Göttingen, Germany) for the actual sequencing reaction. Sequence analysis was performed using NCBI nucleotide blast
search (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), resulting in identification of T. whipplei. A 65-year- old male patient presented to his family
physician for routine check-up with feelings of exhaustion over the previous 2- months, mild exercise induced dyspnea and occasional
palpitations. On cardiac auscultation a 2/6 early diastolic decrescendo murmur best heard at the third left intercostals space radiating
along the left sternal border was appreciated. He reported yearly travel to Denmark and Sweden for the purpose of holidays, but denied any
close contact to livestock, pets or poultry. Laboratory test on admission revealed 9 × 10 /L white blood cells, 31 mg/l c-reactive protein
and 0.074 ng/ml procalcitonin respectively. All other laboratory values including haemoglobin, liver and renal parameters were within normal
range. A chest x-ray film revealed bilateral accentuated perihilar haze and mild cardiomegaly. Abdominal sonography only revealed a mild
splenomegaly. Transthoracic echocardiographic exploration revealed 1 cm × 1 cm vegetation over aortic surface of the aortic valve
(Fig. 2a–b). Aortic regurgitation grade III° with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (40 %) was also appreciated. He was started on
a triple antibiotic combination of Rifampicin (2 × 600 mg i.v., Gentamicin i.v. according to blood levels and Sulbactam/Ampicilin 2 × 3 g
i.v.). Two sets of blood cultures remained negative. During surgery for aortic valve replacement, all valve leaflets with exception of the
valve ring were involved in the endocarditic process, with severe destruction of all valves. Indication for a 21 mm trifecta tissue valve
(St Paul, Minn) was made after excision of the diseased valve. Post surgery the patient was transferred to the ICU and after an
uncomplicated ICU stay he was transferred to the normal ward. Further hospitalisation was uncomplicated and the patient was discharged to
our cardiology unit on the 7th day post surgery. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) results 10 days post surgery revealed Tropheryma whipplei
as the causative agent. This was confirmed by histopathological visualization of Periodic Acid Schiff (PAS) and CD-68 positive macrophages
on the aortic tissues (Fig. 2c–d). A diagnosis-adapted scheme of the antibiotic regimen was immediately installed comprising ceftriaxon
(4 weeks), meropenem (14 days), and Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazol, which was to be continued for 2 years depending on clinical and
paraclinical response to this therapy regimen. At 6-month- follow up, echocardiographic and clinical evaluation remained stable with normal
infective parameters. During the six-month follow- up post surgery, the patient revealed that prior to his hospitalization for endocarditis
treatment he had experienced 4 episodes of self-limiting polyarthralgia involving his toes, ankles and fingers of over a period of two
years. Though he sought a medical attention, it was neither treated nor followed up extensively due to its self-limiting nature, lasting
only a couple of days with mild swelling of the involved joints. He reported complete remission since surgery and ongoing treatment of
infective endocarditis. Gastroenteroscopic biopsy analysis was pre and post operatively not necessary due to absent gastro intestinal
symptoms in our patient, in particular: no weight loss or diarrhea was reported. Continued regular echocardiographic and clinical check-ups
remain imperative for this patient.Fig. 2 a–d: Whipple endocarditis in a 65- year- old patient. a/b. TEE displaying degenerative aortic
valve with vegetations. b. Mild degenerative aortic valve changes with pronounced edema, fibrin insudation and superficial collections of
foamy macrophages (haematoxillin&eosin, 4x). d. Demonstration of Pas-reactive foamy macrophages, which contained T. whipplei particles (Pas,
20x) a–d: Whipple endocarditis in a 65- year- old patient. a/b. TEE displaying degenerative aortic valve with vegetations. b. Mild
degenerative aortic valve changes with pronounced edema, fibrin insudation and superficial collections of foamy macrophages
(haematoxillin&eosin, 4x). d. Demonstration of Pas-reactive foamy macrophages, which contained T. whipplei particles (Pas, 20x) Histologic
examination of the submitted specimen showed severely degenerative calcific valvular disease with a chronic resorptive inflammation
(Fig. 2c–d). With PAS reagent, foamy macrophages with granular intracellular PAS positive material, characteristic of T. whipplei infection,
were demonstrated (Fig. 2c–d). DNA analysis performed as stated above revealed T. whipplei as causative agent. Whipple’s disease is a rare
chronic, often multisystemic disease, which was first described by George Hoyt Whipple in 1907 . But, it was only after 1992 that the
causative agent, a rod-shaped, gram-positive bacterium, Tropheryma whipplei, was identified by sequencing its ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene . In
spite of its bacterial etiology, Whipple’s disease is a non-readily-contagious condition, which mainly affects patients with a Th1/Th2
imbalance . Chronic asymptomatic carriage of T. whipplei has been found in stool specimen of human, especially those exposed to sewage water
. However, the infectious potential of Tropheryma whipplei is a moot point . There is evidence that person-to-person close contacts either
by faeco-oral or by oral to oral routes support bacterial transmission . General hygiene practices to prevent faeco-oral transmission are
therefore highly recommended for vulnerable population groups, since predisposing immunologic or genetic factors would favour development of
Whipple’s disease in the long run [14, 15]. After contamination, patients may develop acute infection with specific antibody response.
Thereafter, two principal ways of dealing with the infectious agent are envisioned: patients displaying a strong immune response and
harbouring specific antibodies for at least 5 years eventually eliminate T. whipplei from their intestines, while patients developing no or
only a minor antibody response will suffer from subacute or chronic infections, including classic Whipple’s disease . Whipple’s disease has
a variable symptomology, explainable by T. whipplei invasion into various tissues and subsequent incorporation by tissue macrophages, which
are unable to eliminate the bacteria . In Whipple’s endocarditis, the infection is slowly progressive, similar to that seen in Q fever and
bartonellosis-induced culture-negative endocarditis, and a prominent fibrosis with mild chronic inflammation is seen histopathologically .
In most cases, the cardinal features, i.e., diarrhea, weight loss and arthralgia are present. However, in the absence of this symptom-
complex, diagnosis may be extremely difficult, elusive and delayed due to the absence of an easily available and reliable serological or
molecular method to detect this microorganism in blood [17, 18]. Infective endocarditis during classical Whipple’s trio (arthropathy,
weight-loss and diarrhea) due to T. whipplei is rare and its diagnosis could be difficult if it presents without any prior history
suggesting Whipple’s disease, in which case blood cultures remain negative [18, 19]. Most information on this entity has accrued from
occasional case reports and case series . In fact, the prevalence of infective endocarditis due to T. whippelei could be higher in patients
treated for culture-negative endocarditis . In contrast to previous reports, Geiβdörfer et al. found T. whipplei to be the fourth most
frequent cause of bacterial endocarditis (6.3 %) and the most frequent cause of culture-negative endocarditis [18, 19]. Out of 16 patients
with Tropheryma whipplei endocarditis, 14 lacked gastrointestinal symptoms prior to surgical treatment . According to Fenollar et al., the
following characteristics may aid in the recognition of possible Whipple associated infective endocarditis in the absence of classical
diagnostic criteria: T. whipplei endocarditis occurs mainly in Caucasian men, who are about 50 years of age with cardial symptoms such as
heart failure, acute ischemic stroke and peripheral arterial embolism . These patients might have complained about arthralgia for several
years and might have recently received immunosuppressants . Arthralgia might be subtle and is only noticed after a careful clinical
investigation . They strongly suggested inquiring for the presence of arthralgia since the combination of infective endocarditis and
arthralgia suggests T. whipplei infection . This is in line with the history of our first patient, as we observed a possible association
between exposure to certain immune-modulatory agents and exacerbation of otherwise under diagnosed Whipple’s disease. Our patient had sero-
negative rheumatoid arthritis for approximately 15 years and only complained of unintended weight loss over a period of 6 months prior to
diagnosis of infective endocarditis. No other symptoms were recorded, until infective endocarditis struck. The second patient reported none
of the symptoms that would suggest T. whipplei involvement in his ailment. However, during follow up at 1-year post surgery, a comprehensive
interview revealed that the patient had a benign, self limiting arthralgia, which was not medically attended to, due to the subtle nature of
his symptoms. So far, little attention has been given to consequences of T. whipplei infection exacerbation during therapy with biological
agents, a potentially fatal coincidence. Table 1 presents reported cases and case series of patients with symptoms initially misinterpreted
until clinical deterioration under various immune-modulatory agents, especially TNFα antagonists, facilitating a more fulminant course of T.
whipplei infection .Table 1Reports indicating alteration of the course of subacute Whipple’s disease during therapy with biological
agentsNr.Reports Indicating Potential Fatal Complications Of Biological Therapy During Sero-negative Rheumatoid Arthritis.AuthorJournalYr of
PubNr. of Pat.Initial symptoms/DurationTherapyResultsConclusion/FindingMahnel R. et al.Am. J. Gastroenterol.200527Immunosuppressiva lead to
earlier onset of diarrheaKneitz C. et al.Scand. J. Rheumatol.20051Infliximab/MTXRapid weight loss Erythema nodosum diarrhea LN enlargement
sigmoido-vesical fistulaInfliximab seems to increase the risk of exacerbation of WDRazonable R.R. et al.Transpl. Infect. Dis.20081Kidney
Transplant and migratory poly arthritis, weight loss, GIT-symptoms for yearsAzathioprim/PrednisonChorioretinitis and VitreitisTropheryma
whipplei DNA in vitrous fluid and peripheral bloodKremer AE. et al.Z. Gastroenterolog.20081SNRA/4 yrsAdalimumab/LeflunomidSeptic fever
severe arthralgia weight lossImmunmodulatory therapies, TNF blockers and Corticosteroids may lead to exercerbation of subacute, undiagnosed
Whipples DiseaseSpoerl D. et al.Orphanet. J. Rare Dis.20091Multisegment spondylitisTNF-aWorsening back painTNF-a treatment worsened
spondylodiscitis, leading to diagnosis of T. Whipplei from rebiopsy of vertebral specimenLagier J-C et al.Medicine20101135 of 16 patients
with endocarditis as initial symptoms had immunosuppressive treatmentCorticosteroids 50 (43 %) TNF-a antagonists 16 (14 %) Others 16 (14 %)
Previous immuno suppressive Treatment 56 (50 %)32 patients (28 %) experienced aggravation of various symptoms after immunosuppressive
therapyPatients with inflammatory rheumatoid disease who experience severe general involvment should be screened for T. Whippelii or the
therapy is inneffective against polyarthritisHoppe E. et al.Joint bone Spine20105RA(2), AS(2), SA(1)TNF a antagonistsFailure to control the
disease and other symptomsBiological therapy probably worsened pre existing whipples diseaseVancsa A et al.Joint Bone Spine20101Seronegative
OligoarthritisEterneceptEndocarditisDMARDs resistant arthritis should prompt thourough search T.whippelii prior to initiation of TNF-a
antagonistsHmamouci I et al.J. Rheumatol.20101Ankylosing spondylitisEterneceptScurvyEternecept probably modified the cytokine environment
and thus favoured exercerbation of whipples diseaseDaien C.I. et al.Rheumatology20101B-27- negative Ankylosing
spondylitisEterneceptEndocarditisReport of the first case of t. Whippeliis endocarditis, potentially induced by TNF-a antagonist
therapyGaddy J.R.Rheumatology20121Back pain; ArthritisVarious TNF a InhibitorsFever, migratory arthritisClinical deterioration despite TNF a
antagonists lead to thorough search and T. Whipelli was foundSparsa L et al.La Revue de medecine interne20132Spondyloarthritis (both
patients)Eternecept/adalimumab (Both patients)peristent elevated acute phase reactantsWhipples disease should be suspected in patients with
treated with TNF a antagonists who do not improve during inflammatory rheumatismMarth T.World J. Cardiol.201441vs 61vs1059ArthritisTNF-a/41
patients12.2 % vs 1.6 % vs 0.16 % endocarditis ratesTNF-a triggered severe whipples disease complications particularly endocarditisMarth
T.Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther.201541Arthritis, weight-loss, DiarrheaVarious TNF-a InhibitorsFever, septic temperatures (n, 16), Tropheryma
whipplei septicemia (n, 6), Endocarditis (n, 5) etc.In case of doubt, Whipples disease should be excluded before therapy with TNF-a Reports
indicating alteration of the course of subacute Whipple’s disease during therapy with biological agents We strongly advocate intensive
search for a potential occult Whipple’s disease in patients with therapy resistant sero-negative rheumatoid arthritis prior to introduction
of immune modulatory therapies. T. whipplei should always be ruled out in patients who present with unexplained transient arthralgia
irrespective of duration, frequency and severity. Exacerbation of subacute Whipple’s disease should be added to the list of possible side
effects of therapy with these agents, especially TNFα antagonists. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication
of the Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal.
Ankylosing spondylitis Central nervous system Disease-modifying anti rheumatic drugs Gastrointestinal tract Lymph node Non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drug publication Rheumatoid arthritis Spondylarthritis Seronegative rheumatoid arthritis year Competing interests The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions AA and AZ drafted the manuscript and collected clinical data. KK and
AP carried out microbiological analysis including PCR and sequencing analysis and drafted part of the manuscript. BW and GS participated in
coordination and design of the study. AO and AE carried out the histological analysis and participated in the design of the study. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank Dr. B. Weiss and Dr. J. Wendeborn for taking care of the patients both during their
hospital-stay and follow up.
