Mycobacterium lentiflavum (M. lentiflavum), a slow growing nontuberculous mycobacterium (NTM), has recently been described as an emerging
human pathogen regardless of the immune status of the host. Previous reports have demonstrated that cervical lymphadenitis of children is
the most frequent pathology of M. lentiflavum. However, there are little reports regarding pulmonary diseases by M. lentiflavum specifically
in immunocompetent patients. A 60-year-old man having prolonged productive cough and dyspnea with fever was initially diagnosed as pneumonia
with parapneumonic effusion. Imaging studies showed that the radiologic abnormality was acute bronchopneumonic infiltration with abscess
formation in the left lower lobe and parapneumonic pleural effusion. M. lentiflavum was identified in the cultured pleural tissues. On the
basis of these findings, he was diagnosed as pulmonary infection and pleurisy caused by M. lentiflavum, which was treated with a combination
of antibiotics covering NTM. His clinical manifestations were dramatically improved by the treatment targeting NTM, while those were
refractory to empirical antibiotic therapy. In this report, we introduce the isolation of M. lentiflavum from pleural tissues associated
with acute necrotizing pneumonia combined with parapneumonic effusion in an immunocompetent host, suggesting that the M. lentiflavum can be
a human pathogen invovled in pulmonary infectious diseases and pleurisy with poor response to empirical antibiotic treatment. Mycobacterium
lentiflavum (M. lentiflavum), one of slowly growing nontuberculous mycobacterium (NTM), was first identified in 1996 as a distinct strain .
This strain is characterized by slow growth of tiny yellow colonies and has biochemical characteristics identical to the Mycobacterium avium
complex (MAC). In addition, mycolic acid and fatty acid chromatography patterns are very similar to those of Mycobacterium simiae . Thus,
the identification of M. lentiflavum is usually confirmed through genetic analysis. Because like other NTM, M. lentiflavum is often isolated
fortuitously, the clinical significance must be carefully considered. Recently several cases of human diseases caused by M. lentiflavum have
been reported, including cervical lymphadenitis, fatal disseminated infection, ascites, soft tissue, liver abscess, and pulmonary infection
in immunocompetent and immunosuppressed patients . However, there are few reports on M. lentiflavum as a cause of pulmonary disease and to
date it has rarely been described in immunocompetent patients. Herein, we present a case of acute necrotizing pneumonia combined with
parapneumonic effusion caused by M. lentiflavum in an immunocompetent patient. A 60-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with fever,
chills, productive cough, and dyspnea for last two weeks, which had exacerbated for preceding three days despite taking oral antibiotics for
about 10 days. Since he had been diagnosed to have bronchial asthma three years ago, he had taken the combined inhaled medicine of
corticosteroid and a long-acting β2 agonist. However, he had no previous history of structural lung diseases including pulmonary
tuberculosis and immunocompromised disorders such as HIV infection. He was an ex-smoker with 20 pack/year smoking history and his occupation
was a farmer. On physical examination, inspiratory crackles were heard mainly on the left middle and lower lung fields. Chest radiography
showed pulmonary consolidation with air bronchogram in the left lower lobe, which also showed fluid shifting sign (Fig. 1a and b). Chest
computed tomography (CT) scan revealed bronchopneumonic infiltration with abscess formation in the left lower lobe, accompanying left
pleural effusion (Fig. 1c and d). Bacteriologic examinations including Gram stain with sputum, pleural fluids, and bronchial washing fluids
revealed no definitive causative organisms. Pleural tissues were also obtained through needle biopsy, in which the acute suppurative pleural
inflammatory reaction was found and some tissues were cultured to examine any bacterial or fungal growth. As a result, there was no evidence
of growth of bacteria or fungi for seven days they had been cultured.Fig. 1Chest X-ray and chest computed tomography (CT) findings in M.
lentiflavum-infected patient. Chest Radiography (a; posteroanterior view, b; left decubitus view) shows consolidative lesion in the left
lower lobe with fluid shifting sign. Chest CT scan revealed that solid consolidative lesion occupied the left lower lobe with air-
bronchogram (c and d). Despite of the antibiotics therapy, the radiologic features were aggravated showing abscess formation in the left
lower lobe, accompanying left pleural effusion and newly developed pneumonic infiltrative lesion on the right middle lobe (e and f) Chest
X-ray and chest computed tomography (CT) findings in M. lentiflavum-infected patient. Chest Radiography (a; posteroanterior view, b; left
decubitus view) shows consolidative lesion in the left lower lobe with fluid shifting sign. Chest CT scan revealed that solid consolidative
lesion occupied the left lower lobe with air-bronchogram (c and d). Despite of the antibiotics therapy, the radiologic features were
aggravated showing abscess formation in the left lower lobe, accompanying left pleural effusion and newly developed pneumonic infiltrative
lesion on the right middle lobe (e and f) Firstly, levofloxacin was prescribed as a single intravenous regimen. Up to hospital day 3,
however, his clinical manifestation did not respond to the antibiotic therapy and even worsened (Fig. 1e and f). We decided to change the
antibiotic regimen to aztreonam and metronidazole as a combination regimen. On hospital day 7, his symptoms including fever started to be
resolved and then followed by radiologic improvement on chest radiography. After his discharge, we got a final bacteriologic report
describing that M. lentiflavum was isolated from pleural specimen biopsied. The antibiotic regimen covering NTM (etambutol, ciprofloxacin,
rifabutin, and clarithromycin) was prescribed to him in out-patient department, and his remnant lesions kept being improved (Fig. 2a-c),
showing bronchiectasis and multiple smaller nodules of a tree-in-bud pattern in the left lingular segment and the left lower lobe (Fig. 2d
and e).Fig. 2Serial chest imaging findings in M. lentiflavum-infected patient. At 12 month follow-up, chest imaging studies revealed that
the previous lesions in both lungs were improved remarkably (a-c). In addition, serial chest CT scans showed the distinct bronchiectasis and
multiple small nodular lesions with a tree-in-bud pattern were scattered in the left lingular segment and the left lower lobe (d and e)
Serial chest imaging findings in M. lentiflavum-infected patient. At 12 month follow-up, chest imaging studies revealed that the previous
lesions in both lungs were improved remarkably (a-c). In addition, serial chest CT scans showed the distinct bronchiectasis and multiple
small nodular lesions with a tree-in-bud pattern were scattered in the left lingular segment and the left lower lobe (d and e) In 1959,
Runyon proposed the first classification system of mycobacteria in which, based on growth rates, colony morphology, and pigmentation in the
presence and absence of light, mycobacteria were divided into four groups of human pathogens; M. tuberculosis complex, M. leprae, slowly
growing NTM, and rapidly growing NTM . The NTM are usually acquired from environmental sources such as surface water, tap water, soil,
domestic and wild animals, milk, and food products. Though most species are less pathogenic or sporadic, they can, in broad terms, induce
four distinct clinical syndromes ; 1) Progressive pulmonary disease, especially in older persons with or without underlying lung disease. 2)
Superficial lymphadenitis, especially cervical lymphadenitis. 3) Disseminated disease in severely immunocompromised patients. 4) Skin and
soft tissue infection usually as a consequence of direct inoculation. Recently, with the availability of 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing and
high-performance liquid chromatography, and polymerase chain reaction-restriction length polymorphism analysis, the number of new species of
NTM including M. lentiflavum has risen dramatically [14, 15]. In fact, M. lentiflavum, one of slowly growing NTM, was first identified in a
cluster of 22 isolates . Among them, only one isolate from a vertebral disk in an elderly patient suffering from spondilodiscitis was
clinically significant. Since then, several cases of isolates from cervical lymphadenitis of very young children have been reported . Other
infected sites including pulmonary infection are less frequent [1, 4, 6–12]. Typically, pulmonary disease by NTM is characterized as chronic
progressive infectious one which develops both in healthy persons and in those with underlying pulmonary disorders or immunosuppressive
conditions. The clinical features may resemble slowly progressive pulmonary tuberculosis, which is often the initial diagnosis in patients
with positive results on acid fast bacilli (AFB) staining. Radiologic manifestations of pulmonary infection with NTM are various, to some
degree, non-specific including the formation of solitary or multiple nodules, chronic pneumonitis, bronchiectasis, cavitary formation, or a
combination of these features. Altogether, the diagnosis of pulmonary infection with NTM is extremely difficult due to several factors
involved; these are various clinical and radiologic manifestations, the frequent presence of significant prior pulmonary disease, and
harmless colonization of NTM in the lower respiratory tracts. According to American Thoracic Society (ATS)/ Infectious Diseases Society of
America (IDSA) guidelines, the diagnosis should be based on specific, validated criteria that emphasize a compatible clinical syndrome,
characteristic findings on chest X-ray or CT, and repeated isolation of NTM from the sputum or growth of NTM from a lung biopsy . Thus, in
cases with these typical radiologic findings but with negative results of routine sputum cultures for mycobacteria, physicians have been
subsequently recommended to perform bronchoscopy and transbronchial biopsy. To our knowledge, this report is the first case of acute
necrotizing pneumonia with pleurisy by M. lentiflavum in an immunocompetent patient without underlying pulmonary structural disorders. In
our case, a 60-year-old man having prolonged productive cough and dyspnea with fever was initially diagnosed as pneumonia with parapneumonic
effusion. Imaging studies showed that the radiologic abnormality was acute bronchopneumonic infiltration with abscess formation in the left
lower lobe and parapneumonic pleural effusion. Bacteriologic examinations with sputum, pleural fluids, and bronchial washing fluids,
however, revealed no definitive causative organisms. Fortunately, we could confirm that the etiologic organism was M. lentiflavum found in
the cultured pleural tissues, although there is still a possibility of co-infection with other bacteria such as anaerobes because it is
difficult to culture or isolate anaerobes in several respiratory samples and the patient was pre-treated with the antibiotics that would
have negated bacterial cultures or have activity against co-infected bacteria. On the basis of these findings, he was diagnosed as pulmonary
infection and pleurisy caused by M. Lentiflavum as at least one of etiological pathogens, which was treated with a combination of
antibiotics covering NTM. In light of general information of NTM, this case report describes several interesting points as follows; the
acute progress of NTM pulmonary diseases, pleural disease by NTM infection, and occurence of pulmonary infection by M. lentiflavum in
immunocompetent subject. Thus, we suggest that clinicians should consider the M. lentiflavum as a human pathogen invovled in lung and pleura
regardless of immune status. In addition, M. lentiflavum can be an infectious cause of acute pulmonary disease as well as chronic pulmonary
disease. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report. Copies of the written consents are
available for review by the editor of this journal. Mycobacterium avium complex Nontuberculous mycobacterium Yong Chul Lee and So Ri Kim
contributed equally to this work. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions YCL
and SRK designed the study. YCL and SRK drafted the manuscript. YCL, SRK, SBK, and SYP contributed to the diagnosis and treatment. SBK
contributed to the analysis and identification of M. lentiflavum. SJG reviewed and edited the manuscript. YCL and SRK reviewed and
supervised the manuscript. All the authors approved the final version of the manuscript. We thank Professor Mie-Jae Im (Chonbuk National
University Medical School, Jeonju, South Korea) for critical readings of the manuscript. This study was supported by the Korea Healthcare
Technology R&D Project, Ministry for Health and Welfare, Republic of Korea (Grant A121931), by Basic Science Research Program through the
National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and future Planning (NRF-2014R1A2A1A01002823), and by the
fund of Biomedical Research Institute, Chonbuk National University Hospital.
