Candida parapsilosis was the most common species causing candidemia in the 2010 China Hospital Invasive Fungal Surveillance Net (CHIF-NET)
database. Compared to Candida albicans, the description of azole resistance and mechanisms in C. parapsilosis is very limited. We report a
patient with C. parapsilosis candidemia over several months, due to a probable intravascular source, who developed fluconazole resistance
after prolonged treatment. An 82 year-old male had a hospital admission of approximately 1.5 years duration. He was initially admitted with
acute pancreatitis. Prior to succumbing to the illness, he developed candidemia and treated with three antifungal drugs for nearly 5 months,
at suboptimal doses and without source control. Following treatment, 6 blood cultures were still positive for C. parapsilosis. The last 2
strains were resistant to fluconazole (MICs 32 μg/mL) and intermediate to voriconazole (MICs 0.5 μg/mL). Microsatellite multilocus analysis
indicated that the 6 isolates from the patient belonged to a single genotype. The first 4 isolates were susceptible to fluconazole (MICs
2 μg/mL) and voriconazole (MICs 0.015-0.03 μg/mL), which were slightly higher than susceptible control strains from other patients.
Overexpression of MDR1 genes were detected in the two resistant isolates, and this was associated with a homozygous mutation in MRR1 genes
(T2957C /T2957C), with the amino acid exchange L986P. This case corroborates that the resistant C. parapsilosis isolates can emerge in the
setting of complicated infections and the extensive use of antifungal agents, emphasizing the need for standardizing and improving the
antifungal treatment as well as source control in the treatment of infection diseases. Candida parapsilosis is a significant clinical
pathogen that can grow in total parenteral nutrition, form biofilms on catheters and other implanted devices, persist in the hospital
environment and be nosocomially transmitted by hand carriage . In China, C. parapsilosis was the most common species causing candidemia in
the 2010 China Hospital Invasive Fungal Surveillance Net (CHIF-NET) study . Azoles are the most commonly used drugs for the treatment of
Candida infections. Besides species that show intrinsic resistance, such as Candida krusei, the acquisition of azole resistance,
particularly after prolonged exposure and prophylactic overuse, is well described in Candida albicans, Candida tropicalis, Candida glabrata
. However, the descriptions of azole resistance in C. parapsilosis are very limited [10, 11]. Constitutive overexpression of 2 types of
multidrug efflux pumps, encoded by CDR1 or MDR1 genes is a major cause of resistance to azoles . Morschhäuser et al. found that gain of
function mutations in MRR1 genes cause constitutive MDR1 overexpression in fluconazole-resistant C. albicans and C. dubliniensis .
Similarly, the mutations in TAC1, a transcription factor regulating CDR genes, are responsible for the constitutive high-level expression of
CDR genes [18, 19]. Another common mechanism is the ERG11 gene overexpression or acquisition of mutations, resulting in target enzyme up-
regulation or reduced affinity to bind azoles . The mutations in UPC2 are a frequent cause of ERG upregulation . We encountered a case of
induced fluconazole resistance in C. parapsilosis from a patient with persistent candidemia due to a probable intravascular source in the
Peking Union Medical College Hospital (PUMCH). Here we describe the case and explore the possible resistance mechanism. An 82 year-old male
was admitted to the PUMCH in December, 2008 with severe, acute pancreatitis. He was managed with mechanical ventilation and received
parenteral nutrition, diuretics and anti-microbial therapy. His renal function deteriorated in the 11th week following hospitalization, he
began haemodialysis, 3 times per week, through a left internal jugular venous catheter. In the 49th week, he developed a fever of 39 °C, and
blood culture were collected. He was treated with empirical meropenem and his fever resolved after 3 days. His blood culture were positive
for C. parapsilosis after 7 days, however, due to his clinical improvement he was not given any antifungal therapy (Fig. 1). In the 52nd
week, the left internal jugular venous catheter was removed, and an arteriovenous fistula was created in the forearm using a
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) graft to allow hemodialysis. In the 66th week, he became febrile and a sputum smear showed a large amount of
yeast, with culture positive for C. glabrata. CT scan of the chest showed nodules in the right upper lobe and bilateral pleural effusion. He
was treated for a pulmonary fungal infection, with fluconazole (100 mg/day, renal dose adjusted) (Fig. 1). While still on the antifungal
therapy, C. parapsilosis susceptible to fluconazole was isolated from blood culture in the 71st week following admission. In the subsequent
9 weeks the patient had intermittent fevers. There were 4 other blood cultures positive for C. parapsilosis, consistent with an
intravascular source of infection (Fig. 1). The final two isolates (PU123 and PU127) were resistant to fluconazole and had intermediate
susceptibility to voriconazole.Fig. 1The antifungal treatment course and isolated C. parapsilosis strains information of the patient.
aSputum smear showed a large amount of yeast and antifungal treatment was commenced. bThe patient died of systemic invasive fungal infection
and chronic renal failure The antifungal treatment course and isolated C. parapsilosis strains information of the patient. aSputum smear
showed a large amount of yeast and antifungal treatment was commenced. bThe patient died of systemic invasive fungal infection and chronic
renal failure Antifungal treatment received by the patient and isolated strains are summarized in Fig. 1. Due to fluconazole treatment
failure, it was changed to intraconazole (100 mg/day) in the 74th week. This was ceased in the 76th week and fluconazole was recommenced at
a higher dose (200 mg/day). As a possible source of infection, the synthetic arteriovenous fistula was removed in the 78th week. However,
the candidemia persisted and in the 80th week caspofungin (50 mg/day) was commenced. In the 81st week, the patient became comatosed
(Glasogow Coma Scale 5) with hypertonia, a positive Babinski sign, and neck rigidity, indicative of central nervous system infection or
metabolic encephalopathy. No further investigations were performed, as treatment was withdrawn following discussion with the patient’s
family. The patient died in the 82nd week of admission. The use of the isolates in the present study was approved by the Human Research
Ethics Committee of Peking Union Medical College Hospital (No. S-263). We have obtained the writing consent from the control patients to
publish the case report. There were 6 blood culture isolates from the patient described in the case study (patient 1). In addition, 6
isolates of C. parapsilosis obtained from the other patients (patients 2–7) in the PUMCH during the hospitalization of patient 1 were
studied for control purpose. Identification of C. parapsilosis was confirmed by DNA sequencing of the fungal internal transcribed spacer
(ITS) region and the D1/D2 domain of the 28S rRNA gene, using a published protocol . Sensititre YeastOne YO10 broth microdilution
susceptibility panels (TREK Diagnostic Systems, Westlake, Ohio) were used to test the susceptibility of C. parapsilosis to antifungal
agents, according to a published protocol . For C. parapsilosis, the interpretation of fluconazole, voriconazole and three echinocandins
susceptibilities was done in accordance with CLSI M27-S4 . Table 1 summarizes the in vitro susceptibility results of the 12 C. parapsilosis
isolates. There was no significant difference in the drugs tested except for fluconazole and voriconazole. The isolates from patients 2–7
were susceptible to fluconazole (MICs 0.25-0.5 μg/mL) and voriconazole (MICs ≤0.008 μg/mL) (Table 1). For patient 1, isolates PU017, PU110,
PU112 and PU116 were susceptible to fluconazole (MICs 2 μg/mL) and voriconazole (MICs 0.015-0.03 μg/mL), but with higher MICs than the other
susceptible strains. Isolates PU123 and PU127 were resistant to fluconazole (MICs 32 μg/mL) and had intermediate susceptibility to
voriconazole (MICs 0.5 μg/mL) (Table 1).Table 1 C. parapsilosis strains information, antifungal susceptibilities, microsatellite typing
results and the MRR1 gene mutationsStrain no.a PatientWardb Susceptibility results by Sensititre YeastOnec (μg/mL)Multilocus genotyped
Genotypee MRR1
FLCVRCITCPOSANFMCFCAS5FCAMBB5CP1CP4CP6PU0171EGW20.030.120.060.50.50.250.060.5109/109242/242307/307291/291AT2957C/WTPU1101EGW20.030.120.060.50.50.250.060.5109/109242/242307/307291/291AT2957C/WTPU1121EGW20.030.060.060.250.250.250.060.5109/109242/242307/307291/291AT2957C/WTPU1161EGW20.030.060.060.50.50.250.060.5109/109242/242307/307291/291AT2957C/WTPU1231EGW320.50.120.060.50.50.50.060.5109/109242/242307/307291/291AT2957C/T2957CPU1271EGW320.50.120.060.50.50.50.060.5109/109242/242307/307291/291AT2957C/T2957CPU0042Outpatient0.5≤0.0080.060.030.50.50.250.060.5107/107242/242307/307267/267BWT/WTPU0263ICU0.25≤0.0080.030.030.50.50.250.060.5143/145242/242304/304282/282CWT/WTPU0904Medical
ward0.5≤0.0080.030.030.50.50.25≤0.060.5113/129224/245358/358267/270DWT/WTPU1065Surgical
ward0.5≤0.0080.060.030.50.250.120.060.5109/109242/242307/307291/291Af
WT/WTPU1086EGW0.5≤0.0080.060.030.50.50.250.120.5115/129242/248364/385267/267EWT/WTPU1317Medical
ward0.5≤0.0080.030.0150.50.50.250.120.5109/109242/242307/307288/288FWT/WTATCC 22019--
10.0150.120.030.50.50.250.120.5129/129245/251304/304291/291GWT/WT aAll strains were isolated from blood cultures b EGW Emergency general
ward c FLC Fluconazole, VRC Voriconazole, ITC Itraconazole, POS Posaconazole, ANF Anidulafungin, MCF, Micafungin, CAS Caspofungin, 5FC
5-Flucytosine, AMB Amphotericin B. Clinical breakpoints for susceptible, intermediate, and resistant for C. parapsilosis, respectively, were
those of the CLSI M27-S4 for fluconazole (≤2/4/ ≥8 μg/mL); and for voriconazole (≤0.125/0.25/≥1 μg/mL); and for anidulafungin, caspofungin,
and micafungin (≤2/4/≥8 μg/mL) dThe numbers indicate the fragment size in base pairs of the different alleles obtained with the listed
marker eThe genotype was designated according to the different microsatellite typing results fThe PU106 isolate yielded identical genotype
with the isolates from patient 1 C. parapsilosis strains information, antifungal susceptibilities, microsatellite typing results and the
MRR1 gene mutations aAll strains were isolated from blood cultures b EGW Emergency general ward c FLC Fluconazole, VRC Voriconazole, ITC
Itraconazole, POS Posaconazole, ANF Anidulafungin, MCF, Micafungin, CAS Caspofungin, 5FC 5-Flucytosine, AMB Amphotericin B. Clinical
breakpoints for susceptible, intermediate, and resistant for C. parapsilosis, respectively, were those of the CLSI M27-S4 for fluconazole
(≤2/4/ ≥8 μg/mL); and for voriconazole (≤0.125/0.25/≥1 μg/mL); and for anidulafungin, caspofungin, and micafungin (≤2/4/≥8 μg/mL) dThe
numbers indicate the fragment size in base pairs of the different alleles obtained with the listed marker eThe genotype was designated
according to the different microsatellite typing results fThe PU106 isolate yielded identical genotype with the isolates from patient 1 All
the strains were genotyped using the highly polymorphic microsatellite markers, B5, CP1, CP4 and CP6 . Amplification reactions were
performed as previously reported . The microsatellite multilocus genotypes allowed the differentiation of the 12 strains from 7 patients
into 6 different genotypes. The 6 isolates from patient 1 involved a single genotype (genotype A). The strains isolated from control
patients 2–4 and 6, 7 were assigned to genotypes B to G based on the observed differences. Isolate PU106 from the control patient 5 showed
the same pattern on microsatellite sequence analysis as the isolates from patient 1 and designated genotype A (Table 1). Primers used for
PCR amplification of MRR1, TAC1, UPC2, and ERG11 genes were listed in Table 2 (11). After alignment of the MRR1 sequences from the 12
isolates, a single nucleotide mutation (T2957C/WT) was detected in PU017, PU110, PU112 and PU116 compared with the MRR1 sequence of C.
parapsilosis ATCC 22019 and the control strain with the same pattern on microsatellite typing, PU106 genotype A (Table 1). This mutation
results in the replacement of a leucine amino acid residue with a proline (L986P). In the PU123 and PU127 isolates from patient 1, mutations
were found in both alleles (T2957C/T2957C). After alignment of TAC1, UPC2, and ERG11 gene sequences from the 12 isolates, no mutation was
found.Table 2Sequences of primers used in genes sequencingPrimer namePrimer
sequenceReferenceMRR1-F5'-CCCTTTCTTCCGCAGATTTC-3'11MRR1-R5'-CGTTGTAAAGATGGCGTGGT-3'TAC1-F5'-AAGAGACCTACAGATAGTGC-3'TAC1-R5'-CTTGAGATGCTGAGACATAT-3'UPC2-F5'-TTCGTGATAGTTTTGGTGGTAG-3'11UPC2-R5'-TTTCCTCCACCCCTATTGTAG-3'ERG11-F5'-ATGGCATTAGTTGATTTAGCCCT-3'ERG11-R5'-TCAGATTACACATGTATCTCTTT-3'
Sequences of primers used in genes sequencing Overnight C. parapsilosis cultures were diluted to an optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of 0.2
in YPD medium and then incubated at 35 °C with shaking at 150 rpm for additional 6 h to mid-log phase. Total RNA was extracted from isolates
grown in YPD medium using the Yeast RNAiso Reagent Kit (TaKaRa, Tokyo, Japan) and reverse transcribed to cDNA using the PrimeScript RT
Reagent Kit (TaKaRa, Tokyo, Japan) according to the instructions of the manufacturer. The quantitative real-time RT-PCRs were performed in
triplicate using the SsoFast EvaGreen supermix (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) on a BioRad CFX96 system. ATCC 22019 were used as the control
isolate. The primers used in this study were listed in Table 3 [11, 24, 25]. The ACT1 gene was used as the endogenous control. The change in
fold expression was obtained by calculating 2-ΔΔCT, and a change of 2.5 times was considered to be overexpressed . The 2 resistant isolates
from patient 1 had higher expression levels of MRR1 than the four susceptible isolates from patient 1 (PU123 10.5-fold and PU127 9.5-fold;
Fig. 2). The 4 susceptible isolates showed higher expression levels (>2.5 fold) than the controls. The MDR1 expression was further increased
in the resistant isolates (PU123 51.0-fold and PU127 39.4-fold). In contrast, the CDR1, UPC2, ERG11 genes expression levels in the 2 azole-
resistant isolates were not significantly different from the 4 susceptible isolates from patient 1 and the control isolates.Table 3Sequences
of primers used in quantitative real-time RT-PCRPrimer namePrimer
sequenceReferenceMRR1-F5'-ACAATGGTCTGAGCAATGAA-3'11MRR1-R5'-GGCAATACTGGTGATGGAA-3'MDR1-F5'-TTCGTGATAGTTTTGGTGGTAG-3'11MDR1-R5'-TGAACCTGGAGTGAATCTTGT-3'CDR1-F5'-GCGTTTGACCATCGGAGTT-3'24CDR1-R5'-TACCGCTGTTTGCGAATCT-3'UPC2-F5'-ATTGGAGTGTGGGTATCTTCAT-3'11UPC2-R5'-CCTTCGCCTTCTTCAGTTC-3'ERG11-F5'-GGTTTACTTGTGTTTGCTCCT-3'11ERG11-R5'-GTCCATAAGATACGGCTGAAC-3'ACT1-F5'-ATGATAGAGTTGAAAGTAGTTTGGTCAATA-3'25ACT1-R5'-ACTACTGCTGAAAGAGAAATTGTTAGAGAC-3'Fig.
2Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis of MDR1 (a), MRR1 (b), CDR1 (c), ERG11 (d) and UPC2 (e) genes expression levels in the 6 isolates
from patient 1 and 6 susceptible isolates from other patients. Each sample was processed in triplicate. Error bars show the standard
deviations Sequences of primers used in quantitative real-time RT-PCR Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis of MDR1 (a), MRR1 (b), CDR1
(c), ERG11 (d) and UPC2 (e) genes expression levels in the 6 isolates from patient 1 and 6 susceptible isolates from other patients. Each
sample was processed in triplicate. Error bars show the standard deviations In order to confirm that only MRR1 and MDR1 genes were
overexpressed, we subcultured isolates in the presence of sub-inhibitory concentrations of fluconazole, and repeated the gene expression
studies. Two susceptible isolates (PU017, PU116), the 2 resistant isolates (PU123 and PU127) from patient 1, 3 control isolates (PU090,
PU106 and PU131) were subcultured. All the tested isolates and the control strain ATCC 22019 were firstly incubated at 37 °C for 4 h in RPMI
1640 (Sigma, USA). Fluconazole was then added at a concentration of 1/2 MIC and the isolates were incubated for an additional 4 h. RNA
extraction and the quantitative real-time RT-PCRs were performed as the previous experiment in the present study. The 2 resistant isolates
showed higher expression levels of MRR1 than the other isolates (PU123 3.90-fold and PU127 3.99-fold; Table 4). The MDR1 expression was also
obviously increased in the resistant isolates (PU123 9.70-fold and PU127 9.01-fold). Similar to the previous experiment, the CDR1, UPC2,
ERG11 genes expression levels in the 2 azole-resistant isolates were not higher than other susceptible isolates.Table 4Gene expression in
the eight C. parapsilosis isolates cultured in the presence of fluconazole with concentrations of 1/2 MICSample MDR1 b MRR1 b CDR1 b ERG11 b
UPC2 b ExpressionExpression SEMExpressionExpression SEMExpressionExpression SEMExpressionExpression SEMExpressionExpression SEMATCC22019a
1.000.041.000.031.000.021.000.041.000.03PU0172.380.091.740.040.810.030.870.021.040.03PU1162.330.131.550.101.030.061.080.061.160.06PU1239.700.633.900.200.210.010.260.150.310.02PU1279.010.283.990.140.280.010.350.010.370.02PU0902.160.100.740.030.770.030.550.030.530.02PU1061.450.071.550.051.550.041.130.051.860.07PU1311.170.041.310.050.950.020.520.010.520.02
aATCC22019 isolates was used as control isolate, and was also cultured in the presence of 1/2 MIC of fluconazole bAll the samples for each
gene were tested in triplicate. The left column shows the mean value of expression, and the right column shows the Standard Error of Mean
(SEM) Gene expression in the eight C. parapsilosis isolates cultured in the presence of fluconazole with concentrations of 1/2 MIC
aATCC22019 isolates was used as control isolate, and was also cultured in the presence of 1/2 MIC of fluconazole bAll the samples for each
gene were tested in triplicate. The left column shows the mean value of expression, and the right column shows the Standard Error of Mean
(SEM) Compared to other Candida species, C. parapsilosis tends to be associated with higher MICs to echinocandins . Therefore, the
development of azole resistant C. parapsilosis has significant clinical implications, as multiazole- and multiechinocandin-resistant
isolates would limit available treatment options . In addition, there could be nosocomial transmission of resistant C. parapsilosis between
vulnerable patient groups . Microsatellite genotyping was consistent with fluconazole resistant developing in previously susceptible strains
of C. parapsilosis. The 2 resistant patient-isolates (PU123 and PU127) overexpressed MRR1 and MDR1. The MRR1 overexpression was highly
associated with mutation (T2957C), leading to the amino acid exchange, L986P. This indicates that the C. parapsilosis resistance to
fluconazole was conferred by the increased expression of the MRR1 transcription factor, which resulted in a concomitant overexpression of
MDR1. The previous studies have demonstrated that a gain-of-function mutation in one MRR1 allele results only in slightly decreased
susceptibilities to the azoles and the loss of heterozygosity further increases drug resistance [15, 16]. A similar observation was made in
the present study, where the patient isolates that were heterozygous MRR1 (T2957C/WT) mutants showed slightly higher MICs than wild type
strains (WT/WT). The last 2 isolates became homozygous (T2957C/T2957C) mutants and showed much higher MICs and overexpression of MDR1. While
this mutation was the probable cause of the phenotypic resistance in this case, a mutagenesis study that demonstrated the development of
resistance and increased gene expression in a previously sensitive organism would provide additional evidence. After repeating the
experiment in which the strains were cultured in media containing fluconazole with concentrations of 1/2 MIC for each isolate, we confirmed
that only MDR1 and MRR1 were overexpressed in 2 resistant isolates. However, MDR1 expression did not increase as much as in the initial
experiment. This may be related to different medium as well as all the isolates, including the control isolate ATCC22019, being exposed to
fluconazole. The ERG11 genes in resistant isolates were not overexpressed, even following to fluconazole. Similarly, Grossman et al. has
sequenced the ERG11 and MRR1 genes in 30 fluconazole resistant C. parapsilosis isolates and 37 susceptible dose-dependent isolates, and
found no isolate with both the MRR1 and ERG11 gene mutation . In most cases, phenotypes of resistance developed due to a combination of
mechanisms, so the whole genome sequencing will be included in subsequent investigation. This case corroborates that the resistant C.
parapsilosis isolates can emerge in the setting of complicated infections and the extensive use of antifungal agents. Patient 1 received
fluconazole treatment for more than 3 months. However, treatment was not instituted for the first candidemia and when fluconazole treatment
was commenced it was initially at a lower dose because of chronic renal failure, and on the basis of sputum microscopy. In the previous
studies, suboptimal fluconazole dosing has leaded to the development of resistance in Candida species [6, 29]. In addition, itraconazole was
used for 2 weeks, when it is not recommended for invasive candidiasis . This highlights the need for standardization of antifungal
treatment, in terms of drug selection, dose and duration . In this case, probable sources of the persistent candidemia were the intravenous
hemodialysis catheter and the synthetic vascular graft. Vascular catheters have been regarded as the source in more than 50 % of cases of C.
parapsilosis candidemia and prompt removal of the catheter is recommended . This report described a case where fluconazole resistant C.
parapsilosis emerged during prolonged antifungal treatment, with associated MDR1 overexpression, which was related to a MRR1 mutation
(T2957C). Resistant C. parapsilosis has the potential to complicate the management of candidemia in vulnerable patient groups. This case
illustrates the need for effective antifungal treatment, source control in the treatment of infection diseases. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions LZ, MX, FK and YCX conceived
and designed the experiments; LZ, HW and XF performed the experiment, contributed to the acquisition, analysis and interpretation of data.
LZ, MW and FK wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This present study was supported by Innovation Fund
of Peking Union Medical College (2012-1002-023) and Research Special Fund for Public Welfare Industry of Health (201402001). This study was
selected for oral presentation at the 12th ASM Conference on Candida and Candidiasis in 2014, New Orleans, America.
