Numerous pathogenic mutations responsible for mitochondrial diseases have been identified in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)-encoded tRNA genes.
In most cases, however, the detailed molecular pathomechanisms and cellular pathophysiology of these mtDNA mutations —how such genetic
defects determine the variation and the severity of clinical symptoms in affected individuals— remain unclear. To investigate the molecular
pathomechanisms and to realize in vitro recapitulation of mitochondrial diseases, intracellular mutant mtDNA proportions must always be
considered. We found a disease-causative mutation, m.5541C>T heteroplasmy in MT-TW gene, in a patient exhibiting mitochondrial myopathy,
encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes (MELAS) with multiple organ involvement. We identified the intrinsic molecular
pathomechanisms of m.5541C>T. This mutation firstly disturbed the translation machinery of mitochondrial tRNATrp and induced mitochondrial
respiratory dysfunction, followed by severely injured mitochondrial homeostasis. We also demonstrated cell-type-specific disease phenotypes
using patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) carrying ~100 % mutant m.5541C>T. Significant loss of terminally differentiated
iPSC-derived neurons, but not their stem/progenitor cells, was detected most likely due to serious mitochondrial dysfunction triggered by
m.5541C>T; in contrast, m.5541C>T did not apparently affect skeletal muscle development. Our iPSC-based disease models would be widely
available for understanding the "definite" genotype-phenotype relationship of affected tissues and organs in various mitochondrial diseases
caused by heteroplasmic mtDNA mutations, as well as for further drug discovery applications. The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/s40478-015-0227-x) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) has
unique translation and transcription machinery and is associated with the maintenance of cellular homeostasis through intergenomic crosstalk
with nuclear DNA (nDNA). Numerous pathogenic mutations responsible for various mitochondrial diseases have been identified in mtDNA-encoded
tRNA genes , and in most cases, such disease-causative heteroplasmic mutations (i.e., wild-type mtDNA and mutant mtDNA co-exist within a
cell) exhibit their intrinsic pathogenic thresholds. Mutant mitochondrial tRNAs frequently induce various loss-of-function at a molecular
level including not only damaged mitochondrial protein synthesis, but also inhibited aminoacylation , tRNA molecular instability , altered
tRNA processing , wobble-base modification deficiency [6, 7], or a combination of these. Therefore, the degree of accumulated mutant
mitochondrial tRNAs within a cell is most likely to determine the trajectory of tissue- and organ-specific disease progression and
phenotypic severity in affected individuals. Focusing on MT-TW gene, which encodes mitochondrial tRNATrp, several pathogenic mutations have
been reported to cause widespread clinical symptoms in relation to mitochondrial diseases (e.g., encephalopathy, myopathy, dementia and
chorea, gastrointestinal syndrome, or severe multiple organ disorders) . Mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and
stroke-like episodes (MELAS) is genetically heterogeneous and presents a broad clinical spectrum among individuals including variations in
age of onset (infantile to adolescence) or affected tissues and organs (central nervous system, cardiovascular system, neuromuscular system,
endocrine system, gastrointestinal system, or a combination of these). Such variations may depend on the influence of molecular defects in
mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes I and/or IV (CI and/or CIV) on mitochondrial energy metabolism and oxidative stress in various
terminally differentiated cell types in affected individuals. To date, however, limited somatic cell types (e.g., fibroblasts, myoblasts, or
lymphoblasts) are available to characterize patient-specific pathophysiology of affected tissues and organs in mitochondrial diseases.
Recently, the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from various human somatic cells by forced ectopic expression of several
pluripotency-associated transcription factors has been reported [15, 16], and patient-derived iPSCs carrying mutant mtDNAs have therefore
opened new avenues for facilitating mitochondrial medicine. In this study, we found a disease-causative mutation, m.5541C > T heteroplasmy
in MT-TW gene, in a patient exhibiting MELAS with multiple organ involvement. We identified the intrinsic molecular pathomechanisms of
m.5541C > T and demonstrated cell-type-specific disease phenotypes using patient-derived iPSCs carrying ~100 % mutant m.5541C > T. Our iPSC-
based disease models would be widely available for understanding the definitive genotype-phenotype relationship of affected tissues and
organs in various mitochondrial diseases caused by heteroplasmic mtDNA mutations, as well as for further drug discovery applications. This
study was approved by our Institutional Review Board and was stringently conducted in accordance with the ethical principles of the
"Declaration of Helsinki". Patient biopsy was performed for diagnostic purposes only after we received written informed consent with
permission to study patient-derived iPSCs. Note that 10 control subjects were also used in this study. A partial family pedigree for this
patient is shown (Fig. 1a). In this family, there was no clinical history of any neuromuscular disease. He had no growth and mental
retardation until firstly presenting epileptic symptoms at age 10 years. At age 11 years, he developed weight loss, activity loss, easy
fatigue, cognitive impairment, and acute heart failure. Radiographic and ultracardiographic images revealed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy at
interventricular septum and left ventricular wall (Fig. 1b). Markedly increased serum lactate level (114.7 mg/dL; 3.0-17.0 mg/dL as normal),
serum pyruvate level (3.86 mg/dL; 0.30–0.94 mg/dL as normal), and lactate/pyruvate ratio (29.7) were detected. At age 13 years, he developed
headache, vomiting, visual disturbance, convulsion, and myoclonic status with unconsciousness. Brain MRI revealed multifocal hyper-intensity
lesions at basal ganglia, cortex, and subcortical white matter of both cerebrum and cerebellum. A representative lesion showed decreased
N-acetylaspartate level and increased lactate level (Fig. 1c). On this occasion, no significant abnormalities in serum lactate level
(18.9 mg/dL), serum pyruvate level (0.99 mg/dL), or lactate/pyruvate ratio (19.0) were detected; however, cerebrospinal fluid lactate level
(41.5 mg/dL), cerebrospinal fluid pyruvate level (1.40 mg/dL), and lactate/pyruvate ratio (29.6) were clearly high. Skeletal muscle
histopathology revealed diffuse cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficiency (less than 5 % population of COX-positive fibers) (Fig. 1d); however,
no other typical pathological abnormalities such as ragged-red-fibers or strongly succinate dehydrogenase (SDH)-reactive blood vessels were
observed. We diagnosed this patient as MELAS and started oral administration of l-arginine, dichloroacetate, and sodium pyruvate. He
relapsed with stroke-like episodes twice in 4 years. At age 14 years, he developed multiple organ involvement including acute pancreatitis,
gastrointestinal malabsorption, renal tubular disturbance, and endocrine glucose intolerance. At age 15 years, he developed quadriparesis.
Now, he keeps stable condition without serious trouble.Fig. 1Clinical diagnosis and molecular genetic analysis for the patient. a A partial
family pedigree. Filled square indicates this patient. b Radiographic and ultracardiographic images for this patient at age 11 years,
indicating hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Cardiothoracic ratio (CTR) in radiographic image is also shown. c T2-weighted FLAIR images of brain
MRI for this patient at age 13 years, indicating multifocal stroke-like episodes. Brain MRS also shows decreased N-acetylaspartate (NAA)
level and increased lactate (Lac) level. d Histopathology against serial frozen sections of biopsied skeletal muscle specimens from this
patient at age 13 years, indicating diffuse COX deficiency. e Electropherograms of the anticodon domain of MT-TW gene for extracted DNA from
blood tissues and skeletal muscle tissues of both control and this patient. Arrowheads indicate m.5541C > T. Note that the same mutation was
also found in blood tissues from this patient’s asymptomatic mother. f Alignment of sequences in the anticodon-stem and the anticodon-loop
of MT-TW gene from various eukaryotes. Arrowhead indicates m.5541C > T. Blue-colored characters indicate the anticodon recognition site of
mitochondrial tRNATrp Clinical diagnosis and molecular genetic analysis for the patient. a A partial family pedigree. Filled square
indicates this patient. b Radiographic and ultracardiographic images for this patient at age 11 years, indicating hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Cardiothoracic ratio (CTR) in radiographic image is also shown. c T2-weighted FLAIR images of brain MRI for this patient at
age 13 years, indicating multifocal stroke-like episodes. Brain MRS also shows decreased N-acetylaspartate (NAA) level and increased lactate
(Lac) level. d Histopathology against serial frozen sections of biopsied skeletal muscle specimens from this patient at age 13 years,
indicating diffuse COX deficiency. e Electropherograms of the anticodon domain of MT-TW gene for extracted DNA from blood tissues and
skeletal muscle tissues of both control and this patient. Arrowheads indicate m.5541C > T. Note that the same mutation was also found in
blood tissues from this patient’s asymptomatic mother. f Alignment of sequences in the anticodon-stem and the anticodon-loop of MT-TW gene
from various eukaryotes. Arrowhead indicates m.5541C > T. Blue-colored characters indicate the anticodon recognition site of mitochondrial
tRNATrp Patient-derived skeletal muscle tissues were minced, enzymatically digested, and centrifuged to collect myoblasts according to
standard protocol. Patient-derived myoblasts were maintained in DMEM/F12 (Gibco) supplemented with 20 % FBS (Gibco), 100 units/mL penicillin
(Gibco), 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Gibco) at 37 °C under humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2. During establishment of patient-derived primary
myoblasts, 0.5 μg/mL MC210 (DS Pharm) as a mycoplasmacidal reagent and 2.5 μg/mL fungizone (Gibco) as a fungicidal reagent were also added
to culture medium. Terminal differentiation of patient-derived myoblasts into myotubes was performed as follows: Briefly, patient-derived
myoblasts were seeded at high cell density onto 6-well culture plates and were maintained at 37 °C under humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2.
After 3 days in culture, culture medium was switched to myogenic differentiation medium (Cell Applications) supplemented with 100 units/mL
penicillin (Gibco), 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Gibco), and patient-derived myoblasts were maintained at 37 °C under humidified atmosphere of
5 % CO2 for 2 weeks. Long PCR-based whole mtDNA sequencing for the patient was performed as described elsewhere with modifications to
eliminate any adverse results arising from pseudo-sequences in nuclear DNA: Briefly, extracted DNA as template (10 ng for iPSCs, 20 ng for
myoblasts and skeletal muscle tissues, 100 ng for blood tissues) was amplified via mtDNA-specific long-range PCR and the following mtDNA-
specific nested PCR with a thermal cycler (GeneAmp PCR System 9700; Applied Biosystems). The amplified mtDNA fragments were sequenced with a
DNA analyzer (ABI PRISM 3130xl; Applied Biosystems). The obtained mtDNA sequence data from each patient was compared with the databases of
"Human Mitochondrial Genome Database (MITOMAP; http://www.mitomap.org/MITOMAP/)" and "Human Mitochondrial Genome Polymorphism (mtSNP;
http://mtsnp.tmig.or.jp/mtsnp/)" to find any genetic variants. Mutation ratio of m.5541C > T in the patient was determined as follows:
Extracted DNA (1 ng) was used as template for quantitative PCR with TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix kit (Applied Biosystems) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. A sequence detection system (ABI PRISM 7900HT; Applied Biosystems) was used, and a calibration curve was
created using several copy-number standards with plasmids containing the amplified mtDNA fragments (nucleotide position in mtDNA; 5205–5767)
for either wild-type or mutant sequences. in silico modeling of bovine heart CIV homodimer in fully oxidized state was performed on the
database of "RCSB Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/)", and the graphics were arranged using RasMol software. Amino acid sequences
of bovine and human mtDNA-encoded CIV subunits were referenced in the database of "NCBI Protein Database
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/)". in silico modeling of wild-type and mutant mitochondrial tRNATrp were performed on the database of
"Vienna RNA Servers (http://rna.tbi.univie.ac.at/)", and representative physicochemical parameters (e.g., minimum free energy and base-pair
probability) were simultaneously calculated. Reverse transcription was performed with PrimeScript RT Master Mix kit (TaKaRa Bio) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. After reverse transcription of extracted total RNA, total cDNA (25 ng) was used as template for RT-PCR
with a thermal cycler (GeneAmp PCR system 9700; Applied Biosystems). The amplified PCR products were resolved via electrophoresis through
2 % agarose gel, stained with GelGreen (Biotium), and detected with a UV transilluminator (GelDoc-It Imaging System; UVP). Quantitative PCR
for measurement of transgenes expression was performed with SYBR Green I PCR Master Mix kit (Roche) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. After reverse transcription of extracted total RNA, total cDNA (10 ng) was used as template for quantitative PCR with a real-
time PCR system (LightCycler 480II; Roche). The averaged threshold cycle number for housekeeping genes were adopted for ΔΔCT-based relative
quantification. Enzymatic activities for individual mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes were analyzed as described elsewhere with
modifications: Cultured and harvested patient-derived myoblasts (1 × 105 cells/assay) were applied for measurement. A spectrophotometer
equipped with thermostated unit (U-2010; Hitachi) was used, and a base line calibration was done before each measurement. For CI activity
measurement, cells were added into reaction buffer [pH 7.4; 50 mM Tris–HCl, 250 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 10 μM decylubiquinone, 50 μM NADH,
5 μg/mL antimycin A, 2 mM potassium cyanide] and were incubated at 37 °C. CI activity was monitored by time-dependent absorbance
alterations. For CII activity measurement, cells were added into reaction buffer [pH 7.4; 50 mM potassium phosphate, 20 mM succinate, 50 μM
2,6-dichlorophenolindophenol, 50 μM decylubiquinone, 5 μg/mL rotenone, 5 μg/mL antimycin A, 2 mM potassium cyanide] and were incubated at
37 °C. CII activity was monitored by time-dependent absorbance alterations. For CIII activity measurement, cells were added into reaction
buffer [pH 7.4; 50 mM Tris–HCl, 250 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 50 μM cytochrome c, 50 μM decylubiquinol (reduced form of decylubiquinone), 2 mM
potassium cyanide] and were incubated at 37 °C. CIII activity was monitored by time-dependent absorbance alterations. For CIV activity
measurement, cells were added into reaction buffer [pH 7.4; 10 mM potassium phosphate, 25 μM ferrocytochrome c (reduced form of cytochrome
c)] and were incubated at 37 °C. CIV activity was monitored by time-dependent absorbance alterations. For citrate synthase (CS) activity
measurement, cells were added into reaction buffer [pH 8.0; 125 mM Tris–HCl, 300 μM acetyl-CoA, 100 μM 5,5’-dithiobis (2-nitrobenzoic acid),
500 μM oxaloacetate] and were incubated at 37 °C. CS activity was monitored by time-dependent absorbance alterations. Sodium dodecyl sulfate
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (BN-PAGE) were performed as described
elsewhere with modifications, respectively: Cultured and harvested patient-derived myoblasts were resuspended in isolation buffer [pH 7.4;
210 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 1 mM EGTA, 5 mM HEPES] and were homogenated on ice. Cell lysates were centrifuged to isolate mitochondrial
proteins. Obtained mitochondrial proteins were quantified by Bradford assay, and a calibration curve was created using several known
concentrations of BSA. For SDS-PAGE, isolated mitochondrial proteins (100 μg) were solubilized with 0.5 % SDS containing 50 mM
dithiothreitol at 70 °C for 10 min. Electrophoresis was performed on 4 –12 % NuPAGE polyacrylamide gel (Invitrogen) at room temperature
under 200 V constant. For BN-PAGE, isolated mitochondrial proteins (100 μg) were solubilized with either 0.5 % n-dodecyl-β-d-maltoside
(individual complexes detection) or 1 % digitonin (supercomplexes detection) on ice for 30 min. Insoluble proteins were removed by
centrifugation. Electrophoresis was performed on 3 –12 % NativePAGE polyacrylamide gel (Invitrogen) at 4 °C under 150 V constant for 30 min,
then resumed at 4 °C under 250 V constant. Electrophoresed gels were blotted onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes using an iBlot
transfer system (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Blotted PVDF membranes were blocked at room temperature for
30 min. Primary antibody probing was performed at room temperature for 90 min. Secondary antibody probing was performed with chromogenic
antibody detection kit (WesternBreeze; Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Primary antibodies used for SDS-PAGE were
as follows: 0.5 μg/mL anti-porin (Molecular Probes), 2.5 μg/mL anti-MT-CO1 (Molecular Probes), 2.5 μg/mL anti-MT-CO2 (Molecular Probes),
2.5 μg/mL anti-COX4 (Molecular Probes), 2.5 μg/mL anti-COX5B (Molecular Probes). Primary antibodies used for BN-PAGE were as follows:
0.5 μg/mL anti-NDUFA9 for CI (Molecular Probes), 0.5 μg/mL anti-SDHA for CII (Molecular Probes), 0.5 μg/mL anti-UQCRC2 for CIII (Molecular
Probes), 2.5 μg/mL anti-MT-CO1 for CIV (Molecular Probes), 0.5 μg/mL anti-ATP5B for CV (Molecular Probes). Patient-derived myoblasts were
seeded onto 4-well culture slides and were maintained at 37 °C under humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2. After 3 days in culture, cytochemical
staining was performed as follows: For cytochemical COX staining, cells were stained with reaction buffer [pH 5.5; 100 mM sodium acetate,
0.1 % MnCl2, 0.001 % H2O2, 10 mM diaminobenzidine] at 37 °C for 1 h, followed by subsequent incubation with 1 % CuSO4 at 37 °C for 5 min.
Cell nuclei were co-stained with hematoxylin. Stained cells were rinsed, fixed, and dehydrated according to standard histological protocol.
Samples were sealed with cover glass and were observed under an optical microscope (BX50 System; Olympus). For cytochemical SDH staining,
cells were stained with reaction buffer [pH 7.4; 50 mM succinate, 1 mM nitrotetrazolium blue] at 37 °C for 1 h. Cell nuclei were co-stained
with hematoxylin. Stained cells were rinsed, fixed, and dehydrated according to standard histological protocol. Samples were sealed with
cover glass and were observed under an optical microscope (BX50 System; Olympus). Patient-derived myoblasts were seeded onto 4-well culture
slides and were maintained at 37 °C under humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2. After 3 days in culture, cells were fixed, permeabilized, and
blocked according to standard immunocytochemical protocol. Primary antibody probing was performed at room temperature for 2 h. Secondary
antibody probing was performed with 2.5 μg/mL Alexa Fluor 568 (Molecular Probes) at room temperature for 1 h. Mitochondria were co-stained
with 0.25 μg/mL MitoTracker Green (Molecular Probes). Stained cells were observed under a fluorescent microscope (IX71 System; Olympus).
Primary antibodies used were as follows: 2.5 μg/mL anti-MT-CO1 (Molecular Probes), 2.5 μg/mL anti-COX4 (Molecular Probes). Cultured and
harvested patient-derived myoblasts (100 cells/assay) were applied for measurement. ATP amount was monitored with rLuciferase/Luciferin
chemiluminescence-based ATP detection kit (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A chemiluminescent multi-well plate reader
(Centro LB 960; Berthold Technologies) was used, and a calibration curve was created using several known concentrations of ATP. Patient-
derived myoblasts were seeded onto 96-well culture plate and were maintained at 37 °C under humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2. After 3 days
in culture, cells were stained at 37 °C for 1 h. Stained cells were rinsed and were measured on a fluorescent multi-well plate reader (ARVO
SX; Perkin Elmer); first at excitation/emission of 545/595 nm (red fluorescence) and then sequentially at excitation/emission of 485/535 nm
(green fluorescence). Fluorescent dyes used were as follows: 0.25 μg/mL MitoTracker Green (Molecular Probes), 0.25 μg/mL MitoSOX Red
(Molecular Probes), 0.25 μg/mL JC-1 (Molecular Probes). Patient-derived iPSCs were generated using episomal vectors as described previously
with modifications: Briefly, each 1 μg of episomal plasmid vectors (Plasmid #27077, #27078, #27080; Addgene) were electroporated into
patient-derived myoblasts (5 × 105 cells) with an electroporator (Neon; Invitrogen). Transformed patient-derived myoblasts (1 × 105 cells)
were reseeded onto mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF; ReproCELL) 4 days after electroporation. The next day, culture medium was replaced with
primate ESC culture medium (ReproCELL) supplemented with 10 ng/mL bFGF (ReproCELL), 100 units/mL penicillin (Gibco), 100 μg/mL streptomycin
(Gibco), and transformed patient-derived myoblasts were maintained at 37 °C under humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2. Emergent colonies with
ESC-like morphology were manually picked up to establish patient-derived iPSCs, and these iPSCs were expanded either on MEF-seeded dishes in
primate ESC culture medium or on Geltrex (Gibco)-coated dishes in mTeSR1 medium (STEMCELL Technologies) supplemented with 100 units/mL
penicillin (Gibco), 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Gibco) for long-term maintenance. Characterization of patient-derived iPSCs via detection of
pluripotency markers was performed as follows: Briefly, cultured and harvested patient-derived iPSCs were transferred onto MEF-seeded 6-well
culture plates and were maintained in primate ESC culture medium at 37 °C under humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2. After 3 days in culture,
patient-derived iPSCs were characterized by immunocytochemical staining. Fluorophore-conjugated primary antibodies used were as follows:
5 μg/mL Cy3-conjugated anti-OCT4 (Millipore), 5 μg/mL Cy3-conjugated anti-NANOG (Millipore), 5 μg/mL AlexaFluor 488-conjugated anti-TRA-1-60
(Millipore), 5 μg/mL AlexaFluor 488-conjugated anti-TRA-1-81 (Millipore). in vitro spontaneous differentiation of patient-derived iPSCs into
EB-mediated three germ layers was performed as follows: Briefly, cultured and harvested patient-derived iPSCs were transferred onto ultra-
low-adherent culture dishes (HydroCell; CellSeed) and were maintained in primate ESC culture medium without bFGF at 37 °C under humidified
atmosphere of 5 % CO2. After 7 days in floating culture, emergent EBs were transferred onto gelatin-coated 6-well culture plates and were
maintained in primate ESC culture medium without bFGF at 37 °C under humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2. After 14 additional days in adherent
culture, spontaneously differentiated cells were characterized by immunocytochemical staining. Primary antibodies used were as follows:
5 μg/mL anti-TUJ1 for ectoderm (Abcam), 5 μg/mL anti-αSMA for mesoderm (Abcam), 5 μg/mL anti-AFP for endoderm (Abcam). Secondary antibody
used was 2.5 μg/mL Alexa Fluor 568 (Molecular Probes). Directed differentiation of patient-derived iPSCs into NSCs was performed according
to a previous report with modifications: Briefly, patient-derived iPSCs were seeded onto Geltrex-coated dishes and were maintained in mTeSR1
medium at 37 °C under humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2. After 3 days in adherent culture, culture medium was switched to NSC induction
medium [1:1 mixture of DMEM/F12 (Gibco) and Neurobasal medium (Gibco) supplemented with 1 × N2 (Gibco), 1 × B27 minus vitamin A (Gibco),
1 × GlutaMAX (Gibco), 100 units/mL penicillin (Gibco), 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Gibco), 10 μM SB431542 (Wako), 100 nM LDN193189 (Wako),
20 ng/mL EGF (Peprotech), 20 ng/mL bFGF (Peprotech)], and patient-derived iPSCs were maintained at 37 °C under humidified atmosphere of 5 %
CO2. Emergent NSCs were expanded in NSC induction medium and were characterized by immunocytochemical staining. Fluorophore-conjugated
primary antibody used was 5 μg/mL AlexaFluor 488-conjugated anti-Nestin (Millipore). Directed differentiation of patient-derived iPSCs into
NCCs was performed according to a previous report with modifications: Briefly, patient-derived iPSCs were seeded onto Geltrex-coated dishes
and were maintained in mTeSR1 medium at 37 °C under humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2. After 3 days in adherent culture, culture medium was
switched to NCC induction medium [mTeSR1 medium (STEMCELL Technologies) supplemented with 100 units/mL penicillin (Gibco), 100 μg/mL
streptomycin (Gibco), 2 μM (2’Z,3’E)-6-bromoindirubin-3’-oxime (Wako), 20 μM SB431542 (Wako)], and patient-derived iPSCs were maintained at
37 °C under humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2. Emergent NCCs were expanded in NCC induction medium and were characterized by
immunocytochemical staining. Fluorophore-conjugated primary antibody used was 5 μg/mL FITC-conjugated anti-HNK1 (Miltenyi Biotec). Terminal
differentiation of patient-derived NSCs and NCCs into neurons was performed as follows: Briefly, patient-derived NSCs and NCCs were seeded
at high cell density onto Geltrex-coated 6-well culture plates and were maintained at 37 °C under humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2. After
3 days in culture, culture medium was switched to neuron induction medium [Neurobasal medium (Gibco) supplemented with 1 × N2 (Gibco), 1 ×
B27 minus vitamin A (Gibco), 1 × GlutaMAX (Gibco), 100 units/mL penicillin (Gibco), 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Gibco), 10 ng/mL BDNF
(Peprotech), 10 ng/mL GDNF (Peprotech), 10 ng/mL NGF (Peprotech), 500 μM dbcAMP (Sigma), 200 μM ascorbic acid (Wako)], and patient-derived
NSCs and NCCs were maintained at 37 °C under humidified atmosphere of 5 % CO2 for more than 2 weeks. For immunocytochemical detection of
emergent NSC-derived neurons, 5 μg/mL anti-TUJ1 (Abcam) and 2.5 μg/mL Alexa Fluor 568 (Molecular Probes) were used. For immunocytochemical
detection of emergent NCC-derived neurons, 5 μg/mL PE-conjugated anti-Peripherin (Santa Cruz) was used. We found a patient who was
clinically diagnosed as MELAS with multiple organ involvement including hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, acute pancreatitis, gastrointestinal
malabsorption, renal tubular disturbance, and endocrine glucose intolerance (Fig. 1a-d). We identified a disease-causative mutation,
m.5541C > T heteroplasmy in MT-TW gene, in this patient (Fig. 1e and Additional file 1: Table S1). Skeletal muscle tissues and the
established myoblasts showed quite high mutant proportions (~100 %), whereas blood tissues showed relatively low mutant proportions (~50 %).
The same m.5541C > T heteroplasmy was also observed in blood tissues from this patient’s asymptomatic mother at quite low mutation levels
(~10 %). The mutated position in the anticodon-stem of MT-TW gene was evolutionarily conserved through most parts of primates and typical
eukaryotes (Fig. 1f). We also performed in silico calculation of mitochondrial tRNATrp stability for both wild-type and m.5541C > T mutant
(Additional file 1: Figure S1). Mutant mitochondrial tRNATrp was destabilized by m.5541C > T and was probably existed more physicochemically
stable but biochemically inappropriate conformation. Our findings suggest that m.5541C > T presumably induces defects in mitochondrial
tRNATrp-associated translation machinery. Although m.5541C > T was previously reported and predicted as "definitely pathogenic" , and our
patient was the second case to show this mutation, the detailed molecular pathomechanisms of m.5541C > T —how this mutation influences
mitochondrial pathophysiology, which is closely related to the variation and the severity of clinical symptoms in affected individuals—
remain unclear. We comprehensively evaluated mitochondrial function using patient-derived myoblasts carrying quasi-homoplasmic m.5541C > T
(i.e., ~100 % mutant mtDNA exists within a cell). On mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes, severely decreased CIV activity and
moderately decreased CI activity were both detected in the patient, whereas the other respiratory chain complexes showed within normal
ranges (Fig. 2a,b). CIV holoenzyme and CIV-containing respiratory supramolecular architectures were also diminished in the patient, whereas
the other respiratory chain complexes showed almost normal levels with the exception of moderately decreased CI holoenzyme amount
(Fig. 2c,d). Such CIV holoenzyme deficits in the patient were most likely because of decreased mRNA and protein expression levels of mtDNA-
encoded CIV structural subunits (Fig. 2e-g). On mitochondrial physiology, widespread dysfunction such as decreased ATP level, increased
oxidative stress level, and damaged membrane potential level were all observed in the patient (Fig. 2h-j). We also performed in silico
prediction on mitochondrial tryptophan contents and their locations in each mtDNA-encoded CIV structural subunit (Additional file 1: Figure
S2). Amino acid sequences in all mtDNA-encoded CIV structural subunits showed high homology between bovine and human, and bovine
mitochondrial tryptophan residues were predominantly located in α-helix and β-sheet domains essential for the maintenance of CIV structural
subunit conformations. Some human mitochondrial tryptophan residues in mtDNA-encoded CIV structural subunits were also located at the
boundary between CIV structural subunits necessary for CIV holoenzyme assembly. Our results clearly indicate that m.5541C > T primarily
induces the aberrant steady-state of mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes, followed by severely injured mitochondrial homeostasis.Fig.
2Mutant mitochondrial tRNATrp triggers widespread mitochondrial dysfunction. a Enzymatic activities of individual mitochondrial respiratory
chain complexes for cultured myoblasts of both controls (n = 10, closed circles) and the patient (open circles). Error bars indicate as the
means with SD of controls. All samples were measured in triplicate and averaged. b Representative images of cytochemical staining of COX and
SDH for cultured myoblasts from both controls and the patient. Cell nuclei were co-stained with hematoxylin. c,d Immunodetection of c
individual respiratory chain complexes and d respiratory chain supercomplexes for isolated mitochondria from cultured myoblasts of both
controls and the patient. e Gene expression of several CIV structural subunits for extracted mRNA from cultured myoblasts of both controls
and the patient. f Protein expression of several CIV structural subunits for isolated mitochondria from cultured myoblasts of both controls
and the patient. g Representative images of immunocytochemical staining of CIV structural subunits for cultured myoblasts of both controls
and the patient; MT-CO1 (red), COX4 (red). Mitochondria were co-stained with MitoTracker (green). h ATP level for cultured myoblasts of both
controls (n = 10, closed circles) and the patient (open circles). Error bar indicates as the mean with SD of controls. All samples were
measured in triplicate and averaged. i Oxidative stress level for cultured myoblasts of both controls (n = 10, closed circles) and the
patient (open circle). Fluorescence intensity ratio of MitoSOX/MitoTracker served as mitochondrial ROS level. Error bar indicates as the
mean with SD of controls. All samples were measured in triplicate and averaged. j Membrane potential (ΔΨm) level for cultured myoblasts of
both controls (n = 10, closed circles) and the patient (open circle). Fluorescence intensity ratio of JC-1 dye aggregates/monomers served as
mitochondrial ΔΨm level. Error bar indicates as the mean with SD of controls. All samples were measured in triplicate and averaged Mutant
mitochondrial tRNATrp triggers widespread mitochondrial dysfunction. a Enzymatic activities of individual mitochondrial respiratory chain
complexes for cultured myoblasts of both controls (n = 10, closed circles) and the patient (open circles). Error bars indicate as the means
with SD of controls. All samples were measured in triplicate and averaged. b Representative images of cytochemical staining of COX and SDH
for cultured myoblasts from both controls and the patient. Cell nuclei were co-stained with hematoxylin. c,d Immunodetection of c individual
respiratory chain complexes and d respiratory chain supercomplexes for isolated mitochondria from cultured myoblasts of both controls and
the patient. e Gene expression of several CIV structural subunits for extracted mRNA from cultured myoblasts of both controls and the
patient. f Protein expression of several CIV structural subunits for isolated mitochondria from cultured myoblasts of both controls and the
patient. g Representative images of immunocytochemical staining of CIV structural subunits for cultured myoblasts of both controls and the
patient; MT-CO1 (red), COX4 (red). Mitochondria were co-stained with MitoTracker (green). h ATP level for cultured myoblasts of both
controls (n = 10, closed circles) and the patient (open circles). Error bar indicates as the mean with SD of controls. All samples were
measured in triplicate and averaged. i Oxidative stress level for cultured myoblasts of both controls (n = 10, closed circles) and the
patient (open circle). Fluorescence intensity ratio of MitoSOX/MitoTracker served as mitochondrial ROS level. Error bar indicates as the
mean with SD of controls. All samples were measured in triplicate and averaged. j Membrane potential (ΔΨm) level for cultured myoblasts of
both controls (n = 10, closed circles) and the patient (open circle). Fluorescence intensity ratio of JC-1 dye aggregates/monomers served as
mitochondrial ΔΨm level. Error bar indicates as the mean with SD of controls. All samples were measured in triplicate and averaged We next
generated each 3 lines of integration-free disease-relevant iPSCs derived from myoblasts of both control and the patient carrying quasi-
homoplasmic m.5541C > T as in vitro disease models. No apparent differences in embryonic stem cell (ESC)-like pluripotent characteristics
were confirmed between iPSCs derived from control and the patient (Fig. 3 and Additional file 1: Figure S3). To elucidate patient-specific
cellular disease phenotypes triggered by quasi-homoplasmic m.5541C > T, we used myotubes and iPSC-derived neurons of both control and the
patient (Fig. 4a). In myogenic lineage, no significant differences in in vitro differentiation propensity into ACTA1-positive myotubes were
observed between control and the patient (Fig. 4b,c). This phenomenon indicates that m.5541C > T seems not to affect skeletal muscle
development in the patient regardless of serious mitochondrial dysfunction (see also Figs. 1d and 2). We differentiated patient-derived
iPSCs into central nervous system (CNS) lineage. Efficient differentiation into nestin-positive NSCs (>95 % conversion) was observed in both
control and the patient (Fig. 4d,e and Additional file 1: Figure S4a); however, the number of TUJ1-positive mature CNS neurons was markedly
decreased only in the patient (Fig. 4f,g and Additional file 1: Figure S4b), and most parts of patient-derived differentiating NSCs finally
died during long-term terminal differentiation (data not shown). We also differentiated patient-derived iPSCs into peripheral nervous system
(PNS) lineage. A trend quite similar to CNS lineage, stable differentiation into HNK1-positive NCCs (>95 % conversion) was confirmed in both
control and the patient (Fig. 4h,i and Additional file 1: Figure S4c); however, significant decrease of peripherin-positive mature PNS
neurons was detected only in the patient (Fig. 4j,k and Additional file 1: Figure S4d), and patient-derived differentiating NCCs no longer
survived during extended periods of neuronal maturation (data not shown). Several recent studies have demonstrated that mitochondria are
gradually rejuvenated to an ESC-like "quiescent state" during cellular reprogramming . Our results also suggest that stem/progenitor cells
of both CNS and PNS lineages are minimally influenced by m.5541C > T, most likely because these cell types may possess a less active
mitochondrial respiration state similar to ESCs and iPSCs. Therefore, we conclude that the molecular pathogenicity of m.5541C > T is
strongly visible in terminally differentiated post-mitotic neurons, but not their stem/progenitor cells, which is probably associated with
the degree of mitochondrial maturation during cellular lineage-commitment process.Fig. 3Generation of disease-relevant iPSCs carrying all
mutant mitochondrial tRNATrp. a Representative images of the established iPSC lines; OCT4 (red), NANOG (red), TRA-1-60 (green), TRA-1-81
(green). Arrowheads in electropherograms indicate m.5541C > T. b Representative images of the embryoid body (EB)-mediated in vitro
spontaneous differentiation into three germ layers; TUJ1 (ectoderm, red), αSMA (mesoderm, red), AFP (endoderm, red). c Expression of other
representative pluripotency genes in the established iPSC lines. d Silencing of transgenes expression in the established iPSC lines.
Parental myoblasts after 7 days of transduction were also used as positive samples for both control and the patient. Expression level of
each transgene was calculated using ΔΔCT-based relative quantification method by real-time PCR. Measurements were performed in triplicate.
ND: Not DetectedFig. 4Mutant mitochondrial tRNATrp strongly impairs neuronal maturation, but does not affect skeletal muscle development. a
Experimental design used to identify patient-specific disease phenotypes triggered by m.5541C > T. b Representative images of myotubes after
2 weeks of differentiation; ACTA1 (red). Cell nuclei were co-stained with Hoechst 33342 (blue). c Differentiation efficiency of myoblasts
into myotubes. The number of ACTA1-positive myotubes was counted using a cytometer to estimate differentiation efficiency. Assays were
performed using 3 experimental replicates for both control and the patient. Error bars indicate as the means with SD. Statistical
significance was evaluated by unpaired, two-tailed t-test. NS: Not Significant. d Representative images of iPSC-derived NSCs; Nestin
(green). e Expression of representative NSC marker genes in iPSC-derived NSCs. f Representative images of CNS neurons after 2 weeks of
differentiation; TUJ1 (red). Cell nuclei were co-stained with Hoechst 33342 (blue). g Differentiation efficiency of NSCs into CNS neurons.
The number of TUJ1-positive CNS neurons was counted using a cytometer to estimate differentiation efficiency. Assays were performed using 3
experimental replicates for both control and the patient. Error bars indicate as the means with SD. Statistical significance was evaluated
by unpaired, two-tailed t-test. *: P < 0.05. h Representative images of iPSC-derived NCCs; HNK1 (green). i Expression of representative NCC
marker genes in iPSC-derived NCCs. j Representative images of PNS neurons after 2 weeks of differentiation; Peripherin (red). Cell nuclei
were co-stained with Hoechst 33342 (blue). k Differentiation efficiency of NCCs into PNS neurons. The number of Peripherin-positive PNS
neurons was counted using a cytometer to estimate differentiation efficiency. Assays were performed using 3 experimental replicates for both
control and the patient. Error bars indicate as the means with SD. Statistical significance was evaluated by unpaired, two-tailed t-test. *:
P < 0.05 Generation of disease-relevant iPSCs carrying all mutant mitochondrial tRNATrp. a Representative images of the established iPSC
lines; OCT4 (red), NANOG (red), TRA-1-60 (green), TRA-1-81 (green). Arrowheads in electropherograms indicate m.5541C > T. b Representative
images of the embryoid body (EB)-mediated in vitro spontaneous differentiation into three germ layers; TUJ1 (ectoderm, red), αSMA (mesoderm,
red), AFP (endoderm, red). c Expression of other representative pluripotency genes in the established iPSC lines. d Silencing of transgenes
expression in the established iPSC lines. Parental myoblasts after 7 days of transduction were also used as positive samples for both
control and the patient. Expression level of each transgene was calculated using ΔΔCT-based relative quantification method by real-time PCR.
Measurements were performed in triplicate. ND: Not Detected Mutant mitochondrial tRNATrp strongly impairs neuronal maturation, but does not
affect skeletal muscle development. a Experimental design used to identify patient-specific disease phenotypes triggered by m.5541C > T. b
Representative images of myotubes after 2 weeks of differentiation; ACTA1 (red). Cell nuclei were co-stained with Hoechst 33342 (blue). c
Differentiation efficiency of myoblasts into myotubes. The number of ACTA1-positive myotubes was counted using a cytometer to estimate
differentiation efficiency. Assays were performed using 3 experimental replicates for both control and the patient. Error bars indicate as
the means with SD. Statistical significance was evaluated by unpaired, two-tailed t-test. NS: Not Significant. d Representative images of
iPSC-derived NSCs; Nestin (green). e Expression of representative NSC marker genes in iPSC-derived NSCs. f Representative images of CNS
neurons after 2 weeks of differentiation; TUJ1 (red). Cell nuclei were co-stained with Hoechst 33342 (blue). g Differentiation efficiency of
NSCs into CNS neurons. The number of TUJ1-positive CNS neurons was counted using a cytometer to estimate differentiation efficiency. Assays
were performed using 3 experimental replicates for both control and the patient. Error bars indicate as the means with SD. Statistical
significance was evaluated by unpaired, two-tailed t-test. *: P < 0.05. h Representative images of iPSC-derived NCCs; HNK1 (green). i
Expression of representative NCC marker genes in iPSC-derived NCCs. j Representative images of PNS neurons after 2 weeks of differentiation;
Peripherin (red). Cell nuclei were co-stained with Hoechst 33342 (blue). k Differentiation efficiency of NCCs into PNS neurons. The number
of Peripherin-positive PNS neurons was counted using a cytometer to estimate differentiation efficiency. Assays were performed using 3
experimental replicates for both control and the patient. Error bars indicate as the means with SD. Statistical significance was evaluated
by unpaired, two-tailed t-test. *: P < 0.05 The molecular pathomechanisms of m.5541C > T can be summarized as follows: This mutation firstly
loses the appropriate base pair interaction, from Watson-Crick to T-G mismatching, in the anticodon-stem of MT-TW gene and induces defects
in mitochondrial tRNATrp-associated translation machinery most likely due to inadequate anticodon recognition of mitochondrial tryptophan by
its altered conformation. Mutant mitochondrial tRNATrp disturbs the synthesis of mtDNA-encoded respiratory chain complexes subunits; in this
case, markedly decreased amounts of mtDNA-encoded CIV subunits predominantly inhibit CIV holoenzyme formation at each assembly process . In
fact, some patients carrying this mutation or other reported pathogenic mutations in the anticodon-stem of MT-TW gene also present severe
COX deficiency [8, 26, 32]. Therefore, our findings clearly demonstrate why mutant mitochondrial tRNATrp is able to cause severe COX
deficiency as one of common clinical phenotypes. Induced mitochondrial respiratory dysfunction triggered by loss of CIV holoenzyme severely
impairs mitochondrial biogenesis and bioenergetics such as decreased ATP level, increased oxidative stress level, and damaged membrane
potential level. Increased oxidative stress level may promote the accumulation of oxidative damages to other mitochondrial enzymes,
substrates, lipids, and mtDNA, all of which lead to premature cell senescence. Damaged membrane potential level may also accelerate the
leakage of cytochrome c molecules in mitochondrial electron transport system, which induces apoptotic cell death. Thus, m.5541C > T causes
widespread mitochondrial dysfunction, which is closely related to cell-type-specific physiological impairment in various post-mitotic
tissues and organs in this patient. This case is consistent with MELAS with multiple organ involvement characterized by its various clinical
symptoms; however, we did not find any typical abnormalities in patient-derived skeletal muscle tissues other than diffuse COX deficiency.
Generally, 80-90 % of MELAS patients those carrying mutant mtDNAs (e.g., m.3243A > G in MT-TL1 gene) exhibit ragged-red-fibers and/or
strongly SDH-reactive blood vessels in skeletal muscle tissues, which indicate morphological, numerical, and/or physiological abnormalities
in mitochondria. These findings suggest that quasi-homoplasmic m.5541C > T may cause rare pathological signatures in skeletal muscle
development, presumably because this patient exhibits no significant differences in in vitro differentiation propensity into terminally
differentiated myotubes as compared with control regardless of serious mitochondrial dysfunction. Recently, several groups have also
reported iPSC-based disease models for other heteroplasmic mutant mtDNAs . As the common perceptions, intracellular mutant mtDNA proportions
must always be considered for actual in vitro recapitulation of mitochondrial diseases at each cellular fate-determining process such as
reprogramming, self-renewal, or differentiation. From this viewpoint, we generated integration-free patient-derived iPSCs carrying ~100 %
mutant mtDNA and used them as in vitro cellular disease models to investigate the definitive genotype-phenotype relationship. We also
demonstrated that terminally differentiated iPSC-derived CNS and PNS neurons, but not their stem/progenitor cells, are strongly influenced
by m.5541C>T, most likely because the molecular pathogenic severity of mutant mitochondrial tRNATrp may be determined by the degree of
physiological and morphological maturation in mitochondria. Although our presenting results do not completely elucidate the relationship
between in vitro cellular disease phenotypes and in vivo clinical symptoms of this patient, our approach would be widely available for
understanding bona fide molecular pathomechanisms and cellular pathophysiology of affected tissues and organs in patients carrying
heteroplasmic mtDNA mutations, as well as for further drug discovery applications. Throughout this study, we identified the "definite"
molecular pathomechanisms of m.5541C>T and demonstrated cell-type-specific in vitro disease phenotypes triggered by mutant mitochondrial
tRNATrp using integration-free disease-relevant iPSCs derived from myoblasts of the patient. Our iPSC-based strategy therefore holds
enormous promise for the development of evidence-based, personalized diagnostics and therapeutics to patients exhibiting various
mitochondrial diseases. Additional file 1: Supplementary Figures and Tables. (DOC 4252 kb) Figure S1. Comparison of mitochondrial tRNATrp
stability between wild-type and m.5541C > T mutant (related to Fig. 1). Figure S2. Protein modeling and amino acid sequences of each mtDNA-
encoded CIV subunit (related to Fig. 2). Figure S3. Generation of disease-relevant iPSCs carrying all mutant mitochondrial tRNATrp (related
to Fig. 3). Figure S4. Mutant mitochondrial tRNATrp strongly impairs neuronal maturation (related to Fig. 4). Table S1. mtDNA sequence
variants in this patient. Table S2. Primer list. Table S3. TaqMan probe list. Supplementary Figures and Tables. (DOC 4252 kb) Figure S1.
Comparison of mitochondrial tRNATrp stability between wild-type and m.5541C > T mutant (related to Fig. 1). Figure S2. Protein modeling and
amino acid sequences of each mtDNA-encoded CIV subunit (related to Fig. 2). Figure S3. Generation of disease-relevant iPSCs carrying all
mutant mitochondrial tRNATrp (related to Fig. 3). Figure S4. Mutant mitochondrial tRNATrp strongly impairs neuronal maturation (related to
Fig. 4). Table S1. mtDNA sequence variants in this patient. Table S2. Primer list. Table S3. TaqMan probe list. Competing interests The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’ contribution HH conceived the study, designed and performed experiments. AK,
HK, and IN collected the patient’s clinical data. HH and YG analyzed and interpreted data, wrote the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. We are grateful to the patient’s family for participating in this study. We also thank Mayuko Kato, Junko
Takei, Yumiko Ondo, Yasuha Ono, Saki Okabe, Miyuki Kanazawa, and Dr. Mutsumi Yokota (NCNP, Japan) for their assistances. We also appreciate
Dr. Ikuya Nonaka (NCNP, Japan) for his critical comment on the manuscript. This study was financially supported in part by Grant-in-Aid for
Research on Intractable Diseases (Mitochondrial Disorders) from the Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare, Japan; by AMED-CREST from the
Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development.
