The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors, Biljana Ilkovski and Alistair Pagnamenta should be regarded
as joint First Authors. Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins are ubiquitously expressed in the human body and are important
for various functions at the cell surface. Mutations in many GPI biosynthesis genes have been described to date in patients with multi-
system disease and together these constitute a subtype of congenital disorders of glycosylation. We used whole exome sequencing in two
families to investigate the genetic basis of disease and used RNA and cellular studies to investigate the functional consequences of
sequence variants in the PIGY gene. Two families with different phenotypes had homozygous recessive sequence variants in the GPI
biosynthesis gene PIGY. Two sisters with c.137T>C (p.Leu46Pro) PIGY variants had multi-system disease including dysmorphism, seizures,
severe developmental delay, cataracts and early death. There were significantly reduced levels of GPI-anchored proteins (CD55 and CD59) on
the surface of patient-derived skin fibroblasts (∼20–50% compared with controls). In a second, consanguineous family, two siblings had
moderate development delay and microcephaly. A homozygous PIGY promoter variant (c.-540G>A) was detected within a 7.7 Mb region of
autozygosity. This variant was predicted to disrupt a SP1 consensus binding site and was shown to be associated with reduced gene
expression. Mutations in PIGY can occur in coding and non-coding regions of the gene and cause variable phenotypes. This article contributes
to understanding of the range of disease phenotypes and disease genes associated with deficiencies of the GPI-anchor biosynthesis pathway
and also serves to highlight the potential importance of analysing variants detected in 5′-UTR regions despite their typically low coverage
in exome data. Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) acts as a membrane anchor for many cell-surface proteins including receptors, enzymes and
adhesion molecules. At least 25 genes are involved in the step-wise production of mature GPI-anchored proteins (GPI-APs) (1). GPI
biosynthesis is initiated in the endoplasmic reticulum from phosphatidylinositol (PI) in a reaction mediated by the GPI-N-
acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GPI-GnT) complex. The GPI-GnT enzyme complex consists of seven proteins including PIG-A, PIG-C, PIG-H, PIG-P,
PIG-Q, DPM2 and PIG-Y. Phosphatidylinositol glycan class Y (PIG-Y), the smallest subunit of this complex, is a 71-amino acid protein
containing two putative transmembrane domains and it directly associates with the catalytic subunit PIG-A. In the absence of PIG-Y activity,
the cell surface levels of GPI-APs are severely decreased (2). The first disorders to be described in association with deficiencies of the
GPI-anchor biosynthesis pathway were paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria (PNH), caused by somatic mutations in PIGA (3), in haemopoietic
cells, and inherited GPI deficiency caused by a hypomorphic promoter mutation in PIGM (4). Whole exome sequencing (WES) technology has
facilitated the discovery of pathogenic mutations in several other GPI biosynthesis genes. Germline mutations in PIGL (5), PIGM (4), PIGN
(6), PIGO (7), PIGT (8), PIGV (9), PIGW (10), PIGQ (11) and PIGA (12) have all been reported in a small number of families in association
with multi-system disease. Common clinical features include moderate to severe developmental delay, seizures and dysmorphic facial features.
Reduced levels of GPI-APs CD59, or membrane attack complex-inhibitory protein, and FLAER (fluorescently labelled inactive toxin aerolysin
which binds to GPI-linked structures) at the cell surface have been described in many of these patients (13). We have identified two
different sequence variants in PIGY in two unrelated families associated with different phenotypes. In Family A, we identified a homozygous
c.137T>C variant in two affected sisters presenting with a multi-system disease encompassing dysmorphism, developmental delay, seizures,
cataracts and gastrointestinal dysmotility. Levels of two GPI-APs on patient fibroblasts were reduced, providing evidence that these
sequence variants impair GPI synthesis and are pathogenic. In Family B, we identified a c.-540G>A mutation in the promoter region in a
consensus SP1 site. The affected siblings from Family B have primary microcephaly, moderate developmental delay and are more mildly affected
in comparison to Family A. This report identifies PIGY as a new disease-causing gene with variable expressivity and increases our knowledge
of the phenotypes that can arise from abnormal GPI biosynthesis. Two affected sisters were the only children of a non-consanguineous
Australian couple of Caucasian decent. Patient II-1 from Family A was born at 32 weeks gestation and had a complicated course with
necrotizing enterocolitis and chronic lung disease. She was dysmorphic and had brachyphalangy (Fig. 1), 2–3 toe syndactyly, elbow and knee
flexion contractures and severe bilateral hip dysplasia. At 5 months of age, she developed an intractable seizure disorder with multifocal
spike and slow wave activity on EEG. This was followed by developmental regression and death at 2 years of age from a respiratory infection.
Figure 1.(A) Clinical features of patients with mutations in PIGY. Family A, Patient II-1 had proximal limb shortening, left hip dysplasia
and contractures were present at the elbows, hips and knees (i). Dysmorphic features included bitemporal narrowing, upturned nares,
depressed nasal bridge, deep-set eyes, a short neck (ii) and ears with thickened helices and fleshy earlobes (iii). Brachyphalange, fifth
finger clinodactyly and adducted thumbs were present (v). Brachytelephalange was present on X-ray (iv). Family B Patient II-2 (v) and
Patient II-3 (vi) had a milder phenotype, with soft dysmorphic features including long palpebral fissures, a bulbous tip to the nose and a
wide mouth. Patient II-2 had a strabismus. (B) Pedigrees of Families A and B. Shading indicates affected individuals. The probands are
indicated with an arrow. Proven heterozygote carriers are shown by a dot. Sanger sequencing validation from Family A confirms the homozygous
missense variant c.137T>C (p.Leu46Pro) in the PIGY gene (NM_001042616.1) in the two affected sisters. Region shown corresponds to chr4:
89,442,795–813 (hg19). For Family B, Sanger validation and segregation testing of the PIGY promoter variant c.-540G>A is shown. The
consensus SP1 binding motif is indicated with a black rectangle. Region shown corresponds to chr4: 89,444,938–958. (A) Clinical features of
patients with mutations in PIGY. Family A, Patient II-1 had proximal limb shortening, left hip dysplasia and contractures were present at
the elbows, hips and knees (i). Dysmorphic features included bitemporal narrowing, upturned nares, depressed nasal bridge, deep-set eyes, a
short neck (ii) and ears with thickened helices and fleshy earlobes (iii). Brachyphalange, fifth finger clinodactyly and adducted thumbs
were present (v). Brachytelephalange was present on X-ray (iv). Family B Patient II-2 (v) and Patient II-3 (vi) had a milder phenotype, with
soft dysmorphic features including long palpebral fissures, a bulbous tip to the nose and a wide mouth. Patient II-2 had a strabismus. (B)
Pedigrees of Families A and B. Shading indicates affected individuals. The probands are indicated with an arrow. Proven heterozygote
carriers are shown by a dot. Sanger sequencing validation from Family A confirms the homozygous missense variant c.137T>C (p.Leu46Pro) in
the PIGY gene (NM_001042616.1) in the two affected sisters. Region shown corresponds to chr4: 89,442,795–813 (hg19). For Family B, Sanger
validation and segregation testing of the PIGY promoter variant c.-540G>A is shown. The consensus SP1 binding motif is indicated with a
black rectangle. Region shown corresponds to chr4: 89,444,938–958. II-2 had abnormal antenatal scans from 25 weeks gestation with enlarged
echogenic kidneys and bowel and long-bone growth failure. Delivery was induced at 28 weeks gestation due to polyhydramnios. Similar
dysmorphic features, brachyphalangy, proximal limb shortening, contractures and left hip dysplasia were present. She had bilateral inguinal
hernias and bilateral dilatation of the renal collecting systems, with markedly increased echogenicity of the renal parenchyma. Intractable
seizures commenced at 6 weeks of age, her development regressed and at 5 months she was mostly unresponsive with poor vision. She died at 7
months of age secondary to an aspiration. In addition, both affected sisters from Family A had congenital cataracts, intermittent episodes
of abdominal distress and vomiting and growth failure. Head growth was normal. MRI brain was normal in both neonates, but showed loss of
white matter and cerebral volume in Patient II-1 at 9 months. No abnormalities were present on diffusion-weighted images. Skeletal survey
showed osteopenia and brachytelephalangy. Creatine kinase (CK) measurements were persistently elevated in both siblings (554–3640 U/l,
normal range = 15–180 U/l). Muscle biopsies were taken from rectus abdominus (II-1, 9 months) and vastus lateralis (II-2, 8 days) showed
moderate variation in fibre size with many small, rounded atrophic fibres, increased fibrosis and adipose tissue. No degenerating or
regenerating fibres were seen, but in Patient II-2, acid phosphatase staining was increased suggestive of active degeneration. Alkaline
phosphatase levels were elevated in both patients (443–853 u/l, normal range = 40–300 U/l). Extensive metabolic work-up was normal including
urine metabolic and oligosaccharide screen, lactate, thyroid function, very long chain fatty acids, 7-dehydrocholesterol,
8-dehydrocholesterol and 8(9) cholestanol, serum transferrin isoforms, white blood cell enzyme testing for CDG type 1A and 1B, white blood
cell lysosomal enzymes, bile alcohol analysis, sterol analysis, urine and plasma creatine and guanidine-acetate and CSF lactate, amino acids
and neurotransmitters. Neuraminidase on cultured skin fibroblasts were normal. Respiratory chain enzymology was normal in liver. Complex
1-IV were all low relative to protein in muscle, but citrate synthase was also low likely secondary to poor handling and storage. Karyotype
was also normal. Additional studies in II-2 included mildly elevated erythrocyte plasmalogen levels and normal serum phytanic acid, normal
DHAP-AT and DHAP-s enzyme activity and subtelomere FISH. Two siblings, born to consanguineous parents of Pakistani descent, were referred
with global developmental delay and microcephaly. II-2 was born following an uncomplicated pregnancy and delivery, but had microcephaly at 6
weeks of age. At 5 years this was 46 cm (−3 to −4 SD). His developmental milestones were delayed. He sat with support at 15 months and
walked at 3 years of age. His speech was delayed with the acquisition of only short two to three word sentences at the age of 5 years. He
was short-sighted with a strabismus and had behavioural difficulties with aggressive outbursts. II-3 was born following an uncomplicated
pregnancy and delivery. She had microcephaly noted at 2 weeks of age and at 2 years had a head circumference of 42.1 cm (−4 to −5SD). Her
development was delayed. She sat with support at 18 months and was not walking at the age of 3 years. Her speech was better than her
brother's with 10–15 single words at age 3 years. She had poor concentration and was hyperactive. The parental head circumferences were
within the normal range. Neither child had seizures. There was mild facial dysmorphism with long palpebral fissures, a bulbous tip to the
nose and a wide mouth (Fig. 1A). Brachytelephalangy was not present. WES of DNA from II-1 and II-2 from Family A identified a homozygous
missense variant c.137T>C (p.Leu46Pro) in the coding region of the PIGY gene in both individuals (NM_001042616.1). Sanger sequencing
confirmed variant segregation was consistent with an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern (Fig. 1C). Analysis of allelic ratios across
chromosome 4 indicated that the homozygous c.137T>C variant lay within a ∼10 Mb segment of autozygosity, suggesting that the parents may be
distantly related (Supplementary Material, Fig. S1). In silico analysis predicted the variant to be pathogenic (PolyPhen-2 score of 1.0)
(14) and the variant was not present in the NHLBI Exome Variant Server (http://evs.gs.washington.edu/EVS/, accessed April 2014), 63 000
exomes ExAc (Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC), Cambridge, MA, URL: http://exac.broadinstitute.org/, accessed, January 2015) or in the
1000 genomes project (15,16). For Family B, an autozygosity mapping approach identified candidate regions on 4q22.1-q22.3 and 10p14-pter,
both 7.7 Mb in size. WES was performed for the proband (II-2), and the resulting variants were intersected with these two candidate loci.
This revealed a c.-540G>A variant in a conserved region of the PIGY 5′-UTR. This variant was not in either of the publically available
databases mentioned above and was not detected in 274 in-house genomes of mixed ancestry (see www.well.ox.ac.uk/wgs500) or 108 Punjabi
individuals from Lahore. However, it should be noted that the region of the variant in Family B is not covered well by either the SureSelect
or TrueSeq platforms (Supplementary Material, Fig. S2) and is not covered in the ExAC dataset. Sanger sequencing confirmed segregation
consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance (Fig. 1C). Analysis of the exome outside of the homozygous region revealed no likely
causative coding variants. Given the known function of PIG-Y, we investigated the effects of the p.Leu46Pro substitution on the surface
expression of two GPI-APs, CD55 and CD59. Skin fibroblasts derived from skin biopsies from both affected sisters had a ∼20–50% reduction of
cell surface expression of CD55 and CD59 compared with three different controls (Fig. 2A) [For CD55-APC: Patient 1, P = 0.0055 (mean
fluorescence intensity (MFI) = 2809 ± 521), Patient 2, P = 0.0449 (MFI = 2393 ± 582) (pooled controls MFI = 3042 ± 485); for CD59-PE:
Patient 1, P = 0.0165 (MFI = 2422 ± 921), Patient 2, P = 0.0164 (MFI = 1927 ± 582) (Pooled control, MFI = 3988 ± 485) using a standard
Students' t-test]. These data suggest that the PIGY p.Leu46Pro substitution disrupts GPI biosynthesis or interferes with GPI anchoring
capacity, associated with reduced expression of CD55 and CD59 on patient cells. Skin fibroblasts were not available from Family B. Figure
2.(A) Analysis of patient tissue by flow cytometric analysis. Cultured skin fibroblasts from Patients II-1 and II-2 from Family A were
labelled with anti-Human CD55-APC and anti-Human CD59-PE and analysed by flow cytometry. (A) Histograms showing the mean fluorescent
intensity (MFI) are depicted for Patient II-1 and show a reduction in MFI for CD55-APC and CD59-PE (red) compared with control (blue). (B)
Graphical representation of these data shows a statistically significant reduction in MFI for these GPI markers. Skin fibroblast biopsies
were taken from Patient II-1 and Patient II-2 at 5 months and 8 days, respectively. Primary human fibroblast controls were used from three
different individuals at ages 5.5 years, 6 months and 3.5 months. All experiments were performed in triplicate. (A) Analysis of patient
tissue by flow cytometric analysis. Cultured skin fibroblasts from Patients II-1 and II-2 from Family A were labelled with anti-Human
CD55-APC and anti-Human CD59-PE and analysed by flow cytometry. (A) Histograms showing the mean fluorescent intensity (MFI) are depicted for
Patient II-1 and show a reduction in MFI for CD55-APC and CD59-PE (red) compared with control (blue). (B) Graphical representation of these
data shows a statistically significant reduction in MFI for these GPI markers. Skin fibroblast biopsies were taken from Patient II-1 and
Patient II-2 at 5 months and 8 days, respectively. Primary human fibroblast controls were used from three different individuals at ages 5.5
years, 6 months and 3.5 months. All experiments were performed in triplicate. We permanently transfected Daudi cells (PIG-Y-deficient human
Burkitt's lymphoma cell line) with wild-type (WT) or p.Leu46Pro mutant vector constructs driven by the weak promoter followed by assessment
of cell surface expression of CD55 and CD59 by FACS analysis. WT-PIG-Y transfection restored the cell surface expression of both CD55 and
CD59, but the p.Leu46Pro mutant PIG-Y did not (Fig. 3A). Levels of their expression by the mutant PIGY were similar to the empty vector
control. To test if the lack of activity is due to the instability of the mutant PIG-Y protein, stronger (17) expression was needed for
detection by western blotting. For this, Daudi cells were transiently transfected with WT or mutant (p.Leu46Pro) pME-oriP HA-PIGY vectors.
With this strong promoter-driven vector, the mutant PIGY restored the surface expression of CD59 similarly to WT PIGY, indicating that the
mutant PIG-Y likely has some GPI biosynthetic activity (Fig. 3B). As demonstrated by western blotting, the mutant protein expression was
significantly decreased compared with when WT-PIGY was transfected (Fig. 3B). These data suggest that the p.Leu46Pro mutation reduces PIG-Y
protein stability leading to lower protein levels and a reduced capacity to synthesize GPI anchors for correct protein targeting to the cell
surface. Figure 3.(A) Daudi cells (a PIG-Y deficient human Burkitt's lymphoma cell line) were transiently transfected with normal (WT) or
mutant (p.Leu46Pro) PIGY driven by minimum TATA box promoter in pTAL oriP puro PIGY (weak promoter). Restoration of the surface expression
of CD59 and CD55 was assessed 2 days later by flow cytometry. WT-PIGY restored the surface expression of CD55 and CD59, but p.Leu46Pro
mutant PIG-Y did not. (B) After transient transfection of Daudi cells with normal (WT) or mutant (p.Leu46Pro) PIGY driven by the strong
promoter in pME-oriP HA-PIGY, restoration of surface expression of CD59 was achieved by WT and p.Leu46Pro constructs, indicating that the
mutant has some residual activity (left panel). Cell lysates prepared from Daudi cells transfected with either WT-PIGY, mutant p.Leu46Pro
PIGY, and empty vector were separated by SDS-PAGE and probed for anti-HA and anti-GAPDH antibodies. Normalization of the anti-HA signal
compared with GAPDH showed a marked reduction in protein expression in the mutant (p.Leu46Pro) compared with WT. HA-tagged PIG-Y appeared as
doublet bands on western blotting for an unknown reason. (C) In vivo labelling of 3H-mannose into transformed fibroblast cells derived from
Patients II-1 and II-2 (Family A) was performed to enhance incorporation into GPI mannolipids. Fibroblasts derived from Patient 2 (Family A)
had KOH-resistant alkyl-bond-containing GPI spots similar to fibroblasts from a healthy control 1 (spots in KOH lanes). Fibroblasts from
Patient 1 and another healthy control were not efficiently labelled by mannose. DPM, dolichol-phosphate mannose; H3, B, H6 and H7, mannose-
containing GPI precursors; H3′, B7, H6′ and H7′, GPI precursors converted from H3, B, H6 and H7, respectively, by KOH-treatment. (A) Daudi
cells (a PIG-Y deficient human Burkitt's lymphoma cell line) were transiently transfected with normal (WT) or mutant (p.Leu46Pro) PIGY
driven by minimum TATA box promoter in pTAL oriP puro PIGY (weak promoter). Restoration of the surface expression of CD59 and CD55 was
assessed 2 days later by flow cytometry. WT-PIGY restored the surface expression of CD55 and CD59, but p.Leu46Pro mutant PIG-Y did not. (B)
After transient transfection of Daudi cells with normal (WT) or mutant (p.Leu46Pro) PIGY driven by the strong promoter in pME-oriP HA-PIGY,
restoration of surface expression of CD59 was achieved by WT and p.Leu46Pro constructs, indicating that the mutant has some residual
activity (left panel). Cell lysates prepared from Daudi cells transfected with either WT-PIGY, mutant p.Leu46Pro PIGY, and empty vector were
separated by SDS-PAGE and probed for anti-HA and anti-GAPDH antibodies. Normalization of the anti-HA signal compared with GAPDH showed a
marked reduction in protein expression in the mutant (p.Leu46Pro) compared with WT. HA-tagged PIG-Y appeared as doublet bands on western
blotting for an unknown reason. (C) In vivo labelling of 3H-mannose into transformed fibroblast cells derived from Patients II-1 and II-2
(Family A) was performed to enhance incorporation into GPI mannolipids. Fibroblasts derived from Patient 2 (Family A) had KOH-resistant
alkyl-bond-containing GPI spots similar to fibroblasts from a healthy control 1 (spots in KOH lanes). Fibroblasts from Patient 1 and another
healthy control were not efficiently labelled by mannose. DPM, dolichol-phosphate mannose; H3, B, H6 and H7, mannose-containing GPI
precursors; H3′, B7, H6′ and H7′, GPI precursors converted from H3, B, H6 and H7, respectively, by KOH-treatment. Radiolabelling of
tritiated mannose into tunicamycin-treated transformed patient fibroblast cells was performed to investigate whether GPI protein anchors in
Family A were abnormal in their structure as well as their quantity, as occurs in peroxisomal disorders. GPI precursors in fibroblasts
derived from Patients 1 and 2 (Family A) had KOH-resistant alkyl bonds similar to that observed in similarly transformed control fibroblasts
(Fig. 3C, bands in KOH lanes). These data suggest that patient cells harbouring the p.Leu46Pro PIGY mutation can remodel GPI lipid to the
alkyl–acyl form. As the c.-540G>A variant disrupts a consensus SP1 transcription factor binding site (GGGGCGGGGC > GGAGCGGGGC) in which
there are no other variants reported in dbSNP138, we hypothesized that it might influence PIGY gene expression. Sanger sequencing of genomic
DNA confirmed that the father (I-1) and the unaffected sibling (II-1) were heterozygous for the A:T haplotype (c.-540G>A:rs3177413) and so
could be used to directly compare the relative allelic expression. RT-PCR and Sanger sequencing of two independent blood samples obtained
from each of these individuals indicated that expression was consistently higher from the WT allele (data not shown). However, Sanger
sequencing does not have a high sensitivity for variant detection when one allele is present at low levels (18). Therefore, to better
quantify the relative expression, sequencing was repeated using the Ion Torrent PGM and this showed that only 7–11% of transcripts originate
from the mutant allele (Table 1). These results were consistent with qPCR, which showed that for both affected individuals (II-2 and II-3),
the PIGY expression was at 6–10% compared with an unrelated control (Fig. 4), whereas for the three heterozygote carriers in family B,
expression levels were intermediate. Despite this decrease in the PIGY transcript levels, we could detect no significant reduction in
granulocyte CD16 surface expression for the two individuals homozygous for the c.-540G>A mutation (Supplementary Material, Fig. S3). Table
1.Quantitative analysis of PIGY allelic expression levels in Family B using Ion Torrent PGM sequencingAmplicon detailsSample information and
genotypeSequencing rs3177413 on coding strand (CS1)Sequencing rs3177413 on non-coding strand (CS2)TemplatePrimer sequences (common sequence
CS1 and CS2 tags underlined)Target sizeIDSP1 mutation (c.-540G>A)rs3177413 (c.-222C>T)TCTotalPercentage TTCTotalPercentage
TcDNACS1-PIGY-1Fv2: 5′-ACACTGACGACATGGTTCTACAGGGGCAAGAAGACTGAGGA-3′; CS2-PIGY-2Rv2: 5′-TACGGTAGCAGAGACTTGGTCTAACTAGCGCTGCTCCACTTC-3′232
bpI-1A/GT/C168176119298.71210224824588.54II-1A/GT/C156143915959.782231911213410.45Control 1G/GT/C9811190217145.1911101432254243.67Control
2G/GC/C2207820800.102209921010.10I-2A/GT/T21905219599.7720873209099.86cDNACS1-PIGY-1Fv3: 5′-ACACTGACGACATGGTTCTACAGACCGGGGCAAGAAGACT-3′;
CS2-PIGY-2Rv3: 5′-TACGGTAGCAGAGACTTGGTCTTGTCATCCTAGCTGCCTGTG-3′195
bpI-1A/GT/C5444361490511.092772238251511.01II-1A/GT/C389473151207.60160207222327.17Control 1G/GT/C18992006390548.631010973198350.93Control
2G/GC/C9478747960.191138713880.07I-2A/GT/T486410487499.7925769258599.65gDNACS1-PIGY-intronF:
5′-ACACTGACGACATGGTTCTACATGAAAATCAGGCTCTTCAAGC-3′; CS2-PIGY-2R: 5′-TACGGTAGCAGAGACTTGGTCTCTAGCGCTGCTCCACTTCTT-3′210
bpI-1A/GT/C28992814571350.7419881625361355.02II-1A/GT/C26352880551547.7820471802384953.18Control
3G/GC/C8674067480.128490549130.16I-2A/GT/T560512561799.7936333363699.92Next generation sequencing of cDNA fragments derived from SP1
mutation carriers confirmed that the mutant PIGY allele is expressed at lower levels than the WT allele. As the mutation in the SP1
consensus sequence (located at chr4:89,444,948, hg19) is 4 bp from the transcription start site, this position could not be interrogated
directly in cDNA. Instead, the rs3177413 C/T polymorphism was used as a surrogate for the SP1 mutation—familial transmission confirmed that
the SP1 mutation is in cis with the T allele at rs3177413. Based on raw read counts from two independent cDNA templates, the C/T allelic
ratio at rs3177413 (located at chr4: 89 443 162) showed that in heterozygote carriers, only 7–11% of RNA was expressed from the mutant
allele (in bold). In contrast, a control subject who was heterozygous for rs3177413 but who did not have the SP1 mutation showed biallelic
expression (44–51% from T allele). Sequencing of all samples was performed on a single 314 chip using the Ion Torrent PGM using the Ion
Torrent variant caller software after deconvolution of individual sample barcodes. Ion Torrent bidirectional sequencing allows the data
derived from the coding and non-coding strands to be analysed independently, and these were shown to be in good agreement with one another.
Analysis of genomic DNA from heterozygous samples at rs2177413 were added as internal controls to confirm that there was no amplification or
sequencing bias towards one allele, while rs3177413 homozygote samples confirmed that sequencing noise at this position was minimal (<0.2%).
Variant positions annotated with reference to NM_001042616.1. Figure 4.Expression analysis in family B using qPCR. Expression analysis was
performed using RPL30 as a control gene, and the results are normalized with respect to the first control individual. qPCRs were performed
in triplicate and then the experiment was repeated three times. Error bars represent the standard deviations obtained across the three runs.
The RNA used for this experiment was from whole blood samples extracted using the PAXgene blood RNA kit. Quantitative analysis of PIGY
allelic expression levels in Family B using Ion Torrent PGM sequencing Next generation sequencing of cDNA fragments derived from SP1
mutation carriers confirmed that the mutant PIGY allele is expressed at lower levels than the WT allele. As the mutation in the SP1
consensus sequence (located at chr4:89,444,948, hg19) is 4 bp from the transcription start site, this position could not be interrogated
directly in cDNA. Instead, the rs3177413 C/T polymorphism was used as a surrogate for the SP1 mutation—familial transmission confirmed that
the SP1 mutation is in cis with the T allele at rs3177413. Based on raw read counts from two independent cDNA templates, the C/T allelic
ratio at rs3177413 (located at chr4: 89 443 162) showed that in heterozygote carriers, only 7–11% of RNA was expressed from the mutant
allele (in bold). In contrast, a control subject who was heterozygous for rs3177413 but who did not have the SP1 mutation showed biallelic
expression (44–51% from T allele). Sequencing of all samples was performed on a single 314 chip using the Ion Torrent PGM using the Ion
Torrent variant caller software after deconvolution of individual sample barcodes. Ion Torrent bidirectional sequencing allows the data
derived from the coding and non-coding strands to be analysed independently, and these were shown to be in good agreement with one another.
Analysis of genomic DNA from heterozygous samples at rs2177413 were added as internal controls to confirm that there was no amplification or
sequencing bias towards one allele, while rs3177413 homozygote samples confirmed that sequencing noise at this position was minimal (<0.2%).
Variant positions annotated with reference to NM_001042616.1. Expression analysis in family B using qPCR. Expression analysis was performed
using RPL30 as a control gene, and the results are normalized with respect to the first control individual. qPCRs were performed in
triplicate and then the experiment was repeated three times. Error bars represent the standard deviations obtained across the three runs.
The RNA used for this experiment was from whole blood samples extracted using the PAXgene blood RNA kit. We describe two families with
homozygous recessive mutations in PIGY, establishing PIGY as a new disease-causing gene in humans. Two affected sisters from Family A, who
were homozygous for a missense mutation in PIGY (p.Leu46Pro), died from severe multi-system disease while two affected siblings from Family
B, homozygous for a mutation in the promoter region of PIGY (c.-540G>A), presented with moderate developmental delay and microcephaly. The
p.Leu46Pro substitution involves a conserved residue in the second putative transmembrane domain (2). Amino acids in this domain and the
carboxy-terminal cytoplasmic region are relatively more conserved among species and may be important for interaction with PIG-A, a catalytic
component of GPI-GnT. The substitution of leucine to proline, which is less hydrophobic and is inhibitory to the formation of α-helices,
might affect association with PIG-A, thereby causing instability of mutant PIG-Y protein as suggested by our results (Fig. 3B). Fibroblasts
derived from both affected sisters from Family A show a 20–50% reduction in protein expression of CD55 and CD59 at the cell surface by flow
cytometric assessment, consistent with a defect in GPI-anchor biosynthesis in these patients. Using a cell culture model, we show that
expression of mutant p.Leu46Pro PIG-Y in the PIG-Y deficient Daudi cell line only partially restores the cell surface expression of the GPI
protein markers CD55 and CD59. Taken together, these results provide strong evidence that the p.Leu46Pro substitution leads to defects in
GPI-APs in patient cells. Family A had multi-system disease consistent with previously described disorders of GPI anchor biosynthesis,
whilst Family B had less severe disease limited to microcephaly and global developmental delay. This is likely due to differences in the
mutations between the two families and their effects on PIG-Y protein function. We have shown that the promoter mutation in Family B
markedly reduces PIGY transcript levels in blood, which likely leads to reduced expression of functionally normal PIG-Y protein. We
hypothesize that the level of PIG-Y expression in most tissues in Family B is sufficient for many aspects of health, explaining why Family
B's phenotype is more limited. The effects of the SP1-binding site mutation on PIGY transcript levels may also vary between tissues. Indeed,
initial experiments showed no difference in levels of CD16, a GPI-AP, in granulocytes from affected individuals from Family B, suggesting
that PIG-Y levels are sufficient for normal GPI biosynthesis in that tissue. The only known cases of GPI deficiency caused by promoter
mutations are PIGM deficiency (4). Two individuals with the same homozygous promoter mutation had hepatic vein thrombosis, which has never
been reported in GPI deficiency caused by mutations in protein coding regions. It is therefore not surprising that affected individuals from
Family B who had homozygous promoter mutation had phenotypes quite different from those of affected individuals from Family A who had
mutations in coding region. In contrast, the mutation in Family A will lead to expression of the p.Leu46Pro mutant PIGY protein in all
tissues, which likely accounts for the severe, multi-system involvement. There is growing recognition that autosomal recessive disorders of
GPI biosynthesis are an important subclass of the congenital disorders of glycosylation. Over 150 proteins require GPI anchorage for cell-
surface expression and all cell types in the body employ this anchoring mechanism (1). Previously published defects of GPI anchor
biosynthesis present in infancy with multi-system disease, likely due to the wide range of biological processes affected by the reduced
expression of GPI-APs. The findings in our patients help to understand the range of phenotypes that can arise (Table 2). Common dysmorphic
features found in a range of GPI anchorage disorders include bi-temporal narrowing, anteverted nares, depressed nasal bridge, long philtrum,
high palate and a tented upper lip. The ears are commonly large with fleshy lobes and overfolded helices. Fifth finger clinodactyly and nail
hypoplasia are commonly described. Seizures, moderate-to-severe developmental delay, growth failure and cerebral visual impairment are
commonly described. Other common features include genitourinary defects, gastrointestinal dysfunction and cardiac defects (Table 1). The
sisters from Family A share many features with other inherited GPI anchor defects but are the first to be described with cataracts. The
hyperphosphatasia often observed in inherited GPI deficiency occurred albeit mildly in the two affected individuals from Family A. When
mature GPI available to precursor alkaline phosphatase was not sufficient, some alkaline phosphatase is transferred to water instead of GPI,
resulting in secretion of soluble enzyme. Recently, it has been reported that pyridoxine may be effective in patients with mutations in PIGO
(19) and butyrate may be effective in patients with PIGM (20), raising important therapeutic considerations. Table 2.Comparison with
features of described disorders of GPI anchorageClinical featurePIGY Family A (c.137C>T)PIGY Family B (c.-540G>A)PIGA (germline
mutation)PIGLPIGWPIGMPIGVPIGNPIGOPIGTPregnancy and birthPolyhydramnios−PolyhydramniosDysmorphic featuresHigh forehead, bi-temporal
narrowing, upturned nares, depressed nasal bridge, high palate, thick, short neckFifth finger clinodactyly2–3 syndactylyMildly dysmorphic
with long palpebral fissures, bulbous tip to nose, wide mouth, squintPierre Robin sequence, depressed nasal bridge, short, anteverted nose,
malar flattening, upslanted palpebral fissures, small mouth with downturned corners and a triangular shape, short neckNail hypoplasia+Broad
nasal bridge, tented upper lipRound face, downturned mouth, long palpebral fissures, prominent nasal bridgeNail hypoplasia, hypoplasia of
the terminal phalangesSupernumerary nipplesBi-temporal narrowing, small nose, upturned nares, long philtrum, open mouth, tented upper lip,
high palate, micrognathiaHypertelorism, downward-slanting palpebral fissures, short nose with broad nasal bridge and tip, long philtrum,
facial asymmetry, tented mouthFifth finger clinodactylyNail hypoplasiaBroad distal phalanx of the thumbHigh forehead, bi-temporal narrowing,
depressed nasal bridge, long philtrum with a deep groove, open mouthMild macrosomia and macrocephaly−−+++−+HypotoniaTruncal hypotonia with
brisk reflexes−Truncal hypotonia with brisk reflexes++++Moderate–severe developmental delay++++++++Growth delay+−++Seizures+−++Tonic
spasms+++++Ophthalmologic featuresCataractscerebral visual impairmentStrabismusColobomaStrabismusNystagmus, cerebral visual impairment,
wandering eyes−Nystagmus, strabismus cerebral visual impairment, hyperopia abnormal eye motilityEars and hearing−Overfolded helixConductive
hearing lossThickened helicesLarge ears with fleshy prominent ear lobe, overfolded helixLarge ears with fleshy lobesNormal
hearingDental−Gingival hypertrophyGingival hypertrophyPremature loss of incisorsGenitourinary tractDilated renal collecting systems and
increased echogenicity of renal parenchyma−Vesicoureteral reflux and a duplicated collecting systemInguinal herniaHydronephrosisHydrocele,
dilatation of renal collecting system−Nephrocalcinosis, ureteral dilatation, unilateral renal cysts and dysplasiaGastrointestinalPoor
feeding, abdominal distension and vomiting, necrotizing enterocolitis−Abdominal distension and vomitingAnterior anusShort-segment
HirschsprungFeeding and swallowing difficulties. Gastroesophageal reflux. Anal stenosis, imperforate anus, ano-vestibular fistulaAnal
stenosis, anal atresia, perineal fistulaBrainSmall brainThin corpus callosum, delayed maturation of white matter, absent septum pellucidum,
dilated lateral ventricle, hypoplasia of the cerebellum and vermisMild enlargement of ventricular spacesDelayed maturation of white matter
and thin corpus callosum. Hypoplasia of the cerebellum and vermisEnlarged supra-tentorial ventricular systemVariable—frontotemporal atrophy
and cerebellar hypoplasia, primitive Sylvian fissures, severe cerebellar atrophy with vermis hypoplasiaCardiac––Atrial septal defect, patent
ductus arteriosusCongenital heart diseaseAtrial septal defect, peripheral pulmonary stenosis, patent ductus arteriosusAtrial septal defect,
peripheral pulmonary stenosisRestrictive cardiomyopathy and PDASkeletal featuresFlexion contractures of the elbows, hip dysplasia. Proximal
limb shorteningShort fingers and small feetRadiographic—osteopenia, shortening of the small tubular bones of the hands and feet, delayed
bone age–Craniosynostosis, prominent occiputHip, knee and elbow contractures. Broad palms with short fingers and poor central tone with
brisk reflexesBrachytelephalangyMild scoliosisTapering fingers, brachydactyly, deep plantar groove between first and second toes, small
feet, joint contracturesBrachytelephalangy of digits II–V.Left coronal synostosisPectus excavatum, scoliosis, short upper extremities,
craniosynostosisRadiographic—bracycephaly, slender and osteopenic long bones with relatively large secondary ossification centres, wide and
long femoral necks with enlarged secondary ossification centres, short ulnae and delayed bone ageHaematological–Paroxysmal nocturnal
haemoglobinuriaPortal and hepatic vein thrombosis–OtherMigratory ichthyosiform dermatosisAtypical lobulation of the lungsMild elevated of
plasma calcium, hypercalciuria and low PTHALPElevatedNormalElevated–Elevated–ElevatedLowReferencesJohnston et al. (12)Ng et al. (5)Almeida
et al. (4)Thompson et al. 2011Maydan et al. (6)Krawitz et al. (7)Kvarnung et al. (8) Comparison with features of described disorders of GPI
anchorage The two severely affected patients (Family A) in this study share many clinical features in common with rhizomelic
chondrodysplasia punctata type 1 (RCDP1), a peroxisomal disorder which also presents with proximal shortening of the long bones, growth
retardation, cataracts, severe intellectual disability, seizures and early death. However, the absence of punctate calcification in our
patients is inconsistent with this disorder. Plasmalogens were mildly elevated, phytanic acid was normal and DHAP-AT and DHAP-S activity on
cultured skin fibroblasts was normal. Lipid remodelling of GPI anchors occurs in a later part of the GPI biosynthetic pathway and is
dependent on the alkyl-phospholipid biosynthetic pathway in the peroxisome. Kanzawa et al. showed that patients with mutations in genes
involved in peroxisomal biogenesis had defective GPI lipid remodelling and were unable to synthesize 1-alkyl-2-acyl GPIs (21). Unlike
patients with RCDP1 and Zellweger syndrome, patients with p.Leu46Pro substitution in PIGY do not have defective GPI lipid remodelling and
are able synthesize alkyl–acyl GPI forms. Inherited GPI deficiencies are an important differential for peroxisomal disorders and GPI lipid
remodelling might be used as a tool to differentiate between these two clinically similar disorders. In Family B, even though we could
restrict the search space to <1% of the genome based on autozygosity, initial filtering of the 217 641 variants detected by WES did not
yield any likely causative variants. It was only after extending our definition of ‘deleterious’ to include 5′-UTR variants that lie in
regions annotated by the ENCODE consortium (22) as transcription factor binding sites, that we uncovered the c.-540G>A variant. UTR regions
were not targeted by first-generation exome capture kits and even when capture probes are present in these regions, sequence coverage is
often low due to high GC content (Supplementary Material, Fig. S2). Although variants in these regions are becoming less refractory to
detection as researchers switch from exome analysis to WGS, they remain difficult to interpret. Our detection of a functional homozygous
5′-UTR variant, despite only having four good quality reads, thus represents an unanticipated finding that highlights the importance of
developing better tools to analyse the non-coding portion of the genome. In conclusion, we describe the first report of two different
recessive mutations in the GPI biosynthesis gene PIGY that are associated with different phenotypes. The p.Leu46Pro mutation in the coding
region of the PIGY causes a severe congenital, multi-system disorder resulting in early death, whilst the promoter mutation identified in
Family B is associated with a moderate CNS phenotype compatible with life. This study contributes to understanding of the phenotype of
disorders associated with deficiencies of the GPI-anchor glycosylation pathway, an important differential diagnosis in infants with multi-
system disease, epileptic encephalopathy, dysmorphic facial features, brachytelephalangy and hyperphosphatasia. This research was approved
by the Human Research Ethics Committee of the Children's Hospital at Westmead, Australia (10/CHW/45) and the Wales Research Ethics
Committee, UK (12/WA/0001). WES was performed on genomic DNA from two sisters and their parents from Family A in collaboration with the
Broad Institute using methods previously reported (23). In Family B, SNP-array-based autozygosity mapping was performed on all close family
members using human CytoSNP12v2 (Illumina). WES of the proband (II-2) and data analysis were performed as previously described (24).
Segregation of both variants was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. All tissue culture media and reagents were purchased from Life Technologies
unless otherwise stated. Skin fibroblast cells were grown in a Dulbecco's Modified Eagles Media (DMEM)/F12-HAMS supplemented with 10% foetal
bovine serum (FBS) and gentamicin (50 µg/ml) and grown in 5% CO2 incubator. To investigate levels of GPI-APs, cultured skin fibroblasts
derived from Patient II-1 in Family A (a full thickness skin biopsy taken at 5 months), Patient II-2 in Family A (8 days) and three controls
(ages 3.5 months, 5.5 months and 5.5 years) were treated with versene and incubated with allophycocyanin (APC)-conjugated mouse anti-human
CD55 and phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated mouse anti-human CD59 antibodies (BD Biosciences) in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) without calcium
or magnesium and supplemented with 2% FBS for 30 min at 4°C. Cells were then centrifuged at 250g for 5 min and washed twice in the above
solution. Labelled cells were analysed using a CantoII flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) and analysed using FlowJo™ v 7.6.5 software.
Experiments were performed in triplicate from each cell line, and the results were averaged. Fibroblasts were not available from members of
Family B and so whole blood samples were used instead. These were treated with ACK lysis buffer and stained with anti-human CD16
(Invitrogen); samples were run on a BD FACSCanto and data analysed by FlowJo. Granulocytes were identified according to FSc and SSc profile.
Daudi cells (PIG-Y deficient human Burkitt's lymphoma cell line) expressing EBNA1 antigen (2,25) were permanently transfected with WT or
c.137T>C mutant PIG-Y constructs containing Epstein–Barr virus oriP. For low level expression, PIGY cDNA was driven by minimum TATA box
promoter in pTAL oriP puro PIGY. Cells (107) were suspended in 0.8 ml of Opti-MEM and electroporated with 20 µg each of the plasmids at 350
V and 500 µF using a Gene Pulser (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). After selection with 0.5 mg/ml of puromycin for 2 weeks, restoration of the
surface expression of GPI-APs was determined by staining cells with mouse anti-human CD59 (5H8), human CD55 antibodies and each isotype IgG
followed by a PE-conjugated anti-mouse IgG antibody (mouse IgG1 and IgG2a, and secondary antibody were purchased from BD Biosciences) and
analysed by flow cytometer (Canto II) using Flowjo software (Tommy Digital Inc., Tokyo, Japan). For high level expression, PIG-Y deficient
Daudi cells were transiently transfected with WT or mutant (c.137T>C) strong promoter-driven pME-oriP HA-PIGY. Two days later, restoration
of the surface expression of CD59 was assessed by flow cytometry. Lysates were applied to SDS-PAGE, and western blotting was performed using
anti-HA antibody (HA-7, Sigma, St. Louis, MO). The levels of protein expression were normalized with the intensities of
glyceraldehydephosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), the loading control and luciferase activities used for evaluating transfection efficiencies.
Patient and control fibroblasts were transformed using telomerase gene and SV40 large T gene and metabolically radiolabeled with tritiated
mannose in the presence of tunicamycin to enhance incorporation into GPI mannolipids by preventing incorporation into more abundant N-glycan
precursors. Radiolabeled GPI mannolipids were treated with 0.1 N KOH to cleave ester linkages and then analysed by thin layer chromatography
on silica gel followed by phosphoimaging to detect tritiated GPI (26). RNA was extracted from 2.5 ml of blood using the PAXgene kit (Qiagen)
and Reverse Transcriptase (RT) reactions were performed using the QuantiTect RT kit (Qiagen). Relative allelic expression of PIGY was
measured by analysing cDNA using both Sanger sequencing and a 314 chip run on the Ion Torrent PGM platform. As the c.-540G>A variant is only
4 bp from the transcription start site, expression levels had to be measured indirectly using the T allele at rs3177413 (c.-222C>T) which
familial transmission showed was in cis with c.-540G>A allele. RT-PCR primer sequences are shown in Table 1. The first round of
amplification (25–30 cycles) and second round of amplification (15 cycles, with barcoding primers) were both performed with the FastStart
Taq DNA polymerase kit (Roche). Samples were pooled, cleaned using Ampure beads, quantified using the BioAnalyser (Agilent) and diluted to
10 pM. Emulsion PCR and sequencing were carried out according to manufacturer instructions. Quantitative PCR was performed using IQ SYBR
Green Supermix (BIO-RAD) and the iQ5 Real-Time PCR Detection System (BIO-RAD) and the following primers: PIGY-V5-F
5′-AGGGATGTTCATCTCCAACCA-3′, PIGY-V5-R 5′-TGCGCATATCAGGCTTAGGA-3′, RPL30-F 5′-CAGACAAGGCAAAGCGAAAT-3′ and RPL30-R
5′-TGGACACCAGTTTTAGCCAAC-3′. PCRs were performed in triplicate, and the experiment was carried out three times. The Sydney Group lead by
Nigel Clarke (senior author) identified the gene and lead the collaborative studies to ascribe pathogenicity. Both Nigel Clarke and Kathryn
North were responsible for study concept and design, analysis and interpretation of data, study supervision obtaining funding and
drafting/revising manuscript for content. Biljana Ilkovski's (co-first author) contribution has been to perform the flow cytometric
experiments on the patient cells (Fig. 2), assemble the figures and take a lead role in the preparation of the manuscript. Gina O'Grady
(author position #2) identified the gene via WES, confirmed the mutation and family inheritance, reviewed and assembled detailed clinical
and pathological information, compiled a detailed clinical table of all known PIG phenotypes, helped write and edit the manuscript. Leigh
Waddell was involved in mutation identification and confirmed the mutation by Sanger Sequencing and edited the manuscript. Fabienne Brilot
helped direct flow cytometeric experiments and edited the manuscript. David Sillence, Anne Turner and John Christodoulou were the clinicians
who described the clinical phenotypes of the patients, contributed to diagnostic investigations and edited the manuscript. The Oxford Group
lead by Usha Kini and Jenny Taylor identified the gene in the UK family. Alistair Pagnamenta (co-first author) performed SNP array
experiments, homozygosity mapping, analysed exome data, did RNA extractions, designed and performed RNA sequencing, was involved in the flow
cytometry experiments and helped write and edit the manuscript. Malcolm Howard performed the qPCR and Sanger validation of the UK Family
mutation, analysed exome data and helped with the flow cytometry. Samantha Knight supervised and reviewed the SNP array data. Consuelo
Anzilotti helped perform the flow cytometry experiments. Anne Goriely helped design, perform and interpret data from the PGM RNA sequencing
experiment. Niko Popitsch analysed the exome coverage in the two families and compared with in house WGS data. David Keays was involved with
setting up of the Oxford Brain Abnormalities group. The Boston Group lead by Daniel MacArthur identified the gene in the Australian family
via WES. Monkol Lek and Brett Thomas performed the Bioinformatics of WES to ascribe pathogenicity. All authors revised and edited the
manuscript. The Japanese Group lead by Taroh Kinoshita lead the collaborative studies to examine the functional consequences of the PIGY
mutation in the Australian family using cell culture models lipid remodelling studies, helped write and edit the manuscript. Yoshiko
Murakami and Noriyuki Kanzawa were responsible for designing the flow cytometric experiments examining expression of PIG-Y constructs into
PIG-Y deficient cells as well as the lipid remodelling studies and helped write and edit the manuscript. Supplementary Material is available
at HMG online. This work was supported by the National Health & Medical Research Council of Australia (APP571287—KN, NC, APP1035828—NC and
APP1022707—KN, NC) and National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre Oxford with funding from the Department of
Health's NIHR Biomedical Research Centres funding scheme. We thank the High-Throughput Genomics Group at the Wellcome Trust Centre for Human
Genetics (funded by Wellcome Trust grant reference 090532/Z/09/Z and Medical Research Council Hub grant G0900747 91070) for generating the
sequencing data. Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was provided by the Wellcome Trust. We thank the
families for their contributions and Indira Taylor for technical assistance. The views expressed in this publication are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the Department of Health. Conflicts of Interest statement. None declared.
