Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine malignancy; the most common type of thyroid cancer is papillary thyroid cancer which accounts
for approximately 90% of all thyroid cancers. Previously defined prognostic factors of papillary thyroid cancer include age, gender, tumor
size, extrathyroidal extension, and distant metastasis. Cervical lymph node metastases are very common in patients with papillary thyroid
cancer. Although papillary thyroid cancer has an excellent prognosis, lymphatic spread is associated with an increased risk of locoregional
recurrence. Axillary metastasis is not a common finding in the classic type of papillary carcinoma; hence, a limited number of case reports
have described the exceptional and rare metastatic spread of papillary thyroid carcinomas to the axilla. We report a case of metastatic
axillary lymphadenopathy in a 61-year-old Egyptian man with a recurrent papillary thyroid cancer. He had a history of total thyroidectomy
with right radical neck dissection 18 months ago. He presented to our cancer clinic at the Oncology Centre –Mansoura University with
recurrent mass at the right lower parotid region, left cervical lymphadenopathy and left axillary lymphadenopathy. Removal of the recurrent
right intraparotid mass, left comprehensive neck dissection and left axillary dissection were performed and the postoperative pathology
report showed infiltration of the cervical and axillary lymph nodes by metastatic papillary thyroid cancer. Axillary lymph node enlargement
in a patient with papillary thyroid cancer should be considered metastatic from thyroid until proved otherwise. Careful thorough examination
of patients with recurrent thyroid cancer is essential to address any unusual metastasis. Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) is the most common
form of differentiated thyroid cancer, comprising approximately 90% of the new cases of thyroid cancer in the USA . Surgery is the
definitive management of PTC. Cervical lymph node metastases (LNM) are common in PTC and are associated with a significant probability for
locoregional recurrence of the disease, even in low-risk patients. These considerations generated a strong interest in a more comprehensive
preoperative evaluation of the neck and renewed the controversy about the role and the extent of lymphadenectomy at the time of
thyroidectomy . Careful preoperative clinical examination and neck imaging are very critical to not miss any LNM. Regional LNM are extremely
common (up to 50%) at initial presentation of PTC. This feature does not apparently adversely affect long-term prognosis especially in
patients under 45 years of age at diagnosis . The usual pattern of cervical LNM of PTC is through central and lateral neck compartments as
well as superior mediastinal compartment. Axillary LNM as part of the disease spectrum of thyroid carcinoma is rare, with only isolated case
reports . We report a case of axillary lymphadenopathy in a 61-year-old Egyptian man who presented to our cancer clinic at Mansoura Oncology
Centre with a recurrent PTC. He had a history of total thyroidectomy and right radical neck dissection 18 months ago, which were followed by
two doses of radioactive iodine at intervals of 6 and 12 months. On clinical examination, there was a recurrent mass at the right lower
parotid region, left cervical and axillary lymphadenopathy. Imaging was performed in the form of a computed tomography (CT) scan of his
neck, chest and abdomen which showed: 1) multiple bilateral cervical lymphadenopathies of which the largest node was 2.5cm in diameter at
level III, 2) right intraparotid lesion 2.5×3.5cm in diameter, and 3) left axillary lymph nodes of which the largest node was 3cm in
diameter (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Computed tomography showing significant axillary lymph node Computed tomography showing significant axillary lymph
node Fine-needle aspiration from his left cervical lymph nodes as well as from his left axillary lymph node revealed metastatic PTC. He was
managed by removal of the recurrent right intraparotid mass, left comprehensive neck dissection and left axillary dissection (Fig. 2).Fig.
2Intraoperative picture of the patient undergoing axillary block dissection after closure of neck wound Intraoperative picture of the
patient undergoing axillary block dissection after closure of neck wound Postoperative pathology revealed recurrent papillary cancer at the
right intraparotid mass, infiltration of 10 lymph nodes out of 16 lymph nodes of the left neck dissection and infiltration of one lymph node
out of 11 lymph nodes in axilla by PTC (Fig. 3).Fig. 3Histopathology of axillary lymph node showing metastatic papillary cancer
Histopathology of axillary lymph node showing metastatic papillary cancer He had an excellent recovery without complications (Fig. 4).Fig.
4Postoperative picture of the patient 10 days after surgery Postoperative picture of the patient 10 days after surgery PTC and the
follicular variant of PTC have a propensity for cervical lymphatic spread that occurs in up to 50% of patients on standard review of
surgical pathologic specimens and in 90% of those examined for micrometastases [2, 11]. Regional lymph nodes are located in three
compartments: central, lateral and mediastinal . Axillary LNM from thyroid carcinoma is exceedingly rare. A search of the English language
literature found only nine cases including our case. The last case report was published in 2011 . The mean age was 55 years, with a patient
aged as young as 21 years . Three patients presented with concurrent axillary LNM, and five presented with axillary LNM as a part of the
recurrent disease process [5, 8–10]. In cases with recurrent disease process, the period from initial diagnosis to the development of
axillary LNM ranged from 5 to 41 years; this was not the same in our case, which was only 18 months. The primary cancer was PTC in eight
patients and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma in one patient. There has been no report of axillary LNM from follicular thyroid
carcinoma. In all final pathology reports that specified tumor differentiation, all patients had poorly differentiated components suggesting
that axillary LNM may be associated with poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Seven patients out of the nine had synchronous or
metachronous distant metastasis. Axillary LNM may thus be an indicator of systemic disease and a poor prognosis. Rouviere reported that
there is a communication between the cervical and axillary lymphatics; however, the physiologic flow is centripetal to the jugulo-subclavian
junction . Consequently, mediastinal LNM sometimes occurs in PTC but still axillary LNM is rare. However, malignant tumors can alter and
partially block lymphatic pathways, potentially resulting in axillary LNM. When sentinel nodes around the lymphatic terminus in the jugulo-
subclavian confluence are involved with carcinoma and their lymphatic flow is blocked, disease spreads in a retrograde direction along the
transverse cervical lymph nodes in the supraclavicular region. These retrograde pathways of lymphatic drainage can ultimately culminate in
axillary LNM (Fig. 5). In our case we have been able to identify a large lymph node at the left jugulo-subclavian junction.Fig. 5How an
axilla is involved. LN lymph node, LNM lymph node metastases How an axilla is involved. LN lymph node, LNM lymph node metastases In summary,
we reported a case of axillary LNM from recurrent PTC. Both the recurrent tumor and lymphadenopathy from the neck to axilla were resected
with an aim to cure the patient. Axillary LNM is rare and appears to indicate a poor prognosis. Axillary lymph node enlargement in a patient
with PTC should be considered metastatic from thyroid until proved otherwise. Careful thorough examination of patients with recurrent
thyroid cancer is essential to address any unusual metastasis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
Lymph node metastases Papillary thyroid cancer Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Authors’
contributions MH carried out the idea and revision of the draft, and supervised the surgery. BR carried out writing of the draft and editing
of photos. KAE participated in surgery and collecting evidence. MA did all the pathology work. IA did most of the surgical part. WE shared
in revision. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This research article was approved by Oncology Centre – Mansoura University
research committee and we had approval from the patient to publish this research article.
