Laparoscopic multi‐visceral resection in patients with T4 colorectal cancer remains controversial. A 73‐year‐old man was admitted to the
hospital for rectosigmoid cancer directly invading the urinary bladder trigone without distant metastasis. We successfully performed
complete resection by laparoscopic anterior pelvic exenteration while preserving the anus. After laparoscopic mobilization of the rectum,
urinary bladder, and prostate, the urethra and urethral catheter were dissected to reveal the lower rectum. By pulling the urethral catheter
toward the head, the prostate was excised retrogradely from the lower rectum anterior wall. The lower rectum was resected and anastomosed by
the double stapling technique with a safe distal margin from the tumor. Pathological findings of the resected specimen indicated no residual
tumor in the surgical margin. There was no evidence of recurrence 34 months after surgery. En bloc, R0, laparoscopic anterior pelvic
exenteration for T4 rectal cancer is feasible. However, further studies with long‐term follow‐up are required to resolve oncological
outcomes. [Correction added on 1 December 2015, after first online publication: The copyright line was changed.] Laparoscopic surgery has
been successfully adopted for colorectal surgery because of its favorable effects on short‐term outcomes 1, 2, 3. However, T4 colorectal
cancer is still regarded as an exclusion criterion for laparoscopy, as open conversion may be required 3. Multi‐visceral resection for T4
colorectal cancer has acceptable morbidity and mortality rates and a fair long‐term prognosis 4. Recent reports suggest that minimally
invasive techniques for multi‐visceral resection should help achieve adequate short‐term outcomes and improvements in quality of life 5, 6,
7. Here, we describe our experience of complete en bloc resection by anal‐preserving laparoscopic anterior pelvic exenteration in a patient
with locally advanced rectosigmoid cancer with direct invasion of the urinary bladder. A 73‐year‐old man was referred to our hospital for
treatment of gross hematuria. Cystoscopy indicated that the tumor protruded into the trigone of the bladder, and a colonoscopy revealed a
circumferential rectosigmoid tumor (longest diameter ∼6 cm). The urinary cytological examination was class II negative. Histopathological
examination revealed a well‐differentiated adenocarcinoma via colonoscopic tumor biopsy, and transurethral bladder tumor resection indicated
direct invasion of rectosigmoid cancer. CT and MRI revealed that the rectosigmoid cancer had directly invaded the urinary bladder and was
protruding into the bladder lumen (Figure 1). There was no lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis according to fluorodeoxyglucose
PET‐CT. The rectosigmoid cancer was diagnosed clinically as T4bN0M0, stage IIC. Thus, we planned laparoscopic low anterior resection with en
bloc cystectomy to preserve the anal sphincter. Preoperative evaluation. Cystoscopy of the bladder tumor, colonoscopy, and pathological
findings revealed direct invasion of the rectosigmoid cancer. Because of mild renal dysfunction, CT and MRI scans were performed without
contrast enhancement. The rectosigmoid cancer displayed extramural involvement. The patient was placed in a lithotomy and Trendelenburg
position. The surgical procedures were multidisciplinary, and laparoscopic total cystectomy and extracorporeal ileal conduit urinary
diversion were performed by urologists. With the patient under general anesthesia, and after pneumoperitoneum was achieved, a 12‐mm
periumbilical trocar was introduced to allow inspection of the peritoneal cavity for evidence of metastatic disease. This inspection
revealed that the primary rectal tumor was directly invading the posterior bladder wall with a small amount of ascites, which were
identified as class II ascites by cytology. Additional trocars were introduced as follows: two 12‐mm trocars in the upper and lower right
abdominal quadrants, a 5‐mm trocar in the upper left quadrant, a 12‐mm trocar in the lower left quadrant, and an additional 12‐mm trocar at
the upper border of the pubis. The inferior mesenteric artery was divided close to its origin. After the mobilization of medial‐to‐lateral
retroperitoneal dissection of the mesocolon, posterior and lateral mesorectal excision was performed distally to the pelvic floor and
sufficiently beyond the tumor. Bilateral ureters were identified and mobilized distally to the level of the ureterovesical junction. The
pelvic peritoneum was incised anteriorly through the medial umbilical ligaments and the urachus. The vas deferens was doubly clipped and
incised between the clips. With combined blunt and sharp dissection, the retropubic space, also known as the space of Retzius, was opened
down to the puboprostatic ligament. The endopelvic fascia was identified and incised bilaterally. The pelvic ureters were clipped and
divided just proximal to the clip. The dorsal venous complex was ligated with an intracorporeal knot (0 VicrylTM; Ethicon, Somerville, USA)
8. The posterior urethra was transected, and any remaining prostatic attachments were freed. To avoid the dissemination of cancer cells, the
Foley catheter was clipped and cut (Figure 2). Pulling the cut end of the catheter toward the abdominal space enabled the prostate to be
dissected retrogradely from the lower rectum. Mobilizing the prostate provided an adequate length of lower rectum for anastomosis
(Figure 3). Total pelvic exenteration was avoided by this procedure. We used an Endo GIATM Ultra Universal Stapler with Tri‐StapleTM
Technology (45‐mm purple cartridge; Covidien, Mansfield, USA) for rectal transection. Two cartridges were used intentionally for complete
resection due to the narrow male pelvic space. The surgical specimen was extracted through the mini‐laparotomy with an Alexis Wound
Retractor (Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarita, USA). The sigmoid colon was transected extracorporeally, and the double stapling
technique for anastomosis was performed with a circular stapler (CDH29, Proximate Curved Intraluminal Stapler; Ethicon). The urinary
diversion with ileal conduit was constructed extracorporeally through the mini‐laparotomy. The total estimated blood loss was 1050 mL, and
the total operation time was 888 min. Laparoscopic view. After the dissection of the bladder and prostate, the posterior urethra was
transected. The Foley catheter was clipped and then cut. Laparoscopic view. Retrograde dissection of the prostate from the lower rectum
involved pulling the cut end of the Foley catheter toward the abdominal space. DVC, dorsal venous complex. The tumor was an advanced
rectosigmoid cancer 5.4 cm in diameter (Figure 4). The circumferential resection margin demonstrated no evidence of tumors microscopically.
The cancer cells had directly infiltrated the wall of the urinary bladder, forming a large polypoid mass in the lumen. According to the TNM
staging system, the staging was T4bN0M0, stage IIC. Resected specimen. Left, rectum; right, bladder lumen. The circumferential resection
margin did not display cancer cell (R0) involvement. Rectal cancer: pT4b(bladder) N0 M0, stage IIC. The indications for laparoscopic surgery
of colorectal cancer have recently increased dramatically, ranging from additional bowel resection for stage I colorectal cancer to curative
surgery for stage II/III cancer and palliative operations for stage IV cancer 9, 10. An important surgical consideration in T4 colorectal
cancer is the ability to perform en bloc resection. Although the performance of multi‐visceral resection for T4 colorectal cancer has not
been universally accepted, extended en bloc resection may improve overall survival 11. To be considered oncologically sound, minimally
invasive procedures must include complete en bloc resection. In this report, we describe our initial case of complete en bloc resection with
laparoscopic anterior exenteration of the pelvis conducted in a patient with locally advanced rectal cancer. There were two major advantages
to this procedure. First, the magnified view provided by the laparoscope allowed us to recognize the exact surgical orientation in the
narrow pelvic space. Second, complete en bloc resection was performed while the sphincter and an adequate length of lower rectum for rectal
anastomosis were preserved. Pulling the dissected Foley catheter toward the abdominal space enabled the prostate to be dissected from the
lower rectum with a safe surgical margin from the primary tumor and without injury to the dissected rectum in the narrow pelvic space.
However, the oncological concern still remains because there is no evidence of the oncological safety of this maneuver. Although we clipped
the Foley catheter to prevent urine spillage, it would be better to add mass ligation of the urethra and catheter before cutting a catheter
12. During the postoperative course, the patient was administered fluids because of a large amount of watery stool from the diverting
ileostomy. Otherwise, the patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged from the hospital 30 days after the operation.
Stoma closure of the diverting ileostomy was performed 2 months after the operation. There were no signs of tumor recurrence or metastasis
at the last follow‐up (34 months after the surgical procedure). Laparoscopic anterior pelvic exenteration may be a suitable modification of
the classic surgical procedure in selected patient groups with locally advanced rectal cancers. The benefits of the method include better
visualization and exact orientation in the small pelvic space along with other generally accepted advantages of minimally invasive
procedures. However, further studies with long‐term follow‐up are required to resolve oncological outcomes. The authors have no conflicts of
interest. This article is dedicated to the memory of Prof. Kazuo Chijiiwa, who passed away on 26 November 2013.
