Conflict of Interest: None. Cutaneous meningiomas are rare tumors most commonly located on the scalp. We report the case of a 55-year-old
male who presented with a 2x3 cm tumoral lesion on the forehead. The lesion was hard, adherent and covered by normal skin. Incisional biopsy
revelead a proliferation of monomorphic round cells, organized in nests and focally forming pseudovascular spaces. Immunohistochemical study
revealed positivity for epithelial antigen membrane and vimentin. Vascular markers, cytokeratins and S100 protein were negative. A brain CT
scan did not show any evidence of intracranial meningioma. The authors describe the case of a cutaneous frontal meningioma in probable
relation with previous cranioencephalic trauma. Meningioma is the most common tumor of the neuroaxis and is derived from meningothelial
cells. Cutaneous meningiomas are collections of ectopic meningothelial cells in the dermis and subcutis, occuring most commonly on the
scalp. 1,2 The authors present a case of cutaneous meningioma of the frontal region with an unusual presentation and which could not be
included into any of the classical types described. The objective of the report is to emphasize the rarity of this entity but also to
increase awareness of its existence, so that clinicians can include it in the differential diagnosis of unusual scalp lesions. A 55-year-old
male presented with a slowly growing asymptomatic tumoral lesion in the frontal area, which had been evolving for 3 years. Physical
examination revealed a 2x3 cm, firm, ovoid subcutaneous mass, which was adherent to the deep tissues and covered by normal skin (Figure 1).
There was no evidence of cervical lymphadenopathy on palpation. 2x3 cm, firm, ovoid subcutaneous mass, adherent to the deep tissues and
covered by normal skin in the frontal region The patient had suffered an occupational injury resulting in head trauma (24 years earlier)
with fracture of the frontal bone and damage to the right brachial plexus. As a consequence, he developed encephalomalacia, right arm palsy
and epilepsy (focal right frontal paroxysmal activity). In 2007 he suffered another episode of head trauma, which caused an acute fronto-
parietal subdural hematoma. There was history of alcohol abuse. He was being treated with levetiracetam 1g 2 id, oxazepam 15 mg id and folic
acid 5 mg id. A deep biopsy was performed and histological examination showed a proliferation of cells arranged in nests and lobules (Figure
2A). Some areas showed an interstitial growth pattern, with collagen dissection, evoking the formation of vascular spaces (Figure 2B). There
was occasional entrapment of hyaline collagen, forming rounded collagen structures, but no calcification was seen (Figure 2C). The cells
were round or ovoid, monomorphic, and devoid of mitotic activity or significant cytological atypia (Figure 2D). The nuclei were basophilic
with finely scattered chromatin and the cytoplasm was moderately abundant, staining with a pale eosinophilic color. Histopathology of the
lesion (HE stain) A. Proliferation of cells in lobular arrangement between adipose and muscular tissue. B. Proliferation of cells arranged
in nests and lobules. C. Some areas presented intersticial growth, with collagen dissection, evoking the formation of vascular spaces. Areas
of entrapment of hyaline collagen, forming rounded collagen bodies. D. The cells of the proliferation were round, monomorphic, without
mitosis or significant atypia Immunohistochemical study showed that the cells were positive for EMA and vimentin (Figure 3). Staining for
epithelial (cytokeratins), melanocytic (S100 protein), vascular (CD34 and CD31), histiocytic (CD68) and muscular (desmin and smooth muscle
actin) markers was negative. The combination of morphological and immunohistochemical features established the diagnosis of cutaneous
meningioma. Immunohistochemical staining revealed positivity for vimentin (A) and EMA (B) Cranial computed tomography revealed a frontal
mass and a bony defect in the frontal area (Figure 4). There were lesions of encephalomalacia in the frontal region and ventricular
asymmetry (which had already been detected in previous exams) but no intracranial mass was detected. Cranioencephalic CT revealed frontal
mass and a bony defect in the frontal bone (*). There were no intracranial masses detected. Frontal e n c e p h a l o m a l a - cia and
ventricular asymmetry had been already present in previous exams The patient is now waiting for neurosurgical intervention. Because of its
rarity, the literature regarding cutaneous meningiomas is mainly based on case reports. In 1974, Lopez et al2 developed a classification
based on clinical and histopathological criteria. This classification is still widely used, and divides cutaneous meningiomas into 3 types:
Type I are congenital lesions, although they are frequently noticed later in life. They occur on the scalp (occipital area and along the
suture lines) and para-vertebral regions, and derive from meningothelial cells that become trapped in the dermis and subcutis during
development. There may be a connection with the central nervous system (sinus tract), leading to the assumption that type I meningiomas may
represent rudimentary meningoceles that have not kept their connection to the central nervous system. 3 Type II meningiomas are acquired
lesions that probably develop from ectopic arachnoid cells that extend to the skin by contiguity, along cranial and spinal nerves. Hence,
they are located around sensory organs (eyes, ears, nose and mouth) and along the course of cranial and spinal nerves. There is no
associated meningioma of the neuroaxis. 1,2 Type III are intracranial meningeal tumors that involve the skin by direct extension through
bone, traumatic or surgical defects, occurring most commonly on the face, temple and scalp as slow-growing subcutaneous masses. 2 Due to its
rarity and lack of characteristic clinical features (painless subcutaneous nodules, alopecic areas with tufts of hair or hipertrichosis),
the differential diagnosis is quite broad, including nevus sebaceous, alopecia areata, adnexal tumors, dermoid cysts, pseudocysts, fibromas,
hemangiomas, squamous cell carcinoma, hamartomas, meningocele, meningomyelocele, nasal glioma, neuroectodermic tumours, metastatic
lesions.1,2,3,4 The clinical features and imaging studies are most of the times inconclusive, making cytology, and most notably histology,
crucial for establishing the definitive diagnosis. The most common histopathogical form is the meningothelial type, with lobules, nests and
sheets of oval/polygonal meningothelial cells, with a whorled arrangement that shows hyaline structures (collagen bodies) or calcification
foci (psammomma bodies), which are very helpful clues to the diagnosis. 4 The immunohistochemical features in our patient's lesion are in
agreement with other reported cases: positivity for EMA and vimentin, and negativity for cytokeratins, S100 protein, CD34 and CD31, CD68,
desmin and smooth muscle actin. These allow to exclude epithelial, melanocytic, vascular, histiocytic and myogenic differentation,
respectively. 4 The gold standard treatment is complete surgical excision, although some advocate conservative treatment if the lesion is
asymptomatic and there are no complications. 1,4 Type I lesions have better prognosis than type II and III. Some type III lesions can be
inoperable, significantly worsening the vital prognosis. Some investigational studies based on molecular-based targeted therapies such as
vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitors and platelet-derived growth factor inhibitors are being performed. 5 Although our case does
not fit neatly into any specific type of cutaneous meningioma, it is probably best regarded as a variant of a type II lesion. We might
speculate that there may be a relation with the previous head trauma, with presumable extension of meningeal tissue through the bone
structural defect. The authors highlight the importance of a detailed clinical history in such cases, which may contribute to evoke the
possibility of cutaneous meningioma in certain clinical settings. Histopathological examination plays the major role in establishing the
definitive diagnosis, namely through careful assessment of the morphological features combined with a selected panel of immunohistochemical
stains. Finally, imaging studies are useful to detect associated features (namely a connection to the neuroaxis or a possible association
with an intracranial meningioma), and are of great importance in planning the correct therapeutic approach in these cases. Financial
Support: None. How to cite this article: Ramos L, Coutinho I, Cardoso JC, Garcia H, Cordeiro MR. Frontal cutaneous meningioma - Case report.
An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90 (3 Suppl 1):S130-3. Study conducted at the Dermatology and Venereology Department, Centro Hospitalar e
Universit√°rio de Coimbra- Coimbra, Portugal.
