Conflict of Interest: None. Primary follicular mucinosis is a rare dermatosis characterized by the accumulation of mucin in the follicular
epithelium and sebaceous glands. Clinically, it is characterized by the presence of papules or well-circumscribed and infiltrated plaques.
In this paper, we report the case of a female patient, seven years old, evolving for three months with an asymptomatic, erythematous and
infiltrated plaque located in the chin region. The research of thermal, pain and tactile sensitivity was inconclusive. Histological findings
confirmed the diagnosis of follicular mucinosis. There was regression of the lesion with the use of medium potency topical corticosteroids
for 20 days. The pathogenesis of follicular mucinosis remains unknown, being in some cases associated with lymphoproliferative disorders. In
endemic areas of leprosy, isolated and infiltrated follicular mucinosis lesions should be further differentiated from leprosy. Follicular
mucinosis (FM) is a rare dermatosis whose etiology is not fully understood, characterized by the accumulation of mucin in the follicular
epithelium and sebaceous glands. It was described for the first time by Pinkus et al., in 1957, who named it mucinous alopecia.1 Since this
alopecia is not seen in all cases, being best observed in areas with terminal hairs, Jablonska et al. proposed in 1959 to name it follicular
mucinosis, the designation more commonly adopted nowadays.2 It is clinically characterized by the presence of well-delimited, erythematous
or brownish-erythematous, infiltrated papules or plaques. Follicular keratosis or areas of alopecia may also be observed. Other less common
presentations have been already described, with acneiform, eczematous, cystic or nodular lesions.3 FM may also present itself as an
exclusive form or in association with diverse benign or malignant conditions, such as hematological neoplasms, infections and autoimmune
diseases.4 In this work, we report a case of a child with an infiltrated erythematous plaque in the chin region, whose clinical presentation
constitutes an important differential diagnosis of childhood tuberculoid leprosy, mainly in endemic areas of leprosy. Female patient, seven
years old, evolving for three months with asymptomatic cutaneous lesion located in the chin region. At the dermatological examination, an
erythematous-brownish plaque, oval-shaped, well-circumscribed and infiltrated, measuring approximately 2.5 cm in its largest diameter was
noticed in the chin region (Figure 1). The evaluation of thermal, pain and tactile sensitivity was inconclusive. In light of the clinical
picture, hypotheses of childhood tuberculoid leprosy and follicular mucinosis were raised. Bacilloscopy was negative. At the histological
examination, reticular degeneration in the infundibulum of hair follicles was observed, forming large clear spaces, with lymphohistiocytic
infiltrate around vessels and appendages and discrete collagen fibrosis. Alcian blue staining confirmed accumulation of mucin in hair
follicles. Atypical lymphocytes or epidermotropism were not observed (Figure 2). Patient was treated with medium-potency topical corticoid
during 20 days, evolving with complete remission of lesion (Figure 3). She remains under outpatient clinic follow-up, twelve months after
the initial treatment, with no relapses. Erythematous-brownish oval-shaped plaque, well-circumscribed and infiltrated, measuring
approximately 2.5 cm at its largest diameter, located in the chin region In hematoxilin-eosin staining, reticular degeneration in the
infundibulum of hair follicles was observed, forming large clear spaces, with lymphohistiocytic infiltrate around vessels and appendages and
discrete collagen fibrosis Complete remission of lesion after treatment with topical corticoid Follicular mucinosis is a disorder
histopathologically defined by the accumulation of mucin in hair follicles and sebaceous glands, which undergo epithelial reticular
degeneration. It is believed that follicular keratinocytes are responsible for mucin production, as a response to the stimulus of cytokines
released by perifollicular T lymphocytes. Its pathogenesis, however, remains unknown, even though the role of circulating immune complexes
and cell immunity have already been considered.5 Classically, three forms are described: primary of short evolution; primary of prolonged
course; and secondary, associated with diverse benign or malignant conditions. Primary follicular mucinosis of short evolution affects
children and young adults, presenting few lesions, limited to the head and neck regions, which may remit spontaneously with no relapses,
similarly to the case presented. Primary FM of prolonged course occurs in older patients, manifesting itself with multiple lesions of
chronic course, prone to relapses. In both cases there is usually no association with systemic diseases, although some of the latest studies
have demonstrated the presence of histological characteristics of mycosis fungoides in patients with primary FM. 6 Secondary mucinosis
usually appears between the fourth and seventh decades of life, with multiple infiltrated plaques, which are commonly associated with
systemic diseases, particularly lymphoproliferative malignancies.7 The creation of a new clinical subtype named reactive follicular
mucinosis was recently proposed, where incidental histopathological findings may be observed in some dermatoses, with mucin deposits, such
as hypertrophic lichen planus, striated lichen and melanocytic nevus.8 In the case presented, the importance of differential diagnosis
between primary follicular mucinosis and Hansen's disease is emphasized, mainly in cases with presence of infiltrated plaque in patients who
are from endemic Hansen's disease areas. Studies published in the literature show that, in endemic areas, the differential diagnosis between
Hansen's disease and follicular mucinosis is not always easy and must be considered. In the case presented, the histological examination was
essential for the diagnosis, since the inflammatory infiltrate composed of macrophages, perifollicular and perivascular lymphocytes, with no
atypias or epidermotropism, rejected the diagnosis of childhood tuberculoid leprosy, confirming the diagnosis of FM. Besides Hansen's
disease, primary FM must be differentiated from persistent reaction to insect bite, lymphocytoma and lymphocytic infiltrate, among others.9
Several therapeutic modalities have been described for primary FM, with the use of topical or intralesional corticosteroids, dapsone,
antimalarial agents, oral retinoids, interferon alpha, minocycline and phototherapy. 10 In the case presented, there was total remission of
lesion with the use of medium potency topical corticoid for 20 days. Financial Support: None. How to cite this article: Westphal DC, Pennini
SN, Souza PP, Maquiné GA, Schettini APM, Santos M . Follicular mucinosis: an important differential diagnosis of leprosy in an endemic area
. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90 (3 Suppl 1):S147-9. Work performed at Fundação Alfredo da Matta (Fuam) - Manaus (AM), Brazil.
