Conflict of Interest: None. (In memoriam) The term "Wolf's isotopic response" describes the occurrence of a new skin disorder at the site of
another unrelated and already healed skin disease. In most cases, herpes zoster is the inicial disease. Different disorders may develop on
the same site, most commonly granulomatous and lichenoid reactions, infiltration of hematologic diseases, skin tumors and infections. There
are few related cases of lichen planus presenting as isotopic response. We report a case of a 74 year-old woman, with multiple itchy, rose-
colored and shiny papules that developed at site of previously healed herpes zoster, on the right arm and shoulder. The pathogenesis of this
phenomenon is still unknown and further studies are needed. Wolf's isotopic response occurs when a dermatosis appears in a region previously
affected by another unrelated and already healed skin disease.1 The term was created by Wolf et al in 1995, but it had already been
described by Wyburn-Mason, an English neurologist who in 1955 reported 26 cases of patients with malignant tumors, developed in the same
site of a previous herpes zoster or herpes simplex eruption.2,3 Primary lesion is usually a herpes zoster, followed then by secondary
condition - most commonly a neoplasm or granuloma annulare.1 It's important to differentiate the isotopic phenomenon from the isomorphic
response (or Köebner phenomenon), which defines the appearance of lesions of the same disease after traumatic provocation. Wolf's isotopic
response is an uncommon phenomenon in clinical practice and even in the literature, so its recognition is very important. We report a case
of this phenomenon. Female patient, 74 years old, with pruritic skin lesions on the right shoulder and arm for a week (Figures 1 and 2). She
states that the eruption occurs exactly in the area where she had been affected by herpes zoster for 3 weeks, which was diagnosed and
treated with resolution of the lesions. Physical examination revealed slightly elevated papules, rose-colored and shiny, with zosteriform
distribution following the thoraco-brachial dermatome. Clinical hypothesis of lichen planus was made and a biopsy was performed (Figures 3
and 4). Histological analysis showed epidermis with hyperkeratosis, mild increase in the granular layer, acanthosis areas interspersed with
atrophic areas, foci of degeneration in the basal layer, subepidermal cleft (Max Joseph space), mild lymphohistiocytic infiltrate in the
superficial dermis. These findings confirmed the diagnosis of Wolf's isotopic response. Slightly elevated papules, rose-colored and shiny,
with zosteriform distribution Papules following the thoraco-brachial dermatome, area previously affected by herpes zoster Epidermis with
hyperkeratosis, mild increase in the granular layer, foci of degeneration in the basal layer, subepidermal cleft (Max Joseph space) and
lymphohistiocytic infiltrate in the superficial dermis Presence of hyperkeratosis, hypergranulosis, irregular acantosis and lymphocytic
infiltrate There are about 200 reported cases of Wolf's isotopic response. The most commonly found initial dermatoses is herpes zoster, but
the condition has also been described after herpes simplex, varicella and thrombophlebitis.4 The most reported secondary diseases are
granuloma annulare, malignancies (breast cancer, squamous cell and basal cell carcinoma), leukemic/lymphomatous infiltration, inflammatory
reactions (lichen planus), contact dermatitis, psoriasis and infections (mycosis, molluscum contagiosum, verruca vulgaris, furunculosis).
5,6 There are also reports of cases of perforating collagenosis, comedones and acneiform eruptions, morphea, graft versus host disease
(GVHD), eosinophilic dermatoses, Kaposi's sarcoma, angiosarcoma, erythema annulare centrifugum, sub-corneal pustular dermatoses and chronic
hives. 3,7,8 A literature review analyzed 176 cases of isotopic response and found herpes zoster (89%) and herpes simplex (11%) as the most
common initial diseases. 3 Regarding the secondary diseases, the largest group was granulomatous reactions (31%), mainly granuloma annulare
(18%). The study also found 36 cases of malignant tumors (20%), 15 cases of infectious diseases (9%), 10 cases of lymphomas (6%), 9 cases of
leukemic infiltration (5%), 9 cases of lichen planus (5 %), 6 cases of morphea (3%) and 4 cases of perforating dermatosis (2%) (Table 1).
Jaka-Moreno et al 4 reported in a series of 9 cases the occurrence of 4 granulomatous dermatitis, 2 lichenoid dermatitis, 2 infiltration by
B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia and 1 infiltration by non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Key secondary skin diseases and reported frequencies
Interval between initial infection and the development of secondary disease varies widely, from days to years.1,8 Jaka-Moreno et al found
intervals from 15 days to 7 months. The pathogenesis leading to the development of secondary disease is not yet fully understood. It has
been suggested that viral particles remaining in the tissues would be directly responsible for the occurrence of secondary disease. Findings
of isolated viral DNA in secondary lesions corroborate this hypothesis.9 However, the presence of viral DNA is rare and has only been
documented in cases where there was a short interval between the two diseases (less than 4 weeks).10 Moreover, it was showed no detectable
reduction in the occurrence of the response with the use of systemic antivirals for the treatment of herpetic infections.4 Some authors
postulate that vascular and immunological changes occur after viral infection and would make the skin more susceptible to a second disease
in the same area.1 The herpesviruses are known for their ability to destroy A-delta and C-nerve fibers in the mid and deep dermis. Damage to
peripheral sensory nerves would alter the expression profile of neuropeptides and neurotransmitters (substance P, calcitonin gene-related
peptide, neuropeptide Y) of these nerves. These neuropeptides mediate immune functions such as degranulation of mast cells and release of
pro-inflammatory cytokines. The neuroimmunologic reaction would create an invisible scar of immune dysregulation confined to the area of
initial infection, which has been called "locus minorus resistentiae", where apparently healthy skin is more susceptible to subsequent
diseases.6 In these sites of immune alterations, the hyperreactivity would favor the inflammatory processes as lichenoid and granulomatous
dermatitis, and local immunosuppression would lead to tumor infiltration and infections.1 It has also been suggested that the nerve damage
may lead to abnormal angiogenesis, causing development of vascular tumors.4 It's still unknown how the herpesvirus infection leads to such a
wide variety of secondary diseases and why most people do not present the isotopic response. It is postulated a contribution of genetic,
environmental, nutritional and other unknown factors.6 Financial Support: None. How to cite this article: Queiroz MTS, Almeida JRP,
Sementilli A, Mattos e Dinato SL, Romiti N. Wolf’s isotopic response, presenting as lichen planus. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90 (3 Suppl
1):S91-3. Study performed at Centro Universitário Lusíada (UNILUS) - Santos (SP), Brazil.
