Conflict of Interest: None. Darier's disease is a rare autosomal dominant genodermatosis. It has an estimated prevalence of 1 in 55,000 to
100,000 individuals, regardless of gender. It is characterized by multiple keratotic papules on the seborrheic areas of the trunk, scalp,
forehead and flexures, and the clinical picture is worsened by heat, sun exposure, perspiration and mechanical trauma. Histopathology
observed loss of epithelial adhesion and abnormal keratinization. About 10% of cases present in the localized form of the disease. We report
a case of segmental Darier's Disease Type I and discuss the main characteristics of this condition. Darier's disease (Darier-White disease
or follicular keratosis) was described by Darier and White in 1889.1 It is a rare genodermatosis of autosomal dominant inheritance, with
high penetrance and variable expressivity.1,2 The estimated prevalence of Darier's disease is 1 in 55,000 to 100,000 individuals. Men and
women are equally affected.3 The first signs of the condition appear between 6 and 20 years of age.3 This disease is a consequence of
spontaneous or hereditary mutations in the gene that codifies the endoplasmic reticulum calcium-dependent ATPase (product of protein
SERCA2), located in chromosome 12, in region 12q23-q24.1 These alterations modify the efficient processing of proteins necessary for
cellular adhesion, leading to defective organization of tonofilaments with manifestations of acantholysis and dyskeratosis.2 Patients
develop keratotic papules which may coalesce in plaques in seborrheic areas of the trunk, scalp, forehead and flexures. The lesions may have
bad odor, especially in flexural areas, and be prone to secondary infection, which leads to clinical exacerbation and worsening of the odor.
The presence of keratotic papules is common on palms and soles, in addition to ungual abnormalities, including erythematous and/or white
longitudinal lines, fragility of nails, which tend to break distally in a "V" shape and subungual keratosis. These alterations in the
extremities may be the first sign of widespread disease. Hypochromic papules may be present in mucosae.3 Around 10% of DD cases present
localized lesions, which is a rarer clinical presentation, with 40 cases described in English literature. 3-5 This pattern was reported for
the first time in 1906. Since then, several variants of the localized disease were described: unilateral, linear, segmental or
zosteriform.3,4 Two phenotypes are recognized in the localized disease. Type I is characterized by unilateral distribution along the
Blaschko lines. In type II variant, patients present widespread disease with localized areas of more severe involvement.2,4 We report a case
of type I segmental DD, with lesions confined to the right lower limb of the patient, with histopathological confirm ation. Female patient,
40 years old, of mixed race, housemaid, reported the onset of keratotic papules on the fourth and fifth right toes, with an ascending path
towards dorsum of feet and anterior and medial face of right leg, since she was 12 (Figures 1 and 2). Clinical picture is asymptomatic, with
no aggravating factors. She denies comorbidities. She has nine siblings and two daughters without similar lesions. Grouped keratotic
normochromic papules, with linear disposition on the dorsum of right foot Erythematous and brownish keratotic papules grouped in a linear
and ascending path on the anterior and medial face of right leg At the histopathological examination, acantholysis and dyskeratosis were
observed, compatible with segmental DD (Figure 3). Topical treatment with adapalene gel 0.3% was prescribed, associated with urea 20% and
salicylic acid 8%. Histopathological section showing acantholysis and dyskeratosis, characterized by the presence of round bodies in the
granular layer and grains in the corneal layer (HE - 200x) She has been under outpatient clinic follow-up for 6 months and, after 3 months
of treatment, there was total remission of lesions on the leg and partial on dorsum of foot (Figures 4 and 5). Partial improvement of
cutaneous clinical picture demonstrated by the decreasing number of papules and keratotic aspect of lesion Complete resolution of lesions on
the leg after topical treatment Type 1 phenotype of DD is the most common.2,4,5 The skin surrounding the affected areas is normal. A post-
zygotic somatic mutation would explain this variant.5 If genetic mosaicism involve the gonads, the mutation may be transmitted to
descendants and potentially result in widespread disease.4,5 In the case presented there was no similar history among siblings and
daughters, suggesting a post-zygotic mutation with no gonadal involvement. Histological findings do not differ from those of widespread
disease.4 In type II variant, there is heterozygotic mutation in the germline associated with somatic loss of heterozygosity of the wild-
type allele in a segmental area, which leads to homo or heterozygosity and then to an exponential increase in severity.2,4 The
characteristics which accompany the widespread disease may be absent in the localized forms.3,4 The average age in segmental cases
presentation was estimated to be 27 3; this is an older age group than the observed in the widespread disease. The patients frequently
report the onset of lesions after sun exposure and exuberance with heat, perspiration and mechanical trauma, similar to what is observed in
the widespread disease.5 However, the mentioned patient presented onset of lesions when she was 12 and denied aggravating factors.
Histopathological characteristics include dyskeratosis and acantholysis. Dyskeratosis is characterized by early keratinization cells with
large basophilic nuclei in the granular (round bodies) and corneal (grains) layers.6 In these clefts originated by acantholysis, there are
keratinocytes, either individual or in groups (acantholytic cells). Also observed are elongated buds and mild lymphocytic perivascular
infiltrate in the superficial dermis.2,6 It is controversial to consider the localized DD form or some special form of epidermal nevi.7 The
localized variant may be clinically and histologicaly indistinguishable from nevi with acantholytic dyskeratosis.4 The hypothesis of nevus
is supported by the absence of hereditary pattern, even though the course of segmental DD may happen without familial cases and be an
underdiagnosed entity.3 The onset of late-age lesions corroborates the diagnosis of segmental DD.7 It is believed that the epidermal nevus
with acantholytic dyskeratosis is a form of localized DD and it is suggested that its name be changed to segmental DD induced by post-
zygotic mutation.4 Recent studies may lead to the conclusion that these two entities might be the same.2 Due to the low severity of the
localized variant of DD, the treatment consists predominantly of topical therapy, besides behavioral measures such as avoiding triggering
factors, wearing light clothing and sunscreen.5 Case reports have shown that topical retinoids (adapalene, tazarotene gel 0.01% and
tretinoin) may reduce hyperkeratosis in 3 months, with irrigation being a limiting factor. Emolients, topical corticosteroids and reduction
of retinoid concentration are options to alleviate the irritation.8 Some studies have demonstrated that tazarotene gel is superior to other
topical treatments.5 Therapy with topical 5-fluorouracil has been effective in some patients. There are reports of success with topical
pimecrolimus.8 Bacterial colonization may be reduced with antiseptics and antibiotics.5 The established treatment took into account the easy
access and low cost of chosen medications. Due to good therapeutic response and absence of adverse effects, the treatment was maintained.
The case reported confirms the need to place segmental DD, however rare, as a differential diagnosis of clinical lesions that follow
Blaschko's lines, as well as verrucous epidermal nevus, striated lichen and linear lichen planus. The importance of histopathological exams
in this diagnosis is also highlighted. Financial Support: None. How to cite this article: Medeiros PM, Alves NRM, Trujillo JM, Silva CC,
Faria PCP, Silva RS. Segmental Darier disease: a presentation of diffi cult diagnosis. An Bras Dermatol. 2015;90 (3 Suppl 1): S62-5. Work
performed at Hospital Universit√°rio Pedro Ernesto da Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (HUPE - UERJ) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
