The appropriate surgical approach for a large mediastinal tumor is controversial. Median sternotomy is the standard approach for thymomas.
We herein report the case of a giant thymoma, 13 cm in diameter, surgically resected via anterolateral incision. Subsequent thymectomy was
performed via thoracoscopy. The resected specimen was a WHO type AB thymoma, Masaoka stage I, without capsular invasion. The anterolateral
incision was less invasive and more versatile in the present case, as the incision could be extended to a hemiclamshell or posterolateral
incision depending on exposure and relationship to adjacent organs and vascular structures. Thymomas are rare neoplasms with an indolent
growth pattern and present with various clinical symptoms . They are commonly found in the anterior mediastinum. Complete surgical resection
is the mainstay of treatment. While median sternotomy has been the standard approach for thymectomy, the best incision is controversial for
so-called giant thymomas . Here we report the case of a giant thymoma in the anterior-inferior mediastinum successfully resected with
additional thymectomy via anterolateral thoracotomy. A 45-year-old man was referred to our hospital due to a routine chest x-ray showing an
abnormal shadow in the right lower lung field (Fig. 1). He had no obvious symptoms, except for slight dyspnea on exertion for three months.
He had no smoking history and no significant medical history. No previous chest x-rays were available. Chest CT-scan showed a well-defined
mass 13 x 10 cm in diameter, in contact with the diaphragm, pericardium, right inferior pulmonary vein, and superior vena cava (Fig. 1). The
tumor showed heterogenous contrast effect. F18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed abnormal FDG uptake with
maximum standardized uptake value of 4.2. Laboratory examination showed normal serum levels of alpha fetoprotein (2.4 ng/ml), human
chorionic gonadotropin beta (<0.2 ng/ml) and anti-acetylcholine receptor antibody. Differential diagnosis included thymoma, thymic
carcinoma, and a germ cell tumor; surgical resection was thus recommended. Preoperative needle biopsy was not performed because of the risk
of dissemination or bleeding. As the tumor showed possible invasion into the superior vena cava, inferior pulmonary vein and diaphragm, we
elected to perform an anterolateral thoracotomy in the fifth intercostal space in the semi-lateral decubitus position, which could be
extended to a posterolateral thoracotomy or hemi-clamshell thoracotomy depending on the relationship of the tumor to the inferior pulmonary
vein or superior vena cava, respectively.Fig. 1Chest x-ray shows a giant mass in the right lower lung field (left). Chest CT shows a mass
measuring 13 x 10 cm in diameter, in contact with the right inferior pulmonary vein (right) Chest x-ray shows a giant mass in the right
lower lung field (left). Chest CT shows a mass measuring 13 x 10 cm in diameter, in contact with the right inferior pulmonary vein (right)
Thoracoscopic examination through the eighth intercostal space revealed no adhesions or pleural disease. An anterolateral incision, 20 cm in
length, was made in the fifth intercostal space. The tumor was excised from the anterior mediastinal fat tissue and thymus. Dense adhesions
of the tumor to the pericardium were sharply peeled off, and the tumor was resected without involvement of the superior vena cava or
inferior pulmonary vein. Intraoperative frozen section diagnosed the tumor as a thymoma; thymectomy was thus performed through the same
incision via thoracoscopy. The adherent portion of the pericardium was excised and reconstructed with the use of a Gore-Tex pericardial
patch. The resected specimen was 13 × 11.8 × 8 cm, showing a well encapsulated tumor with a lobulated appearance separated by fibrous bands.
Microscopic examination revealed the tumor to be composed of a lymphocyte-associated area and a spindle cell-dominant area (Fig. 2), which
was diagnosed as World Health Organization (WHO) Type AB thymoma without capsular invasion (Masaoka stage I). The postoperative course was
uneventful and the patient is free of recurrence 12 months after the surgery.Fig. 2Microscopic examination revealed a WHO type AB thymoma,
without capsular invasion Microscopic examination revealed a WHO type AB thymoma, without capsular invasion The optimal surgical approach
for giant thymomas is a point of controversy (Table 1). Two cases of giant thymoma resected via anterolateral thoracotomy have been reported
[2, 3]. One case was an ectopic pleural thymoma measuring 20 cm in size located in the lower portion of the right thoracic cavity, with
adhesions to the pulmonary pleura of the right lower lobe and central part of the diaphragm . The other case was an anterio-inferior mass
weighing 1705 g, which was attached to the mediastinal pleura via a small vascular bundle. This was easily removed after transection of the
pedicle, and additional thymectomy was performed . In the present case, we preferred the anterolateral approach because the incision could
be extended to either a posterolateral approach in the case of adhesions to the inferior pulmonary vein, or a hemiclamshell approach in case
of adhesions to the superior vena cava. Additional thymectomy was successfully performed via the same incision via thoracoscopy, thus
avoiding the need for a second operation.Table 1Surgical approach for giant thymomaApproach n CasesRemarksMedian sternotomy [reference
4–6]3Anterior massesSuitable for invasion into innominate veinPossible blind spot caused by anterior massHemiclamshell [reference
12–14]3Large masses occupying more than half of thoraxEasy access to the mediastinum and hilumRelatively invasivePosterolateral [reference
8, 9]2Masses close to the diaphragmSuitable for inferior mediastinal massesRequires thymectomy at second operationUnsuitable for antero-
superior mediastinal massesAnterolateral [reference 2, 3]2Antero-inferior massesPossible to extend the incision posteriorly or with median
sternotomyEctopic massUnsuitable in cases that are unstable in the decubitus positionClamshell [reference 7]1Masses with bleedingQuick
access to the hilum and tumor controlInvasive Surgical approach for giant thymoma While median sternotomy is the standard approach for
thymomas, only three cases of giant thymomas resected via median sternotomy have been reported . Median sternotomy was suitable for one case
with invasion into the innominate vein , but access to the hilum or posterior thorax can be difficult in cases of giant thymomas. A
hemiclamshell approach is a reasonable approach for giant thymomas , but is relatively more invasive compared with the other approaches. The
clamshell incision, widely used in lung transplantation procedures, was selected in an emergency operation for a patient in shock secondary
to spontaneous rupture of a giant thymoma, thought to be a giant sarcoma in close contact with the pulmonary artery . The clamshell approach
enables rapid tumor control and easy access to the hilum. A posterolateral approach was reported in two cases [8, 9]. One case was an
ectopic pleural thymoma, preoperatively suspected to be a solitary fibrous tumor, and a subsequent transcervical thymectomy was not
performed. In the other case, the remaining thymus gland portions were removed through a median sternotomy at a second operation .
Anterolateral thoracotomy is less invasive than the clamshell and hemiclamshell approaches, and may be appropriate for cases of giant
thymoma. While the size of the thymoma has been reported to be a significant prognostic factor from experienced single centers [10, 11],
sporadic case reports of giant thymomas larger than 13 cm consisted of 4 cases of WHO type A, 6 cases of type AB (including the present
case), and 2 cases of type B1 [2–9, 12–14]. Although the five year survival for thymomas more than 10 cm is reported to be 72 % ,
successfully resected giant thymomas tend to be low-grade . In the present case, surgical resection for a giant thymoma and additional
thymectomy were successfully performed via an anterolateral approach, which is relatively less invasive and more versatile due to the
ability to extend the incision posteriorly or to add a median sternotomy. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. F18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography World Health Organization Competing interests The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Authors’ contributions All authors participated in the design of the case report and helped to draft the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This study was supported in part by a Grant-in-aid for Scientific Research
(C) 15 K10272 from the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and The Research Promotion Grant from Toho
University Graduate School of Medicine (No.15-02 to A.I.). Disclosures The authors have no funding, no financial relationships, and no
conflicts of interests.
