Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds Collection
Intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) is a well-known condition, but ICH restricted to the thalamus is less widely studied. We investigated the
prognostic factors of thalamic ICHs. Seventy patients from January 2009 to November 2014 were retrospectively reviewed. Patients who
demonstrated spontaneous ICH primarily affecting the thalamus on initial brain computed tomography (CT) were enrolled. Patients were
categorized into 2 groups based on their Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS) scores. Various presumptive prognostic factors were analyzed to
investigate relationships between various clinical characteristics and outcomes. Of the enrolled patients, 39 showed a GOS of 4–5, and were
categorized as the good outcome group, while another 31 patients showed a GOS of 1–3 and were categorized as the poor outcome group. Initial
GCS score, calculated volume of hematoma, presence of intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH), coexisting complications, hydrocephalus,
performance of external ventricular drainage, and modified Graeb’s scores of patients with IVH were significantly different between the 2
groups. In multivariate analysis, among the factors above, initial GCS score (P=0.002, Odds ratio =1.761, Confidence interval =1.223–2.536)
and the existence of systemic complications (P=0.015, OR=0.059, CI=0.006–0.573) were independently associated with clinical outcomes.
Calculated hematoma volume showed a borderline relationship with outcomes (P=0.079, OR=0.920, CI=0.839–1.010). Initial GCS score and the
existence of systemic complications were strong predictive factors for prognosis of thalamic ICH. Calculated hematoma volume also had
predictive value for clinical outcomes. Spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) is a major public health problem with an annual incidence
of 10–30 cases per 100 000 population, accounting for 2 million (10–15%) of approximately 15 million strokes, which occur worldwide each
year . It is the most devastating type of stroke, with the greatest rates of morbidity and mortality . Most spontaneous ICHs (78–88% of
cases) originate from the spontaneous rupture of small vessels damaged by chronic hypertension or amyloid angiopathy, and is termed as
spontaneous ICH . Secondary ICHs represent ICH that occurs in a minority of patients in association with vascular abnormalities . This
spontaneous ICH can affect the brain parenchyma anywhere, but more commonly affects specific locations, including the basal ganglia,
thalamus, pons, and cerebellum . Recently, ICHs were categorized as lobar hemorrhages and non-lobar hemorrhages based on their location.
This is because their locations were found to affect the prognosis of the disease. Supratentorial non-lobar hemorrhages include ICHs located
in the thalamus, basal ganglia, and internal or external capsules . Among them, thalamic ICHs represent 8.3–15% of all ICHs, secondary to
ICHs originating from the basal ganglia . Spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage is a relatively well-studied disease, but studies restricted
to ICHs affecting mainly the thalamus are scarce. We retrospectively studied 70 cases of thalamic ICH to identify factors affecting
prognosis in these patients. We conducted a retrospective review of 653 patients who presented with ICH and who were admitted to our center
from January 2009 to November 2014. The inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) spontaneous ICHs affecting primarily the thalamus; and (2)
spontaneous ICHs with no antecedent disease such as arteriovenous malformations, Moyamoya disease, cerebral aneurysms, or traumatic events.
Finally, 70 of the 653 patients were enrolled in the study. On and after making a diagnosis of spontaneous thalamic ICH, all patients were
managed in a neurosurgical intensive care unit (ICU). Blood pressure was controlled to maintain systolic blood pressure below 160 mmHg, and
osmotic diuretics were administrated to control increased intracranial pressure (ICP). When the patient’s condition met the indication for
external ventricular drainage (EVD), EVD was performed after gaining informed consent. The indications for EVD in our institution are as
follows: (1) acute hydrocephalus, measured Evans ratio >0.30 on brain CT scans (2) Evans ratio <0.30, but the patients presented
neurological deterioration signs resulting from hydrocephalus or intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH). EVD side was chosen based on the
patient’s condition and hemorrhagic factors observed in their initial computed tomography (CT) scan. In the acute phase of ICH, we prefer
EVD to lumbar drainage to treat ventriculomegaly regardless of hydrocephalus type. There are some reasons as follows; (1) to perform
continuous ICP monitoring (2) possibility of usage of urokinase through EVD catheter. Lumbar drainage is only performed as the diagnostic
test of chronic hydrocephalus (communicating) for shunt operation. Thus, in this study, there was no patient with thalamic ICH who underwent
a therapeutic lumbar drainage. When the patient’s condition met the indication for surgery (neuronavigation-assisted hematoma drainage or
open craniotomy with hematoma removal), surgical interventions were performed after gaining informed consent. The indications for surgical
intervention in our institution are as follows: (1) calculated hematoma volume >30 mL on brain CT scans, (2) 4≤ Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)
scores ≤9. Pneumatic compression stockings were applied for patients in the acute phase who required equipment for the prevention of deep
vein thrombosis (DVT). Patients beyond the acute phase who did not need ICU care were transferred to a general ward, and underwent an
individualized rehabilitation program. Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS) scores evaluated 1 month after admission were used to determine clinical
outcomes. Patients were divided into 2 groups according to their GOS scores: the good outcome group (GOS scores of 4–5), and the poor
outcome group (GOS scores of 1–3). The presumptive prognostic factors of the patients with thalamic ICH were collected and analyzed to
examine their relationships with clinical outcomes. In our study, presumptive factors were divided into patient factors and hemorrhagic
factors. Patient factors included: age; sex; initial GCS scores; platelet counts; coagulopathy (prothrombin time (PT, International
Normalized Ratio) >1.2, activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) >45 sec, or platelet count <150000 103/μL; underlying diseases, such as
hypertension (previously known, patient being treated with antihypertensive medications, or blood pressure >140/90 mmHg during the non-acute
phase) and diabetes mellitus (DM) (fasting glucose >7 mmol/L or patient being treated with antidiabetic medication); use of anticoagulants
or antiplatelet agents; blood pressure >140/90 mmHg at visit; blood pressure >140/90 mmHg at third day of admission; and accompanying
complications after admission, such as pneumonia, urinary tract infection, central nervous system infection, phlebitis, Clostridium
difficile infection, or sepsis. Hemorrhagic factors included: side; co-affecting location such as basal ganglia; brain stem; existence of
IVH and its volume calculated with the modified Graeb’s score system [IVH based in fourth ventricle (maximum score 4), third (maximum score
4), right and left lateral ventricles (maximum score 4 for each), right and left occipital horns (maximum score 2 for each), and the right
and left temporal horns (maximum score 2 for each). An additional score of +1 is given to each compartment if it is expanded beyond normal
anatomic limits attributable to clot] ; calculated hematoma volume with by ABC/2 formula ; evidence of hydrocephalus (Evans ratio >0.30);
EVD, and surgical intervention for hematoma removal. Information of hemorrhagic factors was collected from each patient’s initial brain CT
scan. Presumptive prognostic factors were compared between the good and poor outcome groups with the Mann-Whitney U-test for continuous
variables and Pearson’s chi-square test for categorical variables. The Mann-Whitney U-test was used to analyze modified Graeb’s score data
of patients with IVH (n=50). Independent associations between prognostic factors and clinical outcomes were analyzed using binary logistic
regression, and odds ratios (ORs) and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated. The data were presented as mean ± standard
deviation (SD). Analyses were performed with SPSS ver. 19.0 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY, USA). P-values less than 0.05 (P<0.05) were
considered statistically significant. Overall, 70 patients were enrolled in the study. The mean age was 64.36±12.31 years, and there were 32
(45%) males and 38 (55%) females. Among the 70 patients, 39 (56%) had good GOS scores (4–5) evaluated at 1 month after admission, while the
other 31 (44%) patients had poor GOS scores (1–3) evaluated at 1 month after admission. The overall mortality rate was 11%. In total, eight
patients (11%) died, and 6 of these died due to intractable increasing ICP. Another 2 patients died due to other causes, including sudden
onset of ventricular tachycardia and respiratory arrest. EVD was performed to 20 patients, and among these patients, only 1 patient showed
good outcome. A total of 5 patients underwent surgical intervention for hematoma removal. Two patients underwent open craniotomy, while 3
underwent neuronavigation-assisted hematoma removal. All 5 patients showed poor outcome. Table 1 demonstrates patient factors, while Table 2
demonstrates hemorrhagic factors. We drew a comparison between the presumptive factors of the good and poor outcome groups. Age and gender
distributions were not statistically associated with clinical outcomes (P=0.094, 0.294 for each factor, Mann-Whitney U-test for age
distribution and Pearson’s chi-square test for gender distribution). The initial GCS score, which was 13.79±1.67 in the good outcome group,
was significantly higher than the 7.74±3.21 of the poor outcome group (P<0.001). Among the 70 patients, 22 had been taking anticoagulants or
anti-platelet agents, including aspirin, clopidogrel, and warfarin. However, their distribution between the good outcome group and poor
outcome group was not statistically significant (P=0.091, Pearson’s chi-square test). Laboratory data of patients who presented with
abnormal bleeding profiles, including low platelet counts and prolonged PT/aPTT, were also not statistically significant (P=0.260 for
platelet count, Mann-Whitney U-test, P=0.140 for pronged PT/aPTT, Pearson’s chi-square test). Forty-one (60%) patients had hypertension, but
their distribution among the good and poor outcome groups was not statistically significant. However, 17 (24%) patients had DM, of which 15%
were patients with good outcomes and 35% were patients with poor outcomes, and their distribution pattern showed a borderline tendency
(P=0.051, Pearson’s chi-square test). The number of patients whose initial blood pressure >140/90 mmHg showed no difference between the 2
groups (P=0.409, Pearson’s chi-square test), but the number of patients whose blood pressure >140/90 mmHg on the 3rd day of admission showed
a borderline tendency (P=0.058, Pearson’s chi-square test). Furthermore, complication (including pneumonia, urinary tract infections,
central nervous system infections, phlebitis, C. difficile infection, and sepsis) rates during admission of the poor outcome group were
significantly higher (P<0.001, Pearson’s chi-square test). The distribution of side of thalamic ICHs was not different between the 2 groups
(P=0.470, Pearson’s chi-square test); however, the volume of ICH calculated in each group was significantly different (17.07±15.19 in the
good outcome group and 26.52±17.78 in the poor outcome group [P<0.001, Mann-Whitney U-test]). The rate of co-affecting areas, including
midbrain, basal ganglia, corona radiata, etc., was not significantly different between the 2 groups, but showed a borderline tendency
(P=0.065, Pearson’s chi-square test). The rate of coexisting IVH was also significantly higher in the poor outcome group (90%) than in the
good outcome group (64%) (P=0.002, Pearson’s chi-square test). In total, 50 patients presented with coexisting IVH. The volume of IVH
described by modified Graeb’s scores was also significantly higher in the poor outcome group (14.93±7.81) than in the good outcome group
(7.41±5.07) (n=50, P=0.001, Mann-Whitney U-test). The rate of hydrocephalus and EVD was also significantly higher in the poor outcome group
(P<0.001 for both parameters, Pearson’s chi-square test). Surgical interventions such as hematoma drainage and open craniotomy were also
significantly higher in the poor outcome group (P=0.009, Pearson’s chi-square test). Tables 3 and 4 demonstrate the results of logistic
regression analysis of associations between characteristics and clinical outcomes. Among the presumptive factors, absence of IVH (OR 7.212,
95% CI 1.873–27.778), decreased modified Graeb’s scores of patients with IVH (OR 0.839, 95% CI 0.772–0.913), decreased volume of hematoma
(OR 0.853, 95% CI 0.783–0.928), absence of hydrocephalus (OR 19.733, 95% CI 4.033–96.543), patient conditions did not meet the indication
for EVD (OR 60.167, 95% CI 7.212–497.770), decreased initial GCS score (OR 2.209, 95% CI 1.528–3.193), absence of complications (OR 13.143,
95% CI 4.173–41.391) were statistically correlated with good outcomes of patients with thalamic ICH on univariate analysis. Among these
factors, only initial GCS score and the presence of coexisting complications demonstrated an independent association with clinical outcomes
(initial GCS score OR 1.761, 95% CI 1.223–2.536, P=0.002, coexisting complication OR 0.059, 95% CI 0.006–0.573, P=0.015). Volume of hematoma
showed a borderline relationship (OR 0.920, 95% CI 0.839–1.010, P=0.079). Other factors, such as sex, age, platelet count, PT/aPTT, presence
of IVH or hydrocephalus, EVD, surgical interventions, modified Graeb’s score of patients with IVH showed no significant associations with
clinical outcomes. A 50-year-old man with hypertension visited our hospital due to sudden right-side hemiparesis. His initial GCS score was
15. Brain CT scans demonstrated a left thalamic hemorrhage, which measured about 5 mL (Figure 1A) and CT angiography showed no vascular
anomaly (Figure 1B). The patient underwent conservative therapy. He showed alert mentality and mild hemiparesis 1 month later with
additional rehabilitation (GOS 4). A 66-year-old man with a history of hypertension, DM, chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage V, and prior
history of a cerebrovascular accident (CVA, cerebral infarction at left pons) visited our institution due to sudden onset of altered
mentality. He was treated for prior CVA with clopidogrel. His initial GCS score was 8. He also presented with severe hemiparesis on his left
side. Initial brain CT scans demonstrated a right thalamic ICH extended to the midbrain (Figure 1C) but angiography demonstrated no vascular
abnormality corresponding to a hemorrhagic event (Figure 1D). The calculated volume of hematoma was about 26 mL. His blood pressure was
consistently high from admission to the third day. During admission, he had no other systemic complications. However, after 1 month, he
presented a minimally conscious state, and his GOS was 2. We investigated the presumptive prognostic factors that might correlate to
clinical outcomes of patients with thalamic ICH. In multivariate analysis of a variety of presumptive factors, only initial GCS score and
the presence of systemic complications were independently correlated with clinical outcomes. Calculated initial hematoma volume showed a
borderline relationship with outcomes. Among patient factors, age and sex were important non-modifiable parameters. A number of studies have
proven that age has predictive value in the clinical outcomes of patients with ICHs . However, in our study, neither age nor sex was
associated with clinical outcomes. We excluded ICHs located everywhere but the thalamus, so the number of enrolled patients was relatively
small (n=70). Further investigation in a larger numbers of patients is probably warranted to determine any significant relationships. We
also investigated modifiable factors dependent on patients, such as hypertension, DM, and use of antiplatelet agents or anticoagulants. A
history of hypertension has been consistently reported as a major risk factor of spontaneous ICHs , but its association with clinical
prognosis has not been clearly determined . In this study, history of hypertension was not associated with clinical outcomes of patients
with thalamic ICHs. However, DM was not independently associated with clinical outcomes, but showed borderline tendency in univariate
analysis (OR 0.331, 95% CI 0.106–1.033, P=0.057). Larger investigations are warranted to determine any associations. Drug histories,
including anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents and the presence of coagulopathy, were not associated with clinical outcomes in our study.
Initial blood pressure is not considered as a risk factor or prognostic factor of ICHs , but there are some reports showing intensive
reduction of blood pressure associated with clinical outcomes of ICHs . In our study, initial blood pressure was not associated with
clinical outcomes. In contrast, blood pressure on the 3rd day was not independently associated with clinical outcomes, but showed a
borderline tendency in univariate analysis (OR 0.395, 95% CI 0.150–1.040, P=0.060). We used blood pressure estimated on the 3rd day of
admission for statistical analysis, but these findings generally corresponded with those from previous studies of relationships between
prognosis of ICHs and reduction of blood pressure. Coexisting systemic complications such as pneumonia, urinary tract infections, central
nervous system (CNS) infections, phlebitis, C. difficile infection, and sepsis were significantly associated with clinical outcomes of
patients with thalamic ICHs. Previous studies have noted systemic complications as important predictive factors for clinical outcomes of
patients with ICHs . These complications include variable conditions such as pneumonia, urinary tract infections, thrombotic events due to
immobilization, CNS infections, gastrointestinal bleeding, and renal complications. Interestingly, in our study, complications related to
immobilization such as DVT or thrombotic events were not observed. In our institution, most patients in the intensive care unit undergo DVT
prevention, including compression stockings or pneumatic compression stockings, and this was probably related to the lower rate of
thrombotic events in our study. However, in our study, other systemic complications except thrombotic events were observed, and these
complications were strongly related to prognosis of patients with thalamic ICHs (OR 0.059, 95% CI 0.006–0.573, P=0.015). This finding was
constant with previous reports of relationships between prognosis of ICHs and systemic complications, except thrombotic events. Without
doubt, prevention of thrombotic events is an important therapeutic strategy. In our series, 4 cases of ventriculitis were noted. All
patients with ventriculitis showed poor outcomes. Recurrent episodes of EVD were considered as a common source of infection . Four cases of
ventriculitis in our study were associated with EVD. Ventriculitis without EVD was not noted in our series. Initial GCS score was a
predictive factor that demonstrated an independent association with clinical outcomes (OR 1.761, 95% CI 1.223–2.536, P=0.002) in our study.
According to some previous studies about relationships between initial GCS scores and clinical outcomes, initial GCS score was strongly
correlated with clinical outcomes in patients with ICHs . Our result was consistent with these previous reports. Hemorrhagic factors
influencing the clinical outcome of patients with thalamic ICHs were side of ICH, calculated volume of hematoma, presence of co-affecting
areas, presence of IVH, development of hydrocephalus, modified Graeb’s score for quantification of IVH, and performing of the EVD or
hematoma removal. As in the previous study by Shah et al., side of hematoma did not relate to clinical outcomes of patients with ICHs . In
our study, there was no significant relationship between side of thalamic ICHs and clinical outcomes. This finding was similar to previous
studies. Shah et al. also reported that clinical outcomes correlated with volume of hematoma and level of consciousness for putaminal and
lobar but not for thalamic ICH , but in our study, there was a borderline tendency between volume of hematoma and clinical outcome in
multivariate analysis (OR 0.920, 95% CI 0.839–1.010, P=0.079). As a result of univariate analysis, there was a significant relationship
between the volume of hematoma and clinical outcome (OR 0.853, 95% CI 0.783–0.928, P<0.001). These findings were consistent with those of
some previous studies about ICH not restricted to thalamic ICHs . A larger study investigating thalamic ICHs is warranted. Presence of IVHs
was considered as a strong predictive factor of prognosis of ICHs, as in previous studies, and controlling the increased ICP with EVD was an
important therapeutic strategy . Clinical practice guidelines for ICHs in Korea also recommend that EVD for hydrocephalus can be ventricular
or via the lumbar route if it is a communicating type of hydrocephalus . In univariate analysis, all factors related to IVHs (presence of
IVH, presence of hydrocephalus, modified Graeb’s score of patients with IVH, EVD) were associated with clinical outcomes, but these factors
were not independently correlated with clinical outcomes in multivariate analysis. Surgery such as hematoma drainage and open craniotomy was
not independently associated with clinical outcomes. There were some limitations to our study. The number of patients who were enrolled in
this study was relatively small. The borderline association between volume of hematoma and clinical outcome might have resulted from these
limitations. Co-affecting areas and systemic complications were not subdivided due to small patient number. Finally, the 1-month follow-up
period in our study was relatively short. Thus, prognostic factors of long-term outcome in thalamic ICH might be different from our results.
In summary, initial GCS scores and the existence of systemic complications were important prognostic factors of thalamic ICHs. On the other
hand, volume of hematoma had a borderline relationship with clinical outcomes of patients with thalamic ICHs. Further investigations with a
larger number of patients, a longer follow-up period, and a scrupulous set of data are required for a more accurate analysis of predictive
factors of patients with thalamic ICHs. Source of support: This study was supported in part by grants from the Basic Science Research
Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology
(2013R1A1A2057994), and the Korean Health Technology R&D Project, Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea (HI12C03370400) Conflict
of interest The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. (A) Initial brain computed tomography (CT) scan of case illustration 1. A
50-year-old man visited our hospital due to sudden right-side hemiparesis. 2.1×1.9×2.2 cm sized acute spontaneous ICH located on thalamus
was demonstrated by brain CT scan. (B) CT angiography demonstrated no vascular abnormality. (C) Initial brain CT scan of case illustration
2. A 66-year-old man visited our hospital due to altered mentality (GCS 8) and severe right-side hemiparesis. 4.2×6.6×3.5 cm hematoma mainly
affecting the thalamus was demonstrated. The hematoma extended to midbrain. (D) Angiography demonstrated no abnormality signifying a
hemorrhagic event. Patient factors of 70 patients with thalamic ICHs. GCS – Glasgow coma scale; PT – prothrombin time; aPTT – activated
partial thromboplastin time; BP – blood pressure; Mann-Whitney U-test; Pearson’s chi-square test. Hemorrhagic factors of 70 patients with
thalamic ICHs. ICH – intracerebral hemorrhage; IVH – intraventricular hemorrhage; EVD – external ventricular drainage; Mann-Whitney U-test;
Pearson’s chi-square test. Result of univariate analysis. IVH – intraventricular hemorrhage; ICH – intracerebral hemorrhage; EVD – external
ventricular drainage; GCS – Glasgow Coma Scale; OR – odds ratio; CI – confidence interval. Result of multivariate analysis. ICH –
intracerebral hemorrhage; GCS – Glasgow Coma Scale; OR – odds ratio; CI – confidence interval.
