Authors’ Contribution: Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds
Collection Conflict of interest: None declared Patient: Female, 15 Final Diagnosis: Varicella Zoster aseptic meningitis Symptoms: —
Medication: — Clinical Procedure: Lumber punctur Specialty: Infectious Diseases Unusual clinical course Neurologic complications can occur
with varicella zoster virus (VZV) infection, usually after vesicular exanthem. A review of the literature revealed 3 cases of viral
meningitis associated with 6th nerve palsy but without significantly increased intracranial pressure. We report a case of a previously
healthy 15-year-old girl with aseptic meningitis as a result of reactivated-VZV infection with symptoms of increased intracranial pressure
and reversible 6th cranial nerve palsy but without exanthema. Diagnosis was made by detection of VZV-DNA in cerebrospinal fluid using
polymerase chain reaction and documented high intracranial pressure. Full recovery was achieved after a course of acyclovir and
acetazolamide. This case demonstrates that VZV may be considered in cases of aseptic meningitis in immunocompetent individuals, even without
exanthema, and it may increase the intracranial pressure, leading to symptoms, and causing reversible neurological deficit. Varicella-Zoster
virus (VZV) remains dormant in the cranial and dorsal root ganglia, with the potential for reactivation as shingles (zoster) . Neurologic
complications are known to occur with VZV infection, especially in the immunocompromised, and usually in association with a vesicular rash .
A series of cases has been reported in the literature of reactivation of VZV in immunocompetent patients and direct invasion of cranial
nerves, with partial or complete recovery , but none with significant increase in the intracranial pressure. We report a case of a
previously healthy immunocompetent 15-year-old girl with acute aseptic meningitis without exanthema, as a result of reactivated VZV
infection and significant increase in intracranial pressure. A 15-year-old girl complained of 1-week history of severe headache, new-onset
diplopia, blurring of vision, nausea, and vomiting for 3 days. The headache was severe, persistent, with no special character, and with no
exacerbating or relieving factors. The headache severity gradually increased over a 1-week period, with no improvement following analgesia.
The blurring of vision and diplopia were mostly on her leftward gaze. She denied any history of fever, photophobia, neck stiffness, skin
rash, or recent travel. However, an episode of varicella infection in her childhood was reported by her parents, with no history of Zoster.
Apart from that, her medical history was unremarkable. She was not taking any medications or oral contraceptive pills. Her family history is
not significant. On examination, the patient was alert, oriented, and overweight, with a BMI of 28 kg/m2. Her vital signs were normal. No
fever or skin rash was reported. Her examination revealed no signs of meningeal irritation, and she had normal papillary reflexes and
bilateral papilledema (Figure 1). Cranial nerves examinations were normal except for left abducent nerve palsy and diplopia in both right
and left gaze. The rest of her full neurological assessment was within normal limits. Her blood tests revealed normal renal, liver, and bone
biochemistry. Normal inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein and Erythrocyte sedimentation rate) and white cell count of 5.3×103 per mm3
were 41% neutrophils, 45% lymphocytes, 11.4% monocytes, 1.3% eosinophils, and 0.4% basophils. Imaging studies including chest x-ray,
computed tomography (CT), MRI, and MRA of the brain failed to show any evidence of cerebral venous thrombosis, vasculitis, or other
abnormalities. Lumber puncture revealed an opening pressure was 53 cm of water (normal opening pressure 10–20 cm of H2O), 537 white blood
cells, with the following differential (lymphocytes 96%, monocytes 3% and segmented 1%), 17 red cells/mm3, protein of 62mg/dL (normal
protein 15–45 mg/dL), and glucose of 2.3 mmol/L (blood glucose of 6mmol/L). Gram stain, Indian ink for Cryptococcal neoformans capsule and
CSF cultures were negative CSF cytology did not demonstrate any malignant cells, and CSF polymerase chain reactions (PCR) for herpes simplex
virus I and II, enterovirus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, adenovirus mumps, Parecho virus, and TB were negative. A positive VZV DNA
PCR was detected in the CSF sample, but plasma serology for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was nonreactive. The patient was treated with
IV Acyclovir for 14 days together with Acetazolamide 250 mg PO BID. Her symptoms resolved gradually with complete recovery of her diplopia
and headache. She was discharged home following a normal parametric visual study and instructed to have a regular ophthalmology follow-up
for her papilledema. Reactivated VZV can cause wide varieties of neurologic disease . The discovery of PCR increases the detection rate in
diagnosis of viral meningitis due to herpes simplex type 2 (HSV-2) and varicella-zoster virus (VZV) . Several studies conducted in patients
with herpes zoster have demonstrated that subclinical meningeal irritation can occur in 40–50% of cases , but a careful review of the
literature showed that VZV-related neurologic disease can occur without the classic herpes zoster exanthema, even in immunocompetent
patients. There are several reported cases about VZV reactivation; Klein et al. reported on a 14-year-old a patient with the same clinical
presentation but lacking symptoms and signs of increased intracranial pressure . Moreover, 6 cases of VZV meningitis confirmed by PCR have
been reported, and those cases failed to show any skin manifestation . This may confirm the ability of the latent virus in the spinal
ganglia to travel directly to the central nervous system without the classical skin involvement. The present case demonstrates the same
phenomenon, but with increased intracranial pressure as a predominant clinical feature. The mechanism behind this increase remains poorly
understood. However, this can be explained by one of the postulated theories, where superimposed infection of baseline subclinical
pseudotumor cerebri or caused primarily by the VZV meningitis. Further explanation suggested by Lo et al. is the post-infectious allergic
response to the causative virus and diffuse brain swelling . In their series of 3 cases of aseptic meningitis with similar complications,
the causative virus was not identified in 2 cases, while in the third case evidence of herpes infection was detected. In the present case,
the viral etiology was proven. Similar to our case, complications appeared at between 11 and 16 days from the start of the illness. Table 1
summarizes the previous case reports of aseptic meningitis with neurological complications and compares it with the present case
presentation. The high opening pressure in our patient (53 cm of water) compared to previous reported cases may favor the first theory –
subclinical pseudotumor cerebri with superadded infection. However, the dramatic response to antiviral medication suggests that aseptic
meningitis was the direct cause of her symptoms. Moreover, a recently published review concluded that reactivation of herpes simplex virus
isoform 1 (HSV-1) and/or herpes zoster virus (HZV) from the geniculate ganglia is the most strongly suspected cause of isolated Bell’s palsy
. Another theory describes Bell’s palsy as an acute demyelinating disease, which may have a pathogenic mechanism similar to that of
Guillain-Barré syndrome . It has been suggested that they both represent an inflammatory demyelinating neuritis in which Bell’s palsy can be
considered a mono-neuritic variant of Guillain-Barré . This may partially explain the involvement of the abducent never in this case, but
fails to clarify the increased cranial pressure. This case demonstrates that VZV may be considered in cases of aseptic meningitis in immune-
competent individuals, even without exanthema, and it may increase the intracranial pressure, leading to symptoms and causing reversible
neurological deficit. Fundus photograph (A) Right eye, (B) left eye. Shows bilateral papilledema. Summarizes the previous case reports of
aseptic meningitis with neurological complications and compares it with present case presentation. VZV – Varicella Zoster Virus, Based on
clinical Judgment.
