Pantoea agglomerans is a plant pathogen which very rarely causes an opportunistic infection. Human beings are usually infected by thorn
prick injuries or by contaminated parenteral fluids. Pantoea agglomerans has been reported as a cause of neonatal sepsis very rarely and to
the best of our knowledge this is the first reported case from India. A 4-day-old Asian baby boy from the rural area of Odisha, India, was
admitted to our neonatal intensive care unit when he presented with fever, tachypnea and chest retraction. Pantoea species were isolated
from his blood culture. He was treated successfully with meropenem administered intravenously and other supportive measures. Early detection
and proper management may cause a favorable outcome. Pantoea agglomerans, formerly known as Enterobacter agglomerans, is a member of family
Enterobacteriaceae. It is primarily an environmental and agricultural organism that inhabits plants, soil and water. It is an opportunistic
pathogen and very rarely causes disease in healthy individuals . The most common infections caused by Pantoea agglomerans are septic
arthritis or synovitis, cholelithiasis, occupational respiratory infections and skin allergy, peritonitis and blood stream infection in an
elderly person . It is an unusual pathogen in the etiology of neonatal sepsis. Here we report a blood stream infection caused by Pantoea
species (spp.) in a term baby which was delivered vaginally and this is the first documented case from India. A 4-day-old Asian baby boy was
delivered vaginally at term in our hospital; he was referred to our neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) 48 hours after delivery when he
presented with fever, tachypnea and chest retraction. His birth weight was 2.9kg and he cried immediately after delivery. His mother was
19-years old and she came from a rural area. Her antenatal history revealed that she had undergone regular checkups at our hospital; she had
no bad obstetric history during the whole pregnancy period. On examination it was found that her human immunodeficiency virus (HIV),
hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) status was negative by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) method. No vaginal
lesions were identified during pregnancy and there was no history of birth trauma. She gave a history of premature rupture of membrane
(PROM) approximately 8 to 10 hours before delivery. She noted a foul smelling discharge after rupture of membrane. The baby boy had
respiratory distress with some pneumonic changes seen on chest X-ray. A blood sample was collected with complete aseptic precaution into
aerobic and anaerobic blood culture bottle (BacT/ALERT® 3D; bioMérieux, Marcy-l’Etoile, France). He was then empirically treated with a
combination of amikacin and vancomycin. Aliquots of broth were subcultured on 5% sheep blood agar and MacConkey agar. On blood agar plate
colonies were pin-point and had a smooth surface, whereas on MacConkey agar there was a lactose-fermenting colony with similar morphology. A
routine biochemical test showed that the colony belonged to the family Enterobacteriaceae and further identification was performed by Vitek
2 using GN25 card (bioMérieux, Marcy-l’Etoile, France); it was identified as Pantoea spp. with 97% probability. Isolates were sensitive to
imipenem, meropenem, amikacin, cefoperazone-sulbactam, ceftriaxone and netilmicin, and resistant to gentamicin, cefotaxime and ceftazidime-
clavulanic acid. The anaerobic culture bottle showed no growth after 7 days of incubation. A high vaginal swab of the mother was also sent
for culture and sensitivity and it also showed growth of Pantoea spp. Other laboratory parameters were: hemoglobin (Hb) 10gm %, red blood
cell (RBC) 4.49/cmm3, total leukocyte count (TLC) 41,000, neutrophil 80%, lymphocyte 16%, monocyte 4%, C-reactive protein (CRP) 22.5mg/L,
urea 73.5mg/dl, serum creatinine 0.45mg/dl, sodium (Na+) 141mmol/L and potassium (K+) 4.8mmol/L. After collection of the blood sample the
baby boy was treated empirically with vancomycin and amikacin. His therapy was changed to meropenem and he was successfully treated with 1
gram twice daily for 14 days after getting the sensitivity report. Pantoea spp. is an opportunistic pathogen and rarely causes disease in
healthy individuals. Infections caused by Pantoea spp. have been reported in samples obtained from cotton swabs, intra-arterial devices as
well as plants and plant material . Cotton swabs are continuously used by nurses and physicians in hospital and can be contaminated in many
ways. Pantoea spp. is often associated with outbreaks due to contaminated intravenous solutions and stored blood products. Pantoea spp. when
involved in a systemic infection has a predilection for the lungs. The common pathogens causing early onset neonatal sepsis are Klebsiella
pneumoniae, Serratia marcescens, group B streptococcus, Escherichia coli, coagulase-negative staphylococci and Pseudomonas spp. [4, 5].
Pantoea spp. is a very rare pathogen causing early onset neonatal sepsis. To the best of our knowledge this is the first case report of
Pantoea spp. causing early onset neonatal sepsis from India in an otherwise term baby exposed to PROM. All the previous case reports had
been associated with significant prematurity and comorbidity but a similar case report in a near-term baby was reported by Lalas and
Erichsen (see Table 1).Table 1Summary of cases of Pantoea agglomerans causing neonatal sepsisStudy group and Reference numberGA (weeks)BW
(gram)GenderAD (days)ComorbiditySymptomsICCFOutcomeThis studyFT2900M4PROM, RDSRDNoNoSurvivedLalas and Erichsen 351990F2PROMRDNoNoGoodBergman
et al. 291795UK5RDS, PROMRD, shock, DICYesNoDeathBergman et al. 2860UK20IUGR, RDSRD, shock, DICYesNoDeathBergman et al. 403810UK12CHD,
PDARD, shock, DICYesNoDeathHabsah et al. 26950UK11RDSRD, shock, DICYesYesDeathHabsah et al. 403300UK4AsphyxiaRD, shock, DICYesYesDeathHabsah
et al. 321500UK3RDSRD, shock, DICYesYesSurvivedHabsah et al. 403200UK5VACTERLRD, shock, DICYesYesDeathHabsah et al. 361670UK5IUGRRD, shock,
DICYesYesDeathHabsah et al. 362000UK4AsphyxiaRD, shock, DICYesYesDeathHabsah et al. 261200UK5RDSRD, shock, DICYesYesDeathCruz et al.
FTUKF24CardiomyopathyUKYesNoDeathCruz et al. FTUKM16CoarctationUKYesNoSurvivedAly et al. 301500M13RDSRD, ShockYesNoSurvivedAly et al.
291030M12RDSRD, ShockYesNoSurvivedAly et al. 28815F17Pre-NECRD, ShockYesNoSurvivedAly et al. 26855M8RDS, PDARD, ShockYesNoSurvivedAly et al.
271020F11RDS, PDARD, ShockYesNoSurvived AD age at diagnosis, BW birth weight, CF contaminated fluids, CHD congestive heart disease, DIC
disseminated intravascular coagulation, F female, FT full term, GA gestational age, IC indwelling catheters, IUGR intrauterine growth
retardation, M male, NEC necrotizing enterocolitis, PDA patent ductus arteriosus, PROM prolonged rupture of membrane, RD respiratory
distress, RDS respiratory distress syndrome, UK unknown, VACTERL vertebral anomalies, anal atresia, cardiovascular anomalies,
tracheoesophageal fistula, esophageal atresia, renal anomalies, limb anomalies Summary of cases of Pantoea agglomerans causing neonatal
sepsis AD age at diagnosis, BW birth weight, CF contaminated fluids, CHD congestive heart disease, DIC disseminated intravascular
coagulation, F female, FT full term, GA gestational age, IC indwelling catheters, IUGR intrauterine growth retardation, M male, NEC
necrotizing enterocolitis, PDA patent ductus arteriosus, PROM prolonged rupture of membrane, RD respiratory distress, RDS respiratory
distress syndrome, UK unknown, VACTERL vertebral anomalies, anal atresia, cardiovascular anomalies, tracheoesophageal fistula, esophageal
atresia, renal anomalies, limb anomalies Infections caused by Pantoea agglomerans are usually associated with an identifiable exogenous
source . These organisms grow well at 4 °C and most commonly cause septic arthritis or synovitis following a penetrating injury by
vegetation. Organic materials like plant thorn may penetrate the skin and remain embedded in the tissues and set up a chronic inflammatory
process [8, 9]. Although Escherichia coli is a common cause of vertically transmitted infection in the new born, Pantoea agglomerans
infection could also be the result of exposure to colonizing bacteria in the birth canal following PROM. A similar case was reported by
Lalas and Erichsen in 2010 . Although it is very difficult to draw any conclusion from a single case, it should be kept in mind that Pantoea
spp. could be a rare cause of vertically transmitted infection in a term baby. Pantoea spp. is a rare pathogen in the etiology of early
onset neonatal sepsis. In the majority of previous cases, the outcome was very poor because of association with prematurity and comorbidity.
In our case the outcome was excellent because it was a term baby, the antibiotic meropenem was administered intravenously and other
supportive measures like oxygen were given in time. Early detection and proper antibiotic therapy may cause a favorable outcome despite
significant clinical deterioration. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal guardian(s) for publication of this case
report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Neonatal
intensive care unit Premature rupture of membrane Species Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions ST contributed in the preparation of manuscript, data analysis and interpretation of the data. SSB contributed in
data analysis and drafting of manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.
